





SISTER MINNIE’S (BILLING)
LIFE AND WORK IN
PAPUA
INTRODUCTION BY
L. BROMILOW
Sydney;
EPWORTH PRINTING & PUBLISHING HOUSE
218 Castlereagh Street


MwUim&Laiiifa ifswnafaitofti Qimh. Wm v ‘
for, transmission through the, frost §1 fj koska
Wholly set up and printed in Australia by the
Epworth Printing nnd Publishing House,
218 Castlereagh Street, Sydney.


FOREWORD.
The devoted life of Minnie Billing in our loved Mission in
Papua (D’Entrecasteaux Islands), and her success among the
girls of Dobu, is worthy of this purpose to “tell it out,” and to
stimulate the workers of to-day to “carry on” in the same spirit
of this worker for God during the years she lived and suffered for
the Papuans.
She believed in the power of prayer as the essential element
of service in the Kingdom. Many a Sister who came after her
owed the deepening of her faith to her bright example.
Let us, who will be stirred by these lines of her “diary,” spe-
cially pray for all the self-denying Sisters of our Missions in the
Pacific Islands.
Yours in His service
L. BROMILOW.
Woodford,
Blue Mountains,
September, 1930.


TIMETABLE FOR DOBU STATION
IN EARLY DAYS.
Sunday— 6.30 and 7 : Prayer Meeting.
10 and 10.30: Morning Service,
2 and 2.30: School.
4 and 4.30: Service.
7.30 and 7.45: Prayers in Own Houses.
Monday— 6 and 6.30: Prayers.
2 and 2.30: Little Boys’ School,
7.45: Prayers.
Tuesday— 6 and 6.30: Prayers.
10.30 and 11: Students’ and Wives’ School.
2 and 2.30: Girls’ School.
7.45: Prayers.
Wednesday—6 and 6.30: Prayers.
10.30 and 11: School.
2 and 2.30: School.
7.30 and 7.45: Service and Boys’ Singing Class.
Thursday— 6 and 6.30-—Prayers.
10.30 and 11: School.
2 and 2.30: School.
7.45: Students’ and Girls’ Meetings.
Friday— 6 and 6.30: Prayers.
10.30 and 11: School.
2 and 2.30: School.
7.30 and 7.45: Class Meetings.
Saturday— 6 and 6.30: Prayers.
7.30 and 7.45: Praj r er Meeting.
The Lali at 9.30 Every Morning to Knock Off Work.
Curfew Bell at 9.15 or 9.30.
Gimwani.—Yams, 101 b. 1 stick; Bananas, 101 b. 1 stick; Nuts,
3 puri 1 stick.
Masura. —To Nono and Mwanedi, Gonagona namo, Sinab-
wadi, 3 lb., Natudi 2 lb.; Ine, 241 b. yadua; Gidioni, 21b. yadua;
To Paisewa, 31b. yadua serabenaia.


CONTENTS.
Page
Foreword . 3
Timetable for Dobu Station in Early Days .... 4
Introduction 7
I. The Voyage to Papua 9
11. Samarai and Kwato, the L.M.S. Mission Station . . 17
111. Dobu at Last! 23
IV. Fever, Earthquakes, and the Language! 27
V. Adventures in the Villages 39
VI. Papuan Legends and Papuan Customs 49
VII. Sanaroa and the Visit of the “Meda” 57
VIII. More About the People of Dobu 67
IX. A Visit to Tubetube 79
X. Sad News from Panaieti 85
XL The Visit of Dr. Brown and the Wreck of the “Meda” 95
The Episode of the Witches, an Examination, and
Some Weddings 103
XIII
A Christmas Holiday and Some Experiences with the
Girls 11l
XIV. Last Days at Dobu 117
Sisters’ Plan of Appointments 123
Letter from Mrs. Bromilow to Mrs. Nicholls . . . 124
From One of the Four Boys 125
English Translation of Dobuan Hymn ...... 126


ILLUSTRATIONS.
Page
Rev. :W. E. Bromilow, D.D 16
A Group of Papuan Teachers . 21
Papuan Fire-makers 22
Cooking Pots: Big and Small 37
Rev. loane Siatua, Samoan Native Minister, Bwaidoga,
Papua, and His Wife 38
Staff of Native Teachers, Papua 47
A Papuan Village Policeman 48
Eliesa Duigu 56
Sailing a Canoe 65
The Late Dr. George Brown 66
A Native Preacher 78
Bathtime in the Nursery 83
Playing at Cats’ Cradle 84
A Christian Congregation of Over 600 People at Dobu . . 94
Aj Missionary Meeting in Papua 101
Spearing Fish 109
On the Beach at Dobu, Papua 110
Papuan Children Playing “Dead Man” 115
Waiting for the Preacher 116
Two Papuan Girls 116


Sister Minnie’s life-work was commenced when she gave her
Lord and Master “love for love” and “life for life.”
She was a teacher in Adelaide, South Australia, under the
famous Inspector of Schools there named Hartley, and gave up
a good position and salary to take our modest one of Sister and
hard toil, with malaria of the country thrown in. I was a mis-
sionary’s wife, and to get rid of malaria, I had travelled to Ade-
laide. Addresses were given there in all the suburbs. Two Sisters
were asked for and two offered, but both had to be rejected. One
was ill and the other unfitted.
When I returned alone to Sydney a telegram awaited me that
Miss Billing, a trained teacher, had offered—would I take her?
The return telegram said, “Send her! I sail on such a date.”
So we met in Sydney, and on a certain Sunday morning (will
I ever forget it?) avc two were pulled off to a rough-looking sail-
ing ship, the bells rang in our ears for service on shore, but only
the clanking of chains was for us interspersed with swearing
from the captain. No one came off to AAash us “God-speed” and
no one waved us farewell! But it had not been advertised, and
that was our consolation, that nobody kneAV. But the exception to
every rule came in, for Sister Minnie’s cousin was off to Manly
and thought of us, and we were glad that it was so.
Before we got out of the harbour we Avere in smooth Avater for
two hours, and then outside the Heads, in rough and tumble seas.
Worse than rough seas was the drinking of Avhisky by the cap-
tain. Every day he was lying drunk in the shade of a boat that
hung in the davits. The mate was a decent man, and in sympathy
with us. On the deck he erected a tent to shield us from the
sun’s heat. Another man going to Sudest asked if we Avould accept
a soft drink and biscuits every morning at 11 a.m. Both of these
men asked us not to try to make the poor captain better. Said
they: “We are afraid he would strike you; drink has made him
irritable.”
In a terrific storm that struck us a boat Avas “stove in.” Dur-
ing the storm I leached up and clasped Sister’s hand. For com-
fort I sang “Rock of Ages,” Once out of the billows and into
peaceful water I sent for the captain and mate. My request
Avas: “Please put us on shore on the coast and I will find Metho-
dist people who will help us.” The man then SAVore by all the
names of the Trinity that he couldn’t and wouldn’t. He said:
“We are 500 miles from land.” So I had to let the matter drop
and hoped we Avould get on better than before the storm. If
only, my heart said, there Avas no drinking!


The ship had to be our home for days and days until we
sighted Samarai, which was a very small community in those
early days.
We got ready to leave the ship, and the surly captain said,
“The ladies are in a great hurry to get ashore.”
Wc found a boat to go over to the L.M.S. Station at
Kwato.
Our home at Dobu was still far away, and with neither
launch nor wireless no word that we had arrived could be sent.
At Kwato we were welcomed, and it seemed like Paradise, after
the rough voyage, to be in a well-appointed home.
A week passed, and the Dove appeared. To Dobu we travelled
in her.
The first evening there Sister Minnie said, “The half has
not been told of God’s work here.”
A born teacher was she, and at home at once amongst the
girls; recognising all the difficulties ahead, she put her shoulder to
the wheel and was happy in the work God had given her to do.
When Dr. Brown visited us and her school, he remarked
with fervour in his tone: “This is what we want! Trained
teachers consecrated to God!” He had witnessed calisthenics gone
through without a sound from her. She had taken the spears that
we had bought from the now peaceful tribes, converting them into
poles. The sight of these children of erstwhile cannibals being
well taught filled us with thrilling delight. For the response she
got was remarkable.
Capable, young, and sympathetic with these native girls was
Sister Minnie, and it Avar sad to find her attacked from time to
time Avith malarial fever.
I had her carried over to my house to give her attention
through the nights of five weeks’ duration. But the break in her
life, when she decided to try the Fijian climate, was nobly faced,
and in Fiji also she left her mark. My late honoured husband
wrote of her: “Sister Minnie is devoted and talented, and if she
has health will be a most useful Avorker.”
As I send out this booklet I believe that her Avork follows her
in Papua to-day, and God has given her in the eternal Home
“higher service.”
L. BROMILOW.


CHAPTER I.
THE VOYAGE TO PAPUA.
Brig Zephyr,
26th December, 1894.
Dear Home Folks, —
This is the eleventh day on board, and I have only just sum
moned up courage to begin writing.
Life on board this ship has not been the most happy experience,
but we can afford to look back and laugh at our past troubles.
Before this reaches you, Hedley will have told you of the
delay in Sydney.
On Thursday, the 3rd December, so sure w r ere we of start-
ing, that all our personal belongings were sent on board, but a
strong N.E. wind continued to blow most obstinately, and the
captain said it was no use starting with contrary winds.
If we had been sure of the day we could have made better
plans for using up the time, but each morning we could not be
sure until perhaps eleven o’clock what we were going to do. On
Thursday morning things reached the comic stage in the Mission
Office. Each day a few more parcels had found their way upstairs,
some purchases, some brought by friends, until they formed quite
a heterogeneous collection. There were big baskets, little baskets,
boxes, bundles, parcels of various shapes and sizes containing all
manner of things from a bonnet to a slipper or from a battery to
a bottle of medicine—then came the task of strapping them to-
gether or trying to tie them in bundles. Poor Mr. Andrews looked
in despair as he struggled with the more obstinate things that
would not be fastened up in portable fashion. Mrs. Bromilow tried
in vain to reduce chaos to order —the office boy stood by with a
broad grin on his usual placid countenance, and the whole scene
would have tickled the most sober old Scotchman. It really was
too funny! I could do nothing but look and laugh until my sides
ached. It was a real “old curiosity shop” that morning. After
these exertions we adjourned for lunch in the Strand. The Strand
is an arcade just opposite The Book Depot in George Street. The
Gresham Dining Rooms, which we patronised, are downstairs, in
about the middle of the Strand. They are very popular, and you
can get very good meals there.
After dinner Mr. Fletcher, Mrs. Bromilow, and I took the
car out to Enmore to attend the Speech Day at Newington. There
was a large gathering—quite the elite of Wesleyan Methodism.
After the prize-giving was over we were invited down to after-


noon tea by Mrs. McKie, a daughter of the Rev. Moulton. I met
Mr. and Mrs. Rutledge there and was introduced to such a number
of people.
The word “New Guinea” seems to bring a gleam of interest
to everyone’s eye. It was such a pleasant afternoon! While wait-
ing for the car to take us back to the city I met two W.C.T.U.
ladies. They were very cordial when they heard I belonged to
the honoured household of “The President,” but we only had time
for a word before the car was off.
Our only mishap in the way of missing trains, trams, or
ferries occurred that afternoon. We knew we were too late for
the 5.5 p.m. train to Gordon (the one used by the Brown family),
but tried for the 6.30 p.m., knowing we should come out for the
tail-end of dinner, but crossed the ferry only to find the train just
gone. There was no other until 7.35, so we hunted up a little
restaurant and had tea there.
The maid who waited on us was very chatty; she had been
on the stage with “Maggie Moore.” “I always took one of the
principal parts,” she said, “and sometimes got as much as 7/6 a
week. I would go back if they would let me.” I gave her a little
advice on the subject, which she took very kindly, but did not seem
convinced as to its wisdom.
On Friday morning, after hoping against hope that we might
make a start that day, we had to give up the idea. Mr. Fletcher
proposed that we should go to the cricket match. He holds a
member’s ticket, which includes two ladies’ tickets, so he, Mrs.
Bromilow, and I went after dinner. We saw Giffen make his
splendid score, but have not heard yet what the result of the
match was.
We then returned to Gordon—good-bye was robbed of all its
sentiment and became altogether too common in those days. Every
morning we made our farewells to the family, and did not take a
return ticket by the train; then we had to get another single ticket
each evening, as the Sydney railway regulations will not allow you
to take a return ticket and use the return half next morning.
On Saturday morning, 15th instant, we had grown sceptical
about sailing, so took return tickets, and that day, out of the per-
versity of things, we actually went on board. The weather
prophets prophesied southern winds, just what we were waiting
for, so it was thought best for us to go on board on Saturday
afternoon. The captain said we would probably get away in the
night or early on Sunday morning.
The Zephyr was lying in Neutral Bay on North Shore. We
(Mrs. Bromilow and I) took the ferry across to the High Street
Wharf and signalled the Zephyr to send a boat for us, which they


did almost at once. It seemed so strange to go off like that, no
one to see us off, no farewell service or anything in that way.
Many folks would have liked to have come on to the vessel and
seen the last of us, but it was so uncertain whether we really
would get away even then, that it was thought unwise to announce
the departure of the ship. Tl he captain promised that in the event
of our not sailing before Sunday the ship’s boat would be at our
service to land us whenever we wished.
We arranged to spend the Sunday with the Rev. Bavin if we
came ashore and no good-byes were said. Hedley was on Circular
Quay a little while before we took our ferry. As our ferry moved
out we waved to him as he! stood on the Manly boat, and that was
the last I saw of him. Perhaps it was better so, as the tug of
parting was spared. I almost hesitate to describe the first night
on the Zephyr.
This is a brig of only 135 tons, and seems a fast sailer when
there is wind; to-day the wind has dropped, and we are making
very little progress. The accommodation is not good—we went
down a flight of steps, very steep, into a place which, for want of
a better name, I will call the saloon. Our cabin door is so very
near the dinner-table, we get most appetising odours when sick in
our bunks.
Two folding chairs were put on board for “the ladies,” but
when it is too wet or too hot to go on deck there is no room for
them in the saloon, so we have to do as best we can.
There are eleven souls on board in all. All but sailors and
cook sit down to meals together. The table appointments are
most primitive—a coarse cloth, not of the cleanest, is put on
crooked —the cutlery arranges itself—a cruet made of wood hangs
at the time on a hook above. The first meal on board made a
marked impression on us two lonely womenfolk. The steward
popped various dishes on the table and rang the bell most vigor-
ously. The tea was poured from a huge tin pot into great mugs
and handed to us. We ate as much as we could, but it was a poor
attempt. Then we went to the deck, but it rained and we had
to go below; the air was stifling, as the rain made it necessary to
cover up some of the hatches. Then oh! pity us! came an invasion
of cockroaches —such fierce specimens I have rarely seen. They
were very much at home and ran over the table, seats and floor, and
did not even respect our persons.
I got out a budget of letters which Ellie had dated in order;
you can imagine how I enjoyed reading them. Then came an
exciting chase after cockroaches, headed by the steward. He used a
slipper and went at it in real earnest, but could not exterminate
the nest.


Then the mate unrolled his curtain and retired, so without
a word we thought we had better follow suit. Prior to this we
had spent an hour in setting our cabin in order, and into the wall
pocket were thrust all manner of things—slippers, cap, sponges,
watches, hairpins, bottles and all sorts. Without it and my little
pillow I should have fared badly.
The cabin was dark when we went in, but when the lamp
was lit the scene was changed, cockroaches on the ceiling, on the floor,
on the bed, under the pillows—ugh! it was terrible!
What poor weak mortals we are to mind little things so much,
but really it was the hardest trial I have ever had to face to go
to bed amid such horrors—you know my hatred of creeping things,
so will appreciate the situation. If ever I prayed for grace it was
then. The loneliness of it all seemed to overpower us. After we
had prayed privately, Mrs. Bromilow prayed aloud so beautifully,
but we both broke down a bit.
But for the strength which God promised, I felt that I
couldn’t face a voyage in such a boat. The air was stifling and
the night was long. However, the ship was at anchor in the
calm waters of Neutral Bay, so sea-sickness was not added to our
troubles.
When morning came we went on deck to find a little steam-
tug snorting and puffing, waiting to tow us off. The wind was
light, but in the right direction, so we weighed anchor. Then I
realised that we were leaving Australian shores, but it did not
seem hard then; I think the wrench came the night before in the
cabin.
What a strange Sabbath that was! The tug did not take us
outside the Heads, but just into the offing, then the sails were
spread one by one like a bird just testing its wings, and we glided
slowly, very slowly, out of the harbour. We had some difficulty
in getting through the Heads, and the wind dropped, and when
actually out we made very little progress till 3 a.m. on Monday;
in fact, Sydney lights were in sight for days.
Mrs. Bromilow was the first to be affected, and fondly I
hoped to escape; but before dinner on Sunday I was on my back.
The captain is a rough old fellow, but kind. He made us as com-
fortable as possible with rugs and pillows, and said, “I’ll put one
of these things beside you, so that you won’t have to go .to the
side of the ship.” We declined with thanks, the sight being enough
to make one ill.
Mrs. Bromilow went below, but I stayed on deck till it was
quite dark.
We just got into bed, clothes and all, that Sunday night, and
did not move out again until Thursday. Perhaps we should not


have been so bad if the weather had been fine, but we had a storm
for the first few days. We were not on deck, for the waves were
of tremendous size; heavy seas came right over and we were too
sick to care.
O God, our help i?t ages past.
Our hope for years to come;
Our shelter from the stormy blast
And our eter7tal home.
Several times the water poured into the saloon. There must
have been a leak; we could see the water rushing backwards and
forwards when a heavy sea broke over us with a thud.
Mrs. Bromilow reached her hand up to mine and said,
“Eternal Father, strong to save.” On Wednesday night one sea
carde with such force as to smash in one of the ship’s boats and
damage another. However, the big wind was in the right direc-
tion. To-day it is favourable! I went on deck, but felt a very
helpless being, and on Friday I seemed to go backwards instead
of getting stronger, and hardly touched any food.
Mrs. Bromilow is a bad sailor, but she was good to me. One
night, when I was so hot I nearly burned holes in the sheets, she
got up and cooled me down with wet cloths and cooling remedies
till I went to sleep.
On Sunday they had a short service, and I could hear it
all from my bunk. I got up in the afternoon and thought of you
all in South Australia.
Mr. Andrews gave an address, “And there will be no more
sea.” Sea was typical of separation, division and danger and death.
Life is a sea, Bible is our chart, Jesus is our Captain, and Heaven
our port to be gained. We then sang “Rock of Ages” and the
Benediction was pronounced. It was good to be there!
We hope to be in Samarai next Sunday. This ship is only
taking us as passengers to Samarai, and we shall get to Dobu by
some other means.
On Monday the cook was very busy preparing the pudding;
Mrs. Bromilow and I stoned the raisins and washed the currants,
etc., otherwise they would have gone in stones and all. The cook
knows his business very well as far as cooking goes, but does not
serve up things in the best style. He gives us three courses for
dinner and plenty of variety in food.
The worst of travelling in a boat like this is that there is no
awning on deck and no place to rest on down below; there is no
seclusion either, except in our own cabin, and that is rather close.
However, since the storm we have had lovely weather. To-
day is hot, but not unbearable. Xmas Day on board yesterday,


my thoughts turned to the dear folks at home. The books and
cards received were a real bit of home, and I will treasure them.
We hadn’t a bad dinner, and a real iced cake, the first we have
had since leaving Sydney, and someone had put three-penny bits in
the pudding. We are still at sea, but are hoping to get right to
Dobu by New Year’s Day, but it is a little doubtful.
This has all been written on deck, so you will excuse any
faults. I haven’t got out ink; there would sure to be a spill, as
this boat is never still. We almost felt like saying in those days
of storm, “Stop, ye waves, be restful for to-day!”
Send me my books—Carlyle’s “Past and Present,” Tennyson,
Longfellow, Whittier, Thackeray, and anything else you think
worth while.
For two days we have been almost becalmed, and the cap-
tain’s temper has been sorely tried, and we are all longing for a
sight of land. In the fortnight since leaving Sydney we have not
once sighted land. Life on board is very pleasant when we can
keep from being impatient, and we stay on deck almost till the
small hours of the morning, and some of the gentlemen have slept
on deck.
Mr. Andrews is a born musician, and has a good tenor voice
also. He played the chorus, “Come, oh! come to me,” and the
cockroaches that had been living in retirement took the invitation
most literally and came. It was the Pied Piper over again—
great ones, small ones, and lean ones invaded the place. Slippers
and boots were used wildly. The steward has not heard the end
of it yet, how Mr. Andrews’ solo charmed the creatures.
This morning a large bird, known as a booby, flew round
and round the ship, and at last alighted on the boom—a wonder-
ful sight. We were so glad to see it rest, as it was our first visitor.
The sky last night was a wonder—the heavens fairly glistened with
stars, scarcely a ripple on the water, just a gentle swell. “Truly
the firmament showeth His handiwork.”
I was reading in Isaiah on deck this morning, before break-
fast, what a number of references there are made to the “isles of
the sea.” I was quite struck with this fact.
We are having a taste of tropical weather; about a pint of
perspiration pours off one even as early as seven o’clock. It is so
intensely hot that the heat seems to burn into one. We avoid
it or should suffer. The afternoons are much less trying. Last
night’s sunset was marvellously beautiful; it was a glowing lighted
west indeed.
Still head winds from Samarai; it seems as far off as ever;
we are tacking slowly towards our port.


Another Sunday and not yet in sight of land! The poor
captain’s temper is sorely tried; he spent most of yesterday in
abusing God for sending such weather. We are sorry for him;
he seems to have such an awful idea of God, believes not in the
future life, also drinks constantly, which makes matters worse.
Jimmy, the Honolulu boy, thought he saw land; but it was only
a fallen tree with birds on it. Glasses were brought out to see a
canoe with natives, and various opinions were expressed. The
next news was sharks at the end of the ship, but I did not get
up to look; it was too hot. The men were all excitement for
about two hours, with hooks and harpoons, and even a revolver,
but Mr. Shark evaded them all, and they gave it up as a bad job.
We had service on deck in the evening. It was the most pic-
turesque scene I have ever witnessed. Two lamps were brought up
and stood on the hatchway; the ship was so still there was no
danger of them tipping over. Mr. Andrews used the hatch for
a desk. On his right hand, lying, half-sitting, were the ten coloured
men, and Jimmy, the steward, the dim light just playing on their
swarthy faces. Steward is a real Christian; he looked such a
picture with his spectacles and beaming face.
Mrs. Bromilow and I used the only two deck chairs, and
Mr. Andrews performed the duties of organist. The captain
attended both services on the previous Sabbath, but would not
come to this one. He retired to the cabin, saying he wasn’t going
to praise God when He had taken away all the wind for four
days. _ It was a strange way to spend the last Sabbath, or rather
a strange place, not a strange way. Everything was so still. We
sang “Sun of My Soul,” the ship gently rocked, now and then the
crescent moon came in sight and a silver gleam fell across the
water. It was a peaceful hallowed service—God was surely there
—His Holy Spirit’s power was most plainly felt. I knew as never
before that
Though sundered far by faith we meet
Around one common mercy seat.
We rose very early and performed our toilet before the
gentlemen were up, and then watched the sun rise. It was glorious
as it peeped above the horizon. The ocean reflected the light in
all the colours of a rainbow. I never saw anything like it. The
water was almost as still as a pond and looked beautiful. The
clouds all around the horizon were bathed in a glow of crimson
which gradually faded as the sun rose higher in the heavens.
How can men doubt the existence of God when His works
are so wonderful ? Come, breezes, come and blow us to New
Guinea!


Ist January, 1895.
And we are still at sea. At about 11.45 we (Mrs. Bromi-
low and I) had a watchnight all to ourselves. We had just put
our heads down again when the mate told us that rain was com-
ing, so we and our beds were bundled below in great haste. Then
the rain came down in torrents and continued till 7 a.m. When
it ceased and we got on deck, land was in-sight. Fifty miles from
Samarai, waiting for a breeze, and all we can do is to wait!
Fair wind this morning, and houses at Samarai in sight. I hear
the questions, “Will it be? How get to Dobu ? Welcome to
New Guinea shores when you come there/’
Rev. W. E. Bromilow, D.D.


CHAPTER 11.
SAMARAI AND KWATO, THE L.M.S.
MISSION STATION.
3rd January, 1895.
Envy me now as you read this. The beauty of the place sur-
passes anything I have ever dreamed of. When you hear of the
gems of ocean, the fair isles of the Pacific, the jewels set in rip-
pling sunshine, never say again that the pictures are over-drawn;
that would be sheer impossibility. Yesterday we had a light fair
wind and simply glided in amongst the islands, each turn revealing
fresh scenes of loveliness. The varying shades of green, the wav-
ing palms, the dancing wavelets were a dream of beauty. Then
Samarai came into view, and about 3 p.m. we anchored. Samarai
is a little place; there are only seven or eight European residents
on the island.
The Customs House officer came off in a boat manned by
seven native police. He brought a letter from Mr. Bromilow,
which leads us to expect the Dove in a day or two to take
us to Dobu. He advised us to come and stay here at Kwato for
a day or two.
Kwato is the station of the London Missionary Society in
charge of Mr. Abel. He has a lovely wife and little girl 14
months old. The station has been established about four years,
and an immense amount of work has been done. About 150
natives live upon it, and, in a sense, have been adopted by
the missionary. There is quite a street of native houses all on
piles. The house occupied by Mr. Abel is a native one, but fur-
nished in English fashion. The dining-room and sitting-room are
all in one. It is such a pretty room, beautifully furnished. The
table at tea-time was lovely—the china and silver, serviettes, etc.,
of the best. The native boys wait on the table very cleverly. It
was like getting into perfect Paradise after the rough life on the
Zephyr. We got here on Wednesday afternoon, and a service was
held in the evening in a large native building. Over a hundred
natives were there and joined heartily in the service. They sang
splendidly, chanted the psalm, recited the commandments, and
and were most reverent in prayer time. A teacher from
Raratonga gave an address, and the service closed with the Lord’s
Prayer recited in unison. What a grand sight it was! What
an evidence of the power of the Gospel! It was a most impressive


sight, perhaps more so to one just arrived; but it was grand. We
had a native room to sleep in—a very large cool place, nicely
furnished. At 7 o’clock this morning a little boy came over with
the tea and toast, served in the daintiest fashion.
Then we dressed and came over to the house for breakfast.
Soon afterwards a number of natives came with fish. They had
gone out very early and got a good haul. They have school here
at six o’clock in the morning for an hour or two, and then again
at ten.
Mr. Abel invited me to come and see the writing school.
The natives sat on the floor and put their copybooks on tables
about a foot high. Some write very well. I set head-lines for
several. One boy would make “e” above the line, and I could not
speak his language; but by signs and smiles managed to make him
see his error, and he looked so pleased when he got it right. It
was remarkable to see how clean they kept their books. They were
of all ages, and many of them were married men and women. The
language is very different from the Dobu tongue.
I wish I could show you some of the flowers and leaves that
grow here. Some native blues are lovely: they would be prized
in South Australia. Of the savage people of New Guinea I have
seen nothing as yet. The native police who brought us from
Samarai to Kwato in the Government boat (a great privilege this)
were well trained, and all on this station are more or less civi-
lized, although they live in native fashion and are little troubled
with dress. At Dobu, where there is an immense population, I
shall see the real raw material as well as the partly polished
Islanders. As I look out of the door across the narrow channel
which separates this island from the next, I have to stop and wonder
afresh at the beauty. I can hardly realise yet that this is other
than a great moving picture, which will soon fade away, and they
say this is nothing to the views at Dobu (pronounced Doboo).
I don’t know when this will be posted; there is little chance
of a boat going to Cooktown for three weeks. A vessel has appeared
which we hope is the Dove, and we shall start off, but we may
have to wait. This afternoon was pleasant, and the evening was
perfect as we sat on the steps in the moonlight.
A good many of the natives here are dressed—the men in
their T-shaped dress and the women in grass petticoats. Their
dark skin seems a sort of dress for their covering. Of course, all
these I have been telling you about belong to the station. I have
yet to see real heathenism. It will require real courage to face, that
I realise that nothing but the power of the Holy Spirit can make
the native mind grasp the truths of the Gospel.


There is an old chief who lives on the island opposite Kwato.
He lives a good Christian life and is a great help to the missionary.
1 he resident magistrate offered to make him a justice of the peace.
He came to Mr. Abel for advice and spoke thus: “If I take this
position, when a man does wrong I must catch him and take him
to Samarai to be punished; but when I was a bad man God for-
gave my sins for Jesus Christ’s sake. Ought I not then to forgive
my brothers if they do wrong, instead of taking them to gaol?”
Wasn’t that a change from the old fighting cannibal ways?
Another little girl, very nice-looking, was sitting on a tank
near the back verandah. Mr. Abel pointed her out as a real
cannibal. I could hardly believe that the little thing had really
eaten human flesh, but such was the case.
We have planned a visit to one of the near islands to-day if
we do not leave for Dobu. Some of us are to go in a native canoe.
At present the rain is pouring down, but the showers do not last
long as a rule, so we have not given up hope of having our outing.
We are not in hopes of getting in to Dobu. I can imagine
how you are looking out for news. I meant to telegraph at
Samarai, but there seemed no hope. This waiting for mails and
receiving them tells of being far away. I will send this diary to
you, but when will you receive it?
The canoe in which we took our trip was a log hollowed
out. About four feet apart along one side were round sticks at
intervals; they formed the outrigger. From the outrigger to the
canoe planks were spare mats to sit on, and an impromptu awning
was made by a shawl fastened to the top of upright sticks. And
so we embarked—four white people, two native women, and half
a dozen natives for poling.
We kept in shallow water, and we were poled along very
cleverly. The water was so clear, and we could see the shells at
the bottom of the sea. We landed at a shady spot and camped
under some coconut palms, then we went for a walk through mazes
of beauty. The foliage is something wonderful: climbing ferns
and orchids twist themselves up the trunks of the trees and form
graceful festoons from stem to stem. Coloured crotons show
through the green foliage, crotons so varied in colour that they
would be prized in a conservatory in the Colonies. The leaves are
veined with different colours, variegated, etc.
Now we would come out into an open space where the natives
had planted pineapples, and then would plunge into thick bush
through which we had to push our way. Butterflies were flitting
about, gorgeous insects were seen on the trees, and here and there
a glimpse of the water that surrounded the island was gained.


Ever since coming here I have a feeling that this is all a dream
from which I shall soon awake—it is all so beautiful.
Yesterday (Sunday) was a blessed day. We began the day
by attending the service at 7 a.m. All the natives on the station
came to it. They repeated the commandments, chanted a psalm,
and sang hymns. They are most reverent at prayer time and listen
most attentively to all that is said. About 10 o’clock natives from
the near islands began to arrive in canoes, and the church was
packed for both morning and afternoon services. The difference
between the natives who live on the station and those who came
from a distance was very noticeable. The day was crowned by
the evening service, at which the Sacrament was administered.
Mr. Abel has ten students who will by and by go out as native
teachers. Their earnestness and intelligence is splendid to note.
One of them preached at the afternoon service, and judging by
his gestures and expression was giving a most eloquent address.
These students and the church members occupied the front part
of the church and seemed to understand the solemnity of the occa-
sion. You cannot think how it impressed me —that first Sacra-
ment among these dear people. I felt, as never before, how we
are one in Christ—colour, nationality, education, mode of life—
these differences all were as nothing, as we met as brothers and
sisters around the table of our Lord and knew the same Jesus.
This morning I saw what to me was a novel sight—four
canoes filled with natives put off to catch fish with dynamite.
One, a Samoan teacher, carried a charge of dynamite. The men
surrounded the shoal, the dynamite was discharged in amongst the
fish, and then into the water went the men. The soles of their
feet as they dived, and their heads as they bobbed up, were all we
could see for some time. With net and by hand they caught the
stunned fish and made a fine haul. They catch plenty of fish here
and are very clever at it.
A procession of girls was seen going down to the water’s edge;
some carried bundles of clothes, others buckets and tubs. “We
are going a-washing,” they might have sung. Just now water is
rather scarce on the island, so they were going in canoes to the
island opposite to wash at the spring there. It was a pretty sight!
They were as merry as if off for a picnic instead of beginning a
washing day. They work so willingly, but take things in a most
leisurely fashion. All this happened before breakfast, as they begin
the day early here.
After breakfast we got news of the arrival of the Dove, so
we shall leave for Dobu to-morrow at sunrise and shall probably
be there by Wednesday. The men have just landed with the fish


and seem in very good spirits. Now, till I write from Dobu,
farewell! lam hungry for letters from South Australia. Why
don’t they come?
Yours lovingly,
Sister Minnie.
A Group of Papuan Teachers.


Papuan Fire-makers.


CHAPTER 111.
DOBU AT LAST!
Arrived at Dobu this afternoon (January 9th), and was
kindly welcomed by all on the station. Dobu is a lovely island
and commands a grand view of the surrounding islands.
I am staying in the Sisters’ Home for the present, as Sister
Walker is away on another island for a short time. Spent the
morning upsetting Sister Tinney’s room with my belongings, and
the afternoon trying not to break the tenth commandment, while
listening to Sister Jeannie conversing with the people.
I learnt a few words and phrases of Dobuan from Mrs.
Bromilow, and it proved quite providential. It appears that the
girls on the station were very curious to see the new Sister, but
raised the objection that she would not be able to speak their
language. When I came and asked for a glass of water, so that
they could understand, they flew to get it in wonderment, and
when I made a remark about the ship and thanked them in their
own tongue, one rushed over to Mr. Bromilow’s study with the
news that Sisita Minnie could say their words. He, Mr. Bromilow,
was so pleased at their delight. It seems to have quite won their
hearts, so I thanked God for opening my way among them.
This afternoon Sister Tinney and I went to visit the villages
on Normanby, which is distant about an hour’s row in the boat
from Dobu. We visited seven little villages and Sister talked
to the people in each. I said a word or two, submitted to being
looked at, drew off a glove which they admired, and told them I
brought it from “dimdim,” i.e., a foreign land. Oh! how sin has
marked their faces! especially the women! They try to turn aside
the questions when we talk of God and religion, and these have
been talked with many times. What those must be who have never
been helped at all I cannot imagine!
Tell all the people to send more workers.
11th January, 1895.
I went into school this morning. The hours are from 6.30 to
8.30. I shall soon be able to help there, I can see, as the reading
is all done phonetically, and I can teach them to read before I
can translate the words. Knowing the names for the numbers, I
can soon manage the arithmetic, and I took writing lessons to-day
to help Sister Tinney.
Everybody here has been very kind to me. I have been expect-
ing some of my stores, and they have not arrived yet, nor any of


our trunks. They are on the Ellen Gowan, a slow boat; it must
be, as we have been here two days, and it was at Samarai before
the Dove. I am having a washing day, as I have only my clothes
bag with me, and Mrs. Bromilow is in the same fix; the captain
said all our personal luggage was on the Dove, but he must have
been mistaken.
12th January, 1895.
Saturday is here; I am going to attempt collars and cuffs for
the first time. I am going to try to map out next week’s work
to get as much time as possible at the language; it is such a bar-
rier to work against, both in the house and amongst the people. I
just have to pull the prayer wires while Sister Tinney talks to
the people. What curious people these are —the girls sit on the
floor to wash; in fact, they sit on the floor for all their work, even
when it is impossible!
To-night the Workers’ Meeting will be held in English.
What a*treat to be able to understand all that is said!
Have just come in from the Workers’ Meeting, where I was
formally welcomed as a Sister in the Mission. The meeting was
a grand preparation for the coming Sabbath. I said a few words
about my call to the work and about missionary zeal in South
Australia. Mrs. Bromilow spoke about her visit to the Colonies,
and emphasized the work done by the auxiliary in South
Australia. Mr. Andrews, lay-missionary, also spoke.
13th January, 1895.
The first Sabbath in Dobu is just over. Prayer Meeting at
7 a.m. —about 60 present. Church at 10 o’clock—the building
was full, 300 being present. Both Mrs. Bromilow and I spoke
and Mr. Bromilow interpreted. The behaviour of the people is
remarkable—so reverent. About 40 stayed to the various class
meetings at the close of the service. Sunday school at 2 p.m.;
after that Sister Tinney and I went to two villages and held a
short service at each; two of the students rowed the boat for us.
A great many are living at their gardens for a few weeks, so were
absent. At our service the natives sat on the ground and we sat
on a log. Sister Tinney played the concertina to let the people
know it was time for service, and then we began. Sister Tinney
led, of course, as I cannot talk to them yet; but can sing their
hymns, as the reading is not at all difficult. Sister Tinney thought
I must have been practising the hymns on the way up, but I
had not even seen the outside of the hymn-book till we landed.
To-night we had our English service in Mr. Bromilow’s house.


Mr. Andrews preached from Psalm 138-3—a most helpful sermon.
What a responsibility rests on the missionaries! They have to
represent the Christ life to these natives, I realised this as I saw
how men and women, old and young, sat at the feet of Sister
Tinney as she brake the Bread of Life before them. They could
only know what she told them by lip and life.
I am taking charge of the house-keeping this week. It is no
small matter to direct five girls and teach them how to do the
work. It takes much longer than to do it all myself, but the girls
need to be taught how to do things. They stay for six months
often, sometimes much longer.
.When they go back to their villages they will influence their
people to be clean and neat. Much good is done in this way; we
take as many girls as we can manage. We buy their food and
pay them a small amount per month. They are very willing, but
want constant showing and directing.
We go every afternoon to the near villages. This afternoon
Nurse came also. We had the large boat and a crew from the
D ove. There was a fair wind, so we sailed over and rowed back.
We visited six villages on Fergusson Island. At the first 85
people gathered to the service, both men and women. After the
service Nurse asked if there were any sick folk, but at the first
two villages there was none. At all the others some needed
attention in various ways. It was like the stories of the Gospel
how the sick people gathered round. If only Jesus Christ could
come into their hearts! There were from 40 to 60 people at each
service. We got back in the cool of the evening. One of our
girls is sick with fever and Sister Tinney has been mothering her,
and she seems a little better now.
I love these dark people already—they appeal to all one’s
sympathies. I am and shall be very happy here , though happiness
was not my aim in coming here. Don’t think of this as a place
of misery and toil! The work fills up the days and the duties
become pleasures, because they are done for Jesus and they are
pleasant duties in themselves. I am struggling with the lan-
guage. Next week I can give the morning to it from school till
noon, as I shall not be house-keeping. To-day, Poati, a Fijian
teacher, put up a partition in the dining-room, which is twice the
size of ours at Prospect, to make a bedroom for me. My belong-
ings have not arrived yet, but as soon as they come I will set my
room in order.
Village and school took up to-day. We rise about 5.30 a.m.,
so try to get to bed at 9.30; but it makes the evenings very short.
1 have mastered enough words to get on all right in the school.


The girls who come regularly are v.ery smart, but some are very
irregular. We must make an effort to get all to come who can.
The girls are too useful in the gardens (yams) to be spared by
their parents.
16 th January j 1895.
This afternoon Mrs. Bromilow, Mr. and Mrs, Tomlinson
from Wedau (A.8.M.), and I, went to the villages in the Kenaia
district. There I saw the saddest sight I have ever witnessed —
a widow in her house (a prison really). It is the custom in Dobu
for widows to stay in a house, sometimes in a lean-to under a raised
house, for a long time, often two years. They must not come out
or speak to anyone. Their food is brought to them, but no one
speaks to them, and all this misery is put upon them because they
are widows. Her life is a living death. We held a short service
in the village, but she could not come. We went to the door of
her house, sang a hymn and prayed; but she might not respond in
any way. Her face is before me all the time. It would be worth
while coming to Dobu if only to make the people physically more
comfortable. They live happily enough when strong and healthy,
but the infants, the aged, and the sick are cruelly neglected. When
we got back to Dobu the boat, with its occupants (four whites and
eight natives), was photographed. In the proof my gossamer was
blown out by the wind, so I seem to be wearing a bonnet instead
of a hat. To-day Sister Tinney, our house girls, and I were
‘‘took’ 1 in group.
We were walking through a village to-day and heard a loud
thud behind us. A coconut had fallen from a high tree; we only
just passed the spot in time. How God protects us!
To-night the Ellen Gouian is in sight, so to-morrow our goods
will be here. We are very glad; it has been so awkward without
them.
Don’t be surprised if I go up to Heaven in a chariot of fire
some day! The country all round is very volcanic. At Siwao’o,
a little village on Dobu, there are boiling springs where the natives
cook their food, and the smell of sulphur at that spot is very
strong. We have had several slight shocks of earthquake since I
came here—they occur frequently.
A mail leaves to-morrow; there may not be another oppor-
tunity of sending news for a few weeks, but I will send this now
as there is no knowing when another boat will go.
My love to all the friends at Walkerville and elsewhere.
Your loving Minnie.


CHAPTER IV.
EARTHQUAKES AND THE LANGUAGE.
28th January,\ 1895.
Full-stop for a few days in this journal. Many things have
happened, but I have been doing nothing but lie about for a week.
I have not had the orthodox New Guinea fever. I got a good
deal of teasing last Saturday because when Mr. Tomlinson asked
after my health I said I had not had fever. He told them all this
as a great joke; I have not heard the end of it yet. After a day
or two of slight sickness, Mrs. Bromilow asked me not to attempt
work for the week. Saturday night was the beginning of it. Be-
hold me on Tuesday morning in the lap of luxury! Nurse set
one of the girls to rub the ache out of my joints, and another to
wield the fan, while I discussed jelly and biscuits. The comical
side of it all got the better of me; we all had a laugh about it.
I am at work again this week. Yesterday I took a class in
Sunday School, as we were short of workers. Having been in
Dobu two and a half weeks, you can guess the extent of my voca-
bulary. Fortunately, I can read their books. We read, or rather
they repeated after me, part of a chapter from St. Mark. Then I
talked to them for a while and then taught them their catechism.
They were girls from 10 to 14 years of age, and were most atten-
tive. White girls would have giggled, for no doubt some most
atrocious blunders occurred on my part.
Miss Walker came back from Wewemara last Thursday. She
has been very bad with fever, and looked so ill when she landed
from the boat, but is much better now. The two Sisters here
have taken the names of Sister Ellinor and Sister Jeannie instead
of Sister Walker and Sister Tinney, and I am Sister Minnie.
Everybody likes it much better. Last week Mr. Bromilow planned
me two afternoons in the villages by myself. He said he thought
I could manage. My opinion was that God would need to do
it all through me, as it seemed such an undertaking so soon after
arrival. However, being “off duty” for the week, the ordeal was
spared. I am house-keeping again this week, and have had a try-
ing day. Monday—washing, pouring rain, and seven girls to look
after. It gives me plenty of practice in Dobuan.
To-night I have just set my first batch of bread, and am
anxious to see how it will turn out. House-keeping here is very
different from house-keeping at home. We have everything that


is necessary here, but dinners need a lot of planning as we have
no fresh meat.
The one who looks after the house for the week has shorter
rounds for visiting three days a week, so it gives a little more
time; other duties go on just the same. Nurse has a variety of
patients, European traders, occasionally a Chinaman, a Kanaka,
and the natives.
One very sad case is causing us all much sorrow. One dear
little girl suffered much from rheumatism in her leg. Nurse had
her in her own room and gave her every attention, but the mother
took the child back to the village. On Saturday Mrs. Bromilow
went into the village, but they had hidden the little girl away.
Nurse went down, but they will not let her do anything. The
poor child cannot walk, and her people must have handled her
roughly, as Nurse is afraid the hip is out of joint now and thinks
the child will die. She is in great pain, but we can do nothing
when the parents are so obstinate. Isn’t it sad to think they will
let their heathen customs deprive their child of the care she needs?
Bedtime is here: this will keep till to-morrow. We must
retire early as we rise so early in the morning. No letters have
come yet. How I long to hear!
Good-night all.
29th January, 1895.
Another ordeal to-day—Sister Tinney has gone for a trip
in the Dove to Wedau—A.B.M. Station. Nurse has gone also.
This afternoon Mr. Bromilow was unable to come in to open or
close school, so sent word for Sister Walker and me to take this
duty. I had to open. This consists of giving out and starting a
hymn, leading in the Lord’s Prayer, and giving a few necessary
orders. The prayer is printed in the book, so I managed pretty
well.
This afternoon we saw the Dove off with great waving of
handkerchiefs. Mr. Bromilow is sending it to Wedau to take
Mr. and Mrs. Tomlinson home, as their own boat has not turned
up for some unknown reason.
Some of these natives are very odd in their ways. Dawesi
was told to iron the clothes this morning. She got about half
done by noon and wanted to leave the rest till to-morrow. I
said, “No.” In less than an hour she announced, “Calico gumara”
(finished). I went to see, and she had really done them all. Next
came a request that she could go to her village for a while. She
could be as quick as a white girl when she liked.
An unwritten law amongst these natives is “never be in a
28
Sister Minnie of Papua.


hurry,” and they obey it instinctively. I am using all my spare
minutes to make a vocabulary of all the words I have learned as
yet. The pronouns are simply awful—so many of them. “My
food” is a different word from “my thing.” There are exclusive
and inclusive pronouns, known as “pronominal terminations.”
Shall I ever know them? There seems so little time to settle to
study or for correspondence, but I am picking up the language all
the time and getting hold of the idioms. “Cup little you bring?”
—not “You bring a little cup”—is their way of arranging a
sentence
30th January, 1895.
Sister Ellinor and I went to Kegadoi this afternoon. At two
villages I spoke and Sister interpreted. The people had not seen
me before, and said, “Oh! it is an ignorant person from the foreign
land.” This was quite a polite way of saying that I did not know
their language. They were amazed that I could sing their hymns.
Sister Tinney took half my loaf away in the Dove. I must
set some more to-night. The first was pronounced good by those
who tasted. I hope the next lot will be as good. Shall I send you
the bill of fare for this week? We do not live on yams alone by
any means.
A schooner is in sight in the passage. Does she bring letters?
We have such a nice little girl here for the table. She waits
at table very nicely, but forgets to set out about half the necessary
articles. She puts on such a concerned look when I send her for
the missing things. Her name is Daisy, quite a relief after the
long Dobuan names the others possess.
To-day, the 31st, the Elleti Gowen arrived, also the long-
expected Albert McLaren; but alas! no mails by either of them.
Mr. Barnett and Mr. W. Barnett, sons of a Queensland squatter,
were on board the first-named vessel. They have been in New
Guinea some months collecting specimens for one of the Roths-
childs in England. They are on their way to another part of
the islands to continue their work. Mrs. Bromilow invited them
and us to dinner, and we spent a pleasant evening.
Another month gone—how time flies!
Kulia, the wife of Poati, is sick. Miss Walker went to see
her and took some English food; not long after we heard the
report of a gun, and a fowl was brought to the door as a present
from Poati. Fresh meat is a treat here. In less than an hour
that bird was roasting in the oven, stuffing and all. Just then a
splendid yam, about two feet long, was sent, and then four fine
fish from Mrs. Bromilow, Fish are rarely brought here, the
29
Fever, Earthquakes and Language.


natives like them too well. All the good things came at once. “It
never rains but it pours” came true this time.
Our boat was in use to-day, so we could not take our usual
visit to the far villages, so walked to three within easy distance,
and got back in time for school at 4.30 p.m.
We have had heavy rain this week. One of the villages we
passed through was very dirty, as the water had been allowed to
collect under the houses. The people were asked if it was their
village or the pigs’ village. They said, “We are very dirty. It is
a pigs’ village.” It is very hard to impress these people with their
badness. They assent to all you say, but they don’t want to be
better, and they don’t feel that their badness is any disgrace.
Sister Jeannie returned to-day from Wedau, also Nurse.
They have had a very pleasant trip. One of our girls who went
with Sister Jeannie has come back full of the news that she had
seen a horse. The people here have never seen a horse, only pic-
tures of one. Bomatu is quite an important personage now, and
holds a levee occasionally to tell of the wonders she has seen.
A woman on Fergusson Island died a .few days ago and left
young twins. One they buried alive with the mother, and would
have done the same to the other, but Harry, the trader (a Kanaka),
saved it. This Harry used to oppose the missionaries. He told
the people that Tapwaroro was a lie; now he helps the Mission,
and following the example of Marama and those who with her
saved Gideon, has determined to care for this baby. His wife
is a New Guinean. He came to the Mission Station and told us
about it, and bought some condensed milk.
It is good to find right influence spreading from Dobu to
other parts. He used to scoff at and openly oppose the work, but
has changed entirely. Nurse cured his foot a little while ago—
perhaps that helped to alter his views. Through the body to the
soul, you see!
There are some printers’ mistakes in the Dobuan Catechism
which want correcting. There are some 2,000 books to be gone
through, so we three Sisters will take an afternoon at it in turns
instead of doing the visiting, and wfill soon get through them and
start on the Testaments. There is a great variety of work to be
done here, but it all helps on to the one end —Dobu for Jesus
Christ.
Next week I have to go visiting the villages alone; humanly
speaking, God will be there though, and it will be all right.
To-morrow will be Sunday in Dobu, and you all at home
will be one with me in Spirit.


When it rains in New Guinea it rains to some purpose. This
afternoon Sister Ellinor and I went by boat to Siasia for the after-
noon service. We had scarcely begun in the open when a very
big wave came up almost over our feet. Then a thing like a
frog was washed up, and a man with a very mischievous look on
his face held it up on the end of a stick and asked what he should
do with it, thinking perhaps to make us jump. Sister just nodded
her head towards the sea and he threw it away. Then down came
the rain in torrents.
We and our congregation of about 25 people took shelter
under a house, which was built on piles about four and a half feet
from the groond. It was very close quarters. We sang another
hymn to let the people settle down again, but they seemed disturbed
about something in a few minutes, and we found a young river was
running under our mat into a hole just under me.
The house is at the foot of a steep hill, and the water was
pouring down to the sea. We put on our cloaks, and after a short
service stood up and waited for the rain to stop. Little streams
of water were pouring past us. I have never seen such heavy rain
before.
While we were waiting, Taubada (Mr. Bromilow) passed in
his boat, just coming back from his appointment. He had an oil-
skin coat, so had the laughing side of us. We got home without
getting very wet, with the exception of our feet, but very dirty
with sitting under the house. However, to-morrow is tub day.
We had another shock of earthquake to-day, about mid-day.
It was rather severe.
A rumble went under the house and the place shook. We were
at dinner at the time. Some of the old women here remember a
shower of ashes, and there is a tradition that long, long ago the
mountain on Dobu and the one on Normanby were on fire, so
don’t be surprised if we are either sent up or down suddenly
some day.
We had a nice English service to-night. Sister Jeanni'e led,
and gave a very good discourse on prayer and “answers” to
prayer. We have to take it in turns to lead this Sunday night ser-
vice for us white folks. My turn will be here soon.
4th February, 1895.
Last night we had another earthquake, the most severe they
have had yet. It came with such a bang, and the room seemed to
keep on rocking for some time afterwards.
It gave me a feeling akin to sea-sickness. I struck a light,
partly to see the time and partly to get rid of the uncanny feel-


ing. It was 12.30 a.m., just past midnight; but sleep was gone
for that night. Sister Jeannie got up too. She heard me moving
and came out of her room for a few minutes.
This morning, when dressing, another very slight shock
occurred.
Will you ask Mary Allen to make me two more navy blue
dresses like I had before? Blouses to be worn outside the skirt.
The wear on the navy dresses is much heavier than on the white
—the boating and the village work wear them so and the climate
seems to rot everything. I wear the collars and cuffs with them.
All the folk here like the costume.
About the mail, I feel like singing the old song:
Go to them and tell them from me
To write me a letter from home.
Mail day to-morrow, as a boat is going to and will take the
letters.
Give my love to all my friends. I am sending off a good
many letters by this mail—one for Walkerville Sunday School,
one for Port Wakefield Auxiliary, one for “The Children’s Hour”
and “The Review.” Have you heard from Arthur?
Don’t wait for a mail to be advertised to write —send them
via Cooktown. They will go direct there and then across by any
trader going.
Good-bye to all. With love and constant prayers for the well-
being of all my dear ones.
Believe me,
Yours lovingly,
Minnie.
To-day I witnessed such a sad scene. We had just come out
of school and were sitting down to breakfast, when news came
that a little baby in the next village was dead. Mrs. Bromilow
and Nurse went down, and soon after Mrs. Bromilow sent for me
to come. When I got there about twenty hired mourners were
wailing most dismally. The mother was sitting in front of the
house rocking the body of the baby in her arms and crying
piteously. This very woman kicked her last baby to death, and
by neglect probably hastened this one’s end, yet her cries were
heart-rending and her grief seemed genuine. When they wanted
to put the child into the grave she had almost to be forced to
give it up.
Little Doilasi, or Janie, as she is now called, is a sister to
the baby who died; but she again took her stand as a Christian
by keeping aloof from the heathen wailing and the rites of burial.
She went to the village, but would take no part in what went on.


6th February, 1895.
Yesterday I went for the first time alone in the boat to the
villages. “Alone” means no other white person, as I had one of
the girls and the two boys to pull. I had a very pleasant afternoon.
7th February, 1895.
To-day Mr. and Mrs. Bromilow went to Duan (Cape Pear-
son). They went in the Dove and took the whale-boat as well,
Poati, a native teacher, two girls, five students, captain and crew,
formed the rest of the load. Duan is a place they want to open
up soon. The last District Meeting recommended that Sisters
Ellinor and Jeannie should go there with a lay missionary and his
wife. The D ove and party will be away possibly a week.
To-day I went out again by myself to Siwao’o and other places.
The people are so pleasant. There is a woman who cannot walk
about at all. Sister Tinney has given her some patches to sew,
and she gets on very well wi‘th the ton-sewing. Each time I have
been to see her I have set some work for her. She is a nice
woman to talk to, but dirty! Ugh! These people are dirty—very
dirtv!
We have had a lot of rain and the paths in the hills are
slippery. At Edu I sat down in the path a little quicker than I
intended. Dawesi, the girl I had with me, saw the comical side
and laughed heartily. When we got home she described the scene
in very vivid language. Fortunately, I only got a little dirt on
one sleeve, so was respectable enough to finish my visits to these
not-over particular folk.
Both my “Sisters” are on the sick list to-night—one with
neuralgia and the other with a slight touch of fever.
I have planted some dimdim seeds to-day, in hope of getting
some new plants for the garden.
This has been a rather free day, being Saturday; but both
Sisters are a little indisposed, so I have had to do a little petting
up. They are such dear girls, and we three hit it very well.
The “Ivanhoe” has come in. It is such a nice schooner and
looked so pretty coming in. I have told Winnie in her letter
about it. This is only a sort of running journal of events, but must
take the place of letters until I have more time fo r writing.


34 Sister Minnie of Papua.
Sunday , 10th February , 7SPS.
This morning Sister Ellinor and I went across to Ebi eda
for the services—over seventy in that place. We had a very rough
time coming back, as the boys seemed hardly up to the business of
rowing. The men from the Ivanhoe came to the evening English
service.
Monday.
Such a hot day this has been —the worst since I have been
here. We had dinner at the other house to-day. Captain Steele
was there. He told us he could see us struggling along against
wind and tide. This afternoon Sister Jeannie went to the vil-
lages on Nikumara. The heat coming over was dreadful. We
held service at a few villages and then had to rest awhile. The
boys opened some young coconuts for us, so we had a refreshing
drink. The people on the island of Nikumara are very, very
dark —they hardly seem to take in the message when it is said
to them.
One poor old woman was quite blind and has very swollen
limbs. A disease known as elephantiasis is very prevalent on this
island. The legs swell till they are the same thickness all the way
down, and the people look as if they have young elephants’ legs.
We did not get back until seven o’clock, so got a good scolding
from Nurse and Sister Ellinor. The journey back was pleasant,
as the sun had set.
12th February , 1895.
Another very hot day this has been, but there is a breeze now.
Last night our girls were loth to retire. It was bright moonlight
and they were far from sleepy when the pati (bell) sounded.
Sister Tinney had to go down to them several times to make them
stop chattering and laughing. We have to be strict about having
quietness after the pati rings, for “give them an inch and they
might take an ell,”
We three Sisters had a discussion on the temperance and
women suffrage questions this morning. They are both very much
on the right side of both, so we agreed on most points.
Something is always happening. This morning Eroni, the
teacher on Fergusson, sent word that he was very ill. Nurse went
off to him at once, and Sister Jeannie went to look after things
at the other house.
Nurse found him very bad, so they have brought him here.
Nurse sat up part of the night with him and he seems better.


In the afternoon great shouting and excitement was heard
among the natives, and they announced that a steamer was in sight.
They must have very good sight, as we could not see it till some
time after. It was the Merrie England, the Government steam
yacht.
It is the only steamer that has ever been here, and when first
it came, three years ago, the natives were very scared.
She brought us a mail, but there was not a very big budget
for me. One home letter (Ellie’s), one from Amy Sanders, one
from Marian, one from Mrs. Odgers and Arthur and Will.
I mentioned our talk on the suffrage question yesterday, so
the news in the “Alliance,” that the Adult Suffrage Bill had
passed both Houses, was received with great approbation.
What a nice letter from the Australasian President for the
New Year! My two Mission Sisters did like it, and would be
glad to know the writer, but have to be content with admiring
her photo.
Isn’t it strange that so many unusual things should happen
while Mr. and Mrs. Bromilow are away? The Ivanhoe has come
and gone, the Merrie England too, and Eroni has been so very
ill. The Sisters say it is always so.
Have you had news from Arthur? Write often, won’t you?
Sister Jeannie will probably be going to the Colonies on
furlough. If she should come to South Australia (a very big if),
mind you invite her out to Prospect. This is purely a flight of
imagination, but it is the impossible that often happens. We are
having a spell of heat. It is barely bearable to-day.
Nothing of particular note has occurred to-day. If I send
a few curios by Miss Tinney, and she sends them by rail from
Ballarat—her home—will you pay the carriage from thence? I
can get the curios by barter here, but we do not have money, and
as I spent all but a few shillings in Sydney, I cannot give her
money to pay carriage. I will not send a heavy box—just a
few odds and ends. This will probably reach you at the same time
as my last, as the Merrie England will pick up our last mail at
Samarai.
This place teems with insect life, and they keep perambulat-
ing across the page and take occasional walks up my sleeve. The
mosquitoes are sampling my blue blood, moths are warming them-
selves at the lamp, and a cockroach has just perched itself on my
ink bottle. I can hear a pig rooting about under the house. He
is a regular nightly visitant, and saves the girls some of their
morning yard-sweeping by eating up the scraps. The others have
gone to bed, so I am all alone in my chamber. The midnight


hour is near, so I must stop. Good-night. Accept love, all of
you, from Minnie.
Judge Winter (Acting-Governor of British New Guinea in
Sir Wm. McGregor’s absence), and Mr. Green, his private secre-
tary, dined here to-day. I had the honour of sitting on the Acting-
Governor’s right hand. The Judge has stayed at Dobu in the
schooner, instead of going back to Cooktown in the Merrie Eng-
land, on purpose to see Mr. Bromilow, who was away at Duan.
He and Mrs. Bromilow returned to-day after a very encouraging
trip. This Cape Pearson is a very rough point, with a poor
anchorage for a schooner and a bad landing for boats.
The last District Synod asked for a lay missionary and two
Sisters to be sent there, and recommended Sisters Ellinor and
Jeannie for the work. No news has come to hand yet as to what
the Mission Board mean to do in the matter. This was pro-
posed before I came here. Whoever goes will have hard pioneer-
ing work to do.
The roughness of the coast makes boating dangerous, so a
great deal of walking would have to be done. The beach is
covered with broken coral and red ants crawl over you as you
walk along. The villages are built in the most inaccessible places,
and why —nobody knows.
Sunday.
Another Sabbath gone. How fast they fly! The members of
the native police force who are here with the Acting-Governor,
and the crew of the Government yacht, came to church this morn-
ing, also Judge Winter and his secretary. The police looked so
nice in their uniforms. Two of them are Dobu boys, some are
from Samarai, and some from Pert Moresby. It is really wonder-
ful how smart these natives can become with training. Ginger
(so called from the colour of his hair) is quite a character. He
is the sergeant-in-charge of the police on this trip, and has his
men well in hand. He marched them in and out of church with
quite a flourish. He is very daring and brave. He speaks very
fair English, so is valuable as an interpreter when the Governor
visits Dobu, as Ginger hails from here.
Mr. Bromilow made some big hits at the superstitions of the
people on Sunday afternoon in the church. On his trip to Duan
he passed the place where the spirits of the departed are said to
go. These people hardly look there, and if a ship were to anchor
in the bay it would never get away again, or the people on it. It
is a very weird spot. It is not surprising that the spirits are sup-
posed to haunt it. Mr. Bromilow, on purpose to prove the spirit’s


power, or want of it, anchored the Dove right under the shadow of
the dreaded mountain, in the haunted bay. He called aloud to
the spirits, told them to come and seize the ship and its company
(about 22 in all), called loud and long; but, of course, in vain.
Then in the morning the ship sailed out again in safety. He told
this in vivid Dobuan language in the church. The people were
bound to believe the testimony of so many, so superstition has re-
ceived a hard blow.
The troubles of Monday’s house-keeping affect to-day. One
of our girls has gone home. Another had a holiday, and one is
very sick. Both my table girls are among the absentees, and my
mainstay at the wash-tubs.
You know it takes two to do everything—to carry a bucket
of water, to wring a garment, or to set a table. It has been a
very hot day too. However, the four girls left to me really tried
hard, so we got through. They are but children, you know, even
the eldest amongst them. I got ten fair-sized fish to-day for the
worth of a penny. Yams are very scarce just now; we want them
badly.
Please post me some more of these notebooks. Send them
soon, as soon as ever you can. Life is a rush.
Cooking Pots: Big and Small.


Rev. loane Siatua, Samoan Native Minister,
Bwaidoga, Papua, and His Wife.


CHAPTER V.
ADVENTURES IN THE VILLAGES.
M rs. Bromilow was going to one of the distant districts to
nurse, and I went too. We had the large whale-boat with an
awning. The boys think it an honour to take us out in this big
boat; they had five to pull on each side and one to steer, and stuck
big feathers in their hair. The place we went to is a beautiful
bay on Fergusson Island, Numanuma by name, one of the pret-
tiest spots I have seen. The beach slopes a good deal, and except
on very smooth days, there is such a heavy swell that the boat can-
not land Without danger. We were favoured with very fine
weather. We landed at the boat-house and went in for a while.
Then we went for a tour through the villages. Mrs. Bromilow’s
concertina is out of gear, so she gave me a triangle to jingle
merrily, so the people were called to worship. When we got into
the village I acted as scout. Most of the people come and sit down
ready for the service, but sometimes a few stragglers stay in their
houses, so I took a look round and told them to come to Tapwa-
roro. One man was in his house. I called to him, and he said
he would come. He came, carrying a tiny baby, and a little mite
of a girl carried another. They were twins and looked sickly.
If something is not done, one of them will be killed or starved,
most probably, as these people won’t be bothered with two babies.
We arranged with the teacher’s wfife to take one of them and
bring it up, unless the parents wish to keep both.
Gave my first address in Dobuan at one of the villages to-day,
for 1 have been visiting alone lately where services are not held,
and where we can just visit each woman personally. Mrs. Bromi-
low turned to me with, “You say a few words.” I said, “You
will translate?” but she asked me to try Dobuan, and I did. I
was glad the brown folk listened. Only six weeks here and fluency
seems a long way off, I have a bad memory for learning by rote.
I trust and pray for advancement in the writing out of little ad-
dresses. God does help me most wonderfully.
An earthquake to-day and a strong wind.
Mr. Bromilow has influenza—he does not often get sick.
Sunday week some baptisms are to take place—seven in all.
These natives have to go a year on trial.
As Sister and I went into one of the villages to-day we saw
a woman disappearing into the bush in a great hurry. These
women wear so many grass petticoats, and they wag from side to


side when they run, that she looked so comical hurrying off. We
asked why she had gone and her face had been blackened. She,
they said, was ashamed for us to see her. This is a hopeful sign,
just to find them becoming ashamed of their customs.
At our Workers’ Meeting to-night, Mr. Bromilow asked me
to take the Sunday services at Naikwara and Rakurakuia. He said
he thought I could manage it, but it seems such a responsibility.
Hymns, prayer, address—all in Dobuan, but God will help.'
The latest news is that Mrs. Bromilow and I were both
drowned and wrecked on the way to New Guinea. It was in the
Cooktown paper, and Mr, Meeks contradicted it, because he knew
we were safe in Dobu. We hope no such report has been circu-
lated. and that nobody at our homes has been disturbed about it.
The Zephyr deserves to go down at any time —she •is such an
old tub.
I have just come in from holding my first Sunday service. I
took two big pictures—“ The pearl of great price” and “Christ
blessing the little children.” In the first village I tacked them to
the trunk of a big tree and sat on the spreading roots; my umbrella
did duty as a pointer. Two of our girls were with me and
two youths to pull the boat, and as they knew the hymns they
could help with the singing.
We began with “Jesus paid it all,” then had prayer, fol-
lowed by the Lord’s Prayer—then “Take the name of Jesus with
you.” The people listened to the talk on the pictures and seemed
to understand. “When he cometh” w 7 as sung, and the Benediction
closed the service. Home in the boat after a very pleasant time.
One man said I had given them a short service, but when I had
drunk some more w r ater of Dobu I would preach longer ser-
mons. They seemed so surprised to see me come alone for Tapwa-
roro. Only a few Sundays ago I was there with one of the
Sisters, and they commented on my ignorance of Dobuan. I had
just got my pictures up at the last village, and the people were
seated on the ground, when a man informed me that I was just
under a coconut tree and a nut would drop on me, but it didn’t.
Nurse, Sister, and I went to Begasi to-day. We had the
whale-boat and a fine strong crew of six boys. We took three
little girls with us, one each to carry boxes, cloaks, pictures, medi-
cines also.
We started at 7.30 in the morning and reached Begasi just
before 10 a.m. The boys had to pull all the way—no wind. As
we had left home early we hungry for breakfast before going
into the villages. A teacher’s empty house, and the cook boys
brought some food in the boat, so it all made, put together, a
good breakfast. Then the boys rowed us across to Gomwa, and


we each had a service in each village, and Nurse looked up the sick
people in all. Then we got on board again—rowed to the other
side and found a lovely river. We, Sister Jeannie and I, had
talked five times in services and were a wee bit tired. After a
cup of tea we started for home. The boys had taken down the
awning and put up the mast, so if a wind came when we got out
of the bay they could sail home. But fortune did not favour us,
and they had a long pull home again. I turned into bed soon after
reaching home. I don’t think lam properly acclimatised yet, as
a day like that finishes up with a bad headache.
I am so thankful to have sufficient hold on the language to
tell the people about Jesus, Having got so far in six weeks, I am
hoping for more fluency soon —pray, all of you, for this, as it is
such a big hill to climb over.
Rain, heavy rain, to-day. We can hardly hear ourselves
speak. We are in the sitting-room and two of our girls are help-
ing with the sewing. A rat is in the store; we can hear it
scratching. We asked the girls if they were afraid, and I would
like some of you people, who jump on the table and scream at the
sight of a mouse, to have heard the tone of contempt in which they
said, “What! frightened of a rat!” Then Dawesi spoke—that in
the silly season, as she expressed it, before the missionaries came,
they used to think rats were werebanas or witches and be frightened
of them. Send along by first chance patches for the girls’ quilts;
we are hard up.
A comical scene took place to-day in a village. Mrs. Bromi-
low was addressing a large crowd and asked how many of them
prayed to God. No one answered, so she asked them to pray a
short prayer after her. They all seemed afraid to open their
mouths till one very old woman led off. "Very good,” said Mrs.
Bromilow. “Now again!” and this time more chimed in. When
rhe prayer had been repeated by all Mrs. Bromilow tried to go
on with the address, but the old woman who led off had got into
the spirit of the thing and intended to keep on being very good.
“That will do now,” said Mrs. Bromilow, and our virtuous friend
repeated it after her. Another sentence was tried, and again it
was echoed. After one or two more attempts all the folk tried
to tell her not to speak, but that very good had put her on her
mettle and she was wound up to go. At last we sang a hymn and
then she subsided. You have no idea how funny it all was, I felt
an almost uncontrollable desire to laugh, but that would have been
too shocking a proceeding.
After the service one woman varied the programme by admir-
ing our Marama’s nose.


There is an immense population on this Fergusson. Several
good native teachers are stationed there, but so many more helpers
are needed. The chief of Sawa’edi lost his wife last week. We
went to see him. He was sitting in a hut built on the ground
instead of on piles. He had blackened his brown skin from head
to foot. We asked what had caused his wife’s death, and he said a
werebana (witch). We asked who had seen the witch, but no-
body had. One man said the dead woman had been ill twenty
days—that might mean anything, as these people have very little
idea of counting.
Sister is indulging in a bad cold on this her birthday. Mr.
Bromilow set the fashion a fortnight ago, and a good many have
followed suit. When such a great man leads the way, of course, it
is well to follow. One elderly woman wished me good-bye—
“Kaioni ategu”—(“Good-bye, my heart, or from my heart”) —a
term of endearment, so 1 said, “Good-bye, my mother,” which
seemed to please her. We are adopted in all sorts of ways by some
of the old people. The Sisters have fathers and mothers all over
the place.
These are a curious people. They are dreadful hypocrites.
They scorn the idea of witchcraft when we talk about it and say
they want “Tapwaroro” (Christ’s religion) above all things: but
they stick to their customs all the same, A woman at Piasia was
making a great confession to me, when one of my boat boys tuned
to me in great disgust and said, “She is telling lies, Sister Mimie!”
Nurse went away to Panaieti in the Dove. We gave ler a
good send-off—quite a chorus of Kaioni’s, “Farewell, we’ll meet
again!”
At the Workers’ Meeting last night a branch Avas establshed
at Kenaia and another on Fergusson. The girls’ school will le in
my hands, and Mr. BromiloAV said some very kind things abou: my
work, which encouraged me very much. I shall need your prayers,
if anything, more than ever. What a grand promise in John D:4!
“When He putteth forth His own sheep He goeth before thm.”
We are praying for souls. You will see that I have no vilage
work on the Sunday that I take the English service in the louse
at night.
Jerry, one of the teachers, died last night—he has a cuious
history. He was a Fijian by birth and got his living by dnng
for pearls. He was at Dobu before the missionaries came. He
was converted in one of the mission services and became a yeat
help, and afterwards got the position of teacher in one of our
districts. He married an aboriginal from Queensland (]\ary


Ann), and had a son known as “Little Jim.'’ Both wife and
child are buried in the little cemetery here, and now Jerry has
followed them. We had a service this morning in the Fijian
house. Mrs. Bromilow gave a very good address, and we sang
“Shall we gather” in Dobuan. The old chief, Gaganamore, was
there. He was battling with emotion and trying to keep back his
tears. Jerry had been very much liked by the natives.
Mr. and Mrs. Bromilow and I had another talk about the
school, and decided time in the morning to be from 9.30 to 11.30
afternoon to remain the same. Sister Jeannie will come in and
help with the sewing on Friday afternoons. I should feel it very
much if the school were to go down when put into my hands. Mr.
Bromilow has more confidence in me than I have in myself. There
have been two Sisters at it all along, and then three came. I am
a bit afraid, but “by my God have I leaped over a wall.” (2nd
Sam. 22:20 or 30.) Monday and Tuesday I go in the boat to
near villages, and Wednesday afternoon to the mat-making with
the girls. Catechisms have been printed with errors. We Sisters
are doing them between us when we are not house-keeping. I am
for study, as it is no joke preparing talk in an almost unknown
tongue.
The mail has just arrived—ten letters, but only two from
home. You don’t keep me up in Walkerville news; I should like
to know how the folk there are getting on. I am sorry that any-
one should have had to think that Mrs. Bromilow and I were
drowned. News has just come in that the Zephyr, in which we
came here, has been dismasted on the way back to Sydney. How
true it may be I cannot say. Send cuttings of news from papers, or
better still, papers with the important matters marked. We read
in a paper received that the “Adult Suffrage Bill” has received the
Royal assent. Three cheers !
To-day has been uneventful, but to-night we have had a very
unpleasant experience. We were sitting at tea just at 7 p.m.,
when a rumbling sound was heard and the house began to rock.
The earthquakes we have had before have come with a sharp
shock and been done with. This one was quite different. It began
with slight rumbling and rocking, and gradually increased in force.
At first we sat still at the table, but as it grew worse we went
down the steps out into the open. The rocking increased, and we
had to hold on to one another to keep ourselves from falling. We
had forgotten to put out the lamp; it hangs from the roof, and
we could see it through the window swinging to and fro. A pic-
ture fell, then quietness, and we re-entered the house, only to


come out as the quaking began again. It was the night for ser-
vice, but Mr. Bromilow thought it best not to have the lam>s lit,
so we had it in the open.
Mr. Bromilow stood on one of the steps, we had chain, and
the people sat all round us on the grass. Village folk were present
in numbers; they had come up to the station in a big fright. Two
of the women whose daughters were here begged them to go home
with them, but the girls preferred to stay. My books wee all
thrown down and a clock stopped. We had fifteen shocks h all,
two of them serious ones. When the rocking was persistert we
went out on to the lawn, but grew quite hardened.
All the sick folks come here for treatment, as Nurse s far
away at Panaieti. Mrs. Bromilow has her hands full. I find
sick folk in the villages. We Sisters take our medicine baslet to
give out simple remedies. If anyone would like to help in send-
ing me eucalyptus, quinine in tabloid, vaseline, etc., old limn, I
would be thankful.
The tide was against us going to Ebi’eda (90 people). The
people watched for our boat, and when they saw it coming, stirted
off along the beach and were there as soon as we.
During the service a pig intruded. The women gave it a
few knocks, and it retired with a squeak, which nearly upse: my
gravity. Forty people assembled to meet us at a small village an
hour further on. We had a very hot journey back, and my arms
got painfully sunburnt. I was astonished afresh at the atteition
of the people, but they are slow to alter their habits.
I went for the first time into the hill villages. The )aths
are terrible (rugged and steep), but the view grand and extersive.
It was a wonderful sight as we came back. The full moon rose
from behind the hills, and we caught gleams through the >alm
trees as she crept up.
I am trying to work up the attendance of the school, t is
hard to get at the absentees. Two mothers told me that heir
(two girls) were hiding in the bush, as they had seen me appmch-
ing, and I went after them, and there they were, hidden in the
long grass. They were caught and we had a good laugh. Sold-
mg would only keep them away. I want to make friends anc get
them to like school. To my delight, they turned up at the 4 >.m.
school.
Rain, and we are glad, for our tanks are low.


God’s help and goodness is great. He helped me to speak
with ease. At one of the villages a little boy had died. One
woman said the witch ( werehana ) had done it. The mother
interrupted and said that she knew God ruled and the child was
in Heaven. It was good to hear her speak like that, as the people
put all death and sickness down to these witches.
I mentioned the Governor being here lately over a case of
murder. It has proved more serious than was expected. The
people had made all preparations for a fight, and had killed several
dogs and pigs for a battle-feast, because there had been a murder
far away in a lonely part of the district.
The police of the Merrie E?jgland marched inland and up the
bed of the river just in the nick of time, to find the people with
their spears arrayed on either bank. The police told them to go
back to their villages. One tribe went back, but the other stayed
and attacked the police with their spears. The sergeant-in-charge
called on the police to fire. Some were afraid to do so—but
others fired. The hill tribes did not know the power of a gun, so
did not run. Five were shot and more wounded. It is very sad.
but the affair wall in the end save lives. The police also arrested
a man at Numanuma for threatening one of our teachers.
Mr. Bromilow T went to meet the class members for tickets
at Taibes’ie and Numanuma. Mrs. Bromilow accompanied him
and I went with them. A fair wind, but as we sailed Mr. Bromi-
low said to the captain of the crew, “Where are the rowdocks?”
“Alas! left behind.” Somebody had blundered, and the captain
was chaffed as we turned round and returned for them.
The place was reached at last, and there we were regaled
with a real feast—fish, yams, coconut milk, Fijian pudding and tea.
A present of yams was given to Mr. and Mrs. Bromihnv. We
could not possibly finish the food, and the girls had a feast too.
Fijian teachers’ houses are very clean and nice. I should have said
that a meal provided for the boat-boys outside. To return to
the Fijian house and its description. They are large houses, and
the floors are covered with mats. One end of the room has the
floor raised and is the place of honour. After the meal a bowl
of water is passed round for us to dip our fingers in, and then a
towel to dry them. This is necessary in Fiji, as knives and forks
are superseded by fingers.
Then we sailed for the next place, and the islands about
looked glorious. We found the teacher and his wife in distress
because they had mistaken the day, and did not expect us till to-


morrow, so had no meal ready. They had seen us coming, how-
ever, and a fowl was in the pot and yams steaming. It would have
been an unpardonable offence to go away without eating, so we
made up our minds to wait a bit. After the meal, Mrs. Bromilow
and I went on to some of the villages, and Mr. Bromilow held
the class for the members. We got home in the dusk. Mrs.
Bromilow asked me to stay for tea, so I sent word to the Sisters
not to expect me till later.
Little Gideon was very lively when we got in. He is grow-
ing such a bonny boy, and he does like to be nursed by white folks.
I took him and gave him his tea, and to everyone’s surprise he
went to sleep. He generally has a good cry before dropping off,
but must have been very tired.
Next day a long day’s visiting. Started at 8 a.m. for an
hour’s journey round the coast, and landed. I told the boat-boys
to go to Naikwara and wait there for me, then climbed the hills,
and the paths were very steep. During the morning I had short
services in eight villages. If only the people would believe to
their salvation. I gave medicine to about fifteen sick folks. I
scrambled up to a rough house to see a sad case—the „ old
woman was a skeleton, and her poor hands and feet were eaten
away with sores. She looked dreadful and her case was
incurable. I could do nothing for her body, and her mind was
dark; but I tried to tell her of Jesus and Heaven. After four
hours’ tramp we (I and two native girls) got down to the beach
again, w r here the boat was waiting. While I had the service the
girls made tea for me and cooked their own yams.
About 2 p.m. we started for Tau’ulu, on Normanby. I spent
the afternoon amongst the villages there, and got home about 6
p.m. The Sisters thought I was attempting too much, but I do
not feel any the worse for it, and hope to be able to do it again.
Air. and Mrs. Bromilow went to Wewemara to meet the class
members, and will be away till Sunday night.
We have had rather an anxious time to-day with Poati, our
capable native teacher. Pie came up, looking queer. He was
burning hot, face and eyes swollen, and we thought from the
symptoms it was sun-stroke. We followed the directions of a
medical book and applied wet cloths to neck, head and chest, and
about midnight he was normal and well enough to be left.
Both Mr. and M rs. Bromilow are away, and they undertake
the medical work. We are glad he came round all right. A good


native teacher died that same night who has been ill for some
time. A valued worker was he. He was buried here to-day, after
the morning service. All the teachers came over to the funeral.
His wife and two children will probably go back to Samoa in a
short time.
Mr. and Mrs. Bromilow are back, and saw where the recent
earthquake had opened the ground and left an open crack the
width of a child's arm. One native report is, “Hell came up, but
the water put it out.” At the Trobriands a rent was made and
a tidal wave washed away some houses. Another report says, “A
child was swallowed up,”
In a village to-day I saw
man were in a group on the
pigs. He had tied a string to
them fight one another. The
a cruel deed. Four women and a
ground. The man had two little
two legs of each and was making
bigger one was almost killing the
little one, and the string was cutting their legs. I made him let
them go quickly, and asked him why he did it. He showed me a
mark on his hand where the pig had bitten him, and said he
wanted to hurt it. The women had looked on, thinking it great
fun. It does no good to scold these people, but I told him how
cruel it was, and he looked a bit ashamed.
Staff of Native Teachers, Papua.
47
Adventures in the Villages.


A Papuan Village Policeman.


CHAPTER VI.
PAPUAN LEGENDS AND PAPUAN CUSTOMS,
We view the temperance battle from afar here. I feel some-
how on a vantage ground and want to watch the enemy being
vanquished, rhough I cannot join in the strife.
We are fighting sin and Satan here all the time in other
forms.
There is a heavy penalty in Papua for selling drink to the
natives. No spirits come to the Mission Station, except a little
brandy kept among the medicines.
Up in the hill country this morning I got a bird’s-eye view
of the district—the Mission Station at Barnagura and far-off
Begasi, Duan, Nekumara and Tisiana. It was a lovely sight, and
God seemed very great as I gazed at His wonderful works. My
faith got a big lift up! God was present although the congre-
gations were small, for a great many women have gone to the
opposite island to weed their yam-gardens.
The girls are singing the evening hymn to the tune, “Jesus,
tender Shepherd, hear me.” It sounds so sweet. They often sing
from prayer-cime to bed-time.
We have Dr. Loria staying at Dobu. His fame reached Mr.
Bromilow long ago. He is an oddity! Report says “he invited
his friends to dine with him one day at Samarai. He went round
and borrowed various eatables for the feast. When the guests sat
down he said, ‘Will you have some bread? It is not mine! Will
you have some It is not mine!’ and so on, until he came to
the salt, when he said, ‘That is mine!’ ” When he visits he comes
to stop. Dr. Loria is studying the customs of different nations
and is a clever linguist, but stammers dreadfully. He is an Italian,
and is specially clever in distinguishing the different vowel sounds,
and Mr. Bromilow will consult with him in reference to the more
difficult vowel sounds of this language. Dr. Loria has picked up
some strange legends from different parts of the group through
an interpreter.
On one island near Samarai they tell how this archipelago
was formed. A long time ago a man, his dog, and his grand-
mother lived on the mainland. One day the dog began to bark
at the foot of a big, big tree. The man went to see what was
the matter, and found some things which we now call fish, and
wondered what they were, and as he stood another fish dropped


down from the top of the tree. He climbed to the very top and
looked on millions of fish swimming in water inside the tree. He
took a fish home, cooked it, and told his grandmother to eat it.
“If it is not good to eat and you die, it will not matter; you
are old. I am young; I must not die.” The fish was very good,
so he called his friends and told them. They decided to chop
down the tree, but it was very big, and night came on, so they
slept, to begin again next day. In the morning every chip had
gone back to the tree again, and it was whole.
More men were called and they tried again, but could never
finish in a day, and every night the chips went back into the tree.
One day a little boy made a fire of chips to roast his yam, and
the next morning the tree was whole, with the exception of the
chips which had been burned. So the people decided to chop each
day and burn the chips, until one day the tree fell towards the
south. The tree broke, the fish swam out, and each piece of the
tree became an island; hence this great archipelago named the
“Louisiades.”
Another legend of the same island tells that the happy places
of departed souls is under the ground. When they have a great
surplus of food they send all they don’t want up to the earth from
underneath; hence a good harvest. When there is not much over
a little is sene up; hence a poor harvest. These folk get strange
ideas.
Mr. Bromilow and the two Sisters, after an early lunch,
left for Fergusson Island. Mrs. Bromilow invited me to lunch
to meet Dr. Loria. He is a comical man, and if he did not
stammer so much would be good company. He is a Roman Catho-
lic, but attended our services yesterday most religiously. He can-
not say enough in praise of Dobu singing.
Heavy rain. We have had the Sacrament this morning, and
the native students partook for their first time. The teachers were
there and the class members were admitted. One old woman came
too, but knowing of her evil life Mr. Bromilow sent her out, and
told them all that only baptized members were admitted to the
Sacrament, and the members on trial just to look on.
It was a very impressive time for all. Mr. Bromilow explained
the reason why we took the Sacrament. He said, “If any of you
are good, or only bad a little, go outside. We are bad, but Jesus
died.” It was a time of heart-searching for us all. It meant a
great deal to these natives to take the bread and wine. It was a
breaking through a heathen custom which forbids them to eat be-
fore certain of their relatives. However, they all went through it
all right.


Still about the Father’s business! I have been spending two
days on my back with a severe headache. Everything here is put
down to fever, but I won’t admit to much fever, although the
headache was pretty bad. We had the school examination on Wed-
nesday morning. I was only in for part of it. Ninety-three were
present—boys and girls. Mr. Bromilow and Dr. Loria judged
the work, and the prizes were given out afterwards. Mr. Bromi-
low, the day after, sent me an encouraging report. The girls are
no trouble at all to manage, but their brains are not very first-
class.
As I went through the yam gardens to the hill villages I
called out to the women at wmrk weeding.
“Waine dimdim, nate”—“That’s the foreign woman’’—was
their greeting, so I went through the poles and admired their
yams. They, the yams, look splendid growing. They twine round
poles, something like hops.
“Where are you going?” was their question. “To your vil-
lage,” I said. One suggested having Tapwaroro there. This
seemed a good plan. We sat down amongst the beautiful plants
and Christ's banner was waved where the witch and sorcerer had
had their fling for so long. The women joined in the service so
nicely, sang well, and seemed to understand better than usual.
Good Friday. 12th April, 1895.
We spent a quiet day in a quiet station. All the students,
boys, and girls got permission to go off for the day to their vil-
lages. The girls on the station were up with us in the evening,
and we got them to show us native games, and sang together at
fhe ringing of the curfew bell, “I will sing for Jesus,” in Dobuan.
Easter Sunday.
The glad day of the resurrection, and the services gave us
joy. These natives have poetry and imagination in their natures
At tea time rast night little Bomatu came in and said in an
excited manner, “Waisana, waisana” (ladder, ladder). We asked
where, and she said, “In the sky.” We went out to see, and, sure
enough, the clouds formed almost a perfect ladder in the sky.
Sister Jeannie began about Jacob’s ladder, but she had barely said
the word “Jacob,” Avhen Bomatu rattled off the whole Bible story.
She is smart, and never forgets the stories she has heard in church.
The children were fairly hugging themselves with delight and
saying, “Waisana, waisana.” I suggested that if it reached down
here we might climb it, and Dawesi exclaimed, “Oh, when shall
we enter Heaven!”


A mail arrived in the night and the letters were sorted at
daylight, so the first hours of this Easter Monday were spent in
perusing them.
A small school to-day. It is the season for digging up the
ripe yams, and all the women and girls are in their gardens. These
yam gardens are beautiful.
In the hill country again to-day, I never get tired of the
view from the top, though the “pull up” is dreadful. Crossing
over to Tau’ulu our keel scraped the reef twice, but we were not
in danger. One girl named Gaigu I w T as interested in, and she
told me she used to live in the Sisters’ Home and was in class
for a short time. Since then she had been very wicked, but had
given it up, and would soon ask to join class again. Evidently
she knows right from wrong.
Our girls have been chatting about the times when the men
used to roast their victims. I asked, “Why did they roast the
victims alive?” and Bomatu said, “Oh! that is the nature of
Dobuans!”
No power but God’s could do what has been done in Dobu.
Another of our fine native teachers has died. His name is
Eroni, a Fijian. This is a great shock, and it is the third death
among the teachers since I have been here. We are so short of
workers!
Tell me in your news of Walkerville if any more of my girls
have come into the Kingdom. I am sending them a letter by
this mail. Give the Endeavourers this greeting: Numbers 6, 24-26.
I did not go, as I expected, to the usual appointments. Mr.
Bromilow sent over to say he did not think it would be wise in
such rough weather.
In the afternoon service, I was present. Mr. Bromilow spoke
forcibly, and the people were moved, especially when he told them
Eroni’s last words;
“laruiaruagu i waiwai. la iamwa-iamwa tuka be pili pili
wagi i mai, be ia gem, ta garewa ea ruku.”—“My spirit is strong.
I am only waiting for the canoe to come and I will get on board
and go into Heaven.”
A lovely thought! Only waiting for God’s canoe! A thought
well understood by these natives! Mr. Bromilow then compared
the Christian’s death with those who say “Tapwaroro” is a lie.
God and His judgment you will meet! Where will your Bweb-
weso be then? “Shall we gather” was sung at the close. We will
all meet there! I wonder who will be first to walk by the river
of life!
Your loving Minnie.


A cutter dragged its anchor. Some of our boys and some
from a trader’s boat swam out and brought it back.
Rain, rain, rain! Ants in swarms are seeking refuge in my
bedroom.
Sunaay.
Desp te the rough weather, we had a splendid congregation.
I afterwards taught a class of girls. With Sister in the after-
noon, we were trying to land at one village, when a huge wave
drenched our skirts, for the boys were slow in pushing off. I
went on to Tutu. Seated on a log, 38 people gathered around
me and joined in the service, also two small, noisy pigs, which
squeaked and fought at intervals.
The people were looking round, and I found that Poati, the
teacher, was returning home. I was not altogether pleased, as I
object to an audience other than Dobuans. The women came
round me and said, “You will talk to us and Poati to the men.”
But Poati told them “the woman was going to talk and not he,”
So they laughed and joined our group. On account of the thun-
dering of the waves on the beach, talking loud made me hoarse,
and I had to fall back on Poati for the closing prayer.
As we got into the boat we had the joy of seeing drinking
coconuts, and all enjoyed a drink—better than lemonade.
A feast for a hungry soul contained in a brotherly letter
that was a real joy to read, although Ben does not approve of my
flight from Australia.
The South Australian Ladies’ Auxiliary seems to be doing a
deal of work in the missionary line. Write and tell me all about
the Easter Offering.
Arthur’s notes from China were such precious thoughts. May
Day has come. “We only pass this way once.” No news of the
Meda. We live in expectation corner and do not know that
vessels are near until they appear in the Straits.
These people are the essence of “cheek” at times. They
are quite innocent of any attempt to be rude, and err so comically
that one cannot be vexed. To-day in the hills I had just finished
the service when a woman, in the coolest way possible, asked me
to pay them. I said, “What for?” “Oh! for listening to your
Tapwaroro!” I told them it was God’s word, not mine, and they
ought to be glad to hear, instead of asking for pay.
In the afternoon I had a pleasant surprise. On coming down
to the boat from a village, I met Mrs. Bromilow. She had
started from one end of the district and I at the other. I got
into her boat, so had company home.


A boy died in one of the hill villages a few days ago. When
I went in. yesterday all the friends and relations were met to-
gether for a mourning feast. Great pots of food were bubbling
over the fires and some of the people were scraping old coconuts.
I dio wish I could have told these dark heathen that the boy was
safe in Heaven, but I dared not say so.
Two fresh cases have just come to light of mothers doing
away with their little babies. One was strangled and another
starved to death. And yet the mothers wail and make a great
show of mourning over the dead bodies at the burials.
Do you remember the story of the two goats who met in a
narrow pass n the mountains and fought for the passage? In a
very narrow pass in the hills two (not goats) met, I and a man
with an axe over his shoulder. It is a place where a narrow path
leads between two steep walls of rock. I wondered how we were
going to pass one another. When we had passed he shouted out
to know whcie I was going, so I satisfied his curiosity. These
people always want to know “Where are you going? What for?
And who is going with you?”
Early, 2 a.m., we were awakened by an earthquake. “Roused”
is the proper word. Sister Jeannie reminded me of this when a
day or two ago I made the remark in fun that nowadays things
without earthquakes were commonplace.
The students have just dug up their first lot of yams. They
are such big ones. This is quite a triumph for them. The Dobuans
nere have an idea that the yams must be planted and looked after
by women, that witchcraft must be performed over them or they
will not grow. The idea for the students is to be self-supporting
as far as food is concerned. Of course, the gardening takes up a
part only of their time, as they have their studies and other work
to see after. No women had a hand in their gardens, and the yams
are the biggest and finest produced anywhere. So much for the
new religion, Tapwaroro Yams.
The other day the students all marched up to the verandah
each bearing a big yam as their first fruits for Mr. Bromilow, the
Dobuan missionary.
The yams looked like great Indian clubs. They have a large
storeroom full of them
’Tis Mrs. Nicholls’ birthday. My prayer for her and Leslie
is. “Peace be to thee and to thv house” (1 Sam. 25:6) and to
L , “The beloved of the Lord shall dwell in safety by Him.”


I had a comical experience to-day. I started off in the boat
with three o.t the most stupid boys it has been my lot to have as
oarsmen. It was very low tide, so we had to look out for reefs.
One boy haa to look out and the other two to pull. The first
boy would sec a big stone just under the water, so would call out
for one of the boys to back. About twenty times this conver-
sation took place. “You back water,” naming the boy. “Who?”
“You!” —very vigorously. By that time we would be scraping
along the stones. I would like to have laughed, but I scolded
instead. Then they were so very careful that they avoided the
rocks and struck a mud bank. Leisurely they got out and pushed
the boat off. The fun came in at the landing place. By rowing
and getting out and pulling the boat, they could not get within
about 50 feet of the dry land. Between me and the shore stretched
soft mud and pools of water. Any other boys would have crossed
hands and carried me, but these jibbed. One said I would be too
heavy, another said his arm was sore, and the third looked on.
Generally, they are rather over-anxious to carry us, the foreigners;
but these boys would not move.
Some women were just coming along the beach with baskets
on their heads, so one put down her load and offered me her back.
1 thought some other way would be better, so she offered to carry
me in her arms. She told me to lift up my skirt as she would
soil it. These people don’t wash every day, as they might make
the sea muddy, so her caution was necessary. However, I pre-
ferred the dirt on the outside rather than nearer to me, and said
my calico could be washed afterwards. She picked me up like a
baby and landed me high and dry, leaving her card in the shape
of a beautiful circle of dirt where her arms had held me. Still,
I was glad of her timely aid, as I should have had to take my
boots and stockings off and wade. I turned round to the boys and
said, “My rowers are weak to-day, but the woman was strong,”
and they had the grace to look ashamed.
These people don’t do something for nothing, you know, so I
was not surprised when almost before the woman set me down she
asked, “Where’s my pay?” which, of course, I gave her.
Workers’ trade-marks I carried home, for I slipped several
times on the wet tracks, without injury; but you ought to have
seen mv dress.


Eliesa Duigu.


CHAPTER VII.
SANAROA AND THE VISIT OF THE MEDA.
The Meda is in Samarai and is quarantined for a month, for
fear of bringing smallpox from New Britain, “So near and yet
so far.” But our anxiety is over for she was so long in coming.
Mr. Bromilow has gone with the Government boat to-day to
buy land for a new Mission Station at Duan. The Sydney Con-
ference has appointed a lay missionary and two Sisters to Duan.
As no lay missionary is yet sent, and while Sister Jeannie is away
on furlough there will only be two Sisters here; unless more workers
are sent, the station cannot be established.
These people are the root and stem of untruth. Those who
know them best say that their chief characteristics are hypocrisy and
deceit, and my experience goes to prove the fact. There is a very
bad old woman in Nemunemu, close by, but to hear her talk she
might be very good indeed, I was in her village to-day, and talked
to her about sending her daughter and grand-daughter to school.
She got in such a temper. “What!” said she, “do you think I would
hinder them? Why, I tell them to go, and strike them if they
don’t go.” She worked herself up into a passion because I could
think she would keep the girls away. Everybody knows she is one
of the worst enemies of Tapwaroro, and was speaking falsely.
A pretty sight was seen by me to-day as I saw women making
grass skirts of the coconut leaf torn into strips and dyed a bright
red, the next strip of brown, and so on. They showed me the
whole process. The dye is made from most innocent looking leaves
with fine red veins. These they boil in one of their great earthen
cooking pots until the water is quite red, then they wring the
leaves tight and throw them out. The grass they want dyed they
put into the pot. It is then hung over a bar of wood to dry.
The people of Dobu do not often go to the trouble of dyeing their
dobcs (skirts), but these were being made for some special
occasion.
An epidemic of sickness (influenza) is raging. All the people
at one village Wanted medicine of some sort. The ground in
T au’ulu is swampy, and we are afraid we shall lose some of the
people there, as they will not all be sensible enough to come for
medicine, and we cannot be in all places every day.
Just as I was leaving a village, a little child came running


up to say that Elizabeth was sick and had come in her canoe,
but could not walk fast. I w T ent back to her and found her lying
on the beach. I patched her up with a eucalyptus plaster, for she
had a bad cough and pleurisy, doctored her up a bit, and told
her to come to me next day if able, or if not, to send word. She
used to be at the Sisters’ Home,, but has married since.
I am in the fashion and have joined the throng of barkers.
Some of our house girls have it too, so we cough in solos and
choruses. It was quite funny in church to hear the people cough-
ing one after another. They seemed to keep going the whole time.
Elizabeth is' better; I have told her to stay here until she is quite
well, and she has agreed.
I have come to stay with Mrs. Bromilow for a week—you
would all love her—she is adored by all the girls, and no wonder!
Little Gideon is a real terror; the girls all conspire to spoil the
little fellow. He has the funniest little ways, and is growing more
attractive every day. Mr. and Mrs. Bromilow are so fond of
him. The girls put him in a clothes basket to get him to sleep
after he has given them a time of work getting him bathed. They
swing him in the basket until the people are convulsed with
laughter. Everything is new—even the clothes basket—and a
crowd immediately gathers around the verandah to watch.
A great shouting brought us out of doors yesterday morn-
ing, and we found some big canoes coming in. The one that
was leading was a new one the people had been building for
Taubada (Mr. B.), Amid great shouting it was brought up to
the beach. The other canoes held the people who had helped to
build it. Two villages had had a hand in it, and so came to look
on, and, of course, get a share of the pay. The chief builder re-
ceived the pay, and he would divide it out afterwards. These
people are very fair in dividing out any food or property. After
Taubada and Marama and the rest of us had had a look, the
students got aboard with their paddles and went for a gay pull
around to show off the canoe.
I have had to stay on with Mrs. Bromilow a whole fort-
night ; as I had not been well, she asked me to come over and
she would doctor me up. I got down a bit further before getting
well, and Mrs. Bromilow has been kindness itself. The mixtures
of various kinds that I have swallowed could be better measured
by gallons than pints. I think I shall never be able to repay the
kindness Mrs. Bromilow has shown me. She went to so much
trouble in the way of jellies, etc., and would get up in the night


to look after me, that I felt quite conscience-smitten at having to
let her do it.
Last Sunday Mr. Bromilow and Dr. Loria went across to
Ebi’eda for service and took me along for the blow. It zvas
pleasant on the water.
To-morrow I am going to Sanaroa to stay over Sunday if
the weather permits. It is one of our distant outposts. Now for
the journey. Saturday morning, while still dark, we were off in
the boat before 5 a.m., steering by starlight. Sanaroa is 16 miles
from here, and we have to cross the open ocean, and it is an open
whale-boat we travel in, and we hoped for a good wind that would
be fair.
The first part of the trip was lovely. The stars lit up the
sky and then at six the sun rose. After about two hours’ travel-
ling we got past the shelter of the islands and the swell was
horrible. The little boat rolled in a most uncomfortable manner,
so the next two hours were very unpleasant, and the women-
folk were quite unable to appreciate the scenery, but succumbed
entirely.
We got a little wind, so kept the sail and jib up and had
the oars going also.
When we got into the bay near our destination the water was
beautifully calm. It was wonderful to notice the different shades
of green and blue. As we neared the land the water was pale
green and so clear. We could see the coral reef at the bottom.
We landed at 10 a.m.; Angelo and his wife Tulefona (Samoans)
met us. They have just built a new house for themselves, so we
had the use of it during our stay, and they lived in the old one.
It was an unusually good house for a native one—one large room,
with a little one behind for a bedroom, and a verandah on both
sides. It is built of native material—roof and walls of coconut
palm leaves, the floor of strips from the sago palm, and built on
piles. The floors were spread with Samoan mats, beautifully
plaited and clean.
After the five hours I did nothing for the rest of the day
but He down. I do not seem to have got back my usual strength
yet, but expect this trip will do me good. The boys made a fire
and boiled the kettle; we had brought provisions with us, and
soon had breakfast. The day slipped by, and when the sun set
we lit a lamp that hung from the roof. Our table was a mat.
and we reclined on the floor at meal times, as natives don’t have
chairs or tables in their houses. The teacher’s wife brought in a
a little roasted pig (whole) from the “umura” (earth oven). The
umura ’ is just a wide hole in the ground; stones are made red-
hot in it, and then the food, wrapped in leaves, is placed in the


hole, with stones above and below, and the whole oven ccovered
up till the food is cooked. This makes a splendid ovem, and
through these heated stones the food is steamed. They brought
the whole pig for us three, and some more cooked pork fcor the
boys and girls. Needless to say, we did not eat the wholie, but
just fried some slices cut from the ribs.
The pigs raised by the teachers make much better porlk than
the village pigs, but I never eat the flesh of either, although itt looks
very nice.
The evening was perfect; the moon was nearly full. We looked
across the water to the other side of the bay, for the house was
close to the beach.
All the folk, the teacher and his household, and our boys and
girls, came in to our house for evening prayers, conducted by Mr.
Bromilow. A large mosquito screen was hung in the big room
for Mr. and Mrs. Bromilow, and a smaller one for me in the
little room. We had brought a rug and a pillow each, so just lay
on the mats and threw the rugs over us, and our beds were
complete.
Sunday was a lovely day. Such a number came to the morn-
ing service. A funny little pulpit had been built; the teacher’s
wife had draped it with a gorgeous patchwork quilt of many
colours. A railing divided the end of the church corresponding
to our communion rail; the floor inside this was spread with new
palm leaf mats, and a seat at the end for M4s. Bromilow and me
was covered with Samoan cloth. Mr. Bromilow, of course, had
the pulpit. Our boys and girls sat with the teacher and his wife
on the mats inside the rail; all the other people sat in the body
of the church. The singing was very good indeed. After the
service the classes met. None yet has been baptized at this
station of Sanaroa, but over twenty are on trial.
The station is only two years old, but a great deal of work
has been done. After the service, lunch, and then Mr. Bromilow
and some of the boys went off to visit distant parts of the island
and have services with the people.
The teacher’s wife takes a great deal of trouble with the sing-
ing, but wanted to get it better, so asked Mrs. Bromilow to teach
them to sing well. So she had an hour’s singing practice in the
house. It was good to see how hard they tried to rectify mis-
takes. They made rapid improvement in the short time they had.
At 4 p.m. Mrs, Bromilow and I both gave short addresses.
About 5.15 p.m. Mr. Bromilow returned and two couples pre-
sented themselves for marriage. They had been married for some
trnm according to native custom, but wanted to be married ac-
cording to Tapwaroro. In cases like this no papers have to be


filled in, only the ceremony performed, then we all knelt in prayer.
On Monday morning we found that our big jar of water
from Dobu had been used up. Sanaroa water is not good, so the
boat boys went off to another island for good water.
Instead of early coffee we had young coconuts roasted until
the water boiled inside. The water was poured into cups; this,
with roast yam and butter, was excellent.
We wanted to see the breakers on the other side of Sanaroa,
so walked across. The breeze was splendid. Looking away in
one direction we saw the great ocean expanse of water —no land—
“the end of the world far off.”
We heard that a woman had died in one of the villages we
had passed. We wondered why we had heard no crying. Then
it came out that they were going to cook and eat their food in the
morning, so that they might be strong to cry all the afternoon.
’Tis “bubuna Dobu” {Dobu custom). Even like the law of the
Medes and Persians of old.
About mid-day we were ready to start for home; our party
had increased by six, so we were a boat load. What with boxes
and baggage, the boat was low in the water; but she is a good
sailer and would carry us home.
We had very little wind to start with, but after a little while
a breeze sprang up and we went on in splendid style. This is a
strange land for winds; they are local and variable. Bye and bye
our breeze had gone, and the sail had to be lowered and the oars
used again. What a pull the poor boys had! We rested in a
delightful spot to give the boys a spell and have lunch. If any-
one had come in to view us we would have presented a pic-
turesque group, for on our left the breakers were dashing on to
the reef, while our boat just rocked on little waves. After the
rest we went on—there was about one and a half miles of open
sea to cross, and the worst bit of the whole journey. The swell
was tremendous and great rollers tossed our little boat up and
down. They looked like little mountains rolling towards us, but
did not break. ’Twas hard for the men to pull; just before dark
we got under the land and went ashore. The boys had the kettle
boiling in almost no time, and we made a bottle of milk for
Gideon and tea for us. The moon had risen and the rest of the
journey was delightful. A cutter coming from Dobu passed us,
and we hoped a mail had been landed. Mr. Bromilow and I said
we were too tired to read letters if they had come. When we got
home and actually found a pile of letters awaiting us, we could
not resist them, Mrs. Bromilow had a laugh at us when she
found our tea growing cold while we were deep in letters. I am


still staying with dear Mrs. Bromilow: she is going to kceep me
till the end of next week, and longer if necessary, “if yoiu don’t
behave better.”
My time spent here has taught me many lessons; II could
never have learned in any other way.
We are looking out for the Meda, and goods ordered here
last October have just reached Samarai. We shall have ai lively
time when the Meda and boxes arrive, and the pleasure of months
of anticipation thrown in, and then the realisation.
I don t know what to say to you good people of the Auxiliaries.
1 am afraid there is a bit of pride in me, but it is impossible to
thank adequately from this distance.
Two days later. We were expecting to have the Meda, but
she is not in yet. The beautiful Straits are a real nuisance, as
they lie in a region of calms and vessels get stuck there for want
of wind.
Doctor Loria has been trying to take Gideon’s photo, to-day.
The little Turk is never still, and all sorts of ruses had to be
adopted to make him steady for a few seconds.
The Meda has got through the Straits at last. Mr. and Mrs.
Bromilow went off in the boat to meet her, and I was left
monarch of all I surveyed—Gideon and all. He has been good,
and so have the girls and boys been good too. It is now nearly
midnight! Sixty-nine natives are on the Meda, and most of these
have been landed, and the rest were still on board at 9.30 p.m. I
was glad to hear the click of the oars, with Mr. and Mrs. Bromi-
low, as their boat came near. After supper we took a lantern
and went round the compound to see that all the new-comers
were in comfortable quarters for the night. Some are to stay here,
and others are on their way back to Samoa or Fiji, and have
just come ashore for a few days. The rest of the Meda pas-
sengers were landed this morning. Mrs. Bromilow and I are to
have all the children from the ship here to tea, and we are just
going to make a huge pile of scones for them. It will be a good
effort to feed them all.
14th June, 1895.
esterdav the children came and feasted on scones and jam,
biscuits a,nd tea. They did eat, and enjoyed themselves. The
native ministers from New Britain dined with us last night; they
are fine-looking men. To-morrow morning the Samoan teachers
are coming to breakfast. I got knocked up by mid-day, so missed
the pleasure of helping to entertain the folks. This is a stupid
sort of climate—once your strength goes down it is such hard
work to pull up again.


This morning the Samoans all came up to breakfast. The
men all wore a piece of native cloth over their other garments and
the women carried fans. The dining-table was moved to one
side, and they sat on the mats and the white folks at the table.
They would not be comfortable at the table. They sang a Samoan
hymn and then fell-to. I hey were so merry over it; when they
went away they left the fans and native cloth as a present for
their hostess. I was in the next room and heard the sweet sing-
ing, and the tune was, “There is sweet rest in Heaven.” In the
evening we had all the teachers and their wives (visitors and our
own workers) assembled in the dining-room— a roomful! Our
boys and girls were on the back and front verandahs. The doors
of the large dining-room open on to both verandahs, so all could
hear well, The Samoans sat on one side of the room and the
Fijians on the other, and you ought to have heard them sing. I
was wishing especially that Arthur could have been there when
grand old “Nativity” was rolled out by the Fijians; it was an
inspiration. After a while dear old “Home, sweet home ” was
sung in Fijian, and it sounded just as sweet as in English. There
was more than one eye dim when this pathetic home tune was
heard. Isn t it grand to see these people, who were once so dark,
loosed from their chains of sin and praising God in this hearty
fashion ? It will be a great help to our young students, who have
as yet only begun their training, to see these men who by faith-
ful service have become catechists, and two of them native
ministers. The visit of all these people has made an impression
on the heathen world about us. They see a religion that can make
all these dark men leave their own lands simply for Christ’s sake.
Tis no light thing to witness!
15th June, 1895.
A day of dissipation! This morning all the Fijians came to
breakfast; the table was moved out on to the back verandah and
set out there while our friends sat in the dining-room. After that
we went on board the Meda. The captain had invited Mr. and
Mrs. Bromilow and the Sisters to lunch, boys and girls of the
station to follow. He sent the ship’s boat for us, and students
rowed the girls and boys in our boat. The children did enjoy it,
and they went all over the ship and were especially interested to
see the cabin Sister Jeannie is to occupy. Sister will have to look
forward to about three months on the ship, as they are going to
Fiji first and then on to Sydney. About three o’clock the children
went ashore and stayed till sundown.
At the Workers’ Meeting that evening Mr. Bromilow said


a formal farewell to Sister, as this is the last Saturday night she
will be with us.
Sunday was a day to be remembered. We had a glorious
congregation—quite 450 people—and the church was packed.
Wiliami Taufa, a native minister, spoke in Fijian, and Mr. Bromi-
low interpreted into Dobuan. Sister Jeannie gave her farewell
address. We had Sacrament afterwards; class members and the
baptized stayed; the two native ministers assisted Mr. Bromilow.
In the afternoon Apesai spoke in Fijian from “They that are whole
need not a physician, but they that are sick.” He illustrated it
by the way the sick come up to the home for medicine, and then
spoke of the sin-sick soul.
Just now the verandahs are full of sick people suffering from
such a long journey in the Meda. Some of the children have had
sores, and we are giving them all the attention we can while
they are here. From 7 a.m. till 9 a.m. the verandah is full, and
in the afternoon again.
I am sending a box of curios to you all per the Meda, and
Mrs. Bromilow is sending one to Miss Tilly, of Hardwicke Col-
lege. I marked them all for her when I was not strong enough
for other work. It took a long time, but it was a labour of love
for dear South Australia,
Such a day! Mrs. Bromilow was called away at 7 a.m.
to a woman who is sick and she has been away nearly all day. I
had to look after the patients, see about the house-keeping, Gideon’s
bath, dressing sores, making arrowroot for the sick, and baking
scones for breakfast. Then came school before I was ready for it.
It is such a pleasure to help these people,
’Tis bedtime now and I am ready for it. I am thinking
about the hill villages, for I have not been there for five weeks,
and Mrs. Bromilow would not hear of my going. But I started
off this afternoon looking forward to seeing my people once more.
A very big wind was blowing; the two strong boys said they would
try. It took twenty minutes to go about a hundred yards. I saw,
at last, that I could not do it, besides trying the boys’ strength, so
much to my regret, we turned back to where the water was
sheltered from the wind. I must try to get to the hills, but it
seems almost as if I am fated not to go.
The Dove returned to-day from Panaieti bringing Nurse.
We are all so glad to see her; she brought the sad news that Mrs.
Fletcher’s baby is dead. He only lived six weeks, and was, Nurse
says, a beautiful child. Poor Mr. Fletcher had to make a coffin
and conduct the burial service himself! It must have been hard
for them to lose their first baby like this. The Meda is going
to-morrow.


The Visit of the Meda 6s
Late last night a Fijian came up to say a little baby was
very sick. Nurse and I did all we could for it, working to save
it with hot baths, etc.; but just at dawn it died. The poor mother
just lay watching all we did, and she seemed to trust so implicitly
that Nurse would cure it, that when it was dead she was quite
broken down. It was buried this morning at 7 a.m. as funerals
cannot be delayed here.
The Meda cannot go for want of wind, so we shall have all
the folks here for another Sunday.
Thirty white people on Dobu to-day, and twenty-eight at
the English service to-night. The Ivanhoe came in with three
English girls, going to Cooktown in her to be educated. In addi-
tion to them there were several miners, sailors from the two vessels
Meda and Ivanhoe, the two captains, and ourselves.
The day after this the Meda got a fair wind, and they went
down the Straits and out of sight very quickly. We are feel-
ing lonely without Sister Jeannie. I have come home to-night
after being next door for five weeks. lam looking forward to
receiving my box, etc., for that is the next excitement.
Sailing a Canoe.


The Late Dr. George Brown.


CHAPTER VIII.
MORE ABOUT THE PEOPLE OF DOBU. i
Dr. Loria has been taking photos., and was quite excited, and
says the group of our girls is the best he has taken. He has gone
to the Trobriands, 100 miles from here; but it is in our District,
and there we have a Mission Station.
It was quite an unusual thing to go to Naikwara, but we
felt we must go. As we landed a girl came running down to the
beach, saying, “The baby is dead!” We thought at first it was
the baby we had come to see, but it was another little child just
a fortnight old. We went to the house and found the mother
holding the body in her arms. The baby was almost a skeleton,
and seemed to have died in a sort of fit. I had prayer with them
and told the hopeless-looking mother of the hope of meeting her
child in Heaven if only she believed in Jesus. There is a hopeless-
ness and bitterness about death to these people. I always long
to see them come into the light. The woman whom we came to see
was very sick: it was quite a providence that we went. Her
friends had been giving her hot drinks all day, the very worst
thing they could have done under the circumstances. Nurse doc-
tored her up and she is better already. Earlier in the afternoon
I met the mother and grandmother of a little child who died
yesterday. The elder woman has become a Christian. I said,
“The baby’s body is in the grave, but where is its soul?” Her
face lit up wdth a half-questioning, half-delighted look, and her eyes
sparkled as she said, “In Heaven, is it?” I told her “Yes!” and
she said, “We will go too.”
Mr. and Mrs. Bromilow left in the Dove to-day, the 2nd
July, 1895, for the Trobriands (Mr. Fellows’ Mission Station),
to take the new teachers who came down in the Meda to their
new places.
A tap came to my glass door, and there was Nurse with the
news that Kulia, the wife of Poati, was dead. Death meets us
constantly! Poati is one of the best of our teachers, and the one
stationed here at Burnagura (our station). She had been ill, but
was better in the morning and was on the mend. Poati preached
at the Aveek-night service and did not dream that his wife would
die. She took a fit, and he ran to the Mission House for Nurse,
but she could not save her. We are all sorry for Poati, and we
have no way of sending news to Mr. and Mrs. Bromilow. Poati
is keeping up very bravely indeed.


The funeral took place early this morning. We had a short
service in the house, and then we all walked up to the cemetery
at We’udi. It is a lovely spot on a hill close to the sea. Only
Mission workers and their children are buried there, but the graves
are many, although the Mission is only four years old. The
natives all bury in their own villages. Kulia was a Tongan, and
had been for many years in the household of the Rev. and Mrs.
Moulton, in both Tonga and Sydney. She was a superior woman,
and her first husband died here in New Guinea, then she married
Poati.
This same evening the Rev. Murray, from the Church of
England Mission Station, arrived. He has only been in New
Guinea three months. He and his sister came up together from
Sydney. He will stay over Sunday. It is unfortunate that Mr. and
Mrs. Bromilow are away; they would have been glad to see him.
Monday is hot and our tanks are low, but as I write it has
begun to rain, and so on the days go by for another week. How
we miss Mr. and Mrs. Bromilow, but Poati and Sister Ellinor took
the service; it was impressive all through,
Mr. Murray took the English service and preached on the
Companionship of Jesus.” He is very ill and weak from fever.
The L.M.S. schooner Nieu arrived and ought not to have
come in on Sunday, as that is a rule for Mission boats.
Monday—washing day and a deluge of rain.
9th July, 1895.
Walked to Naikwara to see a sick woman to-day, and I had
to coax and persuade her to take the medicine. Next day I was
at the other side. A woman, talking to me, gave me a compli-
ment: You used to be ‘kena dimdim’ (foreign woman) ; now you
are kena Dobu (Dobuan woman).” You don't know how nice
it is to hear them greet me with, “Oh! this is Sister Minnie”; or
from the old women, “Oh! my child!” I had to execute a gym-
nastic feat to get up to see a sick man, I gave him some medicine
and he pretended to drink it, and asked for some eucalyptus to
rub his chest with. As soon as the people see the bottle of
eucalyptus they immediately have very bad colds, but we say,
You must finish the medicine first and then you can have the oil!”
When I was leaving he told his wife to give me three yams for a
present.
New Guinea must agree with my weight, as I went through
the floor of a house in Naikwara. The woman was much better,
but she was full of distress over my leg going through the old
floor. The house is on piles, and my foot dangled gracefully in
mid-air, but no harm was done.


I had a conversation with a girl named Harriet, who had
lived with Mrs. Bromilow and taken her name in baptism. This
is to tell you how much good can be done by training the girls who
live on the Mission Station as she did. Her two younger sisters are
both living on the Mission Station. Their father has been a very
bad man, and it seems wonderful that we have gained influence over
the three daughters.
Last Sunday the mother was ill, and on Monday she died.
I saw Harriet to-day, and she told me she prayed by her mother’s
side. “Did your mother say anything about where her soul was
going?” I asked. “Yes!” said Harriet. “She listened, and then
said, ‘I am holding God’s hand,’ and then she died.” So you see
Harriet was able to help her mother, and who can say that the
woman’s repentance, though late, and her simple trust, “holding
God’s hand,” was not acceptable in God’s sight? Oh! that we
all might “hold God’s hand and trust Him all the way.”
Mr. and Mrs. Bromilow came back from the Trobriands—
all there were well and the work is going ahead.
Sunday , 14th July, 1895.
I spoke this afternoon. It was still an ordeal, but God helped
as He always does. I took my musical instrument to the villages
and managed the hymn tunes from memory.
I have had to leave my diary, for I took a chill at Tau’ulu
and had a touch of fever in the morning, and Nurse rolled me
into bed for a few days. She stayed up part of three nights and
I tried to get her to bed, but she loves to take trouble to make
sick folk well.
On the 22nd July, 1895, the Governor and his suite entered
our harbour in the Merrie England. On Sunday they attended our
church; afterwards I was introduced by Mr. Bromilow to His
Excellency. On Monday Mrs. Bromilow wanted the boys in
school to sing the round, “Come, follow, follow me.” You should
have heard the peals of laughter as they tried saying pollow instead
of follow. A terrible mouthful for them! School dismissed. A
small steam tug, belonging to the Merrie England, came puffing
along in a most conceited fashion. The captain asked the young
boys on the shore to jump into a boat behind the tug and have a
short trip—quite a joy ride for them. I was in the hills again
and got a drenching, but made for home to escape fever.
A letter written (not copper plate) I am forwarding to you
as a specimen of the girls’ writing. I think it is good for them!
English service for me to-morrow. In the service to-day about 100
folk were late and the service was half over—they did not, because
of the wind, hear the pati or drum. When they trooped in they


looked so astonished. Sister Ellinor had a rough time. As she
was two hours late, when she came in she said, “One Who
was used in storms to sail had been on board,” so she was safe.
Daisy, one of our girls, has brought a long yellow string to
send to my people. I have put in a fishing net and two hooks also.
The custom is always to give a present in return, so perhaps Winnie
would send a present in return to Daisy—perhaps a bright hand-
kerchief or bead necklace—and write on it, “Gete egu oboboma
emuia,” which means, “This is my love to you.”
The Merrie England has called in on its way back to Samarai
and will await our mails.
A wee baby boy was brought here from Bwaio to-day. Its
mother cannot look after it, so they want someone to take care
of it. Tulefona, whose baby died three weeks ago, said she would
like it, and it was given to her.
I had an experience at Kegadoi, and saw a white man com-
ing towards us. The people called out to me that it was Dick,
the traders’ friend; but it was a man employed by Judge Winter.
Leaving him, we camped under a tree, the boys lit the fire and
the girls roasted some yams, then made a start after our lunch
for the island opposite. Now began our troubles. One of the
boys cracked his oar, the wind blew hard, and we did not know
whether to go back or go on. As we pulled on with difficulty
a deluge of rain came and drenched us all, I had my cloak on,
but it went through that and every garment I had on. The poor
girls, with only their thin pinafores and skirts, and the boys, with
jumpers, were like drowned rats. Much to my regret, I told the
boys to alter the course and make for home. It would not have
been safe to spend the afternoon in dripping garments; as it was,
I was paid for the wetting by a good dose of fever in the evening.
In school next morning, and Nurse came in to see the girls
at work. Mrs. Bromilow came in for the last quarter of an hour for
singing. We had no end of laughing in learning the old song, “This
is the way we wash our hands,” in Dobuan. I showed them how
to sing, putting in the actions of washing hands and faces and
combing their hair. The hair was the fun. They comb their
hair up, not down. I ran my fingers through my front hair in
their fashion and it was altogether too much for their gravity.
They nearly fell over with laughing. By and bye they will do it
all as a matter of course, but anything new they must laugh at.
Mrs. Bromilow went through two or three tunes with good success.
Mail is off, 3rd August, 1895. Time to breathe freely now,
and all the day is given up to sewing and teaching the girls to
sew. The photos, have a great attraction, and the girls know


all about my relations. They want to know whether my male rela-
tives are Taubadas and the female Maramas.
“No!” I said, “but they are great men and women.”
Next day I had to go on the blown side of the island and did
not accomplish much, but I have been thinking over a remark in
one of my home-letters. I wish I could give you some idea of
the feeling that exists between us and the people of Dobu.
Ellie says, “You must be brave to go amongst them.”
“Not in the least.” They would not dream of harming us.
They are now our friends —yes, real friends —and I forget that
they are of a different colour. It is wonderful to be able to say
this, for after Mr. and Mrs. Bromilow had been here some time
a plan was laid to murder them, but now it is different.
In the places where our blessed Gospel of peace has not spread
fighting goes on and cannibal feasts are held, and this in places
not so very far from here; in fact, not far distant from those parts
of the islands around where teachers of our Mission are stationed.
But wherever they are established, peace reigns. There is no
danger at all from the people. We never lock up our doors at night.
Anyone could walk in and steal our stores, but they don’t.
In early days, when the clothes were hung out to dry, some-
one had to be stationed to watch them, or they would go. At
one of the Mission Stations the people used to steal things, then
bury them in the sand, and come next day to sell them. The mis-
sionary’s wife was only too glad to buy them back for a trifle-
At Mr. Fellows’ station, even now, they have to watch the clothes
and lock up just as they used to do here.
It is grand to find these people getting to know and believe
in us. We long to see them all believe in Jesus, our Saviour and
theirs. We try to live Him by example, as well as speak to them
of Him.
Perversity of human nature, as exhibited on Dobu: I was
in Murisia, and asked where the children were; the women said
they were playing on the beach and didn’t want to come to school.
I went down the cliff to walk to a village round the next point,
and the little girls saw me coming, so as I came down one path
they went up the other. It was a case of the “wicked flee when
no man pursueth.” They evidently thought I was coming after
them to tell them to come to school, so ran away as fast as they
could. I met some of the women just going to climb up to the
village, so told them to ask the children if they thought I was a
werebana (witch), that they were afraid of me.
On the way back the same children were again on the beach,
and this time did not run away, so my message must have had
some effect. They said, “Shall we come to school ? This after-


noon or to-morrow morning?” I knew their natures pretty well,
so said, “Wha wants girls at school who are afraid of me?” With
one accord they got up and came along with me there and then,
so a little mild sarcasm had some weight. They are bright, and 1
hope to get these young girls to be regular.
1 went in the boat next morning with Mr. and Mrs. Bromi-
low. They went out to mark some new gardens at Tau’ulu, and
I to visit villages. They promised to pick me up as I came back.
I had been through two villages and then met a creek. It had
been a little stream that I could jump over before, but had widened
with the rains and high tides. Some men were mending their nets.
I asked them where the women were, as I wanted them to carry
me over. The men suggested that I should be carried over by
them if I would show them how to cross their hands (hands very
dirty), and away we went.
I heard of a sad event which took place last Sunday at
Kenaia. A man was up in a tree picking fruit on church day,
when he called to those down below, “My hands feel weak and
I’m going to fall,” and he fell from the top of a high tree to the
ground. Poor man! he lived in great pain till Wednesday. We
did not hear of the accident until after he was dead, for they kept
the matter secret, knowing he had been breaking the Sabbath.
9th August, 1895.
On 9th August, 1895, my little friends came again to school,
and have begun to sew well. Such a wet day!
I taught in the Sunday School, and my thoughts went back to
the days of long ago when Percy, of our household, used to ask
us to read from “Line upon Line,” and he used to say, “Read about
Joseph.” I have been reading this same story to these brown girls,
and their request was, “Do read some more!” “Next Sunday,” I
answered. But when school was dismissed, about ten of them
followed me to the house and begged just to hear a little more,
so we had another chapter in the dining-room. Daisy (Dawesi)
said an hour after she couldn’t remember the little brother’s name
(Benjamin), so I told her as I ate my yam. These wonderful
Bible stories have a fascination for black and brown children as
well as white.
Last Sabbath six of the older women asked to join the class.
Mrs. Bromilow leads this band, and we are all praying that they
may stand firm, for the difficulty in Dobu is with the older women.
Three out of the six are notorious characters. Do all of you pray
for the women of Dobu? Nothing but the power of the Holy
Spirit can touch them.
A white child was brought by its father and mother from a


ship, and the brown house girls simply adored the child and feasted
their eyes; others came in crowds to Mrs. Bromilow’s house to see
the dear wee thing and its dress.
13th August, 1895.
To-day such a lot of new girls came to school. They are
from villages where the mothers have been very obstinate about
school. They say they know Tapwaroro, but what is etoladi
(school) ? I have been trying to persuade them for some time to
come to school, and was pleased to have succeeded. I do hope they
will be regular. They are bright little children and seemed very
much interested.
14th August, 1895.
My village contingent arrived again to-day with three new
ones in their train. Nurse and I are going to see them to-morrow.
We went as arranged, and Nurse tore her frock, so she said, “I
will ask the woman in the next village for a needle and cotton to
mend it with, just for fun, to see what they will say.” She did
so, and, to our surprise, one of the women said, “Yes! I will give
you needle and cotton,” and up she popped into her house and
brought out the said articles. We might have gone to almost any
other native house in Dobu, and its people would probably have
said, “What! are we foreigners (dim-dims) that we should have
needles and cottons?” This is the case of a girl who had lived at
the Mission House, and at some time or other had these things
given to her, and she had taken care of them.
17th August, 1895.
Hundreds of people were selling bananas and curios, and I
bought, and was pleased with the number of girls at school. Mr.
Bromilow nearly took my breath away by telling me he had
planned for me to speak in “Dobu Cathedral” on Sunday after-
noon. It is all God’s work, and if it is not easy, never mind. On
Monday my namesake’s mother brought me a present from her, con-
sisting of some bananas, coconuts, and yams. Of course I sent a
present in return —that is Dobuan etiquette. The selling is great
to-day. I bought about 80 coconuts this morning—16 for a penny
or two.
This week has opened with the biggest school that they have
had on Dobu since the school has been opened.
A trader was here and offered us some bacon for a price. One
of our girls said to another, “Their friends in dim-dim are good.
See! when they kill a pig they send part of it here, but when we


kill a pig we eat it all up and don’t think of our friends in other
places.”
Another day to record:
Still in the ivay “of life!”
My new school girls tell me their mothers have been scolding
them for coming to school and saying, “Yes, you go to school and
we will cook all the nice food while you are away, and you won’t
have any!” The little bricks came, however, and their mothers
will hear of it when I go into their village.
Nurse and I, with Sister Ellinor, climbed to the top of
Gulibubu. This mountain is the highest peak of Dobu. It took
us two hours and quarter to get to the top. It was a dreadful
pull. One path led over a horrible place. It was very narrow,
and fell away in a sort of precipice on both sides. We had to go
up one at a time and the others waited at the bottom till she was
up, so that if one fell she would not send the others down. How-
ever, we got to the top and found a shady spot with a glorious
view. We shall ache to-morrow! No Home letter in the mail
which we found at Dobu. Are you all dead?
The woman that hid her child so that its sore leg should not
be attended to has now a more sensible way of thinking.
Hymns are being introduced, such as “Art thou weary?” One
was written by Mr. Bromilow. I have composed one to “I love to
tell the story.” To-night we tried them both over and they want
me to give mine as a solo, but I declined with thanks, so Mrs.
Bromilow will sing it. We have to introduce all the new hymns
as solos first and then teach time and words.
Nothing of importance, only several of the girls have had to
be nursed with fever, also Nurse. They will be better in a day
or so.
Sunset glory behind the hill, “Old Solomonai.” His head
was first bathed in a glow of crimson; the sky was of a lovely
blue, and the sunset tints just glorified it. Across the water was a
gleam of colour, too, in which our boat seemed to float. This
was on the left. On our right was our isle of Dobu. From be-
hind it up rose the moon, and every hill on Dobu stood out so
clearly against the shimmering moonlight. The coconut palms
look lovely in this light. Each leaf seems to shine with a light of
its own, though not really so. Here and there were villages
dotted along the shore, and the glow of their fires as the natives
cooked their evening meal just gave the touch of humanity to the
scene. The sea was so still as we rowed along— we heard a voice
up on the hills chanting one of their wekus (native songs), and


could just make out the dusky form of the owner as he clambered
down towards the village.
I have come across a girl who told me an untruth last time
I was in her village. She was ashamed to-day, and ran into the
bush. These women look so funny when they run, and for all
the world look like emus with very thick feathers.
Mr. and Mrs. Bromilow went to Wewemara for Sunday—
Joapi, the Fijian, is doing good work here. Joapi, one of our
students, has been ill, and said to one of the other students, “My
waqa (canoe) is coming for me.” The friend answered, “But
you are not praying about it, and you don’t know whether God has
ruled it that you shall go yet.” So they prayed and his breath
came more easily, but the pain was very bad, so one of the boys
went and called Nurse. He is a good deal better now, but has
had a sharp sickness.
Our home is not finished (the Sisters’), and looks desolate for
Sunday.
The hymn that has taken the people to-day is “Turn back
Pharaoh’s army— Hallelujah —a very lively tune.
Mary was telling of her trip to Sydney when she came with
the first party to Papua. . Her husband was with her, and when
they saw Sydney they said, “This can’t be the earth. Fiji is
the earth, but this! this must be Heaven!” “We Fijians felt
like this —God is here” (pointing to the top of her hand), “these
white people here” (pointing to the top joint of her middle finger),
“quite near God, and we are down here” (pointing to her wrist).
This is how the wonders of city life impressed them. Another
Fijian once told Sister Eilinor when he went to Sydney he said,
“What do these people worship God for? They are gods them-
selves. Why don’t they worship themselves?” I told Mary that
white Christians, instead of thinking that they are all as great as
God, feel that He is so far above them that they cannot conceive
of His glory!
We are having a week of prayer to begin the year with. The
moon has made its appearance, and it was greeted with the usual
call, “Nawarae, nawarae” (moon, moon).
We had a terrific walk, for the girls had said it was just a
little way (a very long way), and the journey back was almost
too much. The Fijian teacher said, “What! Are you strong, you
two, that you should walk so far?”
The mail has been sent to us here at Numanuma, and we know
that Miss Newell has arrived and Mrs. Field. Our mail was so
big that we read till our eyes ached. You will have received news
about me, and I am praying that God will take away any anxiety
from you.


We have returned to our home on the Mission Station after
five days away. Mrs. Bromilow and our girls came down to the
beach to meet us. The house looked its welcome, with the table
set for tea with cakes and scones from Mrs. Bromilow, After tea
we went across to the other house to exchange news and thank
Mr. Bromilow for sending the mail, one of his many thoughtful
acts. It will be eleven weeks, and to-morrow I will take up one
of the broken ends, “God is good!”
A big feast is being held at Murisia, canoes are passing up and
down, drums are beating. Three men were on one canoe, with
their brown bodies made quite black with a native preparation
they use, and as their canoe was paddled along they beat their
drums and jerked their bodies up and down (dancing up and down
the outrigger). A young woman was the chosen representative
of the women of Murisia. She has a long standing reputation for
audacity and mischief. She was dressed in a gorgeous red grass
Dobu (petticoat), with white streamers, and a yam was balanced
on her head, and she stood there like a statue. How they manage
to carry things on their heads I know not. The women dance each
with a yam on her head often, stoop or sit down, get up again, with-
out the yam or basket falling off. I suppose they are used to it.
They have such straight backs, as they always carry on their heads,
so have to hold themselves well. The men carry on the shoulder,
and are not nearly so erect as the women—you often see a man
lounging along, but never a woman.
This day I can write “Sunshine after rain,” for some little
girls came into my room and asked to join the class. They had
sweetness talked to them by the village women to tempt them into
a life of sin, but they had disliked their talk, and now wanted to
be good. One child said she had prayed about it. To the other
two I said, “What will your mothers say?” “Our mothers will
be very angry,” they answered. The child that had prayed, we are
specially glad about, for her mother is a werebana or witch and a
terror to all the children round. As the office of witch is heredi-
tary, this little girl ought to inherit her mother’s position. She
has all along shown a very determined spirit in many ways, and
while many of her companions have professed to want to leave
their sins, and then have fallen away again, she has steadily re-
fused to desire to repent. We think she is likely to make a firm
stand some day. She has a most infectious laugh and is a merry
child.
I tasted the nearest approach to meat to-day that I have had
for over a year, in the shape of the flesh of a turtle fried very
slowly—it was delicious.


An uncommon entry in ray diary. Turtle was the order of
the day.
We had dinner with Mr. and Mrs. Bromilow this evening.
Mr. Moreton, the magistrate of this district, was the guest. At
the beginning of the week a notice was read out that the paths
on Dobu were all to be cleared; they have only been tracks partly
overgrown with grass. The Government does not levy taxes and
hire men to do the work, but tells the people to do it. The people
of each village were told to do so, and the whole lot was divided
to give each an equal share of work. So this week all the men-
folk, our students included, have been hard at it. Mr. Moreton,
with the schooner Tiai, has been here nearly a fortnight looking
into cases of law-breaking caught by the police. The people stand
in awe of the “gobemani” (Government) and policemen while
they are here; but forget their fear when the schooner has gone.
I found the people crying so hard in a certain village that I
thought there must have been a death, but the Government boat
had caught the chief and taken him away. More people came to
see if my boat was the police boat. “What has the man done?”
I asked, and they said he had done nothing. Two of the chief’s
wives were pointed out to me, and my little maid told me of a
third. I said, \ou say he is good and yet he has three wives.”
They said, Oh! that was long before you Tapwaroro people
came, and w T e didn’t know it was wrong,” which was not all true,
as the youngest wife is only a girl, and he has frightened her into
marriage lately. He is a baran or wizard, and threatens to kill
the people by his sorcery if they don’t obey him. The natives are
terribly afraid of these barans. The man was tried on two dif-
ferent charges, and has got six months in Samarai gaol. Now
the people find that the Government is stronger than the baran.
they will not be so afraid of the old wizards.
The attendance at my school went down while I was sick, as
the village girls need keeping regularly at it; they soon forget.
About a week ago one of our girls asked to go home, and she pro-
mised to return next day. A week passed and she did not return.
Her home is far back in the hills and her people have lately been
trying to persuade her to go and live in the village and be as
bad as they, but she refused. When she did not come back we
began to be afraid she had yielded. There were some other girls
in the same district who were specially on my mind—three in par-
ticular whom I mentioned to Sister. I had prayed for all four,
and on Sunday morning the girl came back and explained her
absence by showing a swollen leg, which had prevented her from
coming before. With her were the very three girls I had been


praying for. They had come to ask if they might stay here, as
they said their mothers wanted them to do wrong, and they, the
girls, did want to be good. Of course, we consented, although we
had a big family already. Really, the place seems full of girls, dear
girls. We do long to see them all earnest Christians.
A new Sister, Miss Newell, arrived to-night, and Mrs.
Andrews also. We have been too busy talking to write much.
The storm of yesterday afternoon kept on all night and the
thunder was terrible.
I have been arranging the new stores. It is such an under-
taking, and we are glad it only comes once a year.
A Native Preacher.


CHAPTER IX.
A VISIT TO TUBETUBE.
Mr. and Mrs. Field, of Tubetube, have written kindly letters
for me to go for a change when the Dove goes back next week.
All here are anxious for me to go, but if I feel well enough to
do without the change, I prefer not to break into my work again.
In the village services the people during the afternoon came
together near the beach, as I told them the wonderful story of
Jesus and sang their hymns. One boy’s soul seemed to be look-
ing out of his big dark eyes at me. God grant that he may learn
to love our Saviour!
When I got home there was another boy waiting on the
verandah with his mother. He had come from one of the villages
I had been in this afternoon. A stone had fallen on his foot and
hurt it, and they had come to have it dressed. The little fellow
was so good, and did not cry at all while I washed his foot and
bound it up. I gave him a biscuit afterwards, and he limped away
quite happy.
In O’Bunebune next day a notable old witch was there when
I sat down to have a talk amongst the women. I commenced with,
“My Sister Ellinor is away at Vakuta. She has left me.” They
said, “Oh! you stay here and we will all be friends together.”
Next question was, “Where are you going to-day?” I told her,
and she said, “Oh! you needn’t go there to-day. You are our
friend; stay with us all the time.”
It is a joy to feel that these people look on me as their friend,
and that makes me want more than ever to lead them to their
great Friend —Jesus! Before I left, Boiakuta, the witch, was
anxious to know all about Sister Emily. She said, “You love
her, don’t you? You were on the verandah when I saw you with
your arms round each other.” I told her that Sister Emily was
the stem of love (a common expression here). Boiakuta came to
our home next morning with the ready question, “Where is the
new woman?” I pointed to her room and then the witch said,
“She is the stem of love, isn’t she? Tell her to come out here
and give me some tobacco!” It was a case of “I love my love
for what she giveth me.” Needless to say, the stem of love had
no tobacco to love her with.
There has been excitement over snakes—one at our house and
now I escaped one in the village. They are said to be harmless,
but not for me —ugh!


Another had headache and fever. I have decided to accept
the invitation to Tubetube for a month. All seem to think
it is the right thing, and God can take care of His work. I feel
more than ever that we must live Christ before these people—
example must have weight.
As the Dove will leave on Monday, got my belongings ready
for the voyage, and started out for Nikumara. It is a low, flat
island, some distance from Dobu. The sea was smooth, and the
boys pulled across in an hour. We made our way to a little church
and told the lads to ring the drum, which would be heard a long
wav. Men and women gathered up splendidly, and children too.
It was the most attentive congregation I had even spoken to.
After service they all came down to the beach to see us off. Three
students came on board at my request, for they had had a long
walk. A little farther on we picked up Mrs. Bromilow, who had
been visiting a sick woman.
Next day I left in the Dove and had a good breeze through
the Straits, and then we anchored for the night in a lovely bay
on the south side of Normanby. Twelve coloured people and I
am the only white woman. I slept up on the main deck, and my
native girls near me. With a rug and pillow I went to sleep,
“rocked in the cradle of the deep.” Sunrise next morning was
most glorious. About 5 a.m. the first streaks of dawn appeared,
and the sky blushed a delicate pink, flecked here and there with
clouds. The birds began to make themselves heard, and the earth
was waking up as if she, too, had been asleep. Soon the sky was
aglow with all the varying shades of crimson and gold; it was
a wonderful sight. Some hills, tipped with palm trees, stood be-
tween us and the eastern horizon, where the sun would appear,
and the tips of the palms caught the sun. The shiny leaves dressed
in sunbeams waved in the breeze, and made the trees in the shade
below look darker still. I was the only one awake for a while,
and I shall never forget it. Then the sun peeped over the hill.
Everywhere the parasites, orchids, and climbing plants have inter-
laced the foliage. It is very dense. A good breeze all morning,
but in the afternoon it dropped, and we just drifted along. Be-
fore we settled down at the anchorage for the night, canoes came
with things to sell, then we had prayers in Dobuan. I chose a
deck chair, so that I would descend quickly if rain came on. Sure
enough, about 2 a.m. it poured down, and I got down to my bunk,
but not before the cockroaches were in possession, but they made
room for me. We crept slowly up towards Tubetube, and at
last Mr. Field saw us, and came out to meet us, knowing that
we would be slow on account of the wind. But it grew dark,
and they were about two hours looking for us. They showed a


light, and our boys answered with a light, so they pulled along-
side and took me on board with my girls, leaving the Dove to
follow. It was good to get on shore again, and I am sure 1 shall
have a good time here and get strong.
1 wish 1 could describe Tubetube on paper. It is a small
island in the southern part of the Engineer Group, and though the
islands are near, you see nothing but ocean —glorious rolling ocean,
it is so refreshing. There is nearly always a breeze, and often a
very strong one. The Mission House is on a hill that slopes up
from the back; there is only room for the house and a few native
buildings for the boys and girls who live there. The church, school-
house and teacher’s house are on the flat at the foot. There is a
wide verandah round the house which is built on piles. Looking
over the railing, you see the top of the great coconut palms away
below, so you can imagine we are elevated. It gives one a “king of
the castle” sort of feeling to be up there.
To-day (Sunday) we went to church. This church is built
entirely of native material, and is really a fine building, and wonder
of wonders for a native church—straight. Mr. Field has done
most of it himself. The floor is of narrow strips of the palm,
bound to the rafters with split cane. The walls are lined with
strips of sago palm, which has a natural polish and looks pretty.
The pulpit and communion rail are made of round bars of wood,
and all bound round with split cane in the same way. It does look
beautiful.
A strong proof that barbarous customs are still practised came
to light to-day. Kekeke, the cook-boy from the Dove , was walk-
ing along the beach, not far from where the ship was anchored.
He saw something on the sand which he could not understand,
so went to look closer, and found a young girl’s head sticking up
above the sand, all the rest of her being buried. He, with the
help of others, dug her out. It was nearly dark then, and if the
girl had been left there all night she would probably have died.
The people all say a little child did it, helped by the evil spirits,
and the girl herself will not say who did it. We suspect that the
older women did it for punishment and the others are afraid to
tell.
Mr. Field took us part of the way round the island to a place
where the coral is very fine. Two of the boys dived and brought
up some very good pieces. We took a good load home.
Baby Field has a tooth—the first. He is such a dear wee
thing, and so well.
Another grim fact to relate. A few days ago a young girl
died and was buried. The chief of the island, who is a good old
man —one of the first converts here—came to Mr. Field this morn-


ing in a state of great excitement, and said the old women of the
villages near were going to take up the body and eat it. This,
you know, is no new custom, but an old one, which has almost
died out in the place under the influence of the missionaries. The
men do not partake of the flesh. All victims taken in war made
a feast for the menfolk, but bodies from the graves, and any
strangers whose canoes were wrecked near the island were women’s
perquisites. Women’s rights again, you see!
The sea is rough here, and squalls come on suddenly, so
wrecks were not uncommon. The men hung the skulls of their
victims as ornaments in front of their houses, but the women car-
ried skulls and bones all up to a great cave in the side of the
highest hill, and stored them. When I visit the cave, shall I pick
out a few good teeth and send them along to supply any deficiency
in your mouths? It would be a saving, I am sure.
To return to the old chief who wished to reprove the women
at the afternoon service. Permission was given, and it was a good
sight to see that old man urging the people to leave their old
ways and follow the “way of Jesus.” He waxed quite warm, and
told them the custom was bad and foolish in the superlative degree.
He said, “You all say you don’t do it, and blame the other
women, but you need not tell me that—-I know your way—you all
do it.” Then piling argument on argument, he said, “Do you
want the Government boat to come and take all the women of
Tubetube to Samarai and lock them up?”
Was he not a brave old chief to show his colours and acknow-
ledge himself on the side of Christ? He is very fond of Mr.
Field. He was very ill some time ago and used to send for Mr.
Field to come and talk to him about Jesus. He is very grateful
for the medicine which cured him. His words might almost have
been prophetic, for to-night towards dark the Government schooner
anchored here with Mr. Moreton, the magistrate, on board.
We know of one or two cases that he will have to inquire
into, and some matters in connection with the clearing of paths
and burial grounds. Up till now the people have dug the graves
in the villages, but now will have to use the cemetery.
Rain came down in torrents to-day. With Mr. Field I
went to one of his out-stations to see where Pad, a Fijian teacher,
is at work. He is a model of neatness, and has made a wall of
coral to enclose the whole compound, and built the church too;
also sunk a well and built a low picket fence around it. It looks
quite picturesque.
At the second place the church was not finished, but the
people crowded in and sat anywhere. They are a wild-looking lot,


and have picked up the evil habits and not the good of English
traders. Is not this sad? The vices of our fellow-coutrymen they
pick up all too easily.
Sunday again, and my last on Tubetube, for I sail for dear
Dobu to-morrow. Oh! that I could fly there and not have to
depend on the wind! My stay here has been so pleasant, but I
shall be so glad to get back to my work at Dobu.
Bathtime In the Nursery.


Playing at Cats’ Cradle.


CHAPTER X.
SAD NEWS FROM PANAIETL
It proved a rough time but a quick passage home, and what
a welcome I had! The girls were just coming out of school and
they did shout! Marama and Taubada were away, but the dear
Sisters gave me a warm welcome. It is good to be safely back
at Dobu. Poati, the teacher, has been ill.
After a night’s rest, went into school. I do thank God that
I am here and not in the Colonies. God’s will is always best.
Marama and I aubada returned home, and Mr. Bromilow has
been into the mountains inland, near Begasi, looking up the village
folk. There is too much to do until we get more workers. Mrs.
Bromilow carried me off for lunch. I wish you all could know
her—she is very dear to me.
Cutting out and preparing sewing for my school examina-
tion. A break of three months in the work. I must make a big
spurt to get done in time. On Sunday a full day, but so happy.
This is a blessed work.
We are to have the steamer in every six weeks now, and it
will be a great convenience for goods and mails.
We are expecting Mrs. Fletcher, Mrs. Fellows and perhaps
Rev. A. Fletcher.
Ihe heat of South Australia, I can, I assure you, sympathise
with; a fellow feeling makes us wondrous kind.
Showing large pictures to-day; the people seemed to listen with
more than usual understanding. They are always attentive and
interested here, but to-day they seemed to listen with the heart
as well as the ear. At a place where I took Sister Emily the people
made her feel “they were my friends,” we-belong-to-each-other sort
of fashion. One girl was quite overwhelming in her welcome—
in the ear 1 } days she used to strut up and down in such a consequen-
tial manner that someone gave her the name of “My lady gay,”
and she still keeps it. She has small hands and feet, and puts on
most comical airs. When we landed the other day she said.
You ve come, Sister Minnie—l am your friend, you know me.”
To Marama, on her return, she gave a message. “Tell Taubada
(Mr. Bromilow) that I am coming to Dobu for some calico he
promised me.” The dimdim custom of shaking hands takes her
fancy, but I am not anxious for them all to adopt the practice:
their own call of Kaioni (farewell, we’ll meet again) means more
to them, and their hands are often very dirty.


Easter Monday, 1896.
This afternoon we kept holiday and had a trip in the boat
and a picnic. Mr. and Mrs. Bromilow and Sisters three went to
the students’ garden at Normanby. The business part was to
plant young coconut trees on the Mission property. We planted
two each, and declared them well and truly planted, then the
boys set some more. Through the bush we walked to a beauti-
ful little creek; there is a narrow path, so we were able to get
through the path easily. Foliage was lovely. The creepers and
entanglements, with a great banyan tree superb; parasites were
clinging to the trunks of the trees and rope-like creepers hung from
tree to tree. Butterflies flitted here and there—all very beautiful—
with ferns and shrubs underneath, covering the ground thickly.
Some gorgeous spiders had spun their webs from tree to tree. We
came at last to the banks of a stream, on the banks of which the
students have their yam gardens. We spread our table and the
boys made a fire to boil the kettle. Close to the beautiful water
we sat, enjoyed our lunch and gazed at Nature. So ended the first
picnic we have indulged in and slept well at night.
7th April, 1896.
I had another experience to-day of the bad influence of native
mothers over their daughters. One of our girls, who has a deal
of evil in her nature, but is making an effort to follow Christ,
has for a mother the worst woman in Dobu. This mother has
been doing her best lately to persuade this girl to leave us and to
give up the new religion. I met this woman this afternoon and
talked to her very straight, and she said to me, “She is your child.
She is to stop with you. Who am I, that I should take her away?”
I said, “She is not my child only; she is God’s child and a ser-
vant of Jesus. She is not to be Tapwaroro because I tell her to,
but because Jesus calls her.” We had a long talk, and I told the
mother if she chose the bad way herself she was not to try to draw
her child into it too. You have no idea how evil is the influence
of the mothers on their sons and daughters. They do all they can
to tempt them into sin.
A downpour of rain which came down in sheets, and the two
Sisters, one at Taibe’u and the other at Nikumara, will get soaked
through and through. When the clouds lifted the Kiriwina boat,
with Mr. Fellows on board, was sighted, and it was dark before
our anxiety was over concerning the return of the two Sisters;
but we were happy when they returned and got into dry garments.
Air. Fellows was a long time, so Air. Bromilow sent out his
whale-boat with a lantern at 7 p.m.—and dark, so dark! They


meet them not far from the station, but they had missed a point
oft land. Their boat had a narrow escape.
Why the D ove had not arrived we could not tell, but on the
Suinday following, when we were going over to Mrs. Bromilow’s
toi lunch, what a state of excitement was ours over the news that
thie ladies we were looking for were close by in the Straits!
Siaster Jeannie, too —the good news nearly took our breath away!
We sat down to lunch, but nobody could eat —the news to us far-
away folk was overwhelming, and we decided to have dinner to-
gether in the evening. Mrs. Bromilow had two tables put to-
gether, and we combined forces to provide a bill-of-fare for
hmngry travellers. A happy reunion at night and eleven around
thie table. Afterwards we had prayers in the sitting-room. We
samg, ‘And are we yet alive and see each other’s face?” Such a
prrayer of praise followed it. God is good. We are glad to have
Siister Jeannie back, looking very well. Mrs. Fellows’ little
bo3y, Eddie, is the great attraction for the boys and girls. They go
nearly wild with delight when they see a white child, and they
very seldom meet one.
Mr. and Mrs. Fellows came in to see the sewing-class in,
the girls’ school, and later on Mr. and Mrs. Fletcher and Mr.
and Mrs. Bromilow. They were all delighted with the school’s
progress, and said it was quite like a school down south in point:
of discipline. The girls were on their best behaviour, and did
everything so nicely—as the time came for closing they passed up
slates and pencils so well, and marched to their places without a
sound. I was quite proud of my little darkies. I would like you
all to hear them sing “God Save the Queen” in English; it is
funny to hear the English words rolling from their tongues.
Last night we had such a pleasant time together. You folk
who meet so often miss the big pleasure of an occasional meeting
like this. Our usual early hour for retiring was not observed, as
you may guess, and we talked on till almost midnight.
To Fergusson I had to go to my and took Sister
Emily with me. At 10 a.m. we landed and rang the first pad—
rested in the teacher’s house during the 15 minutes’ interval—the
teacher’s wife gave us a refreshing drink of coconut. Such a large
congregation, and I never spoke to a more attentive people. After-
wards, Edna, the teacher’s wife, gave us her house, and brought
in a cooked fowl and steamed yam, and we were quite ready for
it. I turned to Edna with, “While I am in a Fijian house I will
be a Fijian,” which saying pleased her. When the students returned
from their preaching appointments a huge lobster and dish of yam?
were set before them.


We found the tide had receded, leaving the boat surrounded
by mud, and our students had to carry us to it one by one. We
reached Dobu for the afternoon service, and on the morrow I was
at Kegedoi, and I had an interesting talk with an old woman about
her grandchild, a bright, even pretty, child, and I said to the
woman, “You must not let her follow the bad customs of Dobu;
teach her about Jesus and teach her to pray.” The old woman
was one of the first converts and has been baptized. Her answer
was splendid. She said, “Our little ones must learn about Tap-
waroro. When we old people were young our minds were dark
and our ears deaf, and it was with heaviness we took up religion,
because we were old. These children’s ears are open to hear and
their minds are open to the light. You will teach her about Jesus
and teach this one how to pray, and our children will take up
religion with ease ■, and be able to tell it too.”
A number of men from Subetubia, on a huge canoe, are here
to return a visit from Dobu to them some time ago.
In Piasia a man had died two days ago, and I inquired for
the widow. The people pointed to a house back from the beach.
I went to it, and there on the ground, under the house, sat three
women. One of them I knew was not the widow, as her husband
was there, but wondered which of the other two she could be. The
first woman, who was sitting a little apart from the other two,
said in a whisper, “Oh! pity them, pity them! They are both
widows. He married them both when they were little girls, and
now they both crj r .” Poor things! they looked bitterly miser-
able. Banana leaves had been torn into strips to form a long
skirt for the time being. Another one for each was in course of
preparation. The women’s faces were all smeared with dirt and
tears. Lily’s mother could not speak above a whisper as her
voice was all used up with crying. I went close to her and could
hear, “Come close, it is hard for me to speak! Tell Lily to
bring a mat for the widow to lie on. They have only the ground
under them.” I promised to tell Lily, and then we had prayer;
but it all seemed so hopeless. The two women then lay down,
side by side, and Lily’s mother put some big leaves over them,
saying, “They have cried till they are so tired —let them sleep!”
A few of the dead man’s belongings were near by, and the rough
chair in which it is their custom to place the dead, so that the
limbs may be placed, even before they are dead, the right position
before they stiffen. Hopeless sorrow like this almost break one’s
heart.
Another shock of earthquake. We two Sisters were over on
Normanby. Curiously enough we did not feel it. When we got


back to Dobu we found that the shock had been a big one. Sister
Jeannie said it was so bad that the tanks shook so that she was
afraid they would fall. Mrs. Fletcher and Mrs. Bromilow were
on Fergusson, and they said the ground seemed to roll from under
them and the trees swayed to and fro. I was quite glad to have
escaped it, as earthquakes are uncanny things.
Mr. Bromilow and Mr. Fletcher returned from their visit to
Goodenough Island. Goodenough is the place where we hope soon
to open another station. They had a most successful trip and
established friendly relations with the natives.
Sunday service here at Dobu was one of the most impressive
I have ever been in. Joapi gave a powerful sermon about “fishers
of men.” He illustrated it by their own methods of fishing and
the people drank in every word. Then Mr. Bromilow said a few
words, and the people sat as if every word went right home. He
quoted one of their own sayings:
Ta adau be ta Henna,
Tn kwaia beta doioge —
We sail away and we return again
We die and cry in vain.
The Holy Spirit was there.
Sister Emily and I talked it over at night, and we agreed to
make to-morrow a very special day of prayer for results from this
service.
27th April, 1896.
Talked with God a good while. He will answer.
Rough waves in landing up the coast of Dobu to-day. We
just escaped a drenching, but all our belongings got wet.
Sister Ellinor leaves to-morrow on her way to Sydney, and
needs a change badly.
May Day.
Mr. and Mrs. Fletcher left this morning for Panaieti, and
Sister Ellinor for Sydney. A lovely breeze took them right out.
The Dove does look pretty -when in full sail.
Sister Ellinor’s district had to be taken up, and as I tried to
get two villages to come together, a man called out, “Two ignorant
people have come to have service—shall we go and listen ?” He
came, and when he discovered that I was not ignorant of Dobuan,
he settled down into a most interested and attentive listener. It
is most amusing to hear the remarks on going to a strange place,
“What is her name? Is she a new one? Is she ignorant?”


The week just over has been uneventful, but the directing of
our twelve girls has been a task, and some of them are growing
such a comfort and are such dear girls. Some are accomplished
at bread-making, cook yams, make rissoles, toast bread, boil rice,
make tea and coffee. We encourage them to come to us about
everything.
Malaria has troubled me a bit, but I think it has left me.
The girls were so helpful to me. Did I tell you that a fortnight
ago another baby was rescued from being buried alive with its
mother? Elizabeth, a girl who used to be with us, but is now
married and lives in her village, rescued the child. She brought
it to the Mission Station. The little thing was very thin, but is
thriving now on condensed milk. To-day it was baptized in the
church. Mrs. Bromilow held the little thing; it looked such a
wee mite and is named Anna.
Sister Jeannie is having her turn of fever, the bane of this
place— not serious, but unpleasant.
I went up the coast in a canoe, because the boat was wet with
new paint. At one village the men asked me to undo my picture
rolls. “You show them to us and the women will be back soon.”
The women came and I had a good time.
We had got home and were already in bed, when we heard
an anchor. From the verandah we could see a cutter —voices
rang out. “Have you come from Samarai?” “Yes!” “Got a
mail?” “Yes!” “How many bags?” “One!”
We put our wrappers on and went across to Mr. Bromi-
low’s to help sort out the letters and papers. Then another sur-
prise came from Mr. and Mrs. Field—letters and a beautifully
bound copy of Mrs. Browning’s poems.
When one mail comes in quickly on another Dobu seems
quite an important place.
In the afternoon I ventured in a canoe to my work with four
strong boys, and we kept close to the shore. The little thing
did dance about, the nose of the canoe kept dipping under the
waves and letting in a stream of water. My girl, Dawesi, called
out, “It is drinking all the time.”
The Dove will leave for Kiriwina on Wednesday morning
and Sister Emily will go in her. She and I have been fast friends
from the first day we met—l hardly dare to think what a blank
there will be when she has gone. But our work must be done in
different places for God! And they were scarcely gone from here
when an explosion of dynamite took place. A trader and boy
were out after fish, and through carelessness and too short a fuse
the man’s hand was blown off. Mrs. Bromilow dressed the wound,
and they are sending him to the doctor in Samarai. Mr. Bromi-


low sent the good teacher in with the poor man. It is very seri-
ous to have the delay before a doctor can amputate the hand. Mrs.
Bromilow had to help him all last night, but we can do no more!
Another side of life comes, and the first wedding among the
students took place to-day. Daniel, a fine lad, was married to
Imwatea, one of Mrs. Bromilow’s girls. The bridegroom has had
terrible opposition from his relatives, as they wanted him to marry
another girl from the village.
Too rough to-day for me to take my boat on, and I said,
“We will not go farther to-day!” One of the boys answered, “Our
friends will despise us for being weak rowers.”
The Ivanhoe was in when we got here, and came in here with
one of her passengers, who had died of inflammation of the lungs,
Captain Mullens, one of the oldest traders in New Guinea, and
he was on his way home to England. Mr. Bromilow went on
board and had a service, and then they all came on shore in the
ship’s boat and walked to the cemetery. When the funeral was
over the Ivanhoe, with Captain Steel, left for Samarai.
Re waifs. The youngest, Anna, is ill with bronchitis, and
is such a wee mite to struggle against it. Two of our girls,
Mumunori and Baeta, are ill too. The damp weather is giving
all the people colds. It is quite a business doctoring them all up.
These are a very weak-chested people and take cold so easily. The
two I named are really ill, and I have them sleeping up in the
dining-room to be near me at night. Last night about 2 a.m.
Mumunori could get no rest at all, and coughed till she almost
choked. After a time the medicine eased her and she slept till
morning. What it is to have a family of fourteen! I gave them
a dose all round of eucalyptus on sugar and it was comical to see
the face> some pulled over it, and spluttered at a great rate.
Mumunori took hers down without a sound, as she has all the
medicine I have given her. She is such a dear girl.
The deluge of rain has come, and as it sometimes plays at rain-
ing in New Guinea we risked it. When the rain comes down in
earnest, cloaks and umbrellas are nowhere, and to-day we were
drenched through and through in a few minutes. The boys could
hardly see in wfliich direction to pull. We were bailing out most
of the time. To crown it all, one of our two oars snapped, so we
had to make the best of one long and one short oar, so were
longer than ever in reaching home and dry garments.
Next morning—rain—everybody has a cold, self included (the
result of yesterday’s drenching). I kept all our girls inside and
gave them sewing, which is a real pleasure to them.
Isaia and Meri were married—less than a week ago he,
Isaia, proposed to another and was refused. As he had his


house ready he tried for Meri, and at a few hours’ notice they
were married in the church. Our girls did not know he had pro-
posed to Meri, and their astonishment was very comical. No effort
was made to keep it a secret, but somehow it did not leak out, as
most things do here, and the girls were quite amazed. ‘‘But when
did he propose?” they said. “We did not hear of it,” as if a most
important part of the business had been omitted.
I have had our detached kitchen “out of doors” to-day, every-
thing movable taken down on the grass and scrubbed with pumice
stone.
The two tables never looked so white before and the kitchen
is transformed. The girls said, “Our minds are astonished,” and
to each other, “We must never put the saucepans on the table
now.” These little humans are great sinners with the saucepans.
Things are lively at the Mission Station just now; a large
native house or two for the Synod’s convenience are being erected.
Women are plaiting mats for the floor-covering, spring cleaning
in our homes, school, singing lessons, etc.
Dear wee Anna is having a stiff time. We have helped Mrs,
Bromilow to nurse her at night time.
The L.M.S. boat has come in with the Rev. and Mrs. Abel
on board, and a number of their native boys and girls. They all
came to church and looked so nice. They will come in on their
way back from Kiriwina,
Next news is that the Ivanhoe is wrecked, and we are find-
ing out where to keep up our supply of wild turkeys’ eggs. Our
hens’ eggs have been in plenty, and w y e have been able to help
Marama for her table.
The girls were full of a new pod they have discovered. It
was large, about the size of a lemon, and filled with a soft silky
substance. It struck me that it would make splendid filling for
cushions—as good as kapok. Mr. Bromilow thinks it is the real
kapok, or perhaps its first cousin. We have been destitute of
cushions, but now will be well off.
Sunday.
As the people were leaving the church a lad saw a snak»,
coiled round one of the posts. He pointed it out to Taubada, who
made short work of it with his stick.
A lot of people from one group of villages along the coast
absented themselves from church. In each place I heard the same
story. A dog in a small village they would have to pass on the
way to church bit a child when she was teasing it, and the people
were afraid to come that way. Great men and boys, grown women
and children, were all afraid. Was it not absurd?


Why did not one of them, I asked, carry a stick and keep the
aniimal off, etc.? As a conclusion one of them said, “How can we
go quite softly—our grass dobes rustle and the dog sees the
calwes of our legs and desires to bite.” I don’t wonder, hers looked
quiite a feast for the poor beast.
The Dove was quite close to anchorage to-day, 30th Novem-
berr, 1896, and no white people on board. It gave us quite a turn
as we knew something must be wrong. When she was near
encough Taubada shouted across the waves, “Where are they?”
Thie answer was that the Rev. and Mrs. Fletcher could come from
Pamaieti, and that the Rev. and Mrs. Field were nearly here in
thedr whale-boat, having left the Dove in order that they might be
firsst with the news. But the Dove , with a breeze, had raced them by
an hour.
The trouble at Panaieti is serious. Seluwaia, a Topgan
teacher's wife, has been attacked and terribly injured by a native.
I have not all the details, but the main facts are these: A native,
in a fit of anger and jealousy, set out to wreck his vengeance on
the first unprotected person he met. Josaia’s station is inland,
and he was away from home on a cutter. His wife, Seluwaia,| and
her child, were alone in the house, and there were no men about.
She had nothing to do with the man’s anger, but when these
natives are in a temper they are just mad for the time and lose
control of themselves. Poor Seluwaia had several frightful gashes
on head, face, neck and body, and the child’s arm is almost severed
just below the elbow. Josaia and his wife have suffered much for
their religion. He was imprisoned for seven years at the time
of the trouble in Tonga, and Seluwaia waited all that time to njarry
him. They came here with the first party, and soon afterj the
landing Josaia’s clothing was all stolen. And now this heavy
trouble has come. We fear she will not recover from the injuries;
Mr. and Mrs. Fletcher have been attending to her night and day,
and could not possibly leave her to come to District Synod. The
man who attacked Seluwaia was full of cruel revenge because
one of his wives had gone away with a native of another island.
I regret to say I have had fever again, and the first night I
had fever it took so much out of me that by morning I could
not lift my head, and it has returned at intervals all the week.
The folks here have made up their minds that I must have
a change of climate, as the risk is far too great to stay as I am
through the hot months. I don’t want to go south, and the oppor-
tunity has come without any seeking on my part.
Mr. and Mrs. Bromilow put the matter before me in this
light, and I cannot refuse. They say if I stay now it may mean


losing me altogether, while a trip south may set me up for years
to come. I have not the least idea how or when I shall leave
here.
Just before sunset another mail came in ; at least, we suppose
so, and I must decide whether I go in her.
Just decided to leave next Friday by the Meda, as she is going
to Sydney via New Britain.
A Christian Congregation of Over 600 People at Dobu.


CHAPTER XI.
THE VISIT OF DR. BROWN AND THE WRECK OF
THE MEDA.
Next entry is unpacking. Such fun! And I left in the
Meda on 21st November, 1896. Got through the journey and
arrived again in Dobu on 7th June, 1897, and once more I can head
my letters Dobu.
Ten days after we reached Samarai, Dr. Brown and Mr.
Bromilow went on to Panaieti in the Meda, and I to Dobu in the
Canomie.
Reached there after a pleasant passage on Sunday afternoon,
A boat came off to meet us. Sister Emily, Ruve, Gideoni, Joapi,
and some students were on board. We were sailing faster than
they could pull, so we took them on our ship and towed the boat
to anchorage.
I never realised before what a number of girls we have liv-
ing on the station, as when I saw them all on the beach watching
the boat come in. Mrs. Bromilow was there amongst the girls
and babies, also Sister Julia with our girls. Sister Jeannie is
away at Kiriwina with two of our girls.
Unpacking quite an undertaking, etc. Next day, Wednesday,
I took up school with pleasure. Before it was time to close, a mes-
sage came from Mrs. Bromilow that the Meda wao in sight. Be-
fore we were half ready, one of the girls spied the dinghy not far
off. We all went down to the beach to welcome Sister Ellinor,
Mr. Andrews, and six new Fijian teachers, who had manned the
boat.
Sister Ellinor looks like a new woman. Her cheeks are
plump, eyes bright, and new teeth. We can hardly believe she is
the Sister who went away twelve months ago. It was the night
for service. All the new teachers and their wives from the Meda
were there, and we had a grand time.
About 10 p.m., as we were going to bed, we heard a com-
motion, and Ruve’s voice calling to us, “Father’s come! Father’s
come!” Sure enough, before any of us kneAV it, the Dove's dinghy
had crept in and landed Mr. Bromilow, Dr. Brown, and Mr. and
Mrs. Fletcher. The excitement had been pretty high all day,
what with the returned Sister, new teachers—but this beat all.
The girls and boys swarmed out of their houses and gave the late-
comers a noisy welcome. Then up the students, clad in white
singlets and sulus, with scarlet waist-bands, filed in a line; it was


a goodly sight in the moonlight. Mr. Bromilow and Dr. Brown
just spoke to them, but it was too late an hour to have any formal
welcome.
On Saturday afternoon, at 5 o’clock, we have a Prayer Meet-
ing as a preparation for the Sabbath, Students, girls, workboys,
teachers and wives, Sisters, Saragigi, and Marama, and the visitors,
all joined in, and it was a splendid meeting. This has only been
established since I went away, and all enjoyed it so much. The
singing was the best I have ever heard in Dobu.
Sunday following was a 'red-letter day in Dobu. I don’t
think any who were present will ever forget it. We began the
day with 7 a.m. Prayer Meeting. The 10 a.m. service was the
big feature of the day. The church was packed. In the front, occu-
pying about six rows, were the members of our White Flag
Society, and the rest of the church was filled with men, women
and children, sitting as close as they could get to one another.
The teachers and their wives from the Meda were on and
near the platform. We had a flag service, baptismal service, and
usual, all combined. We began the service with, “I hear Thy
welcome voice,” and then, after the prayer, the members of the
White Flag Society stood and sang, “Hold the fort,” with the
flag-waving accompaniment, wfliich runs thus:
You make firm my standard ,
Jesus- -He calls:
Jesus is our Standard-bearer,
Who among us would be slothful?
The idea of a standard-bearer is very familiar to these people,
as in all their expeditions they had a recognised leader, who was
known as the “toni doe” or standard-bearer. Since the starting
of the Society a few flag members have had to forfeit their flags,
but most have stood firm.
After this hymn Dr. Brown baptised ten adults, five men and
five women. Then we had another flag hymn, all the congrega-
tion joining in. The flag members remained standing, but turned
and faced the congregation. With pledge cards in hand they re-
peated their pledge and knelt, repeating their pledge-prayer. This
is done at each monthly meeting, but it was an ordeal for them
to face a congregation of relatives and friends who, many of them,
cling to the very evils which the members have pledged themselves
against. Dr. Brown then gave an address in English, and Mr.
Bromilow translated. Altogether it was a glorious service!
Class, Sunday School, afternoon service were part of my work
for the day, and we finished up with an English service in the sit-


ting-room. Dr. Brown preached a splendid sermon, of which the
keynote was “The Love of Christ constraineth us.”
News has come to-day (Monday) that the Meda is wrecked.
She had landed Sister Ellinor, teachers, and Dobu goods, and
started back to Samarai to get the timber that the Titus had
landed there. All the New Britain stores are on board, and the
timber for a new Mission House at Raluana, New Britain, and
most of the timber for the Kiriwina Home for Sisters.
To-night, when the moon rose, Mr. Bromilow, Dr. Brown,
and Mr. Andrews, left here in the whale-boat for the wreck.
Teachers, too, have gone in another boat.
Ten days later Mr. Bromilow returned, and we are relieved
to find all are safe.
28th June, 1897.
To-day Mr. and Mrs. Bromilow, Ruve, Dr. Brown, and Mr.
and Mrs. Fletcher, left in the Dove for a trip round Goodenough
to choose a site for the new Mission Station. Marama has left
her thirty-two girls in my care, and Mrs. Fletcher has left her four
girls also. Sister Julia has charge of the five waifs during Marama’s
absence, but I am to oversee, as she is not very well up in Dobuan
yet. We hope that none of them will take into their heads to
have convulsions or any other extraordinary complaint while
Marama is away. The thirty-two girls will be no trouble if they
keep well and good. I shall have to lead their morning and even-
ing prayers, allot their duties, and see them carried out. Each day
different girls have to be appointed to mind the waif babies, wash
their clothes, sweep and clean their houses, and cook the food,
etc., etc.
Mr. Bromilow has left all the teachers’ stock of medicines
with me, and they have to apply for what they want. Dr. Brown
added to my troubles one very weighty matter. He called me into
the study and gave the chronometer from the Meda into my care.
This chronometer is a beautiful little instrument and very regular.
It has to be wound every Friday at 8 a.m., and if allowed to run
down will have to be sent to Sydney to be re-set. The captain of
the Mercury was in the study and he showed me how to wind it,
but I am scared lest I shall forget it. To-day is Monday, so I
have till Friday to remember it or to forget it in. If it were in
my room I should remember, but it is in Mr. Bromilow’s study, and
“out of sight, out of mind.” I have stuck up a placard on my look-
ing-glass, and one over the clock in the dining-room. Dr. Brown
said I should feel honoured at the trust reposed in me, but I can
hardly see it in that light.
All these extra duties come in addition to my regular school
and visiting work, so I shall have a busy week. The Dove and


party may be back for Sunday next. I, for one, hope they will
be back by then. At times like this, when burdens would press
heavily, it is so good to be able to lean hard on the Lord and to
be so sure that His grace is sufficient. One needs special grace to
remember to ring the bells at the proper time. I reckoned up just
now, and find 52 different bells are rung every week to notify
times for the different duties, etc. Every day there is a bell for
morning prayers, a bell for evening prayers, and a curfew bell
for bed. There are first and second bells for each session of school,
and first and second bells for each service on Sunday, and a few
extra thrown in—s 2in all. I shall have bell and chronometer on
the brain soon, I think. Of course, if I always had the bells to
look after it would come naturally; but I am used to hearing
them rung instead of ringing them.
It is just nine o’clock, so good-night.
Our only cat was seized to-day wfith a desire to taste india-
rubber, so took the opportunity when Anna’s bottle was washed
and left to drain, to eat the top of it. Fortunately, Marama had
left a supply of bottle requisites with me, so we chased the cat
and fitted a new top on the bottle. Our school is steadily increas-
ing in numbers.
Early this morning the Merrie England steamed in, and Sir
W. McGregor came ashore. He only stayed long enough to tell
us that he was going straight on to Kiriwina, but would be back
in four or five days. He wants to see both Dr. Brown and Mr.
Bromilow r .
This has been a very trying day. Two Samoan women were
brought here very sick with fever. I have been doing what I could
for them, and have just paid them a last visit before bedtime. Their
temperature is lower now, and they seem easier. I have a sick
Fijian woman on my hands too. All three are new arrivals, per
Meda, and are very depressed over the fever. Those who have
been here longer don’t feel alarmed when they have fever, as they
“know it,” to use their own expression. The girls and babies arc
all keeping w r ell except for colds.
The Waverley arrived to-day with a load of things from the
wrecked Meda; amongst them were dozens and dozens of white
singlets. All were wet and sandy and some stained. The girls
have been hard at work washing them and hanging the clean but
wet ones out to dry. “Plenty of hands” have made “light work.”
We had boxes and boxes opened and spread out to dry. The
Mission premises presented the appearance of a wet curiosity shop
My patients are all on the mend. I did not tell you that,
after I had been in Dobu a week, I renewed my acquaintance with


New Guinea fever, I had six days of it, but have been much
better since than before it, I am glad to have had the attack,
because I found myself able to take quinine and to benefit by it.
My trouble in the old days was that quinine, which is the sovereign
remedy for this fever, did not agree with me and made me worse
instead of better. Now I can take it, fever loses half its terrors.
The Dove is not in sight, much to our sorrow". It will be
strange to have a Sunday without either the Taubada or Marama.
The Dove was sighted early, but did not get here till 5 p.rn.
I made some scones and a pudding, as I knew the party from the
D ove would be sure to be ready for a good meal.
Marama’s house-boys had made bread the night before, and
Sister Jeannie a cake, so there was something for them to eat be-
sides tinned meat and yam. We were in school when the anchor
w r as dropped, but I knew the girls were longing to get out to
meet the folks, so dismissed the school half an hour earlier, and we
all trooped down to the beach.
They have had a most interesting trip, having visited Hughes
Bay, Mud Bay, and several parts of Goodenough and Fergusson
Islands. Several rivers w r ere seen and inland villages visited. Every-
where the people were friendly, but in some places the people were
frightened at the sight of white people and ran into the bush.
In one place Mrs. Bromilow found only one woman. It was
a large village, and the fires were burning and pots of food were
bubbling away in preparation for the evening meal, but the people
had vanished. The one woman had been slow in getting away,
and when she saw Marama she seemed transfixed with fright, and
stood trembling as if shivering with ague. Marama could just
hear a rustle now and then in the long grass, and could feel the
presence of the natives who were crouching there, but they kept
out of sight.
Sunday they held short services in Dobuan, which some of
them understood. There is a big field of work there, and these few
visits that have been paid at intervals will pave the way for the
missionary w T ho settles there.
We are daily expecting the Governor in the yacht, Merrie
England. Orders have been given to the men and women on the
station, that if any of them see the steamer coming, to hurry back,
as we want them all to meet His Excellency, and sing, “God Save
the Queen.” I, too, am waiting, as the Governor would like to
see the school work and drill. I took an hour’s walk, however,
and a little girl came to me, running as hard as she could, and was
out of breath. We hurried home. Mr. Bromilow and Dr. Brown


went off to the steamer, and we watched to see them leave the
vessel with the Governor. Joapi brought the boys and I the girls,
and they formed three lines on the beach. Marama led off, and
they sang the National Anthem just as the Governor stepped
ashore. He went up and down the lines and shook hands with
them all, and then said he would like to see the girls’ drill. While
he spoke to the teachers I marched the girls into the church (our
only schoolroom) and got them ready for their pole drill. They
went through it very well and His Excellency congratulated me,
I dismissed, and we Sisters went across to the Mission House for
afternoon tea. Tell Ellie that the pink glass sugar basin and cream
jug which she sent to Mrs. Bromilow figured at the tea, and looked
pretty and delicate.
The steamer left next day and took our mail. T hen came
an epidemic of sickness. Mumunori has had ten days of it, and her
people wanted to take her to the village where, humanly speaking,
she would have died. Jemesa, a valued teacher, died, too, and
leaves a wife and child. It was two days after Dr. Brown left
here.
A great work of stacking timber from the ship is being done
rapidly, and Mr. Andrews will begin at once to prepare the
timbers for the Sisters’ Home in Kiriwina (given by Adelaide).
Marama has just come over to tell us that the child adopted
by Siatua and his wife has died. Marama did nurse the child well,
but the little thing died.
There is to be an important wedding, and to-day the inhabi-
tants of our Mission compound are all on the “qui vive” with the
excitement and sight of two tremendous canoes and a boat com-
ing across from Pilato’s station (he is the bridegroom). They
were loaded with people, including four couples who were also to
be married—six live pigs and piles of yams for the feast. When
the day arrived it was high holiday for the station and visitors.
The church was beautifully decorated by Pilato’s fellow teachers,
and Monica, the bride, trained on the Mission Station, was sup-
plied by Marama, also the other four brides. The bridegrooms
were from the bush country —one of them had not evidently worn
calico before, and he got over the difficulty by putting it length-
wise over his shoulders and tying it under his chin. He advanced
to his seat with the others in this grotesque rig, and a broad smile
went round the congregation, but no one smiled aloud. One of the
teachers sitting near him seized the man, whipped the calico
undone, and fastened it in orthodox fashion round his waist. Each
couple stood up in turn while Taubada performed the ceremony.
When he, of calico fame, was told to stand, he got up and walked
towards the door, quite relieved to think it was all over; but


Taubada called him back to say it was not finished yet. Then
when his and his bride’s hands were joined during the ceremony,
the man let go again, and the hands had to be put into position
again. The other three man-o’-bush couples behaved sensibly, and
Monica and Pilato, of course, were very proper. After the register
had been signed by those who would write, and X his mark put
by those who couldn’t, all adjourned to the wedding feast.
A feast here does not mean a sit-down spread on our lines,
but a division of food, and, in this case, a cooked meal given by
the teachers in honour of Pilato and his bride. A long table right
on the mats, and great plates of yams, joints of pork, salt-beef,
ship biscuts, and tea, were placed down the middle of it, and they
fell too.
The wedding presents were given. All Marama’s girls came
in, carrying a gift of some sort, and put them down in front of the
bride. Marama then went up, touched the gifts, and made a
speech. The presents were a curious collection—a boiler, sauce-
pan, frying pan, saucers, plates, looking-glass, soap, etc.
Another wedding on a larger scale than before. Poati and
Fanny Poati looked happy, but Fan was ready for a weep.
A Missionary Meeting in Papua.




CHAPTER XII.
THE EPISODE OF THE WITCHES, AN EXAMINATION
AND SOME WEDDINGS.
A most novel scene took place here on Burnagura (Dobu)
Station to-day. The Government Chief here (Gaganamore) and
his nephew and heir apparent (Cockroach) want to have the paths
on Dobu and Fergusson cleared before the Governor’s visit in
October next. This was hard work for the menfolk, so they con-
ceived the brilliant idea of locking up all the old women witches
and sentencing them to hard labour on the roads. These twm
men are both native policemen, and Gaganamore is also a Govern-
ment Chief, and has been invested with a silver-mounted staff of
office. Cockroach has made himself a black staff, and mounted it
with half a tin beaten out, and is as proud of it as the chief of
his staff. This chief-to-be went through all one district yester-
day and made prisoners of all the women suspected of being
witches. From these villages he gathered forty-seven old women,
and put this question to each: “Are you a witch? If you are and
deny it, when the Governor comes you will be tried and taken to
Samarai for a long term. If you are and admit it, I will punish
you by making you clear the paths.” As this latter was the lesser
of the two evils, they, one and all, confessed that they were guilty.
Then they were all taken to the chief village to await the
arrival of Gaganamore on the morrow, when he would pass
sentence.
Both Gaganamore and Cockroach had clearly overstepped their
duties in making prisoners of the women. Mr. Bromilow holds
the position of Q.O. here for the convenience of traders, so that
they can sign on their crews here instead of going all the way to
Samarai, and he also tries to check any blunders on the part of
the police. He knew the police would get into trouble if they
carried out their plans, so advised them to bring the women over
for him to admonish, and then advised that they should let them
go. By this he would not lessen the influence of the two officers
among the people, and would save them from the probable results
of their folly.
So this afternoon Cockroach and his 42 witches arrived. He
came in a small canoe, and arrived half an hour before his
prisoners, who paddled themselves across. They had evidently had
a big fright, and were still in fear, as they landed in perfect silence
—a fact that deserves special mention.


Cockroach met them and arranged them in single file, and
then, walking backwards at their head, led them into the open
space near the verandah. Then he put them in three rows, and
bade them sit down on the grass. This they also did in silence —
wonder of wonders!
Such rows of sin-hardened faces I have never seen before. One
tried to extenuate sin by saying, “I have only struck three people
with death,” mentioning the three. Another said, “I do not kill.
I only make the winds and the waves.” Taubada spoke to them
and told them how wrong it was to frighten the people so, and
how wicked to pretend to rule the sickness or death of others.
Then he told them to fly, and show us how they did it (they pro-
fess flying as one of their accomplishments) ; lacking the orthodox
broomstick, not one of the witches flew away. They pointed out
one woman as the stem of witchcraft. Taubada asked her if
this was true, and she answered, “Yes! and that’s my brother!”
pointing to Cockroach himself. After admonition, he told the
women they might go home. He said, “You could not fly, now let
us see if you can run. Run off to your canoes.” It was a most
comical sight to see these old witches running, looking like so many
emus, with their grass skirts waggling. Their fears over, their
tongues were let loose, and the shouting and yelling over getting
on board their canoes was truly awful. Bedlam let loose was a
mere circumstance to it. If sin be weighty, surely the canoes must
have gone to the bottom.
To-night, about 9 p.m., we saw the dim outlines of a schooner
coming in, but it did not come right up to the anchorage. Then
we heard a great blowing of conch shells and shouting from the
vessel, and Joapi said he was sure it must be the Dove, as he
could distinguish Jimmy’s voice.
We were expecting the Dove any time from New Britain,
but not from that direction, as she ought to have gone to Samarai
first, as it is the port of entry. Mr. Bromilow went off in a boat,
but they shouted to him not to come too near. To come ashore
or to let anyone go on board would be a breach of customs and
quarantine.
The Government schooner Tiai was anchored about one and
a half miles away. A magistrate was on board, he having arrived
at Dobu most unexpectedly about three hours after the witches had
gone home.
The D ove had started for Kiriwina, but the wind and tide
being against them, they had anchored at Neku Mara. Mr. Bromi
low sent a note off to the Tiai, late as it was, to know if the magis


trate could grant pratique, as it seemed too bad for Dr. Brown
to be so near and not able to come ashore.
Dr. Brown rested ashore for the night and went on again in
the early morning.
A baptismal service is to be held at Wewemara on Sunday,
and the examination of school on Monday.
Again I have charge of the girls, and Sister Julia of the waifs,
while Mrs. Bromilow and Ruve are. away.
They all returned in due time, after a very satisfactory trip,
but to find a Samoan teacher very sick, and he says he will die
to-night. The native teachers so often seem to know the time of
their own death, that one always dreads to know of their speaking
thus.
A feast is on, preparatory to one of our school examinations.
We climbed up into the house and a meal was served according
to Fijian custom. A mat about the size of our kitchen table served
as a table cloth, and we sat round it on the other mats. A huge
boiler was brought in, and two boiled fowls fished out with forks
and put on dishes; the liquor was served as soup in coconut shells;
second course was Fijian pudding; several were put before us
made of taro, coconut and sugar-cane tied up in prepared banana
leaves. About 30 puddings and quantities of yams and bananas
were sent out to the boys and girls who had come with us. Instead
of such stuff as tea or cordials, delicious young coconuts drunk
from the shell formed our beverage. Then the school bell sounded
and we all went in. Our boys and girls sat at the back with us,
so as not to “flurritate” the examiners. The boys and girls be-
haved splendidly, but as this is one of the newer schools, the scholars
are not very wise yet.
The examination only took one and a half hours, and then
we started on foot for Taibe’u, sending the boats round. A very
short cut overland brought us to Taibe’u, -where 156 boys and
girls had gathered up for examination. Here, to our horror, we
had to attempt another meal! Just a pretence at eating to satisfy
the Fijian host and hostess, who would have been mortally wounded
if we had refused the food! Here the school children entered into
the spirit of affairs and excelled themselves—a most unusual thing
at an examination. After it was ended a presentation from the
children was made to the Students’ Institution at Dobu. All the
school children marched up in single file, carrying a gift of one
sort or another—yams, bananas, coconuts, sugar-cane, etc. —until a
heap rose and our boat was laden to the gunnel.


1 o-day has been a great time for the school children —you
will remember that we paid a visit to the recent examinations at
Fergusson, and now they have returned the compliment. “It is
our ambition to get this school up to a hundred,” said Mrs. Bromi-
low a year ago, and to-day we almost reached the second hundred.
The girls are looking after their yam gardens well, taking an
hour and a half in the mornings.
An ever-interesting theme—a proposal of marriage—came to
Dawesi from one of Mr. Bromilow’s students, and she refused
him. One on trial proposed for- Nancy. He dreamed that she
came to him and presented a very white garment, asking him to
wear it. He took it as a sign that God meant him to marry Nancy,
so he proposed to her and she accepted. They will make a fine
couple. Both proposals were in writing, and were answered in
the same way. Our boys and girls are advancing, you see. To-
night another letter was sent to Dawesi. The custom now is for
a lad to send his letter through Mr. Bromilow, and he sends it to
the girl either through Marama or a Sister.
In the village the parents arrange the marriages without re-
gard to the young folks’ wishes at all. Girls are forced into mar-
riages, and some have come here to live to be protected from their
parents. The engaged couples have often never spoken to each
other prior to marriage. It is a sign of immorality for them to
have any dealings with one another, except through a third party,
so love-letters have to come in a round-about way. Dawesi’s letter
was from a lad in one of the near villages, a church member, but
not her equal in the matter of training and education. We would
have been glad to see her marry one of the students, as she is in
every way fitted to become a useful teacher’s wife; but she has
accepted this lad and seems very happy over it. I can only hope
(as we all do) that she will be a help to the people in the village
and act as leaven to raise the tone of the people. How we shall
miss our two dear girls, Dawesi and Nanisi! They have grown
into our lives! I am fast losing my big girls out of the day school.
Pani and Monica are married to teachers. Dili will shortly
be married to Joapi, the tutor. Unaisi and Meri are married to
students and have wee babes of their own.
Borenni also married, but cannot read yet, so attends when
she can; also Mareda, Nanisi, Eleni, Rube, and Saloti, are shortly
to be married. I am glad to have helped in their training. God
bless them every one! And He is already using these trained
Christian girls!
Sister Emily came back from her school at Taibe’u looking
very sick. Last Monday she left here, had fever on Tuesday, and


is not well yet (Friday). She is quite disappointed at breaking her
record of nearly two years. The fever has left her, but she will
take some days to pick up her strength again.
Last Sunday we heard very sad news of Tababuai, a lad who
has been connected with the Mission from its inception. He is
about the finest Dobuan I have seen, and was Mrs. Bromilow’s first
table-boy, and was a pretty little fellow. He had been on the station
a good deal, and helped to build the Sisters’ Home —then became
one of the Dove's crew, the captain’s right-hand man. Though a
good boy, he had not come out decidedly for Christ until the be-
ginning of this year.
A large party from our “White Flag Society” went in the
Dove to Sanaroa to hold White Flag meetings. Tabubuai and
Tolokedu decided to join them, and were doing well. About six
weeks ago Tababuai joined the schooner Jessie Riley for a term of
ten months.
He was in the neighbourhood one Sunday and sailed across
to attend class and services. Everybody was glad to see him, as he
is a general favourite, and we all felt he was in earnest about his
religion. At sunset he weighed anchor, and there was a chorus
of kaioni’s (farewell) from a crowd on the shore.
Last Sunday the sad news came that he and two other
boys had been killed and eaten at Bwaidoga, on the other side of
Fergusson Island.
Mr. Thompson, the captain, had bought land, and left Taba-
buai in charge, and it seems the natives disputed the boundary;
but Tababuai and the others followed Mr. Thompson’s instruc-
tions and went on the disputed ground.
Tababuai’s mother is almost beside herself with grief. It is
a great trouble to her that she has not his body to bury. She came
to the Mission Station with a garment that he used to wear round
his shoulders, with his comb, looking-glass, etc., in her hands, and
walked about saying, “I want to tread where my boy has trod.”
She was a most pitiful sight; she cries all day and refuses to eat.
The people say if only missionaries were at Bwaidoga they would
teach the ways of peace.
We missionaries hope that the Goodenough Circuit will be a
reality next year. Mr. Bromilow, with Dr. Brown, you will re-
member, chose a site for the station, and the place where Mrs,
Bromilow and Ruve with Poati and Baniani went alone, is near
the very village where these murders occurred. The women there
were terrified at the sight of a white woman and ran to hide in
the grass.


We all went across to Taibe’u to the inaugural meeting in
that place of the White Flag Society. With the members, the
Sisters are now at work there week by week; it will be possible
to help the Society on after this inaugural meeting is over to-
night. We had a grand meeting. All who wanted to join from
Taibe’u and the districts were assembled on either side, and they
alone nearly filled the church. Crowds had to stand outside and
look on through doors and windows.
There is a large population on Fergusson, so the Society
should grow even larger than the one at Dobu. The pull home
was glorious in the moonlight.
I was appointed to Sikiruku and Gigipwaru for Sunday.
Leaving on Saturday, I asked to take Ruve with me, also my name-
sake, Mini, and Seleaia, and Ruve took Ani, and our rugs and
pillows. The girls do enjoy a trip to the other stations, but it
is always hard to decide whom to take. The teacher and his wife
had not a fowl to offer us, but had a substitute of shrimps and
duga. They were made up into patties with leaves—a real chief’s
dish in Fiji—so we were honoured. The night was hot and the
mosquitoes lively. After the service, which I took, we had no
time to waste, and worst of all, the wind dropped, and the boys
had to pull. Three villages at Gigipwaru gathered together for
service. Two of our students walked down the coast to villages
and held services.
The last village I was to take was reached by a bush path.
I took Ruve and the girls with me, leaving the boys to make a fire
on the beach and roast some yams for our tea —we were hungry.
A woman here addressed me by name and called me “My
friend.” I recognised her as one of the class members from Dobu;
then she pointed out her husband. She had been spending some
weeks with her friends in this village, and said, “I am not forget-
ting to pray, and we two have stopped the people from working
to-day, and we are teaching them to keep the Sabbath!” She
then asked me to wait while she brought some ripe bananas from
her house and cooked yam. When we got to the boat we discussed
the roast yam, and made a start for Dobu, reaching there at sun-
down—a big pile of letters was awaiting me.
Eleni and Nanisi and four other girls were married to-day
(Monday).
District S3mod met to-day, and three days after Mr. and Mrs.
Bromilow left for Cooktown. They have taken two Dobuan boys
with them to act as pundits and help in the translation. They
intend stopping in Cooktown until the end of January, to com-


plete the translation, and I am appointed Sister-in-charge of the
Home here and Girls’ School. A good Fijian teacher is also ap-
pointed for the station at Dobu and the boys.
To-morrow two Sisters are to leave for Kiriwina, 100 miles
away—their names are Sister Emily and Sister Jeannie. The
Sisters appointed will go in to the Adelaide Home in Kiriwina.
Eister Ellinor is to work the Taibe’u section. She will live in the
Sisters’ native house over there, and come home to Dobu for
Saturday and Sunday.
Mr. and Mrs. Field have returned to Tubetube and Mr.
Fellows to Kiriwina.
Spearing Fish,


On the Beach at Dobu, Papua.


CHAPTER XIII.
A CHRISTMAS HOLIDAY.
24th December, 1897.
This has been a great day for Dobu, for Christmas is on us
and the teachers and people from all parts of the circuit are already
arriving for the sports. To-day they are to be held, and to-morrow
morning (Christmas Day) the 10 a.m. service. They will have
time after it is all over to get back to their stations for Sunday.
The Mission Station seems alive with people—over 1,000 folk.
We began at 1 p.m. with canoe races, with about 15 people on
each. It was such a pretty sight to watch the paddles dipping all
together. A race followed of smaller canoes, then foot and swim-
ming races, tug-of-war and climbing the greasy pole. Captain
Craig came ashore; he gave a substantial addition to the prizes
and took a great interest in the doings of the day.
On Christmas morn the service was addressed by four speakers
—a Samoan, Fijian, Papuan, and myself. The rest of the day
was happily though quietly spent. After this, as the schools were
closed, we took our girls to Rawia for four days. Rawia is on
Fergusson Island; the part that is Mission property is used for
yam gardens, and a good native house built on it. Fresh breeze?
get there that never reach Dobu. Dobu is somewhat shut in by
the surrounding islands. On our two whale-boats were sixteen
folk, kettles, yams and provisions.
New let me describe the house. It consists of one large room,
and the walls are plaited coconut leaves, the floor (four feet off
the ground) covered with mats made from the coconut leaves,
roof of thatch, and quite bare of furniture. Each girl brought
her own mat and quilt, made of patchwork by herself—a Dobuan
can very easily “take up her bed and walk”—a pot to cook in, a
lantern, a couple of pinafores, their grass skirts, with plenty of
yams to eat, to make them happy and comfortable. We wfliite folk
were a little more elaborate. Mr. Fletcher teasingly said, “When
three Missionary Sisters go away for four days it takes the biggest
boat on the place to carry their luggage.”
Rawia’s beach was our kitchen, the ocean the bathroom.
Our domicile was right on the water, from which the thick bush
had been cleared a little to make room for the house. Great trees,
with their branches. netted to other trees by rope-like creepers, an
undergrowth of ferns, palms of drooping foliage, all made it very


beautiful; the outlook was —ocean and isle and glistening beach, and
to the right Dobu, ever fair.
The quantity of shellfish here is a delight to our girls. It is
such a rest to be away from the bustle of our Mission Station
and the sound of bells. There are so many elements and phases
of work that it is never very quiet there. Splendid order, method,
and system is the order of that wonderful station development at
Dobu; 236 in all are the bells rung every week, so you would think
that a special bell-ringer is needed, but all this is not managed by
one person.
The girls’ delight also is to make torches and go crab-hunt-
ing by torchlight at night on Rawia beach. We are going to Dobu
by moonlight.
We saw the New Year in at the watchnight service; the church
was decorated by the teachers. We will buckle to on Sunday, feel-
ing better for rest and change at Rawia. On Monday I, with some
of my girls, visited the hill villages, and on returning went to see
the yam gardens, for they look so pretty when growing. Thin
bamboos are stuck in the ground, and three or four tied at the
top of each stake. A yam garden is very like a hop-garden, only
that the product is underground.
Had a chase next afternoon after one of my girls. When any
girl asks to come here to stay she promises not to go home without
permission. If a girl really wishes to leave us and asks to go,
we never force her to stay. In the early days they just ran off,
but now they understand.
Yesterday Wedega asked to go for the day and return at
night. After my special work was over, I set out to visit Wedega’s
father’s village, where I expected to find her. I asked for her, and
they said, “She is in the bush. She has gone to her own village.”
As I entered the village I had seen what might have been vanish-
ing legs and a ladder; so, without wasting words, I stepped up the
ladder, and there was Wedega hiding in a corner, for she knew
I was about. I told her to come down and go back with me to
the boat. She meekly obeyed, and the people were too astonished
to expostulate until I was almost out of the village, when they
found their tongues and began to shout and talk. I told them
that she had come away without permission and must go back.
Wedega seemed very sorrv, and said she wanted to return last
night, but her step-mother had kept her, although she had pleaded
earnestly, for I would think she had told me a falsehood; but she
would not let her go. This is probably true. In her village poor
Wedega is surrounded by unusually bad influences.


She has been very good all day. I have told her she must
sta here all this week, and after that, if she still wishes to go,
shemust ask me first. We are praying that she may decide aright.
Another trouble arose to-day! A little girl, who has not been
hei very long, is sick, and her sister came to take her home, pro-
ofing to bring her back when she is well. It would have been
eas for me to consent, as she is one of the most unpleasant little
patnts I have ever had; but I knew she would have no proper
car in the way of suitable food or medicine in her village, so had
to efuse. She is a nice child when well, but oh! such a trying
paent, for she spits and kicks when I want her to take medicine.
Evr since I scored one in making her take her dose, she has been
in better frame of mind.
To minister to others takes time, but it is happiness to put
asie the work I have planned for the day and “do the next thing.”
Our Nanisi brought to me a plaited mat to sell. She wanted
enugh print for the top of her mosquito net, so I gave her the
prit for 2/- and kept the mat.
IJt January, 1898.
Ginaula, our biggest girl, helped herself to a small canoe and
padled herself off to her home on Fergusson. I am wondering
wither it is wise to have her here, for though a good girl she
ha wayward fits, and has twice climbed a tree and tried to kill
he;elf. I have been praying specially for guidance in her case,
Giaula turned up, but climbed a tree on the beach and sat there
allafternoon, too much ashamed to come up to the Mission House.
Wen she came, I told her she must go home, as she was setting
a id example of disobedience to the little girls.
Ginaula begged to be allowed to stay. She said that when
sbwent home her mother would not let her stay in the village.
Sh said to Ginaula, “You are not my daughter, your sisters are
nomore your sisters and your brothers are no longer your brothers.
Gi back to the Mission Station and stay there—we have no place
fo you here.” She spent the night with some of her distant rela-
tias at Sawaedi. For some reason or other the girl seems to be
a ort of outcast in her village. Most of the mothers do their
lefi best to get their girls away from here, and this was the guidance
lad been praying for. Now, I dare not refuse to let her stay
he. She is very penitent, and I hope will be more steady in her
coduct. We are told to forgive till “seventy times seven,” and
I in love poor Ginaula.


To-day we had the sad news of the early death of Piseo, a
favourite boy. He, with four others, were the first to go to Mr.
Bromilow and confess sorrow for sin and a desire for repentance.
One of the five, Daniela, is now a missionary to his own people,
and he graduated from the ranks of the students. He is doing
well. Piseo’s heathen mother was bent on getting him away from
the Mission Station, saying she wanted to make a rich man of him
and a chief. She tempted him, cried for him, coaxed him, so that
he left here, and his religion, too, returning to the old life of sin
in the village.
A few months ago I saw him, and his mother said that he
was not well. She had tried to persuade him to go to Mr. Bromi-
low for medicine, but he refused, saying that the girls would laugh
at him because he was thin. He grew thinner, and his mother
said in great distress, “I have begged him to go to the Mission
Station and stay there to get well, but he will not go.”
“She reaped what she had sown.” She had cried to get him
to leave the Station and had tempted him to sin. Now she cried
in vain for him to go back. I have never seen such devotion to
a sick person as she displayed, waiting on him and watching at
his side to give him food or drink. Early this morning he died,
having given no outward sign of repentance.
A boat passed by, and we are longing for the Christmas mail,
and January is nearly over.
Since the two Sisters went to Kiriwina, the two Sisters, Ellinor
and Julia, have had attacks of fever, and I have had to doctor up
some of the girls. A budget of letters came in, and, being Satur-
day, there was leisure to enjoy one’s letters and “good news from
a far country is good indeed.”
This past month has been particularly difficult, but walking
in the dark with God brings one very near to Him. I have had
to wrestle in prayer for three of my girls. “Satan desired to have
them and sift them as wheat,” but God’s power was stronger. God
forbid that by any mistake on my part I should cause one of His
little ones to stumble!
The yearly supply of stores from Sydney has come, and all
these things had to be put away; then the girls’ gardening had to
be arranged for to-morrow.
Mrs. Fellows, Ruth, and six Kiriwina girls have arrived per
D ove, and little Ruth is a great attraction to our girls.
One of our best girls has disappointed us by going off to a
feast on Normanby, where I cannot get at her at all.
A feast time, as these people express it, is the “stem of sin,”
and one is being prepared for in Dobu by dancing and drumming
every night. On Sunday there was not a drum to be heard, how-


ever, so that was good. We dread it coming, as it will be a time
of testing for some of our class members. We pray that they may
not be led into temptation.
We have had a large gathering at Numanuma for a “White
Flag Meeting.” Mr. Fletcher was in charge, with the Fijian
teacher and his wife. Sister Ellinor and her girls we met, for
they had preceded us.
A very nice meal for us (three Sisters, Mrs. Fellows, Dr.
Vaughan)—fowl, yam, etc. A small tin dish was handed round
to wash our fingers in, and a towel, because we had to eat with
our fingers.
The crowd dispersed about 6 p.m., and when the bright moon
arose, I decided to go with Sister Ellinor to Taibe’u, and home
across the Straits later on. She has such a comfortable little house,
though native-built.
Mr. and Mrs. Bromilow returned a few days ago.
Papuan Children Playing “Dead Man.”


Waiting for the Preacher.
Two Papuan Girls.


CHAPTER XIV.
LAST DAYS AT DOBU.
Sunday has come and has been spent on the House
Station:—
1. Prayer Meeting, 7 a.m
2. Church, 10 a.m
3. Led girls’ class, 11 a.m.
4. Sunday School, 2 p.m.
I taught the girls and Taubada the boys. Marama had gone
to take the afternoon service at Kenaia.
5 p.m., service, at which I gave an address.
6. English service in the Mission House, at which, 7.30 p.m,,
Taubada (Mr. Bromilow) preached.
Monday’s school, I had 40 girls present —the largest number
I have had for some weeks, as the yam harvest is just over. It is
so nice to have them all here, but it keeps my hands full to look
after them all—three classes.
At the monthly meeting to-night, one of Marama’s girls, who
has recovered from a severe sickness, stood up alone and thanked
God for helping her in her time of sickness and for making her
well. It was good to hear her speaking out bravely in the presence
of many heathen people, who come out of curiosity and sit in the
back of the church.
To-day we had a letter from Sister Emily, telling us that
it was 14 weeks since their last letters. We had ours a few weeks
since, and theirs have been here ever since, awaiting a boat.
It seems that the pearl-fishing is not paying, and the cheer-
ful news has been given that we shall probably get mails less
regularly now.
1 his white rush of population to the mainland will not
benefit us.
On the way in the boat to my work, we had to pass the boil-
ing springs, so one of my girls suggested that we should put some
coconuts in and have a hot drink on the way back. We had some
drinking nuts (young nuts), so just dropped them into a hollow in
the rocks and left them. On our return we took them out. The
way to drink a coconut is to knock out a circular piece of shell
from the top, and cup and liquid are ready.
No small stone was at hand, so the rowlock did duty to open
the nuts. The liquid was boiling inside the nuts. We were all
thirsty and burnt our tongues at the first attempt, but the liquid
soon cooled down and made a most refreshing drink.


Baieta had a nasty fall from our verandah this morning as
she was coming in to prayers. In the accident she fell heavily
and was stunned for some time. Somebody stupidly ran and told
her grandmother, who lives in the next village, that the little girl
was dead. She came in a great state, and tried to get Baieta to
speak to her, and was so distressesd that she could get no answer.
The child was stunned for about an hour, and faint even after
that; but was all right by the middle of the morning. She begged
to come with me when I was going to the villages this afternoon,
but I told her she had better keep out of the sun. In the after-
noon she astonished me in the afternoon school by getting three
sums right. The fall must have shaken her brain into order, as
she is usually dense in the extreme over figures.
A saltwater shower bath was my fortune this afternoon —free,
gratis, and for nothing. As we were starting for Naikwara,
the waves were as nothing, but the current unusually strong.
Taubada tried to get to Sisiana, but was swept back. Two students
were carried across to Fergusson instead of Dobu, and had to sleep
there all night. We, in our little boat, were drenched with the
waves and had a lively time.
The natives were in distress about me, but do not mind get-
ting wet themselves. Dobu natives would protect us from harm
and not one would do us an injury. This can be said of Dobu,
because of the Gospel, which has taken root here.
I set a woman to cut grass, and when I inspected her work
she was brimming over with a message two of my friends had
left with her. I was to bring their favourite medicine (eucalyptus),
but the woman had forgotten that, so I did not put it in my
basket. They crave for the smell of it, and to rub it on throat
and chest cures them of all things. Their sorrow that I had
brought none was almost comical.
Tau’ulu I have not been able to cross to, so the people have
come by twos and threes, and their song is, “We looked in vain
for you, so have been crying for our friend and her medicine.”
A very sick woman sent for me, and I took her quinine and
eucalyptus. “We have wanted you so badly,” was their cry, “but
waited in vain.” It is pleasant to me to know that one’s visits
are appreciated. God is good to so open the hearts to receive us,
but oh! if only they would receive Him into their hearts and
lives!
The serious cases of sickness come to Mrs. Bromilow, as we
have no nurse now.


A native custom came across my path to-day. A woman asked
me to wait and see the fish brought in for the morning feast. 1
could see five canoes approaching the shore, all sailing abreast, with
a good haul of fish on board. They came in slowly, all keeping
in line. Just before they touched the shore one man, a leader,
shouted out for the women to bring them water to drink; then
they all struck the sides of their canoes and gave a great yell. That
over, another man carried the fish, threaded on long strings, and
hung them on the front of a house. The people in these villages
will cook food and exchange for fish.
Marama and Taubada have gone to Numanuma, and almost
as soon as they were out of sight a mail came in. We sorted it
and sent off a boat to Marama with their letters. She would
wonder if anyone was sick and had sent for her.
Earthquakes again, and we can never get used to them,
especially the loud rumble which precedes them. Not quite easy
to be ready for these sudden shocks in the earth we are living on!
Marama’s girls all went to plant yams. We are getting in
a heap of yams, and it takes a young mountain of yam food to
supply these girls with healthy appetites— taro and pumpkins and
sweet potatoes.
News from Kiriwina is that the natives there are in terror
of the Government, and when they heard that the schooner was
in sight, they, in a large crowd, came up to the Mission House
and asked Mr. Fellows to plead for them. Mr. Fellows told them
that only those who did wrong and killed people were arrested
and those who did right went free.
Some hundred are in hiding! The magistrate says he has
known the natives of Kiriwina do everything bad under the sun,
but betray one another— never!
They have for years been influenced by the immoral lives of
a certain class of traders and Mission work has been made much
harder. Dobuans had the same fear of the Government in the
early days, but know better now.
We have had experience meetings, and one student rose and
said, “I was living in sin, but God pitied me and put my sin before
my eyes and I repented.”
It is an ordeal to a Dobuan to get up before others, as they
are bashful to a fault. The girls, however, find it very hard r
but after a short pause, Eleanor, a sweet girl of fifteen, spoke
out clearly and said, “Some time ago I found God’s love. I wanted
to do all my work as before the face of God, but my body is often
weak and sometimes I could not do it, Marama told me God


would hear if I prayed, and He heard, and He gives me strength
when 1 am weak.” She does light work in the Mission House,
but does it all so well. She is very gentle.
At a singing service, when my audience did not sing well,
1 said, “Why! Even my ‘bino bino’o’ makes the time right, and it
is not alive , and you don’t sing at all.” One man looked at the
instrument and said, “Yes! it’s voice is very sweet; but see how
many tongues it has (pointing to the keyboard), and we have
only one.” His logic was convincing.
I am so well again; it seems almost too good to be true, and
I thank God daily for it!
Poor little Dobuan babies, they are so neglected that we want
to save them all! There was a fat baby the other day, and the
wee thing could scarcely get its breath; but the mother did not
seem at all concerned, and the husband was working at a new
house. I said, “Why didn’t you bring it over to the Mission
House first thing this morning?” I pleaded for their help, and
at last succeeded. “Let us go,” he said roughly, and entered a
canoe. Half-way over we overtook them and took the woman and
baby on board, and wrapped it up warmly, and rubbed its chest
and throat with some oil 1 had with me. For a time it seemed
easier, but before we got to the Mission House it was dead. I
said to the mother, “I am afraid it is dying.” She said, “Yes,
its breath is stopping,” but did not seem at all troubled. It’s
a marvel that Marama and I should be sorry about it.
We have a funny man, Subegasi by name, and everybody
laughs at him. If he looks at the girls in the middle of the sing-
ing lesson, they can hardly sing for laughing. He is a sort of
public clown and makes fun for all.
A place close to the students’ yam gardens, where the people
have come from Dobu, I love to visit. They always seem so glad
to see me, and always place a mat for me in a shady spot, and
never wait to be told to gather up for service; but every man,
woman, child, baby, pig and dog in the place group themselves
for “Tapwaroro.” The two latter species certainly are devotion-
ally inclined, as they never absent themselves until chased away, and
then return very speedily.
Dobuan etiquette is to give a present in return for a basket
of yams that is coming to me very soon —so I must not forget!
Sent a letter to Sister Emily at Kiriwina, and I could almost
envy it —it will see her, but I cannot.
Several students and one young woman were baptized yester-
day. Joseph, Enoch, Thadrach, were some of the names given.
They all like Bible names —the boys especially.
An important examination took place this week, begin-


ning at 10 a.m. and finishing at 5 p.m., with an interval for lunch.
Fifty girls present, and we finalised up well with singing and
drill.
Catechism was fine! 1 think I know the catechism better
in Dobuan than in English.
Mr. Bromilow is trying to get more planting ground in
Dobu.
Sister Emily’s letter tells of great opportunities for work in
Kiriwina. I wish the Sisters’ Home could be built and another
Sister be sent. The villages are larger than Dobu villages, so the
work is more concentrated. The church has just been opened.
About 400 were present, and very well behaved indeed. This
is splendid news for the wild, rowdy Kiriwinians.
The Olive Branch has come in, and to-morrow morning we
are going on board to see the vessel whose perfections have been
so much noised abroad.
After that visit Mrs. Bromilow has asked me to make white
flags for the Society (White Flag) that we are all so interested
in. This is her idea, and she, and we all, hope that it will be a
real help to the boys and girls.
Your home news makes me wish to fly over for a short time
and come back quickly to this place. I have not the slightest desire
to leave Dobu.
As I talked, a man of the village pressed himself forward,
and a woman exclaimed, “He is the stem of impudence,” and that
described him.
A story of the Dobu feast will interest you all. Fifteen girls,
Sister Julia, and myself, left here at 8 a.m. in the whale-boat, and
crossed over to Tau’ulu.
We did not land at the village where the feast was to be
held, but at the next village. We put our belongings in the shade
under a house and walked on to view the display of food before
the great company arrived.
The village had new houses built in a circle, and before every
house was a high crate of' yams, decorated with bananas, and they
looked magnificent. In the clear space a circular platform had
been erected, two storeys high, on which to place cooked food. In
front of the chief’s house there were eight of these columns. All
of these were gifts to the owners of the feast, and had been erected
by the donors. On the lower platform were yams. There must
have been hundreds of baskets of yams, and they stood close to-
gether all round the bottom platform. On the upper platform
were large heaps of yams arranged at intervals, and later on, huge
joints of pig filled up the spaces. Besides all this, thirty pigs were
tied up ready for slaughter.


We did not stay for this, but walked to where the temporary
shelters for visitors were; they were employed in cooking or sleep-
ing in a rough and ready fashion.
After having a chat with some of them, we went back to
where we had landed, and had some yams roasted for our dinner.
Then began the process of dressing and decorating girls for the
afternoon dance. About a dozen from each village were made
ready to enter the feast with a flourish. We stood to watch a
dandy, who stood to have his body, from his waist up, daubed with
a black mixture, lines of black from his armpits, Turkey red as a
belt, and his legs daubed with black too, till he appeared to be in
black tights. His armlets and ear-rings were made from shells, and
white and yellow feathers stood upright in his hair. The women
were resplendent in several new grass skirts, one on top of the
other, a long ornament stuck through the nose, ear-rings with
sixty discs of shell, and their faces painted with stripes of black.
Some of the young men had their chins blackened and edged with
a narrow white line to show up the black to advantage. The beach
was thick with canoes from early morning, and about 2 p.m. the
representatives of each village began to arrive.
’Tis worth a journey here to see this native feast of Papua.


SISTERS’ PLAN OF APPOINTMENTS.
SUNDAY, MARCH 31, 1895.
| EM Sister Minnie
TARABWARENA ]
SIWAO’O P.M Sister Jeannie
PIESIA J
NEKUMARA—A.M Sister Eleanor
Class Meeting Sister Minnie
Sunday School Sister Eleanor and Sister Minnie
English Service Sister Jeannie
WM. E. BROMILOW.
Arrangements will be made for Sacrament on Thursday Morn-
ing next, at 7.30 o’clock.—W.E.B.


DEPARTURE TO HIGHER SERVICE.
93 John Street,
Stanmore,
Sydney,
May 27th, 1901.
My Dear Mrs. Nicholls, —Pardon my delay in writing re
Minnie’s early departure to higher service.
I was on the sea when that great sorrow came upon you all.
Keenly do I feel her loss! May God teach us all and sustain you
and yours! I knew Minnie well, and seven years ago I went back
to New Guinea, after a furlough, with Minnie under my care.
God sent her to us, and during that voyage, and in subsequent toil,
I knew ahd valued her, both as a friend and worker, in the
Sisterhood under my superintendence.
She, in the initial stages of that toil, was a real comfort to
me. I had only to express a wish, and without waste of words,
that wish was put into action. The girls then under her care are
in the district, and some of them have homes of their own.
At times they have needed a word of counsel, and often I
have said of late, “Sister Minnie is lying ill, would she like you
to do this?” and they have gone away in tears to think and pray.
So perfect a teacher was she, that the girls were ruled by a
word given in a low voice, and without lifting a finger.
When she had to leave New Guinea’s shores, we felt her loss,
but hoped that in Fiji she would enjoy better health and labour
there for many years. God has, however, judged her ready for
the higher service of the “Upper Sanctuary.”
With my best love and sympathy,
I am, dear Mrs. Nicholls,
Yours in sorrow,
L. BROMILOW.


FROM ONE OF THE FOUR BOYS.
(L.H.N.)
I have been asked to write briefly my recollections of Minnie
Billing, who, with her sister, lived with us for 14 years, when
we grew up as brothers and sisters. It is difficult to call to mind
clearly details of our life after 35 years, but some impressions of
her character are vivid enough.
There is no doubt that she was very intelligent, and the fact
that she was a born teacher must have helped us greatly in the
many daily problems of home lessons and in putting in firm foun-
dations for our education.
She was uncompromising in regard to what she believed to be
right, and with her strong convictions, had no time for peace at
any price.
She was most thorough and conscientious as a teacher. Hours
were not from 9 a.m. to 4 p.m., as is popularly supposed, and
piles of books for correction at night showed that the teaching
period was by no means the sum total of the day’s work.
These and similar traits of character were all helping to make
her a power for good in church work among the young people, and
later on as a Mission Sister to the South Sea Islanders.


English Translation of Dobuan Hymn by M. Billing.
THE BEAUTIFUL STORY.
The Bible story
It is very beautiful
This beautiful story
In the past I have heard.
To-day I am very glad
And will hold to the story,
It is enough for me
And for all people.
Beautiful story,
It will live forever;
Beautiful story,
I will always sing it.
The Bible story
To-day I know,
This story is great,
And very, very true.
I know
Christ has said
To a beautiful home,
His friends shall come.
The Bible story
I truly believe,
And therefore my sins
Jesus will take away.
If I pray
Jesus wall help me,
And if I follow Him
He will reign over me.
If my friends
This story they understand,
They will be happy
And have no need to weep.
The saying is not false
That heaven they will see;
I don’t want to go alone:
All of them, let them come.
This is as near the English of it as I can get. Some Dobuan
expressions are not easy to put into English, giving the exact mean-
ing. I wrote the hymn when preparing for Sunday School one
day. Such a longing came over me to tell the story right, that I
just put it on paper.—M.B.




SMj EPWORTH PRESS WJ
2lB CASTLEREAGH ST. DMj
B SYDNEY mra
PHONE: MA 4749 I




