

SIXTY YEARS
OF
PORT ADELAIDE.
A RETROSPECT
BY
E. J. STACY,
With his Worship the Mayor (J. W. Casre's)
Compliments.


Mr. j. w. CAIRE,
Mayor of Port Adelaide ; Elected, December 1, 3890.


SIXTY YEARS of
PORT ADELAIDE.
A RETROSPECT
By E. J. STACY.
Reprinted flom “ Tin South Australian Register.’
Adelaide :
\V. K. Thomas & Co., Prlnters, Ckeneei.i, street.
1S! tO.




PORT ADELAIDE—A RETROSPECT.
CHAPTER I.
On October 14, 1899, Port Adelaide, a«
it is now known to South Australians,
entered upon its sixtieth year of existence
Sixty years ago, where the leading seaport
town of the colony now stands, was no-
thing but a shallow stream and a man-
grove swamp. How great the transforma-
tion effected during the interval must be
apparent to 'the most casual observer, who
now walks through the well-paved and
macadamized streets, lined by substantial
and commodious buildings; or visits the
wharfs frequented by the largest of cargo
vessels. And yet it was so comparatively
recently as October 14, 1840, that upon the
completion of Maclaren "Wharf Port Ade-
laide was formally declared open to the
commerce of the world. In 1836 Colonel
Light, to whom the province is indebted
for the selection of the site of its capital
and chief port, arrived in the Gulf, and in
an official report dated February, 1837, he
referred to tire inlet, now known as the
Port River, as follows: —“I have no hesita-
tion in saying that, with the entrance
buoyed, ships drawing 16 ft. of water may
go in with ease, and when in there is no
safer or more commodious harbour
in the world for merchant ships.’
It is scarcely necessary to say
that the present port must not
be confounded with the first settlement
further up the raver, near what is now
known as old Queenstown. The “Old” Port,
so named in contradistinction to the
“Hew,” wars situated about a mile above
the present Jervois Bridge, and nearly op
posite Buck’s Flat. It was selected by the
early pioneers as offering greater facilities
of access from the river than any other
spot in the immediate neighbourhood, the
intervening belt of mangroves being
scarcely 400 yards through. Across this a
ditch about 30 ft. wide by 5 ft. deep was
cut to the foot of the sandhills. This was
piled at the end with pine poles, capped
with quartering, and backed with teatree
bush to prevent the sand from falling in.
The silt dug out formed an embankment.
The creek was available for small craft of
light draught only, and at low water it was
dry. There were no mechanical appliances
for landing heavy goods on this primitive
wharf, and delays and disputes among cap-
tains, sailors, and the shipping fraternity
were by no means rare. The trade of the
colony, at that time carried on by means
of small sailing craft, was principally
of an intercolonial character. The damage
to cargo by exposure on the whaif and
by high tides was considerable, and when
about £3 per ton for cartage by bullock-
drays to Adelaide had been added it is
small wonder that the cost to the con-
sumer was considerable. The drawbacks of
the place dlid not escape attention at
head-quarters, for on August 21, 1839, the
Governor officially notified that in order to
remove the difficulty experienced in carry-
ing goods over the sandhills at the
head of the wharf, and also to improve the
road across the nvamp to the canal, all
carters using the road would be required
to take down a load of sand in their carts
to be discharged where the officer super-
intending the work might deem desirable.
To facilitate the operation men were
stationed on the sandhills to assist
jin loading and unloading the carts
Altogether the Old Tort—Port Misery, as it
was called by some —was anything but a
success, and in 1839 an enterprise was be-
gun whereby, according to a notice which
appeared in the “Government Gazette,”
“the principal source of complaint, annoy-
ance, and loss in this fair province will
thus be effectively and permanently remov-
ed, and one most important means of its
future and increased prosperity afforded.”
This enterprise was no other than the for-
mation of a new port. On May 25, 1839,
Governor Gawler, by digging the first spado
of earth, approved the formation of tho
road which was to copnect the Port River


with the solid ground near Alberton. The
road was 92 chains in length, 35 ft. ia
breadth on the surface, and was formed by
excavating the ground on each side and
raising what was virtually an embankment
one foot above the highest tide which had
occurred after the establishment of the
colony. About the middle of dime in the
same year the work was begun, and it was
expected that it would be finished in six
months. At the same time the announce-
ment was made of the construction of a
■wharf at the termination of the road. The
opening of tlheroad, which cost about £14,000
to construct, was timed for January
22, 1840, but, as previously mentioned, it
was not until October that the completion
of the whole scheme made it possible foi,
the landing of goods to take place. The
work was carried out by the South Austra
lian Company, who brought metal in then
own vessels from Kangaroo Island with
which to ballast the new roadway. Al-
though the colony had not then been de
dared four years, a procession of 450 ve
hides and 600 equestrians accompanied tin
Governor to the Port. On arrival a roya'
salute was fired by the sappers and minen,
and replied to by the vessels in the river
The Governor was then conducted by Mr
D. Maclaren, Manager of the South Austr..
lian Company, to the new wharf, and after
prayer had been offered by the Colonial
Chaplain, llev. C. 15. Howard, His Excel
lency said— ‘‘ I now declare this landing-
place to he a part of the new Port. I will,
if you please, give this wharf the name ot
the gentleman under whose management it
has been constructed. We will call
it the Maclaren Wharf. We will
now proceed to laud the first
bale of goods upon it.” A small
barque, called the Guiana, was lying along-
side, and two boxes of tea and spices were
hauled up from the hold and deposited on
the wharf amid great applause. The Go-
vernor’s flag was struck, the Union Jack
run up, a salute fired by the sappers, and
then the company adjourned for dinner in
the Company's warehouses. These had three
floors, with a frontage of 60 ft. to the road
and 90 ft. to the river. They could stow
1,500 tons of goods.
From this time onward the building up
of the Port has been literally proceeding,
the deepening of the stream yielding the
spoil to reclaim the swamps. The boun-
daries in the forties were on the north the
North-parade, on the South St. VinCent-
street, on the west Mundy-street, and on
the east Commercial-road. Excavating for
the construction of the embankments caus-
ed the Port to be surrounded on three
sides by ditches, and as on the fourth there
was the river it was possible for a
boat to almost circumnavigate the set-
tlement. A wooden bridge in a line with
the North-parade spanned the creek which
ran up Commercial-road, and the buildings
were mostly grouped at the north-eastern
corner of the town and along St. Yincent-
street As land within the restricted area
became valuable outside districts sprang
up.
A few of the fast-vanishing landmarks
in the shape of old houses remain to show
the original street levels. These ancient
residences would he as accessible from the
pavement by way of the chimney, seeing
that the footpath makes a halfway com-
promise between the door and the roof.
Yet at one time these identical dwellings
were entered from the street by steps, and
precocious youths of the forties were known
to defy parental capture by jumping from
the humble cottage threshold into a foot
or so of water which surrounded the
house. The primitive Town Fathers were
perennially perturbed about the lowlying
lauds, and the first work undertaken after
the formation of the Corporation was the
Idling in of the St. VincenL-stleet ditch.
One of the winter lagoons recorded 350 by
180 ft., and to remove the fever-threatening
water, amongst other things, a steam
pump was proposed. Legislation was
sought to compel owners to drain
or dll up and fence the submerged allot-
ments. Steady advancement was made
with the work of reclamation. In 1877 it
is recorded that a well-known two-story
shop, erected riot many years after the es-
tablishment of the Port, and occujded by,
among others, the late Air. Sawtell, was
level with the footpath, whereas when
erected it was Feet higher than tihe level
of the town. So much attention had to
be paid to the raising of the streets that


J) Will, 204 tons. 11V. I’(IR( HEH, AHAWK, 24.') tmi-. KDKX, .127 ton-. KMKRAU) ISLK, oil! ton-,.
•)10 tons.
PORT ADELAIDE IN 1842,




for many years little indeed could be done
towards the improvement of the surface,
but the splendid municipal work of recent
years has robbed the Port of special
claim to be now described "Mudholia” an I
“Dustholia.” Not less marked has been
the progress of streeJMighting. A few flare- ,
lamps constituted the only pretence at il-
luminating the highways in the early day.?.
They were few in number and uncertain
in power, rendering noteturnal perambula-
tion, with unknown holes and uneven sm- j
face, as hazardous as a tribal engagement. 1
The forward party has been frequently
cheeked by the instinctive aversion of the
average ratepayer to swell his burdens, but
the enlargement and increasing importance
of the town ultimately received just ap-
preciation. To gas has been added elec-
tricity. With miles of wharf liming the
stream navigable for the modern mammota
steamer, with facilities for transacting ship-
ping and general business as thoroughly
and expeditiously as in any port of the
j world. Port Adelaide is to-day the centre
of a populous district, the home of one of
the finest bodies of working men in Aus-
tralia, one of the largest and wealthiest C
our municipalities, and governed by a Town
i Council whose management is worthy .J
the best traditions of the colony- It v
impossible to compare the present and past
’ without a feeling of gratitude and admira-
tion for the labours of the pioneers of Port
Adelaide.
CHAPTER II.
Both in local government and in the lar-
ger sphere of politics Pont Adelaide has
played no unimportant part. Some of the
most familiar figures in the public life of
the colony during the last half-century have
hailed from this waterside district. This is,
however, rather anticipating the narrative.
In the very early days, it is scarcely too
much to say that the government of the
Port was largely controlled by one man.
The reference is to Captain Upson, an Eng-
lish naval officer, who, with the cordial
approval of the people, was Harbourmaster,
Magistrate, Collector of Customs, and, in-
deed, almost Governor of the eaily settle-
ment. With his family he occupied the
best house in the place, a Government
building where the Custom-house now
stands, and lie was the only fortunate in-
habitant who possessed a garden and a
piano. As time wore on, however, a desire
was expressed for a measure ol local go-
vernment. The first municipal law was
passed in the colony at the latter part of
1839, the enactment being a partial trans-
cript of an English Statute of 1835. Some
years later, as a result of a petition by the
residents, Port Adelaide w r as proclaimed a
corporate town. From December 27, 1855,
it was officially announced the ‘‘inhabitants
of the town and their successors were to
cousitute a body corporate and politic, by
the name of Mayor, Aldermen, Councillors,
and Burgesses.” The district was divided
into two wards. East and West, the main-
road to the Port being the division line.
A public meeting of persons entitled to be
placed on the citizens’ roll was held in tlie
Ship Inn on January 8, 1856, Mr William
James presiding. A motion that the meet-
ing should merely elect Councillors and
leave to them the selection of Mayor, al-
dermen, and officers, did not find favour,
the ratepayers of the place from the start
announcing their intention of exercising to
the full their prerogative. Four nomina-
tions were received for 'Mayor. Captain E.
French was nominated by Mr. D. Bower,
Captain A. France by Mr. J. Grosse, Mr.
E. G. Oollinson by Mr. Anthony. The
fourth candidate was Mr. Simpson. The re-
sult of the voting was that Captain French
and Mr. Oollinson each received 18 votes.
The other two candidates then retired, the
first two names being again put to the meet-
ing. Captain French was declared elected
as first Mayor of Port Adelaide with the
“ large ” total of 21 votes to his credit, Mr.
Collinson being close up with 18. For West
Ward Mr. David Bower was elected Aider-
man, and Messrs. Walter Smith, dames
(iros.se, and E. G. Collinson Councillors.
For East A Yard Air. John f-imiLh was re
turned as Alderman, and Captain Alfred


France and Messrs. William Galway and
John Cave Councillors. Mr. William Boy-
kett was selected as Town Clerk from two
applicants for the position, while Messrs.
Robert Murray and W. F. Webster
for East Ward, and Charles Boykett
and James Giles for West Ward, were ap-
pointed assessors. Collectors for West and
East Wards were Messrs. P. G. Perry and
M. H. Graham respectively, while the ap-
pointment of Messrs. George Fergusson and
Charles Calton as Auditors completed the
constitution of the first Port Adelaide Town
Council. The early meetings of the Corpo-
ration were held where the Ship Inn on the
North Parade now stands. A move was
afterwards made to the Court-house, and
subsequently' to the small two-story build-
ing, pulled down not many years ago to
make room for the present Bank of Aus-
tralasia. it was at the last-named place
that a fire destroyed the valuable early re-
cords of the Council. Open voting was in
vogue in those days, and the fun was often
fast and furious. Captain French occupied
the position of Mayor up to 1860. In that
year Captain J. W. Smith was elected. As
this is the earliest date to which the re-
cords go back, it will be interesting to give
the constitution of the Council at that time.
L was as follows:—Mayor, Jacob William
Smith; Aldermen, John Smith and Walter
Smith; Councillors. William H. Godfrey,
Thomas Henry Parker, James Grosse, and
W. W. Ewbank; Assessors, William Hamil-
ton, Charles Fleetwood, John Newman, and
Theo. Robin; Auditors, Janies Page, Edwin
Sawtell, and William Mart. Captain Smith
was re-elected in 1861, and his successors
in the Mayoral chair up to the present have
been as follows: —1862-3, Edwin Harris;
1863-4; Francis Reynolds; 1864-6, J. W.
Smith: 1866, 1869, and 1873-6, J. M. Sinclair;
1869-73, J. FonnbyJ 1876-8, D. Bower;
1878-80, T. Hack; 1880-2, H. W. Thompson;
1882-3, G. Bollen; 1883-5, T. J. King; 1885-7,
S. Malin; 1887-9, J. Cleave; 1889-90, R. W.
O. Kestel; 1890-3, C. Tucker; 1893-4, B. Si-
grist; 1894-8, C. R. Morris; 1898-9, T.
Grose; 1899-1900, J. W. Caire.
Belaw will be found a photo of the late
Captain E. French, first [Mayor of Port
Adelaide. Captain French was connected
with the early shipping trade of the
Port. He subsequently removed to the
South-East.
LATE CAPTAIN E. FRENCH, FIRST MAYOR
OF PORT ADELAIDE.
As might naturally be expected, the rat-
able value of property of the early Port was
not great. The estimated expenditure for
1858 in given as £1,587. The actual expen-
diture during six months of 1859 was
£l4B. Contrast with this tlie actual expen-
diture of the town during 1898, which to-
talled no less than £11,384. Thirty years
ago the rates did not amount to more than
from £250 to £3OO. Last year they came to
over £5,000. In making any comparisons
of this nature, it must not be overlooked
that the boundaries of Port Adelaide have
been much extended of late years. Prom
two wards of limited area, it now com-
prises eight wards, which take in an area
stretching from the mouth of the Port
River on the north, to the boundary of
Woodville and Grange on the south,
and reaching on the east to
the North Arm-road. Port Adelaide has
within the last twenty years absorbed four
local governing bodies, a triumph of muni-
cipal unification unapproached in South
Australia, and a testimony to the confi-
dence felt in the excellent management
characterising the Town Council.
The Electoral District of Port Adelaide
has, on the other hand, been contracting.
Formerly it included Yorke’s Peninsula, as
far up as Wallaroo, the complaint often be-


MR. T. GROSE,
Mayor of Port Adelaide, 1898-1899.




ing that the mining towns dominated the
voting. Even before the establishment of
responsible government the chief seaport
was ably represented at the Councils of
State. Mr. William Scott, one of the elect-
ed members of the Legislative Council in
the days when some of the members were
nominated and others elected, sat for Port
Adelaide. Mr. Scott was one of Port Ade-
laide’s pioneer merchants and successful
business men. He assisted in passing the
Parliament Bill of 1853, which was disallow-
ed by the Queen, and on a special Council
being summoned in 1855 to frame a new
Constitution Mr. Scott, Mr. J. B. Hughes,
who resided at Woodville, and Mr. John
Hart, the first miller of the town
and the owner of Glanville Hall,
were members. Later-day Porto-
nians who are fond of thinking of
their district as the stronghold of demo-
cracy may well cherish the names of some
of their early members, who fought for
dearly held principles. The members who
comprised the special Council were evident-
ly required to possess a “stake” in the
country, for the declaration made by Mr.
Scott set out that he was “seized at law or
in equity for an estate or freehold of the
value of £2,000, situated at Maclaren
Wharf, Port Adelaide, and being a ware-
house.” At the first election in
Port Adelaide prior to the granting
of responsible government, Messrs. Hall
and Giles were candidates. The former
gentleman was a brother of the late Mr.
Anthony Hall, and an uncle of Mr. A. P.
Hall, the miller. In those d'ays the rival
candidates were distinguished by different
colours, those of Mr. Hall being blue, while
Mr. Giles chose orange-and-green. The
first Parliament under responsible go-
vernment met in 1857, and Port
Adelaide was represented by Messrs. E. G.
Collinson and J. Haul, and some of the
subsequent but still early members were
Messrs. W. Owen, P. B. Ooglin, J. W.
Smith, W. Quin, H. K. Hughes, and D.
Bower. It is only of recent years that a
record of 'the early open-voting days has
been destroyed. The majority secured by
one of the candidates, 166, was painted on
the wall of the Port Admiral Hotel, and for
many years when the building was reno-
vated the figures were freshly painted in.
Compared with some of the early contests
Parliaraentarv elections at the seaport con-
stituencies nowadays arc tame. A fav-
ourite meeting-place was the Old Exchange
Hotel, the Town Hall not being construct-
ed till the latter part of the
sixties. “Fighting men” for the various
candidates used to be regarded almost as
indispensable, 'and very likely more useful
than the modern “political platform” with
reversible planks, and the young bloods of
the place had warm times during elections.
It is stated that on one occasion a candi-
date with a particularly glib tongue and
shave manner was addressing a crowded
meeting at the Old Exchange. The table
had been converted into an improvised
platform. It suddenly occurred to an indi-
vidual of rather exceptional strength, re-
joicing in the nickname of “Hullocky Hill,”
that there was room for a practical joke.
Quietly creeping under the table, he mu -
i reeded* in tipping Chairman and candidates
I off into the crowd. This little by-play was
taken humorously. Later on the same
evening the candidate of many words invi-
ted questions of all matters touching cur-
rent politics.
“I should like to ask you one question
—only one,” said a small man known lm
his fund of dry wit.
“Certainly,” unsuspectingly replied the
candidate.
“Well, then, I should like the candidate
to tell us"—then followed an ominous pause
--“what he has been talking aboul lor llm
last three-quarters of an hour.”
In an instant the little man was pounced
upon, and true as pellet from small bo\ s
catapult, out he went through the window,
Parrying part of the sash with him. This
was the signal for a free light. The sup-
porters of the rival candidate rallied their
forces, converted the passage of the hotel
into a Laing's Nek, and cleared the room
of their opponents. Those times have, how-
ever, disappeared with the Old Exchange.
Port Adelaide sent the firot distinctively
working man member to Parliament in Mr.
William Quin. With regard to the ad-
ministration of the law, as far as can be as-
certained from early records. Inspector Poi-
nter and Sergeant Lorrimer were the
first stationed officers in charge of the


local police. The police station and cells
were in the early days situated at the rear
of the present post and telegraph offices.
The cells may be seen at the present time,
ft is interesting to recall that in
1857 the strength of the Port
Adelaide police was as follows: —
Two sergeants, one corporal, and fifteen
constables. In the early days there was
practically only Fort Adelaide proper under
the supervision of the guardians of the
peace, for flic adjoining districts were very
scantily populated. Among the early Magis-
trates were Captains Lipson and Dash wood,
Mr. Newland, and Mr. G. W. Hawkes. The
first-named, it is said, was often very severe.
An old record .shows tliat at a certain pe-
riod of the history of Port Adelaide the re-
sidents were so troubled ■with larrikins that
they contemplated asking the Government
to enforce the compulsory clause of the
LdncatioiU Act. For many years past, how-
ever, Port Adelaide has enjoyed a reputa-
tion for orderliness which might well be
envied by other seaports.
CHAPTER III.
Two public buildings stand out at Port
Adelaide, on account not only of their size,
but also of the nature of the business daily
transacted within the Avails. The one is
the Town Hall, around Avhicli the muni-
cipal, political, and social life of the district
centres, and the other is the Custom-house,
containing also the Marine Board offices,
Avhcre the mercantile and trading interests
find a rallying point. Naturally tlie marine
interests have always been prominent at
Port Adelaide. Among the early Acts pass-
ed in the colony in the first year of the
Queen's reign Avas one entitled '“An Act for
the better preservation of the ports, har-
bours, havens, roadsteads, channels, navi-
gable. creeks, and rivers in Her Majesty’s
province of (South Australia, and for the
better regulation of shipping and their
crews in the same.” In the early
days the marine administration avus prac-
tically in the hands of Captain Lipson, Avho
Avas appointed in England as Naval Offi-
cer and Harbourmaster, and avlio arrived
in the colony In the Cygnet on September
11, 1886. It Avas subsequently found neces-
sary to divide his duties between no fewer
than four departments, namely. Customs,
Trinity Board, local Marine Board, and
Harbour Trust. The Trinity Board was
constituted in 1851. Captain Lipson aa*«s
selected as first Master of the Board, but
he held office for three years only. Messrs.
W. Elder, W. Scott, and R. Tapley Avere
the first Wardens. The first-named re-
signed in the same year as Captain Lip-on,
and his place was taken by Mr. J. F. Duff.
The functions of the Trinity Board were
chiefly to license pilots, lix rates, superin-
tend lighthouses, regulate wharfs, and sup-
ply ballast to ships. Captain Douglas
succeeded Captain Lipson as Har-
bourmaster, Naval Officer, Chairman
of Harbour Trust, President
of the Marine Board, and subsequently
Collector of Customs. The gentlemen who
have presided at the receipt of Customs at
Port Adelaide from the first are as follows:
—Captain T. Lipson, 8.N., 1827 to 1841;
Sir R. R. Torrens, K.C.M.G., 1841 to 1852;
Captain Cf. F. Dash wood, R.N., 1852 to
1858; Captain B. Douglas, R.N.R., 1858 to
1870; Mr. J. W. Lewis, J.P., 1870 to 1879;
Mr. F. J. Sanderson, 1879 to 1894; and Mr.
T. N. Stephens, 1894.
On the next page is given a photo of
Captain Lipson. The late gentleman wars
in command of a revenue cutter in Mug-
land, and, rather curioiusly, his vessel was
afterwards purchased by the South Austra-
lian Government and did service in the co-
lony. On 1819 he was promoted as a com-
mander of the active list. He had previous
ly served in general naval action under
Lords Keith and Nelson, and was awarded
the naval medal and two clasps. In 1856 he
was made a post-captain on the retired list.
Deepening operations in the Port Ade-
laide River were started in 1849, but they
were not vigorously prosecuted till some
years later. In 1854 the Trinity Board,
which among other things had been charged
with the responsibility of deepening the
channel, found itself hampered "by want of


MR. T. N. STEPHENS,
Collector of Customs and President of Marine Board.




funds. Just about this time it was thought
necessary to provide a depth of water over
the bar and up to Prince’s Wharf of IS ft.
THE LATE CAPTAIN LIPSON, R.N.
at low water —there was a depth of 14 ft.
only—and in order to provide the necessary
funds an Act was passed authorizing the
issuing of bondis for £lOO,OOO. The three
senior members of the Trinity Board of
the day, with Messrs. W. Younghusband,
G. Hall, and E. G. Collinson, were appoin-
ted to give effect to the Act, and thus the
Harbour Trust was brought into existence.
A few years later the Commissioners passed
under the control of the Commissioner of
Public Works, and to-day all harbour im-
provements are under the direction of the
Fugineer-in-Ohief. “Finds” cannot yet be
written to the history dealing with the
conversion of Port Adelaide into a
lirst-class 'harbour. The authorities have
not rested content with a mini-
mum depth of 23 ft. at low watey
but are now continuing dredging operations
to provide for 27 ft. Up to the present
about three-quarters of a million sterling
has been expended in improving and
deepening the channel and harbour.
A local Marine Board, of which Captain
Douglas 'was Chairman, took over and pcr-
lormed for some years the duties formerly
discharged by the Harbour Master as Ship-
ping Master, but in 1860 all earlier enact-
ments were repealed, and the Marine Board
of South Australia was constituted to
generally administer marine matters. For
years the Government nominated the mem-
bers, the first Board being composed of the
following gentlemen:—Captain Bloomfield
Douglas, President, and Messrs. Handasyde
Duncan, Anthony Hall, Richard Tapley,
and John Acraman as Wardens. In 1881
nomination gave way' to semi-elec-
tion. Captain Douglas was follow-
ed as President by Captain Fer-
guson. Air. J. Formby, S.M., was
afterwards appointed Chairman, but on tlic
amalgamation of the Customs and Marine
Departments Mr. F. J. Sanderson, S.M.,
presided at the Board meetings, and he, in
turn, has been succeeded by Mr. T. A,
Stephens.
It wall be interesting to glance at some
of the early enactments affecting trade and
shipping, and to notice how at some
periods the desire was to throw out every
inducement for A-essels to visit the port. In
1838 harbour dues were levied on a scale of
ss. for vessels of 100 tons, and ss. for evei y
additional 100 tons. Pilotage dues were also
charged; the minimum was £2 10s. lor
vessels drawing up to 7 ft. of water. At
a meeting of the Executive Council held hi
1842, the Governor, in laying on the lablc
abstracts of receipts and expenditure, drew
attention to the cost of the principal Go-
vernment establishments, including the
Harbour Department. The expenditure
had been heavy, and the total receipts from
pilotage fees only £293, involving a loss of
over £2,400. It was pointed out that the
pilotage and harbour dues were much below
those of any other colony. The same year
an Amending Act was passed, and pilotage
rates were fixed ranging from £6 to £l3
10s. per vessel, according to draught
of water. Port Adelaide Harbour
dues ran from 10s. to £3 ac-
cording to tonnage. Tonnage dues
were also charged, but altogether the ex-
penses to shipping were considered out of
proportion, and in the same year they
were reduced. During the September quar-
ter of 1844 the pilotage and harbour dues
amounted to £247. The following j ear a
variation was introduced by allowing pi-
lots to lake the fees, but soon after the


pendulum swung to the other extreme, and
for a short time Port Adelaide enjoyed
w nat it has never since been able to lay
claim to—‘the distinction of being a free
port. In 1845 the Governor considered the
state of the revenue justified his abolish-
ing all port charges on ships of all nations
without exception. “All the ports of South
Australia,” it was announced, “are now de-
clared free ports in the most extensive
sense of the word. Vessels may put in
anywhere without having to incur a single
farthing of expense, for even pilots are fur-
nished to vessels gratis.” A public meet-
ing, held in the Supreme Courthouse, Ade-
laide, at this time presented an address to
the Governor, conveying the deep sense of
the benefits conferred upon the colony by
His Excellency’s administration of public
affairs, and more especially the spontaneous
abolition of all harbour rales, and port
dues, and charges. The revenue derived
from port charges at that time amounted to
only £2,000 per annum, and by way of
compensation certain Custome duties were
increased. From this source an additional
revenue of about £1,200 was eollected, leav-
ing an actual loss of about £BOO, “which,”
lL was remarked, “cannot for a moment be
put in comparison with the immense benefit
to be derived from the abolition of the
port charges.” On the day on which the
Bill for abolishing the port dues was intro-
duced, one of the members of the Council
stated that a ship was in sight coming up
the Gulf, and it was resolved, in order that
she might be the first to benefit by the
Act, that the Council, having had the Bill
read the first and second time that morn-
ing, should meet again in the evening.
This was done. The ship proved to be the
Cheerful, from Manila. The freedom from
port dues lasted only a few years.
The first vessel was registered at Port
Adelaide in 1838. The certificate, which is
at piesent hanging in the Customs House,
sets out that in pursuance of an Act passed
in the fourth year of the reign of King
William IV., John Barton Hack, of Ade-
laide, shipowner, had declared that he was
the sole owner of a vessel of 36 tons, named
the Hero, of which William Wright was
master. The vessel was built at the Mann-
ing River, New South Wales, in 1837. She
had one deck and one mast, her length
from the inner part of the main stem to
the sternpost was 40 ft., beam 14 ft., and
depth 7 ft. The Hero possessed no figure-
head, was carvel built, and square at the
stern. It was particularly stated that she
had no galleries. The surveying officer was
Daniel Simpson, and the certificate was
signed by Captain Lipson on October 3,
1838. Among the latest vessels registered
at Port Adelaide is the steamer Pilbarra,
2,664 tons, and 315 feet long.
Such in brief outline is an account of the
rise of our chief port. Sixty years have
seen it emerge from a swamp fronted bv
what was little better than a creek. The
part it is destined to play in the history of
the nation arising in these southern seas
depends in no small measure upon the wis
dom of the State Legislature, and also upon
the industry and energy of its townspeople,
who have inherited qualities as well as
fruits from the early pioneers.
CHAPTER IV.
In the very early days there was con-
siderable difference of opinion whether the
capital and its chief seaport had been right-
ly located. At the beginning of 1837 a pub-
lic agitation on the question was begun, and
Mr. Edward Stephens, writing from Glen-
elg to the “South Australian Gazette and
Colonial Register,” said “Adelaide is un-
questionably a beautiful spot; for agricul-
tural purposes altogether unexceptionable;
but it can never be a great commercial city.
It is six miles at least distant from the har-
bour, which, if safe, is, at present at least,
entirely destitute of fresh water, and not
capable of receiving ships of heavy tonnage.
The supply of water, it is true, could be
brought to-day from Adelaide, a canal might
be dug, or a railway formed, the bar could
be deepened. All this could be done —and
will be done if no better place exists —but
the point to be determined at the outset
is—Does a better place exist? Adelaide may


be chosen, We may erect houses and com-
mence canals to connect it with the sea,
and some fine morning may bring us the
news that at Encounter Bay, or at Boston
Bay, or at Point Drummond, or in Spen-
cer’s Gulf, a splendid harbour, with abun-
dance of fine land has been discovered.
What then becomes of Adelaide? Bring
the ships to our doors, if possible. That is
the paramount consideration, and an essen-
tial to commercial and colonial prosperity.”
It is interesting, after a lapse of sixty years,
to reflect that almost everything suggested
by Mr. Stephens in regard to Port
Adelaide has been done, and there
are few people now who regret that Ade-
laide was laid out anywhere else than where
it was. As for the port of Adelaide, although
it was moved a few miles further down
the river than originally decided upon, it
has been shown that it possesses all the ad-
vantages of a perfectly safe harbour, and of
a convenient shipping centre. The Port
now draws its supply of fresh water from
one of the most complete reservoirs in the
colonies. The supply, it is true, has had to
be brought from Adelaide, and even from
a greater distance. Although a canal was
at one time seriously contemplated, and
provision made for the cutting of a water-
way when the main road leading from the
city to the Port was first made, nothing
further has been done in this direction. The
railroad, however, places the Port only half
an hour distant in point of time from the
capital. Although this undertaking was
contemplated not many years after the pro-
clamation of the Port, the laying of the per-
manent way was not undertaken until 1855.
It was completed in the following year.
Mr. Babbage was the first Chief Engineer.
Bares in the early days were 2s. fid. first
class, Is. fid. second, and Is. third, and goods
were charged at the rate of 4s. fid. per ton.
In the same year that the railway was be-
gun a telegraph-line was laid between Ade-
laide and the Port at the sole expense of
Mr. James Macgeorge. The Government
about the same time imported a magnetic
telegraph to be laid between Adelaide and
the beach, and these two cables were
the nucleus of the network . of lines
which have since spread over the co-
lony. As far as the bar at the mouth
of the river is concerned, reference has
1 1 ready been made to the deepening which
has been done in the past. The policy of
the Marine authorities has been, and still
is, to maintain a depth of water in the
liver that will permit of all vessels coming
to the wharfs that pass through the Suez
Canal. It may be mentioned there has been
only one total wreck with loss of life
at Port Adelaide. The Grecian stranded
some years ago on the inside bank near
the lighthouse, and about a dozen lives
were lost during the rescue proceedings.
The first vessel to run aground in the Port
River was the Tam o’ Shanter, a barque
of 450 tons. The name of the craft ha-
been perpetuated to-day in a creek whic.'i
runs off the river.
THE LATE CAPTAIN QUIN.
Above is given a photo of tire late Cap-
tain Hugh Quin, one of the pioneers of
Port Adelaide, who arrived in South Aus-
tralia in September, 1836, in the Cygnet, of
which vessel he was appointed second mate
on the voyage out. It is interesting to re-
call that in the same vessel were Mr. (after-
wards Sir) G. S. Kingston, Deputy-Sur-
veyor-General; Captain Lipson, who came
out as Harbourmaster and Collector of
Customs; Mr. B. T. Finniss; Mr. (after-
wards Sir) John Morphett, and a party of
surveyors. Captain Quin formed one of the
party present at the proclamation of the
colony. After a little voyaging in the
Cygnet he returned to the colony in the


Sir Charles Macarthy in Augu.-t, 1837, and
his first position under the Government
was that of pilot. Two years later Captain
Quin was appointed Assistant Harbourmas-
ter, under Captain Lipson. Subsequently,
on the arrival of Sir George Grey, he, with
others, was retrenched, and reduced to the
position of chief pilot. In 1849 he took
charge of the Government Lug Adelaide, and
he held this position for five and a half
years. Eventually he had superintendence
of the tug, and was at a later date appoint-
ed Harbourmaster, which position he
occupied for twenty-six years, resigning
oliicc in June, 1882.
Amongst the earliest vessels to arrive at
Port Adelaide were the Papid, Tam o’
Shanter, William flutt, and Mary Ann.
"Those all arrived prior to June 1, 1837,
and were thus the forerunners of
a long line of sailing vessels and
steamers which have made Port Adelaide
a place of call. It is instructive as well
as interesting to compare some of the early
shipping records with those of a later
period. Thus there were at Port Adelaide
at the time of its proclamation the follow-
ing vessels;—Courier, 102 tons, from Lcvi-
don; Ituna, 221 tons, from London; Mar-
tin Luther, 445 tons, from Greenock;
Mary Dugdale, 375 tons, from Bristol apd
Dublin; <|ohn Pirie, 106 lons, from Kan-
garoo Island; Victoria, 28 tons, from Kan-
garoo Island; Timelovc, 133 tons, from
Kangaroo Island;, Rapid, 153 tons, from
Port Phillip; Prances, 216 tons, from Ho-
bart Town; Governor Gawh r, 15 tons, from
Encounter Ray; Jane Elaxman, 15 tons,
fi’Oiin Port Lincoln; Alice, 30 tons, from
Port Lincoln; Guinn, 256 tons, from Singa-
pore; and Enterprise, 155 tons, from Lon-
don. Compare this list with the vessels
in harbour on the corresponding day of
1899. There were at- that dalle thirty-
seven vessels at the wharfs, of which ten
were oversea traders, seven were intercolo-
nial, and the remainder coasters. The lar-
gest was the steamer Wilcannia, of 3,887
tons. The aggregate tonnage of the extra-
colonial vessels was 15,455 tons, and inter-
colonial 6,340 tons. Ships now-a-days re-
main in port for so short a time that even
a ■week may afford a great contrast in the
matter of tonnage. Thus, if the enormous
growth of trade is to be truly gauged, Octo-
ber 14, 1840, with its aggregate of 2,250 tons
of shipping at Port Adelaide should be
compared with October 7, 1899. At the
latter date, Port Adelaide was particularly
busy. There were at the wharfs vessel*,
representing 44,000 tons, of which 11 were
steamers of 31,369 tons. These figures speak
eloquently of the growtii of steam. It is
further interesting to note that of the Jl
steamers 5 with an aggregate tonnage of
21,351 tons were deep-sea traders.
In the early days the trade of Port Ade-
laide was largely confined to interchange
with the neighbouring colonies. During
the first quarter of 1844 the tonnage which
entered the Port amounted to 2,168 tons, of
which 1,388 tons was engaged intercolo-
nially. During the third quarter of the
same year 17 vessels arrived, of which only
one was a deep-sea craft. An idea of the
growth of thy shipping trade will be ob-
tained fiom the following figures, showing
flic arrivals at Port Adelaide for the years
mentioned:
Vcar. No. of Ships. Tons.
1847 150 31,701
1848 215 40,010
1810 277 80,023
1859 338 87,880
1809 408 132,430
1870 032 328,770
1880 024 811,038
1898 845 1,513,200
The growth of tonnage has been continu-
ous, though this has not altogether been the
Case with the number of vessels visiting the
port.
'The facilities for handling cargoes in the
early days were not to be compared with
what they are to-day. In the fifties the
landing of 130 tons of goods at Maclaren
Wharf in ten hours was considered to be
a smart piece of work. Nowadays Port Ade-
laide stevedores, who have gained a repu-
tation for cfficicnry which extends to the
other colonies, can handle as much as 800
tons of cargo in the same space of time. A
great transformation has been effected in
the method of stowing wool, and for this
Mr. Joseph Stone, who still resides at Port
Adelaide, is largely to be thanked. As far
back as 1844 Mr. Stone dumped wool in
Tort Adelaide for a little ship called the
Gungn. The work was done by the aid of
a small hydraulic press, in a shed where the


GULF OF TRINID AD. DULF OF VENICE.[?]tonS. BUNGAREE, 1,859 tons.
PORT ADELAIDE AT PRESENT DAY.




Imports.
Exports.
Staple.
Foreign.
£
£
£
1878
4,393,494
g,647,454
333,087
1888
5,413,038
2,562,666
1,376,155
1891
3,110,640
1,855,632
2,041,300
1895
3,295,614
2,241,300
2,360,841
1896
4,313,397
2,322,661
2,524,374
1898
3,826,071
1,871,451
2,390,885
Bank of Adelaide was afterwards erected.
The custom in those days was for vessels
to bring out hand-presses by
which the bales of wool were dumped
on deck. Hand hydraulic presses were
next introduced, and in about 1868 steam
machinery. In 1876 the South Australian
Stevedoring and Humping Company was
formed by Captains Legoe and Begg and
Messrs. J. Stone and C. Brown. The
Company first employed a four-horsepower
engine, the first to be made in Port Ade-
laide. The American screw superseded the
tripod, and continues in use to the present.
It may here be mentioned that Mr. Stone,
who was the first Manager of the Com-
pany, is the oldest stevedore in Adelaide
or Melbourne, while he is contemporaneous
with those of Sydney. Captains of indus-
try at Port Adelaide have kept pace with
tire times, and shipping facilities have at-
tracted commerce. The growth of the
trade of Port Adelaide will be seen from a
few comparisons. During the second half
of 1844 imports received amounted to
£69,012, while exports were £57,943, of
which £50,526 represented the produce of
the colony. During the second quarter of
the following year some of the principal
items of export were 13 tons of bark valued
at £5O, upon which an export duty was
levied; 3,843 qrs. of wheat valued at
£4,372; 69 tons copper ore valued at
£1,377; and 31,926 lb. of wool valued at
£1,510. In the very early days the trade
of Port Adelaide was virtually the trade of
the colony. To go no further back than
twenty years the following table exhibits
the movement of trade at Port Ade-
laide: —
Some allowance must be made for fluctua-
tions in values of commodities and varia-
tions cf seasons. Imports it will be no
ticed are not as large as they were twenty
years ago, but there has been an expansion
in the exports of produce of other colonies
indicating that Port Adelaide has grown
as a distributing centre. The aggregate
value of inward and outward trade last
year was larger than it was in 1878. In
addition outports have developed.
CHAPTER V.
In previous chapters an attempt has been
made to contrast the growth of Port Ade-
laide during the last sixty years in special
directions. The particulars of the ship-
ping, the trade, and the municipal growth
of the town have afforded striking proofs
of the energy of the people durng the last
half-centnry. If a general review of the
conditions of life at the chief seaport of
the colony in its early days and at present
were taken, Corroborator! would be forth-
coming of gratifying development, and the
younger generation wxrn'ld find much for
which they have to be grateful. Obviously
the primitive Port lacked present-day con-
veniences. For some years ordinary means
of lodomotion to and from Adelade were
what are colloquially known as “shanks’
ponies.” The more fortunate possessed a
bullock-dray, and in rarer instances an Eng-
lish gig might have been seen bumping over
the road. Quite early some enterprising
colonists imported horses from Tasmania,
and a service of two-wlheeled traps known
as “Port-carts'’ was started. The first
four-wheeled coach some years afterwards
made a great sensation. For years the fare
each way was 2s. 6d. Even when the
railway started folks were unable to travel
by this means to the city after 6 o’clock
in the evening, and to supply the much-
felt need the late Mr. Henry Ernes started
a night wadi. In 1876 reference may be
found to be the “boon” of a train at 9.30 p.m.
from Adelaide, returning from the Port at
10 o’clock. The first locomotives apparent-
ly did not travel at a dangerous rate of
speed, for many people can recollect a
former worthy citizen who was accom-
panied on his railway traveling by a dog.
The animal, it is said, would invariably com-
plete the journey in the same time as the


train. The Semaphore branch was opened
early in 1878. Through passengers had to
take the front carriages at Adelaide, and on
reaching the Pont these were uncoupled
and taken on by another engine. Con-
siderable inconvenience was experienced
owing to delays in opening the swing
bridge crossing the river.
CAPTAIN HANSFORD WARD.
Captain Hr.nsford Ward, whose photo-
graph is given above, arrived in 1839, an 1
for two years, under Captain Lipson, was
employed by the Government in boarding
and piloting vessels at Holdfast Hay. He
was present at Glenelg at the launching of
the first vessel in 1842, named the Osmond
Gilles, commonly called tire ().(!. She was
a. culler, and was used to trade on the
coast. He afterwards bought the brig
Punch, and traded to Calcutta, Batavia,
and other Eastern ports. He sold her in
China, and on returning purchased the
schooners Waitermaitia and Alice Alar-
tin, the latter having been previously
known as the Flying Eagle. Alter trading
for some years with these vessels he dis-
posed of them, and worked in connection
with Elder, Stilling, & Co., Joseph Stilling
and Co., and Joseph Downs. He was mas-
ter of the Marion for a couple of years,
and took the first passenger vessel up Spen-
cer’s Gulf. In 1859 he proceeded to Eng-
land, with commission to build or buy a
coasting steamer. Ho built the old Lubra,
and sailed her for over two years. After
further experience with steam he again in-
vested in sailing vessels, several of which
were wrecked. For twenty-tone years he
has been a licensed marine surveyor at Port
Adelaide. He was present at the procla-
mation of Port Adelaide in 1840, having
been sent for from Glenelg by Captain Lip-
son. He was one of a party under Captain
Lipson, Colonel Gawler, and Mr. Hardy,
who surveyed the coastline from Port Lin-
coln to Franklin Harbour. Captain AVard,
who is one of the very few surviving pio-
neers of Port .Adelaide, is eighty-two years
of age, and has passed through exciting ex-
pci iences.
MR. W. H. CARTER.
A.T. AV. 11. Carter, whoso portrait ap-
pears above, forms one of not more than a
trio of survive::s who were present at the
proclamation of fort Adelaide, lie arrived
by the Thomas Harrison on February 28,
1839. lie joined the Customs boat at Glen-
elg a few months afterwards, and later the
harbour-boat at Port Adelaide. In the for-
ties he paid a visit to England, and on re-
turning resumed his position on the har-
bour-boat, and rose to become mate of the
Government tug Adelaide. In 1852 he was
appointed pilot at Port Adelaide, and two


years later he became master of the tug. In
1856 he was sent as Head Keeper to the
newly-constructed Troubridge Lighthouse,
and in 1862 was transferred to Cape Wil-
loughby as Head Keeper. This position he
retained until the end of 1893, when he re-
signed owing to an accident. In spite of
his mishap Mr. Carter is still hale.
The present Port has been at least twice
threatened with destruction. In 1846 the
new settlement was swept by a disastrous
fire, and on November 9, 1857, there was a
serious conflagration. In 1866 an unusually
high tide swamped most houses, and des-
troyed the'greater part of the contents. It
may be mentioned that scarcely any very
old landmarks of Hie early Port are stand-
ing to-day. Almost the only exceptions are
the wooden house near the Town Hall, the
framework for which was imported from
England; the chaff-store in Nile-street, for-
merly occupied by Messrs. Jones, Parry, and
Co., and a couple of cottages. For some
years the firat-named was the bead-quar-
ters of the Trinity Board. In the first
year of its existence Port Adelaide enjoyed
but one mail from Adelaide a day. Under a
new arrangement which came into effect
that year, it was announced that the Port
Adelaide postman would leave the General
Post-Office at 11 o’clock in the morning,
and proceed direct to the Port. The chief,
if not the only source of supply of fresh
water was a well sunk by the South Austra-
lian Company on a sandy patch near where
Mr. Fletcher’s slip is now at Birkenhead.
The water was taken across the river in
casks by means of a flat pontoon, and, in
the absence of horse power, the casks were
rolled to the customers. Reference has been
made to the building up of the Port with
silt taken from the river. It is noteworthy
that the first dredging was done, not by
steam, but by spoon barges worked by
hand.
Mr. A. E. Sawtell has in his possession
an interesting old chart of the Port Ade-
laide River, and from it some idea can he
obtained of the deepening which has been
done. The depth of water at the outer
harbour in 1839 is shown as 12 ft, and at
different spots in the natural channel 18 to
24 ft. At the inner bar in the vicinity of
Schnapper Point there was but 9 ft 1 ., and
thence onwards to a point opposite the
North Arm, the site of the “future port
already surveyed and sold,” from 12 to
21 ft. Here anchored “the largest vessel
that has yet entered the harbour, the Asia
of 525 tons.” Where the Ocean Steamers’
Wharf now stands the depth was not more
than 18 ft. To-day the outer bar has 25 ft.
of water, and throughout the whole course
of the channel soundings reveal from 23 up
to 27 ft. The historic chart was compiled
from the survey of Colonel Light.
W. K. Thomas & Co., Fruiters, Grenfell Street. Adelaide.


J. W. CAIRE,
Wholesale and Retail
Saddlery Warehouse,
COMMERCIAL ROAD, PORT ADELAIDE.
Practical Manufacturer of every description of
Saddlery and Harness.
A Large Assortment of all kinds of Saddlery Goods kept
in Stock and Made to order.
Buggy and Spring Cart Harness £3 10s. per set
A. & E.
Custom House, -
Shipping and -
General Commission Agents.
Telephone No. Go.
