

SKETCHES
CHINESE CHARACTER,
ILLUSTRATIVE OF
THEIR MORAL
AHD PHYSICAL EFFECT
THE RISING GENERATION
VICTORIA.
By HUMANITY.
CASTLEMAINE :
F. Y. BENHAM, PRINTER AND BOOKBINDER.
1878.




SKETCHES
CHINESE CHARACTER,
ILLUSTRATIVE OF
THEIR MORAL
AND PHYSICAL EFFECT
THE RISING GENERATION
VICTORIA.
By HUMANITY.
CASTLEMAINE
F. T. BENHAM. PRINTER AND BOOKBINDER,


DEDICATED UNTO ALL
AND EVERY THOUGHTFUL AND MERCIFUL MAN AND
WOMAN OF
VICTORIA AND NEW SOUTH WALES ;
ENGLAND, IRELAND, AND SCOTLAND,
BUT PARTICULARLY TO
OUR LEGISLATORS, MEMBERS OP PARLIAMENT,
MAGISTRATES AND BOROUGH COUNCILLORS,
AS WELL AND ESPECIALLY TO
GOD’S MINISTERS,
FAITHFUL AND HONEST CHURCHWARDENS,
AND WEALTHY, SHAMELESS OWNERS OF THE PROPERTIES
LET TO THE CHINESE
FOR THEIR ABOMINATIONS,
BUT REALLY DEDICATED TO
Hon. GRAHAM BERRY,
CHIEF SECRETARY
OF THIS FAIR AND LOVELY COLONY OF VICTORIA ;
For in him we trust; and the writer fully confides that, in the
launching of this pamphlet, the motive will bear it with full
current and force to the hearts of all who feel with him, and
give the fearful evils herein exposed their death-blow of
extermination, and check the dire enemy of all pure emotions,
which are stricken down to the dust by these heathenish,
swinish, devilish hordes of Chinese thieves, murderers, and
adulterers, until they be no more known amongst us.


N33S S/F lO^i
/9-Z In
SKETCHES.
Castlemaine, Sunday, August, 1878.
Thanks be to God ! Yes, I thank God for the witness I have
this day seen and beard—-the name of Jesus Christ proclaimed
even unto and into the Sodom and Gomorrah of Castlemaine, —
to the Chinese amidst their evil surroundings, and their filthy
and sinful abodes of sin and swinish devilry entered into by
the servants of the Most High God ! May the wayside scatter-
ing of the seed of holiness and truth take root in this hotbed of
all unholy and unclean vices !
And to our fallen sisters, who have given up their bodies to
to these evil vampires ; yes, to them may the words of holiness,
of invitation, from Jesu’s Garden of Love, not come, alas ! my
Lord, too late!
Come out ! Come away from your sinful company ; in the
Holy Name of Jesus I bid you leave these fearful places ! You
are not fitted by your Maker for this dreadful, Chinese dire and
fearful contamination ; for if, my sisters, the words of love and
Christian invitation will not persuade you, the consequences,
be they what they may, must fall on you, and you will not
escape punishment right soon at the hands of offended and
disgusted humanity.
Could I but write—and by God’s help I’ll try—the scenes of
that awful red, blood-red brick alley or lane off Forest-street,
and publish it in England, it would never be believed that our
Saxon and Norman girls could have sunk so low in crime as to
consort with such a herd of Gorilla Devils, devilish and leprous
in feature, and devilish are they in nature also.
I will endeavour to pen three or four word-sketches of that
blood-red brick lane off Forest-street, Castlemaine. —
At the door of a hovel, with little tables inside the front
rooms, stood four persons : —two young women, and a China-
man of frightfully distorted appearance (would that Dante had
seen him !)—his picture seemed to me to be the embodiment of
all evil. The fourth was a youth of 15 or 16 years, a sad, sad
sight to look on ; pinched in features, lustrous eyes, his features
seeming to shrink with horror away from a pair of good eyes,
and to thrust them out (the eyes) prominently like spies upon
his own misguided life.


This youth could be saved—rescued from himself, I believe,
if the right means were adopted. He seemed the last link of
chivalry linked into decaying, withered, dying beauty—linked
by the two European women aforesaid at the door, one, fair
and prepossessing, but with one eye blackened by a blow. This
woman would have adorned a good man’s home, and her chil-
dren would have called her blessed. How will it be now, alas!
and that I truth must write it.
Another of these our, your, sisters or daughters, of loving
parents, was a good-looking young woman; and even as she
listened to the hymns, her face proclaimed the story that her
better nature was touched, and that she would leave those
cursed haunts and receptacles of horror if anyone would kindly
bid her come out. If there are none in Castlemaine who will
say that word, others outside the district will do so soon.
So much cruelty and open wickedness I have never yet seen
elsewhere, and it is crying out unto heaven for vengeance.
The old adage applies here, “ The gods grind slowly but surely.”
Where, where, where is there a city so fallen from her high
estate as Castlemaine 1 Business and mining seem to be
accursed, and why? Churches and,public offices neglected and
languishing, and why ? Because your young men, who should
and would support them, laugh them to scorn in the standing,
open presence, and silent teaching of these vile haunts.
I remember the time was when Castlemaine was the boast of
the Colony, and your churches the best attended and supported
also. I cannot say so now ; and again I ask why ?
Still there is hope left; still the faithful few, such as the
little band of three or four faithful women, and three or four
faithful, earnest workers for God which I witnessed with such
pleasure to-day, can, if you assist them, do much good. En-
courage and countenance' their efforts, every one of good
thought.
And now unto the rich and powerful I write : and to those
who drive in buggies, &c., past these little bands of evangelists,
when you drive, drive gently and reverently,
For, respectable people, alas ! these fallen sisters and brothers
are, may have been, and may yet be such to you. And to you,
gaily dressed ladies and gentlemen, their wretchedness cries
aloud to do all you can for them ; for who can tell the time or
hour that their Christianity may be required for you or yours.
Picture Number Two. —Hovel or shop, butcher, poulterer,
or devil—l know not; but at the door an evil-looking, bloated
Chinaman lolls or leans, and one or two more of the same class
around him ; also, a woman—l looked twice or thrice to be
quite sure—who was dressed in Chinese shoes, red skirt dld
Chinese, and little more.
Oh ! my God ! what a fearful picture this last European
woman presented ; she had lost all appearance of anything
human or womanly ; she looked something like an upright pig.
She had the redeeming spark left, for, as I scanned her, she
backed into the pig-stye of the place, shop, or hovel aforesaid.
The Third Picture consists of two European women in
flaming prints and Chinese colors, Chinese shoes ; also, manners
bold, defiant, brazen, lost, blotched, and accursed by drink,


opium—incipient leprosy propagators, disease clearly marked
and strongly defined. Such a picture words cannot describe—
it is simply awful, dreadful, and thoroughly accursed.
Passing the same Camp again, I see two girls—young women,
and a (Tnnaman. He (the Chinaman) approaches the girls and
a hovel, and triumphantly waves aloft a square gin bottle
which he has just pulled from under his loose jumper, and he
enters in with others of his nation and nature. This, mark you,
again is Sunday.
Granting licenses for public houses to Chinamen is most
infamous in every possible light I can at present see it in, and
opens up the worst and most wicked places that can be
imagined.
If my opinions on the Chinese are strongly expressed, my
convictions are still stronger and unexpressed at present. Yes-
terday at mid-daj r I visited the Chinese Camp at Maryborough,
and the same features presented themselves before me. The
hideous and sickening stink or smell of burnt hair, grease, and
filthy matter, too numerous and indelicate to particularise, and
the grossest immorality openly and shamelessly indulged in.
Women here, there, and all about the horrible place,—drunken,
dissipated, lost to shame, and received by shouts of horrid
import into the midst of these abominable vultures, to scatter
broadcast the loathsome, deadly, innocuous diseases into the
future generations of this fair land. I write only what I have
seen, and
* * “The Truth, . . impugn it whoso list.”
Passing slowly through the main thoroughfare of the Mary-
borough Chinese Camp, I will particularly point out three
groups of persons I saw there. —Two women, Europeans, dressed
nearly d Id Chinese, whose distorted faces and shape resembled
puffed and stuffed greasy bacon. Some of the women had
jewellery of the Brummagem type, and if the manufacturer in
Birmingham had seen the work of his hands in that Camp, I
think he would never make any more. Of these two women
one was smoking, well, I don’t know what-—opium, it might
be—and the other one leering and otherwise employing her
diseased body, surrounded by some ten or more Chinese ghouls
of the Camp.
Scene two of the same Camp One European woman stood
at a partly open door of one of these infamous dens of vice,
speaking to two young European men, or rather, a youth and
a young man, the latter with the first outcrop of whisker and
moustache, the former about 15 or 16 years of age. The young
woman was clad in black cotton velvet, with large white
buttons, but in her face the same stamp of awful wreck, wrecked
by the Mongolian virtues, if you like it, but wrecked by drink,
prostitution, opium, leprosy, filthy surroundings, the gambling
hell or Fan Tan ; and, whilst under the influences of Chinese
drugs, ravished by a horde of these worthy citizens of Mary-
borough, the future hope of the British Crown. I say the law
makers who gave these devilish monsters entrance into this
country, deserve the worst condemnation ; and if crime stamps
its indelible mark upon the features of every man or woman,
what a fearful mark is stamped upon every Chinaman you


meet; and the Missionaries, Interpreters, and Chinese Doctors,
with the Chinese Merchants of Melbourne, are of the same
fearful type.
And now for scene three. —Three or four girls going in and
out, and the hideous laughter and gesture of the Chinese, with
their horridly expressive glances at them, and rapine, lust,
and dreadful murder plainly marked on their closely watched
countenances. This is my plain story in broad daylight; what
must it be Avhen the sun goes down—when the dark hours of
night cover the horrors from the sight of day, and the hellish
passions of these fearful people are loosened by drug and
liquor; and what scenes, seen only by the poor degraded
victims, have, and still cry out for vengeance ?
Take one instance One of these infant girls is debauched,
and, sooner than look upon her kind parents or friends, seeks
either Death or deeper seclusion in their vicious abodes. How
many children are tossed into holes and places of which no
earthly record is kept, except paragraphs occasionally in the
papers—“ Dead body found ” here, another found there ; and
remember the fearful murder of Sophia Lewis.
I ask, can missionary measures ever subdue the tiger in the
jungle, or the jackal in his lair 1 Just as hopeless is their case.
What is required is this —that they bring an equal number of
Chinese women with them, or else that they be not allowed to
come at all into this country. Strong and stringent measures
must be adopted to keep them in order and from growing into
a fearful evil of colossal magnitude ; and the Chinese merchants
of Melbourne should be compelled to see that their countrymen
obey the laws of this land as a very high privilege. The
Chinese code of morality is of the lowest class, even in their
camps. After the victims of their too successful lusts have
failed, and are completely broken down in health and body,
they are driven forth to their former haunts again amongst
the Europeans, there to further develop the Chinese diseases —
leprosy and crimes, amongst the young men of European
parents, and thence to the daughters of the same.
Is my voice now, think you, one moment too soon, or is it
not rather too late ; what thinkest thou, my reader 1
This afternoon being very fine, a beautiful day, in fact, for a
walk, so much so that a walk becomes a real pleasure, and
about the beautiful suburbs of Ballarat is very enjoyable indeed,
rambling amongst the suburbs, and coming amongst industries
of various kinds at different points—brass and iron foundries,
breweries, banks, &c., and nice gardens just commencing to
dress themselves with their loveliness in blossoms, buds, leaves,
and flowers ; I say I pleasantly strolled, with the intent of
visiting the Golden Point Chinese Camp ; so, thitherwards I
journeyed.
I soon discovered signs of the Chinese gathering, to wit, —
I spied a cab drawn by an old grey horse—l should have been
more correct if I had said that the grey horse objected quietly,
but decidedly, not to draw the load of passengers, which an old
gentleman, who was coming out of a house opposite to the
jibbing or objecting horse, called “ a lot of mullock which is a


gold fields phrase, and means, according to my views, anything
of no use, and lie did not, in this instance, apply it very res-
pectfully either. I could see at once that they were Chinese
women, and, half in fun, I recommended him to discharge his
cargo, which he understood, and the women got down with a
little persuasion, but with some difficulty, and a little uncere-
monious display of bright-colored stockings, &c. The objecting
animal —that is, the horse —at once started on his way up the
hill; the women got into the cab again, more stockings, &c., and
the old grey horse with a groan (this is not exactly correct either,
but his groans came from the tail end of him), and groan he
did, that’s quite certain, passed on with his load. The women
were—one with a black velvet dress, big buttons, as much red
and white striped stockings as necessary. Vermilion and hair
oil I dont pretend to know anything about, but the same oily
greasy, brazen-faced, hardened, prostitute appearance, though
young. They drove to the doctor’s- —the Chinese doctor’s.
The second woman looked awfully sick, even at the distance
of 20 paces. I could see the dire summons to the grave was
issued to her; and, doctor Chinaman, you may quack, you
may prescribe, but she never will (I may be wrong) recover.
She appeared perfectly yellow.
The third was a hard-faced woman, and I could see. much
trouble and concern in her face and manner ; it was another
fearful picture of sorrow and deadly sin.
I pass on to the Camp—a motley collection of old tin utensils,
scraps and rags, so skilfully stuck together, to encase the Chi-
nese inhabitants. Little children ran out of these hovels like
rats, but then there are no rats in Ballarat, so you have the substi-
tute —the hybrid breed of Ballarat gold, Chinese oil, and
women. I also saw some dressed in Chinese trousers altogether
this time, and smoking I knew not what, I am quite sure it
was not rose leaves. They have a public house in this camp,
and here the rats (the children, I should have said), the women,
and the fattest of the greasy Chinese seemed to collect for
pleasure ; but the smell of these things, the dreadful, greasy
smell, —the awful smell of things rotting, wasting, dying, crying,
howling, smoking, and all together, for miles away would be
too close for my inspection.
I never can forget that smell, that Chinaman’s smell; I can-
not possibly give you any notion of what it is like, but all green
herbs seem to wither up before it, all birds of the air seem to
avoid it. You will observe that Chinese gardens are all far
away from their unclean camp.
I was an eye-witness of a quarrel amongst the celestial rulers,
close to the Joss-house —a wordy quarrel in Chinese characters,
irate pig-tails —angry magi—a running in and a running out
again—a chase—a thrust with a thing like a sharp poker—and
in which no one seemed to take any interest but the party
themselves. One old Chinaman came out of the house next the
Joss-house, blew his nose Chinese fashion, looked at the sky
above and the Chinese shoes below him, Chinese fashion again.
I spoke to him to appease the quarrel; the old humbug didn’t
see it, and I left them ky haying and ah laying, and if a lot of
them are run through the bowels by that sharp pointed poker,


that old humbug aforesaid must take his share of the affair, my
remonstrance did not signify. I was painfully struck with the
fact that doctor’s shops are very numerous both in the camp
and also in the Main road. The camp altogether is an abomin-
ation, a disease-spreading and filthy place to a terrible extent.
These are passing visits by day, what will they be at night ?
But still I will do my best to see them at "that hour, and write
only what I have seen and can vouch for; and I also have a
great idea that their teas and vegetables are not fit for European
people, for if you only knew how their vegetables are raised,
forced by poisonous, miasmic manures, your dainty ladies at
their breakfast-tables would not enjoy the breakfast or tea
spread of Chinese vegetables. However, I may visit the gar-
dens, and then I’ll write about them.
All the camp is huddled together, and should not be allowed
within three miles of any town of Europeans. I cannot, as yet,
see any one good quality about them at all; no manly virtues,
nothing but crawling, like insects or barnacles to a good ship’s
side, and slowly but surely sapping and undermining all British
principles. It would be a real blessing to re-ship them to their
own country, and also to forbid the merchants of Melbourne, I
mean the Chinese merchants, further concessions, and also
re-ship them to China ; and if this can not be done, the people
will take other steps to remedy the evil of their presence.
Again, good pen, point with force to the Melbourne scene of
Chinese commerce, roguery, seduction, prostitution, smokery,
thievery, Fan Tan, and abominable cookery; but, my pen,
write only truth.
Well, to the sickening story.—l go up Swanston street and
look at the Chinese ghouls and storekeepers, lolling, or rather
sticking by some glutinous position to their respective doors.
Mark now ; the warehouses of your City are emptying them-
selves of the busy toilers for honest, daily bread ; for, thanks
be to God, the employment is over at six of the clock, when
both old and young men, women and children are hurrying
home for their teas, some, perhaps, to kiss a little loving addition
to their quivers, but all going away from labour done for the
day, and feel glad, something like the being let off the chain
feels; that’s the way I always feel. Mark the expression of
the Chinese lolling against the door-posts of their places. As
yonder fair lily of Victoria passes by, he gloats, he bitterly
exults over the passing victim, and then his deadly game begins
by the aid of young Europeans, whom they bribe, pay, and
employ for this fell and evil purpose. They give a little pre-
sent, a few lollies at first, then, perhaps, some Chinese rubbishy
drapery, then money, through their hired procurer or procuress ;
then they administer, through their lollies, opium, which once
taken, the poor victim, the fair lily, is as surely brought down
as the sky is blue. Once the opium is administered to her all
power to resist is swept away, and then the feast of lust, rape,
and deadliest of all foul crimes ever committed, is fully enacted.
She, the lily that was-—so beautiful to look on—the lily of last
week-—alas ! what is she now ? Where are all the early lessons
of piety inculcated so zealously ? Where all the careful training


of Sunday-school teachers ; of what avail to her now is
her beauty of eyes, lovely hair and figure ; what do they avail
her now, degraded, disgraced, blasted for all time, diseased and
heart-broken? And all this is being enacted day by day, hour
by hour, as surely as the sun rises and sets on your polluted
city of Melbourne. The gas-jets flare with lurid light, and the
music of instruments is faintly heard by myself and others
even here.
But look, reader, at that public house at the corner of
Swanston and Little Bourke streets. The lily comes out of the
side door, eyes as blue and wildly open as misery and devilry
can open them ; hair wildly, restlessly tossing to and fro which
ever way the intoxicated, opiumed, wrecked lily turns her
head. Two Chinese devils came out with her, but, as the
crowd gathers round to witness our sister’s deadly murder, these
Chinese merchants, devils, or adulterers leave her, like cowards,
against the wall. She is helpless—cannot walk a step ; she
clutches the brick wall of the aforesaid ark of refuge —the
public house, and stands there the stricken down, drunken,
debauched ; ruined in body and soul. The policemen look on,
and no one helps her ; but a cabman driving a grey horse
comes to the front, and, with the assistance of the Friend of
Humanity, that publican or his barman, or somebody belonging
to the public house, bundles that wrecked, wretched lily into
the cab, and drive away with her deeper and deeper, faster and
faster, into the boiling, seething, reeking city, down, down—
away from light—into darker and more sickening scenes of
damnable degradation. Here I see children buying lollies, —
half-pennyworths and pen’orths ; there’s nothing in that,
surely ? but there’s something in the children’s appearance—
in the appearance of one or two of these little lolly consumers—
my friend points it out to me, and I see with horror, anger,
and bitterness that one or two of these infants—children, —oh !
God in heaven ! can such things be done in Melbourne I —yes,
readers, the children are enciente.
With these fearful contanimators I have no patience—scarcely
enough even to write these truths. I have no pride left in me
as a Briton. Scenes and acts such as these, if enacted in a slave
state, would have raised thousands of pens and armies of men
at a burst for their deliverance ! but, here in Victoria, by the
act, will, and deed of unprincipled politicians of conservative
proclivities, they have been fostered, cultured, and encouraged.
At Castlemaine, the contractor for the repairs of telegraphs,
Mr. A. S. Bust, employs none but Chinese.
I have no doubt many a one will not like my plain picture,
but I care not, as I feel it my duty to point the Chinese evil
out. All other resources of crime pale before the hotbed of
Chinese immorality and profanity. All the teaching of Sunday-
schools, all your early lessons of piety, given carefully to your
children, all honourable and virtuous thoughts—all are swept
away from your children by these “Heathen Chinee” colonists.
As an excuse, one Missionary tells me that they are the out-
casts of China —the criminal classes—the vile and wicked even
of the mysterious land of China. I cannot gainsay his state-
ment, and hope it is true, and if it is so, the Victorian soil and


nation has been insulted and polluted, international law has
been broken, and, as convicts, they should be at once re-shipped
at the expens'e of the Chinese dealers of Melbourne.
To the Sanitory Officers of the different places I have at
present visited they are a great disgrace, if nothing worse, and
show gross neglect and great injustice to the Europeans of
those towns. If any other than Chinese kept their places and
habitations in such a filthy, disgraceful state, they would be
summoned in all directions. What a hollow farce, what mock-
ery and humbug it is to make so much fuss about earth closets,
infectious diseases, and, at the same time, right in the centre
of your brightest little towns, the forcing beds, the nurseries of
fevers, leprosy, black fever, and ulcerous skin eruptions are
allowed, nay, carefully encouraged and protected by the law as
it now is to germinate and spread abroad east, west, north, and
south, just as the wind listeth to blow the fever seeds in any
direction.
I can also vouch for their dishonesty as the following
instances, which occurred lately, will show.
A Chinaman went into a store for a scarf ; “ Never mind
paper, too muchee trouble,” said John, so he put it in his
pocket, paid Is. for it, and, Chinaman-like, remarked, “Welly
good ; ” but he had two. The storekeeper, however, was too
much for him that time, he bowled John out completely. The
other happened in this way:—l was in a store when a China-
man came in and helped himself to about half-a-dozen gimlets ;
X saw him, as did also another gentleman. We told him that
we had seen him take them, but he swore and vowed —“ No
savee, me pay money along a street—twolly shilling ; ” but he
dropped the gimlets, and the proprietor of the place politely,
delicately, and very playfully assisted him out of the store,
something after the game of football, only John got the kicks
as the football wasn’t handy. I expect this lesson of the foot-
ball has done John’s morals a little good ; at all events I hope
so. As for any industry that Chinamen will ever introduce,
they have had plenty of time to do it. Even Professor Hearn
or Baron von Mueller must admit that they have introduced
nothing worth knowing, eating, drinking, or smelling.
There is an old adage to the effect that “ there would be no
thieves if there were no receivers.” These camps of Chinamen,
only partly let, with their gambling, opium smoking, and other
habits, are visited by the youth of different places, first out of
curiosity, and, after becoming acquainted from other motives,
craftily baited by the Chinese keepers of Fan Tan, and worse
to follow. How many young men have fallen victims through
them, and how many more of our young women have fallen
down to the very lowest wickedness in these scandalous camps
of evil and murder 1 And is the reason because they are weak
and comparatively defenceless that they are allowed to break
down all that is right and noble ? This is not a sufficient plea
to my mind. The constitution of their existence amongst us
must be altered altogether to stem the advancing flood of roll-
ing power that each year gives them, and which will be more
difficult to arrest the longer it be delayed ; and in conclusion,
I believe that we have about 160 of these nurseries of crime


and idolatry amongst ns, scattering evil and misery amongst
us by their example and practices, even if they did not attack
our youths and maidens ; but in their fiendish, diabolical
practices they remorselessly seduce, ravish, blast, and disgrace
the future people, the infants in years, who fall before their
fatal infatuations and seductive plans, like flowers before the
sharp scythe of early harvest with this difference, that our
maidens and young men live out their existence blighted,
miserable, and diseased, until death in most cases comes as the
greatest mercy.
And now, dear readers, my present task must end, and I
leave the issue with God, trusting that all true Christians will,
by God’s help, take prompt and decisive measures to stamp out
from amongst us these horrible nurseries of fiery evils, wicked-
ness, idolatry, gaming, lasciviousness, murder, and all other
deadly sins.
Youes very truly,
F. Y. Benham, Printer , Castlemaine.


lii conclusion to the SKETCHES OF CHINESE WICKED-
NESS AND VICE, I will write what I saw again in Castle-
maine ; —ln Forest Street, nearly opposite the BLOOD-RED
Sinful, Brick Alley, there stands a Weatherboard House ;
shamefully and sorrowfully it looks, as if ashamed to hold its
occupants, and ashamed to cover the lewd scenes that occur
beneath its roof. In this the company of the Mongols of the
Blood-Red, Sin-Stained, Brick Alley occasionally, nay.
regularly adjourn for fuller and more horrible lascivious
atrocities. One I witnessed, and can never forget ; and I pray
that I may never see another such. But to the purpose :
Well, well! I saw in the Weatherboard Cottage the follow-
ing horrible and lustful scene:—Passing slowly by the afore-
said house, I saw, as the blinds were up, and the bed-room was
lighted by lamps or other means, three or four heads, which
at first I took to be Chinese children ; but I returned to be cer-
tain, and steadily looked through the lighted window, and this
is the sight—the sickening scene—l witnessed :—A European
girl lay as if under the soporific influence of hell, opium, or
the Chinese drugs, nude, or nearly so ; yes, dear readers, there
sire lay, and on the same bed or couch, three adult and lascivi-
ous Chinamen lay around her ; they were to me, so many fiends
exulting o’er the deadened, inert, opiumed, drugged woman
or girl aforesaid.
The eye of God sees in all places, and what a spectacle was
there ! I have now but to pray that the Magistrates and our
Moral Instructors may turn to good account the rough Sketches
I have attempted to delineate, and solely in the aid of fallen.
sinful, and suffering
HUMANITY.




