

siuttfr
THE LATE REV, K FLETCHER,
ST. KILDA, MELBOURNE.
Jfuucral J&enranr,
THE REV. J. L. POORE.
WITH AN APPENDIX.
EDITED BY T. BINNEY.
Hlarrclttsßr:
SEPTIMUS FLETCHER, 43, JOHN DALTON STREET.
ganbm:
JACKSON, WALFORD, AND HODDER,
18, ST. PAUL’S CHURCHYARD.
S l9 (a %


* «
G. UNWIN, GRESHAM STEAM PRESS, BUCKLERSBURV, E.C.


SKETCH.
On the morning of Sunday, the 15th of December
last, the news that Death “had entered into our palaces”
spread through the Metropolis. We met and worshipped
under the shadow of a great grief. Every one felt as
if a personal calamity had fallen upon himself. The
friends of him, to whose memory these pages are dedi-
cated, feel, on looking back, that they, at that very hour,
were really sustaining a personal loss, though they knew
it not. Sunday night in Australia is Sunday morning
with us; and, on Sunday night, December 15th, about
eleven o’clock, one whom many in this land loved and
honoured, was there and then “ falling asleep,”—falling
asleep in Christ,” and, as all who knew him would
expect, in the possession of perfect, unruffled peace.
This slight tribute to his memory,—consisting of the
funeral sermon delivered to his people on the Sunday
after his decease, together with contributions from other
quarters, giving an outline of his career, an estimate
of his character, and some particulars of his last illness
Mszss/rtirs


and death, —is raised, at the request of some of his
friends, by one who knew him in early life, and whose
lot it was to be frequently an inmate of his family during
the fifteen months which, in the years 1858-9, he spent
in Australia, To Mr. Fletcher’s house myself and com-
panion went on our arrival. Thither we returned, again
and again, after our visits to the other colonies. From
it we took our departure, when we had to embark on our
return home. He “ accompanied us unto the ship.”
The outlines of our friend’s ministerial life are
sufficiently indicated in the following pages not to re-
quire to he given here. I may he permitted to refer,
however, to my early personal knowledge of Mr. Fletcher,
which is noticed by Mr. Poore. At this distance of
time, my recollections, I confess, are neither very
numerous nor very distinct. It must have been about
the year 1816 or 1817, when some ten or twelve of us,
all youths under twenty, mostly connected by birth and
training with the Presbyterian churches of Newcastle,
formed ourselves into a society for the study of the
Scriptures, prayer, and mutual religious improvement.
It was not a literary class. We met on a Sunday
evening, and though essays and sermons were read, it was
not with the object of criticism or discussion, but rather
as a means of spiritual advancement. The congregations
to which most of us belonged were connected with the
Established Church of Scotland; at least this was the
case with Mr. Fletcher and myself. His father was an
Elder, at the time I speak of, of the Silver Street con-
gregation, of which the Rev. A. Laidlaw was then the


minister. It was in the vestry of this church that our
meetings were held. I have a distinct recollection of
the pleasing appearance and quiet manners of Mr.
Fletcher as a youth—he was some two years my junior.
I do not remember any special effort or exercise which
brought him prominently before us. I can, however,
recall the fact that he was very diligent in his studies,
and had made arrangements by which, though engaged
in a merchant’s office, he could attend, in the day-time,
twice or thrice a week on a Latin class, in addition to his
having evening instruction. There were then about him
the same features of character which afterwards were de-
veloped and perfected in the man. He was a pure, well-
principled youth. Modest, religious, devout; unobtru-
sive, amiable, good. The elements and the prophecy
were there of that “ good man” which Barnabas was,
and which our friend became, —as Mr. Poore has very
justly and felicitously described. He was active and
zealous, too; for there was a Juvenile Missionary
Society, of which, my impression is, that he was the
secretary. This institution belonged, however, to the
Independent congregation, of which the Rev, Ralph
Davidson was then the minister. The Presbyterian
churches were not distinguished for activity or zeal. We
heard, indeed, of Morison of China, who had sprung from
amongst us, and were naturally proud of him. But the
more advanced or ardent among the young men, if they
sought for opportunities of action, had to look for them
in connexion with other societies. Of the members of
the little band to which I have referred, several became


ministers or missionaries. I was one of the first, if not
the first, who left the association to go to College. I
am now almost the last remaining in the field of labour
into which we successively entered ; —of those, at least,
who were my associates and contemporaries. I saw
lately among some old papers, the MS. of the sermon or
address I delivered in the prospect of leaving, founded
on Eph. vi. 18, 19. But lam not writing a memoir of
myself.
Mr. Fletcher, as will be seen, pursued his studies for
the ministry in Eotherham College. He entered that
Institution in 1819. He settled at Darwen in 1823.
In 1831 he removed to Manchester. He left England
for Australia in 1853, and in the last month of last year,
1861, as has been already noticed, he died. Such are
the outlines of his quiet and even course; a life, with
the exception of the call to colonial labour, visibly
uneventful. To eyes, however, that could look at it in
connexion with spiritual phenomena,—its influence on
others through the speech and actings of the man of
God, —it might be full of incident. He was a “ good
minister of Jesus Christ,” and “ so spake” that, in the
course of his ministry, “ many believed.” He won by
his example as well as persuaded by his words, for he so
lived as to “ adorn” and commend “ the doctrine” he
taught. “He had a good report of all men, and of
the truth itself.” Those who knew him best concur in
their testimony to his exemplary excellence. His preach-
ing was not of an exciting, popular character, but to
advanced Christians it was interesting and attractive,


and often singularly edifying. So, at least, it used to
impress me. He was endowed with good average talents,
though not with genius. His mind had undergone con-
siderable culture; he kept up through life, as far as
circumstances permitted, the habits of a student. As to
those personal virtues which beautify character, every-
body acknowledged them in Eichard Fletcher. He might
not inspire enthusiasm in his friends, but I never heard
that he made an enemy. His manners were mild, his
temper calm, his spirit and disposition candid and
charitable. He was a devout man. His piety was deep
and earnest, though restrained and unobtrusive. In all
his habits he was systematic and regular; his industry
was great; his whole life unspotted and blameless.
His wisdom in counsel, his practical judgment, and,
when required, his cautious and conciliatory suggestions,
are noticed, I observe, by all who speak of him. in
confirmation of their testimony, I may mention that
when I was in Australia, in a town a good way from
Melbourne, a friend there, referring to a visit of Mr.
Fletcher at a time when the Church was passing through
rather critical circumstances, spoke in grateful terms of
the lasting benefits they had derived from it. He dwelt
on the sagacity of his counsels ; the weight and wisdom
of his words; the spirit in which he presided over, and
which he infused into their meetings ; the manner in
which he healed or prevented misunderstandings, con-
ciliated parties, and by his patience, forbearance and
gentleness, brought every thing to a satisfactory and
tranquil result.


One of the first missionary deputations, of any im-
portance, in which I was called to act, was one to Man-
chester in 1831. Mr, Fletcher had then just removed
thither, as the successor of Mr. Eohy. I well remember
the high terms in which Dr. McAll referred to him.
Though mentally and constitutionally very different, the
two men drew towards each other, and a friendship was
cemented between them which never knew a jar. In
the life of Dr. McAll there is frequent reference to a
paper, w T hich Mr. Fletcher furnished to Dr. Wardlaw, of
recollections of their mutual friend, with an estimate,
apparently, of his genius and character. The quotations
from this, embodied in the biography, are marked by
great discrimination of thought, and distinguished by
much felicity of expression. One of the statements, in
the account of the closing hours of the dying man, as
narrated by Dr. Wardlaw, is to the following effect, and
is very touching. “ The last interview was at a time
when he was appallingly ‘death-struck’ and oppressed.
As Mr. Fletcher entered the room, he lifted up his eyes,
and stretched out his hands to him, saying, * Ah,
liichard Fletcher, —my faithful friend,’ and embraced
him."
I have now lying before me an extract from the dis-
course which the Rev. P. Thomson, the successor of Mr.
Fletcher, recently delivered on the news of his death
reaching England; and also a paper furnished to him by
Mr. Gwyther, who knew Mr. Fletcher during the whole
period of his residence at Manchester. These papers were
sent to me at my request, and are kindly placed at my


disposal. They contain, as may be supposed, very much
the same testimony as that given by Mr. Poore, and by
the other writers quoted in the “ Appendix ” to this
book, who obviously wrote from personal knowledge.
They need not, therefore, he given at length; but this
imperfect sketch would be still more incomplete if it
did not include some utterance direct from Manchester.
The sympathetic reader (and for such only I write) will
be pleased, I am persuaded, with the following passages.
Mr. Thomson says, “ In the year 1831, he commenced
his labours as minister of this chapel. At the early
stage of his ministry here, Mr. Fletcher had to contend
with many difficulties and discouragements. Such, how-
ever, was the consistency of his character, the loveliness
of his spirit, the conciliatory influence of his manners,
the evangelical tone and useful tendency of his minis-
trations, and the deep interest he took in all philan-
thropic and Christian efforts, that he gradually sur-
mounted his disadvantages, and gained for himself a
high position among the ministers of Manchester. He
was held in great esteem by his ministerial brethren,
and by none more so than by Dr. McAll. His preach-
ing is represented as having been solid though not
brilliant, instructive rather than stimulating, persuasive
rather than eloquent or powerful. As a Pastor, he was
characterised by the wisdom of his counsels and the
tenderness of his sympathy. As a man of business, he
was apt and laborious. He was distinguished by the
spirit of the peace-maker, and was often called upon to
arbitrate on cases of difference, and did so with the


happiest results. You know that he had a warm attach-
ment to his flock, and that he was very greatly beloved
in return. Nothing but an imperative sense of duty
could have induced him, when past the meridian of life,
to sever himself from his people here, and to enter on a
career of sacrifice and toil in the distant and rising
colony of Victoria.”
Mr. Gwyther’s testimony is in the form of a letter
to Mr. Thomson. It was written for Mr. Thomson's
use, as Mr. Gwyther’s state of health did not allow him
personally to undertake the public service. I omit, as
much as possible, the mere repetition of what has been
already said. Though the substance, however, of the
evidence of two witnesses may be similar, individuality
of manner gives interest to the statements of both, while
each mutually strengthens the other. Mr. Gwyther
savs :
“ The thirty seven years daring which it was my happiness
to know Mr. Fletcher, served to make me thoroughly acquainted
with him, and I can remember no one incident which
even for a moment impaired in the smallest degree my im-
pression of his high Christian principle and religious worth.
If there were others who possessed a larger measure of bril-
liant talent, he was behind none in earnest devotion to the
cause of his great Master, and in that harmonious combination
of spiritual graces which bring glory to His name. His intelli-
gence, sound judgment, and uniform kindness and geniality
made him a great favourite with all who knew him well, and
few excelled him as a counsellor in cases of difficulty, or in
the management of business.
* * * * *
«He was a great favourite amongst his ministerial brethren.


In all his intercourse with them there was the most transparent
evidence of fraternal feeling, honour and sincerity; whilst his
kindness, his regard to their feelings, his genial manner, and
cheerful, intelligent conversation, could not fail to inspire their
attachment and confidence. In counsel he was cautious and
wise; in positions of difficulty he was judicious and con-
ciliatory. Still, there was no vacillation or hesitancy where
duty called or principle was involved. He would buy peace
at any price, except that which involved the interests of truth
or the claims of Christ. Then he was firm as a rock, —
though as far as possible without offence.
“ But the honour and spread of religion called forth his
warmest and most absorbing regard. Here bis master-passion
was engaged. If truth was impugned, if ministerial character
was dishonoured, none but his most intimate friends could tell
how deep was his sorrow, amounting sometimes to real anguish
of spirit. If some way of advancing the honour and pro-
moting the progress of religion was laid before him, his sym-
pathies and his services were at once engaged.
* * * * *
“ And with all his other excellences, there was combined not
only genuine humility, but a remarkable absence of all selfish-
ness, and a thorough delight in promoting the honour and happi-
ness of others. You will not, therefore, wonder at my strong
affection for him. I knew his worth, and was deeply affected
at his loss. When, after working happily together in Man-
chester for twenty-two years, without a single misunder-
standing, the slightest jar, or one moment’s coldness, he was
taken away, —a cold, dark shadow fell on my heart, which is
now intensified and deepened by his death. And yet that
death was everything which we could have expected in such a
case as his.
“ I write in much haste and with difficulty. I give no syste-
matic portraiture of my dear friend, but have indulged in the
utterance of thoughts and feelings which are uppermost. I
have said nothing about his clear and well-balanced mind, and


still less about his attainments. Yet his stores of information
were very large, and his scholarship far beyond that which
will often be found where there is much pretension and parade.
But I have kept everything in subjection to those qualities of
heart and life which have more than all besides embalmed
him in the affection of all who knew him best. Yet all that I
have said is needless. The tribute paid to his memory, in the
leading article of the Melbourne Christian Times, presents an
estimate of his character as remarkable for its correctness, as
for the appropriate terms and Christian tone in which it is
expressed.”
I have reason to believe that if Mr. Fletcher had
spoken to us from the press, he would have done so suc-
cessfully. It was not in him to have sent forth anything
crude, undigested, hastily put together, carelessly written.
His thorough conscientiousness was carried into every-
thing. He could have attempted nothing without in-
stinctively regarding the great rule which alone can
secure anything like enduring success in authorship—
“ taking all possible pains to do your very best.” His
modesty restrained him from coming forth in the form
of a printed book ; but I am disposed to think that, had
he done so, we should have had mature, weighty, and
well-arranged thoughts, conveyed in a style distinguished
by elegance and perspicuity. He had read and thought
much ; and I may now mention, without any violation of
confidence, that, in the prospect of his visiting England,
he mentioned to me that he had accumulated materials,
and formed a plan for a course of lectures, which he
thought (though he was almost startled when he realised
to himself the presumption) might not altogether dis-


grace the series of “ The Congregational Lectures,” if
circumstances should lead to their delivery, and to their
taking their place as a volume in the series.
It will be seen that Mr. Fletcher’s mind and heart
were strongly set on the establishment of a Theological
Institution in Victoria. For the work of a tutor he had
many qualifications. He was attached to it and liked it,
and would have gladly devoted himself exclusively to it.
He looked forward to this consummation of his wishes.
Movements had begun in Victoria. One or two students
had been placed under him, and had passed through
a course of theological instruction. The idea was
entertained of establishing a college, towards which con-
siderable contributions were promised. It was our
friend’s sanguine hope that he could do something in
England to help the realisation of his cherished idea,
that led him to welcome anything that appeared to afford
the prospect of a visit to the Father-land. It was this
that gave tenacity to his purpose, and kept him to it,
when the first serious approaches of illness were felt;
this, which led him to hope against hope as his debility
increased; and it was this which, when the reality had to
be abandoned, retained its supremacy in his mind as an
idea and a purpose, and which, with solemn earnestness,
he bequeathed to his friends as something they must
determine to see completed.
How to supply the Colonies with efficient ministers
is felt to be a difficult problem with all churches. Not
only are there at home so many attractions for all, but
there is so much need at home for any who possess


more than average ability, that it is not easy to persuade
either students or ministers to give themselves to colonial
service. In some positions there are no doubt hard-
ships to be endured and sacrifices made, hut in respect
to the towns and cities, and comparatively populous dis-
tricts, the apprehension of these things, as entertained
here, is often greatly exaggerated. At the same time,
it is to be remembered, that those who go forth to
colonial work ought to do so in the spirit of missionaries,
prepared to “ endure hardness” for Christ’s sake. In
every country, old or new, there will be many positions
on a certain level, for which men of ordinary qualifi-
cations are sufficient, and for which such only can be
obtained. There are others, however, which demand
“ leaders ” in every sense of the word, —men of power,
acquisition, diversified ability,—capable, by speech or
writing, to impress and persuade,—wise in counsel yet
bold in enterprise, to whom people will look up, and
by whom they will be willing to be led. Such men are
real Bishops, by whatsoever name they may be called.
Society, in all its divisions, civil or sacred, requires and
calls for them. It is the natural result of the constitu-
tion of things. Episcopy is an attempt to give form and
visibility to what nature and necessity demand; but as
the issue is often secured by mere manipulation, rather
than by growth, the place and the man don’t always fit
each other. There is an advantage, certainly, in being
able to meet and gratify a sentiment, in the act by which
you put before a man a call for special and somewhat
self-denying service. Many a man of good position as a


presbyter—who, therefore, as such, would not for a
moment think of expatriation to the colonies —will yet
listen to the offer of a colonial bishopric ; —though even
that, it must be remembered, has not always been suc-
cessful with the class Al, or even with 89, It
is not to be wondered at, therefore, human nature being
constituted as it is, and home-society and old English
life being what they are, that we should meet with
difficulties in persuading any of our first-rate men to
emigrate as ministers. Some, I believe, would go,—go,
that is to say, to the great centres of action, if they were
to have there a recognised position, in an organised body,
which would give them scope and power for doing some-
thing beyond the capabilities of the ordinary pastor.
Such men are wanted in the colonies ; they might take
positions, acquire influence, be to all intents and pur-
poses “ Guides,” “ Overseers,” “ Bishops,” without
official designation, and accomplish something for the
present generation and for succeeding times beyond any-
thing possible to their positions here. For such men,
and for equal and competent co-workers with them, the
colonies, for a good while to come, must be dependent
on the mother-country. But they must look a-head and
make provision for raising and educating a native minis-
try. As settlements grow in age and population, and a
new generation springs up, heads and hands not only
multiply, but are gradually set at liberty from the rough
labours which necessarily absorb the time and strength
of the pioneers of civilisation. From this latter class—
the pioneers themselves—“ students for the ministry,”


“ candidates for a college education,” are not to be
expected. The very idea is ridiculous. Any belonging
to it, however, who are men of religious faith, having
ordinary ability, and zeal and earnestness, should be
encouraged (by all churches) to keep up, in their
families, and among their neighbours, the habits of social
worship, the remembrance and the preservation of Sab-
bath solemnities. From the former class—the children
that come in the place of the fathers—especially where
large populations have congregated, and society has con-
solidated and advanced, there may be expected to arise
many for whom a life of study, of mental exertion, and of
sincere religious devotedness to God, and to the service
of their fellow-men, in the ministry of the church, will
have its attractions. For such, colleges are needed. It
is well to lay the foundation of one as early as possible.
Its beginning may be humble, but it will grow with the
growth of the State, and with the advance of the Body to
which it may belong. The heart, as it will be seen,
of our friend Mr. Fletcher was fixed on this object.
Latterly, he lived for it. He stimulated the friends at
Melbourne to promise liberally towards the commence-
ment of the work; and his fond hope was, that he might
obtain here pecuniary contributions, especially from the
opulent, to forward and sustain the undertaking. This,
and no mere gratification of personal feeling—rather
considerable sacrifice of that —was the object for which
our friend resolved to return to England ; with a view
to which, ho made his preparations, took his passage,
preached his farewell sermon, and stood ready to depart!


It was not to be. The call came, “ Come up hither.”
His time of rest had arrived; —the time, rather, for
higher service in the upper world. The purpose of his
heart was not to be realised ; the work that was in his
hand had to be bequeathed to others. Others, it is
hoped, on both sides of the world, will take it up. It
ought not to be suffered to die. The time has come for
such an institution to be established in Victoria, lam
not without hope that money and men will both be forth-
coming,—for both are required to secure success.
The present year, 1862, has already begun to assume
a remarkable character. I always anticipated that it
would bring with it recollections of the last great revo-
lution in the fortunes and fashioning of the English
church, and that, in the conduct of the original Non-
conformists would be found certain lessons specially
adapted to these our times. I never thought, however, of
anything like a movement to raise a large sum of money
for the purpose of commemorating the event of 1602.
I am not sure that I should not myself have been more
content with a purely thoughtful and reflective year,—a
year without any pecuniary effort, and even without so
much public combination, and such associated planning
and purposing to do “ some great thing,” as have sprung
up amongst us. I could almost have wished that the
lessons of the past, and the memory of the men and the
events, had been left to those who, in the spontaneous
stirrings within them of thoughts and feelings not to be
repressed, became conscious of a vocation to set them
forth. But this notion of mine may be a mistake. The


sounding of the trumpet and the stir of preparation
may be the means of awakening energy, and stimulating
purpose, and discovering power, and thus become a voca-
tion to some who, though they ought perhaps to have
done so, yet would not otherwise have heard the call, or
heeded it. At any rate, if people are moved to give of
their wealth a special thankoffering to God, —if a large
sum is thus laid down for purposes of benevolence which
would not otherwise have been available, —we can only
see in this a cause for thankfulness, and pray that it may
be well and wisely directed. The building of chapels
commemorates one aspect of Puritanism and Noncon-
formity ; the establishment and endowment of colleges
would commemorate another. The more eminent of the
Bartholomew Confessors were men of learning. They
had received a university education, and naturally took
those leading positions to which culture and erudition
(other things being equal) will always conduct their
fortunate possessors. The second generation of Non-
conformists were remarkable for their efforts in making
the best provision they could for securing an educated
ministry. From the first moment of my hearing of the
intention to raise a Bicentenary Fund, it struck me that
the devotion of some considerable portion of it to Col-
legiate Institutions, would be graceful and appropriate.
I understand that it is in this way the Presbyterian
Church in England (a branch of the Free Church of
Scotland) intends to distinguish the year. As those
Congregational Nonconformists who give their money
to the Fund named, have the power of directing the


application of their respective contributions, I venture
to put in a plea for the colonies, and especially for a
Colonial Theological College. The cause of Puritanism
is singularly identified with missions to distant regions
of the world, and especially with an interest in our
colonial dependencies. The original idea, and the first
form, of the “ Society for the Propagation of the Gospel
in Foreign Parts,” sprang from the mind of Baxter, and
was realised by the hand of Cromwell. The new world
received its civilisation and religion from those who fled
thither as sufferers for conscience sake. After the
ejectment, one of the coarse modes by which the Non-
conformist ministers were assailed, was in the form of
contempt and ridicule for the wild notion which some of
them were said to entertain of going to far-off lands to
preach the Gospel there ! Every such land, heathen or
colonial, must ultimately depend on a native ministry,
—a ministry of its own, raised and educated by itself.
I earnestly pray that some into whose hands these words
may fall—who may have given their Bicentenary offer-
ing, or are about to give it—may be disposed to weigh
what I have said, and be led to direct that a portion of
what they contribute should be devoted, through the Colonial
Missionary Society, to the establishment of that Theological
Institution for which Richard Fletcher was so anxious
to have lived and laboured!
I wish I had the power, in one concluding word,
adequately to depict the opening which there is at
Melbourne for two or three of our first-rate men. An
accomplished tutor will, I trust, be soon wanted; and


for a preacher, the now vacant church of St. Kilda, one
of the most beautiful suburbs of the city, offers a noble
sphere; while the city itself, if some desirable arrange-
ments could be made, would be a position of command,
and a centre of influence, which would afford scope for a
Birmingham, Liverpool, or any other form of pulpit
power, that might allow itself to be “ translated” thither.
The claims and the wants of home, however, are such
that appeals from a distance cannot be heard; and, from
inevitable circumstances, the capabilities of some of the
more important spheres cannot be felt, —felt, especially,
by those who alone are fitted to fill them. If, from what
I have here said, any one should desire to confer with
me on the subject, I shall be forward to give him the
opportunity. With such an intimation, it is unnecessary
further to multiply words. May God graciously grant
that the death of my excellent and esteemed friend may
become subservient to the realisation of those objects to
which his energies and his life were devoted !
T. B.
*** The following sermon was delivered on Sunday morning,
December 22nd, in the Congregational Church, St. Kilda, of
which Mr. Fletcher had been the minister from the first. The
funeral took place on Wednesday, the 18th instant, and was
attended by a large number of ministers of different denomina-
tions. In connexion with the usual solemnities, an address
was delivered, which, though having points of much interest,
it was thought unnecessary to include in the present pub-
lication.


THE MAN AND HIS MINISTRY.
% S-ermtm, tic.
“He was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost and of faith ; and
much people was added unto the Lord.”— Acts xi, 24.
The island of Cyprus has considerable interest to the
student of the Bible, and occupies an honourable place in
the history of Christian missions. It was early visited by
the Gospel, and furnished one of the first evangelists to the
heathen. The Apostle of the Gentiles began his foreign
travels in this island ; here, first, a great official of the
Roman empire was converted to the faith, who has
linked his name for ever with that of Paul. While Saul
was yet at Tarsus, nursing his mighty energies for
coming toils, men of Cyprus, Hellenistic Jews, were
made the instruments of awakening the Gentiles, one of
them probably being that Mnason of Cyprus, afterwards
distinguished as a “ disciple of old standing.” When they
were come to Antioch, they spake to the “ Greeks ,” and
the Divine Spirit gave such power to their word, that
“ a great number believed and turned unto the Lord.”
The wonderful news soon travelled to Jerusalem. The
Jewish Christians in Antioch were probably perplexed
how to deal with their new and unlooked-for converts,
and sent to ask advice. “ Joses, the Levite of Cyprus ,”
whom the Apostles had surnamed Barnabas —an inspired
teacher, eminent alike for his gifts and generosity, was
selected by the mother-church that he should go as far


as Antioch, and confirm the souls of the disciples. He
'was singularly qualified for this service, being not only
a man of enlarged spirit and free from Jewish pre-
judices, hut he it was who had introduced Paul, his future
companion in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ,
to the company of the Apostles; and it seems natural to
suppose that his presence was specially desired by the
fellow-missionaries of his native island. “ When he
came, and had seen the grace of God, he was glad, and
exhorted them all that with purpose of heart they would
cleave unto the Lord ; for he was a good man and full of
the Holy Ghost and of faith, and much people was added
unto the Lord.” My further remarks on what is here
said of Barnabas will be brief, and only such as may
serve to elucidate his character, that I may he able
intelligently and justly to apply this language as a
condensed statement of the character and history of our
lamented friend and your late pastor, Mr. Fletcher.
I do not intend, this moaning, to obtrude my own
feelings, or to indulge the expression of my own grief,
further than to say that in my public life I had sustained
one great and heavy trial in the death of my most
excellent and judicious deacon and friend, Mr. James
Carlton, the treasurer of the Lancashire Independent
College, in 1851; and now this is the second, bereaving
me of my companion and co-worker in the designs of
the Society which we served —a loss to me, personally
and officially, which I do not think can he equalled.
1. The private character of Barnabas. How simple the
phrase, yet how suggestive! one stroke, yet how com-


plete ! A good man! What an embodiment of natural
virtues and acquired gracious dispositions does it
suggest! We cannot add to its force, nor can a higher
tribute he paid to worth and excellence. Everything
recorded of Barnabas is harmonious and consistent, and
such as fully to justify this honourable record—this dig-
nifying summary —He was a good man. It is not easy to
define the exact meaning of goodness, nor is it neces-
sary. Men’s ideas about it vary according to the degree
of their moral culture and their intelligent appreciation
of the Biblical pattern. The wicked man knows that
goodness is something which he does not possess. The
lukewarm Christian is sensible that he dares not claim it.
i
The man of good intentions cherishes the character as an
object of desire, and the amiable moralist contemplates
it as a beautiful picture ; but the sincere and earnest
Christian alone, who acts under the abiding influence
of God’s grace, can either feel or receive such a blessed
attestation to his worth as is here given of Barnabas ;
“ For the fruit of the Spirit is in all goodness.”—Ephe-
sians v. 9. The expression, a good man, includes the
notion of virtue or integrity, benignity or gentleness,
but much more. A good man is more than virtuous,
just, benevolent, truthful. He is one who loves goodness
for its own sake, and because God commands it, Christ
exemplified it, and the Gospel induces it. The virtue of
this world is outside goodness, wanting in regal power
and constancy of motive. It springs from something
personal, is precarious in its endurance, and may be
exercised in utter unconcern about God. Eeal goodness


rests on choice—has its seat in the heart—is a work
of renewal—centres in God—tends to Him—and is
exercised with a view to please Him and be approved
Impure men often display instinctive excellences in their
social relations, do good, and are charitable and kind;
hut they are all that they are without any thought of
God, and often mistake the act of goodness for goodness
itself. That goodness may exist, the heart of man must
bo renewed ; the fountain of life must be purified. God
Himself must enter into the soul, filling it with His
glorious presence, and thus make the outward life good
—in other words, godly, Christian.
The Gospel reveals the way and the means by which
this goodness may be produced. It tells of the renew-
ing grace of God. It sets forth the perfect example of
the Lord Jesus, and by the motives which it brings to
bear upon the soul, it subdues selfishness, and produces
a new divine life. There is no real goodness or virtue
without religion, and to be like Christ is to be good.
He that is born of God has an inwrought and instinc-
tive love of goodness wherever found; and he delights to
manifest it in doing good to all men as he finds oppor-
tunity. He is thus essentially different from those
whose goodness is earth-born —the result of an amiable
disposition, or of social influences; the product of causes
separate from the thought of God, and exercised inde-
pendently of His will. He is a child of God, and bom
of the Spirit —by that Spirit’s grace, the divine life in
him is sustained and developed into all manner of perso-
nal and social excellence. “ There is none good but


one, that is, Godand true goodness in man is god-
likeness. The Bible everywhere asserts the superiority
of goodness to all other forms of greatness, and thus
stamps its wisdom as from above. Its object is to break
the charm of the visible and the mighty, and to raise up
an unquenchable desire for the acquisition of the good, the
pure, the Christ-like. Alas ! how few seem to enter
into this divine economy ! how few appear to make that
comprehensive rectitude, that universality of goodness—
the obligation to which they admit, and the pattern of
which in the Lord Jesus Christ they admire—the rule
of their daily actions, or who school their hearts in con-
scious obedience to its claims ! And it must be regarded
as a proof that there is something radically wrong in
human nature that the admiration inspired by power and
intellect should be so much greater than that awakened
by goodness. The reverence for talent, for example, often
degenerates into something like idolatry, while moral
excellence rarely receives its deserved honour, and is
often acknowledged with a contemptuous insinuation of
its inferiority to the physical and mental; yet, surely,
invincible patience and heroic constancy in doing the
will of God—perfect honesty of purpose and purity of
desire—a heart that is proof against flatteries and
threats—a spirit of unfeigned humility, benevolence and
charity, are qualities not less worthy of our reverence
than that power of mind which can search out the mys-
teries of the stars, or pour forth strains of eloquence or
song. Dr. Paley has remarked, that it is one of the
proofs of the divine origin of the Gospel, that it chiefly


insists on the cultivation of an order of virtues which
had been least applauded by man, and in which man was
most deficient—of humility, meekness, patience—rather
than of those opposite virtues to which the active pxdn-
ciples in his nature would prompt him, and which have
ever been the chief objects of culture and admiration.
It equally proves the divinity of the Gospel, that the
ideal of greatness contained in it is of a different cha-
racter from that which chiefly awakens human enthu-
siasm. It is not one in which power and intellect prevail,
with just so much of virtue as shall make the picture
attractive, hut it is the'perfection of truth, and rectitude,
and love. Glorious as is the light of superhuman wis-
dom and might, in the character of Christ, it is quenched
in the brighter lustre of His ineffable and beaming good-
ness. We think of Wellington as the great and wise
warrior; of Shakespeare , as the great and gifted poet; of
Newton, as the great and instinctive philosopher ; but,
when the Christian thinks of Christ, though he knows
that He is possessed of immeasurably greater resources
than they, yet his first, last thought of Him is, He is
the Good ; and we all feel that, to be like Him, is to be
both good and great.
Now, though we cannot affirm of any man absolute good-
ness, or claim for him moral beauty without defect, and
purity of character spotless, yet Divine Wisdom says of
Barnabas, and with confidence we say of Mr. Fletcher,
“ He was a good man and we use this phrase of him as
it is used of Barnabas —to designate the highest style of
man, and the noblest memorial we can place upon his


tomb. Four things are deserving of special note, in rela-
tion to the personal character of Barnabas, which find
singular exemplification in the life of Mr. Fletcher.
Indeed, I have long thought that the one might have
been taken as the type of the other. First, His
generosity, “ Having land, he sold it, and brought the
money, and laid it at the Apostles’ feet,” to meet the
exigency of the poor saints. Among many acts of
voluntary benevolence, this one is singled out, either
because its amount was large, or as being the act of
one well known and eminently useful, an incident
helping to make up the sum of his character. He thus
showed that his religion had power. Secondly, His
candour is recorded. When Saul was converted, and
essayed to join himself to the disciples, they were sus-
picious, and shunned him; then it was Barnabas took
him by the hand, and brought him to the Apostles, and
gave evidence that he was a true convert and a zealous
Christian. So, also, the incident before us is very beauti-
ful. It is supposed that he Avas sent to Antioch to
correct and to regulate, rather than to foster the innova-
tion ; but with true Christian candour he suav in the
admission of the Gentiles to the church the hand of
God, and instead of doubting the reality of their con-
version, or finding fault because the door was opened to
admit them to the fold, he glorified the grace of God
in them. Thirdly, His devotion. He was a humble,
holy man. I understand the first clause of this verse as
a parenthesis, thrown in to assign a reason why he Avas
glad. The display of divine grace aAvakened his joy,


because he was a good man. He had sympathy with
the Saviour in His designs of love. His devotedness of
spirit prepared him to welcome the Gentile converts, for
he saw in them the promise of further triumphs to the
Gospel, and the fulfilment of the design for which
Christ had died. Fourthly, His amiability maybe noticed.
Every particular of the narrative suggests that he was
free from envious malignity and censorious asperity.
He was amiable, perhaps, by natural disposition, cer-
tainly as a fruit of the Spirit. He was not the means
of effecting this work in Antioch, yet was he glad. Some
wither at others’ praise, and detract from good not
wrought by themselves. When he was satisfied that
what was going on in Antioch was a genuine product of
grace, feeling his need of assistance, and remembering
the strong character of his friend, whose vocation to this
particular task of instructing the Gentiles had been
miraculously declared, “ he departed to Tarsus to seek
Saul,” who recognised the voice of God in the words of
Barnabas, and the two friends travelled in company to
Antioch, How amiable does his conduct here appear!
He might have remained in Antioch, and have kept
control; but he joyfully calls in the assistance of one
whom he knew to be his superior in ability, and wis-
dom, and force, as well as in the divine purpose; and
henceforth Paul assumes the lead, but Barnabas could
say rejoicingly, “He must increase.” Generosity, can-
dour, devotion, and amiability , marked Mr. Fletcher s life,
A sound, and clear judgment —a kind and gentle dispo-
sition—a readiness to admit evidence, and to accord


merited praise,—and a heart steadfast with God, and that
could rejoice in others’ good, distinguished him. He
had the open eye, the ingenuous mind, the liberal hand,
and he walked with God. “He *vas a good man.”
11. His ministerial qualifications. “He was full of the
Holy Ghost and of faith.” The manifested efficacy of
the Gospel upon the Gentiles made Barnabas glad,
because he was a good man ; and the phrase, “ full of
the Holy Ghost and of faith,” assigns the reason for
his diligence and zeal in preaching; “ Exhorting them
all that with pui’pose of heart they should cleave unto
the Lord.” His ministerial fitness grew out of his per-
sonal excellences and gracious spiritual character. As a
private Christian, his name was Joses or Joseph; but
when, by the exercise of spiritual gifts and the zealous
consecration of his natural powers to public usefulness,
his divine call to the ministry became apparent, he was
distinguished, not by an ordinary surname, hut by one
that seems to refer to his special endowments. The
Apostles surnamed him Barnabas. The precise meaning
of the name has not been clearly ascertained. It is
assumed to denote a son of prophecy or inspiration, and as
one important function of the New Testament inspired
teachers was persuasive exhortation, as a means of en-
forcing doctrinal truth, it seems likely that the Greek
translation of the name has the primary sense of exhor-
tation rather than its secondary of consolation; and it
thus describes him as a zealous and successful preacher,
which agrees well with what we read of him afterwards.
“He was full of the Holy Ghost,” the immediate


reference of which language is not to the ordinary work-
ing of that divine agent in the souls of men, renewing
and purifying their hearts, but that he was an inspired
teacher, endowed with miraculous gifts, and eminently
under the promptings and teachings of the Spirit. He
was a holy man of God, and was divinely taught, con-
trolled, and qualified for special missionary service.
The extraordinary gifts of the Holy Spirit were conferred
upon the Apostles and early teachers of the Christian
Church, in attestation of the divine commission, in the
absence of other criteria, for the conviction of unbe-
lievers, and for the purpose of qualifying them for the
performance of extraordinary services in the cause of
Christ. They were designed to prove the celestial
origin of the Christian faith to those foreigners under
whose notice it was brought; but which, not being
required after the general diffusion of the Gospel and
the complete exhibition of its evidences, gradually ceased.
They were special endowments for a special purpose, and
having fulfilled their design, they passed away. There
were diversities of gifts— ** To one was given by the
Spirit the word of wisdom —to another faith —to another
the working of miracles —to another prophecybut,
gradually, prophecies failed, tongues ceased, and know-
ledge vanished away ; but faith, hope, and love, perma-
nent graces of Christian character, remained, and con-
tinue to be exercised by all who have received the love of
the truth. Inspiration, with its concomitant gifts, dis-
appeared at an early period, because no longer necessary,
their several uses being supplied by written testimony,


and the ever accumulating proofs derived from the
growth of Christianity and its transforming effects upon
the nations. “ Full of the Holy Ghost and of faith."
As we seek a special meaning for the first part of this
phrase, so we understandby faith here, not the means by
which a sinner is justified, but the principle that appro-
priates all truth, and brings the soul into harmony with
it. Having this, while resting upon Christ and rejoicing
in a personal salvation, he entered into the divine plan in
the calling of the Gentiles, and anticipated the fulfilment
of the purpose for which Christ had died, —that the ends
of the earth should see His salvation. But more than this;
he was a son of prophecy, or inspiration, and had faith, in
the sense of its being a special, supernatural endowment.
The Charismata of the early Christian church were of
three orders, each of which comprehended under it one
or more specific differences, wisdom, faith, tongues. I
cannot stay to explain these; but of the second class,
four are ranged under the general head of faith, viz.,—
“gifts of healing,” “working of miracles,” “prophecy,”
“ discerning of spirits.” Faith, itself a miraculous en-
dowment, was the fundamental principle by which these
other endowments were called into exercise. "Without it,
no miraculous cure could be wrought, no supernatural
effects produced, no prediction uttered, no discernment
of character be made. The faith here intended is to be
understood, therefore, as not that of doctrines, nor
merely a firm confidence in the truth of the Christian
religion ; hut an immediate impulse of the Divine Spirit,
that He would enable His servants to perform acts of a


supernatural character for the good of man and to
advance the cause of Christian truth. It is of this
peculiar kind of faith our Lord speaks when He says
(Mark xi. 23) —“ Have faith in God. For verily I say
unto you, that whosoever shall say unto this mountain,
Be thou removed, and be thou cast into the sea; and
shall not doubt in his heart, but shall believe that those
things which he saith shall come to pass, he shall have
whatsoever he saith.” It is the “same faith” the Apostle
has in view when he says, in 1 Cor. xiii. 2, “ If I have
all faith, so that I could remove mountains.” This is
evident, not only because he classes it with prophecy
and the gift of supernatural knowledge, hut from the
effects that were to follow.
Our Lord promised (Mark xvi. 17), “ These signs
shall follow them that believe. In my name shall they
cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues.”
Believing is to be taken in the sense of exercising the
faith of miracles. This is evident both from the nature
of the subject, and from the well-known fact that the
endowments here promised were not the heritage of all
who embraced the Gospel, but of a selected number, by
the sovereign appointment of God. Thus endued with
the Spirit, confiding in God, and resting not in his own
sufficiency of wisdom or skill, but on divine strength
and the miraculous power of the Holy Ghost to be
exerted through him, he went forth on his mission,
preaching and teaching the Gospel of the kingdom, and
the hand of the Lord was with him and gave success.
Firmly assured that Christianity was divine, deeply


experienced in its preciousness and value, faith, as a
principle and a power, dwelt in him, and its fruits
abounded. The supernatural gifts conferred upon the
early church gradually ceased, just as the persons on
whom they had been conferred by the Apostles were
gradually removed by death, and when the great
ends for which they had been imparted had been
attained. Visible interpositions in favour of Chris-
tianity on the part of its Divine Author, in attestation of
its truth, are now superseded; because the collection of
the books of the New Testament into one whole, with
the collateral testimony of the effects of the Gospel and
the fulfilment of prophecy, is sufficient to establish its
truth, and to convince all honest inquirers that it is from
God. The ministry of the Gospel, carried on by holy
men of God, moved by the Holy Ghost to undertake and
to fulfil its duties, aided by natural gifts, acquired
learning, and gracious affections, remains and will
remain till the end of time—“ till we all come in the
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of
God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the
statureofthe fulness of Christ.” That Christian ministers
should be Christian men, men of God, imbued with the
influences of the Spirit, producing zeal, love, self-denial,
a readiness to spend and be spent in the service of
Christ, for the good of men, cannot be doubted; nor
how important it is, they should have faith in their work,
and the sufficiency of the grace of Christ to sustain them,
and to convert and sanctify their hearers.
We claim for them no segregation from their fellow


men, and no exemption from ordinary human infirmities,
prejudices, and imperfections. We believe nothing sacer-
dotal belongs to the Christian ministry. It is a ministry
of truth not of rites, of Christian doctrines not of priestly
functions, and therefore, while we denounce and repu-
diate all notions of the successional and sacramentarian,
we do claim for them to he men divinely impelled and
controlled ; of more than ordinary piety and devotedness;
sensitive to divine suggestions, yielding readily to
gracious promptings, and responsive ever to the love of
Christ, and His claims upon their generous service and
self-sacrifice. Having faith in their work, as of God and
good for men, they separate themselves from the busi-
ness of life and the worldly profit of commerce and
science, to intermeddle with all divine wisdom, and
they strive for the conversion and salvation of their
fellows ; the hunger of their souls finding relief to its
cravings only as they see Christ begotten in the souls of
them for whom He died ; and we claim for them to be
“ esteemed very highly in love for their work’s sake.”
Sincerely devoted to Christ, the making full proof of
our ministry in the saving of souls should be the ruling
passion of our life—the end of toil —the aim of our
ministry, and we should feel we have missed our mark
if this end he not attained ; for this we are to travail in
birth, to study, preach, pray, to instruct, exhort, and
persuade men, “ warning and teaching them in all wis-
dom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ
Jesus.” Thus did Barnabas, because he was a man full
of the Holy Ghost and of faith.


Of Mr. Fletcher’s excellent qualifications for the
ministry I need hardly say anything. You knew him
well. Early discipled to the faith of Christ, and made
the subject of divine renewing grace, he consecrated
himself to the work of the Gospel ministry. Endowed
with a good natural understanding, and adorned with a
meek, modest, and amiable disposition, he acquired
facility of utterance by speaking among other young
men, members of a class meeting for mutual profit, in a
chapel vestry, in Newcastle-upon-Tyne, his native town,
of whom several entered the ministry—Mr. Binney being
one, Mr. Robson, missionary in South Africa, another.
At about nineteen years of age he proceeded to study in
Rotherham Academy, where he remained four years, and
was then commended to the grace of God for the minis-
try, which he fulfilled at Darwen, Lancashire, for the
space of eight years ; thence in 1831 he removed to
Manchester, to take the oversight of the church long
ministered to by the venerable William Roby, and con-
tinued in the efficient discharge of his trust till he heard
the voice of God addressed to him through the Colonial
Missionary Society in July, 1853, directing him to this
colony. He was of studious habits, and loved literature.
His knowledge was thorough, and extended to many
things. He was a solid and judicious divine, and had
a clear apprehension of the truth of God as a whole.
His mind was logical, and he was most perspicuous as a
speaker. The didactic element was strong in him, and
he sought to move the affections through the under-
standing, His piety was serene and deep, unosten-


tatious and retiring. He wrought in private and his
voice was seldom heard in the streets, yet did he never
shun any post of duty though it might he irksome ; and
notwithstanding his natural disposition to quiet thought-
fulness, he was ever found in the front rank of all
aggressive efforts to promote the kingdom of Christ. He
had a sound judgment and a tender heart, was a prudent
I
counsellor, and knew how to comfort them that were
cast down. He was a wise teacher, and sought out
acceptable words. He was zealous as a servant of Christ,
and his labour was not in vain in the Lord. He was a
spiritual man and sought spiritual results. His motives
were Christian, and his eye was single to the glory of God:
and that he was a man of faith, looking far on and anticipa-
ting ultimate results, his coming to this country was proof.
And now his work is done. He rests from his toils. The
approving voice of his Master has called him to his reward,
and being dead he yet speaketh. He inherits the promises,
and we are called upon tofollowhim as he followed Christ.
-111. His public usefulness. “ And much people was
added unto the Lord.” Of the public usefulness of
Barnabas, the evangelical history contains many delightful
intimations. It is generally supposed he was one of
the seventy chosen by the Saviour, and sent forth to
preach. He it was who introduced Paul to the Apos-
tles, and obtained for him recognition in the church as an
Apostle. Five years after that event, the church at
Jerusalem, being informed of the wonderful work of
gi'ace in Antioch, selected him to travel thither. He
beheld with joy the fact, that unto the Gentiles God had


granted repentance unto life ; and he laboured to build
them up in the faith. Abundant success crowned his
efforts; but as the work grew beyond his strength (and
probably his mental culture did not qualify him for the
contest with the heathen philosophers of the city), he
went to Tarsus to seek Saul, who, however he may have
been employed since his conversion, was pre-eminently
skilled in dialectics, was zealous in the study of philo-
sophy, was a student of Gentile literature, and had made
himself acquainted with their opinions and prejudices.
At Tarsus, we may he sure, he would have frequent dis-
putes with the learned men of the place, and argue with
them on their own ground, as afterwards in the “ market
at Athens,” with “ the Epicureans and the Stoics.” And
thus he was preparing for the work getting ready for
him at Antioch. It was an eventful day when they met.
All that they had hoped for, and perhaps more than they
had thought possible, when they had last met in Jeru-
salem, had been accomplished. The door of faith had
been opened to the Gentiles, Barnabas had seen the
grace of God in heathens who had been carried away
unto dumb idols; and, in connexion with his own
efforts, a great multitude had been added to the Lord.
In haste they journey, for both are eager to the work,
and for two years, interrupted only by a brief visit to
Jerusalem to convey alms to the poor saints, they jointly
labour and convert great numbers, teaching and building
up in the faith those who had joined themselves to the
ever-increasing church. It seems probable that Barnabas
was the chief pastor of the church at Antioch—he be-


longed to the rank of prophets —men who enjoyed a gift
of exhorting with a peculiar force of inspiration—and
Saul to that of teachers —which is in keeping with the
inferiority of the latter which had hitherto been ob-
served. But now, a momentous change is about to take
place in the work to which they were henceforth to
devote themselves, and a change also takes place in the
relative positions of the agents themselves. Hitherto
Barnabas, as the elder man and most experienced Chris-
tian and teacher, had taken the lead*; now, with the
change of service, the younger and more ardent Paul,
gifted with irrepressible energy, burning zeal, and
boundless resources, gradually assumes the prominent
place. “ The Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas
and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them.”
With ready zeal and instant despatch the church obeys
the mandate, and the men as readily gird themselves to
their arduous mission. “ And when they had fasted and
prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them
away,” and their missionary travels began. Thus from
Antioch our religion came—thence its first missionaries
sailed. There it took root and grew and overspread
the world. And now, what Jerusalem was to the Jew,
and Peter to the Jewish Christian, all that is Antioch to
us who were Gentiles, and Barnabas and Saul to those
who have received the faith through their preaching and
toil.
Of Mr. Fletcher’s public usefulness I could say much.
The direct influence and effect of his ministry was con-
siderable the indirect and associated was perhaps


greater. It is often given to many, especially in this
age of division of labour and conjoined efforts, to have a
kind of a secondary parentage in the salvation of souls.
As the minister and pastor of a large church and con-
gregation in Manchester for twenty-two years, his words
fed many, and several hundreds were joined to the
fellowship of the saints. The Sunday school grew in
efficiency and numbers, till nearly 1200 scholars were at
one time being taught the right way of the Lord. Several
godly youths went forth from the bosom of the church,
and from his personal instructions, to the work of the
ministry in England, in the colonies, and in heathen
lands, among these, his own son, named after his sainted
predecessor; Mr. Howe, of Tahiti; Mr. Eoyle, Aitutaki;
Mr. Hamer, pastor of a church in Auckland, N.Z., and
other holy men and women, that counted not their lives
dear unto them that they might testify the Gospel of the
grace of God. In conjunction with Dr. Raffles and Mr.
George Hadfield, M.P. for Sheffield, he was chiefly
instrumental in establishing the Lancashire Independent
College, one of the noblest in England. For many years
he was one of the secretaries of the local Bible Society,
which sent forth many thousands of the Word of God.
He was also co-secretary to the Lancashire Union, a
valuable Society to evangelize that great county, and its
rapidly multiplying population. He was one of the secre-
taries of the Evangelical Alliance, a brotherhood which
had great attraction for his generous and catholic spirit.
From his church, hundreds of pounds were annually sent
to sustain the Manchester City Mission and other Chris-


tian agencies ; but to him and to his people, the London
Missionary Society was ever most dear, and whilst they
sent several men into the field of the world—“their
messengers and the glory of Christ”—they year by year
gave not less than £6OO to its funds. In short, though
a quiet, calm man, retiring, meek, and willing to be
unseen and unheard, he was yet through the resistless,
mighty working of his piety, ever in the forefront, or
where real work was to be done. Whoever might appear
on a field day, or rejoice in an accomplished good, he
had prepared for the event and had toiled to make ready.
His pen was that of a ready writer. He was efficient on
committees, and never spared personal effort and ex-
hausting toil. Of his life in this colony I need not
speak. You will readily feel that the change from
Lancashire to Victoria, and from his crowded schools
and large congregation, to the quiet and smallness of
this sphere, was very great, but it suited his spirit, was
grateful to his waning energies, and was made in
obedience to what he regarded as a divine call, and in
the spirit of faith. He looked on—he saw the rising
splendour of this cluster of colonies, and to be at the
beginning of things, to foster a Christian literature, to
found a church, to begin the work of training a ministry,
was to him compensation enough for all he left, and he
sacrificed something to come and dwell and die in this
land. He knew that his eye would not rest on the
accomplished work, but he knew that what he did would
not die but grow, and that in due time a glorious harvest
would be reaped; and this to him was enough: and


therefore, when the summons came, he calmly put his
house in order, adjusted his affairs, and then lay down to
die, his work done, his judgment with his Lord, and his
soul reposing in perfect peace upon the promise and
grace of Christ. He is no longer with us, for God has
taken him. We mourn for him as dead, but he has
entered into the joy of his Lord. Holy and useful was
his life. Holy and peaceful was his end. Our brother
sleepeth. Be ye also ready, as he was, to meet your Lord.
Set thine house in order, for thou too must die.


APPENDIX.
OBITUARY.
On Sabbath evening last, at eleven o’clock, God called to
his rest the Rev. Richard Fletcher. He died at St. Kilda, at
his residence under the shadow of the church, and in the
bosom of his family. He died as man should die, not worn
with disease, nor in the flower of youth, but because the
physical frame became too weak to support the energy of life
any longer. It was not given him to reach the allotted period
of threescore years and ten, but yet he died full of days at the
ripe age of sixty-one. We had hoped God would have spared
him yet longer, and he had hoped so too, but God thought
otherwise. He had higher work for him to do in the world of
light, and so He called him away from this sphere of labour to
enter upon a better. It was God’s will, and God’s will must
be done. We meanwhile look up to God and say, “ Lord,
increase our faith.” He who has gone died in the calmest
faith. He did trust in God. Without a murmur he gave into
his Master’s hands the work that he had already wrought, and
the work that he yet hoped to do. “ I leave it to God,” he
said, and then he died.
Yet, if we measure life by deeds not words, this life was a
long one. During forty-two years did Mr. Fletcher stand


forth as a preacher of the Gospel. His earliest and his latest
efforts in life were devoted to the service of his Master, and in
that service he counted nothing dear unto him, and no self-
sacrifice too great. From the beginning to the end of that
long career he was characterised by one motive and only one,
and that was the desire to work out the purity, and forward
the progress of the church of Christ. This desire burned in
his soul with the steady determined flame of an absorbing
sacred passion. It was the spring of all his thoughts, it con-
trolled his actions, it prompted him to meet difficulties without
any fear, and when in the midst of them it enabled him to
triumph over them. His was the energy of a quiet strong
purpose, given by God, and kept active by prayer.
Before he came to this colony he was pastor of a large and
useful church in the city of Manchester. He occupied the
position of minister of Grosvenor-street Chapel in that city for
twenty-two years, during which period the blessing of God
rested abundantly upon him and his ministry. Numerous
conversions testified to the evangelical earnestness of his pas-
toral career, and the love of a prosperous and peaceful church
rendered a period of hard service a time of great happiness.
During that portion of his life he was ready for every good
public work, —occupying the office of secretary to many of the
leading benevolent movements of the day, especially the Bible
Society and the County Union; but his especial object of care,
beyond his own church, was the Lancashire Independent
College. He always had a deep interest in the work of train-
ing young men for the ministry, and laboured faithfully and
diligently in this cause in every portion of his life. The
establishment of the college near Manchester was a duty on
which, along with other like-hearted labourers, he had set his
mind, and which he had the pleasure of seeing brought to a
satisfactory result.* This same deep interest in the rising
• We may mention likewise that from its commencement until the time of
his leaving England he performed the duties of college secretary, which
were to him a constant pleasure.


ministry led him himself to form private classes of young
men to prepare themselves for college tuition, and the results
are seen in the lives of many now filling useful stations in the
ministry and the mission fields.
In the year 1853, the Colonial Missionary Society wrote to
him asking him to come out to Victoria, to endeavour there to
carry on the work of doing good. These colonies were then
in the midst of the tumult of the gold discoveries, and it was
felt necessary that something should he done to overtake the
spiritual wants of the population. It was seen that Australia
was destined to advance to national greatness, and that there-
fore it was all important that potent religious influences should
be brought to bear upon it in its infancy. To effect this work
the Colonial Missionary Society invited Mr. Fletcher, and his
friend, the Rev. J. L. Poore, to emigrate to Victoria. They
arrived in March, 1854, in company with the Rev. E. Day,
now settled at Castlemaine. Among other works which it was
hoped they would accomplish was the foundation of a college.
Mr. Fletcher’s long experience in reference to the education of
ministers awoke the expectation that God would allow him,
at all events, to see this scheme in a fair way for accom-
plishment.
His career as a pastor and public man among us is well
known, and on that we need not dwell. He lived at peace
with all men, the friend of all who knew him, the gentle, wise
comforter, and the faithful preacher. During his pastoral
labours at St. Kilda his favourite project was still before him.
He knew that in the course of a few years his life on earth
would end, and therefore he was anxious to make a beginning,
however humble. Several young men offered themselves from
time to time for the work of the ministry. He was appointed
by the Congregational Union of Victoria tutor to any such
candidates for the pastoral office. The result of his labours is
seen in the fact that two young men are now labouring as
ministers in this colony, who have been under his tuition.
As the future history of this colony develops itself it will ever


be an honour to our dear friend to be remembered as the first,
in connexion with the Congregational churches, who gave
himself to the apostolic work of “ choosing out holy men to
the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of
Christ.” To carry out this object more fully was the purpose
of a voyage to England, which he contemplated taking this
summer. An appeal to the co-operation and liberality of the
Christian friends in Australia being cordially met, he trusted
that he should be able to awaken a similar lively interest in
the work among the churches of Britain. To accomplish this
he made all arrangements for going to England in November
last. He told his people he would be absent from them for
twelve months, and preached a farewell sermon to them, before
his departure, on the 6th of October. In the morning his
subject was John’s vision of the great multitude of those who
had washed their robes and made them white in the blood of
the Lamb (Rev. vii. 14, 15); and in the evening, 2 Cor. xiii.
11, “ Finally, brethren, farewell. Be perfect, of good comfort,
be of one mind, live in peace ; and the God of love and peace
shall be with you.” It proved, however, to be his farewell
before his flight to the world of glory. He felt his powers
of life waning previous to this time, and was all the more
eager to do his Master’s work ere “ the night came when
no man can work.” But God said “no.” He began to grow
much weaker, and his voyage was postponed for a month.
He was still full of high expectations of years of service in his
cherished work, but his continuing weakness began to arouse
fears in his mind that his day in the vineyard was nearing the
twelfth hour, when the Master would come and reckon with
him. He gave up all public services. The last occasion on
which he preached was on Sunday, October 20th, in the
Congregational Church at Kew, when his text was Luke ix.
57—62.
Not long after that he began to apprehend that the work was
not to be his. The dark cloud of death hovered over his
prospect, yet it was not gloomy. His day of toil was closing,


but his spirit, disappointed in its hope of labour, found rest in
the land of Beulah. Whatever shade of a murmur came over
him was quickly chased away by the light of faith. Calmly
and submissively he saw his disappointment and rose above it,
with the strong pure joy of one who, having fought the
good fight, is looking forward to the crown of righteousness.-
It was a hard trial trial, hut he bore it in faith. Often he com-
pared his experience to that of the holy king of Israel who
wished to build the temple in Jerusalem, but who left his work
to his successor. Again and again he quoted the passage:
“As for me, it was in my mind to build an house unto the
name of the Lord my God; but the word of the Lord came
unto me, saying —Thou shalt not build an house unto my
name.” Daring this period of his illness he seemed to be
full of the light of heaven. He lived in an atmosphere
of prayer. He seemed ever with God. His mind was
unclouded, his faculties unimpaired, and over all was spread
the calm joy of that walk of the redeemed when they are
coming to Zion with songs and everlasting joy upon their
heads, and sorrow and sighing are about to flee away.
Over such, death hath no power. It is to them the Father’s
kindly message, saying, “ Come unto me.” Thus gently weaned
from the earth and drawn in heart heavenwards, the days went
by, and after a while his friends saw that he was not long to be
with them. He sank day after day, till all hope was gone.
They were sad—he was calm. “ If,” he said, thinking of old
Matthew Henry, “by the lifting of my finger I could decide
for myself whether I should live or die, I would refuse to do it,
and say, ‘ Not my will but thine be done.’ ” And on another
occasion he gave vent to his feelings by uttering twice the
words “ Calm as a lake”—“ calm as a lake.” “ His peace flowed
as a river.” On being asked again if his soul truly rested in hope
in Jesus, he answered “ Perfect peace.” Thus the current of his
feelings was unruffled even in the hour of the tempest; but the
real reason of his calmness was his full assurance of his personal
acceptance in Christ. He clung to the cross. When almost


deprived of the power of utterance he emphatically said (the
first part of the sentence being lost) “ and me, too, such a
sinner;” and previously he had expressed a hope that his
death might be a testimony to the consoling power of the
doctrine of the atonement of Jesus, and that he might thus be
useful to his children and friends in pointing them to the dying
Lamb of God as their only hope of salvation.
During the last ten days of his life articulation was very
difficult. He spoke little, and that little was generally incom-
prehensible. Only fragments of sentences or phrases of texts
of Scripture could he caught up by the attentive ears of those
so anxious to look within and behold his heart, but they always
betokened the same cloudless faith. Not a single doubt or
fear ever appeared to cross the prospect. It was as if the words
of the Apostle, which he more than once tried to utter, were the
fitting expression of his inner life. “ I know in whom I have
believed, and that He is able to keep that which I have com-
mitted to Him until that day;” or another saying which broke
from him, unlooked for, in the silence of night, “ Underneath
me are the everlasting arms.”
During last week he remained in the same passive state,
with little change as day after day brought him nearer the end.
But on Sunday, at noon, a visible alteration came over him.
For the first time he complained of pain, and seemed much
distressed. The beginning of the end had come. In this state
he passed through the closing hours of his last Sabbath, till
about half-past ten, when he became perfectly calm and still.
The end was come. His family were called to his bedside.
Around the dying father were gathered seven of his sons and
daughters, and his now widowed partner. His breathing became
heavy and loud, and longer and longer intervals intervened
between the inspirations, till at last the breath came not again.
His spirit was fled to God. “ God’s finger touched him and
he slept.”
We may mention, in conclusion, and as an appendix to this
rapid notice, that when the Congregational churches of Victoria


formed the Union and Mission which was constituted in 1860,
that Mr. Fletcher was appointed to the office of the first chair-
man. He held that post for the usual period of twelve months.
In view of his contemplated departure for Europe, the Executive
of the Union agreed upon presenting him with an address,
expressive at once of their sympathy and confidence, and
commending him to the churches of Britain. It ■ was as
follows:
“ The Executive Committee of the Congregational Union and
Mission of Victoria to the Rev. Richard Fletcher:—
“ Honoured Brother, —We, the members of the above-named
Committee, being aware of your contemplated visit to Britain,
feel that we should be wanting, not only in courtesy hut in
duty, were we to allow you to leave the colony without our
embracing the opportunity, so as to give expression to the
strong feeling, not only of confidence but of affection, with
which we all regard you.
“We shall be losers by your absence. We shall miss what
we have learned to value —the wisdom and forethought which
your large and varied experience and observation in the father-
land have secured you. We have, on many occasions, since
the formation of our Union and Mission, felt the value of your
conciliatory spirit and judicious counsels, while, last year, we
were specially benefited by your presidency at our various
meetings. Nor do we forget your labour of love, in assisting
and directing in their studies those young men who seemed
divinely called to ministerial labour, and were anxious to
improve their qualifications for the work.
“ We regret even the temporary separation which impends;
but trust that your visit to our much-loved fatherland will he
productive of a large amount of good, not only to you and
those endeared by past associations and friendships, but to this
colony and to the churches here planted, and particularly to
those holding our own church polity.
“ Permit us, while we indulge in the expression of our own


regrets, to express also our sympathy with you and yours in
the separation which your visit seems to involve. We hope
that your absence may not he a lengthened one, and trust that
God will care for and protect all — you, in your voyaging, and
travels, and labours; and those left behind, in the absence of
the husband and father.
“ We would not forget to express also our sympathy with the
church under your care, and the satisfaction which mingles
therewith, to believe that your pulpit will be worthily filled.
“ As a Committee, honoured brother, we now present to you
this expression of our regard, and hope that, if spared, a happy
re-union will soon be enjoyed.
“ Signed on behalf of the Committee,
“Thomas Odell, Chairman.”
CHARACTER.
Our obituary this week contains the honoured name of the
Rev. Richard Fletcher. The colony has lost, in him, one of
the most distinguished of its clergy, and the Congregational
body a venerable and much-loved pastor and father in Christ.
The long funeral cortege which passed through Melbourne,
the sorrowful crowd who stood around his tomb on Wednesday,
bore silent testimony to the respect in which he was held by
the whole church in this city.
His death was the fitting close to his life of calm earnestness
and fervent piety. His whole course has been marked by
blameless consistency and thorough consecration to the cause
of Christ. During the seven years of his residence and minis-
try at St. Kilda he has lived and grown in the respect and
confidence of all Christian citizens. An atmosphere of dignity


and kindliness was ever around him. He was a wise friend
and judicious counsellor; upright, shrewd, clear-sighted, and
firm; ever regarded by his brethren in the ministry, for his
age, experience, and practical wisdom, as a father—a true
Christian bishop —-primus inter pares. Yet, though thus
honoured and stamped, he was perfectly unassuming, gentle,
patient, possessing the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit.
Naturally retiring and unobtrusive, he was often called upon
to mediate and judge in matters of difficulty and dispute. He
was never rash or hasty. His words were weighty, and to the
point. He made no mistakes. He rarely made an enemy or
lost a friend. With a nature singularly calm, and balanced,
and undemonstrative, he yet had a warm place in the hearts
of all who knew him, which glowed with greater fervour as the
acquaintance ripened. The harmony, beauty, and congruity
of his character were not spoiled by the petty weaknesses and
crotchets which often, like “ dead flies," mar the perfume of
devoted life. A course so spotless and perfect hut rarely illus-
trates the blessed power of the religion of Christ. “ He walked
with God,” and showed, in all the relations and duties of life,
how ennobling and sanctified was that hidden and constant
fellowship. The verdict which always is pronounced by men,
before the grave closes upon one whom they have known—a
verdict generally true, and just, and searching, will, we are
certain, justify our estimate of his character, and redeem it
from the smallest tinge of flattery.
He is taken from us when, humanly speaking, his life was
of peculiar value. Honoured and useful as he had been, his
hopes and sanctified ambition fondly centred in a scheme of
still higher labour for the benefit of the Congregational churches
in these lands. Like the aloe, after long silent growth, the
flower of his life seemed to have shot up and to be just
bursting into beauty and fragrance! We mourn that in his
case the analogy was not completed—that he died just when
his plans were matured, and that the college which may yet be
opened, will not enjoy his presidential guidance and scholar-


ship and ripened thought. Very mysterious are the ways of
God. Our departed friend was about to revisit his former
church in Manchester to preach in connexion with its jubilee.
He had accepted proposals and laid his plans, intending to
make the visit subserve his design by collecting funds at
home in aid of the projected college in Melbourne. All his
arrangements were completed. He had set his house in order ;
preached farewell sermons to his people; his passage was
taken, and but for the New Zealand rush which diverted so
many vessels for a time from their usual course, he might
perhaps now be sleeping calmly in the deep sea, instead
of in the Melbourne Cemetery. "Man proposes, God dis-
poses.” Illness set in rather suddenly—great prostration and
languor, strength rapidly failed, and soon he was convinced
that he should never clasp hands with old friends in Man-
chester, but that he was bound to “ the silent land,” the
heavenly places, the Father’s house.
The last weeks of his life were a beautiful and striking com-
ment on the gracious promise—“ Thou shalt keep him in
perfect peace whose mind is stayed on thee, because he
trusteth in thee.” His entire resignation, and firm trust and
hope, it was very affecting and delightful to witness. No word
of murmur ever escaped his lips. No ripple of doubt or wave
of fear disturbed his soul. Submissive, patient, happy, he
calmly waited for the change. He had fought the good fight,
and finished his course, and kept the faith, and lay listening
on the edge of life, to catch his Master’s voice. At eventide it
was light, and on last Sabbath night, about eleven o’clock, be
passed away to “ the rest which remaineth unto the people of
God.”
“ Servant of Christ, well done!
Praise be thy new employ;
And while eternal ages ran,
Rest in thy Saviour’s joy.”
While we bow with resignation to the divine will, we cannot
but regret the removal from amongst us of this able and


honoured servantof Christ. That in closing one leaf of life, to
open another of even brighter promise, the volume should thus
suddenly have been finished, is to us full of sadness and
mystery. That the lamp we fondly hoped would have burned
to light many along the path into the colonial ministry has
flickered and gone out, we deeply mourn; and yet we must
submit. It is another lesson that God’s purposes do not
depend upon man for their accomplishment. He does not
need us. His state is kingly. The promise is sure. He must
reign.
Mr. Fletcher has bequeathed his college scheme to his
brethren as a sacred legacy to cherish and complete. He rests
from his labour and anxiety, but the plan must be carried out.
It is absolutely necessary that all the churches here should
now determine that a native ministry should be raised up, and
trained to carry on the cause of Christ in these lands. Might
we stretch across the oceans which divide us from the father-
land, and ask the many Congregational churches in Man-
chester, who will mourn with us the loss of our venerable
friend, to aid the churches of their order here in an earnest
effort to carry out his wish? This would be a fitting tribute
to his memory—a monument which would perpetuate his
spirit, and, under God’s blessing, accomplish the grand aim
and purpose of his colonial life.
It needs not that we should dwell upon the general lessons
in this bereavement. “ Mark the perfect man and behold the
upright; the end of that man is peace.” “Be ye also ready.”
“ Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might.”—
Melbourne Christian Times, Bee. 21, 1861.
'////>
/hi ft Lfo
G. UNWIN, GRESHAM STEAM PRESS, BUCKEERSBURY, E.C.
U CCtfif
