

SKETCH OF EXPLORATIONS
BY THE LATE
JOHN M'KINLAY.
1861-2






JOH N M'KINLAY.


SKETCH OF EXPLORATIONS
BY THE LATE
JOHN M‘KINLAY
IN THE
INTERIOR OF AUSTRALIA, 1861-2.
BEING A PAPER READ BEFORE THE COWAL SOCIETY, OCT. 28, 1878,
AND PUBLISHED AT THE REQUEST OF THE SOCIETY.
M'KINLAY'S BOAT ON THE ALLIGATOR RIVER
Any Profits arising from this Publication to he Devoted to the Relief of
Widows and Orphans connected with the Society,
GLASGOW:
AIRD & COGHILL, 263 ARGYLE STREET.
AND THROUGH ANY BOOKSELLER.
/£SV.




INTRODUCTION.
The following paper, giving a sketch of the life and travels of
an old school-fellow, was read before the Glasgow Cowal Society
on the 28th October, 1878, by Mr. Duncan Whyte, who, having
been for some years in the Colony, was personally cognizant of
Mr. M‘Kinlay’s labours.
The interest it awakened led to a unanimous request by
members of the Society that it should be printed and published.
This was agreed to on the understanding that any profits
accruing from the sale of the publication should be devoted for
the benefit of the widows and orphans connected with the
district of Cowal.
Having been President of the Society when this paper was
read, and being one of the old school-fellows spared to hear of the
distinguished position attained by our old friend, I have been
asked to preface it by a few words of inti'odnotion.
Among the reminiscences of youth, none are more cherished
than those of our school days. The old school of Dalinlongart
was the source of many such associations. Situated at the head
of the Holy Loch, near the fourth milestone from Dunoon, it
was the centre of attraction to all the families for miles around.
The secret of this lay in its being presided over by an able,
genial, and careful teacher, the late Mr. John Taylor, M.A.,
whose instructions in all branches were so thorough and
masterly that they came to be universally appreciated. The
school was the centre where the families of all classes met —
the children of the laird, the gentleman, the farmer, the cottar


■were all equally welcome, and received the same kind treat-
ment. All joined in the same studies, competed with each
other on common terms, and were equally well taught. It is
interesting to remember that in this unpretending side school
five languages were taught weekly in addition to the ordinary
branches of education. Many good scholars and good men
received their early training there, and look back to their school
days and their old teacher with gratitude and pleasure.
Among the numerous scholars who might be seen gathering
down from the glens, across from Strathechaig, and up along the
side of the Holy Loch, none were better known than the group
who came from Sandbank—the family of Mr. and Mrs. Dugald
M‘Kinlay, whose genial welcome and kind hospitality endeared
them to all the country side.
This family consisted of four sons and one daughter, of
whom only two survive—Dr. Ellar M‘K. M'Kinlay, of Dungog,
Maitland, Australia, and Mrs. Robert Hunter, of Broxwood
and Glasgow.
The subject of this sketch, John M'Kinlay, was the third
son of the family. From his early years he had the greatest
delight in roving about the hillsides with his gun, seeking for
a shot at whatever might come the way, or watching before
daybreak on the shores around the head of the Loch for wild
ducks or sea fowl of any kind. Early and late, by land or sea,
he followed his favourite sport, often, it must be allowed, to
the detriment of his lessons and attendance at school ; but his
ways were known, and he was a general favourite. Under
such a training how little could his parents, his teacher, and
class-mates, have imagined that the boy was being prepared
for such a future as a man.
The following sketch of his career will show this, and when
reading it, we can in some measure understand how the seed
sown in early life developed so remarkably into the prudence,


care, sagacity, foresight, and wonderful common-sense shown
in his life’s work. These are displayed in every entry in his
journal, from which only a few extracts are given in this paper.
Amidst all his dangers, anxieties, and trials, his “ pluck ” and
endurance are equally conspicuous—his self-possession and self-
trust never seem to have failed, under circumstances often the
most trying it is possible to imagine.
This paper cannot fail to be read with the deepest interest
by those of Mr. M‘Kinlay’s old school-fellows who survive,
and also by everyone who can truly estimate the indomitable
perseverance and thorough purpose of our countryman, whose
name will ever be remembered as one of the noble pioneers of
civilization in the new Southern World.
C. B.
Glasgow, January , 1881.


SKETCH MAP OF M‘KINLAY’S ROUTE.


EXPLORATIONS IN THE INTERIOR OF
AUSTRALIA BY JOHN M'KINLAY,
1861-62.
The subject of this narrative was a native of the District of
Cowal, Argylesbire. He was born at Sandbank, on the shore
of the Holy Loch, in the year 1819, being the third son of
Dugald M'Kinlay, Esq., merchant —the first feuar in the
village. Having received a good education under the tuition of
the late Mr. John Taylor, schoolmaster at Dalinlongart, John
M'Kinlay, along with his brother Alexander, emigrated to
New South Wales in the year 1835.
Before emigrating, Alexander spent some time in a mer-
chant’s office in Glasgow. John, a curly dark-haired, burly,
broad-shouldered boy, was fresh from school. The two young
men arrived in New South W^ales after a long and tedious
voyage of about eight months. Then, trade winds and the
currents of the trackless ocean were less known to mariners
than they are now, when voyages can be performed in seventy
to eighty days.
Our young countrymen had a fair prospect of success in
Australia on leaving home, having an uncle in the Colony,
the late Captain M‘Kellar, a retired shipmaster, who, early
in the history of the Colony, settled there as a squatter or
sheep farmer. He had large possessions and was likely then
to become very rich. However, by the time the young men
arrived, a crisis in trade had reversed the prospects of many


who thought themselves in a position of independence. Captain
M‘Rellar was fo Some extent affected by the crisis, but was
able to continue in possession of his lands.
How long the nephews remained with their uncle after their
arrival is now somewhat uncertain. John, being a strong
hardy youth, and from early boyhood passionately fond of his
gun, entered upon bush life—viz., shepherding or stock-
riding. After spending some years in pastoral pursuits, which
in a young Colony is anything but a comfortable life, he betook
himself to the occupation of exploring new stations towards
the interior, and hitherto unknown either to the Government
or to stockmen. For each station so explored he applied to
the Government for a squatting license, which, being got, he
advertised and sold the new station to the best advantage.
Each license cost ten pounds, and extended over an area of
land sufficient to pasture 4000 sheep. When the license to the
new Run was conveyed to the purchaser, saddling his horse
and providing himself with provisions for the journey, he started
afresh for the unknown and untrodden regions, and returned as
soon as possible to the Colonial Office with an application for
a license for another station, and so Mr. M‘Kinlay spent many
years in this dreary and solitary style of living. I have been
frequently told, by diggers, squatters, and shepherds in the
Colony, that Mr. M'Kinlay discovered more stations, and got
from the Government more squatting licenses than any dozen
men that ever entered the “ Bush.”
Having thus gained much experience as an explorer, he
became well known at each Colonial Office from Sydney in the
east, to Adelaide in the west. Accordingly, in the year 1861,
when the unfortunate expedition to the Gulf of Carpentaria
under the leadership of Robert O’Hara Burke was despaired of,
John M'Kinlay was chosen by the Government of South
Australia to take command of one of the four search parties


sent out by the various Colonies to seek for the long-lost
explorers.
A slight digression may here be excusable, while a brief
account is given of Burke’s expedition, and the melancholy
death of himself and so many of his party. When the
gold fields were becoming unprofitable to many, and all
the lands supposed to be suitable for the feeding of stock,
south of the Stony Region, being wholly taken up, the Govern-
ment of Victoria resolved on sending an exploring expedition
to the Gulf of Carpentaria to discover territory on which the
surplus population in the Colony could be settled, and where
the accumulated money then in their possession could find
profitable investment. In the summer of 1859, the desire
of discovering a practical route from Cooper’s Creek to
Carpentaria I’eceived a stimulus from the offer of a gentle-
man to contribute £lOOO towards the expense of the explora-
tion of Central Australia. Several public meetings were held,
and the sura of £2500 was raised by subscription, and Parlia-
ment voted a sum of £3OOO for the purchase of camels in
India.
Eventually the management of the enterprise was confided
to “ eighteen gentlemen, members of the Royal Society; Sir
William Stawell, Chief Justice of the Colony, being President.
Mr. Landells, who was sent to India for camels, having returned
safely, the expedition started from Melbourne on 20th August,
1860.”
Mr. Burke was appointed leader, Mr. Landells second in
command, W. J. Wills surveyor and astronomical observer,
Dr, Beckler medical officer and geologist, and Dr. Becker artist
and naturalist. When they set out, the party consisted of
fifteen men, supplied with every necessary calculated to secure
the success of the expedition.
“ On the 16th of October they arrived at Menindie, a town-


ship on the River Darling, 430 miles north of Melbourne, and
twenty days thereafter they arrived at Cooper’s Creek.”
Here five of the party remained with some camels and horses
and an ample supply of provisions, while seven stayed at
Menindie, with instructions to keep up communication with
each other, but not to leave for the south for four months at
the soonest, or till the return of Burke, Wills, King, and Gray,
who had left Cooper’s Creek for Carpentaria on the 16th of
previous December. Before the time specified had elapsed,
Dr. Becker and two others of their number had died of scurvy.
The remainder of the party becoming uneasy, and a misunder-
standing having taken place among them regarding Burke’s
instructions, and further, losing hope of his return, they left
on the 21st of April on their return to the south, but left
behind them at the depot a supply of provisions consisting
of flour 50 lbs., rice 20 lbs., meal 60 lbs., sugar 60 lbs., dried
meat 15 lbs.
Burke and his party had arrived at Carpentaria on the 20th
of E’ebruary, 1861, six months and four days after leaving
Melbourne, and got back to Cooper’s Creek on the 21st April,
Gray having died of exhaustion four days previously. Burke
and Wills survived till about the 29 th June, when both died
of starvation. Burke, when about to breathe his last, requested
King to leave his body unburied, with his pistol in his hand, so
that, when found by future explorers, his appearance might
testify that his life was lost in the cause of science and civiliza-
tion. How sad to relate that the depot party had only left
Cooper’s Creek seven hours before the arrival of Burke and his
party, famished and exhausted ! Had the depot party remained
but one day longer, the lives of Burke and Wills would have
been saved, as there remained at the depot in good order ten
horses and four camels, with ample provisions for the whole
party till they would arrive in the settled districts of the Colony.


John King, the solitary survivor of the party, was found by
Howitt* on the 15th of September, nearly thirteen months from
the date of their leaving Melbourne ; he was living on the
charity of the natives, and reduced to a skeleton ; his
clothes and shoes being worn out. He was so shrunk and
emaciated in appearance that he was scarcely recognisable as
belonging to the white-skinned race of humanity.
Long before the Cooper’s Creek party returned to the settled
districts with their melancholy tidings, the whole of the
Australian colonists had become painfully anxious about the
safety of the expedition, and search parties were fitted out and
despatched from each of the four Colonies. Mr. Howitt, with
a party from Melbourne, was sent direct on their track ; Mr.
Landsborough was sent from New South Wales in a north-west
direction; the steamer Victoria was sent from Rockhampton,
under the command of Captain Norman, along the east coast
and on to the Gulf of Carpentaria. Our countryman, Mr. John
M‘Kinlay, was appointed to be leader of the party sent by the
Government of South Australia; and my narrative will show
how fortunate they were in this selection.
On the 16th of August, 1861, Mr. M‘Kinlay started from
the town of Adelaide, having sent his party on the way several
days before. Their path was not along a toll-road, but through
an utterly unknown country.
On leaving Adelaide the search party consisted of ten white
men. Two natives were subsequently added, but they soon
after deserted. The stock of the expedition consisted of twenty-
six horses, eleven bullocks, four camels, and seventy sheep; a
spring-cart, which they afterwards made into a dray, and which
they were compelled to leave behind them on entering the
Stony Desert.
* Mr Howitt was the son of the well-known William and Mary
Howitt, the eminent authors.


Quoting from Mr. M‘Kinlay’s Journal, dated near Lake
Torrens;—
“ 28th September. —Weather very hot, and the bullocks very
troublesome, refusing to pull, and charging right and left. The
coupling of one of them gave way, and in an instant poor Peter
(a native) was tossed into the air by “ Bawley,” and as he des-
cended was caught again and tossed about on the ground. The
brute invariably stuck his horns into a large canteen Peter was
carrying, or he certainly would have been killed.”
“6th and. 7th October. —“Spelling” (resting) the camels and
bullocks, taking the shoes off the horses; the country soft, not
likely to need them for a time; they appear in good condition.”
“20th October. —Near Lake, latitude 27.40. —Abundance of
good water. Here we discovered the tracks of camels and
horses, and found the grave of a European rudely dug.”
“21st October. —Will spell the animals for a few days to
recruit their strength. Took Hodgkinson along to examine the
wrave. On removing the earth, we found close to the surface
the body of a European, in a flannel shirt with short sleeves,
a piece of the breast of which I have taken. The skull is
marked with slight sabre cuts, one over the right eye, the
other over the left temple.”
Then follows a description of the teeth, the length of his leg
and thigh-bone, &c., which were carefully replaced in the grave
and covered up.
“ Find a second grave, evidently dug with a spade or shovel,
and a lot of human hair of two colours, some of which I have
taken. I fancy the persons must have been murdered here,
but we found no remains save one little bone. The blackfellow
says they have been eaten and the bones burned, some of
which bones we have seen. No appearance on the trees of
bullet-marks as if a struggle had taken place.”
“ 22nd October. —A blackfellow made his appearance, but on
seeing us he fled at full speed. We went in pursuit, and
captured him. Our own blackfellow requested us to shoot him
at once, as he knew him to be one of the murderers of the
white men. He says that there is a gun or pistol in a creek at
some distance to the north, which we sent him to fetch.”


“ 23rd October. —The fellow we sent for the pistol arrived at
day-break with about forty others bearing torches and shields,
shouting and making a great noise, and endeavouring to sur-
round us. We threatened to shoot them unless they retired
but they were quite regardless. I ordered Hodgkinson and
Middleton to get their arms ready, and fire when desired.
Seeing we ourselves were to be butchered, I gave orders to fire,
but they refused to retire till we fired several rounds.
Some of them must have been hurt, but none were killed. I
still think the fellow • I sent for the pistol must have had a
hand in the murder, as I saw on his body several gun-shot
wounds. Inside the knee he is badly wounded. On his breast
some shot are still visible. He must have suffered much, but
is healing up.”
“ 25th October. —Have made up my mind to send a party to
Blenchwater in the settled districts with information regarding
the object of my search, a copy of my journal, and a tracing of
my route.”
“28th October. —Hodgkinson, Bell, Wylde, and Jack (a native)
are gone south, and instructed to bring up additional supplies,
such as flour, tea, sugar, and other etceteras that may be
required; also to procure a native that can speak the language
of the natives here, as those we have got do not know a word
of it. Strange to say, they are all circumcised,* and knock out
the two front teeth of the upper jaw.”
The following is the copy of letter buried at Lake Massacre :
“I arrived at this water on the 19th October, and by means
of a native guide discovered a European camp one mile north of
this flat. Near the camp were traces of horses and camels.
Hair apparently belonging to Mr. Wills, Gray, Burke, or King,
was picked up from the surface of a grave, dug with a spade.
Other less important traces also, such as a pannikin, oil-can,
saddle-stuffing, etc. Beware of the natives, upon whom we
had to fire. We fear that Burke and party are all killed and
eaten. John M‘K inlay.”
* From whom have they got the ordinance of circumcision ? Could it
be possible for any of the seed of Abraham to have found their way
here, after their disappearance from the parts of the earth known to
mankind ?


Here the leader remained till the return of Hodgkinson and
party, but not by any means in idleness. He is daily on
horseback, surveying the country towards all the points of the
compass, and the journal records a very minute description of
its appearance, whether flat or hilly, bare or timbered, its
streams, its lakes, etc.
11 9th November. —The leader is ill of dysentery, and his horse
very seedy.”
“ 21st November. —Hodgkinson and party have not returned
from the settled districts. From a long conversation I had
yesterday with a native I am led to believe that only one
European was murdered at Lake Chadibarrie. They (the
Europeans) repulsed the natives, killing some and wounding
others. They buried their own companion and marched south-
ward. But the blacks dug him up, cut up all the muscular
parts of his body, and feasted upon their revolting repast. So
minutely does this native know all their movements, that he
described to me the waters they passed, and their various
camps in this neighbourhood. I find it impossible to ascertain
how many moons have been since the attack at the Lake, but
it must be some considerable time, as the body I found was
perfectly decomposed, and the skull as bare of skin as if it had
lain in the grave for years.”
“ 28th November. —Heat 106 degrees at noon. Hodgkinson
and party have arrived, for which I am truly thankful. He
brought me some Adelaide papers and some Melbourne tele-
grams, in one of which is announced the rescue by Howitt ol
one of Burke’s party, viz., John King, so that I have been^ de-
ceived as to the appearance at Lake Chadibarrie (about 27 - 20
S. latitude) respecting the massacre of Europeans which must
have taken place there. By receipt of this information—and
that the whole of the lost party is accounted for—it renders
my journey to Cooper’s Creek useless for any purpose of relief.”
The instructions which M £ Kinlay had from the South
Australian Government were :—ln the event of his finding
the lost party, he was at once to return with them to the
settled districts, but, otherwise, to proceed first to the north


and west, and then to the west and south for the purpose of
exploration.
In pursuance of these instructions the party proceeded, about
the middle of December 1861, toward Mount Stewart, to the
north-west of Cooper’s Creek. They had first to cross the
Stony Desert, which Mr. M'Kinlay describes as a succession of
bronzed undulations —the hills evidently falling into decay.
Heavy floods have swept over them with such violence as to
wash down all the earth except occasional patches.
Having passed through the Stony Desert, the party came upon
a tract of dry country. They were, however, prevented from
getting to the westward by an enormous body of water coming
down from that direction. So rapidly was the country flooded,
that the party had a narrow escape from being all drowned,
having had frequently to swim from knoll to knoll, and to wade
through the water to higher ground eastward. The country to
westward was nearly all under water, only the tops of trees and
sandhills could be seen.
Mr. M‘Kinlay is of opinion that, if Leichhardt had camped
on the places to the west of these hills, during floods, nothing
could have saved him. So far were the party driven to the
east and north before being able to cross these waters, that
Mr. M'Kinlay resolved on proceeding to Carpentaria, in order
to replenish his stock of provisions, hoping to fall in with
H.M.C.S. Victoria which was sent thither to meet Burke’s
party. Several times on the journey Mr. M £ K.inlay crossed
the track of Burke and his party, but was unable to follow it
owing to the effects of recent heavy rains.
“29 th Nov. —Hodgkinson unwell; his illness is brought on by
a pummelling he got at the Burra from the camel Siva, who at
that time was inclined to be vicious.”
“ sth Dec. —Middleton, while attending to the camels, has
got his foot seriously injured, and is suffering much pain; will
have to camp with him. While in camp we discovered the
B


grave of Wills, also the grave of Burke, at a distance of two
miles south of the Creek. On a tree close by was marked
R. O’H. B.
21 | 9 1 61.
A. H.
which evidently means ‘ Robert O’Hara Burke, 21st Septem-
ber, 1861, A. Howitt.’ ”
COPY OF DOCUMENT LEFT AT COOPER’S CREEK,
DATED 7TH DEC., 1861.
“ To the Leader of the Party out for the remains of Burke
and Wills, but more especially to the Officer in chai'ge of the
Dep6t likely to be formed on this Creek :
“ Sir, —I beg to state that I had communication with Adelaide,
and received papers from thence intimating the relief of King,
the only survivor of the Melbourne and Gulf of Carpentaria
party, announcing that the Victorian Government were likely
to have the remains of the gentlemen removed from this creek
to Melbourne to receive a public burial, and a monument
erected to their memory j stating also their intention to estab-
lish a depot somewhere on this creek, to await the arrival of
one or other of the parties in search of the late Burke and
Wills from Rockhampton, the Albert, or the Gulf of Carpen-
taria. I beg to state that my party is situated 85 miles west
of this place ; and after my return thither, I will proceed north-
ward, and will ab every suitable camp bury documents convey-
ing all possible information to either of the parties, by which
means they will be put in possession of the facts as to the dis-
covery of the lost party, and they can return to the Albert or go
southward to Adelaide, and thereby avoid passing a summer in
this hot and disagreeable region. My course will intersect any
course the parties can take between Erie’s Creek and Burke’s
Depot on this creek. JoHN M‘Kinlay,
Leader of the S.A.B.R. Expedition
“ 17th December—Here the pole of the dray got broken,
which caused some delav. While the dray was being repaired,


Hodgkinson swam out, and is exploring the lake beside which
we are camped. When out about 300 yards he measured the
depth with a plumb-line, and found 10| feet deep—a body of
water not likely to become dry any season. Here one of the
bullocks got sun-struck, and was left behind. The beef was
useless for food, but the hide was preserved.”
Little does the leader imagine that this same hide is to be
used on a future occasion to make palatable soup made from
camel’s feet and tripe, which the party in their necessity were
obliged to use as food.
“ 21st December. —The camels and horses arrived at camp,
but the sheep and cart are behind. Sent two men in search of
them, who are obliged to pass the night in the desert, and arrive
at camp next morning without finding cart or sheep.”
“ 22nd December. —Cart and sheep arrive, and a day’s spell
is resolved on for the purpose of recruiting the cattle. Natives
are seen about the lake. Innumerable pelicans, ducks, gulls
and waders, cormorants, fish, and pigeons in abundance. Good
green grass, but no shade or protection from the extreme heat
of the sun. Unfortunately, here we got the thermometer broken,
so we cannot hereafter record the degrees of heat. The highest
recorded up to date is 158 degrees.”
“ 25th December. —Christmas day. Natives prowling about
camp in great numbers. Set up a rocket to scare them, which
exploded well, and had the desired effect. The black gentry are
off in mad career to their camp, but next day they come back
as if nothing had happened. Spelling to recruit the strength of
men and animals ; hope to make a good start to-morrow. Had
an excellent dinner of roast mutton and plum-pudding, and do
not envy anyone in the city of Adelaide.”
We may here observe that our countryman, at his Christmas
festival, fully displays the characteristics of the true Celt in his
indomitable perseverance and endurance, also in his happy
adaptation to his lot in circumstances not to be envied by any
one who values the comforts of home and of civilized society.
“ 28th December. —A large number of natives at our camp.
Distributed some trinkets amongst them. They are a splendid


set of people, and in excellent condition —much better than the
appearance of the country would warrant us to expect. Those
near our camp knock out the four front teeth of the upper
jaw, and are here in hundreds. Killed a sheep to jerk (sun
dry), for our journey to the east. They are all so fat that the
leanest had to be looked for, which does not speak badly for
the country.”
Although Mr, M'Kinlay describes particularly the natives
and their condition, he never fails to show them kindness,
keeping the “ black gentry,” as he calls them, at a respectful
distance. Of those with whom he was in conflict he remarks
that they were all circumcised , and that tribes at a distance
from each other speak different languages.
“ 7th January. —Natives very numerous. They chased our
bullocks and horses round the lake a distance of two miles.
We pursued them on horseback, but they soon disappeared,
and we got the cattle taken back. Most of their hobbles are
broken, and the horses are very excited, but the wary blacks
have disappeared and can nowhere be found.”
“ Bth February. —Thundering all round, and wind from all
points of the compass. Hoping there will be as much rain as
will enable us to start and push across the desert, as our provi-
sions are gradually getting less, and the ration is as low as I
can well make it. Flour reduced from 8 to 4 \ lbs. per man
weekly \ sugar from 2to 1| lbs.; tea from 4 to 3 ounces per
man ; plenty of good mutton, but 4|- lbs. flour is a scanty
allowance. Moreover the quality is bad, and the taste
wretchedly disagreeable, owing to naphtha or some such stuff
having been spilled upon it by the way.”
“Latitude 26T5.—Near the Camp, IJfth February , 1862. —
Passed the remains of Burke’s horse and saddle. Another of
our bullocks broke down, and one of our native servants took
French leave of us. The rain that has fallen is quite a God-
send both to our party and also to the natives, who are off to
the sandhills in search of lizards and other creepers which make
their escape thither for protection from floods, the approach
of which they seem to know instinctively. Another bullock
killed with sun-stroke. Heat very oppressive. Travelling


quite out of the question. The leader ill with dysentery. The
road very bad. Must leave cart with many sundries, which is
a pity.”
“ 17th February. —ln camp, very ill, but getting ready to
start to-morrow. Have got weighed to-day, and find I have
lost 14 lbs. from the violence of the attack. lam now exactly
12 stones, having lost 3 stones 12 lbs. since leaving Adelaide.
Still unwell, and Middleton very ill. Can scarcely crawl.”
“ 26th February. —One of the best bullocks has got disabled.
The weather is wet, so we cannot get its beef jerked. Travel-
ling does not give the sheep the slightest inconvenience. They
are as ready to start in the morning as the man that attends
them. No party should go exploring in summer without a
flock of sheep.”
The dog which Kirby brought from Adelaide got poisoned
soon after leaving; and it is therefore somewhat mysterious
how the sheep have been driven; but there is not a single
entry in the Journal complaining of their being troublesome to
drive.
“ 27th February. —Travelling with great difficulty, and every
prospect of our provisions getting short, otherwise we could
explore the country in this quarter thoroughly. Unless we
meet Captain Norman and the Victoria in the Gulf, we will be
obliged to live the most of our return journey on animal food.”
“ Ist March. —Heavy rain. The Creek is rising rapidly, at
the rate of five inches per hour; five feet deep at the shallowest
and quarter of a mile broad. The sheep are swimming splendidly.
Got to dry land. The camels very useful, their long legs pre-
venting our ammunition and perishable goods getting wet and
destroyed. They acted splendidly, and served our purpose as
well as if we had been supplied with boats. We are very for-
tunate in getting to this place. A day longer and we were all
washed away, or, quite as bad, perched on an island of sand,
with the animals around and nothing but starvation staring us
in the face.”
“ 3rd March. —One of the bullocks has got disabled. Had
him killed, and his beef jerked. Middleton still badly; his
disease was aggravated by having to swim in his clothes, and


remain wet for days in succession. It will be very sad if
we lose him, as he is an invaluable man in a party such as
this is.”
“ 6th March. —Weather clearing up. Got the bullock jerked.
Lots of bones and scraps, of which we will make soup. He
weighs 116 lbs. of beef besides bones and scraps.”
“ 11th March. —Another bullock knocked up and left; but
he may follow us to camp at night.”
“ 12th March. —One of the bullocks dropped down close by
the camp. Had him killed. The beef weighs 162 lbs. Hope
he may keep good, as we will need all the food we have.”
“Latitude 25-30. —Camp 17, 19 th March. —Very fine weather.
Grass luxuriant. Perfume from flowers quite refreshing.”
“21st March. —Bullocks and sheep not forward to-night.
Mosquitoes very bad. The most infernal night I ever passed.
Never slept a wink. Fires burning all round us. Oilskins and
blankets no protection from the brutes. The air seems full of
the little tormentors.”
Notwithstanding his tormentors, Mr. M‘Kinlay is charmed
with the aspect of the country. He names several places in
honour of parties for whom he had special regard,—such as
Devonport Creek, for George Devonport, Esq., Melbourne;
Brown’s Creek, Hamilton Range, Gordon Island, Mary’s Island,
Moses Island. Some of these names were for relatives and
friends in Scotland.
“ 13th April— Kirby by some mistake did not arrive here
to-night. Sent a party in search of him and found him some
miles away.”
“ 17th April. —Kirby and the sheep again lost.”
“ Latitude 22, Camp 40, 18 th April. —Middleton and Palmer
are off on horseback in search of them. The night very cold,
and the poor man has nothing wherewith to cover himself.”
The leader is sorely grieved for the loss of Kirby. He fears
that he will never see him again. He says :
“ It will be a very sad end of the poor man if he is not
found. A better man for his place could not possibly be had.
Just fancy the poor man getting lost between two and three


hundred, miles off the coast with twenty-three sheep, but no
matches wherewith to make a fire. If he is ever got he may
thank his Maker for his safety. The search party is still out
for Kirbv. We had nothing to eat since he got lost. I have
resolved on killing one of the four remaining bullocks. If
Kirby and the sheep are not found our prospects are anything
but bright in travelling to the G-ulf, thence to Port Denison
on horse-flesh provisions. I am very unwilling to kill them
except in extreme need. We cannot stay here more than a
week whether Kirby is found or not, as our provisions are
daily getting less. Our flour is now reserved in case of sick-
ness. We had some liver to-day for breakfast, and Middleton
and Palmer are off in search of Kirby; Bell has gone back
to our old camp to see if he returned thither when he lost
his way.”
The leader takes a different route and is overcome with
anxiety for poor Kirby (as he calls him). Not a probability of
his ever seeing one of his own colour again. Possibly killed and
eaten by the natives. Just at dusk Middleton rides up with
the joyful news that Kirby and the sheep are found. Bell
and Palmer remain with him to help him on with the sheep.
They arrive at camp at 11 p.m. How truly grateful all were
for his being found. The poor man said that he never expected
to see them again. Bell picked him up three miles south of the
last camp. He got quite bewildered while travelling in the
dark. When he arrived he was quite worn out, not for want of
food, but distress of mind and want of sleep. Kirby slept all
next day, and the beef was drying at the same time.
“ Latitude 2140.—Camp 41, 23rd April— The horses have
cone back on their old tracks. The two idiots sent after them
have returned to camp with part of them, afraid no doubt of
getting lost also.”
“ Latitude 21, Williams Creek. —Camp 44, 27th April.
To-night we will sleep on the sand in the bed of the Creek.
There must have been terrific floods here lately, rising forty
feet over our heads ; we see logs of timber, grass and rubbish
of all sorts left by it, trees torn up by the roots, others broken


twenty to thirty feet from the ground, which show the depth
and violence of the current.”
“ Latitude 20 , 30.—Camp 46, 29th April. —Blackfellows
burning grass in all directions. This is their mode of signalling
to each other the approach of a hostile tribe, or danger of any
kind. Killed three emus, weighing respectively 48, 33, and
31 lbs. This will save the killing of three sheep. The men all
got sick after eating emu, but I liked the fowl very well, and
it is to us a great acquisition.”
“ Latitude 19‘25.—Camp 51, May. —Our sheep got out
of the fold and the half of them are amissing, but after much
searching we found them. The losing of them woiild deprive
us of many a day’s food, which would be no light matter in
such a country as this, where we seldom can get a fowl to shoot.
Our party, lam happy to say, are in excellent health. We
travelled to-day ten miles, and the sheep and bullocks got to
camp at 8 p.m., which is an astonishing journey for the poor
little fellows. They are now, with constant travelling and coarse
grass, falling off in condition, but still they are far from lean.
My calculation is, that I am now on Gregory’s track, 20 miles
east of where he crossed the Leichhardt River; but very uncer-
tain—bad time-keeping watch, and nothing to guide us but the
guess of the pace of our horses. See in the distance a native
burning grass. I want to get near her, but she is off at full
speed • will try to make up with her to get information as to
our distance from the coast. This is a gin with her piccanini*
She is very shy. I gave her a fish-hook and line, the use of
which she evidently knew, but could get no information from
her.”
It may here be remarked, that the strength of mind possessed
by the leader must have been very great. Acting for his party
as commander, as physician, as navigator, as astronomer; his
thermometer broken, and his watch useless as a time-keeper;
without a tr&ck to direct his path,—notithstanding all these
drawbacks, he shaped his course as directly to the Gulf of
Carpentaria as if he had been guided thither on a road studded
with well-marked milestones.
* Native woman and child.


“Latitude 18 - 20, longitude 148.—Camp 58, 12th May. —
Another of our bullocks refuses to proceed, so killed him and
jerked the beef, on which I find that there is not an ounce of
fat, so the beef won’t take long to jerk. Leave the party at
camp, and take an excursion northward along with Middleton
and Pool, and find by night we are within the influence of the
sea. Caught a few fish, that served for supper; would have
done well had there been sufficient of them. Returned to camp
next evening after sundown, and found the camels had gone
astray, and Bell and Davis were in search of them.”
“ 15th May. —Start off Hodgkinson and Maitland with horses
and provisions north to where I left Middleton and Pool.
Promised the party a treat on arriving within the influence of
the sea on the north coast. We got some flour baked that was
kept in reserve. Each man had a liberal allowance served out
to him, with fresh and excellent mutton, and salt found in the
flats, which was to the whole party a perfect treat.”
“ 16th May. —Bell and Davis still in search of the camels;
Palmer and Wild left in charge of the camp.”
The leader is off in search also, and is successful j finds them
in a creek 13 miles south of the camp. He fancies the finding
is more by luck than otherwise.
“ Got them taken back to camp, although late at night.
The bullock we killed has given us 70 lbs. of stuff that can
scarcely be called beef ] not a particle of fat visible anywhere,
and excessively tasteless.”
“ Latitude 17'35, longitude 140.—Camp 60, 20th May. —
Have arrived at the Gulf of Carpentaria. It is now nine
months and four days since our party left Adelaide. We have
travelled in a straight course twelve hundred miles, also many
hundreds of miles east and west of that course, exploring an
extensive breadth of country as we travelled northward. There
is still in prospect a distance of six hundred miles to Port
Denison.”
The expectation of finding the S.S. Victoria at the Gulf was
not however realised—Captain Norman having returned to
Melbourne some time previously. It had been arranged that
Captain Norman should, at stated periods, fire-off guns and


rockets, which were not heard by the exploi’ers. Mx\
M‘Kinlay, after staying a few days at the Gulf, decided on
returning through the settled districts of Queensland —the
distance being shorter, and thought to be more easily traversed
than the course he had taken northward. The journey proved,
however, an extremely difficult one. The country was hilly
and very rugged, and knocked up the camels and horses far
more than the other route would have done.
Before the close of my narrative it will be seen that twelve
hundred miles of such a country as they have gone over is more
easily travelled than the six hundred miles over which the
party must still pass.
A very full description is here given in the journal of the
appearance of the country, vegetation, the rise and fall of the
tide, the fish and fowl that are seen in the lakes, &c. It may
be observed that the distance M‘Kinlay and his party had to
travel, from Adelaide to Port JDenison, is as nearly as possible
the same as that traversed by Dr. Livingstone in crossing the
continent of Africa from Zanzibar to the west coast, viz., 1800
miles, and through a territory in some respects not entirely
dissimilar. The bones of the great Dr. Livingstone have found
a suitable resting-place amongst the renowned in Westminster
Abbey, while those of John M‘Kinlay repose in the cemetery of
Gawler in South Australia. It is not desirable that his remains
should be disturbed ; but, on making known to his countrymen
his triumphant success as an explorer, I cannot hope for nor
expect less than that they will raise a suitable monument to
his memoxy. The new cemetery of Kilmun, overlooking the
spot where first he breathed the mountain air and spent his
playful youthful days, would be a most suitable spot for such
a monument.
“ Killed the thx*ee remaining sheep, and collected a quantity
of salt for curing the mxxtton. And now begins our retixrn


journey; but feel sorry that the order of the South Australian
Government cannot be carried out for want of a sufficient sup-
ply of food, —viz., to return by a route to the west of the one
by which we went north, and arrive in Adelaide from the
north-west, which is now impossible.”
“Latitude 18-30, Longitude 140-40 W.—Camp 5 ,26 th May.
I find that my watch, the only one in going order, or rather
in disorder, gains eleven minutes per hour with the regulator
hard back, and sometimes stops altogether, which is very un-
satisfactory situated as lam here in calculating distances. The
camels have got very lame; the burned reeds over which they
passed when near the coast have pierced their feet. Leather
boots have been made for them, still they suffer much and are
losing condition in consequence.”
“Longitude 140-25.—Camp 7, 28th May— Palmer and
Kirby on horseback, and Maitland on foot, did not arrive in
camp last night. At sunrise the two horsemen and the bullocks
arrived, but not Maitland. He has been careless and lamed
two horses and is obliged to walk in consequence, and has been
absent two nights. He arrived at camp almost cranky (crazy),
fearing he was lost. I hope this will make him more careful
of his & horse in future. We will rest here to refresh the cattle.
Kill a bullock and find he is very fair beef. Middleton has
been laid up for three days, having lost the power of his limbs.
I hope he will soon get better, as we cannot get on well
without him.” _ .
“ 29th May. —Three of the party laid up. All seized with
cold-shivering and numbness, also headache. All confined to
bed. I hope, with what care and attention we can give them,
they will soon recover, as it is an awkward part of the world to
<ret ill in. Getting the beef jerked, and putting our traps in
order. Our only bullock stays about the camp wondeifully
contented; takes a survey of his dead companion, and quietly
returns to feed. ’
“ 30th May. —Still in camp. Meat-drying, bag-mending,
horse-shoeing, and otherwise preparing for our journey. Our
provisions are now exhausted. We have nothing left but beef
and salt, that can be used as food, except 4 or 5 lb. of flour,
kept in reserve to make gruel in case of sickness.
The foregoing entry is a most remarkable one. No adequate


supply of food, and two months’ journey before them ere they
can expect to get a morsel to eat from any human being. How
are the explorers to live during this long period of two months 1
It was well for them that they knew not the hardships through
which they must still pass by the way, or in all probability
they would have left their bones to whiten in the desert as poor
Burke did. But the lion-hearted M'Kinlay was never crest-
fallen. He makes the following entry in his journal with as
much ease and confidence as if he was within a day’s journey
of an hotel:—
“Camp 8, Ist June. —We are now out beyond the time
anticipated when we left Adelaide. It is quite possible that
the colonists have given us up for lost. I hope, however, they
will not think it necessary to send a search expedition out
for us.”
“ The members of our party are very weak and feverish, but
we must move to-morrow if possible. Had a visit to-day from
a large number of natives. They are not circumcised ; but all
of them have one or two teeth knocked out of their upper jaw.
The old men do all the talking. The young men must keep
silent. I made them a few presents that pleased them much,
but could understand very little of their language. They must
have seen white men somewhere, as they knew how to use the
axe. They are greatly in dread of the camels, and wished
them removed from the camp.”
“Longitude 141-45.—Camp 9, 2nd June. —Got our traps in
order and are once more on the way. Travelled twelve miles
and would have gone further, but Palmer became ill, and
Kirby is very weak, and we are obliged to camp earlier in
consequence. Here one of the horses died. From his ap-
pearance he must have been poisoned or bitten by a snake.
Name this place Harry’s Creek after the poor horse.”
“ Longitude 142-—Camp 10, Harry’s Creek, 4th June. —
The old camel is done up. We will leave her and her saddle
here, as they are both useless. We will have her load divided
between the other camels and the horses, and she will likely
follow ns. Kirby is to-day very weak and spiritless.”
“ 7th June. —Our friends are improving. We will kill the


last bullock to-day, as he is troublesome in driving, rushing
amongst the horses and tearing their bags, and causing them
to travel unsteadily. When killed he had very little fat.”
“Longitude 142-40.—Camp 14, 9th June. —Shoeing horses,
mending pack-bags, and getting in order for to-morrow’s
journey. Kirby is much better, and all the others improving.
The beef is now jerked, and all the horses shod but one, and we
have no shoes large enough for him. I hope we will be able to
get along, as our store of food is now reduced to 230 lbs. of
jerked beef. Everything else in the shape of food is done.
The country here is very rugged, and travelling extremely
difficult. Scrambling and creeping over rocks and precipices,
our camels and horses are severely tried. One of the camels
can scarcely be got along.”
“Longitude 143-10. —Camp 17, iJfth June. —Lost some time
searching for one of the horses that bolted and kicked off his
load. We are here obliged to leave two of the horses in the
Creek, fairly knocked up. We can bring them no further, and
if the country ahead does not improve, we will be obliged to
part with others that are getting lame. I wish the supplies of
food were somewhat larger, then we would rest the animals for
a few days to recruit their strength, but as our supplies of food
are only sufficient for six days we are compelled to move on-
ward. The country looks wild and extremely rugged toward
all the points of the compass. The old camel is so knocked up
that she cannot rise to go to feed. We will have her killed and
use her flesh for food to save our jerked beef. This I do re-
luctantly, as she is anything but a pleasant morsel to eat. But
when compelled, it is no use hesitating. So we shot her, and
had the liver stewed, or rather steamed. It is the most extra-
ordinary morsel I ever ate. It is quite dry and juiceless, and
has not the slightest flavour. None else of the party could use
a bit of it. Have got the flesh cut up to dry. The heart is
quite as good as the heart of a bullock—the beef, considering
the condition of the animal, not so tough as we expected. Our
party after fasting for some time, have quietly taken to the
meat now, and they rather like it. The weather is rather moist
and the beef not likely to keep in consequence. “ Rowdy,” one
of our best horses, was found dead a short way down the creek,
and still warm; he must have been poisoned, or bitten by a


enake. We will feel his loss very much. We can proceed no
further down the Creek, nor can we ascend from the bottom on
either side. We must retrace our steps, which is unfortunate.”
Our friend writes here with as much composure as if he were
surrounded with all the comforts of home.
“The horses look badly ; I am sorry for it, knowing, as I do,
that they have heavy work before them. We encamped in the
bed of the river, which is 150 yards wide. We find that the
camel flesh has got quite putrid, and have thrown it away as
useless. This is a loss to us of 70 lbs. of food which we can ill
spare. Even with the rest our horses have had, they get along
badly. I fear some of them must be left here, as we cannot
afford to stay till they get refreshed, owing to our short supplies
of food.”
“Longitude 143-30. —Camp 20, 20th June. —We have now
on hand only food sufficient for 5| days, at the rate of one
pound three oz. per man daily, without salt or any other season-
ing, which is not by any means a heavy diet. Another of our
horses must be left to-day as he has been ill for some time and
refuses to proceed. Water has been scarce. Our horses never
do so well when water is carried for them as when they go of
their own accord to drink from a pool or stream. The horse
we left yesterday has made up to us this morning, he can
scarcely trail his legs after him. Three more of the horses
have got knocked up ; they must all be left. Travelling
extremely difficult and trying to men and horses.”
“Longitude 143-50. —Camp 22, 22nd June. —Maitland and
Kirby very sick. They can render no assistance to the party.
We will be obliged to rest here to recruit their strength, and
sorry to say, must kill one of the horses for food and jerk him.
Had I known when we got to the Gulf that we would have to
kill our horses for food, I would have shaped my course back
for Adelaide, I could not have imagined so wild and rough
a country as we have found in this direction. "Walker and
Landsborough would have found it so likewise. Killed one of
the horses I got from Mr. Scott, being the most suitable for our
purpose ‘ an excellent pack horse he was, having always carried
one of the heaviest packs, but from a fall he got yesterday he
became quite disabled. Cooked the heart, liver, and kidneys


made into a sort of hash, and found them excellent. Keen
cold wind from all points of the compass. Drying the horse
flesh. To lose another animal’s flesh, as we did the camel’s,
would be a serious loss to us. Kirby and Maitland still poorly.
Cannot understand their disease. Kirby has been ill for some
time; he got dispirited from the fearful rough country through
which we have to pass.”
“ 25th June. —Parties no better. The horse-flesh getting
jerked. The men are shoeing the horses, and preparing to start
to-morrow. We have got 70 lb. of flesh off the bones of the
horse. I trust this will be the last horse we will require to eat
till we arrive where there is beef and mutton.”
“Longitude 144-45.—Camp 26, 30th June. —Maitland is so
ill that he can scarcely hang on the back of his horse. Another
of our horses has got knocked up. We killed him, and
although only a bag of bones, he will make soup for the party
for a few days; and by resting some days here Maitland will
have a chance of recovering. The camels and horses are in
need of rest. Hodgkinson and Palmer are also ailing, so that
the whole party are in need of rest, if we can possibly spare
time. Name this place Jack’s Swamp, after the unfortunate
horse. Poor old fellow ! many a score of miles he has cax*ried
me; but he got lame in these ranges and became useless.”
“ Middleton has now got well, and all the others are recover-
ing. Bell and Davis progressing slowly. We would be the
better of a change of food. None of us are very energetic,
being so long fed on horse-flesh; and unfortunately the maggots
have got into it, which does not in any way improve it, either
in appearance or quality, but we are not very nice now as to
what we get for a meal.”
“4th July. —Maitland and Palmer quite well now, and
Kirby is improving. 40 lb. of horse flesh is all we now have
left. I hope this will be sufficient till we arrive at the
Burdeken. Have for the first time seen the tracks of horses
and cattle, which cheered our whole party.”
“Longitude 145-10.—Camp 29, 6th July.— To-day we had
boiled in our soup some hide that was reserved for making
boots for the camels. It was salted when taken off the bullock.
It imparts quite an agreeable flavour to our scanty meal, and
we all enjoyed it very much. Another horse knocked up.


Killed him. We are using his flesh and preserving our jerked
meat.”
How rarely amongst mankind can one of our race be found
to write or speak of enjoyments under circumstances so fear-
fully discouraging. Poor Burke and Wills died of starvation;
but in the face of such knowledge Mr. M‘Kinlay never seems
to have lost courage.
“Longitude 145-30. —Camp 31, 9th July. —A large number
of natives have been here; but they disappeared on our arrival,
leaving all their spears, cooking utensils, and vegetables behind
them. Their food was being cooked in ovens. It consisted of
excellent roots of some kind; was very agreeable, and was used
by our party. We took all their spears and weapons of war
to our camp, which saved us from keeping watch over the
fellows during the night, as they might appear in numbers suf-
ficient to be troublesome. No appearance, however, was made
by the natives, but the howling of their dogs somewhat dis-
turbed our sleep during the night. Here we must leave one of
the camels. He had tumbled into the bottom of the creek and
got disabled; he was a very useful animal. In consequence of
losing him we must leave some of our luggage also, which will
be a serious loss to us hereafter.”
“ Longitude 145-40 E.—Camp 33, 12th-IJJh July. —ln camp
drying horse-flesh. The horse “Goliath” has given us 521bs.
of dried meat [not the weight of a good old ewe; if the men
have lost flesh in the same proportion, they must be by this
time living skeletons], and we have shot a few crows and a
white eagle, wherewith we will make a stew for breakfast.
These, cooked with a piece of salted hide, and about 21bs. of
dried meat, will make a very good meal as matters now stand.
The remainder of the dried meat, with what we can shoot,
will, I hope, be sufficient till we arrive at the Farming Liver,
which now must be about ninety miles distant. lam quite
disappointed at not finding settlers higher up the river than
this.”
Think of the materials with which a meal is to be made—
salted hide, the hard sinewy fowl from off the bones of


an eagle, and dried horse-flesh, made into a stew ! But
M'Kinlay and his brave party contrived to make what he calls
“ a very good meal ”of it. It was no part of his nature to
grumble ; indeed, it appears as if, when he undertook the
charge of this expedition, he had left behind the art of com-
plaining.
“ Latitude 20TO ; Longitude 14630.—Camp 39 , 21st July.
—Hard frost this morning. The night was very cold. No traces
of stock or of drays seen anywhere. Another horse knocked up.
We will have him killed, boil his flesh, and carry as much with
us as will keep us in food for a few days, and rest the others
for a day. We will take the shoes off the dead horse
in case some of the others may need them, feasting ourselves
at the same time on the head, feet, and bones. lam greatly
astonished at not meeting settlers ere this. This is now the
sixth horse we have been compelled to kill for food, and I trust
it may be the last one, as we have only two pack-horses and
one camel left.”
When the leader’s health permits cheerfulness, and the
aspect of the country is pleasant to the eye, he is often found
dedicating mountains and creeks to the memory of parties for
whom he entertained a special regard. A river lately crossed
is called Clark’s River, for Walter Clark, Esq., late of Inver-
chapel, Argyleshire; Mount Scott, Mount Buchanan, Mount
Middleton—this is an immense mountain, right a-head, that he
called for his right-hand man, “ whose attention to his duties,
and good example to the others, entitled him to the esteem of
anyone in my situation.”
“ Latitude 20-30; Longitude 147-15.—-Camp 43, 27th July.
—Here we are, enclosed by impassable mountains on the
one side and a deep river on the other. A raft must be
constructed of such materials as we can find. Timber of
all sorts, as can be fastened together, is now collected. Our
canteens inverted, pots and pans placed in position, some of
c


them scarcely air-tight. Our air-pillows, in fact everything
calculated to float, are called into requisition, and by to-morrow
morning we will be ready to cross.”
“ 28th July. —Middleton and Hodgkinson have swam the
river. The alligators close by look very hungry. If they
reckoned on getting one of our party for breakfast, they have
got a disappointment; although, from reduced muscular power,
swimming the river was accomplished only with great effort. The
camel and the luggage are got across, but the horses must be left
behind. Left some of the men to look after them till to-morrow.
I hope we will get them safely ferried, as it is a most difficult,
intricate, and dangerous place. If they get across in safety, it
is more than I can expect.”
“ 29 th July. —By much perseverance and exertion we have
got men and horses across in safety by 4 p.m., and started down
the river-side over rough and rugged ground. Our camel is
getting knocked up, but we will try and get him along. We
must now leave our best pack-horse load of stuff here until
it can be sent for. It consists chiefly of seeds that I
would be sorry to lose. We will try and take the camel
one stage further and kill him. By doing so we will save a
horse.
“Longitude 147*30; Latitude 20*30.—Camp 46, 30th July.
—We buried the traps safely and securely from wet. Should
the natives not find them they will be perfectly safe till we can
get them sent for. We lost some time to-day shoeing horses.
The ground is very rugged and sore on their feet; travelling
extremely difficult. We are now obliged to kill our good and
faithful companion, the last remaining camel, “ Siva,” that
was with us in all our wanderings and journeying. He was
indeed a splendid animal, but now quite unfit to travel further.
I hope to get enough of his flesh to keep us in life till we
arrive at a station, or, if the country is at all passable, Port
Denison.”
“ Ist August. —ln camp boiling camel flesh. Pool is unwell.
He has an attack of fever and ague. We had a fine breakfast
this morning off the camel’s tripe and feet. We will start
to-morrow, hoping soon to find a station. If not, we will
have to kill another horse, and must then walk and ride


alternately. I hope, however, we will not come to that,
as the whole party will be kept back to keep pace with the
pedestrians.”
“ 2nd August. —Started at 8.35 a.m., each man supplied with
a certain weight of boiled camel, which he carries in front of
him on horseback. We are now reduced to eleven horses, one
only with pack-bags. After travelling ten miles we found the
tracks of a bullock quite fresh, and shortly after we were grati-
fied with a sight of the bullocks themselves, with two men
tailing (herding) them.”
These were the first white men seen by the party during twelve
months and sixteen days, and we may safely assume that the
sight was a joyful one to the heroic explorers. They soon
forgot their hardships and privations after finding themselves
within the bounds of civilization. Their spirits were elevated,
and their joy beyond description. The happy feeling of mixing
once more with men of their own race and colour banished
from their minds all remembrance of their trials and fatigue,
forgetting that they had not been faring sumptuously every
day, and sleeping at night on beds of down. Notice the next
and last entry in the journal;—
“We rode up to the men, and soon thereafter were pitching
in to roast beef and damper, and, don’t let me forget, potatoes
and mustard. The station belongs to Messrs. Harvey and
Somers, and is situated on the river Bowen, a stream that
flows northward into the Burdeken. Mr. Somers was not
at home on our arrival, but soon thereafter made his appear-
ance, and we were very hospitably received and treated by
him. The damper of which we partook had a most astonishing
effect on all of us. We suffered great pain after meals, our
digestive organs being much weakened from the continual
use of flesh-meat. For some days we suffered severely,
and what was more wonderful, our feet and legs became
very much swollen and stiff, which made walking very
painful.”


The journal does not inform us how long the party remained
at the station, or how long they were on the way to Port
Denison, but the distance is about eighty miles. This was at
that time the most northern station in the colony. The
following quotation from the Sydney Morning Herald of 22nd
September informs us that they were on the sea-board on the
17th September, which is thirteen months from the date of
their departure from Adelaide :
“ A complimentary dinner was given to Mr. M ‘Kinlay and
party at Port Denison on the 17th ultimo, on the eve of their
departure from thence. At 2 o’clock p.m. a large party sat
down in the dining-room of the Port Denison Hotel to an
entertainment prepared for the occasion—John Leith Hay,
Esq., in the Chair.
“ The health of Mr. M‘Kinlay, and then of his party, were
severally proposed and drunk with much applause, and duly
and happily responded to. Shortly before the departure of the
exploring party from Rockhampton, a meeting was held in the
saloon of the steamer Balclutha, to present a testimonial to
Mr. M'Kinlay, and to welcome him and his party on their
arrival at Rockhampton. Although very little time was
given to make the meeting known, a large number of influ-
ential residents of the town were present, and many were
on the poop of the vessel that could not be accommodated
below.
“ Captain Trowton having been voted to the chair, called on
Mr. Brown, who read the following address, which was
numerously signed :
“To John M‘Kinlay, Esq.,
“ Leader of the South Australian Exploring Party.
“ Sir, —We the undersigned inhabitants of Rockhampton and
the neighbouring districts, beg to greet you with a most hearty
welcome on your safe arrival here. We feel that we would be
wanting in our duty to you and to ourselves, did we fail to
recognise, to appreciate, and to acknowledge that your sudden


and unexpected appearance here amongst us, is one of those
public events which will, in the history of these Colonies, be
permanently and prominently recorded. While those who take
an interest in Australian Geography and Exploration have had
their attention directed to South-Western Australia, anxiously
looking for you and your party in that direction; while the
latest telegraphic despatches from Adelaide speak of your
arrival there as being daily counted on, you, meteor like,
flash on us here at the opposite end of the Continent, after a
most successful exploration of much new territory, the sur-
mounting of formidable difficulties, and the bringing in of your
party in complete safety, although for a large part of your
journeying, entirely wanting those supplies of food that even
in settled districts are considered essential to subsistence. We
do not think, Sir, that it is our duty to withhold our approba-
tion from an Explorer till he has been starved to death, or been
killed and eaten by blackfellows. On the contrary, we are
of opinion, that having run those risks, and having overcome
them, are the best proofs of your possession of those fitting
qualifications for the task you have undertaken, and in your case
does not the less warrant us in classing you in the same roll-
call of that daring band of heroic pioneers that have voluntarily
faced the unknown and' imminent hazards of privation, of suf-
fering, and of death, and who can lay claim as their martyrs to
science and civilization the names of Leichhardt,* of Kennedy,
of Burke, and of Wills. The good behaviour of the men of your
party bespeaks, amongst other things, one important essential
in an Explorer, viz., discrimination in the selection of men who
can bear without repining the extremes of hunger and thirst,
of cold and of heat, and who can be inspired by their leader to
copy him in enduring suffering with equanimity, in meeting
daily trials with cheerfulness, in making light of fatigue, and
in laughing at privations. We would therefore, Sir, request
you to convey to your second in command, Mr. Hodgkinson,
and the rank and file of your party, our acknowledgments of
* Poor Leichhardt got lost in the year 1846, and to this day no trace
of him or of his party has ever been fonnd. He was a brave and spirited
Explorer, but the hardships'of a dangerous country proved too much
for him.


their brave behaviour under your command, wishing you, Sir,
a safe arrival at your destination, and a fitting recognition of
your services by the various Governments of Australia.
“We are, Sir,
“ Respectfully yours, &c., &c.
“Rockhampton, 16th Sept., 1862.”
“ Mr. M‘Kinlay rose and said that he felt very flattered, and
could not in words express his feeling of pleasure at the kind
and hearty reception which they had given him and his party.
He was not a man of many words; and could only, therefore,
thank—on behalf of himself and his party—one and all of
them for the cordiality with which they had been received.
“ The following resolution, in proposing and seconding
which complimentary reference was made to the success of
Mr. M'Kinlay, and the plucky spirit of the South Australian
Government in fitting out the expedition, was unanimously
agreed to:—
“ ‘ That this meeting begs to convey its entire concurrence in
the good wishes expressed, and just read to Mr. M‘Kinky;
and also, that this meeting recognises the immediate, and still
more the remote, advantages that will accrue to the inhabitants
of these colonies from the Expedition sent by the Colony of
South Australia,’
“ The proceedings terminated with a vote of thanks to
Captain Trowton for the use of the steamer Balclutha for the
meeting.”
John Davis in his journal, page 400, writes as follows;
“We passed two pleasant days in the Port Denison Hotel,
thereafter took our passage south in a small vessel that traded
between this place and Rockhampton. She carries the mails,
and we embark to-morrow, 17th August, for Rockhampton.
Nineteen of us in so small a boat ; how we are to get stowed
away I cannot understand! Mr. M‘Kinlay’s getting accom-
modated is a puzzler ; he is 6 feet 4 inches high, and his berth
is only 5 feet 6 inches, and very narrow; I fear he must go as
a deck passenger, or put a knot on his legs. After a passage
of seven days our vessel, the Ben Bolt, arrived in Rockhampton.


There was no tidings of our arrival till we appeared in town;
the citizens were quite amazed at seeing so ragged a lot landing
at the wharf. We stayed here for a week, waiting the arrival
of a steamer to take us to Sydney, Two steamers arrived,
but we go by the Balclutha. I take a telegram to send to
Adelaide, Bell and Hodgkinson remain with Mr, M'Kinlay ;
four of our party remained at Port Denison, and we are now
reduced to six. We arrived in Sydney harbour early in the
morning, a sight of which is well worth a voyage from the old
country. found on arrival that the Calcutta is to sail to-
morrow fox* Melbourne j we go also, Captain Trowton making
us as happy as possible. After a sail of two days we arrived,
but too late to go by the steamer Hannibal for the city of
Adelaide. Had to stay two weeks, but are very comfortable
in the Criterion Hotel. Here we are on board the steamer
Havelock, and in four days we arrived. Friends glad to see us
after all our journeyings and an absence from home for fourteen
long months.”
The following quotation from the Glasgow Herald , of 18th
January, 1863, is very interesting, and may be given in full,
although to a small extent a recapitulation :
« It was about the middle of May that M‘Kinlay’s party left
their camp on the Leichardt Biver, and on the Ist of June they
left the Flinders, On their route they crossed some of the
waters of the Gilbart, thence to the valley of the Burdeken.
They passed a station on Clark River, and another on the Bur-
deken, Thereafter they came to a station on the Bowen; and
soon after they arrived at Port Denison, where, after a few
days, they left for Sydney, and arrived on the 21st September
after an absence of thirteen months. There was not a death in
the party \ all were in good health and spirits, and none the
worse of the hardships and privations they had undergone,
which is the more remarkable, seeing that for five months they
had neither flour, tea, nor sugar, but had lived entirely on horse
and camel flesh. Seven of their horses, and two of their camels,
were used entirely as food.
“ Mr. M‘Kinlay and his party remained two days in Sydney,


then took steamer for Melbourne, at 'which place they remained
a few days, and received an enthusiastic reception from the
Exploration Committee of the Royal Society at a meeting
specially called for that object. At this meeting Mr. Lands-
borough, the celebrated explorer, was also present, and in course
of some well-chosen remarks by the Rev. Dr. Cairns he said
there was only one thing wanting to complete his (Dr. Cairns)
happiness, viz., the pi’esence of Stuart. He should like to see
Stuart sitting with M‘Kinlay and Landsborough, and thea he
would have before him three great explorers, whose names
would go down to posterity as the best friends the contineat of
Australia ever had.
After having received (along with Mr. Landsborough) the
congratulations of 3000 of the citizens of Melbourne at a public
meeting, the party proceeded to Adelaide, where Mr. M‘Kialay
delivered up his journal to the South Australian Government,
who had appointed him, they having tendered to him a vote of
thanks, and one thousand pounds, in token of their apprecia-
tion of the valuable service he has rendered to the colony.”
From the Herald of same date :
“ The following extract of a letter from ‘ Our Own Corres-
pondent’ was saved from the wreck of the Colombo ;—As was
anticipated when my previous letter was sent on the 25th
September, Mr. M'Kinlay, the leader of the South Australian
Relief Party, arrived in Melbourne on that day, and a few days
afterwards he received a warm welcome from the Royal Society
at a meeting held for that purpose. But the great feature of
the month in connection with exploration was the public recep-
tion of M‘Kinlay and Landsborough in the Exhibition Build-
ings, which was crowded with an enthusiastic assemblage. It
was a great treat to be present on that occasion, for besides the
two leaders, there were associated with them on the platform
several others who had shared their dangers and privations.
The opportunity was seized for setting on their legs each of the
explorers, both leaders and subordinates, by way of presenting
them to the meeting, when each of them had to make an
attempt at speech making. This was manifestly out of their
line, and one of them (Mr. Bourne) averred that he would


rather go back across the continent again than make a
public speech, while another (Mr. Davis) told the meeting
not to expect many words nor fluent speeches from men
who had just left off eating camel and horse flesh. Indeed
leaders and men seemed on a par as regards oratory.
When it came to Landsborough’s turn he pulled his speech
out of his pocket, as he well knew his sphere was not on the
platform, but in the bush, where he can not only observe but
describe well, and moreover show his skill in sketching both
bush and swamp scenery. It may be worth while to let you
know what these men say about each other when they appear
once in their life before a public audience.
“In the course of his remarks, alluding to Mr. MKinlay,
Mr. Landsborough said My friend and brother explorer has
just come in from a glorious trip from South Australia, by
Carpentaria and Port Denison. I consider his mode of explor-
ing with live stock, consisting of cattle, camels, sheep, and
horses nearly the very best. To make it complete he only
wanted some aboi'igines as trackers. This I am sure he felt
on one occasion, when Kirby and the sheep were lost for three
days. Mr. M‘Kinlay deserves the greatest credit for being
the first to take sheep across the continent. The camels will
yet be found of the greatest value, for it is probable that other
explorers will not find water at such convenient distances as
we have done, and as they can go nearly three times as far as
horses without water, they will be of the greatest value for
searching for water; and when water is found it is very easy
to take the party on, as it is generally found at distances
sufficiently near to be reached by a party like that which Mr.
M‘Kinlay and I had. By Burke, Walker, M‘Kinlay and
myself, six of the rivers of Carpentaria have been traced.
These rivers chiefly water countries of a character, which,
although dry, are of a kind that I prefer for pastoral purposes,
and now that my friend Mr. MKinlay has taken sheep across
the continent I hope that flocks and herds will soon follow, so
that the fine pastures of Carpentaria instead of lying waste
may soon become profitable not only for Australia, but to the
civilized world.
“At this meeting Captain Norman, Commander of H.M. sloop


Victoria, also took part, as one ■who had materially aided this
enterprise. Your readers will remember that he formed the
Depot party at the Albert Biver, from which Walker and also
Landsborough started south in search of Burke, and last,
though not least, there was present that universal favourite,
King, who on this occasion seconded the motion welcoming
back the explorers, and certainly none other had a better
right than he to do so, as he was one of those whom they had
gone forth to rescue. Taken as a whole this was, as said by
Dr. Cairns, a magnificent meeting, and in the annals of
Australia may well rank as an historic one; indeed one result
of these meetings is to make us more thoroughly Australian,
since these adventurous bushmen have revealed so many
pleasing features of the interior of this great continent. The
yearnings after home are becoming small by degrees, and
beautifully less. If your readers are half as fond of getting a
peep at the doings of the explorers and their manner of life
when they are out on their long and perilous journeys, they
will excuse a short extract from a letter of Mr. M'Kinlay’s
party being introduced here, and it will let them see what
became of the cattle, camels, sheep, and horses, alluded to by
Mr. Landsborough.
“ The writer in his letter says;—Mr. M‘Kinlay has
crossed the great desert, not with one or two, but with
his whole party of men, taking with him to the Gulf
horses, camels, bullocks and sheep, what no one else has
ever done. He discovered fine lakes, lots of fine pasture,
and some of the most infernal country man ever beheld, only
fit for uro, and kangaroo, and wallaby. No man can live
therein. We started from Blenchwater with 26 horses, 4
camels and 12 bullocks ; also a cart and 100 sheep. We ar-
rived here (Queensland) with only 11 horses; 2 having died, 6
done up and left by the way, and 7 eaten; 6 oxen died and 6
eaten; 98 sheep eaten and 2 died; 2 camels done up and 2
eaten; the cart left in the desert—so that we had hard times
of it indeed, living on horse flesh and little of it. But we kept
our spirits up, at least some of us did. One or two of the
party began to look on the black side of the picture, and never
expected to get home. However, here we are all safe and


well, our troubles and fatigues nearly forgotten in good damper
and beef. Our horses are so trained to climbing that I really
believe they would travel along the roof of a house with ease
and comfort. The Queensland scenery is beautiful. I have
enjoyed the trip on the whole well, although it got tiresome
when the men got sulky. But they were good and brave
fellows, and behaved as well as I could expect. Mr. M‘K inlay
has now left Melbourne and arrived in Adelaide, where the
Parliament has voted him <£looo, and each ot his men six
months’ pay. Having been sent out by the South Australian
Government, his journals have become their property. Part
of it has been read in the Assembly there, and the whole will
soon be published, and may be sent you per next mail.
M'KINLAY'S SECOND EXPLORING EXPEDITION.
The fame of John M‘Kinlay as leader of an exploring party
had become known not only in the Australian Colonies, but
also throughout the whole British dominions, and consequently
he was soon called upon to undertake the command of a
second expedition, attended as on the former occasion with
much danger, even to a tried and expert leader. The Colony of
South Australia had planted a settlement in the extreme north-
west at Yan-Diemen’s Gulf. This settlement, after having
a fair trial of the place, turned out a total failure, and the
parties who undertook the enterprise became desirous of being
removed to the old settlements at all hazards, and petitioned
the Government to that effect. Mr. M‘Kinlay was appointed
a second time to undertake the command of the party, and to
explore the country south of the Gulf, and give a report to
the Government of the suitableness of the country foi a
European settlement.


It is to be sincerely regretted that M £ Kinlay’s Journal of
this expedition is now lost. Although it was but a brief
record, it was extremely interesting. It showed clearly that
M £ Kinlay, on this as on a former occasion, possessed ingenuity
and judgment in management of his difficult enterprise, rarely
to be found amongst the most talented of men. Had he not
been the right man for the occasion, he and his party would
most assuredly have shared the fate of Franklin and Leich-
hardt, and their remains would now be lying in unknown
regions far from the abodes of the civilised races of man-
kind.
Mr. M'Kinlay arrived at Port Darwin by sea, and put him-
self in communication with the settlers, and having heard from
them a very unfavourable report of the place—of its being
unhealthy and unsuitable in many ways for European settlers—
he resolved to recommend to the Government that the settlers
be removed with the least possible delay, which was accordingly
done at the expense of the Colony, and the price paid for their
land was restored to them.
Before leaving the place he resolved on exploring the coun-
try toward the interior, so as to be able to give a satisfactory
report to the Government on his return to Adelaide. Ac-
cordingly he got his party prepared, consisting of fifteen men,
all told, with a competent number of horses and bullocks to
carry their provisions and luggage. They left the sea board
and shaped their course in a south-east direction. The country
through which they passed was very difficult to travel. It was
scrubby and swampy, and its vegetation was very rank. When
but a few weeks on their journey they found their cattle and
horses falling off in condition, without any apparent cause.
The pasture was abundant, but the grass was very rank, and
although eaten by the animals it seemed as if destitute of


nutritious qualities. Tlie animals were all becoming emaciated,
and some of tbem had already died as if of poverty. It be-
came evident that although freed from yoke and load, the
animals had not strength left to bring them back to Port
Darwin. The land was becoming more soft and swampy and
very difficult to travel, and the position of the party had now
become the most difficult and dangerous that can possibly be
imagined. To travel back on foot the same distance, under a
tropical sun, was beyond human endurance, even although the
animals that were still alive could be got to carry provisions
for the journey. But to travel and carry provisions without
other necessaries was an utter impossibility.
The following interesting quotation from a Colonial news-
paper fully describes one of the dangers that the party had to
encounter in this expedition, and also shows the capacity of
their leader when reduced to a last extremity :
“ M'Kinlay’s Boat or Baft. —When M‘Kinlay in bis recent
explorations in the Northern Territory, found himself and party
hemmed in by the Biver Alligator in front, and an impenetrable
swamp in his" rear, he determined to effect his escape by con-
structing a kind of raft or boat made of saplings, covered with
hides and canvas. Accordingly he killed all his horses and
jerked their flesh for provisions. He used their skins and the
canvas of his tents for the covering of his novel boat, and then
drifted down with the ebb-tide bound on his perilous voyage.
The sketch (see vignette) represents the boat crossing the sea
at the mouth of the river, where a strong ripple nearly proved
fatal to the whole party, numbering fifteen men. They, how-
ever, arrived safely at Escape Cliffs, after being six days on
board. When the boat was beached, the hides were found to
be completely gone, in fact perfectly rotten, so that probably
if 24 hours longer in the water, the covering of the boat would
have gone to pieces,”
Mr. M‘Kinlay, in spite of all difficulties, accomplished his


mission to the entire satisfaction of the Government who
appointed him, and received his hard earned reward. He
shortly afterwards married Miss Pile, a native of Hamilton,
Scotland, and finally settled as a stock owner in the Colony of
South Australia,
Our brave countryman has now gone the way of all man-
kind, He died at Oaklands, Gawler, 31st December, 1872,
where a handsome monument has been erected by his admiring
fellow Colonists to his memory, with the inscrip-
tion ;
“Erected by many Colonists as a monument to John
M‘Kinlay, a Chief amongst Australian Explorers, and Leader
of the Expedition in search of Burke and Wills, 1861. Born
at Sandbank, Argyleshire, August 16, 1819; died at Oaklands,
Gawler, December 31, 1872.
“ Brave yet gentle, resolute yet unassuming,
Formed to command, yet stem to none
Who knows to obey ;
He was admired and loved ;
To his country he bequeathed a name
Which she may proudly add to the head roll
Of her distinguished men.”
Distinguished by an unassuming manner and thorough self-
reliance, Mr. M'Kinlay gained a firm hold upon the best
sympathies of all associated with him, and by his fearless
example nerved them to share with him the privations and
dangers of expeditions, the true value of which will not be fully
known for long years to come. With splendid muscular power
and a robust constitution he combined a peculiarly ready in-
genuity, equal to every emergency, and his journals indicate a
fertility of resource not often approached.
His aim was simply to perform his commission thoroughly ;


and that he did so we have endeavoured to show. Personal
advantage had no place in his thoughts. To rescue the unfor-
M'KINLAY'S MONUMENT.
tunate expedition was naturally the primary object of his
labour; and, that settled, the ultimate benefit of his fellow-
colonists in obtaining an accurate knowledge of the unknown


interior of the great continent. His explorations justly
entitle him to a high place among the gallant band of explorers
whom Scotland is proud to claim as her sons, and future
inhabitants of Australia will look back to Mr. M'Kinlay as
one of the most successful pioneers whose researches have
assisted in developing the wonderful country which they first
penetrated.








