

SKETCH OF THE RESIDENCE
... " ;
JAMES MORRILL
AMONG 1'HE ABORIGINALS
- oi? . ■
NORTHERN QUEENSLAND
• FOR SEVENTEEN YEARS:
BEING A NARRATIVE OF HIS . , E, SHIPWRECK, LANDING
ON THE COAST, AND RESIDENCE AMONG; THE ABORIGINALS :
' ' ' ALSO, , - ' ’
AN ACCOUNT OF THE NATURAL PRODUCTIONS OF NORTHERN
QUEENSLAND, AND MANNERS, CUSTOMS, LANGUAGE, AND SUPER-
• ‘ STITIONS OF ITS INHABITANTS-
r-#— _
; A'
EDMUND GREGORY.
, -4 —-—-— -
QUEEISST- VTSTIJ:
PRINTED AT THE “COURIER” GENERAL PRINTING OFFICE, GEORGE STREET, BRISBANE*;
1866. . ■' ; , ’
FIFTH THOUSAND. -


The substance of this Pamphlet was published in 1863, but it has long since
been out of print, and believing that the narrative of the sufferings and strange
incidents here recorded will be read with interest as long as Queensland is in
existence, I have determined to reissue it. It has, however, been necessary
to re-write it. Under the circtSßtances it was to be expected that time
would have made it necessary to correct some parts, hastily called to memory
after laying dormant so long, but in this very little has to be done:
substantially no corrections w 7 ere necessary, thus proving the strength of our
hero’s memory. The most notable correction is in his own name, as will be
noticed in the first page.
E. G.


1-1 T
CHAPTER I.
Birth and Pai’entage of James Murrells —Education —Choice of Profession—Apprentice-
ship —Voyage to Sydney, New South Wales, in the Ram ales—Voyage from Sydney
to New Zealand and back —Shipped on board the barque Peruvian, for China.
James Mueeells, not Morrill, was born on the 20th of May, 1824, in
the Parish of Heyhridge, a considerable village on the north side of the River
Blackwater, and which is a northern suburb of Maldon. I find from “ The
History, Gazetteer, and Directory of the County of Essex,” by William White,
published in 1848, among the names in the Directory is that of Edward
Murrells, hawker, a brother of the above, with many of the other names
afterwards referred to. It Would thus appear that, seventeen years’ isolation in
the bush, had taken from him the power to re-call his own name to memory
with accuracy, although he told me that he would sit sometimes for hours
together in the bush, and trace the outline of his name on his knee, and would
greatly amuse his black companions by writing on the sand, and afterwards
reading it to them. His father was a millwright and engineer by profession, and
carried on business in Swan Yard, in connection with James Hayes, his uncle.
It is, however, only about twelve months ago I received information from
Henry Mqy, Esq., of Maldon, Government Emigration Agent, of the death
of Murrell’s father, who lived just long enough to hear of his long-lost son’s
restoration to civilized life, and who (immMiately before his death) greatly
desired to see him once more : and at the date of the publication of the above
Directory, Murrell’s uncle was still carrying on the business in his own name.
At the time he finally left his home he had one brother, older than himself,
and three sisters, who were younger. When old enough he was sent to the
village National School, the schoolmaster of which was the same then as in
1848, according to the Directory—Mr. George D. Bridge, who had been a
soldier, and was a great disciplinarian, who added to the usual course of study
the manual exercise, and who frequently put the boys through their facings to
their no small amusement. His schoolboy days, however, were not marked
with anything worth calling particular attention to.
When he was about 13 or 14 years of age, and Imql acquired an ordinary
education, such as was generally given in those days, and old enough to be of
use, he went with his brother to work in his father’s shop. But the confine-
ment of a workshop was evidently not congenial to his somewhat restless
disposition, as he was always glad of an opportunity to get away from it, if
only for a day, particularly if he could get amongst the shipping. Among the
friends who used to visit his father’s house was a pilot named Janies Firman
(whose ‘name is also in the Gazeteer above referred to), who piloted the
craft down the River Blackwater, and would sometimes take him with him on
his piloting excursions, and bring him back in the pilot boat. This was, of
course, only in fine weather; the novelty of these trips, the songs of the
sailors, the beautiful smooth sea, and no doubt the yarns of* the sailors, made
a powerful impression on his youthful mind, and he was constantly expressing
his desire to become a sailor. His parents frequently told him of the troubles
of a sea life, and that he would soon wish himself at home again, but he was
nothing daunted.
On one occasion when he was going on one of these excursions, the
• -''V “ J!


The subst
been out c
incidents 1
existence,
to re-writ
would ha-'
after layi
substantia
hero’s me
is long since
and strange
ns]and is in
;n necessary
d that time
I to memory
) be done:
mgth of our
as will be
noticed in tne nrst page.


1-1 T
CHAPTER I.
Birth and Pai’entage of James Murrells —Education —Choice of Profession—Apprentice-
ship —Voyage to Sydney, New South Wales, in the Ram ales—Voyage from Sydney
to New Zealand and back —Shipped on board the barque Peruvian, for China.
James Mueeells, not Morrill, was born on the 20th of May, 1824, in
the Parish of Heyhridge, a considerable village on the north side of the River
Blackwater, and which is a northern suburb of Maldon. I find from “ The
History, Gazetteer, and Directory of the County of Essex,” by William White,
published in 1848, among the names in the Directory is that of Edward
Murrells, hawker, a brother of the above, with many of the other names
afterwards referred to. It Would thus appear that, seventeen years’ isolation in
the bush, had taken from him the power to re-call his own name to memory
with accuracy, although he told me that he would sit sometimes for hours
together in the bush, and trace the outline of his name on his knee, and would
greatly amuse his black companions by writing on the sand, and afterwards
reading it to them. His father was a millwright and engineer by profession, and
carried on business in Swan Yard, in connection with James Hayes, his uncle.
It is, however, only about twelve months ago I received information from
Henry Mqy, Esq., of Maldon, Government Emigration Agent, of the death
of Murrell’s father, who lived just long enough to hear of his long-lost son’s
restoration to civilized life, and who (immMiately before his death) greatly
desired to see him once more : and at the date of the publication of the above
Directory, Murrell’s uncle was still carrying on the business in his own name.
At the time he finally left his home he had one brother, older than himself,
and three sisters, who were younger. When old enough he was sent to the
village National School, the schoolmaster of which was the same then as in
1848, according to the Directory—Mr. George D. Bridge, who had been a
soldier, and was a great disciplinarian, who added to the usual course of study
the manual exercise, and who frequently put the boys through their facings to
their no small amusement. His schoolboy days, however, were not marked
with anything worth calling particular attention to.
When he was about 13 or 14 years of age, and Imql acquired an ordinary
education, such as was generally given in those days, and old enough to be of
use, he went with his brother to work in his father’s shop. But the confine-
ment of a workshop was evidently not congenial to his somewhat restless
disposition, as he was always glad of an opportunity to get away from it, if
only for a day, particularly if he could get amongst the shipping. Among the
friends who used to visit his father’s house was a pilot named Janies Firman
(whose ‘name is also in the Gazeteer above referred to), who piloted the
craft down the River Blackwater, and would sometimes take him with him on
his piloting excursions, and bring him back in the pilot boat. This was, of
course, only in fine weather; the novelty of these trips, the songs of the
sailors, the beautiful smooth sea, and no doubt the yarns of* the sailors, made
a powerful impression on his youthful mind, and he was constantly expressing
his desire to become a sailor. His parents frequently told him of the troubles
of a sea life, and that he would soon wish himself at home again, but he was
nothing daunted.
On one occasion when he was going on one of these excursions, the
• -''V “ J!


captain asked the pilot if the lad would like a sea life ; if so, and all was
agreeable, he would take him there and then, and when he arrived at Shields,
the place of his destination, he would supply him with the few things he
would need. James was consulted, and readily agreed to go on those terms ;
the pilot on his part offered no resistance, and thus, without further consulting
his parents, he went away on his first voyage in the brig Royal Sailor, belonging
to the Maldon Shipping Company. The captain was a very good man—a
Wesleyan and a local preacher of that body. Every night at 8 o’clock,
weather permitting, he used to call all hands together to read the Bible to
them, and conduct a religious service.
Everything went on right that voyage, and his ardour was not in the
least abated to be a sailor. He went several voyages in her, and when he was
16 years old he was bound "apprentice to the Company for four years. He
served part of his time in the Royal Sailor, and part in another of the Com-
pany s vessels called the Duchess of Kent, a schooner. Nothing happened
while serving his time but the usual casualties attending a sea life, viz.,
hairbreadth escapes from the violence of storms, the worst of which he
remembered was, when once they were driven in bad weather to leeward of
their port, and went into the Firth of Forth for shelter.
After he finished his apprenticeship he re-joined his old skipper, Mr.
Harlen, and went four voyages with him. But at this period of his history
his ideas began to enlarge, and he became dissatisfied with the small colliers
and short voyages he thought he would like to go long voyages in larger
ships. He made known his wish and determination to carry his new ideas
into execution to Mr. Henry May (who was then agent to the Company, and
at the present time a Government Emigration Agent in the same place, who
took great interest in him at that time, and has done so since his return to
civilized life,) for his advice and assistance. He gave him a present for good
conduct, his discharge, and three letters of recommendation—one to the
Sailors’ Home, London, and two to large shipowners. With these he started
by rail to the Metropolis, and arrived there late in the afternoon. The next
morning, without much thought, and without using the letters of recom-
mendation, he shipped on board a troop ship—the Ramales —as carpenter’s
mate. He only had time to hurry home and prepare for his voyage, which
being accomplished, he left for the last time and joined his shijD at Deptford,
on a Friday. Tire following day they dropped down the stream, and anchored
at Gravesend. The next day (Sunday) they shipped the XL Regiment of
Foot for Hobart Town, whither she was bound; also with, a detachment of
the Royal Artillery for Sydney, which was intended for New Zealand, the
war having broke out in the Bay of Islands. They finally started some
time during that week, and were six months on the voyage.
All troop ships were obliged to carry a double complement of hands, so
that when they arrived at Sydney one-half the hands were not wanted; he
thus obtained permission to leave the ship, as he had not then been long
enough from home. He soon after shipped on board a little schooner called the
Terror, bound for Auckland, New Zealand. They made a successful trip in
her to Auckland and back, hut its not being an easy job to get a cargo in
those days, some of them were discharged —himself among the number.
There were several vessels in the harbor laid on for the mother-country,
but having no desire to go home, he shipped on board the ill-fated ship
Peruvian, bound to China, with a cargo of hardwood, with what result the
following pages will show.


CHAPTER 11.
Voyage from Sydney—Shipwreck —Forty-two days, on a Raft —Reaching Land—
Reception by the Natives—Death of the Apprentice Boy, the Captain, and his
Wife —Restoration to Civilized Life—-Appointment under Government —Death and
Burial.
On Tuesday, the 24th February, 1846, he shipped on hoard the ill-fated
ship Peruvian, Captain George Pitkethly, with a full complement of
hands and passengers, as follow —Passengers—Mrs. Pitkethly, Mr. and
Mrs. Wilmott, Miss Wilmott (an infant), and a young nursegirl, Mr.
J. R. Quarry, and daughter, about six years old. Ship’s company—The
captain, the captain’s brother (first mate), John (second mate), the
carpenter, John Millar (sailmaker), the cook, James Dicks, James Gooley,
Jack , and myself (able seamen) ; James Wilson, William , James
■ , and an other (apprentices); and two black men ; the captain, officers,
and apprentices were all of Dundee.
The following letter is confirmatory to some extent of the above
statement :
Custom House, Sydney, 4th April, 1863.
Sib, —I beg to acknowledge the receipt of youi*letter of the 30th ultimo, and in
accordance with your request I forward the list of the passengers who sailed in the
ill-fated barque Peruvian. Passengers—Mrs. Pitkethly (captain’s wife), Mr. and Mrs.
Willmott, Mr. J. B. Quarry, and Miss Quarry. No list of the crew can be found in
this Office. —I have the honor to be, Sir, your obedient servant,
W. A. Duncan, Collector of Customs.
To E. Gregory, Esq., Courier Office, Brisbane.
The rgst of the narrative will be read with greater interest in his own
words. On Wednesday we finished loading, and dropped down the stream.
On Thursday she was cleared at'the Customs, and on the sailor’s unlucky
day (Friday), the mail came on board, with the pilot, and we slanted on
our voyage, with a fresh leading wind, which lasted during that day and
the next. On Sunday, stunsails, main-skysails, and every stitch of canvas
were set, till sundown, when the weather came on threatening. All th®
small sails were taken in and stowed, and the wind increased very much
during the night. At eight bells on Monday morning all hands were
ordered on deck to shorten sail. We got her all snug. On the following
day her fine weather sails all blew away, but we immediately got new
ones bent on. The bad weather increased till Friday, when every stich of
canvas had to be taken off, and she drove under bare poles. The next
day, Saturday, the weather showed sign* of breaking, and the captain got
sights, but it was very thick. When it moderated we got a little sail on
her, to keep her steady ; and at night, during the first watch, the mate
made more sail. The captain said that we were in'the neighbourhood of
Horse Shoe Reef, or the Minerva Shoal, and told us to keep a good look
out for broken water. The first watch was relieved at 12»o’clock ;«I was
in the second watch, under the charge of the second mate. I took the
wheel from 12 to 2, when I was relieved by the eldest apprentice.
Bi tween the hours of 3 and 4 o’clock, we observed what appeared to be
%and or a dark cloud dead a-head of us. The second mate went down and
told the captain, and immediately returned on deck; he had hardly done
so, however, when she struck with great force on a rock, and the first sea
that struck her lifted her partly on the rock, and swept one of the boats
and the second mate overboard, who was never afterwards seen. The
next sea that struck her lifted her wholly on the top of the rooks, where


she stuck fast; the first shock knocked her bilge off, and otherwise damaged
her, that if she had been in deep water, she must have sunk quickly.
The captain and all hands ran on deck in great confusion, most of whom
were in their night-clothes, and finding that she was hard and fast on the
rock, the sea still running very high, and not knowing where or how we
were situated, we took shelter under the lea of the cuddy, till such time
as we could see what was best to be done.
At daylight a terrible scene presented itself, as far as the eye could
reach there were the points of the rocks awash, but no friendly land in
view. The captain ordered the jolly boat to be got over the side, as that
seemed our only chance of escape. We hung her in the tackles, but no
sooner lowered her within reach of the water than she stove to pieces in
the broken water, and became useless. We now had only the long boat
left, which was olcT and shaky. The captain ordered us to launch it over
the side, which we did, intending to keep her there till we got the passen-
gers and provisions into her, and then cut ourselves away. But no sooner
was she put over the side than the spray and broken water filled her as
shg,hung in the tackle. The captain ordered some hands into her to bail
her out, but it was so unsafe that none would risk their lives in her—
excepting the first mate—he fvas the captain’s brother. Before he had got
out a couple of buckets the stern post was jirked out of her and left
hanging in the tackles; at the same time the fore tackle got adrift, and
she was carried away from the wreck with the force of the current. Lines
were thrown out, but none reached him. There was a live sheep in the
boat beside the mate. He then calmly sat in the bows of the boat, and bade
good-bye to his brother and sister, and awaited the will of God : presently
he disappeared from sight, and was seen no more. He could not have
lived long. Our position being now apparently hopeless, the captain
called us all into the cabin, where we engaged in religious exercises, and
commended ourselves to God in prayer. We then went on deck again,
and discussed the propriety of making a raft; although our chances of
being picked up were very small. This we decided to do, as our position
was very hazardous, as every sea threatened to wash us off our resting-
place. We accordingly set to work and cut away the spars of the ship,
and fixed them—first the mizenmast, then the mainmast—but it was very
difficult to make use of them, for they came down with the sails all flying,
and they got very much entangled- With these and some small spars we
had in-board, we had enough for our purpose. The large outside spars we
rested partly on the rocks and partly on the wreck; we lashed and nailed
them strongly together, and in the centre we fixed a mast and platform of
light spars, to enable us to sit and lie down out of the water. When
finished, the next difficulty 7 was to get it adrift. With great labour we
managed to get it first off the ship’s quarter on to the rock all safe, and
then into the water, this we accomplished by middle day Sunday. We
then began to look up the provisions, and to our dismay we found the
bread all utterly spoilt with salt water; and the preserved meat, which we
had previously piled on deck to put in the boats was nearly all washed
overboard, unobserved in our confusion. To add to our misfortune, there
was nothing left whole that would hold water, excepting a small keg.
All the provision we could muster was, a few tins of preserved meat, the
small keg of water, and a little brandy. This was deposited in the safest
part of the raft, the ladies and children were next put on, with the
Captain’s instruments, charts, some blankets, and clothing. We were


at last all safely on the raft, and it was dur intention to stay by tbe wreck
a few days, and if possible build a boat, as there were some boat planks
aboard. "During the night, however, the strength of the current and the
dead weight of the raft caused her to part her moorings, and we were
carried to sea. There were on the raft three ladies, two children, two
gentlemen passengers, the captain, carpenter, sailmaker, cook, four able
seamen, including myself, four apprentices, and two black men, stowaways,
working their passage —in all 21 souls.
It was agreed that the stores should be given out equally amongst us,
and that there should be no lots drawn to take away each other’s lives.
One tablespoonful of preserved meat a-day was served out, and the water
was measured in the neck of a glass bottle, four to each person—the meat
about 12 o’clock in the day; the water, one in the morning, two in the
middle of the day, and the other in the evening. All went on as well as
could be expected under the circumstances for twenty-two days. The
current and our small sail carried us about forty miles a-day. At first
we caught a few birds, which were a great treat; their blood was greedily
drunk, and their raw flesh eaten with gusto : but as we neared the land
we caught no more. The weather was fine throughout: in the daytime
there would be a light wind, which died away at sundown. The captain
took sights occasionally. On the 22nd day out we saw a sail in the
distance, which kept in sight about four hours, but finally disappeared,
we having no means of attracting attention. This greatly disappointed us.
A few days after this the first man died (James Quarry), leaving his
child to survive him for a short time. He said the day before that he
was dying, and that he should not live long. As soon as he died he was
stripped and thrown over, the sharks devouring him instantly before our
eyes. The next day or so we caught a fine rock cod fish with a line knd
hook baited with a*bit of white rag, which was cut up in equal parts and
served out. We caught another fish, but smaller, the next day, and
another the following day. preserved meat had all run out. It
then rained, but the sail was so soaked with salt water that we could not
drink what we caught till the salt was well nigh washed out of it. We
managed, however, to get enough to eke out our small storq before, it cleared
up again. The sucking child of Mrs. Wilmot was the next to succumb,
shortly afterwards the other little girl, and next to her Mrs. Wilmot
herself died. Her husband then took off what clothing she had on, which
was only a night dress, and threw her into the sea; but he told us that if
we were men, we would not look at her. She remained in company with
us longer than the others, floating on the water; she was observed near
us about twenty minutes. The burial service was read over each. At
this time they dropped off one after the other very rapidly, but I was so
exhausted myself,that I forget the order of their names.
We next began to think how we should obtain food. Our only
fishing line had been broken and carried away. We had more hooks, but
no more line. There were plenty of sharks about, and we tried to catch
them. The captain devised a plan to snare them with a running bowline
knot, which we managed as follows: —We cut off the leg of one of the
men who died, and lashed it at the end of the oar for a bait, and on the
end of the other oar we put the snare, so that the fish must come
through the snare to get at the bait. Presently one cdme, which we
captured and killed with the carpenter’s axe. We cuthis head off, and flayed
him. The sailmaker’s hunger, however, was greater than his caution, for.


while he held its head in his hand eating it, he incautiously put his hand
in its mouth, which gave him a severe bite, —so much so, that he did not
want any more of that shark to eat: sucking his own blood quite satisfied
his hunger for that time. The rest of us made a fine meal off him. Three
days after that we caught another in the same way, and with the same
bait, which we cut up in strips and dried, which was much better. ' We
then caught another, ancV did the same with it. Qur numbers by this
time were very much reduced. Shortly after this we made the Barrier
Eeef; we came down upon it driven by a strong current. We managed,
after a great deal of trouble, to get her clear over it in deep water before
dark. Two days after this, we came in sight of the land, which appears
to have been Cape Upstart. We were not a long way out at sea, and at
night we passed it. Two or three days afterwards we saw the land once
more, and were driven towards Cleveland Bay; but just as we were pre-
preparing to get ashore, in the hopes of getting water, a land breeze sprung
up, and drove to sea again. During the night, however, fhe sea
breeze drove us in shore once more, and eventually, about midnight, we
landed on the southern point of Cape Cleveland. One or two tried to
water, but were not successful; so we laid down on the sand, and
went to sleep. Presently it came on to rain, which filled the holes in the
rocks, and we filled our tins. So that we might not lose all knowledge
of time, while on the raft, the captain cut a notch in a piece of wood every
day, and on counting them there were forty-two. Of the twenty-one who
left the wreck alive, only seven remained —the captain, his wife, Mr*
George Wilmot, myself, James Gooley, the sailmaker, and one of
the boys. ,
In the morning, when* the sun arose, we washed and dried a piece of
white rag, took a magnifying glass out of the spy-glass, set light to the
rag, and made a fire. We then cut some pieces of the dried shark off,
boiled it in a preserved meat tin, and ate it, with a drink of^ clear fresh
water, for breakfast, which we enjoyed very much.
At low water the captain, being the strongest, sallied forth in quest
of food. He shortly afterwards returned for the axe, bringing a few rock
oysters, which were very plentiful, sticking in large clusters to the rocks.
Some of us managed to crawl and get a few, and return to our camping
ground,"but being so long on the raft without exercise, it was very difficult
to move about at first. We continued to do this fjjr a few days; but
Mr. Wilmot and the able seaman, James Gooley were so exhausted, they
were utterly unable to move about to provide for themselves ; so they lay
down by a water-hole and died, nobody being equal to provide for more
than themselves. The captain found in his rambles a native canoe, and
in it the lines and spears of a fishing party of natives, who had evidently
been there lately—as I ultimately learned they usually did—in the rainy
season. The sailmaker. Jack Millar, hearing of this, determined he would
go away in the canoe, and make another effort to reach a more inviting
spot. He could not prevail upon any of us to accompany him in sus| a
frail thing, 5o he started alone the next morning. We eventually knew
he was starved to death on the shores of the next bay, for the natives
found his body, and told us of him.
The same day that he left, or the next, as I and the captain were
going over a hill into the adjoining bay, we saw a full-rigged ship running
down the inside channel, but having no means of signalizing her we
could only sit down and cast a longing eye at her white sails, wishing we


were on board. She soon disappeared out of sight. We then came on
the track of some blaekfellows, but could not trace them far as the rains
had washed them and made them illegible.
After we had been fourteen days on the shore we were seen by some
of the natives. It appeared that for several nights they had observed
falling stars in one particular direction—the direction of the rocks on
which we were. They also, it afterwards appeared, have a kind of super-
stition in reference to falling stars, they think that they point out the
direction of an hostile tribe. Something, however, more than usual pos-
sessed the minds of these blaekfellows, and they bent their steps in the
direction the stars fell, and came on to the coast, where they immediately
discovered fresh-made tracks, which they followed up till they came to a
camp fire at the place where the boy had camped on the preceding night.
Indeed he had only j ust left. In consequence of the low state of his body
he.had two large boils on his legs, and was thus not able to get to the
general camping ground the previous night, but as soon as possible in the
morning he came away ; it was a few minutes after he had left that the
blacks came upon his track. They followed him up at a distance and
saw him, but as there were so many tracks they did not come near nor
show themselves : they, however, tracked him clown to the captain’s wife
—I and the captain were out. They then arranged that one of them
should stay in sight and the other two should go to the camp and bring
some more—they brought about 20 or 30. When I returned in the
evening, the captain’s wife said she had heard the natives jabbering and
whistling; I did not think she had. When the captain came Ipome she*
told him, and while we were talking about it—about ten minutes after the
captain came home—she heard the same noises again. She immediately
jumped up and went outside to see what it was, she looked up on the
rocks, and there, sure enough, she saw a number of the naked blaekfellows.
She exclaimed—“ Oh George, we have come to our last now, here are such
a lot of the wild blacks.” We went out to see, and there, sure enough,
they were. At first they were as afraid of us as we were of them. Pre-
sently we held up our hands in supplication to them to help us, some of
them returned it; after a while they came among us and felt us all over
from bead to foot. They satisfied themselves that we were human beings,
and hearing us talk, they asked us by signs where we had come from.
We made signs and told them we had come across the sea, and seeing how
thin and emaciated we were, took pity on us; they asked us, as well as
we could understand, where we were going to sleep, for it was getting
dark. We showed them in the rock. They came in with us, we were
going to give them some of our things, but we found while we were en-
gaged talking, some of the others had been in and eased us of everything.
Eventually about ten of the old men came in the cave-like hollow rock
that we had made our camping place, to sleep with us, and they kept us
separated by laying between us. They kept up a constant jabber among
themselves, which led to a second and more minute examination of our
persons, to ascertain our sex, which seemed necessary to them on account
of our being clothed. The captain’s wife strongly resisted, but they per-
sisted, and when they found we were like themselves—male and female
—they were satisfied, and did not further interfere with us. They seemed
to understand that the captain and his wife bore that relationship by
their Being always so close together, and they never afterwards troubled
us. We got some lighi sleep during the night. At daylight the next


morning, there was great commotion among the blacks as to what should
be done with us. There were present representatives of two different
tribes—the boy and myself were claimed as relatives of one tribe who had
jumped up whitefellows —their permanent camping place was about
Mount Elliott; and the captain and his wife were similarly claimed by
the tribes belonging to Cape Cleveland." Hot content with taking all that
we brought with us on the raft, they commenced to strip us. They took
the boy’s trousers off, but he begged to be allowed to keep his shirt and
sou’-wester, pointing to the sun, to make them understand that it would
kill him ; they seemed to understand, and allowed him to retain them.
They then took the captain’s clothes all off; and when they came to me
and the captain’s wife we made signs that we were afraid of the sun, so
they let us retain them. Presently, seeing that we had our clothes on
and the captain was without his, they gave him them back again. They
then gave us some small roots to eat, about the size of small marbles,
which we enjoyed very much—they tasted like nuts. They pointed to
our stomachs, to make us understand they knew we were hungry; and
to their own that they had plenty. They also pointed to the bush to tell
us if we came with them they would give us plenty to eat and drink.
On our signifying our intention to go with them they were very glad,
and wanted us to join with them in a corroboree, but as we could not, we
thought we should please them by singing a hymn. I accordingly gave
out the words of a hymn I knew—
God moves in a mysterious way,
His wonders to perform, &c.
to the end, which we sung, and which amazed them much. While we
were by ourselves in the cave every night, we read the Bible, sung
hymns, and prayed, as we had done on the raft —we had among the few
books we took with us from the wreck, a Prayer-book, Bible, and Hymn-
book.
They soon began to make preparations to move off towards the camp,
and were delighted at our going with them. Seeing the boy was unable
to walk, one of them picked him up and put him on his shoulders, with
his legs hanging down —the same way as they carry their children when
on a journey. And seeing us so weak and exhausted, two of them helped
each of us along, one walking each side of us to lean on. After we had
got a little way, three new arrivals came from the camp ; they were told
to stay somewhat in advance of us, and wait till we came up—it was on
the edge of a plain —where they had made a small fire. When we came
up with them they were sitting round the fire —we recognised them as
strangers —they were powerful men, and seemed to be sitting in
state, as they did not move when we came up. Great fear seized hold of
me, for I thought they were chiefs ; and when they came to lead me up
to them to satisfy their curiosity, thinking I was going to be led up to
slaughter—to be cooked and • eaten —I refused and struggled against it;
but on reflection seeing the fire was so small, and not observing any
weapons with them, it struck me they could not mean that, so I suffered
myself to be led up to-them, and sat down. They looked at me, and
observing me shake with fear, they warmed their hands at the fire, and
put them on my face, and all over my body, to re-assure me, seeing which
I took heart again. The captain, bis wife, and the boy, underwent the
same scrutiny. Here we halted for awhile, and they wanted us to join
them in a corroboree again, but not being able they had it among


th pm selves. Some of them dressed themselves after a fashion with the
clothes, shirts,-trousers, coats, <fec., which we had saved from the wreck,
and a more ludicrous scene could not be imagined ; one with only a
sleeve of a shirt on, another with only a pair of trousers —his legs put
through the bottoms, and another hind part before —some one way and
some another. They also tove the leaves out of the books, and fastened
them to their hair and bodies ; altogether they presented a most ludicrous
appearance. In the meanwhile some were sent on ahead to the camp, to
tell them to make haste and get plenty to eat, and prepare'for a grand
corroboree. From where we were on the sea shore to their camp was
from five to eight miles, but it was sundown before we reached the camp.
The first thing they did was to lay us down and cover us over with dried
grass, to prevent * our being seen till the appointed time. They then col-
lected together to the number of about fifty or sixty—men, women, and
children —and sat down in a circle; those who discovered us went into
the middle, dressed up in the things they had taken from us, wuth a little
extra paint, and danced a corroboree, in which they explained in their
rude song, the result of their discoveries, from, whence they had brought
us, and all they knew about us, which greatly surprised them. That
being over, we were led into the middle of the ring in triumph. The
sight of us—being white people, and dressed —produced a panic, and they
scampered off in all directions. After a little time, however, being re-as-
sured, they returned one by one and. looked at us, and a few of the more
courageous felt us over; by and by they came nearer and examined us
more minutely, till all fear was removed. After their curiosity had some-
what subsided, they led us to a gunyah, which w r as placed at our service,
and one and the other of them brought us plenty to eat and drink, and
frequently came to make enquiries about us—whether we wanted any-
thing, and to have a peep at us. They went on preparing their evening
meal, but one after the other they gradually disappeared, and went to
bed. In the morning they replenished our stock of roots and got Us
water, and then turned out in quest of their day’s wants. As they re-
turned they brought numbers of their relations and friends from the near
tribes, and in the evening they •had another corroboree, explaining all
about us. When they had clone, they came and fetched us into their
midst, as on the previous even A.g to show us to them. This was conti-
nued evening after evening for about six or eight evenings successively,
as representatives from the more distant tribes came in to see the won-
derful people, till the most distant known to them had seen us. This was
carried on to such a length that we became wearied out, and we expressed
our disinclination to go; but they made us understand that they would
kill us if we did not, and we thought it prudent not to put them to the
test, although we believe they did not mean to do so—only to frighten
us. But things eventually assumed their usual course at the camp.
They would not, however, let us go out to get food while we were so
weak, but gathered us sufficient for all our wants. As the novelty of our
situation wore away, and when our strength was sufficiently established,
we began tc join them in their search for roots and other kinds of food,
under their guidance, till we could do for ourselves.
After we had been with them for five or six months, and we began
to pick up their language, they made us understand that a large tribe and
a great many other tribes were coining to see us, and that they would be
there in the dry season, in about four moons’ time. We spent our time


in wjnderihg about with them on their fishing excursions, and in learn-
ing to snare ducks, wild turkeys, geese, and other wild which I
became very expert in after a while, much more so than the natives them-
selves, because I took more care in making strong string for the nooses,
and in choosing the best places to set them; also, being a sailor I w T as
able to make better knots than they, which made them very attached to
me.
Time yan on, and strange natives began to jcollect in large numbers—
as they had previously intimated to us. These were the tribes that we
had been led to expect were coming to see us. When they all arrived,
they numbered considerably over a thousand souls, this was a larger num-
ber than I have ever seen since. They belonged to %bout ten different
tribes. We learned that some of the tribes belonged to the country far
south of where we were, which determined us, if possible, to go away
with them when they returned, hoping by that means we should be able
to reach some white settlement. They had a grand corroboree, which
lasted about three days, and went through the rites and cere-
monies of the Boree, or making young lads nien, and instructing them in
their duties towards the women —hereafter to be described. The tribe I
was in went through their ceremonies by themselves, when about fifty
lads were made men ; and another tribe by themselves made only about
twenty. After it was all over, they began to move off to their various
districts. We stole away, and went with the tribe that was going south.
We were then well known to all the tribe, and we got distributed one in
one tribe and one in another. The boy went down farther south than
mygelf. The tribe I was in were located on the present site of Port
Denison. Nearly two years after we had been living with them, intelli-
gence was brought us that the boy was dead, and that they had burnt
his remains, as they do with the remains of their own dead. About six
weeks after the boy died, the captain sickened and died also, I believe the
death of the boy preyed upon his mind, and also the degraded state of
his wife. For up to this time she managed, by dint of great difficulty, to
keep herself partially covered, but he knew it could not last much longer,
and the thoughts of her having to cor 1 qo low, and our utter helpless
condition, was too much for him —he e> fder it. The sight was too
much for me, I almost broke my heart. "■ was forced to leave, and go on
a hunting and fishing expedition to i( ert my mind from the painful
feeling of,isolation and despair of ever being restored to civ.fi.ation. I
saw he could not last long, and I told them not to burn him, but to bury
him in the ground, which they did. As soon as I heard of his death I
hurried back, but before I reached the camp his wifa had followed him—
four days afterwards. Being in a oamige tribe, I felt lonely, and I deter-
mined to go back to the tribe that claimed me as their own, thinking
they would take more care of me. After several months I reached it,
and they were all very 7 glad to see me, and asked me about the others ;
when I told them they were dead, they were very angry with me, and
laid all the blame on me, and said I deserved a crack on the head. The
tribe that the captain belonged to would have killed me if they dared, but
my tribe protected me. It was the cause of a good deal of trouble be-
tween the two tribes. I was the first to go away with the captain, and
when'we got about forty miles the captain went back alone and fetched
his wife and the boy, and as I did not appear, they said it was me who
had taken or decoy r ed them away.


After the misunderstanding was settled, I lived on year after year in
the tribe as one of themselves. On one occasion when I was on the coast
fishing, I saw a barque going to the north in the inner channel, but she
was too far out for me to attract her attention. Shortly after this, I was
on Mount Elliot, looking for honey and bread fruit, which was not quite
ripe, a report was brought to me that a vessel was seen on the coast at
Cape Cleveland, where our raft had landed, and the people on board had
given some of the natives some speckled shirts, which they showed me.
This appears to have been Captain Till, who was on a survey expedition.
Some time after this, another vessel was seen, which was duly
reported to me, and the men from the vessel went on the rocks and looked
through a glass, and brought down the sun to the water. I had previously
told them, if ever they saw white men again, to try and make them under-
stand that there was a white man living there with them. On this
occasion they remembered my wish, and tried their hardest, but seem to
have failed: the white men became alarmed, and thought they meant
mischief, whereas it was only their earnestness in trying to cmke them
understand. The following quotations from the report of the proceedings
of the Government schooner Spitfire, in 1860, will explain this report:—
Saturday, 15th September, 1860.—Having been bove-to during part of the night,
we bore up at daylight, with Cape Cleveland bearing W. \ S., about nine miles distant,
and at 9.30 a.m. came to in its roadstead. Fixing on a convenient rocky promontory
for making observations for latitude and longitude, we landed ; and perceiving a small
party of natives, I was in hopes that such friendly intercourse would take place as would
enable us to gather information respecting the mouth of the Burdekin. Such hopes,
however, were soon blighted ; for upon an increase of their party, they suddenly made
an attack, which was instantly repulsed; when they retreated with great rapidity.
Observing a canoe passing round one of the points into a lagoon, we gave chase:
and after it was deserted, we took possession, and broke it to pieces, so as to cut off the
communication and prevent any immediate increase to the force of the aborigines,
already numerous and violently hostile. ,
Sunday, 16th September. —During this day we observed considerable numbers of
natives about the beaches and hills, shrieking and yelling most diabolically. Finally,
(as we did not land on this day), they retired towards the south.
Nothing is said in the report about shooting the natives; but one
raw-boned stout able-bodied blackfellow, a friend of mine, was shot dead
by some one in the boat, and another was wounded; and the hideous
yelling was the noise they usually make over their dead.
About three years ago there was a report brought to me by the
blacks of a distant tribe that a white man had been seen with two horses.
Some of a tribe were lamenting the death of an old man, and while doing
so, this white man fired in among them, and shot the son of the old man,
who was lying on his father’s dead body. The rest ran away; but
eventually they apparently made friends of each other, and they got him
off the horse, and by a preconcerted signal massacred him, and tried to
kill the horses, thinking they could speak and do mischief as the man had
done; but they got away. Mr. P. Somers, of Port Denison, told me it
would most likely be a Mr, Humphrey, who had left the party he was
out with in search of runs, intending to go by a new track. After this,
four stray cattle were seen in our district; but I was on the coast with
one of the blacks —my brother-in-law —making a possum skin rug. When
I came back they showed me the tracks of the cattle, and I recognized
them as being cattle. I questioned them about them ; they said three
had teats, and one had none ; thus I understood three were cows, and one
was a bull. I told them they were what white men ate, and they chaffed


me about their great size, long tails, big ears and horns. Those reports
made me feel uneasy ; I began to think that civilized life was drawing
nearer, and it considerably raised my hopes of being restored to
civilization. Soon afterwards, a report came into camp of a lot of white
and black men on horseback, near Cape Upstart, shooting down the tribe
that I had been living with when the captain died at Port Denison. They
explained to me about the saddles for the men to sit in, the stirrups,
bridles, guns, smoke, and the noise it made when fired; and asked me a
great many questions. I explained it all to them, to their great surprise.
On hearing this, I travelled south to the Burdekin River (Mall Mall,
native name), thinking my chances would be greater on the river than at
Mount Elliott—fifty miles further inland. My tribe kept coming backwards
and forwards, and they asked me why I did not come back, as I had lived
with them so long; they began to suspect something. I told them I
would by-and-by. Erom the first I represented to them I had a wife
and two children, knowing they would not think it so strange at my
wanting to get away, and because I could the better excuse myself from
being too closely linked in with them by taking a wife, which I knew
would be dangerous in many ways. At last I told them I wanted to see
the white men for myself—to see if they knew my people and to
get clothes and guns and old iron, and that I would come
back again. They then gave me up, and let me do as I liked,
as they saw I was bent on going. From this time forward I received
almost daily reports of the white people. There were two white
men and a black boy constantly in the neighborhood where I was
—the black boy being a great favorite among the gins. I was about a
moon and-a-half from the place where they were, at one of the fishing
grounds (Bokudally), and I left to try and see them, but could not. So
I returned to our head camping ground again. Shortly afterwards I
heard of the cattle being on the river in great numbers, and of a man being
on horseback with a stock whip which he cracked, and they thought it
was a gun, on hearing which, they got up the trees quite frightened.
They saw him get off the horse and drink some water with his hands,
but the water being hot, he scraped the san,d aside and got some cool; a
little black dog was with him. They described to me that there were so
many cattle, that they had drunk ail the water that was in the holes.
They said they would have got the fish out only they were too much
afraid. Hearing this, I was very anxious to find out the white settlement,
for I felt sure there was one not very far off. Having, however, been
with the blacks so long, there was a strong attachment felt for me; they
were not willing to let me go, telling me I should be mistaken for a black-
fellow, and that I should be killed. Hearing that the blacks had guns I
could not make out, and was afraid myself, lest if I met one of the
blackfellows he w r ould not be able to understand me ; indeed, I could not
tell whether I should be able to make a white man understand me, being
away so long, and was quite unable to satisfy myself that what I thought
was English was so. The next news I heard was, that about fifteen
blackfellows of a fishing party belonging to the tribe I was then
living with, were shot down dead. I told them it served them right; if
they would let me go away, and show me where the white men were, I
might be the means of saving their lives. They reasoned among them-
selves that what I said was true, and they agreed to go on a hunting
expedition on a hill called by the natives ( Yamarama ■), which was about


luilf-a-mile from the station, which I was destined soon to reach. But
thinking that the white men were the same as ourselves, wandering in
their habits, they were not sure whether they were there. When we got
to the hill, we spread our nets and commenced to work ; and, while we
were hunting, the old women went down as spies to look for the white
men. They speedily brought word back, and I made out from their
report that there was a large hut, and that they had seen red and white
blankets hanging on stock-yard fences, and heard a dog bark, and an old
sheep bleeting tied up to a tree ; also, that they heard the report of a gun
twice, but could not see where it came from. * I then wanted to go and
see for myself, but the man I was living with was not willing without
somebody was with me. So he made his gin go with me. When we got
clear of the hill going down in the direction of the hut, we saw the sheep
feeding in the grass, the sight of which so frightened the gin, she not
having seen any before, that she ran away back, I looked at the sheep
but could not see anybody with them ; so I went further on and came to
a water hole, where I washed myself to make myself as white as possible.
I went on still further till I came to the sheep pens, and saw the blankets
and sheep as the gin had told me. I also saw the smoke of the fire in
the hut, and heard noises. I stood behind the yard some minutes not
knowing what to do, and how best to make myself known, and trying to
think what I should say. Presently I took courage and got on the fence
to prevent the dogs from biting me, and called out so that they might hear
me, “ What cheer, shipmates.” There were, it afterwards appeared, three
living in the hut, but there were only two at home then. They heard me,
and knowing it to be a strange voice, one of them came out and saw me
there—neither black nor white—naked, and looked surprised; he went
half in the hut again and spoke to his mate. I understood him to say,'
come out, Bill, here is a red or yellow man standing on the rails, naked,
he is not a black man—bring the gun. But being dreadfully afraid they
would use the gun, I said «do not shoot me, I am a British object a
shipwrecked sailor.” Of course I meant “subject,” but in the excitement
of the moment I did not know what I said. One said to the other “he
says he is a shipwrecked sailor”—one of the men’s names was Hatch, the
other Wilson, the latter had been a sailor himself. They told me to come
round the stock yard; which I did—they meeting me half-way—they
cross-questioned me and I told them when and where I was wrecked and
all about my misfortunes. They asked me whether I knew what day and
date it was. I told them no, they then told me it was Sunday, the 25th
of January, 1863. They reckoned back to 1846, when I was lost and
told me it was 17 years, and asked me if I thought it was so long. I said
no, not half so long. After talking some time, asking me many questions
about the country, the blacks, my mode of life, my wishes and hopes, &c.,
&c., they took me in the hut and gave me a piece of bread, and asked me
if I knew what it was. I told them it was made with flour. I tried to
eat a piece, but I was so overjoyed that it stuck in my throat, and I could
not get it down. Besides, I was not hungry, for we had caught twenty
small grey wallabys during the day, and we had had plenty to eat. They
gave me some tea and asked me if I knew what that was. I said yes, but
that it was too sweet. I had not been accustomed to sugar, and so they
put some water to it. After I had been in the hut for some time they told
me to look out and tell them what I saw. I saw a large flock of sheep
with their third companion, coming home—he was a Scotchman, named


Creek, They then wanted to give me some clothes, but I told them I had
better go back to the natives who were on the hills in the distance, where
we had been hunting all day, just as I was for that night, to tell them to
go away towards the sea coast; and I would return in the morning, which
they agreed to, and instructed me to tell them that if they did not inter-
fere with us, we should not interfere with them. They also told me that
if I did not come back in the morning they should conclude I told them a
lie, and that they would put the black trackers on our track and shoot us.
When I left them I went back to the hills to the blacks, and they
began to surround me and ask me whether I had seen the white people
and how many there were. I told them as I thought for their good, so as
to intimidate them that there were a great many people, many more than
themselves, and plenty of guns, and that if they went near they would
be killed. I told them the white men had come to take their land
away. They naturally act on the principle that might not right is
the law of the world; and, therefore, they are the more ready to
act on it. So believing me, and bowing at once to the force of might,
they told me to ask the white man to let them have all the ground to the
north of the Burdekin, and to let them fish in the rivers; also the low
grounds they live on to get the roots—ground which is no good to white
people, near the sea coast and swampy. They asked me what I intended
to do. I told them I was going to stay that night, but in the morning I
must go back, or they would come and track me up, and shoot us all.
They said, “Perhaps they are doing so now.” I assured them they were
not, but that we must go further away. So we went four or five miles,
and camped. The next morning they all came round me again, and
finding I was determined to go, they asked me if I would come back
again in a few days. I told them no, I should be away quite three or
four moons. They then said, “Youwill forget us altogether!” and when
I was coming away, the man I was living with burst out crying;—so did
his gin, and several of the other gins and men. It was a wild, touching
scene. The remembrance of their past kindness came full upon me, and
quite overpowered me. There was a short struggle between the feeling
of love I had for my old friends and companions, and the desire once
more to live a civilized life, which can be better imagined than described.
I then left them, and came on to the hut. The men were glad to see
me, and they took me down to the water-hole, washed me with soap and
flannel, and brought me up and gave me some clothes. That day we
tried to cross the river to get to the head-station to get their rations, but
it was too swollen. We came back, and at night they killed a sheep, and
cooked me a chop of it. I remained a fortnight, in case the natives should
come to me; but none of them ever came in sight. I then gave myself
up to Mr. Meyers, who left me in charge of Mr. Salting, of Hiffling
cattle-station, until the return of the Commissioner’s orderly from the
Fanning River, who accompanied me safely into the town of Bowen.
I experienced great kindness from Mr. W. H. Thomas and Mr. P. Somers,
who gave me clothes and collected a subscription for me in my necessities.
From Port Denison Murrells was passed on to Rockhampton by the
captain of one of the steamers, where he stayed a short time, and where also
the inhabitants made a subscription or him. From Rockhampton he went to
Brisbane by the same means. In each of these places he was besieged by
those curious to see a man who had passed such a strrnge life. He was,


however, very shy, especially at first, and was not communicative ; this arose
mainly from his inability to express himself readily. The knowledge of his
own language came back to him very slowly, and it was very troublesome at
first lor him to make himself understood. He made several acquaintances in
Brisbane during his stay there, among others, the Rev. B. G. Wilson, Baptist
Minister of Wharf-street, by whom he was publicly baptized on a profession
of faith in Christ. He was introduced to Sir G. P. Bowen by Geo. Edmon-
stone, Esq., M.L.A., and Mayor of Brisbane at that time. He afterwards
visited Government-house several times, and ultimately the Executive gave
him an appointment in the Custom House Department at Bowen, as a bonded
warehouse-keeper. After a short stay in the metropolis he entered on the
active duties of his office. Some time afterwards the Government organised a
party to examine the coast northwards of Bowen, and he was appointed one
of the party; he was useful in that he could easily converse with the natives :
he would, no doubt, have been much more useful to an overland party in that
neighbourhood. When he heard of the equipment of a party to go in search
of Leichhardt, he did, through the columns of the Port Denison Times, offer
his services, he fully believing it probable that some of the party are yet
alive. He became a freeholder at Port Denison and a general favorite with the
inhabitants—he no doubt giving some sort of eclat to the neighborhood—his
living so near the scene of his solitary life. His personal appearance was
somewhat striking. Of course exposure to a tropical sun and climate had
made his skin dark. He was rather short and thick set, his eyes were
sunken, and he had a very wide mouth. His teeth were nearly worn down
to the gums, for they were his only knife for years. He had suffered many
years from rheumatism. In the heaviest of their rains the most he would
frequently have to cover him would be a handful of grass to cover over his
ears at night. About once every twelve months for some years past, he had
had large rheumatic swellings in various parts of his body, which had left ter-
rible marks on him, and which he told the writer he believed would be his
death, indeed, at that time he was sadly complaining of the formation of one
of those swellings of which he was greatly afraid. He also entered the ma-
trimonial state, which, together with the circumstances of his death and
burial are thus recorded to in the Port Denison 'Times :
It is our mournful duty to record the death of the pioneer white man in the north
—dames Morrill —which took place on Monday, 30th October. For some time he had
been suffering from the effects of a wound received in the knee during his sojourn among
the aborigines, which had been attacked with rheumatism, and ultimately brought on
inflammation and fever, which resulted in his death. It will be a satisfaction to his
numerous friends to know that during his last illness he was unceasingly attended by
Dr. W. S. Smith. Jemmy was devotedly attached to his wife and child, and during his
late illness, when his mind passed, as in a dream, through the scenes of misery and care
of his exile, he always returned to his wife and child, and his only care seemed to be,
how they should in future be provided for. He was a general favorite throughout the
district, and when his death became known in the town on Monday, the whole of the
flags of the ships in harbor, and at the various stores throughout the town, were lowered
to half-mast. The funeral took place yesterday, and was attended by a large number of
mourners, including many of our influential citizens. The men belonging to the pilot
station had asked and obtained permission to act as bearers to their old comrade’s
remains ; the police also attended, and moved in the procession next the hearse ; then
came the Mayor and the Police Magistrate, followed by a long string of vehicles, horse-
men, and pedestrians. During the reading of the solemn and beautiful service of the
Church of England, by the Eev. E. Q-rifiiths, many an eye glistened with the unbidden
tear as some act of kindness of the departed was recalled.
James Morrill was by no means an old man, his age being only 41, but he was
rendered prematurely aged by the troubles and hardships he had encountered during his
adventurous life. Could the Mount Elliott blacks learn that their pah-faced brothel


was dead, what howling and woe there would be. But their grief, though perhaps more
demonstrative, could not be more serious or deeply felt than is that experienced by the
people of Bowen at the loss of one who was always ready to explain the use of a black-
fellow’s mysterious weapon, or the qualities, poisonous or otherwise, of the various roots
and plants found in the neighbourhood.
CHAPTER 111.
The Aboriginals of Northern Queensland —Nomadic habits —Living in. Tribes—What
they eat as Food—Language —How they make Fire—The Ceremony of making the
lads Men—Relationship—How they dispose of the Bead —Flax grown, and the uses
they make of it—Description of the Country—Gold—Extinction of the Race.
The aboriginals among whom Janies Murrells had been living so long, he
describes as a vastly superior race of people to any he had seen in the
more southern part of the colony, physically, and as to general appearance.
Nevertheless, they are treacherous, jealous, and exceedingly cunning.
They are not black—they are more of the colour of half-castes. When
born they are nearly white, but when they are three days old the gins
squeeze their own milk bn them, and rub charcoal into their skins to make
them black and shine. They have sunken eyes, broad flat noses —which
are made so by their parents in infancy—and very large broad mouths.
The infants are allowed to suck at the breast a very long while —indeed,
until they are old enough to get their own food. He (J. Murrells) had
seen a child sucking at the breast with its next brother or sister. Pie had
also seen the little things working in the swamps with their mothers,
getting roots, and every now and then go and take a suck at the breast.
The women have very few children, seldom exceeding four, and very
seldom more than one at a time. He knew of about four cases of twins.
He also remembered that in one case when there was a boy and a girl
born to a woman, the father killed the boy, and saved the girl, to save
the trouble of bringing them up —for they are very lazy. It caused,
however, a great disturbance in the camps among their friends, who
thought they ought to have brought them up. The women go in the
swamps the next day after their confinement as usual, to gather food, as
though nothing had happened. The men have several wives—in some
instances as many as eight or nine—and it is about their wives that all
their wars, fights, and feuds occur; they steal them from each other, and
frequently lend them or sell them for a time, for a slight consideration.
It was his early knowledge of this that made him very careful.
They never stay long in a locality ; as one place becomes a little
exhausted of food, they travel to another. In the wet and cold season
they put up small gunyahs to live in, but in no particular order. They
live hi tribes, each tribe speaking a different dialect, —it can hardly be
called a different language. James Murrells could speak eight of these
dialects. They have no regular chiefs ; the strongest is the best man.
They get their living by fishing, hunting, digging in the earth
for roots, gathering fruits, &o. They can eat anything: among other
things, sharks, alligators, shrimps, shell fish, and fish of all kinds.
Kangaroos, rats, wallabies, snakes, grubs, snails, and all kinds of creeping
things ; wild ducks, geese, turkeys ; several lands of roots, one of 'which
grows at the tops of the mountains is the best eating, called moogoondah :
it is white, sweet, firm, dry, and grows in red clay soil. There is another
lower down, on the foot of the mountains, in the scrub, called malboon,
which is soft and more moist, and is very nice eating. There is another
root, rather of a sticky nature when cooked, grown on the mountains (not


In the scrub, but in the grass), and white, like a turnip, with a small thin
leaf, called carnool. There is another, smaller and darker in its colour,
hut in other respects very much like it, called cahnan. Another, a creeper,
which grows on the high banks of the fresh-water rivers, with a small
green leaf, the leaves very thick, called booan. There is another, similar
to a turnip, but smaller, called manoon. There is one which runs in and
out among the grass with a little blue flower, called cardoola or carlmbar ;
and many others more or less like them. They have several kinds of
fruits: —a plum, very large, but very little flesh on it (all stone nearly),
called cowan gowan , or ooluhhu; there is a small currant, very blue in
colour, but nearly all stone, called moorgah mudda ; a wild banana, full of
black seed, and very little flesh. There is also a white berry, similar to
the white currant, very sweet, called walba. There is another, which is
red, nearly all stone, called mooray. There is a fruit like an apple, called
barkabah; a red fig, called cowarah; and a‘black one, called baltamoo.
The bread-fruit grows on the mountains, called mugurdah. The following
remarks by Monsieur Thozet, of some of the natural productions above
and elsewhere alluded to, written by that gentleman, which appeared in
the Rockhampton Bulletin, of the 14th of March, 1803, will no doubt be
read with interest by botanists and the scientific world :
The importance of Morrills’ experience would have been practically illustrated,
had his services been at the disposal of the late lamented Yiotorian Expedition, by the
preservation of Burke and Wills’ lives, through his knowledge of indigenous articles of
food, and the consequent certainty of their ultimate return to relate their own achieve-
ments. But fate otherwise willed it; and Providence appears now to have conferred
upon us a means of averting the recurrence of similar disasters. With the above
preface, then, we will at once plunge in madias res , and commence our botanical
recapitulation with the native small plum, aboriginally known as the Balemo; botani-
cally, as the Ficus aspera, E. Br., a shrub occasionally verging into a small tree, and
pointed out by Morrill on the northern range of the Eitzroy. This plant can be readily
identified by its oval dark-green leaves, which, like its specific name, indicates its
singular roughness. The milky juice of the young shoots is emyloyed by the natives
medicinally, and is represented by Morrill, from personal experience, to be very
efficacious in healing wounds. After the application of the milky juice of the Balemo,
the scraped root bark of the Ourai (or Greivia of botanists), a genus belonging to the
Tiliacese order, is employed as a poultice to the wound —it is to be presumed frosn its
emollient properties, as a counterbalance to the acridity of the Balemo. The Ourai or
Grewia grows abundantly near Eockhampton, and has a large alternate oval serrated
leaf, tementose beneath, bearing as fruit a very small brown berry, generally in pairs, on
a small axilery peduncle. The Eockhampton tribe call this plant Karoom. The two
plants —the Balemo and the Ourai —are the only two Morrill could identify in the
Eockhampton flora, as in use by the natives both medicinally and as edibles. The
following are the other vegetable foods from which Morrill derived a considerable
portion of his sustenance. The Barkabah, or botanically Barringtonia Carega, Roxb.,
occasionally locally denominated the broad-leaved apple-tree, very common in our rich
alluvial soil, bearing a handsome pink and white flower; the fruit is full of seed, and
tasting not unlike a dry banana. According to Morrill the bark of the stem of the
Barkabah is used by the natives for stupefying fish in fresh water; and, strange to say,
the bark of the root for the same purpose in salt water. The Kaourou, or Nymphcea
gigantea , Hook —the well-known blue water lily, common in our lagoons—is another
edible plant, its seed and root forming an important item of aboriginal diet, in addition
to another aquatic plant termed the Kournabai—may-be, a Triglochia (?) —with a yellow
flower, and a root considered as a great delicacy. The Kadolo, or Phascolus restrains,
is one of our small, creeping, legumenous plants, with three narrow, long, sharp-pointed
leaves upon a common stalk, bearing a flower not unlike our cultivated tea, and root
compared by Morrill to our carrot, growing abundantly in every plain, valley, or creek
bank, and constituting a prominent feature of native gastronomy. The Bonganga, or
Nargan, is probably Oaladitim rnacrorhizon (?) Yent., colonially known as the Creek Lily,
with a large poisonous root, employed as a native food, after a peculiar preparation, too
long for present explanation. The DTorin of Morrill is the small egg-shaped slightly


acidulated fruit of the Carissa ovata of B. Br., and with the previously mentioned,
Nargado, palm-nut (or Cycas media), the Taberio, Leichhardt tree (or Nouclea Leioh-
hardtii Fd.Mueller); the native plum (Owenia cerat sefera —F. M.)> the large pome-
granate fruit ( Capparis Mitchellii), the Pink Lily (or Nelumbium Leichhardtii), two
species of yam {Dicorose and the Morgogala,) native banana (or Musa Jackii), very
abundant ' round Mount Elliott, and, according to Morrill, extending far inland,
constitute the catalogue of plants it has been possible to identify. But at the same
time, to assist botanical research in the comparatively unknown north-eastern flora, the
aboriginal names of several other plants are appended, including the Kanoul, Kanane,
Boan, Malboun, and Mogoudal, whose roots or bulbs were employed by the natives
as food.
Although so far as James Murrells’ experience went lie never saw
cocoa-nuts growing, yet he said he had sometimes seen them on the shore.
There is plenty of honey in the hollows of trees, from the native honey-
bees. The natives eat honey, combs, bees, and all if they are hungry.
There is plenty to eat if they are not too lazy to fetch it. Human flesh
cannot be considered part of their food, although they sometimes eat it.
They eat young men killed in battle, or if killed by accident; also young
women and children, but never those of their enemies. They cut their
enemies up in strips, dry them, and distribute the pieces through the
tribe, by which means they think they have their enemies’ strength added
to their own, and that they will be lucky in hunting and fishing.
They have no written language whatever, and very little
tradition. The language is very gutteral in sound, and extremely limited
in power of expression. Of course they have no means of teaching
their language but by imitation and memory, assisted by their wants.
The different animals are arranged according to the size of their feet,
hence the sheep have the same name as their wallabys (cargoon), all
kinds of sailing vessels have the same name as their canoes, because they
float on the water (woolgoora). The heavenly bodies are named differ-
ently, the sun is ingin, which they think is a body of fire, because of its
warmth, and especially so since they saw us light rag with a burning
glass. The moon ( werboonburraj they say is a human being like them-
selves, and comes down on the earth, and they sometimes meet it in some
of their fishing excursions. They say one tribe throws it up and it gra-
dually rises and then comes down again, when another tribe catches it to
save it from hurting itself. They accordingly think there is a new sun
and moon every day and night. There is a large open space on Mount
Elliott with not a vestige of vegetation on it, whilst up to the very
margin of it is a thick scrub, and they told James Murrells it was done by
the moon, who once threw his circle stick round it (meaning his boome-
rang) and cut it off. Throwing the sun and moon up by one tribe and
catching them by another will easily be recognised as their explanation
of the rising and setting of those bodies. They have no knowledge of the
earth beyond the locality they inhabit. The stars and comets are both
the same in name, milgoolerhurda. They think the falling stars indicate
the direction of danger, and that comets are the ghosts or spirits of some
of their tribe who have been killed at a distance from them, working their
way back again, and that they come down from the clouds on the coast.
They saw one the last dry season previous to Murrells’ restoration which
they thought was one of the tribe who had been killed in war. They think
all the heavenly bodies are under their control; and that when there is an
eclipse, some of their tribe hide it with a sheet of bark to frighten the
rest. There was, about six years before Murrells’ restoration, an eclipse of
the sun, nearly a total eclipse, the only one he saw, about 4 o’clock in the


afternoon. He asked an old man wkat it meant, and lie told him his son
had hid it (the sun) to frighten another of his tribe. But they were very
uneasy during its continuance. They picked up a piece of grass and bit
it, making a mumbling noise, keeping their eyes steadily fixed on it till it
passed over, when they became easy again. They think they have power
over the rain ( durgun) to make it come and go as they like. The rainbow
(terehare) they think is the clouds spewing fish in the lagoons, and roots
on the hills, or something for their good, wherever the end points. They
are very frightened of thunder (teegoora) and lightning ( timulha ), although
Murrells never knew an instance of any barm being done with the light-
ning. They have no knowledge of how they came into existence, they
think they live and die like dogs, but there is a kind of inate fear of
death, and they have some thought that they will jump up white-
fellows ; the reference before to their friends in the comets point to
some undefined hereafter, but the knowledge of the future is nearly obli-
terated. They told me that their forefathers witnessed a great flood, and
nearly all were drowned, only those who got on a very high mountain
(Bibbiringda , which is inland of the north bay of Cape Cleveland) were
saved. He understood them to refer to the flood mentioned in Scripture,
especially as they say only a few were allowed to go up.
They can only count five : Woggin, 1; boolrag, 2; goodjoo, 3; munvjool,
4 ; murgai, 5; for any number beyond these they put up their ten fingers
together; beyond that again the ten fingers of another person, and so on
for three or four persons, till they come to a moon ; and when they have
reference to fish, roots, or things in general, they can only say a few or
plenty. They measure time by moons, and wet and dry seasons.
The language is very irregular, and seems to be totally impossible to
systematise it in any way. The following is a list of the principal words —-
Nannie —earth. Booloo—belly Coobirangil—all one color
Ejugabah—fire Doolga—back light brown, rather dan-
Doongalla—water Woolgoora—canoe, ships gerous
Ingin—sun Cargoon sheep, named Carbul—carpet snake, very
Wurboonburra—moon after small kangaroos on harmless and good eating
Nilgoolerburda stars, the mountains Carmoomulle— black snane,
comets
Durgun—rain
Terebare—rainbow
Teegoora—thunder
Timulba —lightning
Moggoor —clouds
Bundara—sky
Mu ny ah—man
Cockool —cattle, named after y el ( low b f ?7 eB . bo , th in
i , ’ water and on the land
dge 'angaroos Othubuda—a long thin light
Oombal -horses, named brown snake, lives in the
after dogs grass, to be bit by which
Oodra kangaroo, large, on j 3 certain death. They
the plains, male have no antedote against
Bourgoola—ditto ditto, fe- snake bites.
Youngoorah—woman male
Mowdruman—boy Coondoola Emu
JVlowdruman —boy
Murgunman—girl
Colaman —babies
Deenah— feet
Tabaray—legs
Toobun —arms
Cabankabun— hands
Ooode —head
Teeb urra—eyes
Deeragun—ears
Weir —hair
Telli —tongue
Tingool—teeth
Moolin —lips
Dungaburre—a large brown
snake
Prorogwan—native compa- Bindebudda—a large brown
mon snake with red spots on
Moongun—opossum, or wild his belly. These are all
~c al; , ... . good eating.
Munbrebare flying squirrel Mooraynburra turkey,
Cundulmule—wood or kan- named after the red cur-
garoo rat, because of the rant, because they are very
hoof of the foot being like fond of it
a kangaroo’s Booioon —albatross
Kooroongun—common rat Noorgooral —goose
Grungur iguana, green, Yamarah —duck
harmless (there are three Waboora—small
kinds of iguanas) Wadoolbil— large
Mooda Mooda— neck Coonbinmuila light dark Queearilla—plenty
Ugar —breast speckles, short thick tail, Enugedy—enough, that will
Nhamoon—teats harmless , do.


The natives easily obtain fire by friction. The operation is very
simple and is conducted as follows : —The wood used is that of the black
fig after it has rotted and become almost powder with age. They take a
branch off a little thicker than your finger, split it up and put it on the
ground, the flat side upwards, holding it clown with their feet; they then
take a sound piece, round and straight, about twelve inches long, and put
one end on the flat side of the piece on the ground, holding it up between
their hands, and then commence rolling it rapidly between them, pressing
it into the piece beneath, so that it begins to make a hole in it, as though
they were boring it; after they have done that for a minute or to, they
make a notch on the side of the piece at the bottom, so that the fine dust
made while the boring process is going on shall fall down on some dry
grass, they then repeat the rolling process till sparks come, at last they
pick up the dry grass with the dust in it, and blow it till it lights up.
The ceremony of making the lads young men takes place about once
every six years. Murrells remembered four different occasions when there
were great meetings for the above purpose while he was with them. For
eight or nine months immediately previous, the lads have to go. in the bush
to provide wholly for themselves, during which time they are never allowed
to see a female, this is to test their fitness to take a wife ; if they do acci-
dentally see a female, they think they will waste away. After the nine
months are over they are brought camp, cane rings are put on
their arms and tightened very much, so as to stop the circulation of the
blood. Their arms swell very much, which puts them in great agony.
They are then left in that torture all night —their cries are terrible to hear.
To keep their fingers from contracting and thus deforming them, they sit
with their hands and fingers spread out on the ground, with the heels of
their feet tightly pressed on them. In the morning they are brought out,
in the presence of their mothers, sisters, and relatives; and just above
and below the mark of the cane ring on tbeir arms they make small inci-
sions to let the blood flow which is simply to prevent inflammation. While
this is being done, their mother, and relatives, are crying and cutting
themselves from head to foot with sharp stones, in token of joy at seeing
them. When this is somewhat subsided, they retire to places previously
provided for them to sleep under, with boughs to shade them from the
sun, as they could get no sleep of course during the night. While they
are sleeping the old gins go into the swamps and get roots to make cakes
for them, by the time they get up in the evening ; while the men get all
the young men’s spears they have been carrying with them during the
nine months they have been away, and fix them in the earth on a clear
space in a semi-circle, fastening from head to head of the spears grass
festoons. In the evening all being ready, they wake up, generally about
eighty in number at a time, and they are each seated under a festoon in a
reclining position. Then their sisters or female cousins lay with their
heads on their swollen arms, to press down the swollen and cut places, and
they believe nothing harmful will come of it after that. While they are
laying there, a lot of cakes are tin own up and scrambled for by the lookers
on who had gone through the ceremony before them ; they then go to their
several fir°s. In the morning they are taken a little w r ay in the bush
again, and dressed up with shells, and the down of birds stuck on their
heads, painted, and made to look to the best advantage, they are then
brought back to choose and take their sweethearts, and the whole ceremony
closes with a grand corroboree.


After this is over, there is a good deal of quarrelling arid fighting
among them. They steal the wives of the old and weak men, and daughters
from their parents, which leads to fighting, and often extends between two
tribes, and then there is a war, which is not, however, of a very sanguinary
nature. They often get some terrible blows, and sometimes one gets killed.
But they cannot keep it on many hours, for they are forced to go and get
supplies in the shape of food, in the swamps, and they seldom renew the
conflict.
They are very strict in their relationship. When girls are about ten
years old they are not allowed to sleep with their brothers at the same
lire. The intended mother-in-law of a young man, is not allowed to look
at him, until such time as the before mentioned ceremony is over. And
as families they are very distinct. They burn their dead, and carry the
burnt remains about in a sheet of bark, tied up, about twelve months,
and when tired of it they throw it in a water hole. Their tomahawks
(bullgoo) are made of stone, and latterly they have got a good deal of iron
(bingulburra) among them, with which they make a kind of chisel, by
fastening a piece between two pieces of wood at the end, with which they
make their spears, boomerangs, &c.
There is very fine flax grown there, which they make great use of, in
making their fishing and hunting nets. They make very good mesh nets.
They place their net for hunting in the most frequented paths of the kan-
garoo or whatever they are hunting for, and they then go and beat them
up and drive them in. They catch a great many birds with snares, merely
loose knots, which are placed in the thick grass and reeds in the swamps,
and as the birds go through in quest of food, in the night they get caught.
Murrell’s description of the country was anything but uninviting, and
far from being uninteresting. From many circumstances that came under
his notice, he thinks it a gold bearing country. He described the country
about Mount Elliott, where he most lived, to be well grassed and watered.
At the top of the mountain there is a never failing spring of beautiful
water, which finds its way down both sides. The waters are full of
alligators, and dozens of his companions lost their lives by being pulled
down under the water by them. He also described the snake as very
venomous, and that the natives had no antidote against their bite. He
himself had been scarred by an alligator, and bitten by a whip snake,
from both of which he had had a narrow escape.
The work of extinction is gradually but surely going on among the
aboriginals. The tribe he was living with were far less numerous than
when he first went among them. What with the wars, fights, destruction
by the settlers and black police, and the natural deterioration in the
people themselves, they were fast disappearing. During the time he was
among them, he suffered a great deal from rheumatics, which had left its
mark on him; so much so, that he had very little strength left, and he felt
he should not have lasted long among them if he had not come away.


r -f rap,
i, j
ESTABLISHED 1840.
f “ COURIER” GENERAL PRINTING OFFIQE, |B
|| GEORGE STREET, BRISBANE. |i|
| The above Printing Olilce having been uninterruptedly in Jj
fTp full working so manv years, is in itself the best guarantee fjCl
(ij| that its resources are fully equal to any emergency. tig
|yl Authors and writers generally will find it to their ad-
ylf vantage to avail themselves of the facilities offered by the I|K
fj); large and varied assortment of Printing Materials, together
a with Hand and Stream Machinery at the command of the Cfjjh
Proprietor, being by far the largest of any Office in the Colony. JO
Public Companies, Institutions, and Commercial Men, are lip
Tlf reminded that‘the Proprietor, importing his materials direct i|(?
L from the Home Markets, enables him to execute all orders on ||y
the lowest possible terms ; and so as to keep pace with the
Cl' times, another new east printing machine is now in By)
cJr FULL AYOI IK!NO ORDER.
Every description of Printing executed with neatness and
£|i despatch. Bankers’ Account Books ruled and bound to any
Yg pattern or size, together with Notices, Cheques, and Circulars. jbj^
A|j Auctioneers’ Land Plans, Posters, Account Sales, Billheads, ]J7)
&c. Corporations supplied with complete sets of Rate,
p c |a Assessment, Account, Cheque, Notice, and all other Books.
(/|j Grocers’ Tea Papers, Bags, &c., and Linendrapers’ Billheads | J
tfj) and Bags of all kinds and sizes, printed expeditiously and cheap. | s
S Country Storekeepers will find it greatly to their advantage j A
to send their orders through the Post, as they can be executed
by return Mail, at Town Prices.
111 REAL PROPERTY ACT. P
yM All the Forms under the above Act are constantly kept in SK
(f || stock, and to Solicitors, Agents, and all persons taking 50 of I 7)
Bit either, or all the Forms, a liberal discount is allowed, They
Scan he sent through the Pdst to any part of the country, at a
trifling cost. An Epitome of the Real Property Act, con- ||j
tabling a complete Index, price, 2s, 6d. SK
The following Forms are kept on Sale Will, Form of i|A
Agreement for Letting Houses, Notice to Quit, Insolvency
Perms complete, Import, Export, Drawback, iransire, Ware-
() j| housing, Bonds, Warrants, and all the various kinds oi Custom- ||^
tjj, house Forms, Promissory Note, Acceptance, Bill Books, dL
a Masters’ and Servants’ Agreements, Sheep Returns, Lien on TjA
Crops, Land Order Power of Attorney, Dog, Claim, Objection, l|C
Timber License, Hawkers, Publicans’ Applications, I 0 U h-1
flj Books, Cargo Books, Blank Cheque Books, Board and \j
rs| Residence, House to Lot, &0,, &c.. &c. i J
Country Orders promptly attended to.
