

SKET6HY. . .
6HARASTERS
Gold Fields Life,
BY .
“CAS-HAMBA,”
Mining and Descriptive Writer, and formerly Editress of
the “Silver Press,” Sunny Corner, N.S.W.
SYDNEY :
S. D. TOWNSEND & CO., PRINTERS, 282 PITT STREET.
1900.




Sketchy Characters
OF .
Gold Fields Life,
BY -
“ CAS-HAMBA,”
SYDNEY
S. D. Townsend & Co., Printers, 282 Pitt Street.
Mining and Descriptive Writer,
and formerly Editress of the “ Silver
Press, Sunny Corner, N.S.W. .




PREFACE.
Sketchy Characters and Notes of Travels.
The following notes of characters met with is the first edition
in a collected shape for the reading of a larger public, who
have not read it in the newspaper form. The interest taken,
and by the express wish of many t.o have the life and scenes
of a gold-field described, induced the writer to make it short
and pithy, as the migrating populace wants short articles,
even on great subjects. For that reason, much of the drier
mineral and geological features of West Australia is not
entered upon in this sketch, as the writer hopes to interest
the people of other colonies, and bring back to memory the
reminiscences of their youth, or of their fathers, when, in the
early days, the now beautitul cities were canvas townships.
The sketches of scenes and people will remind them of gold
rushes when, from their newly-pegged-out claims, they watched
the glimmer of the guttering candle caused by the breeze of
the flapping tents, saw the place grow till it looked like the
camping-ground of an army, and disappear as quickly if there
was no payable gold, or it was worked out. These remem-
brances, as Tennyson partly writes it in verse, will
“ Rise in the heart and gather in the eyes.”
To a city man, camp life is always a pleasant variety. The
yarns round the camp fire, and free out-door life, takes him out
of the worry of office and city life. To those who have gone
to gold or silver-bearing countries, it will awake up memories
when ISTature in her lonely loveliness and pure sweet breeze
lulled them to sleep, to awake at sunrise by the sound of the
many wild birds, instead of the alarm clock or cries of city life.
Instead of stone-faced buildings, they now see stone in moun-
tain shape —the age unfathomable. The outcrop, caused by


volcanic disturbance, they are going to disturb to look for that
metal precious to all, and well will be remembered the bound
of joy their hearts gave when they saw the stone dotted with
pyrites. “Ah! gold —gold,” everywhere was the joyous com-
ment eagerly accorded to their mates, who perhaps once
thought the same, but experience taught them different, and
no joy was in their hearts when they said, “Umpli! ISTew
ehum gold—worthless as husks.”
Like a thunderbolt, down fell the castles in the air—
visions of city life made easy. The long years of struggle for
existence : the parting from wife and children: the rolling up
of the “ bluey the long weary tramp over unexplored gullies
and mountain top, with billy-can and water-bag often their
only companion, hushed to slumber by the weary tramp at the
close of a dying day.
The narration of these incidents in the traveller and writer
observation illustrates the comedy and tragedy of life and
scenes, shifting in its splendor, but practical in the mineral
future of West Australia.
Sydney, Australia,
December, 1900.


INDEX.
'“A West Australian Souvenir”... ... ... ... 6
Western Australia ... ... ... ... ... ... 8
Among the Kanowna Diggers ... ... ... ... 11
Wayside Sketches ... ... ... ... ... ... 19
The History of Some Norseman Mines... ... ... 22
Seen with One Eye, Heard with One Ear ... ... 25
A Suit of Clothes ... ... ... ... ... ... 27
-—<3’*; •"", 1


“A West Australian Souvenir.”
From the Land We Live In.
We love oftentimes to sit and to dream and conjure up olden
faces, to wander afar by hill and by stream and sigh for the
return of the days that are past. But here now in this arid
west, all parched and dry as the arid plains, all parched are the
arid hills, not even the cry of the wild bird, not a sound of
animal life, and scarce a sound of a falling leaf, is heard on this
gladsome morn. But here we sit by the side of log cabin or
tent and endure the blazing rays of the sun, or perhaps watch
the clouds that have a charm and a splendor and a silver
adorning that makes up for the scene of a desolate, dry morn-
ing. There is a blessedness in unconscience, and the hunt and
thirst for gold obliterates the scenes of happier days. But now
’tis the season of the year that fond greetings are wafted over
sea and land. To the old folks at home and friends of bygone
days are sent views, flowers that are supposed to be everlast-
ing, and specimens of virgin gold, found ofttimes when the life
of the finder paid the penalty, but now it arrives home ’midst
the scene so vastly different—snow-clad mountains, leafless
trees, and slushy streets, garland homes of the ivy and
holly berry, big fires, and story telling of haunted castles. But
here in this arid desert no rippling streams are heard, nor
ghosts, spectres, phantoms, goblins, elf or sprite, nature gar-
lands the trees, which from its leafy umbrella shape is the only
shelter. The ground in some parts is carpeted with the flora,
beautiful in color, whilst the flowering shrubs excel the hot-
house plant and make green with envy the gardener who has
labored for years to obtain the tints and variety of hue's of
flowers in this arid desert. ’Tis one of nature’s mystery how
they t hrive in the dry sandy soil and over and by the side of
rocks and reefs of stone dotted with mica shining like flakes of
silver. But here, in the solitude of tent life, with the pale
moon casting moonbeams over hills and mullock heaps thrown
hither and thither in search of gold, gold that was to take
some back to the homes of their birth, to make happy aged
parents or the loved face of her who clung to the departing'
digger and sworn the oft, oft story of love and constancy.
Years have rolled by, but no return; the welcome nugget had
not been found. And again ihe New Year comes, and again
the digger sits with memory of golden dreams, the loved face of


her by the crystal brook or cottage door wreathed with roses
and jasamine are as far off as ever. This dreary wilderness,
where sandflies and sorrow reigns supreme and the Christmas
pudding comes in tins ! Memory of the roast goose or turkey
is revived by such luxuries that finds its way here in tins. But
why lament ? This is a land of promise—the golden west —
that from far and near you can list and hear of nuggets found
in unlooked for places, and when the prospector wanders forth
amongst the once deserted shafts, or on maiden ground, he may
find the precious stuff that will be balm for all the ills of time;
those bygone days will come again—or, at least, a more roseate
one —to recompense for the lonely hours of the wilds of a West
Australian life. Meantime from this land of promise is wafted
all kinds of presents and greetings. From those in the bush
comes and goes the fervent hopes, and perhaps the recipient of
a missive at the close of the old year, or beginning of the new,
“ that she would woo him back with her again to stay ” makes
joyful the close of an unsuccessful year, and when surrounded
by goldless stones and to the ears of his only mate one says, “ If
it were land these weary feet would travel for one fond embrace
of her, my wife, my child, whose clinging arms have so oft
climbed into mine and lay there in the tranquil slumber of a
peaceful sleep. The last time I laid her in her cot I imprinted
a farewell kiss on her dimpled cheeks and then the mother. Ah,
I draw a veil ; I left them to try to better their condition, and
all I have now is the memory of those loved faces.” The other
whispers, “ Ah, yes ! If it were land I, too, would travel, but
the sea divides us and I have no gold, only the memory of the
face as dear and sacred as the wedded wife, ‘ my mother.’ ”
And to wife, mother, sister, brother, goes forth from the bush,
over sea and land, “the fondest of greetings.”


Western Australia
Needs no introduction; it is known as the “Golden West.’"
Pictures illustrate the “ Golden Mile,” and no doubt have
reached the four quarters of the globe—at least, if not, so much
has been written about it. The ups and downs of shares, the
bulling and bearing of the market, the failure of the original
plant, and the difficulty of treating the sulphide ore, caused the
Golden West to be known far and near.
Therefore my chief object is to give an object lesson by
showing the samples of stone, wash, pug, &c., gold is found in
there, as it differs so vastly from other gold-bearing countries;
and also to say the difficulty of treating the refractory ore is
nearly surmounted. It has passed the laboratory experiments,
and the big mines have both machinery and cyanide vats so
extensive that each mine resembles a manufacturing township.
The economical treating and handling the ore have enabled the
tailings, which was once thought worthless and used for filling
up, to be put through the cyanide solution, and yields from
ldwt. to 3oz. and 4oz. So it is now beyond all doubt that
“ Westralia” is the forthcoming biggest mining country in the
world, and that it will last till the end of time, for as experience
goes on and science is brought to bear on still more economical
treatment of the various low grade ores, then can mountains be
put through a process and the gold therein be extracted.
For hundreds of miles there is a belt of auriferous country •
the very slimes that exude and forms itself into what is known
as “ pug ” and alluvial, is both extensive and deep, the fine gold
is disseminated through it—and doubtless “ the finest ” —which
is not at present extracted, wfill be in the near future. Also in
time must come the Esperance railway to connect Coolgardie
with that vast track of gold-bearing country in which is
situated the Norseman and Dundas Goldfields and which is now
only worked in the rich sections, as they have not adequate
machinery to treat the vast low grade ore that is there. Kal-
goorlie Field has proved that the lodes are more valuable in
depth than in the shallow levels. The town exceeds in its
building structures the wildest imagination of those who have
not seen it and know that it is a city of half-a-dozen years of
age. Yet it vies in beauty, in structure, and the shops present
a frontage equal to Sydney or Melbourne, nor is the fashion or
quality of clothes behind either city. The local newspaper,


Kalgoorlie Miner , has the latest improved machinery, offices and
stationary warehouse—a three-storied premises—which seems
to stand out in bas relief. The streets for width, with a bicycle
track, and the pedestrian path is as wide as the Sydney roads,
so altogether it is superior to any city in Australasia. Not-
withstanding the depression of the share market at present,
the fact of the still increasing building, the high value of land,
and fully equipped mines with its best of management, who by
experience have overcome the difficulties of its experimental
treatment and the inadequate equipment, and who have the
courage of their own convictions, and will not work the mine by
the dictation of the directors or theoretic views. Mr. Hamil-
ton, of the Great Boulder Mine, has shown it is wise and better
to work the rich and poor ore together, not pick out the eyes,
cause a sensation one month, depression another, and so throw
the blame on the manager.
The North End Mines have been held at a discount, but as
my prophecy came to pass of richness in depth in the “ Boulder
Group,” so I prophecy that in same depth and more extensive
exploration, together with the necessary plant, that it will
become a gold-producing section. The Golden Zone, Reefers’
Eureka, and Hannan’s North have obtained in the oxidised ore
some rich veins, but they are not down to the depth to prove
the value of their sulphides, still their developments have
proved the continuous lode formation. Had they their own
battery, the mines named have sufficient ore at grass to pay,
but to send away to treat is different; but so sure am lof their
ultimate success that, regardless of the low price of shares, I
would either buy or hold on to those I had.
Of the politics of the country I am not going to enter
upon, only to say from a mining standpoint the Government
have not been able to grasp the importance of its mining
requirements. They have not worked hand in hand with the
mining community. The various concessions necessary to
advance the industry was withheld, and so retarded prospect-
ing, and stone which would have been sent to the seaport for
treatment was left at dump rather than pay the high freight
asked. Thus did the trucks return empty and the ores re-
mained unremunerative until the proper plant was constructed
on the mines. The alluvial difficulty, which nearly ended in a
revolution, has even now not been satisfactorily settled, and
many suffered martyrdom for the Government’s short-sighted-
ness. However, they must have woke up to the fact that they
have a body of people not to be trifled with, and also that the
greater portion of W.A. has only its mineral resources to be
relied upon. Without it it will only be a fit place to turn the
sea into ; as earth is to earth, so will salt be to salt. Nothing
of use to man or beast grows there. The land is salt, the water


salt; the lakes are dry ; the very trees, what foliage they have,
hang their drooping leaves high up in the air like an umbrella.
The blacks, who once held sway and called it their country,
must have rejoiced when the white man came, for they were
living monuments of the meanest wrecks of humanity. Clothes
props are plump to them. Semi-starvation caused them to be
living skeletons, for there are neither game or wild animals,
“ except dingoes,” from Esperance to Kanowna or anywhere in
the district. However, lam told that up north the country is
more fertile, and fresh water is to be had by sinking; but sink
as deep as a thousand feet, it is not to be obtained on the
Kalgoorlie or Norseman fields, so that is another proof of the
strange phenomena of that extraordinary mineral country. Up
north and the East Murchison district has an equally promising
future when the railway is extended and cheaper rates of crush-
ing obtained. The lode formation and stone differs from Kalgoor-
lie, resembling more Norseman and Coolgardie quartz. With a
few exceptions, the mines are worked by working men who
have no capital for quick development or the required
machinery, and have often to send the stone by camel to a
distant battery. With such prospects in view and the satisfactory
returns of mines which have a 20 or 30 head battery and its cyan-
ide plant, capital will be forthcoming to develop mines now
hardly heard of, and thus open up the most extensive field in the
world. In quoting, Mr. Maryanski, the discoverer of the value
of the telluride, said, “ I always believed in the richness of the
ore bodies at depth.” This has been proved by the permanency
and distribution of the telluride in the Great Boulder main reef,
the Associated Mines—in fact, will be in depth in all of the
“ Golden Group ” Mines. Electricity and coal will, as is now
in the Great Boulder Mine, soon be a feature to minimise
expenses and utilise the coal of that country and further the
coal industry, which still more enhances the prosperous future
of W.A.
Inseparable are the names of explorers and prospectors of
this barren wilderness, whose undaunted courage and inflexible
will opened up this golden region. Some suffered the most
agonising death from hunger and thirst, and it would only
harrow up the feelings of relatives to depict them and cast a
gloom over the reader. Therefore in silence respect their
memory.
These short stories of digger’s life and scenes on the
various goldfields will illustrate the life of many who are
associated with the opening up of that peculiar country.


Among the Kanowna Diggers.
Why is a digger unlike a leopard ? was a question once asked
me. That riddle was easily answered, for the leopard cannot
change his spots and the digger can, and I think the Kanowna
diggers are frequently doing it. Formerly the digger scorned
to be classed as a miner. They drew a distinct line —and they
are, in fact, different characters. Their rushing propensities,
their prospecting tours and tramps in all climes afford them a
different life. But now as the alluvial Kanowna diggers have
to sink shafts, drive and crosscut, bag ore for battery treatment,
they have merged into the miner’s life, except when the
puddling machine is at work, or the cradle rocking, and pans
of wash sluiced to and fro. However, the typical digger is
there, and the heterogeneous army that form a mining com-
munity fraternise as one class—those to the purple born a,nd of
college education have the same purpose in view as the plebian
of plebians —gold is the object of researches, virgin gold, hid
away in every imaginable form, from gully to mountain top.
It is a study in human nature to see and hear these diggers.
Some carry their past in their faces, others leave not a vestige
of a sign to indicate their past, except when in a camp reverie
passing incident recalls the past. They have, through habit of
colonial life in the bush, come to look upon the trees as com-
panions—the trees tell no tales. They looked to each knarled
and warped tree as if each one had an individual life, the
tassled flowering shrubs the creepers mingling with the dead
trunks of a fallen forest monarch, reminds them of their
own life. Then they turn to study the innumerable
traits of human character that make up the vast army of
diggers, and sit around the fire telling adventure stories. They
sink any superfluity of refinement, for they know all must fare
alike, irrespective of accident of birth or education. They share
the same tent, boil the same billy, eat of the same tin dog, and
share and shar-e alike. In sickness the digger is dependent on
the rough and horny hands of his comrades. He has to tramp
over the same country, and the elements favor no class or creed ;
the same stars, moon, and sun lights them on their way. If
the rain is sent from the clouds all share alike. Some of these
diggers have gone astray from the path of virtue and honor,


bur, erring ones are amongst their mates—the soul of honor
and truth.
Ah, what studies and contradictions in human nature are
found in a goldfield’s camp! It is a romance in trying
to unravel the real from the fictitious. I once knew a digger
named “ Sugar George,” whose only hobby when he went to
town was to buy a bag of sugar, and he enjoyed eating it as
much as an epicure relishes a savory dish or an old toper when
a whisky bottle is his own. Another of my acquaintances was
“ Painkiller Dick,” whose tent was bestrewn with empty pain-
killer bottles. He drank the contents not to kill pain but be-
cause he liked it. And “ Wheelbarrow Jimmy,” he was never
so happy as when trudging for miles, pushing his wheelbarrow,
which contained all his worldly goods and the necessaries of
his frugal life. The canopy of the heavens was his covering
the stars and moon his only light. His love of lonliness, face
to face with nature, was sweeter than the companionship of man.
Then 1 remember well, there was Jack tbe Hooker, and
Bill, his mate, who came across a promising patch. They sunk
a shaft but when they bottomed on poor stuff Bill was “full
up ”of mining, and said he would “sling it.” Next morning
they struck water, shivering, dirty and wet, Bill comes up the
ladder, he kicks the mullock from his shoes and swears loud
and deep. Then he goes into his tent, swears a bit more at his
unoffending wife, who had recently joined him in what she
hopefully wished would turn out a Golden Valley. Presently
Jack comes to see what in- he is doing away from the
windlass.
“ I tell you Jack,” roared Bill in a fury, “I have slung it,
and not for the devil himself will I do another hand’s turn.”
“Bless me,” remarked Jack, “We have hopes now, the
wash looks promising, and when we drive——•”
“Drive be damned, lam going to drive out of this. I’ll
sell you all my kit —lock, stock, and barrel, and my share in the
infernal hole.”
“ All right, Bill ; what do you want for the lot, £2O ?”
“ Yes, that figure will suit me.”
“ The whole lot ?”
“ Yes.”
“ Including the old woman ?”
“ No, you can have her for another £20.”
“ All right, will take her too, Bill.”
“ Don’t be a fool, Jack,” exclaimed the dame under offer,
“I’m not worth it; it’s too much.”
However, the bargain was struck, and Bill left a free man
for another rush.
There is, however, a pathetic side to the digger’s life.
Roughly garbed as they are, they have a soft heart. When


gold was discovered in the Kanowna cemetery and the usual
rush took place, irrespective of its being the resting place of
the dead, God’s acre was no more to them than the desert, and
so they sunk their shaft alongside of the graves. One day a
digger’s pick struck a coffin. He came out of the hole nearly
as white as if he had faced the dead come to life.
“ Great Scott, mate, are you hurt ?” asked his mate.
“ Ho.”
“ What’s up, then P”
“ Nothing, nothing.” But he mopped his face, more as if
he was drying a tear, and sat down on the last bucket of dirt
he had sent up.
“ Well, mate there is something up, so out with it. Ease
your conscience, like; not that I want to be your father con-
fessor, but you got sick like all of a sudden.”
“ Yes, mate, I did ; that coffin brought back to memory
the only sorrow of my life. Years ago, I had a school mate,
and as boys we swore eternal friendship, fought each other’s
battles, smoked our first smoke behind a big tree, and resolved
to go together to some colony where we could dig for gold.
Australia was the chosen one, and we put in years of comrade-
ship together, shared alike in everything, barring the love he
formed for a pretty, but worthless, girl who played fast and
loose with him, and finally jilted him almost at the very altar.
And, my God, he was a man, every inch of him ! He bore it
bravely, but I could see the battle he was fighting with him-
self, and I was powerless to help him. One day when I saw
him in a moody state with an unrest in his eyes and a twitching
of his hands, I asked him if he would go to the West. ‘Yes,
anywhere,’ he replied. I lost no time in securing our passage,
and we soon landed on the shores of West Australia, and, like
many more, tramped it inland. There was a rush to Siberia,
and we followed. What we went through for want of water,
and the scorching rays of the sun, was equal to the black hole
of Calcutta. Our tongues were swollen and parched; our
brains almost crazed. I was the stronger, and battled it the
better. One morning I rose at daybreak, watched the grey
mist fading away, thankful my mate slept in the cool hours of
the morn; but he opened his eyes, and, looking up to me, said :
‘ Joe, do you think you can hold out till we reach water ?’
‘ It’s hard to say; but what about you ?’ As I asked that
question, a faintness came in my heart; the yearning look in
his eyes spoke volumes. I felt as if I was going to loose all
that was dear to me, and a sense of desolation crept over me.
He defined my thoughts, for calmly and slowly he said : ‘ I am
past suffering, mentally and bodily ; good bye, good bye, good
bye, mate; bless and thank you for all the pleasure I ever had.’
Then he held out his hand. ‘Raise me,’ he murmured, ‘I am


dying.’ He gave one gasp and was gone. Oh! to describe my
feelings alone in the wilderness, with my dead friend, passes
words. I wept tears rung from my very soul, and finally
fainted from exhaustion. When I recovered I felt, I knew, I
was mad, and embraced the corpse of him I loved so well. All
our boyhood days came vividly before me. Then the sun
drove me madder and I suffered the pangs of hell. Fortu-
nately a camel team found us, and I was revived by the
Afghans, bless them, yes, I bless them, black though they be,
for they dug a hole with sticks. Ah, we know not our resources
till we’re tried ; we know not our friends but in the hour of
need. I waited for the sun going down, then I buried my
friend in a sand hole in the desert. No tomb mai’ks his resting
place, but I know it, it is engraved in my heart, and when I
struck the coffin here I thought of my dearest comrade in his
unconsecrated grave, and it was too much for me, so I will
shift my camp. Not for all the gold could I drive underneath
that corpse.”
The Q.E.D. illustrates another type of the digger class, for,
judging by his knowledge of euclid, when he named it, “ Quod
erat demonstrandum ” —“ that which has been demonstrated ”
—one can imagine him being more of a philosopher, and it
would be imagined that this mundane life to him would be
scientifically looked at, and his grief modified by the fact of
his superior learning. Like the trained singer, the science of
the training robs some of the sweetness of the natural voice.
The untrained singer often sings so soft and sweet as to bring
tears to the eyes of the listener. The clever and trained
voice has often commanded admiration for its rendering, but
not excited the sympathy as that of the natural born singer.
Therefore, if the namer of the Q.E.D. was to again revisit it,
he would scientifically explain the cause of so many worthless
shafts, the mounds of which are monuments to the buried
hopes of many a poor digger who has left it, and now gone to
the rush at Shepherd’s Flat. For the time being hope is an
incentive to further energy. No one can hope more for their
success than the writer, for, take the diggers on the whole,
and with all their faults, they are the embodiment of all that,
is honorable, honest, pure of heart, and the most unselfish. If
a black sheep gets among them he is soon ousted, therefore,
my experience of many years and in many countries is that the
digger’s life is a happy and cheerful one. The majority have
no idea of the high standard of intelligence amongst diggers,
or of the elevating conversations around their camp fire.
In following up the various rushes, the diggers are often
joined by non-diggers who are trying to make money somehow,
and often while waiting for the billy to boil, or a long smoke
after their frugal meal, they will extol or denounce both men


and mines, and wonder where their late mate may be. It is
little use asking for them, for they are generally known as Bill,
Tom, or Jack ; for as one man observed, “ I really possess
three names, but I may as well keep them to myself, for I am
not known by Christian or surname —I am called ‘ Joe.’ How
I came by that name was this : I had tramped it, practically
speaking, from Adelaide to Kalgoorlie. I tried station life en
route so as to get ‘ tucker.’ Money ? No; thankful I got a
feed. I was a sundowner they called me, and by cripes they
weren’t far out, for the sun of my life was about set. I know I
ain’t any chicken, but I am a prematurely withered old man ;
hard fare, hard life, hot sun and little water have left armorial
bearings which I did not inheritand here the old man
heaved a sigh, for in truth he was old beyond his years, with a
haggard, thin, hungry look in his face that bespoke self-denial
of every vestage of the necessaries of life; his clothes were no
less luxurious, they were threadbare, and patched after the
style of a “ crazy quilt ” —they were habiliments that touched
him nowhere. But the old man continued—“ I tramped on over
some of the ground Mr. John Forrest was reported to have been
the pioneer of. 1 went through more hardships than he ever
did, discovered some gold field, —that is to say, I thought I did,
for after working the blessed claim for months I found nothing
worth calling gold, and I tramped on. I was joined by some
diggers nearing Norseman, and we camped on the hill a mile
out of what is now the township. ‘Well, Joseph,’ exclaimed
one of the four strangers, ‘what think you of this spot?’
He was addressing me, for his keen piercing eyes looked me
through and through. Ob, it will do fine, I answered, never
thinking to inform them that my name was not Joseph. The
next time one of them addressed me it was ‘ Joe,’ and Joe it
remained, and the others went all by Dick, Tom, Jack and
Harry. ‘ Just as well,’ said Jack, ‘ though I lost a good thing
by some cove coming to ask at a pub. for Mr. John Williams.
The pub. man said be didn’t know of any one that name.
Well, the man I mean is a mate with Jones down in the gully,
his first name is John, I know that.’ ‘ No, don’t know him.’
Later on his mate met him ; ‘ Sorry, Jack, that fellow I sent up
to the pub. couldn’t see you, for there is a rush on down the
gully. Ah, here he comes.’ ‘ I can’t find your friend anywhere,
Mr. Jones,’ said the enquirer. ‘ Great Scott! don’t mister me.
Do you want me to be the laughing stock in camp p In the
name of God who did you ask for when you went to find Jack ?’
‘ Mr. John Williams.’ ‘No wonder no one knew him ; if you had
asked for Jack, ‘Gully Jack,’ you would have found him, for Jack
always swears you don’t find gold only in the gullies ; he has
got his opinions about where the gold comes from. Shed
from the reefs, washed down in the gullies, and when an extra


torrent conies washes it into gutters, and there you are, now you
have got it, now you haven’t; rich in some parts, poor in
another, and some places none at all, —gone deeper down, and
in this extraordinary country the; gold has played fast and
loose and mixed with all kinds of decomposed rubbish, so you
don’t know in what or where you are going to find it. But
here, something strikes me this is no alluvial field, but there is
a promising outcrop. Suppose we all join and sink a shaft ?’
4 Yes,’ echoed all hands. Then on went the billy, the damper
was made to the tune of ‘ I have been in love, and in debt, and
in drink, and now I am out on my own and there is nothing but
gold that will cure me of the spasms I am now enduring.’
After supper Jack, the singer of the ditty, drew forth a pack of
cards. ‘ Say, boys, let us have a game to while away the tjme,
and to-morrow at the dawn of day we will peg out and call the
claim the Right Bower, Left Bower, Ace of Hearts and the
Joker,’and sure enough we did, but they turned out duifers.
The Joker held its own a little longer, got even floated, but the
owners got bit with it, so did we, but they were rich and
strong, we were poor and weak. Nevertheless we stuck toge-
ther, and our little band tramped over hills and down gullies,
all over the Norseman district, but no gold did we find. Jack
and Sam went into a mine to work, and the water they struck
must have come up from hell—it was brimstone and God
knows what ; but it burned like the devil’s fork and made
their feet sore. Then the Widgiemoola rush took place, and
like the diggers we were we rushed too. Did we doubt ? No,
let a whisper be heard and the diggers follow like sheep, and a
lot that ain’t diggers—to any part bearing a golden rumour.
Faithful to each other, did you say ? I should think so, none
who trusted us had cause to rue it, but you cannot get blood
from a stone, no more than we could get gold from diorite, and
when we had run down to our last bob, why a fellow can’t
starve, so we ask for trust—not go begging, but work on, hop-
ing to strike gold somewhere, so fling away the base suspicion
that a digger will betray a trust reposed in him. He’d work
on, tho’ his hands be cut and bruised, his heart is good—his in-
tentions honorable. But sometimes fate is against him, and as
George, a mate I once had, said, ‘lt was no good working.’
But George was a character, he had tried. ‘No, not tried,’ but
reasoned the thing out this way —you see George was a slow
man, some called him lazy. Anyway he thought he was fast
enough for a civil servant’s billet, but the pension was too long-
coming, the crawling scale was too tedious. Though nature
had endowed him with a patient disposition, it was not in that
line, it was in billiards where he shone, or when he had to ante
up over a race he had lost, or drinks he had to pay for.
George was not very communicative either. Once he drove


eighty miles with a mate and never spoke. See ! He was
patiently waiting for his mate to speak, and his mate was
waiting to see how long he would hold out. And he held out
the whole eighty miles. At the end of the journey he said,
‘By Jove, there’s the pub we are going to stop at.’ George
never allowed anything to excite him, and worry he know no-
thing of. His past was locked up in his breast and the key lost.
“Whether he run in double or single harness, no one knew ;
if there was any irregularities in his moral character they
were not so glaring as to render his company objectionable.
Ho one would dream of asking him if he was a married man.
Speculation was once mooted on that score, but a friend
observed, as a married man, he would be a failure —he never
liked settling down, and, though a man of few words, he liked
himself best. He sometimes asked a fellow to have a drink,
but he was that slow diving down into his pockets for the
money that no one knew when he would pull the money out, so
few took the trouble to drink with him. Barmaids and hotel-
keepers dreaded him sitting down, for he always monopolised
the softest seat, and it took hours to move him. One day he
marched into a saloon bar at a very inopportune time, as the
fair Hebe was having a quiet, private chat with her admirer,
but down sat George, and nothing short of a bomb-shell would
move him. Suddenly the boss of the hotel came in, went
behind his chair, and deposited something; a moment after
bang, bang went the something. They were crackers, but
they never moved George, so the boss gave it up ; he had too
much respect for his fire insurance. Whatever was George’s
vice it was not drink, for he was too long between drinks to
have any effect. George, as a rule, formed no very intimate
friend, though he had many acquaintances, but Donald—a man
he often had a wager with, and more often a game of billiards
—he formed a greater liking for, and one day made a confes-
sion to him that he was going to get married. How, slow and
quiet as George was, there were times when he had a burst of
dry humour, and, though he seldom laughed at himself, he
made others laugh, and Donald laughed at the bare idea of
such a joke as that. Fancy George as a lover; why he could
never be bothered with conversation long enough to lead up to
a proposal. However, his love affairs and marriage only added
to the many extraordinary matrimonial alliances all over the
world. Wherever George went for his honeymoon, there he
stopped, for he was missed from his old haunts, and years had
passed before Donald saw him again, and by that time George
was a father several times over. Donald became acquainted
with his wife under very trying circumstances. She evidently
had come to town to look for her husband, for George as a
benedict had not altered his ways, and, when he went out, it


took him weeks to get back ; so the neglected wife had worn
herself out mentally and physically, and here he was again
absent from home. Taking her baby in her arms, she went to
an hotel where she knew her husband was in the habit of
going. The strain at last was too much for her brain, and,,
bereft of reason, she flew out in the street, shrieking that Mrs.
Jones was murdering her baby. The police were soon on the
scene and took charge of her, and Donald, knowing who she
was, offered to fetch her baby, and accompany her to where
she would be cared for. Meantime, George arrived, and both
were with her, but nothing could quiet the raving wife but the
sight of her baby, and George returned to the hotel for the
baby left asleep in its bed, but even this calamity did not
hasten George’s movements, for he was not a conscience-
stricken criminal, nor took it upon himself as having been the
author of his wife’s madness, so, calmly taking his baby in his
arms, he as coolly came down stairs, and joined some men
throwing dice. He took a hand in the game of chance, and,
when Donald’s patience became exhausted, and the heart-
rending wail of the mother for her child was more than he
could stand, he went after George and found him in a bar
parlour with a baby on one arm crying as only babies can, and
in his other hand was the dice-box. ‘ Sb,’ ‘ Hush,’ ‘ Shaw,’
came between eight, one, five, two, and there stood George
shaking one arm to quiet the baby, and with the other he
threw the dice. Donald gave a sudden hard pull at his coat-
tail, and exclaimed, ‘ Great Scott, man, do you realise that
your wife is mad, and raving for her baby ?’ ‘ Ah, y-e-s,’
drawled George; ‘I am coming.’ And he sauntered out as
if going to a funeral.”
w


Wayside Sketches.
A Night Scene in Western Australia.
Jack Abams and Bill. Ho one knew Bill’s other name,
even his letters must have been addressed Bill, because when
he went to the Post Office the clerk always said, “ No letters,
Bill,” or, if there were, “ I say, Bill, here is a letter for you.”
Well, one day Bill got a letter, and whoever wrote to him had
a delicacy in addressing him as Bill, so added Mr. in front.
“ Hang me,” said Bill, “ they might have tacked on
Esquire, if they wanted to put a handle to my name.”
Whatever the contents of the letter were, Jack and Bill
had a good laugh, a prolonged laugh, then went and had a
drink, likewise a prolonged drink.
A mate met them and he was jubilant or depressed, for he
had a letter from his wife informing him that he was the
happy father of a fine pair of twins.
“Girls. Gripes,” said Bill, “ twins, and girls too; now, if
they were boys it wouldn’t be so bad ; they could be turned to
account sooner, but girls, they are no good. A fellow has always
to he looking after them, and when they might be of some
service some other fellow gets them that had no trouble in
bringing ’em up.”
“ Say,” said Bill to the happy father, “ can’t you change
them P ”
This caused a laugh, and another drink, and as the twilight
was fast fading away others on their way home stopped for a
drink, and sundry healths were drunk in honor of the twins,
separately and collectively.
As the evening advanced songs were sung, and hied was
the guest, and toast “ He’s a jolly good fellow ” echoed in the
camp. “Well, he beat us,” replied Jack; “we ain’t got no
twins.”
“ Well, lam sugared,” laughed Bill. “Why, you ain’t even
married.”
Jack and Bill conversed in like manner nntil the effect of the
drink they had taken became manifest.
They lost the run of their argument, their speech waxed


heavy, and, yielding to the day’s heat and the influence of the
spirits, sank to the nearest resting place into a slumber.
One of them was the happy father, the other one Bill.
Towards the dead hour of the night Bill heard the mopoke and
Ned heard the curlew.
“ Bless my soul,” murmured Ned, “ how did I get home so
quick ? Why, that’s the kids crying.”
The curlew kept on his screeching yell, until at last Ned
jumps up. “ Hang me,” he said, “ I ain’t a going to stop home
with them kids yelling all night. Look here, Mary, one is bad
enough, but when it comes to two its more than a fellow can
stand ; as soon as one leaves off the other begins; it will drive
a fellow mad. I was going to have you over with me in the
West, but not now those howling brats will keep the camp
awake, and the fellows will desert the mine.”
Then the noise ceased, and a gentle “she” was heard.
“No good sbenin them,” said Ned. “ Suppose they can’t
help being shes, though they are a darned plague.”
The noisy, resless-winged nigbtbirds in chorus kept up
their noise incessantly and fairly exasperated Ned. Then he
jumped up and swore he would throw the varmints out.
When he got on his feet and looked round to see where he
was, one of the household observed he “ had got ’em bad.”
“ Yaas,” said Ned, gaping, “ I know I have got ’em, and by
cripes if you had a pair of twins screeching all night you would
kick.”
“ Well,” replied the host, “ there ain’t no twins here, and
I swear you can’t hear your’s from South Aus.”
“ So help me ; where the devil am I, and what was the
noise I heard ? ”
“ That’s the curlew.”
“Well, I’m hanged ; I’ll go and wring his neck.”
And out Ned goes really on his way to camp. In the bush
he heard a fearful row, and for certain then he could recognise
Bill’s voice.
Swearing something dreadful, Ned goes to see fair play
and help Bill if necessary. But all he could see was an inoffen-
sive fellow standing mutely to be struck, and Bill striking
with all his strength and every now and then indignantly
uttering, “ Call me a mopoke, will you P ” “ Mopoke, mopoke,”
reiterated the voice.
“ Well, darn me, “ I’ll stop your mouth,” and Bill let out a
blow at a tree which would have knocked John L. Sullivan out
in one act. Still the mopoke kept on, and Bill kept on too,
until his knuckles were fairly skinned and Bill covered with
bis own blood.
Presently the mopoke came nearer and began his plaintive
wail, “ Mopoke, mopoke.”


“ Well, durn my skin,” replied Bill, “ if I don’t finish you
this time, calling me a mopoke. Call me names, do you, you
son of a sea cook.”
Then Bill took off his jacket and shaped up to the stump
of tree standing there in defiance and calling him, as Bill
thought, a mopoke.
When nearly exhausted in thumping the tree, Ned went
up to him.
“ What’s the matter, old fellow ? What’s the disturbance
about P ”
“ Why, that fellow calling me mopoke, and there the devil
stands in spite of me and keeps on calling me mopoke. Hear
him now ? ”
“ Yes, I hear him,” replied Ned, “ but that’s a bird called
the mopoke.”
By this time Bill’s blood trickling down roused him to the
fact that something was the matter, and he got up, and both,
who occupied the same tent, started for home.
The walk and the early morning breeze sobered them, and
they got to camp and found Jack with a very unsteady gait
looking for something on the ground.
“ What are you looking for, Jack ? ”
“ A candle.”
“ Why, you have got a lighted candle in one hand and an
unlighted one in the other.”
“Um, I thought I dropped it.”
“Well, see here, you fellows, you might have left some-
thing to eat in the camp.”
“ There is a stew full of snakes. I never gave you snakes
to eat.”
And Jack sent the billy flying, stew and all.
“ Hold on, Jack, I say there was no snakes in that stew. I
put some potatoes and onions in it at about 4 o’clock and had a
feed myself, so there has been no chance for snakes to get in.
Glad, old fellow, you have got snakes on the brain.”
s ‘You’re drunk,” said Bill.
Here Ned burst out laughing and uttered “ mopoke.” Bill
laughed too. Had he known about Ned’s curlew he would have
been even with him.
Jack thought they were laughing at him, and he kept on
about the snakes, swearing he would give them a feed of
reptiles for breakfast. Meantime he sat down to a raw onion
and dry bread, until at last the onion dropped from his hand.
He got the candle to hunt for it, but fell asleep while doing
so, with a lighted candle in his hand and dangerously near his
bunk.
Bill took the candle from his hand, and he slept murmur-
ing in his sleep, “ Snakes, snakes, by gad ! ”


The History of Some Norseman Mines.
On record there are some queer names to mines, some
sentimental, some grotesque. After a day’s outing among
some mines, I write of them as I found them, combining the
two.
About a mile from Norseman, on the top of a gradual rise,
are a group of mines called the Right Bower, Left Bower, Ace
of Hearts, Ace of Clubs, and The Joker.
These are small mines, but close to them is the Lone Hand.
Evidently the owner of that mine made up his mind to go
alone. Spirit of the West adjoins it, but the Spirit soon took
flight in disgust at the poor show it had.
The others, like a game of euchre, fell through when there
was a Lone Hand. The Joker held its own and promising
stone, or perhaps from more promising facts on paper.
A Queensland -Norseman company took it up, and had men
driving away with spade, pick, and dynamite. Lower and
lower they sunk, drove and crosscut, uplifting mullock and
goldless stone. The hearts of the workmen were like their
muscles, strong, but the company became weak and fitful in
the sinews, until at length they faltered, paid in fragments,
then collapsed. And The Joker, serene and indifferent, stands
at the top of the hill leading into Norseman, once more helpless,
shattered, and abandoned hope of Norseman Mines.
The euchre pack shared the same fate as most gamblers
who plank their all on bowers and aces; they fall in. So did
the mines, and their output is a monument to its demise. The
Lone Hand stuck well, fully believing it would scoop the pool.
Whether there was any cursin’, swearin’, or bribin’ I would not
ga y the law of libel stares me in the face. But it was under
offer for £3OOO cash down, and 5000 shares fully paid-up ; £3OO
was the deposit, but there were two buyers; one went one
better, and while the first was haggling over £SO the second
closed. Then a lawsuit ensued, bat the ways of laws and
mining are like the heathen Chinese, very peculiar, which the
same I set to explain, and the same I am free to maintain, for


the whole thing got so fumbled up that, like a will contention,
the lawyers got the best of it.
Meantime the mining fever, and perhaps cash, got ex-
hausted, and it was finally abandoned after a good deal of work
had been done on it. Altogether, the whole running of the
concern was so mixed up that it is like W.A. laws, quite a
puzzle. Mr. Valvas then comes on the scene and arranges with
the public battery proprietor to crush lcwt. of ore, and was to
give them a fourth for their pains. The result was, the battery
master said it was not worth crushing, so Yalvas abandoned it
as a forlorn hope. He did not say he re-christened it that
name, but he looked it in retailing the facts, especially when he
added that the battery people carted 200 tons more on their
own account, and on the strength of which a Mr. Crabb took up
the mine, and so far there it lies up to date ; what it will turn
out remains to be seen —it might turn out crabs or gold.
The Sudden Norseman has had its vicissitudes, and came
down from the top rung of the ladder. Three years of graft-
have been put in on that mine, and about a year ago it was
floated for £30,000 or £40,000. I don’t think the whole of the
money could have been paid, for there is no machinery or
anything of tangible value on the mine, so shareholders came
to their senses and went back on the calls, and the mine was
put up to auction and brought 375. Why the only butcher on
the field bought it is more than I can say. At any rate, he
did.
The Cumberland was in a very shaky state, and a part
owner offered his interest in it for £5O, but he found no buyer,
and perforce stuck to his share. Lately he got either £l3OO or
£l5OO, and it is so far a promising mine.
The Break of Day is the latest that a company will be
lamenting over. Hot completing a purchase after making a
deposit of £7OO, they worked and developed the mine, brought
hundreds of tons of stone to grass, then forfeited their deposit
money and backed out of it, saying the area was not large
enough. The owners then sent 100 tons to the battery, and it
went 300 oz. without counting the tailings, which are going to
be treated by the cyanide process, and they expect that to go
an ounce.
So what is mining but a lottery ? I could quote many
other mines all with a similar history to the former. For
though I hear not their wailings I see the conglomerate
mounds and scattered diorite like pyramids in the wilderness.
I have looked down the deep shafts, holding on to the deserted
windlass, and thought there lies much wasted money. One
day a voice as if from the deep startled me, for I thought I
was alone. He must have read my thoughts for in quavering
accents he said, “ There lies all my hope. I have laboured


there for years ; spent all my money thinking it would turn
out. a harbour that would bring me to a golden shore. I hear
the voice of my wife and children calling for my help, and I
look upon those hungry white quartz dotted with worthless
mica, and think what use is it to return home when I can only
give them a stone instead of bread.” I looked away towards
Trig Hill, for a lump came in my throat, and a mist before my
eyes, and I left the old man, for he was past the prime of life,
with the only balm I could—hope. We travelled on, my bike
and I, but the sound of that poor prospector’s voice rung in my
ears, and no other sound I heard, or sight I saw than abandon-
ed mines. Had I been visiting a grave-yard I could not have
felt more sad. In fact not so much, for there all hope is over,
struggle ended, no voices heard crying for bread.
Some of Bret Harte’s words are very appropriate—
“ This is that hill of awe
That Persian Sinbad saw—
The mount magnetic.
And on its seaward face,
Shattered along its base,
The wrecks prophetic.”


Seen with one Eye, Heard with one Ear.
In that land of sin, sand and sorrow and sore eyes —viz.,
West Australia—flies play a very prominent part; but that
golden region has not the monopoly, for Broken Hill, the land
of silver, runs them pretty close. There is a season, however,
in which the flies are more virulent, and the local journal
reminds the people of their advent.
But now I am far away in the Golden West, far away
from a newspaper even if that organ were humane enough
to put me on my guard ; and so a fly took the advantage—
result, “ a bung-eye,” big and hard as a plum pudding made by
a bad cook. You look an object for laughter, never sympathy.
If it was a black eye a remark might be made to elicit the
cause, but a bung-eye no comment is made, except “ A fly, eh,
has been at you ?” What you think yourself of them is better
not recorded, the language is too sulphurious. So, carrying my
eye in a sling, I sought shelter from the blazing sun in the
hollow of a tree. There an ant crept into my ear. This
completed my torture and patience. My faithful dog sympa-
thised with me and did not repeat my language. Presently I
heard voices more excited than my own and a general scuffle.
“ Down him ! ” exclaimed one. “ Get the long-handle shovel !”
said another. Then Prince, my dog, set out after them, and I
felt sure he would down the lot. Past experience, doctors’
bills, and new clothes which I had to pay for came vividly
before me, and I called him back, but he took no notice; he felt
he had to protect me, and he would do it. In watching with
one eye his first onslaught, I saw a pale-faced man I knew, so
did Prince. The object, or culprit, the men and dog were after
was in a formidable ambush. Crack, crack, went something
like a pistol shot. “Listen,” said pale face (I, too, listened),
“ Go to the camp and get some dynamite and we will blow the
devil up.” A shudder went through me, maddened by the ant
in my ear and witness to murder. Death in some form would
be my lot. If I stayed in the tree it might fall ; if I came out
I was witness against them, and my dog, noble animal, he may
get blown up, for he was taking an active part in trying to
break down the barrier. “ Look out! ” roared one of the men,


“ here is an opening to get at him.” Suddenly Prince gave an
unearthly howl that I thought a knife was plunged into him.
Mv own last moments seemed to draw nearer, and I suffered
the pangs of waiting for death, which was worse than the
actual death blow. “ Prince, my faithful companion, we will die
together,” I murmured, and I ran to the scene of conflict, there
to find it was a big snake they were after. It was a relief to
my mind that no murder was intended, but what I suffered was
worse than death, for every stray leaf which touched me I
thought was seizure of my body. Another ant stung my leg,
and I felt it was cold steel entering my heart. Even a harmless
fly lighting on me had the effect of an electric battery. There-
fore I have come to the conclusion that the condemned suffer
more by suspense while waiting for the last stroke that severs
life from the body—at least, I did, for the imagination was
equal to the reality.
“ Pale Face,” whose first name was Ben, then related his
sufferings from past experiences. He was at college, and there
had a chum, dearer to him than a brother, for he fought many
of Ben’s battles, and by his own quicker learning helped Ben
with his studies. Clary, as he was generally called, had a
hobby for reptiles, especially for snakes, which he liked to
skin, or even tame. One day a fellow student brought a live
snake in a box, and Clarence fed it and kept it there for weeks,
until they became perfectly acquainted with each other. One
day the snake tried to get out of the box, and Clary gently put
him back; in doing so he felt a sharp prick on the hand, but
seeing a point of a nail on the top of the box he attributed it to
that and paid no immediate attention to it. “ When I came
in,” said Ben, visibly turning white at the recollection, “ I
found Clary unconscious. Quick as lightning I guessed the
reason, for I hated and feared snakes. I ran for a doctor, but
the poison had a strong hold, and very little hope the doctor
gave. Still be lived, and day and night I nursed him for
weeks. Ah, God, better had he died ; his attenuated body, his
sightless eyes, the babbling talk of a lunatic, smote me to the
heart as I led this wreck of humanity about, contrasting his
once handsome face to the now haggard and ugly, thinking of
his past brilliant mind, the genius that would have placed him
high above his fellow men, now was dependent on the meanest
hirelings when in course of time I must leave him, for we both
had to provide for our own future. Though seas divide us now,
I see him in my mind’s eye every waking hour and often
dream of him in his two different forms. Hence my horror and
fear of snakes.”


A Suit of Clothes.
Can the reader picture mentally a canvas township, varied
in architecture and building material, in the form of bush
breakwind and calico roofs, scattered over an area of land as
extensive as an estate of an English noble P These inartistic
homesteads are dotted over hill and dale, down in valleys
and unsullied by putrid water, only the pure rain from the
clouds now and then, like angel’s visits, dampen the fragile
tenements. There are no crowded slums, no human dregs, no
foundries making all black with smoke, but space, by which the
speculative builder can have ample choice. At present each
inhabitant is his own builder. They like to throw open the
ends of their tent and let in the gentle breeze and perfume of
the wild flowers, see the hillside ridges and dingles of moss
from which birds of various hues emerge after the scorching
rays of the sun is melted into a gentle glow. These natural
scenes are precluded when the builder arrives and the iron or
wood houses, perchance stone or brick, are certainly more
shapely and substantial, although they are none the less hotter,
and of a night more like a baker’s oven cooling off, as the sun
playing on it all day penetrates it, and there are not sufficient
inlets to allow the cool night air to reduce the temperature.
That perhaps is one reason why Sleepy Creek retained so long
its original structure, and the only “ pub ” in the township put
up a corrugated two front rooms. One was for the bar, the
other —-well, it was put up to make the building shapeable, not
that it was used, for travellers preferred a canvas roof with the
bottom turned up. They were cool and slept well, with the
night air fanning them to sleep.
The bar of course had to be strong, stronger than the cash
box, for you need not have a very elastic imagination to think
there are some people who would help themselves to a drink
that would not touch a cash-box. It is a fact, though one of
the problems of human nature.
In a tented field there are seldom housebreakers but when
the goldfields become established and settled and modernised,
then craft and thefts occur. The windows are forced open and


strongly-built houses are broken into, whereas the tents are
not often burglariously entered.
But Sleepy Creek had not arrived at that civilized point,
though the shifting sandhills were not more settled than the
inhabitants, who came, saw and left. The reefs of gold were
no attraction. They wanted alluvial, and plenty of the yellow
stuff at that.
One night, on a bench, made of boxes, sat three men dis-
cussing the merits and demerits of the field in general. It is
astonishing the heterogeneous class of men who congregate on
a goldfield. By their dress they were all alike. They hump
their bluey, take their billy in one hand and walk for miles.
They sit and smoke and ask a stranger for tobacco with the
easy familiarity of men who had been mates for years.
All these three men were strangers to each other. They
had gone to the pub for a drink, and were sitting outside for
a smoke and a yarn.
After the probable progress or utter extinction of the field
had been settled, one ot the strangers commented upon the
physical degeneracy of the Australians.
“ How do you make that out, stranger ?”
“ They lack pluck, have no energy, sit and wait until for-
eign capital and labour comes into their country. Where
would be all the palatial buildings in Melbourne but for the
American enterprise P The rookery shanties would be there
now, and are there where outsiders have not bought the land
and built on it. If the country or goldfields want developing
similar outside capifal has to be got, though there are hundreds
of rich Australians who could foster an industry if they liked.
No, they have no pluck. They want to see the whole of the
capital put in by foreigners, and then step in, maybe, if they
are assured of the value of shares. And who are the majority
of the miners ? Why Cornish, or Irish and English, fresh from
the old country. Americans P No, Australia offer few advan-
tages over their own country, mineral or otherwise. Still they
put their capital in it to help it along like. They know its
resources and the lack of enterprise in the Australians, but
socially they give them a wide berth. The progress is too slow
and life too monotonous for sojourn amongst them. Industrial ?
No, they want no industries. Free trade, they say, suits them
better. Manufacturing towns would spoil their bits of marine
and rural scenes.”
“ You are hard on the Australians, stranger. Now I can
tell you a story of an Australian that with all your boasted fer-
tile brains and geniuses, will take the wind out of your sails.
Are you a Yank ?.’
“No, lam not. I am—well, my name is Mike Flanaghan,
so you can guess my nationality, but I have a brother in the


States, and by his description of it I wish I was there.”
“ Well, if you can do what an Australian did you can go if
money is the only drawback.”
“What did he do? For, be jabers, I can do what any
Auser can.”
“ Well, this Auser, as you call him—l only know his one
name, Dick; no doubt his parents gave him more, but I only
knew that one —well, Dick and I had been chums for months,
we had tried our hands at all kinds of manual labour, and pro-
fessional, when not too near a town, but somehow we were
dead failures, nothing turned up trumps. If it was a game of
cards the only trump turned up was the only one we held. If
it was red w r e had all black, if it was black we had all red.
Then we went shearing, bless me, the sheep-even were failures,
that is to say they resembled a Chinese map when we had fin-
ished with them. So the owner told us to buy a sheep and
practice on our own property, for he would be hanged if we
should practice on his. Well, we did not want to see him
hanged so left, for we had not money enough to buy a sheep,
nor did we want any mutton since we had no bread. And so
we tramped for about thirty miles, and there was a chance of
wood-cutting, so Dick says to me—
“ Mike, we can cut wood. No fear of bleeding the trees.”
“ Yes, Dick, we can,” I replied.
That night we spread our blanket on the sand. I scooped
out a hole like a dog would do, and thereby got a pillow and
slept as sound as a drugged baby.
Next morning we got a job at woodcutting. We cut,
and cut, and cut again, but the axe made no impression on the
wood.
> Suddenly a chip flew up and hit Dick right in the eye. I
was afraid his eye would run out, and in my fright brought the
axe down on my foot; but for my boot I would have cut my
foot in two.
“ You couldn’t have struck very hard on the wood, or your
shoe and foot would have gone,” was the comment of the
listener.
“ No, you are right, and if your hands were as blistered as
■ours you would not have done so either. But the accident and
hard graft gave us such a fright that we slung woodcutting.
We could not make our salt at it.”
As soon as Dick’s eye got well he says to me, “Mike, I’ve
had enough of this life; I’m going to Sydney.”
I laughed. “How are you going?” Tasked, knowing a
two-shilling coin was all he possessed, and I hadn’t a shilling.
“ Going to walk ? ” he replied.
“Walk two hundred miles?”
“ Yes, if they were five hundred.”


“ Are you coming, Mike ? ”
“Well, I have nothing to stop here for, so here goes with
you.”
And off we started. At sundown, or sometime, we came
across a station and got food. At night we spread our blanket,
and finally got into Sydney with still the two shillings, the
joint sum total of our wealth.
Physically we were none the worse, but our clothes were a
bit off for town.
Dick, he was young and handsome, a graceful figure, and
magnificent brown eye. His skin was olive-tinted by exposure,
and he would well pass for Spanish.
When we were fairly under the gaslight we entered the
city portion of Sydney.
“ Now,” said I to Dick, “ what are we going to do F The
police won’t let us spread our blankets here.
“ No, I am going to yonder boarding-house.”
“ But we have no money for a bed, and they are sure to ask
for the money in advance.”
“Leave it to me,” replied Dick, “and come on.”
Up we went, and straight into the eating-house.
“ Grot room for us P ” asked Dick, without any hesitation
or embarrassment.
“ Yes,” replied the landlord, and without more ado led us
into a room.
“ There you are,” he said. “ Will that do ? ”
“ Fine,” replied Dick.
“Well, come along and I will show you the dining-room,
so when you are ready you can find it by yourselves.”
We followed the host to the dining-room, saw it, and
returned to our room. We had a wash, and then Dick says to
me, “ Mike, I am going out alone, and you get a feed and amuse
yourself.”
I did, by opening my swag and taking out the only clean
striped shirt I had.
The night was far advancing, and no signs of Dick. I
became uneasy and strolled out to see if I could see him. When
I returned there was a man in our room coolly going to bed.
He was a swell of a fellow, white shirt with studs, black serge
clothes, and light clean shoes. I looked at him; he never
spoke.
Presently, when I saw him preparing for bed, I said,
“ Mister, I think yon have made a mistake in the room.”
“ No,” he drawled out, “it’s all right.”
“ ’Tisn’t all right, though, so clear out. My mate and I
have this room; he is only gone out for a spell, and may be
back any minute and want to go to bed.”
The fellow kept on undressing, obviously indifferent to my


conversation, and that riled me. Yet there was a something
so cool and gentle about him that I could not seize him and put
him out of the room. Presently as he deposited his nether
garments on the bed I saw his shapely ankle and foot encased
in a fine pair of black socks.
Then he lifted his languorous eyes and an imperceptible
smile played round the corners of his mouth as he twirled his
“ mo” with all the self-assurance of a cavalier, then stood, looked
me straight in the face, and burst out laughing.
“ Ye gods,” I said, “ this is too much, I’ll call the landlord.”
When I had my hand on the door he gently put his hand
on mine and said, “ Don’t be a fool, Mike. Have a suit of
clothes and a shave so altered me that my own mate don’t
know me ? ”
“ Well, I was speechless for Gfod knows how long, until he
began to tell how he had a Jew friend, a pawnbroker, and he
went to him for help for the sake of old times.”
“I asked him to lend me a suit of clothes, for I saw an ad.
in the paper for a barman in a hotel, and I’m going to try for
the situation, and it’s no use going shabby.”
Next morning we went into the breakfast-room. The
landlord served us, but took Dick for a stranger just dropped
in for breakfast. After a while, not seeing my mate, he asked
me where he was, for, as he added, “ I saw him go out, but did
not notice him return.”
“ Oh yes,” I said, “ he did, and is in the room now.”
“Well, bless me, I don’t see him ”
And the landlord’s swell customer burst out laughing.
The dismayed host could not see where the laugh came in,
but when he did he laughed too.
About 10 o’clock Dick marched into the bar of the hotel
that had advertised for a barman. I watched his proceedings
as a stranger.
He stepped up to the barman, and asked if he could see
the landlord.
“ He is not up yet,” was the reply.
“ Will he be long ?”
“No,” answered the landlord himself, “here I am. What
can I do for you ?”
“ You want a barman I presume, since you advertised for
one,” Dick said in an off mannered kind of way.
“ Yes, I do. I have had many applicants.”
“ Are you suited ?”
“ No, not yet.”
“ Have you had experience and town reference ?” asked
the landlord.
“Of the former I have had plenty. As to the latter, I am
a stranger in Australia.”


“ Well, that’s true.”
“ What do you think of that for an Auser ? ”
3 1508 00333271 0
S. D. Townsend & Co., Printers , 282 Pitt-st. , Sydney „
“ Where do you come from ?”
“ The States. I may not be well up in your kind of
drinks, but as I can mix any kind of drinks, cocktails and
julups, I can soon learn drawing the plain stuff.”
“ Call in again,” said the landlord.
“ Well, you see I can do that certainly, but if you are not
suited, and you think I will suit you, it's no good wasting your
time, or mine either.”
“ Have a drink,” said the landlord, quite friendly like.
“ No, thank you, I never drink. I will have a smoke,
please.”
And so he smoked and chatted with the landlord and his
wife, until the owner of the hotel said, “I have made up my
mind you will suit us, so you can come when you like, and as
you are a stranger here, better come to-night, and save your
hotel expenses.”
“ Well, he did go, and though he never was in a bar be-
fore, nor never in the States, he got on so well that the land-
lord made him manager in a few months, and raised his salary
higher than any barman he had before, and in twelve months
he owned the hotel and the landlord was barman.




