









SKETCHES
IN
MAURITIUS
BY FREDERICK. R.NI O




Mauritius.




TO
LADY GOMM,
THESE
SKETCHES IN MAURITIUS
ARE,
BY PERMISSION, RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED.
BY HER LADYSHIP'S
MOST OBEDIENT AND OBLIGED SERVANT,
THE AUTHOR.
S<
"y'i.'’ -y i/rf -




CONTENTS.
Page.
Introductory Remarks • *
Historical Sketch of A*
22 Articles descriptive of the Sketches.. . *0
SKETCHES,
1. Title-Page.
2. Outline Plan of the Island.
3. Government House.
4. Protestant Church, Port Louis.
5. Roman Catholic Do., do.
6. View of Port Louis from Champ de Mars.
7. Malartic Tomb.
8. View of Port Louis from the Cemetery.
9. Bathurst Canal, Riviere Lataniers.
10. Fort Dumas.
11. Pamplemousses Church.
12. Grande Baie.
13. Cap Malheureux and Coin de Mire.
14. Poudre-d’Or Church.
15. Grand River S.E.
16. Mahebourg.
17. Mahebourg Church.
18. Port Soulllac.
19. Post Jacotet.
20. Falls of the Chamarel.
21. Do. Tamarin.
22. Phoenix Sugar-Works.
23. Plaines-Wilhems Church.
24. Reduit.
25. Protestant Church, Moka.
26. Grand-River Bridge.
27. Aqueduct at Grand River.


CORRIGENDA,
In the Historical Sketch.
Page 4, line 6, for “bu,” read “but.”
5, 20, for “natural,” read “National.”
6, 4 and 5, for “des-played,” read “dis-played.”
l4, 13, for “his by,” read “ by his.”
17 5 14, for “it proved,” read “ they prove.”
lB, 18, after “ The next ruler was,” insert: “Sir W. Nioolat,
who was appointed in the year 1833, and continued at
the head of the Government until 1840, at which period
he was releived by.”
2O, —• 6, for “introduced,” read “cultivated.”
2l, 25, for “sportsmen,” read “sportsman.”
25, 16, for “either,” read “anyone.”
In the Descriptions of Sketches.
“ Reduit,” &c., line 4, for “ sighing,” read “ sighed.”
“ Grande Baie,” page 2, line 3, for “ some,” read “ soon.”
“ Pamplemousses Church,” page 2, line 9, for “privileged,” read “pre-
vailing.”
“ Port Souillac,” line 18, for “quiet,” read “quite.”
“ Fort Dumas,” line 13, for “ nor could he,” read “nor could the autho
of their history.”


INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.
Under the title which this little publication assumes, it is to
be hoped that neither finish in the execution of the drawings,
nor elegance, in the composition of the few pages which ac-
company them, will be sought for. Ihe style of the -i«
ings u, a certain extent preclude, the possibility of delicacy
of"touch, being designed on stone with a pen, in mutation o
etching. The chief object sought for was accuracy of out-
line; and if this has been attained, the rudeness which cha-
racterizes them may. in a measure, be overlooked. Highly-
wrought pictures, whether engravings or ordinary paintings,
are not always the most faithful : for
.< the slightest sketch, if justly traced,
“ Is often by ill-colouring but the more disgraced.”
The interest which is naturally attached, by local associa-
tio„s, to many of the views, has induced the author to give a
description to each; and as this in its turn has suggested
some further information on the island, he has also endea-
™ d to add a short account of its
productions, -society,-population, and the ,
Jo the stranger may not perhaps prove quite unaccept, b. ,
Considering the extended range which the EngM.artist’s
•I V Wn 1 akin o' of late years over almost all parts o
the world, it is rather strange that Mauritius up to this time has
been overlooked. Though limited in size, yet may it safely e
said that few olher places of the same dimensions offer mo
attractive subjects for the display of the painter s talent. Go
where we may, every variety of scenery arrests our adm ra-
JJon;—from the active scenes of town to the solitary vatl.es
A


amidst the forests; —from rural plains along the sea-shore, to
abrupt and rocky mountains; —from trickling rivulets to
roaring cascades ; —in a word, there is all that the most fasti-
dious lover of the picturesque could possibly desire.
In addition to these attractions, the history of the island,
though of no great length, has been scarcely less varied or
interesting. From the time of its discovery, which took
place at the end of the sixteenth century, by the Portuguese,
until the present moment, it has undergone a series of chan-
ges and petty revolutions, sudden as they have been eventful.
2


HISTORICAL SKETCH OF MAURITIUS.
Although Mauritius was originally discovered by the Por-
tuguese, yet the colonization of the island may da'e its com-
mencement from the arrival of the Dutch in the year J6dB,
The former were too much absorbed in conquest and ag-
grandisement at the time to think of reclaiming from the
wildness of nature a solitary spot in the middle of the In-
dian Ocean. From what would appear by the accounts now
extant, they found nothing to invite their stay beyond an
ample supply of water and timber and a few wild goats.
But their successors, the thrifty Dutch, who always united
industry with their system of speculation, soon discovered
its natural advantages. They found that the soil was of the
richest character; and, nearly as important as this, they as-
certained that the island was provided with numerous inlets
and harbours affording protection to vessels in cases of dis-
tress, and facilities to trade in the event of its becoming a
Colony. Besides, it did not escape their keen penetration
that from its peculiar position, placed as it is nearly mid-
way between the Cape of Good Hope and India, at both of
which places they had possessions, it must at no distant pe-
riod become a point of great consideration, although at
the moment little had been done in the country itself
to augment its value. Results and events have since shewn
how correct was their foresight. With the Dutch it was for
a considerable period the depot of their Expeditions, and a
halting-place either after long voyaging, in distress, or in
danger. But losing, one after another, their territories in
the East, and desiring to concentrate their resources, which
were already small, to the settlement of Java, they deemed
it prudent to relinquish the Island of Mauritius.


It would appear that their first attempts at colonization
were confined to the District now called Grand Port; but
afterwards, as the country was better known, they ex-
tended their operations in other directions. Near Mahebourg
they erected a strong battery and a house for a Governor.
They also commenced cultivation on an extensive scale ; bu
it does not appear that they confined themselves to any par-
ticular branch. It was at the District of Flacq, however, that
they made most progress. There they enclosed a large gar-
den, or nursery, in which were reared every variety of trees,
shrubs, grain, vegetable, flowers, &c., that could be collect-
ed ; and from this nursery the settlers in other parts of the
island, were supplied. Nor were any pains spared to render
the collection as extensive and choice as possible. They
were the first to introduce the clove and nutmeg, the mono-
poly of which they possessed at that period in the East; but
in consequence of their limited stay and the many difficul-
ties they had to contend against in a new region, these spices
do not appear to have been cultivated to any extent.
About the beginning of the seventeenth century, the Dutch
departed from the island—leaving it a prey to the next ad-
venturer. In this state of abandonment it was found by the
French in the year 1715, at which epoch they formed an esta-
blishment close to the present town of Port Louis. Tradi-
tion would wish us to believe that on the very same day an
English and French Expedition arrived at the harbour
for the purpose of taking possession of the Island; and that
the French carried away the neglected prize in triumph* in
consequence of having been so fortunate as to precede their
rivals by only a few hours!
The first care of the Government of France was to fortify
the coasts at every weak point and at every possible or pro-
bable place where an enemy would be supposed to attempt
a landing, and much of the time and attention of the local Go-
vernors were directed to this object ; nor was it without
4


great expense and labour, that it was effected. The Lines
which surround the northern side of the town seem to
have been the first undertaken. These, as far as an inexpe-
rienced eye can discern, appear to have been planned with
judgment. They commence at the entrance of the harbour
and follow the general course of a little river known as the
“ Latanier,” towards the hills; and after a distance of near-
ly one mile, terminate on the side of the mountain, at a
small battery named “ Fort Dumas,” which commands the
Pamplemousses road, most of the surrounding country, and
also the town. Although this fort took its name from the Go-
vernor who commenced it, yet was it left to his successor:
Labourdonnais to complete the work.
At an early period of the existence of the Colony this su-
perior man arrived with ample means to protect and improve
the country ; and in addition to the fortification just spoken
of, he commenced and completed nearly all the others to
be found round the island. Three regiments were formed in
France for the sole protection of Mauritius; and to this force
was added a militia or natural guard composed of cavalry,
artillery, infantry. The country was divided into depart-
ments or districts, the names of which still exist, and each
had its commandant and deputy commandant. Thus nothing'
was left undone to ensure security to the inhabitants and
to render it difficult of access to the stranger. But whilst
every precautioti of this nature was taken, he was not
unmindful of the internal improvement of the island. He
made himself personally acquainted with the character of the
country, —chiefly with a view to the cultivation of the most
fertile parts ox it, and also to ascertain the best lines of com-
munication.
To him the Colony was indebted for several of its princi-
pal roads; and under his auspices the forests which once cover-
ed the Districts of Moka, Plaines Wiihems and Ville-Ba-
gue, gave place to an extended and varied cultivation-
B
5


In speaking of the history of Mauritius, it is not easy to
omit the frequent mention of the hame of this really great
man : and although his field of action was, to a certain de-
gree, limited, yet in his character as Governor he has des-
ptayed abilities sufficient to induce us to conclude that he
would have been also great in a wider sphere. let the
voyager look around him on his arrival at Port Louis. He
will find that the very first works of moment which attract
his attention were those constructed by the order of Labour-
donnais, viz., the batteries at the entrance of the harbour; the
“.Trou Fanfaron,” (or basin for ships of war), which oc-
cupied some years in its construction originally but ,8 feet
in depth, now possessing some 32; —the military hospital
hard by, having an open elevated sea-board, and capable
of lodging a large number cf invalids; the barracks,
considered one of the finest and best-arranged in any Colo-
ny, capable of holding two regiments ;—the aqueduct and
canal of Grand River, a work of no ordinary importance, the
latter having a course of nearly 4 miles, constructed in the
most permanent manner, with fountains and branches in va-
rious directions, and always abundantly supplied with water.
Under his administration the churches of Port Louis and
Pamplemousses were erected. The former, however, was de-
stroyed by a hurricane and rebuilt some years afterwards as
it now exists. Not content with these improvements, which,
it is to be remembered, must always be attended with great
difficulties in a new country just rescued from a state of na-
ture, he also constructed arsenals, which not only contained
all the necessaries for the repairs of ships, but were also of
such extent as to admit of their construction. In this man-
ner all vessels of war belonging to the French nation found
speedy assistance in case of disaster. At these central
workshops he also established schools in which the art of
ship building, as well as almost every other trade, was
taught
6


Mauritius at this time contained but a limited population,
and though isolated by its geographical position yet may
it be safely asserted that it never has been since in a
more happy condition. Although its exports were not
considerable, yet the island, by the indefatigable efforts of
its Governor, was furnished with the means of self-support,
which in a time of war was a consideration of no small mo-
ment. One of the means made use of by hirri to effect this
object was the employment of the military placed at his dispos-
al. Instead of limiting their duties to the ordinary barrack rou-
tine, he allotted civil occupation to all of them. The officers
were employed in superintending the construction of roads,
bridges, exploring the interior, surveying, and the like; and
when not engaged in assisting in works of this nature, the
men were permitted to devote their spare time to the service
of the planters. Both as a reward for good conduct and
with a view to secure to the country a class of useful settlers,
the Government offered small concessions of land to such of
the soldiers as had distinguished themselves by length of ser-
vice and steady behaviour; but always on the understand-
ing, that in eases of emergency they should consider
themselves again at the disposal of the Crown. Thus the
island was not only furnished with materials for powerful
defence, but also, at the same moment, with means to re-
claim and improve it. So minutely did Labourdonnais en-
list himself in the interest of the country, that he endea-
voured to introduce every species of grain, fruit, and vege-
table which could be procured either from Europe, America,
China, or India, with the idea of selecting what were best
suited to the climate and soil, and what would prove most
profitable to the settlers.
All this care has, however, to a certain extent, proved of
little avail, as the majority of his importations have since
been lost or neglected. Amongst them was the manioc ,
7


which was, brought from the Brazils at considerable cost. For
a long period of time this excellent root was the sole food of
the working classes. Grown with little care in almost every
part of the island, in great abundance, and possessing at the
same time the most nutritious qualities, its important value
was soon felt by the Government. By an Ordinance passed
under the administration of Labourdonnais, each planter was
obliged to cultivate a certain quantity of this esculent, pro-
portionate to the extent of his concession. That law has
long since either been repealed or forgotten, and the manioc
has now become comparatively scarce.
The Cochin-China rice was likewise introduced into Mau-
ritius with great success. In addition to its having a supe-
rior grain to the rice of India, the quality most to recom-
mend it was its natural adaptation to grow on high and
mountainous land ; and although water is absolutely neces-
sary for the production of the ordinary descriptions of rice,
in this respect the grain from China seems perfectly inde-
pendent. It is unnecessary to say that this article ol produce,
though once extensively cultivated, is also abandoned.
Although the cultivation of sugar (which does not appear
to have existed in the time of Labourdonnais) may be deemed
the most profitable in the present day, still it is difficult to
suppress our regret that it should exist to the complete ex-
clusion of all other produce. Beyond a certain range or
level, the cane does not thrive, as the climate and soil then
become too cold and moist: —thus Nature, it would seem,
had directed that man should not confine himself to one par-
ticular branch of cultivation. Sooner, however, than follow
the course thus plainly pointed out to him, he prefers to
forego the advantages which these new fields offer for his
exertion and enterprise, and in apathy adheres to the limited
system of culture which now prevails over the island.
Notwithstanding that Labourdonnais had done so much
8


for the actual benefit of the island, and for the interest of
France, yet it would seem that he was not born to enjoy the
reward of his exertions without suffering’s and jealousies.
As merit usually brings down both upon the head of its pos-
sessor, so he had his full share of them. Having completed
a period of more than eight years at Mauritius, during
which he accomplished, by the natural activity of his mind,
the work of many Governors, he proceeded in command of
a squadron to India; but not finally succeeding in the mis-
sion upon which he was sent, he was suspected of disloyalty,
chiefly through the machinations of some rivals he there en-
countered. On returning to France (which he did not effect
without numerous perils), he was imprisoned; and it was
only after a confinement of three years, that a formal trial
was granted him. Though honorably set at liberty, yet
such was his mortification at this barbarous treatment from a
Government which he had served with but too much fidelity
during the best part of his life, that he secluded himself
altogether from the world; and in the interval of a few
months died. Nor was it until his services were thus lost to
his country, that his ungrateful masters discovered how un-
justly he had been dealt with. However, as it was now be-
yond their power to make restitution for the wrongs and in-
juries to which he had b?en subjected, they endeavoured to
atone for their conduct by providing for his family.
A century has now nearly elapsed since his death, and
important changes have taken place within that time in the
condition and Government of the island ; yet many years
must pass ere his memory can be effaced from the records
of Mauritius. *
Labourdonnais was succeeded by Mr. Magon in 1754,
under whose administration the first sugar plantation was
established at the habitation called Ville-Bague, a distance
of some 10 miles from Port Louis. It belonged to the Gover-
nor; and he himself having been in the West Indies, where
c
9


sugar was grown to great extent, he naturally imbibed a
taste for planting, which may have been strengthened by a
vague hope of ultimate profit; and thus to a caprice or ex-
periment are the Mauritians now to attribute the origin of
this valuable branch of industry. His period of office was
likewise marked by the arrival from France of Mr. Poivre,
an eminent botanist. He held the appointment of Intendant,
but little was left for him to do beyond attending to the prac-
tical parts of his profession. By his industry he made seve-
ral valuable additions to horticulture in the country. The
royal gardens of Pamplemousses were laid out under his su-
perintendence, for the reception and culture of all kinds of
plants; —and no expense or pains on the part of the Govern-
ment were spared to render them useful, as well as ornamental.
Although the advancement of agriculture generally wad
a subject of importance, yet the production of spices was th >
most prominent object of Mr. Poivre. As it has been saul
before, the Government of Holland at that time possessed »
monopoly of them, and it was not without substantial reaspnd
that they regarded that branch of their traffic with an eye of
jealousy. Poivre in person undertook an expedition to the
Molucca islands, for the sole purpose of securing plants; but it
was not without considerable difficulty as well as danger that
he succeeded. From a commencement of this nature, attended
with so many impediments, spice trees were disseminated
over almost all parts of the island ; but the ultimate result
is already known. Great as were his exertions to forward
the prosperity of Mauritius, very little is now left, besides the
gardens spoken of, to record the extent of his industry. And
these pleasure-grounds, even if taken in their present state,
would convey but a poor idea of what had been originally
done. Walks, streams, reservoirs, trees, and plants, which
once bore the aspect of order, taste, and neatness, have now
become a general wilderness. An air of melancholy almost
contagious strikes the visitor as he saunters through the som-
bre shades which nearly envelope the whole locality.
10


During- the revolution in France, many families of respec-
tability and means emigrated to Mauritius, locating them-
selves in different parts of the country. Considerable ad-
vantages were here attainable which elsewhere did not exist.
Land was conceded by the Crown free of expense ; Slavery
being general, labour was at all times to be had at trifling
cost; materials for building abounded; the soil was of the
richest character ; every fruit, flower, grain, or plant known
in Europe or the tropics, flourished here without outlay or la-
bour; rivulets and springs of the purest water irrigated those
places which could be made habitable ; and, what was of
more consequence than all these, the island enjoyed a cli-
mate proverbial for its salubrity.
Profiting by these numerous natural resources, the settlers
quickly found themselves surrounded by permanent home-
steads, with all the means of independence at their disposal.
Cut off from their native land by an enormous distance, and
alienated from it by recent political changes, they found in
Mauritius a tranquil resting-place, where a general feeling
of contentment appeared naturally to have spread itself
among the new adventurers. The passion for agrandisement
and commercial speculation had not then infected the is-
land; and, satisfied with the fruit of their own honest indus-
try, they passed their lives in peaceful felicity. Such may be
considered the state of the inhabitants until the arrival of the
English in 1811, not long after which period, a great change
took place. Nor have we better proofs of this than in the
many neglected residences we find scattered over the island.
Though capital has been introduced and the soil has been
made to yield a greater portion of produce, consequently in.
creasing the agricultural and commercial resources of the
island, yet *has it been done at the expense of (he do-
mestic happiness of its inhabitants. Instead of these lit-
tle properties remaining in the possession of numerous
families, they are now thrown together in large masses and
11


generally in the hands of absentees who spend their profits,
if any, too far from the country to be of benefit to it.
In wandering over the country we too frequently meet, as
has been said, with records of these truths, which involunta-
rily throw a gloom over our feelings. Houses that had once
been occupied by a simple people, now empty and moulder-
ing ; gardens and pleasure-grounds forsaken and overgrown
with “ weeds that had no right to come there •” and alleys,
roads, walks, in a similar state. An air of solitude and sad-
ness hangs overall; which, notwithstanding what may be ad-
vanced by political economiststo show that “ union is strength,”
cannot remove these impressions, nor make one the less la-
ment that their doctrines could not have visited the island,
without bringing in their train so severe a revolution to test
the accuracy of the assertion.
Up to the year 1790, the stream of affairs in the Isle of
France appears to have advanced prosperously and without
interruptions of importance. This, and several of the suc-
ceeding years, however, were marked by events and disturb-
ances which in many instances were of a serious character,
and were only terminated by the exertions and wisdom of
General Malartic, who arrived in 1792. He found the
island in a condition not far removed from anarchy. The
effects of the French revolution had already spread across
to this little place. What in Europe was done on a grand
scale, was here required on a small. The cries of equality,
freedom, and self-government had become general, and
alone animated the islanders. In imitation of the mother-
country, they had formed a colonial assembly ; and although
they could not boast of the names of the heroes who flourish-
ed during the troubles of France, yet was a substi-
tute found in Mr. Macnamara, whom they murdered at
Port Louis. This unfortunate man, in his zeal for public or-
der, had opposed himself to the local agitators, and found in
the sacrifice of his life a return for his patriotism.
12


It is easy to imagine that the office of Governor Malar-
tic was not of the most enviable nature. By the extraordi-
nary address, as well as natural amiability of character, for
which he was ever distinguished, he won over, —for at this
period it would not have been politic to force, —the obedience
of the people. In this he was however fortunately assisted
by the excitement which attracted their attention in other
quarters. War having been declared between France and
England, a field was thrown open to the creoles of Mauritius
to engage themselves against the common enemy,—always
the best means of quelling social disturbances. Ships were
fitted out and armed at the port, for the purpose of attack-
ing, or at least interrupting, the vessels belonging to the
English nation trading to and from India. These were filled
with the enthusiastic aspirants who before would fain have
immortalized themselves, for the love of freedom, on the
Champ-de-Mars. Nor, in the enterprises which were under-
taken, were they deficient in daring. It is well known how
many were the annoyances as well as losses that our ships
were subjected to by their onsets from time to time in the
seas adjacent. Thus to this outlet, if we may so call it, of
patriotism, are we in a measure to ascribe the success of
Mal ARTIC in maintaining peace at home.
But whilst he was congratulating himself on the happy
issue of affairs, the arrival of two commissioners, Messrs.
Burnel and Bago, almost again plunged the Colony in
another ferment. These men had been despatched to the
Isle of France by order of the Directory to proclaim eman-
cipation to the slaves. As nearly all the prosperity of the
planters and inhabitants generally depended upon their la-
bourers, the loss of them, or what was considered akin to
it, —their freedom,—would immediately involve them in mi-
sery, if not utter ruin, •». •i. . _E ' •« • • . i
With such a prospect before their eyes, they at once re-
solved to oppose the measure, and demanded of the Govern.
o
13


ment that the commissioners should be summarily sent back.
With this cry, which was universal, the Governor was com-
pelled to comply,—and they were ordered forthwith to de-
part. Again was tranquillity restored, and, it may be said,
continued unbroken, until the death of this excellent man,
whose name is still revered and loved by the few who are
now living and had the honor to know him.
His death appears to have thrown the whole Colony into
sincere grief; and to mark it, the tomb in the Champ-de-
Mars was erected.
The administration of the Government was next placed in
the hands of Mr. Mag/llon, a man of high aristocratic prin-
ciples ; but his by gentlemanly bearing and the urbanity
of his manners, he appears, notwithstanding the republican
tone which then prevailed in French society, to have been
not only endured, but admired. He remained until 1803,
when General Decaen, the last Governor of the French
dynasty, relieved him. If little things can be opposed to
great, he might be termed the Napoleon of Mauritius, As
a soldier, he had more than once merited the notice of the
man to whom we dare to compare him. He had belonged
to the army of the Rhine and served in some of the Em-
peror’s most brilliant campaigns; and as a reward for gal-
lantry and talent he was sent to command the possessions
belonging to France on the coast of India, and afterwards
to Mauritius, with the title of Captain-General of all the
French Colonies in these seas. This was the man with whom
the English were to contend for the dominion of the island.
His first step on landing was to disband or rather dissolve
tfte Colonial Assembly. This, however, he could not have
effected with ease perhaps at a former period, but the inha-
bitants being now wearied of excitement, contentions, and
the weight of self government, were not sorry to see a man
of decision relieve them ol their self-inflicted burthens. He
busied himself in altering old, and framing new laws for the
14


Colony; and likewise repaired such of the fortifications as
had been neglected; remodelled the National Guard, and
still retained the naval armament which had been set on
foot by his predecessors. His political aspect, like that of
his person, resembled war rather than peace. During his
administration many prisoners of war were detained on the is-
land, and amongst them was the well known navigator Captain
Flinders, who had steered into the port not knowing that
hostilities had been recommenced. Some three years be-
fore the period of his visit, he sailed from England to explore
the coast of New Holland, having with him a passport from
the French Ambassador. Unfortunately, however, the vessel
in which he started was lost, and after suffering many privations
he arrived at Sydney, New South Wales, hoping there to find
another ship suitable to continue the voyage. This not being
practicable, he resolved to return to Europe. His new vessel
being small, and his supplies of provisions running short as
he approached Mauritius, he changed his course for the
purpose of obtaining a new stock at that island. There, as has
been said, he was seized by the orders of Decaen as an impos-
tor. The grounds for this charge were based on some notes
found in the private journal of Flinders, unfavorable to the in-
terest of Franee, and also on the inconsistency between the name
of the vessel mentioned in the passport and that of the ves-
sel in which he reached the harbour. An angry and not
very courteous correspondence passed between the Gover-
nor and Flinders ; and it only ended in the determination of
the former to retain his prisoner in perpetual durance. Seven
years of Flinder’s life were spent on the island, though not
(after the first 18 months) in close confinement, as he was al-
lowed a certain range of the district of Plaines Wilhems to re-
side at. To his imprisonment, as in the case of others similar-
ly situated, are we to attribute the very interesting account
he has given of his voyages, which were there written in
great measure for amusement.
15


The continueJ annoyance offered by the French privateers
to the shipping 1 of India, to which may be added the feeling
of national rancour then existing at its fullest height, deter-
mined the Government of Great Britain to strike a decided
blow against the Colonies of France in these regions. Accord-
ingly the island of Bourbon, in the year 1810, was first at-
tacked, and soon fell into the hands of the assailants. De-
caen hearing of this piece of misfortune, saw that Mauri-
tius could not now be held but with much difficulty. Never
despairing, he made every preparation the shortness of the
time would allow, for defence; —and even indulged the
idea of attacking the English at their new possession,—should
they not have arrived at this island first. Such hope, how-
ever, was frustrated by their appearance off Grand Port.
At that place were concentrated all the naval energies of
the Colony; and after a severe action there, which
lasted some hours, the English, under Willoughby, were
compelled to yield. This success on the part of the French
was but of short duration ,• for, hardly had they recovered spi-
rits and breath, than another British fleet was discovered at
the north of the island, by its numbers and aspect threaten-
ing immediate destruction; but still undismayed, the Governor
was resolved to maintain the honor of his country, if he could
not its possessions, and again made preparations to receive his
ancient foe.
# & &
This part of the history of the country is too well known
to require recapitulation. It is enough to say, that with the
means of defence at the disposal of the Governor, and the
number of troops under his command, not amounting to
more than a tenth of his adversaries, he shewed a resistance
and courage, that almost savoured of the desperate struggles
of the military hero of Sweden, and from all unprejudiced
minds must call down general commendation.
After a capitulation, extremely advantageous to the French
16


Government and honorable to the Captain-General himself,
he left the island, accompanied by the few troops then under
his command, in December 1810; and the new administra-
tion was undertaken by Mr. Farquhar, who accompanied
the English expedition. It is easy to understand the nume-
rous difficulties he had to encounter, and the careful policy
he had to adopt to succeed in governing with satisfaction a
Colony just conquered; occupied by a people speaking a
foreign language, enjoying laws congenial to their charac-
ter and habits, and professing a religion different from that
of England. But the ability and tact displayed by him, and
the conciliating and, at the same time, firm course which he
pursued, at once confirm the superior order of his mind;
while it proved the discrimination of the British Government
in appointing’ him to this responsible office.
With him English capital was introduced into the
country. Men of enterprise came out from England;—a
new impetus was suddenly given to commerce and to agri-
cultural pursuits. Buildings increased; —publicroads werere-
paireS—new ones were opened;—bridges erected, and every
means not hitherto established, were put into operation
to develope the resources of the island. The condition of
the slaves was ameliorated, whilst at the same time the inter-
est of the planter was not forgotten. His term of office hav-
ing expired in the year 1813, he set sail for England, uni-
versally regretted; and was succeeded by General Hall,
who it appears only remained a very limited period.
Go! duel 1) vlrimple was next appointed, in 1818, and he
shortly after, in the beginning of 1819, made way for Gene-
ral Darling, who, in 1820, was relieved by Sir Robert
Fauq'lthar, who had been re-appointed as Governor. 'Until
1823 the Colony w r as fortunate enough to enjoy his valuable
services, when he once more bade farewell to the place where
he had passed so many years of his life, loved and respected.
u IHiid iool of vino ovfid s?/. rto bsiiwb sd tn
E
17


In the same year arrived Sir Lowrv Cole, who continued
to hold the office of Governor until replaced by Sir Char-
les Colville in 1828. Both of these gentlemen were dis-
tinguished by many excellent qualities, which were not onlv
manifested in their public capacities as Heads of the Go-
vernment, but also in their private lives. The extreme re-
gret expressed by the inhabitants on their departure, suffi-
ciently proves the estimation in which they were held. The
latter, Sir Charles Colville, appears to have been an es-
pecial favorite with the ladies of the island. Before talking
his final leave, they requested he would sit for his portrait,
which was a favor and an honor it is unnecessary to say, he
was too gallant to refuse. The expense of the painting—
amounting to some £2oo—was defrayed by a subscription
among themselves ; and it now decorates the Lodge of Free-
masons in Port Louis, —a well-chosen memorial of himself,
and also of their taste and generosity.
The next ruler was Sir Lionel Smith, who died shortly
after his arrival; —and the office was then temporarily filled
by Colonel Stavelev, until the nomination of General Sir
Wt lliam Gomm in 1842, under whose auspices the Colony
is still placed.
Under the head of productions, the Island of Mauritius
might display as great, if not greater, variety than any other
country, perhaps, in the world. Put, as already remarked
more than once, no attention, though some encouragement,
has been given to a diversified system of cultivation. The
whole, the grand idea of Mauritius, is concentrated in the
production of sugar—come, how or wdiere it will. If some
soil, or particular situation in the Island, shows an un
congeniality to canes, still are they planted—despite the
silent remonstrances of nature herself.
To prove to what extent, and with what success, general
cultivation can be carried on, we have only to look back to
18


the lists of exports published some years ago. In them we
tind coffee, indigo, cotton, cloves, nutmegs, cinnamon,
pepper, rice, manioc, maize, wheat, oats; —to which have
been added more recently, silk and tea. Existing in the
island are also almost every species of fruit and vegetables,
not forgetting as a foremost in the latter, potatoes, which in
some of the higher districts equal even those of Ireland it-
self. Although at the annual agricultural and horticultural
exhibitions, specimens of all these articles of produce may
not be found, yet enough will be seen at once to prove to the
sceptical the correctness of the above statement. A Society
has been formed for the encouragement and propagation of
agriculture and horticulture; it awards prizes, and makes
reports, but it has not succeeded—apparently— in convinc-
ing people that varied cultivation is necessary as well as use-
ful. It has however, directed the attention of planters to
improved methods of raising canes and of manufacturing
sugar—a consideration that must be of satisfaction to the
Society and of advantage to the country at large.
Some few individuals have planted the mulberry-tree with
the view to raise silk, and have succeeded perfectly. As
considerable expense is necessary, and much time must
elapse before a return can accrue, it is unfortunately out
of the power of those whose means are limited to em-
bark in its cultivation to any extent. To the enterprize, in-
telligence, and industry of a lady, Mrs. Moon, are the
first attempts of consequence to be attributed. Recently the
Government consented to second her efforts ; and it is
to be hoped that she will not have reason to regret her la-
bour, nor the Government its generosity in forwarding an
experiment so interesting.
The example of Mrs. Moon has been followed by other
persons, also distinguished for enterprize, who have formed
plantations on a large scale, —and which up to the present
time look sufficiently promising. Thus we see from one or
19


two propitious sources there are grounds to hope that the
infatuated sugarists— if the word will be permitted—may
have a new field of action thrown open to their industry,
which in many cases is now misapplied.
Owing to the exertions of Mr. Jaunet, the tea plant has
been introduced; and like the mulberry, succeeds best in
those parts of the island where canes will not thrive. If
there is any impediment to perfect success, it is in drying
or curing the leaf after it is gathered. This difficulty would
be perhaps easily removed by the introduction of a few prac-
tised hands “cunning in the art” from China, and at the
same time a few of the best plants,—the latter an affair, pro-
bably, of more trouble than either of the others.
The actual natural productions of the island are few as
compared with other places: —timber may be reckoned
among the principal, if not the only one, sought after. Large
quantities of iron ore exist, and in former days this metal
was worked ; but it is now too cheap and abundant in Eu-
rope to make the raising of it here profitable. Of the first
material mentioned, is ebony, for the excellence of which
the country was justly celebrated. Owing to the difficulties
at present existing, from its inaccessibility, its scarcity, and
the expense of labour, little is felled and less exported.
The other timber indigenous to Mauritius is varied and
useful ; some species of it are handsome when worked. The
tree, or plant (for it partakes of both characters), so com-
mon, called the Vacoa, is of immense importance to the
planter, as all the bags in which sugar is sent to Europe, are
made from its curious leaf.
The citron and tamarind trees are also thought to have
been found here in a state of nature, as they are met with in
many places apparently wild. The former, if attended to,
is capable of producing excellent fruit. The orange is
grown ; but from carelessness of culture it rarely arrives at
perfection. The other European fruit-trees, —such as the
20


peach, apple, cherry, vine,—thrive admirably when good
situations are selected for them; but the tropical fruits,—es-
pecially the banana, custard-apple, pine-apple, and above,
all the mango (which is without a compeer), flourish here in
perfection. The latter in size is larger than a pear oval, and
contains a large stone,—the greatest drawback about it
The best are of a beautiful pink color and superior in flavour
to all the others, without the unwholesome effects of any of
them. Being perfectly new and peculiar in taste, the stranger
does not at first relish the mango. A little habit however, and
he will seek no other fruit while that is to be had. The water-
melon, that other luxury so justly valued, so grateful, and
delicious in warm climates, does not appear to thrive well
in Mauritius. The fig also seems out of its element: both
are natives of a dry as well as hot climate, and as dryness is
not peculiar to our climate, their failure is readily accounted
for.
From animals distinguished by savage Or venomous propen-
sities, the island is happily exempt. However, there are others,
in a measure useful, as affording sport, and provisions for the
Bazaar. These are deer, pigs, and hares. Throughout the
higher parts of the country great numbers of the two first
are found. The difficulties in hunting the deer are many
and irksome; and although an occasional shot “tells,” yet.
unless impelled by extraordinary enthusiasm, the sportsmen
is miserably repaid for his fatigues. The country to which
those beautiful animals resort, is well adapted for their pro-
tection, being generally covered by thick and matted forests,
-—totally preventing a fair and open “ run” with dogs, or
indeed in any other way. Each “ chasseur” for the time
being, must fancy himself a species of culprit. He is fixed
to a tree or at some little opening in the wood, and there
remains as steady as his patience will allow, distracted with
suspense, hunger, thirst, and solitude, until some generous
stag approaches, —an event not always to be relied on, and
«■ . ... r-
21


not always that he is secured when he does arrive. As in fish-
inov the excitement must exist in the mind, not in the occn-
• £5 “ ,
pation itself. The good fellowship, however, which generally
succeeds these melancholy diversions, appears to be the best
part of them.
Boar hunting that usually-allowed manly sport —is
not practised to great extent, as it too imperatively de-
mands the immediate presence of the huntsman every where,
which in a place like Mauritius, is not always convenient or
practicable.
These animals usually inhabit the wood and sometimes
make incursions on the adjoining estates, where, if not de-
tected or captured, they commit lamentable havoc. After
feeding for some time on canes, it is easily imagined, that
their flesh becomes extremely delicate, —as it ought, from
banqueting on such sumptuous fare !
Next on the list are monkeys and rats. Though so much
smaller than the other animals, yet their depredations are
more extensive. The latter are difficult to extirpate, unless
by a general conflagration. Their propensity it would seem
is not actually to devour the plants, but solely to destroy
them, from a principle of innate malice ! In all directions,
where they enter, they at once commence to gnaw the canes
into two parts and the moment they fall, they are abandoned
for others, and so on. Thus a company of rats will march
onward, cutting right and left, felling all before them in-
differently. ' Traps are used; but though they may check,
they cannot arrest the evil altogether.
The monkeys are particularly destructive to orchards.
The mango fruit appear to be their favorite, as well as that
of man. They are small, and inoffensive—of the usual co-
lor and size of ail monkeys—remarkable for the same mali-
cious tricks, and for inhabiting* the most unaccessible places.
It has been said that they are very palatable,—perhaps after
having fed on mangoes,—and when the sharp tooth of hunger
is to be appeased.
22


The question is not jet decided whether all these animals
were found in the island on its first discovery by the Portu-
guese ; but they certainly were by the Dutch and French.
The trifling communication with the island before the
seventeenth century,—its isolated position,—and its great
distance from any other country where birds were numerous,
at once accounts for the scarcity of them here. The only
ones of consequence are a few hawks, paroquets, cardinals,
(from something red being about them), quails, partridge,
and doves. But how many, or if any, of them existed ori-
ginally, is no better ascertained than the number of the ani-
mals. It is rather curious that that species which was known
and discovered by the Dutchmen,—namely the Dodo, —is
now extinct. Tradition would have it that they were not
only numerous, but so tame as to permit the close approach
of man without the slightest appearance of fear,—to which
(misfortune) may be attributed their total annihilation.
The coast is enriched by vast numbers of fine fish—almost
equalling in quality and excellence those of any other part
of the world. Severe regulations exist for their preservation, as
well as for the manner of taking them. Licences for the
latter purpose are always required, and are heavily taxed,
which is partly the reason for the high prices now existing
and also the reason for the large consumption of salted fish
and other provisions, less nutritious, that are imported.
To the advantages of entire freedom from animals of ma-
lignant habits may well be added the agreeable climate the
island enjoys. Although in the tropics, yet is it extreme-
ly temperate. The .heat of summer is rarely intense,
—except at particular spots that are sheltered by hills, or
placed at very low levels. Among the mountains, and on the
High fable lands of Plaines Wilhems, Moka, Qhartier J/i/L
* A. bird called the “ Martin ”is common. It was introduced from: India ex-
pressly for the purpose of destroying vermin, and especially the locusts which once
nfesu'd the Island.
23


can be more saljkiffpiis or exhilarating-, winch
may be attributed to prevailing- trade winds and also to
the bf tHe | island itself. To every constitution,
therefore, with perhaps the exception of the consumptive, it
is admirably suited. But although the breezes, which per-
petually carry with them freshness, are most welcome to the
majority of the inhabitants, yet they are, at the same tune, •
more or less charged with humidity, and consequently [ire-
judicial to those of delicate lungs,—a class, fortunately,
not, numerous in Mauritius. The grand “alloy” however,
in the climate are the storms and hurricanes it is occasionally
liable to. But their ravages of late years do not (if we can
form a comparison with old records) appear to have been so
severe as formerly. We have accounts where it is said that
trees of giant dimensions have been torn up and whirled
into “ mid-air,” —rocks wrendhed from their places,—fields
cleared of their crops,—houses razed by hundreds in “fell
swoops,”—ships dashed to atoms against rocks and each
other, as if they were so many glass phials, —all living things
hurled info positions the least agreeable,—in fact that (hey
have “ played the most fantastic as well as the most lament-
able tricks before high heaven,”—that it is possible for an
intensely affrighted imagination to “ body forth-”
When the object of the historian is to excite sympathy and
amazement, nothing is more common and natural than to ex-
aggerate catastrophes. On this principle are these over-
wrought descriptions to be accounted for; as, in reality, no
such direful scenes ever occurred. Doubtless, much damage
has been done to houses, trees, plantations, and vessels, but. hi
the same time some of the mischief might probably have been
avoided if proper precautions had been adopted. Taught
by experience,—people have of late years built more sub-
stantial dwellings,—protected their orchards by barriers of
trees to “ windward,” —moored their ships more securely?
24


and above all have carefully watched their barometers, which
were all but unknown in the last century.
# # *
The population of the island up to the present time is es-
timated at 162,899, composed as follows:—General popula-
tion, 102,882; Immigrants, 56,520; Garrison, 2,445; Ship-
ping, 1,052.
In few other places is a greater diversity of nations to be
met with. In the same street may be seen, our own country-
men—in the characters of the grave official, —the busy mer-
chant—the rigid soldier—and the rolling seaman, mingled
with elegantly-attired and mustached Frenchmen; and then,
descending in the scale of color, we find Chinamen —Arabs—
Malays—lndians—or, as they are commonly denominated,
“Malabars”—Africans—Malagasys, and natives of the island,
with other shades and castes composed of all these, and not
belonging distinctly to either. The Indians are for the
most part only visitors. They come here for 5 years from
Calcutta and the other Presidencies, and at the expiration
of the period fixed, many return with a rich harvest of ru-
pees —to bask away the rest of their existence in idleness
on the banks of some sacred slimy river, or in the neigh-
bourhood of some reeking jungle in Father-land.
The institutions of Mauritius are well adapted to its wants
and size. Here are, Courts of law, with their judges, de-
puty judges, avoues and advocates, —of whom, for the
population, there are a large number, amounting to some
60. Most of these gentlemen are natives of the island, but
many have been educated in Europe, Though the English
language has been recently introduced, yet the laws (from
the terms of the Capitulation) are the same as those adopted
by the French Government. Trial by jury consequently
does not form a part of the jurisprudence.
The police force is composed chiefly of blacks, who, it is
unnecessary to say, are by no means so efficient as Euro-
peans. The number is therefore greater than if it had been
composed solely of Englishmen. The officers are generally of
6
25


this nation ; and the system of organization and clothing, as
much as possible resemble those of the London police. From
the excellent discipline, energy, and imposing appearance
(this has weight sometimes) of the Gens-d’armerie at the
neighbouring island, Bourbon, it is often regretted that we
have not a similar force here.
The great importance of the position of Mauritius obliges
the Government to maintain a large body of troops in it.
Three regiments—or two, one having two battalions —usually
compose the garrison. The head quarters are always at
Port Louis; and one regiment is dispersed on detachment
at different parts of the coast; as for example at Cannonier’s
Point, Flacq, Grand River S. E., Mahebourg, Souillac,
Black River, &c. There is an hospital, but no charitable
institutions, which speaks favourably for the prosperity of
the country ; a post-office, which disseminates letters to dif-
ferent parts of the island, and a multitude of other depart-
ments to carry on the machinery of Government.
The system of general education is established on an ex-
tensive scale. In Port Louis there are many public and pri-
vate schools. At the head of the former is the “ Royal Col-
lege,”—an institution formed under the administration of
M. Magillon in 1799, who gave it the name of Ecole Cen~
trale, —afterwards under General Decaen it assumed that
of Lycee des Isles de France et de la Reunion, —for which it
was again changed by General Darling to “Colonial College,”
and at last arrived at the honor of “Royal,” under Sir Robert
Farquhar. This institution has an ample number of pro-
fessors and teachers. The course of education is nearly the
same as that of the generality of high schools in Great Bri-
tain. One excellent feature in its plan is, that the most de-
serving student of each annual examination is sent to Eng-
land, there to study for a term of 4 years some profession, at
the expense of the Government. The number of boys now
amount to about 200—one half of whom are of the white
population. Much talent and emulation have been display-
ed by some of the boys of the colored classes. The build-
26


tng is large, commodious, but certainly not very remarkable
for architectural beauties.
The Government schools now extend to about 25, ten of
which are at Port Louis, and the remainder scattered over
the country at points where the population is most concen-
trated. The number of scholars fluctuates, but may be
reckoned at nearly 2000, including both sexes. A general
desire manifests itself on the part of parents to have their
children taught, and this is augmented by the eagerness and
aptness which characterize the latter in learning. A clergy-
man of the church of England has the general superintend-
ence of all these useful institutions. In most cases the teach-
ers appointed to the schools are married, and their general
assiduity in their laborious duties is worthy of great praise.
In Port Louis is a Masonic Lodge, called “La Triple Es~
perance” which musters a strong force. The building oc-
cupied by them, is often generously lent for the winter re-
unions or balls, and for other useful purposes. No regular
assembly-rooms, it is strange to say, yet exist. As a duty to
the society of Mauritius, one is bound to state that the balls
of its capital are in no wise inferior—relatively speaking—in
beauty, in attraction, or in selectness of company, to simi-
lar assemblies elsewhere. The former quality is proverbial,
as can be attested by the detention here of many of the visi-
tors to the island!
The language of society is still French—a language that
seems created for every refined people in the world; but in
the manners and usages of the English and French, few
differences are apparent, owing to the intercourse which has
so long subsisted between them.
A theatre has been established for some years past; and
although the acting* is at times excellent, and much discern-
O O 9
ment displayed in the selection of subjects and music, yet it
is not well supported ; nor is it easy to account for this neg-
lect, especially as it appears in a people who were always
distinguished for love of amusements generally, and all that
belonged to the beaux arts , particularly.
27


Another establishment, without much ornamental preten-
sions, but of greater practical utility, is the Bazaar, recently
erected. Under the roof of that building are to be found
many varieties of fruit, vegetables, grains, meat, fish, and the
ordinary produce of the island. It is well arranged spa-
cious—airy—supported on iron pillars—and always kept in
the neatest order. The part reserved for fish is in itself
perfect. They are exposed on sloping slabs of marble, over
which flows a constant current of clear water, supplied from
the Grand River canal. The market is said to be too large
for the population. At present, however, there are not
many evidences of the correctness of this statement, as few
of the stalls are unoccupied.
Port Louis boasts of 4 or five hotels and inns, but two only
of the first are received. The principal of these, the Hotel
d’Europe, is a highly respectable but very expensive esta-
blishment. The other, the Hotel Masse , is also remarkable
for the same features, —and likewise for the quantities of
“ Burgundy wine ” there consumed
In a town with a population probably amounting to some
40,000, and among which number there is a very large
proportion of the higher classes, it is surprising that no Club
establishment, similar to those in London and other places,
has yet been formed. The many advantages arising from
them over ordinary hotels, both in respectability, conveni-
ence, and economy, are too well known to require comment
here.
# # #
The necessarily limited number of these pages prevents the
writer from entering at length into the details of any of the
subjects touched on. His object throughout the whole was to
imitate the general rude character of the drawings, which he
intended to make more intelligible by description. Conse-
quently, all he could hope for or ever aimed at, was mere
faithfulness of outline.
* See Pkidham on Mauritius.
28


Government House , Port-Louis .




PROTESTANT CHURCH,
PORT LOUIS.
Although Port Louis has much to be admired in pictu-
resque scenery, yet up to the present time it is not remark-
able for architectural ornaments. The building now under
consideration may be regarded as one of the chef d’oeuvres
there; but it is left for the spectator to decide how many
are its claims to the beautiful. In actual strength and dura-
bility, nothing is wanting, it having been in former days
built for and employed as a powder magazine, but, since
that period, has undergone sundry changes and embellish-
ments, according to the will or taste of each new administra-
tion, until the form it now assumes was attained. Thus from
warlike purposes we see it transformed into the most peace-
ful as well as the most sacred, literally realizing the
sanguine dreams of those who fain would see all engines of
destruction metamorphosed into those of universal benevo-
lence. For such part of the Protestant population as are
in the habit of attending, it is greatly too large ; however, it
is to be hoped that this comparative state of abandonment
will not be of long continuance. Two clergymen perform
divine service, one especially for the soldiers of the garri-
son at an early hour; and the other at midday and in the
evening, for the ordinary congregation.
The site of the church is tolerably good, and as seen from
the Company’s Gardens, and certain other parts of the town,
it presents an extremely picturesque appearance. The struc-
ture stands on an open piece of ground recently planted with
trees, and is besides ornamented with a fountain, which,
though it has no pretensions at the present day, yet at some
future period may, like its gigantic neighbour, also swell
into importance.




Protestant Church. Port-Louis




ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCH,
PORT LOUIS.
Soon after the formation of the Colony* a handsome
church was erected; but in the year 1773 it was destroyed
by a hurricane. From that period the inhabitants were forced
to content themselves with a temporary place of worship
near the Port—-and it was only in 1813 that the present
structure was built—nearly on the site of the former one,
and with part of its materials.
The plan is simple and unassuming l , and, it is said, is a
copy of a church in France much admired.
The interior contains some good paintings, and is further
ornamented by a very beautiful pulpit, which displays in the
design considerable taste, and in the workmanship great de-
licacy.
The neighbourhood is refreshed and enlivened by a hand-
some fountain, which is supplied from the Bathurst Canal ;
and between it and the church is a stone cross. The clump
of foliage on the right shelters a convent where there is a
school especially for the education of young ladies, includ-
ing those who intend to seclude themselves from the world.
On the left is the Presbytery, the residence of the Roman
Catholic Bishop—an old building, and also surrounded with
trees; in front, a Bank; and beyond, on the hill, a portion of
the Citadel ;-—the tout ensemble forming a view sufficiently
picturesque, but somewhat curious in its materials, —as at
one moment we have all the elements of peace, war, and
commerce, in close vicinity.
Beside the Bishop, there are at present 10 other clergy-
men in the island, but the number is fixed at 14. Five are
occupied at Port Louis, and the remainder in different parts


of the country,—thus one is able to form a good idea of the
extent of the population belonging to their faith. Nearly
•2000 baptisms take place yearly at the parochial church;-
and the number of Roman Catholics in the Port Louis dis-
trict may be counted at 35,000. Two schools are attached
to the establishment—one here and the other at Mahebourgh ;
but the bulk of the children attend the Government semi-
naries.
The piety of the congregations in the Isle of France is no
less zealous than in other Catholic countries. From an early
hour in the morning until late in the evening, hundreds
may be seen going to and returningdrom the church, all ac-
tuated by the same feeling of devotion which has characte-
rized their religion through many ages <and <in all sparts of
'tbewMMil orb do 9th sdt no yhaen-—:bind Bbw oiutmnv


Catholic Church, Port-Louis.




Port-Loins . from Champ de Mars.




MALARTIC TOMB,
CHAMP-DE-MARS.
This monument was commenced bv the French soon after
;
the demise of the Governor to whose honor it was erected,
but was not completed by them, owing’ to the political
changes in the Colony about that time. The original idea
was a column surmounted by an urn. However, it has been
deemed more prudent to alter the plan and substitute an
obelisk, which is sufficiently conspicuous. A handsome iron
railing now encloses the whole structure. The funds for the
completion of the monument were raised by means of a
Fancy Fair, —an idea due to Lady Gomm, and carried out
under her patronage and with the assistance of the other
ladies of Mauritius, —to whom too much praise cannot be
awarded for their exertions in so interesting a cause.
Though a testimonial of this nature was not required to
perpetuate the memory of Malartic, yet as it has been
raised, it is to be lamented that his distinguished predecessor
Labourdonnais, whose name will be imperishable as long
as the history of Mauritius exists, should not also have had
a similar, or even less humble, mark of respect offered to
him ! It would be invidious to draw parallels between two
men who had the same good and high object in view, name-
ly, the prosperity of the country. But assuredly, the man
who becomes the founder of a Colony,—supposing he had
nothing more favorable to recommend him, —from which
thousands of its inhabitants have derived benefits, and in a
measure owing to the wisdom of his arrangements, merits
some token of remembrance ! Fortunately, however, for
him, no “ storied urn” is absolutely necessary, although
gratitude should demand it.


Two other objects in this sketch have also claim to histo-
rical celebrity,—viz., the house in the distance, now in pos-
session of the family of Le Breton, originally built for the
first English Governor, Sir R, Farquhar, in which he re-
sided during his auspicious sojourn here ; and beyond that,
the Signal Mountain, which brings to recollection the man who,
by the extraordinary power of his vision, was in the habit of
foretelling the arrival of ships days before they could be
seen by the ordinary world. This individual is no longer
living. However, the faculties by which he became remark-
able not only on the spot, but all over Europe, will not be
readilv forgotten.
.em;) turit tnodfi veelo') odt ni fOTmrd-


Malar tic Toinh.




View of Port-Loins from the Cemetery.




GRAND RIVER AQUEDUCT
AND
BATHURST CANAL.
The Aqueduct at Grand River is a work of considerable
merit as well as importance; and, at the period of its con-
struction (now nearly 100 years ago), when the Colony was
still in its infancy, must have been an undertaking of no or-
dinary moment. It crosses a valley near the Suspension
Bridge, and is supported on seven semicircular arches, hav-
ing a height of about 35 feet and length of nearly 300. lo
the roving part of the world it is perfectly lost, although
close to the high-road, being concealed behind a clump oi
trees and the fortified hill already described.
The canal itself is called “ Dayot,” from the name of the
engineer under whose inspection it was constiucted. The
general plan is admirable, and from its extensive dimensions,
its solidity, and nature of the materials, is calculated to last,
with little care, for many years yet to come. The body of
water conveyed by it is considerably more than is required
for the wants of the town, —a proof of the foresight of its
emminent projector, Labourdonnais, who thought rather
for the future than the limited present.
Such is the stability of the Aqueduct, that it was proposed
to turn the main line of road over it, in order to avoid the
steep hill in the vicinity ; but no decision has yet been come
to on the sqbject. Although the Bathurst Canal does not
equal the Dayot Canal, either in size or general capabili-
ties, yet it is a structure of consequence. It was commenced
at different times,-even so far back as 1745 ; but, from tl.e
want of money, dissensions among the proprietors through
whose properties it was to have passed, changes of Govcr-
nors, general troubles, and lastly the change of Govern-
ments, it was not completed till after the great conflagration
in 1816, at which moment the inhabitants most experienced
the absence of an abundant command of water. And had
it not been for that catastrophe it is probable that the canal


would not even now be in operation;—an instance where
misfortune itself is the origin of an ultimate benefit.
The conduit commences at the “ Riviere du Tombeau,” a
distance of some 4 miles from Port Louis, and in its course
it crosses other rivers, one of which is the “ Latannier,” of
celebrity, from whence the accompanying view was taken.
At present the canal is managed by a Commission or Board
of nine persons, who have a managing director, secretary,
and other officers, to look after its preservation and effi-
ciency. Lord Bathurst happened to have been one of the
Ministers at the time of its completion, and thus to this cir-
cumstance is the euphoneus name it bears to be ascribed.
As the demands for new supplies of water are every day
increasing, and as it is besides of great importance that a
larger quantity even than what is usually required should
be at command, in the event of accidents by fire, it has been
proposed to the local Government, by the directors, to
turn another stream, of which the water is excellent, but now
comparatively useless, into the “ Riviere du Tombeau,” from
whence, as has been said, the canal is fed; but as yet no de-
cisive reply has been given. This would be a work of some
labour and expence ; but its necessity would at once war-
rant the outlay.
Another benefit to the public would be the continuation
of the supply of water to the dwellings at the N. E. side
of the Citadel and also to the Champ-de-Mars, both of which
places have long suffered much inconvenience from the
want of it.
The surplus might easily be conveyed to the centre of the
Champ-de-Mars, and there expend itself in a “ jet d’eau,”
or a pretty fountain, which would be of all other ornaments
one of ihe most appropriate, as well as most useful that could
be introduced.
The members of the Board have already shewed much
energy in the general arrangement and improvements of
their canal ; and it is still to be hoped that what has been
contemplated, and is here suggested, may one day be realized.


Bathurst Canal - Lataniers River.




Aqueduct at Grand- River.




FORT DUMAS.
Although not often visited, still this old battery has some
attractions. Looking 1 at it from below, there is little to in-
duce the curious to attempt an ascent; —on arrival,
one finds himself repaid for the trouble of his climb, by the
commanding view it affords, and the appearance of the place
itself. To the north is seen the extensive and well-cultivat-
ed plains of Pamplemousses and Mapou ; beyond, the
horizon is broken by the “ Coin de Mire” and “ Flat Island.”
The right is bounded by “Montagne Longue,” on which is a
signal station; and between it and (he fort are the “ Vallee
des Pretres” and “Riviere Latannier,” both immortalized—
the former from having been the birth-place of Paul and
V irginia ; —nor could he, it may be remarked, have selected
a more romantic site for the abode of two such interesting
characters.
The prospect on the left comprises the whole of the coast—
stretching from “ Cap Malheureux” to Grand River, in which
are included, “Grande Baie,” “ Baledu Tombeau,” the Port,
town, and the signal hill at the extremity of the Peter-Booth
range. Another feature that mils' strike the eye of the vi-
sitor is the excellent position of the battery as a military
station. The great road to the north of the island is per-
fectly commanded by it; and the range of its influence in
other directions would also embrace a wide circle a fact
practically experienced by the English troops on their ap-
proach in 1810.
Many guns of large calibre are still strewed about the
place, most of them in such postures as to induce us to sup
pose, that no friendly hand had so arranged them. On the
parapet outside the fort, lies a gun reversed and spiked. The
head of the nai! is flattened out like a battered bullet, evi-
dently the result of angry feelings,—in fact looking as if
every soldier, hurt or otherwise, in (he invading army, had his
turn of revenge. Trifling though this little incident be, yet
is there in it sufficient field for the rumination of the moralist.




fort Dumas




PAMPLEMOUSSES CHURCH.
A description is hardly necessary for a building and
Place so well known, not only to those on the spot, but n
almost every part of Europe. The name atoncejecal *£
the mind, the interesting and justly-famed history of
and Virginia.” Though not yet a century ■» existence,
the locality possesses all the charm that ant.qmty and ro-
mance could give it. The church in itself has much o re-
commend it to the eye of the, artist, though perhaps not to
that of the architect, the style being simple and unpretend-
ing The interior is ornamented by some good paint-
inits a well toned organ, —is well arrange , airy,
and sufficiently capacious for a large congregation Close
by is the cemetery, a romantically-situated piece of ground
in which, for the extent of the district, are a vast number of
monuments. Amongst them, the tombs of Mr. Magon, for-
merly Governor of the island, -Mr. Cere, a distinguished
botanist, Mr. A. D’Epinay, and others, bearing names of lo-
cal celebrity. Nothing strikes the eye of a stranger, more
forcibly, nor is in stronger contrast to the general character
„f English burial-grounds, than this, and indeed all the
cemeteries in the island. The extreme negligence that cha.
racterises the manner in which all those places ,n Eng and
are kept, is sufficiently known, and often reprobated by
foreigners. Here, however, as much care is bestowed on
these”sacred grounds as there is neglect in Britain Almost
all the tombs, no matter of what age, bear the marks of sor-
row and affection. They are also continually visited by the
friends or relations of the departed, who offer prayers for


their happiness, hoping that when their time of rest also
arrives, some one of their own kindred will render a simi-
lar duty to themselves ; and although their supplications may
or may not be availing, yet the idea is consolatory, and should
not be condemned. Flowers, trees, and shrubs are generally
found ornamenting the graves, all of which are kept in the
neatest order and constantly watered. The vessels used for
this purpose are always left on the spot, thus in a manner
partaking of the privileged sacredness of the place.
The church is now surrounded by several cottages, chiefly
occupied by creoles, and on this account almost deserves
the title of a village. It boasts of a pharmacy, a Post
Office, and two or three shops, besides a Police station.
But what adds chiefly to the interest of the locality of
Pamplemousses, are the tombs of Paul and Virginia, not
far distant. Although not genuine, yet the world who flock
to the spot will not suffer themselves to be divested of the
romantic illusion which is attached to the place. What the
burial place of Romeo and Juliet at Verona was to the
Italians, this of the hero and heroine of Bernardin St. Pierre,
is to the travelling world of the east. Who that ever visits
the shores of the Isle of France does not at once post to
Pamplemousses, to satisfy the curiosity excited by that beau-
tifully-written romance ? If the voyager returns to Europe
without this local knowledge, he is supposed to have seen
nothing, and is branded as little less than a savage. Poe-
tical pilgrims, however, are not always to be seen wending
their holy steps in that direction. It has of kite years be-
come the rendezvous of the idle, the mischievous and the
drunken of all classes: and if we desire to see those of our
countrymen who call the ocean their home, in their true
element, we have only to drive out and see them there. The
tears usually shed at the shrines are those distilled from gin
and water ; the offerings usually those of broken bottles and,
the debris of feasting ; and the incense of these devotees
savours rather of reeking tobacco than of frankincense
or myrrh. No better cure for romance could possibly be


sought for, than a visit to the tombs of Paul and Virginia
on a Sunday.
The Royal Gardens already spoken of, adjoin the church;
and though not in a state most to be desired, are notwith-
standing attractive. The pleasure-grounds of Mon-Platsn
are likewise at hand. They are exceedingly picturesque,
but neglected. Great pains evidently had once been be-
stowed in their arrangements, and in the plantations. Ihe
house is spacious and handsome; but, not being the same as
occupied bv the old French Governors, little interest is now
attached to it. The first has been pulled down,—a pity, as
all the memorials of the earl) establishments of the Colony
would be worth preserving.
Two beautiful streams run through the neighbourhood, —
one through the grounds of this demesne, and the other at
the lower or western side of the church. Now and then they
expand into artlfieal lakes, which are ornamented with little
islets covered with the foliage of bamboos and other grace-
ful trees.




Pamplemousses Church.




GRANDEBA BAIE.
PAMPLEMOUSSES.
From the imposing- name assumed by this place, a strang-
er might be led to suppose that some thing- extraordinary
existed to recommend it—either in depth, dimensions or ge-
neral capabilities. The outline of the basin, as it may be
termed, is considerable, but its other resources are “ poor
indeed.” A bar of sand stretches across the entrance, which
at once prevents vessels of larger size than coasters and fish-
ing boats, from passing.
About half a mile distant is “ Cannonier Point”—a head-
land formerly fortified by the French, and still in a state of
defence. Here is a splendid plain, having an uninterrupted
expanse of some 2 or 3 miles along the coast, and covered
with a thick verdure similar to that at “ Cap Malheureuar .”
It is reserved by the Government, —as indeed is a certain
portion of the coast-line round the island, —a regulation
that originated under the French administration, and of
great public convenience.
Grand Bay has nearlv the same claim to the title of village
as Parnplernousses and Grand River, having sundry shops—
a school house—police station—post office—and two or
three stores built of stone for the reception of the sugars of
the neighbouring estates, previous to (heir shipment to the
Port.
Fishing operations on an extended scale are spiritedly
carried on, as some of the finest fish, as well as the largest
numbers, are here caught. At early dawn the sea for a long
distance is dotted over with boats, which with their little


bright sails resemble so many butterflies, —abroad apparent-
ly more for amusement than lucre; but the deeply-laden
aspect of the returning fleet, some explains what has been
their real object. Altogether, Grande Baie may be looked
upon as a retired—unpresuming, rural little nook,—not
much known, and where its inhabitants pass a tranquil, con-
tented, and therefore we may presume, -a happy life, —never
disturbed but by an extraordinary “take of fish” or by the
rumbling of some stray vehicle over its wretched road.


Grande Baie.




CAP MALHEUREUX
A locality - distinguished bj a name so friste would na-
turally lead us to expect something wild and terrible, —such,
for example, as.frowning cliffs,—-dark rocks —a roaring surge
—dashing spray, and even here and there shattered spars—
broken anchors —bones, and other vestiges common to wrecks.
But in this is another proof that we are not to be guided in
our notions of things or places by the names they bear. Cap
Matkenreux, so far from being recognised bj any of those
features, is, of all spots on the island, one of the mildest,
sunniest, and pleasantest. It forms the most northerly ex-
tremity of the coast; but in other respects is not marked by
a headland or indeed any prominent object. A dangerous
reef and strong ciirret t, however, exist outside, and have
been the cause of frequent shipwreck, when the navigation
of the coast was but little known ; —and to this circumstance
may naturally be attributed the origin of the above name.
The view also represents the Coin de Mire , so called from
its resemblance to the wedge used in former days by the ar-
tillery to support their guns.
It is distant some three miles from the main- land, nearly
without soil, bad water, difficult of access, and consequently
useless, except as a land-mark. From its convenient and
conspicuous position, a light-house has been proposed to be
built on it by our talented Surveyor General, Colonel Lloyd.
It would throw a light to a distance of 18 miles, illumi-
nating both coasts as far as “Grand River” on the one
and “ Quatre Cocos” on the other side. The importance of
this building is apparent, and, it is to be hoped, ere Jong
will be constructed,


It was in the vicinity of this rock that Admiral Bertie,
with his squadron of attack, anchored; and at Cap Malheu-
reux the troops, commanded by Genl. Abercromby, effected a
landing’. Under the circumstances at the time, a better spot
could hardly have been selected. The coast in the neigh-
bourhood of the Cape offered-every facility for the assembly
of large military bodies, being in its natural state perfectly
Jevel and open, varying in breadth from | to j of a mile.
This plain, which extends some miles towards Port Louis,
was bordered towards the interior by a dense forest of stunt-
ed timber, covered with the strong thick creeper, peculiar to
the country, that rendered it next to impervious.
The prospect towards the S, and W. is extensive and inter-
esting. To be seen, are Flat and Round islands, —the district
of Mapou, dotted here and there with its sugar factories, —
the mountains of Flacq,—part of that district, —Ville-Bague,
—the Piton, —Peter-Eooth, —Ponce—and the ranges towards
Black River. The eye in returning passes along the pictu-
resque line' of sea-coast between the Port and this place,
and conspicuous are Cpnnpniers Pointe, Grande Buie, —•
Pointe Vacoa. Close at hand is the habitation well known
as “ Beau Manguier,” borrowing its name from an ancient
and enormous mango-tree now standing in the court-yard
of the establishment. Though this property has not been
under the cultivation of sugar-canes for many years, yet, if, we
may judge from numerous remains of coeoanut plantations,
and this very tree Itself, we may conclude it has been occu-
pied for a considerable period. The estate is chiefly made
remarkable from its once having been in the possession of
Charles Telfair, Esq., who for so many years was distin-
guished by his scientific pursuits, and known for the same
reason to almost every learned society in Europe. Asa
place of residence, none more agreeable or salubrious could
well be chosen in the island. The air, always passing unin-
terrupted over a short distance of land from the sea at the
opposite side, is on that account peculiarly clear and exhila-
rating ; and to this may be added the plain just spoken of,


which, besides being- perfectly open, is covered with a carpet
of thick and elastic grass, rendering a walk or ride de-
lightful.
The distance from Port Louis to this place is about eigh-
teen miles, over a tolerable road. The sugar from the es-
tate is sent by water to town, being the cheapest and most
expeditious mode of transit. It may be remarked that the
soil in the neighbourhood is of the richest character, being
formed—as indeed is all the land on the northern side of the
mountains—of decomposed lava, which, without manure or
repose, has produced crops of canes successively for 10, 12,
and 14 years. 8o much has soil to do with the flavour of
its produce, that it imparts, it is said, to the sugar made in
this district a colour and taste superior to that of any other
in the island. The country being thickly strevyed with large
stones, renders the removal of them an expensive and tedi-
ous operation, but, once effected, soon repays for the out-
lay.




"Cap M’alheureux"aud "Coin de Mire."




ROMAN CATHOLIC CHURCHES AT POUDRE D’OR
AND
GRAND PORT.
The extent of the population of these two places has long 1
demanded suitable buildings for public worship ; but it was
rather “their poverty than their will” which prevented the
inhabitants from having them built before the present period.
Between these structures there exists a strong resemblance
both in architecture, size, cost, age, and position. Towards
the erection of each the local Government contributed $5OOO,
or £lOOO, and the remainder was found by the people them-
selves, making in the aggregate about £12,000, —an excel-
lent testimony to the zeal and energy of the inhabitants ge-
nerally, and also to the liberality of the administration.
The name of Poudre d’Or immediately brings to the me-
mory another “ scene in the last eventful history” of
Paul and Virginia, which was supposed to have been en-
acted close by, at lie d'Ambre— marked in the distance by
a small line of trees, —where also appears the outline of lie
Ronde. It was in this vicinity, without doubt, that the wreck
of the St. Geran took place, which vessel, besides the rich
freight of the heroine herself, had also on board large remit-
tances of specie.
He (TAmhre , it is said, owes its name to the Dutch in con-
sequence of their having discovered at that place consider-
able quantities of grey ambre, then very rare, and there-
fore precious. They lost no time in gathering and
exporting it; but since that none has been reproduced, nor
was it ever found in any other part of Mauritius, —a circum-
stance that rather gives the history an air of romance, con-
cocted at the time of the discovery of the renowned Dodo !
The Elysian sound of Poudre d'Or, it is supposed, arose
from the extraordinary fertility of the soil thereabouts, —not
from an exuberance of (hat precious dust am where.




Church at Poudre d'or.




Catholic Church, Mahebourg.




MAHEBOURGH,
GRAND PORT.
It has been already said that this is the oldest-established
part of the island. So early as 1640 the Dutch commenced
a village on the opposite shore of the harbour, about 5 miles
from the present town, tew remnants of their industiy,
except a fort, are now visible; and ere long all traces of
their sojourn Will be obliterated, Mahebourgh takes its
name from Mr. Labourdonnais, having been commenced
during his administration. The population is at present li-
mited, as there is little or no trade with the Port; indeed it
rather appears to be declining in the number of inhabitants,
if we would judge by the general aspect of the streets and
houses Over the whole there is a certain air of apathy and
neglect, partaking of abandonment and dissipation, seem-
ing as if the people were only visitors, and therefore had no
interest whatever in their dwellings. If the military, who
are one of the—if not the greatest support to the town—
were to be withdrawn, we might reasonably expect to see a
general break-up, like a caravan in the desert.
Mahebourgh is ornamented by a fine barrack, and its vi-
cinity by a new church for the Roman Catholic inhabitants,
on the point of being finished. The accompanying drawing
o-ives the S. E. view of it, and also includes part of Grand
Port harbour,—the Camezar mountain ; and beyond, on the
right, Pointe au Diahle ,—so called, it is said, because the
compass there loses its properties, mistaking the East for the
North, and so forth. A rough sea, currents, and reefs, com-
mon hereabouts, may have also contributed to the origin of
the name. A species of road once existed from the Port


round this headland, and conducted to Grand River S. E.,
bat is now nearly impassable, except for goats and monkeys,
—in consequence of the excavating propensities of the crabs,
which infest this neighbourhood in great numbers. The
scenery round the town of Mahebourgh is varied in the ex-
treme. At almost one glance you have the ocean in all its
(said-to-be) wild grandeur; the mountains intermingled with
rock and foliage, streets dotted with people in costumes of
motley hues, and plains studded with plantations and resi-
m ’ r t pul) bifig /bi;oi.
d en c e s
bnommoo dotnfl orb Obdf adJ
The present road from Mahebourgh to Port Louis is kept
Ouodß .igodißri adt ip sioda ahepoao oibjio.e-ofjjiv
in excellent repair,—and m this respect, size, and the man-
. , aioni liq einfinmai wol 'nwot 4nsee*ia srit «oit
ner it has been laid out, almost equals any in Europe, fwo
To eoaetJ llr, gnol oiq bun Idler/ won -.o y; jw e ..
Omnibuses are constantly running on it to and trom the
capital every other da} r , and, being the great Central line
across the island, is much frequented.


View at Mahebourg.




GRAND RIVER SOUTH EAST,
FLACQ.
The view here given was taken from an ancient fort near
the present military station, looking across the bay or em-
bouchure of the river in the direction of Mahebourgh. In
former days, the fort, it would appear, was intended to pro-
tect an entrance through the reefs leading into the bay, but
the object of its original construction is now disregarded ?
as the works in their present dismantled condition are per-
fectly useless.
On the highest peak of one of the mountains opposite, is
a large and curiously-formed rock, which, seen from a cer-
tain point, has a striking resemblance to a Cat: there are
other smaller rocks scattered around, and these, from the
association of ideas, are called Kittens. The hill forms the
termination of a range dividing the district of Grand Port
from Flacq. The whole being of considerable elevation,
and extremely rugged, has hitherto prevented the formation
of a road to connect the two places, which, as may be ima-
gined, is an inconvenience much felt.
The scenery in the vicinity is of the wildest and most di-
versified character. A short distance up the river is a cas-
cade, which, though of no great height, is nevertheless ex-
tremely picturesque. It is easiest approached by means of
a boat, from the precipitous nature of the banks on both
sides. Before reaching the place, the cliffs rise suddenly to
the height of 200 feet or more, in some places overhanging
in the most menacing manner, and from their deep shadows
Imparting a gloomy aspect to the water below.
A sudden turn of the channel at once brings the fall into
full view. Its loud roar, —the sombre color of the rocks,—
the sparkling whiteness of the water itself, the feathery
spray, and its mimic rainbows,—the mixture of rock and
foliage above, —and the distant wooded hills—form a scene
worthy of the warmest admiration, immediately below the
fall, the water becomes brackish, as it is there met by the sea.


The whole coarse of this river is studded with charming
points of view ; and is frequently interrupted by rapids and
cascades. At this place it runs through the estate called
“ Beauchamp ,” —one well deserving the name, although
some portion of it is still under forest.
At no great distance from the old redoubt just mentioned,
is the spot where the Dutch established the garden alluded
to in the beginning of this little work; but it is to be re-
gretted that no vestiges of it are now existing,—at least,
O° • »
none are known. However, although this may have perish-
ed, they have left behind them memorials of a more perma-
nent character, in the shape of a road and some wells exca-
vated through rock, which still retain the name of that ad-
venturous nation. Though the road is now in disuse, yet it
is practicable in many parts, but, throughout the whole
course, uneven and circuitous, in a manner resembling the
character of the people themselves,—“ slowly waddling to
the point in view.” It is of some miles in length, and has a
tendency towards the interior, —probably leading to some
rich and favorite swamp. Being the first works in the is-
land of any moment, and having now existed so many years,
they are deserving of our respect and consideration.
The remnants of old houses, walls, gardens, spice-trees, to
be found dispersed over this neighbourhood, at once attest
the length of time it has been inhabited and cultivated; and
although the soil, for the latter reason, has lost much of its
strength and fertility, still its productiveness is remarkable.
Notwithstanding that it is capable of growing every species
of vegetable, the cultivation of canes is the only one now
attended to. A handsome and extensive factory has been
recently erected on an estate known as the J ictovia ,
for boiling the sugar on the “ Vacuum” principle. It is one
of the largest in the district * and besides manufacturing
the produce of its own canes, it will be able to manufacture
that of the adjoining estates also,—thus to a certain degree
concentrating the small establishments around,—a system
which of late years has been partially adopted, and is now
attracting much attention.


Grand River S .E .




FORT SOUILLAC
SAVANNE.
This extremely pretty place took its name from le i-
comjbte de Souillnc, Governor of the Isle of France in the year
177.9. Though in his time little had been done towards
reclaiming the neighbouring district, yet since that epoch
great progress has been made ; and at the present day Souil-
lac boasts a respectable assemblage of dwellings, sufficient
to entitle it to the name of village. Hard by is a rural bar-
rack for an officer’s detachment; and in the village are a
Police station, —such as it is;—a school house built of stone
and of imposing dimensions; —a post office, also of a rural
character; —some shops in which are vended all kinds of
« notionsand, though the last in the list, a R. C. Chapel,
which at present is without a Pastor, and likewise without
architectural ornaments of any sort.
The “ Port” itself is in perfect keeping with the size and
wants of the village. Few craft drawing more than 6 feet
of water, or 30 tons, can enter, but, when inside, are
quiet secure. All the sugar made in the quarter is here
shipped, which at the present moment amounts to a conside-
rable quantity.
Besides the generally romantic character of Souillac, the
fertility of the lands in the vicinity, and the liveliness of the
incipient village itself, it is ornamented, and its value en-
hanced, by an excellent road leading to Port Louis ; and at
about the distances of 2 and 4 miles respectively it crosses
two bridges, erected at considerable cost and labour, and
winds through some charming scenery—especially in the lo-
cality of the Riviere des Anguilles,


A caravan has been established on the line, and runs twice
in the week to and from Town, —a proof of the rising’ im-
portance of Port Souillac, and also of an increasing- popu-
lation. The road is to be carried on to Jacotet and Bate da
Cap in due process of time; and to further this object a
bridg’e is in course of construction over the stream, which
empties itself into the port and divides Souillac from Ja-
cotet.
The hills represented in the distance are as yet covered
with dense forest, and harbour great numbers of monkeys,
wild boars, and deer, all of which at times prove themselves
most troublesome neighbours.


Port - Souillac.




POST JACOTET,
SAVANNE.
Here it was that Bernardin St. Pierre in his voyage
through the island paused to enjoy the beauties of the rural
scenery around, and declared that he “ would have given up
all the universe beside, might he but with some chosen and
beloved objects, have spent the future in this delightful
place.” This enthusiastic praise was bestowed in the year
1769, when the district was in a perfect state of nature. In
o-eneral aspect, of course, it has changed considerably since.
Instead of being now covered with groves of feathery palm-
trees,” and “ clumps of other foliage shaped like pyramids
in one place and umbrellas in another,” —instead of “mur-
muring springs—smooth plains, and the grateful smell of
Veloutiers —which diffused around peace and happiness,”—
we have in their stead well-cultivated cane-fields, dwellings,
mills, bridges, roads, and so forth, which, though perhaps
not so arcadian in appearance as the scenes described by
our celebrated author, are nevertheless conducive to ge-
neral happiness, only in another and less romantic manner.
The point from which the drawing was made was once
protected by a fort, —as the old gun would denote. Another
battery existed on the opposite side of the harbour or bay
on a small island, where some guns are also to be found—
(and what part of the island is without them !) —At the fur-
ther side of the bay are a substantial bridge leading to Soul-
liac—a sugar establishment belonging to Mr. Wainright—
some magazines for sugar, and two jetties,—from which all
the produce of the quarter is sent to Port Louis by way
of sea.


It was here also that the English effected a landing which
was first attended with any result. The expedition was under-
taken by Captain Willoughby, who with some 120 seamen
entered the bay at midnight , and surprised the French sol-
diers at their posts. The action was a short one ; and by no
means advantageous to the enemy. Some prisoners were
made, among them the Colonel commandant of the district,
and the naval officer, Mr. Chauvin, enseigne de Vaisseau,
then in charge of a French schooner of war in the harbour,
—this gentleman and the other prisoners were afterwards ex-
changed, and he still resides at Port Louis, now one of the
oldest and most influential merchants there.


Poste Jacotet.




FALLS OF THE CHAMAREL
AND
TAMARIN.
The first of these, the Chamarel, is in the district of Sa-
vanne, although almost touching that of Riviere Noire ; and
it belongs to the estate known as the “ Nuage , which ap-
propriate name was given to it by Mr. Chamarel, the former
proprietor. It is now in possession of the Baron d Lnien-
ville, son of the author of k< Statistics of Mauritius, and
is one of those properties too elevated to grow canes. Here
in former days,—that is to say, some 50 years ago,—large
quantities of coffee and cotton were raised ; but at the pre-
sent time, no vestiges of any of those products are ' isible.
This is to be regretted as the soil is of excellent quality, and
the climate particularly favourable.
The subject of the sketch is one of the “ Lions” of Mau-
ritius. It is said to be 600 feet in height,—but if 200 are
subtracted, it will leave it nearer to truth. Even that is a
tremendous break in a river ! It is almost presumption to
represent by a little drawing of this nature, the magnificence
of the fall. The water in its descent is no longer characte-
rized by rushing, but here Imitates the graceful falling
of sheets of snow. There is no dash or hurry about it, but
rather a measured feathery pace. Its greatness does not at
first strike the eye; however as it is watched, the extent of
the scene gradually expands itself over the mind.
In consequence of its distance from town,—(about 25
miles,) not over the best of roads,—it is not so often seen
as its rival—the cascades
“ BE TAM AKIN,”
which are nearer Port Louis by some 10 miles. 1 hey are


aeservedly celebrated for picturesque beauties. In all, there
are seven falls, and their united height far exceeds the re-
-7 O
ported elevation of the Chamarel, In views of this kind
it is nearly useless to attempt description. They must he
seen to be appreciated. The prospect in a nearly opposite
direction is even more interesting- and grand than that now
under consideration. It embraces the great gorge of the Ta-
O o o
marind river, where it enters the plains of the Rividre Noire
district. The immense height of the sides of the hills inclos-
ing the river—(he fearful cliffs—the mingled foliage and
rock—and the sombre shadows thrown from opposite projec-
tions—as contrasted with the indistinct and sunny distance
below, —is a scene that Salvator himself would have been
delighted to depict.
This scenery —perhaps the most beautiful in the island, —
is in that part of the district of Plaines Wilhems known by-
the name of Vacoa. The soil in the neighbourhood is com-
posed of rich alluvial deposits and is well adapted for gene-
ral cultivation, particularly maize, potatoes, and European
fruit-trees. Formerly it was covered with forest, which was
cleared and occupied at great cost ; but from various causes,
such as the emancipation of slaves, change of culture, and
perhaps caprice, the district is now comparatively abandon-
ed. Here therefore is another of those localities where we
find neglected avenues, gardens, trees, canals, and other
marks of civilization; and it is at this place likewise, that
the first essays in silk growing were made, with so much of
success that it is not improbable the culture of that precious
article may become general in the district, which seems in
every way so admirably suited to its delicate nature.


Chamare Falls.




Falls of the Tamarin .




PHŒNIX SUGAR-WORKS,
PLAINES WILHEMS.
A sketch of this establishment is given, as much on ac-
count of the interesting and extensive prospect it presents,
as because it is considered one of the most perfect, though
not the largest, in the island. Peter-Booth and the Pouce,
those two ever-conspicuous objects, are to be seen in the
distance; and in the foreground a stream which, though at
certain periods of the year it is not well supplied with water,
vet in the rainy season swells to such extent as to render the
passage of it both difficult and dangerous. Close by is the
high-road to Grand Port, which is crossed by this river;
and here an iron bridge is in course of erection, having a
span of some 45 feet.
The estate of Phoenix is one of the oldest cultivat-
ed in the district, but not always known under its present
promising name, which was given it by the late proprietors.
In former days, a water-mill was employed to grind the canes
of the estate, then called “ Reunion,” which in course of
time was exchanged for one of steam, and which again in
its turn was replaced by the present splendid factory.
Here it was that the process of curing sugar by means of
the “Vacuum Pan” first, succeeded ; and on that account, as
also for the simplicity and completeness of the machinery, the
works have become justly remarkable. Great difficulties
had to be surmounted before success could be obtained; and
no trifling praise is due for the developement of this princi-
ple. which is new in the island, to the enterprize and perse-
verance of Mr. Frederick Dick, one of the late proprie-
tors —and to Mr. Target the Engineer, for the skill and


ability displayed by him in the general construction of the
works.
The advantages of the new system, it is stated, are nume-
tous, and Important. The sugar is produced in a greater
degree of purity, and in colour equal to the ordinary refined
sugar of Europe. There is also less waste and refuse, con-
sequently a larger amount of crystallization is obtained than
by the old mode of manufacture; —a great saving of fuel is
effected; —the sugar is never liable to burn, —an event of
frequent occurrence under the general system ; —and the
produce of the bad as well as the good canes is rendered by
this means more uniform.
Two engines are employed: one of 10 horse power is
confined entirely to the crushing of canes; the other of
much smaller power, is attached to the Vacuum apparatus.
Ihe quantity of sugar that can be made per day at this esta-
blishment may be rated from Bto 10 tons. To form a just
idea of the different manipulations necessary to prepare this
all-important article of modern necessity, the curious must
in person see for themselves; nor will they deem the time
thus spent, unprofitable.


Phoœmx Sugar Works .




REDUIT, AND THE PROTESTANT CHURCHES
AT
MOKA AND PLAINES WILHEMS.
Could the renowned Rasselas himself, with all his fas-
tidiousness, have but o?ice seen the charming” retreat of the
rulers of the Isle of France, it is possible he might have
sighing for no more on the score of residences. It is a bi-
jou in scenery, let us look at it from what point we may.
Therefore, to enumerate or to descant upon each beauty,
one after another, methodically, would be but to endeavour
to “ add another hue unto the rainbow,” and, in truth, “ waste-
ful and ridiculous excess !”
W itbout this, it is enough to say, that its silvan charms
have engaged the pens and pencils of all classes of travel-
lers, and yet no satisfactory picture has been produced.
As a Government villa, it has been now occupied for many
years. The situation was discovered by Governor David in
1746, who then, it seems, built a rustic cottage ostensibly for
the ladies of Mauritius, in the event of attack, siege, or
other disaster. Too much gratitude could not be shown
him by that sex for this new and unusual display of gallantry ;
but his chivalry, alas! has sunk with himself, unrequited, to
oblivion !
The view here given represents the house, looking towards
the Port. The coup d'oeii is extended and brilliant. On the
left side is a large and well-stocked garden. Our limited
space will not permit a description in detail, yet it must be
remarked, that a visit to it would immediately convince the
sceptical of the perfection of which European vegetable cul-
ture in this island is susceptible.


Not far from “ Reduit” is the church of Moka, a stone
structure, having a portico supported on four pillars. The
site of the building is excellent; and, as it is seen from a
particular point, aided by distance, its sombre color, and
simple form, resembles some temple of antiquity restored.
The first stone was laid by General Sir William Gomm,
October 1846, to whose liberality, and (hat of Lady Gomm,
the public are greatly indebted for its origin. It is now
opened for Divine Service, and it is calculated to accommo-
date about 200 persons.
The view was taken so as to bring in a portion of the
Corps de Garde and trois mamelles mountains, descriptions
of both of which are met with in the often-referred-to his-
tory of “ Paul and Virginia;” and also included, are (he
road and bridge leading from Port Louis to “ Reduit,” as
likewise to the last named building, the church of
St. THOMAS, PLAINES WILHEMS,
whose architect and pastor is the Reverend L. Banks. The
foundation was commenced under the auspices of Lady
Gomm, in December 1845, and it has been completed some
time. It will also hold about 20d people. The expense is
estimated at £2,200.
It may be observed, that much of the pretty effect of this
little church is sacrificed by the inappropriateness of its site.
The high ground beyond is traversed by the main road to
Grand Port; and as the building is viewed from that point,
its size is apparentlv diminished, and it likewise seems as if
it had been bodily removed from its lawful position on the
hill above, by one of those extraordinary phenomenons, *o
common in divers parts of the world, known by the name of
land-slips.” Despite all this, much of the rural and pic-
turesque is still ieft to recommend it.


R'eduit.




Moka Churh & Part of Corps-de-Garde Mountain




Protestant Church, Plaines Wilhems.




GRAND RIVER BRIDGE.
To the energy and taste of the Surveyor General, Colonel
Lloyd, is the island to attribute this valuable work, which
was commenced in 1836 and opened ten years aftei, having
been built by Indian convicts. The total length is 566 feet,
and that of the suspension part is about 170. Ihere are
three elliptical arches, very handsome in themselves, each
having a span of 50 feet. The height of the roadway above
the ordinary level of the water, is nearly 30 feet. Ihe ma-
terials and workmanship are unexceptionable, and equal to
anv thing of the kind to be found in England. The riyei
over which this bridge has been thrown, is often of the size
that well merits the name given ; and therefore, to avoid the
many accidents always occurring in mountain streams like
the present—a solid and extensive structure was absolutely
necessary.
The little sketch only shews a portion ot the building, in
consequence of its great length, and also from a desire to
include the signal mountain, as likewise an ancient fort on
the little eminence to the left. This, like most of the French
fortifications in the country, is now abandoned, but notwith-
standing the dilapidated condition of the parapets, and the
rust and grass that now envelope the guns, it still wears a
martial aspect. Nothing, it may be said, useful, sacred, or
peaceable can well be seen in Mauritius without some maik
of military power near —proof sufficient of the value and im-
portance attached to the island at a former period.
In the vicinity of the bridge, is an hospital,—long esta-
blished—an old barrack—a police station—a school, and a
general sprinkling of shops,—which, together with the
bridge itself, seen from certain points, has an extremely
picturesque effect. The bay of Grand River is wide, and
its shores are ornamented by several pretty residences, as
also by two martello towers—both of which are armed and
occupied.




Grand-River Bridge.










