

SKETCHES
OF
South Australian Wesleyan
Methodist Ministers,
( Jubilee Year , 1887.)
"THE AUSTRALIAN SILVERPEN
(H. GLENNY, J.P., F.R.G.S., F.G.S.)
From the A delaide Christian Weekly.
AUTHOR OF
Silverpen Sketches—“ A Trip to Warrnambool, Tower Hill, and
Belfast;” “Ye Chronicles of ye Rechabites “ Victorian and
Tasmanian Dew Drops;” “South Australian Preachers ;”
“Old Times in Ballarat;” “Thistledown, or Jottings
from My Note Book;” “The Rainy Day, and
How to Prepare for It;” “ By Road and
Rail Through Victoria ;” “ History of a
Gold Mine,” and other Papers.
Wesleyan Book Depot :
Wesleyan Book Depot :
Adelaide, South Australia
Melbourne, Victoria.
Printed by H. Adair, Arthur Street, Belfast, Ireland.
1888.




PREFACE.
BY THE
REV. DR. LUNN,
Wesleyan Minister, of the West London Mission,
Methodism has been aptly described by a recent writer as
“ The cement of Empire.” Wherever the follower of John
Wesley goes, as soon as he finds a Methodist Chapel he is at
home. He has but to mention the names of the leading mem-
bers of his own branch of Methodism, to find that in this great
Freemasonry, they are known and respected by those amongst
whom he is visiting. The Australian no sooner begins to talk
of Bickford , of Knight, of Wats ford, and of Thomas Williams,
than he finds some English Methodist who knows and honours
one or more of the names he mentions. In like manner our
Cousins from across the Atlantic find the names of Simpson,
Taylor, Fowler, Hurst, and Peck an “ open sesame ” to all
Methodist Circles. “ Silverpen,” who is now visiting England
for the second time, has therefore, as it seems to me, done well
to prepare for readers in the United Kingdom these interesting
sketches of the style of our leading South Australian Methodist
ministers, and of their power and influence in the various
pulpits of South Australia. As Methodists we cannot know too
much of each other, and any work which tends to strengthen
the bonds which now unite the various sections of our world-
wide and powerful Church will do good work. Mr. Glenny has
requested me to write these few prefatory remarks, and I do so
with pleasure, in the hope that this and other publications by
“ Silverpen ” may increase the influence of Methodism as “ The
cement of Empire.”
Henry S. Lunn, M.D.
West London Mission,
Sept. 2, 1889.




THISTLEDOWN :
OR, JOTTINGS FROM MY NOTE BOOK
A Moening Seevice at Pieie Steeet Wesleyan Chuech
The Rey. S. F. Peioe.
a DEL AIDE, the chief entrepot of South Australia, might
well he called the City of Churches, for in no one of the
big centres of the Australias will you find such a variety
of church edifices, and such a plethora of preaching talent.
In fact, as I wandered about on Sunday morning last, I
came across a place of worship whose front walls were covered
with hieroglyphics I could not for the life of me make out, and
even now-1 know not whether they are Gaelic or Italian.
The sermonising of the city is, however, not confined to
the inside of brick or stone walls, for on the Sunday after-
noon —as it is in Hyde Park, Sydney—quite a crowd of Park
Lands’ stump-orators harangue the multitude in language
forcible if not logical or orthodox, and aim at swaying the masses
of Sunday out-of-doors strollers by hard facts, and homely
similes, thus gaining some of their audiences to their own way
of thinking, by thunderbolts of eloquence and lightning-flashes
of wit.
As a Victorian visitor to the city called by all beautiful, I
hied away on Sabbath morning last to the Pirie Street Wesleyan
Church, and had I been as blind as a bat, as I approached the
outside of the building I could have little doubt by the good old
Methodist one-and-all unison of voices, aided by the swelling
symphony of the organ, and the old-time ring of the tune sung,
that I was approaching a “ Methody Chapel ” —pardon me, Church.
The interior of Pirie Street Church is very similar in ap-
pearance to that of the Melville Street and York Street Metho-
dist Churches of Hobart and Sydney. There is, however, a
more cleanly look about Pirie Street than either of the two
named.
The preacher of the morning, the Rev. S. F. Prior, from
his looks I should not take to be more than say thirty-three;
from his name a Cornishman, and from his accent a son of
Scotia. I only jumped at these conclusions during the first
part of the service, as I never heard the rev. gentleman’s name


till the Saturday previous, and for the first time saw his face
when I entered the church.
Now, I have found in my long experience at home and in
these colonies that the pulpit accent or intonation of voice of
many preachers is not a bit like the accent used by them when
in ordinary every-day conversation, so that many good preachers
are not themselves either in diction or accentuation when preach-
ing to their congregations from the sacred desk ; in many cases
it is in this respect hard to judge a preacher’s nationality.
The subject was, as the rev. gentleman very wisely put it,
one more for an aged minister than a stripling, but this cautious
opening statement did not in any way hinder the somewhat
youthful-looking preacher from delivering a most interesting
and effective discourse.
Old-fashioned Methodism I took it, was the pith of the
sermon, and for a Jubilee service it was most appropriate.
When I had listened attentively to the opening remarks of
the preacher, thinks I, I may get a new idea or two on a
subject I have written on so often previously, and I must
confess, I was in no way disappointed.
In every part of the sermon occasional glimpses of origi-
nality peeped out, and as they were paraded in broad daylight
they appeared to my mind to be dressed with a newness quite
refreshing, backed up as they were, by a considerable amount
of vigorous effectiveness.
It did me good to hear the rev. gentleman refer to my old
friend James Caughy, the revivalist, and his reply, as to the
success of his preaching. There can be little doubt this “ knee
work,” or, as the Salvationists call it, “ knee drill,” is a
powerful Gospel lever, both in and out of the Church.
I remember in the old land following Mr. Caughy from
church to church, wondering at the marvellous manifestations
of power exhibited during his services, and the seemingly unac-
countable influence he swayed over his audiences. There was
something remarkable, not only in his sympathetic preaching
and persuasive utterances, but also in his effective hymn-
reading.
Ministers of to-day little know how the old Methodist
worthies gave out the hymns. There seemed to be from the
start to the finish of the reading of each verse a holy awe rest-
ing upon the congregation. Every word went home. I have
seen scores during the hymn-reading and service, drop down
as if dead, Mr, Caughy looking on, calm, cool, and collected,
telling the friends to quietly remove the fainting ones, and when
they were themselves again, let them return to their seats, and
whde this was being done a verse of a well-known hymn was
sung by the congregation, led off by the preacher.
The incidents given by the Eev. Mr. Prior anent the old


days when John Wesley, like a brilliant star, arose upon a be-
nighted world, and attracted the masses by his style of preach-
ing to the people’s hearts, not to their heads, was admirably told.
The horse-racing, cock-fighting parsons of the day came in
for their share of censure ; but why the rev. preacher so often
partly apologised for bringing out these black spots in the history
of the Church of England and its ministers, is a puzzler to me.
Why, bless me, similar facts have been brought out time after
time in the various histories of the days of the Wesleys by every
writer who has faithfully discharged his duty, so that to-day
when these things are brought to the front no apology is needed
for so doing.
I wondered, as I listened to the more than once half apolo-
getic excuses for the preacher’s plain speaking, if it was alto-
gether manly thus to do.
But this little hitch in my musings did not influence me
against the preacher. I confess I was well pleased with the
discourse, and would gladly go a few miles to hear it again.
Had I expected such a brilliant pulpit effort, I certainly would,
as I have many a time before done when listening to good
preachers, with the aid of a pencil taken away with me, on my
shirt cuffs, if nothing else were handy, a condensed epitome of
the good things, new and old, given as they were, with such in-
telligent earnestness and sound common-sense raciness.
The remarks of the preacher anent the passage, “ All we
are brethren,” were given with great pathos, Christ, the living
elder brother, being held up before the congregation as being
linked with the Fatherhood of God, so that every man, woman,
and child might through this loving elder brother be acceptable
to, and accepted by God.
The incidental remarks anent the duty of the Christian
pastor were to my mind hardly Methodistic, if I might thus use
the word.
I opine the great hold Methodism has upon the common
people is the fact that the minister is one of themselves, and
that he is in their homes not a casual formal visitor, but a dear,
confiding friend.
I regret I have neither time, nor probably the Christian
Weekly space, for me to say a word or two about other parts of the
discourse, the salient points of which I have still fresh in my mind.
In the evening 1 again attended the Church, and heard our
old Victorian friend the Kev. Samuel Knight, but I must leave
the “ Three Jubilees Sermon ” for another time.
In closing, as a stranger I was very pleased with the sing-
ing. Pirie Street congregation is much better off in this respect
than many Churches in other colonies I have recently visited.
Adelaide, May 23, 1887.


THISTLEDOWN:
OR, JOTTINGS FROM MY NOTE BOOK
Sunday Evening in Pie i e Street Church.
The Rev. Samuel Knight
(an ex-Prbsident op the Conference).
0-3
*N my last I specially noticed the morning service by the
Rev. S. F. Prior, leaving the interesting evening disserta-
tion by the Rev. S. Knight till a more convenient time.
And here let me say by way of proem, that the Sabbath
evening in nearly all the Methodist Churches both in this and
the old land is, as a rule, given over to attacks on the great
enemy of mankind and his subjects, as well as the pointing out
to those wishing to flee from his tyranny—City of Refuge
coverts—so that the sin-sick, wounded conscience and heart
may at once take refuge, and escape from the toils of his satanic
majesty.
I think in this respect Methodist ministers seem all to
agree, for they generally so arrange their Sunday services as to
suit both classes of hearers —saints in the morning, sinners at
night.
I don’t know why it is so, but of this I am sure—that the
evening time, with all Methodist preachers, is the generally
acknowledged opportune season for drawing in the “ gospel net”
and crowding the penitent form. Perhaps it is that the shadows
of the coming night impress the mind, and throw a somewhat
reverential cloud over the heart, and it may be have a softening
influence on obdurate and stiff-necked hearers of the Word,
Whether this be so or not, it is an acknowledged fact that you
seldom or never hear of a revival meeting uow-a-days before the
dinner hour, or a copious shower of penitential sorrow during
the forenoon service.
But to my theme ! On entering the church on the Sabbath
evening of which I write I noticed a much larger number pre-
sent than at the morning service. I did remark one or two
little matters not altogether praiseworthy to the younger portion


of the congregation as they somewhat hurriedly came in and
took their seats. But as I myself live in a “ glass house,” I
had better not attempt to throw a stone —even at the little ones.
A word to the wise is sufficient. I would therefore only remind
young worshippers of the text, “ Keep thy foot when thou
goest into the house of God.”
The interior of Pirie Street Church, when lit up, looks
cozy and comfortable. The lighting is not quite even all over—
in some seats quite a glare, and in others too much shadow. A
light more generally diffused would be better adapted to the
convenience of all.
I like these old-fashioned boxed-in, galleried places of
worship, although it is said by Americans that some folk sit up
aloft in order to overlook their less fortunate brethren below
who have but few hairs on the top of their craniums. Bald-
headed men in the lower part of the church do attract the top-
story hearers. I speak feelingly upon this subject.
The Bev. Samuel Knight—the preacher of the evening—
was transplanted from Victorian into South Australian soil
about twenty years ago, and seems to have thriven so well as to
almost make people doubt so long a time has passed, since he
joined the ministerial ranks in this colony.
Our old Victorian friend is only slightly tinged with grey
about the head and beard. He walks, talks, and sings like a
fourth-year candidate.
As the reverend gentleman ascends the pulpit stairs with
springy steps and head erect, the looker-on is impressed with
the fact of his active nervous temperament; and as he appears,
book in hand, and announces the hymn, it is quite evident he
has something good to say, and that he means to say it.
If I have any proficiency in a science I profess to know
something about, I would say, judging by Mr. Knight’s facial
development, that he is a studious, but rather impulsive
preacher, not always on the hill-top. His ideas are thoughtful,
and so clearly brought out at times that you cannot but feel that
he has toiled in the quarry of book-lore some time or other
in exploring and digging out of the mine these stones of truth.
For when he presents them to you from the pulpit, they sparkle
with brightness and life, and you are led to wonder you have
not before seen these crude Bible monoliths in the same light.
The subject of discourse was the three Jubilees—the
Jewish, the Methodist, and the Gospel.
The Jewish Jubilee was portrayed with all its peculiar sur-
roundings ; its fiftieth year of blessing and equalization —the
rich becoming poorer, and the, for the time, less fortunate,
richer.
All mortgages (said the preacher) were on the first dawn
of the Jubilee cancelled, and, with a merry twinkle of the eye,


he said it would be a grand thing for many of us in South
Australia if a Jubilee year of this sort was now looming. This
sally of wit had the effect of causing a goodly number of the
congregation to smile most serenely.
The reverend gentleman also referred to the prisoners in
gaols and all bondsmen being set at liberty on the first day of
Jubilee. But his statements on these points, in my opinion,
were rather ambiguous. He said—“ On the morning of the
Jubilee year the prisoner would knock on the inside of his cell
door and cry, ‘Ho ! there ; let me out of here. I’m no longer
a prisoner, * l'm free to-day /’ The gaoler would ask him,
* Why all this noise and fuss ?’ The imprisoned man would
reply, ‘ Why, it is the Jubilee! it is the Jubilee!' ” It seemed
strange to me, if the reverend gentleman’s logic was coi'rect,
how the prisoner inside the stone walls could know that the
glad day of Jubilee had arrived, and the gaoler seemingly
ignorant of the fact.
The Jubilee paid all debts, undid all foolish bargains, can-
celled all leases, and left each individual Jew with about £3OO
of our money to begin the new Jubilee with. A good many
folk of to-day would be quite satisfied if this “ Jubilee Com-
munism” would again come round, even if they had to wait a
number of years for it.
The Methodist Jubilee was dwelt upon with great eloquence
and power. The rise and progress of the Methodist Church of
South Australia was adverted to, the preacher giving the fol-
lowing statistics; —280 churches and other preaching places,
8,000 members, and tens of thousands of Sunday-school scholars.
These numbers when compared with those of fifty years ago
show, as the preacher said, that literally the little one has become
a thousand.
The prayer meeting and its helpful influence to Church
growth was feelingly portrayed, the rev. gentleman showing that
it was by prayer the fathers of the present generation of Metho-
dists gained their victories. He instanced in quite a dramatic
way his first appearance 21 years ago in a week-day prayer
meeting in Pirie Street Church ; the place crowded, the power
of God felt all over the sanctuary; a gracious influence per-
vaded the minds of those present. But (said the preacher) let
us but compare those blessed and hallowed days with the pre-
sent, and what do we find ? why, you could count upon your
fingers of one hand the number who gather together at a week-day
prayer meeting to-day. Let (said he) this new Jubilee year be
one o£ reconsecration and sacrifice to God, and soon the old
times will come again, and we as God’s people all over the
colony will rejoice over the outpouring of the Holy Spirit.
The Gospel Jubilee was touched upon in felicitous terms.
One of our great revival preachers would in his meetings con-


tend, while urging sinners to return to God, that the year of
Jubilee had come. His argument was that each soul saved was
an evidence of the time being a “ Jubilee ” one, of God’s saints.
n j i a reverend preacher urged upon all to consider the way
God had led them, and in doing so with a heart full of thank-
fulness and love praise Him for the past and trust Him for the
future.
Mr. Knight, in concluding, summed up the different points
brought forward anent the Three Jubilees, urging all to in-
creased devotion to God and His cause, so that the future of
the Methodist Church in these lands would be much more,
glorious than the past.
It is only the fear of the editorial eraser that stays my
hand, not lack of material.
I would, however, say, as a visitor, that it is a pity some
axiangement was not made so that these Jubilee sermons preached
all ovei South Australia could be read in the homes of every
Methodist family in the colony, full as they were, with his-
torical facts and figures of a most valuable and interesting
kind.
I might be pardoned for introducing here the opinion of
one of our ablest Victorian ex-Presidents anent the rev. gentle-
man whom I have so imperfectly sketched.
The Rev, R. C. F. writes to me as follows:—“ I hope, dear
Silyerpen, you will not forget to see and hear the Rev. Samuel
Knight, and others whose names he gives. As to Mr. Knight,
you know him as well as I do—a man full of flash and dash,
now lifting all from earth to heaven, now down in the vale, hut
always a success . .
I would add to this another fact that speaks well for the
rev. gentleman’s popularity. On leaving the church on the
evening referred to, one of those in the crowd speaking to his
friend said, “ Wasn’t he splendid to-night ?” I took this, as a
stranger, as a fine compliment to the preacher.
I have next on my list the Rev. Charles Lane, of Norwood,
and hope during my stay to hear all the leading Wesleyan
ministers, from the President to the most recently ordained.


THISTLEDOWN:
OE, JOTTINGS FROM MY NOTE BOOK.
The Rev. Charles Lane, of Norwood (ex-President op
the Conference.
CONSIDERABLY more than twenty years ago I hied away
{vfyu one lovely Sabbath morning to the Wesleyan Chapel,
Campbell’s Creek, Victoria, to hear a preacher then
much talked about as a young man of rare talents, both as a
pulpit orator and a platform speaker.
When my friend, who accompanied me, and I arrived, we
were gratified to see a crowded church, composed mostly of
diggers and their families, who nearly all hailed from Cornwall.
The majority of these hardy sons of toil were either adherents
or members of the Methodist Church. A sprinkling here and
there in the congregation were not averse judging by what I
heard, to a good “ Amen” or “ Hallelujah” now and then
during prayer time. This in no way interfered with the solem-
nity of the occasion, but rather aided the preacher in getting
up “ gospel steam,” as he must have felt that the people to
whom he was about to dispense the word of life were a praying
as well as a hard-working community.
The youthful appearance of the preacher as he appeared in
the pulpit, and his barefacedness —(please read this word not
in the vulgar, but literal sense)—would, had we not known we
were in a Methodist Chapel, almost have made us believe that a
young Romish priest was about to officiate; but the opening
prayer quickly disabused our minds in this respect. There was
very little of Roman Catholicism in the extempore appeal to
the throne of grace we listened to, but such an outpouring of
the soul to God as called forth from almost every seat in the
church a loud response from the heart.
On the Sunday evening referred to, the preacher spared
none, but lashed out right and left against all forms of rebellion
against God, and particularly drunkenness—then, as now, the
great curse of the Australias.


I well remember an impulsive but good fellow called Fore-
man, long since dead, at that time the Castlemaine “ Salva-
tionist,” keeping up all during the service a string of “ Glory,”
“Hallelujah,” “Praise the Lord,” “ Give it them hot,” and
other expletives, amusing to many who were sitting in close
proximity to him. This was the Bro. Foreman who, some years
before, had twelve months in gaol for standing up in the same
chapel and denouncing a Sunday morning milk-selling local
preacher, afterwards a Free Church of England minister, who
has years ago, like his hot headed, impulsive critic, passed over
to the great majority.
Heed I say that the reverend gentleman whose name
appears over the heading of this article was the minister on
that long ago Sunday morning, whom to hear preach my friend
and I had a walk of six miles over the diggings there and back,
and then we did not regret our visit to the said diggers’ church
at Campbell’s Creek.
Can any one versed in divinity or physic tell me how it is
that the majority of Wesleyan ministers keep up their juvenile
appearance ? A clear conscience, a cool head, a contented mind,
and a fair stipend, I suppose, have something to do with it.
On a recent Sabbath evening I struck a bee-line from Ade-
laide for the Norwood Methodist Church, where it was notified
my old friend, the Eev. Charles Lane, was to preach. Mr. Lane
is, I believe, the Superintendent of that Circuit.
I could not help remarking to myself as the preacher
entered the pulpit, how kindly old Father Time deals with some
folk.
The Church at Norwood, as you approach it, is conspi-
cuous, with its tower and steeple. The interior is comfortable
and cleanly, seating accommodation inclining towards the pulpit
or platform-reading desk, so that all can have a good view
of the preacher. The lighting is good. But —and here I sup-
pose I am entering upon slippery ground—the singing was not
as good as it might be. The voices in the choir seemed now
and again ahead of the organ, and vice versa. I should judge
from what I heard that the choir practice is not attended to as
it should be. Any hitch in Church singing sounds bad to the
ear of a stranger who knows something of harmony and sweet
sounds. Ido not write thusly in a carping, fault-finding spirit,
or with any previous knowledge of either the organist or the
choir, but suggest kindly, so that an improvement may be the
result in the unison between the organ and the voices. There
is nothing more attractive than good congregational singing, as
it is acknowledged by all preachers to be a grand aid to the
preaching services.
The reverend gentleman took for his text Luke, 19th chap-
ter, and 10th verse: —“ For the Son of Man came to seek and


to save that which was lost.” The subject of discourse was, as
may be anticipated by the text, “ Our Lord’s loving enterprise
Seeking the lost.”
Mr. Lane started by asserting that the world had its heroes
and men of enterprise—men who would have dared difficulties,
danger, and death for the good of humanity. Some men, said
he, lead a dreamy life, with no object in view, at the same time
taking the most pleasant way to get through the world. They
aim at beauty and pleasure and gain, and hope to strike the
goal some day—but they are lost.
Who are the lost ? Why, every man and woman who
is not answering God’s purpose concerning them. All have
wandered from the path of righteousness. Carlyle has said,
“ Men have their waking moments, but they are for the most
part sleeping—dreaming of home and happiness, and yet lost
and perishing.”
Many, said the preacher, start in life with the Bible as their
chart, yet neglect to study it—trusting to their own judgment,
choose pleasure instead of duty, and thus become lost to God’s
purpose concerning them. Some are lost to divine fellowship.
Their place is in God’s family, but they do not cultivate com-
munion with God, nor keep up their fellowship with heaven—
and thus they are lost.
The rev. gentleman here adverted to the murderer of the
late Rev. Wm. Hill. Ritson, said he, was gifted and educated,
but was lost to the Church, his family, and the world through
sin and the drink curse.
He, the preacher, very plainly showed by illustration, that
a person may actually be living and yet lost, so that in this big
world of ours there are the “living lost.”
There are at all times deeper pangs of woe felt for the
living lost by their friends and families than if they were really
dead.
He very feelingly referred to the fact of many Magdalens,
as well as prodigals, who were wandering away from God, and
lost. But, said he, none need perish. Christ has died. The
vile and worthless may be saved. For He came to seek and to
save, the lost.
The preacher here instanced an elder brother coming to
this fair land of ours seeking for a lost prodigal. He would be
sure to go to those with whom the prodigal would be likely to
associate in order to seek for, and find the lost one for whom the
family were sorrowing. And thus, said he, did Christ act. He
came to His own. He advertised the conditions of reconcilia-
tion in His gospel. He followed this up by pressing invitations
and warnings, urging them home on the mind and heart. And
then he said, with deep pathos, “ The Holy Spirit of God wooes
everv man, and if He is doing this to-night, I pray you resist


not His influence. If He is striving with you yield your all into
His hands and be reconciled now. He is come to save that
which was lost. How, do you say, does He save ? Why, by
substitution. He bore our chastisement that we might be free.
He bore our sins in His own body on the tree.
Self-righteousness won’t save us ; the self-righteous man
is lost—like Zaccheus, he will have to come down, and when he
does so, then he will be able to say—To-day has salvation come
to my house. By revealing the Father’s great love, Christ
disarms the sinner. He prepares for Heaven by His blood and
by His Holy Spirit, but it is the love that sanctifies, not the
blood,—by completing the work of eternal redemption and pre-
senting us before God without spot or wrinkle or any such
thing.
It is said of the preacher that some one asked him the
difference between Sanctification and Regeneration. He, Mr.
Lane, replied—“ The former is but a few yards more of the
latter.” A very common-sense answer, I admit.
In concluding, the rev. gentleman urged all to learn their
obligation to God, who came to seek and to save that which was
lost, and let us, said he, manifest our gratitude by returning to
His service and fellowship.
The Rev. Charles Lane is a type of Methodist preacher of
whom it may be said, the more you know him the better you
like him. In every circuit he has travelled his name is remem-
bered with great favour. He is somewhat brusque in manner to
those who do not know him, but underneath is the genuine man
and friend. Scores in Victoria will never forget Charles Lane,
or his peculiar phraseology in preaching, talking, and praying,
and many are the crowns of his rejoicing.
A friend of mine writes to me of him as follows :—“As to
Charlie Lane, he is a fine fellow; a prince of a preacher, and as
a man of platform power, few can touch him. His wit is splen-
did. His command of language is at times wonderful; he has
moved crowds in Victoria that few men could. He was one of
our foremost revival men, had a magical influence over his con-
gregations, and many a score were led to the ‘ Cross’ through his
agency.”
Such a diploma as this from an able and much revered ex-
President in Victoria should be as valuable as it is complimentary
to any minister of Christ, no matter what Church he belongs to.
The rev. gentleman seems as active as he was in the old
days, and no doubt he and his good wife are as much loved by
the people of South Australia as they were by Victorians.


THISTLEDOWN :
OR, JOTTINGS FROM MY NOTE BOOK
The Rey. C. H. Nield, Wesleyan Minister.
SOW difficult it seems to some folk and how comparatively
easy to others to diagnose a sermon, an oration, or a read
essay; and not only draw conclusions in the abstract,
but come to a definite decision in their own way, upon both the
delivered and the deliverer. It, however, some way or other,
seems like second nature to the writer thus to cogitate and
aC I have heard so many sermons in my time—both in this and
the old land—listened to such a variety of preaching talent,
heard discursive appeals of all kinds on so many subjects both
in and out of the pulpit, and written, in my off-hand way, my
opinion upon this, that, and the other sermomser and pulpit
orator for such a number of years, that some folk say I ought to
be if I am not, well up in theological and biblical literature. _
I don’t think that any of my readers will dispute the point
that in all countries of the civilised world there are preachers
good, bad, and indifferent. As I write 1 can pass m review
before my mind’s eye a few of the many I have sat and listened
First, there is the sympathetic preacher, who works himself
right into your heart by his tenderly touching appeals Ihen,
as he steadily gets his auditory up to the proper pitch of feeling,
he quietly but persuasively clinches home the truth so _ that
the tears come rolling down the cheek, the workings of the inner
nature are affected, and the listener feels better after the vibra-
tions of the heart strings have responded to the magic wand
thus successfully swayed. _ fllll
Then there is the fiery, impetuous revivalist, who is tuii or
galvanism and animal magnetism, and whose finger tips, as well
as his tongue and body, throw out imperceptibly magnetic
flashes- waves of odic force, if you like-full of entreaty,


warning, and reproof; a heart to heart preacher, who is as
sensitive as a telephone tissue, and who, unless he can count his
converts by hundreds, is sad, dispirited, and completely out of
sorts.
Then there is the hard-headed thinker, something like the
late Rev. R. W. Campbell, of Western Australia (so well
remembered in Victoria), who, as with a sledge hammer, hits
the callous and indifferent (though in himself as kindly as a
little child), tearing down with his sharp pointed periods all the
various fabrics of free thought and sentimentality already built
up in the mind, giving his hearers the idea for the time of God
as a dealer out of justice, whose wrath is kindled not a little, but
always winding up with the fact—
“ That this awful God is ours.
Our Saviour and our friend,”
Who, although just, is the justifier of the ungodly, merciful and
gracious to all who call upon Him.
Then, there is the thoughtful, quiet, never-put-about
preacher, who spins out every sentence with a drawl, and seems
to speak in measured tones and set phrases wearying to the ears
of his hearers, nutting them as if by a magician’s wand comfort-
ably off into the land of Nod.
Then there is the smirking preacher who, no matter how
serious the subject he discourses upon, has a smile on his face,
and thus entirely destroys the seriousness which ought to be felt
on certain occasions when the truth of God is presented from
the sacred desk.
Then there is the anecdotal preacher, who has a story, and
generally an apropos one, for every division of his subject, and
dovetails these in so well that the points he makes are frequently
indelibly photographed on the mind and heart of both old and
young, and tell in the after daily life as long as memory holds
her sway.
Then there is lastly the singing preacher, who knows he
lias a good voice, and likes to use it, and sings the gospel
frequently with as much abandon and energy as if all his people
were to believe that he, in his own person, is the possessor of a
Moody and Sankey compendium of sacred song.
Now, there is not one of these preaching characteristics
here noted that is not good in its place. But they need careful
“ mixing,” and when they are properly amalgamated, the result
in preaching power and ingathering of souls (Methodistically
speaking) is generally satisfactory. ;
If all these characteristics were fully developed in any one
man, I fear muchly the strain would be such upon his nervous
system as would send the poor itincrent preacher to the home of


the angels much sooner than either he or his wife or family
would desire.
The Rev. C. H, Meld, the subject of this sketch, is some-
what youthful in appearance, and has hardly as yet blossomed
out into full ministerial life. He, I judge from what I heard, is
a thoughtful, studious preacher. What he does say is well said,
the line of thought he starts with is followed out right through
the discourse. I don’t think Mr. Meld is the preacher to
attempt to preach without previous preparedness. He gives out
his hymns and text and reads with good emphasis and great
distinctness, and winds up not before he has pithily and fully
explained and cleared up every part of his subject.
The sermon I heard the rev. gentleman preach was one on
“ Principle,” the text “ Whether ye eat or drink or whatsoever
ye do, do all to the glory of God.”
In opening, the preacher ventured the opinion that when
the apostle gave expression to the words of the text he was
realising the impossibility of directing the Corinthian converts
who had applied for his counsel, how to act and what to do under
every circumstance. Ho code of laws or set of rules was suffi-
cient for this ever-changing life. A rule which suited the case
of one person and which he would be right in following, it
might be absurd and even wrong for another to observe. That
was true respecting particular and specific rules, but a general
rule of universal application, such as that contained in the
text, was always right:—“ Do all to the glory of God.”
If, said the preacher, there is principle at the foundation
of our lives and actions, we cannot much err. In regard to our
great British laws, they were different in detail in different
colonies from what they were in England ; but, notwithstanding
all these alterations and adaptations, the fundamental law
running through the whole remained the same. So while special
rules might change, the principle at the base of them remained
untouched —eternal and indestructible in its character.
It was therefore important that we should have a fixed
standard of principle to be guided by, so that we may act,
walk, and live by principle only. Let us, said the preacher, in
this matter of principle be like the oak—stern, uncompromis-
ing, and unmovable—not like the willow, bending with every
wind. Always let us act from principle, not from impulse.
Acting according to fixed standards of principle, we should walk
consistently and safely.
In order thus to act we must have some definite course of
conduct before us, and not vary like a clock pendulum before
the adjustment of the compensation balance. This Mr. Meld
very lucidly explained. The summer heat and winter cold had
its varying effect on the pendulum, but the compensation balance
put all to rights; so that by the simple combination of two


different metals, each having a different degree of expansion
under changes of temperature, and so arranged as to counteract
each other, the uniformity and regularity of the movement was
preserved.
In this way we all should have fixed rules to walk and live
by, and by this means we would be kept from inconsistent and
erratic action.
The rev. gentleman eloquently set forth the purity of the
principle in the text. We cannot, said he, glorify God except
by keeping pure and holy, and always walking in the light, for
“He is light and in Him there is no darkness at all.” In our
daily life there must be no self-seeking while we aim at glori-
fying Giocl> but we must do all with a single eye to His glory.
In closing, Mr. Meld said My friends, the text draws a
circle round our every-day _ Christian life—week-days and Sab-
baths alike. The little things of our daily life must be done
with as much fidelity as the greater ones. There are no such
things as trifles in the Christian life. If we test our conduct
and mode of life by principle, we will easily detect the wrong
and be led to choose the right. “He that is faithful in little
will be faithful in much/’
The young especially needed a sure and abiding principle
to guide them. If they acted always according to feeling they
would assuredly go astray.' They must not act upon impulse
but have fixed truthful principles to steer by. If they were not
thus actuated their lives would not be upright. Let all there-
fore aim high—have an exalted standard of excellence before
them—and let the principle of our lives be of the highest kind,
as in the text—“ Whether we eat or drink or whatsoever we do*
do all to the glory of God.”
From the outline of the very excellent sermon I have given,
it will be easily seen that the young preacher is above the
ordinary run of sermonisers.
If I were to write a chart of the phrenological and phy-
siognomical developments of the Rev. C. H. Meld, judging
from a short acquaintance, I would thus sum it up Studious,
cautious, methodical; plenty of brain power—Tcnows how to use it;
not a man to make friends quickly, but improves upon acquaintance.


THISTLEDOWN:
OR, JOTTINGS FROM MY NOTE BOOK
Rev. R. M. Huntee, op Kent Town (an ex-Peesident of
THE CONFEEENCE).
SOFTEN had a foolish wish when listening to young
ministers preach for the first time, that I could by some
means see into the future, so as to be able to trace out their
after life.
As I write, the wonderful career of my old friend and
companion, the late Rev. Dr. G-uard, of the Methodist Episcopal
Church of America, stands out before me. How often we have
as mere striplings trotted along the green lanes of a country
village together, plucking the primroses and wild flowers from
the green banks and mossy dells, as we merrily chatted away in
our boy-lingo about the mysteries of nature, the God of creation,
and the infinitude of space. Then the kind and gentle “ Thomas”
would sit down on some grassy mound and in a playful mood
tell my fortune by placing a daisy and buttercup conjoined
under my chin while he counted ten as he blew the petals partly
away, and noticed the shadow left by those remaining. The
midday sun shining out in all his splendour, and the skylark
singing his song of praise, clear and musical as the faint distant
sound of a silver clarion, we boys now and then watching the
little warbler gradually soaring aloft, leaving for a time this
earth-bound vale of tears, hearing his music long after he had
faded away from our sight.
Ah, those were happy days. I can well remember the first
time Thomas Guard was persuaded to take a service. The Rev.
E. H., Wesleyan minister, came to the little shop he was serving
at and found the future Dr, Guard and the writer practising
“ Old Devizes ”on two cracked flutes. With great reluctance
the timorous young fellow promised to make the attempt if I
accompanied him. The day came round, and off we started.
Well do I remember how my young companion grew timid as
we approached the farmhouse. “I know, H,,” said he, “I’ll


break down; come, let us turn back.” A little encouragement,
however, and on we went. When inside the big kitchen, I can
even now picture the long lanky youth with pale face and light
silky hair in a tremulous lisping tone of voice giving out the
hymn—
“ Jesus, the name high over all,
In hell or earth or sky ;
Angels and men before Him fall,
And devils fear and fly. r
No one present could pitch the tune, and as a last resource
young Guard said, “ H., start Arabia,” and the old tune went
with a swing, as every one seemed to know it. The text was a
very appropriate one, “A bruised reed He will not break."
There I sat in a home-made settle, expecting every minute that
there would be a scene, but when the youth with tremulous
nervousness prayed and asked for strength to help in his time
of weakness, I felt it was all right. The timid lisping boy
became still paler before he attempted to preach, but when he
did, I could feel that there was a power greater than his own
speaking through him. The results of that first effort were not
very remarkable, for the whole service only occupied about
twenty-five minutes, and it was, as he characterised it himself,
“ a very trying time.”
On our way home he seemed to have plucked up ’courage
somewhere, for he said, u I’ll never be afraid to preach Christ
again,” and he never was, for it is now a matter of history that
the Rev. Thomas Guard, D.D., was acknowledged to be, before
his lamented death, the greatest living platform and pulpit
orator in the United States of America.
Well, as usual, I am getting on the soliloquising track.
But, to my subject, I can remember quite as well the first time
I heard the Rev. Robert Morris Hunter preach, and I think with
a little fossicking over old scraps I might find a short line or two
I wrote thereon for one of the Victorian papers. But, bless me,
it is so long ago that I begin to feel quite venerable as I write.
There are few who know him now, who could believe that
the rev. gentleman named has been for nearly a quarter of a
century a minister of the Wesleyan Church. Mr. Hunter looks
to-day about as youthful as the first Sunday I heard him preach,
I don’t think I am wrong in venturing the assertion that
good Father Watsford’s opinion of a young preacher is valuable,
for our venerable and aged Secretary of the Jubilee Fund in
Victoria is as well (if not better) known and honoured in South
Australia as he is in any of the other colonies. A local preacher,
who in those early days expected to be called to the ministry,
once said to me after he himself had been rejected by the
quarterly meeting, “R. M. Hunter will be somebody yet; he is
sure to be a rising man, for he is one of Daddy Watsford’s pets.


You know Silverpen,” said he, “ John Watsford sees along way
ahead, and somehow instinctively spots out budding talent.” I
chimed in, “I guess he didn’t spot you, then.” Whether this
was so or not, the youthful E. M. Hunter was soon looked upon
in the circuit as a very excellent preacher, and up to to-day in
that city his name is remembered with great kindliness, and the
sermons he preached during his novitiate are treasured up in the
minds of many of those who heard him.
I had little idea in those days that so many years after, in
the city of Adelaide, during the Queen’s Jubilee year, and also
the Jubilee of Methodism in South Australia, I should meet
once more the young preacher referred to, laden with honours,
an ex-President of the Conference, and a much-loved senior
minister of the Methodist Church. But so it has turned out.
On a recent Sunday evening, accompanied by Mrs. F. Hambly
—a daughter, by-the-way, of the late Eev. John Hunt, the first
missionary to Fiji —I attended the Wesleyan Church, Kent
Town. The exterior is not unlike other Wesleyan sanctuaries
I have seen, but the interior is, to my mind, superior to many I
have worshipped in. The platform pulpit, the splendid organ
and choir gallery as a background, the cathedral wings on either
side of the pulpit, and the neat gallery over that to the right
and left, as well as at the extreme end, together with the com-
fortable pew accommodation and excellent arrangement and
lighting struck me forcibly as a whole to be quite a model
interior.
On mv entering I noticed a good congregation, everyone
seemingly in their places, and all looking devotionally composed.
I like to see before the entry of the minister a spirit of expect-
ancy in the looks of the people, and a visible quietude pervading
the atmosphere.
There were several noticeable innovations for a Methodist
Church in the service. The most interesting, to my mind, was
the reading of the commandments, the congregation joining
heartily in the responses. It appears this is carried out on the
first Sabbath in every month. I was quite pleased with the
arrangement, and hope soon that other Churches called Metho-
dist may follow in this particular the commendable exercise
thus adverted to.
The rev. preacher is an exceptionally good reader. Had I
closed my eyes, and not have previously seen Mr. Hunter, I
should have thought one of our ablest Victorian elocutionists
and preachers —also a son of Scotia —was the occupant of the
sacred desk. There is a depth and roundness of intonation
about the preacher’s utterances that attracts the attention and
falls pleasingly upon the ear. This was specially noticeable in
the reading of the Commandments.
The text was 90th Psalm, Bth verse—“ Thou hast set our


iniquities before Thee, our secret sins in the light of Thy counten-
ance
The preacher started with the fact, strange as it is true,
that every man is endowed with a faculty by which he judges
his own actions, whether right or wrong, good or bad. This
faculty does not always wait for the exercise of will, and even
against our will sometimes judges the exercises and actions of
ourselves and others, and commends or condemns.
There are, said the preacher, two axioms which need no
proof— First, that whatever you find in the creature must have
existed in the Creator; second, that whatever you find in the
creature in a degree must be found in the Creator in perfection.
This judging faculty in us —called conscience—is marred by
ignorance, miseducation, and self-love, while in Him none of
these inequalities exist. Our own nature, as well as the Bible,
thus assures us that God sets our iniquities before Him, and
our secret sins in the light of His countenance.
The character of this Divine scrutiny, then, is perfect.
We cannot trace all sin. But if we consider the sins of a
single day, of thought, word, deed, against men and women
and children in the various relations of life—against ourselves,
against God —sins of omission and commission—and multiply
these by years, by a lifetime, they baffle us in number, but they
cannot baffle God.
In their true magnitude some men feel the greatness of
some sins, and not of others. This was finely illustrated by
the American Christian conscience being keen on the sin of
intemperance and dull on the sin of slavery, while the British
Christian conscience was just the reverse at the same time.
But God, the Perfect One, judges the guilt of all sin cor-
rectly. We cannot judge others’ responsibility for training—
knowledge, Holy Spirit’s influence, and other things may come
in the way of our judgments, and the former lead us into error.
But God has no misjudgments.
In dwelling upon personal influence, and the fact that a
brief act of sin may make a powerful impression upon another,
the rev. gentleman feelingly told the tale related by the sainted
John Angel James, that when a young man a fellow shopman
had but for a moment shown him an “ infamous book.” The
evil instilled into his mind by that “one look” followed him
through life. Oh, said the preacher, profanity curses our land.
He who sells himself to the devil thus, sells himself cheap.
God must set our sins before Him in their ulterior effects.
A young man dying in St. Petersburg cried out —“ Oh ! that you
could bury my influence with me.” We are, said the preacher,
like men on mountain top rolling boulders down upon the village,
The influence of our lives will affect those who come after us ;
but all this God will set before Him,


The Eesults of God’s scrutiny.—His estimate of us may
be very different to that of others. The smuggler chief on the
coast of Cornwall was looked up to, in his native home, as a fine,
jovial, good-hearted fellow—in fact a brave man—the pride of
the village, and an example for young men to follow. But he
cared nothing for deeds of daring, or to even kill the coastguard,
so long as he was interrupted in his unlawful calling. But here
again, you see, God’s estimate of us may be very different to
that of men. He judges differently. He knows more about us.
The story of a lawyer in another colony who sought divorce
from his wife was aptly told. The lawyer failed to prove his
case, but by cross-examination had his own misconduct brought
to light. The Judge in dismissing the petition said, “ Sir, you
go from this Court without the character of a gentleman, though
previous to this trial you have had such a character.”
The question therefore for us is not what does man think,
but what does God think. God’s estimate of us may be very
different to our own. Custom and use blind us to sins of our
country or class.
This point of the discourse was very clearly illustrated by
the custom at one time in England of farmers employing chil-
dren of tender years in field work. But when this crying evil
was exposed by reporters for the public Press, specially sent to
inquire into the matter, and condemned by public opinion, even
the farmers themselves began to look upon the thing with abhor-
rence. The great question is not what do I think of myself, but
what does God think of me. May God have mercy upon us all!
Sin must be punished. This strange faculty in us says so.
God who gave it must also say so. Men would punish the rogue
who robs the widow and orphan, and prospers here. But they
have often neither the power nor right to do so. If any man
had the right and the power he ought to punish that rogue.
God has both the right and the power to punish hereafter, if not
punished here.
In judging other men worthy of punishment, we condemn
ourselves. Our punishment (said the preacher) will be propor-
tionate to our deserts. The question of duration is settled by
Christ. Some are to be beaten with few stripes ; not duration
but intensity is the question. Our punishment will be according
to our deeds, opportunities, and real character. There are some
(said the preacher) who will carry their own brimstone and
scorpion with them into the other world.
In concluding the rev. gentleman drew a fearful realistic
picture of the lost standing before the bar of God to be judged,
and hearing the awful words, “ Depart, ye cursed ßut (said
the preacher) these words are in the past tense. They represent
a process now taking place. Our sins are now before Him. Oh !
hear Him speak—“ Come, now, let us reason together, saith the


Lord. Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall become as
white as snow; though they be as crimson, they shall be as
wool.”
Mr. Hunter, during the interesting discourse referred to the
“ rose-water theology of the day,” and deprecated any keeping
back of the whole truth.
The sermon was a most eloquent and impressive one, and
was listened to by a large congregation with great attention.
If the rev. gentleman’s eloquence as a preacher is to be
gauged by the sermon I have but given the outline of, I am not
at all surprised that our old Victorian friend is so much thought
of in South Australia, and that a crowded church is the rule,
not the exception, where he preaches.


THISTLEDOWN:
OE, JOTTINGS FEOM MY NOTE BOOK.
Ebv. James Bickford (an ex-Peesident of the Conference').
MTHO that has heard the Eev. Dr. Dickson or Dr. Eule,
or Eeys. John Eattenbury or Wm, Arthur, M.A., will
ever forget their peculiarly impassioned appeals as
they kept spellbound their audiences by the power and variety
of their many intellectual gifts.
When a mere boy I was sent from a leading Liverpool
journal to hear Dr. Eaffles and report his sermon. That was
the toughest job I ever had, and a very poor fist I made of it,
notwithstanding the fact that my report made three parts of a
column of the Mercury. The Doctor was so prosy and argumen-
tative at one and the same time, I felt that another job of that
kind would make me cease Sunday scribbling to my dying day.
Well, I have not once, but a score of times in the other
colony, reported for the Press the pulpit and platform efforts of
my old friend Father Bickford, and I have never had the
slightest difficulty in thus doing.
Mr. Bickford is an old-time Methodist preacher. He comes
of a race of Wesleyan Methodist worthies fast dying out. There
are no new-fangled notions about his preaching. The Gospel
pure and simple is his theme. He is a man greatly loved by the
Methodist people all over the colonies. In proof of this, at one
of the Annual Conferences the Circuit authorities had decided
to invite Father Bickford, and felt sure, as he was willing to
come (and this a second time), that the Conference would
acquiesce in their wishes. The Legal Hundred, however—or I
should say in Victoria the Stationing Committee—placed
another name down for the circuit on the second reading. This
was “ wired” up to the circuit stewards. A big row was imminent.
A meeting of friends was called, and after due consideration the
following telegram was sent to the Conference“ Bickford or
nobody.” This was war to the knife with a vengeance; but the
reverend fathers saw their way clear to accede to this peremptory
mandate, and the rebels (?) had their man. Father Bickford
went ; and everyone was happy.


I have many other instances jotted down anent the way
our Victorian people prize the good old veteran Methodist
preacher; hut the editor threatens to clip my wings if I don’t
“boil down” my jottings, and as I don’t wish to cause a
“ Christian Weekly panic,” I thus curtly cut short my opening
remarks by stating the fact that the Rev. James Bickford has
been elected three times President of Conferences, so that he
may well be called “ The Whittington Methodist President,”
It was a dark wet Sunday night that I made my way with
difficulty to the Unley Church. I unfortunately got on the
wrong track, and had it not been for a passing tramcar I would
have assuredly not reached the church in time for the opening
hymn.
There is a depth of feeling in the way Mr. Bickford gives
out the hymns ; he seems to realise the beauty of expression
and depth of meaning of every line. His voice quivers with
sympathetic fervour, and his heart seemingly is in unison with
his voice as he reads aloud the inimitable words and heart-
painting outpourings of the Wesleys’ poesy.
I think there can be no room for complaint by the congre-
gations he ministers to as to his correct pronunciation and
forcible diction.
The subject chosen for text on the evening referred to was
Psalm cxix., 6th verse— ‘ Then shall I not be ashamed, when I
have respect unto all Thy commandments.” The reverend
gentleman, from start to finish, kept the truths laid down in
the text directly before his auditory. He said the Book of
Psalms is spoken of “like the paradise of Eden,” inasmuch as
this little verse of the text affords us in perfection, though in
miniature, everything that grows elsewhere. Bishop Hall says,
“ The Psalms of David were composed for particular occasions,
yet designed for general use. They were delivered out as ser-
vices for Israelites under the law, yet no less adapted to the
circumstances of Christians under the gospel.” They present
religion to us in the most engaging dress, communicating truths
which philosophy could never discover, in a style which poetry
can never equal; while history is made the vehicle of prophecy,
and creation lends all its charms to paint the glories of the re-
demption.” Bishop Horne says, “Of all the books of the Old
Testament, the Book of Psalms is the most universally read,
but, it is to be feared, as little as it is understood.” This cannot
be ascribed to any great obscurity of these sacred songs, for of
all the prophetic parts of Scripture certainly they are the most
perspicuous.
The object of David’s regard, “ Thy commandments.” In
the psalm there are ten words of importance.
1, Testimonies containing the witness of God’s will and
man’s duty.


2. Precepts directing our obligations to God and to tbe
monitions of His divine will.
8. The Word is revealed by the Holy Spirit,
4. Law —that is, the doctrine or teaching of God—an
emanation of His wisdom suggesting lessons of obedience, trust,
and love to Him. .
6. Ways —as prescribed by Divine authority as right, and
safe, and practicable. .
6. Truth. —The revealed word is so called—“ Thy word is
truth.” . . . ,
7. Judgments, i.e., rules of conduct as seen in God s judicial
decisions, &c.
8. Eighteousness.—Exhibited in the impartiality of the
Divine will and in the just administration of moral government.
9. Statutes, i.e., Divine ordinances and enactments of a
Divine nature. .
10. Commandments, i.e., fundamental and infallible direc-
tions —in short, the whole will of the Supreme Creator and
Righteous Judge. ,
The sermon of the reverend preacher was so full of good
things that it is somewhat difficult to keep from enlarging from
my notes on each point touched upon. For example—the
existence and perfectness of God, the redeeming work of the
Messiah, the immortality of the soul.
The blessings to be experienced, said the preacher, are—
(l) A true conversion, (2) the purest and fullest happiness, and
(8) spheres of usefulness.
In the second part of the discourse the preacher referred to
the conduct which David proposed to himself ‘ When I have
respect to Thy commandments.” This implies a firm belief in
the Divine Author of God’s commandments. Second, a fervent
love for them —“ 0, how I love Thy law.” This, said he, is one
of the strongest marks of a gracious and pious heart, cast in the
mould of obedience. Third, a devout performance of God s
commandments. ,
The result contemplated : <! Then shall I not be ashamed
—in the presence of my adversaries —in approaching the Throne
of Grace—in the trials and troubles of life.
In concluding, the reverend gentleman showed that the
whole drift of the exposition on this important subject was to
show the obligation under which each of us lies to make Goa s
commandments the rule of our lives, together with the sa^J »
happiness, and final status of all God’s faithful servants, -j-his
is written in the last of the books of Holy Scripture, as exhibit-
ing the final consequences to the good man of the life which he
has lived. “ Blessed are they that do His commandments, that
they may have a right to the tree of life. And God, He which
testifieth these things, saith— ‘ Surely I come quickly.’ Amen.


The conquering servant responds— ‘ Come, Lord Jesus.”
And again—
“ Bold shall I stand in Thy great day,
For who aught to my charge shall lay ;
Fully absolved through these I am,
From sin and fear, from guilt and shame.”
In my opinion, said Mr. Bickford, the Psalm from which
the text is taken does not appear to have any relation to some
special occasion or interest of the Jewish Church or nation, but
was composed rather as a manual of pious thoughts for the
instruction of young people, whilst its artificial structure
would be helpful to their memories and to heart devotion. But
it is equally appropriate to the intellectual and spiritual condi-
tion of the more mature worshippers of God and believers in
divine revelation.
The reverend gentleman in referring to the beauty of the
Psalms, and the passages in the New Testament expressly re-
presented as predictions of the Messiah, made use of the fol-
lowing pretty simile:—“ The Scriptures are at once the plainest
and yet the deepest of all books. They resemble those large
tracts of country where gold is to be found on the surface, but
the richest veins are to be found deep down in the bowels of
the earth.”
The sermon throughout was one of great excellence, and
from the attention given by the congregation, was no doubt
fully appreciated.
The Rev. James Bickford in the olden days in Victoria had
much to do with the gold-fields, and always wielded a powerful
influence in every Circuit with which he was associated. It was
at Mr. Bickford’s solicitation and earnest request a quarter of
a century ago that His Excellency Sir Henry Barkly came from
Melbourne to Ballarat, and laid the foundation-stone of the
Lydiard Street church—now the School of Mines—amid great
enthusiasm and rejoicings.
Years are telling upon the once fine pleasant face and portly
bearing of the venerable Father Bickford. But he still pos-
sesses the old fire and sound logical reasoning as in the days of
yore. No minister in the Connexion is more highly respected,
and more truly loved. All Victoria—Methodistically speaking—
mourned with him in the loss of his dear life partner, who with
him bore the heat and burden of the day, when ministerial life
on the gold-fields and mission stations was a series of incon-
veniences, trials, and difficulties.
“ God sends His teachers unto every age,
To every clime and every race of men,
With revelations fitted to their growth
And shape of mind.”


THISTLEDOWN :
OR, JOTTINGS FROM MY NOTE BOOK
Rev. James Haslem, Secretary op the Conference.
%N the annual gatherings or Conferences of the people called
W Methodists all over the world the casual onlooker of the
proceedings may without much trouble “ spot out” —if I
may be allowed the vulgarism —rising men. There is no more
conservative body of people in the universe than this annual
conclave of divinity ; nor is there a gathering of ministers of
religion anywhere in the world more jealous of their rights and
liberties, or more generally correct in their decisions.
By the Conference vote men of mark are judged righteously,
without fear, favour, or affection—judged by a jury of their
peers in a higher, if possible, sense than the ordinary every-day
judgments of every-day life.
It is said by a high authority on Methodism and Methodist
polity that never in the history of the Church has an unworthy
minister been known to have gained the highest offices in the
gift of the Conference, and that no President of the Methodist
Church has ever soiled or tarnished the sacred escutcheon of
Methodism, or disgraced the faith he holds up to others as a
minister of the gospel of Christ. This speaks well for Metho-
dism, and the purity of the lives of its ambassadors—called
preachers.
Although only a layman, and somewhat of an outsider at
best, I have in my time read most of the standard works per-
taining to Methodism and the people called Methodists, and
sweated over, frequently by the midnight lamp, almost every
authority on the history and founders of this wonderful and
powerful organization. Even the father and mother of the
Wesleys have not been overlooked by me. So that I have in
part filled my head with Methodist lore, and as I was born,
bred, and cradled in Methodism, I ought to be, if 1 am not, “ a
good Methody.”


I expect it is in this wise I take a special interest in its
followers, and especially its preachers.
I have, like a black tracker, followed up the traces of “ likely
men ” for high office, marking well how the Conference
pulse beats towards them, noting always that when the votes
were in favour of a certain reverend seignior for Secretary, the
chosen one is without fail on a “ bee-line ” for the Presidential
chair. A man to gain the Secretaryship of the Conference must
be a holy man, “ above suspicion,” “a good divine,” following
his own instructions. “ What his heart thinks his tongue
speaks.” “ One to be trusted.” “ Holding honour far more
dear than life.” Thus the wise saws of the immortal
Shakespeare give me words to define the character of a Methodist
Conference Secretary.
I can therefore well believe that the voice of the Confer-
ence in selecting the Eev. James Haslam as their Secretary gave
no uncertain sound, and was but an echo of the pulse of the
Methodist Church of South Australia towards him.
The history of South Australian Methodism, now writing
chapter by chapter by the subject of my sketch, and appearing
in the Christian Weekly is of itself quite sufficient test of the
author’s knowledge of the rise and progress, the laws and usages
of the Church of his choice. I have partly refrained from
reading as a whole, each successive chapter, hoping some day
soon to have the more satisfactory treat of reading in book form
the history complete. But I have read sufficient as a somewhat
clumsy expert to judge of the writer’s adaptability for the
literary task he has taken in hand, and more than sufficient to
convince me that the Eev. James Haslem is an out-and-out
Methodist, a thorough believer in the orthodoxy of the founder
of Wesleyanisn, and from a slight knowledge and personal
acquaintance a sound doctrinal Methodist preacher, and a
Christian gentleman.
* * * * * * *
I quietly slipped in one dark Sabbath evening recently to
the Unley church, and, as I thought, took a back seat unnoticed
by either preacher or people, but to my evident surprise on the
following morning Mr. J ,of the Book Depot, told me that
“ Silverpen ” was spotted by more than one member of the
congregation, so that it is just as well that I at the
close of the service made hasty tracks and hied quickly away,
or the critic might have had some one criticise him at close
quarters, and, above all other things, this is what he most
dislikes. It is all very well to thoughtfully criticise others, but
to have a counter-plot hatched up against yourself is quite a
different thing.
On entering the church I noticed the Eev. James Haslam in
the pulpit. Strange as it may appear, I had a vague notion


when the first hymn was announced that I had heard the
preacher’s voice from the pulpit on some previous occasion,
although this was the first time, and then, as if by magic, the
Rev. John Nash, of the Irish Conference, flashed across my
memory —the face, height, tone of voice, and style were those
of my old, but, I believe, long since dead friend.
Mr. Haslam has a peculiar way of looking at the congre-
gation from under his deep-set eye-brows, so that for a little
time I thought the sermon was a read one, not an extempore
deliverance. This I found to be, as a first impression, incorrect.
The preacher is one of a class of sermonisers, I judge, who
do not indulge in Bible thumping, but who rather feel they
have a deliverance to make of weighty import, and impart to it
a solemnity at any rate requisite when such a deeply solemn
theme as the subject of the text chosen for that evening was
dwelt upon —“ The dying prayer of Jesus”—(St. Lukexxiii. 34)
—“ Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do.”
The preacher commenced by remarking that the dying say-
ings of men were always specially remembered. For the testi-
monies of Christian pilgrims at the edge of death’s dark river
we were thankful. How thrilling those last words of jubilant
hope ! How solemn and inspiring still the remembrance of
that last adieu when we were pledged to meet the departing
ones in heaven ! It is possible that we sometimes put too much
emphasis on the question concerning a departed friend —
“ What were his last words ? ” Of greater importance is it how
grace enables men to tread the path of common life than what
it enables them to say in the moment the spirit crosses the
border ’twixt time and eternity. But Christ comes not within
the common category in this respect. He was not one of those
to be saved, but the Saviour of us all, and hence we may bid
men gather around His cross and listen to His dying sayings
with an interest which cannot be too great. The prayer of the
text, as other cries of the cross, shows that He had no thought
of revenge, no feeling of anger, but that in the hour of cruel
torturing He was full as ever of wondrous sympathy, and of love
which was a mystery. The prayer included Pilate, the Roman
soldiers, the multitude, the Jewish authorities, and all who
took any part in that tragic scene. For all that any of them
knew of what they did, the most knowing were yet ignorant of
the full nature of the offence they committed; even as Paul
affirmed, “ None of the princes of this world knew, for had they
known they would not have crucified the Lord of glory.” Not,
indeed, that ignorance in itself constituted a claim to forgiveness.
Ignorance in certain cases is guilt. The only ground of all for-
giveness is the death which Christ offered up, but the ignorance
of the crucifiers brought them “ within the pale” of that for-
giveness. There were men who were as guilty to-day as the


crucifiers of our Lord. The evil passions leading to the crucifixion
were common still, and they lacked but the opportunity to
crucify again the Lord of Life. Do you ask why the prayer
of Jesus seemed to fall fruitless and remain unanswered in
respect to the crucifiers of Christ, inasmuch as in their mad-
ness of evil they continued, nor after the Saviour was dead
did they seem to relent? Then, even as now, the difficulty
lay not in the divine willingness or power to forgive, nor in the
lack of efficacy in the intercession of our great High Priest, but
in the willingness of man to be forgiven. When by the melting
power of Pentecost men’s pride had been dissolved in penitence,
and they looked unto Him whom they had pierced, they were at
once forgiven. Do you not know the joy of forgiveness ? It
is not because the Saviour prays not, nor because his prayer is
unheard ; not because you are outside the circle of the cross’s
saving merit, but because you have not joined to the Saviour’s
prayer yours also—“ Lord, forgive me !” The truth is you
have not yet come to see what you have done. God’s forgive-
ness waits for those who are willing to receive it, and when once
you are willing the Saviour’s prayer in you will be fully
answered.
£ ‘ By the Spirit, Lord, reprove,
All my inmost sins reveal;
Sins against Thy light and love
Let me see and let me feel,
Sins that crucified my God,
Spilt again Thy precious blood.’’
In concluding this notice of a very excellent discourse, I
may be allowed to say a word or two anent the singing and the
choir. I know nothing of the organist or the members, but am
of opinion that they, one and all, deserve a word of praise. The
singing went with a swing; the tunes selected were admir-
ably rendered, and the sweet unison of voices was very notice-
able to the ear of one who has frequently had to criticise and
comment upon Church music.


THISTLEDOWN :
OR, JOTTINGS FROM MY NOTE BOOK.
Rey. Wm, Reed, of Kent Town.
ANY years ago in a newly-formed agricultural township
Jim of Victoria I met in the main street a young Wesleyan
minister, and was introduced to him by the Rev. Ralph
Brown. I, as usual, reckoned up the young parson before I had
been ten minutes in his company. The mental diagnosis then
taken has proved to be in many respects correct.
I noticed firstly that the forehead denoted good reasoning
powers, mental capacity of a high order, language full, stern but
kind, a man who could be reasoned into a line of argument, but
who would never be driven, a thoughtful, observant student,
who would not mind a little hard work in order to succeed in
gaining information.
From the fulness of the organ over individuality, I judged
he had a good retentive memory, and could with ease reproduce
his thoughts in a way to make them attractive to others.
On the following Sabbath day I attended the Wesleyan
chapel on the hill of St. Arnaud, and heard the young minister
referred to. I liked the sermon.
The preacher seemed perfectly at ease, with an amount of
self-confidence not usual in a youthful aspirant of the pulpit,
but by the arrangement of the sermon, I could see at a glance
that the subject had been thought out, previous to his entering
the pulpit. As a consequence he was not stilted in his utter-
ances, but spoke with a freedom and liberty quite refreshing,
I incidentally mentioned the fact of my hearing young R.
on the Sunday to a leading member of the Church in the town,
who said, “ There is something in that young fellow. I believe
he is made of the stuff they make good pastors out of.”
It is hardly necessary for me to say that the young minister


referred to was the Rev. W. Reed, now of Kent Town, the
subject of my present sketch.
Years after the time adverted to above I again heard Mr.
Reed preach, and I felt then more than ever convinced that he
was still on the upward track, and gaining honours for himself
as a popular minister of the gospel of peace.
When you find a minister apt at illustration, rolling off
quotation after quotation from the best authors, logical in his
utterances and sound in his arguments, you may rely upon it he
has been gathering honey from the hive of knowledge somewhere.
Mr. Reed’s pulpit efforts are noticeable, inasmuch as the
attentive hearer can always get glimpses of the beautiful in his
reasoning out of the subjects he so ably dilates upon, and be
compelled to say, “ Well, really, I never saw that text in the
same light before.”
The rev. gentleman is, I judge, of active habits, sanguine
temperament, not easily bluffed, but would, even if clouds were
surrounding him, make his way out of the shadow somehow, and
when in the sunlight, luxuriate in its beams, and by his cheery,
happy, sociability cause those with whom he comes in contact to
honour, love, and respect him.
I should be induced from the close reasoning of the rev.
gentleman in the sacred desk to conclude that he is a bit of a
philosopher, fond of scientific gleanings, and as ready to dive
into a scientific experiment as to write a sermon or read an essay.
Be that as it may, I am sure the congregations who listen
to his preaching from Sabbath to Sabbath must be both edified
and instructed, and go away refreshed and invigorated anew for
the battle of life.
The last time I heard Mr. Reed preach was in the Kent
Town Church a few weeks ago. The text was Rom. xiv. 17 —
“ For the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteous-
ness and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.”
The rev. gentleman started with the assertion that the text
was a link binding the teaching of the apostle to that of Christ
—that the teaching here indicated re relation of Judeo-Chris-
tianity is more or less legal compared with the pure spirituality
of the gospel of Christ.
We (said the preacher) are all bound to consider the in-
fluence as well as rightness of actions. By actions lawful in
themselves, and even by claiming rights which the gospel gives
us, we may injure and destroy others. The question of meats
and drinks is a vexed one. The strong must show their strength,
not by offending and humiliating the weak, but by sharing the
burden of their weakness in love and tenderness. In this regard
proselytes must be considered, who have brought with them the
memories of the forms, rituals, and observances of Judaism
into the gospel, and who in part still cling to their attachment


to the law. The kingdom of God, as given in the text, has a
new, large, grand, comprehensive meaning here. _We have
parables to teach us what it means. We have this kingdom
revealed in word and deed. We have glimpses of it in |the
graces of Christian life, and a perfect revelation of this kingdom
m Jesus himself. The very conception of such argues divinity.
Its extension and triumph. It comes not with observation;
it is not lightning, but light. He who casts ridicule on such a
kingdom reveals himself in his true colours, and virtually pro-
nounces his own doom and condemnation. This kingdom con-
sidered negatively. It is not sentiment, ceremony, profession,
nor is it doctrinal statement or routine of worship. Considered
positivelv, it is righteousness. A fine word to explain its im-
port. Bright as light; sharp as a sword. We might then ask,
Who then can be saved ? How shall we be right who have
sinned ? Justification we hold is legal forgiveness, and righteous-
ness an internal quality as well as an external relation. The
foremost question in this kingdom of character is, Is it right
Not, Is it pleasant? Is it expedient? Is it easy? Is it
probable ? . . , .
But is it right, not according to human opinion and custom,
but is it right according to the law of God ? Righteousness is
a fire; if applied as a test it would burn up some businesses
and pleasures of to-day. But only right is the man whose
heart-whose life-stands the test. This kingdom of God
meaning righteousness must mean revolution, regeneration, con-
version, a doctrine as reasonable as it is Scriptural ; the
righteousness of which is the inspiration of God—that of love,
not of fear. The peace of the text can come only by righteous-
ness. Its conditions are freedom from guilt of sin, freedom
from love of sin. This peace does not forget the past or ignore
the future. Her feet have firm footing as she views eternity.
The instilled soul has indeed harmony with God and self— 3 oy
in the Holy Ghost. Right living is not painful and gloomy.
Let the righteous man rejoice. He is like a well-tuned instru-
ment that will make sweet music anywhere. The ]oy in the
Holy Ghost was well illustrated by the case of an old woman,
blind, deserted, dependent on charity, yet rejoicing in the Lord,
knowing and believing that He doeth all things well. _
In concluding, the rev. gentleman laid it down as a righteous
principle that character determines the future for all of ns. Lach
individual will go to his own company. It is, said he, vain to
hope to go into the kingdom of heaven unless the kingdom of
God is first established in us.
The above is but a faint outline of the excellent discourse
delivered by Mr. Reed on the Sunday referred to. The church
was well filled by an attentive congregation, who, 1 have little


doubt, were as pleased as I was with the rev. gentleman’s lucid
exposition of God’s Word.
The singing seems to be always good in Kent Town. The
hymns sung were appropriate to the subject; and the way they
were read by the preacher, who is clear and distinct in his
utterances, gave the words force and power.
I rather envy Kent Town Church, with such preachers as
the Eev. W. Reed and the Rev. R. M. Hunter.


EEV. J. Y. SIMPSON,
PRESIDENT OF THE SOUTH AUSTRALIAN CONFERENCE,
1887.
'jff WAS rather unfortunate in not hearing the President
Jjlp preach during my stay in South Australia ; but I did hear
him deliver a very effective address in the Pirie Street
Church on June 20th, 1887, the day set apart by the Govern-
ment for the grand Jubilee demonstrations.
The Pirie Street Church at midday was literally packed at
the United Thanksgiving Services, Ministers of the various
denominations held forth, and altogether the two hours spent
in the Cathedral of South Australian Methodism were both
interesting and instructive.
I was glad when the time came for the Rev. President to
deliver his address. Of course it was but a review of the fifty
years of national progress under the Queenly sway of Victoria
the Good —and as a consequence, the narration of a number of
incidents in her life.
Honest praise, said the President, is always a source of
strength to virtue ; and the opportunity to show it is a gain to
the soul. It is not always, however, said he, that preachers
have been called upon to utter the praises of princes or of kings
or queens ; for the history of the great is too often the history
of the bad.
It was not so, however, with “ Victoria,” for when the
Maiden Princess was called to ascend the throne, the prayer of
Britain’s heart was, “ God hless our young Queen,” And now,
when the seven times seven years, with their wondrous triumphs
and chastened experience, have been accomplished, the heart-
felt prayer of men, women, and children of all ranks and sects
and parties throughout her vast empire is, “ God hless our
ividowed Queen.”
The address was a capital platform effort, interlarded as it
was with new items of interest not generally known in Australia
regarding the life of the illustrious Lady the Queen of England
and Empress of India ; and as a whole, it deserved to be placed
among the best addresses on “ Jubilee day.”
The Rev. J. Y. Simpson is one of the men who wear well.
He has a pleasing, intellectual face, a good physique, and is a
favourite with Methodists generally; and altogether such a
representative man as any Church in Christendom might be
proud of.


The following will give my readers a more comprehensive idea of
the Rev. S. F, Prior, whose shetch precedes it:
A SYMPOSIUM ON METHODISM
THE CONNEXIONAL PRINCIPLE—
ITS SOCIAL ASPECT.
By the Rev. S. F. Prior.
mwETHODISM is distinguished among the Churches by her
family feeling and family life. In seeking out the prime
cause of this I find it in her theology, or her interpretation and
presentation of the truths of Scripture as to the will of God
concerning the race of man. Asking as to reason of the con-
tinuance and evolution of this family feeling and life, I find it
in the fact and presence of that Connexional polity which is
itself the logical and legitimate outcome of the family life, but
which when once adopted as a principle of working, fosters and
developes that which has brought it into being, and so has made
of world-wide Methodism a unit; of the Church, a family;
and of Methodists, the members of that family, a brotherhood.
And first to consider somewhat the relation of Methodist
theology, or her conception and declaration of the will of God
as revealed in the Scriptures concerning man, to the family life
of Methodism. As I understand them, Methodist doctrines, as
at the first proclaimed, appealed especially to the heart. In a
time of Laodicean ease amongst the Churches, and of appalling
mental and moral destitution amongst the people, accompanied
also by much poverty of circumstance, John Wesley was raised
up in the providence of God to preach the glorious gospel of
His grace, and the unsearchable riches of Christ. In a time
when to be poor was to be degraded and ignorant, and to be
despised as the filth and off-scouring of the world—and in a
time, too, when the very many were also the very poor—for a
man prepared of God by varied, and as some think by almost
vicarious spiritual experiences, and not unacquainted personally
and relatively with bitter and grinding poverty —for such a man
to step forward asserting: “We speak that we do know, and


testify that we have seen,” and speaking from the heart to the
heart, to enunciate sympathetically and powerfully the Father-
hood of God, the Brotherhood of Christ, the love of the Spirit,
the universality of redemption resulting in the initial salvation
of all, and the possible salvation to the uttermost of all those
who would come to God by the great and general Saviour of
mankind, was a thing calculated to touch the popular heart to
the core, and a revelation that, thrilling the whole being, caused
multitudes to rise enfranchised from the power of sin and
Satan crying: “We love Him because He first loved us,” Con-
cerning John Wesley it was true as of his Master, that “ to the
poor the gospel was preached,” and with the same result, that
“ the common people heard him gladly.” On the one hand the
iron fetters of a rigid Calvinism, which taught and sternly
insisted upon the election of the few and the reprobation of the
many from all eternity to all eternity, the iron of which entered
the soul and caused gloom and hopelessness and despair, were
broken by the insistance upon such texts as these—“ God willeth
not the death of any sinner;” “ God so loved the world,” &c.;
“Jesus Christ, by the grace of God, tasted death for every
man;” and on the other hand the slime and filth of a deadly
Antinomianism, which proclaimed “ Once in grace, always in
grace,” and which practically taught, “ let us sin that grace
may abound,” was purged away by the proclamation of God’s
hatred of sin, and of His hatred of it most of all in His own
children. In such an atmosphere the early Methodists “ lived
and moved and had their being.” “ The grace of God which
bringeth salvation appeared to all men.” The bright shining of
the sun was not more universal than was in their esteem the
love of God. The health-giving breathings of the viewless
winds that, blowing where they list, visit every shore and fan
every face and invigorate every life, were not to their thinking
more numerous than the winsome wooings of the free and fetter-
less Spirit, the breath of God; and those strenuous strivings
wherewith in utmost tenderness of yearning affection He
struggles to overcome the resistance of those souls which God
had made and the very heart’s blood of the Lord’s Christ had
redeemed. To them of every man the Lord Jehovah was both
the God and Father, By them was the vision seen of the Lord
Christ spreading pierced hands in loving benedictions over the
once lost, but now ransomed and rescued race. From out of
His heavens they heard the Saviour say, “All souls are Mine,”
They caught the spirit of the prophecy and rejoiced in it, “He
shall see of the travail of His soul and be satisfied;” and they
sung, “ And all may live, for Christ hath died.” To them God
was Father, Christ was brother, and the whole world, not a
Golgotha or a pandemonium, but a reconquered province of the
great universe kingdom of their Lord. No wonder, then, they


looked with eyes of earnest beseeching upon all men—men for
whom the Christ of God did die—as their brothers, too, and
had hope and love for all. This was their heart’s attitude
towards all of Adam’s race, to all men everywhere, of every
creed and clime. As Christ was own brother to every man, so
were they, for while the grand utterance, “ God hath made of
one blood all nations of men for to dwell on all the face of the
earth,” was not abrogated—was still true for them, and full of
the teaching that unified the race, and made one the many
peoples of the world—there rang out from the Cross of the
Crucified a deeper truth, a loftier teaching, a sweeter music,
and a diviner message, “ God hath now redeemed by one and
the same blood all nations of men that dwell on the face of the
earth.” We need not wonder, then, that when as standing as
disciples beneath that Cross they heard their Saviour say, “ All
ye are brethren ,” “By this shall all men know that ye are My
disciples if ye have love one to another ,” their hearts responded,
“If God be our Father, and Christ our Brother, then indeed
are we brothers too.” Methodist theology touched the heart,
evoked love, lit the flame of filial and fraternal affection, aroused
the family feeling, and ministered to the family life, and as
Methodists stood under heaven’s blue canopy they cried, “Abba,
Father,” and consciously members of “ the whole family in
heaven and earth” bowed the knee to Him the Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ.
And this family life of Methodism, which I claim has been
largely called forth by her theology, her presentation of the
truth of God, has been conserved and consolidated by her
Connexional polity, and by her special and peculiar means of
grace. Take the latter first. John Wesley, with a rare states-
manship that characterises only the born leaders of men, and
with a shrewd and sagacious insight into the necessities of his
flock which bespoke the heaven-appointed Shepherd, made from
the first provision for the full oversight of the sheep, and
erected sheepfolds, provided pasture, and appointed under-
shepherds. In other words, he provided spiritual homes for the
family ; and in the class meetings we have especially the spiritual
homes of the early Methodists, where they held sweet counsel,
and where, as iron sharpeneth iron, so did the countenance of a
man his friends; and over these family gatherings presided the
brother-elect, or, as in some cases, one who from his age,
experience, and venerableness was felt to be, if not actually so
called, “ a father in God.” Of the early Methodists, many of
whom were of the poorest of the poor and ignorant, the class
meeting was the spiritual nursery; of many others separated
from their kith and kin by a change of heart and life, and often
by a savage and intolerant persecution such as recent friends
turned into bitter foes can alone practise, the class meeting, the


communion of saints, was their shield and hiding place, their
harbour of refuge. By such an institution John Wesley wisely
fostered those spiritual instincts and feelings which made up
the Methodist family life. Thus the class meeting—the need
of which was pointed out by the instinct of fellowship—is in
turn the preserver of that which called it forth. Band-meetings
and love-feasts—now, alas! held all too seldom—had their place
in these economic and educational provisions, and ministered to
the nurture of the family life.
Then as the Societies, against Wesley’s will at first it may
be, but under the direction of an all-wise Providence, developed
into a Church, there also grew up insensibly, according to the
needs of the hour, a Connexional polity which ministered to the
necessities and conserved and advanced the interests of the
family as such.
I do not wish to dwell on this part of the subject, but I do
claim that as a Church Methodism corresponds more nearly than
any other I wot of to the Scriptural ideal of the Church as a
family, and fulfils the family responsibilities and possesses the
family life, joys, privileges, and immunities. Think of true
family life, of the love, fellowship, union, and unselfishness of
brothers. True brotherhood means relationship, love, unity,
interdependence, mutual help, generosity, the feeling that “ it
is more blessed to give than to receive communion in spirit
and communion in kind—in a word, unselfishness. Is it asked,
does Methodism abide these tests? I reply, more than any
other Church I know she does.
Take relationship. The words “ brother” and “ sister
have not yet lost their meaning. Methodists are at home with
Methodists the wide world over. The family name is a passport
and an introduction. Methodism is a spiritual freemasonry,
and those who have travelled can speak of many unexpected,
but hearty welcomes, and of the formation of friendships that
endure and intensify as the years roll on, and that shall exist
when time shall be no more. Is there love ? Let Methodist
heart-leaps answer that. Is there practical unity ? Think of
the (Ecumenical Council held in London in 1881, representing
25,000,000 adherents, all of whom might join in singing—
Like a mighty army
Moves the Church of God;
Brothers, we are treading
Where the saints have trod.
We are not divided,
All one body we:
One in hope and doctrine,
One in charity.
Is there Interdependence ? Let our Connexionalism answer that.
Is there Mutual Help ? As nearly as is possible to a human


system, I think there is in Methodism a revival of the Scriptural
spirit and a perpetuation of Scriptural methods —a very near
approach to Christian Communism, to the having all things in
common, spoken of in the history of that spasmodic attempt of
the early Church to show forth the family spirit. The preachers
as a body and to a man give themselves for Christ’s sake to the
whole Church, and their gifts and graces are the common pro-
perty of all. T o the Methodists we say : “ All things are yours,
whether Paul, Apollos, Cephas.” With Methodists it is not so
much “ our minister they have a larger heritage, a wealthier
possession than that—it is “ our ministers.” And wondrous
bonds and bands of union to the body corporate are these men;
the grandest brotherhood in all the world, as I take leave to
believe them to be. Travelled, experienced, knowing men and
manners, acquainted with the Methodist Canaan from Dan to
Beersheba, in their itinerancy they knit by a universal knowledge
and sympathy and love our laymen together, and those who have
never seen each other’s face in the flesh rejoice in the mental
pictures and spiritual introductions they receive through men
who know them all— our ministers.
The laymen, too, contribute to the keeping up of the home
life and family feeling by their noble contributions to the Home
Mission Fund, thus fulfilling the law of Christ by bearing one
another’s burdens. The Methodist rich help the Methodist
poor. The strong bear the burdens of the weak. Thus the
surplusage which would otherwise go, say to increase the salaries
of the more talented ministers, &c., is spread abroad over the
whole field, so that “ he that had gathered much had nothing
over, and he that had gathered little had no lack.” Is there
generosity? the pure “giving, hoping for nothing again.” I
think so. Witness Methodist Foreign Mission contributions,
second in amount to that of but one Protestant Church, and
that confessedly the wealthiest by far in the world. Is there
unselfishness? Ah, me ! selfishness is sin, and sin is selfishness,
and the taint of it is upon us all; but let us thank God if we
are striving after it, if in all brotherliness we desire to manifest
it. May He help us to live up to our ideal! May He preserve
to us in all its purity the family life and the family love !


THISTLEDOWN :
OE JOTTINGS FEOM MY NOTE BOOK
REV. THOMAS RASTON (a VENERABLE EX-MISSIONARY).
Oh.
» THINK it was in the year 1857 that I, one week evening,
as a Press reporter, visited the little church on the side of
Mount Tarrengower, Victoria, and on my entering found a
missionary meeting in full swing. The meeting was one of
exceptional interest, as the chief speaker had not been long in
Victoria, and had had a disastrous voyage to these shores, so
that he had stories not only of missionary work but shipwreck
to tell; and he told them so well that the folk were sorry when,
after over one hour’s speech, he resumed his seat.
The missionary speech was of the kind reporters write
about as one that brought down the house.
The rev. gentleman who orated, speaking among other
things of the great bugbear of civilization and Christianity—
bigotry—said:—My friends, if I had my way I would bury
“ old bigotry ” in the deepest “ shicer” on the diggings. This
allusion, so familiar to the gold-fields, caused a regular furore
of applause from the miners and their wives who were present,
and composed the greater portion of the audience.
I remember well on the platform on the occasion referred
to there was a speaker called Noble, a local preacher —and a
noble little fellow he was —together with Jimmy Jeffrey.
Jimmy, not content with applauding in the ordinary fashion,
made an attempt to lift the wiry little parson up from the
platform, patting him on the back, and with a Cornishman’s
enthusiasm shouting out, “ Bully for you, sir ! Bully for you !”
or some such phrase as that.
Little Noble—who at the time, and for months before, was
the stay of the Church—has, with his friend Jimmy Jeffrey,
long ago joined the great majority, where both, I have no doubt,
have entered into their rest, as they each left a sparkling testi-
mony behind them of zeal for God and love for His cause.
Little Coble’s funeral was attended by almost every man,


woman, and child on the diggings, and, if I mistake not, the
ex-missionary I refer to read the service over his grave.
. .to return to my subject. The rev. gentleman was,
during his stay in the Castlemaine Circuit, one of the most
popular preachers and lecturers of the time. His preaching
was ofa very high order, and his platform efforts surprised and
delighted the Methodists of diggerdom.
Small of stature, active, swift of foot, enthusiastic, and
always as cheery as a four-year-old, it would be rather difficult
now-a-days to recognise in the characteristics I have given of
thm ex-nnssmnary the person of the Eev. Thomas Easton, of
.Kent Town —hut he it was.
I did feel sorry to meet my old friend in Adelaide bowed
down in body with years of hard work as a Methodist preacher,
but pleased when I found out in conversation that the old fire
still burned, and that years do not make a man old. As John
B. Gough, in writing to me some years ago from America, said,
Tir e J l6ver 9 row while the heart is young.” And so it is with
Mr. Easton. When I referred to the old time of long ago his
eye brightened up with the memories of those days of thirty
years ago or more, and for the while he was a youngster again.
_ The Castlemaine Circuit folk-that is, those who are stili
livmg—wdl never forget the Eev. Thomas Easton ;he was con-
sidered by the critics one of the best all-round Methodist
ministers then in Victoria. Eloquent, logical, persuasive, and
sympathetic, he always proved a power either in the pulpit or
on the platform. No meeting c\i r. Easton ever attended fell
flat, for he had the knack of imbuing all around him with the
same enthusiasm as he himself possessed, and it was acknow-
ledged throughout the Circuit, at public meetings, if Mr. Easton
was on the platform, everything would go with a swing.
The writer, and many of the other youngsters of the time
connected with the Church, looked up to Mr. Easton as an
authority upon everything—in fact, a walking epitome of the
Encyclopaedia Britannica—and we all wondered much how such,
a little head could have stored in it such a cargo of general
information.
Mr. Easton was great on the temperance question; his
lectures on this subject were amusing, instructive, and full of
interest. Few could beat him in the anecdotal line ; he always
had a good batch of stories ready for every subject he either
lectured or preached from.
. . In those days of the colony he did double duty in
visiting the sick and dying, neglecting nothing in his anxiety to
do good. J
I well remember one lovely Sabbatfc morning meeting by
arrangement the rev. gentleman at an early hour in order to
go with him to the local gaol to visit a condemned prisoner.


That scene is one of many engraved upon my mind, although so
many years ago. I can see the outline as I write the con-
demned man, weeping bitterly, chained to the logs, waiting for
the following morning to be hanged by the neck till dead ; the
solemn and impressive reading by the minister of the 51st
Psalm; the prayer in the condemned cell; the confession of the
murderer, taken down by the writer at the time ; the clanking
of the chains; the farewell of the wretched prisoner; the
clearing away of doubt from the poor fellow’s mind, and his
crying in an agony of soul, “ God, be merciful to me a sinner;
the tears coursing down the cheeks of the man of God as we
left the prisoner to his fate, and his last words, ‘ But for the
drink, sirs, I never would have been here .”
Mr. Easton had a great sermon on the text, “A man that
hath friends must show himself friendly: and there is a friend
that sticketh closer than a brother.” I heard him preach from
this text four or five times, and always enjoyed it.
Mr. Easton was a fast friend of the young people of the
congregation ; both Mrs. Easton and he were ever ready to help
and counsel the young folk. . .
There are several in the ranks of the ministry to day who
acknowledge to the fact that it was through the ministrations
of the Eev. Thomas Easton they were first led to Christ.
A few weeks ago I met a somewhat aged minister of the
Wesleyan Church at Bright, Victoria—the Eev. E. 0. Cook—
who told me in conversation that it was through Mr. Easton ho
first thought of entering the ministry.
But I could go on for an hour retailing incidents ot interest
connected with the ministry of my old friend.
I do exceedingly regret that during my recent visit to
South Australia I had not an opportunity to hear Mr. Easton
pieach. tl . well be wr itten of this aged servant of God (the
Eev. Thomas Easton), as inscribed on the tombstone of Peter
Jaco, in the burying-ground of City Eoad Chapel, London:
Fisher of men, ordained by Christ alone,
Immortal souls he for his Baviour won,
With loving faith, and calmly-potent zeal,
Performed and suffered the Redeemer’s will.
I hope, in conclusion, that my old friend may still have
years of usefulness before him, and that his last days may be
his best.




