

SKETCH
PROPOSAL FOR COLONIZING
AUSTRALASIA,
&C. &C. &c.




SKETCH
PROPOSAL FOR COLONIZING
AUSTRALASIA.
It is proposed.
I. That all land now granted, and to
be granted, throughout the Australasian Set-
tlements, be declared liable to a tax of 10 per
cent, upon the actual rent.
11. That a payment in money of 21. per
acre be required for all future grants without
exception.


111. That the proceeds of the tax upon
rent, and of sales, form an Emigration Fund ,
to be employed in the conveyance of British
Labourers to the Colony, free of cost.
IV. That those, to whom the administra-
tion of the Fund shall be entrusted, be em-
powered to raise money thereon, as money is
raised on Parish and County Rates in Eng-
land.
V. That the supply of Labourers be
exactly proportioned to the demand for la-
bour at each Settlement; so that no Capi-
talist shall ever want Labourers, and no
Labourer shall ever want employment.
VI. That, in the selection of Emigrants,
an absolute preference be given to equal


numbers of both sexes, and to persons be-
tween the ages of eighteen and twenty-four.
VII. That every person, reaching a Set-
tlement at his own expense, or providing a
passage for others, be entitled to a grant of
land, at the rate of acres for himself,
and for each person by him conveyed to the
Settlement.
VIII. That every person, reaching a Set-
tlement at his own expense, or providing a
passage for others, have the option to receive,
either a grant of land, as by Article VII., or
a payment in money from the Emigration
Fund, at the rate of 2Z. per acre for the
quantity of land to which he should be en-
titled.


IX. That grants be absolute in fee, with-
out any condition whatsoever, and obtainable
by deputy.
X. That any surplus of the proceeds of
the tax upon rent, and of sales, over what is
required for Emigration, be employed in relief
of other taxes, and for the general purposes
of Colonial Government.


EXPLANATORY REMARKS.
That all land now granted, and to be
granted, throughout the Australasian Settle-
ments, be declared liable to a tax of 10 per
cent, upon the actual rent.
This is not a land-tax, but a tax upon rent. The
amount of the tax would be determined, either by the
actual receipt of rent, or by the estimated letting
value of land when occupied by the landlord ; and
the machinery for collecting the tax would be the
same as that by which county rates are levied in
England.
The highest rent accrues, it is established, when
the number of people is so great as to require that the
worst land should be cultivated. Rent, therefore,
depends entirely upon population.
In all modem colonies the people have been very
few in proportion to appropriated land; and land, con-
sequently, has yielded little or no rent. The amount
of rent yielded by land in New Colonies appears to
have been governed by the terras on which waste land


could be obtained. Where grants have been made
with great profusion, as if land were of no value,
no rent at all has been obtained for it, until, after
a long time, the people had increased so as to
counteract the profusion of the Crown. Where
land has been sparingly, or rather wisely, granted,
some rent has accrued almost immediately, and
it has rapidly increased. In no modern Colony,
as far as I can learn, has the Crown granted land
with so little profusion as in New South Wales; and
land in New South Wales bears, I believe, a higher
rent than was ever obtained in any modern colony of
the same age. I ought rather to say, that this was
the case, both as to grants and as to rent; for, lately,
a single grant of land in New South Wales exceeded
in quantity the whole extent of previous grants dur-
ing forty years, and I am not aware of the effect
which that profuse measure may have had on the
rent of land generally. In 1821, the total extent of
land granted in New South Wales was 381,466
acres ; the average estimated rent about one shilling
per acre. If the proposed measure had then been
applied to that settlement, the tax upon rent would
at once have produced 1906/. per annum. Money
borrowed at five per cent, upon that security would
have been 38,146/. That sum would, at 20/. for
the passage of each person, have added 851 young
couples to the population. As, probably, 851 young
couples would have been equal to half the number
of young couples in the colony, the increase of popu-


lation occasioned by their arrival would, in proportion
to the increase which could have taken place with-
out their arrival, have been very great; and their
immigration would have occasioned a proportionate
rise in the rent of land. Consequently, the tax upon
rent, employed in emigration, would have been, not a
loss, but a considerable gain, to the owners of land.
The proposed tax upon rent would, no doubt, take
so much from every Land-owner; but it would bestow
upon him twice, perhaps three times, as much as it
would take from him—perhaps a great deal more.
To decide how much, the probable effects of that tax
must be estimated in conjunction with the other
measures.
ARTICLE 11.
That a payment in money of 2 1, per
acre, be required for all future grants without
exception.
The only objection to this part of the measure
seems to be, that, as hitherto land has been attainable
in the Colonies almost without any payment, the im-
position of a comparatively high price on waste land
would operate as a check to colonization. If that
objection can be maintained, the proposed measure
is ridiculous; for one of its main objects is to cause
the utmost possible increase of colonization.


By colonization I mean the cultivation of waste
land, not its misappropriation and neglect, which,
more or less, have been the attributes of all modern
Colonies. The prosperity of a Colony signifies, not
merely its extent, but also the wealth of its inhabi-
tants ; and the progress of colonization depends not
merely on the number of acres granted, but also on
the quantity of production which occurs, and upon
the degree in which production exceeds consumption,
that is, upon the accumulation of wealth.
The following passage is extracted from Adam
Smith’s “ Inquiry into the Causes of the Prosperity
of New Colonies.”
‘ The colony of a civilized nation which takes pos-
‘ session, either of a waste country, or of one so thinly
‘ inhabited, that the natives easily give'place to the
‘ new settlers, advances more rapidly to wealth and
‘ greatness than any other human society.
‘ The colonists carry out with them a knowledge
‘ of agriculture and of other useful arts, superior to
‘ what can grow up of its own accord in the course
‘of many centuries among savage and barbarous
‘ nations. They carry out with them too the habit
‘ of subordination, some notion of the regular govern-
‘ ment which takes place in their own country, of the
‘ system of laws which support it, and of a regular
‘ administration of justice; and they naturally esta-
£ blish something of the same kind in the new settle-
‘ ment. But among savage and barbarous nations,
‘ the natural progress of law and government is still


‘ slower than the natural progress of arts, after law
‘ and government have been so far established, as is
‘ necessary for their protection. Every colonist gets
‘ more land than he can possibly cultivate. He has
‘no rent, and scarce any taxes to pay. No landlord
‘ shares with him in its produce, and the share of the
‘ sovereign is commonly but a trifle. He has every
‘motive to render as great as possible a produce,
‘ which is thus to be almost entirely his own. But
‘ his land is commonly so extensive, that with ail his
‘ own industry, and with all the industry of other
‘ people whom he can get to employ, he can seldom
* make it produce the tenth part of what it is capable
‘of producing. He is eager, therefore, to collect
‘ labourers from all quarters, and to reward them
‘with the most liberal wages. But those liberal
‘ wages, joined to the plenty and cheapness of land,
‘soon make those labourers leave him, in order to
‘become landlords themselves, and to reward, with
‘ equal liberality, other labourers, who soon leave
‘them for the same reason that they left their first
‘master. The liberal reward of labour encourages
‘marriage. The children, during the tender years
‘ of infancy, are well fed and properly taken care of,
‘ and when they are grown up, the value of their
‘ labour greatly overpays their maintenance. When
‘arrived at maturity, the high price of labour, and
‘ the low r price of land, enable them to establish them-
selves in the same manner as their fathers did be-
* fore them.


‘ In other countries, rent and profit eat up wages,
‘ and the two superior orders of people oppress the
‘ inferior one. But in new colonies, the interest of
‘ the two superior orders obliges them to treat the
‘ inferior one with more generosity and humanity ;
‘ at least, where that inferior one is not in a state of
‘slavery. Waste lands, of the greatest natural fer-
‘ tility, are to be had for a trifle. The increase of
‘ revenue which the proprietor, who is always the
‘undertaker, expects from their improvement, con-
‘ stitutes his profit; which in these circumstances is
‘ commonly very great. But this great profit cannot
‘be made without employing the labour of other
‘ people in clearing and cultivating the land; and
‘ the disproportion between the great extent of the
‘land and the small number of the people, which
‘ commonly takes place in new colonies, makes it
‘ difficult for him to get this labour. He does not,
‘therefore, dispute about wages, but is willing to
‘ employ labour at any price. The high wages of
‘ labour encourage population. The cheapness and
‘ plenty of good land encourage improvement, and
‘enable the proprietor to pay those high wages.
‘ In those wages consists almost the whole price of
‘ the land; and though they are high, considered as
‘ the wages of labour, they are low, considered as
‘ the price of what is so very valuable. What en-
‘ courages the progress of population and improve-
‘ ment, encourages that of real wealth and greatness.
‘ The progress of many of the ancient Greek colo-


' nies towards wealth and greatness, seems accord-
ingly to have been very rapid. In the course of a
‘ century or two, several of them appear to have
‘ rivalled, and even to have surpassed their mother
‘cities. Syracuse and Agrigentum in Sicily, Ta-
‘ rentum and Locri in Italy, Ephesus and Miletus in
‘ Lesser Asia, appear by all accounts to have been at
‘ least equal to any of the cities of ancient Greece.
‘ Though posterior in their establishment, yet all the
‘ arts of refinement, philosophy, poetry, and eloquence,
‘ seem to have been cultivated as early, and to have
‘ been improved as highly in them, as in any part of
£ the mother country.
£ All those Colonies had established themselves in
£ countries inhabited by savage and barbarous nations,
‘ who easily gave place to the new settlers. They
‘ had plenty of good land, and as they were alto-
c gether independent of the mother city, they were at
£ liberty to manage their own affairs in the way that
£ they judged was most suitable to their own in-
terests.’
In the above passage, of which the object is to
account for the very rapid acquisition of wealth by
Emigrants from the states of Greece, five main
causes are stated, —knowledge of agriculture and
other useful arts ; freedom from taxes ; independence
from the beginning; cheapness of land; and dear-
ness of labour. The statement, when examined, will
appear very objectionable, both in fact and in reason-


ing. The Emigrants from Greece did not obtain im-
mense tracts of waste land over which they and their
children might spread at will. There is not, I believe,
an instance of their having advanced far into the
interior of any country. Wherever they landed they
had to displace warlike tribes, who, abandoning the
sea coast after a struggle, continued to watch the in-
truders and to confine them within very narrow limits.
The first occupation of a Greek colony seems to have
been to erect a fortress, into which the whole body
of colonists might retire in case of need. Some of
these strong places became, in a very short time,
splendid cities; but the quantity of land required to
maintain the inhabitants of one great city, formed, in
most cases, the whole territory of a Greek colony,
from the beginning to the end of its career. Abun-
dance and consequent cheapness of land, therefore,
was not a cause of the rapid prosperity of the Greek
Colonies. In the next place, high wages,—-dearness
of labour, —assuredly, had no part in their rapid ad-
vancement. For, besides that high wages could have
arisen, only in the manner so well described by Dr.
Smith, from superabundance of land, the Colonists
carried with them, and obtained after their settlement,
numbers of slaves, who were their principal culti-
vators and artizans. Lastly, it may be denied that
the complete independence of a Colony from the be-
ginning is by any means advantageous ; for, however
ill dependent colonies have been governed after they


had arrived at some importance, they have generally
received nothing, in their first beginnings, but pro-
tection and assistance from the parent States under
whose dominion they remained.
If these objections to the facts and reasoning of
Dr. Smith are not unfounded, but two out of the five
causes assigned by him can be admitted—knowledge
of agriculture and other useful arts, and freedom from
taxes. These, by themselves, are surely quite inade-
quate to the effects for which he endeavours to ac-
count. May not other causes be assigned ?—I ima-
gine four.
First.—The constitution of the emigrating body.
The leaders of bodies of Emigrants from Greece were
men of the highest distinction, whose fame, ability,
and wealth enabled them to collect and transport a
great number of followers, drawn from all ranks in
the old State. Thus a body of Colonists formed, not
a new society, in the common acceptation of the term,
but an old society that had changed its abode. Se-
condly—The new abode was not an immense waste,
without inhabitants, over which the Colonists might
spread themselves, remaining for ages a scattered
people, without that concentration in anything, which
in every thing is the essence of power. Thirdly—
The narrow limits of territory in proportion to people,
together with the institution of slavery, renderediabour
cheap instead of dear. Hence the profits of stock, to
use a modern term, were large; wealth rapidly accu-


mulated; and it was easy for the new society to erect
fine buildings,—to create very rapidly a city rivalling
their parent city. Fourthly—As the portion of pro-
duce which falls to the land-owner, in modern lan-
guage, rent, is small or great according as people are
few or many in proportion to territory, and as the
leaders of the new society were the owners of a li-
mited territory, they possessed, either at once, or very
soon, the riches and the consequent leisure, wherewith
to cultivate “ all the arts of refinement, philosophy,
“ poetry, and eloquence.”
In the same chapter Dr. Smith endeavours to ac-
count for the less rapid progress of the American
Colonies, in comparison with those of Greece, by
dwelling on the evils of dependence; and he fre-
quently repeats that settlers in America were enabled
to prosper, in spite of dependence, by reason of the
cheapness of land and dearness of labour, which ad-
vantages, he says, they possessed in a greater degree
than Emigrants from Greece.
This doctrine may be submitted to the test of facts.
The United States of North America have for some
time enjoyed complete independence. Their inha-
bitants pay no tithes and but few taxes. Land may
still be obtained almost as easily, and labour is still
quite as dear, as when their States were founded.
Their population equals, probably, that of Great Bri-
tain and Ireland at the time when Dr. Smith wrote.
A constant influx of Emigrants from Europe, the


press, and great improvements in navigation, have
placed at their disposal the accumulated, and always
increasing, knowledge of the old world. Their soil is
naturally fertile, and their climate is more favourable
to varied production than that of Britain. Their mi-
neral productions are little inferior to those of Britain.
Their magnificent rivers afford natural means of com-
munication infinitely superior to those of any Eu-
ropean State; and the people are hardy, brave, ac-
tive, intelligent, enterprising, and extremely ambitious.
According to Dr. Smith, therefore, they ought by
by this time to have rivalled at least, if not to have
surpassed, their parent state in wealth and greatness.
Yet, look at their condition. Their metropolis is not to
be compared to many of the mere pleasure towns of
England. Want of capital prevented the state of
New York from commencing its great Canal from
Lake Erie, until long after the profit of that under-
taking had been demonstrated ; and other States are
now attempting to raise money in London, for great
works, which cannot be undertaken unless capital be
obtained from the parent country. In the useful arts,
excepting only, perhaps, that of steam-navigation,
they are far behind the parent country. Their manu-
factures, miserable at best, exist only through restric-
tive laws. If in the fine arts, there arise amongst
* O
them a man of ability, he hastens to Europe for pa-
tronage and profit. Their best writers live in France
and England, because America offers no rewards for


success in literature. Their cleverest mechanics
bring their skill to the rich market of Europe, be-
cause, in America, skill is less valuable than strength.
Their boasted naval power is held as a mere boast by
those, who know that they are positively unable to
man as many ships as constitute a fleet. And all the
arts of refinement, philosophy, poetry, and eloquence,
are more largely and successfully cultivated in the sea-
port town of Liverpool, than throughout the extensive
regions of North America. Thus the doctrine of
Adam Smith concerning the effect of cheap land and
dear labour, in producing national wealth and great-
ness, has been refuted by the safest of all arguments
—an ample experiment. Doubtless, the people of
America are laying a most extensive foundation of
future wealth and greatness, —of a national greatness
surpassing any that has occurred in the world. They
are spreading over such extensive regions that, if
they do but preserve their integrity, they must, when-
ever they cease to spread, acquire an unexampled de-
gree of national wealth and power. But at present,
and until they can no longer spread, they are, and
must remain,—like children acquiring the means of
knowledge by learning to read—an infant people, ac-
quiring only the means of future wealth and greatness.
The operation of dearness of labour in preventing
the accumulation of wealth may, I conceive, be rea-
dily traced. All the wealth that the world contains,
is the accumulated produce of labour. Wealth,


therefore, is acquired by an excess of production
over consumption, and its increase must be slow or
rapid according to the degree of that excess. The
gross produce of labour is shared between the capi-
talist and the labourer. When labour is little divided,
that is, when it is dear, the gross produce is small;
In other words, Division of labour is the soul of pro-
duction. When labour is dear, the share of the la-
bourer is great, —that of the capitalist small. It is
the capitalist who accumulates ; and when labour is
dear, he obtains but a small share of a small quantity
of produce. Thus dearness of labour hinders the
accumulation of wealth. “ The disproportion be-
“ tween the great extent of land, and the small number
“ of people, which commonly takes place in new co-
lonies,” renders labourers scarce and wages high.
In most new countries, in all where there is a great
excess of land in proportion to the people, every
man, more or less, supplies his own wants, and there
is but little division of labour. It follows that, in
new countries, production exceeds consumption in
but a small degree, and that the accumulation of
wealth is proportionably slow.
This view of the subject will be confirmed by refer-
ence to a fact that has often been noticed. The most
wealthy and eminent men of North America, have
been growers of tobacco. The cultivation of tobacco
has been principally carried on in Virginia and Mary-
land, in which States abundance of slaves renders


labour comparatively cheap. Slave-labour employed
in that cultivation is minutely divided, and the pro-
duce, consequently, is very great. As the owner of
the land is also the owner of the labour, and of the
capital which employs it, he takes the whole produce,
except that small portion which maintains his slaves.
He is able, therefore, rapidly to accumulate wealth.
Possessing wealth, he has leisure to occupy himself
with public objects; he obtains eminence in his own
country, and, if his abilities are great, universal fame.
If in the States of Virginia and Maryland, slavery
were abolished, the negroes would acquire property
by their labour, and would gradually emigrate to the
West, in search of waste land. Labour would then
become'as dear in those States, as it is now in states
where slavery has been abolished; and the cultivation
of tobacco would no longer be a more profitable em-
ployment of capital than the growth of wheat. In
those states where slavery was never firmly estab-
lished, cheapness of land and dearness of labour pro-
duced a substitute for slavery, under the puritanical
name of “ indentures.” Indented labourers would,
if the bond could be rigidly exacted, be to all intents,
slaves; and kidnapping, so largely promoted by the
founders of some of the American States, was literally
a slave-trade in whites. The Americans are induced,
by the facility with which land can be obtained by
any but slaves, to preserve the institution of slavery;
and it would not, I believe, be difficult to prove that


the excess of land and dearness of labour which com-
monly take place in new Colonies, were the sole
causes of the revival of slavery. So great were felt
to be the evils arising from excess of land in propor-
tion to people, that, in order to mitigate them, another
and greater evil was willingly, nay eagerly, incurred.
If this be true, if those evils were so great as to call
for so evil a mitigation, have not cheapness of land
and dearness of labour greatly retarded, instead of
greatly hastening the progress of new Colonies to
wealth and greatness?
I have dwelt at tiresome length on Adam Smith’s
doctrine as to the advantages of dear labour, because
I would not pertly oppose so great an authority,
whose opinions on this subject are generally received.
But I must now state, that one main object of the
proposed measure is to render land dear, and labour
cheap, in all the Australian settlements—dear, and
cheap, I mean, as compared with the usual price of
land and rate of wages in new colonies. The end
sought by such comparative dearness of land and
cheapness of labour, is the greatest division of labour;
the greatest production; the utmost excess of produc-
tion over consumption; the greatest accumulation of
wealth—in other words, the utmost prosperity of the
colony —the greatest progress of colonization.
To illustrate the operation of Articles I. and 11. in
conjunction with Article 111., let it be supposed that
a hundred thousand acres of naturally fertile land
should, by miracle, rise out of the sea on the coast


of Essex. Such land, being Crown property, would
sell for a considerable price. Why? because it
would yield a considerable rent. It would yield a
considerable rent, because population, in the country
of which it would form a part, is very dense. In this
imagined case, the purchase-money of waste land
would be retained by the Crown. In the proposed
case, the purchase-money of waste land would be
expended on emigration, that is to say, in thickening
the colonial population, and giving to the land granted
the same sort of value that land possesses in old coun-
tries. The purchaser of land, therefore, would pay,
not for his title to the land, but for the value which
his purchase-money would give to the land. He
would pay for a valuable thing, instead of getting a
valueless thing for nothing ; and, in contemplating a
purchase, he would be guided by his own calculation
as to the degree of value, which the purchase-money
of the thing would give to the thing bought.
He would say, “No one can obtain land in this
colony for less than the price at which land is now
offered to me. That is one reason in favour of pur-
chasing. My purchase-money, and the purchase-
money of all future grantees, will be expended in in-
creasing the colonial population. This will soon cause
my land to yield rent. Again, a tax of ten per cent
upon the future rent, being anticipated (by Article IV.)
and expended on emigration, I may expect that my
land will soon yield a high rent. Moreover, if these
measures do not provide for a degree of emigration,


sufficient to make my land yield a high rent, the pur-
chase-money of future grants will be anticipated and
expended for that purpose. On the whole, I had
rather pay for land according to these regulations,
than obtain land for nothing according to the old
system.”
Such, I imagine, would be the calculation of a
speculator, unless, indeed, we can believe that Capi-
talists would consider 100,000/ yielding an interest
of one per cent, more valuable than 50,000/ yield-
ing an interest of five per cent. If lam not mis-
taken in this view of the subject, the investment of
capital in the appropriation of waste land, according
to the proposed measure, would be far more profitable
than according to the present system. It would
follow, that the proposed measure must operate, not
as a check, but as a great encouragement to colo-
nization.
For the execution of Article 11. the mode of selling
waste land in North America would furnish a useful
model. Here, it is only needful to suggest, that sur-
veys of waste land, divided into convenient allot-
ments, each allotment comprising, as nearly as possible,
equal quantities of the best, middling, and the worst
land, should, at all times, be made in advance of the
demand for grants; and, above all, that the persons
charged with those surveys should be so chosen, paid,
and controlled, as to be beyond the suspicion of
jobbing or partiality.


ARTICLE 111.
'fhat the proceeds of the tax upon rent,
and of sales, form an Emigration Fund, to
be employed in the conveyance of British
Labourers to the Colony, free of cost.
This provision explains itself. I may remark, how-
ever, that, in conjunction with the other provisions, it
would supply the desideratum, so anxiously but fruit-
lessly sought by the Parliamentary Emigration Com-
mittee; namely, a means of conducting the Emigration
of paupers from Britain, without any expense to the
country. The principle on which the recommendation
of the Committee was founded, is, that the labour of
paupers, removed from an old to a new country, would
repay the cost of their removal. No doubt it would;
but the measure proposed by the Committee provides
no security for repayment. They suggest that Go-
vernment shall advance to the Pauper Emigrant not
only the cost of his passage, but also stock, imple-
ments, and food for a year; holding as security for
repayment, the bit of forest or swamp on which he
shall be located. The pauper, necessarily ignorant
and imprudent, is to be converted, all at once, into a
landowner, and under circumstances, which, above all
others, require much intelligence and the greatest


prudence. He is not to be planted on a small grant,
in the midst of rich, intelligent, and prudent Emi-
grants, whose example and assistance might lead him
to profit by the great change in his condition; but
thousands like him are to be planted in masses, and
left entirely to their own guidance. His land, being
in a country where land can be obtained for next to
nothing, will possess no value, except according to the
degree in which it shall be improved. The security
of the Government, therefore, for the repayment of its
advance, is the Emigrant’s good fortune and good con-
duct. He will be subject to fever, and in a society so
composed, to idleness, drunkenness, blunders, and
despair; any one of which must prevent him from ful-
filling the condition of his grant. Here then is an end
of security, in the usual sense of the word. Moreover,
the settler will be tempted, by the high wages of
labour at no great distance, to sell his stock, quit his
embarrassing estate, and return to his proper condi-
tion of a labourer for hire. Many attempts have been
made both in America and in New South Wales, to
settle paupers, in masses, isolated from capital, intelli-
gence, and prudence. Such attempts at plantation
have almost universally failed. The poor, ignorant,
imprudent landowner has sunk under his troubles; his
land has passed away to the dealer in rum; and, the
wages of labour near him being very high, he has
returned to his proper condition of a labourer for hire.
Unquestionably the Emigration of Paupers, according


to the system proposed by the Committee, would
greatly benefit the condition of the persons removed ;
but there is no security for repayment to Government
of the expense incurred by their removal; and this
country is not inclined to risk further taxation for any
purpose, bad or good. These, I imagine, are the
reasons why Mr. Wilmot Horton’s benevolent plan
has been received, by all parties with apathy, if not
with dislike.
Recurring to the proposed measure, whatever the
extent of Emigration for which it should provide, the
whole would occur without any expense to this coun-
try. Emigration would be carried on by private
speculation, not to the loss but to the advantage of
those who should defray its expense. A part of that
expense would be defrayed beforehand by the pro-
duce of rent-tax and sales; or, if that produce were
anticipated, there would be ample security for repay-
ment to those who should make the advance. The
Emigrant labourer would not change his condition,
except by living in plenty instead of misery; and he
would not be called upon to exert qualities foreign to
his habits and character. In short, as respects labour-
ers, both those who should emigrate, and those who
should remain at home, the operation of the proposed
measure would be the same, as if, by miracle, a quan-
tity of fertile land could be added every year to the
territory of Britain, in due proportion to the increase
of people. In that supposed case, the labourer, who


should remove to the new land, would obtain good
wages; and his removal would raise the wages of
labour on the old land. As the people increased,
wages would fall ; but, if more land were added, the
same operation would be repeated. If, by the pro-
posed measure, the extensive regions of Australasia
be, as it were, connected with Britain, that is, if every
grant of land in Australasia should cause a demand
for labourers from Britain, and supply the cost of
their removal, the operation of raising wages, by an
addition of territory, may be repeated over and over
again for ages to come. Or, rather, a desirable rate
of wages may be constantly maintained, by a constant
but gradual increase of territory. Volumes might be
filled in attempting to point at the happy conse-
quences, both at home and in the Colonies, of this
presumed effect of the measure in question.
The Parliamentary Committee on Emigration have
provided the machinery for executing all that part of
the proposed measure which concerns the mere re-
moval of the Emigrant from Britain to the Colony.
article xv.
That those to whom the administration
of the Fund shall be entrusted, be empow-
ered to raise money thereon, as money is raised
on parish and county rates in England.


An anticipation of the produce of rent-tax and
sales, is suggested, with a view to give immediate and
extensive effect to the proposed measure. As, lately,
land has been granted in Australasia with the utmost
profusion, a very great increase of people must occur,
before much ungranted land would be sold for money,
and before appropriated land would yield much rent.
The utmost yearly produce of rent-tax and of sales,
would not, perhaps, exceed 10,000/. a year, for some
years to come. At a cost of 20/. for the passage of
one person, that sum would convey only 500 Emi-
grants a year. But if money were raised at 5 per
cent, on that fund, 200,000/. might be immediately
expended on emigration, and 10,000 persons might
be at once conveyed to the different settlements. If
all future rent-tax and sales were charged with the
sum borrowed for the purposes of Emigration, the
lender would see his capital employed in providing
an ample security for the interest, and for ultimate
repayment. For it is certain, that, if rent-tax and
sales would yield 10,000/. a year, without any foreign
addition to the population, they would yield a great
deal more, after an addition of 10,000 Emigrants.
What would be the proportionate increase of the
Emigration fund, Ido not pretend to estimate; but
something like a reasonable estimate of the increase
of rent, at least, might be formed, by comparing the
actual population with the number of acres actually
granted, and by calculating an increase of rent in


proportion to an addition of 10,000 persons to the
actual population. This calculation, it must be
remarked, would not extend beyond the immediate
increase of rent. A further increase, not to be cal-
culated, would arise from the increase of people by
births in the Colony. Here, however, the principle
only requires notice —It is that common principle,
which, in half the affairs of trade, induces men to
mortgage their revenue, in order to increase it; and
we owe nearly all great useful works to the operation
of that principle.
article v.
That the supply of Labourers be exactly
proportioned to the demand for Labour at
each Settlement, so that no Capitalist shall
ever want Labourers, and no Labourer shall
ever want employment.
The execution of this provision would require con-
siderable intelligence and judgment in the persons to
whom it might be confided. These,-it is proposed,
should be an Agent of Emigration at each Settle-
ment. His duties would be,


First, To supply the Government at home with
accurate information as to the state of demand for
labourers in the Settlement; and according to his
reports, the supply of Emigrants would be carefully
regulated.
Secondly, To receive the Emigrants on their ar-
rival, and to facilitate their being hired by Capitalists.
Thirdly, To furnish them with a very moderate
provision until hired.
The first duty is the most important. In the in-
fancy of the Settlement, the Agent might very accu-
rately learn the state of demand for labour, by receiv-
ing applications from Capitalists, and keeping an
exact registry of the same. Afterwards, as the Settle-
ment should increase, and Capitalists should be far
removed from the seat of Colonial Government, he
must take great pains to collect true information, and
to judge soundly.
There is a maximum as well as well as a minimum
of wages. The minimum being the value of the
smallest quantity of the produce of his labour, upon
which the labourer can exist, the maximum is the
largest share which the capitalist can, profitably, re-
linquish to the labourer. No one will labour for less
than his bare subsistence, and none will employ la-
bourers but for profit. Between the maximum and
the minimum there are many gradations, governed
by the proportion which labour bears to capital. But
there are some countries in which the maximum, and


others in which the minimum, generally obtains. In
Britain the common rate of wages is the minimum;
and in North America the common rate of wages is
the maximum. In Britain, however, many labourers
cannot earn even the minimum, and they are either
starved or maintained in idleness; —whilst, in Ame-
rica, there is often an absolute want of labourers, even
at the maximum. After the State of New York had
raised a fund sufficient for the completion of its canal,
calculating the cost at the ordinary high rate of
wages, it could not proceed till it obtained a great
importation of Irish labourers. Again, when the
pay of seamen in the American navy exceeded the,
maximum of wages in the merchant service, the naval
demand, even for landsmen, was still unsupplied. So,
at this moment, in Australasia, there is, notwithstand-
ing the supply of cheap labour afforded by convicts,
an unsupplied demand for labourers at the maximum.
Take, for example, the case of settlers in Van Die-
man’s Land, where as many as five thousand sheep
sometimes, and two thousand commonly, are allowed
to run in one flock, male and female, young and old,
weak and strong, all mixed together. The loss, in
consequence, is immense. That loss would be wholly
prevented by the employment of more shepherds;
and, any one capable of estimating the loss, will ac-
knowledge that the gain would afford ample wages
to the additional shepherds, besides leaving a large
additional profit to their employer. But though


these high wages are there going a begging, as it
were, there are not labourers to take them. The case
of the Australian Company furnishes another exam-
ple. One source of expected profit mentioned by
their prospectus, is “ the production, at a more distant
time, of wine, olive-oil, hemp, flax, silk, opium, See.”
But why “at a more distant timeT’ Not because the
Company wants capital for any very profitable em-
ployment—not because the cultivation of those arti-
cles, in a climate so agreeable to them, and on picked
land, would be otherwise than most profitable to the
capitalist,-—but simply, because, for any such pur-
poses, which require the employment of much labour,
there is an absolute want of labourers, even at the
most extravagant wages.
This unsupplied demand for labour at high wages
exists inmost newcountries. But Australasia promises
to furnish a demand for labour at high wages to a
greater extent than most new countries, for this very
important reason. In most new countries, waste land
does not produce till after a great expense of labour
not immediately productive, that is, labour in clearing
forests, draining marshes, building sheds for cattle, &c.
—whereas in Australasia a warm and dry climate en-
able the farmer to breed cattle almost without build-
ings, and nature has, to a great extent, cleared and
drained the land for him. Thus he may direct the
greater part of his capital to immediate production; and
of course, as the first labour employed by him is imme-


mediately productive, the employment of labour ena-
bles him immediately to employ more labour. Where-
as, on new land in America, the settler cannot employ
productive labour till he has employed a great deal
of what may be called unproductive labour. His
demand for labour therefore increases slowly. In
Australasia, as compared with the new settlements of
America, nature has provided capital for the set-
tler ; and it is a mere truism to say that the demand
for labour must always be in proportion to the quan-
tity of capital.
Supposing the present demand for labour at high
wages to be supplied, the supply would create a
fresh demand. The Capitalist, supplied with the
means of rapidly increasing the capital provided
for him by nature, would soon have more employ-
ment for labour; and the labourer, obtaining high
wages, would, if industrious and careful, acquire ca-
pital, wherewith to demand and employ other la-
bourers. mis process of demand causing supply,
and supply creating fresh demand, would, I imagine,
continue until the pressure of population upon land
should occasion a demand for more land. The ap-
propriation of .more land would occasion a fresh de-
mand for labour; and the whole process would be
repeated, or rather, would be in continual operation,
until all the waste land of Australasia should be appro-
priated and cultivated.


ARTICLE VI.
That, in the selection of Emigrants, an
absolute preference be given to equal num-
bers of both sexes, and to persons between
the ages of eighteen and twenty-four.
The proposed selection of Emigrants would, it
appears to me, be easy, just, and politic;—easy,
because persons of that age would most readily
make the venture of Emigration;—just, because it
would prevent the many evils attendant on the dis-
proportion between the sexes, which has hitherto
marked the beginnings of all modern Colonies; —•
and politic, because in the same degree that the
Emigration of young persons only, must, more than
that of persons of all ages, cause a very rapid in-
crease of people in the Colony, would it, exactly,
check the increase of people in Britain, more than
would the Emigration of persons of all ages.
To this last point, I beg particular attention.
Referring to the questions already considered, the
success of the whole measure would depend upon
the rate at which the Colonial population should
increase. According to that increase would be the
increase of rent and sales, —of the means for defray-


mg the cost of past, and of future, Emigration. The
greatest possible increase of Colonial population
would, therefore, be the most desirable.
A thousand Emigrants of all ages might not, at the
end of twenty years, increase the Colonial population
by more than that number. As many might die as
would be born, and, if there were an excess of males,
the number might, at the end of twenty years, be
much less than a thousand. But five hundred young
couples, supposing that each couple rears six chil-
dren, and that in twenty years, half of the original
Emigrants be dead, would, in that short period,
increase the Colonial population by three thousand,
five hundred souls. Any number of Emigrants, in
short, would, if selected as proposed, treble them-
selves in the first twenty years. Whereas, I must
repeat, a number of Emigrants of all ages might not,
and probably would not, begin to increase till the
end of twenty years.
Now the cost of conveying one thousand Emi-
grants would be, I have supposed, 20,000/. That
sum, increasing for twenty years at compound inte-
rest of 5 per cent, would be 53,000/. Supposing
one thousand Emigrants of all ages to be conveyed
in the year 1830, the cost of increasing the Colonial
population by a thousand souls, in the year ] 850,
would be 53,000/. Whereas, if young couples only
were selected, an increase of a thousand souls would
be obtained, in 1850, by the Emigration in 1830, of


three hundred persons, at a cost, allowing com-
pound interest of 5 per cent, for twenty years, of
16,000/.
This is an extreme calculation; but it is offered
only to illustrate a principle. By adopting that
principle in the conduct of Emigration, I am in-
clined to think, that, in conjunction with the rest of
the proposed measure, the Crown might eventually
sell land in Australia for as high a price as could
be obtained for fertile land, rising miraculously out
of the sea, close to Britain.
ARTICLE VII.
That every person reaching a Settlement
at his own expense, or providing a passage
for others, be entitled to a grant of land
at the rate of Acres for himself and for
each person by him conveyed to the Settle-
ment.
The object of this regulation is to encourage the
settlement of persons, who, though not rich, might
be unwilling to accept a free passage for themselves
and families. It would not at all interfere with
general principles, on which the whole measure is
founded. The quantity of land allowed for each
person would be at the rate of one acre for every 2/.
of the ordinary cost of one person’s passage.


ARTICLE VIII.
That every person reaching a Settlement
at his own expense, or providing a passage
for others, have the option to receive, either a
grant of land as by Article VII., or a pay-
ment in money from the Emigration Fund, at
the rate of 21. per acre for the quantity of
land to which he should be entitled.
The object of this regulation is to enable Capi-
talists to obtain labourers accustomed to any parti ■
cular kind of cultivation. It would not at all inter-
fere with the general principles on which the whole
measure is founded. Perhaps, with a view to the
cultivation of tobacco, silk, wine, &c. the same
allowance should be made for Emigrants brought
from foreign countries. But that allowance should
be strictly confined to Capitalists, engaging to
employ the foreign Emigrants, by them brought to
the Colony. Otherwise people would speculate on
the Emigration Fund, by claiming, for Emigrants
from India and China, the cost of Emigrants from
Britain.


ARTICLE IX.
That Grants be absolute in fee, without
any condition whatsoever, and obtainable by
deputy.
The other regulations of the proposed measure
would obviate the necessity for conditions. All the
conditions at present attached to grants of colonial
land are intended to prevent the misappropriation
and neglect of land. They have entirely failed of
their object. But that object would be obtained, in
the most simple and certain manner, by the proposed
measure. As the supply of labourers would always
be in proportion to the land granted, the grantee, if
he did not let his land, would surely cultivate it. It
cannot be doubted that, at present, grantees of waste
land wish to fulfil the conditions of their grants. To
do so would be for their own advantage; but the
dearness of labour, —the absolute want of labourers,
—prevents them from doing so. In the proposed case,
the grantee would have the power to consult his
own advantage, by cultivating his land. It is for this
that he would pay, when appearing to pay for his
title to the land ; and he would no more neglect
to use that power than a hungry man would neg-
lect to eat food presented to him. It seems, there-


fore, quite unnecessary to bind him to do that, which
every man in his situation would be sure to do with-
out any bond. If this view of the subject be correct,
it furnishes a strong argument in favour of the whole
measure. The Governments of all new Colonies have
followed the principle of checking the misappropria-
tion of land, and have hitherto universally failed
in their attempts to give effect to that principle.
The proposed measure, it is conceived, would at
once give complete effect to that excellent principle,
by securing what alone has been sought by the
conditions attached to grants.
That grants should be obtainable by deputy, that
is, without emigration, is recommended with a view
to treat colonial land as much as possible like land
that should, miraculously, rise out of the sea close to
Britain. In the imagined case, the purchaser of land
would not be compelled to reside on his grant.
Whether or not he should reside ou his grant would
be wholly unimportant, with a view to the effect of
an increase of territory in causing a decrease of pau-
perism. So in the proposed case, the Grantee, even
though he should never quit London, could not mis-
appropriate land. His purchase-money would be
employed in augmenting the Colonial population, in
proportion to the extent of his grant. His land there-
fore would yield rent; and of course it would be cul-
tivated, though not by him.
If this conclusion is reasonable, it is much to be


desired that grants should be obtainable witnout
Emigration. The whole object of the proposed mea-
sure is to diminish the evils of pauperism in Britain,
and to promote Colonization, by rendering the pur-
chase of waste land a very profitable employment of
capital. The greater the quantity of land purchased,
the more gratifying would be the results of the pro-
posed measure. Consequently the purchase of waste
land should be encouraged as much, and checked as
little, as possible. An obligation to emigrate would
be a serious check. If there were no such obliga-
tion, much British capital might be invested in the
purchase of Colonial land. Such a mode of invest-
ment would be peculiarly eligible for properties in-
tended to accumulate, and would, I cannot but think,
be preferable to any investment in reversionary pro-
perty. Every argument, at least, which favours the
presumption that the whole measure would cause a
rapid advance in the rent of land, is an argument
also in favour of such investments. For the increase
of rent is an increase of market value; and if the in-
crease were rapid, such investments would be a very
profitable employment of money. London Capitalists
would require no other encouragement to assist in
giving effect to the proposed system of Colonial
Policy.


ARTICLE X.
That any surplus of the proceeds of the
tax upon rent, and of sales, over what is re-
quired for Emigration, be employed in relief
of other taxes, and for the general purposes
of Colonial Government.
“ If a body of people were to migrate into a new
“ country, and land had not yet become private pro-
“ perty, there would be this reason for considering
“ the rent of land, as a source peculiarly adapted to
“ supply the exigencies of the Government; that in-
“ dustry would not, by that means, sustain the small-
“ est repression; and that the expense of the Govern-
“ ment would be defrayed without imposing any
“ burthen upon any individual. The owners of capi-
“ tal would enjoy its profits; the class of labourers
“ would enjoy their wages, without any deduction
“ whatsoever; and every man would employ his ca-
“ pital in the way which was really most advanta-
“ geous, without any inducement from the mischiev-
“ ous operation of a tax, to remove it from a channel,
“in which it was more, to one in which it would be
“ less, productive to the nation. There is, therefore,


“ a peculiar advantage in reserving the rent of land,
“ as a fund for supplying the exigencies of the State.”* 1
All the expense of the measure itself, that is, the
whole cost of surveys, of the collection of rent-tax,
and of Emigration, would,of course, be at once defrayed
by the proceeds of rent-tax and sales. The utmost
economy of administration, would be indispensable
to the success of the measure; and especially that eco-
nomy, which would devote as much as possible to the
mere passage of Emigrants, and as little as possible
to the salaries of officers. Perhaps, the surplus of
the fund produced by rent-tax and sales, over what
would be required to maintain a constant supply of
labour in proportion to the demand, would, at times,
be very considerable. Such surplus might properly
be employed in the construction of roads, bridges,
canals, docks, or other public works, having a ten-
dency to increase production and consumption, that
is, to raise the rent of land. Perhaps also that sur-
plus might be sufficiently great to defray a part, or
even the whole, of the expense of Colonial Govern-
ment. Ultimately, —as soon as the demand for
Emigration should cease—the tax upon rent would
amply provide for any conceivable expense of Govern-
ment,
I have estimated the cost of passage for one per-
son at 20/. At this time any number of poor Emi-
grants might be conveyed to Australasia at an average
* Mill’s Political Economy.


cost of 25/. each. But one operation of the proposed
measure would be to lessen the cost of passage. A
pipe of wine may, it is said, be sent from the Thames
to the Ganges, at less cost than from the Docks to St.
James’s. Because, probably, our imports from India
are, for the most part, raw produce, whilst our exports
thereto are manufactures and money. The whole of
the imports and the whole of the exports must be of
equal value ; but the former occupy much more ton-
nage than the latter. Whence it happens, that ships,
not unfrequently, proceed to India in ballast. May
one not conclude that a similar difference would occur
in our trade with Australasia, whenever a plentiful
supply of labourers should lead to the production of
raw materials to be exchanged for the manufactures
of Britain? If so, the cost of emigration would soon
be lower than at first. As the cost of emigration should
decrease, the surplus produce of rent-tax and sales
would increase.


GENERAL REMARKS.
1. It is suggested that this mode of disposing of
waste land should be rendered permanent by an act
of the Legislature. Because, without the best security
for its permanence, capitalists would not, to any great
extent, either purchase waste land, or advance money
on the future proceeds of rent-tax and sales.
2. To operate effectually, this mode of disposing
of waste land should be adopted in all the settlements
of Australasia, actual and future. Otherwise the capi-
talists of a settlement where land might be obtained
for nothing, would, in order to supply their conse-
sequent want of labourers, entice away the labourers
of other settlements, where land had been obtained by
payment; and the purchasers of land would thereby
be cheated of their consideration.
3. The measure could not be applied to Canada.
Because the vicinity of the United States would in-
duce emigrant labourers to emigrate once more in
search of waste land, or extravagant wages; and the
purchasers of waste land in Canada, would thereby
be cheated of their consideration. It might how-
ever be applied to the Cape of Good Hope as
easily, perhaps, though not so effectually, as to the
Australasian settlements. It appears peculiarly
adapted to Australasia: in the first place, be-
cause, in that country, the acquisition of land at no
great distance from the sea, might proceed for ages


to come; and the cost of transport, both for Emigrants
and for produce, would be much less than in a country,
where colonization could proceed only at a great dis-
tance from the sea: secondly, because the profit on
the employment of capital in colonization would de-
pend on the increase of people ; and in Australasia
the absence of those diseases which afflict other new
countries, and of many diseases which are fatal to
children in Europe, would permit an unexampled
excess of births over deaths: thirdly, because the
Australasian settlements are yet in their infancy; no
uniform system of granting land has yet been esta-
blished in them ; and an uniform system might be
established there without injury to any existing class
of persons.
4. I cannot discover any class of persons whose
vested rights, or other interests would be injuriously
affected by the measure. The actual grantees of land,
whom, at first sight, it would appear to tax, are exactly
the class of persons that would gain the most by it. As
waste land would no longer be obtainable but by pay-
ment of 21. per acre, their land must very soon possess
that market value, at least; and the tax upon rent,
not being a land tax, would take from them only a
tenth part of what, in most cases, the tax itself would
first bestow.
5. It would be in accordance with the principles
on which the suggested measure is founded, to allow
the occupation of Crown land, for grazing, as such
occupation is now usefully permitted in New South


Wales and Van Diemans Land. The object of that
permission would be to give a temporary additional
value to appropriated land, and to facilitate the rapid
increase of capital in the shape of animal food.
Whenever a demand should occur for the purchase
of land so occupied, the time would be come for
making that land still more productive; and then its
occupation by the owner of other land ought pro-
perly to cease.
6. Supposing the measure to be adopted, its ope-
ration might be materially retarded if the intention of
Government to adopt it were publicly known before
the first step towards execution. The first step to-
wards execution would be to put a stop to the grant-
ing of land according to the various existing regula-
tions. Were the intention of Government, to take
that step, publicly known, and were it besides pub-
licly understood that, before long, no Grants would
be made but for payment in money, and that every
Grant would provide for a given increase of people,
very many Grants would be hastily obtained on the
easiest of present terms. A very great misappropri-
ation of land would take place. Such misappropri-
ation would be directly contrary to the whole spirit
of the measure, and must retard its beneficial effects,
by postponing the time when the increase of people
and capital, in proportion to appropriated land, should
cause a demand for fresh Grants at a money price.
But when Government had taken that first step
publicity would be useful, by affording to individual


and joint-stock capitalists time to prepare for giving
effect to the new system of colonization, as soon as
possible after it had been established by law.
7. If the principles on which this proposal are
founded be correct, and if the calculations by which it
is supported be not unreasonable, its adoption would
seem to promise, amongst others, the following very
desirable results. First, to relieve this country of its
excess of people in proportion to territory. Secondly,
to create a new, and rapidly increasing, market for
the products of British industry. Thirdly, to make
the Colony furnish a part, if not the whole, of the
cost of its own Government. Fourthly, to cause a
superior class of persons to settle in the Colony; and
to make the social condition of the Colony something
like that of the mother country, by causing some
resemblance between the new and the old countries,
in respect to the value of land, and the original pur-
chase money of all things ! And, lastly, to bind toge-
ther the Colony and the mother country by a compli-
cation of mutual interests, by a moral chain, which
never could be broken, whilst the waste land of the
Colony should be treated as a gradual addition, though
distant, to the territory of the mother country f
In conclusion, I must apologize for the dogmatical
terms in which some of the above propositions and
arguments are stated. They have been so stated,
merely for the sake of brevity, and are intended
rather as questions than as confident assertions. The
principles here advocated may be quite erroneous;


but they seem at least worthy of examination. In
truth, they have been recognized by Government in a
late regulation for granting land in Western Australia.
If the condition on which two hundred acres of waste
land can be obtained at the Swan River settlement,
by the conveyance of one labourer from Britain, were
made imperative, —that is, if no land could be ob-
tained otherwise than by the conveyance of emigrant
labourers, —and if the number of acres allowed for
each person were very much diminished, the same
results as are proposed by this measure would be
obtained, though at a later time and to a less extent.
Numerous other methods of giving operation to the
principles in question might be suggested. I have
selected, from amongst several other methods, that
which, after much reflection, appears to me to be the
best. But I offer it as a mere sketch of what might be
effected. To suggest to the existing Government a
measure professedly complete in all its parts, would
be an act of great presumption in any individual.
For the Government alone, by its information, power,
and responsibility, is qualified to frame a complete
measure ; and, happily, the existing Government does
not shrink from the task of performing those functions
which properly belong, not to individuals, but to
Government
THE END.
Primed by J. f. Dove, St. Jotui’s Square.
