

■ , ■ . . ■ ■
OF THE
pp
18(
WITH A HIMKF Af
HISTORY 01
o-O I,
.TXT OF THE EARLY
* 'Ssl '■ i ' 3
OYAL ENGINEERS.
MAJOR PASIEY,


Erratum. —Page 31, line 26, for “more than twenty” read “thirteen.”


THE WAR IN NEW ZEALAND.
By Captain Pasley, R.E.
From the Journal of the Royal United Service Institution, vol. vi.
PART I.
The Chairman: I have great pleasure in introducing Captain Pasley of
the Royal Engineers, who is about to read a paper upon the War in New
Zealand. Captain Pasley served in New Zealand during the war, and was
wounded in one of the actions.
Captain Pasley: Mr. Chairman, Ladies, and Gentlemen, —In order to
make the remarks which I have to offer upon the war which has recently
taken place in New Zealand intelligible to those amongst you who are not
well acquainted with that colony, it will be necessary to give in as few
words as possible a sketch of the previous history of the country.
New Zealand consists of two large and a number of smaller islands.
The northern island, which contains nearly the whole of the aboriginal or
Maori race, is considerably larger than Ireland. The other large island is
about the size of England and Wales. The first European navigator who
as far as we are aware ever visited New Zealand, was Tasman, who
touched there in 1642. Captain Cook, who visited the islands in 1769,
left behind him a permanent record of his presence, in the shape of pigs
and potatoes, then for the first time introduced into the country. These
gifts were of the greatest value to the people of a country in which
indigenous animals and edible vegetables were very scarce. For many
years subsequently to Captain Cook’s voyage no attention was paid to
the islands, but towards the close of the last century New Zealand began
to attract notice in England, America, and Australia, as a favourable
station for whaling. A large number of vessels was sent from those
countries to cruise about New Zealand in search of whales, and depots of
stores and provisions were established on the coast, the most important of
which was Kororareka, in the Bay of Islands. **
The natives gladly welcomed these settlers, who in the course of trade
supplied them with many things, the value of which they readily learnt to
appreciate. In all their dealings they showed an aptitude for improve-
ment and civilisation which has been rarely observed among savage tribes.
They cared nothing for coloured beads and trinkets, but iron in every
shape found a ready sale amongst them. Blankets and tobacco were also
great articles of trade, and soon became almost necessaries of life to them.
Constant intercourse with Europeans soon created in the minds of the


more enterprising of the Maories a desire to see foreign countries, and in
1820, Hongi, the principal Chief of the Ngapuhi tribe, made a voyage to
England, where he was received with much honour, and introduced to
King George IV. Up to this period the Maories had been entirely
unprovided with fire-arms, but Hongi, on his return to New Zealand,
procured 300 muskets, with which, having armed a portion of his followers,
he commenced a career of war and conquest which spread desolation over
the country for several years. His contact with civilisation in England
does not appear to have done much towards refining his tastes, for, not
content with slaughtering his enemies, he cooked and ate as many of them
as he could. Traditions differ very much with regard to the origin of
cannibalism in New Zealand, but it is supposed to have been first practised
as an act of vengeance. There does not seem to be any reason to suppose
that the Maories ever devoured human flesh merely for the purpose of satis-
fying their hunger. The practice was always connected in their minds with
the idea of insult, triumph, or revenge. No Maori could offer a more
deadly affront to another than to tell him that his father had been eaten.
After every battle the prisoners were triumphantly devoured. Thus, war
promoted cannibalism, and cannibalism promoted war.
The first result of Hongi’s wars was a great demand among the Maories
for fire-arms, the possession of which had become essential to the safety of
each tribe. This demand gave a great stimulus to trade, and consequently
to agriculture and other industrial pursuits. From this again arose a
desire and demand for other European manufactures, such as clothing,
cooking utensils, and agricultural implements. Notwithstanding these
advances towards civilisation, petty wars and feuds raged for many years
more violently than ever among the various tribes, to whom the posses-
sion of new and more formidable means of destruction appeared to have
imparted a fresh desire for blood.
In the meantime the European settlers at various points on the sea-
coast had been rapidly increasing in numbers. In 1838 the population of
Kororareka amounted to not less than 1,000 souls, chiefly whalers, sealers,
runaway sailors, and escaped convicts. These persons were under no
recognised or lawful government whatever. The native chiefs did not
wish or attempt to exercise any control over them, and no civilised power
had as yet claimed any sovereignty over the island. The state of anarchy
and lawlessness into which the settlement consequently fell soon became
intolerable to the inhabitants themselves, who attempted to put a check
upon it by the establishment of an institution somewhat similar to the
famous Vigilance Committees of the United States.
In 1839 immigrants of a different character began to arrive, under the
auspices of the New Zealand Company, by whom systematic colonization
on a great scale was attempted.
Colonel Wakefield, the leader of the expedition, purchased an immense
territory from the natives, on payment of goods valued at about 9,000/.
It appears very doubtful, however, whether the natives understood the
real nature of the bargain they were making, or that they ever intended
to part with the fee-simple of the land. It had been an immemorial
custom among them for tribes, families, or individuals, to make over land
to others for temporary purposes, but the right of resumption was always


reserved, and they probably had no idea of the real nature of the claim
which the agent of the New Zealand Company was endeavouring to establish
upon them. The formation of the New Zealand Company’s settlement at
Port Nicholson, together with the scandal caused by the lawlessness of the
people of Kororareka and other whaling stations, at length compelled the
British Government very reluctantly to interfere, and in 1840 Captain
Hobson was sent to the Bay of Islands, as first Governor of New Zealand.
In the same year the well-known treaty of Waitangi, by which the great
majority of the Maori chiefs ceded to Her Majesty the sovereignty of
the islands, was concluded. One of Governor Hobson’s first acts was the
issue of a proclamation declaring that all future purchases of land from
the natives, without the intervention of the Crown, should be illegal, and
that the validity of all purchases already effected should be investigated,
and Crown grants issued for such as might be proved to have been
obtained for fair consideration.
The result of the investigation was that the great majority of Colonel
Wakefield’s purchases were annulled.
In the mean time a revolution of another kind had been going on in
the country. The first missionaries of the Church of England arrived in
the country in 1814, under a promise of protection from the great chief
Hongi, a promise which, although not himself a convert, he faithfully kept.
They were followed by Wesleyan missionaries in 1822, and by Roman
Catholics in 1838. The result of their labours has been very remarkable.
I believe that at the present day at least three-fourths of the Maori race
are baptized Christians, and professing members of one or other of these
three denominations, and the great majority of the remainder can scarcely
be called heathens, as, although not baptized, most of them attend church
and school. Slavery and cannibalism have disappeared from the land as
Christianity has taken root among the people. The eminently practical
character of the native mind, which was evinced in the first instance by
their preference for iron over the baubles which generally charm savages,
had indirectly an important influence on the promotion of Christianity.
The missionaries established not only churches, but schools, where children
and adults were taught to read aud write in their native tongue. The
Maories at once appreciated the immense value of the art of writing, and
were thus induced in large numbers to attend the schools, where they
were also instructed in the truths of religion. They were thus gradually
converted to Christianity, and, as far as it is possible to judge from out-
ward appearances, they seem to be quite as good Christians as the
average of Europeans.
It was estimated a few years ago that one-half of the native population
of New Zealand belonged to the Church of England, one-fourth to the
Wesleyan and Roman Catholic communions, and one-fourth unbaptized,
although not necessarily or generally heathens.
At the period of the establishment of the British Government in New
Zealand the northern tribes carried on a considerable trade, not only with
the settlers of Kororareka, but with the Australian colonies, in which
there was a great demand for Hokianga timber. Between 1840 and 1844
the prosperity and wealth of these tribes were greatly diminished owing
to various causes, of which the most important were the cessation of the
a 2


demand for timber in Australia, the removal of the seat of government
fromKororarekato Aiick land, and the establishment of customs duties, which
interfered with the irregular but profitable trade previously carried on.
A strong dislike to the British Government consequently sprang up in
the minds of many of the natives.
Heke, a Ngapuhi chief, who owing to his marriage with the daughter of
Hongi had become one of the most influential men in his tribe, took ad-
vantage of this feeling, and persuaded a large number of the people that
their losses were owing to British supremacy alone. As a practical illus-
tration of this opinion, he and his followers cut down and burnt the flag-
staff* at Kororareka. He was soon afterwards persuaded to offer an apology
to the Government, and the flag-staff was re-erected, but again destroyed
by Heke, who appareutly attached some mysterious importance to that
symbol of sovereignty. A new flag-staff sheathed with iron was then put
up and placed under the protection of a detachment of troops. A small
body of seamen, with a gun from H. M. ship “ Hazard,” were also stationed
near it.
In March 1845 Heke attacked the town, of which he obtained posses-
sion after a skirmish, which resulted in the embarkation of all the inha-
bitants and the destruction of the town by fire.
Nothing like a savage or bloodthirsty disposition was evinced by the
Maories on this occasion. On the contrary they restored uninjured to
their parents a number of children who had been left behind in the hurry
of the flight.
Reinforcements having arrived from Sydney, a force was despatched
from Auckland to the Bay of Islands on the 3rd of April under the com-
mand of Colonel Hulme. It was ascertained that Heke had established
himself at apa called Okaihau, 18 miles inland. The British force con-
sisted of about 400 men, and was joined by an equal number of native
allies under Waka Nene another Ngapuhi chief, who has always to this
day proved himself a firm friend of the colonists. The expedition carried
a few rockets but no guns. The weather being exceedingly unfavourable,
and the troops having to carry their own provisions as well as ammunition,
four days were consumed in making their way to the pa.
So little was known at that period of the character of these peculiar
works of defence, that Colonel Hulme contemplated taking the pa by as-
sault without having previously effected a breach, but he wisely allowed
himself to be dissuaded from making the attempt by Waka Nene, who
urged him not to sacrifice his men in a mad and impossible enterprise.
The Maories, emboldened by the hesitation of the attack, made a sortie,
but were at once repulsed at the point of the bayonet by the 58th Regi-
ment and the Marines. Colonel Hulme, seeing clearly that without
artillery he had no chance of success, marched back to the coast and re-
embarked his troops, having lost during the operations 14 killed and 39
wounded.
Experience having now shown that the employment of artillery was
necessary for the reduction of a strong pa, a second expedition was fitted
out for the attack of a new pa which Heke had built at Oheawai, 7 miles
inland from Waimate. The force consisted of 630 troops, seamen, &c.,
with 6 guns, under the command of Colonel Despard, and 250 Maori


allies. The garrison of the pa was estimated at 250 men. The expedition
arrived at Oheawai on the evening of the 23rd June, and on the following
morning the guns commenced firing on the pa without result. Afterwards
a thirty-two pounder was brought up, the fire of which produced so much
effect upon the stockade, as to induce Colonel Despard (in opposition to
the opinion of Captain Marlow, K.E., who did not consider the breach
practicable) to risk an assault. A storming party was therefore told off,
consisting of 200 soldiers, seamen, and volunteers, with hatchets, lopes, and
ladders. The attempt was most gallantly made, but in a few minutes the
troops were compelled to retire, leaving one-halt their number killed or
wounded at the foot of the stockade.
The enemy, safely esconced in their rifle pits, watched with mingled
feelings of admiration and compassion the steady advance of the storming
party to certain destruction, whilst our native allies made no secret of the
indignation they felt at the useless sacrifice of the lives of so many
brave men.
For several days subsequently, no movement took place on either side.
On the 9th of July, fire was again opened on the pa, which on the 11th
was discovered to have been abandoned by the enemy. On the 14th the
troops returned to Waimate.
Both parties claimed the victory, and both with some appearance of
reason. The troops claimed it on the ground that they had compelled the
enemy to evacuate a strong position. The Maories claimed it, because,
being opposed to a number far greater than their own, they had lost but
few men, and killed and wounded a great number of their opponents.
Such a result in their eyes constitutes a victory, and when we consider the
rapidity and facility with which they are able to erect their pas, and the
abundance of strong and commanding positions throughout their country,
which makes the loss of a pa of very trifling importance to them, it must
be acknowledged that they had the best of the argument.
An expedition on a larger scale was dispatched a few months after-
wards against Ruapekapeka, a larger and stronger pa than either of
those which had been previously attacked.
It was situated about sixteen miles inland from Kororareka, and con-
tained a garrison of about 500 men under Kawiti, a friend and ally of
Heke. The expedition consisted of 1,110 Europeans (including 280
officers and men of the navy) and 450 natives, with three 32-pounders,
one 18-pounder, a few field guns, and some rockets. Ihey arrived in
front of the pa on the 31st of December. On the 2nd of January, 1846,
the enemy made a sortie, which was repulsed by the friendly natives. On
the 10th of January the guns, having been placed in position, opened
They fired all day on the pa, and succeeded in making two small
breaches in the outer stockade. The following day being Sunday, the
enemy, expecting a suspension of hostilities on that day, retired to the rear
of the pa to cook their food and to carry on their devotions. Some of the
friendly natives having crept up to the stockade and ascertained that it
was deserted, beckoned to the troops to advance. A party of the 58th
and some sailors at once entered the pa and established themselves there.
The enemy, as soon as they became aware of the unexpected entrance
of the troops into the pa, made gallant and repeated attempts to dislodge


them, but in vain. Reinforcements poured in and the Maories were
compelled to retreat.*
The natives were now beginning to get tired of the war, which materi-
ally interfered with their comforts by stopping their supplies of tobacco,
blankets, and other articles, to which they had become so much accus-
tomed as to be hardly able to dispense with them.
Heke’s predictions of the renewed prosperity which was to be the
result of the war were so far from being fulfilled, that the poverty and
misery of the natives increased every day.
Heke and Kawiti consequently soon found themselves almost without
followers, and were compelled to sue for peace, which they readily ob-
tained, with a full amnesty from the Governor.
In the same year hostilities broke out at Wellington (Port Nicholson),
After several skirmishes, in which the natives were generally the assail-
ants, they were forced by starvation to retire from the district. They
removed to Wanganui, and succeeded in the following year in exciting the
natives of that district to make war against the Europeans.
On the 19th May, 1847, about 600 Maories attacked the town of
Wanganui, where 170 soldiers were stationed in small stockades. A
heavy fire was kept up on both sides during the day. In the night the
enemy plundered the town and departed. Hostilities were carried on
during two months with varying fortune, and on the 23rd July the
enemy sent a flag of truce and announced that they were now for peace,
“ being satisfied with the number of soldiers slain.”
The effect produced upon the minds of the Maories by these hostilities
was highly gratifying to their self-love. They were, it is true, profoundly
impressed by the magnitude of the resources of England, as evinced by
the constant stream of reinforcements which poured into the country,
owing to which the available number of troops was, notwithstanding their
losses, continually on the increase, and they felt the hopelessness of final
victory in a contest with a power which became stronger after every
disaster. Nevertheless, the ill-success which had attended most of the
military operations led them to think themselves very superior to the
troops, both in military skill and in personal prowess.
They acknowledged, indeed, that the superior arms and discipline of
the troops rendered them very formidable in the open country; but they
were in the habit of boasting, that, whenever war might break out again,
they would draw the soldiers into the forest, where they would be able to
do what they liked with them. Such being their opinion, it is not surpris-
ing that many of their young men should have been eager to take advan-
tage of any opportunity of enjoying the excitement and gaining the honour
which they confidently expected to follow a collision with the troops.
Although the peace was not actually again broken between the two
* The labour and hardships endured by the troops in advancing and retreating even
a very few miles through the forest were excessive, and the cheerfulness, patience, and
fortitude with which they were borne, beyond all praise. Had the enemy been some-
what more numerous, and as energetic as the present generation of Maories have
proved themselves to be, these expeditions would, in all probability, have shared the
fate of that of General Braddock in North America, Perhaps their unmolested retreat
may have been due to the presence of the native allies, who, although they did not over-
exert themselves either in working or fighting, were invaluable as guides and scouts.


races until the year 1860, signs of coming discord were visible as fax
back as 1854, in which year some of the chiefs of the Waikato tribe, the
most powerful and warlike in the country, alarmed at the increasing
numbers and power of the colonists, conceived the project of setting up a
king of their own; their principal object being to put a check upon coloniza-
tion, by preventing the further alienation of land. Ihe history of this
movement and its connection with the war which has recently taken place
at Taranaki are clearly and succinctly described in the following extract
from a memorandum drawn up by the minister for native affairs at Auck-
land, in April, 1860.
That the present crisis in the affairs of New Zealand may be properly understood, it
is in the first place requisite to give some account of the views and intentions of the
native agitators known in the colony as the Maori or Waikato King party. The contest
in Taranaki between the British Government and the chief Wiremu Kingi and his fol-
lowers derives all its importance from its connection with this movement, for without
the sympathy and expected support of the Waikato league the Taranaki natives would
never have ventured upon armed resistance to the British Government.
The first proposal for the erection of a separate native state under the Waikato chief
Te Whero Whero (now generally called Potatau) seems to have been made as far back
as 1854. There was at first considerable diversity of opinion amongst the promoters of
the movement, and great consequent uncertainty as to its precise objects. Many well-
disposed natives seem to have joined in it without any thought of disaffection towards
the British Government, and purely, or principally, with a view to establish some more
powerful control over the disorders of their race than the Colonial Government has
found it possible to attempt. But there are others whose objects have been, from the
beginning, less loyal. These men have viewed with extreme jealousy the extension of
the settled territory and the increase of the European population. Various influences
have combined to augment the effect on their minds of this natural feeling. The lower
class of settlers, sometimes wantonly, sometimes under provocation, have held out
threats of a coming time when the whole race will be reduced to a servile condition. Of
late, a degraded portion of the newspaper press has teemed with menaces of this kind,
and with scurrilous abuse of the natives, and all who take an interest in their welfare.
False notions respecting the purposes of the British authorities have been industriously
spread by Europeans inimical to the Government, and whose traitorous counsels enable
them to maintain a lucrative influence over their credulous native clients; and there
may have been some few honest friends of the Maories, who, looking only to the better
side of the agitation, have given countenance to a movement which, in their opinion,
promised to promote the establishment of law and order, and the advance of civilization,
and to afford a beneficial stimulus to the languishing energy of the Maori people.
The Government at one time entertained a hope—a hope now deferred, but not aban-
doned—that the good elements in the King movement might gain the ascendancy, and
become the means of raising the native population in the social scale. It must, how-
ever, be admitted that the agitation has of late assumed a most dangerous phase.
The two objects of the league may now be affirmed to be, first, tbe subversion of the
Queen’s sovereignty over the northern island of New Zealand, and, secondly, the prohi-
bition of all further alienation of territory to the Crown.
As regards the first object, the more advanced partisans of the Maori king now dis-
tinctly declare that the Queen of England may, for aught they know, be a great sove-
reign in her own country, but that here, in New Zealand, she shall become subordinate
to their native monarch, from whom the British Governor shall take his instructions.
The utmost conceded to the Queen is an equal standing with King Potatau.
The absolute prohibition of further land sales is a necessary part of the new policy;
for it is plainly seen that, unless the further colonisation of the country can be put a
stop to, the Europeans will shortly outnumber the natives even in the northern
provinces. , . . ,
The general sentiment of the New Zealanders with respect to their territorial posses-
sions entirely harmonises with the views of the king-makers. The Maori feels keenly
the parting with bis rights over the lands of his ancestors. The expressive words of
the deeds of cession declare that under the bright sun of the day of sale he has wept
over and bidden adieu to the territory which he cedes to the Queen. It is in vain to


assure him that the laud remains open to him upon the same terms as to the European
settler. He cannot see the matter in this light. The soil, with all its memories and
the dignity conferred by its possession, have passed over to the stranger; and in its
place he has acquired only perishable goods, or money which is speedily dissipated.
The land-holding policy of the King party is popular, because it secures to every native
the occupation, in savage independence, of extensive tracts of wild land.
When the first emigrant ships arrived at Port Nicholson, and landed their hundreds
of colonists, the natives are said to have wept at the sight. They had been told, but
had not believed, that the foreigners were coming to settle in great numbers upon the
and which the agent of the colonising Company had just acquired. They had not
realised to themselves that their country was about to be occupied by a civilised race in
such force as to be able to hold its ground in spite of native resistance. The New Zea-
landers had always been fond of having amongst them a few Europeans dependent on
their goodwill, but they love to remain masters. It is the notion of the King party
that the settlers in New Zealand should be placed much on the same footing as the
European squatter in a native village, whose knowledge and mechanical skill procure
for him a certain amount of respect and influence, but whose homestead is held on suf-
ferance, and who is obliged to comport himself accordingly. “ Send away the Governor
and the soldiers,” they say, “and we will take care of the Pakehas.”
The old chief, Te Whero Whero, who has been a firm ally of the British Govern-
ment, has been removed by his relatives of the new faction from his late residence at
Mangere near Auckland to a place called Ngaruawahia, at the confluence of the Waikato
with its principal feeder the Waipa. There his supporters have established the old man
(who seems to lend himself unwillingly to the farce) in a kind of regal state. The depu-
tation despatched from Taranaki to solicit support for W. Kingi were clothed for the
occasion in a uniform dress. They approached in military order. At a given signal all
fell on their knees, whilst some one in a loud voice recited the text “ Love the Brother-
hood. Fear God. Honour the King 1 ” After the interview the deputation retired,
facing towards the royal presence. They appear to have been well drilled in this
ceremonial.
The absurdity of these pretensions does not render them less dangerous. Unfortu-
nately they are supported in the minds of the natives by an overweening opinion of
their own warlike skill and resources. It must be confessed that the imperfect success
of military operations in New Zealand has given some countenance to the natives' fixed
opinion of their own superiority. In the debates of the Maori council at Ngaruawahia,
the experience of the wars against Heki and Rangihaeata, and of the Wanganui war, are
constantly referred to as showing how little is to be feared from the prowess and the
boasted warlike appliances of the Pakeha.
As regards the further alienation of territory, the received interpretation of the treaty
of Waitangi recognises rights in the native proprietor which must be respected, however
inconvenient those rights may prove; but it would not be politic, or safe, or right, to
submit to the attempted usurpation of a power of obstructing the settlement of the
country which the admitted interpretation will not warrant. The treaty secures to the
native proprietor the right to part with to the Crown, or to retain for himself, lands
which are his own. The King party would assert a national property in or sovereign
right over the remaining native territory, and are ready to support all opposition to land
sales, without nice inquiry respecting, and even without reference to, the merits of each
particular case. In this they infringe at once upon the rights of the Crown and of the
native proprietor.
It is by no means meant to assert that all who have joined or who favour the party of
the Maori King propose to themselves ends so dangerous and unjustifiable. Potatau
himself is probably sincerely averse to any proceedings hostile to the Government. It
is, however, uncertain how far he may have power to restrain his people, and it is unde-
niable that sentiments quite as strong as those above described are freely expressed
throughout the districts south of Auckland, and may be expected to shape the action of
a large part of the powerful tribes of Waikato.
Such then is the party to whom William King of Waitara is looking for support, and,
it is to be feared, with some prospect of success; and it now becomes necessary to give
some explanation of the origin of the present disturbances at Taranaki.
The settlement of New Plymouth was founded in 1841 by the Plymouth Company of
New Zealand, which subsequently merged in the New Zealand Company. There were
at that time scarcely any natives in the district. Some had fled southward to Cook's
Straits, to avoid the invading Waikatos. Many others, who had been captured on the


storming of the Ngatiawa stronghold Pukerangiora, still remained slaves in the Waikato
country. The New Zealand Company’s agent bad purchased of the resident natives,
with the assent of some of their relatives at Port Nicholson and Queen Charlotte’s
Sound, a tract of country extending from the Sugar Loaf Islands to a place called Ta-
niwa, between three and four miles north of the Waitara River. The block extended
about fifteen miles along the coast, and contained 60,000 acres. It included the land
now the subject of dispute. After the arrival of the settlers, the refugee Ngatiawas and
manumitted slaves from Waikato began to return in great numbers, and disputed pos-
session of the block with the settlers. So completely, however, was the Waikato right
of conquest admitted, that their permission was sought and obtained by the returning
Ngatiawas before they ventured to set foot in the district. The Waikato had, however,
previously transferred their rights to the British Government by the deed of cession
which will be presently referred to.
In 1844 the Land Claims Commissioner, Mr. Spain, investigated the New Zealand
Company’s title, and reported in favour of their purchase; but Governor Fitzroy took
a different view of the rights of the absent and enslaved Ngatiawa, and refused to confirm
Mr. Spain’s award.
In consideration of an additional payment, the returned natives consented to sur-
render a small block of 3,500 acres, comprising the town site ; and within these narrow
limits the British settlement was for some time confined. Other small blocks were sub-
sequently from time to time acquired, and the settlement now extends for a distance
along the coast of about five miles in each direction, north and south, from the town.
The European population amounts to upwards of 2,500 souls, greatly outnumbering the
resident natives.
The northern boundary of the settlement is little more than four miles from Waitara ;
but on this side of the town the Crown lands are intermixed with territory over which
the native title has not been extinguished. A singular spectacle is here presented of
peaceful English homesteads alternating with fortified pas, which command the road to
the town at many points, unpleasantly reminding the spectator that the savage law of
might still rules in this fair district.
It need scarcely be said that the occupants of these pas do not regard themselves,
and practically are not, amenable to British jurisdiction. Since 1854 they have been in
continual feud amongst themselves, and there has been a succession of battles and of
murders in close proximity to the settled territory. A chief has been slaughtered on
the Bell block ; skirmishing natives have sought cover behind the hedgerows, and balls
fired in an encounter have struck the roof of a settler’s house.
These feuds have arisen out of disputes as to the title of land. One native faction
has been steadfastly opposed to the alienation of territory to the Crown ; the other
party has been not less passionately determined to sell, and the contest has been as to
their right to do so. The sellers naturally carry with them the sympathy of the colo-
nists, who feel that an extension of the settlement would bring, not simply a material
prosperity which this unfortunate place has never known, but also the far greater bless-
ings of peace, security, and the prevalence of British law.
It is obvious that in such a state of things the relations of the two races thus closely
intermixed must be full of peril. The embarrassment to the Government is extreme.
But without some knowledge of the native character its extent will not be fully appre-
hended. When a native has offered to cede land to the Crown, his pride (perhaps the
strongest passion of a chief) is committed to carry the sale into effect against all oppo-
sition, and it may be equally dangerous to the peace of the country to accept or refuse
the offer. If the offer be accepted, the Government becomes involved in difficulties
with the opposing party ; if refused, the seller will seek to revenge himself upon his op-
ponent, or become disaffected towards the Government that has put a slight upon him.
If his passion does not turn in either of these directions, he will probably persevere in
his attempts to induce the Governor to purchase ; thus keeping open a source of agita-
tion and peril. Taranaki is by no means the sole seat of such difficulties. At the pre-
sent juncture in the affairs of the colony the Government is in other quarters placed in
a similar dilemma, and is in the greatest danger of alienating those chiefs who are
friendly by the rigid scrutiny to which it is requisite to subject their offers of land.
The truest policy would be a fearless administration of justice between the contending
parties. Unfortunately to determine absolutely what is just is often impossible in
these cases, and were this otherwise the British Government is not in a position to
enforce its award.


In March, 1859, the present Governor visited New Plymouth, and on the Bth of that
month held a public meeting of all the principal chiefs of the district, the native secre-
tary, Mr. McLean, acting as interpreter. The proceedings had reference to the esta-
blishment of British law throughout the Taranaki district, and in the course of his
address the Governor said, “he thought the Maories would be wise to sell the land
they could not use themselves, as what they retained would then become more valuable
than the whole had previously been. He never would consent to buy land without an
undisputed title. He would not permit any one to interfere in the sale of land unless
he owned part of it; on the other hand, he would buy no man’s land without his
consent.”
Immediately after this declaration by the Governor, a Waitara native, named Teira,
stepped forward, and, speaking for himself and a considerable party of natives owning
land at Waitara, declared that he was desirous of ceding a block at the mouth of the
river on the south bank. He minutely described the boundaries of the block, stating
that the claims of himself and his party went beyond those limits, but that he purposely
confined his offer to what indisputably belonged to himself and his friends. Being a
man of standing, and his offer unexpected by many present, he was listened to with the
greatest attention, and concluded by inquiring if the Governor would buy his land.
Mr. McLean replied that the Governor accepted the offer conditionally on Teira’s
making out his title. Te Teira then advanced and laid a native mat at the Governor’s
feet, thereby symbolically placing his land at his Excellency’s disposal. Teira’s right
was denied by none except a native named Paora, who informed the Governor that
Te Teira could not sell without the consent of Weteriki and himself. Teira replied that
Weteriki was dying (he is since dead), and that Paora was bound by the act of his
relative, Hemi, who concurred in the sale. William King then rose, but before ad-
dressing the Governor said to his people : —“ I wish only to say a few words, and then
we will depart.” Then, turning to the Governor, he said : “ Listen, Governor 1 Not-
withstanding Teira’s offer, I will not permit the sale of Waitara to the Pakeha. Waitara
is in my bands. I will not give it up ; e kore, e kore, e kore ( i.e . I will not, I will not, I
will not). I have spokenand thereupon abruptly withdrew with his people.
William King was one of the Nagatiawa who had retired to Cook’s Straits, whence
he returned to Taranaki in 1848. Though a well-born chief, his land-claims are not
considerable, and lie chiefly, if not wholly, to the north of Waitara, On his return to
Taranaki, being still in fear of the Waikatos, he applied to Tamati Raru, Teira’s father,
for permission to build apa on the south bank, which was granted. He put up his pa
accordingly close to one occupied by Teira’s party ; but his cultivations are on the north
side of the river. Rawiri Raupongo, Tamati Raru, Retimana, and the other members
of Teira’s party, have cultivated the block sold to the Governor ; but King has been
joined by a number of natives who have gathered about him since his settlement at
Waitara, and these men have encroached with their cultivations upon the proper owners.
This has been a source of dissension, and one reason determining the sellers to part with
their land. King’s particular followers, who have been enjoying the use of the land
without any claim to share in the proceeds of its sale, naturally support him in his op-
position.
W. Kingi’s arguments against the sale of the land are stated by the
District Land Commissioner in the following terms: —
W. Kingi avowed his determination to oppose the sale, without advancing any
reason for so doing. Upon which I put a series of questions to him, which I called
upon the Rev. Mr. Whiteley to witness, viz.—
Q. Does the land belong to Teira and party ?
A. Yes ; the land is theirs, but I will not let them sell it,
Q. Why will you oppose their selling what is their own ?
A. Because I do not wish that the land should be disturbed, and, though they have
floated it, I will not let it go to sea.
Q. Show me the correctness or justice of your opposition.
A. It is enough ; Parris, their bellies are full with the sight of the money you have
promised them, but don’t give it to them. If you do, I won’t let you have the land,
but will take it and cultivate it myself.
This petty dispute was the proximate cause of the war. The Governor
gave orders that the land purchased from Teira should be surveyed for


sale, and gave instructions to the officer commanding the troops at New
Plymouth to protect the surveyors, and to proclaim martial law if he
should consider it desirable to do so.
W. Kingi and his followers having forcibly interfered with the survey,
Lieut.-Col. Murray made use of the discretionary power entrusted to him,
and placed the district under martial law on the 22nd February, 1860.
Colonel Gold arrived soon after with reinforcements, and assumed the
command. The whole military force at Taranaki, however, at that period
amounted to no more than 340 men. With this force Colonel Gold
attacked a small pa, which W. Kingi had built within the limits of the
disputed land. The pa was abandoned during the night, and destroyed
on the following morning.
On the 24th March information was received that the Taranaki tribe,
who inhabit the country at the base of Mount Egmont and south of New
Plymouth, were about to make an attack upon the town. On the 27th
they arrived at Omata, within about 4 miles of New Plymouth, where
they erected two pas. On the following day a body of troops marched
out by one road and militia and volunteers by another, for the purpose of
bringing in some settlers who had remained at Omata, and who were sup-
posed to be in danger. Both bodies were soon engaged, and the militia
and volunteers particularly distinguished themselves, and inflicted consi-
derable loss on the enemy. Just before dark Captain Cracroft, of H.M.S.
Niger, with a part of his ship’s company, made a gallant attack upon one
of the pas, of which he obtained possession, almost without resistance,
the enemy being taken completely by surprise. On the 29th the Tara-
nakis retired to Warea, about 25 miles south.
In the latter end of April Colonel Gold, having received reinforcements
from Auckland, marched to Warea with about 450 men, including artil-
lery and naval brigade. The numerous deep and swampy ravines which
intersect the whole face of the country, generally at right angles to the
coast line, render the sea-beach itself the only practicable line of march
for troops, except in the immediate neighbourhood of New Plymouth,
where some of them are rendered passable by means of bridges. This
peculiarity, as well as the dense masses of high fern and flax which cover
the country outside of the forest, is very favourable to the Maories, who
are excellent skirmishers, and know well how to take advantage of the
natural features of their country. On this occasion, being either taken by
surprise, or not having quite made up their minds what course they should
adopt, they offered no resistance, and the troops returned to New Plymouth
after destroying several pas.
In the same month a reinforcement of 500 men arrived from
and an entrenched camp was established near the mouth of the river
Waitara, and garrisoned by a small detachment.
In June W. Kingi built and occupied a strong pa in a commanding
position, about 2,000 yards from the camp, very near the boundary of
the disputed land. The communication between this pa and the forest in
rear was secured by a chain of smaller pas, all of which were occupied
by the enemy.
Some of W. Kingi’s followers having assumed the offensive, by firing
upon a reconnoitring party, it was decided that an attack should be made


At that date the military force at Taranaki amounted to—
Troops and naval brigade ....
. 1,188
Militia and volunteers ....
573
Total
. 1,761
upon the pa. Accordingly, on the 27th June, a force of about. 350 men,
under the command of Major Nelson, 40th Regiment, marched out of the
camp with the intention of surrounding and capturing the pa. With this
object Major Nelson divided his force into three detachments, one of
which, accompanied by two 24-pounder howitzers, was to attack the pa
in front, while the other two were to turn both flanks, and cut off the
retreat of the enemy. Unfortunately the force employed was very much
too small for the purpose. The howitzers failed to effect a breach in the
pa, and the detachments, being too far apart to afford each other support,
were unable to reply effectively to the close and destructive fire which
was maintained by the enemy’s skirmishers in the high fern. The troops
were at length compelled to retreat, with the heavy loss of 30 killed and
34 wounded.
comprising about 1,500 effectives.
Colonel Gold soon afterwards left the colony, on his promotion to the
rank of Major-General. In a speech addressed to the officers of his regi-
ment on parting he used the following words:—
I need scarcely now inform you that the reasons for my not being allowed to attack
William King for a considerable period were political ones; nor need I say that I do
not regret having foregone my own aggrandisement and eclat as a military officer in the
eyes of the world, rather than risk some 2,000 women and children being barbarously
murdered by a sudden nocturnal onslaught of the ferocious and bloodthirsty savages,
concealed in the closely approximating bush.
I think it is only due to an officer, whose conduct was the object of
persistent and unceasing depreciation on the part of the newspaper press
of New Zealand and Australia, to say, that, whilst it is more than doubtful
whether any effort on his part, with the very limited force at his com-
mand, could have done anything material towards reducing the Maories
to submission, it is certain that for the thoughtful and provident care
with which he watched over the safety of the lives and property of the
settlers, he merited from them a measure of gratitude which he was far
from receiving.
When the intelligence of the unfortunate attack on Puketakauere
reached Melbourne, Major-General Pratt, C.B. commanding H. M. forces
in Australia, determined at once to proceed to the seat of war, taking with
him every available soldier. The colony of Victoria was, with the consent
of its government, entirely denuded of troops, and the other Australian
colonies very nearly so. These troops were despatched as rapidly as
possible during the month of July to Taranaki, where the General and
staff arrived on the 3rd August. The force at the seat of war at that
time occupied, besides the town of New Plymouth, four detached posts,
two of which were to the north and two to the south of the town. Those
on the north comprised an entrenched camp on the left bank of the
Waitara, one mile from its mouth and about ten from New Plymouth, and
a block-house, commonly known as the Bell-block Stockade, at the village


of Hua, about four miles from the town. There was also a block-house at
the mouth of the Waitara, which was garrisoned from the camp.
The posts on the south were the Omata Stockade, about four miles
from New Plymouth and a little inland, and an entrenched camp on
Waireka Hill, about a mile beyond Omata, and separated from that post by
a deep and densely timbered ravine, which rendered a considerable force
and extraordinary precautions necessary in escorting provisions and am-
munition to the camp.* Within the town itself were two small but
strong forts, Marsland Hill and Fort Elliott, and it was partly surrounded
by a chain of small block-houses, but was unprovided with a continued
enceinte of any kind; and as the forest approaches within a very short
distance of it, and many deep and precipitous gullies, the sides and
bottoms of which are thickly clothed with fern and scrub, extend from
the bush through the line of posts into the town itself, the continued
presence there of a large body of troops was indispensably necessary to
guard against a night surprise, in which the town would have been burnt
and the women and children in all probability murdered.
The total armed force at the disposal of the Major-General at this
period amounted to a little over 2,000 rank and file, including the naval
brigade and all the men borne on the muster-roll of the volunteers and
militia. From these last must be deducted a large proportion necessarily
employed in civil capacities, as boatmen, sailors, carters, bakers, butchers,
&c. leaving about 2,000 for the whole available force. Of this number
little less than one-half were stationed in the various outposts, and so
large a proportion of the remainder was, as above explained, compelled to
remain in the town, that only about 500 rank and file could be depended
upon as available for active military operations at any distance from the
town, except immediately in front of the Waitara Camp, where they
might have been temporarily reinforced by a part of its garrison. It was
found quite impossible to obtain accurate information as to the strength
of the Maories actually in arms in the vicinity, but they were generally
estimated at from 1,700 to 1,800, of whom it was supposed that about
one-half, consisting of the Ngatiawas under Wiremu Kingi, and the
Waikatos, had their head quarters in the Waitara district, their most
advanced post being Puketakauere; while the remainder, comprising the
Taranaki and Ngatiruanui tribes were engaged in an attempt to invest
the Waireka camp on the south, by means of long lines of rifle-pits sup-
ported by pas. The base of operations of both these parties was the
dense and almost impenetrable forest, which, spreading from the slopes of
Mount Egmont, covers a great part of the province of Taranaki, and
stretches all along the coast line to within a short distance of the sea-shore.
For many miles north and south of New Plymouth, this great forest
only separated from the sea by a narrow belt, varying from one-and-a-half
to four miles in width, of land either naturally free from timber or arti-
ficially cleared. A comparatively small portion even of this contracted
space is under cultivation, the rest being generally covered with very
thick fern, often from 5 to 10 feet in height, interspersed with brambles.
The whole face of the country is intersected by a network of wide, deep,
and often precipitous ravines, generally swampy at the bottom, and their
* See Map, Plate 1.


sides covered with dense timber and tangled scrub. These ravines, most
of which are not visible until their edge is reached, connected as they
usually are with the forest, offer peculiar facilities for marauding parties
of the enemy to prowl about at night, and lie in wait for and murder
solitary European stragglers.
Under cover of the forest the two main bodies of the enemy were
enabled to keep up a constant communication, and to concentrate their
whole force in a few hours on any point which they might wish to attack,
without giving the least warning, whilst on the other hand no movement
of the troops could take place without the enemy being immediately aware
of it. The real sympathies of most if not all the so-called “ friendly
Maories ” were undoubtedly with their own race, and, as it was impossible
to obtain any information of the position or intentions of the enemy so long
as he remained in the forest, except through them, it is not surprising that
the rebels had more perfect intelligence than the military authorities. In
this respect the general found himself in a far worse position than that of
the officer commanding the troops in the former war, who possessed a
powerful and faithful ally in the Ngapuhi chief “ Waka Nene.” It was
evident that the friendly Maories at Taranaki were not much to be relied
upon, and it was quite certain that they were in the habit of giving infor-
mation to the enemy ; nevertheless, it was impossible to get rid of them.
The only intelligence, imperfect and doubtful as it was, that could be ob-
tained, came from them, and to have driven them away would have been
tantamount to declaring war upon the whole native race.
Major-General Pratt on his arrival found a very difficult task before
him. It was necessary at the outset to proceed with great caution. The
enemy were well aware that all the reinforcements which had hitherto
arrived were drawn from Australia, which was now drained of troops;
and they had been led by designing persons whose interest it was to promote
a war of races to believe that England was at war with France, and could
send no troops from home. The traditions of Heke’s war, in which the
troops suffered several reverses at the hands of the Maories, and never
succeeded in gaining any decisive advantage over them, led them not un-
naturally to believe themselves well able to cope with and overcome an
equal number of soldiers. They found an easy mode of inducing the
Governor not only to withhold reinforcements from the real seat of war,
but even to withdraw troops from thence, and thus to paralyse the gene-
ral’s operations at a critical juncture, by merely holding out vague threats
of a descent upon Auckland. In the same manner, by actually and con-
stantly menacing New Plymouth, which was full of women and children,
they compelled the general to keep a large force always within the town.
Thus they were enabled with the greatest ease at any time to bring into the
field a much larger number of men than General Pratt was able to oppose
to them. This, however, would have been of little consequence had it
induced them to leave the shelter of their strongholds and to fight in the
open country. This was far from being the case. They had no intention
of fighting except in strong positions, judiciously chosen, and fortified with
great art and ingenuity by themselves. The mere loss of one of these po-
sitions would not have been of much importance to them; but had the
general, with all the little force at his command, been repulsed in an


attack upon them, consequences of the most serious kind would have
ensued. Indeed it appeared more than probable that any such failure
would lead to a general rising of all the wavering tribes, not against Her
Majesty’s supremacy alone, but against the very existence of the European
community. In such an event the war would have assumed a character
and proportions little understood or contemplated by those who, in com-
plete ignorance either of the nature of military operations or of the features
of the country and the character of its population, spoke of the total sub-
jection of the Maori race as no very difficult matter.
Little is known of th.e interior of the northern island of New Zealand,
but it is certain that its inhabitants are not the least warlike among the
Maori tribes ; and it is probable that the complete conquest and subjuga-
tion of the country would be a task not very inferior in magnitude or
difficulty to that which the Romans had before them when they undertook
the conquest of Britain.
General Pratt was of opinion that the best mode of avoiding such a
disastrous complication, and of bringing the war to an end before the great
mass of the tribes should be committed to it, would be to afford them a
practical proof, that, although the hasty attack on Puketakauere—under-
taken before his arrival—had failed, it was in his power to take their
strongest pas by a systematic and irresistible mode of attack, without
much difficulty or loss on his part. In order to do this it was necessary
to increase the strength of his moveable column. With this view he was
desirous of abandoning the Waireka camp, the occupation of which was
then useless, as the Omata stockade, which could be held by 50 men,
was a sufficient outpost in that direction. This step would have given
him an immediate addition of about 250 men ; but there were serious ob-
jections to its being at once carried into effect. The camp was actually
besieged by the whole force of the southern tribes, and to have withdrawn
the garrison in the face of the enemy without a battle would have been
looked upon by them as a confession of defeat; whilst to have attacked
their formidable line of defences with the necessary certainty of complete
success would have required a larger force than he could at that time
employ, without leaving the town almost defenceless, and at the mercy of
the Waikatos and Ngatiawas.
The general therefore determined upon the following plan of action:
first, to hasten by every means in his power the departure, which had
already commenced, of the women and children to the southern island,
when a considerable portion of the permanent garrison of New Plymouth
would be added to his available field force; and in the meantime to employ
the troops in surrounding the town with a palisade and ditch, and in
making gabions for siege operations, should they be required. Next, to»
attack and drive the southern natives from their position at Waireka.
Then, reinforced by the garrison of that post, to march to the Waitara
and to attack and capture Puketakauere, and the chain of pas which con-
nected it with the forest. Then, in the event of the enemy taking refuge
in the bush and refusing to submit, he proposed to follow them up to their
strongholds by the system of operations which he afterwards carried out
with complete success. Lastly, he intended to follow the Taranakis and
Ngatiruanuis into their own country, and to inflict a severe and well-
merited chastisement upon those tribes.


The failure of a portion of this plan, and the necessary postponement
for some time of the remainder, arose entirely from circumstances over
which the general had no control. He proceeded to Auckland for the
purpose of requesting the support and assistance of the Governor and
Executive in effecting the removal of the women and children. This was
promised, and steamers were despatched to New Plymouth to convey them
to Nelson, in the middle island.
During the general’s absence, which only lasted for a few days, the
enemy adopted a most unexpected and unaccountable step, in suddenly
and simultaneously abandoning their strong positions both at Puketakauere
and Waireka. The Waikatos proceeded northwards to their homes, the
Taranakis retired to Tataraimaka and Kaihihi, the Ngatiruanuis returned
to their own country, W. Kingi and his followers fell back into the forest,
and all the great works which had cost the Maories months of hard labour,
fell into the hands of the troops. As the officers of the native department
at Taranaki were of opinion that the Waikatos at least, if not the southern
natives, would return in all probability in much larger numbers in about
a month or six weeks, the general, on his return from Auckland, resolved
to employ the interval in completing the preparations upon which he had
previously decided, not, however, neglecting any opportunity which might
offer of inflicting a blow upon the rebels who remained in the province.
An unexpected difficulty now arose in removing the women and children
The alarm which they had previously experienced, and which had induced
them readily to consent to leave the province, disappeared with the main
body of the enemy, and nearly all of them absolutely refused to embark.
The general at length finding that it was out of his power to effect their
removal without the use of actual violence, was most reluctantly compelled
to abandon the attempt, and to allow about a thousand women and children
to remain, thus depriving himself of the services of about half a battalion
of soldiers. In the mean time, no chance of harassing the enemy was lost.
All the pas, upwards of twenty in number, many of them very strong and
of quite recent construction, which they had occupied outside of the forest,
were destroyed, and in them large stores of provisions. Many attempts
were made to surround the enemy in their pas and to prevent their
escape, but these were always defeated by the accuracy of their informa-
tion, their vigilance, and the rapidity with which they were able to move.
It was said indeed at the time, and perhaps generally believed, that much
more might have been done by a judicious use of the services of the
militia and volunteers, whose knowledge of the country and of the natives
would, it was thought, enable them to follow the enemy through the bush
with advantage. This, however, was a mistake. Soon after the general’s
arrival he was waited upon by the major commanding, and all the
captains of the militia and volunteers, who offered, if their men were
relieved from garrison duty and from work in the trenches, to take them
out in small parties every night, and lie in wait for the rebels. They
undertook, in this manner, to clear the open country of their marauding
parties, and to drive them into their pas in the bush. The general at
once accepted this proposition, but on the following day, when the officers
explained the arrangement to their companies, the men refused to carry it
out. They said that they would of course go wherever they might be


ordered, but they would not volunteer for such peculiarly hazardous
service, and they did not think that they ought to be called upon to
perform any service on which the troops were not also employed.
Without entering into a detailed account of all the operations which
were carried on under these difficulties, with more or less success, but
without any disaster, during the months of August and September, it may
be mentioned here, that all the accounts of disastrous failures, disgraceful
retreats, and misconduct on the part of officers high in command, which,
having first appeared in some of the New Zealand newspapers, were copied
and adopted by the Melbourne Argus , and subsequently by the limes , were
wholly without foundation, and destitute of truth. It is true, that, for the
reasons before stated, nothing very brilliant or decisive could be effected
during that period, but much mischief was done to the enemy, and nothing
like disaster or defeat occurred.
On the 18th September the Governor addressed a letter to General
Pratt, in which he recommended a system of “ sudden, secret, and constant
attack when and where they least expect it,” and urged that advantage
should be taken of our superiority of force at the time, as the proportions
might be reversed in a few weeks.
Perhaps the best illustration that can be given of the difficulties of the
general’s position, will be to quote an extract from his reply to that letter.
He says:
Daring the past few weeks the troops under my command have destroyed between
twenty and thirty pas, many of them very recently built, and provided with rifle-pits
and other defences constructed in the most careful and elaborate manner.
The rebels did not venture to defend any of these places, but deserted them all on
the approach of the troops, in some cases in such haste, that, on our entry, we found
meat half-cooked on their fires. We have also destroyed a great number of “ wharres,
or native habitations, and a considerable quantity of provisions.
During the whole of this period the enemy have been suffering very severely from
sickness, caused by privation and exposure; and I have certain information that they
have lost a good many men, including several of their most influential chiefs, who have
been killed in action, or have died of their wounds. The whole of our casualties, on
the other hand, throughout all these operations amount to only one man killed, and
four wounded. I cannot conceive that such a result can be looked upon as a success
on the part of the enemy.
The plan which your Excellency proposes of harrassing them by secret, sudden, and
constant attacks, by bodies of troops without baggage, is, in my opinion, impracticable.
It is impossible to surprise them, as the scouts, who are constantly on the watch about
their pas, will always give them sufficient notice to enable them to effect their escape
should they be desirous of doing so, or to prepare for defence if they mean to remain.
Experience has proved that to send troops unprovided with artillery to attack a pa
entails certain failure, accompanied with an useless loss of men and of prestige. I
consider it of the highest importance, not only to the successful termination of
present war, but to the future peace of the colony, that the Maories should become
convinced of the superiority of the troops in warfare, and or the hopelessness of their
endeavouring to gain any material advantage over us; and I cannot think that it would
be wise or justifiable knowingly to place the troops in a position in which that supe-
riority would disappear, or perhaps be converted into inferiority.
I arrive at a different conclusion from the opinion expressed by your Excellency, that
he present excess of our numbers over those of the enemy in this province places us in
a more favourable position for the prosecution of the war than we shall probably be in
tw oor three months hence, when the proportion may be reversed. On the contrary,
the principal difficulties with which i have now to contend arise frorn this very cause ;
andl am satisfied that any increase in their numbers, which might give them sufficient
confidence either to defend a pa in an accessible position, or to accept battle in the open


country, would lead to a much more satisfactory result than a lengthened continuance
of the present state of affairs.
The justice of these opinions was signally verified by the event.
In the beginning of October the general received intelligence that the
Taranaki tribe had built a couple of new pas on the river Kaihihi,
about sixteen miles from New Plymouth. He determined to attack them.
There were evident signs reported by a reconnoitring party that the
natives intended to defend them, inasmuch as they had covered them with
fascines of green flax. He looked upon this as a favourable opportunity
for making a serious attack upon them. He left New Plymouth on the
9th of October with 800 men, and the following artillery, viz., one 8-inch
gun, two 24-pounder howitzers, two cohorn mortars, and some rockets.
To give an idea of the difficulty of moving in that country, I may mention,
that the 8-inch gun, which was slung on a devil carriage, required
eighteen bullocks to draw it. It was attended by six carts carrying the
platform, carriage, ammunition, &c., requiring in all nearly sixty bullocks
for one gun. The train of carriages for the whole column, comprising
only 800 rank and file, was considerably more than a mile in length,
although nothing unnecessary was carried. That night the force encamped
at Tataraimaka, and on the following morning reached their destination.
The enemy’s defences consisted of three pas, two on the north, and the
third on the south side of the river Kaihihi. Their flanks were well
covered by deep and impassable ravines, and the only way by which the
pas could be approached was flanked by a line of rifle-pits on the margin
of a patch of dense forest. The pas were sufficiently near for mutual
support, and were well provided with flank defence.*
The nature of the ground made it necessary first to attack Orongo-
maihangai, the strongest of the three.
On the morning of the 11th, a working party and guard of the trenches
advanced to within 250 yards of the pa, and commenced the construction
of a parallel. The enemy showed themselves during this operation, but
did not for some time open fire. They appear to have misunderstood the
nature and object of the work, and to have been in momentary expectation
of an assault.
It was not until the breastwork was nearly completed, and the guns
brought up, that they became aware of their mistake. They then opened
a sharp fire from the pa and from the rifle-pits. The guns and mortars
commenced shelling the pa before noon, and kept up their fire till dark,
without making a breach in the stockade.
In the course of the night approaches by sap were commenced and
carried on till morning, when it was discovered that the enemy had aban-
doned all their pas during the night.
It appears that, although the shells passed through the stockade without
doing it any material damage, they searched the rifle-pits, and must have
inflicted considerable loss on the enemy.
General Pratt’s intention was to follow up this success by a march
further to the south, with the view of attacking other pas belonging to
the same tribe, but he was reluctantly compelled to abandon this inten-
tion, by the receipt of a letter from the Governor, informing him that a
strong force of Waikatos was already on the march for the Waitara.
See Plates 11. and 111.


Considering the nature of the country, the total absence of roads, and
the impossibility of securing a communication with the town by sea,
owing to the exposed and rocky formation of the coast, it could not be
anticipated that any operations of importance further south conld be con-
cluded in a less time than several weeks, and in the face of the Governor’s
warning it would have been extremely imprudent to have attempted any
thing of the kind at that time. A few days afterwards it was ascertained
that the Waikatos had actually arrived at W. Kingi’s pa, whence they
sent a challenge to Mr. Parris, the land purchase commissioner, of which
the following is a translation:
To Mr. Parris, Puke Kobe, 1 Novr. 1860.
Friend, I have heard your word —come to fight me, that is very good; come inland,
and let us meet each other. Fish fight at sea; come inland, and stand on our feet;
make haste, make haste, don’t prolong it. That is all I have to say to you—make haste.
From Wetini Taiporutu.
From Porokore.
From all the Chiefs of Ngatihaua and Waikato.
On the evening of the sth of November intelligence was received that
the Waikatos had taken possession of Mahoetahi, an old pa in a strong
position on the road from New Plymouth to the Waitara. Major-General
Pratt immediately wrote to Colonel Mould, R.E., who was then in com-
mand at the Waitara camp, to inform him that he intended to attack the
enemy early on the following morning, and to desire that he would make
a simultaneous attack on the other side, with a portion of his force.
In pursuance of this plan, the general marched from New Plymouth
with 700 men at daybreak on the 6th, and immediately on his arrival at
Mahoetahi commenced the attack, without waiting for the detachment
from the Waitara, which had been accidentally delayed, but which arrived
in time to take part in the engagement before its close.
The Maories made a gallant but ineffectual defence, and were pursued
for several miles, until they took refuge in the forest. The loss of the
troops and militia on this occasion amounted to 4 killed and 15 wounded;
of the natives 31 were found dead on the field and 5 wounded, and traces
of blood were seen all along their line of retreat, proving that many of
those who succeeded in reaching the bush must have been wounded.
The officers of the native department, who had means of obtaining in-
telligence on the subject, estimated their loss at about 100.
The Governor, on learning the result of this action, was of opinion that
the Waikatos would very probably leave Taranaki and turn their whole
force upon Auckland. Under this impression he called upon General
Pratt to detach no less than 400 rank and file from his already smalls
force to assist in the defence of the capital. The contemplated move-
ment of the Waikatos did not take place, and the only result of the
transfer of these troops to Auckland was entirely to cripple the general’s
operations, and effectually to prevent him from taking any immediate
advantage of his success. About the end of the month, a portion of the
14th Regiment having arrived in Auckland, the troops that had been
detached from Taranaki were sent back again, and the general deter-
mined to carry out the system of attack upon the enemy’s positions in the
bush which he had contemplated from the first; hut, during the month
B 2


of December the weather was so bad that nothing could be done, the
country being flooded with rain.
On the 27th of December the general marched from New Plymouth to
the Waitara with the whole of his available force.
The enemy had in the meantime established a new pa, Matarikoriko, in
a very formidable position, about two miles and a-half from the camp, and
nearly surrounded by deep, precipitous, swampy ravines, fringed with
concealed rifle pits, the whole of the neighbouring country being covered
with fern, from six to eight and even ten feet in height, and so dense
that a horse could with difficulty force his way through it.
The general determined to establish an advanced post at Kairau, about
900 yards from Matarikoriko. From this point he proposed to attack the
pa by regular approaches. On the 29th he marched to Kairau with 900
men, and immediately commenced the erection of a redoubt, the working
party being protected on all sides by skirmishers.*
The work proceeded without molestation until about 9 a.m. when a
heavy fire was opened on the troops from the concealed rifle-pits, as well
as from native skirmishers in the high fern. The work was completed
about 6 p.h. and garrisoned, but the firing continued on both sides
throughout the night. In the morning the enemy showed a white flag,
and the day was spent in strengthening and improving the work. On the
morning of the 31st it was found that the Maories had abandoned all
their works in the neighbourhood, and had fallen back on the forest at
Huirangi. General Pratt described their deserted position as “ one of the
most formidable he ever saw,” and as “ chosen with singular sagacity.”
The pa was demolished, and its site occupied by a block-house to contain
60 men.
The enemy now occupied a line of rifle-pits upwards of a mile in length,
skirting the edge of the forest. These being entirely concealed from view
it would have been a mere waste of ammunition to attack them by artillery
fire, and they were so ingeniously arranged for mutual support that an
attack by vive force could only have led to a useless waste of the lives of
the troops. It was therefore determined to push forward the advance by
a chain of redoubts to within about half a mile of the forest, and from
thence to approach and pierce the centre of their position by double sap. - ) -
The sap was commenced on the 22nd January, and on the same night,
or, more correctly, on the following morning before daybreak, the enemy
attacked the most advanced or No. 3 redoubt in force, and with a degree
of vigour, determination, and military skill, which few persons had pre-
viously given them credit for being able to command. The attack com-
menced some time before dawn, and was gallantly maintained until after
the break of day, when it was seen that they had advanced in regular
military order, with storming party, supports, and reserve. Although the
* In a dispatch dated 31st December, General Pratt says,—“My force, after being
joined by parties from the Waitara camp and other positions, amounted to 900 rank
and file of all arms, which was all I could muster, after leaving the town and other
posts in security, and requiring some assistance from H.M. ships * Cordelia ’ and
Victoria;’ and I note this, in consequence of the great misstatements which are circu-
lated regarding the amount of force at my disposal for aggressive operations.”
t The positions of the redoubts and the line of sap are shown in the accompanying
map, PI. I.


redoubt was well constructed, and garrisoned by a considerable portion
of the 40th regiment, it was not till reinforcements had arrived from the
rear that the attack was finally repulsed, and the enemy driven back into
the forest.
The sap was then pushed steadily forward, small redoubts being erected
at intervals along the line to protect its head, until the 27th, when the
enemy, finding their line of defence almost cut in two, abandoned the whole
position, and fell back about a mile and a half into the bush, where they
had established a similar but still more formidable series of works of
defence. A few days were then occupied by the troops in constructing a
strong work (No. 6 redoubt) at Huirangi, at the edge of the forest, and
in clearing a road to the front, through a part of the bush. They then
pushed forward about three quarters of a mile, and constructed another
redoubt (No. 7) under a heavy fire from the front and both flanks.
In front and on the right of the redoubt lay a great amphitheatre of
lofty rugged hills and deep ravines, thrown together in wild and pictu-
resque confusion.
On the left was a rocky precipice overhanging the river Waitara, of
which it here formed the left bank. The brow of each hill, at a distance
of from six to eight hundred yards from the redoubt, was crotvned by
irregular lines of rifle-pits, so arranged as to flank each other and to com-
mand every ravine which an assailant would be compelled to cross, and so
well concealed by the stunted bush which grew plentifully on the hills,
that their position could only be guessed at by the smoke from the
musketry of their occupants.* The right of the enemy’s line ot defence
rested on the river at Pukerangiora, a commanding eminence, long famous
in the annals of Maori Avarfare, and now crowned by the Pa Te Arei.
Immediately in rear of the enemy’s position lay the great forest, stretching
far away over mountain and valley into the distant and unknown interior.
From No. 7 redoubt the approach was carried on by single sap as far
as No. 8, or about a quarter of a mile; from this point the double sap was
recommenced, demi-parallels being thrown out to cut through the lines ot
rifle-pits on the left front of the attack. The whole of these works were
carried out under great difficulties, owing to the incessant fire kept up by
the enemy in front and on both flanks, and their repeated night attacks
upon the head of the sap; notwithstanding which the troops suffered but
little loss owing to the able and careful manner in which the Avorks were
designed and carried out by Colonel Mould, Commanding Eoyal Engineer.
On the 12th of March, a truce was granted to the Maories at the re-
quest of W. Thompson, a very influential Waikato chief, who had
deputed by the tribe to visit Taranaki and report upon the progress of
the war there. Finding that his people had suffered and were suffering
heavy losses in killed and wounded, and that they were compelled day by
day to fall back before the steady and irresistible advance of the sap, he
became anxious that hostilities should cease. The truce, however, only
lasted for three days, the Maories having refused to agree to the terms
offered them by the Governor.
On the morning of the 15th, three 12-pounder Armstrong guns, and
* For the mode of construction of these pits, see PI. IV.


two 8 and two 10-inch mortars which had just arrived from England, were
moved to the front and placed in position. At 11 a.m. the enemy’s white
flag was lowered, and a red one hoisted, upon which firing recommenced
on both sides.
On the night of the 16th, a last attempt was made to destroy the
head of the sap, which was defeated by the explosion of an 8-inch shell
which had been attached to the sap-roller for that purpose.
On the 18th the enemy finally sued for peace, and the war came to
an end.
The Waikatos, having agreed to give up the whole of the arms and
plunder they had taken, returned to their own country accompanied by
Wiremu Kingi, whose immediate followers came in, and made submission.
Mr. Ridgway : It was stated by Mr. Buxton in the House of Commons the other
night that the war was raging fiercely in New Zealand now. I should like to ask
Captain Pasley whether it is in his knowledge that such is the fact?
Captain Pasley : I do not believe there is any war in New Zealand at present. The
Australian mail has just arrived, and there is nothing about it in that; on the contrary,
everything appears quite quiet.
Mr. Ridgway : I am pretty well up in New Zealand affairs, and I beg to state that
the assertions which have been made with reference to the prevalence of war in New
Zealand are totally without foundation. General Pratt has accomplished the defeat of
the natives. There has been no war in New Zealand since the arrival of General Ca-
meron. If the time would permit, I would have asked some more questions.
Mr. Fitzgerald Foster; What is the greatest number of natives that ever met
our troops during the recent war ?
Captain Pasley : It is impossible to state exactly. It is supposed that the number
of natives engaged in the operations just detailed was about 2,000. It is impossible to
say whether the whole of the 2,000 were actually engaged in action on any one occasion.
Mr. Foster : Did you ever hear it computed what number of men the natives could
bring into the field at once—l do no not mean in the late war, but in future ?
Captain Pasley : It would depend entirely on the union of the tribes, which is a
very unlikely thing to take place. In the first place, the Ngapuhi tribe and its chiefs
appear to be as firm friends of ours as ever they were, and they constitute one of the
most numerous and powerful of the Maori tribes. Taking the population of the northern
island south of Auckland, that is, exclusive of the Ngapuhis, it might be about 40,000
altogether, and probably one-third would be adult males.
Mr. Ridgway : I can state that the population of adult males in New Zealand is
30,000 ; including men, women, and children, 56,000. The Europeans were 70,000,
and since then the augmentation of the British forces has considerably increased that
number.


THE WAR *IN NEW ZEALAND.
Captain C. Pasley, R.E.
PART 11.
In a paper which I had the honour to read before this Institution a few
weeks since, I gave a short account of the history of New Zealand down
to the conclusion of the recent war. I propose on the present occasion to
offer a few observations on the character of warfare in that country, on
the kind of arms that the natives use, with their reasons for adopting
them, and on the peculiarities of their defensive works, which, although
inapplicable to European warfare, are well deserving of consideration as
evincing a natural aptitude for war on the part of the IVlaories which
would be remarkable in any nation, and the existence of which amongst
a people so recently rescued from total barbarism is probably unpa-
ralleled.
A great deal has been said of the apparent absurdity of a considerable
number of troops being kept as it were at bay by a not very numerous
body of semi-savages. In a leading article dated the 20th December,
1860, “ The Times ” contrasts the two pictures of British prowess pre-
sented on the one hand by the small allied force (chiefly British) dictating
terms of peace to the Chinese Emperor “ on the very walls of a capital
containing 2,000,000 of inhabitants,” and on the other, by “ a force of
3,000 effective men commanded by a veteran general, and with an un-
usually large number of colonels and other officers amply equipped with
artillery and with all the munitions of war, drawing its supplies by sea,
and backed by a British fleet of six ships of war, which can hardly hold
its own against a horde of naked savages never exceeding 600, and now
probably reduced to some 120; armed with wretched flint and steel
muskets and tomahawks, unprovided with the scantiest apparatus of war-
fare, and almost destitute of subsistence.” The writer goes on to say that
a force of 1,000 men under General Pratt “had already declined the siege
of a pa of somewhat more than average strength.”
As an evidence of the recklessness of assertion which characterised the
article in question, I will simply observe, that the number of effective
troops (including Naval Brigade) at the disposal of General Pratt at the
period referred to was just one-half of the number stated ; that, so
far from there being “ an unusually large number of colonels and other
officers,” the force laboured under the disadvantage of possessing unusually
few officers of all ranks; and finally that the force under General Pratt,
which was 800 (not 1,000) strong, so far from declining the attack of a


pa, had both attacked and captured it, and an account of the capture had
actually been published in “ The Times ’’ itself two days before the leading
article appeared.
I need not continue the quotation. If any of my hearers wish to learn
how the honour of our troops, and consequently of our nation, may be
vilified in the eyes of the world on the authority of obscure and unscru-
pulous colonial newspapers, I would refer them to that article, and to some
others which appeared in “ The Times ” about the same period. Did time
admit of it, it would not be difficult to show the utter fallacy of the com-
parison between China and New Zealand, and it would be equally easy to
show on the present occasion that the statements of comparative force,
arms, &c.—in short, the whole of the supposed facts mentioned in the ex-
tract which I have just quoted, as well as nearly all those which follow,
are founded entirely on false information.* I readily acquit “ Ihe limes
of any wilful falsification of facts; I only say, that, before giving the weight
of its great name and influence to statements affecting the credit of the
British arms, it ought to take at least as much trouble to ascertain the
truth as it generally does before commenting on matters affecting the
character of an individual.
In this particular case “ The Times ” had, in the monthly letters of its
Melbourne correspondent, which were regularly published without being
noticed, and apparently without being read, by the writers of the leading
articles, the means of correcting many of the falsehoods to which, no doubt
unconsciously, it gave a world-wide currency.
I have alluded to “ The Times,” not only on account of its great circu-
lation and influence, but because it happens to have been the only daily
London paper that 1 had an opportunity of seeing during the period in
question. What sort of remarks may have been made by others Ido not
know.
I ought, perhaps, to apologise for offering these few remarks, which
may seem to have no direct bearing upon the subject of which I have now
to treat; my excuse must rest on the peculiarity of the case. New
Zealand is sixteen thousand miles away, and nearly all the officers and
men who were engaged in the war are still either there or in Australia,
too far off to make themselves heard with effect. General Pratt, it is
has received what I may be permitted to call a well-merited mark of
honour from our Sovereign; but the public does not form its opinions fiom
an announcement in the Gazette, but rather from what it reads in the
daily papers, in which, as far as I am aware, no recantation or apology
for the unfounded calumnies formerly published against the troops has
ever appeared; nor has justice been done by the press in England, eithei
to the gallantry and perseverance with which the troops carried on opera-
tions of the most harassing kind, under extraordinary difficulties, or to
the conduct of the general, who, disregarding the ignorant clamour of
newspaper writers, went steadily on his way, without turning to the right
or left, until he had carried the war to a successful conclusion, in such a
manner as to gain for himself, and for the troops under his command, the
respect of the enemy.
* For strength of troops &c. at various periods during the war, see Appendix A.


Before entering upon a description of the arms and mode of warfare of
the New Zealanders, I must observe, that one of the most fallacious opinions
ever entertained by reasonable men, is, that because savages have often been
able to offer a serious resistance to regular troops, under favourable cir-
cumstances, therefore any other force, no matter what, colonists, sailors,
gold-diggers from Australia or California, men of any kind in short, pro-
vided they have not been trained as soldiers, would be much more efficient,
owing to some imaginary power that every man not brought up as a
soldier seems to be supposed to possess of getting through dense scrub and
“ supple jack,” and of doing without supplies of provisions, clothing, and
ammunition. In short, discipline is imagined to be a mistake, and organised
movements worse than useless. Nothing can be more unfounded than such
a notion. The Maories are infinitely more formidable enemies than the
North American Indians, or any other savages with whom the English
nation has had to deal, with the single exception of the Kaffirs, because
they possess discipline and military organisation in a very high degree.
On the other hand, the Naval Brigade, formed of detachments from the
crews of Her Majesty’s ships on the station (with a contingent from the
steam-sloop Victoria, which was lent to General Pratt by the government
of the colony of Victoria), constituted a very valuable reinforcement to
the troops, not because they were less under discipline than the soldiers,
but because they combined that discipline with that readiness at handling
tools, and turning their hands to any kind of unusual work, for which
seamen generally are justly celebrated.
I mentioned the Kaffirs just now, as an exception to the rule that the
Maories are the most formidable race of savages that we have met. They
were undoubtedly, before the recent breaking up and dispersion of their
tribes, much more numerous than the Maories, and quite as warlike in
their habits. I have heard that a distinguished officer, who served in the
last war at the Cape, considered the Kaffirs to be “ perfect light troops,”
and I can easily believe that they were so, without supposing them to
have been superior to the Maories in skirmishing, whilst they were cer-
tainly inferior to them in the art of constructing works of defence; indeed
I believe the Kaffirs never attempted anything of the kind. Our troops
had also much greater facilities for carrying on war in South Africa than
in New Zealand. They had there a definite frontier, either to defend or
to advance from, as they thought proper; and all the great centres of
population in the colony were far removed from any danger. They were
able also to penetrate the country in all directions without much difficulty,
and even to employ cavalry. The absence of all attempt at fortification
also on the part of the enemy made our artillery only useful as an
auxiliary, instead of being indispensable as a primary part of our field
force.
All these conditions are reversed in New Zealand. Cavalry cannot be
employed. Artillery, indispensable as it is, is transported with the greatest
difficulty, even near the coast, and cannot be conveyed at all to any dis-
tance in the interior. Instead of having a well-marked frontier, all our
settlements are dotted along the interminable coast line of a large island,
the whole of the almost inaccessible interior of which is occupied by the
Maories. These settlements have no communication with each other by


land, and but a very uncertain and precarious one by sea. We occupy
detached spots on the circumference of the circle, whilst the natives have
possession of the whole of the interior, and are able to throw themselves
in force at any time upon whichever of our settlements may appear to be
the most vulnerable.
I conceive, therefore, that in what I hope is the improbable event of a
general war with the Maories, a large proportion of our settlements in the
northern island will be untenable, and must be abandoned. It was this
consideration, I believe, which induced General Pratt readily to acquiesce
in the peculiar conditions under which the recent war was carried on.
These were certainly very peculiar, and to my mind worthy of more than
a passing remark, as evincing a sort of chivalrous feeling on the part of
the Maories, which is, I think, deserving of our respect, and which ought
not to be forgotten in carrying on negociations with them.
The Waikato nation, the most powerful, numerous, and warlike of the
Maori tribes, and the promoters of the native King movement, decreed
that there should be war at Taranaki, and nowhere else; that any of their
young men who chose to do so might go and fight against the soldiers at
New Plymouth, but that no settlers anywhere else were to be disturbed
or molested in any way. Their decision was strictly carried out. There
was war at Taranaki, and peace everywhere else in the colony. Although
the friendly intercourse between the settlers and the Maories was occa-
sionally a little interrupted by suspicions and even threats on both sides,
it never ceased, except at the actual seat of war. Some two thousand
Waikato warriors came down to the Waitara to drive the troops into the
sea. They left about one-fifth of their number dead, and carried away
(by permission of General Pratt) a ship-load of wounded, without having
succeeded in killing or wounding amongst the soldiers anything approach-
ing to the number they had lost themselves; and all this occurred in a
position, or rather a series of positions, chosen and defended with admir-
able skill by themselves.
The war was a kind of tournament, or combat by champions; and if
we except some outrages committed by the southern natives, and which
were condemned not less strongly by W. Kingi and the Waikatos than by
ourselves, it must be admitted that it was conducted on both sides with a
humanity and consideration most unusual in civil wars, and which the
Under Secretary of State for the Colonies (Mr. Chichester Fortescue)
justly characterized in the House of Commons as being almost without
parallel in the history of war.
The arms generally used by the Maories are double-barrelled guns (not
“ wretched flint and steel muskets,” as stated by “ The Times,” but good
percussion guns), and, for close quarters, tomahawks with long flexible
handles, which enable them to reach an adversary’s head over his guard.
They are not ignorant of the value of the rifle, which is used by some of
their marksmen, but as a general rule they prefer the double-barrelled
sporting gun to any other arm.
In order to understand their reasons for this preference, it is only neces-
sary to consider for one moment the peculiarities of their position. The
interior of the island is very broken and mountainous, intersected by
swamps, for the most part covered with dense forest, and entirely destitute


of roads or tracks practicable for wheeled carriages of any kind. It
would, therefore, be impossible for them to employ artillery without
losing all the advantages they possess in being able to move freely
through the forest, and to advance from or retreat on their almost inac-
cessible fastnesses at pleasure. The absence of this important arm
renders it necessary for them, when they meet the troops under circum-
stances in which our artillery is available against them, to keep as much
as possible under cover. Even the use of long-range rifles, requiring a
steady and prolonged aim, would expose them to some extent, not only to
the fire of our own rifles, but to the destructive effect of shells.
They therefore trust to the closeness and rapidity of their fire, rather
than to accuracy at a distance, and their plan usually is to invite and
await an attack in rifle-pits, covered from distant fire and protected in
front either by natural obstacles or by the double stockade of a pa.
Against an attack by vive force , probably no system of defence and no
kind of arms could be more thoroughly effective than those adopted by
the Maories. It is exceedingly difficult to make a serious breach in
the stockades of a pa by artillery fire, even at a short range;* and any
attempt to climb over or cut them down must be made at a distance of
only a few feet from the muzzles of the guns of the defenders, who, being
themselves well under cover, are able to overwhelm the storming party
by a close and destructive fire, to which no effectual reply can be given.
Owing to the rapidity with which they can be loaded and fired, double-
barrelled guns are much more effective at close quarters than rifles.
It has often been suggested that pas might easily be breached by means
of powder bags, and several experiments have been tried at the Eoyal
Engineer establishment at Chatham to prove the facility with which this
can be done. The operation would no doubt be simple and effective
enough if the pa to be breached were unprovided with flank defence, but
such is never the case in fact. No military engineer in Europe under-
stands better than the Maories the importance of flanking fire, and none
could show greater judgment in securing that advantage, or in arranging
works with reference to the formation of the ground, in such a manner as
to afford each other mutual support.
Such being the case, the chance of a bag of powder being successfully
placed and fired against the stockade would be extremely remote.
There remained then two modes of attacking these works, viz. shelling
them, and approaching them by sap.
The former mode was adopted with so much success against the
Kaihihi pas in October 1860, that the Maories resolved no longer to trust
to pas, which they began to regard as mere “ shell-traps,” but for the
future to construct their rifle-pits for the most part in spots difficult of
access from the front, but with a retreat always open, and concealed in such
a manner as to be pretty safe against distant fire, whether of artillery or
rifles. They carried out this design with remarkable skill in their suc-
cessive lines of defence at the Waitara, in the latter part of the war.
An assault upon these lines must have resulted either in a repulse or,
at the best, in the capture of a few empty rifle-pitSj with great loss to the
troops and little or none to the enemy.
# I believe it has never yet been done.


them. The whole is so firmly bound together by the tough grass before
alluded to, that shot and shell pass freely through both lines, often cutting
completely through the timbers without causing any portion to fall.
When an attack is expected it is the custom of the Maories to cover the
outer palisades with bundles of the long leaves of the New Zealand flax,*
which offers some resistance to musketry, and serves in a great measure
to conceal any damage that may be done to the palisades or stockade by
artillery.
The above may serve as a general description of the mode of construction
adopted in all pas, but the ground plan varies very considerably according
to the features of the country.
The plan of the attack on the Kaihihi Pas (Plate II.) shows some of
these varieties. It will be observed, that, whilst Orongomaihangai, occupy-
ing a bend of the river, was traced in a manner somewhat resembling a
bastioned front, with the faces of the ravelin prolonged to meet those of
the bastions, Pukekakariki was almost a perfect square unbroken into
flanks (see Plate III.). Nevertheless, flank defence was far from being
neglected. Owing to the extreme difficulty of moving artillery across the
gullies on the right of the enemy’s position, the attack was necessarily
made upon Orongomaihangai first, the ground in front of which was
swept by the fire of rifle-pits dug in the patch of bush on the right, and
cut out of the crest of the precipitous river bank.
The same remark applies to Pukekakariki, which was well flanked by
detached rifle-pits. Only a portion of the rifle-pits in these two pas were
provided with splinter-proof covering, probably owing to want of time.
Had the whole of them been protected in that manner, it is probable that
the artillery fire which rendered Orongomaihangai untenable, and led to
the evacuation of all the pas, would not have sufficed for that purpose,
and that they must have been taken by sap.
The nature of the soil at Taranaki is very favourable to the construction
of earthworks, whether for attack or defence, as the sides of an excavation,
even if vertical, will stand without any revetment.
The redoubts, eight in number, which were thrown up by the troops
during the attack on the Waikato position at the Waitara, had ditches
eight feet in depth, vertical and unrevetted. The parapets, about eight
feet thick, and seven feet six inches in height, were formed of layers of
fern mixed with earth. The advantage of this mode of construction was
seen during the attack on No. 3 Redoubt, where the enemy’s storming
party, after gaining access to the ditch unperceived in the darkness, found
themselves unable to clamber over the parapet, in consequence of the
yielding nature of the mixture of earth and fern, in which they could not
get a foothold. They then endeavoured to demolish it by pulling out the
fern, but the interlacing of its branches inside the parapet, with the weight
of the superincumbent earth, frustrated their efforts.
The accompanying map (Plate I.) shows the lines of sap and the
positions of the various redoubts.
The sap, both double and single, was constructed in the usual manner
with sap rollers and gabions, but, the supply of the latter being limited,
* Phormium tenax. The leaves are five or six feet long and two or three inches
wide, containing a great quantity of very strong fibre.


the gabions were removed from the rear as the work advanced, and a
revetment of fern and earth substituted. Thus, whilst the whole of the
work remained secure, a sufficient stock of gabions was always kept on
hand to push forward the head of the sap.
The opinion has often been expressed that the settlers, if left to them-
selves, would be able to defend themselves better than the troops could do
it for them. This opinion appears to be founded on the example of the
old Dutch settlers at the Cape, and the English in North America.
In both these cases the colonists had in the first instance the immense
advantage of using firearms against tomahawks, spears, or bows and
arrows. Every house was a little fort, and every man s rifle his constant
companion. Thus, before the introduction of fire-arms amongst the natives
made the terms more equal, the settlers had gained a prestige and a sense
of superiority which they never entirely lost.
In New Zealand the case is entirely different. It is true that the
whalers, sealers, and runaway sailors of former days, men accustomed
to a life of vicissitude and hardship, prompt to strike on small provo-
cation, and endowed with means of offence and defence which the Maories
did not then possess, were able to make themselves respected. But the
present race of European settlers in New Zealand is altogether different
in character. At the close of Heke’s war the European population of the
islands was barely 13,000, of whom but a very small number had taken
any part in the military operations. At the commencement of the recent
war the number had increased to about 60,000,* almost wholly by immi-
gration from the United Kingdom.
During this interval of more than twenty years, many of the Maori
tribes had been engaged in constant wars amongst themselves, whilst the
settlers had enjoyed profound peace. The result was, that the Maories
never lost their knowledge of the art of war, whilst the Europeans, who
were originally ignorant of it, never learned it. In short, they were very
like people of their class in England, excellent material for soldiers, fine
11 food for powder,” but altogether destitute, generally speaking, of the
special qualifications for guerilla warfare which they were commonly
supposed to possess. Game is scarce in New Zealand, and there is little
inducement for men to acquire the habit of using firearms. At New
Plymouth consequently, where the adult male population was scanty, the
women and children comparatively numerous, where no facilities for
defence existed, where there was net even a port by which communication
by sea with the other settlements could be secured, and where the people,
who were generally quiet peaceable agriculturists or tradesmen unac-
customed to war, were surrounded by half-savage enemies brought up
from childhood to skirmishing and the use of fire-arms, I have no hesitation
in saying that the place could not have been held without the presence of
a large body of troops.
There can be no doubt that the military qualities of the Maories, whilst
they have been greatly overrated by themselves, have been equally under-
rated by Europeans. It was a generally received opinion among the
settlers, not only before the recent war, but for some time after its com-
mencement, that, however expert the Maories might be in building pas
* See Appendix (B).


and constructing other works of defence, they were too timid to adopt
offensive operations, and that they would never venture to attack a
military post. I cannot find that there ever was any ground for such a
supposition. On the first occasion on which the Maories met the troops
(the attack on Korarareka in 1845) the former were the assailants. In
the war near Wellington they were almost always so, and at Wanganui in
1847 they repeatedly attacked the stockades in which troops were
posted.
In the recent war also, their well-planned and most gallant assault of
No. 3 Redoubt, as well as their repeated attacks upon the head of the sap,
have shown that when occasion requires it they want neither courage nor
capacity to undertake offensive operations even upon a considerable
scale.
Their habitually defensive tactics, instead of being due to timidity, are
really proofs of sound judgment and good generalship.
The attack on No, 3 Redoubt was caused by their finding themselves in
the presence of a commander whose tactics were superior to their own,
and whom they could not induce to fall into their trap, or to lead his
men up to their fastnesses to be shot down helplessly and unavailingly, as
had been done on more than one previous occasion.
The enemy were much more ready than the British public to acknow-
ledge the ability with which the attack against them was conducted.
In the former war, whilst admiring the bravery of the troops, they
regarded the tactics of our commanders with contempt and derision.
They now say that General Pratt is “ tohunga,” which means a master
of his art or calling; and they confess that they were confounded by the
operation of the sap, and that its slow, but certain and irresistible advance,
wearied, depressed, and disheartened them.
Towards the close of the operations an altered tone began to be per-
ceptible even in the colonial press, which had previously been loud in
vituperation of the general and troops, and, as I am not aware that any
answer has been given in England to the ignorant and unfounded depre-
ciation with which “ The Times ” was in the habit of speaking of the
behaviour of the troops, perhaps I may be permitted to quote one or two
short extracts from colonial papers. The correspondent of the u Taranaki
News,” writing from the Waitara on the 21st February, 1861, speaking
of the country about “ Te Arei ” pa, says—
Beyond is a grand semi-circle of hills and tremendous gullies. One noble hill, which
commands the whole on our extreme left, sloping off thence to the valley, is partly
cleared; but the remainder is clothed in a beautifully variegated skirt of dwarf bush,
amongst which the graceful mamaku is very prominent. The fern and dwarf bush on
the other hills have been partially burned by the retreating enemy, that it might not
afford a cover to our approach; and the summit of every hill from left to right, a
distance of not much less than a mile, appears to be one range of rifle-pits. If I have
succeeded in conveying any idea of our position, it will be seen that the vantage-ground
still belongs to our pertinacious and resolute enemy. Under a desultory fire, which
happily has not yet much harmed us, although continued with but small intermission
from daybreak to dusk, our brave fellows have been labouring somewhat slowly from
the last week’s bad weather, but surely approaching the fastness of the Maori; but there
is no hope of our being able to move with the celerity, promptitude, and all-subduing
energy of those gentlemen who conduct their warlike operations in theory from an easy
chair. The more we see and learn of the obstinate enemy in our front, the greater the
difficulties appear in the prosecution of the struggle in which we are engaged to a


successful issue. Do not misunderstand me. I write not this in a desponding spirit;
for with the above assurance increases our confidence in the master spirit directing
matters here.
A Melbourne newspaper in April, 1861, published the following very
just observations:
It is most instructive to observe that the forces in New Zealand have gained their
successes just by the very means which have been ridiculed by our colonial amateurs
and by “The Times." The general was slow and regular in his movements, —the
amateurs were all for energy and dash. According to “ The Times and his imitators,
savages, forsooth, have learnt “to despise regular warfareand it appears that we
have the best weapons, but do not know so well as the savage how to put them to the
best use. “The consequence is,” says “The Times,” “ that we retire in discomfiture
before foes whose superiority, although they are savages, actually lies less in numbers
than in wisdom. If the Maories had borrowed our shakoes and pipeclay, and drawn
themselves up in line to receive our attacks, we should laugh at their folly. Unluckily
it is we who show ignorance of the conditions of fighting, and the laugh is on the
savages’ side.” We question whether there is, even in the lucubrations of the colonial
press, anything so excessively absurd as the above, which in fact is probably unsur-
passed in the annals of literary or military criticism.
The self-evident folly of the statements renders all commentary superfluous ; but it is
only justice to the gallant general to quote the following remarks by one of the
repentant sinners who wrote some of the reports which doubtless misled “ The Times.’
The remarks are those of the correspondent of a Taranaki newspaper, and refer to the
attack on the last Maori stronghold:—
“ It is only when one has seen this position that he can appreciate the cautious manner
in which the general has approached it. Most of the troops have often expressed it as
their ardent wish to take it by a charge, and your correspondent always thought it the
best and safest plan till to-day; but I now perceive, that, to have charged this position,
would have been like ordering brave men to commit self-destruction. Even the natives,
before they could find footing on it, were obliged to dig away a narrow strip from the
brink, thus forming a ledge for themselves to stand on ; and even this shelf is so narrow
that not more than one row of men in single file can occupy Therefore a line of
soldiers charging it must, in their eagerness to meet their foes, either fall over the pre-
cipice and be dashed to pieces in the shallow river beneath, or, what would be as bad,
they would have to retire defeated before the destructive fire of an exulting foe. Neither
could an attack in flank be ventured upon along this ridge, as only one man could
advance at a time. It follows, therefore, that whatever might be won by charging an
enemy on ground presenting but ordinary difficulties, to order a rush on such a position
as this would be universally denounced as wilful murder, for the result could only be a
terrible catastrophe. I make this statement, because truth prescribes it, in justice to a
general whose plans have been too hastily censured.”
All honour to General Pratt for the skill with which he has rooted out the savages
from a line of defence of such unparalleled strength ; but, in our humble opinion, his
greatest glory consists in the firmness of mind he displayed, in disregarding the vitupe-
rations of his “civil” critics, and his perseverance in spite of all calumny in the
despised system of regular warfare—a system which it is now clearly demonstrated
could alone have been successful.
On a former occasion I expressed an opinion that the complete subjuga-
tion of the Maories would be a task little inferior in magnitude and diffi-
culty to that of the Conquest of Britain by the Romans. In some respects
it would be even more arduous. The difficulty of communication and
transport, owing to the natural features of the country, would be infinitely
greater than they can at any time have been in England, which neverthe-
less cost the Romans many a long year of hard work and hard fighting to
subdue. . „ ,
From the mountains of Scotland they retired baffled, and were even
compelled to protect their territory in the south by immense entrenchments
from the attacks of the wild tribes inhabiting the Caledonian Hills.


Moreover, the introduction of fire-arms has greatly diminished the supe-
riority of regular troops over savages in a difficult country. The power
which fire-arms have given them of projecting deadly missiles from invisi-
ble hiding places has immensely increased their facilities for resistance,
and, as the country in the North Island of New Zealand becomes more and
more impassable as you advance towards the interior, it would require
extraordinary care and precaution to prevent an invading force from
finding itself in a position from which to advance would be impossible, and
to retreat disastrous.
Let us hope that it may never be necessary to undertake anything of
the kind, not only on account of the enormous difficulty and expense which
must attend military operations on a great scale in that country, but for
the sake of the brave, high-spirited, and interesting race whose destruction
would in all probability follow.
The British Government is now in a far better position to promote a
durable pacification than it was at the close of the former war. At that
time the Maories considered themselves with much show of reason to have
been the victors in the contest, and they believed then, and continued to
believe until very recently, that it was in their power if they chose to
drive the whole of the European population into the sea.
The idea, once prevalent in England, of our superiority to the French,
which found expression in the old saying,—“On every pair of English
legs do march three Frenchmen,” fell short of the opinion of their own
prowess entertained by the Maories, who made no secret of their con-
viction that one Maori was equal to three soldiers in the fern and to
nine ‘in the bush. This flattering notion has now been rudely dispelled.
They have learned by bitter experience the superiority of a comparatively
small number of troops, when skilfully handled, even in positions pecu-
liarly favourable to native tactics.
The Waikatos, the proudest and most powerful of the native tribes,
now acknowledge the utter hopelessness of a contest with the power of
England; but they would probably not shrink from war, even to the
death, rather than abandon their rights of property in the soil.
It is easy to point out the absurdity of some 50,000 semi-savages
requiring a fertile territory as large as Ireland for their support, but we
can hardly blame the Maories if they take a different view of the ques-
tion. They have much pride of race, combined with a full knowledge of
the superiority in arts and civilisation of the Europeans. Although they
probably do not suspect the British Government of any deliberate inten-
tion to treat them with injustice, they are very naturally alarmed by the
rapidly increasing numbers and power of the colonists, which they cannot
help associating in their minds with an impression of the impending
downfall and dispossession of their own race. The possession of the
land is the only means of safety that they see before them, and it
is, perhaps, to be expected that they will cling to it with desperate per-
tinacity.
We are fortunately now in a position to practise conciliation towards
them without being suspected of timidity, and we may treat with gentle-
ness and consideration a high-spirited people, suffering under the humilia-
tion of unwonted and unexpected defeat.


APPENDIX (A).
Military Force in the province of Taranaki, including Naval Brigade, Militia, and Volunteers, from June, 1860, to
. January, 1861.
Date.
Troops and
Naval Brigade.
Militia and
Volunteers.
Total.
Effective
(about)
Remarks.
20th June, 1860 . . .
1188
573
1761
1500
H
11th August, 1860 . .
1786
532
2318
2000
K
10th September, 1860
1786
502
2288
2000
►
3rd October, 1860. . ,
1634
527
2161
1860
Half the Naval Brigade ordered to Auckland since last return. hh
12th November, 1860
1253
493
1743
1500
400 troops sent to Auckland.
10th December, 1860
1718
474
2192
1900
The troops sent to Auckland had returned.
1st January, 1861 . . .
1726
477
2203
1900
• W
28th January, 1861 . .
2460
522
2982
2600
-
Reinforcements of 14th and 57th Regiments arrived.
M
Troops and
Naval Brigade.
Militia and
Volunteers.
Total.
12th November, 1860, Garrison of New 1
Plymouth, in all, amounted to . . J
Of whom Effective, about
Non-Effective
530
455
377
226
907
681
I Non-Effectives included 126 Militia employed as boatmen,
/ carters, butchers, and bakers, in New Plymouth alone.
OJ
75 161
226


Northern Island
European.
. 35,000
Middle Island
.
. 25,000
Northern Island
Maori.
60,000
55,000
APPENDIX (B).
New Zealand.
Approximate Population in 1858.
Middle Island . . . . .2,500
57,500
Since that date the European population has probably increased to
about 100,000; but this increase is mostly due to the development of
Canterbury as a pastoral or “ squatting ” country, in competition with
Australia, and to the discovery of the great goldfields of Otago, which
have already drawn off many thousands of gold-diggers from Victoria and
New South Wales, The increase therefore is chiefly confined to the
Middle Island, where the Maori«s are insignificant in number.—C. P.


7 rui/Jrlale# to be*placed; cub the mdy of the roper vryth& order o/‘ their numbere. • . IP1.1 .
MAP OP THE BEAT 01WAB
IN THE
PROVINCE OF TARANAKI,
STEW 2MMIB.
>
- r ;' ' '
(htkmHjnywrau)
**
Scale of Miles.
0 1 2 3 4- K . T P
1 -.. .•.,i.. .Ur. ---t—•-•—-4 .. . .....i- I- "■" ” I i:,:r-;- ■ i
. Note . ]$ aJiye/RiflpyHis shewrv thua
TheFla/es to be/placed/ uh the/ end/ of (Joey Paper nv the order oi' their numbers.
C.Pasley, R.E
IRJohbnui


.
■
■


. • - —— ' ,
Stetah. of the Ground near the/ KA1HIHI RIVER,
Shewing ffie/Tbsitums of (he/ Rebel/ Fuse attddwi/ # tliMWi \\\\\tite
On/the / Tl ( hSU2 , ! v Odri860, also tk&FarcuUet' approaches bo --: t WjjwWfipv
OR ON GOMAI HAN GAI PA.
/front* a/ Sheioh/hy Colonel/ MonJd. K. K. —--
* fi™Bu,s-k* s \j
Kaihihi \ - * ,
jjly| I; j Fohn thick and kCgih
If If ■' ». Deep aAh preripitou-s Gukiro
Ml;; ( /\
\ !• A <k ''"c k #Ms- ) Swampy ab bottom/ \
m I J&-B- i! <&£&*= 4fe«- «£- / \ f \
I im&M , I \ / \
I \ \ \
% || GvJ/bhoUwm Jfc_°- 'V J, \
’j \
' -h-eeg I tjjX * ’
Scal e of Paces .
(f JOO 800 ___jgg *y* \
— 1— — " ~~~ J.R.Johhms




n a
II
I |HI
111 f \ f " « m\$ | I
F~ ' ' ' 1 ■ - --- ----- ~ ~~ 'U99JJS
<4 I Wo\\ Hill I
JK\\ . | flails
o h //»■' \ y ° I °? H ° °
2 <j I /Fv y\\ “
2 S | fl U \ rH | I
s5f | I JtF jMzvmrr* ||
q h j | \\. * J Ip 5 111
O tJ




SIE T C M o
EXPLANATORY OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF MAORI RIFLE PITS
1
1
P
1
w
i
« 1
?
| j 1 j 1 L_
“1
! I 7 r Y
i i '» IS
» l 1 ' , ?
-. i -U- i
1
Ill
/ / \'T / | |
K - * • 5
\ L
V.
It/ , £
suv \ U 1A
/ \ U m-P
vr
/W
w j w
1
1
O
w
/V
Plan.
j
i//
Scale / 20 Feed to an/ Inch/.
/ op 5
0
ID
20 30
40 50
eo 70
7 -
wmmm
1
wb
‘•as |p
* ip
*3 j b\.M£:
|L
i
■o Ip/
A 50 p' :
Section
on A.B .
Note. The/ interiors oi' Ilo covered.
Section on P . 1'
Fite were bawd with Ferny &a. and/
m r k
Wi'.
used as sleeping piccces_ Foodyvas
«o ' 11
'f8 ■ 1
on C . D .
aleo cooked m them'.
Section
3
\ .
, f
¥
*p
XSJobkmB


('
.•
■


* I *
■
»


