

Jppp ft' 10 ''<3
Slavepv
lS
Under? Ihe British Flap
Correspondence and Protest
AGAINST THE
KANAKA v LABOUR v TRAFFIC
Dr. J OHN G. PaTON,
MISSIONARY TO THE NEW HEBRIDES.
ffifZC
Woodford, Essex :
The South Woodford Printing Co., High Road.




Correspondence and Protest
AGAINST THE
KANAKA V LABOUR a TRAFFIC
Dr. John G. Paton,
MISSIONARY TO THE NEW HEBRIDES.


May, 1892.
This pamphlet against the Re-opening of the Kanaka
Labour Traffic between Polynesia and Queensland has been
entrusted to us to make public by the Veteran Missionary,
Dr. John G. Paton.
We earnestly trust that its circulation—in the interests of
the weak and down trodden, and for the honour of the British
name —may, by God’s blessing, be the means of securing the
immediate and final suppression of the Traffic.
JAMES PATON, B.A. {St. Paul's), 2, Park Quadrant, Glasgow,
Editor of the Autobiography of Dr. J. G. Paton.
A. K. LANGRIDGE, Hon. Organizing Sec., J. G. Paton Mission Fund,
To whom all communications should be addressed at
Grasmere,” Grove Hill, South Woodford, London.
Dr. Paton’s address is :
Moreland Grove, Coburg, Melbourne, Australia.


//-*-77,
PRO TEST, See page 8.
CORRESPONDENCE
BETWEEN
Dr. JOHN G. PATON.
Missionary to the New Hebrides ,
The Hon. Sir SAMUEL GRIFFITHS,
Premier of Queensland.
Moreland Grove, Coburg,
Melbourne, 19 th February , 1892.
To the Hon. Sir SAMUEL GRIFFITHS,
Premier of Queensland.
Dear Sir Samuel,
With much pain we read in the newspapers that you have
“issued a manifesto reviewing the decline of the sugar indus-
“ try in Queensland, which is now struggling for an existence,
“ and it has therefore been decided to extend the period for
“ the employment of Polynesian labour for a further term of
“ten years, in which general satisfaction is expressed by all
“sections of the community except the Labour party. The
“ Northern press speaks of it in the warmest praise.”
Dear Sir Samuel, we do hope and pray that no pressure
will ever lead you to renew the Polynesian Labour Traffic to
Queensland, which you know has been so demoralizing and
ruinous to all connected with it in all its past history. Re-
gardless of consequences, it has no doubt been a great saving
to many employers in securing cheap labour; but it has
blunted if not destroyed the best feelings of their nature, and
also of the Queensland public; as seen in their taking upon
themselves, by the largest petition said to have ever been
signed and presented in your Colony, to condone the crimes
and murders by the crew of the Hopeful , and in clamouring
Hr 3fdLo


for their release from all punishment, till they were at liberty
as good members of society, although their hands were drip-
ping with the blood of many Islanders whom they had slain.
But surely Sir Samuel, you, whose praise has been pro-
claimed all over the world for your humane and wise policy in
getting the Labour Traffic to Queensland suppressed because
of its crimes and murders, will never be led now to condone
all by proclaiming its continuance for another ten years.
You have seen clearly that in, defiance of all your regu-
lations and safeguards, as to agents and bonds, such crimes
have always been inseparable from this traffic, and are in it
now. Witness the printed report of your last Royal Commis-
sion, with such a record of crime and murder as it reveals for
one year; and Commodore Williams’ report to the Admiralty ;
as well as the writings of others who got behind the scenes and
have seen the shocking working and doings of this traffic.
With such evidence before you I cannot see how you, who by
a noble, protracted fight got the traffic, on account of its crimes,
suppressed entirely to Queensland, can on any ground be
justified in reopening it without being responsible for all its
evils, and this surely you would shrink from.
If it is renewed avowedly to benefit planters and parties
interested in checking the decline of the sugar industry in
Queensland, “Icabod” may be written, not only on the sugar
industry, but over those who renew and engage in the traffic
further.
When your last Royal Commission brought before the
world such a record of kidnapping and crime in one year, by
the witnesses of all the six labour vessels whose conduct it
enquired into, notwithstanding all your regulations and bonds
—with McNeil, one of your sworn agents, paid by you to
prevent such crimes, himself one of the principal murderers
in the Hopeful , and having his log and the captain’s log so
concocted as to deceive the investigation of one of H.M.
Men-of-War, and you all —what would the Commission have
been obliged to record had its enquiry extended to the fifteen
or sixteen vessels engaged in getting natives for your planta-
tions, by every means possible, during its last year, 1890,
before you closed it by law ?
To continue its prohibition by law would be the surest
way, under God’s blessing, to revive not only the sugar industry,
but to secure a new start and success to every industry in
your Colony; but to renew it for another ten years will un-
doubtedly be followed by Heaven’s blight, for God cannot


smile on any trade so steeped in human sacrifice, suffering and
bloodshed, nor can He bless those who sanction and encour-
age it.
Even apart from its murders, I appeal to you as a hus-
band and a father to think of the sorrow, the suffering and the
agony caused to thousands of Islanders by the recruiting of this
cheap labour for your plantations ! The recruiters lead many
children away from their parents and parents away from
their children, wives from their husbands and husbands from
wives, as you well know is done by every vessel in the trade.
Sugar planters may not care for such agony; but God does
hear the cries, see the tears, pity the agony, and revenge
the murders of our down-trodden defenceless Islanders. I do
most earnestly plead with you, in the interests of humanity and
for your own honour and the honour of Australia, not to
renew the Polynesian Labour Traffic.
How can you, Sir Samuel, sanction on the Islands a
a traffic, which has always done there what you and every
parent in Queensland would be justified in slaying the collector
to prevent them doing in Brisbane. Planters may wink at
such crimes, but God will avenge them in His own way.
Dear Sir Samuel, do try to avert the calamity and retribu-
tive justice sure to follow a renewal of this traffic and its
crimes for ten years. Rather use your powerful influence to
get Britain to annex the New Hebrides, and be able for ever
to close it then to all slave collectors; a step on which God’s
blessing would rest; for we weep over the population of our
Islands, and the continuance of such crimes, and the destruc-
tion of our Mission by that shocking traffic.
Vours faithfully,
(Signed) JOHN G. PATON.
[Sir Samuel Griffiths Reply.]
Merthyo, Brisbane,
February 27///, 1892.
My dear Sir,
It was not without much reluctance that I came to the
conclusion, that it is the right thing to do to remove the
prohibition against the introduction of Polynesians into
Queensland. I am fully sensible, no one more so, of the
abuses that prevailed. They had, however, been reduced


almost to a minimum by the end of 1890, and still more
stringent provisions will be made in the future if it is in my
hands.
I have publicly given my reasons at length for my change
of opinion, and have nothing to add to them except this—
that I could not sit still and look calmly an at the ruin of
hundreds and thousands of our own people, from want of
labour to utilize the rich resources of the country, when such
labour is available, as I believe, without any moral wrong
doing. This is the pass to which the insensate action of the
so called Labour party has brought us. You are quite
mistaken in supposing that my action is avowedly, or at all,
in the interests of the planters exclusively. I think of them,
but I have in my mind the whole people with whose interests
I am charged, and I do what my conscience bids me.
Yours very truly,
(Signed) S. W. GRIFFITHS.
Dr. Raton’s reply.]
To the Hon. Sir SAMUEL GRIFFITHS,
Premier of Queensland.
My dear Friend,
Amidst your burdensome perplexing duties, I thank you
for your reply to my appeal, though your conclusions astonish
and grieve me exceedingly. You know God charges us with the
interests of others besides those at our own doors and, surely,
with the knowledge of the past history of this traffic which
you possess, you cannot again renew it, and look calmly on at
the ruin of hundreds and thousands of our poor islanders, as
in the past, to benefit a small section of the people in
Queensland, without being held responsible for its crimes.
1 know that by renewing that traffic you do not intend to
renew its evils ; but you know such evils have always been
inseparable from it, and, no doubt in defiance of all you can
do to prevent them, they will continue both on the islands
and at sea while the traffic exists. Surely the conduct of no
party should lead us to inflict wrong and suffering on the
innocent.
The minimum of the traffic-evils in 1890 were appaling
to all out of Queensland, and to some in it. Taking children
from parents and parents from children, wives from husbands
and husbands from wives, may appear to some a minimum


evil in such a traffic ; and all in the trade know that this is the
common practice of every labour vessel to Queensland and
all other places to which they are taken; and who knows how-
many were murdered in getting them away from their island
homes ? But God sees all this and will punish the guilty.
Shortly before you closed the traffic, one of our Mission-
aries w r as requested by a number of men on his island to go
with them to a labour vessel, w-hich had got a considerable
number of their wives on board, and had them confined to
take them away; but the captain and agent refused the appli-
cation to give any of them up and took them all away. The
Missionary was abused for pleading for them ; and though one
of the fathers held up his infant child pleading for the
mother to be given back to it, or it would die, yet the slavers
would not give back the mother to the infant, nor the infant
to the mother. Can pity be found among such labour
collectors ?
But to plead further is useless, seeing you have so made
up your mind to “do what conscience bids you!” To free
my conscience, however, using what knowledge of the traffic
I possess, I shall now appeal to the Public in Australasia and
Britain, pleading wath all to unite, and, if possible, secure the
complete suppression of this shocking traffic, at least in every
British Colony. Yet washing you and Queensland every
blessing in Jesus Christ,
I remain, dear Sir Samuel,
Yours faithfully,
(Signed) JOHN G. PATON.


Dr. JOHN G. PATON’S
PROTEST
AGAINST THE RE-OPENING
OF THE
POLYNESIAN LABOUR TRAFFIC
At the close of the year 1890, the Kanaka Labour
for a few months Traffic was'suppressed in Queensland, chiefly by the influence
on, y- of Sir Samuel Griffiths in denouncing its atrocious crimes
and murders as a disgrace to the Colony and to humanity.
All the labour vessels, however, which could sail with licenses
before the last day of 1890, kept returning with their loads
of recruits till far into 1891, and having put additional
vessels on that year and for years before it, they secured an
extra supply of labourers and bound all to serve in the
Colony for three years—so that, practically, it is only about
seven or eight months since the plantations ceased to get
additional black labour, and seeing very many thousands of
Does not account Polynesians are still working on the plantations, it is clear
for decline of , J , rr ° * , r
sugar industry, that closing the traffic cannot account for the decline of the
sugar industry in Queensland. It has, as Sir Samuel Griffiths
knows well, been declining for many years past.
Pken' This traffic has taken away some 70,000 of the most
Hebrides, mosPd - healthy lads and girls from the New Hebrides, and similar
deaThtn Queens, proportions from other groups, nearly half depopulating our
land. islands. Though mostly the young and healthy only were
taken away, yet from long hours of labour, hard work, and
changed circumstances of food, clothing, and houses, the
mortality among them has been very great, often the largest
per cent, in the world ; and many thousands of them have
been laid in their graves in Queensland —buried like dogs—
while others have been imported so to labour, suffer and die,
through the planters’greed of gain. Dreadful immorality is
also encouraged among them, but the veil must be drawn
here.
Immorality and .....
drinking encour- The law forbids giving them intoxicating drinks, yet they
land* plantations! get it, and a planter informed another minister and myself


that on the Sabbath, the natives drank and fought frightfully,
and that he could scarcely keep them from burning their
houses and his own. I heard another planter say that for
£lO he had sold them hogs for a feast, after which they had
savage fighting to the amusement of a crowd of white
onlookers, and even police, who said they could not interfere, es native
until by wounding and killing one another, they had broken labour, ° 4 d na per
the peace. In this way a number of Sabbaths were spent. labomqav-
On the sugar plantations by law the Polynesians are paid 4d. erage), 6,6 per
per day, if they live to get it, for doing work for which white P by fit em-
men would have to be paid from cs. to Bs. per day. The payment of na-
, # t A tives o 2 per qjiv
poor islanders have no rights in common with white people, each’man.
and as they do not, or dare not, complain, in all respects they Polynesians no
serve the planters purpose best. wfthwhite" m ° n
But with the internal knowledge of this shocking traffic Sir Samuel
i • in* o i tc J.L j * i Griffiths defeut-
which Sir Samuel Griffiths possesses, we cannot conceive how i ng his own ends
such a wise far-seeing statesman as he is, does not feel that { £® newing the
by renewing and continuing this traffic for another ten years,
instead of reviving,’ he is almost sure to kill the sugar
industry there; as the cruel oppression and blood-shed of
the traffic will cry to Heaven for revenge, not only on the
murderers, but also on the employers, and on those responsible
for renewing it, seeing it is well known that such crimes have
always been inseparable from it.
No doubt, as in its worst past, many will even now However much
. . *■ ’ J glossed over the
defend it, and boast of the kind treatment and advantages traffic is a. system
to the poor islanders on the plantations, but I have seen of s,avery-
them treated there as no other portion of the human race
could be treated. Before a number of gentlemen and myself,
a planter put the following questions to a number of his
men Are you happy ? Do you like plantation work ? Do
you get plenty of food? Would you like to go back to your
Islands ? They replied yes or no to his delight,—when he
said “ You see how happy they are,” &c. Soon after I asked
them the same questions in their own language, but their
answers were exactly the reverse of what they had before
given, and they implored me to get them taken home to
Tanna. The traffic is a system of deception and cruel
oppression all through.
In proof of this I shall quote from the Report of the dence ancTre C ort
last Royal Commission, which in Queensland examined all of n ßoyai dom-
available witnesses regarding the conduct of six labour misslon ’
collecting vessels for one year.—The Commission embraced
the following enquiries :


Matter*enquired (ist.) “As to the circumstances under which the
“ Islanders were engaged.
(2nd.) “ The manner in which the nature of the engage-
“ ment was explained to them.
(3rd.) “ The understanding by the recruits of the nature
“of the engagements, and the period for which they had
“ agreed to serve.”
naUon S ° fexanii ' The i nvest ig at i° ns of the Commission continued from
the beginning of January till about the end of May, 1885,
and its report is printed in 190 pages. The vessels appointed
for examination were the “Ceara,” “Lizzie,” “Hopeful,”
“Forest King,” “Heath,” and “Sybil,” —all under the
strictest bonds and" regulations of the traffic, yet the Report
says:—
Labourer* 1 ail°e- ( ist ) of the “Ceara” (page 26 —“Our opinion is that
cured under false “ all the recruits brought by the “ Ceara ” on this voyage,
period “ were seduced on board by false pretences; that the nature
of engagement “ 0 f their engagements was never fully explained to them ;
never exp ame (( they had little or no comprehension of the nature of
“ the work they had to perform ; and that the period for
“ which they agreed to come was in no single instance for
“ three years.”
Ceara, and voy. Second voyage of the “Ceara” (page 27:) —“Our
Labourers secur- . . . , J ° - , ... , r i a* i •
ed by fraud. “ opinion is that a system of deliberate fraud was practised in
“ engaging all the recruits during this voyage . . . that
“ none believed they had agreed to remain in Queensland for
“ three years.”
Lizzie, ist voy. (2nd) of the “ Lizzie ” at page 26 : —“We are of opinion
crusting “ that not one of the labourers brought by the “ Lizzie ” on
megai tive a " d U this voyage agreed, when recruited, to serve and remain in
“ Queensland for three years ; that the nature of the engage-
“ ments was never duly explained or understood by them ;
“ and that the method of recruiting w r as cruelly deceptive
“ and altogether illegal.”
Lizzie, and voy. Of the second voyage of this vessel, at page 28 ; — “ On
biy^idnappet[ C & “ reviewing the whole evidence as to the recruiting on this
deceived. “ voyage of the “ Lizzie,” w r e are of opinion that while some
“of the natives were forcibly kidnapped, all of them were
“allured on board by false statements; that the nature of
“ the engagement to which they subsequently attached their
“ marks was deliberately misrepresented to them ; and that
“ they had no clear understanding that they were coming to
“ work on a Queensland sugar plantation for three years.”


{3rd) of the “Hopeful” at page 32: —“We are of die 1 **I*l 1 * 1
“ opinion that none of the recruits on board the “ Hopeful” labourer*law.
“ were lawfully recruited; and that not one understood he fully recruited-
“ had to remain and serve in Queensland for three years.”
We give more about this vessel below.
(4th) of the “Sybil” at page 34 : —“We are of opinion La&urersde’
“ that the attempts made to explain the nature of the engage- ceived by drunk-
“ ments to the recruits, both at the Islands and at the port 0 f encaptain-
“ arrival, were wholly inadequate ; that the engagements were
“ not fully understood by the recruits ; and that none of them
“ appreciated that the term of service for which they had left
“their homes was for three years.” “The Inspector at
“ Mackay, having read the “Sybil’s” log made the following
“entry: —“Having read this log, it is a record of drunken-
“ ness and incapacity on the part of the master, and
“ consequent insubordination on the part of the crew.”
(sth) of the “ Forest King” at page 35; —“W 7 e are of Voy. of Forest
“ opinion that all the recruits brought by the “ Forest King”
“ were decoyed on board under false pretences ; that the under false Pre-
“ nature of their engagements was not explained to them ; ences "
“ and that none of them understood that they were to work
“ on a sugar plantation for any period, much less for three
“ years.”
(6th) of the “Heath,” at page 36: —“Our opinion is Voy. of Heath.
“ that the recruits brought by the “ Heath ” were enticed on frfd'deceivJdimo
“ board under false pretences ; that the nature of the engage- contract.
“ ment was never satisfactorily explained to them ; and that
“ none of them comprehended that they were coming to
“ Queensland to work on a sugar plantation .for three years.”
The report states that the mortality among the natives Mortality among
brought by those vessels straight from the islands in their Queensland
most healthy condition was as follows : sugarpiantations
No. that Deaths per cent,
were dead. on the plantation.
Of 107 by the Ceara, Ist voyage, 26 - 24‘3 in one year.
„ T 37 „ „ 2nd „ 22 - i6 - o in 10 months.
„ 126 „ Lizzie, Ist „ 12 - 9-5 in one year.
„ 66 „ „ 2nd „ 11 - x 6-6 in 8 months.
„ 112 „ Hopeful „ 13 - n*6 in 7 months.
~ 37 „ Sybil „ 6 - i 6 -2 in 4 months.s
„ 21 „ Forest King „ 2 - in months.


How native Of the doings of the “Hopeful,” the Commission says
obwined* are at page 29 : —“ At Merari 30 recruits were taken on board.
“ Some declared that in stretching up the side of the ship for
S e HopefnT° yage “ tobacco in exchange for their fruits, they were dragged on
“ board by McNeil (the Government Agent) and Alic, against
a teard dra <i ged “ wishes, and taken away. At Bently Bay, a woman
kidnapped. “ and several young men were —under threat of being shot—
Others kidnapp. “ordered by McNeil, or dragged by Preston, into the boat;
of death r threat “ the woman, who had been wounded in the struggle, after-
“ wards escaped by swimming ashore at Teste Island.
“ Both the boats subsequently returned to the shore, the
“ people ran into the bush, and McNeil set fire to their
“ houses. At Ferguson Island natives came out in canoes to
Conduct of “ trade with the “ Hopeful,” two of her boats were lowered —
accredited Ciov- “one manned by McNeil, Preston, Harry, Jack, and Alic ;
. 6 nd m hls t nfen ent_ “ an d ot ker by Barney Williams, Rogers, Charley, and the
an is men. <t j. WQ XesteTsland boys. The canoes turned shoreward, upon
Chase 2 canoes “ which chase was given. McNeil followed one with eight
full of natives. << natives in it, and Williams another with six or seven in it.
“ McNeil was unable to overtake the one he was pursuing,
ihootTmeifto “ when he stood up in his boat and fired at the canoe . . .
stop canoe. “ the steersman fell in the canoe dead —the ball also struck
“ the man in front of him who fell overboard and sank. The
“ other occupants of the canoe leapt into the water, and
Canoe captured “ McNeil cut it with a tomahawk and directed his crew to
kidnapped 8 “ pick up the natives who were swimming in the w r ater, —four
“ were so rescued, and to prevent their escape, placed under
2nd canoe sunk, “the thwarts of the boat. The other canoe was cut by
1 native shot and “ Williams, and the natives as usual took to the sea. A rifle
s stolen on heard « was fj re( j an( i one islander shot, five islanders and a small boy
On trying to “ were picked up by the boat. One of the rescued islanders
escape a native “ jumped overboard from the boat, w'hereupon Williams
butchered. “ followed him with a large knife in his hand, and as the
“ native was coming upon the reef Williams cut the poor
“ wretch’s throat, and he sank into deep water. The boat
“ then pulled up to the reef, Williams leapt into it and the
a Huie native “ two boats joined company. The little boy Avho was no use
boy cast adrift .. / , 1 , -r. , , , • ,
and murdered. as a recruit, w r as cast adrift on tw r o cocoa nut& which were
“ tied together under his arms, the little fellow was seen to
“ slip from the nuts and was drowned in the surf. The canoe
“ McNeil had cut contained the dead body of the steersman,
“ Williams cut the head off and the mutilated remains were
“ thrown overboard. There were now four natives in each
“ boat under the thwarts to prevent their escape. These
“ eight escaped when sent to the Victoria plantation (Queens-
“ land), and wandered about in the bush for two months, and
“ w r hen at last found, they were conveyed to Ingham.”


“At Normanby Island, on landing, the natives ran i urtherbut( ' hery
“away into the bush and were followed by McNeil,
“ Williams, Preston, and Rogers, rifle shots were heard and
“ McNeil and his men returned to the boats. Preston declared
“he had shot two men and Williams owned to having shot a
“boy. That night two boys escaped, next day McNeil went at t ‘o e resxst° V and
“on shore and threatened to fight if the boys were not got. *hot-
“ He fired two houses near the beach, and the natives rushed
“ out throwing spears and stones at the boat’s crew, the boat’s
“ crew responded with rifles and two native men were killed.
“At Ciawata Island a canoe with five natives came out from ec i meno f
“the island. A boat manned by McNeil (agent), Captain the method 1 of
“Schofield, Preston, Rogers, Alic, Harry and Jack pulled (p) C “"wer S free
“ after the canoe, the natives shook their heads saying they
“did not want to go; McNeil cut the canoe with a tomahawk
“and the natives jumped into the water, four of the five were
“ picked up and put under the thwarts to prevent their escape
“ till they got to the ship, it was too dark to see the fifth
“ . That night to prevent the boys escaping a sentry was
“placed on deck with a rifle. Next morning McNeil and Another example
“ Williams’ boats gave chase to a canoe containing four natives of slave catching
“who refused to come to the ship. McNeil cut the canoe and
“ it sank, three of the boys were picked up and the fourth was
“ also dragged into the boat and so taken away. Again call-
ing at Teste Island 28 recruits escaped, about two miles off
“shore. After this the “Hopeful” was boarded by the a false log.
“boarding officers of H.M.S. “Swinger” who overhauled
“ the Government Agent’s (McNeil) log and the captain’s, and
“ finding all right, the next day the “ Hopeful ” sailed for
“ Queensland.”
The Royal Commission sums all up saying (page 23) : — summing up by
“The history of the cruise of the “Hopeful” of which s^° yal Com '
“ foregoing is an outline drawn from the evidence submitted The } abour
“to us, is one long record of deceit, cruel treachery, deliberate Traffic one long
“kidnapping and cold-blooded murders. The number of
“ human beings whose lives were sacrificed during the recruit- deHberar^kid^
“ ing can never be accurately known. In addition to the two bfoodef murder,
“men killed at Samaroa, for which McNeil and Williams were
“ tried before, and condemned by, the Supreme Court, ....
“ the stories narrated to us more than confirmed the facts
“ brought out at the public trial, and there is in our estimation Evidence
“ abundant evidence of the commission of many other murders, abundant.
“ The inhuman slaughter of the natives of Hilewow was amply Horrors,
“corroborated by six or seven witnesses. Anything more
“ heart-rending we have never seen or heard than the tale
“of the father of the drowning of his little boy, or the horror


“ depicted in Waneipa’s eyes and face when describing the
“ doing to an atrocious death'of the boy on the reef. All were
“at one as to'the shooting and throat-cutting, and the main
“ incidents were testified to by the boatmen, Jack and Charley.”
Report of Royal I have quoted this history of the traffic from the report
quoted M°that t* l6 R°y a l Commission, as none should doubt its truthful-
none may doubt ness, but much more from many sources can be produced to
But other evi P rove i ts disgraceful, cruel character. Though only now and
deuce could be again law has been able to bring to light such a multitude as
corrok>me° Dr. M u rray*s laugh t ere d' i n his vessel, or as were murdered by
the “ Hopeful” crew, yet the traffic has been steeped in.human
suffering, blood-shed and deaths on the Islands and at sea from
Oni 6 vessels the commencement up to the present. When such a history
examined!'what is brought to light by the Royal Commission from six only of
ofan°r6 had rews t * ie vesse ' s —under'all their safeguards to prevent such crimes
been examined! —what would have been revealed had the Commission been able
to examine the”conduct of all the fifteen or sixteen labour ves-
sels, which in 1890 and for years before, had been tryingby every
means possible to secure for the Queensland sugar plantations
why is the sugar the labourers they could before the traffic closed ? How is it
industry decfin- that for many years the sugar industry has been declining in
Queensland, and fortunes made and as quickly lost in it, and
~ „ . other industries not prospering ? No doubt God’s curse rests
God s curse rests . 1 fT ° .
on it & the blood- on the sugar industry and the money made by it, and on the
through"?^ 0 Colony which licenses it, and condones its crimes to make
riches by it.
Petition for When a petition with 28,000 signatures was presented to
murderers of the Governor in Council in Queensland, to get the murderers
Hopeful. and kidnappers in the “ Hopeful ” pardoned, and a deputation
waited on Sir Samuel Griffiths to get McNeil and Williams
reprieved from the gallows, the plea for mercy, actually was
The reason urged based on the ground that “ these atrocities had been cominon ,
for mercy, such “ and it 7ms hard to make these men the first victims
"’ m Regarding the “ Hopeful,” Sir Samuel said : —“ He had never
“ heard of such a voyage of murderous atrocities ;” and when
sir Samuel he first read the papers, he exclaimed : “It would have been
demned*thetVaffic “ the right thing if every one of them had been hung from
2 years since. “ the yard arm.”
How then can he How can it be possible that Sir Samuel Griffiths, with his'
renew the traffic. e y es Q p en tQ t h e p ast horrors of this dreadful traffic, is not
only going to condone them all, but also renew it, licensing
other labour vessels with their fiendish crews in human form,
having no more security than the crew of the “ Hopeful ” had
to prevent them repeating daily for ten years the same crimes !
who will be responsible for them ?


Though Federation of all our Churches and Colonies is
much to be desired for many reasons, yet, with such undoubted
evidence now before the world of the real character and
crimes of this traffic, if Sir Samuel Griffiths should renew
it, without a very strong protest from the Churches and people churches and
of Queensland, I hope every other Australian Church and people of Austra.
Colony will show their abhorrence of it, by protesting against [^against s™* 5 ™*
its renewal in the strongest terms, and even by refusing to be renewal of traffic
federated with a church and Colony so lost to all sense of
right and wrong, to all pity for the suffering and murdering of
defenceless men and women, that they may not suffer in the And if necessary
. . r ,, 1 y r * • m i • refuse federation
punishment sure to follow a renewal of this traffic and its with Queensland
crimeS - suppressed.
My last argument is—that as nearly all the available Worse
labour has been takep away from our Islands to Queensland, frames renewed
Fiji, New Caledonia, Samoa, the pearl shell fisheries in Torres
Straits, and to work for the inter-island traders and planters
(where very many thousands of them have found their graves), increasing
this renewal, with the ever increasing demand for cheap ch^p n f a £ur and
labour and the ever increasing difficulty of inducing the few fewer available
natives who remain to leave their island homes, will surely tro^”sof
greatly increase the atrocities of recruiting as long as the recruiting there-
traffic exists. f ore hke ' y t 0
increase.
As I praised Sir Samuel Griffiths for closing it, so now Dr. Paton’s
most solemnly I protest against his re-opening the traffic. I again*" 'renewal
protest in the interests of our islanders and mission, of the°f trafflc-
planters and their collectors, of Queensland and humanity, and
for the honour of Sir Samuel, Australia, and Britain. I feel
bound to do so as a duty to God and His cause, for we must
all appear before the judgment seat of Christ. And I plead who win help
most earnestly with the press, the Churches and all our ?
Colonies to protest, and do all possible to avert this dreaded
calamity to all concerned, especially to Sir Samuel Griffiths,
the planters, and Queensland.
I plead with our beloved Queen Victoria, the British His plea to his
Government, and all in Her Dominions, to unite to do all Q ueen and
possible for ever to suppress this shocking traffic and destruc- country-
tion of human life to secure cheap labour in our British
Colonies. Oh that Britain would annex the New Hebrides
adding another rich source of wealth to her Australasian
possessions, and for ever closing those islands to this inhuman
traffic in men and women. Traders of all nations,
English, French, German, American, Swedes, &c., &c,, have
now on our islands a free field for hunting down and obtain-
ing-cheap labour, in which they can and do, as seen by the


quotations, commit the most atrocious crimes and murders
without exposure, restraint, or punishment. Surely all who
permit, licence, and employ such labour will be held respon-
sible in God’s eyes for all its crimes; for, even with its enforced
ten years engagement, I hold it is the worst kind of slavery,
scarcely under a cloak to any person now. Alas! Alas! for
our poor down-trodden islanders and those who are destroy-
ing them !




1508 00247616 1
