

Returned Servicemen’s Anti-Communist
Vigilance Corps of Australia
Addless all Correspondence to;
THE SECRETARY,
BOX NO. ,
SYDNEY
G.1’.0.
MELBOURNE
To the President and Secretary of all Sub-Branches, —
Alarmed at the obvious infiltration into the N.S.W. Council and Sub-
Branches of the R.S.S. & A.I.L.A. of persons affiliated directly or indirectly with
the Communist Party of Australia, a number of Ex-servicemen who seek to
preserve the high ideals of the League, have joined together for the purpose of
investigating Communism within the'League.
The members of this organization are of varying political beliefs who feel that
the influence of Communism in Australia is one which will have a disastrous effect
on our economic and national life.
We are alarmed at the fact that the recently elected President of the N.S.W.
R.S.L. was welcomed to office by the Communist newspaper "Tribune”, and the
fact that following his election he made an appeal to the Executive officers of
Sub-Branches throughout New South Wales for unity which was welcomed by
Communist members of the Council who have endorsed his action.
This organization has caused investigations to be made into the personnel
of the N.S.W. Council and other members whom we suspected of white-anting
out movement.
The results of these investigations are attached for your information.
W. SMITH,
Hon. Secretary.


We find that two members of the NS.W. Council
are active Communists who have caused considerable
damage to the movement in the centres with which they
are associated.
We refer to Arthur Geitzelt, Southern Metropolitan
Councillor, and Charles Davidson of Katoomba, Blue
Mountains Councillor.
Both these men have been white-anting the K.S.L.
and have missed no opportunity of spreading the
Marxist doctrine in this organization.
The results at Katoomba have been alarming- The
Sub-Branch President has resigned and many leading
citizens have withdrawn from the R.Si.
The Secretary of the Katoomba Communist Party, a
man named Small, is an executive of the Katoomba
Sub-Branch.
Charles Davidson and his associate Dr, Dark have
introduced to the Town, prominent Communist lec-
turers such as Rupert Lockwood and Rev. Churchward.
Arthur Geitzelt’s record during the early stages of the
war is one which suggests that he was then guilty of
subversive activities against the prosecution of the War
and a record of his activities in that direction is
attached.
Our investigations led us to the Registrar General’s
office where there is on record the fact that there is a
Communist Company known as People’s Printing fit
Publishing Society Ltd., whose address is Marx House,
695 George Street, Sydney, headquarters of the Com-
munist Party. This company controls and publishes
various Communist papers throughout the State. The
Directors of this Company are all prominent Commun-
ists, the chief of whom is Sharkey, recently convicted
of sedition. In addition, J. B. Miles, Gould and
Keesing are shown on this list.
Among the registered shareholders are:—
Charles Davidson, of 7 Commandory Street,
Katoomba, Accountant, 10 Shares.
Dr. Eric Dark, of 141 Cascade Street, Katoomba,
Medical Practitioner, 25 Shares.
Arthur A. Geitzelt, of 20 Endeavour Street,
Sans Soud, Organiser, 10 Shares.
Harold Rich, Bergeest’s Solicitor, Daking House,
Sydney, 5 Shares.
Viola Bcrgeest, wife of Arthur Bergeest, Flat
5, Moore Park Road, Paddington, 4 Shares.
No more evidence is required than this document at
the Registrar General’s office to clearly bring home to
members of the R.S-L. that on the N.S.W, Council
are definitely two men prominent in the Communist
Organization which at present has so disrupted the
economic life of our community.
The recent dissolution of the Eastern Metropolitan
Council by the State Council was justified when it was
revealed that Communist Arthur Bergeest, former
President of the Communist-controlled Painters and
Decorators’ Union, was the leader of the subversive
influences in chat Council and his assodates are also
holders of shares in the above Communist Publishing
Company.
They are as follows:
JAN ZWOLSMAN of 26 Boundary Street, Padd-
ington, who chaired the meeting on the night the
attack was made on the Federal Executive.
WILLIAM INGRAM, Secretary of the Paddington-
Woollahra Sub-Branch.
FRANK LESLIE, School Teacher, former Secretary
of the Eastern Metropolitan District Council.
‘ALBERT KEESING, Matraville, who at times took
part in the debate and chaired the meeting.
In view of the revelations, we feel that these facts
should be placed before every Sub-Branch in New
South Wales and we seek your co-operation in calling
on your President, Mr. William Yeo, to take action
to rid the organization of these disruptive elements,
whose aim is to destroy our democratic institutions
and establish a Soviet dictatorship for Australia.
In all moves by these two Communists in the N.S.W-
Council, they have been supported by at least seven
other Councillors and we have examined the records
of these men and some of the candidates who have
submitted their names for election to the State Council.
Like Mr. Ferguson, President of N.S.W. Branch of
the Australian Labour Party, we appeal to all Sub-
Branches throughout the State for a united front
against these Reds and we feel that action must
immediately be taken to rid the R.S.L. of Davidson,
Geitzelt, Bergeest, Zwolsman, Keesing, Ingram and
all others who are found to be guilty of associating
with the Fifth Column Organization.
We appeal to the motto of the League:—
“The Price of Liberty
is Eternal Vigilance”


WHO is WHO in the group of Communist Candidates for N.S.W. State Council.
In the fight against Communism "Those who are
not with us are against us-”
Communist Davidson and Geitzelt can always depend
on the following members of the Council for support:—
W. YEO. President. Always with the Communist
Group when attacks were made on these people. His
election was welcomed by the Communist paper
“Tribune”. His appeal for unity sounds very like a
similar appeal made by J. Leslie, ex-secretary of the
Eastern Suburbs District Council.
S. BLACK. Fraternises with the Communist group—
receives much publicity from "Tribune” —Is candidate
for Metropolitan Vice-President.
BERGHGEST. Fought against attempting at ex-
pulsion of Communists from the League- Prominent
Communist. Wife is shareholder in People’s Printing
and Publishing Society Ltd. Does placards of Com-
munist’s Groups for May Day. Past President of
Communist controlled Painters fl£ Decorators’ Union.
Saw no active service 1914-1918. Arrived England
T.B.L. Joined League 1943. With Communist Group
at Congress. Candidate for Eastern Metropolitan
Councillor.
GEITZELT- Southern Metropolitan Councillor. Has
honeycombed this area with Communists groups. Has
defied R.S.L. Council by bitter attacks. Suspected of
Communistic activities in early part of the war (see
war record).
SHEEPSHANKS. Northern Suburbs Councillor.
Joined R.S.L. 1943- No military credentials produced.
Doubtful if entitled to R.S.L. membership. Amenities
Officer with Coal Board. Votes with Communists
Group.
ALLEN, H. W- Schoolteacher, Baradine, Member
of Communist Teachers’ Federation. Silent on Com-
munism. Always votes with Davidson and Bergeest.
Candidate for N.S.W. Council.
DOYLE. New candidate for Ex-lmperiaU’ Councill-.
or. Communist sympathiser. Nominated by Paddington
Woollahra Sub-Branch.
PECK. Sydney Solicitor- Voces with Communists
Group who look to him for guidance. Opposed ex-
pulsion of Communists.
A. G. HORNE. Candidate for Western Metropol-
itan District. Associate of S. Black and J. Hooke
who stood by Communists at last Congress.
C. DAVIDSON- Blue Mountains’ Councillor. As-
sociate of Dr. Darke. Shareholder in Communist
Newspaper publications and People’s Printing and Pub-
lishing Co. With Geitzelt, leader of Communists in the
Council.
HARRIS. Far North Coast Councillor. Has led
attack on R.S.L. officials in “Northern Star”; always
votes with Davidson and Geitzelt.
DRANSFIELD. Hunter River Valley representative
in coal mining area; always with Communists Group.
The Vigilance Committee believes this to be the team
approved by Communists to gain control of the R.S.L.
n Thc price of liberty is eternal vigilance”
ARTHUR THOMAS GEITZHLT. NX 137956
Sgt., enlisted 15/5/41, neat of kin, Mother, Ida Caroline
—Demobilised 19/3/46; 26 Field Company—9th Field
Company—born 28/12/20 San Francisco, original
nationality Czechoslovakian.
Father a manufacturer who had war contracts during
the war period. Brother, Ray Geitzelt, also with a
Communist record, but father in view of War contracts
has never disclosed his hand.
Pre-war years worked for the MYART Linen Ware-
house Pty. Ltd., Foster Street, Sydney, and he was on
the 6/12/40, reported for his activities in this firm
running down capitalists and talking about the Social-
istic State- He was reported a very good friend of
Miss Sheather who worked in this firm, whose father
was a Mr. Sheather of Drummoyne, who was in the
Shipping business and reported a very reputable man
who warned his daughter on repeating shipping move-
ments to Geitzelt,
On the 12/1/40 was a member of Secretariat of State
Committee of Communist Party re Compulsory train-
ing.
On the 19/8/40 he was reported as Secretary of the
Kogarah Branch of the Australian League of Youth.
This fact was printed in the Youth League Paper,
"Ally”. The same day met Eric Aarons and received
from his Duplicator and paper--which he took to his
home and hid.
On the 3/9/40 delivered to McFee 200 copies of
bulletins issued by the Communist Party Military Ex-
ecutive. Stencils for same being cut by Aarons and
the printing was done in Geitzelt’s home.
Was called up for Compulsory Military Training and
went into camp on the 8/12/40. On the 5/12/40 a
special meeting was called by the Communist Party for
Communists and sympathisers who were going into
camp with the Universal trainees. Meeting was arranged
in a room at Rawson Chambers by Geitzelt,
On the 4/4/41 was reported as one of the very active
members of the Communist Military Executive-
-25/5/41, Cumberland District Military Committee
of the Communist Party consisted of A. Geitzelt, Ray
Kirby and D. Bennett.
Geitzelt explained that as he had a Czechoslovakian
name, the name used by him at Communist Party meet-
ings was Ken Stewart, and it is also reported that McFee
and Eric Aarons, were well known Communists.


SMASH THE RED TERROR
"Lest We Regret"
Watch for startling disclosures effecting
Ex-servicemen following the security raid
on Marx House.


Reprintid from Thu Sun, Sydnuy,
4/7/49.
Red plans
on R.S.L
revealed
MELBOURNE, Mon-
day. Necessity for
Communist penetration
of the RSL was stress-
ed at the Victorian
Communist Party’s 1945
conference, Cecil Her-
bert Sharpley declared
today.
Sharpley was giving evi-
dence before the Royal Com-
mission into Communism in
Victoria.
Sharpley said that at the
conference it was stressed
that penetration of the RSL
should be in a “big and ef-
fective way.”
The conference, be said,
discussed the party’s work in
the armed forces, and worker
and soldier unity.
Sharpley said that Central
Committee representative Mr.
J, B. Miles and J. Blake had
stressed to the conference that
it was necessary for Commu-
nists to penetrate the RSL,
as it was an organisation in
which the party would be
able to influence a big sec-
tion of the public.
The party should also try
to tie the RSL up with the
trade union movement, and
especially the Communist-
controlled section of that
movement.
Associated Newspapers Print.
