

i * 'V
BP ES I # JB


f -> -A
\ •
VERITY HEWITT
Bookseller
City, Canberra


|K|i|ig8




SMILE Y


To My Alotbcr


§
VEV
SMILEY
A Novel by
MOORE RAYMOND
SYLVAN PRESS
24-25 Museum Street, London, W.C. 1.


FIRST IMPRESSION, 1945
THIS BOOK IS PRODUCED IN COMPLETE
CONFORMITY WITH THE AUTHORISED ECONOMY STANDARD
PRINTED BY WELBECSON PRESS LTD., LONDON, S.W. 11
MADE IN GREAT BRITAIN


'■; '■} G&i (\
CHAPTER ONE
Every Saturday morning it was Smiley's job to sweep the
yard, and he hated it.
His real name was William Thomas Greevins, but he had
smiled so often during his first week of babyhood twelve
years ago that his father had nicknamed him Smiley Now
everybody in the Western Queensland township of Murrum-
billa called him by that name.
His home was a small, dilapidated house that stood next
to Charlie Sung's store on the main road through Murrum-
billa. Built chiefly from boree logs and the sides of pine
packing cases, the house huddled beneath a huge pepperina
tree which spread a green and lovely curtain about it as if
trying to nide something shameful.
Smiley's father went sheep droving between drinking
bouts His mother kept the home going by washing and
scrubbing for the more prosperous inhabitants of Murrum-
tll ; s * Greevins had one of the shrillest voices in the
West. She rarely used physical force to control her son—
a command was usually sufficient.
S ot on ve ry well together, but there was one matter
which always irked Smiley, and that was his mother's
insistence that he should sweep the yard every Saturday
morning. As he argued, not unreasonably, it did not seem
th^ mU i USB ma j e the y ard look tidy while the rest of
Into 6 c< *!J tin ued to P resent a ramshackle and untidy
appearance. If anything, said Smiley in effect, the sweeping
Thf/t r t ei JP hasized th e unpleasantness of the remainder.
T Saturday morning he had, as usual, argued vainly,
t i e went sullenly out of the house with the broom his
mother had thrust into his hands.
• n s w e Pt the surface sand and paper and leaves fiercelv
in all directions for about half a minute. Then he paused
and looked over the paling fence. Through the row of squat


bottle trees which lined the road, he could see beyond the
flood-protection bank to the Warrego River. The trunks of
the gum trees were blue in the morning sun, and Smiley
thought of water running over coarse sand, the cool wash
over bare feet and the parrots screaming overhead in the
blossoms.
Like the other boys in Murrumbilla—with a few refined
exceptions—he wore only a grey flannel shirt, short blue
tattered trousers held up by a piece of rawhide, and a hat
which was now only a concave remnant of felt. His skin was
tanned by the fierce sun, and his face held the watchful
expression typical of those Australian youngsters who live
in the bush. Immobile, he looked with unblinking eyes
across the road to the river, and wondered if there was any-
one in swimming.
" Git on with yore sweepin' ! " called his mother.
Smiley started back and once more attacked the yard with
fury.
Five minutes later he paused for breath and surveyed his
work with satisfaction. Quite a quarter of the yard had been
swept, leaving the hard, clean earth to charm the eye of the
passer-by. Smiley sighed. If only his mother would let him
and his cobbers play marbles there. It was just the place
for big ring.
He suddenly remembered that the day before he had
traded three stonks and a glassy for a piece of toffee. Dis-
covering the sweet clinging to the bottom of his shirt pocket,
he dragged it out, picked away the pieces of fluff and string,
and bit off a mouthful with his strong teeth.
" Sweepin' the yard ? "
Smiley turned to " Blue " Graham. The red-haired boy's
eyes opened wide when he saw Smiley's jaws moving.
" Give us a bit of lolly ? "
" Got it all in me mouth," replied Smiley, cramming in
the rest of the toffee with difficulty.
" Mingey ! " said Blue disgustedly.
Smiley ignored him and masticated quickly.
" Mingey Smiley ! " said Blue. He chanted his disapproval
for some time before he thought of a synonym.
" Stingey Smiley ! " he sang. " Mingey, stingey Smiley ! "
Smiley regarded him somewhat vacantly for a while
before he noticed that Blue carried raw meat in one hand
and several pieces of string and a tin in the other.


" Goin' crayfishin'?"
" Yairs. Comin'?"
" Gotter sweep the yard."
"Aw, come on," urged Blue. "I'll give you some bait.
Comin'?"
" Too right!" said Smiley.
He glanced across at the kitchen door before cautiously
resting the broom against the fence. He slipped out of the
gate and raced up the street with Blue pattering at his heels.
The ground- was hot beneath the bare feet of the boys, but
as neither had ever worn boots, except for an hour or two
on Sundays, they were protected by hard, thick skin on the
soles of their feet.
They ran on past Hawkin's Hotel, beyond the doctor's
house and the police station, and up the hill to the church.
Here shortness of breath and the stones underfoot made
them slacken to a walk.
" Your mother'll go crook on you, won't she?" remarked
Blue, who, having enticed- Smiley into wrongdoing, now
seemed pleased to remind him of it.
" I'm goin' to take 'er back some bonzer crays," replied
Smiley. " I'm goin' to take 'er ten woppers."
" She'll roar you up a treat," insisted Blue.
" She won't if she gits them bonzer crays. Give us some
string and bait."
Blue handed them over and the boys walked in silence
past Willie Coy's vegetable garden and then ran up the
earthen bank surrounding the dam. Except for a flock of
galahs feeding noisily on the other side of the water, the
place was deserted. Each boy chose a log running from the
bank into the muddy dam, and, squatting with his toes in the
water, prepared to fish.
Smiley tied a lump of raw meat to one end of a piece of
string and lowered the bait gently into the watex beside the
log. When the string became slack, he knew that the meat
had reached bottom. He trailed the line over the log, pre-
pared another line and let it down over the other side of the
log. Then he squatted in silence, waiting for the crayfish
to bite.
Neither boy spoke. It was understood that crayfishers must
keep quiet unless it was imperative to speak, for it was
believed that noise frightened the crayfish.
Smiley tested his first line and grinned when he felt the


weight of the crayfish clinging to the meat. He began to
pull in the line slowly and steadily. Inch by inch the bait
was pulled towards the surface, till the boy, peering down
through the yellow, muddy water, could see the first dark
outlines of the crayfish. He pulled in another inch, and the
black curl of a whisker broke the surface. Even then the
crayfish made no move, but kept its claws firmly embedded
in the bait.
Holding the line with his left hand, Smiley slowly lowered
his right hand into the water about a foot behind the cray-
fish. With a sudden movement, he made a grab at a spot
about six inches below the bait. He knew, as all skilled
crayfishers knew, that the crayfish would, at the slightest
sign of danger, flip himself backwards and downwards into
the depths. He knew, too, that if he grabbed at a spot about
six inches below the bait, his hand and the crayfish would
arrive at that spot simultaneously.
His fingers closed tightly around the hard shell of the cray-
fish, which struggled to get free. Smiley pulled it from the
water, and before its wildly waving claws could nip him, he
shifted his grip and caught it with finger and thumb about
the middle of the dark green body. In vain the claws reached
back for his fingers, in vain the tail curled and flipped—the
boy held him fast.
Blue, from his log further along, heard the splash of the
capture and looked up with a grin.
" Good 'un?" he asked in a loud whisper.
" Bonzer!" hissed Smiley, as he ran along the log to the
bank. He filled Blue's tin with water and dropped the cap-
ture in, where it darted here and there, its shell striking the
sides of the tin with those sharp little sounds that delight
the ear of the crayfisher.
As Smiley returned to his log, Blue grabbed at his first
bite and hauled the crayfish from the water. The catch had
begun.
In half an hour the boys caught twenty crayfish between
them, and they were squatting in patient silence on their
logs when a new sound reached their ears. Both glanced up
sharply at the shrill, persistent squawking.
Over the top of the bank came the black face of Jacky
Harrison. Jacky was a pure bred aborigine, aged eleven.
His real name was probably Hunter of the Emus on the Wide
Plains, but it was more convenient for the Murrumbilla


people to call him Jacky Harrison.
The black boy scrambled over the mound and stood grin-
ning. He wore a ragged shirt and hardly any trousers, and
his jet-black frizzled head was bare of a hat. In his hand-
he carried a dilly-bag of plaited reeds, and from the bag
came the shrill cries the boys had heard. Smiley and Blue
approacned the black boy with haste.
" Galah?" shouted Smiley as he ran.
" Greenie," replied Jacky. " Gittem longa creek."
He opened the dilly-bag and disclosed a young greenleek
parrot, barely fledged and screaming a protest against its
imprisonment. Jacky hurriedly closed the bag as the young
bird tried to struggle out.
" Take 'im longa Doc Gaspen," he informed them.
"Swop you ten crays for 'im?" offered Smiley. Jacky
shook his head. " Crayfish baal budgeree! Doc Gaspen gib-
bit tchillin'."
" Smiley knew that nothing he could offer would be a higher
bid than the doctor's shilling, so he abandoned the idea of
possession of the parakeet and turned to another subject.
" Will you eat a cray for us?" he asked the aborigine.
"Yiss," replied Jacky.
It was out of no consideration for Jacky that Smiley
offered him a crayfish. The gift was to be payment for enter-
tainment. From the Jin in which the catch were chopping
off each other's legs, Smiley pulled out one of the smaller
captures and presented it to the aborigine.
Jacky grabbed the crayfish and slipped it into his mouth.
The two boys gazed at the champing jaws with horrified
fascination as Jacky gulped it down.
" Gibbit 'nother," he suggested.
" 'Ere y'are!" exclaimed Blue, pulling out one of his catch.
Jacky crunched it, gulped it down and looked at the
others with an expectant expression. Smiley decided, how-
ever, that Jacky must display some versatility if he was to
get any more.
" Can you swaller a cray without chewin'?" he enquired.
Jacky nodded, but when Smiley hauled out the crayfish
the black boy looked at it apprehensively.
Pfella too plurry big!" he exclaimed.
" You gotter swaller 'im alive," Smiley insisted.
"Tig, tig, tig!" chanted Blue, tapping Jacky on the
shoulder. " Yore old man's a coward and so are you!"


The taunt left Jacky unmoved. Smiley made a more
generous offer.
" You can 'ave the biggest I got if you can shove 'im all
in yore gob in one go. You can chew 'im, but you can't bite
'unks orf in yore 'and."
He pulled out a dark giant that waved its claws feroci-
ously. The black boy's eyes widened greedily as he took
the crayfish. Opening his jaws, he thrust it in. The crayfish
bit Jacky's tongue so severely that he yelled and shoved his
fingers into his mouth. Smiley and Blue laughed as they
watched the struggle, and when at last the claw released
its painful grip and the blood ran darkly down Jacky's chin,
the two boys were so convulsed that they had to squat on
the ground to prevent themselves from falling over.
Jacky grasped his dilly-bay more firmly and set off at a
run, spitting and spluttering—and in the other hand he
carried the crayfish.
Smiley and Blue eventually recovered and turned again
to their fishing.
"Them blasted crows!" shouted Blue, pointing down
towards the dam.
When the crayfishers had abandoned their lines on Jacky's
arrival, they hauled them out of the water on to the logs,
because they knew that the crayfish might drag them away
if they were unattended. While they had been amusing
themselves with Jacky, half a dozen crows had seen the raw
meat on the logs and had swooped down upon it. Blue
looked over in time to see them gobbling up the bait.
The boys yelled as they raced down towards the crows.
The birds flew off. carrying with them not only all the meat,
but three of the lines as well. They perched on the dead
bough of a nearby tree, where one of them unwisely gulped
down a lump of meat without having first removed it from
the line. It sat there with the string hanging from its beak,
swallowing spasmodically and looking very sick.
The other crows, frightened by the sticks thrown by the
boys—and having picked out the meat anyway—let the lines
drop to the ground, where they were recovered.
The fishers now had three lines and one piece of bait
between them. As compensation for their loss, there was
the sight of the crow trying to swallow four feet of string,
but the bird soon disappeared in the direction of the river.
" We gotter git some mussels, I s'pose," sighed Blue.


" I wisht I could 'ave got that ole crow," remarked Smiley.
" i could 'ave led 'im round like a dawg. 'E might 'ave been
real tame and I could 'ave took 'im to school."
Blue had already rolled his trousers far up his thighs, and
Smiley did likewise. The boys walked across the caked,
craked edge of the dam and waded into the water, where
the cool mud oozed deliriously between their toes. Feeling
their way cautiously, they shifted backwards and forwards
a few inches at a time, thrusting their feet down into the
sludge.
" Got one!" called Smiley as his toes closed over the hard
shell of the mussel.
Lifting his foot carefully, he reached down and picked the
mussel from his curled toes. He hurled it on to the bank,
where the gleaming shell soon dried in the sun to a dull
black.
Within ten minutes two more mussels were found in the
mud, and the boys returned to the bank. They smashed the
shells against a tree and pulled- out the slimy contents,
attached them to the lines and once more began to fish.
Quietly and methodically they hauled in the crayfish until,
at the end of an hour, they had more than thirty in the tin.
Then, down the shimmering air came a far-off jangling.
" Dinner time!" shouted Smiley suddenly. " I can 'ear the
bell at Hawkin's pub."
" Your mother'll go reel crook at you," remarked the red-
head as he gathered up his crayfish tackle.
"Aw, I'll give 'er them twelve crays and she won't say
nothin'," replied the other boy in a tone which lacked con-
viction.
There was some dispute over the ownership of the com-
ponent parts of the struggling mass in the tin, but Blue
rightly received the greater share because he had brought
the lines and the original bait.
"You go first and 'ave a squiz and see if me mother's
watchin' for me," suggested Smiley when they neared his
home.
Blue walked casually past the building and, turning, shook
his head. Then he went on, leaving Smiley to d«al with the
situation.
A stillness hung about the house. As the boy crept up to
the gate, his hand grasping the hat which contained the
squirming crayfish, he wondered at the silence and was


afraid. The yard remained partly swept, and the broom still
leaned against the fence. Perhaps, he thought for one hope-
ful moment, perhaps he had not been missed! But, as he
closed the gate, his mother came to the door.
" Oh, there you are, Willie," she remarked, with a smile.
Smiley stopped in alarm. She had called him Willie! He
edged away from something he could not understand.
" Willie!" called his mother. "Mr. Stephens come along to
see you."
So that was it. The schoolmaster wanted to see him. The
boy walked glumly towards the door.
" Wot for?"
" Come and see," replied his mother, ushering him into the
room where Mr. Stephens sat prodding a globular mongrel
pup with the toe of his boot.
" Good morning, Smiley," he said as the boy entered.
" Mornin', sir," replied Smiley suspiciously.
" Like the sensible aborigines, you protect your limbs from
the attacks of insects by plastering them with mud," re-
marked the schoolmaster with a smile.
The sarcasm was not lost on the boy, who shifted his feet
uneasily.
" My horse got out last night," said Mr. Stephens, coming
to business. " He was seen with Jestin's mob on the Morven
road. Will you find him for me this afternoon?"
So that was all? Smiley grinned and replied, " Yessir!"
With the big toe of his right foot he scratched the caked
mud off the inside of his left ankle.
" Come up and get the bridle after lunch," said the school-
master as he picked up his hat.
" I'll git 'im now," said the boy eagerly.
" Plenty of time. Have your lunch first."
"Aw, I'll git 'im now, sir."
"You gotter 'ave your dinner —er lunch," said Mrs.
Greevins.
" I don't want no dinner," replied Smiley. " I ain't
'ungry."
" There must be somethin' wrong with 'im," said his
mother plaintively. " You ain't crook, Willie?"
" No, I ain't crook and I ain't 'ungry."
Smiley escaped further embarrassment by hurrying from
the xoom, and Mr. Stephens followed smilingly. He knew
the boy was running away from something, though he did


not know what. As his sympathies were with the boy rather
than the mother, he submitted to Smiley's proposal of im-
mediate business.
Twenty minutes later, out in the mulga scrub lining the
road to Morven, Smiley threw the bridle on the ground and
gathered a few sandalwood sticks. The horse could wait,
for the boy was hungry. A match kindled a swift fire, and
soon the coals hissed as the crayfish fell upon them, stiffen-
ing into red and instant death. Raking them from the fire,
Smiley pulled off the claws and tails and, before they were
cool, ate them greedily. Afterwards he threw dirt on the
coals till they were safe. Like all bush boys he knew the
danger of fire in the grass.
He picked up the bridle and he set off in the direction of
the faint discordant bells.
CHAPTER TWO
When Smiley reached the schoolhouse he was met at the
gate by Fred Stephens. The schoolmaster's son, though of
the same age as Smiley, looked a year or two older, partly
because he wore boots and socks, partly because he had a
certain knowing air which he had acquired in the city when
his father was an assistant teacher at a Brisbane school for
some years.
Smiley did not like Fred, but he tolerated him because he
always invited him to the parties he gave three or four times
a year.
" Got your marbles?" inquired Fred.
" I got a tor and a couple of stonks."
" Look at my new tor. It's a real pebble."
Fred held out the richly coloured agate marble. Smiley
turned it reverently in his fingers, admiring the veins that
curled through the translucent stone.
" I got it this morning," continued Fred. "My father wrote
a letter to Brisbane for it and it cost ninepence."
" Betcher could git tribles and fourbles with it," said
Smiley as he unwillingly handed it back.
" I got two tribles this morning," boasted the other boy.
He showed a few faint, creamy moons that lay in the red-


dish-brown veins of the marble. " See them marks? That's
from playing. When you get a lot from playing you put the
tor in fat at night and they're all gone in the morning."
"I'll play you," suggested Smiley.
" Too right I'll play you for keeps!"
He threw the bridle end over the branch of a tree inside
the gate and left the horse standing there while he followed
Fred round to the back of the house.
The school and the master's house were built on a hill of
yellow sand which in some prehistoric era had been the
shore of an inland sea. The sand was no good for playing
marbles on because they would not roll over it. But at the
back of the house, underneath the kitchen window, there
was a hard, smooth patch, where the successive schoolmas-
ters' wives had thrown their dish-water three or four times
a day for many years.
" Big ring?" asked Fred.
" Yairs, big ring."
The circle, about four feet in diameter, was drawn, and
Smiley threw five stonks into the centre. They were small
marbles of some dull composition and of little value. Two
stonks were equivalent to a chalky marble called a chow.
Four stonks made a glassy of the type that came out of
lemonade bottles. Other glassies, veined with many colours,
were worth as much as six or even ten stonks, according to
colour and size.
Smiley rarely carried more than a glassy and a few stonks
loose in his pocket. But Fred had a large bag of assorted
marbles which he was always losing, but which were always
replenished by his indulgent parents.
Fred was a mug at marbles. His frequent losses forced
on him the necessity of being crafty where he lacked skill.
Though Smiley knew he could not expect fair play from
Fred, he was willing to have a game because he knew his
skill could usually beat the other boy's dishonesty.
Fred added an equivalent number of stonks to Smiley's
contribution, and they dribbled their tors towards the centre
of the ring.
"No fudging!" snapped Fred. It was an unnecessary
warning, for Smiley had not moved his hand over the edge
of the ring.
" I go first," said Fred, and though Smiley doubted if the
other boy's tor was nearer to the bunch of marbles, he said


n °FrecTs shot missed the marbles altogether. " I've got to
get used to my new tor," he explained.
Smiley's shot smashed into the group and sent one ot the
stonks flying out of the ring. .
" Knuckle-down!" yelled Fred as Smiley s tor stuck in the
centre of the scattered marbles.
Smiley turned his knuckle over till his thumb almost
touched the earth, yet his shot sent another marble out of
the ring. , ,
" Knuckle-down!" shouted Fred again.
The handicap was too much for Smiley this time, and he
failed to score. But his tor rolled out to safety.
Fred's shot took a marble, but the next one missed. Smiley
then took every marble in the ring. So far he had won four
stonks. „
" Play you again?" suggested Fred.
" Too right!" . _ ~
Smiley won six stonks and five glassies. Fred s new tor
was not justifying its owner's claims.
" Dubs!" shouted Smiley as he knocked two marbles out
with one shot.
" Fain dubs!" yelled Fred a fraction of a second later.
" I said dubs first," remarked Smiley as he picked up the
marbles.
" You never did!"
" I did so!"
" You never!"
" Betcher I did!"
" You're a liar!"
The two boys faced each other angrily across the ring.
Smiley's toes had already curled over his tox in case it came
to a matter of grabbing stakes—the customary end to an
argument about marbles.
"Fred-dee!" '
Mrs. Stephens's voice broke the strained silence, and both
boys relaxed immediately, turning towards the voice.
" Oh, there you are, Freddy," she said, as she came on to
the back verandah.
Smiley felt very ashamed. Somehow he always felt
ashamed in front of this soft-voiced, smiling woman, who
was so different from all the other women he had ever
known. She never spoke a harsh word to him, and she never


showed him anything but kindness. Smiley had never
shown cowardice in any fight, but he was weak and uncom-
fortable in the presence of Mrs. Stephens.
" It's Smiley Greevins, isn't it?" she said. " How are vou
Smiley?"
"All right, thank you, Mrs. Stephens," he mumbled, twist-
ing his cap in his hands.
" We've been playing marbles," said Fred, "and he
cheated."
" You mustn't say things like that, Freddie," his mother
chided gently. " It's wrong to call your friend a cheat."
" 'Ere y'are!" said Smiley, handing his winnings back to
Fred.
" Would you boys like a piece of chocolate cake?"
" Yes please!"
" You betcher life!"
Fred dashed up the stairs on to the verandah with Smiley
on his heels.
The cake was a rich brown sponge with a creamy chocolate
filling that smeared their faces as they gobbled it. They ate
three pieces each before a faintly bilious feeling forced them
to the water bag to wash the taste away.
The bag, in the form of a canvas trough, was slung from
the verandah roof. The water soaked through the canvas
and evaporated quickly in the arid air, cooling the bulk of
the water that remained in the bag. The temperature was
over a hundred in the shade, and the water in the iron tanks
was warm and unpleasant to the taste, but in the bag it was
cold and delicious.
" There's a lot of bees to-day," remarked Fred. He dipped
into the cup.
The bees always fascinated Smiley. They came from the
schoolmaster's apiary and buzzed round the water bags,
clinging to the saturated canvas and filling themselves with
water to take back to the heat-stricken workers in the hives.
Smiley watched the quivering body of one yellow and
black bee with its proboscis thrust into a pore of the canvas
as it sucked up the moisture. Reaching out cautious fingers,
the boy nipped the insect behind the head. The abdomen
curled in swiftly and viciously, but the sting could not reach
Smiley s fingers. He chuckled and thrust the bee towards
Fred.
The other boy jumped back and ran yelling down the


verandah towards the kitchen.
"He's trying to make a bee sting me!" he shouted.
Smiley tossed the bee into the air and dashed down the
steps.
"Are you going now, Smiley?" called Mrs. Stephens.
He stopped and turned shamefacedly. " I gotter git back.
Me mother wants me."
"Come again soon."
He turned and began to run. Suddenly he stopped and
called, " Thank you for the cake, Mrs. Stephens."
This time he ran without a stop over the hot sand, past the
school, through the gate, and down the hill that led to the
main road. . ....
" x wisht I'd stung 'im with a thousand bees!" he muttered
as he ran. " I wisht I'd stung 'im with a million bees!"
He pulled up short, limping painfully. Standing on one
leg he turned up the thick, dark sole of one foot to disclose
a bindyeye—not the small, common kind-, but a goatshead
with four ugly barbs, one of which had pierced the leathery
skin of his foot. He jerked it out and hurled it from him.
"
tered. .
A patch of white caught his eye. It lay half-buried in the
sand against the fence of the butcher's slaughter-yard.
Smiley pulled it out and discovered it was a book which
consisted mostly of pictures —one of those bulky catalogues
which the mail order department of Brisbane stores sent to
prospective customers living out west.
No catalogues ever came to Smiley's house, for no Bris-
bane firm would have considered- them likely customers for
mail order business.
Smiley had occasionally seen catalogues at the schoolmas-
ter's house, and once he saw the doctor's wife looking at one,
but this was the first time he had ever held one in his hands.
It was a bulky publication of several hundred pages, with
a yellow cover bearing the name of Walter Cranston and Co.
Ltd., Queen Street, Brisbane.
The boy turned the pages crowded with illustrations. He
found little interest in the hundred of wooden-faced women
illustrating the latest styles in hats and frocks. He took
longer to go through the pages advertising lingerie, and
looked furtively about him to see that nobody was watch-
ing. But the underwear soon palled and he passed on to


mens sections and the gardening and furniture pages.
He reached the sports section with a gasp of delight.
Cricket bats, footballs, tennis rackets, and all the rest of
the sporting gear fascinated him as he crouched in the shade
of the slaughter-yard- fence.
Turning over a page, he came upon bicycles. He looked
at every picture and read every word of description. Smiley
had once ridden a bicycle over a distance of ten yards, and
he had never forgotten that exhilarating sensation of bal-
ance and speed. He used to be friendly with the police
sergeant's sons and they taught him to ride their father's
cycle. After many hours of climbing on and falling off, one
day he rode by himself for ten yards. Twenty minutes later
one of the sergeant's boys smashed the machine against a
fence and broke his nose. The cycle had to be sent sixty
miles to Charleville to be repaired—and thereafter no boy
was allowed to ride it.
" I wisht I 'ad a bike," muttered Smiley, gazing at the
twelve beautiful models pictured in the catalogue. He
looked through the prices and found that the cheapest was
£3. 10s.
•' I wisht I 'ad three-pound-ten!" he said.
At first he hardly dared contemplate the idea that was
forming in his mind. Three-pound-ten. ... A bike of his
own. . . . Yes! He knew then that he had made up his mind.
He would save three-pound-ten and buy a bike for himself.
He left the shady patch and walked contemplatively down
the hill.
" I'll git one quid, then two quid, then three quid, then
three-quid-ten," he told himself. " I'll git a thousand quid
and buy 'undreds of bikes and give 'em to me cobbers and
I'll be king of Murrumbilla."
The sand was so hot that it burned his feet till he could
bear it no longer, so he set off at a fast run till he reached
the shade of the bottle tree that stood before Charlie Sung's
store.
He paused for a moment, then walked into the store, which
was deserted as usual. Across the counter were shelves full
of big tins with flamboyant labels. The boy knew they con-
tained biscuits, sweets, nuts, and other things good to eat.
For one moment he thought of crawling silently over the
counter and sneaking a handful from the nearest tin. Dis-
missing the idea, he slapped his hand on the counter.


Little, yellow Charlie Sung, wearing his inevitable sloppy
blue jacket and trousers, came shuffling out of the gloom of
the back room.
" Good-day, boy," said Charlie in flat tones.
"'Day, Charlie. I say, Charlie, do you want a bloke to
take a parcel to some place? I can do it."
Charlie half-closed his eyes and shook his head three
times.
" I can run messages fast," insisted Smiley. " I can sool
like mad! Square dinkum I can!"
" Boy not wanted."
"It'll only cost you a sprat —only sixpence, Charlie,"
pleaded the boy. " I gotter buy a bike."
" Boy not wanted." The Chinese was very patient.
" I gotter buy a bike," repeated Smiley. "Aw, be a sport,
Charlie. I'll tell you wot—l'll do anythin' you like for a tray,
jist a threepence."
" You want a bike?"
" Yairs. And I'm goin' to git one!"
Charlie pulled open the till and fumbled among the coins.
He threw a penny on the counter and Smiley snatched it up.
" Oh, thank you, Charlie! Yore a dinkum sport, Chaxlie!"
" Boy not wanted," said the Chinese as he turned and went
back into the darkened room.
Smiley was excitedly happy. He had one penny towards
his bike and it would not be long before the total would be
£3. 10s. Yet when he figured it out with a stick in the dust
and found he needed 839 more pennies, he became subdued.
It might take a year, five years, perhaps fifty years.
But he had made up his mind about it, and he was deter-
mined to get his bike no matter how long it took, even if he
was an old man like Mr. Clark who sat on Hawkin's pub
verandah all day and dribbled from his pipe.
He kept on putting his hand into his pocket to feel the
penny. It was nearly six months since he had had any
money in his pocket —not since a commercial traveller had
given him twopence for helping him to carry his bags. He
wondered where he would keep the money as he saved it
up and at last decided to put it in an old tobacco tin and
plant it in a hole in the riverbank.
He was half-way across the sun-cracked flat of black allu-
vial soil that stretched a hundred yards from the main road
to the river, when he heard a call.
" Smi-lee!"


He turned and saw Blue running up the road with Tom
Gapper, the butcher's son, a youth of sixteen whom Smiley
did not like because he was a bully and took advantage of
his extra height and years to torment smaller boys when the
mood came upon him, which was fairly often. Smiley was
not afraid of him and always fought back, but always lost
to the greater strength of Gapper.
" Where you goin'?" asked Tom.
" Down to the river," replied Smiley shortly.
" What for?"
' Nothin'."
"Aw, struth! You can't be goin' for nothin'."
"I am so goin' for nothin'!"
Smiley started off for the river again, his hand thrust into
his pocket and hotly clutched- the penny. Tom and Blue
walked beside him.
"Gee-hos-o-fat!" said Blue abruptly.
" What?" asked Tom.
" Gee-hos-o-fat! You say it when you git a bindyeye in
yore foot."
" There's no bindyeyes on the flat 'ere."
" I know, but if you did get one in yore foot you'd say gee-
hos-o-fat. It needn't be a bindyeye. If you come a gutzer or
something 'appens you don't think is goin' to 'appen you say
it. .
" Who told you that?" asked Tom.
" The Master. He cracked 'is 'ead on the sliprails and 'e
said it."
" Is it a swear-word?" asked Smiley.
" I dunno."
"O' course it ain't!" laughed Tom. " I know all the swear-
words and that ain't one o' them."
The other two boys reserved their opinions. It was dan-
gerous to contradict Tom.
" Gee-hos-o-fat!" Smiley rolled the syllables on his
tongue and spat them into the arid air. He liked the sound
of them. Suddenly catching a gleam from a rubbish heap
twenty yards- along the bank, he yelled, " Finds keeps!" and
raced away from the other two. Suspecting that he had dis-
covered something valuable, they chased- him, but Smiley
had got what he wanted by the time they arrived.
" Whatter you got?" asked Blue eagerly.
" Haw! It's only an ole jam tin!" snorted Tom.


" Whatter you want a jam tin for?" asked the redhead.
" Nothin!"
"Aw, gee, that's a snake yarn!"
Smiley could not contain himself any longer. He jerked
his hand out of his pocket and displayed the penny.
"A brown!"
" Where did you git it?"
" Found it, and I'm goin' to put it in the tin and put it in a
kingfisher's nest and when I get "
Tom's unswinging arm checked him. The big boy's fist
struck the back of Smiley's open hand and the penny shot-
into the air. Tom reached high to catch it and then darted
off across the flat.
" Gimme that dough!" shouted Smiley as he and Blue gave
chase.
" Gee, he can sool!" panted Blue, for Tom was fast leaving
them behind.
They followed him around the back of Hawkin's Hotel,
but when they reached the front facing the main road he had
disappeared. Smiley's eyes blazed and his fists were clenched
as he stood making quick bird-like glances about him.
"You oughter stoush 'im," said Blue indignantly.
" Too right! I'll dong 'im one! I'll kick 'is grummet till 'is
nose bleeds!"
But Tom had taken his grummet into hiding, and there
was nothing further that could be done —for the moment at
least. They walked up the road, with Smiley still saying
what he would do to Tom. Blue encouraged him by thinking
out suitable tortures.
What was you goin' to git with the brown?" asked Blue.
I'm savin' up for a bike."
Savin' up for a bike?" Blue sounded incredulous.
Yairs."
No kidstakes?"
" Square dinkum I am! You're a cobber of mine so it's
square dinkum when I tell you I'm savin' up for a bike."
" Gee, a real bike?"
" O' course it'll take a bit o' time to git three-pound-ten,"
admitted Smiley.
" Gee, that's a lot o' dough."
" Too right! But I'm goin' to git "
" There 'e is! There's Tom!" interrupted Blue, pointing to
the thief as he came out of Charlie Sung's store only thirty


yards away. He was biting at a piece of sponge cake con-
taining a layer of rich cream that smeared his lips.
"Hi!" yelled Smiley as he and Blue dashed towards the
other boy.
Tom raced away, gobbling the cake. Suddenly he stopped
and, backing against one of the bottle trees that lined the
main road, stood with his fists ready for the attack. Smiley
and Blue ran up and stood a few yards off.
" What did you do with me dough?" demanded Smiley.
" I spent it and I et all the cake," grinned the thief.
"A cove ought to dong you for that."
"Try it on!" He advanced on the two boys, who edged
away warily.
" I'll kick yore grummet!" muttered Smiley.
v " What did you say?"
"A cove oughter stoush you!" he replied, glaring at Tom.
The big boy made a sudden dash at him, and Smiley turned
and raced down the road. When Tom had almost reached
him, Smiley abruptly stopped short and crouched low. His
pursuer, not expecting this move, tripped over him and
crashed into the dust. Smiley was off like a rabbit.
Tom, spitting dirt out of his mouth, raced after him again.
Smiley tried the same trick, but this time the big boy was
ready for it. He fell heavily on Smiley and began to punch
him. Grunting for lack of breath, Smiley fought back, but
he was painfully pummelled till Blue raced up and got both
his hands into Tom's hair, dragging him back ferociously
till he yelled with pain. The two friends jumped on Tom
till, gaining extra strength from fear, he threw them off and
raced for home.
" Hoo!" yelled Blue derisively.
" Sissy!" jeered- Smiley, splitting blood from his cut mouth.
" Go 'ome and tell yore mother!"
" Give baby his bottle!"
A car came rattling up the road. The boys turned at the
sound and watched it bumping over the ruts.
" It's the minister," said Smiley, recognising the travel-
stained car.
The Rev. Harold Lambeth was paying his weekly visit to
Murrumbilla. He was one of the Bush Brotherhood, one of
the travelling parsons of the West who went from settlement
to camp, from camp to homestead, holding services in little
wooden churches or—where there were no churches—in


houses, huts, and sometimes the open air. He was a big, sun-
browned man who believed- in what he called " Practical
Christianity." There was no more popular man within a
fifty-mile radius of Murrumbilla.
" Hi, Smiley! Hi, Blue!" he called as his car drew along-
side the boys.
They shook hands eagerly, proud to be on familiar terms
with him.
" Been fighting?" he inquired of Smiley when he saw the
boy's cut face.
" Yairs, Mr. Lambeth," he replied somewhat ashamedly.
" What about?"
"A bloke pinched me dough and spent it."
" He took Smiley's copper and bought some cake and et
it," added Blue breathlessly.
"No tale-telling," warned Mr. Lambeth. " I don't want to
know the name of the culprit. Tell me one thing—did you
sock him?"
" You betcher life!" exclaimed Smiley gleefully.
" We stoushed him," added Blue.
" Rough justice in the Old- Testament fashion. Jehovah
be with you!"
The boys listened with interest but without understand-
ing. They liked the parson's hearty, friendly voice, so it did
not matter if he sometimes made allusions they failed to
grasp.
" I'm goin' to git a bike," Smiley told him in confidence.
"A bike?"
Smiley explained his plan. Mr. Lambeth put his hand in
his pocket and pulled out a coin.
" There's sixpence to start the ball rolling. I should say,
to start the bike rolling."
Smiley grabbed it and cried, " Thank you, Mr. Lambeth,
thank you! That's bonzer!"
" I'm goin' to git a bike too!" exclaimed Blue, making up
his mind there and then.
The parson laughed and fished out another sixpence for
Blue. He was still chuckling as he drove off.
"You said you was goin' to git a bike just so's 'e'd give
you a sprat," accused Smiley.
" I never did! I'm goin' to git one—d-inkum."
" Where are you goin' to keep your dough? I'm keepin'
mine in a kingfisher's nest."


" What about if the ole river comes down?"
"Aw, she won't come down."
" Betcher she will if there's floods."
" If there's floods I'll git my dough before they come."
" I'm goin' to stick mine in the dirt underneath our 'ouse,"
said Blue. " I'm goin' to bury it."
"Aw, a dawg might dig it up."
"A dawg don't dig up money."
" Some dawgs might. Why don't you put yores in a king-
fisher's nest like me?"
" I'm goin' to bury it under our 'ouse," insisted Blue.
" I'll see you later," said Smiley, moving off towards the
river. " I'll see you at yore place when I git back."
" Hooray."
" Hooray."
Smiley found another tin for his sixpence and then ran
over the flat to the river. The Warrego was now no more
than a trickle in a broad, sandy bed nearly a hundred yards
wide. The boy walked through the sand, searching for the
holes in the bank where the kingfishers made their nests.
It did not take him long to find one into which he poked a
stick to see that neither birds nor snakes were inside. The
nest was deserted, so he thrust his money-box into it till it
was out of sight. He stood back a yard or two, moved here
and there, and, satisfied that the tin could not be seen by
even the most inquisitive passer-by, set off to find his mate.
Blue's house stood among a fairly respectable-looking row
at right-angles to the main road, and just opposite the
buildings concerned with law and order, the police serge-
ant's house, the little wooden courthouse, and the gaol that
was hardly more than a hut.
Smiley stopped short and blinked when he reached the
gate of Blue's home. The red-haired boy was sitting under-
neath the verandah, chewing a long black strap of liquorice.
Peppermint bars and caramel sticks stuck out of his pockets.
" Hi, Blue!" called Smiley.
" Hi!" replied Blue and went on chewing.
Smiley entered and sat down beside the other boy. " Give
us a bit o' lolly," he said.
" You got sixpence. You git your own lollies."
" Did you spend yore dough on lollies?"
" Yairs."
" I thought you was goin' to git a bike?"


"Aw, gee, that was kidstakes."
" Give us a bit o' lolly. Gawn, cobber."
" You got yore own sprat. You git yore own lollies."
" I'm goin' to buy a bike, I tell you," replied Smiley firmly.
Blue went on eating noisily, biting off large pieces of
liquorice and dribbling darkly down his chin. Smiley
watched him with envious eyes.
" Why don't you git yore sprat and spend it on lollies?"
urged Blue, for the other boy's stare disconcerted him. " I'd
give you some lollies if you didn't have a sprat—dinkum I
would. But you got some dough the same as I did."
Smiley got to his feet. " I'm goin' to git my sprat and
spend it," he announced.
" See you later," said Blue.
Smiley got as far as the gate, hesitated, and came back.
He stood with his fists clenched and his feet sturdily apart.
"No!" he said. "I'm not goin' to spend my dough on
lollies. I'm goin' to save up three-pound-ten and buy a bike."
He sat down beside Blue, but did not watch him this time.
He stared out into the shimmering air with a look of grim
determination on his face.
After a time Blue touched his arm. " Want a bit o'
caramel?" he asked-.
" Yairs," came the eager reply.
" I'll give you some if you let me ride yore bike when you
git it."
" I'll let you ride me bike, Blue, square dinkum I will!"
"'Ow many times?"
" Ten times from the church to Morton's store."
"Aw, gee, that's not much."
"A 'undred times. No kidstakes."
"All right, a 'undred times. 'Ere y'are."
Smiley grabbed the caramel stick and snapped off half of
it with strong teeth. The two friends chewed happily in
silence.
CHAPTER THREE
Miss Workman, the pupil teacher, rang the bell precisely
at 9.30 a.m. The children swarmed on to the patch of sand-
in front of the school.


Already the heat of the day was fierce, and the sand
burned the bare feet of the youngsters when they left the
shade of the cedar trees and the playing sheds. They formed
into two rough lines and began to hop from one foot to the
other, scraping away the burning sand to a depth of four
or five inches till they reached- the cool, dark subsoil. By the
time the schoolmaster arrived each boy and girl stood in
a hollowed-out safety zone.
The chattering stopped as he came out of school through
the fly-proof netting door, and the children waited respect-
fully though a little impatiently because of the flies that
swarmed about their heads.
It was compulsory for every child to wear a fly-veil to
school. The master knew it was beyond his power to enforce
this rule outside the school boundaries, and-, after all, it was
no affair of his if parents allowed their children to roam
the town with faces unprotected from the swarms of summer
flies.
But he insisted on veils being worn to school, for he did
not want the children in his charge to endanger their eye-
sight by giving the flies a chance to cause the disease called
" sandy blight." So every child wore a net of cord that hung
from the hat and- reached as far as the mouth or chin. It
was hardly more than a network fringe that any fly could
get through or under if it made up its mind. But for some
reason best known to the flies, they never tried to pass the
veil. Instead, they swarmed about the children's heads and
settled in dark patches on their backs.
The school doors and windows were fly-proofed with wire
gauze of fine mesh, and no fly could pass through this barrier
into the schoolrooms. But there were many flies waiting
outside to slip through the open door, so precautions had to
be taken when the children marched up to the door, each
with a swarm of several hundred insects.
Four boys were appointed guardians of the door. Then
Mr. Stephens gave the order, " Right turn! Quick march!"
The children filed through a crack in the doorway, with
their four guardians sweeping the flies from heads and backs
with their hats, till the last entrant had to plunge through a
great, dark swarm to reach safety. The defensive squad
then brushed themselves quickly and slipped through the
door, leaving a buzzing cloud of pests on the other side of the
gauze.


After hanging their hats in the porch, the children
marched into the rooms and sat at the ink-stained desks.
The headmaster and the pupil teacher began announcing the
lessons for the various classes.
Smiley and Blue were in the fifth class. Because of their
habit of carrying on muttered conversations whenever they
got the chance, Miss Workman never allowed them to sit
together. Blue was given a place at the front desk and
Smiley was put right at the back.
But this morning their first lesson was mental arithmetic
and, as soon as the class filed out on to the floor, the two boys
scrambled for adjacent positions in the semi-circle that
formed about the teacher's desk. She always made the class
stand for mental arithmetic because she thought it kept
them more alert than sitting down.
" Smiley," she said sternly, "go to the bottom of the
class.
He and Blue exchanged grimaces as they realised, that
their 'plot had fallen through. Blue was now five places
away, and conversation with him was impossible.
" How many halfpennies in a pound?" asked Miss Work-
man suddenly.
"Four hundred and eighty!"
" Four hundred and eighty!"
The hands shot up as the children called the answer.
Neither Blue nor Smiley attempted to answer the question,
but winked at each other from time to time.
" Jack was first," said the teacher. "Go to the top, Jack."
The boy went to the top of the class and everyone else
moved down one.
" If I have a hundred apples and sell three lots of fifteen
each, how many have I got left?"
There was a breathless pause as the children muttered
numbers to themselves. The hands jerked up again.
"Fifty!"
" Twenty-five!"
" Fifty-five!"
" Fifty-five is right. Go to the top, Elsie."
Miss Workman's eye focussed on fingers moving in a curi-
ous way. They belonged to Smiley, and he was talking in
the deaf-and-dumb sign language to Blue. The boys caught
her eye and their faces froze into expressions of intense ex-
pectancy as if they waited for nothing else in life than the


next question. Miss Workman was not deceived.
" William Greevins!" she snapped at Smiley. "If I have
any more of your pranks I'll send you to be caned."
Smiley shifted from one foot to the other and stared at
the floor.
" Now," said Miss Workman, "what do you get when you
multiply thirty-five by four and divide by two? William
Greevins, what is the answer?" Half a dozen hands went up.
" No, I want William Greevins to give me the answer."
Smiley hazarded a guess: " Twenty-five."
" Please, teacher!"
" I know, teacher!"
The other children snapped their fingers with suppressed
excitement.
" Wrong!" Miss Workman glowered at Smiley. " The
answer is seventy. William Greevins, go to the bottom of
the class."
Only when Smiley walked jauntily over to his position
beside Blue did the pupil teacher realise that she had played
into their hands. The two friends grinned at each other and
tried to avoid Miss Workman's stare. Her lips formed a
severe, narrow line as she determined that they would not
make a fool of her in front of the class.
She asked a few more questions and then turned to Blue:
"You haven't answered a single question yet? What is
sixteen times twenty divided by ten? Quick!"
" Please, teacher! Please, teacher!" called the others, but
she continued to stare at Blue, who became very .confused.
" What is sixteen times twenty?"
"Er . . ."
" What is sixteen times ten?"
"A hundred and sixty, teacher."
"And twice a hundred and sixty?"
" Er . . . three hundred and twenty."
" Divide by ten —drop the nought."
" Thirty-two, teacher."
" Quite right. You don't deserve to go to the top of the
class because you took too long about it. I'll put you in the
middle. Freddy Jamieson, move down and let him get in
there."
So Blue and Smiley were separated once more, and Miss
Workman flattered herself that she had done it without loss
of dignity and prestige.


Everything went smoothly for another ten minutes. Then
a girl standng second from the end, just beside Smiley, gave
a shrill yelp and a sudden leap forward.
" Jean!" Miss Workman swung round on the interrupter.
"He pinched me, teacher. Smiley pinched me."
" Pinched you?"
" Yes. He pinched my behind!" She rubbed the painful
spot.
" Jean! You mustn't use that vulgar word."
" Well, he pinched me here." She turned and indicated
the place.
" Did you pinch her, William?"
" She trod on me foot."
" Did you pinch Jean?"
" Yairs, teacher," he replied sullenly. " She trod . . ."
" You will stay in after school."
Smiley looked hurt, but he knew it was useless to protest.
He waited his chance to get his own back on Jean. It came
during the next lesson when they were sitting at their desks
listening to the teacher read the history of the Cavaliers and
the Roundheads.
Jean had two long mouse-grey plaits that hung down
her back, which was directly in front of Smiley. By sliding
his hand over the top of his desk, the boy managed to catch
the end of one of the plaits without anyone noticing —except
the boy next to him, who tittered faintly and caused Miss
Workman to look up sharply. The boys' faces froze into
expressions of intense interest in the Roundheads. Smiley's
hand that held the plait was hidden from the teacher's view.
Miss Workman resumed her reading. Smiley lifted the
end of the plait so slowly and carefully that the girl did
not feel it as she concentrated on the history lesson. He took
the fuzzy end of the pigtail and rammed it into the inkwell
set in the desk in front of him. He thrust it down hard,
let it soak for a few seconds, and pulled it out dripping with
ink. He grinned at his companion, who tittered again.
Just as Miss Workman looked up at the sound, Jean turned
her head to see what was causing the amusement. Smiley
still held the plait and, as Jean turned, her hair was pain-
fully pulled.
" Oh! Please teacher, he's got hold of my hair!"
Panic overtook Smiley. He had hoped the ink would dry
before he let go the pigtail. If he released it now the ink


would undoubtedly be smeared over the back of Jean's dress.
That had happened before with one of his victims and he
had been severely caned for it.
"Let go Jean's hair!" snapped Miss Workman.
" Oh, teacher!" squealed the girl.
" Let go Jean's hair!" shouted Miss Workman.
Smiley threw the pigtail away with a circular motion so
that it swung over the girl's shoulder and fell on the d-esk in
front of her, splashing ink on the dark wood.
" He stuck it in the ink!" cried Jean shrilly.
" In the ink?" echoed Miss Workman no less shrilly.
"Yes, teacher, he stuck it in the ink!" Jean burst into
tears.
" William, come out here!"
His expression was a mixture of defiance and shame as he
walked out in front of the class.
" This is not the first time you have done a very wicked
thing by putting ink on somebody's hair. I am going to make
an example of you. Go to the master, tell him I sent you,
and tell him what you have done."
Smiley walked silently to the door leading to the other
classroom. He found the schoolmaster before a map of
England, pointing with his cane to the chief rivers of that
country. The boy eyed the yellow, flexible cane and hesi-
tated for a moment. Then he walked up to Mr. Stephens
and stood beside him.
" Well, Smiley?"
" Please, sir, Miss Workman sent me."
" What's the message?"
Smiley suddenly had an idea. Perhaps he could avoid
punishment by guile. He knew the schoolmaster's all-
absorbing hobby and he decided to gain his sympathy by
making an offer.
" Please, sir, I'll 'elp you with the bees this arvo."
This surprised Mr. Stephens, because it was always very
difficult to get any boys to help him. They disliked being
stung.
" This afternoon?"
" Yairs, sir. Please sir, I'll 'elp you after school."
" Did Miss Workman tell you to say that?" asked the
schoolmaster suspiciously.
" Please, sir ...er . . . no, sir. But I'll 'elp you with the
bees, sir.


" Why did Miss Workman send you?"
" I he faltered, edging away from the cane.
" Out with it!" . . , j ,
« I dipped Jean 'Olt's pigtail in the ink! he blurted out.
" Come with me."
Smiley followed the master on to the verandah, lie
clenched his fists hard and wished he had some resin on his
hands so that he could split the cane. The master turned
and faced him sternly. . .
" I will not have any boy playing tricks of that kind m my
school. It is very mean and a very wrong thing to do. Hold
out your hand."
Smiley raised his open palm and set his teetn.
Whack!
" The other hand."
Whack!
" Left hand."
Whack!
" Right hand."
Whack!
" Now," said Mr. Stephens, "we can continue the discus-
sion about your offer to help me with the bees this after-
noon." .
Smiley, squirming with pain, was tempted to shout that
he wished the master and his bees in hell. It was galling to
realise that his offer had not only failed to save him from
the cane but was now likely to cause him more pain from
bee stings.
"I'd be very pleased if you'd give me a hand, so stay
behind after school."
The boy thought he saw a chance of getting out of it. I m
kept in," he said.
" The cane will be enough punishment. I'll tell Miss Work-
man I need your help. Now go back to your class."
The rest of the school day was uneventful for Smiley, who
presented himself to the headmaster as soon as lessons were
over. „ „
"You'd better have a piece of cake with me first, sug-
gested Mr. Stephens, and the boy felt that he was not such
a brute after all. They walked together across to the school-
house.
" Smiley is helping me with the bees this afternoon," Mr.
Stephens informed his wife.


" Those bees!" she sighed. " Here's a piece of cake, Smiley.
Would you like a cup of tea?"
" No, thanks, Mrs. Stephens."
Fred came into the kitchen. " Can I have a piece of cake
Mother?"
" You've already had two."
Smiley s got a piece, " he complained, so he was given
another.
Are you coming with Smiley and me to take off some
honey?" asked Mr. Stephens.
" Now you know how he swells up when he gets stung "
said his wife.
" I don't want to get stung," grumbled Fred.
. " Oh, very well!" the schoolmaster replied a little impa-
tiently. " Smiley and I will manage it by ourselves."
" Do you swell up when you get stung?" asked Fred of
Smiley.
" Dicken on!" snorted Smiley. " I'm not scared of a couple
o stings."
" I'm not scared."
" Gawn! You're scared of a bee sting."
" I'm not."
" You're a fifty-one-a-r."
" I'm not."
" Yes, you are!"
" Mother, Smiley called me a liar."
" I never did!"
"He said I was a fifty-one-a-r. That's a liar."
" I'm sure I don't understand," said Mrs. Stephens.
" Substitute the latin numerals for fifty-one," suggested
her husband.
Mrs. Stephens worked it out and said, " Oh, I see."
" He called me a liar," insisted Fred.
" Come on, Smiley," called the schoolmaster, " We've got
to harness up."
The boy followed him out to the shed, where they har-
nessed the horse and put it in the sulky. They loaded in
the extractor, honey tins and the other necessary things, then
got into the sulky and drove across the sandhill. The tall
yellow grass was brittle under the wheels, and the thistle-
pods hissed and rattled as they brushed by.
The master's apiary was situated about half a mile away
from the school and well on the outskirts of the township.


At one time his fifty-odd hives stood in the school grounds,
but so many parents complained that their children had
been stung that he was compelled to move the bees further
away The Shire Council gave him permission to keep an
apiary on the other side of the hill just where the sand gave
place to black, alluvial soil.
In the rainy season there was a waterhole alongside the
apiary, but now it was no more than a sun-cracked depres-
sion fringed with twisted gidyea trees. The bees sought
water where the humans stored it, and they flew into the
township and buzzed around the tanks and waterbags all
day long. But as they rarely stung anybody unless molested
—for their visits were entirely peaceable and workmanlike
—there were few complaints about the headmaster's bees.
Besides, half the settlement bought honey from him at a
cheaper rate than they could have got it anywhere else.
Mr. Stephens and Smiley came suddenly into the clearing
where the apiary was situated, the hives set row on row,
each on a raised stand. They were made from kerosene
cases, and as they had never been painted they still adver-
tised " White Rose " and guaranteed its purity.
The horse was taken out of the shafts and tied up a safe
distance from the hives.
" Bees don't like the smell of 'sweaty horses," explained
the schoolmaster. " They sting them and send them mad."
He walked towards the hives. " Come on and let's have a
look for some honey."
Smiley hesitated at the sound of a myriad murmuring bees
and the sight of their swift, busy flight.
" I'm a bit sweaty myself," he said. " They might sting me
and send me mad."
"Nonsense!" laughed the schoolmaster. "You want to
show confidence when you're handling bees and they won't
sting you. Just walk straight through them like this."
He strolled between two rows of hives, regardless of the
bees that flashed past his face.
" Come on, Smiley."
" But they know you, sir, and they know yore a cobber o'
theirs."
" They'll think the same about you if you show that you're
not frightened. Come on."
The boy set his teeth and walked between the rows. Bees
darted before his eyes and one struck the back of his head


and buzzed shrilly when it became entangled in his hair.
Smiley's desire was to claw at the bee and at the same time
to run for safety. But the insect soon got free, and the boy
advanced with more confidence.
That's the way!" said the master approvingly. "We'll
have the smoker ready in a jiffy.*'
He lighted a piece of sacking and crammed it smouldering
into the smoker. Working the bellows, he sent dense puffs
of grey smoke into the still air.
"Keep it going while I get the other things."
Smiley took the smoker and felt more confident. He knew
it was a weapon no bee could withstand. He made gleeful
puffs at passing bees, muttering, " I'm not scared of youse'
Come on and sting me!"
Meanwhile Mr. Stephens put on his white bee-veil with
the black observation square. He broke off some sandalwood
sprigs and made them into a brush.
" Here's your veil.'
Smiley took the veil, slipped it over his hat, and tucked it
into the top of his shirt. He felt more secure than ever but
he wished that he had a veil that would cover up his less
too. 6 '
They advanced on the first hive. Bees swarmed over the
landing-board in a frenzy of activity. A dozen stood before
the entrance fanning a draught of air into the hive. The
low-pitched hum took on a shriller tone when the school-
master lifted off the top of the hive to disclose a piece of
sacking over the top of the frames.
Carefully lifting one corner of the sacking, he puffed the
smoke down between the frames. The resulting sound was
like a thousand tiny yells of protest as the bees tumbled over
one another in their effort to get down into the safety zone
near the bottom of the hive.
Pulling away the sacking little by little, he swept the
smoker over the tops of the frames, driving the protesting
bees downward until there was hardly one to be seen. One
J' S u i zin / a h|fh~Pi tc hed, angry note, darted from the hive
and dashed itself against Smiley's veil.
" Gee!" he exclaimed, starting back.
" They can't sting you through your veil," the schoolmaster
reassured him.
What about me legs, sir?"
They wont sting you if you show you're not frightened


of them."
Smiley stood back a few yards while Mr. Stephens lifted
a frame from the hive. It was heavy with honey and swarm-
ing with bees. The sight of the moving, golden mass fasci-
nated the boy, who went forward to get a closer look.
"There's the queen/' said the schoolmaster, indicating
long, yellow body v
" Gee! Ain't she a bonzer!"
"Bonzer is the word." He shook the frame sharply,
tumbling the bees into the hive. Most of them crawled down
to safety, but half a dozen or more darted at Mr. Stephens
and Smiley, dashing" themselves against the veils.
"Tck!" The schoolmaster clicked his tongue as a bee
buried its sting in his left hand. He wiped it hard against
his thigh, killing the bee and dragging out the sting in one
movement.
" They'll smell the poison, won't they, sir?" asked the boy,
remembering what the master had once told him.
" Stand away a bit. Over at that tree."
Smiley dashed for the mulga tree and stood in its cool
shade. Two bees followed him, and they buzzed shrilly
around his veiled head. He stood quite still and pretended
he was part of the tree, but they were not deceived.
" Go and take a running jump at yoreself!" muttered the
boy.
"•Smiley," called the master, who had brushed the frame
free of bees.
Still followed by the angry pair of insects, the boy walked
over to Mr. Stephens and, standing as far away as possible,
reached out for the honey-laden frame.
" Careful. Don't drop it."
" Ow!" Smiley leapt back as a bee buried its sting in the
calf of his bare leg.
" Don't drop it!" shouted the master, grabbing the frame
from Smiley. " Don't pick the sting out with your finger, or
you'll squeeze the poison-sac and give yourself a double dose.
Come over to the tree and I'll soon fix you up."
Smiley's attacker had gone, leaving a tiny, white sting
quivering in his brown leg. Mr. Stephens opened his knife
and, holding the boy's leg steady, slid the blade up against
the sting and lifted it clean out.
" Gee, it hurts!" complained Smiley, hissing through his
teeth.


" Come on, be a man!" The master dabbed the white spot
with ammonia. " It'll soon be all right. I've had three stings
to-day so far."
"Aw, yore used to getting stung, sir."
"Of course, and you can get used to it, too. Just watch
this."
Mr. Stevens walked back to the hive and waved his hand
among the bees that buzzed over the top of the exposed
frames. In a moment he jerked it away and cupped the
other hand over it. Returning to Smiley, he uncovered the
back of his hand to disclose a bee that appeared to be stuck
there and was buzzing excitedly as it tried to get away. It
could not fly off bcause it was attached to its sting—and its
sting was buried deep in the back of the man's hand.
" I let it sting me," said the schoolmaster, " just to show
how easy it is to get used to it. I can hardly feel the sting.
Now you watch what he does."
Smiley forgot the pain of his own sting as he stared at the
bee on the back of the man's hairy hand.
"E's sittin' down and 'e can't stand up!" said the boy.
" Why don't 'e let go of 'is sting?"
"It can't. It's fixed to the end of its abdomen."
" I thought bees could let go o' their stings like frill lizards
let go o' their tails."
Oh, no. The only way this one can get rid of its sting
is to break it off. It's going to do it now. Watch!"
The bee now buzzed in circles, using his sting as an axis
on which to turn.
" Don't it 'urt?" asked the boy.
"It probably hurts the bee more than it hurts me. There
it goes!"
At last the insect was free. It darted away, leaving behind
the quivering sting. The master lifted it out with his knife
and wiped it on a clump of grass.
" Now are we ready for some more work?"
Smiley backed away. "Gee, me leg's sore. I think
me mother wants me at 'ome. I think she wants me to go a
message."
Mr. Stephens cursed inwardly. He had just allowed a bee
to pump poison into him for nearly a minute so that he could
prove to the boy that a sting was something hardly worth
bothering about—though the demonstration had become
pretty painful before the end —and the boy refused to be
convinced.


He could not rightly order Smiley to help him, especially
as the boy had been stung once already.
" Oh, I was depending on you, Smiley. I'll be in a mess
without your help."
" I gotter go 'ome," said the boy stubbornly. He started to
remove his veil.
The master became desperate. Though he did not believe
in giving schoolchildren money for helping him, he decided
that this was an exceptional case.
" How would you like to earn sixpence?"
" What for?" asked the boy eagerly.
" For staying on and helping me, of course."
"Aw, I s'pose it'll be all right if I tell me mother I was
'elping you, sir."
" I'm sure it will. Put your veil on properly. I don't want
you to get any more stings. You stay away from the hives
and I'll hand you the combs and you take them over to the
extractor. And while you're waiting get out the netting tent
and put it up."
Smiley erected the tent in the shade of a tree, happily
adding sixpence to sixpence and subtracting the total from
three-pound-ten. He decided he would submit to the torture
of a hundred stings if it would bring his bicycle any sooner.
When the master called him to carry the frames to the ex-
tractor inside the tent, he walked boldly across as if defying
the bees to attack him.
Six honey-laden frames were taken from the hive before
the master began uncapping. In the meantime Smiley had
made a fire of mulga and sandalwood twigs and had heated
some water in a long, shallow dish.
The master dipped the broad uncapping knife into the
boiling water, quickly wiped it dry, and then with a long
upward sweep he neatly sliced the wrinkled caps of comb
off one face of the frame. As the white cappings curled
over the back of the knife and the honey glistened in the
cells. Smiley's mouth watered.
" Please, sir, can I 'ave a bit?" He indicated the cappings
which were collecting in a dish beneath the frame.
The master nodded, and Smiley lifted the curled wax
smeared with honey and pushed it into his mouth.
" Spit out the wax," warned Mr. Stephens.
"Mrs. Garth's baby got convulsions when it et wax,"
replied the boy. He spat the wax ten feet and grabbed a


fresk piece.
The comb, with every cell now uncapped, was slid into
one of the wire baskets of the extractor. Soon another was
ready for the second basket.
"Your job is to turn the extractor," said the master.
Smiley took hold of the handle. " Slowly at first —don't jerk
—that's right. Now a little faster—faster—now keep going at
that speed."
The honey whirled from the flying combs in big drops that
gathered on the inside of the wall of the extractor and then
began to ooze slowly downwards. The boy leaned over and
took in deep breaths of the warm, scented air that rose from
the extractor.
"Gee," he said, "that's bonzer!"
A swarm of bees buzzed outside the tent, trying to get in
to the honey.
" Now the other side."
He stopped the extractor, swung the baskets over, and
started again. Before long the combs were empty of honey.
The master took them out and put in another two he had just
uncapped. Smiley got to work again while the master re-
turned the empty combs to the hive.
The afternoon passed quickly as Mr. Stephens took comb
after comb from the hives and uncapped them for the boy to
do the extracting. He did not call a halt till the sun was on
the horizon and the bees were swarming in with their last
loads.
"All we've got to do now is to run off the honey—and then
home."
The heavy golden liquid poured out of the extractor tap
into the tins, which Smiley carried to the cart. Before long
they were all loaded —then the extractor, the tent, and the
rest of the paraphernalia.
They drove home in the dusk. The west was faintly gilded
by the hidden sun, and the eastern sky was pink and mauve.
Half a dozen brolgas flew overhead, trailing slender legs and
shrieking harshly.
Smiley fingered his swollen leg and wondered when he
was going to get his sixpence.
"I m goin' to git a bike," he said. " I got a sprat saved up
for it. I've got it planted in a kingfisher's nest in the river."
" Do you think it's safe there?"
"Aw, yairs. Nobody but me knows where I got it planted."


" I'd advise you to open a savings bank account. You can
do it with a shilling, you know."
"Aw, I dunno, sir."
" I'll make a bargain with you. I'll add sixpence to the
sixpence I owe you, and I'll open an account for you at the
post office, if you'll promise to put in your other sixpence as
well."
Smiley was suspicious of banks and bank accounts because
he knew nothing about them.
" Please, sir, will I git me dough back?"
"Of course," laughed the schoolmaster. "Any time you
like. You can draw it out by just signing your name on a
form. Well, is it a bargain?"
" Yairs, sir."
" Good! We'll go across after school to-morrow. You can
bring your sixpence, and we'll start your account with one
shilling and sixpence to the credit of Smiley Greevins."
When Smiley left the schoolmaster he ran down to the
river to see if his money was still in the kingfisher's nest. At
first he could not find it, in the semi-darkness, but soon he
came upon the hole in the bank. The tin was there, and the
sixpence rattled inside it.
Smiley replaced it carefully. He ran home, muttering the
incantation which someone had told him would protect him
from anything harmful that lived in the darkness:
" One—two—three—four —five —six—seven!
All good children go to heaven!
Penny on the water, twopence on the sea!
Threepence on the railway for you and me!"
CHAPTER FOUR
Smiley thumbed the bankbook till it was grimy. He read
again and again the entry in the first ruled page crediting
him with one-and-sixpence.
On getting the bankbook and a pat on the head from the
postmaster, his first impulse was to race down the street dis-
playing this sign of wealth. But he realised in time it would
be foolish to boast about his money to the other boys, who,


once they knew, would be sure to pester him till he spent it.
Yet his cunning told him that it would be wise to let some
people know —people who would be pleased to encourage his
saving habit by making a contribution to William Greevins'
banking account. The schoolmaster's donation had already
taught him that there were some people only too ready to
give money away if they were convinced that it would not
be immediately spent, but saved for a later date. Smiley
could not see the logic of this, but he accepted it without
question.
He took his bankbook home, wrapped it in some news-
paper, and tucked it into a corner of intersecting beams
underneath his ramshackle house.
"Them flamin' white-ants might git it!" he muttered as
the thought came to him.
So he took it out from under the house, tied it to one end
of a piece of string, and climbed a huge pepperina tree. Near
the top he tied the string securely to a branch and the bank-
book swung among the leaves.
" Gotter git it down when it rains," he thought.
But it had not rained for months, and it did not look as if
the bankbook was in danger of a wetting for a few months
more. In any case, the storms gave plenty of warning, and
Smiley knew no rain would be given a chance to wash out
those fascinating figures.
"Hi! Smi-lee!"
It was Blue's voice, and Smiley did not know whether to
answer him at once or not, because his mate might climb up
and discover his secret.
" Smi-i-lee-e!"
Smiley began to descend quickly, dropping from bough to
bough like a monkey.
" Hi, Blue!" he called before he reached the bottom.
" Where you been?"
"Aw, up the old pepper tree."
" What 'ave you been doin' up there?"
" Nothin'. Just kiddin' I was Captain Cook in the crows-
nest and there was pirates on the starboard bow."
" I like playin' pirates," said Blue. " What about climbin'
up again and playin' pirates?"
"Aw, gee, no. I reckon we ought to git our goats. Do
you know where the mob is?"
" I dunno. I think I 'eard the stinker's bell near the dam."


" Come on, we'll git our goats. Got a 'alter?"
" No, I wasn't thinkin' "
" I'll git you one," interrupted Smiley, running into the
house and returning in half a minute with two pieces of
strong cord.
" Sool you!" he shouted and raced up the road with Blue
in pursuit.
"Hi!" The call came from Tom, the boy who had taken
Smiley's penny and spent it on cake. " Where you goin'?"
he called.
" To git a wigwam for a goose's bridle!" yelled Smiley
insolently, recalling one of the sayings of Granny McKinley,
the oldest inhabitant.
"Wigwag for a goose's bridle!" jeered Blue, recalling it
not so accurately.
Tom cut across the road and ran alongside. " Goin' to git
your goats?" he asked.
" Mind yore own flakin' business!" panted Smiley.
" Wigwag for a goose's bridle!" puffed Blue.
" I'm comin' with youse blokes," announced Tom. "I'm
goin' to git me goat, too."
" Where's yore 'alter?" asked Smiley.
" I got it in my pocket." He hauled out a length of cord
and ran beside them up the hill.
Passing the post office, Smiley grinned in its direction and
neglected to look where he was going till he stubbed his toe
painfully against a big stone. Once over the hill, they
reached the edge of the bindy-eyes. The boys picked their
way carefully, stopping occasionally to scrape their feet in
bare patches of dust in order to dislodge the tiny spines that
thrust themselves into the flesh. They reached the dam to
frighten a pink-and-grey cloud of galahs that rose screaming
and wheeling.
" Can't see no goats," said Tom.
"Listen!" suggested Smiley.
They stopped—and at first they could hear nothing but the
wind in the trees. Then came the faint sound of a bell. Tonk
—tonk —tonk! Tonk—tonk!
" Up be'ind the 'orspital," suggested Smiley.
" Be'ind the 'orspital," agreed Blue.
The three boys turned towards the rambling wooden
building that stood on the top of the next hill. They struck
the road and puttered through the dust that lay four inches


thick in the scorching sun. Even the afternoon heat was so
intense that the air rising from the corrugated iron roof of
the hospital quivered and wavered till it looked like some
fantastic building of a mirage.
As they approached, a woman came out of the hospital,
leading a boy who stumbled as if blind.
" It's Jack Coster," remarked Smiley. " 'E's been 'avin' 'is
eyes scrubbed, I bet."
" I ain't never 'ad me eyes scrubbed," boasted Tom.
" Gee, the way the doctor gits the toothbrush on to 'em,"
exclaimed Blue.
" The pain is excrooshinatin'," said Smiley.
" What?"
" Excrooshinatin'."
" What's that mean?"
" It means it 'urts like flamin' hell!" explained Smiley.
" That's a snake yarn," sneered Tom. " There ain't no
word excrooshinatin'."
" Betcher there is!"
" Betcher there ain't!"
" Betcher! The minister said excrooshinatin'. 'E said the
pain was excrooshinatin' when you git yore eyes scrubbed.
I heard him tellin' a cove he was talkin' to outside Mason's
store."
"Aw, dicken!" was Tom's scornful reply.
Jack Coster, hauled along by his mother, blinked with un-
seeing eyes at the three boys.
"Hi, Jack! Hi, Jack!" they greeted.
" Been avin' me eyes scrubbed," he told them, but he could
not distinguish them through the mist of blood and tears.
" Gee, I'm sorry," sympathised Smiley.
" Don't be sorry fox 'im!" snapped Mrs. Coster. "He never
'ad drops in 'is eyes when the doctor told 'im—that's what he
done."
"Aw, I git drops in me eyes three times a week," said Blue.
" Me, too," said Smiley and Tom.
"There y'are!" snorted Mrs. Coster to her son. " Smiley
and Tom and Blue 'as drops and they never git blight and
'ave theix eyes scrubbed."
" I 'ad blight once," said Blue.
" So did I," said Smiley, "and the pain was excrooshin-
atin'."
"You won't never git blight if you 'ave drops," warned


Mrs. Coster as she turned, dragging her son after her.
The boys watched the miserable little figure go stumbling
along the road after the gaunt, striding woman.
" Hooray, Jack."
" Hooray, mates!" he called back.
" Remember 'ow the doctor gits you down on the table
and turns up yore eyelids and scrubs off the gran—gran —"
" Granulation," suggested Tom.
" 'Ow do you know? You never had yore eyes scrubbed."
" I know I never, but it's granulation he scrubs off. It feels
just like sand under yore eyelids. That's why it's called
sandy blight."
"Aw, yore too smart!" said Smiley sarcastically, but he
knew that Tom was right. "Yore so flakin' clever you
oughter—"
" I can 'ear the stinker's bell," interrupted Blue. The boys
listened intently. " Over in the scrub."
They left the road and picked their way through the
bindyeyes. At the edge of the mulga they came on the mob
of goats. Like the mob attached to every Western Queens-
land settlement, it consisted of every goat in the place—
nearly a hundred of them. They were led everywhere by the
only entire male goat in Murrumbilla, which, because of its
obvious and offensive smell, was known as the stinker.
He was a large and belligerent animal with a bell round
his neck. Wherever the stinker went the rest of the mob
went also. So only one bell to the mob was necessary.
Smiley caught sight of his goat, a black-and-brown animal
called Bootlace. The other two boys helped him catch Boot-
lace. He slipped a loop of cord over the animal's nose,
twisted it over the head behind the horns, and back to the
loop again. The two spare ends formed reins. No boy ever
used a bit with his bridle of cord, for it was not necessary.
The trained goat responded well enough to the crude halter.
Blue caught his goat, named Phar Lap after the famous
Australian racehorse. Tom's animal, called Rogue, was more
fractious, and at first Smiley and Blue stood and laughed at
the fat boy's efforts to catch the beast. Since they did not
like Tom, they saw no reason why they should help him.
Eventually he appealed to them and after some discussion
they agreed to help. Within a few minutes Rogue had his
halter on.
" I'm goin' to sool on the flat so's to git Bootlace into


trainin' for the sports," Smiley told the other two.
" Betcher me and Phar Lap win the races we're in for,"
challenged the red-haired boy.
" Betcher!"
" Haw!" sneered Tom. " Betcher if I was under fourteen
I'd win the lot."
"Yore a skite!" cried Smiley.
" Skite!" echoed Blue.
41 I'll dong you!"
By this time the three boys had ridden their goats out of
the scrub and on to the cleared land on the hospital hill
overlooking the settlement. They were heading for the road
to town when the argument broke out. Tom pulled his
mount alongside Blue's and glared fiercely at the red-haired
boy.
" I'll dong you one on the ear 'ole!" he shouted.
Smiley, who had come quickly up from behind, dug his
toe in the belly of Tom's goat just as the bigger boy swung
his fist at Blue. The goat leapt forward and Tom, caught off
his balance, fell sprawling among the bindyeyes. He yelled
as the hundreds of tiny prickles pierced the skin of his legs
and arms. Before he could get to his feet Smiley and Blue
were galloping down the road, with Tom's goat racing after
them.
When they reached the river they turned and threw stones
at the riderless animal till at last it turned and scampered
off in search of the mob, bleating loudly and trailing its
halter of cord.
The boys had arrived at the part of the river where the
little drought-shrunken stream found a deep basin which it
filled before trickling out and becoming once more a narrow
stream. Here was a natural swimming pool. The boys pulled
off their clothes and plunged in. For the rest of the after-
noon they swam about or lay naked in the shade of the trees.
They rode back through the hot dusk with a faint wind
parching their lips. When they came near the church on
the hill, they dismounted," slipped off the cord bridles, and
set their goats free to gallop away into the trees in search of
the mob.
" Gee, I'm 'ungry!" Blue said as they reached the police
station corner. " I gotter 'ave some tucker. Hooray!"
" Hooray!" Smiley said.


The redhead turned the corner and went pattering away
into the semi-darkness. Smiley ambled down the hill past
the butcher's shop, Kelly's grocery store, and the row of
wooden houses on their hardwood stilts.
A car came roaring up the road, its headlights cutting
brilliantly through the gloom. It swerved into the side of
the road and pulled up with squealing brakes, causing the
horses at the hitching posts to rear and snort. Out of the
big dusty car tumbled seven men, shouting and laughing,
eager to find drink.
Smiley reached the verandah of the hotel to hear someone
say " They're the flakin' shearers from Alicia Downs. They
cut out to-day and I bet they got good flakin' cheques on em."
This crowd, having finished the shearing of 20,000 sheep,
had just driven the thirty dusty miles from Alicia Downs,
and they had thirsts that could not be quenched in an hour
or two. It would take all night to satisfy them—and perhaps
half the next day as well.
Smiley watched them stamp through the doors of the bar,
and he listened to their shouting for a minute or two before
he went on home.
Before he entered the house he shinned up the pepperina
tree and groped among the topmost branches. His bankbook
was quite safe.
After a tea of bread and stew he felt happily bloated and
tired.
" You be back 'ome by nine," his mother called after him
as he slipped out through the door.
The sky was a blaze of stars and the Milky Way burned in
a spangled arch overhead. The lights of the township were
yellow and pale beneath the glitter.
The sound of raucous singing came from Rankin's Hotel.
Smiley hurried up the street and joined the group of chil-
dren who stood outside the hotel staring at the group of
shearers who were singing and shouting and drinking on the
verandah. It had become too hot inside the little bar, so they
had some bottles and barrels brought out on to the verandah,
which was lit by the white flare of acetylene lamps. A few
of the men sprawled on the floor, but the rest sat on the
wooden forms or stamped up and down the verandah singing
" The Dying Stockman" in noisy chorus:


A gallant young stoc\man lay dying.
His saddle supported his head.
As his comrades around him were crying,
These were the last words he said:
" Wrap me up with my stockwhip and blan\et,
And bury me deep down below,
Where the dingoes and crows will not get me—
In the land where the coolabahs grow."
Two women, one the doctor's wife and the other a middle-
aged spinster friend, walked into the glare of acetylene light
as they passed the hotel on their way to play whist with the
police sergeant's wife.
" It's disgusting," said one of the women.
" Fancy drinking and going on like that in public, right in
front of those children. Go home, children. Go on, home
you go!"
The two women urged the children before them somewhat
in the manner of a drover with sheep. Smiley and one or
two of the bigger boys broke away into the darkness and
returned circuitously to the shadow of the trees in front of
the verandah, where they listened to the clamour of voices.
" So I called 'im a skite and donged 'im."
" Skin off your nose!"
" That bint of Charlie's is a bonzer. Best lookin' sheilah
in Charleville."
"An' the boss found three frogs in the waterbag!"
"Aw, wipe your chin!"
" That coot don't know nothin' about classin' wool!"
"And there I was humpin' the bluey from Tambo to
Yaraka."
"Here's Harry!" shouted a voice. "Give us a song
Harry!"
" Song! Give us a song!" clamoured the shearers.
Harry was the township's "character," a ragged, wrinkled
little man, browned and toughened by the sun and agile as
a pony despite his sixty-odd years. Though he lived by
doing odd jobs about the settlement, one of his sidelines was
entertaining parties of shearers, rouseabouts, and station
hands who came to town for a spree.
The shearers grouped round the little brown man as he


skipped into the middle of the verandah and began to sing
in a high, quavering voice.
When I came home last night
My darling wife to see
I saw a hat upon the rac\
Where my hat ought to be.
After that innocent beginning the song developed a ten-
dency to bawdiness, which pleased everyone considerably.
Before long the sixpences and shillings began to ring on the
verandah. Every time a coin was thrown in Harry stopped
and snatched it up as he sang. This made the song rather
spasmodic towards the end, and the climax of the domestic
plot was not at all clear. But nobody seemed to mind.
Smiley observed all this from where he crouched in the
shadow of the bottle tree. His eyes watched Harry enviously
as the little man grabbed the coins and dropped them jing-
ling into his pockets. Smiley had seen Harry make money
like this before, but only now did he have any idea of trying
the same game. He shifted nervously in the darkness, won-
dering what the shearers would do if he went up on the
vexandah and started to sing. Would they give him money,
too? Or would they kick his grummet?
He decided to take the chance. Slipping from behind- the
tree, he walked boldly up the steps and advanced on the
shc&rcrs.
" I'll sing for youse coves," he said to the nearest.
His voice was drowned in the general uproar and nobody
took'any notice of him. ,
" I'll sing for youse coves," he repeated, pulling one man s
arm.
The sheaxer turned. " What do you want, son?
" I'll sing ' Waltzing Matilda' for youse."
"You go home to rosy-red!"
"Aw, I wanter sing ' Waltzing Matilda'."
The shearer turned to the others. " Here's a kid wants to
sing ' Waltzing Matilda'."
" Gawn, sing up, son!"
" Waltzin' Matilda!"
" Let 'er go, kid!"
So Smiley nervously began the most famous of Australian
folk-songs, the song of the sundowner who stole the sheep.


Once a jolly swagman camped by a billabong,
Under the shade of a coolabah tree,
And he sang as he watched and waited till his billy boiled,
" Who'll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?"
The whole crowd took up the chorus:
Waltzing Matilda, Waltzing Matilda,
Who'll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?
And he sang as he watched and waited till his billy boiled
" Who'll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?"
Now more confident, Smiley sang with a clearer and
stronger voice:
Down came a jumbuc\ to drin\ at the billabong,
Up came the swagman and grabbed him with glee,
And he sang as he shoved that jumbuc\ in his tucper bag,
" Who'll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?"
Again the roaring chorus:
Waltzing Matilda, Waltzing Matilda,
Who'll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?
And he sang as he shoved that in his tucker bag,
" Who'll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?"
A coin rang on the verandah. Smiley darted after it and
discovered it was sixpence. Still singing, he grabbed another
sixpence, then a shilling, and then two pennies.
Up rode the squatter mounted on his thoroughbred,
Up rode the troopers —one, two, three.
Where s that jolly you've got in your tucker bag?
You'll come a-waltzing Matilda with me!"
A sixpence rolled off the edge of the verandah before
Smiley could catch it. Darting from the shadow of the
bottle trees, some boy snatched up the coin from the ground
and ran off into the darkness.
Smiley sang the last verse:
Up jumped the swagman and sprang into the billabong,
"You'll never catch me alive!" said he.
And his 9host may be heard as you pass by that billabong,
Who'll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?"


The crowd took up the chorus again. Smiley, flushed and
excited, yelled the words as loudly as he could, determined
to show them that they were getting their money's worth.
As the last line came to a roaring climax, a man on horse-
back loomed up out of the darkness and rode right alongside
the verandah rail. At the sight of the khaki tunic the crowd
became silent, but only for a moment. Then they shouted
greetings to the police sergeant.
"What's that kid doing there?" he snapped.
"Aw, just givin' us a chune."
" You get out of this, son," said the policeman to Smiley.
" This is no place for you."
"Stone the flamin' crows!" complained a voice. "You'd
think we was doin' something crook."
Smiley sidled to the verandah steps.
" Off you go!" called Sergeant Flaxman, leaning down and
giving the boy a slap on the back that sent him running up
the street, leaving the shearers good-humouredly barracking
the policeman as he rode off.
Smiley had not gone far before he heard a patter of bare
feet behind him.
" 'Ow much did you git?"
The questioner was a boy named Fred Craig, whose father
was a drover. With him was his younger sister Elsie, and
behind her came Jacky the aboriginal boy.
" 'Ow much?" repeated Fred.
"Aw, a couple o' sprats."
"You never did! I saw you git two bob."
" Well, I might 'ave got a couple o' bob."
" Give us a bit," asked Elsie.
" Gibbit tchilling," whined Jacky.
" Gawn," urged Fred. "Be a sport, Smiley. You know
me, cobber."
" I'm savin' up," replied Smiley, increasing his pace.
The others crowded about eagerly, pressing and pleading.
At last he gave in and handed over sixpence to each of them.
" Gee, yore a sport —fair dinkum you are, Smiley!" cried
Fred.
" Too right you are, Smiley!" said Elsie.
" Budgeree!" shouted black Jacky.
They dashed off to buy lemonade and lollies. Smiley
slipped in through the gate of his home and climbed swiftly
up the pepperina tree, feeling in the darkness for each fork


and branch and projection with confident hands and feet
Once at the top he made sure his bankbook was still there
Then he took the money out of his pockets and counted it
m the starlight. He could distinguish the pennies by feeling
their unmilled edges, and the silver coins gleamed faintly in
Orion s light. Smiley counted six shillings and sevenpence
This was a fortune! He jingled the coins softly in his hand
as he added the amount to his one and six in the bank
Eight shillings and a penny! Nearly ten shillings—and once
he got ten shillings he would need to repeat the performance
only six times to have his bike.
Gee! was all he said as the wonder of it impressed itself
oft him more and more. He let his imagination wander
down the main street with everyone saying
Thats Smiley Greevins on his new bike!". . . speeding
over the plain in pursuit of kangaroos ... the river's cominl
down! ... the next town is in danger of being flooded'
telephone lines swept away! . . . who'll take the message
and save thousands of lives? . . . Smiley Greevins—on his
bike. . . . over the hills and through the flooded valleys
with water up to his chin and still pedalling through the
seething flood ... at last he gets there and falls exhausted
e message of life . . . the town is saved and
the Mayor presents him with fifty bottles of lemonade and
ntty bottles of raspberry fizz and a hundred agate marbles
and an air rifle that shoots down bronze-wing pigeons at a
hundred yards.
He jingled the coins softly in his hand as he stared at the
five diamonds of the Southern Cross.
> Mst, realizing that the time must be nearly nine
o clock he slid down the tree and crawled under the house
tie pushed the coins up into a corner of the joists and crept
quietly round to the back door.
mother was sitting in the kitchen, mending a skirt bv
the light of a kerosene lamp.
Where 'ave you been?" she asked, sensing the boy's ex-
citement though it did not show in his faco.
"Aw, up at Rankin's pub," he replied." "There's some
shearers up there boozin'!"
"You keep away from boozers. One in the family's
enough. J
She was referring to her drover husband. Smiley felt
uncomfortable. He always did when anyone talked about


his father, and he always felt terribly ashamed to be seen
with him because he was known everywhere as a waster
who spent all his money on drink and let his wife wash and
scrub for a living. Just now he was droving some sheep
to Cunnamulla far away up north and he would not be home
for several months.
" I sung 'em a song," confided Smiley.
" Sung who a song?"
" The shearers. And they give me five bob."
" Not reely?"
" Yairs."
" Where's the money?"
" Under the 'ouse. I'm goin' to put it in the bank
" In the bank!"
Mrs. Greevins stared at her son with astonished eyes. It
was quite conceivable that her son should get five shillings
from somewhere or other, bufdo want to put it in the bank
. . . ! Thrift was not a Greevins characteristic, Indeed,
thrift was not a characteristic of most Western Queens-
landers. Easy come, easy go—that was how they thought of
money. Besides, Mrs. Greevins had always thought banks
were things for flash people like squatters and overseers and
doctors. She frankly didn't believe her son.
" Gawn!" she said. "You're not goin' to put it in the
bank."
" Square dinkum, I am! I'm savin' up for a bike," he told
her, adding in a sudden flush of generosity, " but you can
have a couple o' d-eeners or 'alf-a-dollar if you want it."
" Well if you want to put it in the bank, put it in the bank,
but don't worry about me. I can look after meself. I'd sooner
think you was goin' to git a bike and have a bit o' fun than
go and spend yore dough on lollies and make yoreself sick."
Smiley tried to make her accept just one shilling, but she
refused.
" You go to bed, my lad, and see that you do save up for
yore bike or I'll give you a beltin'!"
So he went to bed and dreamed that he was riding his
bicycle up the face of a cliff with a policeman on horseback
chasing him, but never quite catching him. He woke sud-
denly in the darkness to find he had kicked off all his bed-
clothes. Dragging them on again, he fell into a dreamless
sleep.


CHAPTER FIVE
The next morning, before school, Smiley ran all the way
to the post office and banked the money. Returning home
he climbed the pepperina tree and once more strung the
bankbook among the leaves. He got to school just as the
bell rang.
All that day he was the despair of Miss Workman, the
pupil teacher. He did little else but sit and dream about his
bicycle. It was plain to Miss Workman that his mind was on
something else, and eventually she lost her temper and
slapped him severely. By hovering over him from time to
time she was able to keep him fairly alert till school ended.
Now all this time Smiley had been thinking of ways and
means to earn money. He had all kinds of fantastic ideas,
such as becoming a mounted policeman and capturing some
horse thieves for whom a reward had been offered; or sav-
ing the doctor's wife from snakebite death by slashing the
punctures in her arm with broken glass and sucking out the
poison—and then being praised and rewarded by a grateful
doctor; or putting on a mask and becoming a bushranger,
robbing wealthy squatters on lonely roads. But these he
rejected because of the difficulty of putting them into prac-
tice. At last he hit upon the idea of the devil-devils.
"Where are you goin' this arvo?" he asked Blue as they
came out of school.
" Aw, I dunno. Wot about gittin' our goats agin? We
gotter traimfor the sports."
" The sports don't come orf for a long time. Wot about
catchin' some devil-devils?"
"Aw, gee, devil-devils! Wot for?" asked Blue
" Just so's we can 'ave some in a tin."
" I don't want none."
" Gawn, be a sport, Blue."
The redhead followed him reluctantly round to the play-
ing shed, under which many devil-devil holes were to be
found.
The devil-devil is a fantastic creature that digs ant-traps
in the sand with its head and invariably walks backwards.


It is an insect no more than a quarter of an inch long with
a grotesque sandy-coloured body and two vicious claws.
It lives chiefly on ants caught in its cone-shaped traps dug in
the sand.
The insect selects a smooth patch of sand and, while it
walks backwards in a circle, it tosses the sand away from a
central point by thrusting its head into the soft yellow grains
and jerking them upwajds and outwards. Eventually the
insect finds itself at the bottom of a conical hole, where it
buries itself and waits for the ants to fall pver the lip of the
trap and come slithering down to the bottom.
Catching devil-devils is a skilled job. It cannot be done
simply by scooping up the sand under and around the hole.
When the sand has trickled through the fingers nothing re-
mains. The devil-devil must be seen before he can be
caught, and even then a certain procedure must be followed
to make capture certain.
Smiley and Blue, each with a small tin half-full of sand
beside him, crouched in the shade just under the edge of the
shed, which, like very other Western Queensland building,
stood on high hardwood blocks for protection from white
ants.
" Gee, there's a lot of nests 'ere," said Blue.
" They're not nests —they're just 'oles in the sand."
"Aw, I know, but you call 'em nests."
" No, you don't."
" Betcher."
"All right, betcher. I'll . . ."
" There's an ant!" interrupted Blue, indicating the insect
that came running round one of the posts. The boy stretched
out his hand and nipped the ant between his fingers. He
dropped it into one of the traps.
It started to climb the sloping wall with little, frantic
movements, but the sand slithered away from under its feet
and it tumbled back to the bottom. No matter how it tried
to get out, it could find no secure footing on the sliding sand,
and it stayed struggling at the bottom of the hole.
" The ole devil-devil don't seem to be at 'ome," remarked
Smiley.
" Must 'ave gawn for a walk," replied Blue.
" I got an ant!" Smiley grabbed one that had followed in
the tracks of the first insect. He dropped it into another
trap.


The ant had not struggled for long before a tiny pair of
pincers reached up out of the sand and nipped it round the
body.
"Got 'im!" shouted Smiley.
He leaned over the hole and began to blow steadily into it
The sand scattered on all sides, exposing the devil-devil
with the ant in his pincers. Smiley's swift fingers scooped
up the insect and dropped it into the tin. The devil-devil
backed into the sand and disappeared in a couple of seconds
still with the ant in its pincers.
Blue retrieved his ant from the empty trap and tried
another. This time it was occupied, and in half a minute he
had a devil-devil in his tin.
The boys continued the hunt till each had six devil-devils.
It took them about an hour to make the captures, because
many of the traps had been deserted by the insects that made
them, and only one in five or six was occupied.
By this time the boys were tired of catching devil-devils,
so they left the school grounds and walked down the hill
towards the main road.
Smiley had a definite plan for disposing of his catch. He
did not tell Blue, because he hoped that his mate would soon
get tired of carrying his devil-devils about and would hand
them over to Smiley.
" Wot are you goin' to do with yores?" asked Blue.
" I dunno. Wot are you goin' to do?"
Aw, I think I'll take 'em 'ome and feed 'em on ants."
" Wot do you want to do that for?"
" To make 'em breed."
" Haw, they won't breed!"
" Betcher they will," retorted Blue. " Cats and dogs breed
and so do devil-devils."
" Yairs, but they won't breed in a tin."
" Betcher they will if I give 'em ants to eat and make 'em
teel at ome.
"All right, you see." Smiley's tone was scornful. Though
he did not despair of getting Blue's devil-devils, he now
knew it was going to be harder than he first thought. He
could have asked his friend straight out, but he knew that
Blue would then want to know why he was so anxious to
have them.
I m goin' 'ome to git a piece of bread and butter"
announced Blue.


" Can I 'ave some too?"
"Aw, I gotter ask me mother, but I think she'll give you
a piece."
So they made for Blue's house, where his mother gave
them each a large slice. They sat on the back steps and
chewed.
" We got some devil-devils," Blue told his mother.
" Those horrible, crawly things?" she asked.
" Yairs, and I'm goin' to breed 'em."
"You're not going to bring those nasty things into the
house," she told him emphatically.
" I won't bring 'em inside. I'll keep 'em under the 'ouse."
" You'll do nothing of the sort. You throw them away
this minute. Take them right away from here and throw
them into the river or somewhere."
"Aw, they can't 'urt you," pleaded Blue.
" Don't answer me back!"
" Smiley's got some too," muttered the redhead as he rose
unwillingly and started to walk away.
" Smiley had better throw his away too, or he won't get
any more bread and butter."
So the two boys, still chewing, left the house and walked
up the road. Once they were out of sight of Blue's home,
they stopped and discussed the fate of the devil-devils.
" I s'pose I gotter chuck 'em away," said Blue. "Anyway
I don't want the ole devil-devils any more."
" Give 'em to me," suggested Smiley.
His eagerness made Blue suspicious. " Wot are you goin'
to do with 'em?"
" Nothin'."
" You gotter do somethin' with 'em."
"Aw, I s'pose I'll jist keep 'em for a while, I s'pose."
" Wotcher want to keep 'em for?"
" I've got a sort of affliction for 'em."
"A wot?" asked Blue.
"A sort of affliction. It means I want to keep 'em and not
throw 'em away and let 'em run wild."
|| It don't mean that at all!" said Blue.
" Betcher it does. The master says if you've got an afflic-
tion for anything you like it and can't bear to lose it."
" Your lip's bleedin'," grinned Blue.
Smiley automatically put his hand to his mouth. Then he
realised that Blue's remark was a term used to express ridi-


cule of anyone who used big words.
" Gawn!" he said.
Blue laughed as he hurled his tin into the roadway. It
bounced once and flew open, scattering its contents in the
dust.
" Gee!" cried Smiley as he ran to the spot. He found only
one insect in sight—the others had buried themselves before
he could reach them.
" You mighter been a sport and give 'em to me instead o'
chuckin' 'em away," he said reproachfully.
"Aw, gee, Smiley, I never knew you wanted 'em as bad as
that. You got an iffixion for 'em all right."
" Too right! I'm goin' to do somethin' with these devil-
devils, but it's a secret and I can't tell you now. But I'll tell
you some time."
Blue pleaded to be let into the secret, but Smiley was
adamant. Finally he got Blue to promise not to follow him
about, while Smiley in turn promised to tell Blue something
to his advantage if the plan worked successfully. Blue
watched his friend over the brow of the church hill.
Smiley ran most of the way to the hospital. Slipping
round to the back of the building, he came upon the rubbish
dump which inevitably formed part of any Western Queens-
land institution. The boy, while on his way to catch his goat
the day before, had seen the heap of little cajdboard boxes
which the hospital had thrown out because they had become
stained from contact with some acid.
Smiley collected ten of the best-looking boxes, then he
hurried down the gully and up the sandhill. Here he half-
filled each box with clean sand. Emptying his tin of devil-
devils on to a hard, bare patch he picked up the seven insects
one by one, dropping each into a separate box of sand.
Everything was now ready.
Smiley first called on Charlie Sung, the Chinese store-
keeper. At the sound of the boy's knuckles on the counter,
Charlie came shuffling out of his mysterious back room.
" 'Day, Charlie."
The Chinese nodded and waited for the boy to speak.
" I say, Charlie, do you want somethin' terribly wonder-
ful?"
" Tellibly wonderful not wanted."
"Aw, come on, Charlie. I got somethin' marvellous in this


box. I'll give it to you for a penny. It's wonderful—square
dinkum, it is."
Charlie shook his head and, turning, began to retire to his
back room.
" Listen, Charlie," pleaded Smiley. " I got an animal in
this box and- it walks backwards. 'Ave you ever seen an
animal that walks backwards?"
"Animal not wanted," said Charlie as he disappeared.
" Chinky-chinky-Chinaman!" muttered Smiley derisively.
He stamped out of the store.
He walked down the road to Rankin's hotel. On the
verandah attached to the coffee room sat a man who was
reading a newspaper. Smiley guessed- correctly that he was
one of the many commercial travellers who called on the
township during their Western Queensland itineraries.
Day," said Smiley, peering through the railings.
" What?" grunted the stranger looking over the edge of
his paper.
" Pleased to meet you," said the boy, trying to be polite.
" Hullo, son, what do you want?"
" I think we're goin' to 'ave a drought."
" You think so?" laughed the traveller. "We seem to be
haying one right now, as far as I can see."
"Do you want to see something terribly marvellous?"
Tl '' WeL, I'm always ready to see anything marvellous.
What s the idea, anyway?"
" Do you want to see a devil-devil?"
"A what?"
" I've got a devil-devil in this box. It's a thing that lives
ii» the sand and walks backwards and eats ants. It's a won-
derful thing and I've got an affliction for it."
" Devil-devil? What the devil-devil are you talking
about?" He chuckled at his own joke.
Smiley whipped the lid off one of his boxes and shook it
till the insect came to the top. " That's a devil-devil."
" Suppose it could give a bloke a nasty bite?" grinned the
stranger.
''Aw, no. It don't bite or anythin' like that. It's tame, but
it s a wonderful thing because it walks backwards and eats
ants.
n s .^~ ec^n & I'd like to see it eat a few ants."
4.u' i pl ease -" Smiley thrust the box
through the railings and the man took it. The boy bent down


and picked up one of the many ants that ran in a wiggly,
black line beneath the edge of the verandah.
" You watch 'im eat this ant," he said, as he took back the
box and, shaking it till the devil-devil came to the top,
dropped the ant almost on top of the ugly insect. The devil-
devil was either too frightened or not hungry enough to
bother about the ant, because it retreated stern foremost
into the sand once more.
" O' course I've been feedin' it on ants all day," explained
Smiley, trying not to look disappointed. " It ain't 'ungry now
but when it's 'ungry it eats ants for its tucker."
" That's what you said before," said the commercial travel-
ler. " What's the idea, anyway?"
" I just thought you might like to 'ave a devil-devil to
keep," said Smiley casually. " Some blokes keep 'em and
say they're terribly wonderful things."
" That's kind of you, son. But I haven't got time to go
catching ants for this fellow's dinner."
"Aw, well, I'll catch the ants for you if you take this cove.
It's only a tray."
" What?"
" Threepence." Smiley held his breath while he waited for
the reply.
"You're kidding," snorted the traveller.
" I'm not —dinkum, I'm not. I'll tell you wot —I'll give you
a devil-devil for a penny."
" How do I know it's a well-bred devil-devil? Can you
tell me its pedigree?"
"Aw, no kidstakes," muttered Smiley, who by this time
regarded his chances of a sale as hopeless.
" Here you are," said the commercial traveller, pulling a
penny out of his pocket.
" Gee, thanks! 'Ere's your devil-devil."
" No, thanks, son. I haven't got time to catch ants all day.
You keep it and sell it to somebody else."
The traveller began to laugh, and he was still laughing
when Smiley disappeared round the corner of the hotel.
Here the boy came upon Mrs. Casey, who did the hotel wash-
ing. She told him in strong terms that she didn't want any
devil-devils, the ugly brutes.
So Smiley passed on to another prospective customer,
Harry the handyman. Another refusal —and Smiley began
to lose confidence. He could not understand why no one


would give threepence—or even a penny—for a marvellous
devil-devil in a neat box of sand, with full instructions for
feeding. One penny seemed little enough to pay for such a
remarkable creature.
But the residents of Murrumbilla thought otherwise. At
least those whom Smiley approached were evasively polite
or frankly abusive. The boy at last found himself back near
Blue's home still carrying seven boxes of devil-devils. With
a sudden gesture of disgust he hurled the boxes into the dust
and ran to the gate of his friend's home. Blue was sitting
under the verandah reading a tattered copy of " Hopalong
Cassidy."
" Hi, Blue!"
" Put 'em up!" snapped Blue. " Reach for the sky or I'll
plug you full of lead!" He pointed a quivering forefinger
at his mate. " I'm playing cowboys," he explained.
" I got a brown," Smiley told him.
"A copper?" Blue sprang to his feet, throwing down the
book as he ran to the gate. " Where did you git it?"
" I sold a cove a devil-devil for it."
"Aw, gee, I'm goin' to sell 'em too. I wisht I 'adn'J; thrown
mine away.
I ad a go at everybody," Smiley told him, " and only
one bloke flamin'-well bought one. So I chucked all my
devil-devils away."
" No kidstakes?"
" No kidstakes."
" Wotcher goin' to do with yore copper?"
"Aw, I'm savin' up for me bike. I'm goin' to put it in
the bank."
" You said you was goin' to tell me a secret about them
devil-devils."
"It was only I was goin' to try and sell 'em," said Smiley.
But it was no flakin' good."
" Wot about buyin' some lollies?"
" I'm savin' up for me bike."
'Aw, gee, Smiley, it's only an ole brown. You got a lot
in the bank."
Smiley turned the coin over and over in his fingers, and
replied at last, "All right."
« ;' Gee >" said Blue ' as the y walked towards Meakin's store.
I knew you was a cobber o' mine."
The penny bought each of them a long strap of liquorice,


which they ate slowly as they sat beneath the verandah of
Blue's home.
Having once got the taste, Smiley toyed with the idea of
drawing a shilling out of the bank and buying some more
liquorice. He imagined himself with twenty-four straps of
it, eating them one by one.
" Gee, I wisht I 'ad some more," said Blue, swallowing the
last mouthful.
" Same 'ere," agreed Smiley.
" I wisht I 'ad some dough in the bank. I'd git it out and
buy some more liquorice."
" Would- you —dinkum?"
" Square dinkum I would, Smiley."
" I'm goin' to draw out a deener and git some more liquor-
ice."
He got up and ran through the gate and along the road,
with Blue pattering beside him and repeating from time to
time his trust in Smiley as a generous friend.
Smiley got his bankbook down from th,e tree, and within
a few minutes they were approaching the little wooden post
office.
" You stay outside while I git the dough," advised Smiley.
The truth was that he was nervous about interviewing the
postmaster. He did not know the procedure for withdrawing
money, and he was a little afraid that he might not be given
the money unless he knew what to do. Blue waited for him
at the bottom of the steps.
" Hullo, Smiley," greeted the Postmaster.
" 'Day, Mr. Clare."
" What can I do for you?"
" I want —well, can I 'ave a shillin' o' me money? I've got
the bankbook 'ere."
" You're too late, Smiley. Savings bank business finishes
at four. It's nearly five now."
"Aw, gee!"
" If you come to-morrow after ten you can have as much
money as you like, but I can't even give you a halfpenny
now. I'm sorry."
" Thanks, Mr. Clare."
Smiley went slowly through the door, terribly disap-
pointed. Blue saw that something was wrong.
" Won't 'e give it to you?"
" No, not till to-morrer. It's too late this arvo."


"Aw, gee, that's flamin' crook! Well, I gotter git 'ome."
Blue deserted- his unhappy friend.
Smiley was half-way home when he was hailed by fat
Tom, who had heard the news of Smiley's success as a singer.
" Hi, Smiley!"
" Huh!" grunted the boy.
" Give us a bit o' lolly."
" I 'aven't got none," replied Smiley.
" Didn't you git some lollies with all the dough you made
out o' them shearers?"
" No. I put me dough in the bank."
" I betcher you didn't put it all in. I betcher you kept some
to buy lollies," asserted Tom.
" Mind yore own business." His voice was surly.
" Come on, Smiley," wheedled- Tom. " Come and buy some
lollies."
" I tell you all me dough is in the flamin' bank!" snapped
Smiley.
" Gawn!"
"It is, I tell you. Look! There's me bankbook."
Tom snatched the book from the other boy's hand and
examined it curiously.
" Give it to me back," demanded Smiley.
Tom avoided his reaching hands and turned over the
leaves. " You got a lot o' dough in the bank," he remarked.
"Give it to me back!" insisted Smiley.
Tom spat twice, deliberately and generously, upon the
entries in the bankbook. He looked at Smiley with a vicious
grin.
Smiley saw red, and anger surged up inside him. With a
yell he leapt at Tom, who vainly side-stepped and then stag-
gered away at the onslaught. Smiley's fist smashed against
his nose, and Smiley's fingers clawed at his eyes, scratching
the skin from one cheek.
" Hey!" gasped- the bully.
A fist caught him on the mouth and cut his top lip. He
fought back but was no match for Smiley, whom rage had
made fearsome. A kick in the groin doubled him up, and
he fell groaning into the roadway. Smiley snatched up his
bankbook and stood over the writhing bully.
"A cove oughter rip yore guts out!" he yelled.
By this time a small crowd of children had gathered.
" 'E kicked me in the belly," moaned Tom.


" IS spat oil me bankbook," retorted Smiley.
" Gee! Smiley can stoush!" A boy's voice was full of ad-
miration.
" Stand up and fight, Tom."
" Betcher Smiley could stoush 'im."
"Stone the crows, ain't he bleedin'?"
" 'E kicked me in the belly," moaned Tom.
Suddenly the group was scattered at the approach of a
horseman. It was the police sergeant. By the time he
reached the spot there was only Tom left. He turned a
bloody face to Sergeant Flaxman.
Smiley Greevins kicked me in the belly."
Looks as if a horse kicked you in the face," commented
the sergeant.
" Smiley Greevins did that. I wasn't doin' nothin' to 'im
and 'e kicked me in the belly."
"Well, you're big enough to look aftex yourself," replied
the sergeant, secretly pleased. "And if I catch you fighting
in the street again 111 put you in the cell for a few hours
Now get along home."
Still groaning, and walking with difficulty, Tom made off.
As he went slowly up the road with tears running down his
face Smiley watched him from behind a nearby bottle tree.
" I wisht I'd killed 'im!" he muttered. " I wisht I'd ripped
is guts out!"
He felt his bare foot, which still ached from contact with
the other boy's groin.
CHAPTER SIX
By morning, Smiley's determination to save his money at
all costs had returned. He decided very firmly that he would
not withdraw even sixpence to buy liquorice. The Post-
master's refusal to transact business after hours had saved
money fox him.
He now had a new problem. Yesterday he had foolishly
disclosed to Blue the place where he hid his bankbook.
Though the redhead was his closest friend, he did not doubt
that he would tell any number of people that Smiley kept


his bankbook at the top of the pepperina tree.
Smiley had an idea that if he lost his bankbook he would
also lose his money in the bank, and if anyone else got hold
of the book then that person could draw out the money. It
was this belief that had caused his ferocious attack on Tom.
Anyone who knew the secret of the pepperina tree might
come at night and steal the book, he told himself, so he had
to find a new hiding place. He could have given it to his
mother to keep, but that idea did not appeal to him, because
he wanted his money and his bankbook to be completely his
own.
He could have hidden the book inside the house, ,but there
was the possibility that his mothex would come across it.
Worse,,stiU, his father might come home and find it.
A tall blue gum grew in one corner of the back yard.
About fifteen feet from the ground the stump of a dead limb
projected from the trunk. The wood had rotted away till
the limb had become hollow. Smiley decided that this would
be the new hiding place for the bankbook. It was not an
easy tree to climb because of its smooth bark and absence
of low limbs, but the boy managed it by looping a piece of
rope round the tree and then round his own body, and then
working his way up the trunk a few inches at the time. At
last he reached the hollow limb and slipped the book inside,
where it was completely hidden. He scraped some skin off
his legs while sliding down.
The dosire to earn more money at all costs had now be-
come an obsession with Smiley. He was ready to do any-
thing, to risk anything, in order to make that bank balance
grow. This craving for money caused him to bring on him-
self something that every boy hates more than almost any-
thing else in the world —ridicule.
It all began when the schoolmaster, just as lessons were
about to end that afternoon, asked for next week's sweepers.
Every week two children were appointed to sweep the
schoolrooms out each day after the rest had gone home. It
was considered a girl's job and, although the master did not
object at all to boys doing the work, no boy ever applied.
The job was worth ninepence a week for each sweeper,
and the bigger girls took it in turn to earn this pocket money.
The schoolmaster was as surprised as his pupils when, in
response to his call for sweepers, Smiley held up his hand.


" Smiley Greevins!" exclaimed the master. "Do you want
to be a sweeper?"
" Yairs, sir," he replied firmly as a titter ran round the
class. His face reddened, but he kept his eyes on the master
The schoolmaster's eyes twinkled, but he held back the
smile. He knew why Smiley wanted to become a sweeper.
All right,' he said. " You and Joan Cardew will sweep
the school next week."
a Jo^ n ' s l }° 1 ud gigg 16 wa s cut short by the order to dismiss.
As the children went out noisily a group of boys collected
round the embarrassed Smilev
" Sissy!"
" Smiley the sweeper!"
" Give us a kiss, girlie!"
Smiley snatched his hat from the peg and raced out of the
school grounds and down the hill, followed by cries of deri-
sion. The faithful Blue followed him as fast as he could
and finally overtook him on the flat near the river.
Smiley?" 66 ' sa * d > " Y° u ain't goin' to sweep, are you,
"I am so! I don't care wot anyone says."
" They'll kid you to death for bein' a sissy!"
"I don't care. I'll stoush their flamin' blocks off!"
Blue tried to convince him of the foolishness of his inten-
tions, but Smiley was not to be moved. They quarrelled and
parted in a huff.
" I ain't goin' to be the cobber of a sissy," were Blue's final
words.
Smiley, despite his unhappiness, was determined to carry
on, though he dreaded to think what the other boys might
say to him when he went to school on Monday. All Friday
evening and Saturday morning he stayed at home, itching
to go and play with Blue or some of his other mates, but not
daring to expose himself to ridicule in public.
Blue arrived on Saturday and persuaded him to go for a
swim, but Smiley went with him only on condition that they
sneaked out the back way and then ran as fast as they could
down the road and across the flat to a remote part of the
river where the other boys rarely came. In that way he
escaped seeing any other boys that day. But public ridicule
was unavoidable on Sunday, for Smiley had to go to Sunday
Smiley disliked Sunday School a lot. For one thing, he had


to put boots on for the occasion. They were shiny, black
boots that squeezed and pinched his broad feet till he be-
came so uncomfortable and irritated that he wanted to tear
them off and hurl them as far as he could. He did that once,
and was so severely strapped by his mother that he never
dared do it again. He was also once given a beating for
spending his collection money on lollies and failing to turn
up at Sunday School. He never repeated that performance
either. .
So, after dragging on his boots over his thick black socks
and impatiently allowing his mother to kngt a badly creased
tie round his neck, he took his collection penny and started
off for the church with some nervousness.
He purposely lingered on the way so that he would arrive
as the bell rang and would, therefore, be able to hurry into
Sunday School before his schoolmates had much chance of
telling him what they thought of him.
It was bad luck for him that Mrs. Gaspen, the doctor's wife,
who conducted the Sunday afternoon religious instruction,
was ten minutes late. That ten minutes was enough to cause
one of the better known scandals of Murrumbilla.
It was usual for the children to wait outside the church
till Mrs. Gaspen arrived. Like all Western Queensland
youngsters they disliked the confines of four walls, so they
stayed in open air till it was absolutely necessary for them
to go inside.
Smiley saw a group of girls hanging about the gate as he
strolled along the road on the side opposite the church. They
giggled as they watched him trying in vain to appear quite
at ease. He guessed that the boys were playing marbles
underneath the church —a practice that was condemned by
Mrs. Gaspen, and which was carried out only when she was"
safely out of sight. Marbles were usually played after the
arrival of the Sunday School teacher —while she was inside
preparing the lessons just before the assembly bell.
But on this occasion the word had gone round that Mrs.
Gaspen would be late, and the boys took advantage of it to
play marbles under the church before she arrived. Smiley
did not know this, so he assumed that the doctor's wife was
already inside and that the bell would be rung at any
moment. He looked through the paling fence surrounding
the police station and pretended to be watching the serge-
ant's fowls.


" Sissy Smiley Greevins!" said one of the girls in a voice
loud enough to be heard by one of the boys underneath the
church. Before long all the boys knew that Smiley had
arrived and some of them stopped playing to come out from
under the church and call across the road to him.
" Give us a kiss, girlie!"
" Smiley the sweeper!"
" Sissy!"
The boy had courage. Instead of retreating, he advanced,
walking defiantly across the road till he came to the church
gate. The girls scattered when they saw the expression
on his face. But the boys stood in a derisive group, chant-
over and over, "Smiley the sweeper!"
11l take on all you mob!" shouted Smiley, advancing
with closed fists.
The crowd retreated a little at this unexpected threat.
' I'll stoush the mob o' you!" challenged Smiley. " I'll fight
you one 'and, kneeling down!" He dropped on one knee and
thrust one hand behind his back, circling the other menac-
ingly before him.
There was some laughter at this bravado. Then Blue
detached himself from the crowd and ran to his mate
" I'm on Smiley's side!" he told them. " We'll stoush all
you mob and knock yore flamin' blocks off."
The two friends were joined by half a dozen more boys
who, seeing the unfairness of the impending fight sym-
pathised with Smiley and Blue. '
" Come on!" shouted Smiley.
" Come on!" yelled Blue.
The others made ncynove. They were not keen on fight-
despite the odds m their favour. One of the boys on
Smiley's side made the first attacking move. He reached
for a stone.
" Don't chuck any gibbers!" shouted Smiley.
"He's got a gibber!" cried the opposing crowd.
At that moment the boy hurled the stone. Those in front
ducked in time, but the missile clipped the ear of one of
the boys in the rear. He yelled with pain. In a second the
whole of the opposition was reaching for the smooth stones
that littered the church grounds.
Smiley, Blue and their comrades, realising the danger of
a battle with stones at such short range, turned and raced
out into the roadway, followed by a shower of stones. Blue


got a painful crack in the middle of the shoulders and
another boy received a glancing blow on the head. The
retreating army dashed through the gate of the fence sur-
rounding the post office and got behind the fence before
anyone else had been injured. Meanwhile the attackers had
advanced beyond the church gate, but a volley of stones from
Smiley's side soon drove them to safety behind the fence.
"Git yore gibbers ready!" ordered Smiley. "Fire!"
They hurled the stones across the road. The girls ran
screaming into the church, and the opposing side replied
with a volley that rattled the palings behind which Smiley
and his supporters were hidden. Several of the stones
crashed on to the post office verandah behind them.
"Fire!" commanded Smiley. They hurled another dozen
stones across the road. A yell from one of the enemy told
them that a hit had been scored. The opposition again rat-
tled the palings and the post office building.
"Fire!" shouted Smiley once more .
Nobody knew which member of the army threw the stone
that brought the fight to an end. Of the shower that flew
towards the church, one was hurled harder and faster than
the rest. It soared over the church fence and crashed into
one of the stained-glass windows, smashing a great, jagged
hole in a multi-coloured saint.
A silence fell over the combatants as they stared at the
broken window. At that moment Mrs. Gaspen appeared on
the brow of the hill.
Half an hour later the whole Sunday School was still writh-
ing under the sting of Mrs. Gaspen's tongue and the threat
of hell fire from an outraged heaven. Disgraced, humiliated,
and ashamed, the boys crouched in their pews and listened
to her tirade against the children of Satan who stoned the
Church. The girls sat wide-eyed and afraid, shifting rest-
lessly at each shrill crescendo of the voice that warned the
sinners of the punishment to come in after-life. Ultimately
she became more practical and inflicted material punish-
ment.
" There will be no Sunday School tickets to-day," she an-
nounced.
A gasp of disappointment went up from the children. The
only thing they really liked about Sunday School was the
distribution of the brightly coloured tickets that bore appro-
priate texts surrounded by flowers or illustrated by minia-


ture pictures. Mrs. Gaspen's lecture on sin was bad enough,
but her refusal to distribute tickets was a terrible blow.
After Sunday School the girls hurried home to tell their
parents, but the boys formed a shamefaced group down on
the river flat not far from the church. They did not talk
much, but shifted about restlessly, kicking stones with their
Sunday boots and conjecturing the likely results of their
sacrilege.
The sight of a khaki-shirted horseman sent a few of them
scattering, but most of them moved closer to form a half-
frightened, half-defiant group.
The police sergeant reined his horse and glowered down
at the boys. " Which one of you boys put a stone through
the church window?" demanded Flaxman.
There was a long silence during which everybody looked
very innocent.
"Come on!" snapped the policeman. "Who smashed the
window?"
" It's a mystery," said Smiley at last. " It's a flamin' mys-
tery —square dinkum, it is!"
" It's not going to be a mystery any longer than another
minute," declared the sergeant, edging his horse nearer as
the boys backed away.
They all began to explain at once, and it took several min-
utes for the sergeant to learn exactly what had happened. In
the end he believed them when they said that nobody knew
who threw the stone that did the damage, but he decided
that all the combatants should be punished for throwing
stones at one another on Sunday, no matter which one broke
the window.
Driving them before him like a flock of sheep, he herded
them through the police station gate and sent them mutter-
ing into the cell of the lock-up.
They crowded into the cramped, gloomy cell in which only
a high, barred window gave them light. One of the boys
began to weep and he was soon joined by three or four
others. Smiley and Blue sat together in one corner with
shoulders hunched and hands clasped about their knees.
Half an hour later the sergeant released the prisoners, who
emerged in a chastened group—grinning shamefacedly. His
orders were that they should go straight home, and not one
of them dared disobey.
By night the story of the broken window and the impri-


sonment of the boys had spread throughout the township.
The combatants were in disgrace, and the two who came in
for the severest criticism were Smiley and Blue. Their
former reputation had never been good, and this escapade
convinced the people of Murrumbilla, once and for all, that
they were imps of Satan. Both their mothers used the strap
to express their opinion of the afternoon's events.
Smiley received further punishment on Monday morning
when the headmaster announced that in view of Greevin's
disgraceful behaviour on the previous day he would not
allow him to be one of the sweepers for the week.
This was a severe and unexpected blow for Smiley. Yet it
had its compensations, because none of the other boys called
him a sissy any more.
CHAPTER SEVEN
Willie Coy did not like small boys—and the reason will
soon be clear.
Dr. Gaspen was the only doctor in Murrumbilla, and he
was the medical superintendent of the little wooden hospital
on the hill. Indeed, he was the only doctor within fifty miles
of Murrumbilla and, therefore, Mrs. Gaspen had some excuse
for her assumption that she ranked highest in the town's
social scale, with the police sergeant's wife and the school-
master's wife running dead heat for second place.
It was Mrs. Gaspen's custom to pay a weekly visit to the
garden of Willie Coy, the Chinese who supplied most of
Murrumbilla with fruit and vegetables from his patiently
culutivated strip of land down by the river. Mrs. Gaspen
always took with her one of her few chosen friends. The
object of the visit was to make a tour of the garden and
taste the choicest of its fruits.
This custom of Mrs. Gaspen was regarded by some of the
women—those who never received an invitation —as an
absurd eccentricity. Those who were invited thought it a
delightful affair, because Mrs. Gaspen always paid.
Willie Coy always looked forward to these Sunday after-
noons. Before the doctor's wife and her companion were
halfway across the river flat, Mr. and Mrs. Coy—both wear-


ing the inevitable blue dungaree blouses and trousers —were
standing before the door of their hut, smiling with all their
might.
To Willie Coy, who was saving up to go back to China
with a comparative fortune, Mrs. Gaspen was a godsend,
because she never argued about the bill.
The Chinese knew most of Mrs. Gaspen's friends, because
her choice of companion was not very varied. But one Sun-
day afternoon he saw her walking across the alluvial flat
with a strange woman, and behind them trailed a small boy.
Willie Coy knew enough of women to realise that mothers
will indulge their sons almost anything within reason. So
when the trio entered the gate and, after the customary
greetings, the tour began, the Chinese was careful to see
that the boy had his share of the fruit.
The group approached a tree laden with the most delicious
of all peaches, Chinese flats. The women plucked the fluffy,
pink frut, and Willie pulled off three of the biggest and
handed them to the boy. " Velly good," he said.
" Uh!" replied the youngster, gobbling them down.
They passed on to the persimmons.
' Uh!" said the boy when the Chinese handed over two of
the biggest and ripest. He swallowed them hastily, and the
pink juice ran down his chin.
" Velly good passion fruit," said Willie, leading them over
to the vine where the purple fruit hung heavily, ready to
fall.
While Mrs. Gaspen bit crisply into the brittle skins, the
Chinese handed over half-a-dozen to the lad, who squirted
three down his throat and put the rest in his pocket.
" What are the custard apples like?" asked the doctor's
wife.
" Velly good," replied Willie, leading them on.
The tour of the garden took about an hour. The two
women, though they had sampled sparingly of the fruit, felt
satiated. The boy, who had eaten three times as much as
either of them, was breathing heavily. Moreover, he had
filled his pockets and the front of his shirt with the choicest
fruits of the garden. Willie Coy had never seen anything
so delightful for a long time.
" Eight shilling, please," he said in reply to Mrs. Gaspen's
usual query.
For the first time in the history of that garden, the doctor's


wife looked surprised.
" Eight shillings? Why, that's more than twice what you
usually charge."
" But the lil' boy," replied Willie. "He eat velly much
and put in his pocket velly much.
" The little boy?"
" The lil' boy with the other lady," said Willie.
" I've never seen him before in my life," replied Mrs.
Gaspen's companion.
" Miss Stretton is on a visit from Brisbane," explained the
doctor's wife. " That little boy is young Greevins. It is not
my fault if you gave him your fruit.
Willie ran moaning round the corner to see the boy disap-
pearing into the trees that fringed the river bank.
" That is all I shall pay."
He turned to see Mrs. Gaspen holding out two florins. As
the two women walked off, the Chinese whirled on his mys-
tified wife and cursed shrilly and at length.
That was why Willie Coy did not like little boys. And
that was why Smiley, the little boy concerned, always
avoided meeting the Chinese gardener. Smiley had boasted
throughout Murrumbilla of his gorge, and the laughter had
reached the ears of Willie Coy.
The Chinese had sworn to get his revenge on the boy, and
this had in turn reached the ears of Smiley, who, sometimes
before he went to sleep, saw in the moving shadows beyond
the edge of the candlelight, Willie Coy and his pigtail and
his knife . . . waiting . . .
On a certain Saturday afternoon, Smiley and Blue
crouched behind the fence of the river garden and peered
through a crack at the old horse that always walked in
circles.
" I wonder what that ole 'orse 'as got that over 'is eyes
for?" asked Smiley.
" 'E must be blind," remarked Blue.
The horse was harnessed to the end of a long wooden pole,
the other end of which was fixed to a swivel. The horse
walked round and round all day, turning the central spindle.
For years the animal had trudged the same circular path
and had worn a deep track in the alluvial soil. For years
he had supplied the power which raised, by means of a series
of buckets on an endless chain, the water from the river to
irrigate the Chinese garden. The buckets screeched their


way to the top of a wooden tower, emptied into a tank, and
then descended into the river again.
" It's no flamin' good covering up the ole 'orse's eyes if 'e's
blind," replied Smiley.
" Some blind coves wears black specs over their eyes."
" That's because their eyes is shut or somethin'," said
Smiley, "and they don't want other blokes to point at 'em
and say, ' That cove's blind.' "
"Aw, well, Willie Coy don't want blokes to say 'is 'orse is
blind."
" If y'arsk me, 'e's 'ung that stuff over the ole 'orse's eyes
so's 'e won't see nothin'."
" But wots 'e wanter do that for?"
" Strike me 'andsome, but I dunno!"
" Ssh! They're comin' this way!" hissed Blue.
The boys watched Willie Coy and his wife approach the
nearby bed of young lettuce. From the cans slung from the
ends of the short pole each carried across the shoulders, they
sprinkled the parched plants.
" I wisht 'e'd do some irrigatin'," whispered Smiley.
His wish was soon fulfilled. As soon as the lettuces were
watered, Willie shuffled across to the big tank which stored
the supply pumped up by the revolving horse. He turned a
tap, and a stream of water gushed into a channel and went
racing across the garden. The wave met a mud wall, and
then the water began to rise and spread on all sides into
subsidiary channels that ran between the carrots and the
cabbages.
The boys chuckled to see how Willie ran here and there,
damming up one small stream and controlling the spread of
another till the required area was saturated. The water soon
soaked into the cracked ground, and the sun hardened the
mud into dark flakes.
" I wisht we could pinch a water melon," sighed Blue as
they watched the Chinese and his wife shuffle off towards
their hut.
" 'E might sool the dawg onter you/' replied Smiley.
" 'E ain't got no dawg."
" Me mother says 'e's got a big black dawg in there, and it
chews you in excrooshinatin' agony."
" I never seen no dawg," retorted Blue scornfully.
" It's a fair dinkum wopper," said Smiley, using his
imagination. " It's a sorter cross between a blood 'ound and


a bull dawg. 'E gives it blood and snakes and lizards for
tucker, and even if it gives you just a little bite you die from
blood poisonin'." .
"Gawn!" snorted Blue. "Anyway, I ain't afraid o no
dawg. If a dawg runs at you, all you gotter do is to stand
back and kick it in the teeth."
" What about if it sneaks up be'ind?" asked Smiley.
" Aw, well, you gotter keep yore eyes open and don't give
it no chance. Anyway, I betcher I can pinch a water melon."
" Yore feelin' real cocky, ain't you?" Smiley was struck
by a sudden idea. " What'll you do with the ole water melon
if you pinch it?" he asked.
" Eat it, o' course."
" I'll tell you wot, cobber. If you and me pinch a water
melon we'll take it to some bloke and get a deener for it.
Some cove might give us a 'alf-dollar for it. Then we'll go
'alves in the dough. What do you say, Blue?"
Seeing Smiley's eagerness, Blue realised that his cobber
was taking him at his word. He actually had no intention
of attempting to steal a water melon, because he was far too
afraid of being caught.
"Aw, dicken on!" he said, " I was only kiddin'."
"Tig-tig-tig!" chanted Smiley, tapping him on the shoul-
der. " Yore ole man's a coward and so are you!"
This taunt from a friend immediately changed Blue's
mind. "All right!" he snapped. ."I'll 'ave a go."
" I'll tell you wot —you go down the other end and stick
yore 'ead over the fence and yell out, ' Chow-chow-China-
man!' to make Willie wild, and while 'e's seein' 'oo it is,
I'll sneak in and pinch a water melon."
"Aw, 'e might sool 'is dawg on me," replied Blue.
" I thought you said there wasn't no dawg."
" I thought you said there was a dawg that 'd give you
blood poisonin'."
" That was kidstakes," replied Smiley. " That was jist a
snake yarn."
" All right," agreed Blue. " Only you gotter go 'arves if
any cove gives you a deener for the ole water melon."
" My flamin' oath I will!"
Blue, still entirely in disagreement with the plan, but
anxious not to show cowardice in the face of his friend's
taunt, scuttled away down the fence and disappeared round
the corner.


Within a few minutes he put his head over the fence and
began to call, " Chow-chow- Chinaman" in a voice that
made Willie Coy and his wife turn and stare. Blue kept the
cry while the Chinese couple held a hurried conversation.
Then Willie set off at a pattering trot in the direction of the
yelling boy.
Smiley saw his opportunity and scrambled over the fence.
As he dropped into the long grass edging the garden, Blue
jerked his head down and disappeared. Smiley lay flat on
his belly and muttered to himself, " 'E's gawn and sold me a
pup! 'E's a flamin' coward!"
By this time Willie had stopped, thinking Blue had had his
fun and gone. Just as the Chinese was about to turn and
walk back to his wife. Blue appeared a little further along
the fence and began to shout again, "Chow-chow-China-
man!"
Willie replied with a shrill, unintelligible phrase and ran
towards the redhead.
Smiley waited till he was well down the garden before he
made his crouching run towards the water melon patch. Mrs.
Coy, over in the middle of the garden, still had her back
turned ,towards him, and Smiley knew she would not see
him so long as Blue continued to keep her attention.
Once more Blue disappeared just before Willie Coy
reached him. The Chinese picked up a stone and flung it
rattling against the fence. Smiley dropped flat among the
water melons, praying that Blue would keep it up.
Again his friend came to the rescue. He appeared further
along the fence and repeated his insulting chant. Willie
Coy shouted shrilly and ran towards him.
Smiley, on his hands and knees, grabbed the biggest melon
within reach, snapped off the stalk, and- heaved it up against
his chest. It was smooth and heavy, not easy to carry. He
turned and staggered towards the fence.
For some reason, psychic or otherwise, Mrs. Coy turned and
saw him. She shouted and ran in pursuit.
Smiley did not know this shout meant the alarm, and. in
any case, he was too heavily loaded and too intent on reach-
ing the fence to turn and see what the Chinese woman's cry
was all about.
Then he realised that her shouts were coming nearer, and
cast a hurried look over his shoulder. At the sight of the
bounding figure he dropped the melon and spurted for the


fence. But Mrs. Coy's sandalled feet were faster than the
boy's and before Smiley could reach safety, her thin, yellow
hand reached out and caught him by the collar.
The terrified boy turned on her like a desperate dingo,
clawing to escape from her clutch. An arm whipped round
his shoulders, dragging him down.
" Let me go!" shouted Smiley. " I'll git the police on you!
I'll tell me father on you! Let me go!"
The next moment Willie Coy himself arrived and his hand
caught Smiley's collar and jerked him on his toes.
The Chinese, as he hustled Smiley towards his hut, had no
intention of doing more than frighten the youngster so much
that he would never again try to steal anything from his
garden. But Smiley had visions of slow torture by the knife
or by fire, or by any other devilish method that the Chinese
were reputed to use against their captured enemies. His
face was as yellow as his captor's and his lips trembled as
he kept on repeating, " I didn't try to pinch yore old water
melon, Willie. Square dinkum, I didn't!"
" Velly bad boy!" replied Willie. " Velly bad boy!"
He jerked the youngster through the door of the hut and
sent him staggering across the room.
" I tell police!" he shouted as he slammed the door.
His eyes not yet accustomed to the gloomy room after the
bright sunlight, Smiley stumbled over some cases and fell on
to the hard mud floor, where he lay wondering what dread-
ful things were going to happen. He could hear the high-
pitched sound of Chinese voices on the other side of the
door, and imagined they were discussing what particular
form of torture should be employed.
Actually, Mr. and Mrs. Coy were wondering what to do
about it all. This was the first time they had ever caught a
boy in the act of stealing anything from their garden, and
now Willie was beginning to regret the impulse that made
him grab the youngster and lock him up. He had no wish
other than to scare the lad but, although he knew he had
done that very effectively already, he was afraid he had
gone too far. Chasing young thieves out of his garden would
be justified in the eyes of the white community, but locking
the boy up might get him into trouble and cause loss of cus-
tom —if nothing else.
While this discussion was going on outside, Smiley lay


muttering the incantation that was supposed to guarantee
immunity from any danger:
" One—two—three—jour—five—six—seven!
All good children go to heaven!
Penny on the water, twopence on the sea!
Threepence on the railway for you and me!"
After a little while his eyes became accustomed to the
gloom, and he saw that he was crouching near a pile of
cases. The smell of peaches was very strong, so Smiley in-
vestigated. His hand went into the nearest case, touched a
laxge, furry peach, and pulled it out. While he was bolting
it down, he heard a new voice outside the door.
" Hi, Willie, what about my pipe?" asked the voice.
"No pipee," squeaked Willie. "Go away, please."
" Dicken on!" said the voice. " I want a pipe and I'm
flamin' well going to get one."
"No pipee!" shrilled the Chinese. " Boy inside. Him tell
nleece "
" Boy? What bpy?"
" Inside loom. No pipee to-day."
" That's a snake yarn, you yellow lump of cowdung.
You've taken plenty of dough off me, and you're not going
to kid me out of a pipe this tme. Come on, look alive, you
blasted Chink!"
" Boy tell pleece!" cried Willie as the door was thrust open
and a man's tall figure stood silhouetted in the doorway.
Smiley jumped to his feet and stood waiting. The man
saw the boy and muttered, " Struth, you're flamin' well
right!"
The boy recognised- the man as Rankin, landlord of one of
the two hotels in the township.
" What the hell are you doing here?" snapped Rankin.
" Nothin', Mr. Rankin. Willie chucked me in 'ere."
" Go away, boy," urged the Chinese, pushing past Rankin
and grabbing Smiley by the collar. Tie turned to the pub-
lican and explained, " He stealee water melon."
" I never did, Mr. Rankin, fair dinkum I never."
" Listen, sonny," said Rankin. " Can you keep your mouth
shut?"
" O' course I can, Mr. Rankin."
The publican's tones were soft and wheedling: " If you
don't say nothing to anybody about seeing me here I'll give
you a deenex. I just come to talk business with old Willie,


and I don't want nobody to know nothing about it, see? Well,
if you promise to keep this under the cush 111 give you a
dollar. What do you say?"
"Aw, Mr. Rankin! A dollar?
The man pulled two half-crowns and handed them to the
bov. " There y'are. Now sool!"
Smiley sooled off at top speed, out of the gate, and on to
the river flat. He pulled up a hundred yards from the gar-
den and opened his right hand. The two half-crowns were
there all right. He thrust them into his pocket.
CHAPTER EIGHT
Smiley's reaction towards the whole affair was one of
delighted bewilderment. He could not understand why
Willie had not tortured him, or why Mr. Rankin had given
him five shillings for promising not to say he'd seen him
there. Perhaps—
His thoughts were interrupted by a shout.
" Hi, Smiley!" . . .
He turned to see Blue slip out from behind an ironbark.
" What did 'e do to you, Smiley? Struth, I thought you
was in excrooshinatin' pain."
"Aw, dicken on!" sneered Smiley.
They walked in silence for a little while, with Smiley
grinning at the feel of the money in his pocket.
" Wot you laughin' at, Smiley?"
" Nothin'."
" Square dinkum?"
Smiley could not contain himself any longer. Will you
cross yore 'eart and cut yore throat and say you won t tell
nobody if I tell you?"
" Too right I will."
Blue made the necessary signs, and Smiley poured out a
breathless story, decorating it here and there with exaggera-
tions that made his companion ejaculate "Aw!" and Gee.
and " Struth!" from time to time. _ 1 .
When it was all over, Blue said, " Wot's ole Rankin
want to go buying pipes from Willie for?"
" I dunno. But you ain't goin' to say nothin' are you,


Blue?
with r th? dEughr and cut me throat - Wot you goin ' t0 d 0
" I'm goin' to put it in the bank."
"Aw, gee! All of it?"
" Too right."
"Wot about buyin' somethin' for a penny? You know a
lickerice strap or somethin'."
Smiley's mouth watered. "All right, but I'm not goin' to
spend more than a brown, and I'll go you 'arves "
" Good ole Smiley!"
But when they reached the store Smiley could not resist
the coconut bars, and the change he got out of half-a-crown
was one and threepence. The boys crossed to the river bank
and squatted under a bluegum—silent except for the champ-
ing of their jaws.
When the feast was over, Blue said, " Wot about gittin'
some more lollies?" 6
" I'm savin' up for me bike."
T ? e °L e is closed this arvo - You' ll 'ave to keep
the dough till Monday, and you might lose it while you're
waitin fox Monday to come."
Not on yore life,-" Smiley told him as he jumped up and
ran to the edge of the river bank. " Come on and stop the
river for a thousand miles." ~ F
" All right."
The two boys slid down the steep bank and on to the
sandy river bed. The Warrego was no more than a trickle,
a yard-wide stream that began somewhere up in the hills
and ran for a thousand miles through the arid country till
Darlm £- Ever sin ce Smiley had learned at school
that the Warrego was so surprisingly long and so important
on the map of Australia, he had got much more delight out
ot one of his favourite games—damming up the river in the
dry season.
7? 11 of a , nd did not take lon g t0 pile up: and it did
wlrrtl 1( ®S either. But while it stopped the flow of the
w+v, +t°'- Smile y a Bine enjoyed the feeling of power.
With their own bare hands they had dammed a great river'
r a a minute or two the rising water burst through the wali
a dam was destroyed.
eyWan ! ered U P to . the bank and across the mud flat,
ondermg what to do with themselves.


" Gee, I wisht I 'ad a pea-rifle," Blue said. " then I'd go
kangaroo shootin'."
" You can't shoot 'roos with a pea-rifle, replied Smiley.
" Why, one o' them twenty-twos wouldn't even give im a
'csdschG."
Blue had an idea. " I wonder 'ow ole Thunderguts is git-
tin on^"
" Right-oh! Sool you there!" Smiley broke into a run,
with Blue pattering behind.
They made for the riverside home of young Jack McCoy,
who was more of an acquaintance than a friend. They would
not have bothered to call on him if he had not been the owner
of Thunderguts. „ , . . .
Reaching the front gate, they stood and called in unison for
Jsck. He came out within a minute.
" 'Day, Jack."
" 'Day, Smiley. 'Day, Blue."
" 'Ow's ole Thunderguts gittin' on?"
"Aw, all right."
" Can we 'ave a dekko at 'im?"
"Aw, I dunno." ,
" Come on, Jack," pleaded Smiley. " I'll give you a brown
for a dekko at Thunderguts."
" Will you?" Jack replied eagerly.
Smiley fished out the penny and handed it over the gate
Jack to snatch and examine. In a minute they were
round the house and in the back yard.
Thunderguts blinked at them with little mild eyes. The
young kangaroo was perched on its stilt-like legs so much
out of proportion to its short, thin body. It lurched towards
Jack, stumbled, and fell on its side.
" 'E's a bit weak and 'e ain't so good at pickin isself up
when 'e falls 'ead-over-turkey," explained Jack as he gently
helped the animal to its feet. , . ...
" Joeys is always like that at first." Smiley remarked with
a knowing air. " But it ain't long before their body grows
and they gits big and strong, and starts jumpin' fences.
"'l'm goin' to give 'im 'is tucker," said Jack, running up
the back steps. He returned with a billycan of diluted milk.
" Let me give 'im 'is tucker?"
"Aw, let me feed 'im?"
Jack turned to Smiley and said, "You can feed im first
because you give me the brown."


Holding the billycan in one hand, Smiley dipped the little
finger of his other hand into the milk, then held it in front
of the kangaroo's nose. Thunderguts Closed his tiny mouth
around the finger and sucked thirstily. Smiley gradually
lowered his finger till it was below the surface of the milk.
Thunderguts kept on sucking.
" It won't be long before 'e can drink by 'isself," said Jack
stroking the grey fur. " When 'e does that I'm goin' to sell
lm.
"Dicken on!" snorted Blue. "You can't sell a joey to
nobody round 'ere."
" My flamin' oath, I can! The doctor says a cobber of 'is in
Charleville wants a 'roo for a pet and 'e's goin' to give me
arf-a-dollar for mine."
"Arf-a-dollar?" Smiley repeated incredulously.
" Square dinkum," said Jack.
How to get hold of a young kangaroo was still being con-
sidered by Smiley when he and Blue, after having fed Thun-
derguts, wandered along the main road.
" Gee, I wisht I could shoot a 'roo like Jack's father did "
he sighed "There might be a joey inside 'er pouch and'l
could git im and feed 'im on milk till 'e was big, and then
I could sell 'im for 'arf-a-dollar."
" I'll go you 'arves," said Blue.
" Wot?"
" I know where I can git a gun."
" Dinkum?" asked Smiley excitedly.
" Yairs. Me father brought a new gun 'ome from Charle-
ville on Thursday, and I can go and git it."
" Can you?"
Y a^ s > an d then we'll go and shoot 'roos, and if we don't
find no roos we'll shoot butcher birds or galahs or somethin'
111 tell you wot—you go up to the dam and I'll meet you
there when I git the gun."
Smiley did not like the idea of Blue borrowing his father's
gun. He was afraid of the consequences if the temporary
theft were discovered.
come on," urged Blue.
" Orl right," Smiley agreed at last. " See you at the dam."
strolled up past the police station, the post office,
the church, and down the slope that led to the dam. He
worked out his total savings. He had Bs. Id. in the bank.
IJie cash m his pocket amounted to 4s. 3d. Total? He picked


UD a stick and figured it out in the dust. Total, 12s. 4d.
He wandered around the dam, skimming flat stones across
the water, imitating the creaky cry of the low-flying brol-
gahs, and otherwise amusing himself till the arrival of his
Blue came empty-handed. " Mother was in the kitchen,
he explained, "and the gun's in the kitchen, so I couldn t
« N o> it ain't. But I'll tell you wot—l'll git it termorrer
and we'll go out shootin' in the mornin'."
Disgusted, Smiley set off home with an apologetic com-
panion. It was near sundown now, and the galahs and broi-
gahs chattered and squawked on their way to their nests.
A horseman came slowly down the road, and the boys
recognised him as Mr. Rankin, the publican. He looked half-
asleep as he swayed in the saddle with the bridle loose on
the horse's neck.
"'Day, Mr. Rankin," called Smiley.
" 'Day, Mr. Rankin," repeated Blue.
The man blinked sleepily at the two boys and waved a
Smiley, anxious to be polite and considerate tow aids the
man who had given him five shillings that afternoon, called,
" Did you git yore pipe, Mr. Rankin?"
The man stiffened with a jerk that nearly sent him off h s
saddle. , ,
" What did you say?" he snarled,
Smiley's friendly grin was wiped off his face. He backed
away, muttering, "I only asked you if you got yore pipe.
Mr. Rankin rode up to the boys and scowled down at the
dismayed pair. , T)11 .
"If you tell anyone you saw me at Willies 111 rip your
guts out. Do you hear?"
" Y-yess, Mr. Rankin." .
" I'll tie you to a tree and smash your face in and rip your
guts out. Now git!"
They turned and raced down the road, swung up the sand-
hill towards the school, and finally flung themselves down
behind the slaughter yard fence, whqte they lay panting.
When at last they could speak, they discussed the reason
for Mr. Rankin's anger.
" I think it must be passion," said Smiley.


" Wot?"
Well, I eard the doc sayin' to Mr. Stephens that passion is
the reason for a lot - o' things nobody understands Ain't this
somethin' we don't understand? So Mr. Rankin might be
seein' ole Willie about passion."
" 'E might of," agreed Blue.
, " 0r might Be a secret society like the ones Sexton Blake
as ago at," continued Smiley. " I'll betcher Mr. Rankin is
a spy and workm' in the pay of the yeller devils."
" Yeller devils?" queried Blue.
" Yairs, the Chinks and the Japs."
"Aw, dicken!"
Smiley gave his imagination full play: "And secret
messages come from China to Willie, and 'e 'ands 'em on to
Mr. Rankin, and Mr. Rankin's the 'ead of a gang of bush-
rangers that s goin to elp the yeller devils capture the secret
plans."
" It's a snake yarn." •
" Well, anyway," said Smiley, " you better not tell nobody
about Mr. Rankin or you'll git yore guts ripped out "
" Cross me 'eart and cut me throat."
" I gotter go 'ome now," announced Smiley, " Me mother'll
roar me a treat up if I don't go 'ome now."
" Wot about termorrer?"
" Well, are you goin' to git that gun?"
" Too right," Blue assured him. " I'll git it after break-
fast and we can go 'roo shootin',"
I got a better idea. You git that gun and you and me'U
start a secret society and be bushrangers and stick up blokes
and rob 'em. Then we'll git a lot o' dough."
" No kidstakes. Smiley?"
T„, •'• m n °t kiddin'. You git that gun in the mornin' and
ill see you at the water 'ole near the Tambo road after
breakfast. Then we'll start bein' bushrangers. Hooray."
Hooray," replied Blue, and the boys parted.
CHAPTER NINE
Next morning Smiley reached the waterhole first. While
waiting for Blue he amused himself by jumping on a red-


ants' nest. Thousands of insects came rushing out till the
mound was a swarming, frenzied, red mass of ants. Smiley
stood back and laughed at their fury.
"Hi!"
He turned at the cry, then stared at the approaching Blue
With a mixture of puzzlement and disgust.
" I got it!" called Blue holding the shotgun above his head.
Smiley did not reply because he was observing Blue's com-
panion with obvious distaste.
" Wot did you wanter go and bring a sheilah along for?"
he asked.
"Aw, gee, it wasn't my fault," began Blue. " She
" Now you shut your mouth about me, Smiley Greevins,"
the girl interrupted. " I seen Blue makin' for the waterhole
with a gun and I knew he was goin' to meet you, so I thought
I'd come along . . . see?"
She was Jean Holt, the gawky twelve-year-old whose pig-
tails Smiley had recently dipped in the ink at school.
"Aw, mizzle orf," advised Smiley.
"No, I won't go. I'm goin' to see what you boys are goin'
to do with that gun."
" Dinkum, Smiley, I didn't mean to bring 'er," wailed Blue.
" Jean Holt," said Smiley firmly, " if you don't go 'ome I'll
kick yore grummet till yore nose bleeds."
" 00, you swore!"
" I never did!" he replied.
" Grummet isn't swearing," Blue interposed.
" 00, Smiley swore," Jean repeated. " I'm goin' to tell on
you."
" Go and tell," advised Smiley.
" Not till after I see what yore doin' with the gun," she
told them.
The two boys looked at each other in dismay. This was
going to spoil everything. After all, they could not very well
kick a girl's grummet or even sock her on the jaw. It was
not right to stoush girls.
Smiley, struck with a bright idea, snapped out, " We'll take
yore pants down if you don't clear out."
Jean grinned: " That don't scare me. Come on and do it."
Again the boys exchanged glances, and this time surprise
took the place of dismay.
"Aw, gee!" was all Blue could say to express his disgust.


Smiley turned to him and said, " Come 'ere. I wanter
whisper somethin'."
Blue went over to him, listened, grinned, and nodded
assent. They turned to Jean and slowly approached.
" You leave me alone," she squealed.
" We ain't goin' to touch you, are we, Blue?"
" Struth, no. We think yore a bonzer shielah."
The girl backed away, shouting to the boys to keep off.
The pair made a "sudden rush, Smiley gave Jean a shove,
Blue put out his foot, and the girl staggered and fell to the
ground.
"You big larrikins!" she screamed. "I'll tell on you!"
" You must of tripped over a log," said Smiley.
" Yes, you must of tripped," repeated his friend.
Then the bush was filled with the sound of screaming as
Jean realised that she had fallen on to an ant's nest. It was
the nest that Smiley had already angered a little while
before, and this new disturbance brought a vicious, red
swarm of insects hurrying out of their holes, crawling over
the girl, stinging her bare legs and arms.
Slapping herself madly as she yelled, Jean leaped to her
feet and plunged into the waterhole up to her waist. The
boys turned and raced into the bush, laughing and leaping
with delight.
Having assured themselves that the girl was not following
them, the boys sat down to rest and to examine the gun.
" I got six cartridges." Blue pulled them out of his pocket
and rolled them on the ground.
" Gee, it's bonzer," said Smiley, turning the shotgun in his
hands. He broke open the breech and peered down the shiny
barrel.
" I never fired a shotgun before," confessed Blue. " I only
fired a pea-rifle."
"Aw, it's jist the same."
" 'Ave you fired a shotgun?"
" No, but it's jist the same as a rifle."
" Orl right, 'ave a potshot at that ole crow up there."
" Well," drawled Smiley, " Well, I don't like wastin' a
cartridge on an ole crow."
"Tig, tig, tig!" Blue began to chant the customary chal-
lenge to cowardice.
" Orl right," Smiley interrupted, " Gimme a cartridge."
He loaded the gun, cocked it, and got to his feet. The


crow looked down at the boys, cawed, and flew away before
Smiley got a chance to take aim.
" Me father says crows can count up to ten," remarked
Blue, somevihat irrelevantly.
" Goanna!" shouted Smiley. " Look, an old goanna! I'll
shoot 'im and then we'll boil 'im up and make goanna oil and
sell it."
They moved towards the giant lizard —three feet from
snout to tail-tip—which had paused at the foot of a coolabah
tree.
" Better shoot quick before he gits up the tree," advised
Blue in a whisper.
Smiley dropped on one knee and raised the gun. The
goanna darted and Smiley hastily pulled the trigger.
Wham!
The gun flew from the boy's hands as he fell back on to the
ground, where he lay hissing and clutching his bruised
shoulder.
" 'E's gawn," Blue said. " I think you must of missed 'im."
Smiley sat up, still hissing through clenched teeth.
" Struth," he said at last, " it's got a kick."
" I told you so."
" You never did."
" I did so."
"Anyway," said Smiley, "you wasn't game to fire it orf."
"Ain't we goin' to be bushrangers and stick coves up?"
Blue reminded him.
" Yairs," replied Smiley, picking up the gun. " But we
gotter git masks first. We can't be Ned Kelly and Dan Kelly
unless we got masks on."
" But we ain't got nothin' to make 'em outer."
" What about ti-tree bark?" asked the resourceful Smiley,
leading the way to one of the trees.
They ripped off the yellow, paper-like bark and tore it
into strips. Smiley's knife made holes for the eyes and Blue's
string enabled them to tie on the crude masks.
" Now we gotter find our victims," said Smiley.
" Wot about loadin' up again?" asked Blue, so his com-
panion shoved another cartridge into the breech before mov-
ing off in the direction of the Tambo road.
On reaching the roadside, they crouched in the bushes and
awaited their prey.
" They'll soon stand and d-eliver when they see this gun,"


said Smiley.
" But s'pose they don't stop? S'pose they rush past? Will
you shoot 'em?"
" We —el, I might. But I know a way to make 'em stop.
I read about it in a book. I'll tell you wot —when we see any-
body comin' you run out and lay down in the middle o' the
road and don't, move, and they'll think yore crook or dead
or somethin'. Then they'll stop and see what's up, and then
I'll come out and 'old 'em up while you rob 'em."
"Aw, it's too 'ot to lay down in the middle o' the road,"
complained Blue.
" Well, if you don't do that we can't be bushrangers."
So Blue agreed. The boys sat fidgeting impatiently for
half an hour, but no one came along the road. They went
into the bush in search of kangaroos, but, finding none,
returned to the roadside just in time to hear the sound of a
car come down the hot, still air.
" Quick!" hissed Smiley, adjusting his mask.
Blue ran out into the middle of the road arid fell on his
face in the dust. He yelped and sprang up again because the
hot dust burned him. It took him only half a minute to
scrape away the surface and get the cool earth beneath.
Then he lay down again.
A few minutes later a car came round the bend of the road.
It was big and travel-marked and dusty, and there were two
men in it —drapery travellers on their way to Murrumbilla
with stock and samples.
Smiley held his breath and hugged the gun. Would Blue
play his part and stay in the middle of the road till the car
pulled up?
" Hullo, what's wrong here?" exclaimed the driver.
" Look's as if a kid's been hurt," said his companion.
The car stopped, and the two men got out and went up to
the prostrate boy. The driver bent down and lifted him
to his feet.
" Money or yore life!" snapped Smiley, stepping out into
the road.
The men turned swiftly and stared at Smiley in astonish-
ment. Blue ran and stood beside his companion.
" Come on!" ordered Smiley. " Hand over yore dough or
I'll fill you full o' lead!"
( The driver burst into laughter. " B*ushrangers!" he roared.
" Ned Kelly and his gang. Or is it Starlight and partner?


Ha-ha-ha!"
" Where's yore dough?" Smiley's voice became shriller as
he advanced on the amused pair. "Come on —'and it over!"
Blue hung apprehensively in the background. He thought
the affair was going too far, and he was scared Smiley might
pull the trigger.
The driver produced half-a-crown and tossed it into the
dust. "Is that enough, Mr. Kelly?"
As Smiley bent to pick it up, a strong hand snatched away
the gun and another caught him by the nape of the neck.
He was dragged to his feet, to see that the other man had
Blue by the collar and was pulling off his mask. In a second
the ti-tree bark was ripped from Smiley's eyes.
" Sit down over there," ordered the driver, pushing Smiley
down on to the running-board. "And you, too." Blue sat
beside his friend. They were both very scared, and they
fiddled in the dust with their toes, not daring to look at the
men.
" They hang bushrangers where I come from," said the
driver sternly, winking at his companion. " They hang peo-
ple for robbery under arms."
" But it ain't loaded," Smiley told him in a small voice.
" Just as well," replied the driver. "In that case we won't
hang you. We might bury you in an ant's nest for a while,
or string you up by your thumbs."
As he spoke he fingered the hammer of the gun absent-
mindedly, as people familiar with guns sometimes do. He
thumbed the hammer to half-cock, then full-cock, then he
squeezed the trigger and let the hammer down gently. Up
to half-cock again—full-cock, a squeeze of the trigger and
the hammer was let slowly down.
" We might chuck 'em in the waterhole and cool 'em
down," suggested his companion.
" We was only kiddin'," muttered Smiley.
"All the same, you scared my mate so much he's gone
white in the face," replied the driver. " You can't go round
scaring people like that, you know."
"Aw, gee, we was only kiddin'," said Blue suddenly. " The
•gun ain't loaded."
At that moment the driver's thumb slipped off the strain-
ing hammer.
Crash!
The charge smashed the windscreen to pieces and ripped


away a corner of the hood. The four observers stared aghast
at the damage. ,
" Not loaded, eh?" yelled the driver. Only kiddin, eh?
Well, we'll see about that. Get in!"
The angry men bundled the boys into the back of the car
and drove off to Murxumbilla. Their journey ended at the
police station. . ,
" Well," said the sergeant after he heard the driver s story.
" I'd like to talk to you two alone. Smiley and Blue, you go
and wait out on the verandah till I call you."
They crept out and sat on the steps.
" Now," said the sergeant, " I know those kids did wrong
by trying to hold you up, but it was yourself who fired the
gun and did the damage. You can't charge them with that.
I thought you would have had more sense than to think the
gun was empty without making sure of it."
" Do you mean to say they'll get off scot-free after what
they did?" . ,
" You can charge them with attempted highway robbery
if'you like," said the sergeant. "You can make a case of
it if you want to, and then you'll have to go to Charleville
for the Quarter Sessions to be witnesses. That'll waste a
lot of your time, won't it?"
The driver muttered and fumed angrily.
" But I'll tell you what," continued the sergeant. " I might
be able to get some compensation for you. How much will
it cost to put in a new windscreen?"
" I don't know. I'll have to send to Charleville for one, and
then there's the carriage on top of the cost of the windscreen.
I'd say it would come to a couple of quid or more.
" Well, if I can get that money, or even some of that money,
would you be satisfied?"
In the end the traveller agreed to accept whatever com-
pensation the sergeant could get. The boys were called in.
"Listen, you two," said the sergeant grimly._ Youve
committed a crime that could get you sent to prison. Ive
persuaded this gentleman here not to charge you with this
crime, but only on condition he gets paid for his broken wind-
screen. I know you haven't got any money, Blue, but I
believe Smiley has some. How much money have you got m
the bank, Smiley?"
The boy went pale and did not answer.
"Smiley!" the sergeant repeated sharply. ' How much


money have you got in the bank?*
" Eight-and-a-penny," murmured the boy.
"Is that all the money you've got? I heard you had a
couple of quid saved up. Are you sure that all you've got
is eight-and-a-penny?"
Smiley hesitated, then replied: " I got eight-and-a-penny
in the bank and four-and-threepence at home."
" Well, that makes twelve-and-four altogether," said
Sergeant Flaxman. "And you're going to pay ten shillings
of it to this chap for busting his hood and windscreen."
" But—"
" Don't argue!" snapped the policeman. " I'll pay the ten
bob now, and to-morrow you'll bring ten bob along and pay
me back. Do you understand?"
" Yairs," whispered Smiley.
" Then get along, both of you, and don't let me catch you
playing bushrangers again. Blue, take this gun back home.
Now clear off!"
The boys hurried out and ran down the road. Smiley
swung off towards the river and did not stop till he slid
down the bank into the sand.
Blue tumbled down after him and panted, " Struth, I
never . . ."
He stopped and stared at Smiley with a look of mingled
sympathy and astonishment.
" Gee!" he said. " Yore cryin'!"
CHAPTER TEN
The story of the hold-up soon became public property in
Murrumbilla and the two boys were strongly criticised for it.
Mr. Stephens, the schoolmaster, gave Smiley a lecture on
the evils of avarice and warned him against allowing .the
desire for money to lead him into crime. Then he asked the
boy if he would help him with the bees again that afternoon.
Smiley earned another sixpence, which he banked forthwith.
His bitter disappointment at having to pay out most of his
savings to the traveller did not shake his determination to go
on saving up till he had the three-pounds-ten necessary for
his bicycle. If anything, it made him more determined than
evex.


But luck was against him, and for some weeks he tried
vainly to add even another penny to his total of two shillings
and tenpence.
Then came the hospital sports. Held annually in aid of
the hospital, this gathering on a summer Sunday afternoon
attracted people from all over the district. Besides almost
every resident of Murrumbilla itself, the attendance was
made up of everybody of note from the surrounding sheep
stations, camps and settlements.
Each party brought a hamper of food, which was added to
the common pile and later distributed without discrimina-
tion to everyone who came along. Drink, contributed by the
hotels or bought at wholesale prices by the hospital com-
mittee itself, was sold in aid of the funds.
The children were not asked to contribute anything. They
were invited to help themselves to food and lemonade, to
take part in the sports, and to win the money prizes donated
by various citizens of Murrumbilla.
Immediately after breakfast, Smiley and Blue went out to
get their goats. They were only two of about thirty boys
who selected their mounts from the shaggy mob on the sand-
hill, slipped on the rope halters, and rode them down to the
river flat where the races were to be run.
" I'm goin' to win a lot o' dough to-day," announced Smiley
as they ambled down the hill.
" Me too," said Blue. " I s'pose there'll be four races, and
I'll win two and you'll win two."
" I could win the flamin' lot if I liked, but I'll let you win
a couple."
" Haw, yore a skite!"
" Skite yourself!"
" Struth, look at that!" snorted Blue, pointing down the
road.
Fred Stephens, the schoolmaster's son, rode his goat out of
a lane and on to the road.
" Jee-hos-o-phat!" exclaimed Smiley. "Look at them
flamin' winkers!"
" Haw-haw! Fred's ole goat's got winkers!!"
Fred tried to escape their derision by starting his goat
off at a run, but it was slower than the mounts of his pursu-
ers, and the two boys soon caught him. Smiley on one side
and Blue on the other fingered the leather bridle, complete
with wide winkers, that adorned the head of Fred's goat.


" Leave it alone," Fred said shrilly.
" Bit o' plum-pud," commented Smiley with a grin.
" Too right," agreed Blue.
"Is it so's 'e won't see when 'e's runnin' last?" asked
Smiley.
" I'll tell my father on you if you don't leave me alone."
" Tell-tale-tattle-tit."
" Fred's goat's got winkers," shouted Smiley to a couple
of boys who appeared in the roadway. They ran in to exam-
ine the astonishing and absurd affair.
" Fred's goat's got win-n-nkers!" This time three voices
took up the cry, attracting more spectators. The chant con-
tinued till about a dozen lads formed a sort of procession on
its way to the river flat —a procession led by Fred, who was
now almost id tears with anger and embarrassment.
"Fred's . : . goat's . . . got . . . win-n-n-kers!"
The group turned off the roadway and moved on to the
river flat. , .
"There's the master!" shouted someone, pointing to a
group in conversation under a nearby bluegum.
" I'll tell my father," cried Fred, kicking his goat into a
run.
His tormenters dispersed in all directions while Fred- hur-
ried whimpering to Mr. Stephens. The schoolmaster
abruptly, though not unsympathetically, cut his son short
and offered to buy him a lemonade.
In the meantime, Smiley and Blue arrived at the sports
ground by a circuitous route and began inquiring about the
races they were entitled to enter. When they discovered that
the chief steward was Sergeant Flaxman, they were afraid to
ask for a look at the programme.
But he had apparently forgotten their past misdeeds, be-
cause he approached them and told them the races they
could go in for—three goat races and two ordinary foot races
all for boys of 13 and under. Prizes in each case First
prize, ss; second, 2s. 6d.; third, Is.
Six fives are thirty," muttered Smiley.
' Eh?" asked his friend.
, " 1 wa , s list workin' out 'ow much a bloke could win if
e won the flamin' lot."
I thought you said we was goin' 'arves 9 "
" I never did."
"You did so!"
" You're a flamin' liar!"


'So are you!" ... A , ~ „ ,
The sergeant's booming voice interrupted the argument.
"All entries for the first goat race!"
After much jostling and pushing and arguing a score ot
goats and their riders were lined up on the river bank about
a hundred yards from the winning-tape.
" 'Oo's goin' to win this one —me or you? asked Blue.
"Aw, I dunno. I think I orter."
"Are you ready?" called the starter.
" Well—" began Blue.
" Go!"
The goats, bleating loudly as their riders urged them on
with kicks, sticks, and hair-pulling, surged towards the tape
For twenty yards they ran in a ragged line, but after that
the fastest took the lead. Blue's mount ran well ahead, with
Smiley running fourth. Fred's goat was an easy last, and
many of the onlookers laughed at the sight of the school-
master's son urging on his ambling wmkered mount.
As Blue neared the tape, still leading by several lengths,
the crowd's excited yells grew louder and louder. A boy ran
behind the tape, shouting and beckoning the redhead to vic-
tory Others followed, and soon there were a dozen young-
sters lined up behind the tape, all shouting and leaping and
waving their arms. . ,
Blue's mount, alarmed at the excited crowd towards which
it was heading, faltered and swerved towards the river. Its
rider pulled it round and headed it once more for the tape.
But the goat was too scared to carry on. It again swerved
towards the river, bolted across the few intervening feet,
and plunged over the bank. The mob, following their
leader's example, swerved in a body and hurled themselves
over the edge. „ ~
While women screamed and men stood aghast, rreas
mount ambled steadily on. Its winkers prevented it from
observing the behaviour of the other goats, and so it trotted
happily up to the tape. , ,
Meanwhile the struggling, bleating mass of boys and goats
in the sandy river bed gradually sorted themselves out and
climbed up on to the bank. One or two of the younger lads
were crying from fright, but no one was hurt.
"No race! No race!" shouted the punters, for not one ot
them had backed Fred. . . ,
" No race!" cried the boys who had been carried into tne


river.
The sports committee held a hurried meeting, after which
the sergeant announced: "A prize of five shillings will be
paid to Fred Stephens because his goat was the only one to
finish the course. The race will be re-run for the same prizes
as before —five bob, half-a-dollar and- a bob. No bets to be
paid on the first race, but those bets will stand for the
re-run."
Everybody but the bookmakers cheered like mad.
" The committee has also decided that no goat will be
allowed to wear winkers for any other race to-day, because
this gives them an unfair advantage over the others. And
nobody's allowed to stand behind the tape, because it
frightens the goats."
Everybody cheered again, and the animals were lined up
for the re-run.
"Go!"
Blue's goat sprinted- ahead as before, but it could not stay
the distance, and it ran only second. Smiley came in fifth.
" I dunno what 'appened to ole Bootlace," he said to Blue
afterwards. " I think 'e must be crook. 'E must 'ave the
spavins or worms or somethin'."
" Dicken on!"
" Well, 'e didn't sool like 'e might of."
Blue softened and said he would pull his mount next time
and let Smiley win.
" The other two races is 'andicaps," Smiley replied-, "so
you'll be scratch and I'll 'ave a start, and I'm goin' to win
them."
" Put it there." Blue held out his hand, and they shook.
Before the next goat race there was a foot race for the
boys, a handicap in which both Smiley and Blue were given
five yards start on the scratch boys.
Smiley looked round the field and grinned. He knew the
race was in his pocket.
" Smiley!" called a man's voice, and- the boy looked across
and saw it was one of the hotel hands.
" I've got a quid on you, Smiley, and if you win I'll give
you five bob."
" You betcher!" he called back, waving a confident hand
And if you don't win I'll kick your tail off!"
"Aw, dicken on!"
" Now remember what I said. There's five bob—"


"Go!"
The starter's call took Smiley by surprise. He had been
so busy listening to the hotel hand that he had no paid atten-
tion to the starter. As he turned to run, the field came
sweeping past him.
He was five yards behind the last of the field before he
started off. Desperately he raced in their dusty tracks, and
one by one he overhauled them. But the distance was too
short for him to catch them all before the tape was reached.
He came in fourth —and Blue was last.
Smiley was now ready to weep, or scream, or punch some-
body in the eye. Blue came up to sympathise, but Smiley
repulsed him with a snarl and ran off.
" I wisht I was dead!" he muttered as he raced away. " I
wisht I was dead!"
A little later he pulled up, panting. He could hear the
faint and far-off noise of the sports, and he wondered what
was going on. But still his anger was greater than his curi-
osity, even after the cooling effect of the run through the
bush.
" S-s-s-s!"
Smiley leaped sideways, and even before his feet touched
the ground his body was bent and his hand was reaching for
the nearest stick. i
The first blow broke the snake's back, and the next three
beat it into immobility. The boy looked down at the black
coils and muttered, " That'll teach you to flamin' well spit
at me."
He was trembling slightly with excitement, as he always
did when he killed a snake. Just to make sure this one was
really out of action he gave it another half-dozen blows on
the head. Smiley knew that it was not quite dead, because
he shared the majority belief in these .parts that a snake
never dies till the sun goes down. Chop it to pieces, bury it
in the ground, throw it in the river—but a snake never really
dies till sundown.
The boy's anger was now entirely gone. He could still
hear the faint cries of the people on the sports ground, and
he decided to return. As he turned to go, his inspiration for
mischief gave him an idea.
First of all he gave the snake another half-dozen smashing
blows on the head. Then he picked up the four-foot reptile
and thrust the coils down the neck of his shirt. With the


warm scales gently chafing his skin he set off at a trot.
On reaching the riverside fiat, he saw a group of women
beside a big gum tree. They were the committee in charge
of refreshments, and they wexe sitting or standing among
the benches and boxes and baskets of food and cases of soft
drinks.
As a mixed three-legged race was about to start, the
refreshments committee were enjoying a lull in the business
of handing out food and drink, and they gossiped while they
rested. There were the doctor's wife, the schoolmaster's
wife, the police sergeant's wife, and other leaders of Mur-
rumbilla society.
Smiley sidled up behind the tree, where he stood unno-
ticed. Pulling the snake out of his shirt, he swung it by
the tail while he peered round the trunk of the blue gum.
None of the women was looking.
He tossed the reptile in the air and shouted, " Snake!
Snake!" The next moment the black coils fell among the
group of women. Smiley turned and bolted.
The women screamed and scattered in panic. Mrs. Gaspen,
the doctor's wife, lurched against a loaded bench, and as it
collapsed she fell sprawling among the sandwiches. Some-
body else stumbled over a case of lemonade and plunged
headlong into a clump of bindyeyes. The others ran crying
towards the crowd, who had turned in wonder at the sound
of the screams.
" Snake! Snake!" yelled the female chorus.
A dozen men came running up, snatching sticks on the
way. The first to arrive gave the snake a couple of blows
before he realised he had been fooled.
" It's dead," he said to the others. " It's a dead snake."
" It came flying out of the air," explained Mrs. Gaspen,
as she wiped the butter from her dress.
The sergeant then arrived, and the refreshment committee
reassembled to explain what had happened. The shout of
" Snake!", the sight of the reptile dropping among them, the
rush to escape.
" Who yelled ' Snake' in the first place?" asked the
sergeant.
" I don't know."
" It wasn't one of us."
" I thought it came from behind the tree."
" It sounded to me like a child's voice."


The sergeant suppressed the smile provoked by the sight
of the clucking, indignant group. It gave him special plea-
sure to see the superior Mrs. Gaspen trying to wipe the
butter from her dress.
" It looks as if some kid's been playing a joke on you
ladies," he said.
"Joke?"
" It's no joke getting snakes thrown at you."
" You've got to find that child and punish him."
" Yes, whoever it was must be punished."
The sergeant assured them that the joker would not escape
punishment. " But," he added, " how can I find out who did
it if you can't tell me?"
It was Jean Holt who answered that question—pigtailed
Jean whom Smiley had so recently dumped on an ants' nest.
" Please, sergeant," she said, " I know who done it."
"You do?"
" Yes, I saw Smiley Greevins do it."
The sergeant fixed a hard eye on the freckled face. "Are
you sure you saw him throw the snake amongst the ladies?
Are you sure you saw him?"
Jean faltered: " Er —please, sergeant —I never seen him
throw no snake, but I seen him runnin' away from behind
this tree when I heard the ladies yellin'."
" Is that true, Jean?"
" Oh, yessir. Oh, yes, it's true, sir. Cross my heart it is,
sir."
The sergeant turned to the refreshments committee: "All
right, ladies, I'll find young Greevins and give him what for.
Now you can all settle down nice and quiet again and get
on with your gossiping."
He walked back to the sports ground in search of Smiley,
whom he found talking to Blue. The boys were grinning
with their heads close together, but their faces became blank
as soon as they saw the policeman.
" Smiley, did you throw that snake amongst the ladies?"
" I don't know nothin' about no snake, sergeant."
" You blasted little liar!" snapped the policeman. "It was
a damn silly trick to play and I've got to punish you for it.
You're disqualified from entering any more events in
to-day's sports."
The sergeant waited. He knew that if Jean Holt had been
maliciously lying about seeing Smiley, the boy would make


a violent, indignant protest against the punishment, but if he
were guilty the chances were that he would keep silent.
Smiley just looked at him with a hurt expression on his
face —an expression of such utter disappointment and dejec-
tion that the sergeant regretted having to punish him so
harshly. . ~ u
/'And if you try any more tricks like that, he said, as he
turned to go, " I'll lock you up for a couple of days.
Smiley and Blue watched him go in silence. Finally the
redhead spoke. "Aw, gee!" he said. "Aw, gee!
" I wonder 'oo told on me?" muttered Smiley. It s ex-
crooshinatin'."
"It must 'ave been one o' them ladies. l ~
" They never saw me. It must 'ave been somebody else.
" It's a fair cow," complained Blue. " You won't be able
to win no dough so's to git your bike." * ,
Smiley's whole soul was black with despair. They re
goin' to be sorry when they find me," he said.
" What did you say?"
" They're goin' to be sorry when they find me dead. They 11
all go round cryin' like anythin'—the sergeant and the ladies
and 'ooever told on me."
" Dicken on!" snorted Blue. " You ain't goin' to die.
" I'm goin' to kill meself," Smiley assured him earnestly.
" I'm goin' to cut me throat with a razor and jump in the
river. They'll be sorry when they find me. They'll all go
round cryin'."
The beauty of the idea suddenly struck Blue, who said.
" Me. too, cobber. I'm goin' to kill meself, too."
" Square dinkum, Blue?"
" Square dinkum. Then they'll find two bodies and they'll
be twice as sorry."
" But you ain't got nothin' to kill yoreself about."
" Yairs, I 'ave. Yore me cobber and I'm killin' meself be-
cause they've made you feel excrooshinatin'."
The discusson was interrupted by the approach of Jean
Holt. The boys wondered why she should seek them out, and
eyed her with both curiosity and distaste.
Jean looked at Smiley with a sneering grin. " I told on
you," she said, twitching her pigtails and getting ready to
" What did you say?"
" I told the sergeant on you, see?"


Then Smiley realised what she meant, that she had come
to boast of her tale-telling and to crow over him. He
clenched his fists and became a sidling menace. As the gap
between them decreased, Jean stopped grinning and stared
at him with fear in her eyes.
" Don't you touch me, Smiley Greevins," she said hoarsely.
" If you touch me I'll tell on you."
Smiley continued to advance, with Blue moving up behind
him.
" I'll kick yore grummet till yore nose bleeds," Smiley
murmured between gritted teeth. " You tell-tale-tattle-tit!"
" Je-e-e-an!"
The boys stopped short and the girl turned quickly at her
mother's call.
" Jean, aren't you going in for the egg-and-spoon race?"
" Yes, mother, I'm comin'."
When she had gone, Smiley said, " I'll wreak my revenge
on her and she shall lie low in the dust." Seeing Blue's aston-
ished expression, he added, " I read that in a book. But it's
what I'm goin' to do to that sheilah. Dinkum. it is."
" Come and see when the next goat race is," suggested his
companion.
" That ain't no flamin' good to me. I'm goin' to git some
tucker," replied Smiley as he went off in search of sand-
wiches and cake.
CHAPTER ELEVEN
The air became suddenly breathless, and all the leaves
were still. Some child first saw the distant dark column on
the skyline, and he ran shouting towards the crowd.
" Willy-willy!"
People turned and looked. " Willy-willy!" they repeated
sharply. "Is it coming this way?"
The whirlwind, dark with the dust and leaves and grass
it had caught up from the earth, leaned towards the hospital
building, swerved by it, and came roaring down the hill.
They could only watch —and hope. There was no way of
stopping it, and the only thing to do was to wait till it
whirled itself to death.


Men ran towards the horses that snuffed and stamped and
jerked on the bridles.
" Here she comes!" exclaimed somebody with a nervous
laugh. " Here she comes!"
The willy-willy was making straight for the township, but
just before it reached the church it changed its course and
swung down towards the river. It was snarling now, and it
seemed to reach almost to the sun. Papers were floating in
the swaying column. Empty tins from a rubbish dump were
spun skywards and then flung back to earth again.
The wind struck an outhouse in the back yard of a house
halfway down the hill. The corrugated iron roof was
whipped off, crumpled, and flung a hundred yards. The walls
swayed, then burst apart.
" Hey, Jack," someone called, " There goes your w.c."
" Yairs," he muttered. " Lucky it wasn't the whole flamin'
house."
The willy-willy reached the river flat and was now only
five hundred yards from the sports ground. The women
looked scared, and the men, though anxious, told them there
was no danger.
" Come and help us with these horses!" called a voice, and
a dozen men ran towards the frightened beasts. Before they
could reach the animals, two horses dragged away. One of
them, blind with fear, crashed into a man and trampled him
down before galloping off. The man rolled over and over
in the dust, groaning and holding his head. Dr. Gaspen hur-
ried up before anyone had time to call his name.
Meanwhile the whirlwind came spinning and snarling
towards the crowd, and people began to run down into the
river bed to take shelter under the bank.
But the willy-willy committed suicide. It turned off the
clearing and plunged into the trees, threshing their branches
wildly and frightening a flock of white cockatoos into
screaming flight.
In twenty seconds it was all over. The whirlwind could
not survive the resistance of the trees, and it faltered and
died. The dust and leaves and paper came drifting down
the hot and shimmering air.
The injured man was helped into a trap, and the sergeant
took the reins. With the doctor supporting him, the casualty
was driven quickly off to the hospital for treatment of his
bruised ribs and cut forehead.


The sports continued —and when the next foot race for
boys was announced, Smiley presented himself with the rest.
" I though you was disqualified," whispered Blue.
" Don't say nothin'," Smiley replied. " The sergeant ain't
'ere and 'e's the bloke what done it and nobody else knows."
" 'Ow do you know?"
"Aw, I'm goin' to 'ave a go, anyway."
" You got a bit of a neck, ain't you?"
" Shut yore gob!" snapped Smiley.
"All right, all right," muttered the redhead. " Don't git
yore wool off."
The boys lined up for the sprint, and Smiley discovered
that this time he had only three yards start on the scratch
men. But he still thought he could win.
" Hi, Smiley! I promised you a kick in the backside,"
called the station hand who had bet on him in the first boys'
race. " I lost a quid over you. But I'll tell you what —I'll
give you five bob if you win this race."
"Too right I will!" he called back, but this time he kept
his eye on the starter.
" Go!"
Smiley darted forward, stumbled for a moment on some-
body's heels, recovered his balance and raced on. He was
soon leading the field, and he was filled with a happiness
that gave him wings. But his delight did not last long. A
lanky youth who started from scratch came striding by, and
Smiley finished only second.
His disappointment vanished when the judge called him
over and gave him half-a-crown. He mentally added it to his
former total . . . two-and-six and two-and-ten . . . working
it out with a stick in the dust made the total five-and-four.
Well, that was getting on for half-a-quid, and half-a-quid was
on the way to a pound, two pounds, three-pound-ten and
the bike.
Smiley also intended entering for the second goat race, but
when the sergeant returned from the hospital and took over
the duties of sports organiser once more, the boy dared not
turn up for any more races that afternoon.
Determined to have some fun, nevertheless, he said to Blue,
" Wot about gittin' a couple o' mudsticks and goin' down in
the river and firin' at the mob?"
"Aw, gee, we might git copped and belted."
" Gawn! Nobody'll see us in the bushes. Come on."


So they went down into the bed of the river and found a
tree that provided each with a springy three-foot stick. A
little further along they found a patch of clayey mud, and
they scooped out handfuls of the plastic stuff and moulded
it into pellets the size of pullet's eggs.
Smiley thrust one on to the end of his stick. Holding the
stick in both hands, he swung it back over his shoulder, then
flicked it forward like a fisherman making a jerky cast. The
pellet whizzed off and flew down the river to land about
fifty yards away.
" Gee, this is a bonzer mudstick!"
Blue tried his stick with the same satisfactory results, after
which the boys took up a position among the bushes in the
river bed just below the sports ground.
They fired half-a-dozen rounds each and then paused to
peer over the top of the bushes to see what results they
got. They did not know that one pellet had flattened itself
on a man's head and another had fallen among the tea-cups,
but they could see they had been doing some effective shoot-
ing, because a group of people were standing on the edge of
the bank and talking excitedly while they scanned the river
bed for sight of the culprits.
" Gee, they're goin' to come after us," whispered Blue.
" I ain't scared. You watch me sling one right in the mid-
dle of 'em."
"Aw, cut it out," urged the redhead. "You'll git us copped."
Smiley ignored the warning and swung his stick. The
pellet plopped into the bank almost at the feet of the watch-
ing group.
" Over there!" two or three shouted and pointed in the
direction of the hidden boys. Half-a-dozen men slid down
the bank and ran across the sand.
" They're comin' after us!" hissed Blue as he turned and
ran with Smiley on his heels.
Doubled up, with their chins almost on their knees, they
thrust their way through the bushes while their pursuers
followed noisily. Smiley brushed past his companion and
took the lead.
"The big 'ole!" he panted. " Kid we been swimmin'!"
At last they came to the end of the bushes. As they ran
across the sand towards the waterhole caused by a widening
of the stream, Smiley dragged off his shirt. He paused for
a moment on the edge to jerk a rawhide loop that held up


his trousers —and a couple of seconds latex he plunged into
the water. Blue followed almost immediately.
When the search party arrived a little later they found the
two boys splashing about in the middle of the hole.
" Was youse the coves that slung mud at us?" shouted one
of the men.
" Eh? What did you say?" gasped Smiley, treading water
furiously.
" Come over 'ere, you two. You been chucking mud on us."
" Dunnp what yore talkin' about."
" That's a snake yarn. Come on out."
Observing that three little gixls had joined the group,
Smiley replied: "Can't come out" —puff—"got no clothes
on " —puff —" can't come out nakid!"
" Can't come out nakid," echoed Blue as he turned to swim
upstream, with Smiley following. Both displayed brown,
contemptuous buttocks.
The group stood irresolute. After all, the discovery of the
two youngsters near the scene of the crime was only circum-
stantial evidence, and they had no real proof that these wexe
the culprits. So, after a brief discussion they walked off.
Smiley and Blue swam upstream till they came to a big
coolabah tree overhanging the water. Scrambling up, they
climbed among the leaves and chuckled over their astute-
ness.
After allowing fifteen minutes for the search party to
return to the sports ground, Smiley said, " I'm goin' to do a
gin squash and then git my clothes on."
He stood up on the branch and jumped into the air with
knees bent and legs wide apart. The splash sent the water
spiders skimming to safety.
"Gin squash!" called Blue —and he hit the water with a
smack that stung his bottom.
The pair swam back to their clothes and dragged them
over theix wet bodies. By the time they had sneaked back
among the crowd on the sports ground they were completely
dry.


CHAPTER TWELVE
As usual, the hospital sports finished up with a dance in
Rankin's hall, a long wooden building next to the hotel.
First, the floor was thoroughly swept. Then two men
sprinkled boracic acid from brown paper packets, and small
boys slithered over the white powder, grinding it into the
boards to make the floor slippery.
The people drifted in and took up their accustomed posi-
tions.
On a small platform at the far end of the hall were three
men —the master of ceremonies, the young fellow at the
harsh-toned piano, and the old baldhead with his concertina.
The women sat on the long forms lining the sides of the
hall. Mothers wrapped their babies in shawls or blankets
and pushed them under the seats, where they lay happily
blinking or sleeping, regardless of the noise around them.
The men and boys clustered just inside the front doorway,
grinning at the girls and chiaking them while they waited
for the dance to start.
The M.C. suddenly shouted: "Take yore partners for the
first set o' quadrilles!"
There was a noisy rush from the doorway towards the
women, and the chatter became louder as the dancers took
up their positions—top, bottom, and sides —while the pianist
tinkled and the concertina player squeezed out a few
squeaky notes in order to warm up.
" One more couple wanted!" called the M.C., pointing to a
vacant space in one of the sidelines. A young man hauled
in a girl to fill the gap.
The M.C. nodded to the musicians. The music burst forth
—tiddle-iddle-umtum-tiddle-iddle-umtum —Bright and loud
and irresistible. Everyone bowed to partners.
" Half right and left!" As the M.C. called the first figure,
top and bottom rows advances jauntily. The night of danc-
ing had begun—and even at that stage the sweat was begin-
ning to run down their faces.
Smiley and Blue peered in at the doorway and jostled the
other boys who clustered there to watch the dancing. But


they were soon bored, and they went round to the back of
the hall to investigate.
" Poo, wot a pong!" muttered Smiley, advancing on the
primitive plant for making acetylene gas out of carbide in
order to light the dance hall.
Some slaked lime, spent of its gas, had recently been
scooped out of the tank and dumped in a strong-smelling pile
alongside.
" Watch out you don't burn your flakin' feet," warned
Smiley. He stepped carefully round the heap.
" I know somethin'," Blue remarked iavitingly.
"Wot?"
" I know somethin' to do."
" Wot?"
Blue came closed and whispered, "We can turn off the gas.
This is the tap that turns it off. I saw Mr. Munroe turnin' it
last week, and I asked 'im what 'e was doin', and 'e said it
was for turnin' the gas on and off."
" Dinkum?"
" Fair dinkum."
Smiley bent down and grasped the tap. He tried turning
it one way, but it would not budge. So he twisted it in the
other direction and it moved slowly round.
At first there was no change in the brightness of the lights
in the hall, but within a few seconds they faded swiftly till
they almost went out. The cries of dismay rose in a
crescendo that drowned the music.
" I'm goin' to git," muttered Blue, sidling away.
Men came running down the back steps of the hall, and
someone shouted, "It's those blasted kids!"
Smiley turned and dashed off in the redhead's tracks. The
boys could hear their pursuers clumping after them as they
scrambled through the barbed-wire fence and made for the
nearest group of trees.
" Gee! Gee! Gee-hos-o-fat!" Smiley repeatedly hissed.
"I'll stoush you if I catch you doin' it again!" shouted a
voice from the group that had stopped short at the barbed-
wire fence.
"Gee-hos-o-fat!" panted Smiley, now in the darkness of
the trees. " Gee, it 'urts!"
" Wot are you bellyachin' about?"
" I tore me leg on the wire," he replied, and his exploratory
fingers became sticky with blood. He could not see the


wound in the dark, but the pain and the feel of the blood
scared him a little.
" I'm bleedin' to death," he said.
" Dick en on!"
" Fair dinkum, I am."
" Gawn, you can't bleed to death from barbed wire."
" Well, the pain is excrooshinatin' and I'll git blood pois-
onin'."
" If you do you'll 'ave yore leg cut off like Jack Slade, and
then you'll go round on crutches," said Blue with relish.
" I oughter git some iodine and put it on." Smiley walked
out from under the trees and made for the main road. Ap-
proaching as near as he dared to the light at one end of the
hotel verandah, he examined his leg. A barb had torn the
skin just above the knee, and the blood was running down
his leg.
"Aw, it's only a scratch," Blue said.
Smiley resented this. " I might git blood poisonin'," he
retorted. " I'm goin' to git some iodine from the doctor."
Blue knew, of course, that this was the right thing tQ do.
It was part of the first-aid course they learned at school:
" Wash the wound and apply iodine."
Just as the boys reached the gate the doctor and his wife
came out of the front door.
" Hullo, Smiley. Hullo, Blue. Why aren't you at the
dance?"
Smiley explained and exhibited his wound.
" Oh, that's too bad," the doctor said. " I'll fix it up in a
couple of minutes. Come inside."
A quick bathe, a few dabs of iodine, and then the doctor
reached for his bandages.
" I don't want no bandage," protested Smiley.
" But you must have it bandaged up to keep it clean."
A minute later the boy emerged with a white strip encir-
cling his sunbrowned leg. Accompanied by Blue, he ran
along the road and turned up the sandhill towards the school.
Pausing by the slaughteryard, he dragged off the bandage
and threw it away.
The two boys made their way back to the dance hall,
where the crowd were galloping through a barn dance, and
the whole building vibrated with low, rhythmic thunder
Smiley paused for a moment in the light of a window to
examine his leg. The wound had stopped bleeding. Raw


and stained with iodine, it made an ugly sight, but the boy
was unconcerned because the pain had almost gone out of it.
Smiley and Blue wand-ered round to the back of the hall,
where they came across the women who were boiling the
cauldron of water for tea. Mrs. Stephens, the schoolmaster's
wife, was in charge of this part of the supper preparations.
She turned and smiled at the two inquisitive faces on the
edge of the firelight.
"If it isn't Smiley and Blue," she said. " Would you like
to help?"
"Aw, I dunno," replied Smiley, grinning uneasily.
But Mrs. Stephens did not let them escape. She asked
them to put more wood on the fire und-erneath the cauldron
and to line up the big enamel jugs which would carry the
tea into the hail. They obeyed reluctantly—till Smiley put
his proposition.
" Mrs. Stephens," he said, " do you think me and Blue
could make a deener if we 'elped you with the supper?"
"A shilling? Well, I think I could manage that. But
you'll have to go in and hand round the cups and then take
the tea in afterwards."
" Oh, yairs, Mrs. Stephens!" they told her eagerly.
"All right. The water's nearly boiling, so go in and take
round the cups as soon as this dance is over."
After the pair helped hand round the cups, Mrs. Stephens
instructed them to carry on with the sandwiches.
"And don't eat any off the plate while you're taking them
round," she told them. " You'll get plenty to eat afterwards."
They obeyed her, and they were later rewarded with a
large pile of sandwiches and cakes —and a shilling.
Smiley looked at the coin with a disappointed air.
" Well, aren't you going to say thank-you?" smiled Mrs.
Stephens.
"Aw, gee, thank you, Mrs. Stephens," said Blue.
" Same 'ere," mumbled Smiley.
" Why, Smiley, you don't look too pleased. Aren't you
satisfied with your wages? A shilling is what we agreed
on, isn't it?"
" Yairs, Mrs. Stephens. Only I thought we'd git a deener
each."
"A shilling each? That's a lot of money." She fumbled in
her handbag. " Well, here's another shilling. Now go and
buy some lollies or something. Good-night, Smiley. Good-


night, Blue."
The delighted boys thanked her again and hurried off.
They had almost reached the door of the hall when the police
sergeant entered.
" Smiley," he said, "come here."
While Blue scuttled away, the other boy approached the
sergeant reluctantly. " 'E ain't goin' to take no more dough
offer me," he thought. " 'E ain't goin' to do nothin' like that
to me."
The sergeant's expression was grim. " Smiley, I want you
to come and see me to-morrow after school. Now, don't
forget. As soon as you come out of school you're to come
and see me. Savee?"
" Yaixs, sergeant."
"And don't forget to bring that ten bob with you."
" No, sergeant."
"All right, mizzle off!"
When the boy got outside he found Blue waiting at the
bottom of the steps.
" Wot did 'e want you for?"
"Aw, I dunno. 'E says I gotter go and see 'im after school
termorrer."
"You won't tell on me, will you?" asked the redhead
hastily.
" I won't tell on nobody."
" Gee, I'm glad I ain't you," said Blue. "'E might be goin'
to put you in the cell for a week."
"Aw, dicken on!" But Smiley was apprehensive despite
his air of bravado. The sergeant's order had been so mysteri-
ous —just to come and see him after school. But what about?
" I'd bring you some bonzer tucker every day," said Blue
"Eh?"
" When yore in gaol," explained the redhead. "And I'd
bring you some lollies, too. And I'd come and see you every
day so's you wouldn't be lonely."
" But I ain't goin' to gaol," retorted Smiley. " I ain't done
nothin' crook."
"Justice has often miscarriaged," replied his mate. "That's
what the sheriff says in a cowboy book I was readin'. If
justice miscarriages you could go to gaol even if you ain't
done nothin' crook at all."
Determined to listen no longer to this foolish talk, Smiley
said, " I'm goin' 'ome. Hooray."
" Hooray,' replied Blue, and he watched with a pitying air
107


as his friend strode off into the darkness.
" Smiley," said the sergeant the following aftexnoon, " I've
asked you to come and see me because it's about time you
took a pull on yourself. You're becoming known as the
town's leading larrikin.
" In the last few weeks you've caused a lot of trouble, and
people are beginning to ask me why I don't have you
whipped. Some of them even suggest I ought to have you
up before the court.
" There's that stone-throwing business that broke the
chuch window. You were mostly responsible for that. And
there's that adventure of yours with the gun. You might
have killed somebody with it, or you might have been
responsible for somebody killing somebody else.
" I told you that you were disqualified at the spoxts yester-
day for throwing that snake at the ladies. I see by the list
of prize-winners that you waited till I was gone to hospital
with the injured man and then you sneaked back and dis-
obeyed my ord-ers. By rights you're not entitled to that
half-crown you won.
" You and your friend Blue are suspected of being the
ones who threw mud from the river on to the sports ground
yesterday. And from what I hear you'xe the same two boys
that mucked about with the gas while the dance was on last
night.
" It's getting to be too much of a good thing. It's got to
stop, Smiley. I'm leaving Blue's father to deal with him, and
I've told his father that you're mostly to blame, because
you're the leader and Blue just follows you into mischief.
" Now, I'm going to give you a warning. If I hear of you
getting into any more mischief and upsetting people and
damaging things, I'm going to take action. I've got all the
town behind me, and I can punish you in practically any way
I like. And I warn you that if Ido have to punish you, you'll
be the sorriest boy in all the West.
" Will you give me your pxomise, Smiley, that you'll be
a good boy in future?"
All this time Smiley had been sitting opposite the serge-
ant, glancing from floor to ceiling, scratching a muddy ankle
with the big toe of his other foot, and shifting uncomfortably
in his chair. At first his expression was somewhat defiant,
but as the harangue continued he began to look ashamed of
himself, and at the end he was almost in tears.


"Come on, Smiley," said the sergeant in a softer, more
encouraging voice. " Will you give me your promise?
" Yairs, sergeant," the boy said at last.
" That's fine. I believe you and so I won't say
anything more about it. So long, Smiley."
The boy hurried out of the police station and made his way
towards the dam. He was half scared, half indignant, and he
wanted solitude in which to think things over.
Before long he heard hoof beats behind him, and he turned
to see Rankin, the landlord of the hotel, riding towards him.
Rankin reined his horse and said, " I just seen you comin'
out of the police station. Have you been sayin' anythin'
about me and Willie Coy and the day you was there?"
" No, Mr. Rankin."
"I've a good mind to bash your head in," Rankin said
ferociously. " You been tellin' on me."
" I ain't been tellin' on nobody, Mr. Rankin. I ain't got
nothin' to tell on nobody about."
Then what was you doin' at the police station?"
" I wasn't tellin' on nobody, Mr. Rankin. Fair dinkum, I
wasn't."
" Then what was you doin' there?" repeated the man.
" I was bein' told orf by the sergeant."
" What for?"
"Aw, 'e said I been doin' a lotter crook things lately, and
'e told me orf."
Rankin asked a few more questions and got the whole
story out of the boy. Then he said, " You and me's cobbers,
Smiley. When I said I'd rip your guts out it was only kid-
stakes. You and me's cobbers, eh?"
" Too right," agreed the youngster, but he was still
uncertain.
" Would you like me to give you a dollar?"
"A dollar? Oh, yairs, Mr. Rankin!" Then the boy added
cautiously, " Wot for?"
" I'll tell you what, you wait down by the dam for a while,
and then I'll get you to take a parcel over to the black's
camp. If you do that I'll give you five bob. 'Smatter of fact,
I'd go over to the black's camp myself if I had the time. But
I haven't got the time, so you'll do me a favour if you take
the parcel over for me. I'll give you the five bob now if you
like."
He pulled out the coins and handed them down to the boy.


Smiley jingled them, still wondering what it was all about
Rankin turned his horse and called over his shoulder " See
you down by the dam."
The lad went on down the hill, puzzling over the large
advance payment for a trifling job. When asked to take
parcels anywhere he usually did not bother to wonder what
was in them, but this time he was somewhat curious about
the contents of the parcel he was to take over to the camp.
He remembered how he and Blue had let their imagination
play with Mr. Rankin's possible activities, how he might be
a spy in the pay of the Chinese. Now he was having dealings
vv ith the blacks. Though Smiley knew that the few dozen
blacks who lived in the camp across the river were harmless
enough, he recalled the tales of the old settlers about the
when . the aborigines speared white people and
clubbed them with nulla-nullas, and he wondered if Mr.
Kankin was hatching a plot with the black people as well.
For a moment he thought it might be wiser to hurry off
and break his promise to Mr. Rankin. But that would not
be wise, he decided. Mr. Rankin would undoubtedly come
looking for his five shillings, and would probably do a bit of
stoushmg as well. Besides, Smiley wanted the money so
badly that he was prepared to run a simple errand and ask
no questions. *
o n ° t long before the man r °de up to the dam. He
( ?£ e< r Sm i le y a small parcel wrapped in newspaper.
. ' Take this over to the camp and give it King Billy Don't
give it to nobody else, savee? Just King Billv."
4 Yes, Mr. Rankin."
"And don't say nothin' to nobody about this. It's a bit of
a secret between me and King Billy. Now you won't sav
nothin', will yer?"
"Aw, no, Mr. Rankin."
" Dinkum?"
" Dinkum, Mr. Rankin."
"AIA right, sool!"
Smiley ran off, ploughed across the sandy river bed, and
made for the blacks' camp, where the aborigines of the com-
munity lived in ironbark gunyahs or kerosene-tin huts or
any other kind of crude dwelling. The place was swarming
with dogs—lean, hungry mongrels that slunk away at the
sight of a stranger.
On arrival, Smiley spotted little Jacky Harrison, his only


real friend among the blacks.
" 'Ullo, Jacky."
" 'Lo, Smiley. Gibbit lolly."
"Ain't got no lollies, Jacky. Where's King Billy?"
" King Billy longa gunyah." The black boy pointed to one
of the big huts.
" I gotter see 'im," said Smiley. " You come longa me?"
"Yiss," agreed Jacky, and the pair walked across.
Sounds of scuffling and squealing came from the gunyah
and, as the boys approached, the sacking over the entrance
was jerked aside and a young lubra came dashing out,
squealing and giggling. The top of her dress had been
dragged off her shiny shoulders, and as she pulled it back
into place she shouted something in her own language before
running off, still giggling.
King Billy came to the door. He was the biggest black in
the camp and the boss of the aboriginal community in Mur-
rumbilla. He scowled at the boys, because he did not like
to see the white youngster in his camp.
"Go longa home," he said to Smiley. " Baal budgeree you
pfella here."
" Don't git yore wool off," retorted the boy. " M.r. Rankin
told me to give you this."
" Missa Rankin?"
" Yairs."
King Billy grabbed the parcel and hugged it. " Budgeree
pfella," he exclaimed, patting Smiley's shoulder. "You
likem tucker?"
"No tucker -for me," replied Smiley. He had once before
accepted an invitation to a meal with some blacks, and the
taste of the goanna had been so unpleasant that he made up
his mind never to eat with them again.
" Orright, you go longa home," urged King Billy.
" Orl right. Hooray, Billy."
" Hooray, Smiley."
As Smiley walked off, Jacky kept up with him. " Gibbit
lolly," he said.
" Struth, I told you I ain't got no lollies."
"You gibbit lolly, we go longa bees' nest."
Smiley stopped short. " Dinkum?" he asked eagerly.
" Yiss."
Smiley pulled out one of his half-crowns. The black boy
reached for it, but Smiley jerked it back.


" You can't 'ave all of it, but I'll tell you what, I'll buy
you a sprat's worth of lollies if you show me the bees' nest.'"
" Budgeree!" exclaimed Jacky, and he set off at a run.
They ran so far into the bush that Smiley began to wonder
if he was being kidded. But at last Jacky slowed down and
finally stopped before a dead ironbark that reached its white
skeleton of leafless limbs towards the sky.
" Look," said Jacky. "Bees longa tree."
Smiley looked up, and at first he could see nothing. Then,
after peering for half a minute, he saw a swarm of black
specks about the end of one of the hollow limbs.
"Aw, gee," he said in disgust, " they're only native bees!"
This was a great disappointment. He had expected to see
a nest of ordinary bees, but these were the tiny, mosquito-
like native bees that no one could domesticate. He knew
that if he reported the finding of an ordinary bees' nest to
the schoolmaster, then Mr. Stephens would come out and
capture them, take the swarm home, and, by crossing the
wild strain with his quiet Italian breed, would add a few
more hives to his apiary.
But would Mr. Stevens be interested in these native bees?
Smiley had once helped the schoolmaster chop down a
native bees' nest merely for the honey, and the result was
negligible. The master had been disappointed and had com-
pleted the day with a few mild curses. So would he be inter-
ested again?
" Gibbit lolly," Jacky reminded him.
" Orl right, orl right. You'll git yore sprat's worth. Come
on.
He took Jacky back to the township and spent sixpence
on sweets. Keeping a stick of licquorice for himself, he gave
the rest to the black boy and sent him off home to the camp.
When he called at the schoolmaster's house Mrs. Stephens
told him that her husband was over at the apiary, so Smiley
hurried across the sandhill till he came to the master potter-
ing about among the hives.
Hullo, Smiley. Hot, isn't it? I'm afraid some of the hives
are going to swarm, so I'm keeping an eye on them."
Smiley looked around the apiary with polite interest, and
then asked, " Do you think it's worth a bob if I could tell
you where there's a bees' nest?"
" What a mercenary boy you are! Oh, I forgot, I started
you off on this money-grabbing business, didn't I? Besides,


you're saving up for a bike, aren t you? Well, if you can
show me a bees' nest I'll give you a shilling with pleasure.
" I know one that's in an ole gum tree over the river.
" Good! It's too late to get it to-day, but we'll go across
after school to-morrow. Your information is certainly worth
a shilling. Perhaps I'd better give it to you now "
As the schoolmaster put his hand into his pocket Smiley
said hurriedly, " You might like to 'ave a dekko at it first.
" Why do you say that? If you tell me you've found a bees
nest, I believe you. So here's your shilling."
" It's only a native bees' nest," said the boy glumly.
" Oh!" Mr. Stephens withdrew the hand holding the coin.
" Only native bees? That's a different kettle of fish."
During the pause, Smiley scratched his leg and wondered
if he had been wise to pay Jacky a sprat for the information
he was now hardly likely to sell for a bob. .
" Well," Mr. Stephens said, " I'll withdraw my offer of a
shilling till I see this bees' nest. Of course, the swarm is of
no use to me, but if there's a bit of honey in the nest it 11 be
worth while. I'll make a bargain with you, Smiley. You
come and help me chop down the nest after school to-mor-
row. If it's full of dry comb I won't pay you a penny. If
it's got a fair bit of honey in it, I'll give you the shilling I
promised you. Is that a bargain?"
" Oh, yairs. Mr. Stephens! I think it's goin to be a bonzer
bees' nest."
" Well, I hope so. for both our sakes. And now don't you
think you ought to be going home?"
"I'll sool," the boy assured him, and raced off.
Next afternoon Mr. Stephens and Smiley drove across the
river in the sulky. The boy's bush experience gave him a
true sense of direction, so it did not take long for the pair to
arrive at the tree containing the bees' nest.
After the master had examined the natural lean of the
tree, he indicated where the first cut should be made, and
said. " Come on now. Smiley, let's see what you're like with
the axe."
Smiley picked it up and swung it with expert hands. The
blade bit into the dry wood, sending the big chips flying.
Before long he tired, and Mr. Stephens took the axe. After
cutting halfway through the trunk he paused for breath and
slid- the handle into the boy's hands. He wanted Smiley to
have the pleasure of the last few strokes that would send the


tree crashing.
Smiley walked round to the other side of the tree and
chipped away for about a minute. The tree creaked and
groaned, and the old blue gum leaned outwards.
" Look out!" called the master.
They skipped sideways as the tree crashed to the ground.
With the cloud of reddish dust there rose a cloud of black
bees —tiny, frightened bees from the smashed nest.
" Gee, I 'ope they don't sting me."
"You know very well, Smiley, that native bees haven't
got any stings."
" Well, you never know, sir. Some of them bees mighter
grown stings."
" Not likely. Let's have a look at the nest —and be careful
not to let them get inside your ears."
As they approached, the bees came to meet them, dashing
against their faces, swarming against eyes and ears.
" Whew! This is a big swarm!" exclaimed the master,
flapping furiously. "We should have brought veils."
"Black louses!" muttered the boy as he scooped out
dozens that were trying to crawl into his ears.
"Smiley! That's unpleasant language!"
" It's what Tom Gapper calls the blackfellers, and these
bees is like little blackfellers."
A few strokes of the axe split open the nest to reveal a
mass of dark comb, broken here and there by the fall. It
gleamed with yellow, oozing honey.
The frantic bees came swarming out in even greater num-
bers, so Mr. Stephens said: " Better go back to the sulky and
take it further away. I don't want these bees to get at the
horse. And bring back the two honey tins. We've struck a
treasure trove."
" Is it worth a deener, sir?"
" Oh, yes. You'll get your shilling all right. But you've
got to lend a hand before you get paid."
Within half an hour they were driving homeward. Smiley
kept putting one hand in his pocket to feel the milled edge
of the shilling.
" Gee, I'm sorry, sir," he said.
" Sorry for what?"
" I'm sorry I used unpleasant language and called 'em
black louses."
The master coughed to keep himself from laughing.


CHAPTER THIRTEEN
Smiley's bankbook now recorded a total of lis. lOd. It
was still a long way off the £3 10s. he needed for the bicycle,
and- sometimes he wondered if it was worth while going on
with his project, especially as collecting the eleven shillings
and a bit had got him into such trouble.
As the days went by without producing any opportunity
for increasing his total, his pessimism increased. Initiative
was stifled, too, by the sergeant's threat of severe punish-
ment for bad behaviour. *He was scared to do anything un-
usual in case it got him into trouble.
Several times he was tempted to draw his money out of the
bank and spend it all on one glorious feast of cake, lollies
and lemonade. Blue frequently urged him to do this, and
one day he even got as far as the bank with the book in his
hand.
But something stopped him in time, and he took the book
back to the top of the pepperina tree, more determined than
ever that somehow, at some time or other, he would have the
money for the bike.
One day in school the master went up to him and said:
" Smiley, I want to see you after school."
" Yairs, sir," the boy replied, wondering what he had done
wrong; or perhaps he was required to help with the bees?
When Smiley presented himself, Mr. Stephens asked:
"What are you going to do for the holidays? We break up
on Friday, you know."
" I dunno, sir. I s'pose I'll just mooch around."
" Would you like to work on a sheep station? Would you
like to earn some money?"
"Aw, I dunno, sir."
" Well, I'll tell you what's happened. Mr. Preening, who's
overseer of Yarramanda Station, came in yesterday. He
asked me if I could suggest a couple of good, lively lads
who'd go out to the station next week and be rouseabouts
for the shearing. He says he'll pay a pound a week and
keep He says they'll be shearing for three weeks. What


do you think about that?"
Smiley was dazed for a moment, but when his mind got
working it said: "Three ones are three. Three pounds.
Three ones are three. Three pounds."
" Well, what do you think?" repeated Mr. Stephens.
"Gee!" the boy exclaimed. "Gee, Mr. Stephens, is it
dinkum? No kidstakes?"
" Fair dinkum," smiled the schoolmaster, permitting him-
self a little slang for once.
"That's bonzer! Gee, three quid!"
" I always said you wexe mercenary," laughed Mr.
Stephens. " But there's one other point—what about the
second rouseabout?"
Smiley looked blank.
" Come on, come on," urged the master. " Shake yourself
and listen. Have you got any suggestions as to who the
other rouseabout should be?"
"Aw . . . well . . . sir . . . wot about me cobber Blue?"
" Precisely. I was waiting for you to say that. Well, I
think you'll be an ideal partnership. Will you hand the
news on to Blue?"
" Yairs, Mr. Stephens. You bet yore sweet life I will!"
"Then go and find your friend and break the good news.
And let me know as soon as you can, so that I can tell Mr.
Preening you're coming."
So it was all arranged, and on the Monday after breaking-
up day the shearing team arrived at Murrumbilla, picked up
the two boys, and drove on to Yarramanda Station.
Though they had both visited sheep stations before, they
had only a vague idea of what they were required to do as
rouseabouts.
" I s'pose we'll 'ave to 'old up the sheep while the shearers
take their wool orf," muttered Blue to Smiley on their way
out.
"Dickenon!" snorted Smiley. "The shearers 'old the
sheep theirselves. We gotter pick up the fleeces and chuck
'em on the table for the classer to 'ave a dekko at."
Mr. Preening, the overseer, was waiting at the homestead
to welcome the team, which was led by Jimmy the Boss.
He was called that because he was boss of the board, other-
wise manager of the shed as long as shearing was in progress.
" Hullo, boys," said Mr. Preening to Smiley and Blue. "So
you're the rouseabouts Mr. Stephens sent out? What are


your names? Put it there, Smiley. Put it there, Blue."
They shook hands .rather nervously, despite the overseer's
friendly greeting. They were on foreign soil and they were
not sure how to behave.
" I'll put you in charge of Jimmy the Boss from now on.
He'll show you where to doss. By the way, did you bring
your swags?"
" Didn't know we 'ad to 'ave any," replied- Smiley.
" Never mind, I'll give you a couple of homestead blank-
ets. No extra charge."
They collected their blankets and followed the shearers
across to the huts grouped alongside the shearing shed. Al-
ready the cook had the water on to boil, and now he was
cutting up a sheep that had been slaughtered in readiness
for the shearers' arrival. Smiley and Blue suddenly felt very
hungry.
" You kids had better doss on the verandah," Jimmy the
Boss told them. " There's no room inside."
They were not favourably impressed by the boss of the
board, a big, loud-mouthed man with black teeth and- a pro-
truding belly.
" Yairs, mister," they replied.
" Don't call me mister, call me boss, because I'm your
flamin' boss while shearing's on. Savee?"
" Yairs, boss," said Blue.
" I git yer, boss," said Smiley. " Wot 'ave we gotter do?"
" I'll tell you that to-morrow when we start shearing."
The boys sat on the verandah, waiting for tea, sniffing the
hot air that smelled of frying mutton. The bell rang at last,
a stone rattled in a harsh-toned billycan, and they hurried
in to collect knives, forks and pannikins. They sat on a
wooden form at the end of a long table and ate a huge meal.
Replete, they wandered out into the evening to see the yel-
low edge of the sun showing for a little while above the rim
of the gidyea plain before slipping below the horizon.
" There's a big dam over there," said Blue, pointing to the
mounded square beside the windmill near the homestead.
" You don't call it a dam on a sheep station," Smilev cor-
rected him. " You call it a tank."
" I'll sool you!" Smiley pattered after his companion. As
they neared- the tank they saw a man and a woman lying in
the yellow grass and peering over the top of the bank.
The man turned to the boys and signalled them to stop.


They pulled up immediately and were about to retreat when
the man beckoned them. They recognised him as the over-
seer, and they walked towards him.
" Duck down," he called in a loud whisper, " and keep
quiet!"
Crouching, they hurried to the mound, wondering what
the mysterious instructions were all about.
" Ever seen brolgahs dancing?" whispered Mr. Preening
" No," they told him.
" Well, keep quiet and look over the top. Don't let them
see you or you'll scare them away."
They crawled through the grass and peered over the top
of the bank. On the opposite side of the water they saw the
brolgahs.
A dozen grey, long-legged birds, each nearly five feet high,
were arranged in two rows, and they were dancing the
strangest dance the boys had ever seen.
As the lines advanced, the birds bowed and pranced with
extraordinary grace, bobbing their heads and stepping deli-
cately on their spindly legs. The lines met and, with a lot
more bowing and prancing, the lines retreated.
" Gee, it's like the sorter stuff they dance in Rankin's
'all," muttered Blue.
"Ssh!" hissed the overseer.
The birds once more advanced in line, nodding and skip-
ping with an exaggerated air of dignity that made Smiley
want to laugh. He suppressed the desire for a while, but
when one of the biggest birds jostled another and made it
stagger, the boy could contain himself no longer.
" Ssh!" •
The overseer's warning came too late. Hearing the laugh-
ter, the birds immediately stopped their dance and ran
swiftly along the rim of the tank. The grey wings beat the
air and the brolgahs thrust themselves upwards into the
mauve sky, trailing their long legs behind them as they flew
screeching homewards.
" You've frightened them away," snapped the overseer.
"Aw, gee, I'm sorry," said Smiley. " Fair dinkum, I'm
sorry. I jist couldn't 'elp bustin' out."
"All right, all right. And now I want you to meet my
wife, Mrs. Preening. She's from "Sydney, and she hasn't been
out here more than a few weeks, so I want you to make her
feel at home out West."


They shook hands with the young, pretty woman.. Then
Smiley said: "I'm sorry I scared 'em orf, Mxs. Preening. I
couldn't 'elp meself, and I didn't know they was goin' to
mizzle off."
" Don't worry," she smiled. " There are plenty more times
to watch the brolgahs dance. Isn't that so, George?"
" Oh, yes," replied the overseer. " They come for water
every evening, and you never know when they'll start danc-
ing. Now, you two lads, you'd better get back to the huts.
So long."
" So long, mister."
" So long."
They returned to find the shearers squatting on the veran-
dah and telling yarns. Nearly all of them were dirty stories,
and though the boys did not understand a lot of them, they
giggled- and winked at each other whenever the crowd
laughed.
" Well," grunted Jimmy the Boss at last, " I'm orf to rosy-
red. Good-night, you coves." He paused at the sight of the
boys. " You kid's better unroll your nap, too. Gotter be
up early. Good-night."
Though there was only the thickness of a blanket between
them and the verandah boards, the two tilled boys before
long forgot the hardness of their bed and were soon asleep.
CHAPTER FOURTEEN
Excitement woke the b.oys at dawn, and they whispered
till sunrise, when the cook came stamping out of his hut to
start breakfast preparations. Over at the homestead several
jackeroos and station hands appeared. The horses and cows
were brought in. the horses were saddled, the cows were
bailed up and milked.
The two boys went over to the yard and watched two of
the station hands squirting milk into the buckets. This soon
bored them, so they turned their attention to the scores of
crows that were already collecting to squawk around the
yards in search of food.
" Betcher I can 'it one o' them crows with a gibber," chal-
lenged Smiley.


"Betcher," replied Blue.
But none of the stones hit a crow and all they did was to
scare the birds into a fortissimo of croaking.
" Gee, that's a big mob of jumbucks," remarked Smiley as
they turned their attention to the ten thousand sheep that
were packed in the paddocks and yards surrounding the
shearing shed. "I never seen so many since drovers
brought the big mob through town last Christmas."
"Aw, there's bigger mobs than this ole mob,'' replied the
redhead. "A cove was tellin' me there's a station up Clon-
curry way that's got a million sheep on it."
" Gawn!"
" Betcher!"
" Betcher!"
Further argument was prevented by the breakfast bell,
which sent the boys scampering over to the huts.
"Gee, this is bonzer tucker," muttered Smiley, gobbling
down the chops and eggs and new, hot, scone-like damper.
" Too right! It's better'n a bloke gits at 'ome."
" You betcher life!"
They were still eating when the others had finished.
" Hi, you couple of gxeedy-guts!" called Jimmy the Boss.
" Come on and get down to work. They want you out in the
yards. Come on,. get a move on!"
"But I thought we was goin' to work in the shed," said
Smiley.
" Not to-day. Most of the station hands is still out muster-
ing, so you'll have to work in the yards for a day or two.
Come on, or I'll toe you in the backside!"
They ran out to the yards, where work had already begun.
A station hand took them in charge.
" You gotter keep pushin' them jumbucks through the
draftin' gate," he told them.
"But I ain't no good at pushin' jumbucks." protested
Smiley, who resented having to work under the scorching
sun when he expected to be inside the cool shed.
" Then you'll flamin' well 'ave to learn. See what we're
doin'? We're puttin' the jumbucks through the gate, and
they're bein' drafted —ewes on one side and wethers on the
other."
The boys saw that several drafting gates were in operation.
On the rails above each sat a drafter who swung the gate to
left or right, according to the sex of the sheep that arrived


at the head of a single line that was formed by driving the
animals through a narrow passage between the fences.
" You'll 'ave to yell like mad and scare 'em along," advised
the station hand. " I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll give you a
lend of Mick. 'E's an old dawg, but 'e knows 'is job, and
'e'll be all right if you don't make 'im work too 'ard-."
He whistled, and the old sheep-dog came running up, pant-
ing eagerly at the prospect of working on the sheep.
"All right, git along,' said the station hand. " I'm goin'
into the next yard to 'elp with the draftin' there. And see
you keep pushin' 'em up."
It was fairly easy while the yard was full, but as soon as
the scared sheep emptied a score of their number through
the drafting gate, the rest were more difficult to control. The
boys shouted and the dog barked hoarsely, urging the ani-
mals towards the gate —and all the time the dust rose in
clouds and settled in the eyes and throats of the youngsters.
At last the yard was empty, and immediately the mustex-
ers poured in another hundred sheep to be drafted.
" Jee-hos-o-fat! I'm thirsty!" panted Smiley.
" Same' ere!" muttered Blue through parched lips.
" There's a waterbag." Smiley ran to the bulging canvas
bag that was slung from a corner post. Rapid evaporation
had made its contents icy cold.
" Whatter you want?" called the station hand from the
next yard. " Why don't you git on with them sheep?"
" Can I 'ave a drink o' water, mister?"
"All right. But remember, water makes you weak."
" Yairs, mister. Thanks, mister."
Smiley pulled out the cork and put the porcelain mouth-
piece to his lips. He tipped the bag, and the cold- water
flooded his mouth and throat, washing away the dust and
dryness in a long, cool draught. When he could hold his
breath no longer, he lowered the bag and sighed, "Gee, that's
bonzer!"
" My turn!" Blue grabbed the bag and tipped it high.
" Hey!" called the station hand. " Remember what I told
you. Water makes you weak."
The boys took another quick swig before returning to their
job. Fifteen minutes later Smiley said, " I'm thirsty again.
I'm goin' to 'ave another go at the waterbag."
" 'E says water makes you weak," Blue reminded him.
" Gawn, that's a snake yarn."


While the station hand was not looking, Smiley slipped
over to the bag and took another swig. Blue did the same
thing a few minutes later. After repeating this performance
half a dozen times, the boys felt bloated with the pints of
liquid they had swallowed. They did not drink all that
water because they were really thirsty, but because they
wanted to wash away the patched, dusty taste on their
tongues and in their throats. Once they got a mouthful of
the icy water they could not resist swallowing a pint before
putting down the bag.
'T feel a bit crook," complained Smiley. " It's just in me
stummick."
"Same 'ere," replied the redhead. "It must be sunstroke."
" That's right, it's sunstroke," agreed the other boy, but
they both knew very well what the cause was and they re-
fused to admit it.
A thunderbolt of profanity startled them so much that
they jumped. They turned to see the station hand shaking
the waterbag while he cursed.
"Empty! Drunk the flamin' lot!" he shouted at intervals
between savage and indecent phrases. " Those cows drunk
the flamin' lot!" He hurled the bag at the boys. " Fill the
flamin' thing, you pair of silly cows! I oughter give you a
kick up the jeer!"
Smiley snatched up the bag, and the boys hurried to the
big corrugated iron tank that stood beside the shearing shed.
" 'E's got 'is shirt orf orl right," muttered Blue.
They could understand the man's annoyance at discover-
ing that the bag was empty. They knew that there was
nothing more disappointing than approaching a waterbag
with the intention of slaking a midsummer thirst, and then
finding the bag dry.
They filled the bag with lukewarm water from the tank,
carried it back and slung it over the post. By this time the
station hand had calmed down because he had found another
waterbag elsewhere and had quenched his fierce thirst, but
he still grumbled at the boys and threatened all kinds of
horrible punishments if they were not more considerate in
future.
Smiley and Blue soon became thirsty again, especially as
the old dog went panting into a shady corner and refused to
help them any more. But the boys dared not go near the
waterbag, and their tongues were almost hanging out when


the bell rang for smoke-oh.
Cakes and biscuits were handed out during the half-hour
rest, and these accompanied by pannikins of tea revived the
boys more than the waterbag would have done.
Then back again to work for another two hours, an hour's
break for dinner, two more hours of sun and sweat, another
half-hour's smoke-oh, and then the last two hours of work to
complete the eight-hour day.
The boys were exhausted by the time it was all over.
Ready to drop, they wandered over to a gidyea tree near the
huts and lay down in the shade to wait for tea.
" I I had a million quid," said Smiley. " Then I'd
buy ten million jumbucks and make the boss push 'em
through the draftin' gate every day for a year."
" Too right," Blue agreed. "And all the ole boss would
'ave to drink 'd be 'ot water in 'is waterbag."
"And that station 'and cove, too," added his companion.
" I 'ope 'e gits sunstroke."
" Gee, I'm 'ungry!"
" So'm I!"
After a pause, Smiley said: " I wisht we was in the shearin
shed. We're sweated labour, that's what we are."
" Wot?"
" Sweated la'bour. It means they sweat yer till yer drop."
" Too right," agreed Blue. " It's excxooshinatin'."
" Gee, I'm 'ungry."
" Gee, so'm I!"
There followed a long drowsy silence, suddenly shattered
by the rattle of the bell for tea. The boys leapt up and
raced to the huts.
After tea they were about to sit on the verandah again
and listen to the shearers' yarns, when a jackeroo came over
from the homestead and- said, " Hi, you two kids, the over-
seer wants to see you. Come on."
Wondering what it was all about, they followed him over
to the house. Mr. and Mrs. Preening were lounging on the
verandah in squatters' chairs.
The overseer greeted the boys, then turned to his wife:
" Well, here they are. I hope you can manage to entertain
them."
The youngsters did not know that Mrs. Preening had de-
cided that the influence of the shearers on these nice boys
would not be good for them, and so she proposed to invite


them over to the homestead each evening so that they could
enjoy themselves in a more refined atmosphere.
"Are you lads fond of music?" she asked.-
"Aw, I dunno," Smiley replied.
" Same 'ere," answered Blue.
" Come inside and we'll have a sing-song."
They accompanied her into the drawing-room and the
overseer followed with an expression of mingled amusement
and curiosity.
" Sit down and make yourselves at home," Mrs. Preening
invited.
The boys perched themselves uncomfortably on the edge
of the settee, while she went across to the new piano. She
played "My Old Kentucky Home " and urged them to sing,
but they only grinned at each other and shuffled their feet
in embarrassment. She played "Annie Laurie" but still they
were silent. The overseer sat puffing at his pipe and smiling
broadly.
In desperation, Mrs. Preening said, " Well, what song
would you like to sing? What's your favourite song,
Smiley?"
"Aw, gee," he replied, " I s'pose it's ' Waltzin' Matilda '!"
" 4 Waltzing Matilda '?. I've heard it, but I don't remem-
ber the tune. How does it go? Come on, both of you, sing
it to me and I'll learn the tune in a jiffy."
At first they would not respond, but she finally persuaded
the pair to sing:
Once a jolly swagman came to a billabong,
Under the shade of a coolabah tree,
And he sang as he watched and waited till his billy boiled,
" Who'll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?"
She soon picked up the air, and before the end of the song
she had them bawling each chorus at the top of their voices:
Waltzing Matilda, Waltzing Matilda,
Who'll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?
And he sang as he watched and waited till his billy boiled,
" Who'll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?"
When they finished she said: " That's fine! Do you know
any more?"
" I know one," replied Smiley eagerly. 44 It's called, 4 Yore
blind, you fool, you silly old fool.' "


Mrs. Preening looked surprised. " That's a funny name for
song."
" Well, it ain't its real name. I dunno its real name. But
I've 'eard coves singin' it, and that's what I call it."
" Well, let's hear how it goes?"
Smiley sang in his shrill voice:
When I came 'ome last night,
My darling wife to see,
I saw a 'at upon the rac\,
Where my 'at oughter be.
" Oh, that's quite funny," Mrs. Preening laughed. " Well,
I think I know the tune now, so let's have it again and we'll
go right through the song."
So Smiley sang:
When I came 'ome last night,
My darling wife to see,
I saw a 'at upon the rac\,
Where my 'at oughter be.
I said unto my wifie,
" Now come and tell to me,
Whose is that 'at upon the rac\
Where my 'at ought to be?"
" Yore blind, you fool, you silly old fool,
Yore blind, you cannot see,
That is the fancy chamber that
Me mother gave to me!"
Mrs. Preening's fingers struck a discord as she turned a
shocked- face to the boys. Mr. Preening burst into a roar of
laughter*.
You asked for it! 'he cried as he rolled in his chair 11 I'm
sorry, darling, but you asked for it!"
I don t think we'll have any more singing to-night," she
said stiffly. " I think you boys ought to go to bed."
As they walked towards the huts they could still hear the
overseer's laughter behind them.
She went crook on us," remarked Smiley ruefully.
Any'ow, said Blue, " she asked us to give 'er a bit of
a song."
Do you think she'll ask us to go over again'"
" I dunno. I 'ope she don't."
" Same 'ere."


Relieved to be free of feminine influence, they went back
happily to listen to the shearers' dirty stories.
Next day was as hot as ever, and the sun struck fiercely
at the boys as soon as it came over the edge of the gidyea
plain. They went grumbling back to the yards with thoughts
of mutiny because they were not allowed to work in the
shearing shed. But Smiley knew that a protest might get
him in wrong with the overseer and he might be sacked.
Then what chance would he have of getting money for his
bike? So he went back to the dust and heat, with Blue
working gamely beside him.
During the morning smoke-oh someone ran in and said: " I
think there's goin' to be a ram fight. There's a couple of 'em
in the paddock lookin' as if they're goin' to 'ave a stoush."
Everybody ran out to look. A score of huge rams stood
in one corner of their special paddock, watching two of their
number stamping and snorting and threatening each other
with their heavy, curved horns as they stood a few feet apart.
Suddenly the horns met with a low, dull crash, and the
fight was on.
The rams turned slowly, and each retreated a couple of
yards. Turning again, they charged and this time the noise
of the impact was louder and sharper. They retreated again,
still further apart, and charged again. Crash!
•' Gee, they'll bust their 'eads in!" exclaimed Smiley.
"Not them!" laughed one of the shearers. "You gotter
'ave an axe to bust in a ram's 'ead."
"And it's no good tryin' to stop 'em stoushin'," said another
shearer. "I once seen a blackfeller try to stop a ram
fight by runnin' in between 'em and shoutin' like mad, and
they didn't take no notice, but they bashed into 'im and broke
'is flamin' leg."
" Yore kiddin', ain't you?" suggested Smiley.
"Not on yore life. You just go and try and stop them
rams yoreself!"
But Smiley preferred to watch. By this time the animals
had retreated again, even further apart than they were at
the beginning of their previous joust. As if someone had
given a signal, they started off simultaneously and charged
with lowered heads.
Crash! The sound of the impact echoed throughout the
paddocks and the dust rose over the scene of the battle. Both
contestants, now somewhat dazed, turned more slowly to


retreat even further —about thirty yards this time.
" Will those ole rams stoush orl night?" asked Blue of a
nearby shearer.
"Aw, no, nothin' like that. They just keep on buttin' till
one of 'em gets fed up and mizzles off."
The massive bodies hurled themselves forward, gathering
speed and momentum at every step. Each spectator held
his breath in anticipation of the ultimate collision.
Crash! It was a sound both exciting and sickening, like
the thud of a heavyweight's glove on the heart of an oppon-
ent. The men began to bet on the result, and the excitement
grew as the rams retreated still further.
" Even money on the field!" »
"A quid on the far one!"
"A quid on the near one!"
" Even money the field!"
Crash! But still the contest was undecided, and the com-
batants retreated once more.
" Even money the field!"
" Two quid this one wins!"
Smiley turned to one of the men who was laying evens,
and he asked: " Could I 'ave a bet, mister?"
" 'Ow much? A thousand- quid?"
Everyone laughed at this retort —everyone but Smiley,
who said eagerly, " I'm goin' to git three quid when we finish
shearin' and I'll bet you a quid the far one wins."
"Aw, you're only a kid, and you don't want to go losin'
your dough bettin' on ram fights."
" But I wanter 'ave a bet," pleaded the boy. " I'll pay you
if I lose —dinkum, I will."
" Well, 'ave tenbobsworth if you like. What one did you
say?"
" The far one, mate. Ten bob on the far one."
" I'll take you on."
Smiley sat petrified with suspense as the rams charged.
Crash! Still there was no result, and once more the ani-
mals turned and trotted back into position—now almost fifty
yards apart.
Unexpectedly, a jackeroo came galloping into the paddock,
shouting as he swung a long menacing stockwhip. The lash
caught one of the fighting rams on the rump, but it could not
bite through the long wool into the flesh, so the animal
ignored it and charged. The rider swung the whip again,


and again the lash sank ineffectively into the wool.
Crash! While the rams stood dazed for a moment, the lash
struck one on the nose. It turned and bolted towards the
mob. The whip flicked again, stinging the second ram
between the eyes. It jerked back its head, turned, and ran
into the mob.
The shearers shouted and jeered at the jackeroo because
he had spoiled their fun. He returned the abuse as he can-
tered back to the station with the knowledge that the rams,
once separated, would not fight any more that day at least.
Smiley was annoyed. " That flamin' cove stopped me
from winnin' ten flamin' bob," he told Blue. " I wisht 'e'd got
chucked off 'is 'orse and ripped 'is guts out!"
" But the other jumbuck mighter won. You never know."
"Aw!" was Smiley's disgusted reply.
Somebody said, " Toss you for the dough I 'ad on the ram?"
In a few minutes the shearers were spinning pennies to
decide the possession of the money that had been laid on the
ram fight. /
" I'm goin' to toss for mine," Smiley informed Blue.
"Aw, gee, you might lose."
" Not on yore life!" He approached the shearer with whom
he had made the bet. " Toss you for me ten bob, mister?"
"All right, cobber." The penny spun in the air. What
is it?"
" Heads!"
They bent over the coin that fell into the dust.
" Heads! Heads it is!" shouted the boy, leaping with ex-
citement. " You owe me ten bob!"
"All right, all right, kid. Don't get excited. You might
as well take the dough now." The shearer pulled a ten-
shilling note out of his pocket and handed it to the delighted
boy. " You're a lucky little beggar," he added with a grin.
" I'll tell you what I'll do—l'll toss you double or quits."
"Aw, no thanks," replied Smiley, hugging the money.
" Not if you don't mind."
"All right, you win," laughed the shearer. "And mind you
don't spend it all in one pub!"
Smiley was happy for the rest of the day. Heat, dust, flies,
they did not matter a bit so long as he could occasionally put
his hand in his pocket and feel the ten shilling note.
When he lay down under his blanket that night he was
suddenly seized with the fear that somebody might sneak up


and steal the money while he was asleep. He knew Blue
would not do anything like that, but he suspected any one
of the shearers might try to pinch the note out of his trouser
pocket, even though he slept in his trousers.
So he waited till Blue was asleep, and then he rolled out
of his blanket and stepped silently down off the verandah.
Sneaking past the huts, he slipped through the pony fence
into the horse paddock. The tightly strung wires rang
sweetly like the strings of a harp. Smiley paused, wondering
if the noise had awakened anybody, but the night remained
silent.
There was no moon, but the stars were so bright that he
could vaguely distinguish the track worn down by the horses
when going in to water. He pattered along the horse-pad,
making for the nearest clump of boree trees.
A huge shape suddenly leaped across his path, and the
boy stood petrified till he realized that it was only an old
man kangaroo that was snooping around before going to the
homestead trough fox water. The animal thumped off into
the darkness, and Smiley went on.
He looked for a tree that would be easily identified in day-
light. On entering the boree scrub, he chose the third tree
on the right. Scrambling up its trunk, he pulled out the
note and thrust it tightly into a fork. He descended and re-
turned to the huts.
While sneaking back on to his blanket, he heard Blue
whisper: " Where you been?"
" I been seein' a bloke about a dawg," he replied.
" No, you ain't. You been over in the 'orse paddock. I
seen you."
" You mind yore own business," muttered Smiley, annoyed
that he had been spotted, even by his friend.
"You been up to somethin'," accused the redhead in a
louder voice.
" If you don't shut yore mouth you'll be up to yore eyes
in cowdung," snapped Smiley.
" Gawn! Yore a big skite!"
Another voice broke in. " For Gawd's sake shut your gob!
We want to go to sleep!" called a shearer from the darkness
of the huts.
" What's all the flamin' row about?" shouted somebody
else.
" Some silly coot's makin' a row," replied the first voice.


" Who are you callin' a silly coot?" retorted a third shearer
in tones both annoyed and sleepy.
"Aw, shut your gob!"
" What!" *
" For Gawd's sake!"
The babble increased as all the men were awakened in
turn by the shouting and arguing. One of the shearers got
out of his bunk and threw hisjboots over the partition into
the next hut. They were returned with interest, and the
clatter increased.
Meanwhile the two boys sat up and listened to the row
with both amusement and trepidation.
" Gee!" murmured Smiley. " Gee, they got their wool orf
orl right!"
A fight started inside, and soon the combatants came out
on to the verandah, where they swung wildly at each other
in the starlight. By this time the whole place was awake,
and the shearers crowded round noisily while someone lit
an oil lamp and held it up so that everyone could see the
brawl. The fighters stumbled off the verandah into the yard,
and the onlookers followed their progress. But the two boys
remained on the verandah, still bewildered by the commo-
tion they had caused.
" Hi!" shouted a big, imperative voice. " Stop this blasted
stoushin' and get back to bed!"
It was Jimmy the Boss. He burst through the ring of
spectators and thrust himself between the brawlers. They
fell back panting, and, while the onlookers muttered their
disappointment, the combatants exchanged curses.
Get back to bed.' repeated the boss, and everybody shuf-
fled towards the huts. " Get back to bed and stay there. If
any of youse makes any more row to-night I'll give you
the sack."
Everybody settled down at last, and the night became
peaceful once more.
. Struth!" murmured Smiley. " That was excitin', wasn't
11 .
" Yairs," yawned Blue. " I thought we was goin' to git
stoushed."
" It's yore fault."
" Dicken on," replied the redhead sleepily. "I gotter git
some sleep. Good-night."
" Aw . . . good-night."


CHAPTER FIFTEEN
Next morning the boys set to work in the shed, where
fifteen shearers were lined along the board. Power from a
pock-pock-pocking oil engine outside was transmitted to a
shaft that ran the whole length of the shed, and flexible
cables from this shaft ended in the shears—sharp cutters
oscillating rapidly over steel combs.
Padding across the board in his soft shoes, a shearer en-
tered the opposite pen, grabbed a sheep around its neck with
the left arm and, with a thrust of his right hand against
its rump, pushed it down on to its tail. Then, with arms
around its body just behind the forelegs, he hauled the ani-
mal across to his place on the board.
A touch on the handpiece, and the cutters whirred. Off
with the topknot, a bit of fluffy wool on the forehead. Off
with the belly wool, a poor and dirty patch. Then the real
work began—the job of taking off the whole fleece without
breaking it.
Starting with the near hind leg, the man drove his shears
into the heavy wool, which fell away clean and white. The
shears swept round the body all up the near side till the
sheep lookd- like a man with his coat half off. Then a twist
of the animal's body and the " long blow," sweet, straight
strokes from tail to neck, rolling off the wool in waves of
whiteness till the last few strands were cut and the fleece
lay curled on the boajd.
The shorn sheep was thrust through a little gate behind
the shearer, and it skipped into a pen, looking as undressed
and uncomfortable as a man caught in public in his under-
clothes.
Smiley and Blue had two main jobs. To pick up the
topknots, belly wool, and other scraps and droppings, for
which purpose each was given a broom.
To bring the antiseptic tar and daub it on the wound
whenever the shears slipped and cut a sheep, especially the
old ewes whose wrinkled skin could not be observed until
the thrusting shears had removed not only the wool but
pieces of skin as well.


So they padded up and down the board, sweeping up the
scraps, picking up the belly wool, and hurrying along with
the bucket whenever any shearer shouted, " Tax!" It was
steady work, not half so tiring as working in the yards,
though towards the end of the afternoon their backs ached
from the constant bending.
Smiley was fascinated by Hogg, the shearer on No. 1 stand.
He was the ringer—the fastest man in the team, the one
who earned the biggest money. The speed at which he
could rip off a fleece was xemarkable to see, though he some-
times broke them up a bit and he certainly cut his sheep
more than anyone else. But he did not break his fleeces
badly enough to warrant complaint, and as he did not cut
his sheep too often, his mistakes were overlooked.
On the long blow, with his left knee holding down the
sheep while his shears swept from tail to neck, he would
often brush back his hair with his left hand and wink at
the admiring boy. Hogg was conceited about his good looks,
his bright silk shirt in red and white stxipes (the others wore
grey or khaki) and his skill as a shearer. He did not like to
see Smiley sometimes turn from him to watch old Motty
the veteran of the team.
Motty was one of the few left over from the old hand-
shearing days, before the power-driven shears wexe
invented. Somehow he had managed to survive the change-
over and learnt to use the new shears with enough speed
and skill to get himself into a team of younger, faster men.
Though he lacked their speed, he was equal to them in
stamina, and he was a far better shearer when it came to
taking a fleece off clean and intact. He never cut a sheep
and he never broke a fleece. Smiley watched with delight
the way each fleece lay curled on the board, in perfect posi-
tion for the hands of the picker-up.
The old man grinned at him occasionally. It was not like
Hogg's grin of conceit, but a friendly, encouraging one.
" Gee, you don't never want tar," commented Smiley
towards the end of the final shift. " Yore kind to yore ole
sheep."
" It's just my way o' doin' things," replied Motty.
Hogg overheard and was annoyed. " You do 'em flamin'
slow," he snapped.
The old chap just grinned and went on with his work. The *
ringer's annoyance took his mind off the job, and he let the


shears slip, gashing his sheep badly in the leg.
" You clumsy bastard!" shouted the boss of the board, who
happened to look down and see what had happened. " Tar!
Hi, Smiley, tar!"
The boy ran up and dabbed at the wound.
" It's yore flamin' fault for gabbin' at me while I'm
workin'!" stormed Hogg.
" No, he wasn't," corrected old Motty, straightening up
The ringer's handpiece clattered to the floor, and the
released, half-shorn sheep scrambled up, breaking the fleece.
Hogg advanced on Motty. " I'll shut your flamin' gob for
you!" he shouted.
Jimmy the Boss ran between them. "No fightin' on the
board," he said, pushing the ringer back to his stand. " And
I'll have to dock one off your tally for cuttin' your sheep like
that and then lettin' it go and breakin' the fleece. Come on,
get that jumbuck and finish shearin' it."
Hogg muttered abuse through his teeth as he returned to
work.
Blue snatched a moment to slip up to Smiley and say: " I
thought there was goin' to be a stoush."
" Same 'ere. Anyway, I never done nothin', but 'e picks
on me. It's a flamin' cow, it is!"
A few minutes later the knock-off bell sounded, and the
shearers went out into the yard to watch the tally being
taken on each pen, because their earnings for the day de-
pended on the number they had shorn. Smiley and Blue
also went out to look, and they saw that Hogg continued to
glower at old Motty from time to time as both men checked
the count.
" Looks as if there's goin' to be a bit of a stoush any'ow,"
remarked Smiley to his friend. " That flakin' ringer's got 'is
wool orf all right."
" 'E's been takin' it orf all day!" Blue chuckled at his own
joke.
The count over, the shearers entered the shed again and
walked to the door that opened on to the huts. The boys
kept close to the ringer as Hogg followed Motty out of the
shed. The ringer grabbed the old man by the shoulder and
spun him round.
" I'll shut your gob for you!" he snapped.
" Gawn, you're a big skite!" retorted Motty.
The ringer swung at him, and Motty failed to duck soon


enough. Hogg's fist caught him between the eyes and sent
him reeling back against a bale of wool. Dazed and in pain,
the old man was vaguely conscious that Hogg was rushing
towards him with swinging fists. Motty's hand closed round
the handle of a wool-hook, a curved and pointed piece of
steel used for handling the bales.
" Look out!" shouted one of the crowd who had come run-
ning to see the scrap.
Motty lurched sideways and swung the hook. It caught
Hogg on the shoulder, bit through shirt and skin, and ripped
a deep gash through flesh and muscle. The ringer screamed
and staggered away, clutching at his torn shoulder as the
blood gushed out.
A youth—one of the rouseabouts of the shearing team —
ran up shouting, " Cut it out, Motty!"
The old man, crazy with excitement, struck out with
the hook and scored a bloody streak down the rouseabout's
cheek. The next moment he was overpowered by two
shearers, who wrenched the hook from his hand and bent
him back over the bale of wool. Motty panted and struggled
for a few seconds —then relaxed.
" I never done nothin' to nobody," he muttered. " It's all
that flamin' skite's fault. I never done nothin'."
"Now you take a pull on yourself," advised one of the
shearers.
" I'm all right," he told them. " I never meant to do
nothin', but that skite made me. Let me go, mates."
So they released him. In the meantime the others were
attending to the injured men. There seemed to be blood
everywhere—blood from the ringer's shoulder and the rouse-
about's face, blood dripping into the dust and making little
dull red cakes.
Preening, the overseer, soon arrived with his first-aid kit
and dealt efficiently with the wounds, staunching the flow
of blood and bandaging the two men with expert speed.
"You'll have to go to Murrumbilla and see the doctor," he
told them. " One of the jackeroos is getting the car out.
Come on."
After he had sent them off to hospital he conducted an
inquiry into the brawl. Every one of the shearers agreed that
Hogg had been the agressor and deserved all he got. As for
the rouseabout, that was just a bit of hard luck, because old
Motty did not realise that the young chap did not intend to


attack him.
Everybody was on the old man's side.
Motty himself was pale, shaky, and contrite. " I didn't
mean to stoush nobody," he explained in an unsteady voice.
" Hogg came up and cracked me one, and I dunno what
'appened after that. Dinkum, I don't. I'm flamin' sorry
about the other cove, but I thought 'e was goin' to stoush
me, too."
"All right, all right," said the overseer. " Well, you've jig-
gered up a couple of the team, so I'll have to see if I can get
substitutes."
" I can get a good shearer from Murrumbilla to-morrow,"
Jimmy the Boss told him, " but I dunno about a rouseabout."
" Oh, well, it doesn't matter so much about the rouse-
about. It's the shearer we want. Come back to the home-
stead and talk it over."
Next morning Smiley was promoted. As no picker-up was
available at short notice, Preening decided to give the boy
a chance.
" He seems a bright lad," he said to Jimmy the Boss, " so
try him at picking up. See that he doesn't break too many
fleeces."
" He's sure to bust 'em for a bit," replied the boss. " Pickin'
up isn't a thing you can learn in a couple of shakes of a
lamb's tail."
Smiley was excited to hear the news. He had watched
the other pickers-up at work and he felt sure he could do
the job easily enough, so he was slightly offended when the
boss told him to take instructions from one of the other
rouseabouts.
" Take 'old of the two sides like this, and bend 'em round
like this, so's you can pick up the 'ole fleece in one go. Now
come along to the table."
The picker-up walked down the board to the long wool
table, around which the classer and his men stood waiting.
" Now chuck it like thisj" he told the boy. "Up 'igh and
out, so's it falls down like a flamin' tablecloth. O' course
you wouldn't savee w T hat a tablecloth was. I s'pose you put
papers on your table at 'ome.
Everybody laughed at this. Smiley's laugh was somewhat
forced, because the rouseabout had come nearer the truth
than he suspected.
The man threw the fleece with a smooth outward thrust


of the hands. It unfolded in the air and dropped gently on
to the table. The classer's men plucked off the burrs and
daggs while the classer examined the fibre for strength,
amount of yolk, and other factors which determined its
quality.
" Come on, Smiley, yore go now," the rouseabout said.
Smiley returned to the board and stood in front of a
shearer who was just finishing a sheep. A few last strokes,
and the fleece lay on the board. The boy caught and folded-
it round as he had seen the others do, and he carried it to
the table.
" 'Ere she comes!" he told them, and threw.
The fleece spread in the air, hung for a moment over the
table, then broke in the middle. One half flew down the
table and the other half remained in the boy's hands.
" You hung on too flamin' long," explained the classer.
" It muster been a rotten fleece," retorted Smiley.
"It was a bonzer fleece. Don't go makin' excuses. Go and
get another and be more careful this time. And remember,
every time you break a fleece you break the boss's heart.
And if you break his heart too often he'll break his flamin'
toe against your backside. Now get on with it."
The boy tried again, and again the fleece broke. This
time Jimmy the Boss saw the damage, and he cursed Smiley
at some length.
" Gee, 'e's gittin' wild with you," muttered Blue to Smiley
when the boy returned down the board for another fleece.
"Aw, it ain't fair. A cove's gotter learn."
" I'm glad I ain't pickin' up."
" You'll be pickin' yoreself up if you don't shut yore gob!"
snapped his annoyed companion. "Anyway, I ain't beat yet."
His next throw was almost perfect, and the fleece fell
intact on the board. The classer and his men gave a roaring
cheer, and Smiley grinned delightedly. His regained confi-
dence, combined with a little experience, caused him to
throw fleeces thereafter with moderate skill and, though he
broke one occasionally, he made a satisfactory job of it on
the whole.
When the overseer came in just before dinner time to ask
for a progress report, Smiley grinned to hear Jimmy the
Boss say, " The kid's all right. He's got the makin's of a
good picker-up."
The boy worked well for most of the afternoon, but


towards the end of the day he became tired and careless.
Even while the boss was watching he broke three fleeces in
succession.
" Hi, cut that out!" snapped Jimmy the boss.
Remembering what the boss had said to the overseer,
Smiley grinned somewhat impudently and retorted, " Don't
blame me, boss. Blame the flamin' fleeces."
While the man glowered at him, Smiley returned to the
board, picked up another fleece and carried it to the table.
Nonchalantly he flicked his hands, and the fleece split from
side to side.
Jimmy the Boss stepped down and grabbed him by the
scruff of the neck. He booted Smiley three times in the
rear, and the boy yelled: " Ow, lemme go!"
The boss suddenly felt a bang in the ribs, and he swmng
round to see Blue facing him with clenched fists and blazing
eyes.
"You leave me cobber alone!" shouted the redhead. The
whole shed roared with laughter.
" Oh, so you're lookin' for a kick in the grummet, too?"
The boss released Smiley and grabbed Blue, giving him a
couple of bone-shaking kicks. " Now get back to your jobs,
both of you. And if I hear any more of your lip I'll knock
your flamin' teeth in! Gawn, get back to your work!"
Rubbing their aching sterns and muttering revenge, the
boys shuffled away.
After work was over they discussed reprisals in greater
detail.
" I'm goin' to kill 'im," said Smiley.
" I'm goin' to torture 'im."
Smiley thought over Blue's plan and decided it was the
better one —slow, horrible torture that would end in death.
They discussed the tortures they had read about in books.
"We could give 'im the water cure. You know, stick a
funnel in 'is gob and pour down a bucket o' water."
"We could give 'im that Chinese one. Stick a file between
'is teeth and tie 'is jaws together and pull the file in and out."
" What about roastin' 'im alive over a fire and then givin'
'im to the crows?"
" We could rope 'im to the fence and let the crows pick 'is
eyes out."
But in the end they decided that none of these ideas was
feasible. They had to find some method that could be car-


ried out without having to capture the man by physical force,
some secret method that would ensure their not being identi-
fied with the punishment.
" We could put a snake in 'is bunk," suggested Smiley.
" Or some scorpions and centipedes."
" Some bulldog ants'd sting 'im all over."
They finally decided on ants—a whole tinful of big red
ants to be emptied under the boss's blanket just before he
went to bed.
That was what they decided before tea. After they had
eaten an enormous meal they felt so pleasantly tired that
they were inclined to postpone their revenge.
"We might go lookin' all over the flakin' place and not
come across any flakin' ants that'd sting 'im," said Blue.
" That's right," agreed his friend. "And I'm tired as
billy-oh. What say we don't do no torturin' to-night?"
" Too right."
The boys lay in the cool of a gidyea tree, while Smiley
talked of what he was going to do when he got his bicycle.
" I got one pound one-and-ten saved up, and I'm goin' to git
three quid when shearin's finished. That makes four pound
one-and-ten. The ole bike's only three-pound-ten, so I'll 'ave
some dough over."
" I could git a bike if I 'ad another ten bob," said the
redhead.
" Why don't you? Then we could be biking cobbers and
ride millions o' miles."
"Aw, I dunno. I think I'll git a pony with me dough."
" Gawn!" snorted Smiley. "A pony ain't no flamin' use."
" Too right it is! A pony can go where a bike can't go.
You can't ride a bike through the bush."
"Betcher!"
"Betcher!"
" Betcher I can ride me bike anywhere," said Smiley.
" Betcher couldn't ride yore old bike through sand." chal-
lenged Blue. "And betcher couldn't ride it over them gib-
bers near the 'orspital."
"Aw, yore gab's excrooshinatin'!"
"And so's yore face!"
In a couple of seconds they were wrestling on the ground,
rolling in the dust, each trying to kneel on the other.
"Hi! What's this?" Strong hands tore them apart, and they
looked up to see Preening, the overseer. " There's too much


fighting going on around here. Why don't you expend your
energy on something more enjoyable? Would you like to go
swimming?"
"Yairs, Mr. Preening."
" Too right, Mr. Preening. But there ain't no crick to go
swimmin' in. The cricks and water'oles is all dried up with
the drought, ain't they?"
" Yes, but my tank is pretty full. I came across tp see if
you lads would like a swim in the tank."
They accepted delightedly, and Smiley added, " I s'pose
we'll 'ave to swim in our pants, I s'pose?"
" Oh, no. You can swim in nothing at all if you like. There
won't be any ladies watching. But don't stay in too long.
I'll give you half-an-hour. Then you've got to come back and
go to bed."
Five minutes later they were splashing about in the tank.
The cool water washed away the dust and refreshed their
tired bodies.
Dusk came soon, then darkness, and they walked drowsily
back to the huts, where they lay down to enjoy a deep, un-
broken sleep.
CHAPTER SIXTEEN
"If you don't speckerlate you won't accumerlate. If you
don't speckerlate you wont accumerlate."
Blue heard his friend muttering these mysterious words
from time to time as he went about his work of picking up
the fleeces. A week at the job had made Smiley compara-
tively efficient —at least efficient enough to allow him to
think of other subjects while he padded up and down the
board.
"If you don't speckerlate you won't accumerlate," he
repeated.
" Whatter you gabbin' about?" inquired Blue.
" Jist thinkin'," replied Smiley as he walked off with a
fleece. When he came back the redhead said: " You sound
potty."
" Orl right, you wait and- see if I'm potty."
At smoke-oh, Smiley confided in his friend: " I know 'ow


I can make some more dough."
" Gawn!"
"Fair dinkum, I do. If you don't speckerlate you won't
accumerlate. That's what the coves say when they're playin'
two-up."
" Gee, you ain't goin' to play two-up, are you?" replied his
shocked companion. I *
" I dunno. I might."
"You'll git pinched."
"Aw, dicken on. The shearers play every evenin' round
the back of the 'uts, don't they? Besides, there ain't no police
around this station."
" You might lose all yore dough."
" I ain't goin' to bet all me dough."
" Well," replied Blue in disgust, " I think yore potty. Yore
doin' all this hard yakker for three flamin' weeks for three
quid, and yore goin' to do in all yore flamin' dough at
two-up."
"I tell you I ain't goin' to bet all me dough!" retorted
Smiley angrily. " You know that ten bob I won off the
shearer? Well, I'm goin' to 'ave a go with that."
"Aw, that ain't so bad. Even if you lose, you'll still 'ave
enough for yore bike."
" But I ain't goin' to lose. I'm lucky."
So that evening after work Smiley ran out to the tree and
got his ten shilling note down out of the fork. After tea he
joined the group of shearers who gathered behind the huts
to play two-up. One man held the kip, a flat piece of wood on
which he placed two pennies, one heads up, the other tails up,
He bet the rest even money he could- toss them so that both
coins came down heads. If they fell head-and-tail, the bets
remained. If they came down two tails, he paid out even
money.
The two-up school stood in a circle round the tosser, and
each man put his money on the ground in front of himself.
Smiley and Blue gradually insinuated themselves into the
group till they got a good position. Smiley watched the
play for a time without daring to bet, because he was not
sure if the shearers would allow him to join their gambling
school.
" 'Ow much are you goin' to bet?" asked Blue.
"Aw, I dunno. I thought I was goin' to bet in deeners or
'arf-dollars, but these blokes is bettin' in ten bobs and quids.


So I s'pose I'll 'ave to bet ten bob, I s'pose."
" Dinkum?"
" I s'pose so."
At last Smiley decided to take a chance, and he pulled out
his note and laid it on the ground. He waited for the order
to clear off, but none came. The shearers were too interested
in their own bets to bother about the boy.
"All your dough on?" asked the man with the kip. "All
right, up they go!" .
Smiley held his breath while the pennies spun high,
paused, and dropped back to the ground.
" Head and tail!"
The boy sat back on his heels and released his breath in a
long sigh.
" Here they go!"
All eyes went up —and down.
" Tails! All right, I'll cover your dough. A quid there,
two quid there, a quid there, ten bob there. 'Ullo? Who
said you could come into this school?"
" Er —nobody, mister," stammered Smiley. " I jist thought
it 'd be orl sigarneo."
" Well, it ain't. I don't want no kids around 'ere. Gawn,
mizzle off!"
" Gee, mister, I got the dough to play with, so what's
wrong with me 'avin' a go?"
" Let the kid play," someone said. " It'll learn 'im a lesson
when 'e loses all 'is dough."
" That's right," agreed the man with the kip. "It 11 learn
you a flamin' lesson. There's your ten bob, son. Better pull
out when you've won fifty quid."
Everybody laughed at this quip while Smiley grabbed his
winnings.
" Come on," said Blue, nudging him.
" Why?"
" Yer ain't goin' to do no more bettin', are you?"
" You betcher! I'm goin' to win ten quid."
"Dickenon!"
" Everybody set?" inquired the man with the kip. The
boy slapped down a ten shilling note. "Ah, that's right, son.
If you don't speculate you won't accumulate. Up they go!
The coins fell heads up. and the tosser took the money all
round.
" Come on and 'ave a swim," urged Blue.


"I m goin' to 'ave one more go," replied Smiley. " It'll be
tails this time."
"Aw, spare me days!" muttered his disgusted friend.
The money went down, the coins went up—and they fell
head-and-tail. The coins were spun again
" Heads!"
Smiley sat stunned. It did not seem right that they should
come heads twice in succession.
" I told you so," said the redhead.
" Well, put up your dough, son," invited the man with the
S't VP €n y° ur wallet and bring out the spondulicks."
1 am t got no more, mister."
" Don't kid me!"
u dinkum, I ain't," replied Smiley plaintively.
Well you d better get outer this school. We don't want
no deadheads 'ere."
Smiley got up off his heels and walked disconsolately
away, followed by his friend.
"And listen, son " the shearer called after him, " don't you
go tellm your father on me!"
, lau S^f er . followed- him as he ran towards the tank
with Blue pattering behind. '
Smiley's desire for gambling was subdued, but not
quenched by tins experience. For three days he felt miser-
Svi ! °5 s 0 J e Ji en shillings, but consoled himself
with the knowledge that he still had eleven-and-ten in the
j n ff} \ * sum added to the three pounds due at the
en d of me shearing would be enough for his bicycle.
n three days he stayed away from the two-up school,
v, u ou,r th> which was Sunday, he began to wonder if he
ThP wflri w Se + t( Z a^an^ on . al ] Ideas of playing two-up again.
The Wild West books he had read always stressed the need
tor courage m a man who wanted to be a good gambler—
courage and the willingness to take a chance.
lif- anc * try a S a m? Luck would surely be
with him this time. J
+i, He n °f conf \ de these thoughts in Blue, because he knew
the redhead would try to dissuade him. Blue, he decided
a? a dinkum cobber, but he had a narrow mind.
Alter Sunday dinner, while Blue was reading a magazine
vhf v? shearers had handed over, Smiley went across to
the homestead He found the overseer lounging in a squat-
ter s chair on the verandah, drowsily digesting his midday


meal.
" Mr. Preening?"
" Eh? Oh, hullo, Smiley. What are you fossicking about
here for?"
" It's very important, Mr. Preening."
" Important? Don't tell me you're going to hand in your
resignation?"
"Aw, no, it ain't that. I was jist wonderin' if you could do
me a favour."
" What is it?"
" I been workin' 'ere two weeks now, Mr. Preening, and I
reckon you owe me two quid."
" Quite correct."
" Do you think I could 'ave ten bob of it now and not wait
for the end of the shearin'?" ,
" Hm? You know the rule, don't you? No pay till we ve
cut out."
" Yairs, Mr. Preening," replied the boy, " but I was jist
wonderin' if you could do me a favour."
"What do you want the money for? You can't spend it
here. There's nothing to spend it on. You're not thinking
of going into Murrumbilla, are you? Nobody's allowed to
leave this station till the shearing is finished—none of the
shearing team, anyway. So what good will ten bob do you.
"Aw, I jist wanter git 'old of it."
" But why, Smiley, why?" insisted the overseer.
" I dunno." , , T , f •,
" It's all very mysterious, young feller-me-lad. I m alraid
I can't hand over the money till I know what you want it
for."
Smiley shuffled, leaned up against a verandah post, and
scratched his left ankle with the big toe of his right foot.
After a pause, he repeated, " I jist want it, Mr.
The overseer said suddenly, " Oh, I get you. You don t
want to spend it. You just want to get your hands on some
of the money you've rightly earned. You just want to feel
it and look at it. Is that right?"
"Yairs, Mr. Preening."
"You young miser! Still, I suppose its natural for a
youngster who never has much money. Well, seeing that
you've been working so well lately, I think I could just about
manage ten shillings. Come into the office.'
They went into the little room, where the overseer opened


the safe. "Do you want a note or silver?"
"A note, please."
" I should have thought you'd want silver. It feels good
and it chinks."
" No, thanks. I'll 'ave the note if you don't mind."
"As you say, young man. There it is. Now all you have to
do is to sign this receipt just to keep everything in order."
A minute later Smiley was racing back to the huts with
the note folded and tucked into the pocket of his shirt.
" Where 'ave you been?" asked Blue.
"Me go longa walkabout," grinned Smiley, using an
aboriginal expression to evade the point.
Since the information was withheld, Blue became more
curious. " You been up to somethin'."
"Ask no questions and you'll be told no lies."
" You ain't no cobber o' mine," said the redhead in dis-
gusted tones.
" I am so!"
" Well, what was you doin'?"
Smiley produced the note, explained how he got it and
what he was going to do with it. Blue's first reaction was
astonishment, then came scorn. Despite Smiley's insistence
that the only way to make a fortune out of gambling was to
risk a fortune, the redhead remained unconvinced.
"Anyway," said Smiley in the end, " I'm goin' to 'ave a go."
He waited impatiently for the two-up school to begin, but
the shearers preferred to sleep off their dinner, and it was
not till the cool of the evening that they gathered at the
back of the huts for a game. This time Smiley did not sneak
into the school, but joined it jauntily.
Strike me handsome!" said one of the shearers. " Here's
the Two-up Terror back again!"
After the laughter died down, Smiley announced: "And
I got dough, too. I'm goin' to clean up youse coves."
" Where's your dough?"
Ere it is." Smiley produced the note and showed it all
round.
" Where did you git it?"
The overseer give it to me. It's a bit o' me pay for pickin'
All right, me lad. You've got to be learned some day—
and the more you lose the more you savee that two-up isn't
a kid's game."


It was all over in a few seconds—as quick and decisive as
the guillotine. The coins fell heads up. The shearer picked
up Smiley's note and shoved it into his pocket with the rest
of the winnings. .
Even before the pennies were spun again, Smiley was out
of the crowd and on his way towards the tank.
" I'm a silly, flamin' potty coot!" he kept on muttering,
regardless of Blue's expressions of sympathy.
Tearing off his clothes, Smiley plunged into the tank and
swam wildly about, threshing the water, rolling and diving
like a porpoise, till at last his anger was subdued by physi-
cal exhaustion. He scrambled onto the bank and lay there
panting. , , , n i
After a while he stood up and gazed at the sky. Blue was
startled to hear him reciting the familiar words they had
learned at school:
Then up spo\e brave 'Oratius,
The captain o the gate,
"To every man upon this earth
Death cometh soon or late;
And 'ow can man die better
Than jacin' fearful odds
For the ashes of 'ls fathers
And the temples of 'is gods?"
" Gee!" exclaimed the redhead. " Wotter you sayin that
poitry for?"
" I gotter let orf steam." Smiley told him, and that s the
first thing that come to me mind."
CHAPTER SEVENTEEN
Cutting-out day was a Friday, and when the last naked
sheep skipped out of its pen into the paddock, everyone
joined in a great cheer.
A couple of shearers collected their cheques and left im-
mediately for town, but all the rest stayed on for the cutting-
out party that night.
Between four and five in the afternoon the members of
the team called at the overseer's office for their money.


Smiley had a momentary, fantastic hope that Preening
might have lost the receipt of the ten shillings, or might
even have forgotten it altogether.
But he soon realised how vain was such a hope.
' W SB' here ' s fhe rest of your money—twQ pounds
ten. With the ten shillings I gave you the other day, that
makes the total of three pounds. O.K?"
" Yairs, Mr. Preening."
" Sign here, please. . . . And three pounds for you Blue
Sign here, please." '
Smiley calculated that he now had £3. Is. 10d., so he still
needed another Bs. 2d. to complete the total of £3 10s
required for the bicycle.
O course, he said to Blue, "if you was a dinkum cobber
you d give me a lend of arf-a-quid so's I'd be able to git me
ole bike. 43
Dicken on! You went and lost yore dough at two-up It
serves you flakin' well right."
'ii i^ W ' i ive me a enc * °' * en hob. Then some o' the bike
11 be yores.
"I don't want no bike, and I don't want a bit o' no bike
I m gom to git a pony."
about' 0 ft WaS ac^ so Smiley gave up worrying him
The boys went over to the shearing shed and watched the
preparations for the party. The board was scrubbed down
to make a smooth dance floor. Cases of beer, contributed bv
the overseer were stacked in the pressing-room, which had
been cleared of the bales. The shearer's cook had been told
to let himself go, and he was busy making a large quantity
of fancy edibles. The shearers were sprucing themselves up,
some of them were even putting on ties.
The guests began to arrive after sundown—carloads and
cartloads of people from neighbouring stations and settle-
ments The Murrumbilla contingent included the doctor
and the schoolmaster and their wives. In all, about fiftv
people were gathered in the shed when the two accordion
players struck up the first dance.
There were two men to every woman, but the shearers did
not mmd, because most of them regarded this cutting-out
party as an occasion on which to get drunk rather than one
for dancing.
Smiley and Blue hung around on the outskirts of the party,


waiting for supper. While they were sitting on the sliprails
of the paddock, a figure went staggering past, and a thick
voice sang drunkenly. They recognised Jimmy the Boss.
" Hi, Jimmy," called Smiley.
The man stopped and turned to the boys. " Whozat?"
" It's us, Jimmy," replied Smiley cheekily. " How are you
popping up?"
" Whozat?" he repeated, lurching towards them. " Oh,
Smiley, Blue. Why aren't youse enjoyin' yourselves?"
" We're 'avin' a bonzer time, boss."
" Oh, no! Oh, no!" he said, reaching out and grabbing each
boy by the arm. " You come with Jimmy the Boss and you'll
have a bonzer time."
He dragged them down off the sliprails. His grip hurt
Smiley's arm, and the boy struggled to get free.
"Lemme go, you ole boozer!" he shouted angrily.
" You fiamin' ole boozer!" yelled Blue, trying to drag him-
self away."
" 'Sail right, kids, 'sail right. You come with me and have
a bonzer time."
" Stone the crows!" cried Smiley. " Git on with yore
boozin' and leave us alone."
Seeing the boys refused to accept his invitation, the man's
drunken affability suddenly turned to anger. He swung the
boys together, and their heads met with a loud crack.
"Cheeky bastards!" he muttered as he let them go, and
staggered off.
Dazed by the collision, the boys groaned and held their
heads till they became cleared —by which time Jimmy had
" I wisht I 'ad a gun," said Smiley. " I'd shove it down 'is
fiamin' throat and pull the fiamin' trigger."
" We oughter torture 'im like we said."
" That's right, cobber. We oughter wreak our revenge.
What about them red ants we was talking about?"
"Aw, gee, you can't find no red ants this time o' night."
"I got an idea!" exclaimed Smiley. "Bindyeyes!"
" Bindyeyes! That's right! Stick 'em in 'is bunk and e'll
be tortured all over."
" We'll git a lot o' little 'uns for 'is bare parts like 'is 'ands
and legs," said Smiley eagerly. " They won't stick into 'im
through 'is clothes, so we'll git some big goat' eads that'll go
through anythin'. I know where there's a bonzer patch o'


goats' 'eads jist outside the pony fence."
It was no easy job gathering them in the moonlight, and
their feet and hands were sore from the prickles by the time
they collected sufficient for their purpose. Sneaking into
Jimmy's hut, they pulled back the blanket and sprinkled the
bindyeyes all over the bunk—after which they carefully
spread the blanket in its place.
Soon afterwards the bell rang for supper, and the boys
hurried in for the spread. They were careful to avoid being
spotted by Jimmy the Boss, who was now drunker than ever.
Preening, fearing that the man might suddenly say or do
something that would shock the women, tried to get him to
drink some hot tea instead of beer, in the hope of sobering
him up a little. But Jimmy brushed the tea aside and called
for more beer. Eventually he was enticed outside by a
couple of the more sober shearers.
After supper the two boys shadowed Jimmy wherever he
went. They were determined not to miss the fun of seeing
him get into bed. For a time he sat near the beer, swallow-
ing pint after pint and telling disinterested listeners about
his career as a shearer. Later he took a bottle out into the
moonlight, scrambled through the fence, and stumbled down
towards the troughs.
" Poor l'il sheep," he muttered. " Poor l'il sheep. We're
'avin' a bonzer time drinkin' beer. Poor l'il sheep drinkin'
dirty water."
The mob scattered as the man approached the troughs, but
one old ewe, slower and sleepier that the rest, got to its feet
too late. Jimmy fell on it and dragged it down, kicking and
snorting.
" Poor l'il sheep. Drink, sheepie, drink."
He thrust the neck of the bottle into the animal's mouth,
and the beer ran down its throat. The ewe gurgled and
struggled, but Jimmy's powerful arm held it down till the
bottle was empty, half the beer inside the sheep, and half
spilled in the dust. At last he let the animal go, and it raced
off to join the mob.
That'll make you feel better, sheepie-sheepie," said
Jimmy the Boss as he got to his feet.
Smiley and Blue had watched the whole scene from be-
hind the fence. At first they stifled their giggles, but now
they could contain themselves no longer, and they burst into
loud laughter.


« Whozat?" shouted Jimmy, lurching towards them. " Oh,
it's you flamin' kids. C mere, I want to talk to youse.
They turned and ran. Jimmy scrambled over the fence
in pursuit, but the boys soon disappeared behind the shear-
ing shed, and he gave up the chase.
On returning to the shed, Jimmy the Boss settled down to
drink again. After a time he began to sing a bawdy song
that could be heard all over the place, and Mr. Preemng
soon arrived.
" Better go to bed, Jimmy," he suggested.
" Not goin' to bed till all beer's cut out."
" Look here, I've got an idea. You take all the beer you
want over to your hut. Then you can get into your bunk and
be nice and comfortable and drink as much as you like with-
out anyone disturbing you."
Surprisingly, Jimmy agreed. With a bottle in each hand,
he and the overseer went over to the huts. When they
reached the door, Preening said, " I'll give you a hand with
your boots." .
Jimmy stood on his dignity. " Mizzle off, he said. I
can take off m'own boots. Mizzle off.''
"All right, Jimmy. Good-night."
Smiley and Blue, crouching in the shadow at the edge of
the verandah, watched Jimmy the Boss sit on a box and,
after a noisy struggle, pull off his boots. He stood up, leaned
against the door, and undid his belt. His trousers slipped
down to his ankles. He tried to step out of them and lost
his balance. The trousers became hobbles, and he crashed to
the floor. Cursing and kicking, he eventually got them off.
Now, only wearing shirt and socks, he decided that he was
sufficiently undressed for bed. He hauled himself to his feet
and went across to his bunk. The boys crept closer and
awaited the climax.
Jimmy the Boss pulled back the blanket and sat heavily
on the bunk.
" Yow!"
It was a harsh, explosive noise between a bellow and a
scream, and it rang wildly throught the night.
" Scorpions!"
At his second cry, Jimmy the Boss hurtled from the hut
and dashed across the paddock.
Zing! the taut wires of the pony fence sang with the im-
pact, and Jimmy rebounded into the dust.


Yelling shrilly, he turned and ran towards the lights of the
shearing shed. He arrived just as a dance was finishing, and
eveiyone turned to see a wild-eyed figure, wearing only shixt
and socks, rush on the floor shouting repeatedly, " Scoxpi-
ons! Save my life! I been bit by scorpions!"
While half-a-dozen shearers fell on him and dragged him
to the floor, the two boys, who had followed as far as the
door, rolled over and ovex in paroxysms of hysterical
laughter.
CHAPTER EIGHTEEN
The shearers returned to Murrumbilla next morning, and
most of them handed their cheques over the counters of the
settlement's two bars.
Smiley went straight home, got his bankbook out of the
gum tree then xan to the bank and deposited his £2. 10s.
Returning home again, he went inside and greeted his
mother. She casually asked him if he had got on all right
had the Sh6ep ' and the boy ust as casuall y replied that he
" I jist put me dough in the bank," he added " I nearlv
got enough for me bike."
s a § o °d hoy. And now you'd better go and sweep
the yard. It hasn t been touched since you went away "
Aw, mum, don't you think .. ."
" Smiley," she interrupted sharply.
™2 rl ri I gh V' he muttered and went out to find the broom.
When he had finished he tossed the broom through the
back door and ran up the sandhill till he came to the school-
an that Mr. Stephens might be working
%. be !. s and might willin g to pay for assistance
Mrs. Stephens was sitting on the verandah. " Oh, hullo
Smiley, she said. " Did you have a good time being a
rouseabout?" s
" Yairs, Mrs. Stephens. It was bonzer "
" Are you looking for Fred? I'll call him. Freddie'
Smiley s come to play with you!' "
<{ " Aw > I didn't 'xactly come for that," the boy said hastily.
l come to see if the master wanted me to 'elp 'im with the
bees.


" Well, he's not working at his apiary this afternoon. He's
gone across to see the sergeant."
"Aw."
" Now you're here, you may as well stay and have a game
of marbles ox something with Freddie."
The master's son came whistling round the corner of the
verandah. " Look at what I've got," he called to Smiley. "A
machine gun—and it shoots real shot. I betcher you haven't
got a machine gun."
" Now, you mustn't say things like that, Freddie," his
mother scolded mildly. "It isn't nice to say ' betcher,' and it
isn't nice to make comparisons. You two boys had better
go and play on the other side of the house, because I want
to sit here nice and quiet and have a read."
" Does it shoot real shot, dinkum?" asked Smiley eagerly
as they went round the verandah.
" Yes, it does. It doesn't shoot far, but you can knock down
soldiers at ten feet and it fires a hundred shots a minute."
" Gawn."
"It does so! I'll show you."
He set up the wooden soldiers, sighted his gun two
yards off, and pulled the trigger rapidly a dozen times. The
buckshot flew out of the muzzle in quick succession and
knocked down three of the soldiers.
" Let me 'ave a go," pleaded Smiley. Fred handed over the
gun, and Smiley shot down the rest of the soldiers.
" See? I told you so," said Fred.
" Gee, it's bonzer!"
" My father sent to Brisbane for it. I asked- him for a real
revolver, but he said I had to wait till I was twenty-one
before I could have one of those. I wish I had a real
revolver."
" Who do you think y'are? 'Opalong Cassidy? This ain't
the Wild- West, you know."
" If I had a real revolver," Fred informed him, " I'd go and
get that opium trader —dead or alive."
"You'd git wot?"
" The opium trader. I heard the sergeant telling my
father about him."
" I don't savee wot yore gabbin' about," Smiley told him.
"Well, there's somebody selling opium to the blacks. The
sergeant told my father there's somebody doing that and
breaking the law, and he's going to find out who it is and


lay panting.
Opium . . . Arrest . . . Opium to the blacks' camp . .
The sergeant and the master looking for a clue . . . Arrest
arrest him."
" Opium? Ain't that somethin' you smoke, like terbaccer?"
" Gee, you're ignorant," sneered Fred. " Opium's a deadly
drug from China, and when you have a pipe of it you have
wonderful dreams and it rots your bones."
" Dreams? Aw, that's a snake yarn."
"It's not a snake yarn!" replied Fred indignantly. "My
father says that people smoke opium to have wonderful
dreams and it rots their bones. You can get put in gaol for
smoking it or selling it to anybody. The sergeant told my
father somebody's been taking opium over to the blacks'
camp and making 'em all dopey, but they can't find out who
did it. But when they do they're going to arrest him. The
sergeant asked my father to keep his eajs open for a clue
about the bloke that took opium over to the blacks."
Smiley's mind flashed back to his adventure in Willie
Coy's garden—his imprisonment in the hut, the arrival of
Rankin, the hotel licencee, demanding his pipe, the man's
suspicious manner, the later meeting when Rankin got him
to take a parcel over to the blacks' camp.
" Listen, Fred," he said hurriedly. " I jist remembered me
mother - wants me to go a message."
He ran across the paddock, down the sandhill, across the
mud flat till he came to the river. He leaped down into the
sand and threw himself in the shade of the bank, where he
and gaol!
Smiley now knew why Rankin had given him so much
money for such a trivial thing, and why Rankin had threat-
ened to attack him if he mentioned the men's visit to the
Chinese garden or the delivery of the parcel to King Billy
the blaekfellow.
" I'm a fugitive from justice," he thought, and for a while
the idea gave him a feeling of elation. But he soon changed
his mind when he pictured the handcuffs on his wrists, the
trial, the dark and narrow prison cell. They might even
flog him as well.
He had to escape. That was the only thing to do, escape
from the clutches of the law. Once the sergeant found a clue
he would come galloping up with the handcuffs, so the only
thing to do was to bolt while there was still time.


It did not take Smiley long to make up his mind. The
usual tri-weekly car would leave for Chaxleville in the morn-
ing. He would wait fox it just outside the town, stop it, and
get a ride to Charleville, where he would catch the train for
Brisbane. He had enough money for both car and train.
Three pounds would take him to Brisbane, where he would
get a job under another name. Then, after a while, he would
write a letter to his mother to let her know he was safe and
well. But of course he would never disclose where he was
living or what he was doing. He must always remain a
fugitive from justice.
Smiley approached his house in a roundabout way and
managed to sneak his bankbook down from the tree without
being seen by his mother. He slipped out again and made
a long detour that finally brought him to the post office.
" Can I draw out all me dough?" he asked the postmaster.
" Well, you're a funny kid and no mistake," laughed the
man. "You put two-pounds-ten in the bank this morning
and and you want to draw three pounds out this afternoon."
"Three-pound one-and-ten," corrected Smiley.
" Quite correct. But what do you want to draw out all
your money for?"
" I —er —I wanter count it."
" But you can count it in the book. There you are, it says
three-one-ten. If it says thxee-one-ten in the book you can
be quite sure you've got exactly the same amount in the
bank."
"Aw, mister, I jist wanter draw it out."
"Just as you like," replied the postmaster. "You're the
depositor and I'm just your humble servant. If you want to
draw your money out I can't stop you. I've got to obey
orders. I'll fill in the form for you, and you'll just sign it "
" Thanks, mister."
" By the way, I suggest you don't close the account alto-
gether. Take out three pounds and leave the one-and-ten in
the bank. That keeps the account open, and that means you
won't have to go to all the trouble of opening another
account and filling in a lot of forms and getting another
bankbook if you want to deposit any more money in future.
What do you say?"
"Aw, I s'pose it'll be orl right, I s'pose."
" Good. Three pounds for William Thomas Greevins. And
don't spend it all on lollies and lemonade."


Smiley tucked the money into his pocket and set off for
home, again taking a roundabout route that ended up at the
back door.
" 'Ullo, mum," he said brightly, trying to hide his nervous-
ness.
" 'Ullo, Smiley," she replied. " Yore father's 'ome."
" 'Ome?" he echoed, and an uneasiness crept over him.
" Yairs, 'ere's yore old man back from the bush," said Mr.
Greevins as he came into the kitchen from the front room.
" Safe and sound, me lad, safe and sound."
Smiley saw immediately that his father was drunk. His
eyes were watery and bloodshot, and his blotchy face sagged
around the mouth.
"Ain't you pleased to see me?" the big man grinned.
" Aw, o' course," replied Smiley, edging towards the door.
" I been 'earin' things about you," said Mr. Greevins.
" Eh?" The boy stopped abruptly.
" I been 'earin' what a good kid you been while I was away.
I met the schoolmaster when I was comin' into town, and 'e
tells me you been workin' 'ard and savin' up for a bike."
" Well, I been tryin' to."
" I 'ear you got a lot o' dough saved up. Three or four quid,
I 'ear."
"Aw, I got three," admitted Smiley.
" That's bonzer. And 'ow much is the bike yore goin' to
git?"
" Three-pound-ten."
" Well, I'll tell you what I'll do. I'll give you the other
ten bob."
Smiley and his mother stared at the man in astonishment.
He usually asked for money; he never gave any away.
" Ha-ha! Yer think it's a bit o' kidstakes, don't you?"
laughed Mr. Greevins. " Well, it ain't. Yore ole man's got
a bit o' dough left over from 'is drovin' job, and 'e's goin' to
give you ten bob of it so's you can buy yore bike."
He pulled a few notes out of his pocket, selected a ten-shil-
ling one, and handed it to the boy.
" Aw, cripes!" muttered Smiley, looking at it without tak-
ing it.
" Gawn, take it," urged his father.
" Gee, thanks!" muttered the boy, grabbing the note and
grinning with pleasure.
" I s'pose yore goin' to put it in the bank with the rest o'


yore dough?"
" I ain't got my dough in the bank any more," the boy inl-
formed him. " I got it on me."
He pulled out the three pounds and displayed the money
for a moment before tucking the ten-shilling note among the
rest. He thrust the lot into his pocket.
" I wouldn't go round with all that dough in me pocket if
I was you," his father warned him. " You might git it
pinched. I ain't goin' to give you no more, so you'd better
look after what you've got."
" That's right," agreed the boy. " I'm goin' to put it away."
" Well," said his mother, " you'll be able to write a letter
ternight and send the money off registered termorrer for
yore bike."
Smiley slipped into his own room and tucked the notes
under his pillow. He decided that his father was right—it
would not do to carry all that money about with him. For
the first time for years he felt grateful to his father, and he
almost decided to confide in him his plans for flight. He
knew it would be no good telling his mother. She was a
woman and she would not understand. She would probably
become hysterical. But a man would understand and would
help him.
After further consideration he decided it would be wiser
not to tell his father. Though he was a man, he was a drunk-
ard, and experience had taught the boy that drunks were
usually too talkative and not at all dependable. No, he would
let neither of his parents into the secret till he had reached
Brisbane.
But, he decided, Blue must know. Blue was his cobber,
and he must share the secret. He knew that he could depend
on his friend.
" I think I'll go and 'ave a bit of a stroll," he told his
mother.
" But tea's nearly ready," she said. "It won't do you any
'arm to wait five minutes.
" Cripes!" he muttered, returning to his room to look once
more through a tattered magazine while waiting for the
meal he had no desire to eat.
But when he sat down he found that he was very hungry,
and he bolted large helpings of stew. He was glad his father
preferred to sit in the front room and drink. The man's
presence at a meal was always embarrassing. At last he


was free, and he ran out of the back door into the dusk.
Blue was hanging over the front gate when Smiley arrived.
" Hey," he whispered to the redhead. " I got somethin' to
tell you. Come on down to the river."
They ran steadily till they reached the bushes that grew
in the middle of the sandy bed.
"You gotter keep this secret," murmured Smiley as they
crouched in the shadow.
" Cross me 'eart and cut me throat," replied Blue earnestly.
"Well, I'm a fugitive from justice."
" Wot?"
Smiley told him the whole story. Blue listened enthralled,
punctuating the tale with an occasional "Gee!" and
" Struth!" and " Dinkum?"
When Smiley had finished, the redhead said: "I wisht I
was comin' with you."
" Same 'ere. But you ain't got nothin' to flee from. I'm a
criminal in the eyes o' the law."
" O' course, if you confessed they might be leenent," said
Blue, remembering what he had read in books.
" Wot?"
" They mightn't be so 'ard on you."
"Aw, no. I gotter flee."
" Gee, I wisht I was comin' with you."
Smiley vaguely recalled a phrase he had read somewhere,
and he said: " 'E travels quick 'oo travels alone."
" But ain't it better to 'ave a cobber with you?"
Smiley was annoyed by Blue's insistence. " But you ain't
done nothin' crook," he snapped. " You can't flee from the
law if yore innocent."
" I s'pose yore right," sighed Blue.
They talked for a long time about Smiley's plans for the
future, how he would get a job as a jockey or a messenger
boy (on a bicycle) or a sailor in a ship that would take him
to wonderful places all over the world.
Blue's tears came suddenly, and he sobbed out his grief at
losing his best friend.
"Aw, don't cry, cobber," muttered Smiley. Then he, too,
found tears running down his cheeks. With the movement
of a dog shaking off water, he jerked his head and shoulders
as if to shake off the weakness that had so suddenly over-
taken him. " Come on, I gotter make me will."
" Wot . . . did you say?"


" I said I was goin' to make me will."
" But only coves that's dead make wills."
" 'Ow can a cove make a will when 'e's dead?" retorted
Smiley.
"Aw, I mean only coves that' goin' to die.
" Well, ain't I goin' to die from the ken o' mankind? Well,
from the ken o' this town, anyway. They'll find me gawn
for ever and they won't know wot to do with the things
I left be'ind. I gotter make a will to tell 'em wot to do."
" Can I 'ave yore marbles?" asked Blue eagerly.
"Yairs, yore goin' to 'ave everythin' like that, and I'm
leavin' everythin' else to me mother."
" 'Ow are you goin' to make yore will?"
Smiley produced a pencil and a sheet of grimy paper. " It's
too dark 'ere, so we'll 'ave to go and find a light."
Eventually they crouched in the yard of Hawkin's Hotel,
just near enough to the coffee-room windows for the light to
illuminate the paper.
Smiley wrote on the top of the sheet: " My Will, by Smiley
William Thomas Greevins."
" It's like a composition you write at school," commented
Blue.
Smiley wrote: " I am gone for ever, and I leave my marbles
and my cricket bat. . . ."
"Aw," said his friend, " I don't want that ole thing."
" It's a bonzer bat," protested Smiley. " I made forty-seven
not out with it once."
" It's too old for me," was the blunt reply. " You can leave
it to yore mother."
" Orl right." Smiley crossed out the item and continued:
". . . my two Hopalong Cassidy books and my top and my
emu egg and my topaz . . ." He paused and asked: " 'Ow do
you spell topazes?"
" I dunno."
" I think it's double-z." He wrote on: ". . . topazzes I
I found in the river, and my shanghaie and my ruler and my
compass, to Blue Graham, my dinkum cobber."
"Ain't you goin' to give me yore Western Castrator?"
asked Blue, calling the big knife by its familiar name, as
every other boy in the West called this particular brand of
knife.
" Aw, no," replied Smiley. " I'm goin' to take it with me."
He then wrote: " I leave all else I got to my mother." He


signed it, " T. Greevins."
" There y'are, there's me will," he said, folding it carefully
and handing it to Blue.
" What 'ave I gotter do with it?"
"You keep it till I'm gawn, and then when they find I'm
gawn you give it to me mothex."
" But I ain't s'posed to know yore gawn."
" Struth, that's right." Smiley took back the paper and put
it in his pocket. " I'll 'ide it under me piller and they'll find
it when I'm gawn."
As they walked towards Smiley's home, Blue said: "I'm
goin' to see you orf in the mornin'."
" Gee, that's bonzer. Only you ain't gotter be seen with
me or you'll be branded a crook for bein' seen with me, and
then you'll be a fugitive from justice, too."
It was agreed that they should meet very early in the
morning at a spot just off the Charleville road.
" Hooray, cobber."
" Hooray."
When Smiley reached his home he saw a light in the front
room, and he could hear the voices of his parents raised in
argument. Anxious to escape any sort of scene, he crept in
the back way, through the kitchen, and into his own room.
He decided to get undressed in the dark in order not to draw
attention to himself.
But in the dark he bumped into his cricket bat that leaned
against the wall, and it fell with a clatter.
In a few seconds his mothex stood in the doorway holding
a lamp. The boy saw that she had been weeping.
" I tried to stop 'im," she cried. "'E lost 'is money at
two-up and 'e come back and said 'e 'ad to 'ave more dough
fox booze. I couldn't 'elp it, Smiley."
The boy stood mystified for a moment, then turned and
snatched up the pillow from his bed. The money was gone.
" I tried to stop 'im," moaned his mother, " but 'e 'it me."
"Aw, thass all right," said a drunken voice, and Smiley's
father appeared in the doorway. He swayed unsteadily and
grinned at the boy. " Jus' a li'l lend of a few quid, me lad.
I'll pay you back soon's I git s'more dough."
Smiley stood immobile for five seconds while a terrible
anger flared up inside him. He saw theix faces through a
wavering haze and they seemed to be goggling at him in the
yellow light of the lamp.


Then he sprang. It was a sideways spring that brought
him within reach of the only weapon he could see, his old
cricket bat. Snatching it up, he rushed at his father.
' " Hey! wot . . began the man.
The woman screamed as the weapon crashed against her
husband's face. The blood spurted out, and he crumpled
on to the floor. , . ,
yii liV til v., XAV/VA • _
Smiley hurled down the bat and leaped past his mother.
As he rushed through the back door he heard her calling
him. The boy flung himself out into the night.
CHAPTER NINETEEN
Smiley ran blindly, spurred on by rage and fear. He
shunned the moonlight and raced for the dark shadows of
the trees by the river. Heedless of the bindyeyes, ruts,
stumps and other things that hurt his bare feet, he ran faster
than he had ever run before.
He was nearly a mile from home before shortness of breath
slowed his pace to a trot, and then to a walk. He heard a
queer sobbing noise, and when his thoughts became clearer
he realised it was the sound of his panting for breath.
Glimpsing a light nearby, he saw that it came from the
window of the Marsh's home, the last Murrumbilla house on
the road that ran north to Tambo.
He saw, too, that a saddled horse was tied up to a gatepost.
Somebody was visiting the Marsh's.
The desperate boy made a quick decision. He ran up to
the horse, slipped the reins off the post and over the animal's
head, and scrambled into the saddle. Turning towards
Tambo, he dug in his heels and went galloping up the road.
His feet could not reach the stirrups, but he clung on with
his knees and crouched low over his mount's straining neck.
He thought he heard a shout behind him, but it was drowned
by the roar of the wind in his ears.
" I'm a fugitive from the law!" he muttered repeatedly.
" I'm a wanted man!"
As the horse plunged on, the boy began to realise that he
had become a horse-thief. He had added another crime to
the list. No doubt by this time the sergeant had telegraphed


his description to the surrounding police stations, and as soon
as the loss of the horse was reported the animal's description
would also be used for identification purposes. So he must
get rid of the horse as soon as he had ridden a fair distance
out of town.
After two miles of hard galloping the animal slackened
speed, but Smiley kept pushing it on by kicking in his heels
and slapping it over the neck with the end of the reins.
As his fear of immediate pursuit lessened, a queer kind of
satisfaction began to grow inside him. He felt he was some-
thing like Dick Turpin or Robin Hood or Ned Kelly the
bushranger.
After a while the tired animal slowed to a mild canter,
and, refusing to respond to the boy's slaps and kicks, panted
so hoarsely that Smiley felt sorry for having galloped it so
hard. He reined it to a walk, then stopped it altogether
while he listened for any sounds of pursuit. All he could
hear was the quick breathing of himself and the horse.
He walked the animal for another mile before he stopped
and dismounted. Patting the horse's neck, he said: "You
done me a good turn, cobber. Now git along." He gave its
rump a smart slap and sent it ambling off towards Murrum-
billa. He knew it would go straight home.
Now that he was alone in the bush, Smiley felt a little
scared of the silence. He muttered the fear-dispelling rhyme
as he trudged along the road:
' One—two—three—jour—five—six— seven!
All good children go to heaven!
Penny on the water, twopence on the sea!
Threepence on the railway for you and me I"
Thump! Thump! Thump!
He started at the distant sound, and waited, listening.
Thump! Thump! Thump!
"Aw, gee!" he murmured with a nervous giggle. " It's only
an old 'roo."
He walked on for two hours, and by this time fatigue had
slowed him almost to a standstill. He decided to lie down
and rest for a while, to hide in the trees till he felt fresh
enough to push on.
He knew that even if the sergeant did not pursue him
that night, he was sure to have a blacktracker after him in
the morning, when his tracks would be plain in the dust of


the road. How could he avoid leaving the tell-tale footprints
in the dust? There was no river to wade through. There
Wcis not the slightest likelihood* of x&in to wssh the tracks
He could imagine how Harry the blacktracker would pick
up the trail where he had dismounted from the borrowed
horse, would run with shuffling, crouching trot while the
sergeant rode behind.
Off the road the ground was baked hard, but Harry would
catch sight of a smudge, a broken twig, or some other tiny
clue that would keep him on the trail like a human blood-
hound.
Fifty yards off the road, Smiley came to a fence. It was an
eight-foot wire-netting dog fence for protecting the sheep
from the dingoes. Evidently he had struck the boundary of
a station. . . , , ,
He suddenly realised how he might put the blacktracker
off his trail. He grabbed the wire and stepped up on to the
fence, thrusting his feet into the wide-meshed netting. Then
he climbed sideways, never allowing his feet to touch the
ground.
It was slow and tiring work. His hands and feet became
sore from the chafing wire, but desperation drove him on.
He travelled along the fence for fifty yards before he cau-
tiously lowered himself to the ground to rest, feeling with his
feet for a clump of Mitchell grass. He knew that a single
trampled tuft of dry grass was less likely to be spotted by
the blacktracker than a footprint in the dust.
Soon he began his crab-like journey again, resting as
before whenever fatigue compelled him to step down from
the fence. By the time he had climbed sideways for two
hundred yards he was almost exhausted. He hauled himself
over the fence into the paddock, trudged forward for about
fifty yards, and dropped to a bare and dusty patch under-
neath a gidyea tree.
Now he cared for nothing but sleep. It came almost as
soon as his grimy cheek settled against his curled arm.
* * *
The kookaburras' chorus woke Smiley at sunrise. They
sat on the limb of a dead ironback and laughed raucously
at the prone figure of the boy.
He sat up abruptly, alert at the moment of waking. Lis-
tening, he heard only the cackling of the jackasses and the


distant screaming of white cockatoos. He knew that the
laughter of the kookaburras was often the warning of the
approach of horse or man, so he lay watching and listening
for sight or sound of pursuit.
In a few minutes the jackasses flew away, and he could
hear them laughing again from some tree a long way off.
Were they scared, or were they just laughing for fun? He
waited for a long time, but he neither saw nor heard any-
thing to suggest the approach of the sergeant or his black-
tracker.
Smiley got to his feet, ran to the netting fence, and peered
out on to the Tambo road. To north and south it was empty
and quiet under the already fierce sun. The boy decided he
must turn his back on the road and strike due west into the
bush. With the sun behind him, he hurried on, looking for
a waterhole at which to quench his thirst. He was hungry,
too, but his thirst was the more intense.
Several times he struck the suncracked bed of a dried-up
creek, and once he came across the soft mud of an empty
waterhole, where he cooled his sore and burning feet, but
he found no water for his parched throat.
So he began to look for yams. Jacky the abo had taught
him how to identify the little plant, so he kept his eyes
on the ground as he trudged further and further into the
bush. With each mile his thirst increased its torment, no
matter how many leaves he chewed or what pebbles he
sucked. Hunger was hurting him, too, and he had to fight
hard to keep back the tears.
" Yam!" he yelled suddenly, snatching up a stick.
He scratched away the earth that surrounded the stem of
the plant. Despite his hunger, he tackled the job with slow
care, because he knew that if he broke the tender roots that
wriggled down into the earth, he might lose all trace of its
path to the subterranean food. When he came to the point
where the root split into three, he followed the largest be-
cause it was sure to lead to the biggest yam. At last his stick
struck the potato-like growth, and in half a minute he had
it out of the ground. Rubbing off the loose dirt, the boy
buried his teeth into the sweet and juicy yam.
Soon he was digging for more yams, and he found two
little ones that helped to stifle his hunger. Satisfied that the
plant could provide no more, he trudged on.
Smiley was still terribly thirsty. The yams had stopped


the hunger-ache, but they had done little to relieve his thirst.
His tongue felt thick and swollen, and his throat burned
violently. The sun struck viciously at the bareheaded boy,
increasing his torment hour by hour till he was almost in a
state of collapse. But fear of death from thirst drove hun
further and further west in the hope of striking a creek or a
waterhole. ,
Suddenly he came upon a netting fence, and he saw the
marks of hooves in the dusty pad that ran alongside. The
tracks all pointed in the same direction, and Smiley guessed
that they had been made by a boundary rider's horse as the
man rode round the paddock. He turned and followed them
north in the hope of coming across a hut or homestead before
complete exhaustion overcame him.
He felt giddy, and he seemed to be wading through a shim-
mering river of light that ran between the fence and the
trees. From time to time he stopped and leaned against a
post till his head cleared.
" Stone the crows!" he muttered over and over again.
" Stone the flamin' crows!"
He thought he heard the sound of bees—the kind of buzz-
ing that the schoolmaster's made when they swarmed. The
swarm seemed to be following him all the way along the
dusty pad, yet he could not see a single insect.
" Follered by flamin' bees," he muttered. " Waitin' to
pounce!"
The idea amused him, and he giggled. He discovered that
the giggling continued long after he had stopped being
amused. He leaned against the fence till the paroxysms were
over.
Peering once more into the hazy distance, he thought he
could see something else besides the trees and the fence. As
he stumbled on, he thought he could see the corrugated-iron
roof of a building—a shifting, shimmering patch among
the grey-green leaves of the gidyea.
Smiley began to run. Hope gave him fresh energy that
sent him reeling down the track towards the bright patch.
By the time he had gone a hundred yards he saw a hut not
far ahead. When he got closer he saw a waterbag hanging
from the branch of a tree just outside the door.
The boy kept his eyes on the canvas bag that bulged with
cold, clear water. Stumbling across the brittle grass, across
the bare patch in front of the hut, he reached for the bag


that swung at the end of a hooked wire. Dragging it down,
he fumbled for the cork, pulled it out of the porcelain neck|
and raised the bag to his lips. His legs gave way beneath
him, and he collapsed to the ground, spilling the liquid over
his face and chest. He lay on his back and sucked the bag.
Water poured down his tortured throat, washing away the
agony of thirst in a long, cold draught.
He was so intent on his drink that he did not hear the
approach of the boundary rider till the man and his mount
stood over him. The bearded horseman looked down in
astonishment at the panting, gulping boy.
" Migawd!" he said. " Where the hell did you come from?"
Still half dazed, Smiley blinked at him and gasped, " Jist—
'avin' —a drink —mister!"
Seeing that the boy was in an exhausted state, the man
dismounted and propped him against the tree. Then he held
the waterbag while Smiley drank.
" Here! Not too much for a start." The boundary rider
pulled the bag away and took a closer look at Smiley.
" How do you feel?"
" I'm . . . I'm gittin' better."
" What about some tucker?"
" Gee, me belly thinks me flamin' throat's cut!"
The ravenous boy was soon eating roast mutton between
slices of damper, washed down with more water. At last he
was finished and lolled back with a grin of complete satisfac-
tion.
" What's your name, son?" asked the boundary rider.
" Bill," said Smiley. " What's your's?"
" Mine's Bill, too. They all call me Beardy Bill, so you
may as well call me Beardy, too."
''You saved- me life, Beardy," said the boy dramatically.
Give us yore dook." He put out his hand and they shook
What are you doing in these parts?" Beardy asked.
" I'm a sundowner, jist moochin' around."
" But I thought a sundowner was a chap who humped the
bluey. Where's your swag?"
"Aw, I don't 'ump no swag," replied Smiley. Not daring
to tell the truth, he decided to invent, and he let his imagina-
tion run.
" Im called the Sundowner* Kid, and everyone knows the
Sundowner Kid don't carry no bluey."
" Have you got any dough?"


" No, the Sundowner Kid don't carry no dough."
" H-m-m." The man grinned behind his beard. " No money
and no swag. I don't see how you can get very far in these
parts."
"Aw, I do a bit o' bushrangin'," explained the boy. " I
stick coves up and take wot I want."
" Where's your gun?"
"Aw, me gun?" He paused for a moment, then said hur-
riedly, "It was took from me by the blacks. I been captured
by blackfellers, and they was goin' to torture me, but I did a
bunk."
The boundary rider burst into a roar of laughter. Smiley,
watching him with dismay, realised that his story was not
being received at all seriously.
" Shades of Baron Munchausen!" snorted Beardy.
" Wot?"
"Go on, go on! Tell me more!"
"Aw, you think I'm kiddin' don't you? You think it's a
snake yarn, don't you?"
" Well, it does sound a bit strange," chuckled the man.
" Yore a pommy, ain't you?" asked- Smiley, anxious to
change the subject.
"Yes, Bill. Born and bred in Sussex. Ever heard of it?""
"O' course! I seen it on the map at school."
"And how did you guess I was a pommy?"
"Aw, I saveed it by the way you was talkin'."
" That's a blow," said Beardy. " I was kidding myself that
I'd learned to talk like a dinkum Aussie."
" 'Ow did you come to be a boundary rider?" The boy
scented a story of adventure.
" Oh, I drifted into it. I didn't see eye to eye with a couple
in England, so I came to Queensland, and I drifted out West,
and here I am."
"Are you a fugitive from justice?" asked Smiley in a low
voice.
" Well, I'm a fugitive from parental justice."
Smiley did- not know what that meant, so he said, " You
done somethin' crook in England, so yore a fugitive, ain't
you?"
" That's right."
" So'm I!" the boy whispered hoarsely. "I'm a wanted
man."
" Really?" hissed Beardy.


" Dinkum. There's a price on me 'ead—dead or alive."
" How much?" asked the man.
" I ain't tellin' you," retorted Smiley. " You'll do the dirty
on me to git the reward."
"You've heard the saying, 'There's honour among thieves'?
Well, we're both in the same boat, so we've got to stick
together."
" Give us yore dook," said Smiley—and they shook hands.
" Dinkum, Beardy?"
" Dinkum, Bill."
" Well, the reward's a 'undred thousand quid—dead or
alive."
" Phew! You're more valuable than I am. There's no
reward for me at all."
" But I s'pose you ain't murdered nobody, I s'pose."
" Not exactly."
" I murdered a woman and child," said Smiley gloatingly.
44 With me bare 'ands."
Beardy could contain himself no longer. He bellowed
with laughter that went ringing out into the shimmering
afternoon. He rolled on his back and roared.
Smiley watched him, muttering, " 'E must 'ave the ding-
bats. 'E must be potty."
" Sundowner Kid," said the boundary rider between gasps,
44 you're the grandest thing that's come into my life for
years."
"Aw," replied the boy, disappointed at the way his story
was being received. He was determined, however, that the
boundary rider would never get the truth out of him.
If one lot of lies was not believed, then he would invent
another lot —and go on inventing them till Beardy got tired
of asking questions. He had decided to become the Sun-
downer Kid and he was going to brazen it out.
44 Well, what are your plans now?" asked Beardy.
"Aw. I dunno. I s'pose I'll jist start makin' tracks, I
s'pose."
He paused, then added: " You look the sorter cove 'oo'd be
a cobber. You'd give a swaggie some tucker to go on with
while 'e was gittin' along the track, wouldn't you?"
"Of course I'd give a swaggie some tucker. That is, if it
was mine to give. You see. Sundowner Kid, all this mutton
and damper and stuff doesn't belong to me. It belongs to the
boss —so we'll ha v e to see him about it first."


" The boss?" echoed Smiley.
" Yes. Mr. McVitty, the overseer. He's the boss of this
station, and I couldn't give away any tucker without asking
him first."
" Gawn!" laughed the boy. He knew the boundary rider
was lying, and he was puzzled.
" So," continued Beardy, "the two of us had better ride
over to the homestead this afternoon and see about it."
Smiley went cold all over as the realisation came to him.
He was trapped. The man's grin now seemed evil behind
the sinister black beard. It was obvious that the boundary
rider, incredulous of the boy's tale, had decided to hand him
over to the overseer. If this McVitty had heard from Mur-
rumbilla of Smiley's crimes, then the game was up. If he
had- heard nothing, then he would start asking questions—
and Smiley suspected that they would be more awkward
than the ones the boundary rider had asked.
"Aw, gee," he said at last, " I don't reely want no tucker,
anyway. I jist think I'll be moochin' along."
He stood up to go. He had no idea of where he was going,
but he knew he must get out of the danger of being taken
to the homestead.
" Wait a bit," said Beardy, also getting to his feet. " I can't
let you go out into the bush again like that, even though
you are called the Sundowner Kid. You've got no hat or
boots, or tucker or swag, or anything."
" I don't want nothin'—"
" Oh, yes, you do!" interrupted Beardy, grabbing the boy's
arm. " You're coming over to the homestead straight away."
Smiley tried to wrench away, but only hurt himself. He
was hauled over to the horse.
" Now listen to me, Sundowner Kid," said the boundary
rider severely. "You're coming to the homestead whether
you like it or not. If you try to get away I'll ride you down
and knock you on the head with a stirrup-iron. Savee?"
The boy was silent. He knew that Beardy Bill was master
for the moment, and it would be no good resisting him. He
quickly reconciled himself to the idea of going to the home-
stead and meeting McVitty. There was a chance the over-
seer would give him a swag and some food—the things he
badly needed for his flight through the bush.
The boundary rider mounted and called to the boy.
Smiley scrambled up behind and grabbed the man's rawhide


belt. The horse ambled off along the pad through the gidyea
scrub.
" This is the Sundowner Kid," grinned Beardy Bill to
McVitty on arrival at the homestead just before sunset.
" Who?" asked the puzzled overseer, frowning at Smiley.
" Where the hell did you pick him up?"
The boundary rider indicated that he wanted privacy, so
he and the overseer went inside the house, leaving Smiley
on the verandah. He could hear Beardy's voice droning on,
and occasionally he heard the two of them burst into
laughter.
The boy thought of making a bolt for it, but he realised
that he would soon be trailed and caught. He decided it
would be best to await McVitty's reactions to the bound-ary
rider's story. If the overseer knew nothing of the pursuit
by the sergeant, then Smiley considered it almost certain
that he would give him a swag and some food to help him
on his way.
As a matter of fact, the overseer had heard nothing from
Murrumbilla, so he had no idea of where the boy had come
from. Realising that the youngster was hiding something
behind his fantastic story, McVitty decid-ed to keep him on
the station till the truth was discovered. He told Beardy
that the next day a jackeroo would be going into Murrum-
billa for the mail, and he would report the boy's arrival to
the police so that they could make inquiries about him.
The two men came out on to the verandah.
" See you at tucker-time," said Beardy Bill to Smiley. He
led his horse away to the sheds.
McVitty turned to Smiley: " I hear you're a wanted man,
Sundowner Kid."
"Aw," replied Smiley, grinning awkwardly. His enthusi-
asm for invention had worn off somewhat.
" Well, I'm not a cove who asks a lot of questions. I don't
bother about a bloke's past, no matter what he might have
done. So don't let that worry you."
Smiley brightened up. " I can see yore dinkum, mister."
" Thank you, Sundowner Kid-," replied the o v erseer in
serious tones. "By the way, Beardy tells me you'd like some
tucker and a swag."
" Yairs, mister. If you can spare 'em."
" I think I can. But you'd better stay here to-night—have
some tucker and doss with the other men —and then we can


talk about humping the bluey in the morning."
Smiley was hungry and tired. The prospect of starting
out that night for an unknown destination was not at all
a pleasant one. He accepted the overseer's invitation.
CHAPTER TWENTY
Smiley was awakened at sunrise by McVitty shaking him
and shouting: "Come on, get up, Sundowner Kid. You've
got to earn your tucker on this station. Can you milk?"
" Yairs, mister."
" Then go out and help Joe milk the cows. Up you get'"
Morning brought misgivings, and as Smiley sat with his
cheek against the cow's warm hide he began to wonder how
he would get on after leaving the station. Which way would
he go? How far would he get? Had the sergeant found his
tracks? Was his father dying? What was happening to his
mother? Being a hunted man was not exciting any longer—
it was beginning to be frightening.
At breakfast the men slapped him on the back, called him
Sundowner Kid, and asked him where he was making for
next.
" Go longa walkabout," he replied in aboriginal fashion,
but his grin had little amusement in it.
After the meal, McVitty said to the boy: " I suppose you
know that a blanket and billy and things like that cost
money?"
" Yairs, mister, but I'm stony broke."
" Well, if I had a swag to give away you're the first cove
I'd give it to. But everything on this station belongs to my
boss in Brisbane. I'm only the overseer, you know."
"Aw, gee, I ain't askin' for much," said Smiley plaintively.
" Look here, Sundowner Kid, I know how we can settle
this thing. If I can show my boss you worked for your tucker
and swag, then it'll be all right. What say you do a day's
work for me? Even half a day might be enough to pay for a
swag. What do you say?"
" That's bonzer!" the boy replied eagerly. " Wotter you
want me to do?"
" Well, there's been some dogs in No. 2 paddock, and I've


been trying to get them. You can ride round the traps with
me this morning."
A station hand soon arrived with two horses. McVitty
brought out a small bottle of pale yellow liquid.
" Put that in your pocket," he told Smiley.
" Wot is it, mister?"
" The decoy. We sprinkle it on the bait, and it attracts any
dog that happens to be about."
Smiley pulled out the cork and sniffed. " Poo! What a
pong!" he exclaimed. " What's it made outer?"
" Never mind about that," smiled the overseer. " You just
see that you don't get any on yourself, or you'll have every
dog on the station following you around. They can smell
it a long way off."
The first trap was less than a mile away. It was set in
front of a hunk of raw mutton, and the bait was so arranged
between two logs that a dingo, in oxder to get at it, must
almost certainly step into the jaws. The teeth still gaped in
anticipation of a victim.
"Not a sign of a dog's tracks anywhere," commented
McVitty. " Get down and- sprinkle some of that decoy on
the bait. The other stuff's sure to ha v e gone stale."
" Gee, I bet it'd be excrooshinatin' to git yore feet caught
in that thing." said the boy as he carefully avoided the trap.
" I wouldn't like to be a flamin' dog and git me foot in it."
" I admit it's cruel, but it's no more cruel than the dogs
that rip open sheep's bellies. Sometimes they just bite a
piece out of some old ewe's side, and she goes running round
with a gaping wound, and the blowflies get at it and it's soon
soon crawling with maggots. That's pretty cruel, isn't it?"
" Yairs," agreed Smiley heatedly. " Them dawgs oughter
be skun alive."
He remounted, and they rode another half-mile to the next
trap.
" Struth, look at this!" exclaimed McVitty.
A black snake, nearly five feet long, was writhing in the
trap. Evidently, while investigating the bait, it had slid over
the plate of the trap and set it off. It was still very much
alive, despite its broken back.
The overseex dismounted and grabbed a stick. Only a few
blows were necessary to dispatch the snake, which McVitty
dragged out of the trap and threw on one side.
" That's a whopper of a snake," remarked Smiley, who had


got down off his horse to watch the fun.
" That'll teach it to mind its own business," muttered the
man as he knelt against the log to reset the trap.
A flat, black head slid out from under the log and swayed
close to the face of the unsuspecting overseer.
" What ..." began McVitty, turning to look.
Smiley saw it and yelled, " Look out!"
Smiley saw the snake's head go back to strike, and he
realised the man had no chance of escape.
The boy leapt forward and kicked at the reptile's head
while the overseer stared with horror at the beady eyes so
close to his own.
As the boy's foot flashed past McVitty's face the snake
struck, burying its fangs in Smiley's calf.
He yelled and jerked his leg frantically to and fro. The
snake clung on for a few moments, then fell off on to the
ground.
" It's bit me!" shouted Smiley. " It's bit me!"
McVitty was Qn his feet by this time, and he smashed down
a stick on the reptile's head. Satisfied that he had disabled
it, if not killed it, he turned to Smiley.
" It's bit me!" repeated the pale and shaken boy.
"You'll be all right," the overseer assured him as he
whipped out his knife. " Quick! Where did it get you?"
Smiley pointed out the two tiny punctures in his calf. The
knife slashed at them half-a-dozen times, criss-crossing
gashes from which the blood poured swiftly. Smiley's breath
hissed through gritted teeth.
The overseer bent down and sucked the wound, spitting
mouthfuls of blood on to the ground. "You're a brave lad,
Sundowner Kid. Now get on your horse and ride like mad
to the homestead. We can't do any more here."
Smiley grabbed the reins and scrambled on. With McVitty
leading the way they raced through the bush.
" They'll all be sorry when I die!" muttered the boy.
" They'll all be flamin' sorry!"
Within a few minutes they reached the homestead. Haul-
ing Smiley by the arm, McVitty ran up the verandah steps.
" Snakebite!" he shouted. " Condy's crystals! Bandages!
Somebody get the car out!"
A jackeroo came running with the first-aid kit and brandy
bottle. Meanwhile the overseer dumped Smiley on a bunk
and sucked more blood out of the wound.


Smiley, having got over the original shock, watched with
fascinated eyes as McVitty carried out the treatment the
boy had so often learned in school, but had never before
seen in actual practice.
" Condy's crystals!" The man snatched the bottle and
poured the purple liquid into the gashes.
" Ow!" exclaimed the boy.
" You'll be all right," smiled the o v erseer. " It won't hurt
for long. Joe, give him some brandy."
Smiley took the cup and raised it to his lips.
" Have a couple of good mouthfuls."
The boy gulped, spluttered, and spat most of it down the
front of his shirt.
" You'll never make a good boozer if you can't do better
than that," grinned McVitty.
"It burnt . . . me . . . flamin' . . . throat!" panted the
boy. He tried again and managed to swallow a mouthful.
" Ligatures!" snapped the overseer. He took a strip of
cloth and twisted it round Smiley's calf above the bite,
tying it tightly to stop the flow of blood to the heart and
nerve centres. He tied another below the bite.
" The car's ready," said the jackeroo.
" Come on, Sundowner Kid," called McVitty. " You're
going to see a doctor." He hauled Smiley off the bunk and
hustled him to the door.
" Where are we goin'?" asked the boy.
" Murrumbilla. You've got to see a doctor."
" No, no!" cried Smiley. " I don't want to see no doctor!"
" Don't be damn silly. You might die if you don't get
proper treatment."
" I wanter die! I don't wanter see no doctor!"
Ignoring his protests, McVitty dragged Smiley into the
car, which lurched forward and roared along the rough road.
Smiley now knew it was all up. Fate was thrusting him
back to the very place from which he had tried to escape.
Once in Murrumbilla, he was a doomed man. That is, if he
did not die on the way.
" Have some more brandy," urged the o v erseer, proffering
the bottle.
Smiley gulped down a few more mouthfuls. They did not
taste so bad now.
His leg felt numb. He saw that blood was still running
from the wound. Between the bandages the calf had swollen


considerably and the brown skin had taken on a faint purple
tinge.
The car swung through the station gates and out on to the
road to Murrumbilla. It swayed dangerously as the driver
accelerated to a frightening speed.
" You probably saved my life, Sundowner Kid," said-
McVitty. "If that snake had bitten me in the face I think
I'd have been a goner. You're lucky it only got you in the
leg."
Smiley did not care. He felt drowsy—and even the prospect
of meeting the sergeant did not seem to matter much now.
McVitty turned and saw the vacant stare. He slapped the
boy hard in the face, then shook him unmercifully.
" Wake up!" he yelled. " You've got to keep awake! Here,
drink some more brandy!"
While he forced the liquid down the boy's throat he
shouted to the driver to go faster, and the driver replied that
the car was all out.
The shock of slapping and shaking wakened the boy up,
but the brandy was beginning to fuddle his brain.
" They'll all be flamin' sorry when I'm dead," he muttered.
" I'd better take off those ligatures for a bit," said McVitty,
untying the knots. " Must let some blood through."
Smiley could not feel his wounded leg any longer. He
watched the overseer's operations with dazed eyes, wonder-
ing what all the fuss was about. McVitty saw the relapse
and slapped the boy again.
" Sorry," he said, " but I'm doing it for your sake. Take
another swig at the brandy."
"Excrooshinatin'!" murmured Smiley. "Excrooshinatin'!"
He hiccoughed, then giggled. " I'm boozed, mister, I'm
boozed!"
The car ploughed into a sandy patch, lurched towards the
fence, righted itself, and raced on.
The overseer tied on the ligatures again. "We won't be
long now. Only another couple of miles to go."
" Will I go to the doctor's place or the hospital?" called
the driver over his shoulder.
" Hospital," replied McVitty. " Even if the doc. isn't there,
a nurse is sure to be."
" I gotter confess," said Smiley suddenly and loudly.
" What?"
" I gotter confess," he repeated. He was now quite drunk,


and his fuddled brain had come to a decision. " I'm a fushe-
tive from law and I gotter confess to sergeant."
" What the hell are your talking about?"
" Opium."
" What?"
" I'm goin' to die, and I gotter confess. Get sergeant."
McVitty concluded that the boy was babbling a lot of
nonsense. " You'll be all right as soon as you get to hospital.
We're nearly there!"
The car roared on to the river flat and swung into the road
that led up to the hospital on the hill. The driver sounded
the horn repeatedly in order to warn the hospital that they
were coming. The blasts of sound shattered the quiet of the
morning and brought the township's inhabitants running out
to see what all the noise was about.
Within a couple of minutes the car skidded to a stop in a
cloud of dust alongside the hospital verandah. The doctor
and nurse came hurrying out.
" Snakebite!" shouted McVitty as he picked up the boy
and slung him over his shoulder.
" What sort?" called Dr. Gaspen.
" Black snake."
The doctor turned to the nurse and gave her instructions.
The overseer ran up the steps into the hospital, where he
dumped the boy on the nearest bed.
" Hullo, it's Smiley Greevins!" said the surprised doctor.
" Do you know the kid?"
"Yes. He ran away from home last night. Where did you
find him?"
While the overseer explained, the doctor examined the
bite and loosened the ligatures. The nurse hurried up with
anti-venine and a needle.
" Gotter confess," muttered the drowsy boy.
" He keeps on saying he's got to confess something," said
McVitty.
" Opium," murmured Smiley. " Goin' to die. Gotter con-
fess to sergeant."
" Nurse, ring up Sergeant Flaxman and tell him young
Greevins is up here. Ask him to come up as soon as possi-
ble," instructed the doctor as he took up the needle. He
turned to the boy. " This won't hurt, Smiley. Just a little
prick."
" You'll all be sorry when I'm dead," said Smiley. " You'll


all be sorry."
The injection was soon over. " Drink this," ordered Dr.
Gaspen, holding out a small glass of white liquid, and Smiley
drank it obediently.
" Is there anything I can do?" asked McVitty.
"You'd better wait outside on the verandah till the
sergeant comes." The doctor turned inquiringly to the nurse,
who was crossing the ward.
" Sergeant Flaxman is on his way now," she told him.
" Good. Is that other injection ready?"
" Yes, doctor."
Smiley observed the needle through glazed eyes. " Gotter
confess," he said.
" The sergeant will be here in a minute," the doctor told
him. He made the injection and the nurse attended to the
puncture.
Smiley felt as if he was in a dream. He felt numb all over,
even the pain had gone from his bandaged leg. The doctor
and nurse seemed to float about him, peering at him with a
curiosity he resented.
"Go 'way," he told them. " Mizzle orf."
" Here comes the sergeant," the doctor said.
Smiley was surprised to see a friendly grin on Sergeant
Flaxman's face.
" Well," the policeman said heartily, " you seem to have
had a hell of an adventure."
" I gotter confess," the boy announced hastily. He started
to tell the sergeant about Rankin and his visit to Willie
Coy's garden, when Flaxman interrupted.
" I know. Blue told me, and Rankin's in gaol and Willie
Coy, too."
" Eh?"
" When you disappeared I thought your cobber might
know where you'd gone. So I asked him but he said he
didn't know. After a while I got him to see that it wouldn't
be telling on you if he told me all he knew —so he did. So
I went and saw Rankin and made him tell me about the
opium and where he got it from. You've solved the mystery,
Smiley. Congratulations!"
The boy was surprised to find the sergeant patting him on
the shoulder.
"Ain't you goin' to arrest me?"
"Of course not!" Flaxman laughed. " I'm not even going


to arrest you for coshing your father. Your mother told me
how he pinched your money and you copped him one."
" Is 'e all right?"
"Oh, yes. You only bust his nose and gave him a bad
headache. He's gone to Charleville—left town for good I
told him to get out and stay out, or I'd arrest him for theft.
By the way, I sent someone to tell your mother you were
here, so she'll be coming up to see you any minute now."
" Did you tell 'er I'm goin' to die?"
"If you've got ideas like that," said Dr. Gaspen, "I'm
afraid you're going to be disappointed. If you were going to
die from snakebite you would have been dead some time
ago."
"Aw," said Smiley and he did not seem very pleased.
CHAPTER TWENTY-ONE
Next day was Saturday. Mrs. Greevins allowed her hero
son to sleep in for an extra hour before calling him for
breakfast.
" It isn't right for me to say it," she told him, " but I'm
real glad yore old man 'as gone."
" Too right," agreed the boy, though the idea of a father-
less future seemed strange. After a pause he added, " I wisht
I 'ad a father that was dinkum."
Mrs. Greevins patted his shoulder. " Now don't you go
worryin'. It's best for everybody 'e's been kicked out of town.
Eat yore breakfast."
After the meal Smiley announced, " I think I'll mizzle orf
and see 'ow Blue's gittin' on."
" You've gotter sweep the yard first," said his mother.
"Aw, gee, mum!"
" It's your job every Saturdee."
" Wot about me sore leg?"
" Wot about it?"
He indicated the bandages. "It's still a bit excrooshin-
atin'."
" It's wot?"
" It 'urts like anythin'."
" Well, if it 'urts, you can't go runnin' round lookin' for


Blue. You'd better git back to bed."
"Aw, no. It ain't as bad as that."
His mother said firmly, " You've gotter sweep the yard or
git back to bed."
Smiley reluctantly took the broom and went outside mut-
tering, " I wisht I'd died."
He was halfway through his sweeping when he heard a
whistle, and Blue came running up.
" 'Day, Smiley."
" 'Day," replied the boy without enthusiasm. " You told
on me."
" I nevex did."
" Yairs, you did. You revealed the secret of me flight from
justice."
"No, I never, Smiley."
" You told the sergeant."
"Aw, gee," replied the redhead. " I 'ad to. 'E come to me
and started askin' all sortser things. I couldn't come the kid-
stakes on 'im, could I?"
" You told on me," repeated Smiley sullenly.
Blue brightly changed the subject. " Did the ole snake
'urt you?"
" Gawn! Snakebites don't 'urt you. But when you git yore
leg cut open with a Western Castrator it's excrooshinatin'."
" Show us, cobber."
Removing the bandage, Smiley displayed the gashes, now
healing quickly as a result of hospital treatment and natural
health.
" Gee!" commented Blue enviously.
Smiley told him the whole story, exaggerating where his
imagination suggested.
Blue listened patiently for a time, ejaculating horror,
astonishment, and admiration at appropriate moments. But
at last he interrupted with his own piece of news.
" I'm gittin' me pony termorrer. A grey one from Tim
Gogarty. It cost three quid and it's broken in and I paid 'im,
so I'm gittin it in the mornin'."
Smiley looked glum. Seeing his friend's gloomy expres-
sion, Blue sympathised: " I'm real sorry you ain't goin' to
git yore ole bike."
" I am so goin' to git my bike."
" What?"
" I'm goin' to save up again and git my bike."


" Dinkum?"
" Square dinkum. I got plans."
" What sorter plans?"
" They're secret. I'm goin' to make ten quid as easy as
anythin'."
" Aw, gee, Smiley, why don't you tell a cobber?"
Finally the boy agreed, and he took a little bottle of yellow
liquid out of his pocket.
" This is a decoy for catchin' dingoes. Mr. McVitty, the
overseer, give it to me."
He knew this was not strictly true. McVitty had given
him the decoy to carry on their .round of traps, and in the
excitement of the subsequent adventure the bottle had been
forgotten till the boy discovered it in his pocket that
morning.
"Are you goin' to catch dingoes?" asked Blue.
" No, I ain't goin' after any wild dawgs. I'm goin' after
tame dawgs."
"Wot for?" asked his mystified friend.
" I'll tell you." He uncorked the bottle and held it out.
" Smell that."
Blue sniffed and grimaced. " Poo, it pongs!"
"It might pong to you, but it don't pong to a dawg. It
smells lovely to a dawg, and it don't matter if it's a wild dawg
or a tame dawg."
" Gawn!"
" I tell you straight it's bonzer stuff for dawgs."
"All right, cobber, don't git yore wool orf. What are you
goin' to do with this pongy stuff?"
? Smiley leaned over and whispered: " I'm goin' to lay a trail
o' this decoy from the main street out inter the bush. The
dawgs 'll all foller it. I'll be waitin' out in the bush to catch
em and tie 'em up."
" Haw!" said Blue with a scornful grin. " That won't do
you no good."
" Betcher it will. Betcher I'll make ten quid outer it."
" Gawn!"
Smiley went on: " Then I'll go to a cove that's lorst 'is
dawg and I'll ask 'im if 'e's offerin' a reward for it, and if 'e
jpiJ rbe able to git 'is dawg back for 'im.
Then I go and git 'is dawg and give it back to 'im, and then
I git the reward."
By this time Blue had changed his mind. This was a


scheme of genius. It's simplicity and impudence impressed
him greatly, and he asked his friend if he would let him join
in.
Smiley refused, but Blue argued so persuasively that his
mate was reluctantly agreeing to a partnership when the
schoolmaster came round the corner.
Mr. Stephens greeted the boys and asked after Smiley's
health.
" I hear you were a very courageous boy," he said.
"Aw," muttered Smiley, red-faced and embarrassed.
" I'd like you to write a composition on your adventures, so
that I can read it to the whole school."
Smiley blinked. " Gee, sir, I'm on me 'olidees."
" I know," laughed Mr. Stephens. " I'm not asking you to
do any homework while you're on your holidays. You can
do it when we start school again."
" Thank you, sir."
" Well, I'll be off now. I suppose I'll see you two larrikins
at the dance to-night?"
" Yairs, sir."
"Yairs, Mr. Stephens."
When the schoolmaster had gone, Smiley turned to Blue.
" Did yer 'ear that? I was courageous!"
" Yore lip's bleedin'!"
"I'll dong you one!" retorted Smiley. "You . . ."
" Smiley!" His mother's voice cut shrilly across the argu-
ment. " You git on with your sweepin', and don't stand there
maggin'."
"All right, mum." He turned to the redhead and muttered:
" Mizzle orf!"
"All right, don't git xatty. What about comin' crayfishin'
this arvo?"
" Too right. See you at the dam."
" Too right. Hooray, cobber."
" Hooray."
* *
" Take your partners for the Lancers!"
The M.C.'s command signalled the start of the usual Satur-
day night dance, and soon the hall rumbled with the stamp
and shuffle of eagex dancers.
Smiley and Blue took up their favourite positions just
behind the piano, so that they could peer into the open top
and watch the busy hammers striking the strings.


The hall gradually filled until almost the whole population
of Murrumbilla was there.
After the Lancers and a Schottische, the pianist rumbled
a vibrato bass chord. Everyone turned towards the platform.
Mr. Stephens, the schoolmaster, came forward and ad-
dressed the crowd:
" Ladies and gentlemen—l'm sorry I have to stop your
dancing for a while, but I'm glad so many of you have turned
up for this very special occasion.
" Some of you know what it's all about, and some of you
don't. I think most of the people in Murrumbilla have
heard the story by now, but there may be a number of people
from the surrounding stations who have yet to learn the
facts."
" Struth!" muttered Smiley to Blue during the pause. " 'ls
lip's bleedin' like anythin'."
" Briefly," continued Mr. Stephens, " I'm here to pay
tribute to the courage of one of our inhabitants. I'm here
to pay tribute to his courage and grit and determination."
The schoolmaster turned towards the piano and pginted
an imperative finger.
"Smiley! Come here!"
The boy started back as the crowd burst into applause
and roared, " Smiley, Smiley!"
Astonished and bewildered, the boy turned to escape. Mr.
Stephens strode across, caught him by the arm, and hauled
him to the centre of the platform.
" This is our hero," announced the schoolmaster. " Smiley
Greevins!"
Everybody shouted and stamped and made a great noise.
" Smiley Greevins," continued Mr. Stephens, " deserves
our praise for two things he's done. Most of you know what
these two things are, but you don't know all the details. So
I'm going to ask a couple of people to tell you about Smiley.
First of all, I call on our old friend Sergeant Flaxman."
At this moment Smiley jerked himself free of the school-
master's grip and bolted to the edge of the platform-
straight into the sergeant's arms.
" You're not going to get away now," laughed Flaxman,
hauling the boy back to the centre of the platform while the
crowd cheered.
The sergeant turned to the audience and said:
" Ladies and gentlemen—l can't talk like Mr. Stephens,


but I can tell you this much —this kid here has solved a
mystery I've been trying to get to the bottom of for a long
time."
He then told the story of Rankin and Willie Coy and the
opium. Finally, he said:
" And now I'm going to ask you to give three cheers for
Smiley Greevins!"
The hall roared while Smiley stood squirming. He was
still greatly embarrassed, but now he was elated as well.
This was something he had only dreamed about, and the
whole surprising, exciting affair had the quality of a dream.
Mr. Stephens came forward and said:
" Now I'll call on someone else to speak in praise of oux
young hero. The overseer of Cobalt Downs, Mr. McVitty."
The overseer came on to the platform and stood on the
other side of Smiley.
" Ladies and gentlemen," he said, " I'm only here to-night
because this lad saved my life."
He went on to tell the story of Smiley and the snake.
"And now," he continued, " I've got a bit of a surprise for
Smiley.
" The sergeant told me about how he worked liked any-
thing to save up enough money for a bike, and about how
his father . . . well . . . er . . . how his father spoilt it all."
Everybody hissed and groaned while Smiley hung his
head, not knowing how to look or what to do.
'"Well." said McVitty, "I thought Smiley deserved a
reward for saving my life, so to-day I sent a car into Charle-
ville to get a present for the boy—and hexe it is!"
He signalled to one of his jackeroos at the bottom of the
hall. The man advanced to the platform, wheeling a new,
shiny bicycle.
The overseer turned to the boy: " Smiley, will you be good
enough to accept this bike?"
Gee!" whispered Smiley as the machine was hoisted on
to the platform. " Gee, it's bonzer!"
It was indeed a beautiful bicycle, complete with all acces-
sories, including bell, lamp, toolbag, and luggage carrier.
McVitty had paid £9. 10s. for it.
" Spee-e-eech!" yelled the crowd. "Come on, Smiley!
Give us a speech!"
"Aw," said Smiley. "Gee, Mr. McVitty, it's bonzer!"
Betcher can't ride it!" called someone, and the crowd


took up the challenge in chorus.
Urged on by the overseer, the sergeant and the schoolmas-
ter, the dazed boy descended from the platform, took hold
of the bicycle, that was lifted down to him, and swung him-
self into the seat.
He pedalled furiously down the hall, realised that he was
about to hurtle into the crowd near the door, and jammed
on the brakes.
The locked wheel skidded on the slippery boards, and
Smiley and the bicycle crashed to the floor.
The boy picked himself up amid great laughter, while
half-a-dozen hands lifted up the machine.
There was a sharp, unpleasant smell in the air and a pool
of pale yellow liquid on the floor. The bottle of decoy had
been smashed in the fall.
But Smiley did not notice it. Nor did he know that the
liquid was dripping from his pocket as he grabbed his bicycle
and ran it out of the door and down the steps into the road,
followed by the cheers and laughter of the crowd.
" Hi, Smiley!" called a familiar voice, and Blue came run-
ning up.
" Hi, Blue."
" Give us a double, cobber?"
"Aw . . he began.
" I'll give you a double on me pony termorrer," said Blue
eagerly.
"All right. Git on."
With Smiley ringing the bell furiously and Blue perched
behind on the carrier, the bicycle raced down the main street
and along the road to Charleville.
The night air was fresh on their faces, and Smiley began to
sing exultantly:
There was a jolly swagman came to the billabong,
Under the shade of a coolabah tree,
And he sang as he watched and waited till his billy boiled,
" Who'll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?"
Blue joined in the chorus:
Waltzing Matilda, Waltzing Matilda!
Who'll come a-waltzing Matilda with me?
An hour later they were ten miles out on the Charleville
road.


At the same time the dancers in the hall were trying to
solve the problem of the dogs. Half the dogs in Murrumbilla,
lured by the decoy, were yapping, squealing and fighting to
get in.
"He must have kept the bottle," ruefully explained
McVitty to the schoolmaster and the sergeant.
" He's incorrigible!" said Mr. Stephens.
" Too right!" smiled Sergeant Flaxman. " But there's one
thing you've got to admit—he's dinkum!"






SMILEY
by
MOORE RAYMOND
This is the first novel by
Moore Raymond, the
Austrahan-born journalist
and broadcaster, whose lively
style and friendly
personality are so well liked
by bis numerous readers
and listeners.
The setting for his natural,
human comedy is highly
unusual—the vast and
at id plains of Western
Queensland, inhabited by
boundary riders, sheep
shearers, rouseabouts,
black ft?/ /ows, kangaroos,
pat rots, snakes, and insects
that always walk
backwards.
The hero of this adult
stoty is an engaging
12-year-old rascal called
Smiley, an Australian
counterpart of Tom Sawyer
or Huckleberry Finn.
Reading his adventures will
make you wish you could
have shared all his fun
and excitement when you
were his age.


3 1508
01592982


