

fteTH PPfVv-.
/; I >% Z' / ,-■ _/ / / I
flsL ifprAt „ ffCfhbrirK • PX c- vp v r -r iA^ /
,C 9n x / f-st




‘ Who work for freedom win not in an hour :
Their cost of conquest never can be summed !
They toil and toil through many a bitter day,
And dark, when false friends flee, and true ones faint.
The seed of that great truth from which shall spring
The forest of the future, and give shade
To the reapers of the harvest, must be watcht
With faith that fails not, fed with rain of tears,
And walled around with life that, fighting, fell.’*
Art. V.—SOCIAL STATE OF THE EARLY VICTORIAN
DIGGINGS.
THIE world that never saw before, may never see again, that
singular social phenomenon exhibited in the gold fever of
California and Victoria. The study of some of its leading points
must, then, be an interesting one. The writer, being in an adjoin-
ing colony at the time of the Ballaarat rush, allowed hut a few
months to pass before he was upon the field.
Governor Latrobe, in his first despatch upon the gold fever,
describes it as having ‘ completely disorganized the whole structure
of society.’ He goes on to speak of ‘ cottages deserted, houses to
let, business is at a standstill, and even schools are closed. In
some of the suburbs not a man is left, and the women are known
for self-protection to forget neighbours’ jars, and to group together
to keep house.’
The effect upon the neighbouring colonies of South Australia and
Tasmania was for the time being most distressing. The shop, the
counting-house, the farm were alike deserted. So great was the
emigration of men, that a serious panic seized the ladies of Adelaide
upon the report that the blacks intended to be avenged for the
treatment of their wives, by now coming in a body to the capital,
and making a Sabine onset upon the white women. Property went
down to zero, and the hearts of the strong grew faint.
Our colonial wits made merry at the excitement. One composed
the following upon the symptoms of insanity, and stuck the paper
against a gum tree at the first Victorian diggings, at Anderson’s
Creek—
* Ist. Rising early and proceeding to the creek, pulling the stones about and
washing the sand and gravel, then placing it in a box, resembling a cradle,
imagining the stones and sand to be a child of earth with golden hair, rocking the
child to sleep; then taking the mud and gravel out and putting it into an expect-
ing dish, mixing it with water and shaking it, all the time looking at the slush
with the fondest solicitations for its safety—ultimately throwing it away with
disgust, and assuming the appearance of intense disappointment.
‘ 2nd. Repeating the above strange proceeding day after day.
‘ 3rd. Troubled sleep at night, with frightful dreams of being pelted by Midas
with lumps of gold, upwards of 106 lbs. weight, and being unable to pick them
up, or of smaller, nuggets sticking anywhere but in your breeches pocket.’
* ‘ Craigcrook Castle.’


In a brief sketch of the social state of the early diggings there
will, of course, be many apparent contradictions. Everything was
more or less chaos. Men’s minds were unusually excited.
It is not attempted here to exhibit all the phases of society, and
certainly not to dwell at any length upon any of them; but a
broad touch here and there may give the English reader of 1862
some impressions of the diggings in 1851, 1852, and 1853.
The vast increase of civilization there, the growth of personal
comforts and conveniences, the development of intellectual and
moral agencies, the establishment of the highest forms of social
progression, and the multiplication of religious means, have all
tended to the elevation of the diggings. At the same time it must
he equally admitted that the propagators of disorder and vice have
been quite as assiduous, and more so, and that there now exists
there an amount of intemperance and lasciviousness wholly unknown
in the early times.
The political circumstances of the colony must be regarded in
this investigation of the social condition of the diggings.
Previously, the country was essentially, and necessarily, a squat-
ting one. Herds of cattle and flocks of sheep grazed over the rich
pastures, and the land was leased out on easy terms to the lords of
the wastes. The colony had been recently declared independent
of the older settlement of New South Wales, and His Honour Mr.
Superintendent Latrobe became His Excellency the Governor of
Victoria. The Legislative Council was almost entirely a nominee
one of the government. Such a thing as a true representative
system did not exist, and the ruling power was thoroughly oligar-
chical.
Complaints had been raised against this anti-British rule, but the
real pressure was not felt when the country was so thinly populated.
As soon, however, as the circumstances of the colony changed, in
the advent of new blood, the rise of new modes of life, the accession
of numbers, the growth of wealth, the unparalleled advance of the
labouring classes, an alteration in our institutions was loudly
required. A political expansiveness must keep pace with social
progress.
The battle between the contending parties was not of long dura-
tion. The pressure from without compelled reform. England
seconded the zeal of the Victorian council. The queen’s ministry
exceeded in liberality the wildest dreams of the oldest colonists.
In addition to the self-control of the land fund, the sovereignty
of the soil, the settlers, to the surprise of many, received the boon
of universal suffrage and vote by ballot.
But we have leaped over a few years in our story, and have to
retrace our steps to the opening of the diggings.
Not great sympathy was entertained for the vagabonds, as they
were


were said to have been called by some of the governing body.
The squatters, whose runs were invaded by the pick and cradle,
whose flocks were scattered by the diggers’ dogs, whose shepherds
fled to the mines, were not disposed to view the gold mania other-
wise than as a nuisance and a danger; though, when they after-
wards saw their property wonderfully raised in value by the change,
their resentment passed away.
In the mean time, instead of encouraging the movement, impedi-
ments were employed, and vexatious and unwarrantable interference
with miners’ rights took place.
The mining licence was a sore trouble. The first was issued in
Victoria on Sunday, September 21, 1851, for the month of Septem-
ber. As three fourths of the month had expired, only half of the
month’s fee of thirty shillings was demanded. As an equivalent
in the shape of protection was expected from the government, few
complaints against the system arose at first, excepting it was thought
hard to pay so large a sum for so small an occupancy of the waste
lands.
The working of the system, however, was felt to be most annoy-
ing. Frequent demands for the exhibition of the paper were
objectionable. The luckless fellow on the field without the permit
was fined five pounds. Occasionally the defaulter was kept a
prisoner some time along with thieves, or even secured by a rope
to the stem of a tree. The hunting for licences was not conducted
either prudently or humanely. Violent discussions followed this
line of conduct. Demagogues fanned the flame, and advocated
physical force to get rid of the tyranny.
It is needless to say that ample justice has since been done to
this branch of industry. There is no longer the reproach that the
miner is a nonentity in the state, and that the liberty which was
afforded him in town was refused when he was clad in the jumper
of the digger. Equity was satisfied, but not until blood had been
shed at the stockade of Ballaarat, in the so-called rebellion.
At the outset of the gold fever, a determination existed to main-
tain order at the mines, even with little protection from the law to
help them. The songs of a people are not less illustrations of
feeling than incitements to action. One very popular but rude
ditty was chanted in the tent at the close of 1851 and beginning
of 1852. Too long to give entirely, a few stanzas may serve. It
was set to the air of ‘ Coronation.’
‘ True buslimen wo, wo all agree
That no consideration
Shall cause disturbance ’mongst the free
Upon this golden station.
In bush attire, let each aspire,
By noble emulation,
To gain a digger’s chief desire—
Gold, by wise regulation.
Vol. s. — No. 17. ' f ‘With


‘ With spades and picks, we work like bricks.
And dig a gold formation ;
And stir our cradles with short sticks,
To break conglomeration.
This golden trade doth not degrade
Tho man of information ;
Who shovels nuggets with his spade,
Of beauteous conformation.
* What mother can her infant stock
View with more satisfaction,
Than we onr golden cradles rock,
Which most love to distraction ?
Let those who dare try thwart our care
At onr gold occupation;
They with bewilderment will stare
At golden incubation.
‘ We dig and delve from six to twelve ;
And then, for relaxation,
We wash our pans and cradles’ shelves,
And turn to mastication.’
&c. &c.
Whatever may be said of the rhyme, the reader will admit that
the moral is right enough. There was a principle of law and
order at work among a people who could sing this song.
The mode of life pursued by the diggers greatly influenced their
moral condition. The constant presence of dirt, untidiness, rude
dress, rough food, with inadequate supply of water, and a total
absence of the delicacies and refinements of society could not
hut exercise a most prejudicial effect upon the miners. It is wholly
different now. Upon the diggings at this time, comforts, and even
luxuries, are within easy reach; but in the early times, as the
writer knows from experience, discomfort was the rule. The ex-
citement of drink, under these circumstances, was the craving of
many.
A colonial writer thus refers to the sorrows of an amateur cook
of a party —
*A h ! if they only knew tho trouble you have had—how the fire would not bum
that morning—how many maggots you had to pick off the beef before boiling—
how the pudding got more dust than spice by the wind —how the damper got
burnt, while you were wiping out the greasy dishes with that rag that had,
unwashed, performed so much service of the kind—how you were puzzled to
make the soup with nothing to put in it—how the vinegar keg had leaked on the
sugar bag—how that stupid bullock put his dirty foot into your last dish of clean
water, just as the kettle boiling for supper gently glided off the log, and de-
liberately lay down in the ashes.’
A colonial poet, giving vent to his feelings upon this question of
diggings comforts, has the following lines—
‘ “ Well, it don’t suit me,” said Tim, “ I’m sure ; ,
That crowbar makes my hands too sore.
And miserably soaked, all day I’ve stood,
Locking the cradle, knee-deep in mud.
Now mucking at cooking, and slushing all day ;
Now delving through dirty rocks and clay.
Gold


Life at the Diggings. G 7
Gold digger! bah ! It’s all my eye,
And that you’ll say, lads, by-aud-by.
You’re welcome to your golden joys.
Your duffs, and Johnny cakes, and doughboys,
Your vile lobscouse and milkless teas,
Your endless bacon fry and cheese,
Your dreary nights and weary days.
Your barb’rous, semi-savage ways ;
Farewell to all your toil and strife.
And welcome quiet, cleanly life.” ’
If not quite so bad as the Burns of Geelong has made it appear,
the life was miserable enough, and had no tendency to sweeten the
temper, refine the manners, or elevate the morals.
As may be supposed, the health of the early diggers was much
affected by the discomforts of living, the severity of toil, and the
excitement of the nerves. The profession of a gold digger was not
then established. The pioneers had to learn much, and endure
much for the benefit of those coming after. The first holes sunk
were some six or eight feet square ; it has since been the fashion to
sink one about the shape and size of a child’s coffin. The extra
tod, the unwonted exposure, the miserable cooking, the bad water,
the wretched beds, the annoying surroundings, all tended to reduce
the physical.
Dysentery was sadly prevalent, and doctors’ fees were almost
fabulous. Accidents were comparatively rare, owing to the
reigning sobriety. Sitting upon damp ground, especially when
driving in at the bottom, induced several severe disorders. Rheu-
matism occurred often by carelessness. ’Women were more to be
pitied than men in this time of hardships. The writer has known
cases of confinements with no bed but a collection of leaves on the
ground, and no furniture save a single clothes chest. A medical
friend attended a case of this kind, in a tent of such thin texture
that the rain came in readily upon the poor creature on her
wretched couch of rags and leaves. The expense of medicine
was fearful, and the general character of professing medical
practitioners was something that would astonish the College of
Surgeons.
Fvery man must wash his own shirt in that day, or pay very
handsomely for the accommodation, when ten and twelve shillings
a dozen were expected.
A story is told of a certain cunning digger of that era of dlffi-
culty. The poor fellow had in vain attempted to conciliate the
good-will of a laundress. He sought the cleansing of his linen, and
the lady was too busy to undertake the job, or too independent to
bother herself about it. Finding no chance of a clean shirt by a
direct attack he had recourse to stratagem. He dropped all
mention of the linen, and gradually went into another line of argu-
ment. Soft tones of flattery fell upon the maiden’s ear. The voice
F 2 o


G 8 Social State of the Early Victorian Diggings.
of love stole upon the heart of the laundress, and her eyes soon
rested in modest pride and pleasure upon the manly face of the
miner.
The citadel was gained. The wily fellow waited till the sacred
knot was tied, and then turned upon his fair bride with a sort of
malicious smile, and said, ‘I have you now. You are my wife
now. You must wash my shirts now.’
The moral condition of the diggings, even at the early period,
was not most flourishing, in spite of the regulations prohibiting the
sale of drink, together with the remarkable paucity of females upon
the gold-field.
The one prominent cause of crime there was the presence of run-
away convicts and expirees, known commonly as Van Demonians,
or Derwenters, as Hobart Town stands upon the river Derwent.
These loose fish of the colonies were first to move across to the
charmed land. They were rough and ready characters, as hard
handed for labour as hard hearted for vice. They worked well,
and got the cream of the gold in the early days, but in town they
knocked it down quickly enough in drink, and indulged freely in
riot and disorder. ‘ Derwent Gully ’ and 4 Derwent Store ’ met
the eye at every rush, and testified as much to the members of the
tribe as to their devotion to the country of chains they had left.
Some of these worthies found that they could get just as much
gold by working at their old trade as at the new. Gold digging
would not prove so profitable or so pleasant as the process of bush-
ranging. They took advantage, therefore, of the small number of
constables, the irregularity of times, and the recklessness of wealthy
travellers, to commence their former employment. This was not
done on a petty scale, such as robbing golden washing stuff, hut
in the more orthodox fashion of ‘ stand and deliver.’
The share which these Derwenters took in such proceedings may
be ascertained from the police records. Although after all hut a
small fraction of the population of Victoria, they managed almost
to monopolize the crime.
At one of the assizes, in 1853, the presiding judge called atten-
tion to the fact, that of sixty convictions in the previous year forty
were laid to the charge of convictism. Another statement was
added, that twenty-six of forty formed the average at another time.
‘ It is painful,’ exclaims liis Honour, 4 to consider that we should be stigmatized
and held responsible for the guilt of sixty-six incorrigible offenders, strangers to
us and our country in every sense of the word, and that our gaols should be
crowded and our resources encumbered to furnish means of safe custody, main-
tenance, and coercion for men in whom the alternations of chains, rigour, and
liberty have produced no amendment.’
The colonists had been for several years previously to the gold
discovery engaged in a struggle with the home government
respecting transportation.
Providence


Providence brought relief to the sorrows of the colonies, and
compelled the authorities of Downing Street to look to our necessi-
ties through their own interests. When the table of gold was spread
before the criminals of the South the inducements to commit crime
in Britain, in order to have a free passage to Australia, at once
shocked the Ministry, and urged them to discontinue transporta-
tion. It was high time, for 4 Punch ’ himself had spread the glad
news throughout the British dominions in the stirring appeal of
‘ Labourers as wage and wittles likes
Unto a jemmy turn the coulter.
If you’d dig nuggets with Bill Sikes,
And not potatoes with Giles Jolter.’
The diggings were favoured with visits of ladies as well as
gentlemen of this particular class from the banks of the Derwent.
We give an illustration from the ‘Diggers’ Magazine.’
‘ “ Why don't you get married ?” says Dick to Tom, his mate, as they came down
for a spell. Tom had got a good swag, and thought he might now cage a bird for
a change. A lucky digger is a sure magnet for women; and he had less difficulty
in gaining consent than in getting a licence. After the blessing at church, a new
gig was bought, and the bride, with all her blushing honours, was driven along,
with her gold watch and satin dresses, to the bark hut of the diggings. A mate
soon after made a morning call upon the lady. He found her disrobed of her
satin glory, with a dirty cap half concealing a black eye, a short pipe in her
mouth, and barely sober enough to utter these memorable words, ‘ I’m a Der-
wcnter, and I don’t care who knows it.’
This peculiar satisfaction in contemplating the past, and loyalty
to the island in which they had served their time, may be said to
have been general with the Derwenters.
On one occasion, early in 1852, the writer was passing through
one of the delightful valleys of the diggings region, when he heard
the shout of a salesman. The man was standing in his cart, exhi-
biting some splendid pippins, and singing out aloud, ‘ ’Ere’s your
Van Demonian happles, and them as doesn’t like the country
needn’t buy ’em.’
The profession of a gold digger has had no reputation for morals
at any time. Somehow or other, mining countries have not always
been esteemed for virtue. According to an old translation from
Ovid—
* Men deep descend into the earth
With mattock, shovel, and spade,
And wicked wealth is digged up
Which mischiefe all have made.’
Before this golden age the colonies had made great social
progress. Literary, scientific, benevolent, and religious institutions
had been everywhere established, and were everywhere in healthy
action. Lectures at mechanics’ institutes were crowded, schools
were promptly attended, temperance societies were in successful
operation, and a strong vein of piety ran through the settlement.
Even Tasmania, with all its taint of convictisra, and in defiance ot
the


the cruel injustice of the parent state, had so advanced in morals
as to present features of improvement which the writer has not
seen surpassed in Europe. The enthusiastic reformer wanted but
the cessation of transportation to realize his ideas of a southern
millennium. So great a march had been made by teetotalism that
about the year 1850 a very large proportion of ministers and
Christian people were members of the society, and a strong public
feeling in its favour had been originated: the year 1860 presents
not so fair a picture.
Ihe excitement of the gold discovery closed the halls of the
mechanics institutes, broke down organizations of moral progress,
and almost annihilated the columns of temperance.
And yet upon the gold fields themselves there was not in the
very early times that profanity and vice so conspicuous at a later
date. An important reason may.be that, excepting the Dervventers,
a large number of the diggers were men of families from neigh-
bouring cities, whose influence would be used on the right side.
Notwithstanding the serious examples of declension there were not
a few who maintained the integrity of their principles. Checks
existed in the knowledge that folks were surrounded by those who
knew them, and who might hereafter bear a tale to the distant
fireside.
Another good thing was the absence of temptation to do wrong,
however few might be the inducements to do well. No drink was
publicly sold upon the field. This was the salt of the day. Then,
there were tew women at all present on the ground, and the hordes
of prostitutes of all degrees, so common and devastating now, were
unknown then.
Sunday was from the very first observed in a proper manner.
Work was totally suspended. This deference to public opinion is
worthy of notice, as Chinese and expirees alike obeyed the impulse.
It is true that with many Sunday meant only a clean shirt, a
wash, a rest, and a plum pudding; but others kept it up in the
reading of the Scriptures and private worship, if unable to attend a
service.
A number of Wesleyan local preachers, from Adelaide and
Hobart Town in particular, being gathered on the diggings, held
services in their own localities. A couple of young ministers of
that body were then despatched to the scene. The writer heard
one of them preach on a stump under a huge tree at the Forest
Creek. He had the pleasure of hearing that excellent Presby-
terian pastor of Buninyong, the Rev. Thomas Hastie. This
gentleman was the first to gather the diggers together at
Ballarat. We listened to his earnest discourse on one of the
Flats beside a fallen monster of the forest.
In March and April, 1852, the Bishop of Melbourne went
round


round the and held services. We were present when
lie conducted worship at Bendigo. He stood beneath a sort of
umbiella canopy to shield his head from the sun, and his congre-
gation were scattered about upon fallen logs, or lounging beneath
the trees. He did not go through the entire service, giving us the
Litany, Commandments, and Thanksgiving only. His sermon
was upon the prayer of ‘ Let me die the death of the righteous.’
At the conclusion of his interesting service, he addressed the
miners upon the necessity of putting up more substantial resi-
dences against the rigour of the coming winter season. He thus
showed his anxiety about the temporal as well as the more en-
during happiness of his audience.
The heavy expenses attendant upon a mission to the gold fields
prevented a speedy advent of clergymen. The Government, how-
ever, came to the rescue with a special fund of assistance, in
addition to the usual annual church grant. Then another
objection existed in the minds of ministers—the wretched mode of
life and real hardships to be endured. The diggers had the
same in a more aggravated form. When the clergy did arrive,
they found the abode less irksome than they feared; while the
enormous fees they received from the rush of marriages in the
primitive period, in addition to handsome salaries, rendered their
position an envious one to their brethren elsewhere.
Tiie churches of the day were of canvas, with earthen floors.
Ihese were subsequently exchanged for wooden ones; to be
supplanted, in their turn, by splendid architectural structures of
brick and stone.
In the early times men worked early and late. They were
ardent in pursuit of wealth, if not wise in retaining it. There
were no drawbacks to interfere with their employments. No
amusements had come up on the field, so soon to be inundated
with players, boxers, mountebanks, singers, tumblers, &c. No
roadways had been formed, beyond the tracks wheeled out by the
miners themselves, and rambling among the holes at night was
neither pleasant nor safe. The ‘ Argus,’ regularly cried through
the diggings, gave them news of the outer world ; and a very
irregularly managed and besieged post-office afforded them intelli-
gence from friends.
Thus protected from evening excitement, they were preserved
from much temptation.
Times changed when women began to assemble at the diggings.
With the discomforts and social disadvantages of the first year or
two, this was no place for females, proving agreeable to the
individual husband. It was neither prudent nor comfortable for a
wife to be under the same tent covering as her husband’s mate,
though the family couch may have been parted off’ by a calico
screen.


screen. The decencies and proprieties of life were constantly
invaded by the huddling together of persons and sexes.
The evils grew apace when drink came more freely upon the
field. Their temptation to wives received a fearful extension
in the proffer of the cup. Great irregularity ensued. Left-
handed marriages became the fashion. Loose women from the
neighbouring colonies crowded up to the more attractive gold
region, and formed discreditable and transitory alliances. Ex-
change of partners, and desertions of connexions, entailed great
misery and vice, and pressed cruelly upon the condition of
children.
Much was said about the disparity of sexes as the cause of
licentiousness. Without disputing the fact and the conclusion, we
cannot but say that far less vice existed when the men were
almost wholly alone, than when the disparity was considerably
lessened by the accession of female society. For the first year at
the diggings, before the great advent of English immigration, the
amount of the social evil upon the gold fields was small indeed,
and most unintrusive in character. Perhaps, with some tempe-
rance leanings, we may consider that the comparative absence of
alcoholic stimulants may have had much to do with this virtuous
demonstration. It is but right, also, to add that the majority
perhaps, of the early miners were married men, who had left their
families in Melbourne, Sydney, Adelaide, or Hobart Town.
The Temperance Question comes prominently before us in
this investigation.
It has been well said that drunkenness is fed by excitement.
It may be judged, then, that so high a stimulus as the gold fever
would call for large draughts of alcohol. The very congregation
of men away from homes, from women, from hallowing and re-
straining influences, engaged in such a calling, and surrounded by
so many discomforts and annoyances, would seem, according to
British notions, to necessitate the existence of a considerable
development of the drinking usages.
The nature of society, so rent and disorganized, so little checked
by legislative and administrative functions, was also favourable to
this demoralization.
The composition of the community indicated the high proba-
bility of such intemperance, as a large proportion of the first
diggers came from Van Diemen’s Land, that gaol of convictism.
The worst men had fewest bonds to confine them to their homes,
and were foremost in the flight across the Straits. And though a
check to their passage was raised by a severe enactment passed by
the Victorian Council, absolutely prohibiting, under severe penal-
ties, the immigration of those who had been under government
control in the little island, yet a very large number of this rough
class


class got upon the gold fields. Carrying thence their natural love
ol liquor, and being amply provided with means for the wildest
indulgence of their taste, with little or no hindrance to their enjoy-
ment, it is not surprising that these men of chains went to riotous
lengths, and brought into European disrepute the social state of
the early diggings.
r Ihe fiist men upon the field were colonists of the- province.
■They had homes and families to leave. They were, generally
speaking, sober, well-conducted citizens. They were of no one
station in society, but were representatives of all degrees. The
writer had neighbouring cradle mates, of not merely lawyers,
doctors, merchants, and ministers of his acquaintance, but even
members of the legislature. When, therefore, they found them-
selves placed insecurely enough with so mixed a population,
without adequate government protection, they were not likely to
be blind to the prejudicial influence of strong drink upon the
condition of society. However much they may have been used to
the they saw at once that in their circumstances its
introduction in any guise was to be prohibited to insure their
peace.
When, therefore, at a gully a barrel of spirits was found, it was
seized by popular exclamation, and its contents solemnly emptied
into the creek, rather than down the throats of the miners. It
was better, it was said, that one man should suffer the loss of his
property, than that disorders should be created, and the public
safety hazarded.
The government of the country, though perhaps not more
virtuous, or heedful of the comfort of people, than authorities in
general, proceeded to endorse this public sentiment, and added
the force of law to the absolute prohibition of any alcoholic liquor
upon the diggings.
This was resented by those who preferred their own selfish
enjoyment to the welfare of the community, by those who cynically
object to any regulation whatever proceeding from head-quarters,
by those who hoped to make profit by vice, and who loudly
declaimed against interference with the freedom of trade, &c.,
and by those who hoped for plunder in the wreck of order by
drink.
No law, however good, can be without some injury to the
innocent. It is but human that there should be weakness. The
absolute prohibition of sale, rendered it, at least, exceedingly
difficult for the sick to procure port wine or porter under medical
prescription, especially in cases of fever, which were rather common
in the very early times, from the wretched condition in which the
miners were obliged to live.
The writer has known a medical friend to go from tent to tent
and


and store to store in search of a bottle of wine for a patient,
offering a most extravagant sum for the article.
But when at length, in answer to remonstrances, a sale was
permitted upon medical certificate, the irregularities which ensued
seemed to justify the apparent harshness of the original measure,
and confirmed the views of those who supported the prohibitory
course of authority. The following quotation from the ‘ Gold
Diggers’ Magazine’ for November, 1852, exhibits the evil—
‘We are sorry to learn that certain self-styled medical gentlemen are in the
habit of keeping genteel grog-shops at the diggings. The ordinary pills and
bitter draughts are renounced for the more tasty and better-paying indulgence of
alcoholic physic ; and this, not in the form of tinctures and cordials, but in the
less refined guise of common spirituous liquors.’
But, as with the opium traffic of China, so with drink in
Australia, wherever purchasers are to be found, there will always
be those, greedy of gain, and regardless of moral arguments,
who will dare the law to make a profit. Not a few of those who
kept stores upon the diggings had a private repository of the for-
bidden article, to retail to the safe ones. With grief it must be
affirmed that some Melbourne and Geelong merchants, of high
repute as Christian professors, were forward in this evil work.
They could not resist the temptation, though only drapers or grocers,
of adding to their wealth by becoming sly grog sellers. And when
fines and confiscations fell upon more insignificant and less prudent
dealers, complaints were loudly expressed that the respectable but
more extensive retailers were forgotten or undiscovered by the
police.
Sly grog tents became the institution of the diggings. They
entered quietly and unobtrusively, and pursued their trade at first
in secret and with caution. Emboldened by success, and enriched
in the speculation, their numbers rapidly increased, and their
reserve was abandoned.
As early as December, 1851, a few months only after the first
pick had struck auriferous ground, we have the testimony to the
prevalence of this awful evil, in a letter from Mount Alexander,
Alluding to the grog tents, the writer says—
‘ The numerous drunken men to be seen knocking about, fights, and robberies,
are sufficient evidence that this nuisance exists to some extent; and it will
require something stronger than the dozen or two of the whitey-brown force to
put it down, more especially as it is on the spread, like the thistles round Mel-
bourne.’
The practical experience of the writer, which commenced three
months after the date of this communication, was not of so gloomy
a character. Upon his advent upon the gold fields, he saw so
little interference and violence, as to raise his astonishment. Thou-
sands of rough characters were brought together, and yet he felt
no fear in moving about the gullies at any hour, and very seldom
encountered


encountered a man under the influence of liquor. It was very
clear to his own mind that the law of prohibition was so far carried
out as to be of immense benefit to the community.
The difficulties in the way of stopping the liquor traffic may be
briefly stated. The prohibition doctrine arose from no temperance
origin : it was an expedient suggested by Christians for the pre-
vention of crime in a lawless condition of society. They who pro-
mulgated the order of the State were never suspected of teetotal
leanings. They took their glass, and were willing that others
should drink in Melbourne and Geelong. They objected to the in-
flammatory beverage among an inflammatory community. They
had no higher ground for prohibition. Once remove the fear of
an outbreak, and their supposed temperance principles fell at once
to the earth. There was, then, no inherent vigour in the ordinance.
The police, who were appointed to carry out the enactment,
could certainly never be charged with even sober qualities. Some
of them had passed certain degrees of freedom in the neighbouring
island, and were useful from their experience at an older date,
while others were found in that then unpopular and hooted order
from their unwillingness to labour, and general reckless habits.
The police force of Victoria, which ultimately became as efficient
and as high principled in the execution of duty as any in the
world, was in the early digging times of no great account.
The share in the fines was the propelling motive for conviction;
but as means were forthcoming without such trouble, and saving
uncomfortable collision with persons, these convictions became less
and less, until the law became a byword and a reproach.
The sly grog dealers, who always regarded themselves as a most
harshly and unjustly treated set of people, were not pleased at this
subtraction of their profits, and often grudgingly gave the bribe,
which in some instances went in the shape of a black mail. One
man told the writer that what he had paid the inspectors of police,
to ward off attacks upon his premises, would have made his fortune.
Anyhow, it is certain that collusion did exist between the police
and the dealer, and the prohibitory law thus became in great part
a dead letter.
Another check to the operations of the law arose from the great
unpopularity of government. This was conspicuous enough in
1852, but grew rapidly after, until it culminated in the Ballaarat
rebellion of 1854. The police, employed in the collection of
diggers’ licences, were so much the objects of public abhorrence,
that their interference even in more legitimate and wholesome pro-
ceedings was viewed with distrust and resented as tyranny. Thus
it was that the grog sellers, when set upon by the authorities, were
esteemed by the miners as fellow martyrs, and sympathized with
accordingly.
The


The mode in which the executive treated the offenders was one
rather partaking of Turkish rule than the English constitution. It
was not enough that the vendor was fined fifty pounds, one half of
which went to the informer, but his alcoholic property was de-
stroyed, and his tent was burnt to the ground. However this
summary way of acting was thought of at first, it soon became a
subject of outcry, from its barbarism and unnecessary cruelty. The
writer has been present at the burning of a grog tent, and was
witness to a demonstration of popular condemnation of the deed,
while few undertook to defend the conduct of the dealer.
The unpopularity, therefore, of the convictions, from the mode
of operation, and the actors in the charge, induced a gradual
diminution of attacks, and a corresponding increase of grog tents.
Further, the diggers themselves were charged in process of
time. The nature of the employment, from its associations, tended
to lower the moral sense, and elevate the force of animal propensity.
A taste for liquor was thus almost insensibly gained, even by those
who had once been loudest in their condemnation of the traffic.
Again, a respectable class of early diggers quickly left the field.
They retired to their colonial homes. A call had been made for
their services in their respective professions. It was discovered
that the doctor and the lawyer could raise handsome fees in towns,
the shopkeeper realize most extravagant returns, the mechanic
obtain enormous wages, and the farmer sell his hay at a price
which made sugar less valuable by weight.
The new comers from England, and from almost the world at
large, were not likely to feel the necessity of provision for the
welfare of the colony, as those who had established homes therein.
Most of these were doubtless men of education, and many of them
had been brought up in even respectable positions; but a
hesitancy may be observed as to their superiority of moral cha-
racter, However good at home, some were apt to think they
must be colonial out there. To be colonial they thought was to
be low, drunken, and reckless. This compliment the real colo-
nists did not acknowledge. In pursuit, then, of this supposed
colonial qualification, which they too evidently derived from con-
sorting with the Yan Hemonian fast ones of the gold fields, the
new comers were rapidly the means of exalting the dignity of the
sly grog tent, and of aiding in the propagation of anti-temperance
principles. Young men, suddenly thrown from the confinement of
desk and counter, and removed from the restraint of family rela-
tion, were not likely to be deterred from the indulgence of their
own selfish propensities by any sympathies for the social progress
and welfare of the colony, of whose gold they were willing to take,
but for the good of whose children they were not willing to make
the least sacrifice.


It was not always so. Once it was written from Mount
Alexander : ‘ The respectable diggers are willing to be enrolled
as specials, and are desirous to prevent the sale of spirituous
liquors.’ This was the report of an inspector of police to the head
of his department. Another person, addressing the writer of this
article, writes thus from I ryer’s creek : ‘ The new commissioner,
Mr. Mostyn, deserves the congratulations and gratitude of every
friend, to order. The police, directly or indirectly under his able
superintendence, have been fortunate enough to detect and fine
several infamous proprietors of these local nuisances’ (grog
tents).
An extract from another private letter may be published. At
the very time when the digger wrote these lines he was in the
meshes of a grog tent. The writer found the poor fellow in one of
these disreputable hovels, and vainly sought to rescue him from
the destroyer. A gentleman by birth, and scholar by education,
and a literary man of some talent, he had early fallen a victim to
strong drink. His remarks, therefore, have a force which would
not belong to those from one less practically acquainted with the
nature of these dens.
‘I cannot refrain,’ says he, ‘from a recommendation of the powers that ho to
exercise the utmost of their authority in suppressing the numerous sly grog tents
which swarm in the gold fields. The police may be vigilant, energetic, and im-
pervious to bribery ; but I am of opinion that the remedy to so monstrous an evil
must be effected through other means. Most of us have heard of Murderer’s Flat
and Choke’em Gully in the location of Fryer’s creek ; and it is supererogatory to
refer to the prolific source which gave names to such places. Upon the diggings
there are resident hundreds of educated gentlemen of high family and respectable
connexions. These persons, I am sure, would with laudable alacrity aid our
colonial government, and come to the rescue in such a moral campaign,’
Alas! be could not come to the rescue. He was a slave to the
evil, but bad no moral power to lift a finger to its removal, however
much he groaned beneath its miserable oppression. He has with
bitterness related his experience, and avowed his physical inability
to avoid a glass if that glass were before him. Such a man could
call upon others to come to his rescue, by the enforcement of the
government scheme of prohibition.
The highest authorities in church and in state bore testimony
to the beneficial effects of the law, however feebly and imperfectly
carried out. At the first sessions held at Castlemaine, in Decem-
ber, 1852, we have the judge congratulating the jury upon the
small number of offences. He is careful to refer it to the true
source, the recent act of the legislature, ‘that which,’ he
declares, ‘ prohibits the detestable illicit trade in these infuriating
liquids, to the debasing indulgence in which almost all crime is to
be traced.’
Mr. Hargraves, the first discoverer of gold in Australia, paid a
visit to the Victorian diggings in 1852. At a public breakfast in
Melbourne


Melbourne, the writer heard him make the following assertion:
‘ He heard a great deal of the disorganization which existed at the
mines; but he was happy to state that he had found none of that
disorganization of which so much had been said in the sister
colony.’ Judge Barry, in June, 1852, hears the same sort of
testimony.
In answer to the charges of English prints, an advertisement
was inserted in the colonial papers, bearing the signature of lead-
ing clergymen of various denominations, medical men, storekeepers,
merchants, and others. Among other statements is this: ‘lt is
scarcely possible to imagine that so many persons could be congre-
gated with so small an amount of crime, or a greater degree of
security, both as regards person and property.’
The English reader must bear in mind that this prohibitory law
was promulgated at a time when the government was so feeble as
to be a perfect laughing-stock to the colonists. The want of means,
and the difficulty of obtaining constables, or even clerks, prevented
the authorities from supporting their own orders. The enactment
was sustained at the outset by public sentiment. When, through
circumstances before mentioned, that sentiment no longer ade-
quately existed, the law became wholly inoperative, in spite of a
vast array of officials and mounted police, then brought to act
upon the ground.
The crimes which stained the colonial calendar of the early
period of the diggings were almost wholly committed either in the
two seaports, or upon the roads. There fthe public-houses pre-
sented temptation to men to become preys to robbery, and excited
others to deeds of violence. The horrors of the Black Forest
will be long remembered. But the roving bands of plunder were
sheltered, if not organized, in the roadside inns of the neigh-
bourhood.
The writer is tempted here to give his personal experience of
those roadside dens of the period—to tell of their filthiness and
wretchedness, their extravagant charges and inadequate accommo-
dation, their tumult and confusion, their display of blood and
infamy. But desiring to keep strictly to his subject of the gold
fields themselves, he cannot enter upon this sad story.
When the habits of the people grew worse, when society became
more corrupt, and when government itself was less capable to re-
strain, or less willing to encounter the sly grog system, a deter-
mined effort was made in Melbourne, in 1853, to bring a pressure
to bear both upon the diggings and the rulers.
A Maine Liquor Law movement was organized. An influential
committee was appointed. Large sums of money were forth-
coming. Several merchants promised a hundred pounds a year to
the society. A strong moral influence was brought to bear upon
the


the respectable but illegal traffic in drink. The Governor received
deputations and memorials. An agent held meetings throughout
the colony. The press, almost universally, advocated the cause of
prohibition.
Though associated with temperance, and both organized and
chiefly conducted by those who were known as advocates of tee-
totalism, it was not, strictly speaking, a teetotal society. At that
period total-abstinence institutions were silenced. Many were
altogether wrecked, and others held but a trembling existence.
Drunkenness raged so fearfully in Melbourne, and spread with
such terrific violence to the neighbouring colonial capitals, that the
very demon of misrule seemed to have been loosed amongst us there.
A sort of despairing cry had gone up from the settlements, and
had spontaneously originated this Maine Law movement, which
politicians and moralists of that day appeared to think the only
saving clause.
After doing good service for a time, the society sunk into desue-
tude. Funds failed from the commercial panic. Internal incon-
sistencies checked the zeal. Public sentiment failed to come up to
the mark. The social disorder overwhelmed the efforts of the few.
Personal interestedness thwarted exertion, and checkmated designs.
The institution fell through, and rose no more. But one active
result of the undertaking was the infusion of fresh spirit into the
real temperance movement, and the resuscitation of local societies
for the reclamation of the drunkard.
A vigorous attempt was made in the legislature to open the
diggings to the licensed system.
It was urged that the sly grog tents were nests of crime. None
doubted that. It was then said, that licensed houses would afford
the required accommodation for travellers, but destroy the sly grog
system. This position was declared by [our friends to be unte-
nable. Results have verified their predictions. But the publicans’
interest was powerful, and some good men were deceived into the
belief that at least the trial of the change might be desirable.
Against this insidious policy the colonists generally uttered
their indignant remonstrance. The ‘ Argus ’ did good service on
the occasion. In May, 1853, we hear the editor despairingly
exclaiming, ‘The prevalence of drunkenness is beyond descrip-
tion.’ The ‘ Gold Diggers’ Magazine ’ for February, 1853, pre-
sents the subject in this language—
* Drinking there is, but the proprietors of these dens (sly grog tents) do their
best for their own sakes to prevent disorder and intemperance. So long as no
legalized public-houses are established, we have no great alarm for the sobriety
and safety of the diggings. But we should tremble for the consequence of their
introduction. Drunkenness would be more open and frequent; disturbances and
bloodshedding among an armed community would he common; sly grog shops
would increase enormously, from the facility with which they could then obtain
their supplies ; and the tradesmen would mourn over the loss of industry and pro-
perty, as much as the philanthropist over the growth of immorality and misery.’
But


Bat the attempt did not succeed on that occasion. The hill did
not pass. The occasion led the magazine on the following month
to indulge in some premature exultation : —‘ Every friend to good
order and morality must surely rejoice in the failure of the pro-
posed measure to establish public-houses at the mines. “ Hurrah
for the diggings !” will be the cry now of faithful wives and anxious
mothers. The well-disposed digger, who believed it impossible to
remain, should the law have passed, may now rest from his fears.
Those of our council who have voted in opposition to the bill
deserve the thanks of the whole community. Much honour is due
to the writer of an excellent leader upon this subject in the
“ Argus.” . . . We trust no other attempt will be made to bring
crime, disunion, and dismay into our diggings by legalizing the
sale of strong drinks there. The diggers, as well as the citizens
of Melbourne, have publicly declared their abhorrence and alarm
at the contemplated measure.’
But the triumph was soon eclipsed in defeat. Townships were
proclaimed on the gold fields. The despotic rule of the commis-
sioners was arrested. A more liberal disposition of government
followed. In the success of more enlightened policy the enemies
of temperance saw their means of triumph. Once proclaimed a
township, nothing could prevent Castlemaine and Ballaarat having
the institutions of settled society. Time-honoured usage had
sanctioned the licence system. It came by virtue of the new order
of things upon this part of the diggings, which was thus taken out
of the more direct control of the legislature.
According to custom an application for a licence must be posted.
It was affixed upon a huge tree. The writer had the mournful
satisfaction of seeing it duly recorded. The application was, to
tell the truth, well supported. It was signed by the two clergymen
of the diggings —English and Scotch.
Houses ran up rapidly. Hotels of vast magnitude, and some
rough magnificence, followed. In various other places a remark-
able outburst of civilization took place. Individuals of a parti-
cular locality were suddenly seized with the township mania. The
government office was besieged with applications that such a
locality be nominated a township.
The reason for this singular activity for the interests of the
public was obvious enough to the initiated. The disinterested par-
ties were anxious to open a public-house in that quarter.
It is quite unnecessary to follow up the history of the diggings,
as the article must confine itself to the very early period of their
establishment. But it may be mentioned, in passing, that the
establishment of the regular and orthodox public-house did not
tend to the diminution of sly grog tents, but greatly increased
their number and audacity. For awhile the publicans of the state
order seemed ready to play the indignant, and resent the intrusion
of


of the contraband. But they soon recovered their placidity, as
they observed the development of thirst and the extension of the
wholesale trade; and they were content to receive with smiles the
men supposed to be their opponents.
The growth of intemperance at the diggings was in equal pro-
portion to the spread of conveniences for sale. The greater the
facility, the greater the excess. A sad tale could be told of the
sorrows of drink; but the readers of ‘ Meliora ’ are, unfortu-
nately, too well acquainted with the miseries of drunkenness in
Britain to need a description of the consequences of drinking else-
where.
At the mines it completed the degradation of some, and acce-
lerated the fall of others. Women were being brought upon the
new ground, to be subjected to new temptations under most pro-
voking circumstances. Deaths accumulated, disorders multiplied,
poverty was extended, resources were wasted, enterprise was
checked, and the moral progress of society sustained a shock
which once seemed ready to paralyze the arm of the benevolent,
and the voice of the preacher.
In the cautious times the sly grog-seller had no brandy, but
hard stuff; no gin, but vinegar; and no rum, but brown lemonade.
He was obliged to decline payment for the liquor, even under
these disguises, and be content with selling a bit of tape or a
glass of water.
The less said about the character of these establishments the
better. They were haunts for robbers, asylums for blacklegs, and
houses of infamy. The loss of health, money, and reputation
followed entrance therein. A woman convicted of sly grog-selling
was questioned by the magistrate. 4 Who is your husband ?’ said
he. Her immediate and shameless reply was, 4 Any one who has
five shillings.’ She was a fair type of her class.
An advertisement which appeared in the public prints in 1853
will still further illustrate the social state of the diggings. A pro-
spectus, signed by Dr. Bainbridge, was issued with the following
title :
* GEELONG SANATORIUM AND GOLD-DIGGERS’ HOME.
It runs thus : ‘lt is proposed to establish an asylum for the sick, and a home
for the homeless and friendless gold-digger ; for such as are so unlucky as to have
too much money to entitle them to bo admitted into the Geelong infirmary; for
those who have been so imprudent as to have resorted to the public-house for
shelter, and have, consequently, been found drunk in the streets; for such as
have unwisely devoted then- hard earnings to the destruction of their health, botli
of body and mind.’
Many good-meaning Christians never interfere with politics.
They believe it to be their duty to let governors do as they will.
In \ ictoria there were some of this kind, and they kept true to
their principles so long as the government went smoothly, or there
Vol. s. — No. 17. g seemed


seemed nothing opposed to the interests of humanity. But when,
with this vast immigration of 1852 and 1853, they found the lands
of the colony so locked up from the people, that with the disposi-
tion to settle on a farm there was no way to obtain it, an outcry
was raised against the government, and a demand for a more
liberal policy was urged, on the ground of morality. It was said
that men got money at the diggings, could not invest it in land
because of the obnoxious regulations, and were induced to spend
their earnings wastefully in drink.
When, too, surveys and sales were originated, it was still as-
serted that the system was not so extended as to be of much avail
except to the capitalists.
A successful effort was made to procure the unlocking of the
lands, on the plea that the working man’s millennium would then
come. He would have land cheap and good. He would be able
to settle down away from tile bad diggings, marry, and be a sober
citizen. This was the dream. It required something stronger to
wean the men from drink.
Without doubt they who did invest their savings in a farm
were in a better moral position than those who rambled about from
one digging to another. But the sorrow was this: that temptation
came near them still. Lots of townships were proclaimed in the
centre of every little knot of farmers ; and the public-house, though,
perhaps, excepting the blacksmith’s shed, the only building in the
township, became the rallying-point of the thirsty, and the destruc-
tion of many a good resolution in the retired gold digger.
A diminution of the evil was certainly obtained; for the better
sort of men were thus saved from the fire of temptation at the
reckless mines, when induced to purchase a farm.
The primitive diggings of Ballaarat, Mount Alexander, and
Bendigo have since wholly changed their character. The mise-
rable canvas store has become the well-built shop, with plate-
glass front. The gold-buyers’ tent has grown into the magnificent
stone bank. The earth-floored church of calico has spread into
the noble proportions of architectural beauty. Ballaarat, Castle-
maine, and Sandhurst have all the progressive institutions of the
most flourishing of European cities. The press is worthily repre-
sented, and municipal bodies are in vigorous being.
These are, so to speak, the outward developments of progress.
We decline going into the question of moral greatness. Our task
wfis to bring out some of the social exponents of the early golden
age. From the rudeness of that forest life, Anglo-Saxon energy
has raised an European civilization. Whether in the advance of
Victoria, as in the mighty growth of civilization in the old halls of
Europe, there is a real corresponding increase of national virtue
and individual happiness, yet remains a question.
Art.




