

SOCIOLOGY OF THE ABORIGINES OF WESTERN
AUSTRALIA.
R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
(Read March 77, 1905.)
Five years ago I communicated an article to the Society, 1 deal-
ing with some of the customs of the natives of Western Australia.
On that occasion I described the organization of a number of tribes
possessing four divisions in their social structure. In the present
paper it is proposed to give a short explanation of a different
organization, found among some tribes occupying the northeastern
corner of Western Australia, comprising the country drained by the
sources of the Ord, Denham, King and other rivers, Stirling Creek,
Sturt Creek, Margaret River and the Upper Fitzroy. Some of the
best known of the aboriginal tribes within the immense geographic
limits mentioned, are the Lunga, Kityu, Charrau and Nining.
All the details given in this article have been gathered by me
through the kind assistance of correspondents who reside in the
Kimberly district of Western Australia, in the region inhabited by
• the tribes treated of. I sent them categorical lists of all the points
upon which I wanted information and gave them directions how to
proceed with the investigations. From the reliable character of
my correspondents, and my own general knowledge of the subject,
I feel sure that their work can be depended upon. It is unneces-
sary to add that I am under no obligations to any other authors.
A whole tribe, or it may be a community of several tribes, is
nominally divided into two portions, which may be called phratries,
groups, or any other distinguishing title. Next there is a reparti-
tion of each phratry into four parts, which for purposes of refer-
ence, may be called sections or classes. A name is given to each
section, by means of which the members of the different divisions
are readily distinguished; and identification is further facilitated
by a masculine and feminine form of every one of the eight
names.
A phratry therefore contains four given sections of men, who
'"Native Tribes of Western Australia,” Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Vol.
XXXIX, pp. 123-125.
Reprinted from Proceedings American Phitosophical Society , Vol. xlix., 1905.


marry certain four sections of women. In other words, the men
of one phratry marry the daughters of the men of the other, in a
certain fixed rotation. The constitution of the phratries, the
nomenclature of the sections, with the order of intermarriage and
the designation of the children, will be readily understood by an
examination of the following tabular synopsis :
Table I
Phratry. Father. Mother. Son. Daughter.
C Changura Nungulla Chabuldyi Nabicherri
I Chanima Nulima Chungarin Nabungarti
I Chungulla Nangilli Chambin Nambin
l Chulima Nabana Chakara Nakara
f Chakara Nabicherri Chulima Nulima
I Chambin Nabungarti Chungulla Nungulla
I Chungarin Nambin Chanima Nabana
[ Chabuldyi Nakara Changura Nangilli
The above table gives the phratry, father, mother, son and
daughter on the same line across the page. For example, Chan-
gura takes a Nungulla as his wife, which is the ordinary or normal
rule of marriage and may be called “No. 1.” H£ could instead
marry a Nulima, which I shall designate as “No. 2.” Or he could
mate with a Nabana woman as “No. 3.” And lastly, he may
espouse a Nangilli, who can be distinguished as “No. 4.” Mar-
riages of the “No. 1 ” type, which are those given in the table,
are the most usual; “No. 2 ” is the next most in favor; whilst
“No. 3” and “No. 4” are more or less uncommon, although
quite lawful.
In the tribes we are now discussing the section to which the
children belong, and consequently the phratry also, is invariably
determined through the women. Taking an example from phratry
Ain Table I: If Changura wed a Nungulla, as in the table, his
children will be Chabuldyi and Nabicherri; if he take a Nulima
spouse, they will be Chungarin and Nabungarti; if he choose a
Nabana, the offspring will be Chakara and Nakara ; and if his wife
be a Nangilli, then his family will be Chambin and Nambin.
We will now show the wives eligible to Chanima, the next name
in Table I. He marries Nulima as his tabular wife or “ No. i”;
he takes Nungulla as his alternative spouse, or “ No. 2 ”; he mates
with Nangilli as “No. 3,” and he can marry a Nabana woman as


“ No. 4.” • Similarly Chungulla and Chulima can marry either of
the women opposite their names in the table as “No. 1” and
“No. 2” wives; or they can take Nulima or Nungulla as their
“No. 3” and “No. 4.”
It appears, then, that any specific man in Phratry A can marry
any one of the four women opposite to him in the column headed
“mother” in the table. Everything which has been said respect-
ing the marriages in Phratry A applies equally to the marriages of
the men and women in Phratry B.
All the people have totems, consisting of animals, plants, the ele-
ments, and so on, but there is no well established descent of any
given totem from the parents to their offspring. Indeed, there
could not be any regular succession of the totems in a tribe where
the intermarrying laws are as stated in Table I. For example, if
descent were through the males, and Changura’s totem were a
bandicoot, it would not only be liable to be disseminated through
the children of any or all the sections in Phratry A, but in the next
generation it would be similarly distributed to the children of all
the men in Phratry B. Hence, in a tribe where the sociology is so
constituted, we discover that in some cases the totems follow the
father, in others the mother, and again in other instances the chil-
dren inherit the totem of neither parent. The totem of the off-
spring is determined by the old men in accordance with customary
laws, which need not now be entered upon.
Space will not permit of a genealogical tree, but the reader can
easily construct one for himself from the following explanation. A
study of Table I discloses that Chabuldyi, the first name in the
“son” column, has a normal or “tabular” father, Changura.
But he may have what we shall distinguish as an “alternative”
father. Of these “alternative” fathers Chanima is the most
general, whilst Chungulla and Chulima are not so frequent.
Looking at Table I, we see that Changura’s father is Chabuldyi,
and the latter’s father is Changura. That is, Changura’s paternal
grandfather is Changura, the same as himself. Then Changura
marries his father’s “ tabular ” father’s sister’s son’s daughter Nun-
gulla, as “ No. i” wife already described. Or he marries his father’s
“ tabular ” father’s sister’s daughter’s daughter Nabana as “ No. 3.”
Again, Changura may espouse his father’s “alternative” father’s
sister’s son’s daughter Nulima for “No. 2.” Or he can take his
father’s “alternative” father’s sister’s daughter’s daughter Nan-
gilli as his “ No. 4 ” wife.


■eaa iq 73
Parramatta, New South Wales.
February, 1905.
3 1508 01200795 6
MATHEWS—ABORIGINES OF AUSTRALIA. [March i 7
The genealogy of Changura’s wives could likewise* be traced
through his mother’s father. A woman ascertains who are her
potential husbands by going back to her mother’s “tabular”
father, or her mothers “ alternative ” father, as well as her father’s
father, from which point the pedigree is the same in principle as
that of last paragraph. It is manifest, therefore, that whichever
one of the four specific women which a man is allowed to take as a
wife, possesses practically the same relationship to him, although
through different channels. The lineage from which a man obtains
his wife is decided by the elders of the tribe.
