

(. Reprinted from. Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of
N. S. Wales, Vol. xxxix.)
SOCIOLOGY OF SOME AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
By R. H. Mathews, 1.5.,
Corres. Memb. Aritlirop. Soc. Washington, etc.
[Read before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, December 6, 1905.']






SOCIOLOGY of SOME AUSTRALIAN TRIBES.
By R. H. Mathews, 1.5.,
Corres. Memb. Antlirop. Soc. Washington, etc.
[Read before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, December 6,1905.']
Introductory.
In 1894, when writing of the marriage systems of certain
Australian tribes, I said: “Among the social institutions
of a primitive people there is none of greater interest and
value to the anthropologist than the study of these social
systems.” 1 At different times since then I have published
a number of articles on the social and other customs of
aboriginal tribes in all parts of Australia, but there still
remains much unbroken ground in this branch of science.
Last year I reported for the first time certain subdivisions
among the Ngeumba and Kamilaroi tribes, 2 which had quite
escaped the observation of all previous writers. I now
report for the first time the entire absence of exogamy
among the Wongaibon, Kamilaroi, Ngeumba, Wirraidyuri,
Barkunjee and other tribes in New South Wales and Vic-
toria. I shall also endeavour to briefly explain the regula-
tions regarding marriage among some tribes in Central
Australia. A perusal of these pages will, it is thought,
show the fallacy of the hitherto accepted belief in exogamy
among Australian tribes and abrogate all the old-school
notions respecting their sociology generally.
In any of my previous articles, whether published in this
Journal or* elsewhere, in which it may be stated that an
aboriginal community comprises ‘two exogamous divisions,’
1 Proc. Boy. Qeog. Soc., (Queensland) x., p. 18.
2 This Journal, xxxvm., pp. 209 and 214.


the reader is requested to substitute ‘ two principal
divisions.’
Sociology of the Wombaia Tribe.
In illustrating this important subject I shall begin with
the sociology of the Wombaia tribe, which occupies a large
area on Cresswell Creek and Burnett Downs in the Northern
Territory. It will be necessary to repeat a table showing
the subdivisions of these people. 1 We shall see by this table
that the eight sections of women can be classified genea-
logically into two distinct sets, which we may distinguish
as cycles, each set comprising four specific sections of
women in the column headed “ Wife.” Each of the two
cycles reproduces its own four sections in a certain rotation
and has perpetual succession, as follows:
TABLE I.
Phratry, Husband. Wife. Son. Daughter.
7 Choolum Ningulum Palyarin Palyareenya
) Jamerum Palyareenya Chooralum Nooi’alum <
\ Cheenum Nooralum Bungarin Bungareenya
\ Yacomary Bungareenya Chingulum Ningulum
f Chingulum Noolum Yacomary Yacomareenya
j Bungarin Yacomareenya Cheenum Neenum
\ Chooralum Neenum Jamerum Neomarum
' Palyarin Neomarum Choolum Noolum
I consider this the best form in which to prepare a table
of the eight section names. The four women of a cycle
are placed by themselves, and the quartette of men who
are their normal husbands are set down opposite to them.
This is the same arrangement which I have adopted in
tables illustrating the Kamilaroi, Wongaibon, Wirraidyuri,
and other tribes. I have also used similar tables in describ-
ing the Yungmunni, Chingalee, Warramonga, Jarrau and
other tribes with eight divisions in their social structure
in_Central and Western Australia.


I provisionally call each of the cycles a phratry. Then
in studying the upper half or Phratry A of the above table,
we see that the women in the “wife” and “daughter”
columns reproduce each other in a fixed order. The
daughters belong to the same phratry or cycle as their
mothers but to a different section of it. For example,
Ningulum has a daughter Palyareenya; Palyareenya’s
daughter is Nooralum ; Nooralum produces Bungareenya;
Bungareenya is the mother of Ningulum, being the section
name with which we started, and this series is continually
repeated, no matter which name we commence with. Let
us designate this series as “ Cycle Z.” If we take the
women in the “ Wife ” column of Phratry B it is found that
Noolum is the mother of Yacomareenya; Yacomareenya
produces Neenum; Neenum’s daughter is Neomarum;
Neomarum has a daughter Noolum. This series also repeats
itself for ever and may be distinguished as “ Cycle Y.”
It is evident therefore, that the women of a cycle or
phratry pass successively through each of the four sections
of which it is composed in as many generations, the same
section name reappearing in the fifth epoch. If the totems
were transmitted directly through the women, they would
also remain constantly in the same cycle, and reappear in
the same rotation as the women. Comprehensive investi-
gations respecting the descent of the totems in the Wombaia
tribe and its congeners, however show that the totems do
not follow such a law, because the women of a cycle are
not coincident with the intermarrying sections shown in
Table 11.
In Table I. the husbands, wives, sons and daughters are
given on the same line across the page. For example,
Ohoolum marries Ningulum, Jamerum marries Palyareenya
and so on for all the others. But extended enquiries reveal
the fact that a man of any stated section has potential


marital rights over three additional sections of women.
Clioolum’s wife may be either a Ningulum as in Table 1.,
or a Nooralum, or a Neenum, or a Noolum. That is, he can
espouse a Ningulum or a Nooralum from phratry A ; or a
Noolum or a Neenum from phratry B. Consequently Table
I. does not represent such a bisection of the community
into two intermarrying moieties as would constitute
exogamy. This at once raises the crucial question, Is there
any real exogamy in the Wombaia or kindred tribes ?
Further study of the actual intermarriages demonstrates
that the four sections of women into which Choolum can
marry are equally liable to be claimed as wives, though in
a different order, by three other sections of men, viz.:—
Cheenum, Chooralum and Chingulum. I will now submit
another table, showing a category of four sections of
women from among whom four specific sections of men
must obtain their wives in accordance with aboriginal
custom.
TABLE 11.
Phratry. Husband. Wife.
Progeny.
/ Choolum Ningulum
) Cheenum Nooralum
] Chooralum Neenum
{ Chingulum Noolum
The children of each
individual woman
are the same as in
Table 1., quite irres-
pectively of the name
of the husband.
t Jamerum Palyareenya
g } Yacomary Bungareenya
i Bungarin Yacomareenya
( Palyarin Neomarum
In consequence of any specific
column of Table 11. being eligible
one of four different sections of ]
woman
for ma
in the “Wife”
marriage with any
in the “ Husband ”
men
column, it becomes evident that such a woman’s child’s
father might have any one of four section names, depend-
ing upon which husband she had married. Let us take
Palyarin the first name in the “ Son ” column of Table I.
as an example. If his mother, Ningulum, had married


Ohoolum, he will be Palyarin’s direct, or “ First ” father.
If she had mated with Cheenum, he would be the alterna-
tive, or “ Second ” father of Palyarin. If she had taken
Ohingulum as her husband, he would be the “Third ” father.
And if Ningulum had married Ohooralum, then he would
be Palyarin’s “Fourth” father. That is to say, it makes
no difference to Ningulum which of the four men she
marries—her son will be Palyarin just the same. We observe
that two of the four possible husbands of Ningulum come
from phratry A and two from phratry B in Table 1., which
is an additional argument against exogamy.
In all cases the section name of the progeny is irrevocably
determined through the mother. If Ohoolum marries
Ningulum his children are Palyarin and Palyareenya ; if he
takes a Nooralum they are Bungarin and Bungareenya; if
he chooses a Neenum they are Jamerum and Neomarum ;
and if he be allotted a Noolum they will be Yacomary and
Yacomareenya. See Table 1., which exhibits the children
of any and every section of women.
Let us provisionally call the category or set of four
women noted under the head “Wife” in the upper half of
Table 11. a phratry. Then it becomes manifest that the
men and women of the same phratry intermarry among
themselves, and consequently there is no exogamy of the
sections. 1
Again adopting the phratries as set down in Table 11.,
there could not be any regular succession of the totems,
either patriarchal or matriarchal. For example, if we
postulate that descent is reckoned through the men, and
that the eaglehawk is the totem of Ohoolum, who has
several brothers who all inherit the same animal from their
common father. By working out genealogies it can be
1 Tables 11. and 111. are introduced merely for illustration. Table 1.,
shows the correct arrangement of the sections and phratries.


demonstrated that this totem would not only be liable to
be disseminated through the children of any or all the
sections in phratry A, Table 11., but in a few generations
it could be similarly distributed to the children of some or
all the sections in phratry B. Therefore there could not
be any totemic partition of the tribe into two phratries or
moieties; or in other words there would be no exogamy.
Furthermore, if we assume that succession of the totems
is through the women and work out an example from Table
11., we shall discover that half the women of each phratry
would respectively confer their totems on half the women
of the other. All the totems would thus be scattered
through both the phratries, 1 rendering exogamy impossible.
It appears then that whether we endeavour to trace the
totems according to the fathers or the mothers, the result
is practically the same.
The section names of the men follow a different order to
those of the women —they see-saw from father to son in
alternate generations. Thus Choolum has a son Palyarin,
and in the next generation Palyarin has a son Choolum,
and so on for all the other sections. In 1900 I published a
table suggesting how descent might be counted through
the men, of which the following is a copy.
TABLR 111.
Phatry. Husband. Wife. Son. Daughter.
/ Choolum Ningulum Palyarin Palyareenya
j Palyarin Neomarum Choolum Noolum
i Cheenum Nooralum Bungarin Bungareenya
( Bungarin Yacomareenya Chenum Neenum
/ Jamerum Palyaveenya Chooralum Nooralum
g J Chooralum Neenum Jamerum Neomarum
\ Yacomary Bungareenya Chingulum Ningulum
( Chingulum Noolum Yacomary Yacomareenya
1 This statement applies only to Table 11. If the totems descended
through the women as arranged in Table 1., they would remain con-
stantly in the same cycle, similarly to the totems of the Wongaibon and
Barkunjee, reported in later pages.


In the table I placed Choolum, Palyarin, Cheenum and
Bungerin together, to constitute phratry A, and the
remaining four sections formed phratry B. My reason for
placing these four sections together was because they
represented fathers and sons. Choolum is the “ direct ”
father of Palyarin and the “alternative” father of Bungarin.
Palyarin is the “direct” father of Choolum and the “alter-
native” father of Cheenum.
It seemed to me that if there was any possibility of the
succession of the totems being through the men, this would
be the best way of ascertaining it. But as soon as I made
the discovery that Choolum, as well as all the other sec-
tions in the table, had the further right of marrying a third
or a fourth section, (Table II.), it became apparent that
two of the potential wives of a man of any given section
would come from phratry A and the other two from phratry
B. No matter in what order these four names may be
arranged, it does not alter the fact that they cannot possibly
form an exogamous moiety of the tribe.
The foregoing pages illustrate how all the different
sections intermarry and are perpetuated. Upon this found-
ation the actual marriages of specific individuals are
regulated by a system of betrothals, which are made after
a child is born, and sometimes before that event. The
selection of a wife or husband is determined through the
grand-parents of the parties to the matrimonial alliance.
The following short genealogical tables will elucidate the
letterpress:


"TABLE IV.
Cheenum
i
o Choolum
P Noolum
c
Neenum
2nd Father
/ 1st Father
Palyarin c
Yacomary <
/ c
3
Yacomareenya
Jamerum
o
c
’ Neomarum
Choolum <
> marries Ningulum ,
3
3
Neenum
Nooralum
0
<
> Noolum
1st Wife
2nd Wife
1st Wife
2nd Wife
TABLE V.
Chooralum
i
o Chingulum
1 XT'
o Nin
g
ul um
? Nooralum
4th Father
/ 3rd Father
/\
Palyarin c
Palyarin <
3
<
" Palyareenya
Bungarin c
3
Bungareenya
Choolum <
3 marries Noolum (
5 Nooralum
Neenum c
<
3
Ningulum
1st Wife
2nd Wife
1st Wife
2nd Wife


It was stated in an earlier page that although a man can
have but one actual father, yet this father’s section name
depends upon whom the man’s mother had married. A
man of any given section may therefore have four different
nominal grandfathers. And upon tracing out the genea-
logies of several families by the continued assistance of
trustworthy correspondents who have resided in that dis-
trict for years, I find that there are, so to speak, four sorts
of men in each section —for example, there are four Choo-
lums of different lineage, whom we shall distinguish as
Nos. 1,2, 3, and 4.
Looking at Table IV., and in the left side of it, we see
that the father of Choolum No. 1 is Palyarin and that
Palyarin’s direct or “ Ist Father ”is Choolum. Then
Choolum No. 1 marries his father’s direct or “ Ist Father’s ”
sister’s son’s daughter Ningulum as his “ Ist Wife ” already
described in Table 11. Or he marries his father’s “ Ist
Father’s” sister’s daughter’s daughter Neenum as his
“2nd Wife.”
If we take Choolum No. 2, with another pedigree, still
looking at Table IV., then he espouses his father’s alter-
native or “ 2nd Father’s” sister’s son’s daughter Nooralum
as his “ Ist Wife.” Or he takes his father’s “2nd Father’s”
sister’s daughter’s daughter Noolum as his “2nd Wife.”
Perusal of Table V., introduces Choolum No. 3, whose
father’s “3rd Father’’ is Chingulum, and also Choolum
No. 4, whose father’s “4th Father ” is Chooralum, but it
is expected that the table will speak for itself. It is
manifest, therefore, that whatever one of the four specific
women which a man of a given section is allowed to take
as a wife possesses practically the same relationship to
him, although through different channels.


On account of the section name descending through the
women, it would have been quite as well, or perhaps better,
tohavetracedChoolum’s pedigree back through his mother’s
father, instead of through his father’s father. Looking at
Table 1., we see that Neomarum is the mother of Ohoolum.
Examination of that table will show us that Neomarum’s
“Ist father” is Ohooralum; her “2nd father” is Ohingulum;
her “3rd father” is Ohoolum; and her “4tli father” is
Oheenum. Then Ohoolum No. 1 would marry his mother’s
“Ist father’s” sister’s daughter’s daughter, Ningulum, as
his “Ist wife.” Or he marries his mother’s “Ist father’s”
sister’s son’s daughter, Neenum,as his “2nd wife”and so on.
According to this arrangement, the normal marriages
would be those of a man’s daughter’s child with his sister’s
daughter’s child. Tables IV. and V. could be easily
amended, by a little transposition, for the purpose of show-
ing all the details in full. Among the Wongaibon and
Barkunjee tribes, described a few pages onward, if we follow
a man’s genealogy through his mother, the normal marriage
would be that of a man’s daughter’s child with his sister’s
daughter’s child, and so on, the same as in the Wombaia
tribe.
I have placed Ohoolum and Oheenum together as grand-
fathers in Table IV. My correspondents in the Northern
Territory several years ago informed me that these two
sections of men are very friendly amongst themselves, and
frequently marry into the same two sections of women, in
inverse order. 1 Moreover, referring back to Table 1., we
observe that Ohoolum and Oheenum take their direct or
tabular wives from the same cycle of women. For similar
reasons I have placed Ohingulum and Ohooralum together
as grandfathers in Table V.
1 This Journal, xxxiv., pp. 123, 129.
H—Dec. 6, 1905.


According to Table IV., Choolum No. 1 marries a Ningu-
lum or a Neenum, who is represented as his Ist or 2nd wife.
Choolum No. 2 is allotted a Nooralum or a Noolum in the
same way. Choolum No. 3 (Table V.) espouses a Noolum
or a Nooralum. Choolum No. 4 mates with a Neenum
or a Ningulum. But there are customary extensions of
these rules by means of which any Choolum who is a
paternal or maternal grandson of either Choolum or Cheenum
(Table IV.) can marry into any one of the four sections
mentioned; and any Choolum who is a paternal or maternal
grandson of either Chingulum or Chooralum (Table V.) can
espouse any one of the same four sections of women.
The sequence in which these marriages take place is
as follows: —Choolum No. 1 marries Ningulum, Neenum,
Nooralum or Noolum. Choolum No. 2 takes Nooralum,
Noolum, Ningulum or Neenum. Choolum No. 3 mates with
Noolum, Nooralum, Neenum or Ningulum. Ohoolum No. 4
espouses Neenum, Ningulum, Noolum or Nooralum.
Study of Tables IV. and V. shows that Ohoolum No. 1
marries as his first wife a woman belonging to “ Cycle Z”
mentioned in the explanation of Table I. For his second
wife he takes a woman from “Cycle Y.” The Choolums
Nos. 2, 3 and 4 obtain a wife for each cycle in the same
manner. But if Choolum No. 1, or any of the Choolums
mentioned, has potential marital rights over the women
of all the four sections, as stated in last paragraph, then
he might be permitted to vary the order of succession of
his possible wives, and select a Ningulum as his “ Ist” or
a Nooralum as his “2nd” wife, and in that case both the
women would belong to the same cycle.
When my correspondents in compliance with my request
prepared lists of the section names of certain well-known
men who were actually married to more than one wife
among the Wombaia and other tribes, it became apparent


that the most general custom was to take a “ Ist” and
“2nd” wife from the same cycle of women. Instances of
polygamy were found, however, in which the wives were
from both cycles in accordance with Tables IV. and V.
Although there are four sorts of men in each section —
four Ohoolums for example in that division —they practically
resolve themselves into two, namely, those who marry
women of the Z Cycle and those who obtain their wives
from the Y Cycle (see Table I.). This really amounts to a
partition of the Choolum section into two parts instead of
four. Again looking at Table 1., we observe that Choolum
and Cheenum take two of their possible wives, who are at
the same time the two most usual, from Cycle Z and the
other two from Cycle Y. The remaining two sections of
men, Jamerum and Yacomary, do the same. As regards
the succession of the totems, this matter has been concisely
described in my paper. 1 In that article I stated that “the
partition of a tribe into two exogamous portions would'be
impossible.”
Before quitting the eight-section system, it will be well
to state that everything which has been said in the pre-
ceding pages against the existence of exogamy, refers
equally to the Binbingha, Ohingalee, Yungmunni, Warra-
monga, and Arunta tribes. What I have stated is likewise
applicable to all the native tribes on the Victoria river, as
well as to those on Hall’s Greek and surrounding country
in the State of Western Australia. There is an indubitable
absence of exogamy throughout them all.
Sociology of the Wongaibon Tribes.
The territory of the Wongaibon extends approximately
from about Booligal up the Lachlan river to Euabalong,
thence to Nyngan, Oobar, Paddington and Ivanhoe. Their
1 “ Ethnological Notes on the Aboriginal Tribes of Queensland,” Proc.
Roy. Geog. Soc. (Queensland), xx., pp. 72- 75.


language and initiation ceremonies have already been pub-
lished by me. 1 Beyond a few fragmentary and inaccurate
outlines, practically nothing has hitherto been published
respecting the sociology of the Wongaibon community.
Several of their subdivisions have never been even men-
tioned by any author until now. A table will be used to
illustrate the letterpress.
TABLE VI.
Phratry. Husband. Wife. Son. Daughter.
, T _ , _ f Murri Ippatha Kumbo Butha
Ngumbun j Kubbi Ippai Ippatha
-vr f Ippai Matha Kubbi Kubbitha
Ngurrawan j £' mbo Kubbitha Murri Matha
Besides the divisions shown in the table, every individual,
male and female alike, claims some animal or plant or other
object as his totem. Bach phratry and the sections of
which it is composed possesses a further distinctive division
into Guaigullimba and Guaimundhan, signifying swift blood
and sluggish blood respectively. These may be called
“ blood ” divisions or castes. There is still another repar-
tition of the community, which can be distinguished as
“ shade ” divisions. These divisions are in reality an
extension of the “ blood ” castes, and regulate the camping
places of the people under the shades of large trees.
Intermarriages are regulated as follows : —A man of the
Ngurrawan phratry and Ippai section marries a Ngumbun
woman of the Matha section. This is the normal rule of
marriage. In sucli a case, a man’s son’s child marries his
sister’s son’s child. But it is quite lawful for Ippai to
espouse an Ippatha. which represents the marriage of a
man’s son’s child with his sister’s daughter’s child. These
two alliances are the equivalents of Choolum marrying
Ningulum and Noolum respectively in Table IV.
1 This Journal, xxxvi., pp. 147- 154; Proc. Roy. Geog. Soc. (Queensland),
xi., pp. 167-169.


Another variation in the intermarriages of the sections
allows the Ippai of our example to wed a Kubbitha or a
Butha, corresponding to the marriage of Choolum with
Nooralum and Neenum in the Wombaia tribe (Table IV.).
In other words, a man of any given section can marry into
one or other of the three remaining divisions or else into
his own. It is needless to add that these facts altogether
disprove the existence of exogamy in the Wongaibon tribe.
Reference to Table VI. shows us that the children follow
the phratry or cycle of their mother, but they do not bear
the name of her section, but that of the supplementary
one, because the women of a cycle reproduce each other
in continuous alternation. That is, the section name is
invariably determined through the women. The totems
remain constantly in the same cycle as the women and are
accordingly transmitted from the mother to her progeny.
Although the totems, as well as the sections and pliratries,
are perpetuated through the women, this does not constitute
exogamy. We have already shown that an Ippai, for
example, can marry into either cycle of women, and conse-
quently a totem of either cycle.
Again, a Guaigullimba mother produces Guaigullimba
children, who also take their mother’s “shade.” The castes
of “blood” and “ shade ” are not necessarily coincident
with the other divisions, but apply to any section accord-
ing to pedigree. In short, they divide the people of every
section into two sorts, and are used in tracing out the
betrothals and who shall marry whom. There are for
example, two sorts of Ippais. If the one who married
Matha as already stated, was a Guaigullimba the Ippai
who espoused Ippatha would be a Guaimundlmn, analog-
ously to the subdivisions of the Choolum section in the
Wombaia tribe. An Ippai who could take a Kubbitha for
a wife would be a different “blood ” from the one who could
marry a Butha.


Sociology of the Barkunjee Tribes.
In 1898 I wrote a paper 1 describing the initiation cere-
monies of the Barkunjee and their congeners, accompanied
by a map exhibiting the boundaries of the extensive region
which they occupied in the western portion of New South
Wales. I now desire to very briefly refer to their sociology.
The people of these tribes are segregated into two
primary divisions, of which the intermarrying laws and the
descent of the progeny will be easily understood from the
accompanying table and explanatory letterpress.
TABLE VII.
Phratry. Husband. Wife. Son. Daughter.
A Mukkungurra Kilpungurraga Kilpungurra Kilpungurraga
B Kilpungurra Mukkungurraga Mukkungurra Mukkungurraga
The feminine form of the divisions is distinguished from
the masculine by the suffix ga. A Mukkungurra usually
marries a Kilpungurraga, as in the above table and the
resulting offspring are Kilpungurra and' Kilpungurraga. In
such case a man’s son’s child marries a sister’s son’s child.
But if a Mukkungurra takes a Mukkungurraga as his con-
jugal mate, that represents the marriage of a man’s son’s
child with a sister’s daughter’s child. This conclusively
demonstrates that there is no exogamy among the Bar-
kunjee people.
Every man woman and child bears the name of some
animal, plant or natural object as his or her totem, which
is in all cases inherited from the female parent. There is
a further partition of the people into Muggulu and Ngipuru,
meaning sluggish blood and swift blood. A Muggula may
belong to either phratry and a Ngipuru individual has the
same scope. That is, these “blood” divisions, like the
totems, are dispersed indiscriminately throughout the tribal
territory.


A man of the Muggulu blood and the Butt shade usually
marries a Ngipuru woman of the Branch shade, but this is
subject to some irregularities. In regard to the offspring,
a Muggulu mother produces Muggulu children, who take
their mother’s Butt shade ; a Ngipuru woman produces
Ngipuru children, belonging to the Branch shade. More-
over, the children take the mother’s totem.
Intermarriages of individuals of the same totem are
forbidden. When a Kilpungurra marries a Mukkungurraga
there is no risk of conflict with the totemic regulations. If
a Kilpungurra man, however, could mate with any Kilpun-
gurraga, it would be possible for the parties to belong to
the same totem ; but a Kilpungurraga of the proper lineage
could not possibly be of the same “blood caste” as the man.
As an evidence of the importance attached to the “blood”
divisions, they are brought into prominence at the scarring
of the bodies of the young men during the initiation cere-
monies. A Muggulu youth has his shoulders and chest
marked with shorter scars, whilst a Ngipuru youth has
longer scars, to distinguish one from the other. See my
“ Mumbirbirri or Scarring the Body.” 1
My remarks on the absence of exogamy among the Bar-
kunjee, apply with equal cogency to all the native tribes
who occupied the whole of the western half of Victoria,
where the divisions are called Gurogity and Gamaty. Last
year I reported certain facts respecting the intermarriages
of these divisions, which render exogamy absolutely
impossible. 2
Conclusion.
I have elsewhere stated that whether there are two, or
four, or eight divisions of the entire community, the
principles which regulate marriage and descent among the
1 This Journal, xxxvm , pp. 262, seq. 2 Loc. cit., pp. 290 and 295.


divisions are identical in them all. 1 I shall endeavour to
briefly place an outline of this identity before the reader.
We have seen that the Barkunjee people possess only
two divisions or phratries, Table VII. A man of pliratry
A marries a woman of pliratry B. It is also apparent that
the men of pliratry A, for example, can take their wives
from either pliratry. This amounts to the statement that
the aggregate of men in phratry A can marry all the
women in the community.
Next, taking the Wongaibon tribe, Table VI., we find
that the two sections, Murri and Kubbi, if taken together,
are equal to Mukkungurra of the Barkunjee, and Ippai and
Kumbo together represent Kilpungurra. Murri and Kubbi
taken jointly marry Butha and Ippatha taken jointly in
one pliratry. But Murri and Kubbi can jointly marry
Matha and Kubbitha taken jointly in the other pliratry,
which is equal to Mukkungurra espousing Mukkungurraga
in the Barkunjee. A little consideration shows us that
the Murris and Ivubbis taken collectively can marry into
the whole four sections of the community.
We now come to the Wombaia divisions, Table 1., which
on account of their number will occupy a little more space
to describe. Choolum and Oheenum, taken together as one
person, represent Murri. They marry Ningulum and Noo-
raium, who together represent Butha, the wife of Murri.
Jamerum and Yacomary together represent Kubbi. 2 They
marry Palyareenya and Bungareenya, the daughters of
Ningulum and Nooralum, who represent Ippatha, the
daughter of Butha and wife of Kubbi. That is, Ohoolum,
Oheenum, Jamerum and Yacomary, collectively, marry all
the women in pliratry A of Table 1., the same as Murri
1 Bull. Soc. d’ Anthrop. de Paris, tome n., Serie v., (1901) p. 415.
8 These equivalents are only assumed, for the sake of comparison.


and Kubbi marry all the women of a phratry in the
Wongaibon tribe, Table VI.
But Ohoolum and Cheenum, the equivalent of Murri, can
also marry Noolum and Neenum the equivalent of Matha.
Jamerum and Yacomary, the equivalent of Kubbi, can
marry Yacomareenya and Neomarum the equivalent of
Kubbitha. That is, Ohoolum, Cheenum, Jamerum and
Yacomary, collectively, can marry all the women in phratry
B, the same as Murri and Kubbi can marry all the women
of the other phratry in the Wongaibon. Examination of
Table I. will show that Choolum, Cheenum, Jamerum
and Yacomary, taken in the aggregate, can not only
marry all the women in either phratry, but they can inter-
marry with the whole eight sections of the Wombaia com-
munity, Table 1., the same as Murri and Kubbi can marry
into all the four sections of the Wongaibon.
The four preceding paragraphs may be recapitulated as
t
follows: In the Barkunjee community, a single division,
Mukkungurra, represents phratry A. In the Wongaibon
tribe, two divisions, Murri and Kubbi constitute phratry A.
Among the Wombaia people the four divisions Choolum,
Cheenum, Jamerum and Yacomary form phratry A. My
examples have all been from one phratry because the same
rules apply to both. In all these tribes the women are
divided into two primary cycles, groups, phratries, moieties,
classes, or whatever name we may employ to distinguish
the divisions. It is also manifest that the name of the
cycle or phratry to which the progeny belongs is in all
cases established through the women, altogether irrespec-
tively of the divisional name of the father.
Perhaps I should state here that in 1898 I described the
sociology of the Dippil and other tribes 1 spread over the
region lying between the northern boundary of New South
1 Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Phila., xxxvii., pp. 327 - 336, with maps.


Wales and the 19th parallel of south latitude which repre-
sents more than half of Queensland, which I delineated on
a map. In that article I stated that a man of the Barrang
section could marry a Barrang woman, a fact which dis-
proves the existence of exogamy in that part of Queensland.
In treating the tribes of Cape York Peninsula in 1900 I
gave examples of a man marrying into both phratries. 1 Since
that time in dealing with the sociology of the Murawarri,
Baddyeri and Inchalancliee tribes, reaching from the New
South Wales boundary to the Gulf of Carpentaria, I reported
some intermarrying laws which are altogether opposed to
exogamy.
All the particulars contained in this treatise respecting
the Wongaibon and Barkunjee tribes have been collected
by myself from the natives personally. My information
regarding the Wombaia tribe has been obtained with the
aid of trustworthy correspondents who have resided in that
part of tbe country for many years. I have adopted none
of the opinions nor followed any of the methods of other
Australian authors, but have struck out on my own lines.
The present article is necessarily very brief, but it is
believed that it will shed much new light on the social
organisation of the aboriginal tribes of Central Australia,
New South Wales, Victoria and Queensland, and enable
investigators to make a fresh start.
Spencer and Gillen, 2 have given a table of the eight
divisions of the Umbaia (Wombaia) tribe, which cannot
possibly represent any practical partition of the sections
into cycles, phratries, or moieties. They erroneously state
that descent of the sections is through the men, and they
are altogether mistaken in asserting that the community
is divided into “ two exogamous groups.”
1 This Journal, xxxiv., p. 132.
2 “Northern Tribes of Central Australia,” (London, 1904), pp. 70 and
100.


Dr. A. W. Howitt 1 states that “all Australian tribes are
divided into two moieties, each of which is forbidden to
marry within itself.” He is also in error in speaking of
“ the segmentation of the community into two exogamous
moieties.”
Having studied the question of Australian sociology for
many years, I am forced to the conclusion that neither
promiscuous intercourse of the sexes nor what has been
called “group marriage” has ever existed among the
social institutions of the aborigines of Australia. 2 lam
equally convinced that the divisions into cycles, phratries
and sections have not been deliberately formulated with
intent to prevent consanguineous marriages and incest, but
have been developed in accordance with surrounding
circumstances and conditions of life. This important
division of the subject will receive full attention in a
future treatise.
1 “ Native Tribes of South-east Australia/' (London, 1904) pp. 88 and
284.
* “Les Indigenes d'Australie/' V Anthropologie, (Paris, 1902) xm.,
p. 240.


WljCj 7 k
3 1508 01667131 0




