

Leaflet No. 1
Socialist Manifesto to the Electors of North Sydney
FELLOW-CITIZENS.
The following is the Socialist Labor
manifesto to the electors of North Sydney on
behalf of its candidate, Mr. E. E. Judd: —
RE ARBITRATION.
In spite of the expenditure of millions of
pounds by the Working Class of Australia on
Arbitration Courts, Wages Boards, Fair Rents
Courts, Cost of Living Inquiries, etc., the mem-
bers of the Working Class cannot purchase as
much meat, butter, eggs, milk, and other
necessaries of life now as they could 26 years
ago.
Although their productivity has greatly in-
creased, the Working Class is both relatively
and absolutely worse off than 26 years ago.
What greater proof do our friends desire of
the hopeless futility of Arbitration?
It is not possible for a man and his wife and
two children to secure adequate food, clothing,
housing, and recreation on the living wage as
“fixed” by Arbitration Courts. And it is im-
possible for a woman to secure such things on
the £2 odd per week “living wage” as “fixed”
by such Courts.
RE MOTION PICTURE TAX.
The motion picture is a wonderful achieve-
ment, but is more calculated, in the way it has
been Used, to produce a race of morons than
healthy people. Could the Government have
picked on a more suitable industry to tax?
RE TIMBER STRIKE.
The Socialist-Labor Party alone had the
courage to tell the men the truth from the
beginning of the strike.
The Labor Party, the Communist Party, and
the I.W.W. betrayed the Timber Workers.
Hundreds of the best principled workers and
their wives and families have been uselessly
sacrificed, and over £lOO,OOO of union money
wasted.
And now the Labor Party that betrayed the
Timber Workers on the industrial field is ask-
ing all workers to trust it on the political field.
THE BASHER GANG.
During the campaign of brutal and cowar
violence waged by the Basher Gangs and th -■
organising- directing, and financing th the
Labor Party maintained a cowardly, ye; signifi-
cant silence —except when it apologised for or
indirectly defended the Basher Gangs.
The Labor Party could have stopped the
Basher Gang campaign at any time within
three days of its commencement. Its failing
to do so totally unfits it for the exercise of any
governmental authority.
But even the significant silence and failure
of the Labor Party to stop the Basher Gang
campaign are not all. It did even worse.
The Labor Party, through its delegates, at a
meeting held early in August, and which was
presided over by a Labor Party Senator,
actually ENDORSED the “activities” of the
Basher Gangs and extended its “fraternal
greetings” to all the Bashers who had recently
been convicted and gaoled.
Mr. W. M. HUGHES—DEMOCRAT.
Mr. Hughes would have the people believe
that he is a democrat, and that he is against
“one-man rule” and in favour of free speech,
constitutional rights, etc.
Look at just a few of his “democratic" acts:
He offered 50,000 men for war purposes
without consulting either Parliament or the
people; tried to force conscription on Aus-
tralia; “gagged” the press and free speech for
his own political purposes; went as far as he
dared in emulating Mussolini; offered to join
Australia in a war with Turkey since the Great
War without consulting Parliament or the
people; used his position as Prime Minister to
open and spy upon the letters of other mem-
bers of his own Party; and gaoled and de-
ported men without a trial.
For instance, in 1916, Father Charles Jerger
was a Roman Catholic priest at Marrickville.
He—trying to follow the teachings of the early
Christians —told his flock that war was wrong
and that they should Vote against conscription
and against Hughes. Hughes had Jerger im-
prisoned like a wild beast for about two years
and then deported him—all without a trial.
Jack Wren said that he alone spent over
£1,200 in legal attempts to get Jerger a trial.
And Mr. Hughes says he is a “democrat”!
(Note. —Father Jerger’s mother lived in
Chatswood. See special leaflet with full details
of this outrage.)
Hughes was Prime Minister of the govern-
ment that, in September, 1916, controlled the
naval and military forces of the Common-
wealth. Let him tell the people who it was
that ordered machine guns to be sent to Broken
Hill in September, 1916; who it was that
plotted to machine-gun the workers of Broken
Hill; who caused the faking of the Federal
“Hansard” regarding this matter; and who it
was that caused the following notice to be
issued under the War Precautions Act?
FACSIMILE,
C.S. 12989.
Censorship Office,
Central Railway Square,
Sydney, 15/9/’l6.
Confidential and not for publication.
From Censor to Press.
No reference is permitted in the Press to a
question asked in the Federal House to-day
whether it was true that two machine-gun sec-
tions had been sent to Broken Hill.
G. G. NICHOLSON,
Censor,
Sydney.
And Mr. Hughes says he is a “democrat”!
LABOR PARTY PRESS ON HUGHES.
The following are a few gems culled from
hundreds that have appeared in the Labor
Party press prior to this election campaign;—
“W. M. Hughes is leading the way along
the shameful path.” —“Australian Worker"
(official organ of the A.W.U.), October 19,
1916.
“The dangerous and despicable dictator-
ship which he has set up, backed by an
elaborate organisation for deluding the
electors, must be brought to an end.
“The country has had enough of him and
his furtive despotism, ashamed to look at
itself in the glass. A sickly imitation of
Napoleon, striking absurdly heroic poses in
the drawing rooms of duchesses, and com-
i A Startling
and Damning Exposure of
W, M. Hughes
“I’LL HAVE YOU!”
Worker,” December 13, 191/
peting for favour with their pet poodles, is
not to the taste of this . . . nation.
“Oppression we could bear and still re-
tain our self-respect, but the petty, puny
tyrannies of a tuft hunter humiliates and de-
grades us.” —"The Worker," November 2,
1916.
“A CRIME UNPUNISHED.
“Like all men of a cramped intellectuality,
aggravated by an inflamed egotism, W. M.
Hughes is at heart a tyrant.
“During the period of the censorship this
aspect of his character displayed itself in
the full luxuriance of malignancy . . .
“Such a natural-born tyrant as Hughes
proved himself to be is not fit to be entrusted
with power. In a position of authority his
self-conceit, otherwise simply ludicrous, be-
comes a public menace.
“His detestation of the autocratic Kaiser
was merely an expression of professional
jealousy."—“The Worker," November 27,
1919.
“The Labor Movement henceforth will
have nothing to do with Mr. W. M. Hughes
and his fellow conspirators.” “The
Worker," November 2, 1916.
LABOR PARTY AND HUGHES NOW.
But the Labor Party has suddenly grown
silent as to Mr. Hughes’ faults. No longer does
it ask who gave him the famous or infamous
£25,000, or for what purpose it was given him!
Mr. Lang says the Labor Party should have
opposed Hughes. But Mr. Lang has been dis-
placed from the leadership of the Labor Party
in N.S.W. Theod ore and sordid intriguing
have displaced Lang and his methods. The
A.L.P. Executive is now only the rubber stamp
of Jock Garden and Theodore. The Labor
Party “arrangement” with Hughes is probably
the most sordid piece of political trading in the
history of Australia.
AN INSULT TO DECENT ELECTORS.
The Labor Party must have a poor opinion
of the electors of North Sydney when it con-
siders that a Judas is a fitting representative for
them. It seems extraordinary that there can
be people so poor in spirit and with such a poor
opinion of themselves as to believe that a Judas
is a fit and proper person to represent them.
That there be such people is unfortunate
and regrettable, but we hope for their own
sake that they are not as bad as their implied
opinion of themselves indicates.
UNEMPLOYMENT.
The Labor Party says that by giving greater
protection to Australian industries now, unem-
ployment would cease. America has protec-
tion—and 8,000,000 unemployed!
Unemployment is inevitable under Capi-
talism.
As investors could not reasonably be ex-
pected to have as much confidence in a
Theodore Government as in the Bruce Govern-
ment, there would be more employment if the
Bruce Government is returned than were
Theodore and Co.
THE SOCIALIST PROGRAMME.
The Socialist Labor Party advocates a peace-
ful method of securing the transition from
Capitalism to Socialism. The method, briefly
stated, is as follows:
(I ) The organisation of the Working Class
in One Great Class-conscious Revolutionary
Industrial Union.
(2) The creation of a political arm by the
Union when it is sufficiently powerful.
(3) When its nominees constitute a
majority of those elected to Parliament, they
shall decree the abolition of the Class State
with its parliaments, and leave the conduct of
the Nation’s production, etc., to the Central
Administration, or Grand Council, of the
Union, thereby replacing Class Governments,
composed of persons elected on geographical
areas, by an Industrial Parliament, composed
of men and women elected from and by those
in industry. For example, the workers of the
coal-mining industry would elect one delegate
for every 1,000, 2,000, or 3,000 members, or
such other basis as may be adopted and applied
throughout the industry.
(4) Simultaneously with the abolition of
the Class State by the political arm of the
Union, its economic arm would “take and hold
the socially operated means of production,”
and function as the framework of the Socialist
Kepublic.
This is the peaceful method proposed for
achieving the Social Revolution.
WHY I AM CONTESTING NORTH
SYDNEY.
(By E. E. Judd.)
1 no secret of why I am contesting
/ am ere f° r two purposes:
(1) To spread Socialist thought; and (2) to
defeat the greatest and most treacherous enemy
of the people of Australia.
A greater and more terrible war than the
last is rapidly approaching. If Hughes is in
Parliament he will again attempt to Conscript
you.
Remember what Hughes did to the brave
Percy Brookfield, Mr. T. J. Ryan (late Premier
of Queensland), Mr. Justice Piddington, Father
Charles (Jerger), Archbishop Mannix, and
hundreds of others.
If a man betrays you once, the shame is on
him; if you give him the opportunity to betray
you a second time, the shame is on you.
I do not want the votes of those who worship
at the shrine of Judas. I want only the votes
of those who worship at the shrine of liberty.
Every vote given to Hughes is a vote for
Conscription and treachery, for gaoling and de-
porting men without trial, for the suppression
of free speech.
Every vote given to Hughes is an endorse-
ment of the gaoling and deporting of Tom
Barker, Father Charles (Jerger), and others.
Every vote given to Hughes is a vote for all
that is meanest and basest in mankind.
Every vote given to Hughes is a vote in
favour of machine-gunning workers.
A worker who knows the truth about Hughes
and votes for him is lower than a “loyalist.”
1 say: “To Hell with Hughes! If you can’t
vote for a Socialist, don’t vote for a Judas.
Authorised by John Allan Foley, 107 Liverpool Street, Sydney, on behalf of the Socialist Labor Party of Australia
Electric Press, 267 Elizabeth Street. ’Phone M 3030.
