

SOCIALISM
IN THE LIGHT OF RIGHT CONDUCT
AND RELIGION
Eight Lectures
BY THE
REV. PROFESSOR A. GOSMAN
AUGUSTINE CHURCH, HAWTHORN,
AND
PRINCIPAL OF THE CONGREGATIONAL COLLEGE
OF VICTORIA
PRICE ONE SHILLING
MELBOURNE:
MELVILLE, MULLEN AND SLADE, BOOKSELLERS
262 AND 264 COLLINS STREET
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, 195A COLLINS STREET
1891




SOCIALISM
IN THE LIGHT OF RIGHT CONDUCT
AND RELIGION
£iObt
BY THE
REV. PROFESSOR A. GOSMAN
AUGUSTINE CHURCH, HAWTHORN,
AND
PRINCIPAL OF THE CONGREGATIONAL COLLEGE
OF VICTORIA
PRICE ONE SHILLING
MELBOURNE:
MELVILLE, MULLEN AND SLADE, BOOKSELLERS
262 AND 264 COLLINS STREET
STILLWELL AND CO., PRINTERS, 195 A COLLINS STREET
1891


To Mb. THOMAS RUSSELL, East Melbourne.
My Dear Sib, —
I have much pleasure in associating your name with the
publication of these Lectures, in grateful acknowledgment of your
good deeds to the Augustine Church and Sunday School, of which
it is my happiness to be the Pastor, and of much kindness to
myself and family.
I am, my dear Sir,
Yours truly, •
Hawthorn,
February 9th, 1891.
A. GOSMAN.


PREFACE.
The following Sunday evening lectures were delivered to my
own Congregation during last winter. They were reported pretty
fully in the Melbourne Herald , and they are now published
almost as they appeared in the columns of that newspaper. They
do not profess to discuss the more intricate questions of industrial
and political Socialism, as that would have been out of keeping
with their character and purpose. They aim rather at giving
instruction and guidance to those who look to the pulpit for the
discussion of such questions as have a close and vital relation to
the life that now is, as well as that which is to come.
A. G.




SOCIALISM.
LECTURE I.
The word Socialism is at present in every one’s mouth; and
those who do not like to use words and phrases they do not fully
comprehend, are asking what this Socialism is, of which they hear
so much, and concerning which they know so little. Like most
other words, it has a wider and a narrower range of meaning, and
everyone must train himself to distinguish the particular sense of
the word in the connection in which he finds it. The habit of
strict and accurate definition of terms would prevent many a
useless controversy, and greatly aid one’s mental improvement.
In its wider and looser sense it may be defined as—That modern
movement within the domain of civilisation, which has for its end
or object the removal of all unjust social inequalities; the
prevention of whatever tends to the impoverishment and degra-
dation of the masses of the people ; and the adoption of such
measures as shall better their condition, and equalise the distri-i
• bution of wealth.
In a general sense, therefore, all combined efforts for the
amelioration of society may not altogether inappropriately be
called Socialistic movements.
But there is a narrower and more restricted usage of the word,
that may ere long, in the struggle for existence, overwhelm the
less definite meaning. When employed in this specific sense, it
refers to a certain class of doctrines, or to certain organisations
of men, on the bases of one or other of these doctrines, in which,
not the general aims of Socialism when used in its looser significa-
tion are most prominent, but the mode or modes by which these
objects are to be reached. There are varieties of Socialists even
within this mere limited circle, but anyone may be regarded as a
Socialist who invokes the power of the State to accomplish the
aims of Socialism, by legislating over the whole area of our
industrial and educational activities, limiting the freedom of the
individual, in so far, especially, as it is supposed to be hurtful to
others, and securing the greatest amount of happiness to all, by
the equitable distribution of the combined wealth of the whole
community to each member of it, according to his necessities.


There are also Socialists who seek to reach these objects by
destroying the State, and overthrowing all modern institutions,
who are also called Anarchists. Communistic Socialists are those
who would have all things in common, either by voluntary
combination, or by State authority.
The principles or data of Socialism lie at the very foundation of
our nature. Man is made for society; and combination for
common purposes is one of those forces in man that he can no
more ignore than he can sail his ship over the ocean without
respect to either tides or winds. It is one of the great crises in
one’s life to wake up and to become conscious of what that means
when he says “I am.” It is a thought full of awe and significance
to be conscious that we possess a personal existence, and to feel
that, amid all the changes and diverse experiences of life, the
thread of our identity is never broken. But along with this
consciousness of the sameness of ourselves along the whole line of
our history, there is also the consciousness that we are not the
only living intelligent beings. Our social environment is part of
our very existence. We are not-here of ourselves, but of our
parents who preceded us. No one can do everything for himself,
even when he reaches maturity. And when we are sick, or feeble,
or aged, if life is not to be squeezed out of us by force, we have to
depend upon others both for food and shelter. Man is the crown
of creation, but the crown is not the individual radiance of his
personal endowments, but is in that necessity and capacity for
combination with his fellows which give stability to the family,
strength to the State, and in ten thousand ways contribute to the
happiness of mankind. When two men have a common interest,
they combine or unite to secure that interest; and Socialistic
organisations may exist from such small and temporary unions as
that, to the creation of nations and the extension of empires.
Socialistic doctrines and Socialistic organisations are around us
everywhere, not only as the outcome of man’s Socialistic nature,
but of that inborn impulse that belongs to the social man as well
as to the individual man, to seek his own happiness and advance-
ment in union with others, and to choose the best means known
to him for the attainment of these ends. These ends then
constitute the aims of Socialism to which we shall now more
particularly direct your attention.
The aims of Socialism may be conveniently classified under the
three following heads:—lst. The equitable diffusion of wealth.
2nd. The abolition of all class privileges and distinctions based on
legislation, and at variance with the doctrine of the political equality
of man. 3rd. The universal diffusion of such an education to the
individual, as shall fit and qualify him for taking his place and
discharging his allotted task in the social machine.


The first and the most obtrusive aim of Socialism is the equitable
diffusion of wealth. The extremes of society, from the point of
view of possession, are simply appalling. If there is a place on
the surface of the globe where the rich and the poor meet together
as men, as human beings, it must be some region whose encircling
barriers of isolation prevent all intercourse with the rest of the
world. The gap or chasm between extreme poverty and great
riches is so wide, that the bitter cry of distress from the one never
reaches the ears of the other, save by some messenger of mercy
who hears the cry of the one, and speaks it in the ear of the other,
h’or a man or a woman, or a family where there are young
children, to be without food, for no fault of their own; to feel the
gnawings of appetite until nature is maddened into crime, or
weakened into disease; to be without sufficient clothing to keep
the cold from them ; to live in a room without furniture, without
comfort or convenience of any kind, and foul with overcrowding
and the hopeless accumulations of untidiness, with no star of hope
trembling on the horizon of the darkness which encircled them, is
a situation so distressing and heartrending, that no one with
human instincts can contemplate such a scene without strong
emotion, taking now the form of pity, now of indignation, and
everywhere that of enquiry, Why are these things so? and, Is
there no remedy ? If man cannot live without bread, why are so
many born to die 1
But the picture of abject poverty would, if possible, be less
distressing and perplexing were it not that there are at the same
time instances of such extravagant living, luxury, and waste, as to
convince us that poverty and want are not caused by any lack of
the means of subsistence, but of some blundering in their distribu-
tion. The luxurious and expensive habits of some sections of
society are not only an injury to those who indulge in them, and
undermine all healthy social virtues, but they are a challenge to
the hunger-bitten members of society to rise against such an order
of things; and rather than submit to be starved out of existence
within sight of plenty, Samson-like, to pull down the pillar of our
modern civilisation, and involve all ,in one common ruin. The
feast is too often held over the hollow chamber of hunger, in which
the most destructive explosives are silently gathering their forces,
and when extravagance reaches its fullest development, these forces
become actively dangerous, and a single spark falling into the midst
of them may result in an explosion that would shake society to its
very foundations.
How to prevent the poor from becoming poorer; how to prevent
the rich from becoming richer, and so equalise the distribution of
wealth, is one of the chief problems that Socialism has set itself to
solve; and however difficult it may be, and notwithstanding the
obstacles that have to be encountered, it is not too much to say


that the very existence of society, not to speak of its happiness,
depends on the satisfactory solution of that problem.
It may be said, and no one would call it in question, that a
great deal of the poverty, and the misery which accompanies it,
are brought about by the improvidence and waste of the poorer
classes themselves. But anyone who wastes, and is improvident,
cannot be in a position of abject poverty. A man who has only
half a slice ot bread to live on in the twenty-four hours, is not
likely to throw away the crust, and it is with the abject and
honest poor that Socialism concerns itself first of all. The ques-
tion is, “ Why should anyone who is able and willing to work
want bread, when there is plenty for everyone and to spare?” It
is no answer to say it has always been so, and will continue to be
so in all time to come. Science mutters its phrases about “Nature’s
law,” of “ struggle for existence,” and “ survival of the fittest ”
principles which, if logically and consistently carried out, would
lead to social war, and the extermination by the strong of every
useless or idle member of society.
It is not our province here to discuss the various theories
proposed for the more equal distribution of wealth. We have only
to note carefully what Socialism aims at in this connection, and
look at them in the light of right conduct and religion. It is
enough for us to know that Socialism contemplates the rooting
out of poverty, and the thorough draining and cleansing of the soil
from which it draws the materials of its growth, and to point out
that, ethically, it is in perfect accord with the highest standard of
righteousness ; and religiously, it is part of that Divine plan which
contemplates the highest good of all in every part of their being—
a plan of which Nature gives us occasional glimpses which is also
a natural deduction from the belief in the Divine Fatherhood, and
which finds its highest utterance in the words of Jesus, who told
His disciples that if God so clothed the grass of the field, which
to-day is, and to-morrow is cast into the oven, He will not overlook
the higher necessities of those who bear His image, and who
naturally cry to Him in time of need.
It has been said bitterly by some, that if Christianity is to be
tried by its fruits, it has signally failed in working out the social
redemption of mankind. But if Christianity has failed, so has
legislation, so has the press; combinations amongst workmen
themselves, in fact, must also be admitted to be failures. There
is no other conclusion to which we can come than that the race
has failed, and what comes after that it would be impossible to
conjecture. But such judgments are based upon a totally wrong
conception of what failure is. Man everywhere must work out
the problem of his existence, individually and socially, in an
atmosphere of freedom and experiment. His failures and bitter
experiences are the conditions of his future amelioration. He


cannot by any external force be put right, and by the same force
be kept right. He must find out the right, and by experience
learn to know that his happiness consists in doing it. Now, the
very fact that society is awakening to a consciousness of its misery,
proves that its past experiences have not been useless. For it is
with societies as with individuals—the road to reformation and
happiness passes through the field of sorrow, and there one begins
to discover the sharpness of personal accusation and the bitterness
which springs from a sense of failure and wrong-doing.
The second aim of Socialism is the legislative or political
equalisation of all the subjects of the State. It was not intended,
nor was it possible of realisation, to reduce all to the same dull
level of uniform existence. Men could not be turned out like
bricks, for although we are all formed of the dust of the earth
under the hand of the Great Artist, no individual form has ever
been turned out exactly like another. The evil lies in the impo-
sition of disabilities which create class antagonisms —in the
maintenance of old feudal and military distinctions, which would
be perfectly harmless in themselves, were it not for the fact that
they cannot be kept up without cost, and as they are regarded for
the most part as unproductive, they are an unnecessary burden
upon the resources of our times. In connection with this part of
my subject, allow me to express my regret that, as a community,
we appear to be getting far too anxious for titles and social honour,
and by far too subservient in the respect we pay to them. If the
multiplication of “ Sirs ” proceeds for the next few years as rapidly
as it has of late, there will be few left to covet the distinction.
Nothing can possibly be an honour or adorn a title that has not
true Ipiman worth and character behind it; and we are indebted to
Socialism for reminding us that all men within the State are born
equal, and that the disturbance of that balance, no matter how
little, will bring about its results in the shape of bitterness of spirit
and crime.
The third aim of Socialism follows necessarily from the other
two, namely, the diffusion of such an education to the individual
as shall qualify him for taking his place, and discharging his
alloted task in the great social machine.
One of the most striking features in modern civilization is its
increasing complexity, which on a superficial view of the matter,
threatens to crush out individualism, or the egoistic element in
modern life, and to make altruism triumphant over the entire
field of human activity. But a closer inspection of the ethical
principles that regulate the movement of masses of men, will make
it manifest that social stability and progress are not to be
attained by the sacrifice of the individual ; but, on the other hand,
as a matter of fact, they are absolutely dependent upon individual
culture and advancement. It is capable of demonstration, that


society cannot rise above the level of the individuals of which it
is composed ; and hence the necessity of universal education, a
necessity which the majority of Socialists fully recognise. Their
aim in this direction is to extend the benefits of education to
every individual in the community, and to make such provision
for this purpose, that not a single member of the State, however
poor, shall be excluded from the benefits which education is
meant to impart. If society may be compared to a pyramid, the
education of what are known as the masses, may be represented*
as the broad solid foundation stones on which the whole super-
structure rests.
In the light of right conduct, the education of the people
requires neither apology nor vindication. If we are to govern
ourselves in accordance with the democratic spirit of the age,
failure and disaster are inevitable without education; and without
special training, how can we know anything of these natural laws
which underlie and determine all social movements, and which no
blundering legislation can overthrow or destroy. It would be the
height of criminal folly to give the command of a ship to him
who knows nothing of navigation ; equally foolish and criminal it
would be to hand over the government of a State to those who
know nothing of the science of government, and whose legislative
measures are only a kind of tinkering the defects of previous
unskilful workmanship.
And as for religion, is it not a fact, that religion has been the
patroness of education in all ages. Christianity is founded on the
Bible, and the Bible is a literature, although that does not fully
describe it. To understand Christianity, one must study the
Bible and know something of its parts, and the relation they
sustain to each other; and he into whose soul the Bible has
poured its living tide, cannot be regarded as altogether uneducated.
He will be qualified above many for the duties devolving upon
him in almost every relation of life. For, although the Bible is
small in comparison with the extensive area of modern literature,
it contains in its concentrated essences, everything necessary to
the maintenance of intellectual and moral life, the growth of the
soul, and of sustained and well-directed energy.


LECTURE II.
SOCIALISM AND INFIDELITY.
In my last lecture on Socialism, I endeavoured to characterise
some of the Socialistic movements of the day, with special
reference to their aims. These aims were found to be of a just
and generous character, and such as commended themselves to
those who desired to see the' removal of all unnatural and
unnecessary inequalities amongst men, and the uplifting of the
poor from want and social degradation. All movements that are
under the guidance of intelligence, must of necessity have purposes
or aims, more or less clear, before them. And when that purpose
is not only intelligent, but moral and benevolent, it approves itself
so far to the judgment and sympathy of all right-thinking and
well-disposed persons. All Socialistic movements, as far as their
aims are concerned, are of such a character; and to that extent
should receive the cordial support of all who are earnestly working
to advance the welfare of all sections of the people.
But a movement may have everything to commend it to the
heart and the judgment in so far as its professed aim is concerned,
and yet fail to secure the hearty co-operation of those whose
sympathies would give both character and force to the movement.
The end may be good, but the means taken to secure the end may-
be neither wise nor just. In the domain of the purest morals, the
end can never justify the means. Purity of motive is no
justification of moral wrongdoings; and that principle is not in
the least weakened when applied to the actions of societies and
nations. The means, therefore, must be in strict accordance with
the right in connection with all social movements, otherwise they
will not only fail to secure their ends, but increase the very evils
they were called into existence to remove.
Now, to a very large extent, if not to an alarming one, some of
the Socialistic movements of the day have become identified with
sentiments of an infidel character. In the present lecture, I
propose to indicate how far this identification extends ; the causes
which underlie this alliance between Socialism and Infidelity, the
dangers that threaten all Socialistic movements that ignore the
moral and religions nature of man, and how these dangers may be
avoided.
Infidelity-, like Socialism, is a work of somewhat indefinite
signification ; but I use it here as equivalent to the denial of the
existence of God, whether such denial exists as a speculation, or in
the form of thoughtless indifference. Atheism may be purely
negative, and, like Agnosticism, refuse to believe in the existence
of a supreme intelligence, on the ground of want of evidence ; but
it may also become dogmatic, formulating a creed from which the


notion of God is not only excluded, but opposed and denounced.
Materialism is atheistic when it denies the existence of anything
beyond matter and force ; and Positivism allies itself with this
philosophical system, on the ground that we have nothing
whatever to do with what lies outside our senses and our present
wants. There is also a Secularism which is atheistic, which may
be described as that movement in modern politics which ignores
the religious sentiment; regarding man simply as a being that has
to be fed, clothed, and housed, with a due regard to comfort and
decency ; and if educated at all, to receive no more training than
what is necessary for the daily grind of an existence very little
above that of an animal. Infidelity in this sense is not merely
direct antagonism to religion, but it is also sheer indifference to it.
But, wherever it exists, and in whatever form, it degrades and
imperils whatever it allies itself with ; and Socialistic movements
are weak and doomed to failure, just in proportion as they are
prevaded and dominated by the spirit of Infidelity.
The hotbed of Atheistic Socialism is France, and more particu-
larly Paris. According to some French Socialists, the notion of
God, that is, religion, lies at the root of all the evils that at the
present day afflict society. Hence, no improvement can possibly
take place, so long as people are so foolish and wicked to believe
in the existence of any intelligence beyond or above themselves.
They say, if there is a moral governor over men and nations, he is
■either deficient in power or in goodness ; for if human misery and
wrong exist, and continue to exist, it must be either because this
ruler has no power to remove them, or that he does not choose to
do so, which would indicate a defect of goodness.
From France we may pass over into Russia, and there also
we shall find Atheistic Socialism, in the form of Nihilism, in a
very active condition. Czardom is despotism, both political and
religious; hence the Nihilist of Russia, in seeking to overthrow
-Czardom, contemplates, with a lively satisfaction, a state of society
without government, without God, and with no other religion
than that of humanity. It is not always safe to infer that the
sentiments of the rank and file of any organised movement are
those of their recognised leaders, and Atheism may not after all
prevail so extensively amongst the Nihilists of Russia as one
would be led to expect from what is known concerning them and
their doctrines; for the Russians are naturally a very religious
people, and it is not easy, even under the severest provocation, to
stamp out a natural instinct. Atheistic Socialism prevails in
Germany, and amongst the Germans in the United States, but
noFnearly to the same extent as in Franco and Russia. Still less
does it exist, save in the form of Atheistic Secularism, in Great
Britain and her dependencies. Let it be noted, however, and
remembered, that Atheistic Socialism exists more in the form of a


sentiment, a spirit, than a dogma, embedded n a definite creed.
As such, it pervades the whole atmosphere of thought, and lurks
in places where it is not always to be detected. It is not necessary
in connection with any Socialistic organisation to make the denial
of the existence of evil a condition of membership. All that is
required is simply to ignore its existence, and to regard all
religious consideration, if not superstitious obstacles to true
progress, as matters beyond the sphere of human interests.
The causes that underlie Atheistic Socialism are many, and a
knowledge of some of those causes is absolutely necessary to a
true and just estimate of modern Socialism. Moreover, it is of
supreme importance that we clearly discriminate between Socialism
and the infidel spirit that may dominate it in certain quarters.
Let us not mistake its accidents for its essentials. It is unneces-
sary to remind you of the fact, that the human mind was made to
think, to form opinions; and think it will, in spite of every device
that may be formed to control or check it. It is perfectly absurd
to talk of this erring reason of man, for man has nothing else to
fall back upon for the proof, and the confirmation of truth, but
his reason ; and if that cannot be trusted, the whole superstructure
of knowledge is built on a foundation of sand, and may any
moment become a shapeless ruin. Now, when anyone wakes up
and becomes conscious of this power of thought within him, and
feels that he is free to exercise it, he at once brings all his already
acquired knowledge to the test of reason, and seeks to acquire
conviction by examining the foundations on which all knowledge
rests, rejecting what appears to him to be inconsistent with his
primary and necessary beliefs. And what is true of the individual,
is true of society ; for society is made up of individuals. Scepti-
cism is first of all then a healthy and natural movement of the
spirit, and so long as man continues to be a searcher after truth,
so long will he come under the influence of a natural inquisitiveness
which makes doubt the fore-runner of certainty.
But, in addition to the natural inclination of the mind towards
Scepticism, there are special causes at work at the present time,
which satisfactorily account for the existence and prevalence of
infidel sentiments in connection with Socialistic movements. Of
these, we may mention the following:—The higher thought, or
philosophical speculation is responsible for some forms of unbelief.
The material world vanishes before idealism, and the personality
of God disappears in the all-prevading impersonal reason. If we
can know nothing but our own state of consciousness, it is clear
we cannot know God, save as a thought, which, if thought can
create, it can also destroy. Proofs of the existence of God,
evidence of design, and demonstrations of His being and attributes,,
have lost much of their force and argumentative value for this
generation. And where belief in the existence of God continues


’to be an article in one’s religious creed, it is not a conviction
which the force of argument, or the weight of evidence, creates,
but which both the heart and the reason demand as a necessary
postulate, or universal synthesis, explaining all things, itself
unexplained and unexplainable. This notion of God is like the
light, which reveals whatever it falls upon. But if we ask what
■God is, or what light is, there is no reply, save that God is God
and light is light. The progress of modern science has also had
.something to do with the growth of infidel sentiments within the
area of Socialistic movements. The scientific spirit is inductive,
■experimental, and revels in a region of inevitable sequence, and
the supremacy of law. Within this region there is no room for a
free intelligence, and hence He is dispensed with as something
unknown to science, and wholly unnecessary to thought. Closely
allied with this scientific tendency is the movement for the
temporal and physical welfare of the people. To want bread and
to be badly clothed, are evils that require no elaborate arguments
to prove their existence. Hunger makes itself felt, and where it
exists it claims the first attention, while the demands and
necessities of the spirit do not, unless in exceptional cases, so assert
themselves to the exclusion of all other subjects of interest.
Hence Socialistic movements that have their origin in social
inequalities and wrongs, set themselves, first of all, to serve men’s
physical condition, and become oblivious to his higher wants, and
to the impossibility of so separating one part of his life from
another as to make the attainment of physical happiness a real
possession, without, at the same time, adjusting his relation to God
and the spiritual universe.
It must also be confessed that the Churches themselves have
contributed to the growth of this Atheistic Secularism in modern
Socialistic movements. Entrenched within their dogmatic forti-
fications, and absorbed with the routine of their ritualistic
observances, the representatives and adherents Of ecclesiastical
Christianity have taken little or no interest in movements outside
there own boundaries. And when they have condescended to
notice them, it has been too often with words of protest and
denunciation. The Socialists of the Continent of Europe know
nothing of religion save what is before their eyes, and consequently,
their knowledge must be very defective. Nor must we overlook
the fact, that prejudice and misrepresentation make the
ecclesiastical world look a great deal worse than it really is.
Let us now glance at the dangers which threaten all Socialistic
movements that are not under the influence of the religious spirit.
First of all, no movement for the betterment of human nature can
be successful that ignores the religious nature of man. That man
is made to fear God, and find satisfaction in His worship, may
be accepted as an essential part of his complex nature. He is


made to eat and sleep ; his hands tell us he was made to labour,
and his brain that he was made to think. He has a conscience
which provides him with moral distinctions, and when the shadow
of the infinite falls upon him, he awakes to a sense of the presence
of God, and the spirit of Divine worship asserts itself as naturally
as the sentiment of admiration finds utterance in the presence of
the beautiful. Now to ignore this fact, is to leave out of count
the most important element in the forces that operate in the
building up of our character. An engineer that has to span a
river with a railway bridge, has not only to see to his foundations,
but whether his bridge will bear the weight of the winds that
sweep over it and under it. So it is with all Socialistic movements
that are strong and healthy; they must take into account the
movements of the upper world of thought and of religion if they
are successfully to attain the ends at which they aim.
Another danger in ignoring the religious element, comes to us
when the unexpected happens, or when our plans fail of their
accomplishment by no apparent fault of our own. If God rules
the world, and men do not recognise that fact, there is no
possibility of avoiding friction, and for any movement to be out of
harmony with God’s mode of moral government, is for that
movement to be in a position of peril and danger. The laws of
a country under constitutional government, are positive forces in
that community. When anyone sets himself against these laws,
he will very soon discover they are stronger than he, and provo-
cation beyond a certain point, may prove the criminal’s destruction.
So it is with the government of God, of which Nature is one of
the fields of its operation. We must take into our calculation the
Divine will, for it is true, scientifically as well as religiously, that
whatever is not in harmony with the will of God must come to
naught. It is not only foolish, but dangerous, to fight against
God. An appeal to history will confirm this position, for history
is the record of God’s providential dealings with mankind.
Atheistic Socialism, and atheistic legislation have both hitherto
proved their incapacity to grapple with human problems, or
successfully carry out schemes for the amelioration of any section
of society. Brotherhood assumes the equality of man ; but on
what does it rest, and what binds it together—if you take away
the notion of a common fatherhood 1 For as the material earth
enspheres itself around the centre of gravity, so the individual
elements of the spiritual world find their centre and bond in Him,
in whom we all live and move and have being. Further, if the
religious sentiment has had an evolutionary development, it is
unscientific to imagine it can be eradicated by any revolutionary
movement that contemplates its overthrow. To seek to
suppress it by force, and in the interests of freedom, would be
despotism of the most cruel character, and a return to barbarism,


which kills for an opinion, and puts a premium on hypocrisy and
crime.
We shall now point out how the dangers to which we have
alluded may be avoided.
In the first place then, it is of supreme importance for us to
know that as God and religion are in everything, so we should
endeavour to look at all the movements of society as under the
control and direction of God. Let us not be guilty of the heresy
of supposing that religion is something by itself, that can be taken
up or let down without in any way disturbing or influencing any
other part of our nature. The man who is a saint on Sunday, and
something else through the week, is that something else on Sunday
as well. What a sublime and elevating thought it is to see God
in everything, and to feel it is impossible to eliminate Him from
any part of His vast creation. He is in every atom of matter,
and in every vibration of force. It is His voice we hear in the
murmuring stream and the sighing winds. He is in every leaflet,
and it is He who gives strength to the oak. He is to be found in
the lovely valley, and He is enthroned on the mountain tops. He
is the light of the sun, and He glitters in the distant stars. We
can no more ring the sap of the notion of God from His works,
than we can drain the ocean, or blot out the light of the sun.
We have our intellectual being from Him, and the warm affections
of the heart. It is His voice we hear in the warnings and
admonitions of conscience, and all our ways are under His
directing providence. Where then can we go where He shall not
be ? Or what can we do where his help is not needed, or His
opposition feared ? And if it is so, then let all Socialistic move-
ments be penetrated with the thought of God. If these movements
aim at the welfare and elevation of society, they must be in the
line of God’s benevolent purposes. Let us then recognise His
authority, invoke His blessing, learn to obey His will, and let us
assure ourselves of this, that no cause can possibly be defeated
that has God on its side ; for greater is He that is for us, than all
that can be against us.
In the second place, we should endeavour to hold up before men
a more perfect and attractive notion of God than the most of them
seem to possess. The idea of God, unfortunately, even amongst
those who profess to love and serve Him, requires purification and
expansion. The infidelity of some people is simply an incapacity
to believe in God as he is represented to be in popular religious
speech and writing. God is not a being of infinite power alone.
He is also infinitely wise and good. He has no pleasure in the
miseries of man, nor in the death of the sinner. When we think
of Him under the designation of the Divine Fatherhood, the
human intellect can soar no higher. Now what is repulsive, or
unnatural, or unreasonable in the thought that God is the father


of the human race? The whole tendency of His government is
to promote virtue, and increase happiness, not by any supernatural
bestowment which would destroy both our intellect and will, but
by helping us to attain the perfection of our nature in the conflict
of life, and in making us strong in moral character and excellence.
When the day dawns upon the earth, the shadows of night flee
away, and every object stands out clear and distinct in the light
of the sun; so when the dawn of a people’s knowledge of God
and a broader faith creeps over the minds of men, the night of
superstition shall fade away, and all contradictions and doubts, and
even mysteries, shall disappear in the pure light of God. But
perhaps the most important and valuable antidote for the poison
of Atheism, that has entered so largely into Socialistic movements,
is a deeper, purer sympathy with man as man. The worship of
humanity in its true sense will be its redemption. Both morals
and religion teach us we are to love man, irrespective of rank,
wealth, or learning. The brotherhood of man knows no limit but
that of the race. It rises above colour and country, and embraces
all time in its sweep. It goes back to the cradle of mankind, and
looks forward to his enthroned manhood. To love our fellowmen
is to love God; and if a Socialist professes to love all men, the
love of God surrounds that man like an atmosphere. It is this
spirit of humanity that is rising and flowing in upon every land;
rippling the surface of human thought over which it is its mission
to brood, and filling the prophetic ear with the music of approach-
ing blessedness. It is this spirit alone that will save us from the
Animalism and the Atheistic Secularity that hang around us now
like a funeral pall, and that threaten to stifle us with the unwhole-
some atmosphere of the grave. But notwithstanding this aspect
of the question, Infidelity is not altogether an unmixed evil. It
may be compared to a hurricane sweeping through a forest, which
brings down many a weak and dying branch, and even uproots
trees that have failed to grasp with sufficient force the soil from
which they drew the materials of their growth. But as in Nature,
so also in the world of thought—the calm succeeds the storm,
and winter gives place to spring; and soon again the tempest-
swept fields are covered with verdure and beauty.


LECTURE III.
SOCIALISM AND ANARCHY.*
Almost every modern movement aiming at the welfare of the
people is burdened by some unnecessary weight, and retarded by
obstacles that are put in its path by well-meaning but mistaken
friends, whose alliance is a source of weakness and not of strength.
As the river is coloured by the soil through which it flows, and
as in times of flood it carries on its troubled bosom much of
wreckage from the banks it has overflown, so great public move-
ments are characterised by the imperfections and falsehoods of
the times in which they exist, and when exceptionally active,
carry along with them the evidences of their own destructive
forces. On all public questions, modern society has a tendency
to extremes, and shows a wonderful partiality for half truths.
Everywhere, authority is in danger of running into despotism,
freedom into license, and religion into superstition; and the
development of these extremes is generally in proportion to the
activity of the movement.
In my last lecture I endeavoured to point out that Socialism,
in so far as its aims were concerned, had nothing in common
with Infidelity. In some of its wilder and revolutionary forms,
Socialism has its origin in a deep-seated discontent, whicli is also
the root of much of the scepticism of modern times ; but in so far
as Socialism was identified with unbelief in the popular mind, its
triumph within its legitimate bounds was needlessly postponed.
For Socialism, in its wider acceptation, has nothing whatever in it
that can possibly be construed into hostility to religion. It is,
therefore, a matter of deep and sincere regret that anyone should
associate Socialism with Infidelity. No one who professes to be
anxious to raise men into a higher state of temporal existence,
requires to give up all belief in man’s spiritual nature and
necessities, and society may be sick at heart and sadly out of
joint, but surely it does not follow that because it is so, there is
no Supreme Intelligence in Nature, and no Father in Heaven for
man to cheer him in life’s pilgrimage, and afterwards welcome
him into everlasting habitations.
But there are other alliances and dangers that impede the great
Socialistic movements of the day, besides that of Infidelity.
There is the spirit of Anarchy or revolution, which is too
frequently associated with Socialism, to the disparagement of the
latter and loss. In the popular estimation, a Socialist is too
frequently regarded as a wild, reckless, property-destroying, life-
taking creature, a sort of wild animal of the carnivorous species,
that must either be caged or killed. There are, of course,
* See note appended to this Lecture.


Anarchic Socialists, but all Socialists are not Anarchists.
Socialism, when under the fever of Anarchy, is the wildest and
most dangerous form of it, and the most unreasonable, but at the
same time, the most impracticable of them all. Its very ex-
travagance is the source of its weakness and the ground of public
■confidence, that the solution of the social and industrial problems
is not with the Anarchists. The word Anarchy simply means
the absence of all Government, or authority, and hence the
results which naturally flow from the absence of supreme authority,
in the shape of confusion and crime. An Anarchist, therefore,
is one who traces the miseries of society, not only to the abuses
of Government, but to Government itself, and who believes that
if there is a millennium for the race, which many of them doubt,
it will not be reached until every form of authority and despotism
be swept away. He has no definite creed as to the future ;he is
not under the influence of any constructive ideas, he simply
believes that society has become so rotten and corrupt, that
amendment is utterly hopeless. His creed in relation to modern
■civilisation is, “ cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground.”
Revolution, he believes, must precede reformation ; but revolution
must come, whether it brings reformation or not. It is a bold and
flaring policy, which makes the heart of the timid beat with a
nervous fear, and makes wise men ask how it has come about that
such an unreasonable and diabolical belief should be entertained
by anyone not altogether destitute of the instincts and feeling of
the race.
It is difficult, perhaps, for us in Australia here to understand
why it is there are Anarchists even amongst ourselves, and in
almost every civilised nation of modern times. Still, when we
reflect for a little on the conditions of large masses of people in
some of the nations of Europe, onr surprise is not that there are
Anarchists, but that their numbers are so small. What would
any of us men think, were we compelled to live on the scantest fare,
and shiver in the cold, clad in the most beggarly clothing, to see
no opening anywhere for escape, and to feel that every day our
prospects were getting darker and more hopeless; to have the
miserable profits of our labour wrenched from our hands by
unscrupulous officials of the State, and our persons liable to be
dragged to prison without a trial, and left there to pine away in
misery or neglect, or to be banished to work like slaves far from the
home of our early affections, where escape was next to impossible; to
know that our fellow-creatures in other and happier lands were
not oppressed as we were, and to feel this most keenly of all, that
nothing in the shape of remonstrance or appeal would in the
slightest degree mitigate the severity of our lot ? What would
our feelings and opinions be, I ask 1 And yet such is the condi-
tion of hundreds and thousands of our fellow-creatures. Anarchy
B 2


is the child of misgovernment and oppression, and when stung into
madness by its unnatural parents, it will seize any weapon that lies
at its hand, either for defence or revenge.
In estimating the spirit of Anarchy, as active revolution, there
are three things which belong to it which may be regarded as its
distinguishing marks. In the first place, it is the creed of despair.
There is no star of hope on the dark back-ground of its midnight
firmament Its torch is not only reversed, but quenched.
Disappointment and failure have snapped the chords of heroic
effort, and paralysis is making rapid and dangerous approaches to
the heart. It believes that they who occupy the seats of authority
and have their feet on the necks of their victims, cannot be pulled
out of them by any force save that which will involve all in one
common ruin.
Hence, in the second place, Anarchy is the spirit of revenge.
It says, if we cannot get our rights and enjoy the fruit of our
labour, we shall prevent others from enjoying even what they
may have a right to. Revenge lies deep in the human heart, nor
under the most favourable influences of religion can it be
altogether eradicated. How much stronger, therefore, it must
be when it springs into activity from a sense of wrong, and the
vision of a state of comfort from which they, who are under its
influence, feel themselves to be hopelessly cut off. Anarchy is
the creed of destruction and terror. When there is no hope for it
in active warfare, it works by dynamite and the dagger. So long
as it is a mere speculation, it does little harm to society, however
much evil it may work in the individual whose mind is filled
with its ghastly images. You may hear it talked on a Sunday
afternoon on the Melbourne wharf, but no one sleeps the less
soundly that the red flag has fluttered over him for a little. But
when it proceeds to demolish public buildings, destroy public
property, and kill in cold blood citizens and rulers, it becomes
necessary that it should be resisted by all the means society has
devised for its own protection and safety. There are Anarchists
who, were they not opposed and prevented from giving full
practical effect to their revolutionary programme, would abolish
the present relation of master and servant, and in seeking to
make all masters, would unquestionably succeed in reducing us
all to slavery. All voluntary associations under the protection of
law —the necessity of the present order of things, according to the
Anarchic creed—would be plucked up and thrown to the waste.
Government, whether autocratic or constitutional is, according to-
Anarchists, nothing but tyranny, and it also must be abolished.
Whispers are sometimes heard that even marriage, which,
according to these people, is domestic despotism, would give way
before a freer order of things, where no law.would interfere, and no
fear of punishment restrict the fullest exercise of personal liberty.


Let us now bring Anarchy to the bar of right conduct and
religion, and pronounce that sentence upon it which seems to
be just, and according to righteousness.
In the first place, Anarchy is condemned because it is blind to
the good that is in modern civilisation. It will not admit there
is any such anywhere to preserve society from purification. This
is nothing but moral blindness.
“ There is no lack of kindness in this world of ours,
Only, in our blindness, we gather thorns for flowers.”
Although there is much of shoddy and scamping amongst our
hand workers, they are not all hopelessly incompetent and corrupt.
There are hundreds of thousands of honest men in business,
notwithstanding the revelations of the Insolvency Court. The
Humane Society has every year a long list of those who have
done some deed of heroism, for which they are to be commended
and honoured, and this is one of the most pleasing aspects of the
yearly celebration, that its ranks are largely composed of our
native born. The white flower of a blameless life grows in many
an obscure corner, and plants of the most delicate fragrance may
even be seen to grow near the margin of those streams of lava
and accumulation of ashes which passion and lust throw out of
their volcanic heart. Modern society is, no doubt, frivolous and
painfully pleasure-seeking, but there is a little of affection left in
the hearts of parents for their children, and children for their
parents. There is too much self-seeking and petty ambition in
our public men, and selfishness everywhere, from the humble cot
to the lordly mansion ; but all men are not cowards or sycophants.
Let some sudden danger threaten our coasts, or seek to deprive
us of our liberty, and public spirit would roll in like a mighty
flood, and fill every bosom, proving that patriotism was not dead,
but only sleeping. Now, on what principle of justice, or mercy,
or of humanity, or even of economics, are we asked to destroy all
this at the bidding of Anarchic revolutionary Socialism? Why
is the ship that is difficult of navigation through overloading or
leakage, to be ruthlessly sunk, and not brought into port to be
lightened or repaired ? We crush the quartz for the sake of the
gold j but Socialism would throw the quartz into the sea, and
thus destroy both quartz and gold. The thin streak of dawn in
the morning sky is the promise of the day, and hope waits for
the time when the mountain peaks shall catch the rising sun, and
the valleys be flooded with light. But Anarchic Socialism would
ever fly from the light, and be the companion of night and of
earth’s dark shadow. As yet, at all events, the words of wisdom
and moderation in respect to the modern world are these :—“ Kill
it not, for a blessing is in it.” And not the judgment of despair—
“ Cut it down, why cumbereth it the ground.”


But, in the second place. Anarchy in its confident predictions
of the speedy abolition of all authority, greatly over-estimates its
own strength, and under-estimates the forces that any moment can
be brought against it. Intellectually, it is weak. Its high-sounding
phrases are often as destitute of sense, as of argument. Many of
its organisations are held together by the oath of secrecy, and the
fear of assassination. It has no territorial basis of operation, and
it is deeply conscious that it can only succeed by terror. But
although its programme is destruction and murder, society is not
much alarmed, for it knows it can protect itself, whenever Anarchy
comes out of its hiding places to give effect to its policy of terrors.
It is absurd to suppose that we would stand still and let Anarchists
blow up our public buildings, set fire to our houses, and indulge in
wholesale plunder and crime.
.Revolution or civil war, is not in all cases wrong; there are
times when it is dictated by the highest patriotism, but it is sheer
recklessness for any causes to provoke a conflict in which it has not
the slightest chance of success, and thus to court a destruction
which is inevitable.
In the third place, Anarchy is opposed to the analogy of Nature
and to the law of historic evolution. That Nature is our great
lesson book, few will deny. The rivers that take their origin
along the mountain ranges meet with many obstacles in their
course as they flow onwards to the sea; but these they overcome
by the force of their character. If they cannot wear away what
impedes their onward flow, they will wind round the obstruction.
They never think of surrender or dissipation. Plants do not
wither and die because as they shoot upwards through the soil
they meet with obstacles and dangers. There is a splendid courage
at Nature’s heart which raises her above despair, and makes her
vigorous unto the end. Even in our own body, when we are
wounded and bleeding, the watchful guardians of our life will
rush through a thousand channels to heal the breach and prolong
our existence. But Anarchy’s cure for all diseases of the social
system is not cure, but a cutting at the roots, and an arrest of all
vital energy against which the voice of Nature protests with
unmistakable emphasis; for Nature seeks to cure, not to kill.
Nature is no Anarchist. The process of destruction and decay is
not let loose upon any organism, until the vital bond has been
broken and life has fled But Anarchy, as a policy, runs right
athwart the evolution of nations. That there is such a thing as
historic development, no one with any knowledge of the history
of the race will be prepared to deny. By slow, but by sure, steps
mankind is rising from lower to higher levels. Comparing epochs
within the same century, the difference may not be perceptible,
but as a thousand years are but a footstep in the march of the
race, we must make the comparison with long periods intervening.


Evolution has its crises, its epochs of varied crowding, but revolu
tion is not of Nature, but of man, and to suppose that any good
can come out of a policy of destruction is to shut our eyes to the
lessons of Nature, and the admonitions of history.
In the fourth place, where can Anarchists point to a single
instance of the success of their policy ? For almost every political
nostrum you may find an historical illustration and argument;
but the failures of Anarchy are unrelieved by a single gleam of
success. Its history, in so far as it has one, is written in blood,
which not even a thousand years of the sunshine of peace will be
able to lick out of the records of human suffering. The French
Revolution dawned with bright hopes for humanity ; but alas how
soon were those hopes extinguished before that tornado-blast of
Anarchy which swept through the nation, and which from that
time to this, has filled the minds of men and monarchs with
images of horror and blackness.
And, lastly, let us suppose for a moment that Anarchy, after a
fierce conflict with law and order, should triumph. What then?
Kings and Emperors have disappeared, buried under the wreck
of their own palaces. Churches have been desecrated, and no
bishop or priest or minister has been left to preach the Gospel, or
comfort the dying. Children have no parents but the State, and
there is no crime because there is no law. Were such a state
of things even desirable, what guarantee would we have of its
continuance? Would the Socialists of the Anarchic type be a
loving brotherhood, and would they enter upon a permanent peace
when all their enemies were annihilated? Would they not rather
turn their arms against each other, and fight until nothing was
left to testify to their existence but their broken weapons and
their mutilated bodies ? It would be a strange cure for obesity to
put the fat one in the fire, for from his blackened bones no new
life could spring; and Anarchy is not purification by fire, but
destruction, from which may the God of Nations and the Father
of Mankind preserve us ! There is not much fear of any serious
outbreak of Anarchic Socialism in these colonies, nor yet in the
mother country. Here, at all events, we have bread to eat, and
wherewithal to be clothed, although there are some who have to
bear privation, and that for no fault of their own. The working
classes have abundant leisure, and the means of attending such
amusements and excitements as are congenial to them. Under
these sunny skies and protected industries, we ought to be a
happy and contented people. Our prosperity may be symbolised
by a bale of wool, a bag of wheat, and a bar of gold. Anarchy
will not grow in such a social soil as ours, rich in all the elements
of national prosperity. But let us not contract the fatal habit of
believing that what is will continue to be. Work may be hard
to get and be miserably rewarded. Our granaries may, like those


of Egypt in Joseph’s time, become empty, and famine may stare
us in the face. A thousand contingencies may arise that will put
the stability of our institutions to the severest tests ; and it is
in times of distress and public commotion that Anarchy lifts up
its head, and enters upon a career of destruction and bloodshed.
Our best safeguard, even against that, is not in the multiplication
of restrictive laws, nor in pandering to the prejudices of the
people, nor by fits of public generosity, nor by a State education
that makes no provision for the moral and religious nature of the
children in our public schools; but by righteousness in all our
actions, and by the love of God and of each other—a love which
will make labour and self-sacrifice our deepest, most lasting, and
purest enjoyment.
Note.
My use of the word anarchy in this lecture, has been called in
question by some professed anarchists, namely, on the ground that
there are anarchists who do not come under the description of the
text. The real genuine anarchist, we are told, is one who believes
“ in the fullest equal liberty for each individual,” who “ pins his
faith to education, passive resistance, and peace methods generally.
Rather than participate in the compulsion of the ballot box, he
abstains from voting, in the hope of eventually destroying the
institution of government as its source.” Further, “we are
assured that he looks upon the State as a highly artificial
contrivance, which stunts human growth, and serves only to
protect those who neither toil nor spin, but luxuriate on the
labours of others.”
To these criticisms, I desire to say (1) that they are for the
most part irrelevant. As to the sense in which I employ the
word anarchy, I plead usage, the final arbitrator in all these
matters. lam quite aware of the etymological origin of the word,
and of its primary signification, as simply indicating the absence of
government or rule. But words are very much given to travel
from the place of their birth, and the word anarchy is no
exception, for it would be almost impossible to eliminate from' it
the chaotic and destructive elements that have now entered into
its range of meaning. For example, an anarchist, according to
Webster, “is one who excites revolt, or promotes disorder in a
State.” Usage most certainly sanctions this employment of the
word in popular discourse, nor would it be difficult to prove this
assertion by numerous quotations from modern authors of
reputable authority.
But (2) the most superficial reader can hardly fail to see that
n this lecture I am not dealing with anarchic sects, or schools, if
they may be so called, but with the principle or spirit of anarchy
as akin to revolution, and in combination with modem Socialistic


movements. That I am amply justified in the views I have
expressed on Anarchic Socialism, will appear from the following
quotations which could be largely multiplied. In the first chapter
of Bellamy’s “ Looking Backwards,” we have the following
words :
“ The nervous tension of the public mind could not have been
more strikingly illustrated, than it was by the alarm resulting
from a small band of men who called themselves anarchists, and
proposed to terrify the American people into adopting their views,
by threats of violence, as if a mighty nation which had put down
a rebellion of half its own members, were likely to adopt a new
social system out of fear.”
In his appeal to the young, Kropotkin tells the slaves and
down-trodden toilers of our modern civilization that they are a
multitude which no man can number, an ocean that can embrace
and swallow up all else, and concludes with these words:—
“ When we have but the will to do it, that very moment will
justice be done—that very instant the tyrant of the earth will bite
the dust.”
It may be contended, of course, that these words are simply
figurative, and are in perfect accord with that faith which “ pins
itself to education and peace methods generally.” But with one
exception in history—Nebuchadnezzar, King of Babylon—l am
not acquainted with anyone whose education was promoted by
being compelled to bite the dust. The vast majority of those who
have taken up that position have been compelled to do so against
their will; and if so, in what way can the millenium of anarchy
be brought about but by the free application of that very
authority and force some of them are so fond of denouncing 1
The writer of the article Socialism, in the “ Encyclopaidia
Britannica,” referring to Bakunin, says of him :—“Nothing can
be clearer, or more frank and comprehensive in its destructive-
ness, than the Socialism of Bakunin. It is revolutionary
Socialism based on Materialism, and aiming at the destruction of
external authority by every conceivable means The
anarchy of Bakunin is therefore essentially the same as that of
Proudhon, but expressed without paradox, and with a destructive
energy which has seldom been equalled in history.”
It is quite unnecessary to multiply quotations of a similar
character, which lie at our hand, in socialistic literature. If these
are not sufficient to produce conviction, no accumulation of
evidence will accomplish it. There may possibly be amongst the
anarchists a Quaker sect; but the vast majority of those who
believe in “ liberty, fraternity, and equality,” would not scruple
in the least to provoke and support rebellion to give effect to the
doctrines of their creed.


LECTURE IV.
SOCIALISM AND COMMUNISTIC THEORIES
Hitherto we have been dealing, for the most part, with the
negative aspects of Socialism, and with some of its non-essential
characteristics. In so far as the movement attracts to it Atheistic
or Anarchic elements, to that extent are the true aims and
principles of Socialism in danger of being misunderstood, and its
progress retarded. There is nothing in the creed of Socialism that
necessitates anyone who professes it to be either an Infidel or an
Anarchist. That so many Socialists are both, is a matter for
profound regret, as well as for the sake of those who cherisli and
profess such opinions, as for the character and the success of the
movement itself. Leaving now the negative and critical treatment
of our theme, we are face to face with some of the great problems
of Socialism, and the theories propounded for their solution It is
a hopeful sign of the times that the demand is made everywhere
for some attempt to be made to alleviate the sufferings and
miseries of the industrious poor, and I shall glance at some
Communistic Theories put forth for the rectification of wrongs,
and the more equitable distribution of wealth.
The word Communistic, like the word Socialistic itself, has not
a well-defined border-line around it. It does not admit of precise
application. Although not the best word, perhaps, that could be
found, its use by me on this occasion is to give prominence to a
feature common to all forms of communions, namely, that of
combination or union in contra-distinction to individualism and
unchecked competition. Wherever two or more persons unite for
a common purpose, and the necessity for union on the part of
individuals lies at the very root of human nature, there we find
the germ of association or Communism. In some of its higher
flights of speculation, it pictures to itself the possibility of destroy-
iug*poverty and vice by abolishing the right of private property,
and making the entire city, and even nation, an organised whole
for the purpose both of production and distribution, giving to each
constituent member according to his necessities.
The main problem which all forms of Socialism assiduously set
themselves to solve, arises out of what is understood by the labour
question. Every one coming into the world, has from the first
certain wants that must be supplied, if the life that has been
conferred is to be maintained and enlarged. To these natural
wants everyone has a right, which to deny or deprive him of,
would be equal to the denial that he had any right to existence.
But to meet human wants in all their number and variety, man
must work ; for while Nature has given us the materials necessary
to maintain life, the stern duty has been laid upon us, that we


must work if we would eat. The relation between supply and
demand, although subject to a thousand fluctuations, has ever a
manifest tendency towards equilibrium, for social forces are as
much under law as physical ones; but it does not follow that these
forces cannot be co-ordinated by human intelligence and will;
neither does it follow that all who are conscious of wants, and who
contribute their share of work in meeting them, have an equal
proportion of the products of industry. Rather, is it not the case
that many have far below their necessities, while others revel in
abundance, luxury, and extravagance ? This question will be put
until a satisfactory answer is returned—not by the hungry alone,
but by everyone in whose heart the faintest sentiment of brother-
hood has a place. Why should anyone want, if the earth yields
her increase in sufficient quantities for man’s use, while he does
his part in the work of production, and in bringing it within reach
of the consumer? If matters are not satisfactory here—and no
one will affirm they are—something must be wrong, for it is not
our Heavenly Father’s pleasure that any should perish with
hunger or by anything else. If the associative machine does not
work smoothly, it is not the fault of the original maker, but of
that unskilful apprentice hand whose mission it is to learn wisdom
by experience. To find out what is wrong in our social life.
Communistic Theorists have given themselves up with wonderful
devotion and self-sacrifice : and if they have not fully unravelled
the tangled skein of modern industry, they deserve well for having
made the attempt. No one, unless convinced of their practica-
bility, is under any obligation to accept them, but the duty of
understanding them is paramount.
If we take the phrase Communistic Socialism, and apply it
with some latitude of meaning, we shall discover the existence of
three types of association in which the fierceness of individual
competition has been modified, and where, for the purpose of
having things in common, personal liberty has voluntarily
conditioned and restricted itself. These three are—(l) Trades*
Unionism ; (2) Co-operation, or Profit-sharing; (3) Communism,
properly so called where the State as a .social unit becomes the
sole producer and distributor, where all capital is State property,
and where distribution is made to everyone according to his
wants.
Trades’ Unionism can hardly be called a Communistic notion.
At the same time, it may be convenient to discuss it here, as it is
union for definite purposes, and individualism is subordinated to a
greater or less degree as Socialistic aims and methods are in the
ascendency. The purposes for which Trades’ Unions exist is the
protection of the workman against the evils of unrestricted
competition, against the ascendency of capital, and the injustice of
class legislation, by which he may be injuriously affected.


Trades’ Unionism has made itself pretty conspicuous of late,
and having passed the period in which it had to struggle for
existence against innumerable foes, it has now entered upon the
stage of toleration and patronage in which its usefulness may
possibly be somewhat curtailed. Up to the present time, it has
had many a conflict and many a victory. It has pushed up
wages in almost all departments of labour beyond the line of bare
existence ; it has rescued women and children from some kinds of
work for which they were not fitted, and shortened their hours
where they are still permitted to use their hands. The Eight
Hours’ system is one outcome of Trades’ Unionism, and one of its
legislative triumphs, and many useful measures initiated by it are
amongst the glories of our Statute law. The late Labour
Conference held in Berlin, under the auspices of the Emperor of
Germany, may also be regarded as the fruit of this tree ; and
although the findings of the Conference have not the force of
legislation, they cannot fail in largely contributing to the
emancipation of labour, and the amelioration of the working
classes in all parts of the world.
It has been objected to Trades’ Unions that they engender a
haughty spirit of independence in their members; that they are
more frequently tyrannical in their policy than guided by wisdom,
and a due consideration for the rights of others; that their
demands for a share of the profits amounts sometimes to a
demand for the whole of them, and that individual talent and
genius are kept down and discouraged under some sentimental
theory of equality, and justice to the incompetent and the least
skilful. The indictment is not entirely without justification ; but
what associations of men are free from similar charges? Societies
will often do acts from which its members would individually
shrink. The Church of Christ, theoretically, is composed of
saintly men, and the ends for which the Church exists are the
noblest that can occupy human thought, or engage human action,
and yet how frequently has the Church tyrannised; how often
sought her own aggrandisement, forgotten the poor specially
committed to her trust, and excommunicated those for whom
Heaven’s gate was thrown wide open ? It is not for the Church
at least to cast a stone at Trades’ Unions on account of their
follies and excesses. And against this charge of levelling and
tyranny may be put the spirit of self-sacrifice which the more
skilful workman cheerfully submits to, for the sake of his less
skilful brother, and for the general welfare of his class.
But while giving all credit to Trades’ Unionism for the sub-
stantial triumphs of which it may well be proud, and while
commending the heroism and self-sacrifice of many of its members
in the cause of emancipation of labour, it does not appear to me
to have the full solution of the social problem either in its aims


or its methods. It may help to keep up wages within certain
well-defined laws; but what of the mass who press upon the
outskirts of regulated labour, and if not already starving, are
within a few hours’ march of destitution? Trades’ Unions are
by no means indifferent to the sad conditions of many of their
fellow-creatures, and substantial charitable donations frequently
find their way to those who are in want of the barest necessities
of existence. But men are now beginning to see that, although
benevolence is one of the divinest of virtues, it cannot efficiently
grapple with the poverty which, if not increasing as to area and
intensity, is yet pressing upon the public heart and conscience
with a weight that has never been felt before. Trades’ Unionism
contemplates only one aspect of the social problem—the defence
of the labourers and the elevation of labour to its just and proper
place in our social fabric. But the satisfactory solution of the
labour question, however important and necessary it may be,
would not in itself lift society from the slough into which it has
fallen. If combined labour dictates to capital, combined capital
will assuredly next dictate to labour; and when both forces reach
their maximum strength by union, we shall have a conflict as
severe and deadly as a battle with arms between nations. The
last weapon of Trades’ Union is force—for a strike is an appeal to
force. And nothing has the elements of endurance in it that rests
upon a foundation of force. It is still true, although the lesson
has not yet had its full influence in determining conduct, “ They
that take the sword shall perish with the sword.” Strikes are, in
fact, the modem form of warfare, and all along the boundary
between labour and capital we may hear the clink of hammers
closing rivets up, arming the knights of both camps, for, let us
hope, a final struggle After which, perhaps, wisdom and justice
shall be brought into the field as the final arbitrators in a treaty
of perpetual peace. Then society may take up the song, and
shout it forth joyfully :
No longer hosts enconnt’ring hosts
Shall crowds of slain deplore;
They hang the trumpet in the hall.
And study war no more. '
After Trades’ Unionism, the principle of Co-operation and
Profit-sharing naturally comes up for consideration and discussion.
A great deal has been said lately in favour of this plan, and many
patrons have expressed their belief, that it will ultimately do
more iof the working classes than any other scheme that has ever
been devised. Combinations, well organised and well directed,
will certainly accomplish what individual effort in its sum total
would be powerless to effect. But Co-operation is simply an
attempt to made the workman a capitalist. Profit-sharing means-
more than bare wages, and takes us into the region of capital


at once. The workman who becomes a member of any
co-operative society must have had something to invest beyond
his labour, and that pre-supposes on his part the habit of saving
and skilful management of his affairs. But where such individual
virtues as these are found, the social problem has advanced a long
way in the direction of a satisfactory solution. Were all who
have to labour with hand and head strong, healthy, industrious,
and thrifty, the area of comfort would be very much larger than
it is at present. Poverty and destitution would be reduced to
comparatively narrow limits, and charity would be relieved from
the burden and pain of that depressing hopelessness which the
contrast between the necessities of the poor and the resources at
her command ever produces—a helplessness which cripples effort,
and dries up the sources of benevolence.
Co-operation and Profit-sharing have been also strongly recom-
mended on economic grounds. It is believed that they would
bring the producer and the consumer nearer each other, and so
dispense with that very unpopular character called the middle-
man, whose numbers are said to be far in excess of the
requirements of distribution.
The principle of Co-operation must approve itself to all who are
capable of estimating its advantages, but it must be confessed
with regret that its progress has not been so rapid, nor its results
so satisfactory, as its advocates naturally expected. All the
causes of this want of success may not be apparent, but there are
some that lie on the surface, to which we may briefly refer.
Too much importance has been attached to the abolition of the
so-called middle-men, who in certain positions are indispensable
in the distribution of productions. A load of bricks, for example,
can be taken out of a cart and stacked a few yards away by a line
of, say three men, handing them to each other, much more
rapidly, and therefore economically, than by each man making a
journey from the cart to the stack. The middle-man here, who
simply stands still between the cart and the stack, is doing as
much work as either of his companions, and it would be no gain
to the other two to dispense with his services. But there is a
class of middle-men who can be dispensed with without any loss
to any but themselves. They are the secondary employers of
labour at famine prices, for which labour they themselves receive
fair remuneration. They are the scouts of belligerent capital, and
enrich themselves by the spoils they seize from defenceless labour.
The tide of public opinion is happily setting in strongly against
any unnecessary increase of the distance between real employers
and the unemployed. Their interests are not the same, as some
affirm, but the chances of friction would certainly decrease in
proportion to the directness of their relations. Then there is no
denying the fact that co-operation and industrial associations and


limited companies all tend to discourage individual talent and
enterprise, by narrowing their sphere of activity, and withholding
from them both encouragement and reward. On the other hand,
Co-operation pre-supposes and demands, both in the individual
and in the aggregate, a high state of civilisation. But what
we are in search of is not something that will be adopted in
society when it reaches a high state of moral development, but a
scheme for present necessities, and that will also contribute to
that development. But even if this co-operative principle were to
fail, its very failure would hasten on the millenium of labour
by creating that necessity which is the mother of invention.
The third Communistic theory already referred to is Industrial
Communism, properly so called.
All kinds of labour combination and co-operation are Com-
munism in the bud, but it is not until the community or the
State becomes the sole producer and distributer, private property
being abolished, the wealth of the nation held in common, and
the whole body of the people organised into a vast industrial
army, that Communism reaches its fruition. Many of you have
read “ Looking Backwards,” by Edward Bellamy. The purpose
of the author in that popular little book appears to be to give a
picture of the condition of society under Industrial Communism.
He describes the social state as one of harmony and peace. There
is no poverty, and no superfluous wealth. The labour difficulty is
at an end, and all social distinctions have passed away. There is
no fierce competition anywhere, no over-production, and no waste.
Every constituent member of the community must work, and the
State guarantees to all citizens necessary maintenance and
reasonable comfort.
“ Looking Backwards ” requires that we should go to sleep till
the year 2000, and sleep even for a shorter period than that is apt
to be haunted with dreams. And this book is a dream, not like
those that Joseph had when a lad, which were in his case the
outcome of the prophetic instinct, but a dream fantastical and
impractical. No system of social amelioration can be permanent
or satisfactory that merges the individual in the community. It
is the personal factor that gives value to States, and all voluntary
associations and legislation are valuable only in so far as they
conserve individual liberty, promote individual happiness, and the
higher types of individual character. Between Anarchy in its
purely negative aspect, and Communism on the other, we have
to seek a middle way, equi-distant between the falsehood of
extremes. And this is a moral and religious duty, as well as a
great social and economic question. The discovery of this middle
way will be revealed to us as the reward of faith in the goodness
of God, as the Land of Promise was given to Abraham for the
same reason, if we continue to believe in the fact of His active


government, even in the midst of modern chaos. Every man who
strives to do right in all things and at all times, is helping forward
the Divine order. For to those who know what God’s will is, and
who do it, there is not only for them harmonious relations with
the moral Governor of Mankind, but they become fellow-workers
with God in the redemption of the race according to His eternal
purposes.
LECTURE V.
SOCIALISM AND LEGISLATION.
The surface of the globe is, happily, not all one continuous
stretch of dreary uniformity, either of land or water. What
light and shade ever play upon the face of the deep ? While the
solid part of the world’s surface is made up of valley and plain,
of little hills and lofty mountains, of island continents and storm-
battered promontories. And as it is with the surface of the
earth, so is it with the races of mankind that have made it their
habitation, and who live upon what the kindly earth yields for
their maintenance. We are not all black, nor all white, nor all
copper-coloured. Even within the narrower classification, what
varieties of Colour and character do we meet 1 It is the same
blood that circulates in our veins, but its volume and momentum
admit of infinite modifications, so much so that not two
individuals are exactly alike. Within the wide area of the
race there are larger and smaller groups distinguished by some
common characteristic of origin or language, and in these
distinctions we have the basis of National life and State
organisation. A Nation or State is not a voluntary
It is not a temporary combination of individuals united for some
definite purposes. It is as much the product of natural law as
the growth of a tree, or the rise and fall of the tide. It may be
defined as an organised community, occupying a definite portion
of the earth’s surface, and subject to some supreme power for the
purposes of government. What these purposes are it is not
always wise to determine, but no State can exist in the absence
of sovereign power, invested either in a single person or in the
voice of the whole community. We live here under a system of
government called constitutional, in which supreme authority is
embodied in the laws of the land ; laws not springing directly
from the will of the people, hut originated, discussed, and passed
by the people’s representatives in Parliament assembled, and
assented to by the Crown. A law, therefore, may be defined as
the command of the State prohibiting certain acts, or enforcing


certain duties, and securing observance of the same by the
infliction of penalties on the disobedient. The very essence of law,
founded on legislation, is force. And it may be well here to give
a few examples of its power in the machinery of Government.
The law can take a man out of a comfortable compartment in a
railway carriage, and land him unceremoniously on the platform, for
neglecting to provide himself with a travelling ticket before starting.
The law can impose a very heavy fine upon anyone and appropriate
a considerable portion of his estate, if he is not sufficiently careful
to observe the law in any important matter; as we may see in
the case of him who was recently fined £IOO for some irregularity
in the celebration of a marriage—all the more censurable on his
part, considering his extensive experience in this line of business.
The law can take away our personal liberty if we are found guilty
of certain crimes; and if anyone in Australia here should, as some
do, help himself to money to which he has no just claim, and make
off to some distant part to spend his ill-gotten store, the long arm
of the law, stretching over continents and seas, and guided by an
eye that penetrates into the darkest recesses of crime, can single
him out, even amid the millions of London, and bring him back
to receive the just punishment of his criminal folly. But the
power of the law does not stop at imprisonment, even for life, for if
anyone should, with deliberate intention, commit murder, the law
decrees the death penalty. And as an illustration of the power of
the law, capital punishment exhibits it in its most striking and
solemn manifestations.
It is this power of the law, imparted to it by legislation, that
has induced a large section of modern socialists to seize it as a
weapon for the purpose of working out their ( schemes of social
reform and political freedom. To abolish all class distinctions,
equalise the distribution of wealth, and ultimately to reduce State
action to a minimum, if not to abolish it altogether, democratic
socialists do not trust so much to the growth of public opinion, as
to the spread of intelligence, as to the efficiency of legislation.
They profess to have no faith in active revolutionary movements,
but place great taith in the ballot box and Parliamentary
representation. As a matter of fact, the majority of electioneer-
ing conflicts, both in England and on the Continent, turn on some
question of State socialism. No attempts are made by socialists
of this class, to conceal either their aims or their methods ; nor
are they working without encouragement or hope. There are
two modern movements they point to with pride, each of which
they claim for their cause, both as a triumph and as an ally. The
first is the undoubted progress of democratic ideas everywhere,
whose gathering forces are frequently compared to a rising tide,
that will ere long sweep away or submerge everything erected to
arrest its progress. The other movement is the trend of modern
c


legislation in a socialistic direction. During the last fifty years,
legislation has been completely revolutionised in respect to its
aims and functions. In those good old times to which those who
hate change fondly refer, the State was not supposed to have
more to do than to defend the people from aggressive warfare
from without, and from crime within. With an army for the
one, and a police force for the other, what more was needed or
desired. The sphere of legislation was definite and narrow, and
social questions were almost wholly ignored. With the Reform
Act of 1832, the era of Socialistic Legislation may be said to begin
—not that all such legislation was neglected up till this time, but
that it henceforth partook largely of that characteristic feature.
By Socialistic Legislation, we mean laws for the protection of
workmen in connection with certain kinds of labour, the
protection of the consumer in regard to the purity of his food ;
the education of all classes of the community ; and generally such
restrictions upon individual freedom and unlimited competition
as were supposed necessary to lessen the burdens of life, and
establish just and righteous relations between the several com-
ponent parts of the Commonwealth.
The amount and character of such legislation within recent
times, would hardly be credited without an appeal to the facts of
the case. And one of the least hopeful signs of the times is this,
that notwithstanding all that has been done, and what yet may
reasonably be expected for bettering the condition of the people
generally, there would exist still such a deep-seated discontent in
the minds of so many—a discontent that looks as if it would defy
every effort to dislodge it.
The freedom of the subject has been somewhat circumscribed in
connection with factories and coal mines, the sale of poisons, and
the use of firearms. The freedom of the subject is not permitted
unlimited sway in overloading ships and sending them to sea—a
kind of floating coffins—to find their speedy resting-place in a
watery grave. The freedom of the subject is somewhat interfered
with in preventing the adulteration of food, and the accumulation
of unwholesome nuisances. And is not the freedom of the subject
of little account now in the matter of education, which has become
compulsory, and brought within reach of the poorest subject?
The progress of Socialistic Legislation raises the question of the
proper functions of the State, and of the relation of the individual
to law and government. Unless we have some clear and definite
notion of the relation of the State to the individual, and the
individual to the State, we are in danger of becoming the abettors
of the evils of popular clamour, or the victims of unreasonable fears.
Your duties as citizens and members of the State should not be
discharged on grounds of mere expediency, but of morality and
religion. To vote, for example, thoughtlessly, or because of some


favour bestowed or expected, is an injury to the sacred cause of
democratic government, the best efforts of which are real, however
difficult it may be to trace their course. One may neglect his
private devotions, and injure no one but himself ; but a wrong
done in the sphere of social and political activity carries conse-
quences to our neighbours, which no one who is not wholly given
over to selfishness will deliberately commit.
In order to our enlightenment and guidance in these matters,
we must fall back upon experience. History is the store-room of
practical knowledge. To elaborate an ideal State out of our own
imagination may be a pleasant exercise, but it is almost always
unprofitable labour. Narrowing our observation to our own
country, and within our own times, we may affirm that there are
some things which the State alone can do, and which it does well.
In addition to the maintenance of the Army and Navy, which
certainly comes legitimately within State functions, if the State is
to exist at all, there is the post office, which is emphatically a
socialistic institution. Did you ever think of the value and
importance of the mail service to the whole community? As the
network of nerves over the bony skeleton of the body, so are the
ramifications of the postal organisation of the empire. From the
crowded city to the lonely hamlet in the bush, there is no place
entirely cut off from its lines of communication. What messages
of joy and sorrow it carries ; what threats and implorings ; what
losses, what gains 1 And yet, considering the magnitude and
variety of its work, how few mistakes and failures are there !
Let us thank God for the post office. It is one of those things
which the State alone can do, and we are glad to be able to say
that the State does it well.
There are some things the State does which clearly lie within
its province, but which it does not do well. Of these, we may
mention the regulation of the liquor traffic, and the mode in
which justice is administered. In regard to the former, it is not
saying too much to affirm that legislation here may not inappro-
priately be described as a series of failures. No sooner is one Act
passed than there is a demand for some alteration or amendment.
This failure may be traced to an untutored fondness for restriction
and prohibition, and at the same time a singular indifference to
the power and efficiency of positive legislation. The traffic in
intoxicants is exceptional, and requires exceptional treatment;
but there are positive evils arising out of the traffic that should
be dealt with before repressive measures of an indirect character
should be thought of. Amongst the iliany evils springing from
the intemperate use of strong drink, public drunkenness is not the
least conspicuous. And yet how feebly is this crime dealt with !
It is a very grave offence against society for one to appear in
public in a state of helpless or dangerous intoxication. If it is
C 2


necessary to bind certain persons over to keep the peace, it is also
of the utmost moment to bind over others to keep sober. And if
any one is unable to do so, it must be because he is a confirmed
criminal or a lunatic. But in either case he should be dealt with
accordingly. This is what is meant by positive legislation,
attacking evils directly as they arise, rather than legislating for
those that are simply imaginary, or have not the taint of crime in
them by any standard of ethics. It is no doubt a good thing to
remove temptation from the weak ; but it is better, by all possible
means and moral forces, to make the weak strong, for then
temptation will lose its power, or become the means of giving
additional strength to virtue.
With regard to the mode in which justice is administered, it
must be obvious to all that it would be a great gain if the
procedure of our Law Courts were much more expeditious, and
less costly. Haste here would not only be unseemly, but defeat
the very ends of justice. But, at the same time, no one can shut
his eyes to the fact that the “law’s delay” is sometimes both
vexatious and ruinous, even to the successful plaintiff. What the
community wants is justice, not an exhibition of legal skill by
opposing barristers, at the cost of the litigants. Reform is much
needed in this direction before it can be said that this part of the
functions of the State is well done. When justice is the luxury
of the wealthy only, the causes of the poor must frequently go
unredressed.
But there are some things which the State ought to do, but
which unfortunately it neglects. Our modem civilisation and
favourable climate generate an immense amount of energy beyond
what is required for procuring the means of subsistence. The
popularity of football is largely to be attributed to this cause.
That it not only meets a natural demand for recreation, but helps
to scatter the overflowing energies of those who have not been
overwrought, or exhausted by labour. On the whole, it is better
for the exuberant animal spirits of the youthful portion of the
community to find a vent in this way, rushing like steam through
the escape pipe, rather than by repression to become a dangerous
explosive force. The enthusiasm for football surely reached its
climax the other Saturday afternoon, for as I passed in the train,
I saw nothing but a broad, circular band of umbrellas, beneath
which, I suppose, there were thousands of eager eyes watching the
erratic course of a piece of inflated leather! Now, here is a
fine field for the legislator and the patriot. In a democratic
community, every man should be trained to be of service in the
event of threatened invasion. And there are hundreds and
thousands of young men amongst us who would be vastly the
better for a little physical education, with military drill. There
is no reason why, under proper management, such a training should


fan the war flame into a dangerous intensity. It would be
advantageous to themselves, and a protection to the community, to
take some of these big lubbering fellows, so light above and heavy
below, who gather about street corners in search of what they call
amusement, and give them a manly bearing, and something to do
that would lift them out of the ranks of dangerous idlers.
Volunteering did wonders for the Home land about thirty years
ago, when a French invasion was by no means a baseless fear; and
although our horizon is not darkened by any such apprehension,
we may raise the social standard considerably if the State would
make ample and liberal provision for the proper military training
of all able-bodied men. We should then not only increase our
sense of security, but profitably employ the surplus energy of
those who have nothing better to do on a Saturday afternoon than
watch the progress of a football match.
It would be well also if our legislators would turn their
attention to the desirability of framing some scheme of National
insurance against accident and death for the benefit of the labour-
ing classes. The principle of compulsion in operation in other
directions, may be applied here without injuring the subject,
although it might interfere with his liberty in the reckless
expenditure of his wages. If the State could only direct into such
profitable channels the savings which our free system of education
confers upon the people at large, there would be fewer appeals to
the liberality of a generous public.
There are some things which the State attempts to do, but does
so badly that it raises the question whether they lie within the
proper functions of the State. We have in this colony a National
system of education, which no one can say is fulfilling the purposes
for which it was enacted. It is a system from which the parents
of the children attending school are completely excluded. The
local management is simply a name, and utterly worthless. How
it came to pass that those who are responsible for the proper
upbringing of their children, should have allowed them to come
under the dull monotony of such a secular machine as our present
Education Act, is beyond my comprehension. And the mystery
is only equalled by the fact that they have submitted so long to
such treatment. A system of National education is a necessity
of our times ; but the less the State has to do with it directly, the
better; and the more it is under local control, the more likely is it
to be both efficient and thorough.
Let us now look at some of the things which legislation should
never attempt. And here, the lessons of history should have
special prominence. To attempt to squeeze thought, and especially
religious thought, into a uniform State mould, to get all to say
the same prayers and to go through the same ecclesiastical drill, is
as absurd as it is repellant to human nature. And yet it has been


tried, but happily with absolute failure as the result. Our
Covenanting and Puritanic fathers resisted all such attempts in
the face of much suffering, with loss even of life. They have
handed down to us a precious inheritance, which we cannot prize
too highly or guard with too watchful an eye.
Legislation cannot make men virtuous. I cannot altogether
subscribe to the doctrine that it is impossible to make men moral
by Act of Parliament. There is an educative influence in law
when based on just principles, and what is a moral influence is
favourable to virtue. But still personal virtue will not spring up
at the bidding of authority. It is based on personal choice, and
is first of all an inward sentiment. All that is good and noble in
character comes from the heart, whose beat is that of righteousness
and truth. The best legislation will not make a people virtuous
if they are not that already, and the worst laws will not make the
people vicious if they are not so by deliberate choice and action.
Environment is an important factor in character; but envii’onment
is not all, nor is legislation all environment.
But, above all, let us never forget that legislation alone can
never make a people happy. The human animal must have more
than straw and a stall before he settles down into contentment.
We may picture to ourselves a community where there is no
poverty ; where there is no want of labour; where wages are high,
food abundant and cheap ; where filth and fever have been swept
away by the sanitary broom; and where crime has been extin-
guished. And yet amid all this peace and prosperity, we have no
guarantee that man will be happy. Who are they at whose
ear the demon toad of evil sits and croaks, filling the imagination
with pictures of misery and despair? Not those who have to
work for their living; not even those who have to toil for it. The
poor have but one anxiety ; the rich are overwhelmed with them.
And when to riches there is added idleness, with a craving for
sensational amusement, the heart sinks so low under its burdens
that it begins to ask the question whether life is worth living.
How frequently, alas ! has a suicidal “No” come from the hollow
caverns of despair, giving one more illustration of the too much
forgotten truth, that happiness must have its seat and centre in
ourselves before our surroundings can yield one drop of comfoi-t
for thfe cup of life. The abundance of our corn and wine may
encourage luxury and sloth, and soon bring about depression of
spirits and misery ; but he is superior to all calamity and even
want whose relations with God are filial, and with his fellow men
fraternal.


LECTURE VI.
SOCIALISM AND CHRISTIANITY.
In the previous lectures, I have endeavoured to point out the
relation of modern Socialism to Infidelity ; to Anarchy, as active
revolution ; to Communism and to Legislation; and to indicate to
what extent the aims of Socialism were modified by these
movements. I now propose to inquire how far Christianity
is in harmony with the aspirations of Socialists, and where
Christianity and Socialism part company.
When we remember that we are surrounded by an atmosphere
made warm and bright by Christianity, it would seem to be a very
useless and superfluous question to ask, “ What is Christianity ?”
And yet I am compelled to admit that the amount of popular
ignorance on this subject is far in excess of any charitable
explanation. Christianity and theology are not identical, as many
suppose; and although we cannot get to know what Christianity
is without the Bible, they can be discriminated by broad lines of
demarcation, which to ignore would be sure to lead one into
confusion and error. Again, Christianity is more than morality.
It is not- unfrequently said that the essence of religion consists in
doing to others as we would that others should do to us. But
that rule has almost exclusive reference to conduct, and as a rule
of life, it has nothing directly to do with religion; but Christianity
is a religion as well as a system of morals, and no explanation of
Christianity is adequate that does not indicate its spiritual, or
God-side, as well as that which touches human nature and gives
rules for human conduct. The answer to the question, “ What is
Christianity ?” should be one that would give definite and accurate
information to anyone whose education had not brought him in
very close contact with it. Were I challenged to supply such
information, I would reply as follows:—“ In the first place,
Christianity is a religion, a form of worship, and the object of its
adoration is the only living and true God, under the three-fold
personality of Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.” I am quite aware
that such a description may be controverted by Unitarians; but
notwithstanding their demur, they themselves must allow that the
main stream of Christian thought, from the earliest ages until now,
has flowed between these well defined banks. It is not the, truth
of Trinitarianisrn that is here raised and discussed, but simply the
fact of its historicity as one of the most prominent characteristics
of Christian doctrine. The formula of baptism is as old as
Christianity itself, and the doxology had become part of the
worship of the Church as early as the second century. Christi-
anity is the worship of God, who is a spirit, in spirit and in
truth ; but it has also this peculiar and distinctive mark, that it is


the worship of the Father, and the Son and the Holy Ghost, not
as three Gods, but as God in a mysterious trinity, and no less
mysterious union. Like Judaism and Mohammedanism, the
religion of Jesus Christ rests upon the doctrine of Divine
unity; but the doctrine of the Divine unity, as taught by
Christianity, has a three-fold distinction of persons in it which,
with one exception, has been received as an article of faith by all
sections of the Church of Christ through all the stages of her
history.
But, in the second place, Christianity is more than a system of
worship, it is pre-eminently a remedial scheme—a way of salvation.
It assumes that the race of mankind is not in its normal or natural
condition. That it has, by the free exercise of its own elective
powers, fallen into sin, and involved itself in all the sad conse-
quences of transgression. Looking upon man generally as sinned,
and all but lost, it comes forward with a scheme of restoration, of
forgiveness, and peace. As a system of worship, it inculcates the
worship of the Son in the same way, and to the same extent, as
we worship the Father; but as a plan of salvation, Christ is the
Lamb of God which taketh away the sins of the world. To over-
look this aspect of Christianity is to miss not only its most
valuable characteristic, but its distinctive mark. Fully to des-
cribe a medicine, it is not enough to give the result of a chemical
analysis; its healing properties in relation to some particular
disease should also be indicated. So it is with Christianity. Any
analysis of its doctrinal contents, or summary of its moral precepts,
that keeps out of sight its relation to sin and forgiveness, cannot
be accepted as full and satisfactory. Sin is death, but Christ, who
is Christianity, came into the world to destroy this death, that we
might have life; for the very essence of the scheme of human
redemption is the proclamation of pardon to all who are willing
to fulfil the conditions on which forgiveness is freely bestowed.
Now, this leads us to remark in the third place, that another
distinguishing feature of Christianity is, its demand for repentance
and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ from eveiyone who aspires to
a more than formal connection with that spiritual community
known as the Kingdom of Heaven, which the advent of Christi-
anity brought into existence. But, however important these
things are, they are not the whole of Christianity ; but rightly to
comprehend these, in themselves and in their relations, is to occupy
a most favourable position for becoming better acquainted with
that system of worship, of doctrine, and of duty, under the
designation of Christianity. The keynote of Christian worship
is the doxology :—“ Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and
to the Holy Ghost; as it was in the beginning, is now, and ever
shall be, world without end, Amen.” The foundation stone of
Christian doctrine is the incarnation of the Divine Son, and the


Divine sacrifice of Himself for the sins of the world. He is the
Son of God, and the Son of Man, as also the Saviour of humanity.
The keystone of the arch of Christian duty is faith and trust in
this Divine Saviour, who becomes to all who receive Him the
strongest governing and propelling force in the new life of devo-
tion to God, and the good of mankind, which is the province of
Christ’s Gospel to inspire.
If this is Christianity, what is the relation of modern Socialism
to it?
Their lines run parallel for a certain way, but afterwards they
seem to diverge. And the separation becomes more and more
apparent the farther we travel from the point of divergence. I
shall, therefore, first of all show how far modern Socialism and
Christianity run together, and then where, and to what extent,
they diverge.
Christianity and Socialism are one in recognising with more or
less distinctness the universal brotherhood of man. The founder
of Christianity is the Son of Man. He is also the Lamb of God r
which taketh away the sins of the world. The strength of
Socialism lies in the fact that it has the welfare of the people as a
whole directly before it, and is opposed to all class distinctions and
privileges. To represent Socialism as some wild scheme for
taking by force the accumulated wealth of the nation, and making
an equal distribution of it amongst all, is not only grossly to misre-
present it, but to raise an unnecessary prejudice against a movement
whose aims are right, although its methods may not be always wise.
This sentiment, the brotherhood of man, finds its tersest expression
in the word “ fraternity,” and the word “ equality,” with which it is
so frequently associated, is its natural outcome and complement.
This latter word does not carry with it the notion of perfect
evenness and level on the part of mankind generally, but simply
an equality in the eyes of the law, and the impartial administra-
tion of justice, on the basis of universal brotherhood.
Christianity and Socialism run together also in so far as they
both seek common ends. Their aims are benevolent. They are
both moved with compassion in the presence of human suffering
and wrong. There is a conviction at the heart of both that man
was not made to mourn, and that if he does, it is not because it is
the inevitable condition of things, or, to put it in religious
phraseology, the will of our Father in Heaven ; but from causes
which are preventible, and ought, therefore, to be removed.
Socialism, it it does not avowedly profess to make men happy,
aims at least at these two things :—First, the removal of all those
inequalities and injustices that cause so much of the privation and
misery we see around us at the present day, and which it, in
common with Christianity, so deeply deplores; and secondly, to
bring within reach of all the means of subsistence, and of rational


recreation and enjoyment. Were these proposals accomplished, it
does not necessarily follow that sunshine would come to the heart,
and perfect peace reign in every sphere of our nature; but it
would remove the guilt from society of making their acquisition and
possession all but impossible.
And Christianity has a message for the body as well as for the
soul. The religion of Jesus Christ aims at more than saving one
from the terrors of the world to come. It aims at his highest
welfare, which cannot be reached unless the whole man is touched
and healed. Supreme happiness is the concomitant of perfect
health, and the harmonious adjustment of every part of our
complex nature. The salvation of Christianity includes bodily
soundness as well as spiritual insight and peace; and none is saved,
in the fullest sense of that word, whose relations with himself, and
the world without, are not consistent, however much delight he
may appear to take in psalm singing and religious services.
Christianity and Socialism are also alike in this, that they are
both hopeful as to the future. Their creed is not the creed of
despair. The darkness that hangs over us is made up of clouds,
behind which the sun shines; it is not the outer skirts of an
endless night. The burdened heart is always prophetic; and
nowhere does the star of hope shine so brightly as on the dark
background of human sorrow. No movement for the amelioration
of mankind would survive for any length of time, were it not for
the inspiration of hope; and Socialism in its best estate is
sustained and encouraged in its aggressive efforts by the
conviction that, in spite of the gloomy outlook of the present,
there is a good time coming for the world and for man. And is
not Christianity the religion of hope? Its future world is filled
with brightness, and every tongue is musical with praise.
But having made these admissions, we come to the point where
Christianity and Socialism part company. I shall now, therefore,
indicate how far they differ, both in their estimate of the evils
which afflict mankind, and their methods of removing them.
Socialism, whose range of vision is confined to what is seen and
temporal, finds the cause of human misery and wrong in man’s
surroundings—in unjust and oppressive laws, in social tyrannies
and injustices, in commercial frauds and domestic infelicities, and
generally in man’s inhumanity to man. Christianity does not
deny that those are bitter drops in the cup of life. But in answer
to'the question, From what plant are these drops squeezed? it
replies, going to the very root of the matter, that it is sin or
rebellion against God, which is the source of all our misery and
unhappiness. We are out of joint with our spiritual environment,
and there must be a readjustment before there can be harmonious
action. The soul was made for God, and never in the nature of
things can it be happy until it finds Him. Wherever there is this


alienation of the heart to the supreme good, there is the secret of
human misery and wrong-doing. The higher derangement dis-
turbs the balance of all our lower energies; and until Socialism
fully comprehends the fact of man’s personal relation to God, as
that of a sinner against His laws and a rebel against His
government, its diagnosis of the cause of human suffering will be
superficial and inadequate, and its methods of cure will necessarily
partake of the same character. In this respect, Christianity is the
much more skilful physician, for it lays its finger on the sore and
source of the disease in the state of the human heart towards God,
its culpable ignorance of His character and law, and its choice
and love of wrong-doing. Sin is a choice—a bad choice—for man
cannot be made to sin by any force outside himself; he determines
himself on the direction of sin, and in cherishing the disposition to
do so. In spite of'the light of reason and the admonitions and
warnings of conscience, he voluntarily tramples upon the higher
law of his being, and becomes the slave of his own impulses and
passions. Nothing in the universe can make him happy until this
rebellion is put down, order restored, and the supreme governing
power enthroned.
This divergence, as to the source of human ills, becomes more
apparent when we come to examine the respective methods of
Socialism and Christianity for their removal. Anarchic Socialism,
where it comes short of recommending a policy of violence and
active revolution, would abolish all civil law and government, and
every custom or institution that does not allow the individual to
work out his own redemption, unchecked and unrestrained by any
controlling force, save that which his own reason and conscience
supply. Communism advocates co-operation and identity of
interest over the whole field of our industrial activity. Socialistic
democrats pin their faith to Acts of Parliament, and would adjust
human inequalities by the weapon of legislation. But none of
these go deep enough, and none of them can be accepted as a satis-
factory solution of the social problem. The aim of Christianity is to
establish God’s kingdom upon the earth—that is to say, to bring
the whole world under Divine law and government, to establish
the reign of justice, mercy and peace. But in order to do this,
Christianity lays down this condition, that before any one can
enter this Kingdom, he must surrender himself without reserve
to the new order of things. As the Bible puts it, he must be
converted, and become as docile and confiding as a little child
before the healing stream of a new life brings freshness and truth-
fulness to the field of his activities, which before had been bare
and barren.
Nor does Christianity leave us alone to effect this great change
to which it summons us. It supplies us with the loftiest and
the purest motives. It promises forgiveness for past sins, on


condition of true repentance. It does not, by its liberal offers of
mercy, weaken the foundations of justice, for God’s mode of
punishing sin and saving the sinner, leaves no excuse for under-
estimating the enormity of sinning against Him. Christianity
surrounds us with companionship congenial to our new feelings,
and helpful to us in striving after the perfection of our nature,
and the presence and sympathy of the Saviour Himself, as
possessed and guaranteed to all who confide in Him and overcome
the world by their faith. When trouble comes, Christianity
supplies us with strength to bear it ; and when we are persecuted
and shamefully used, it exhorts, not to retaliate, but to pray for
them who abuse us, that they may cease from evil and learn to do
well. And when the dark shadows of death gather round us, and
the noise of life’s machinery falls upon our ear like a distant
murmur, the darkness is less heavy and confusing by the presence
of Him who conquered death and brought life and immortality to
light by His Gospel. Enlightened Socialism is not absolutely
ignorant of these things. Like the young man in the story of the
evangelist, it is not far from the Kingdom of Heaven; but when
it is converted, for movements, as well as persons, can pass from
darkness to light, then the day of the world’s redemption shall
have dawned.
LECTURE VII.
SOCIALISM AND THE CHURCHES.
Language is the expression of thought, the living body in which
it dwells and by which it makes its existence known and felt
beyond the inner circle of its own consciousness. Christianity is
first of all a thought in the Divine mind, and one of the forms of
its expression is the visible Church. Christianity, like thought,
is internal and invisible; its movements are subtle and not easily
detected ; but when allied to language, it passes from the inner
to the outer world, and may then be judged by the common
standards of value. The visible Church is one of those channels
through which the Supreme Intelligence speaks to the world con-
cerning Himself, and the conditions of human happiness. But
language can never fully express thought, of which fact everyone
has some knowledge who falls back on his own experience. The
visible Church, however perfect in its organisation and widespread
in its ramifications, can never adequately give full and clear
utterance to the thought of God and His merciful purposes to the
race. The language of poets is the highest and richest form of


human speech; but how many thoughts wander spectre-like
through the shades for want of some home to dwell in, and hold
converse with their kin. If, therefore, we must regard the visible
Church as part of the expression of Christianity, let us not forget
its incapacity to give full and adequate expression to all that
Christianity is. At the same time, it must also be admitted
that if the visible Church has not the vital breath of Christianity
in every part of it, it is a defective organisation in proportion as
that breath is wanting; and when the breath departs, it is no
longer a body, but a corpse.
In my last lecture on Socialism, I endeavoured to point out
how far the religion of Jesus, and modern Socialistic movements
were pervaded by the same spirit, dominated by the same aims,
and governed by the same methods. Wherein also they parted
company, and how far in some directions they diverged. I pro-
pose now to bring Socialism and the Churches together, with
the view of ascertaining how far they are working together ;
how far they are antagonistic ; and which of them in the struggle
for existence is likely to survive, and be most serviceable to
mankind.
By the visible Church, I mean the whole company of believers
in Christ’s doctrine and scheme of human redemption on the earth
at one time. In lofty and venerable cathedrals, where the solemn
chant lingers in echo along the vaulted roof, and worshippers
kneel in prayer, and pour out their heart’s devotion in liturgic
forms that have become sacred by the piety of centuries, part of
the visible Church is there. But no less is the Church visibly
manifesting its presence in some lonely hut, where two or three
workmen, in their every-day garb, meet from week to week, to
read their Bible together, speak their wants in their own phrase-
ology to the Great Breadgiver, and encourage each other to live
up to Christ’s standard of brotherhood. For this visible Church
in all its branches, and by whatever system of laws governed, is a
great Socialistic institution —a household whose supreme law is
liberty, and whose bond is fraternity. The motto of some modern
schools of Socialism is liberty, fraternity, and equality ; but this
trio of social and political virtues have been the companions of
the visible Church through all the stages of her history; and if
original inheritance gives any title to possession, these graces
belong to the visible Church more than to any modern movement
that claims to be under their inspiration and guidance.
The visible Church is founded on freedom, for the charter of
its liberty makes the possession of spiritual freedom the first
condition of membership in the household of the Divine Son; and
what we are expected to have on entrance we are exhorted to
maintain, and not to suffer ourselves to be dragged back into
bondage and made slaves to the beggarly elements of the world.


The visible Church is also the brotherhood of the saved, and while
these are, and must be as in all other societies, officers, Govern-
ment and administration, the underlying foundations are those of
fraternity and equality. “ All ye are brethren,” said the Master,
who was at the same time the servant of all, and every departure
from the spirit of that solemn declaration of fraternal equality is
a violation of the laws of His kingdom. Nor has the history of
the visible Church belied the principles that form the foundation-
stones of the edifice. From the earliest ages until now, she
has, in one or other of her organised divisions, kept up a
vigorous warfare with despotism and privilege. When the Jewish
authorities commanded the first preachers of the Gospel not to
speak at all, nor teach, concerning Jesus of Nazareth, they
emphatically refused to do so, and accepted the consequences of
their rebellion. The Roman Empire, again and again, during
the first three centuries, endeavoured to stamp out the Church
by every act of a cruel and oppressive policy ; but in the beginning
of the fourth century, the Churches were strong enough to compel
the Government to issue an edict of religious toleration through-
out the Empire. That display of military enthusiasm in the 11th
and 12th centuries, known in history as the Crusades, had more
of the brotherhood of Christianity in it than the love of adventure
or of war. It was a knell of federation of Christian States, and
though wild and impulsive, and characteristic of the age in which
it flourished, the fuel which fed the fires of its enthusiasm was
dug from Christian mines, and distributed through Christian
channels. The enemy fought against a power believed to be
antagonistic to the very existence of the Christian Church ; and
the glory for which they sacrificed so much, was that of the Cross
and its Divine Sufferer.
In the Middle Ages, the torch of learning was kept burning
within the enclosures of the Church long after the rude blasts qf
social strife had extinguished it elsewhere ; and in these same
institutions, both piety and charity found a refuge when opposed
and persecuted by the world without. The disintegrating forces
that were slowly preparing the world for one of its revolutionary
stages, known as the renascence, were regulated and moderated
by the gradual increase of those constructive elements which, if
they did not originate in the Church, were conserved by her and
made of practicable value when the time for their application
arrived. It is simply impossible to eliminate the spirit of
Christianity from the events that preceded and followed the
period known as the great Protestant Reformation.
The history of our own country has been, until lately, one of
ceaseless conflict between liberty and despotism —between
common justice on one hand, and privilege and power on the
other. The greatest Empire on the face of the earth, at the


present time, may fairly be said to be the United States of
America. It was the Pilgrim Fathers who laid the foundation of
that Empire, and that carried with them, to what was then
comparatively an unknown land, that love of freedom which was
denied them in the country which gave them birth. And when
in after years the principle of representative government was
infringed, on the part of the authorities then in power, by an
attempt to impose taxation without the consent of the people
themselves, the Declaration of Independence was the result, and
once more the spirit of Liberty and Christianity triumphed.
Within our own times also, that great and free people have swept
away, in a revolutionary torrent, that foul growth of slavery,
whose spreading branches and undergrowth were threatening to
weaken and destroy the very foundation of their constitution.
It would be absurd to say that Christianity in the visible
Churches originated all these movements, and alone supplied the
forces by which they were carried to successful issues. What we
should do is first of all to read the facts accurately, and then to find
their causes, not by giving prominence to one cause at the expense
of the others, but assigning to each its weight and value. And
when this is done, no one will deny that the visible Church has
contributed, in no small degree, to the advancement of freedom,
the spread of intelligence, and the welfare and happiness of
mankind.
This admission is made in too many quarters to admit of any
widespread scepticism on the subject; but it is contended by some,
and feared by many, that the work of the Church is done—that
she is amongst the things that are old and ready to perish. This
judgment, we believe, to be hasty and superficial. If we look
carefully into the matter, we shall see such evidences of vitality
and adaptation to her surroundings as indicate her acquaintance
with where the fountains of rejuvenescence lie. Nothing ceases
from its labours until its work is done. There are yet many
social problems to be solved, and many wrongs to be redressed,
and many wild forces to be broken into regular and useful work.
For these purposes the visible Church can render valuable
assistance; but to reject such help would be foolishness or madness.
The visible Church of our day may be said to exist for the
following purposes :—First, the cultivation of reverence towards
the Supreme Being. The importance of this sentiment in the
formation of character, and to the peace of society, can hardly be
over-estimated. He belongs to a low type of the race who is
destitute of veneration, and still lower is he whose soul is the
abode of coarseness and profanity. The beauties of nature, the
starry heavens, the fathomless depths of space, and the evidences
of Divine power and wisdom, create no corresponding emotion in
him who has no temple in his soul, and no sense of awe as the


shadow of the Infinite sweeps over the secularised surface of his
hardened nature. The Church of Christ exists for the purpose of
awakening and augmenting the spirit of reverence, and this
reverence is an important and indispensable factor in all schemes
of social amelioration.
In the second place, the Church exists for the purpose of
instruction and enlightenment. It is a great educational institution,
and cannot, without injury to society, be excluded from the circle
of labour. Instruction in righteousness is as necessary a demand
of human nature as food for the body, or protection from enemies.
To regard human beings in no higher light than machines even,
carries with it the necessity of the highest polish and efficiency of
such machines. But no human machine is at its best whose
moral nature is dormant, and where conscience does not enter
into the work with scrupulous fidelity. Religion arouses the
mind to thought, and speculative theology, although barren as to
its results as far as knowledge is concerned, is a mental discipline
of the highest value. A community accustomed to discuss the
doctrines of the Shorter Catechism, and the last novelty in science
or philosophy in its bearing upon revelation, are not in the least
likely to become the victims of superstition or the dupes of
hypocrisy. A calm and patient study of the Book of Proverbs
and the Sermon on the Mount is not a bad preparation for
grappling with the problems of modern Socialism.
But in the third place, the visible Church exists for the purpose
of teaching men the duty of benevolence. From this source the
vast army of voluntary workers in every department of social
benefaction is drawn. Millions of children in our Sunday Schools
are being taught to fear God and honour all men by unpaid
labourers. Our charitable institutions are either sustained by the
Churches, or receive from her members substantial help for their
maintenance. Her missionary explorers are the pioneers both of
science and of commerce, being the first to carry that fine silken
thread, the product of her own loom, across the distance which
originally separated peoples, and out of which commercial treaties
and friendly alliances spring.
But the question now presents itself—ls the modern visible
Church doing such work? No institution can rest on its past
record, however honourable ; and unless it can be shown that she
is an active and potent force to-day, her existence cannot be
vindicated.
The modern Church may then be described as possessing some
of those characteristics which prove her vitality, and more than
justify her existence. In the first place, she is less keenly alive to
the necessity of maintaining and vindicating her doctrinal beliefs
than at any past period in her history. It would be impossible
for modern Christendom to have another gathering such as the


first Council at Nice. Many of the great controversies between
Roman divines and Protestant upholders of the faith are little
more, nowadays, than matters of historic interest.
The ten years’ controversy in Scotland, which gave birth to the
Free Church, could not be entered upon afresh by the immediate
successors of the combatants themselves. About forty years ago,
Dr. James Morison, a learned divine and eloquent preacher, was
put out of the United Presbyterian Church for holding and
preaching the universality of the Atonement and a free salvation.
A few weeks ago a movement in the same body, to restore
Dr. Morison to the position from which he was cast out, was lost
only by the casting vote of the chairman. It is not that the
Churches have become indifferent to matters of doctrine ; it is not
that they are on the down grade, with a dangerous curve and
precipice below; but simply from the conviction that the battle
has been fought and won.
The title deeds of Christianity are now open to the inspection
of all, and the chain of evidence that unites them to the Crown
grant has not a weak link in it. The visible Church, believing
it is no longer required that she should defend her inheritance, is
busy with preparations for work and warfare outside her own
boundaries.
Another characteristic of the modern Church is, the increase of
its social functions, which is simply the forth-putting of the spirit
of fraternity. The old-fashioned “tea-meeting ” has a good deal of
vitality in it yet, especially in country districts; but the younger
portion of the Christian community prefer “ socials ” as they call
them, and this is a plant of vigorous growth and large promise.
Fifty years ago, when some of us were children, the Church did not
mean much. There was a psalm, a sermon, and a sleep; and if
these had by some process been taken away, it would have
required considerable scientific skill to tell from the remains the
character of the organism to which they originally belonged.
Compare the state of matters around us now. We have our
Sunday-schools, for the most part bright and cheery; bands of
hope, where our future orators are nursed; Christian Endeavour
societies, the training ground for voluntary effort in every form of
Church activity; bands of music and Church choirs, reading societies
and sewing bees, and at every milestone on the road another
“ social,” to record work done and brace up for future action.
Some of our modern church workers must come pretty nearly up
to that state of felicity which speaks of the blessedness of those
who dwell in the House of the Lord. Hence, very little increase
of such activity would leave little time for duties outside the
Church.
This development of ecclesiastical sociality is simply the religious
side of our modern life. The industrial revolution that is working
D


so powerfully in modern society is pulling to pieces much of past
civilisation, and strong constructive forces are required to save us
from disorganisation and Anarchy. And, if anywhere, these
elements will be found within the Christian Church. Here there
is no privileged class, and the bond of fellowship is the strong
Son of God, whose law is love, and whose kingdom is not one of
war or force, but righteousness and peace.
Another characteristic of the modern Church is its aggressive
activity. The “ forward movement ”is a call to arms along the
whole line of battle. The Church cannot grow by the process of
internal assimilation alone. Aggression and annexation are
OO
evidences of extending empire, and from whatever cause it may
have originated, the instinct of universal conquest is deeply rooted
in the Church of Christ. There never was a time in her history
in which she received more general support in the shape of free
contributions from her adherents, and there never was a time
when more zealous labours for the conversion of the world were
put forth by all sections of the Chuch.
But, notwithstanding this satisfactory and hopeful condition of
things, to a very large extent the Church has yet more fully and
clearly to realise her mission, and the full recognition of her duty,
especially in relation to the problems of modern Socialism. In
any coming conflict within the industrial domain, she has to be
reckoned with, if not as an organised factor in the councils of
conciliations, yet as the fountain of these moral principles on
which the final adjustments must rest. Her influence will depend
upon her knowledge of contemporary events, her sympathy with
every form of suffering, her denunciation of injustice and wrong,
and, above all, her firm and unwavering attachment to those
eternal truths on which everything destined to endure must rest.
Let us catch the deep significance of these words, “All flesh is
grass ; but the Word of the Lord endureth for ever.”
Let the visible Church also avoid the evil of trying to do good
by proxy, for the chasm that still yawns between the extremes of
society is not to be filled up by hireling labour. In this age of
machinery, of organisation, of demonstrations, of noise, and bluster,
the personal element is apt to be overlooked and crushed as if it
were a thing of no importance. But the value and force of the
personal element cannot, without the most disastrous consequences,
be so treated; and I once more lift up my voice in protestation
and warning in relation to this crying evil of our times. If
one soul is of more value than the whole universe, the highest and
most perfect form of Socialism is that which gives the largest play
to the individual. In the Church of Christ, the individual is a
living stone in the spiritual temple.


LECTURE VIII.
THE SOCIALISM OF THE FUTURE.
Although it is not given to man to know what shall take place
on the morrow, there is on his part an old but indestructible
desire to peer into it. Coming events, we are told, cast their
shadows before; and upon these shadows many an anxious eye is
cast to read the mystery of which they are the forerunners.
There are three different ways that may be mentioned of fore-
casting the future, and these may be designated the imaginative,
the superstitious, and the scientific. The imaginative belongs to
childhood and the poets. Under its spell we create worlds of
beauty and order out of the materials of our experience, and
surround them with an atmosphere of purity and light. No
philosophy of human life is satisfactory that would shut out the
future, and take away from us all interest in what it has in store
for us. The doctrine of the immortality of the soul rests upon a
pretty solid basis of conviction, but it is over-arched by a
firmament of starry glory—the work of the soul’s imaginative
energy. By the help of this faculty we hear the whispers of
flowers, we converse with birds and four-footed beasts, and hold
counsel with the fishes of the sea, and with strange creatures
under the wave in their coral palaces. However dark and
threatening our horizon may be in after years, it is bright and
hopeful in childhood; or, when in the company of poet minstrels,
we drive dull care away in the contemplation of a future rich in
the colours of the Orient.
But imagination, however original or Divine, can give us no
certain knowledge of the future. Rarely are its bright pictures of
hope realised; more frequently our castles in the air melt away as
we approach them, and leave not a wrack behind.
The superstitious mode of looking into the future is not
unfortunately a relic of the past. In spite of the enlightenment
of the day, its rites are observed in many a dark and guilty
comer; and no amount of failure or disappointment will cause the
mind haunte'd by this spectre to abandon its cherished methods of
extracting the secret of the future from the sealed lips of time.
There is a small book of fate which some possess and highly
value, to which they appeal in a haphazard fashion, and then
regulate their conduct by its responses. There are others who
spend money to have their future life told by those who profess to
be able to read it from the lines in the palm of the hand, or from
the grounds in the bottom of their tea-cup. The horse-shoe,
gilded and draped, so fashionable now-a-days in house decoration,
is simply the survival of an old superstition ; for there was a time
d 2


•when to touch cold iron was not only supposed to be a charm
to ward off evil, but to bring luck to all who were most devoted
in the practice of witchcraft’s mysteries. Even the Bible, the
most practical book in the world, is too frequently pressed into the
service of superstition. Foolish people, whose judgment is not
sufficiently strong to determine for themselves in the way
appointed by God what duty is, will take this book into their
hands and open it at random, and determine their future actions,
even on important matters, by any chance passage on which their
eye may happen to fall. And how many, who ought to know
better, lie in dreamy contemplation before the image sketched
in the Book of Daniel, gazing upon its mystic toes under
the belief that the future history of the world lies in the
interpretation of their number and material; or, worse still,
worrying themselves to death over the number of the beasts in
Revelation, or the mystery of the seals. Superstition’s mystic
glass, in which her worshippers profess to see the secrets of
the future, is happily getting spotted and dim; but the sooner it
is broken to pieces, and cast to the waste, the better.
In seeking to forecast the future of Socialism, we shall
endeavour to keep in check the impulsive powers of the imagina-
tion, and still more to give a wide berth to that dangerous coast
line that skirts the haunted region of superstition.
The only satisfactory method of dealing with the future, is by
the scientific method, and a judicious use of the accumulations of
experience. No one can tell to an hour or a day when any par-
ticular event will happen, or accurately describe in what direction
a certain movement will go, and point out the very spot where it
will terminate. If anyone expect me, in discussing the future of
Socialism, to predict with the accuracy of positive knowledge
what aspect Socialism will present at the end of this century, say,
or the middle of next, he will be doomed to disappointment. I
have no sympathy with those visionary enthusiasts who profess
to be able to give advance sketches of the history of the world,
and I feel called upon not only to reject their conclusions, but to
oppose their methods. The lamp of reason was givdn to man to
enlighten his darkness; and we may rest assured of this, that
such matters as lie outside the circle of its illumination, are not
meant to form part of the stock of our knowledge. In
endeavouring, therefore, to say something worthy on the future
of Socialism, we must put ourselves under the guidance and
authority of those principles or fundamental assumptions that
necessarily lie at the basis of all scientific calculations. And
there are, it appears to me, three of these that may be referred to
in this connection, without whose recognition there can be no
intelligent forecast of the future.


The first of these is that of cause and effect, or the full
acknowledgment of the fact that the events of history are not
isolated, the erratic action of some arbitrary power, but that they
stand to each other in the closest relation of antecedent and
consequent. Nature pursues her course slowly, and with calm
and measured step. She does not indulge in sudden and
unexpected leaps, or in contradictions that would upset all our
past experiences. She is where she is to-day, because she had
reached a certain definite point yesterday; and her position
to-morrow will be the exact result of all the forces in operation
to-day. If God is the same yesterday, to-day and for ever, so are
His methods of government, so also are the laws of Nature ; and
the confidence which these facts inspire, is not only the basis of
knowledge, but the only sound ground from which to look into
the future and prognosticate the course of events. • This law of
continuity, as it has been called, is simply the old law of cause and
effect under a new name ; and that again is only another way
of saying that the Supreme Being in whom we believe is unchange-
able, without variableness or shadow of turning.
The second principle to be accepted in forecasting the future is,
that there is a law of progress in Nature, including human society.
The beat at Nature’s heart is strong and steady, but one throb is
not simply the repetition of another. In every pulsation, there is
an infinitesimal advance forward in the direction of some end of
larger life and wider intelligence. The existence of eruptions in
nature and revolutions in society are not inconsistent either with
the law of continuity or that of progress. A crisis, social or
political, is not an anomoly, far less anything uncaused, although
unaccounted for. It is the natural outcome of previously existing
forces, and forms an integral part of Nature’s original design.
Underlying this law of progress, there must be either choice or
chance; the latter is incomprehensible, and if the former must be
admitted into the calculation, progress resolves itself into one of
the methods of the Divine Government. But let us not forget,
that this notion of progress is after all a relative thing. The
history of the globe is no doubt a history of progress, from the
time in which there was no life on its surface to what it is to-day,
teeming with every form of animated existence. But it does not
follow that perfection belongs to one period more than to another.
The law of progress is simply our reading of the Divine thought
in its orderly manifestation; and our confidence in regard to the
future —yea, our insight into it—depend upon this inwrought
conviction, that God will speak to us in time to come in the same
language in which He has declared Himself in time past.
The third principle is, the recognition and acknowledgment of
the moral government of God, which carries with it the notion of
human intelligence and freedom—important factors in all questions


of life and conduct. The two former are common to all men,
-irrespective of their religious creed. This last belongs to that
view of the universe which regards mankind as God’s children,
and the government of God as conducted for the welfare and
happiness of the governed. Without the full recognition of the
fact of human freedom and responsibility, the history of the race
is either a mystery or a failure. It has been said, in such a
manner as if a flaw in the argument were impossible, that if sin
and misery exist in the world it can only be because God is
limited either in power or in goodness. But if man is an intelli-
gent and free being, the terms of the proposition are not exclusive,
because the very essence of freedom forbids force; and moral
excellence is not a distinction conferred from without, but must
be wrought out by the soul itself in accordance with its nature.
If the Supreme Intelligence, therefore, has imposed upon the race
the task of working out its own moral and spiritual development,
it would be very difficult, even on purely rational grounds, to
prove that such a policy indicated a deficiency either of power or
goodness. It is the child mind under a temporary fit of peevish-
ness that asks the question, Why does not God put an end to all
sin and suffering at once, and make the world happy by the
forthputting of His infinite powers and love? We may well ask
what kind of a world that would be in which human freedom was
extinguished by a Divine power, and a chasm created between
character and happiness. The answer is, that such a world would
be no world at all. The fountain of moral goodness must be
in ourselves, and it can only be there by our own choice and
effort.
These are the principles that ought to guide us in estimating
the probable outcome of the various and complex Socialistic move-
ments of the day. He that understandeth these things and
believeth them, will not make haste to indulge in airy speculations,
or definite predictions; but under the guidance of what has been,
he will look for the working out of contemporary forces in their
natural order, with such improvements as may be reasonably
calculated by the stages of such advancement in the past. We
shall be perfectly safe then, if we affirm the following things with
respect to the future of Socialism :
Firstly.—That social amelioration, coming as it does under the
law of evolution, must necessarily advance by slow and steady
stages. The infant grows day by day into the child, and the
child into the boy or the girl. Then follow youth and early
manhood or womanhood. When maturity is attained, we slide
down by an easy and imperceptible gradient into the valley of
years, where at last we leave our bones to mingle with the dust of
generations that have preceded us. No portion of mankind can be
lifted up from a lower to a higher stage of civilisation and moral


life by the mere application of any external force, nor by the
forthputting of supernatural power. The wand of the magician is
a toy ; the sword of the magistrate may be a terror to evil-doers,
but it is powerless to command the moral sentiments. The oak
builds itself up from within, and moral fibre is the product of life.
It is impossible for a man, whose nervous system has been shaken
and shattered by intemperance, to pass suddenly from a condition
of instability to that of absolute control over himself by the use of
any quack medicine, or by the charms of witchcraft or superstition.
And society is a kind of aggregate man—subject to the same laws
of development and condition as our individual lives. That fact,
when rightly understood, does not make reformation impossible,
nor should it cut the traces of effort by which one seeks to quicken
the speed of civilisation’s car. It should rather inspire us with a
more intelligent zeal and a stronger faith, by enabling us to see'
the real conditions on which permanent success depends.
Secondly.—There is no reason to doubt that labour troubles and
social problems will in the future be solved more easily and at less
expense than at present. The final arbiter in all disputes is not
force, but reason and the equities of the case. Although man is
by nature a fighting animal, lie is far less so to-day than he was in
the past. War, at one time, was the normal condition of matters
between nations that lived near each other, but now an armed
peace may more adequately describe the state of affairs.
Although Europe at the present moment is a huge military camp,
there is everywhere a manifest disinclination to cry “ havoc, and
let loose the dogs of war;” while everywhere you will hear war
denounced as the most wasteful and cruel mode of settling disputes
that human ingenuity could invent. Labour strikes are an appeal
to force ; they are our modern form of social war, and war under
every form is nothing more nor less than an evidence that society, as
a whole, has not left behind it all that pertains to a state of
savagism. The widespread industrial crisis through which, as a
community, we are now passing, is simply a state of siege, but
without the protection of walls and battlements which character-
ised mediaeval times. Irrespective altogether of the merits of the
various questions at issue, it may be asked whether the policy of
paralysing trade can be justified under any circumstances. Force
can only be met by force ; and surely it is time that this clumsy
weapon of modern warfare should be abandoned, and allowed to
eat itself away by the rust of neglect. The very experiences
through which we are now passing, are preparing the way for
wiser counsels and more peaceful methods, than those which give
victory to the side that has the longest purse and the greatest
powers of endurance. W e feel perfectly certain that if civilisation
is not to be buried under a heap of ruins, strikes must cease, and
more amicable relations be established between employers and


employed, on a basis of freedom and common interest. The out-
look is certainly not hopeful at present; but when the watchman
is appealed to, he will tell us that when the darkness is deepest
the dawn is nearest.
Thirdly.—We may predict with certainty, that Socialism will
do much for us in upholding the dignity of labour, and redeeming
it from contempt where it is at present looked down upon as
degrading. We see around us everywhere a rising public indig-
nation against idlers and loafers. It is a healthy sentiment, to
hold up to public scorn all those who live upon the toil or
the industry of others. Let us, however, guard against the
dangerous fallacy, that those only are workers who labour with
their hands. If the wealth of the world belongs to the toilers,
as we are often told, who are they, may we ask ? Can we fairly
exclude from their ranks those who toil at home, making the
fireside bright, and training the children to fill up the blanks in
the army of labour, when thinned by accident, sickness and
death ? Brain workers are also toilers, for as in the body, the
hand executes what the brain devises; so in society, brain and
hand can no more be separated in the busy hive of the nation’s
industry, than in the individual organism. When Socialism
succeeds in getting the whole community to look upon labour as
a duty and an honour, and idleness as a crime, it will do much
to make every mode of money-making infamous that does not
meet a legitimate public want, or that is a violation of the equities
of exchange.
Fourthly.—The Socialism of the future will bring along with it
improved manners and a wider intelligence. The ethics of the
street and the pavement have hardly emerged yet from the first
stages of primitive civilisation. The gospel of culture is not that
narrow, pedantic, colourless thing which some of its detractors
represent it to be, fit only, as they insinuate, for dons and dandies.
But in so far as it is a propaganda, it contemplates the uplifting
of our entire nature and the whole of society into a higher, larger,
fuller, richer life. External polish may pass a man as a gentle-
man in certain circles where the opportunity of close observation
is wanting, but no one is a true and noble man whose heart is
not kind and full of tender consideration for others. It is no
evidence of civilisation to seek to enforce what we believe to be
our rights by the free use of brick-bats, hurled at the heads of
those who are unable to take the same view of social questions as
ourselves. But brick-bats and blue metal are by no means
so frequently used now as in former labour struggles. True
Socialism is teaching us how much we depend upon each other,
how much of evil, how much of good it is in our power to do
each other; and every reformation attempted and victory won


over sloth, and dirt, and rudeness, will mark a step upwards in
the direction of that sweetness and light, the paradise of the
gospel of culture.
The Socialism of the present day is a decided advance on the
Socialism of half a century ago ; and the Socialism of fifty years
hence will mark another advance in social amelioration. Under
the guidance of the little we are permitted to know of the Divine
methods, we may safely indulge the hope that the world will slide
calmly, and move peacefully into its industrial millennium, when
poverty shall be only the memory of a troubled dream ; when the
river of crime shall be dried up at its source; when despotism
shall no longer forge her chains or sharpen her weapons against
any portion of mankind ; and when work and worship shall
become one act of service, whose perennial fountain of energy
shall be the love of man, and whose crowning glory shall be the
favour of God.
Stillwell and Co., Printers, 195 a Collins Street, Melbourne.
