

SOCIALISM
AND
“SOCIAL CREDIT"
THE LABOUR PARTY
PRICE TWOPENCE
THE LABOUR PARTY
TRANSPORT HOUSE, SMITH SQUARE, LONDON, S.W.I




INTRODUCTORY NOTE
THIS Report has been prepared at the request of the National
Executive Committee by a Sub-Committee consisting of
Messrs. E. F, M. Durbin, Hugh Gaitskell and W. R.
Hiskett. The Report deals fully with Major Douglas's “Social
Credit" proposals and the National Executive Committee
associates itself with the Sub-Committee's conclusions on this
subject. The Report also deals necessarily more briefly with the
Labour Party's financial policy. This Policy has been set out in a
series of Policy Reports which have been approved by successive
Annual Conferences of the Party in 1932, 1933 and 1934.* This
part of the Sub-Committee's Report, therefore, should be read,
not as an official statement of policy, but as an unofficial presenta-
tion of the views of three individual Socialist economists.
The essential character and the very serious limitations, from a
Socialist standpoint, of the “Social Credit’' proposals have been
well and clearly expressed by the late A. R. Orage, one of the
leading exponents of Major Douglas's ideas: —
“His constructive proposals when they came to be
clearly formulated, concerned mainly the only practi-
cally important question asked by every consumer—the
question of price; and beyond a change in our present
price-fixing system, there is in his proposals nothing
remotely revolutionary. For the rest, everything would
go on as now. There would be no expropriation of
anybody, no new taxes, no change of management in
industry, no new political party, no change, in fact, in
the status or privileges of any of the existing factors of
industry. Absolutely nothing else would be changed but
prices." f
* Currency, Banking and Finance (1933). Price 3d.
Socialism and the Condition of the People (1933). Price 3 d.
For Socialism and Peace (1934). Price 3 d.
Labour’s Financial Policy (1935). Price id.
■{■ New Age Supplement (November 33, 1934).


PREFACE
IN the following pages we have set down, impartially and
objectively, the conclusions arrived at as a result of a
reconsideration of the Social Credit proposals advocated
by Major C. H. Douglas,
We were anxious to have the assistance of recognised sup-
porters of these proposals in exploring how far they might be
harmonized with Socialist belief and policy. We accordingly
approached the Social Credit secretariat with an invitation to
nominate a representative who would be willing to meet us for
a discussion of matters in which we were mutually interested.
We received a letter in reply, from which we quote the following:—
“Whilst we appreciate your courteous invitation, we
would point out that your terms of reference do not make
it clear whether it is the policy which underlies the Douglas
proposals or their technical details with which you are
concerned. In regard to the former, responsible repre-
sentatives of the official Labour Party have from time to
time made it clear that they are not in agreement with the
policy that underlies these proposals, which quite specifically
does not regard administrative changes, either in the
financial or industrial systems, as being the necessary
component of an improved economic and social order.
In regard to the second aspect of the matter, every member
of your committee has expressed, in print and otherwise,
his disbelief in the technical soundness of the Douglas
proposals, and is therefore committed to an adverse report."
In the hope of overcoming these initial objections, we continued
the correspondence to some length. We explained that we made
no claim to be an impartial committee in the sense of having no
attachments, that we were, in fact, convinced Socialists and had
been appointed by the Labour Party Executive to express the
Labour Party's point of view. But we emphasised our desire to
explore the possibilities of partial agreement between the Labour
Party and the Social Credit Movement, The following quota-
tions from our letters to the Secretariat indicate the stress which
we laid upon this aspect of the matter:
'We are anxious to recognise, fairly and impartially,
whatever points of agreement may exist between us." —
{January 22, 1935.)


"Our object in writing to you was to ascertain whether
you would care to explore with us any points of agreement
between the Labour Party's proposals and your own/' —
{February n, 1935.)
"We felt that it was advisable to give emphasis, wherever
possible, to points of agreement between us, and we had
hoped to have your co-operation in exploring those points
of agreement. We should not have made the offer to meet
you if we had not believed that it was possible, whilst differing
on many major points, to meet in a perfectly friendly discus-
sion of matters in which we are mutually interested." —
{March 2, 1935.)
Our efforts in this direction were, however, unavailing. We
had finally to recognise that it was not possible to overcome a
difficulty arising from a mental attitude which had not changed
materially from the suspicion and hostility expressed towards
the earlier Labour Party Committee.
After the failure of our overtures to the Social Credit Secre-
tariat a second attempt was made through the columns of The
New English Weekly . We are glad to be able to report that this
correspondence resulted in an acceptance of our invitation.
Mr. Alfred Newsome and Mr. W. T. Symons, accompanied by
Mr. Philip Mairet, the editor of The New English Weekly , very
kindly attended one of our meetings on behalf of that journal.
We wish to express our gratitude for their courtesy and the
assistance they have rendered us.
We also desire to thank the Right Hon. Thomas Johnston,
P.C., and Mr. Norman H. Smith, prospective Labour Candidate
for the Faversham Division of Kent, for their kindness in helping
us. We were able to meet both these gentlemen, and in each
case memoranda were submitted which we very carefully
considered.


SOCIALISM AND SOCIAL CREDIT
I
POLITICAL IDEALS AND FINANCIAL POLICY
THE purpose of this Report is to describe the relationship
between the policy of the Labour Party and the pro-
posals for Social Credit generally associated with the
name of Major Douglas. What is the Douglas scheme?
How does it compare with Labour's policy? Are there any
points of agreement between them? What are the points of
disagreement and why? These are the questions which we set
out to answer.
At the start some fundamental differences must be stressed.
The Labour Party is a Socialist Party. It believes that the
community should own and control the material means of pro-
ducing wealth. It believes that, so long as the means of
production are in private hands, it is impossible to make full use
of the nation's resources or to eradicate the terrible evils of
insecurity and social injustice. It seeks to convince the people
of Great Britain that this is so, and, through the normal machinery
of Parliamentary democracy, to carry through the great change
over from Capitalism to Socialism.
Major Douglas is not a Socialist. He does not believe that
the State should own and control the means of production. He
does not aim at eliminating class distinctions or securing equality
of opportunity for all. He does not hold that economic indi-
vidualism must inevitably produce unemployment and waste.
He believes, on the contrary, that only a change in financial
policy is required to make Capitalism work and secure permanent
prosperity. Capitalism is for him the best possible system.
There is only one simple flaw —a flaw in the money machine—
and that can be put right, in his opinion, without any big
administrative or institutional changes.
It might be thought that such fundamental differences —
differences of ideals as well as analysis—would make all further
comparison a waste of time. This, however, is not really the case.
There is no doubt that many believers in Social Credit do
not share Major Douglas' political opinions. Not a few are
active supporters of the Labour Party, and many more have no


particular bias against Socialism. These persons think that
much of what Major Douglas says is not incompatible with a
Socialist outlook and that there are definite points of agreement
in the propaganda of the two movements. They, in common
with all Socialists, detest the injustice of the present system:
they recognise, too, that public ownership will increase output
and improve conditions of work. But they also believe that
Major Douglas has laid his finger on the root cause of capitalist
economic depression, and, what is really more important, that
the remedy he suggests offers an immediate short cut to pros-
perity. They argue that however desirable the ultimate goal of
Socialism may be, the Labour Party is bound for a time to
govern in a capitalist system. There is inevitably a transition
period. It is vital that during this period the Labour Party
should pursue the right financial policy, and this policy is, to be
found, according to their view, in the Social Credit proposals.
A part of this argument, of course, is accepted by all demo-
cratic Socialists. No one denies the inevitability of a transition
period, or questions the profound significance of the financial
policy pursued in that period. But financial policy, which is
everything to Major Douglas, is to the Socialist only a part of a
wider policy, a part which cannot be worked out except in relation
to the whole. Financial policy cannot remove evils which are
inherent in Capitalism itself. But it can, at least temporarily,
modify those evils. It can, for this reason, smooth the passage
to Socialism and be made into an exceedingly valuable ally.
In spite, therefore, of the very obvious differences between
the opinions of Major Douglas and the principles for which the
Labour Party stands, there is no necessary or inherent contradic-
tion between particular Social Credit proposals and Socialist
policy. Social Credit might be regarded as a financial policy
which would not necessarily be inconsistent with Socialist aims.
Now in actual fact the Labour Party has not adopted it. It has a
financial policy of its own to which no one would apply the
name Social Credit, It is the business of this pamphlet to
explain, among other things, why this is the case. The only
way to do this, however, is to proceed to a more detailed com-
parison of the two financial policies, omitting deliberately all
further consideration of the non-financial aspects of Labour's
programme.


Some Points of Agreement
There are three important spheres of agreement between the
Socialist and the Social Credit attitude. In the first place there
is a common recognition that unemployment and trade de-
pression are connected in some way with the money system.
Both might agree that the depression is associated with a fall of
prices below costs and that this fall must itself be caused by some
immediate deficiency or withholding of purchasing power.
Both would agree that the deficiency continues throughout the
period of depression. Money is, so to speak, being drained out
of the industrial system. Prices therefore continue to fall,
stocks cannot be sold, profits dwindle and disappear and un-
employment increases.
This partial agreement in diagnosis is naturally accompanied
by partial agreement in the remedies prescribed. Both maintain
that during a period of depression efforts must be made to increase
the total volume of money in order to offset the drain of money
away from the system.
Agreement about the deficiency, however, is strictly limited.
The Labour Party believes that the deficiency is not chronic but
confined to periods of depression. It is succeeded at first by a
period during which the volume of money is more or less constant
but inadequate to provide full employment. It is then followed
by the boom period when the size of the money flow is growing
larger, prices are rising and employment increasing. At such a
time there is a "surplus 0 of purchasing power over prices. The
movement, once under way, does not stop. The inflation
proceeds to its inevitable climax, when the banks refuse to lend
more money. The crisis is then reached and prices start falling
fast. Depression and deficiency of purchasing power follows
and the circle of boom and slump is completed. The deficiency
is thus due to the contraction of the volume of money resulting
from the restrictive policy of the banks which itself follows
their expansionist policy during the boom. In Major Douglas'
opinion, no the other hand, the deficiency is chronic. According
to him, the gap occurs during the process of building up costs and
consists of an hiatus between (i) the price which is arrived
at by the addition of all costs incurred by the producer plus his
profit, and (2) the purchasing power which reaches the con-
sumer through the medium of the costs incurred. A continuous
deficiency exists because certain elements of cost are not being


concurrently distributed as purchasing power. The system
is never self-liquidating . During the boom, he admits, the gap
is temporarily filled, but only by the creation of additional debt
to the banks. This is to Major Douglas evidence of deficiency.
“We also know,” he says, “that in fact, in those times of boom
which are referred to by economists as proving that it is self-
liquidating, the rate of increase of debt is greater than in times
of depression; so that in real fact, in times of boom even, there
is no justification for saying that, at any time of the trade cycle,
the price system is self-liquidating.” Again, in the same speech,
he remarks: “To put it very shortly, the core of the defect in this
price and money system under which we operate at the present
time is that it cannot, without the help of the banks, liquidate
“costs” as they are produced; or, to put it another way, it is
under an inevitable necessity of piling up debt at an increasing
rate.”
We shall proceed shortly to examine the reasons which lead
Major Douglas to this conclusion. For the moment we are
concerned only to make clear the underlying difference of view-
point about the significance of the “deficiency.”
Another point of agreement, which follows closely from the
first, is the common objection to destruction and restriction
schemes as a cure for economic depression. The spectacle of
millions of workers compulsorily unemployed, of idle machines,
and factories closed, side by side with widespread poverty and
starvation, is deplorable enough. The attempt to remedy this
state of affairs by deliberately destroying goods which are needed
and deliberately cutting down production and increasing unem-
ployment would be ludicrous if it were not so tragic. Socialists
and supporters of Social Credit join in denouncing the iniquity
of these restriction schemes. Both recognise the schemes for
what they are —monopolies which aim at holding up prices and
squeezing the utmost from the consumer. Both insist that the
cure for economic depression lies not in diminishing production
still further, but in expanding consumption.
The third sphere of agreement is to be found in a common
attitude to certain moral aspects of the banking system. Major
Douglas deserves credit for repeatedly drawing attention to two
of its characteristics.
(i) He has emphasised the fact that bank credit is just as
much money as Bank of England notes or coin of the realm.


The right to draw a cheque for £IOO is just as useful for buying
purposes as £IOO in notes. In fact quantitatively bank credit or
cheque money —as it is sometimes called —is nowadays far more
important than cash, since nearly all business transactions take
place by cheque.
(2) He has pointed out that new money comes into existence
through the action of the banks in increasing their assets. It
goes out of existence when those assets are being reduced.
These facts were not discovered by Major Douglas. They
are to be found in all orthodox writings on the subject and are
clearly stated in the pages of the Macmillan Report. But Major
Douglas and other monetary reformers have certainly popularised
them better than the text books, and have also pointed to certain
implications which tend to be slurred over in more orthodox
accounts.
To anyone who stops to think for a moment it is an extra-
ordinary thing that such a vitally important matter as the creation
or destruction of money should be left to private institutions. It
is extraordinary both from an economic and a moral point of
view. We have already seen the tremendous significance which
the inflow and outflow of money has for the working of the
industrial system. Yet the most vital point at which, under
the existing system, this flow can be controlled is left in the hands
of private persons. It is true that a distinction has to be drawn
between the Bank of England and Joint Stock Banks. To a very
considerable extent the latter can be controlled by the former.
If the Bank of England wishes, it can force the Joint Stock Banks
to call in their loans and reduce the sise of the money flow. To a
much smaller extent it can also induce the Joint Stock Banks to
lend more than before. Over the direction in which the new
money goes, however, it has practically no control, and it is itself,
in any case, a private institution. That such great powers—of
special significance now that the money system of this country
is not tied to others through the gold standard —should be
exercised by bodies which are legally beyond the control of the
Government, is an anachronism as dangerous as it is absurd.
This is indeed recognised so far as the issue of notes is con-
cerned. The profits which the Bank of England makes from the
issue of notes accrue not to the Bank but to the Treasury. Yet
since credit is no less money than cash, and the former is, as has
been pointed out, of far greater quantitative importance than the


latter, there is a strong moral case against the exploitation of
credit creation for the purpose of making private profits.
Perhaps the most striking of the effects of the present arrange-
ment is to be seen in the financial history of the war. The
National Debt of this country increased between 1914 and
1919 from £600,000,000 to £7,000,000,000, How was the
money raised. Ostensibly it was borrowed from private indi-
viduals and firms. In fact part of it was borrowed by those
individuals and firms from the banks and then lent to the Govern-
ment, and another part borrowed directly from the banks. The
banks did not have to borrow this money. They were able
simply to create it. Thus although they admittedly incurred a
liability for the payment of interest in respect of part of the new
deposits which accrued from the money so created, such interest
payments were small in comparison with the earnings of the
assets which they gained. They were able in fact, through the
national emergency of the war, to enormously increase their
business and enrich themselves at the public expense.*
Of even greater immediate importance is the difficulty in
which a Government finds itself to-day when it wishes deliber-
ately to increase the money flow. As the opponents of “public
works" have hastened to point out, it can only do this by incurring
a debt. It has to borrow the new money through the banking
system and burden the future taxpayers with the interest and
sinking fund payments. It is, truly, a humiliating position.
Simply because the right of creating new money does not belong
to the State, the necessary impetus to recovery cannot be given.
It is due in large part to these considerations that the Labour
Party stands particularly for the Nationalisation of the Banking
System. There can be no doubt that many supporters of Social
Credit draw the same conclusion. Curiously enough, Major
Douglas himself does not. He proposes both to leave the banks
in private hands and to allow them to continue to finance industry.
As we shall show later, it is most unlikely that the full Social Credit
proposals could be applied, without either producing inflationt
or making it impossible for the banks to exist in their presen,
form. But this does not alter the fact that Major Douglas is
* According to Sir Walter Layton ("Introduction to the Study of Prices")
Joint Stock Bank deposits rose from £895,000,000 in 1914 to £1,874,000,000 in
1919. Profits rose from £9,000,000 in 1914 to £24,000,000 in 1919. Mr. Reginald
McKenna speaking in January, 1920, said “Bank deposits have increased by
£1,230,000,000, of which £1,100,000,000 is in consequence of Bank loans.
£800,000,000 of this was lent to the State and only £300.000,000 to trade.


opposed to Nationalisation. Partly, this is to be put down to a
peculiarly strong anti-Socialist bias in his mind; partly to the
special nature of his own remedy and the analysis from which
it springs.
It is with the details of this analysis, to which we now turn,
that the Labour Party finds itself unable to agree. The back-
ground of agreement on the three points mentioned gives way
to a difference of opinion on the underlying causes of the capitalist
crisis.
II
SOCIAL CREDIT ANALYSIS
As we have explained, it is the contention of Major Douglas
and his supporters that the existing method by which industry is
financed tends always to produce a deficiency of purchasing
power. According to their view, the reason for this is that the
sums of money paid out to consumers during the production of
goods are less than the costs of production incurred in making
those goods.
Now it is useless to pretend that the arguments on which this
conclusion is based are either simple or of a uniform character.
In the literature of Social Credit, the conditions under which
this deficiency of purchasing power is said to occur are by no
means always the same. That under certain conditions a
deficiency would occur is accepted by very many who do not
agree with Major Douglas' general diagnosis. Indeed, as we
have already indicated, it is the opinion of the Labour Party that
deficiency exists during periods of depression. It is also their
view that the price level should be stabilised, and consequently
that purchasing power must be increased proportionately to
production. If this is not done, it may be argued, there is a
shortage if not a deficiency in Major Douglas' sense,
“ The A+B Theorem ”
The central argument on which Major Douglas bases his
conclusion is generally known as “the A plus B theorem." The
following quotation gives one of the most recent forms in which
he has expressed it: —
“A factory or other productive organisation has, besides
its economic function as a producer of goods, a financial


object: it may be regarded on the one hand as a device for
the distribution of purchasing power to individuals, through
the media of wages, salaries, and dividends; and on the other
hand, as a manufactory of prices—financial values. From
this standpoint, its payments may be divided into two
groups:—
Group A: All payments made to individuals (wages,
salaries, and dividends).
Group B: All payments made to other organisations (raw
materials, bank charges and other external costs)*
Now the rate of flow of purchasing power to individuals is
represented by A, but since all payments go into prices, the
rate of flow of prices cannot be less than A +B. Since A
will not purchase A +B, a proportion of the product at least
equivalent to B must be distributed by a form of purchasing
power which is not comprised in the description grouped
under A”
Simple as “the theorem” appears to be, it is in fact capable of
different interpretations. The most straightforward and that
to be derived on the whole from Major Douglas' earlier writings
is to understand “A” as all the A payments made in the system , and
“B” to mean all the B payments made in the system . In this case
the theorem is certainly true. But it is no proof of any deficiency.
For Major Douglas is arguing that the money in the hands of
consumers must be sufficient not only to pay the costs incurred
by the retailer —the man from whom the finished article is
bought—but to pay at one and the same time the costs of the
retailer, the wholesaler, the manufacturer, the producer of raw
material, etc. It is clearly totally unnecessary for the consumer,
however, to do any such thing. The retailer, at least, will be
satisfied so long as he can recover from the consumer his own
costs of production. The wholesaler will be satisfied if he recovers
his costs not from the consumer but from the retailer by means
of a B not an A payment. Similarly the manufacturer and the
producers at earlier stages will also be recovering their costs by
means of B not A payments.
Alternative Interpretation
The theorem is capable, however, of another interpretation.
It may be claimed that A and B refer only to the final stage of
production. The producer at the last stage incurs A costs and


B costs: his total costs are therefore A +B. But he has dis-
tributed to consumers only A. Is there not then a deficiency ? The
answer is clearly that the consumers' income which is available
for buying the finished products is equal not simply to the A
payments made by the last producer but to the A payments made
by the producers of all stages ♦
To take an example:—
If a consumer buys a pair of boots and pays 15s. for them, it
is true that the boot retailer may only have distributed ss. or less
in payments to individuals in respect of that pair of boots. But
then the manufacturer of the boots, the grindery and sundries
merchant, the tanner, the manufacturer of the machinery, the
electrical company supplying power, all the other organisations
contributing to the production of the boots have been making
payments to individuals although they may have produced no final
product which the consumer buys .
Rate of Flow Argument
Major Douglas endeavours to meet this argument in the
following way. It is true, he says, that the rest of the B costs
of the final producer have been distributed by the subsidiary
organisations, but only in some earlier period. These sums
have already been spent and are no longer available as pur-
chasing power, “It is the rate of flow which is vital” Again,
he says, "While the final price to the consumer of any manu-
factured article is steadily growing with the time required for
manufacture, during the same time the money distributed by the
manufacturing process is being returned to the capitalist through
purchases for immediate consumption," Elsewhere he explains
that the money which has been paid out in advance is actually
repaid to the banks. "The essential point is that when a given sum
of money leaves the consumer on its journey back to the point of
origin in the bank, it is on its way to extinction. If that extinction
takes place before the extinction of the price value created during
its journey from the bank, then each such operation produces a
corresponding dis-equilibrium between money and prices."
Now the question whether consumers will have sufficient pur-
chasing power to buy the finished commodities at the moment
when they reach the market depends not only, or so much, on


what they have received in the past, but also on what they are
receiving in the present.
Major Douglas concerns himself wholly with the first of these.
It is, in fact, impossible to say what will have happened to the
money received beforehand. It may have been spent on other
finished goods (it is, of course, assumed that the commodity in
respect of which it is distributed is not yet finished), or it may have
been held by consumers. Its destination is not of great importance.
The much more crucial question is what consumers are receiving
at the moment . Now it is clear that, providing the earlier stages of
production are continuous, they will, in fact, be receiving a sum of
money equivalent to the cost of the finished product. Of course,
if the manufacturers of raw materials and machinery, and semi-
manufactures were suddenly to cease production, there would be
an immediate drop in the A payments, and in the B payments as
well. There would certainly be a shortage of purchasing power
in respect of the finished goods. But so long as production in the
earlier stages continues, and firms continue to employ labour, pay
dividends, and replace stocks, they send out in the process a
steady stream of purchasing power to consumers which is avail-
able to buy the final products then coming on to the market. The
fact that some firms habitually distribute purchasing power a
considerable time ahead of the completion of the final product,
others a short time ahead, and others at the time of their comple-
tion, does not matter in the least, so long as their operations are
continuous. The very fact that production takes time means that
the distributed costs of the present period will always have to buy
the product of a past period.
The attempt to overcome this point, and demonstrate a defi-
ciency, by the “rate of flow" argument does not, in our view,
contribute anything to an understanding of the matter. If, as
Major Douglas admits, all B costs in addition to A costs, are
at some period distributed to consumers as purchasing power,
the volume of purchasing power must be equal to the volume of
costs so distributed to consumers. In these circumstances it is
not possible that the rate of flow of purchasing power could be
continuously less than the rate of creation of costs. Possibly the
point of confusion for Major Douglas is the fact that many B
costs occur repeatedly at various stages of production. They are,
in fact, merely transfers carried from one stage to another. But
only the final cost —not the total of all these transfers —is included
in the price charged to the consumer.


Repayment of Bank Loans
This brings us to another important argument put forward
by the supporters of Social Credit. It is suggested that dis-
continuity of production is bound to arise on account of the fact
that the money required to finance production is borrowed from
the banks and therefore has to be repaid. Now it is certainly true
that if on balance throughout the whole of industry loans are
repaid to the banks, a deficiency of purchasing power is bound to
arise. For the A payments accruing to final consumers would
then be less than the A -f-B payments of the final producer. The
question here is simply one of fact. Is there a tendency for the
total of bank loans to diminish? The answer is that at certain
times —during depressions—this is the case, but that at other
times the total of loans definitely expands.
Bank Debts and Costs
The Social Credit argument, however, explains the adverse
effect of the borrowing of money in a rather peculiar way. It is
implied that the mere fact that a producer is under an obligation
to repay his loan forces him to include the sum which has to be
repaid in the price which he charges the consumer.* Since the
consumer cannot pay this the goods cannot be sold. According to
an explanatory statement which appears in the New Age every
week deficiency arises "because the money required to finance
capital production, and created by the banks for that purpose, is
regarded as borrowed from them and, therefore, in order that it
may be repaid, is charged into the prices of consumers’ goods.”
This appears to imply that if a man borrows £IOO, and spends
it on wages and materials, he must recover from the consumers
not simply the £IOO to cover his costs, but £2OO in all, in order to
repay the loan as well. It is obvious that it is quite impossible for
industry as a whole to do this, and if it were true that no
sales could take place except at a price which both covered
costs and repaid loans, there would certainly be immediate glut
and wholesale stagnation. It is merely ridiculous, however, to
suggest that this is the way industrialists behave. In the example
quoted they would be insisting on 100% profits before selling
* Major Douglas himself has put the point as follows: "If I as an individual
require, let us say, 10,000 Kroners worth of goods per annum, and, while getting
that 10,000 Kroners worth of goods per annum, I get into debt to the extent of
10,000 Kroners per annum, then it is quite obvious that the real price which I ought
to be paying—in order that the system could go on for ever —is Kr. 20,000, for
what I am getting for Kr. 10,000 and borrowing Kr. 10,000 to pay in addition."


their goods. It seems more reasonable to suppose that in order to
sell their goods they would be content with a more moderate
profit and leave their bank loans outstanding. The fact is that in-
dustrialists only repay loans to banks on two occasions (i) when
they are compelled to because the banks insist, and (2) when they
are making profits sufficiently large to justify repayment. It is
clear that if the banks do insist on net repayment, then deficiency is
bound to arise; wages are no longer paid and intermediate goods
are no longer bought. Equally, if a firm is voluntarily repaying a
loan out of profits and the banks do not immediately create
another loan to another producer, then again deficiency is bound
to arise. But as we have already said, the question here is really
one of fact, and the facts show no general and chronic tendency
for the total of bank loans to diminish.
The assertion of Major Douglas that the incomes distributed
in the course of production always tend to be insufficient to pur-
chase the commodities offered for sale, must, therefore, be
rejected. It is also not possible to accept his belief that in practice
goods are sold and production maintained only when money
is being borrowed at an ever-increasing rate from the banks.
In our opinion deficiency can be avoided and production held
constant provided that the banks maintain the quantity of loans
outstanding, and offset, by increased lending, any hoarding which
is taking place. If one loan is repaid it must be offset by the
creation of another. For the same output to be sold, it is not
necessary that a larger and larger debt should be piled up.
The qualification for “the same output to be sold” is of course
an exceedingly important one. In so far as society can and does
increase production, it may very well need a different monetary
policy. If we have, as is the case to-day, heavy unemployment
and quantities of unused resources, it stands to reason that we
shall only be able to employ those unused resources if we increase
the quantity of money. To attempt to employ them by simply
withdrawing money from another part of industry would clearly
leave a deficiency.
If Major Douglas were simply arguing that increased produc-
tion required an increase in the amount of money, there would
be very little to quarrel about. It is, in fact, the policy of the
Labour Party to stabilise prices; and prices can only be
stabilised, when production is increasing, if there is an adequate
increase in the quantity of money. Although at certain times Major


Douglas seems to introduce these dynamic conditions, it is quite
clear that they are not essential to his main argument. He would
doubtless agree that unemployed resources can only be brought
into use if fresh money is injected into the system. But he would
argue that even when they are fully employed, under existing
financial arrangements, more and more money would have to be
borrowed from the banks, in order to offset the “deficiency.”
In conclusion, it is necessary to examine two other arguments
sometimes introduced by Major Douglas in support of his view
that in the present financial system there is a chronic deficiency of
purchasing power. The first of these concerns the process of
saving and investment, the second the replacement of labour by
machinery.
Investment
With regard to investment, deficiency is said to arise in the
following way. The act of saving withdraws money from the
market for finished commodities and makes it impossible to sell
a part of the product. The money which is saved is invested and
paid out eventually in wages and so passes into consumers'
income; but in the meanwhile, it is argued, the process of
investment has led to the production of new capital goods and
there is no purchasing power available to purchase these. Hence
there is a deficiency, which is again only offset by fresh borrowing
from the banks.
This argument is, in our opinion, quite unsound. It is based
on an entirely false notion of the process of saving and investment.
It is of course true that the act of saving will create a deficiency
if it is not balanced by an equal amount of investment in the same
period. If, for example, consumers put additional money on
deposit with the banks and the banks do not at the same time
and to the same extent increase the amount of their lending, then
there will be a net deficiency of purchasing power. Much
attention has been paid by economists in recent years to this
source of industrial depression; but this is not the deficiency
with which Major Douglas is concerned. He assumes that
investment does take place concurrently with saving. If this is
so, there is no need to anticipate deficiency. It is true that if saving
increases some finished commodities cannot be sold at their old
prices, but at the same time some investment goods, machinery,
buildings, raw materials, etc., will be sold at more than cost


prices. There will be depression in certain industries and
boom in others: less money will be distributed in some and
more in others. Consumers' income as a whole will be unchanged.
If the saving continues at the higher rate there will be a move-
ment of capital and labour away from the finishing industries
into the industries producing capital goods. This is indeed
necessary if the rate of production is to be increased. For the
assumption from which we start is that all available resources
are fully employed. The depression in the finishing trades, is,
therefore, not only no indication of deficiency ; it is also a neces-
sary part of the process by which the rate of capital accumulation
is increased. As the new capital goods are produced they will
continue to be bought by the savings of consumers. They will
then be used in production. This will lead to an increase in the
output of industry. If there is to be no fall in prices it is necessary
that the quantity of purchasing power and the incomes of con-
sumers should now be increased. This is, of course, implicit in
the Labour Party policy of stabilising prices. A failure to increase
purchasing power at this point might be said to constitute a
deficiency ; but it is certain that this is not the main deficiency to
which Major Douglas refers.
Depreciation
He refers, however, to another source of deficiency associ-
ated with investment. One of the costs which producers have to
allow for is depreciation of fixed capital. Major Douglas argues
that here, at any rate, is a cost against which no equivalent pur-
chasing power is distributed to consumers. If a machine costs
£SOO and lasts five years, approximately £IOO a year must be
charged on its account into the costs of the article it produces.
But, says Major Douglas, consumers are not receiving this £IOO
a year and hence there is a deficiency.
At first sight the argument seems plausible, particularly when
we consider the individual producer and not industry as a whole;
but a moment's consideration shows that at the same time as
money is set aside for depreciation, new machines to replace the
old ones are being constructed and in respect of these, purchasing
power is being distributed to consumers. So long as the money so
distributed in industry as a whole is equal to the depreciation
costs incurred in industry as a whole there will be no deficiency.
It cannot be claimed that this is always the case, but it must be


pointed out that there is no reason to anticipate a chronic deficiency
on this account. During depressions when producers postpone
replacement, there is deficiency. During booms, however, the
opposite takes place and the purchasing power distributed in
respect of machines for replacement will exceed the depreciation
costs being charged at the time.
This brings us to the last suggested cause of deficiency. This
generally takes the crude form of a mere statement to the effect
that since in respect of machines no wages are distributed, there
is a growing deficiency of consumers" purchasing power. It is-true
that the introduction of machinery may tend to reduce the total
wage bill of industry, but it is not true to say that consumers"
purchasing power is necessarily reduced. Nor is it true to say that
no payments are made to consumers in respect of machine costs.
The substitution of machinery for labour involves the substitu-
tion of two types of cost for one. Instead of the payment of wages
there is (i) the interest, (2) the depreciation costs of the machine.
Now the interest accrues to capitalists who are also consumers;
depreciation cost, as we have seen, is accompanied by the con-
struction of machines for replacement, and this involves the dis-
tribution of purchasing power to consumers. Thus a society
which employs a high proportion of machinery distributes pur-
chasing power adequate to costs no less than one which employs a
high proportion of labour.
A more subtle form of this argument maintains that the actual
change over from labour to machines causes a diminution of the
actual monetary circulation. Since cost reduction, it is main-
tained, is the stimulus to replace labour with machines, the new
costs will be less than the old and hence the amount of money used
by industry will be less. There are, doubtless, occasions when
this will be so, but it seems equally probable that since the reduc-
tion of costs offers the prospect of higher profits, more rather than
less will be borrowed by industry. Because a firm reduces its unit
costs, it does not necessarily reduce the total amount which it
spends, i.e., its aggregate costs.
The real objection to the replacement of labour by machinery
is not, as the supporters of Social Credit believe, that it causes a
monetary deficiency, but, as the Labour Movement fully realises,
that it generally throws certain workers out of employment, and
that in any case it continually tends to reduce the relative share of
labour in the product and increase the share of capital. The


method of dealing with this evil is not monetary policy, but
Socialism. The community must, itself, own the machines. .
III
THE CURE—THE ISSUE OF SOCIAL CREDITS
Having outlined Major Douglas' analysis, and our own objec-
tions to it, we now proceed to examine the cure which he puts
forward. This follows, for the most part, quite logically from the
analysis. It is, in effect, a device for filling the gap caused by the
supposed deficiency without producing the undesirable conse-
quences which are said to follow when it is filled by additional
borrowing from the banks. The most usual form in which it is
expressed is as follows: —
An estimate must first be made of the extent to which
consumption falls short of production.
Suppose that consumption is estimated to be 75%
consumption
production, so that ; =f.
production
Then a decree is issued announcing that all retailers who
reduce their prices by 25% will be given “Social Credits" to
the extent of the price reduction on every commodity sold at the
reduced price. Thus, although prices are lowered to the con-
sumer, no losses are incurred. Social Credits will take the
form either of notes or of cheques drawn on a new Govern-
ment institution: “The National Credit Authority," They will not
be raised by taxation, but will be new money created directly for
the purpose by the State, It is claimed that the immediate conse-
quence of issuing Social Credits will be that consumers can buy
more goods. For “prices are lower" and money will now “go
further," The glut is, therefore, rapidly cured. Producers,
meanwhile, are not only safeguarded against loss, but also find
their turnover, and therefore their total receipts (including Social
Credits), increasing. They are, therefore, stimulated to produce
more to meet the increasing demand.
So long as consumption falls short of total production, Social
Credits continue to be issued,
consumption . .
As the fraction : increases, they are diminished.
production
Finally, when it reaches unity, no further credits are issued.


Before proceeding to consider this scheme, we must emphasise
that disagreement with Major Douglas' analysis is not in itself an
adequate reason for rejecting his proposals entirely. It has already
been pointed out that at a time when resources are not fully
employed an increase in the quantity of money is required.
Major Douglas does, in fact, suggest one way by which this might
be provided. It remains to be seen how far this is the best way,
and also how far the Social Credit proposals can secure not only
the achievement but also the maintenance of a high level of pro-
duction.
The following comments on this proposal appear to us necessary.
(1) The basis on which the fraction c<^ nsum P t * Qn anc j j lence
production
the actual price discount to be granted is estimated has never
been made very clear. This is shown by the extraordinarily wide
differences between the actual estimates made by Major Douglas
at different times.
Probably the differences are due to a confusion about the
principle involved. On the one hand there is the more straight-
forward principle of the proportion of unemployed resources,
which might be put at 30%. On the other hand there is the
wholly distinct notion of the monetary gap between produc-
tion costs and consumers' purchasing power. As we have
seen, Major Douglas believes that this exists always, even when
there is full employment, but that it is filled by additional borrow-
ing from the banks. This difference about the basis for estimating
the price discount is, as we shall see, reflected in a difference
about the purpose of the Social Credits. These are required not
only to stimulate full production, but also to fill the gap in the
place of bank credit.
(2) Supporters of Social Credit do not generally appreciate
that the percentage increase in the amount of money involved
in their proposals is much larger than the percentage increase in
consumers' incomes. If, for example, the fraction is I % so
that the price discount is 25%, then new money would have to be
issued to the extent of some £1,000,000,000, since the total
retail turnover is approximately £4,000,000,000. But the total
quantity of money in effective circulation is only about
£1,000,000,000.* By the end of a year, therefore, the quantity
* Total bank deposits are approximately £3,000,000,000 and about half of this
is in current accounts, and the remainder on deposit.


of money in effective circulation would have increased by 100%,
and the money actually used in the purchase of retail goods might
be more than doubled* If the Social Credits were continued, the
increase would of course be progressive.
(3) Since Major Douglas does not propose to interfere with
the Joint Stock Banks but is prepared to allow them to carry on
their normal business of financing industry, it is important to
examine what their position would be if the Social Credit pro-
posals were adopted. Moreover, as we have already indicated, it
appears to be the aim of Social Credit to relieve industry of debt
to the banks. As Major Douglas himself puts it, If you create
money even at the astronomical rate at which debts are being
created, you can apply the money so created to the liquidation
of the debt, and both money and the debt will go out of existence
at the same time. In that way the process will, as it has not for
many hundreds of years past, become a self-liquidating process
which can be carried on indefinitely."
If we take the numerical example already given, during the
first year of the operation of Social Credit, £1,000,000,000 of
new money will be handed to retailers. This new money takes
the form either of notes or cheques drawn on the new "National
Credit Authority." Now the primary purpose of the new money
is to enable retailers to sell more goods, to enlarge their total
receipts and so to order more from manufacturers, who in their
turn will expand production. It is obvious that to the extent
that the new money is required for this purpose, it cannot also
be used to repay loans to the banks. Or, to put it in another
way, if the money is used by retailers and others to repay
overdrafts, then it cannot be used for expanding production.
It is sometimes assumed that Consumers' Credits can be used
for both purposes, and it is necessary to be clear therefore
that if they are issued as a relief to consumers they will only come
into the hands of producers as a reimbursement of costs incurred,
with the addition of the item of profit. The extent to which such
credits will enable producers to pay off their overdrafts, whilst
maintaining production at the higher level, is therefore limited to
the amount which they are able to allocate for the purpose out of
their increased profits.
The position of the banks may now be considered. In so far
as the money is not devoted to repaying loans, the deposits or
liabilities of the banks will be increased on the one side, and


against these liabilities they will now hold cash either in the form
of notes or credits with the “National Credit Authority/' But
this will clearly mean a very big increase in the ratio of cash
reserves to deposits. If we assume that to begin with deposits
are £2,000,000,000 and cash reserves £200,000,000, the issue
of Social Credits will increase deposits to £3,000,000,000 and
cash to £1,200,000,000. The cash ratio will have risen from
10 /o to 40%. If the banks are allowed to pursue their normal
policy they will then expand their loans to £12,000,000,000.
Moreover, if the anticipations of producers are generally favour-
able, the banks will find little difficulty in lending more money;
but it is equally certain that an increase in the amount of money
on this scale would cause a terrific inflation. Prices would
begin to rise rapidly and neither the mere cessation of the
granting of Social Credits nor legislative attempts at price
control would be of any avail. At the best we should be faced
with the familiar boom of the trade cycle, assisted as always by
the over-expansion of bank credit. It may be argued that this
expansion on the part of the banks could be stopped by the Bank
of England, which could sell securities to the open market and
thus withdraw the excessive cash from circulation. Under
present circumstances, however, the Bank of England does not
hold sufficient securities for this purpose. The only effective
method of controlling the situation would probably be to make a
certain cash reserve obligatory on the Joint Stock Banks, and to
raise this considerably above the 10% which has so far been
customary. Incidentally, in such a case, the banks would be liable
to pay interest on a proportion of the £1,000,000,000 of new
deposits, but would have no new revenue to meet it.
There remains, however, the possibility that the new money
will be used to repay loans to the banks x in this way, it is some-
times suggested, the Social Credits would be “cancelled." Let us
examine this possibility in rather greater detail.
No one for a moment would deny that the volume of bank
money in existence may at any time be reduced by the repayment
of a bank debt by a producer. But the reason for this is that when
a debtor repays a bank loan, he normally collects existing money
for the purpose. He therefore reduces the amount standing to
the credit of all other depositors and places the amount to his
own credit. Consequently when the bank cancels his loan
against his deposit, it reduces the total volume of deposits. It


has destroyed a liability at the same time that it has destroyed an
asset. In the case under consideration, however, the money is
not collected from existing deposits but is a new creation. Hence
the total of deposits remains unchanged and all that has happened
is a change in the form of the banks' assets. It holds cash or
credits with the National Credit Authority where it previously
held loans to producers.
If we suppose the whole of the £1,000,000,000 devoted to the
purpose of repaying the banks, the banks' balance sheet would
still show a total of £2,000,000,000 liabilities and £2,000,000,000
assets, but its cash reserve would now be £1,200,000,000 instead
of £200,000,000. Moreover, while having to pay interest on
that part of its liabilities which took the form of deposit accounts,
the bank would be deprived of the interest which it previously
secured from the £1,000,000,000 lent to industry. There can
be no doubt that under these circumstances the banks could no
longer meet their interest liabilities and remain solvent. It is
therefore clear that in spite of Major Douglas' antagonism to
Nationalisation, his own proposals are quite inconsistent with the
maintenance of private ownership of the banks.
We have already pointed out that their normal policy with
such huge reserves would be to increase their loans to industry.
So long as the banks remained in private hands the pressure to do
this would be irresistible; but if this were done there would once
again arise that indebtedness of industry to the banks which
Major Douglas regards with such suspicion. Social Credit can
only free industry completely of debt to the banks by making
the banks bankrupt. In the extreme case they would hold no
interest-bearing assets at all, but they would still be liable in full
to their depositors and still have to pay interest on approximately
50% of their deposits.
(4) This long discussion of the position of the banks leads to
another conclusion about the consequences of Social Credit. In
our opinion the fundamental cause of capitalist depression lies
in the existence of excessive purchasing power at certain times
and inadequate purchasing power at other times. This irregu-
larity of the flow of money is due to the fact that both industry
and the banks are in private hands. The issue of Social Credits
offers no way of dealing with this problem, as the banks are to
remain in private hands and industry is to continue to borrow
from the banks. No suggestion is made by Major Douglas as


to how the excessive issue of bank credit to industry is to be
prevented. As a method of expansion. Social Credit may have
something to be said for it. As a method of stabilising full produc-
tion it offers no constructive suggestions whatever.
The real reason why Major Douglas assumes that prices
will not rise is that either because of the existence of very
large stocks or because of an increase in production, there is an
increase in the quantity of goods available for sale. But suppose
this was not the case and that nevertheless Social Credits were
introduced, it is clear that after existing stocks had all been
bought at the lower prices, made possible by the issue of Social
Credits, consumers would still have income available unspent.
As soon as they began to spend this they would drive prices up.
This did not take place in the original illustration only because
it was assumed that there were more goods available for them to
buy. Now it is of course true that in a period of depression stocks
accumulate and resources are unemployed, but it does not follow
that these "surplus’' stocks are of the magnitude which Major
Douglas assumes. The growing complexity of the distributive
system necessitates the holding of very considerable stocks and
it is certain that prices would rise long before these stocks were
completely dissipated. It may be said in reply that prices would
be regulated and that the injection of fresh credits would
stop as soon as prices began to rise at all. As we have already
indicated, however, by the time full employment is secured
the dominating factor in the situation will not be Social
Credits at all but banking policy. Is the rate of interest to be put
up when prices begin to rise? Are bank loans to be called in?
If so, how is the crisis and depression to be prevented? If not,
how will a rise in prices be avoided?
(5) Moreover, it must be remembered that the price
situation will not be the same in every industry. Even at the
outset before the introduction of Social Credits there will be
considerable differences. In some industries producers will
have cut prices and will be selling at a loss, in others wage costs
will have been reduced so that the losses are borne by the workers
as well; in these two groups production will probably have been
well maintained. In other industries prices will have been kept
up by cutting down the volume of sales and production. It is
clear that the producers in the latter group will gain more from
the introduction of Social Credits than those of the former.


The former may continue to receive approximately the same
receipts as before, for the same turnover. The latter will benefit
by getting back to their old turnover at the higher prices, and the
policy of restriction and higher prices will reap a most unmerited
reward. In other words the former group will receive credits
on the basis of on a low price level, and the latter group on a high
price level.
Nor will the mere refusal of Social Credits to industries where
prices have risen prevent them rising further. For if prices
remain low elsewhere, consumers can still spend their "surplus"
on the industries where prices are rising because of a relative
shortage of goods.
(6) Finally there are, of course, immense administrative
difficulties in the proposal to control prices and grant Social
Credits everywhere in proportion to price reductions. When
the positively immense range of qualities in nearly all consumption
goods is remembered, it will be seen that the task of ascertaining
that the correct price reduction had in fact taken place before
Social Credits were granted would be virtually an administrative
impossibility. The temptation for the retailer to have it both
ways, to charge the higher price and collect the credit, would be
extremely strong. Without some form of nationalization before-
hand, effective checks could not be imposed.
We therefore conclude that, while the granting of Social
Credits —assuming favourable political conditions —would tend
to cause monetary and industrial expansion, the proposals would
create certain serious banking problems and offer in any case
no permanent cure for the recurring capitalist depression.
The hope that they would achieve permanent prosperity is
entirely vain. Moreover, in their usual form of a universal price
discount for all industries, they involve administrative difficulties
of an almost insuperable character.
THE NATIONAL DIVIDEND
A further proposal, which is complementary to the proposal for
the issue of Consumers' Credits, concerns the payment of a
National Dividend, According to Major Douglas, this Dividend
would be paid as a right of citizenship, and in his Scheme for
Scotland he has estimated that it would be in the region of
£3OO per family per annum. An obvious fallacy here lies in the


fact that Major Douglas appears always to include the capitalised
value of all assets in his estimate of production, and even goes to
the length of capitalising the productive capacity of individuals.
Capital assets are, however, only consumed at the rate of their
depreciation , and so long as replacement takes place concurrently
with depreciation, consumers will receive—for making the re-
placement—sufficient purchasing power to cover the deprecia-
tion charges which are included in the costs of the final products
which they buy. If, on the other hand, purchasing power were to
be distributed, not at the rate of depreciation, but equal to the
total capital value of all assets, this purchasing power would not
be used to purchase the capital assets, but would be available to
purchase consumption goods, and a tremendous inflation would
undoubtedly result.
THE REAL SOLUTION
The Problem
If Major Douglas is wrong, then what is right? That is the
question which will leap to the mind of the reader. There must
be some policy capable of relieving our economic distress. It
cannot be true that we are forced as a society into penury through
increasing productive power.
Socialists believe that the only complete solution lies in the
centralised control of the means of production and exchange,
but they would be prepared to admit at once that one of the most
important advantages to be derived from economic planning lies
in the sphere of credit policy. By varying the lending policies
of the banks and thus the volume of money, it should be possible
to increase very considerably the volume of output. The
standard of living could be made to rise slowly but steadily as
the real productive power of society grew larger. But how should
lending be varied?
In the view of the Labour Party* the course of capitalist
depression is characterised by a deficiency of purchasing power at
certain times and excess of purchasing power at others. It would
be silly to deny the obvious commonsense proposition of Social
Credit reformers and economists alike, that during times of de-
pression there is a purely monetary breakdown —a loss of econo-
mic efficiency directly traceable to a shortage of credit. The
* “Socialism and the Condition of the People? (Labour Party, 2d.)


creation of new money during such periods would release in-
dustrial activity. If we had more money to spend the volume of
production that it would be possible to market safely would rise.
The increase in production would make possible an increase in
consumption and the community would be that much better off;
but again in the view of the economist and Socialist alike, the
periods of monetary deficiency are closely associated with times
of too rapid monetary expansion. It is during the booms —when
purchasing power expands more rapidly than costs and excessive
money profits are made —that the seeds of the future depression
are sown.
So much is common ground between a large number of
different schools of thought. It is not, however, so widely
realised that this view contains a number of important implica-
tions with regard to policy. It shows that there are two essential
and different tasks included in the correct credit policy:
(1) In the first place it is certain that during a period of
depression the earliest and most urgent task is that of securing a
credit expansion. An expansionist programme during depression
is an essential part of the correct credit policy. The expansion
must continue until the unemployment due to a shortage of
purchasing power has been cured.*
(2) But it is equally obvious that expansion or reflation is not
sufficient by itself to create the conditions of stable prosperity.
Expansion and reflation have occurred often enough before. It
is the method by which recovery has always taken place.
Recovery has always been temporary in the past: it has led on
to a new crisis and renewed depression. Unless something
new is done —at least in the later stages of recovery—there will
be no reason to expect that such an induced recovery will be
other than temporary. Something must be done which has
never been done before.
It is the conviction of the Labour Party that the correct
monetary policy can be constructed only by a Central Economic
Authority, f and can be enforced upon the commercial banks
only through a control of their lending operations in the social
interest. We are not in this pamphlet concerned with the
question of socialising the banks or with the machinery of control.
* This is not necessarily the whole of the numbers actually unemployed, because
there may be some persons out of work for reasons other than that of general
trade depression—requiring mobility between employments of both labour and
capital.
"For Socialism and Peace." (Labour Party, gd.)


We are considering credit policy; and we are faced with these two
questions: “How is the expansion to be brought about?” and
By what measures is it to be directed into safe and stable channels
at the right time?”
THE EXPANSION
There are a large number of ways of increasing the quantity
of credit in circulation. To begin with, there are the perfectly
orthodox forms of banking policy. It is possible to lower the
rate of interest charged by the commercial banks for advances
or for the Bank of England to buy securities in the open market.
The first policy makes it cheaper to borrow money from the
banks, and so more people are likely to do so and the total
advances of the banks are likely to rise. If the Bank of England
buys securities, it pays for them with cheques on itself, and as
these are paid into the Joint Stock Banks the deposits of these
banks with the Bank of England rise. Such deposits are regarded
by the Joint Stock Banks as equivalent to cash reserves, and as
they try to keep a certain fixed proportion between their total
loans and their reserves, their powers of lending are greatly
improved by the action of the Central Bank.
The trouble with these orthodox policies is obvious. They
are not likely to be very effective during a period of general
business depression. No one wants to borrow money from the
banks, however low the rate of interest, if they can see no method
of employing these funds advantageously. When industries are
on the point of bankruptcy they would not wish to increase their
capital liabilities even if the rate of interest were nothing. Nor
is it of much service to increase the reserves of the Joint Stock
Banks. They have plenty of reserves already. They are weighed
down with excessive quantities of cash, Hence it may be of
little or no use to improve the powers of lending or borrowing.
It is important to do this —no policy can succeed without it—
but it may not be enough.
It is essential to get more money spent. Only money in active
circulation provides a market for production and increases
employment. One method, and again a perfectly orthodox one,
of intensifying the activity of monetary circulation is for the
Government to spend more money on capital account. It
can either do this directly by expanding investment in public
works, or it can aid the general body of industry to increase


its own investment by extending Government guarantees to
long term investment, and even subsidising the rate of interest
upon such investment. All these steps have their place and
importance. Once again, however, are they enough? In the
first place, a great deal of money has already been spent in
this country upon roads and other typical forms of public enter-
prise. It is not certain that the most urgent necessity is further
expenditure in the same direction. The country has the best
system of road communications in the world. What is far
more important is the construction of more productive industrial
capital. It has been calculated that only £70,000,000 a year has
recently been invested in the whole of English industry. That
is a relatively small sum. It is impossible greatly to raise the
standard of living unless the investment in ordinary capital can
be increased. No doubt there is room for further capital
expenditure on housing, but it should always be accompanied
by the kind of investment in productive industry which will
provide continuous employment at higher real wages. The real
social income must be increased. That brings us back to the
central difficulty. It is not possible to persuade industry to
borrow more when it is in the throes of acute depression.
The trouble about all these orthodox methods of expenditure
on capital account is that with the exception of public works
they do not operate directly on the income position of the com-
munity. Is it quite out of the question that we should devise
some expansionist mechanism which will put money directly
in the hands of the consumer during a period of depression?
If we can do that the sales of the industrial system will be pro-
moted, the advantages of borrowing will be increased, and a
sharp expansionist movement will begin.
There are at least two simple methods by which something of
this kind could be done.
In the first place, the Government could unbalance the Budget
on current account by reducing taxation and filling the gap with
borrowings from the banks.* The result would be to increase
the purchasing power of the public and to secure the injection of
new and active money into circulation. The result would be
precisely the same as that of public works except that it would
directly improve the position of the consumer and prevent the
relative overproduction of large capital goods which can only
* If, and when, the banks are nationalised these securities will pass back to the
ownership of the Government, and the State liability will then be limited to the
comparatively small amount of interest payable on the accruing deposits.


be produced by Government investment. People would get
what they want, expansion would begin, unemployment would
diminish. At least, this would be the case so long as the con-
fidence of the general business world was not adversely affected.
This method, however, in so far as it involves an unbalanced
Budget, is not in accord with the Labour Party's official policy.
In the second place, a Labour Government could secure the
same result by a slightly less direct and obvious way.* It could
proceed to subsidise either the production of certain com-
modities consumed particularly by the poor, such as bread or
sugar, or provide the unemployed and other poor persons with
certain commodities at low prices. It could make use of the
milk, the cattle, and the potato surplus, and possibly the surplus
in other industries where production was easily controlled, by
offering the products of the excess capacity of all these industries
at very low prices to the poor. The difference between cost and
price would be made up by money provided by the Government.
This latter method would have in its favour two very important
advantages. In the first place it would ensure that the immediate
relief was specifically directed to that section of the community
most in need, and secondly it would minimise the possible waste
of products which happened at the moment to be in plentiful
supply. Now, if the money for these purposes was found by ordin-
ary taxation the process would expand the consumption of the poor
at the expense of the rich, but it would not directly increase the
demand for goods. The increased consumption of the poor
and the increased employment offered in the subsidised indus-
tries would be offset by the reduced expenditure of the tax-
paying public. There would be little or no net gain in money outlay
or employment; but if the Government subsidies—or Social
Dividend—were provided by creating new credit, the result
would be a direct and proportionate increase in expenditure and
production.!
* We are indebted to Mr. Thomas Johnston for this suggestion.
t It will be seen that this form of credit creation bears some resemblance to
Major Douglas own proposals. Our views differ from Major Douglas' in four
respects: (a) that they are based on an entirely different analysis of the credit
mechanism as P&rt II has shown; (b) that in our view the credit creation is only a
temporary expedient to get the national economy out of a depression; (c) that
it is °ne of a number of methods of expanding credit; (d) that we disagree very
profoundly wnh the quantitative powers of such policies. Major Douglas has
placed the increase of production which may be reasonably expected as high as
i,600 per cent! We suppose it would be something like 20-30 per cent immedi-
ately, through the absorption of unemployment. After unemployment had been
dealt with there would be a steady increase in output, due to the accumulation and
improvement of capital resources, of something considerably less than this.


By these methods more money could be placed directly into
active circulation at the consumers' end. The difficulty about
such policies is purely psychological. They could and would
be represented by the opponents of financial control as danger-
ously inflationary. They are nothing of the kind. They differ
in no important economic respect from the most orthodox
methods of financial reflation. But they could be misrepresented.
Misrepresentation would not matter unless it sapped financial
confidence. If it did this it might lead to a contraction of
private investment, or even a dangerous rush to buy goods. It
is all a question of confidence and it demonstrates that the correct
financial policy can only be pursued by a Government that has a
firm hand on the levers of financial power and perhaps only a
Government that has already socialised a very large section of
productive industry. If that has been done, the most active ex-
pansionist policies can be pursued with perfect safety. Socialism
is certainly the safest way to prosperity.
Stabilisation
Returning to the central problem of credit policy, it is neces-
sary to take up the question of the second stage of expansion.
Let us suppose that some general financial programme, including
both orthodox and unorthodox methods, has been initiated.
Expansion will begin. The size of the monetary turnover in
the community will rise, unemployment will fall, real incomes
will increase. Prosperity will reappear. This will seem a great
achievement. It will almost seem a sufficient achievement in
the realm of credit control. It is not enough, however, because
it is nothing more than a deliberate engineering of what has often
happened before —a temporary recovery. Unless something
else is done, a new policy pursued, the expansion will move into
a boom, the boom into a crisis, and the crisis into a depression.
It is absolutely essential in the later stages of such a recovery
to obtain control of the general division of the community's
expenditure between consumption goods and capital goods. It
is of vital importance to see that the gross income of the com-
munity is divided between the purchase of consumption goods
and the purchase of new machines in the same way that the real
productive resources are divided between these two types of
industry. Otherwise expenditure and production will get out
of gear—the banks will lend more than they should and break-
down will become inevitable.


In order that the essential identity of proportions should be
maintained, it will be necessary for the Government through the
machinery of central economic and financial authorities to
control the lending policies of the banks, the money income of
the community, the volume of saving, and the volume of
expenditure. It can do these things most easily if it owns all
industries. If it does not, it must seek to control saving and
expenditure by taxation and investment policy. If it can do this
new thing, it can succeed in stabilising a higher level of employ-
ment of all the productive resources at the disposal of society. It
will distribute a larger product more justly, more expeditiously,
and more certainly.




Printed by The Victoria House Printing
Co., Ltd. (T.U. all Departments) Tudor
Street, London, E.C.4, and published by
the Labour Party, Transport House,
Smith Square, London, S.W.i
