

SOCIETY
FOR
SUPERSEDING THE NECESSITY
OF
CLIMBING BOYS.
TWENTY-FIRST REPORT,
MAY 1, 1837.




SOCIETY
FOR
SUPERSEDING THE NECESSITY
OF
CLIMBING BOYS,
BY ENCOURAGING
A NEW METHOD OF SWEEPING CHIMNEYS.
INSTITUTED ON THE FOURTH OF FEBRUARY, 1803.
“ Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.”
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR THE SOCIETY,
BY A. MACINTOSH, 20, GREAT NEW STREET, FETTER LANE!
AND MAY BE HAD GRATIS OF THE HONORARY SECRETARY,
1, NEW BRIDGE STREET.
1837.


PATRON.
THE KING.
president.
The Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Winchester.
VICE-PRESIDENTS.
His Grace the Duke of Bedford, Earl Surrey, M.P.,
His Grace the Duke of Suther- Lord Auckland,
land, Lord Willoughby de Eresby,
Marquis of Westminster, Sir Thomas Baring, Bart.,
Earl Morley, Matthew Wood, Esq., M.P.,
Earl Harrowsy, Frederick Webb, Esq.
TREASURER.
William Tooke, Esq., M.P., F.R.S.
COMMITTEE.
Burgess, W. H., Esq.
Chippendale, John, Esq.,
Francis, Charles, Esq.,
Gillett, Gabriel, Esq.,
Heisch, P. J., Esq.,
Hudson, J. C., Esq.,
Labouchere, John, Esq.,
Richardson, T., Esq.,
Smith, R., Esq.,
Soper, James, Esq.,
HONORARY SECRETARY.
Robert Steven, Esq., 1, New Bridge-street.
COLLECTOR.
Mr. Henry Clemson, 7, Grange-road, Bermondsey.


THE
TWENTY-FIRST REPORT
OF THE
SOCIETY FOR SUPERSEDING CLIMBING BOYS.
Your Committee has great pleasure in announcing that the
present year has been characterized by a degree of success more
than equal to the experience of any former years.
The number of subscribers has fallen off, but Providence still
continues to smile upon the efforts that are made, and the richest
•encouragement is afforded to those who feel for this branch of
the miseries of human nature. Before the short detail of pro-
ceedings is entered upon, it may be well to give a brief outline of
the Society’s origin and objects, together with the grounds which
led to the establishment of the Association; many persons
hearing of the subject for the first time, by means of the Annual
Report.
The following are the reasons which induced its supporters to
unite in this work of mercy:—
Ist. They ascertained by the examination of the children
employed in this trade, that unfair and dishonest means are
always resorted to, to obtain a supply of boys. That the season
of probation,, or “ liking,” as it is called, which precedes the
binding of apprentices, is marked by all that duplicity and mis-
representation can invent, to mislead the children who are sent
on trial; that little or no work is imposed on them during that
time; that every indulgence is granted that can weigh with


persons in that station of life; that they are petted in the sitting
room of the master, and fed in a comparatively sumptuous way, —
and hence arises the positive and unchangeable determination of
the child, to be a chimney-sweeper, and nothing else, when
brought before the magistrate to be bound.
2dly. That grievous pain and sorrow are found invariably to
attend the after stages of this apprenticeship.
3dly. That it is a business to which children ought not to be
put, as it affords no support after a boy has reached 15 or 16
years of age, at the latest.
4thly. That employing children in this trade, subjects them in
after-life to the disease lectured upon separately in the hospitals
as chimney-sweepers’ cancer, and which disease only befals those
who are thus employed.
These grounds led to the formation of the Society. It was at
first supposed that it would only be necessary to offer a premium
for the production of a machine capable of sweeping, and that it
would be instantly adopted by the existing race of chimney-
sweepers.
With this impression, machines were given away on a large
scale in all directions, and everything avoided that could seem to
interfere with the members of the trade. This act of ill-directed
liberality was met by the most virulent hostility, and every
machine thus put into the hand of a common chimney-sweeper,
was employed, as far as in him lay, to destroy the object of the
bestower: these heartless men, having at once discovered that
chimneys were so much better cleansed by this means, that the
sweeping would be wanted less frequently than if boys were
continued; and further, that if children were given up, men
would be required to work the machines, and this would break in
upon the masters’ profits.
These assertions are proved by the fact of the chimney-
sweepers having combined to resist every attempt that has been
made to introduce the machines; and in the year 1834, when a
Bill was sought fof? they are said to have expended 1,200/. upon
counsel, Parliamentary agent, and witnesses; and these witnesses
evinced but little regard to truth. This outlay of money was
severely felt, and it was an expense the trade would not have
incurred to “ protect their customers” alone. If their object had
been a straightforward one, they would have protested against
the adoption of the plan promoted by the Fire-offices; they


would have declared that, in their opinion, it was the abandon-
ment of a safe method, and the adoption of a fanciful and
dangerous substitute; but they would not have taxed themselves
for a headstrong public.
People are beginning to see this in its right light, and having
ascertained that the trade of the common chimney-sweeper is
upheld by deceit, these men are now met at every point with
distrust and suspicion. Necessity compelled your Committee to
set up honest men to work the machine fairly, and by this
means a way is opened for the total abolition of the revolting
practice of employing children in this business. The determina-
tion of the common chimney-sweepers above alluded to, continues
to the present hour in full force (see page 9); and no man,
during the last twenty years, has ever been found to use the
machine faithfully, if he retains a single, child in his service for
the purpose of sweeping chimneys.
Your Committee would now enumerate some of the trans-
actions of the year that is gone by. The first cheering result of
their labours is the having obtained the work at the India-House
for your Agents. Many attempts had been made to attain this
object, but every previous application to the inferiors in the
establishment, had been met with grave assurances of the utter
impossibility of cleansing the majority of the Company’s chimneys
with a machine; and a mock trial of it was got up. This year
the subject was most favourably introduced to the notice of the
Directors by a benevolent and influential man, and happily it
was found in this, as in all other cases, that the defect had been
in the mind, and not in the machine. Encouraged by this
success, an application was made to Timothy Curtis, Esq., then
the Deputy Governor of the Bank, begging him to appoint Glass,
one of your Agents, as the chimney-sweeper to that establish-
ment. In answer to this, the Deputy Governor directed, in the
handsomest manner possible, and with a frankness which always
characterizes his movements, that an experimftit should be made
of the comparative efficiency of the two systems, in the presence
of the Clerk of the Works. The following is a copy of his
Report:—
“ Bank of England, Dec. 31, 1836.
“ I, the undersigned, do hereby certify, that I received the
orders of the Deputy Governor of the Bank, to try the comparative
efficiency of sweeping chimneys by boys, and by Glass’s Machine;


that such experiment was made in the Bank, in my presence, by
sweeping eleven chimneys; that out of this number, five were
swept by boys, and six were swept by the machine; that the five
swept by the boys were afterwards swept by the machine, and
the six swept by the machine, were afterwards swept by the
boys; and that the following is the result
“ Soot brought down by the boys, after six chimneys were
considered fairly swept by the machine, 19 quarts. Soot brought
down by Glass’s Machine out of five chimneys, after the boys bad
finished their labours, 41 quarts and a half.
(Signed,) “ Geo. Topple,
“ Clerk of the Works.”
This, as may be supposed, led to the discharge of the then
existing chimney-sweeper, and the appointment of your Agent.
Your Committee has great pleasure in stating, that the same
Agent is now employed at the Phoenix Fire-office, which is-
considered very important.
Repeated attempts had been made to gain this point, and the
success in this house neutralizes, in a great measure, the mis-
chievous evidence before the Lords’ Committee, which was given
by the Manager of that establishment. And your Committee
has much satisfaction in stating, that the machine was regularly
employed in this Fire-office, for some months before the lamented
death of the gentleman alluded to.
The following Fire-offices have promised to employ your
different Agents, in addition to those who have already certified
to the efficiency of the machine:—
Phoenix Fire-office, —Jenkin Jones, Esq., deceased.
West of England Fire-office, —Jas. Anderton, Esq.
York and North of England Fire-office, —Edmund Barlow, Esq.
The Licensed Victuallers Fire-office, —J. T. Clement, Esq.
The Scottish Union Fire-office, —F. G. Smith, Esq.
Leaving “ The Sun” as the only Fire-office in the city of
London which resists the light, and the only Fire-office which
turns a deaf ear to the cries of misery; and verily it is a proud
and enviable distinction.
Some years ago your machine was introduced into the
Middlesex Hospital, and your Committee has heard, within
these few weeks, that the Secretary of the Institution caused a
quiet experiment to be made in that house, after the Board had
ordered the adoption of the machine. It was so managed, that


neither your Agent nor the old chimney-sweeper knew that the
two systems were to be compared, and it is stated by the
Secretary, that the chimneys were found so clean, that the boys
were literally unable to bring down any soot, after Day, another
of the Society’s Agents, had swept with the machine.
Those who keep in mind the proceedings of the Society, will
recollect that a similar experiment was ordered publicly at
St. George’s Hospital, in 1830, the triumphant success of which,
determined that Board of Governors also to employ one of your
Agents.
This has of course been a constant mortification to Bentley,
the chimney-sweeper, who lost the work, and many stratagems
have been resorted to, to recover it again; and on the 15th of
February last, he induced an influential member of the Board to
bring the subject forward; when the following division took place
among the Governors;
For reinstating Bentley and his boys, with the clear
understanding that the machine is to be used when
practicable 8
For Shepherd, your Agent, who had swept every
chimney in the house for years, without the help of
boys 7
Before this disastrous Resolution was confirmed in the next
week, the subject was rather better understood, and the division
was—
For Shepherd, your Agent 12
For Bentley, his boys, and his practicabilities 0
The only argument urged in the above case was, that Bentley
took his boys to church. This is a very stale argument of the
Bentleys, both father and son, and it would be difficult to prove
what the fact has to do with the matter in hand, or to reconcile it
with the evidence which was given by the elder Bentley upon
oath before the Lords’ Committee in 1834.
(Examined by his own Counsd.)
“ Were you present at any experiment that was tried at St.
George’s Hospital?” (in 1830.)
“ I certainly was.”
“ Have the goodness to state the result of that experiment?”
“ There were some machines appointed to be there, and I was
appointed to be there with some boys; they had, I believe, used
machinery; but there were not fair means resorted to.”


“ Will you tell the whole story ?”
“ The very man who worked the machine for Mr. Glass has
come forward and stated his willingness to prove, that by order
of Mr. Day he carried some soot unfairly in his cloth: I was not
aware that it did not come down the chimney.”
“ Were you not sharp enough to see that?”
“ No; I had no such idea as that they would be guilty of such
a thing.”
“ One-fifth more soot was brought down by the machine than
by the boys ?”
“Yes; so they said.”
“ Do you mean to say, that the man who worked the machine
acted unfairly ? ”
« Yes.”
“ Do you know where he got the soot?”
“ He brought it from one fire-place to another, that was not, to
be swept after the machine.”
“ Have not your boys a desire to win, when they are brought
for experiments of that kind ?”
“Yes; but there were unfair means; which was quite a suffi-
cient excuse for them,”
This is a most extraordinary testimony, and, if true, would
show a total abandonment of principle on the part of your
Agents, and the servants of the Hospital, and brings to mind the
vulgar adage, “ Surely if the old woman had not hidden in the oven
herself, she would never have looked there for her daughter.”
Probably Mr. Bentley is not at church when that beautiful
characteristic of Christianity is insisted on in these words,
“ Charity thinketh no evil; and charity hopeth all things.”
By this allusion to the church, Mr. Bentley appears willing
to work upon the sympathies of the public, to a certain extent,
so that it does not interfere with his own purpose.
It is deeply to be regretted that the energies of good people
are directed to “ fettering the condition of these poor children,”
as it is called, when, by a little Christian co-operation, the em-
ployment which gives them their singularity, and which is said to
prevent their mingling with other children, might be done away.
The value of religious instruction, and the imperative duty of all
constantly to attend the services of religion, are too self-evident
to require an enforcement here. But why those who are so kindly
disposed, should prefer ministering to these children in their


wretchedness, to freeing them from the wretchedness itself, is a
mystery hard to be understood.
Your Committee would state that the Agents of the Society
are exclusively employed in the houses of Fifteen Noblemen,
and that the Society is gaining most exceedingly upon the good
opinion of the community in general.
A Resolution has passed the Town Council of Bath, ordaining
that the chimneys in all the houses belonging to that Corporation
shall in future be swept by machinery. The Mayor’s Lady
writes: —“ Finding upon inquiry that here, as in Bristol, the
machine keepers, though professing to forego the use of boys,
keep them, and most generally use them, it occurred to me that
we might have one of Glass’s Machines, and establish it on our
own terms. lam enabled to inform you, that the machine has
arrived, and answers very well. Not wishing to have one of the
chimney-sweeping fraternity, we have selected a respectable man,
who appears to manage the undertaking very well. He is already
feeling some of the trials of the business, in the persecuting spirit
of the chimney-sweepers; but having the Mayor of the city as his
patron, we hope we may proceed without much opposition.”
Your Agents are constantly employed in One Hundred and
Ten Government and other Public Buildings, and in Eleven
Banking Houses.
Twenty-two Thousand One Hundred and Ninety-three
chimneys have been swept by your Agents in London and its
immediate neighbourhood during the past year.
Machines have been purchased since the last Report by His
Grace the Duke of Leinster; the Earl of Cawdor; Lord Skel-
mersdale; Lord Lynedoch; the Right Hon. B. Bathurst, Lydney
Park. And by persons at the following places—Bath, 2;
Belfast, 1 ; Brighton, 4; Deptford, 1; Gloucester, 1; Green-
wich, 1; Hounslow, 1; Ipswich, 1; London, 6; Liverpool, 1 ;
Margate, I; March, 1; Northampton, 1; Newcastle-on-Tyne, 1;
Stone, 1; Wellington, I; Wisbeach, I.—Toi§il, 31.
Thirteen soot doors have been put into Thirteen chimneys during
the past year, at an average expense of 14s. each, to adapt
these ill-built chimneys to the use of the machine: this is all that
is required, and this alteration is the real amount of what is
described by the enemies of the cause as a most serious destruc-
tion of house property, and involving an outlay of money, not for
one moment to be conceded.


The foregoing has been selected from among the agreeable
transactions of the year.
Your Committee would now draw your attention to a part of
the painful evidence which is forced upon them, of the utter
impossibility of regulating the trade aright, if children are to be
at all employed in it.
The following details are selected from what has occurred since
the last Report
Peter Mollby of Kilkenny, stood charged with the murder of
James Shea, his apprentice, a child of ten years old.
It appeared in evidence that the little creature had been treated
with such habitual cruelty and indifference as to cause his death,
but no one instance could be fixed upon as establishing the crime
of actual murder.
The sentence was, therefore, “ Manslaughter,” and Mollby was
transported for life.
A case of revolting cruelty has been brought home to Needes,
a chimney-sweeper at Bath, who was convicted before the Mayor
of such grievous ill-treatment, as that wretched race of beings is
alone exposed to. The child was discovered lying in the street,
with his head so cut as to require surgical assistance, and he
was proved by the surgeon’s certificate to be too ill to leave the
Hospital, when his master was brought up.
The next case is from Gloucester:—
On Thursday, the 27th of Oct., a chimney-sweeper, a dimi-
nutive child, about ten years of age, was sent up a chimney at the
Talbot Inn, at nine o’clock in the morning, and for the purpose
of lessening his size to suit the dimensions of the flue, he was
stripped entirely naked. Having remained up the chimney for a
very long time, it was thought that he was continuing there un-
necessarily, and from stubbornness, and another lad was sent up to
him; but he failed in bringing him down. After a lapse of some
hours, a cord was attached to the child’s legs, and several vain
attempts were drag him down by force. In this expe-
riment the cord was broken, and a stronger one was substituted,
with no better success. The humane party then obtained a large
quantity of brimstone matches—it is said three pennyworth,
which were ignited, and held burning up the flue. A ladder was
next procured, reaching to the top of the chimney, from whence
several buckets of water were poured down upon the poor little
prisoner; and a pole was thrust down to discover his position,


with such force, that several lumps were afterwards found upon
the poor child’s head.
These mild and gentle efforts were continued at intervals
through the day, till nine o’clock in the evening.
By this time a large crowd had assembled in the neighbour-
hood, and among the number were some more sensible and
humane people than those before alluded to, and they insisted
that by opening the chimney an attempt should be made to
liberate the child, who it was feared might be dead, as he had not
been heard to speak for some time. Masons were accordingly
sent for, and about ten o’clock at night, the poor little creature
was found firmly jammed by the head and shoulders in the brick-
work of the chimney.
Having been in such a situation, and subjected to such treat-
ment as this, and perfectly naked, for thirteen hours, it is needless
to say that he was in a most pitiable condition.
He was washed in warm water, when several excoriations were
discovered on his back and shoulders, and the skin rubbed off his
ears; his head was also sadly bruised. After being taken home,
a surgeon was sent for, and, it is stated with surprise, that though
very ill, his life was not considered in danger. A vain attempt
to rebut this account was made by the son of the proprietor of
the Talbot Inn, in a letter to Wm. Bulphin, a chimney-sweeper
of Bristol, which letter is only worthy of notice as containing an
unintentional comment on the oft-told tale, that children are
required for examining and repairing defects in chimneys, and
which was so pertinaciously insisted on in the evidence before
the Committee of the House of Lords in 1834: it is as follows:
“ The foreman says, had he gone up as he ought to have done,
with one arm up and the other down, no accident could have
happened; instead of which both arms were down.” Every one
must see the utter impossibility of a boy doing any thing in a
chimney in the way of examination or repairs, in a space 9 inches
square, or 9 by 14, and when the utmost %kill is required to
enable him to slide up and to slide down again. This accident
has led to the benevolent formation of an Auxiliary Society in
Gloucester, that city having been anxious to wipe away the
disgrace occasioned by such a painful occurrence.
In March last, a poor little chimney-sweeper had the following
providential escape, at the Luke’s Head, Mercer-street, Long
Acre: —lt appears that the child had got into the chimney-pot


to clean it, and that his weight loosened the mortar by which it
had been secured; and the boy and the chimney-pot rolled down
the roof of the house together. Happily there was a sufficient
height of parapet to save the child, and he was taken up from
the gutter, without any harm having befallen him.
The most appalling feature connected with the subject of
chimney-sweeping is the frequency of the chimney-sweeper’s
cancer.
Immense pains are taken by the trade to conceal this grievous
fact. No chimney-sweeper has even seen a single instance of it.
The idea of such a calamity originates and ends in the clouded
imaginations of your Committee.
It may be well, however, to say, that four cases occurred in
one ward of one hospital within eight months of the past year,
and that three of the cases were fatal.
About this time another chimney-sweeper died of the same
disease at St. George’s Hospital. This was succeeded by the
death of Price, a chimney-sweeper, in Stafford’s-ward, at the
Middlesex Hospital.
A fresh case is now under the observation of one of your
Committee, which cancer has been upon the poor sufferer for
thirteen years. He was asked several questions, and particularly
whether he had been kept very dirty as a child. His answers
were as follow:—“ No children could be kept cleaner.” “ I
believe it to arise from drawing in the soot with the breath in
foul chimneys, for no cap will keep it out.” “ I have been in
great pain for years, but now it has quite mastered me.” “ The
surgeons talk of the cutting business.”
Another victim has also been seen this year by the same
person in a fifth hospital. This poor fellow has been afflicted
three years. Conversing with him on the unwillingness of the
trade to work the machine, it was said, “ I believe the secret
of the opposition arises from its being so much easier to sit
down and gossip w?th the servants while the child is doing the
work;” the poor fellow raised himself a little from his bed, and
exclaimed with great emphasis, “ You have just hit it, sir.”
Since these men were seen, another poor creature has been
visited at his own house by one of your Society. He is a man
of thirty years of age, and has had this affliction upon him for
five years, and it has made such ravages upon his frame, as
to prevent his ever obtaining an easy position for a single


moment, and he may be seen for hours in an afternoon, walking up
and down the miserable court in which he lives, in perfect agony.
He was urged to go into the hospital, and a ticket was offered
him, but the dread of the surgeon’s knife has hitherto deterred
him.
About the middle of April inst., a poor chimney-sweeper came
up twelve miles from town to the Middlesex Hospital. He had
suffered great pain for two years, and it was feared that the
disorder had too deep a hold upon him to be ever removed, even
if he had submitted to the awful operation. The matter was
fully explained to him. He was told that he might remain as
long as he pleased in the house; that the operation would not be
performed without his full consent; but the dread of what he
thought might possibly be done, induced him to leave all the
comforts by which he was surrounded, to die in all the wretched-
ness of abject poverty. Making ten instances of this frightful
disease that have come to the knowledge of one member of your
Committee in the year ending with the 30th April, notwithstand-
ing the incessant efforts of the trade to conceal them.
Sir Astley Cooper, in his evidence before the Committee of
the House of Lords, in 1834, declares—“ I believe the disease
is entirely the result of the specific irritation of the soot;” and
again, “ I must have seen, I think, more than 100 cases of it in
my experience. I have seen three or four cases in a year, and
having been thirty-four years surgeon to one of the hospitals, the
calculation is easy, and I think I am not exceeding the truth, in
saying, a hundred examples of it.” A very large proportion of
the comparatively few persons engaged in this wretched trade.
Would that those who are so much amused with the Society’s
efforts, and who smile with so much self-satisfaction at the
Society’s “ busy trifling,” could have gone the round of the
cases above selected.
It was, no doubt, highly amusing to see the poor creatures
lying on the bed of languishing. »
One was a young man of weak intellects, who had probably
been an easy prey to the vain promises held out to him in child-
hood, if he would be a chimney-sweeper. It was an awful
spectacle to see them motionless in their beds, as the frightful
disease was eating away their flesh, because a British public
cannot be induced to disturb themselves in a matter “ of such
trifling importance.”


Men say, “ Am I to be vexed and harassed, as though the
guilt of upholding the old system rested wholly upon me, because
1, individually, refuse to be a convert ? ” How are the following
words to be understood ?—“ If any man see his brother have
need, and shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him, how
dwelleth the love of God in him ?”
This sketch of the unavoidable misery connected with the
trade is calculated to awaken the attention of the public, and it is
hoped that it may call forth such contributions as are required to
do away the evil. If one surgeon, in one district, has had
100 of the cases under his care, what would the experience of
this city alone amount to ?
In asking for pecuniary aid, your Committee would be far from
pressing the subject upon those whose means are small; from
such they only ask, that the Society’s Agents may be employed
exclusively in their houses, for by this the cause of humanity will
be materially served, without any additional cost to themselves;
and they are earnestly entreated to recommend the same course
to their friends.
But an appeal of a very different kind is made to those who
have ample funds at their disposal, who are known to put aside
large sums every year for the purposes of Christian charity, but
who have never made this Society glad by their benevolence.
There is no eclat connected with this subject—but it is the
ministering to the very humblest class, who are visited in their
filthy wretchedness and obscurity, with a desire to free them from
sorrows which are unknown to any other class of the community.
Too much cannot be said of the liberality of this country, and
yet no effort is made to support an Association which labours to
free helpless infancy from broken-hearted sorrow, and to protect
mature age from a disease generally fatal.
The Society is literally dying for want of support; notwith-
standing the urgency of its claims, and the frequent appeals that
have been made to Hie public.


LIST OF CONTRIBUTIONS
TO THE SOCIETY.
Don. Subscrip.
£. s. d. £. s. d.
Ashley, Right Honourable
Lord (1837) 3 0 0
Allen, William, Esq. ... 110
Angerstein, Miss... .(1828) 10 0 0 3 0 0
Ditto (l 829) 10 0 0
Ditto (1830) 10 0 0
Ditto (1835) 30 0 0
Ashby, —, Esq (1835) 2 0 0
Bedford, Duke of. .(1829) 21 0 0
Bexley, Lord (1828) 5 0 0
Backhouse, John.., .(1835) 5 7 6
Baker, Rev. Mr 0 10 0
Bagster and Thoms,
Messrs (1828) 4 0 0
Barnes, —, E5q...., 110
Barrett, Jeremiah, Esq.... 110
Barrett, Richard, Esq 110
Batson, Robert, Esq 10 0
Bristol Association. .(1829) 5 0 0
Brixton and Stockwell
Association (1831) 2 2 0
Ditto (1833) 2 2 0
Ditto (1834) 2 2 0
Ditto (1835) 3 3 0
Budworlh, Rev. P 5 5 0
Burlingham, Mrs. ..(1835) 3 0 0
Ditto (1837) 2 0 0
Butt, Wm. Esq (1830) 2 0 0
Butlin, —, Esq (1835) 010 0
Butliu, Mrs (l 835) 010 0
Cambridge, C. O. Esq.
(1827) 200
Ditto (1828) 10 10 0
Ditto (1835) 5 0 0
Ditto (1836) 5 0 0
Capper, Jasper, Esq 110
Cator, John, Esq. ..(1828) 5 0 0
Ditto (1831) 2 0 0
Chippendale, J. Esq 110
Christian, H. C. Esq 0 10 0
Clapham Association (1829) 2 0 0
Ditto (1830) 2 0 0
Ditto (1832) 2 0 0
Ditto (1835) 3 0 0
Clarke, T. T. Esq. ..(1829) 10 10 0 1 1 0
Cockle,Richard, E5q.(1834) 1 1 0 1 1 0
Colfield, Rev. E. W. (1836) 010 0
Conquest, Dr 1 1 0
Cropper, J. and E...(1834) 5 0 0
Dennington,—,Esq.(lB3s) 0 10 0
Dewer, D.A. B Esq. (1829) 5 0 0
Dickenson, John, Esq.
(before 1832) 15 0 0
Domville, Wm. Esq. (1828) 5 0 0
Earl, Rev. J. H. ..(1832) 1 0 0
Evesham Association (1829) 210 0
Don. Smbserip.
£■ s. d. £. s. d.
Farmer,Thomas, Esq 110
Fisher, J. S (1835) 010 0
Foster, E. Esq 1 1 o
Francis, Charles, Esq, 110
Friends at Uxbridge (1820) 3 0 0
Gillett, G. Esq 110
Gillett, W. S. Esq. ...... 110
Gilpin, Rev. B (1833) 1 0 0
Goldsmid, J. L. Esq 110
Gurney, Samuel, Esq 2 2 0
Hamilton, Lady Anne
(1828) 500
Hackney Association (1829) 3 3 0
Ditto (1830) 3 3 0
Hancock, Rev. Win. (1828) 5 5 0
Harris, Mrs. Lydia 110
Heisch, P. J. Esq 110
Henderson, Rev. J. Raw-
lins (1830) 10 10 0
Hereford Association (1829) 5 0 0
Hiort, J. W. Esq. ..(1828) 10 0 0
Holland, Mrs (1830) 5 0 0
Ditto (1833) 5 0 0
Ditto (1834) 20 0 0 1 0 0
Horton, E. Esq (1830) 1 1 0
Howard, Robert, Esq 110
Howard, Mrs 110
Kent, Her Royal Highness
the Duchess 0f... .(1832) 20 0 0
Kenah, Col (1836) 1 1 0
Lyttelton, Lord 2 2 0
Labouchere, John, Esq.
(1830) 10 10 0
Legg, Hon. Henry 110
Lister, J. J. Esq 110
Lyon, James, Esq 110
Liverpool Association(lB3s) 5 0 0
Morpeth, L0rd..,.(1831) 10 10 0
Mayfield, —, Esq. ..(1834) 1 0 0
Marten, Frederick .. 10 0
Martin, John, Esq. M.P.
(1828) 500
Minchin, Samuel, Esq.
(1829) 10 10 0
Morland, Miss 110
Monro, Rev. R 0 10 0
Newport Association(lB3o) 5 0 0
P. A (before 1828) 10 0 0
John Parkinson, Esq 0 10 6
Mrs. John Parkinson .... 010 6
Pascal, Miss 010 0
Pentonville Association
(1834) 220
Preston, Miss ~....(1835) 5 0 0


Don. Subscrip.
£. s. d. £. s. d.
P. B (1834—35) 2 0 0
Phillips, Miss 1 1 0
Phipps, Mrs 2 2 0
Platt, Rev. George..(lB37) 1 0 0
Pownall, Henry, Esq 110
Quieter, Rev. Mr. (1835) 5 2 6
Ramsden, R. E5q...(1835) 1 0 0
Richardson, Thomas, Esq.
(1827) 5 0 0
R. H (1829) 10 0 0
Romilly, Rev. J 110
Romilly, Miss 110
Romilly, Miss Lucy 110
Sutherland, Duke of
(1834) 60 0 0
Surrey, Earl of 1 1 0
Scott, John, Esq. ..(1829) 10 10 0
Smith, R. Esq 110
Southampton Association
(1829) 312 6
Stacy, George, Esq 110
Steven, Robert, Esq. (1837) 10 10 0 1 I 0
Sutton, Lady (1836) 5 0 0
Tomkins, S. Esq 110
Tooke, W. Esq (1830) 100 0 0
Ditto (1836) 2 0 0
Ditto (1837) 2 0 0
Don. Subscrip.
£. s. d. £. s. d.
Tottenham Association
(1829) 8 0 0
Tritton, E. M. Executors
of (1834) 5 0 0
Westminster, Marquis of 110
Willoughby de Eresby,
Lord (1828) 5 0 0
Ditto (1829) 50 0 0
Ditto (1830) 40 « 0
Ditto (1831) 40 0 0
Ditto (1834) 20 0 0
Winchester, Lord Bishop
of (1830) 10 0 0 1 1 0
Wager, Tayler, Esq lit)
Wareham Associatn.(lB29) 2 0 0
Wedgewood, Miss ..(1828) 10 0 0
Ditto 10 0 0
Ditto (1829) 9 2 0
Ditto (1833) 5 5 0
Wedgewood, Josh. Esq.
- (1834) 10 10 0
Whieldon, Rev. E..(1830) 2 0 0
Wilde, Mrs 110
Wilde, E. A. Esq. ~(1828) 10 10 0
Wolferston, Mrs. ........ 110
Woods, S. Jun. Esq. (1837) 1 0 0
Young, G. A. Esq. ..(1834) 3 3 0
Young, Mrs. G. F...( 1834) 510 0 010 0
SOCIETY FOR SUPERSEDING CLIMBING BOYS.
CASH ACCOUNT.
May Ist, 1837.
Received. £. s. d.
Balance in favour of the Society,
May 1, 1836 71 16 4
Donations and Subscriptions since
received 102 18 0
One year’s Dividend on Mrs. Den-
yer’s Legacy 6 0 0
*
£lBO 14 4
Balance in favour of the Society.... 29 17 0
Paid. £. s. d.
Advertising, Circulars, Stationery,
Postages, Porterage, &c 26 2 5
Allowance to Agents 26 0 0
Machinery to ditto 32 15 0
For Printing last Report, &c....... 21 17 0
Collector’s Poundage 4 5 5
Expenses at the West-end of the
Town 18 17 6
Expenses attending the different
Experiments to prove the superior
efficiency of the Machine 21 0 0
Balance 29 17 0
£lBO 14 4


PROPOSED RULES FOR LOCAL ASSOCIATIONS,
I.
That an Association be now formed for the
and its vicinity, for Superseding the Use of Climbing Boys in Cleansing
Chimneys.
11.
That the Association be managed by a Committee of Ladies, assisted
by a few Gentlemen : and that all persons subscribing Five Shillings
and upwards, be members of the Association.
111.
That the first object of the Association be, to divide the
into Districts, and to circulate as much information on
the subject as possible, in such a mnnner as the Committee may deem
most expedient; and that Sub-Committees be formed, to carry the
measures better into effect.
IV.
That the Committee endeavour to obtain the consent and signatures
of Housekeepers to have Machines only used in cleansing their
Chimneys.
V.
That be appointed the Agent of the
Association, and supplied with the necessary Apparatus ; and that em-
ployment be sought for the boys, whose services may be no longer
required by their masters.
VI.
That application be made to the London Society, for purchasing
such Machines and other Apparatus as may be deemed requisite by the
Committee, and for any information on the subject.
VII.
That the Committee meet once a month, or oftener, if necessary, and
that Five Members be empowered to act. And that a General Meeting
of the Subscribers be held once annually, on a day to be fixed by the
Committee.


CHIMNEY SWEEPING DESCRIBED.
A number of flues concentrated, forms a stack of chimneys, as represented in the
engraving. Flues, at a distance from the stack, are conveyed to it either in a horizontal
or sloping form, as at A and G. The size of flues generally is nine inches by fourteen
inches; a space sufficiently large to convey the smoke, but not large enough to be
ascended, except by little children, for the purpose of cleansing them.
The plan adopted by the climbing-boy to ascend chimneys is, by pressing his feet,
back, and knees against the sides of the flue, by which means he propels or hitches
himself up by degrees, having one arm above his head, holding a brush, and the other
arm by his side, as described in B. At C the boy is represented as putting his brush
out of thy top of the chimney-pot, but generally he rattles it with his brush, to satisfy
the parties below that he has been to the top. This accomplished, he gradually slides
down, to the stove or grate.


It has frequently occurred, that boys have, either through fear or inattention, got into
the form of nose and knees together, as described at E; sometimes they remain in this
cramped and painful position for hours before they are liberated, being totally unable to
extricate themselves. . . ,
Climbing-boys are exposed to considerable danger m horizontal or angular Hues, as
at A. The reason is obvious; after passing through the chimney and descending to the
second angle from the fire place, the boy finds it completely filled up with soot,
which he has dislodged from the sides of the upright part. He endeavours to pass
by it, and after much struggling, he succeeds till stopped by his shoulders; but
the soot is compressed so hard all around him, by his exertions, that he cannot go
back • he then endeavours to move forward, but his attempts in this respect are often
useless for the covering of the horizontal part of the flue being stone, the sharp angle
of it bears hard on his shoulders, as at H, and prevents him from moving in the least
either one way or the other. His face being covered with a climbing-cap, and being
completely enclosed in the soot beneath, his breath is stopped. In this dreadful con-
dition he struggles violently to extricate himself, but his strength fails him, and in
a few minutes he is gone for ever.
Many instances have occurred of boys being thus suffocated in chimneys, or burnt, or
smothered in the rubbish, while attempting to core a chimney; others have been killed
by falling from the tops of chimneys. Such accidents have happened in London,
Edinburgh, Dublin, Waterford, Wakefield, Newport Isle of Wight, Hereford, Preston,
Dumfries, Dudley, Deal, Keighley, Clapham, and Belfast; and many other cases may
have occurred without having come to the knowledge of the public.
Some persons have an idea that a round brush will not
sweep a square flue, but in the annexed diagram, the
diameter of the brush B B is compared with the chimney
A, which clearly shows that the whalebone of which the
brush is composed, is forced into every part of the flue,
and being repeatedly thrust up and down, must sweep it
| effectually.
A bricklayer might here observe, “ Admitting you can
sweep chimneys with the machine, how would you
core them?” More effectually and with greater facility
than boys can possibly do it. Chimneys that are straight,
or nearly so, do not require coring, and the rubbish that
falls on the diagonal part of the flue, where the angles are obtuse, can easily be
dislodged by a stiff brush attached to the machine, and introduced into the top of the
chimney. At right angles, or when they are nearly so, an opening should he left six or
nine inches square at the angle: and when the chimneys are finished, the core can be
extracted in five minutes, which a boy would not be able to accomplish in several
hours or days. It has frequently occurred, that a boy could not succeed in clearing the
chimney of the core, and an opening has been made for that purpose at last. This plan
was adopted with success at Buckingham Palace, the London University, Post Office,
St. Martin’s-le-grand, and Fishmonger’s Hall. It is altogether unreasonable to employ
boys to core chimneys at the imminent danger of their lives, when it can be so easily
done as described, and at so much less expense.
A builder might remark, “ You have explained how you can core chimneys without
a climbing-boy, but how would you place a brick or stop a crevice in any part of a flue,
if required, without a climbing-hoy?” On the first appearance of smoke, I would
advise that a carpenter should remove the board that forms the plinth, and one or two
flooring boards, when the defect would at once be discovered. A bricklayer would
soon make it sound and secure ; the hoards and plinth might then be replaced, and all
would be safe, and no further annoyance experienced.
A good machine, in the hands of a person who well understands the use of it,
will not meet with one chimney in a thousand that it cannot effectually sweep.
Several persons of this description, who have served their time as chimney-sweepers,
are employed in the use of the machine, by the Agents of the Society for Super-
seding Climbing-boys.
N.B. The provisions of the late “Chimney-sweepers’ Regulation Act” were entirely against the
opinion and advice of the above Society, and the obnoxious clause, prohibiting chimney-sweepers from
calling in the streets, was inserted at the suggestion of the principal master chimney-sweepers themselves.
The Society will never be satisfied till the use of climbing-boys is done away with altogether, being «
cruel and unnecessary method.


PRICES OF MACHINERY,
Manufactured by Joseph Glass, No. 2, Moor-lane, Fore-street•
Cane Machines, with chimney
cloth complete :
40 feet in length £3 10 0
50 ditto ditto 4 0 0
60 ditto ditto 4 10 0
70 ditto ditto. 5 0 0
80 ditto ditto 5 10 0
Ash or Crab Machines,on the same
principles, with chimney cloth
complete:—
40 feet in length .... £2 5 0
50 ditto ditto 2 II 0
60 ditto ditto 2 17 0
70 ditto ditto .. 3 3 0
80 ditto ditto 3 8 0
If a Machine is required partly of Ash, and partly of Cane, the cost
will be in proportion to the number of joints of each used.
N.B. The screws of all the joints of Glass’s Machine are stamped
with his name, to distinguish them from spurious ones.
AGENTS OF THE SOCIETY.
Joseph Glass, 2, Moor-lane, Fore-street, Cripplegate.
Robert Day, 21, Newton-street, High Holborn.
Edward Raven, 64, Lant-street, Borough.
John Shepherd, 19, Kinnerton-street, Wilton-place, Knightsbridge.
The following form is recommended to those who may be disposed to
become Benefactors to this Society by Will :
“ Igive and bequeath unto A. B. and C. D. the sum of
“ to he raised and paid out of my Personal Estate and Effects upon trust , to the
f ‘‘ intent that they, or either of them , do pay the same to the Treasurer for the
u time being of a Benevolent Society, which is now called or commonly known by
“ the name of ‘ 2he Society for Superseding the necessity of Climbing Boys,’
** which sum I desire may be applied to the purposes of that Society .’
«r
Ten Guineas constitutes a perpetual, and one Guinea an Annual Member.
Subscriptions and Donations are received by the Treasurer, W. Tooke, Esq.,
39, Bedford-row; the Honorary Secretary; Messrs. Hoare, Fleet-street;
Messrs. Williams and Co., Birchin-lane; and by the Collector, Mr. h!
Clemson, No. 7, Grange-road, Bermondsey.
Macintosh, Printer, 20, Great New-street, London.




