

SOCIOLOGY OF ABORIGINAL TRIBES IN AUSTRALIA.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
Corres. Memb. Anthrop. Soc., Washington.
Introduction.
So little of a definite and accurate character has yet been pub-
lished on the sociology of the aboriginal tribes of Australia that I
have prepared the following short article dealing with this important
and interesting subject.
I shall commence with the sociology of the Kurnu tribe, which
is quite new to aboriginal literature. Some additional facts respect-
ing the sociology of the Kamilaroi and some Victorian tribes will
be used for purposes of comparison and reference. A fairly ex-
haustive account, within a small space, is given regarding the mar-
riage laws and succession of the totems in the Warramonga tribe
in Central Australia.
I was the first author to publish the divisions which I have de-
nominated “Blood” and “Shade” respectively in any Australian
tribe.* It has now fallen to my lot to be the first writer to report
that exogamy has no existence in any of the Australian tribes which
have been studied by me.
This article will revolutionize or completely dispel all the anti-
quated notions of previous writers regarding exogamy and sociology,
at least as far as the aboriginal tribes of Australia are concerned and
enable investigators to make a fresh start.
The information regarding the Warramonga tribes has been ob-
tained by me from several independent correspondents who have
resided in the country of the Warramonga for many years. All the
details respecting the Kumu, Kamilaroi and Victoria tribes have
been gathered by myself in the camps of the natives.
In studying the sociology of the aboriginal tribes of Australia
we are at once struck with the number of subdivisions of the people,
which intermarry one with the other in accordance with recognized
laws. The natives of some tracts of country are segregated into two
parts or phratries. In other localities there is a bisection of each
phratry, making four divisions of the tribe. Among the inhabi-
tants of other districts there are four subdivisions of each phratry.
giving a total of eight sections. But whether there are two, or four,
or eight partitions of the community, the fundamental principles
governing the intermarriages are the same in them all.
In tabulating the names of the subdivisions and trying to discover
some uniform order of succession amongst them, it is found that
* Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales. Vol. XXXVIII, pp. 209-215.


the women of any tribe can be classified into two distinct sets or
cycles, the members of a cycle reproducing each other continually
in an established order. It is immaterial whether there are two or
four or eight subdivisions, they are subject to the same law. If we
take an example from the Warramonga tribe, Table IV, infra, we
see that Nungulli is the daughter of Napun Kadi, who is the daugh-
ter of Narulla, who is the daughter of Nulcherri, who is the daugh-
ter of Nungulli, which is the name with which we commenced the
series. The order given in this series is absolutely invariable; any
other order of succession of these four sections of women is out of
the question.
But if we attempt to find any infallible law of succession among
the men, we are disappointed. For example, taking Chapulcherri.
the first name in the “Son” column of Table IV, although his mother
is always Nungulli, his father might belong to any one of four sec-
tions, depending upon whom his mother had married. Hence there
cannot possibly be any recurrent succession of the sections through
the men.
Although there are so many nominal divisions, called by various
names, they do not break the tribe up into small independent de-
tachments. On the contrary we discover that the individuals be-
longing to any cycle, phratry, section, or totem, do not collect into
certain localities by themselves, separate from the rest, but are dis-
persed indiscriminately throughout the whole Aribal territory in
such a manner that members of every section are found in all the
hunting grounds of the tribe. It is indeed possible for all the sec-
tions and totems in the community to be represented in the same
locality.
Notwithstanding the apparent complexity of the intermarriages
between the various sections, the matter is simpler than it looks. In
studying the marriage laws explained later on, the reader will be
able to deduce that the matrimonial alliances are really between
the grandchildren of a brother and the grandchildren of his sister,
whether in the Knrnu, Kamilaroi, Warramonga or Victorian tribes-
This relationship is not, however, so uniform or definite among the
natives as it is among Europeans, in consequence of the custom in
all Australian tribes, that a man looks upon his brother’s children in
practically the same light as his own, and a woman takes a similar
view of her sister’s children.
The extent of country occupied by the aboriginal tribes possess-
ing the three varieties of organization described in the following
pages comprises about two-thirds of the entire area of the main-
land of Australia. The Kurnu and Kamilaroi variety of sociology
consisting of four subdivisions of the community, extends over about
two-thirds of New South Wales, the greater part of Queensland, a
wide zone through the center of South Australia, and more than
half of Western Australia.
The organization represented by Table 111, where the tribe com-
prises only two divisions, covers the greater part of Victoria, about


one-third of New South Wales, and portions of Queensland. The
Warramonga variety, containing eight subdivisions, as-in Table IV.
is representative of the sociology of the tribes scattered over an im-
mense region in the Northern Territory, reaching northward from
Alice Springs to Katherine river, and extending westerly from the
Gregory river in Queensland, through the Northern Territory, as
far as the Ord and Fitzroy rivers in Western Australia.*
Sociology of the Kurnu Tribe.
The following is a short description of the sociology of the
Kurnuf natives, located on the Darling river, in New South Wales.
This tribe occupies both sides of the river from about Bourke down-
wards to Winbar station, and extending back both northwards and
southwards into the hinterland of the Darling for long distances.
Their country also reaches up the Warrego river as far as Ford’s
Bridge, a small village situated on that river.
The community is divided socially into two primary phratries or
moieties or groups, whichever of these names we choose to'employ for
purposes of distinction. These two divisions are named Mukkungur-
ra and Kilpungurra, with their feminine equivalents Mukkungurra-
ga and Kilpungurraga. The Mukkungurra phratry is again divided
into two sections called Murruri and Kubburi; and the Kilpungurra
phratry into two, called Ibburi and Ngumburi. In each'of these
four sections the names of the women are modified so as to distin-
guish them from those of the men. The following table exhibits
the masculine and feminine forms of each section name, what sec-
tions can intermarry, and the section name of the resulting offspring.
Table I.
Phratry. Husband. Wife Son. Daughter.
Mukkungurra Murruri Ibbundyerra Ibburi Ibbundyerra
Kilpungurra Kubburi Ngummundyerra Ngumburi Ngummundyerra
Ibburi Kubbundyerra Murruri Murrundyerra
Ngumburi Murrundyerra Kubburi Kubbundyerra
The above table gives the phratry, husband, wife, son and daugh-
ter on the same line across the page and requires no further explana-
tion.
Besides the partition of the community into' phratries and sec-
tions as just explained, there is a further subdivision of the people
into lesser groups, which bear the names of different animals, plants
or inanimate objects, to which the name of “totems” has been given
by anthropologists in America and Europe.
Again, each phratry, as well as the sections of which it is com-
posed, possesses a further distinctive division into Muggulu and
Ngipuru, meaning sluggish blood and swift blood respectively. These
segments may, for convenience of reference, be called “blood divi-
sions.”
* American Anthropologist, Vol. 2 N. S., pp. 185-187 and pp. 494-501, with map
showing geographic distribution of the Tribes.
f Language des Kurnu, etc.,” Bull. Soc. d’Anthrop. de Paris, Tome V, Serie V,
pp. 133-139.
For the Initiation Ceremonies of the Kurnu, see my article in Mitteil. d’Anthrop.
Geseilsch. in Wien, Bd. XXXIV, pp. 77-83.


There is still another repartition of the community, which can
be distinguished as “shade divisions.” These divisions are in reality
an extension of the “blood” castes, and regulate the camping or
resting of the people under the shades of large trees in the vicinity
of water or elsewhere. For example, when a few friendly families,
or a party of hunters, are resting under the shade of a tree, the peo-
ple who belong to the Muggulu “blood division” sit down in the
shadow thrown by the butt or lower portion of the tree. The Ngi-
puru people sit down to rest in the shadow cast by the higher
branches of the tree. The Ngipuru folk, who occupy the outer mar-
gin of the shade, are supposed to keep a strict watch for any game
which may appear in sight, the approach of enemies or friends, or
anything which may demand vigilance in a native camp.
The phratries and sections intermarry as follows: A man of
the Mukkungurra phratry and Murruri section marries a Kilpungur-
ra woman of the Ngummundyerra section. The children follow the
Kilpungurra phratry the same as their mother, but they do not bear
the name of her section. They are Ibburis and Ibbundyerras, being
the supplementary section of their mother’s phratry. (See Table.)
And the progeny, boys and girls alike, inherit the totem of their
female parent; thus, if the mother be a padamellin, so will the chil-
dren.
The castes or divisions of “blood” and “shade” must be taken into
account in arranging the betrothals and marriages, and also in trac-
ing the pedigree of the progeny. A man of the Muggulu “blood”
and the Butt “shade” marries a Ngipuru woman of the Branch
“shade.” In regard to the offspring, a Muggulu mother produces
Muggulu children, who take their mother’s Butt “shade.” A Ngi-
puru mother produces Ngipuru children belonging to the Branch
“shade.”
The castes of “blood” and “shade” are not necessarily coincident
With the other divisions. For example, a Ngipuru man or woman
may belong to either phratry or to any section; and a Muggulu
individual has the same scope.
As an evidence of the importance attached to the “blood” divi-
sions, they are brought into prominence at the scarring of the bodies
of the young men during the initiation ceremonies. A Muggulu
youth has his shoulders and chest marked with shorter scars, whilst
a Ngipuru youth has longer scars, to distinguish one from the other.
See my “Mumbirbirri or Scarring the Body.”*
The phratries, sections, totems, and the castes of blood and shade
above described, are used in tracing out the pedigree of the parties
to a matrimonial alliance. Upon this foundation, the actual mar-
riages are regulated by a system of betrothals, which are made after
a child is born, and not infrequently before that event. For ex-
ample, they wish to determine what woman will be the proper
wife for a boy A. The old men know who is the mother of A, whom
we shall designate B. From this they find C, the father of B, or A’s
* Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol. XXXVIII, p. 262 sq.


grandfather in the maternal line. Next they discuss who was a
sister of C, whom we shall designate D. Then, a daughter of one
of D’s daughters will be the correct wife for A.
In such cases, therefore, a brother’s daughter’s son mates with a
sister’s daughter’s daughter. This constitutes the normal or direct
rule of marriage; for example, a Murruri marries Ngummundyerra-
as in Table I. But if C’s daughter’s son be allotted a spouse who is
D’s son’s daughter, this is the union which may be distinguished as
indirect—that is, Murruri marries Murrundyerra. In the former
case Murruri marries a woman of the opposite phratry, but in the
latter case he takes a wife from his own phratry, which exhibits the
fallacy of all the old school theories respecting exogamy among Aus-
tralian tribes.
Another variation in the intermarriages of the sections allows
Murruri to wed an Ibbundyerra or a Kubbundyerra. Further de-
tails in regard to these marriages are passed over here, because thev
are explained in dealing with the Kamilaroi farther on. In both
the last mentioned instances, Murruri must be of a different lineage
to the Murruri of the preceding paragraph, but it is evident that he
also marries a woman of either phratry which is another proof of
the non-existence of exogamy. Furthermore, the above statements
disclose the fact that the men of the section Murruri, taken in the
aggregate can marry into any of the whole four sections of women
noted in Table I.
A page or two back it was stated that the children follow the
phratry and totem of the mother, but this does not constitute exoga-
my, because we have also shown that a Murruri, for example, can
marry into either phratry, and consequently into either group of
totems.
In making the betrothals already referred to, the old men en-
deavor, as far as the pedigrees will admit, to arrange that the broth-
ers and sisters of certain families, shall intermarry with the brothers
and sisters in certain neighboring families, whether in the same tribe
or in an adjoining one. This has the effect of binding the two inter-
marrying families together by ties of kinship, and thereby strength-
ening their claims to consideration in the tribal councils. It also
adds to their joint importance at the great gatherings which take
place for initiatory ceremonies, barter and other purposes.
Sociology of the Kamilaroi Tribes.*
The Kamilaroi territory may be approximately described as ex-
tending from Jerry’s Plains on the Hunter river, as far as Walgett
and Mungindi on the Barwon, taking in the greater parts of the
basins of Namoi and Gwydir rivers, New South Wales.
The community is divided into two phratries called Dhilbai and
Kuppathin, with their feminine equivalents Dhilgaigun and Kup-
* For my “Bora of the Kamilaroi Tribes,” see Proc. Roy. Soc., Victoria, Vol. X,
N. S., pp. 137-173.
For my ‘‘Language of the Kamilaroi, etc.,” see Journ. Anthrop. Inst., London,
Vol. XXXIII, pp. 259-283.


pathingun. Dhilbai is again divided into two sections called Murri
and Kubbi, and Kuppathin is similarly divided into Ippai and Kum-
bo. In each of these sections the names of the women are slightly
different from those of the men, as will appear from the following
synopsis:
Table 11.
Phratry. Husband. Wife.
Son.
Daughter.
Dhilbai Murri Butha
Kuppathin Kubbi Ippatha
Ippai Kubbitha
Kumbo Matha
Ippai Ippatha
Kumbo Butha
Murri Matha
Kubbi Kubbitha
All that has been said in preceding pages respecting the Kurnu
subdivisions into “shade” and “blood” castes, totems, descent, be-
trothals, etc., apply to the Kamilaroi and will not be repeated. Mur-
ri marries Butha, as in the table and she may therefore be called his
“tabular” wife; or he has the alternative of marrying" an Ippatha
maiden instead. Again, a man of the Kubbi section, whose “tabular”
spouse is Ippatha, can marry a Butha. That is, Murri and Kubbi
can exercise their choice over the same two sections of women in
the opposite phratry.
There is a further mutation in the matrimonial laws. Murri of a
certain lineage can marry a Matha or a Kubbitha, and Kubbi has
marital rights over the same two women. Put in other words, Murri
and Kubbi can marry into both the sections of their own phratry.
Examining these facts still farther, it becomes apparent that the men
of any and every given section, taken collectively, can marry into
the whole four sections of women set down in Table 11.
The foregoing statements prove beyond question that there can-
not be any exogamy in the Kamilaroi community. The same com-
plete absence of exogamy is found among the tribes known as the
Wiradjuri, Ngeumba, Wongaibon, Wailwan, Barkunjee and others
in New South Wales.
Sociology of Some Tribes in Victoria.*
If we assume an approximate line drawn on the map of the
State of Victoria from Geelong- via Castlemaine to Pyramid Hill;
thence via Lake Tyrrell to a point on the boundary between Vic-
toria and South Australia where the 35th parallel of latitude inter-
sects it; thence along that boundary southerly to the ocean; and
thence by the sea-coast easterly to the point of commencement at
Geelong. Here the people comprising all the tribes within the re-
gion thus described are divided into two phratries called respective-
ly Gamatch and Gurogitch, or mere dialectic variations of these
names. The rules of intermarriage and the descent of the offspring,
exhibiting the masculine and feminine forms of the names, can be
easily represented in tabular form. The descent of the phratries and
totems are in all cases through the women.
* See my “Aboriginal Languages of Victoria,” Journ. Roy. Soc., N. S. Wales, Vol.
XXXVI, pp. 70-106.


Table 111.
Phratry. Husband. Wife. Son. Daughter.
A Gamatch Gurogitchgurk Gamatch Gurogitchgurk
K Gurogitch Gamatchgurk Gurogitch Gamatchgurk
According to the table, the Gamatch and Gurogitch intermarry
one with the other, but this is subject to certain regulations. For
example, take a Gamatch man and his sister; then the man’s daugh-
ter’s child marries his sister’s daughter’s child. In this case, which
is the normal or “tabular” custom, a Gamatch marries a Gurogitch-
gurk. In some instances, however, according to pedigree, the man's
daughter’s child mates with his sister’s son’s child, which gives the
irregular custom of a Gamatch marrying a Gamatchgurk. It is need-
less to add that these facts altogether disprove the existence of exog-
amy among Victorian tribes.
For a full account of the highly interesting partitions and repar-
titions of the two phratries in these tribes, and also for a compre-
hensive description of their ceremonies of initiation, the reader
is referred to my “Ethnological Notes on the Aboriginal Tribes of
New South Wales and Victoria,” (Sydney, 1904) pp. 84-132. See
also my “Victorian Aborigines—Their Initiation Ceremonies, etc.,”
American Anthropologist, vol. xi (1898), pp. 325-343.
Sociology of the Warramonga Tribe;.
In June, 1898, I published a short account of the sociology of
the Warramonga tribe in the Northern Territory,*—a name given
to the northern and central portions of South Australia. The home
of this tribe is around the Tennant Creek telegraph station, reach-
ing south to Davenport Range and northward to Whittington Range
or thereabouts.
The community is divided into eight sections, each of which has
a distinguishing name for the males as well as for the females. Upon
tabulating these names we discover that eight sections of the
women can be classified genealogically into two separate sets, for
which we may adopt the name of Cycles, each of which consists of
four specific sections of women. Each cycle has perpetual succession
and remains intact by means of its women, as in the following table:
Table IV.
Cycle or Phratry. A
Wife. Husband. Son. Daugther.
Nungulli Chungari Chapulcherri Nulcherri
Nulcherri Takamara Chupulla Narulla
Narulla Taponunga Tapunkadi Napunkadi
Napunkadi Champacha Chungulli Nungulli
Namachilli Chungulli Champacha Nampacha
Nampacha T&punkadi Taponunga Naponunga
Naponunga Chupulla Takamara Nakamara
Nakamara Chapulcherri Chungari Namachilli
» Journ. Roy. Soc. N. S. Wales, Vol. XXXII, p. 73.


In studying the upper half of the table or Cycle A, we notice that
the women in the “Wife” and “Daughter” columns reproduce each
other in a certain rotation. For example, Nungulli has a daughter
Nulcherri; Nulcherri is the mother of Narulla; Narulla
Napunkadi; and Napunkadi has a daughter Nungulli, being the Sv. .-
tion name with which we started. This series is continually repeated
in the same order, no matter which name we commence with. If
we take the women in the lower half of the table, Cycle B, we ob-
tain a series which repeats itself forever in the same manner.
Taking the first name in the table we see that Chungari marries
Nungulli, Takamara weds Nulcherri, and so on for all the others.
These are the normal and most general alliances and may therefore
be distinguished as “tabular” marriages. In my article of 1898 al-
ready quoted I showed that Chungari had the “alternative” of mar-
rying a Narulla, and that Taponunga could marry a Nungulli—
that is, that these two men could reverse their wives, so to speak. I
also showed that Chupulla could take Namachilli as an alternative
wife and that Chungulli could espouse Naponunga in the same re-
verse order.
In 1901 when further reporting the Warramonga sociology, I
again drew attention to the “alternative” wives. At the same time
I reported that a man had the further prerogative of marrying into
a third section of women, which I denominated the “rare” rule of
marriage.* Shortly after writing the article published in 1901, I
gathered additional details from my correspondents residing in that
district, which prove that a man can espouse still another woman
from a fourth section, which I have denominated the “exceptional”
law. f Up to the present time, so far as I am aware, no other au-
thor has described either of the two last mentioned alliances —the
'‘rare” and “exceptional”—in any of the tribes of Central or North-
ern Australia.
Let us now submit a brief explanation of the inter-marriage of
the Cycles and Sections. Taking the first man in the “Husband”
column of Table IV we see that Chungari marries Nungulli as his
“tabular” spouse. He can instead take a Narullo as his “alterna-
tive” wife. Both these women belong to Cycle A. Taponunga
marries the same two women, but he takes Narulla as his “tabular”
or Nungalli as his “alternative” wife.
Again, Chungari, if of the proper lineage, could marry a Napo-
nunga as his “rare”' wife, or a Namachilli as his “exceptional”
spouse. These two women would be obtained from Cycle B. A
Taponunga man could marry the same women that Chungari could,
but he would take Namachilli as his “rare”
* Queensland Geographical Journal, 1901, Vol. XVt, pp. 70-75.
f American Anthropologist, Vol. 7, N. S., p. 304.
