

REPORT
on
SOCIAL EFFECTS of MUNICIPAL RATING
A STUDY CONDUCTED IN FOOTSCRAY
BY
THE LAND VALUES RESEARCH GROUP WITH THE
CO-OPERATION OF THE FOOTSCRAY CITY COUNCIL
PRICE
2/6


Land Values Research Group
For the collection, analysis and distribution of information upon the incidence and
effects of public charges imposed upon land tenures.
RESEARCH PANEL:
G. A. BAKER
8.C.E., A.M.I.E. (Aust.)
H. E. BARTLETT
A.
L. T. BROCK
Dip. Arch.
P. G. DANE
M.D., D.P.M.
F. DOOLAN
M.V.1.5., M.C.I.V.
G. A. FORSTER
B.
W. E. GOWER
Architect
F. HALKYARD
B.Sc., Dip. Ed.
FRANK HEATH
A. A.R.V.I'.A.
H. W. L. HUNT
B.
A. R. HUTCHINSON
B.Sc., A.M.I.E. (Aust.)
D. W. JOHNS
A.R.E.I.
E. K. MACKAY
A.R.I.n.A.
S. MERRIFIELD
L. M.V.I.S.
L. V. MITCHELL
A.
B. B. MORRISS
M.
L. M. PERROTT
F.R.1.8.A.
E. R. PITT
B. F.L.A.
r /o,
A>v<s>; SAN DOW
8.E., A.M.I.E. (Aust.)
A'. F. SPRATT
8.A., B.Sc., Dip.P.Admin.
L. E. STEVENS
B.Met.E., B.Ed.
W. H. TAYLOR
M.C.E., A.M.1.C.E., AiM.I.E. (Aust.)
F. J. WATSON
M.A., M.Sc.
H. S. WELLER
B. Oom., A.I.C.A.
Hon. Research Director:
A. R. HUTCHINSON, B.Sc., A.M.I.E. (Aust.)
32 Allison Avenue, Glen Iris, 5.E.6
WM 2772
Hon, Secretary:
L. F. BAWDEN
52 Guildford Road,
. Surrey Hills, E.lO
Hon, Treasurer:
G. A. FORSTER, Dip. Com.
8 Leura Street,
Surrey Hills, E.lO


Social Effects of Municipal Rating
THE RELATIVE MERITS OF RATING ON UNIMPROVED LAND VALUE OR ANNUAL
RENTAL VALUE
A Study Conducted in Footscray
by
The Land Values Research Group with the co-operation of the Footscray City Council
AIM:
To find what the economic effects would be of a change in the rating system from the annual
rental value basis to the unimproved capital value basis.
Study made during the period October, 1 )44, to August, 1945.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS:
In addition to general assistance and constructive criticism given by the members of the Research
Panel in the compilation of this Study, special acknowledgments are due to the following, whose
assistance in the field work and other specialised directions has made the Study possible: L. F. Bawden;
L. T. Brock, Dip. Arch; R. N. Collison; L. R. Forrester; G. A. Forster, B.Sc.; A. Halkyard; A. R. Hut-
chinson, B.Sc., A.M.I.E. (Aust.); K. McCarten; L. V. Mitchell, A.R.1.8.A.; M. Pincombe; E. R. Pitt,
8.A., F.L.S.; W. H. Taylor, M.C.E., A.M.1.C.E., A.M.I.E. (Aust.).
Special acknowledgments are also due to those public-spirited firms whose assistance in absorbing
the heavy cost of this publication has enabled it to be offered cheaply to the public.
Price 2/6
(Registered at the General Post Office, Melbourne, for transmission as a book)


INDEX to CONTENTS
PART I—THE FIELD STUDY
Section Page
1. General Information on Footscray 3
2. The need for a field study 3
3. The nature and extent of the field study . . 3
4. What the field study showed 3
part ll—how HOUSE RATES ARE AFFECTED
5. Errors in preliminary checks 4
6. A large area in the Kingsville ward 5
7. A large area in the Middle ward 5
8. The average house in every street in Footscray 5
9. Average Houses gain under site value rating 7
10. How to find the percentage reduction in rates 7
11. Decadent areas bonussed by Annual Value
Rating 7
12. Cost of Houses increased by Annual Value
Rating 9
13. The effect upon pioneer settlement 9
14. The effects upon the building and allied
industries 9
PART lII—HOW VACANT LAND IS AFFECTED
15. The extent of vacant lot holdings 11
16. Total vacant holdings and the rate increases
upon them . . . 11
17. The relative proportions of absentee and
resident holders of vacant land 13
18. The largest holdings of vacant land 13
19. Effect upon Sir William Angliss interests . . 13
20. Wembley Park Estate 13
PART IV—HOW SHOPPING CENTRES ARE AFFECTED
21. The distribution of the shopping centres . . 14
22. The scope of the shopping investigation .... 14
23. Most shops carry lower rates under site value
rating i, . .. 14
24. How individual shop sites fare 14
25. Increases in rates fall on the site owner and
not upon the tenant 14
26. The ability of Nicholson Street sites as com.
pared with other centres to carry rates .... 14
27. The relative volume of business between the
centres compared with their rate contribution 15
28. Effects upon the business centres of a change in
the distribution of rates on other properties 16
29. Rate increases in the main centre fall mainly
upon absentee site-owners 17
30. Agreements under which the tenants pay the
rates 18
31. How shop and house rents are affected by rates 19
32. The diametrically opposite effect of rates falling
upon (a) Improvements and (b) Sites . . . . 19
33. The aggregate rate burden upon improvements 19
PART V—HOW FACTORIES AND INDUSTRIES ARE
AFFECTED
34. Footscray as a manufacturing centre 20
35. The degree of economic development of the site 20
36. The scope of the factory investigation .... 20
37. Industrial Properties classified 20
(A) Highly improved properties
(B) Poorly improved properties
38. The effect of rates upon improvement of
holdings 21
39. Ability to pay examined 21
40. Annual value rates increase the cost of pro-
duction 21
41. Production of costs and plant extensions .... 22
42. Effects upon markets and industrial employ-
ment 23
43. Factory rates compared with the value of the
municipal services received by factories .. 23
44. High factory rates do not mean low house rates 23
45. The ten most improved industrial concerns . . 24
46. The ten least improved industrial concerns . . 25
47. Conclusions regarding rate incidence upon
factories 25
PART VI—MUNICIPAL FINANCE ANALYSIS
How Rate Payments Compare with the Value of
Services Received
48. The nature of rates and the scope of investi-
gation 26
49. The methods of comparison used 26
50. Sharing the Road Maintenance costs carried by
built and vacant lots 26
51. The other items of expenditure on services 28
52. The most suitable basis of payment 28
53. The overhead items of Council expenditure . . 28
54. Municipal revenue other than rates 29
55. The cost to the Council for all items compared
with rate receipts, per foot of frontage .... 29
56. Conclusions upon costs and rate payments . . 31
57. A final note on road maintenance costs .... 32
PART Vll—a balance sheet
58. An approximate distribution of rate gains and
losses 32


Social Effects of Municipal Rating.
A S tu dy made in Foostscray
PART 1.
1. GENERAL INFORMATION ON FOOTSCRAY.
Footscray is the largest of the mixed industrial and
residential municipalities, and the eighth in order of size
of the twenty-eight municipalities comprising Greater
Melbourne. Its area is 4,212 acres. The estimated popu-
lation for the municipal year 1944-45 was 60,000 and the
number of dwellings 13,073. There were 17,583 holdings
with a total of 15,137 ratepayers of whom 14,325 appeared
on the Voters’ Roll.
The district is among the closest to the centre of
Melbourne, being served by two railway routes with an
excellent service. There are 6 railway stations within
the municipality, Footscray itself (the nearest) being
only 3i miles from Flinders Street Station, and Tottenham
ham (the furthest) being 5J miles from that station, the
average being 4 l/3rd miles. It has no tramway com-
munication with the city, but has a self-contained tram-
way system of its own and is well served with bus routes.
The municipality contains a number of the largest
industrial concerns in Victoria and is predominantly a
working class area. In consequence, frontages are small
compared with the purely residential eastern suburbs,
although there are limited areas in the mansion class,
characterised by large frontages and more valuable resi-
dences. The predominating types of dwellings are
weatherboard with corrugated galvanised roofing, although
in the newer sections, brick and tiled roof construction
are more common.
The City is one of the oldest in the Melbourne area,
having been proclaimed in 1891. In some of the older
sections, decadence is in evidence and these tend to be
problem areas. On the other hand, the newer areas are
quite attractive.
The present rating system is that of Net Annual
Rental Value. The Net Annual Rental Value of the dis-
trict was £738,000 and the current rate 2/3 in the £,
giving a rate yield of £83,000.
2. THE NEED FOR A FIELD SURVEY.
Before any reliable comparison could be made of the
incidence of the respective rating systems upon various
classes of property, it became necessary to know the rate
ih the £ of unimproved land value which it would be
necessary to strike, in order to return the same revenue
to the Council as the Current Rate of 2/3 in the f on the net
annual value basis.
This demanded a knowledge of the total unimproved
value of rateable property within the district. It was
found that no such total was available to the Council, al-
though values per foot were closely recorded by the
Valuer.
Too much work would have been thrown upon the
Council officials in taking out the totals as well as supply-
ing the other data for this study. Nevertheless, as the
study was intended to provide reliable information for
the guidance of other bodies, it was necessary to know
this figure with reasonable accuracy rather than to rely
upon approximations based upon other districts. It be-
came necessary, therefore, that the members of the Land
Values Research Group undertake a field study, in co-
operation with the Council officials, to determine this
value.
Advantage was also taken of the opportunity afforded
by this field study to obtain other information not avail-
able from the Council records. The information upon
the relative proportions of rateable and non.rateable
frontages and the distribution of the rate-exempt pro-
perties in classes, as found during this study, will be
of more than passing interest to other municipalities.
3. THE NATURE AND EXTENT OF THE FIELD
STUDY.
In the course of the field study, every street having
buildings in the Municipality was measured and those
subdivided but unbuilt were scaled off the maps. The
primary object was to find how much of each street was
ratable and how much non-ratable. To the ratable lengths
found, the appropriate average land value per foot was
applied. This value was supplied by the Valuer. Where
values changed rapidly streets were treated in sections
Street values were then combined to approximate the total
unimproved land value for the district.
Non-Ratable Properties.
The non-ratable properties recorded at the same time
comprised churches, schools, municipal property, State and
Commonwealth Government properties, S.E.C. properties.
They also included, as the largest single item, the frontage
to one street lost at intersections of two streets, due to
the property being rated only on the frontage to one or
the other street. They also included the rear losses in
a few streets where the front is in one street and the
rear in the next.
Road Intersections.
An addition to these frontages which do not contri-
bute to rate revenue is the square of roadway at every
intersection of two streets. The cost of this portion is
spread over all ratepayers. These intersections were not
measured directly but their length was ascertained by
scaling from the map and by difference.
Vacant Lots,
The number and frontages of vacant lots were record-
ed with a view to studying whether the rate contribu-
tion of this class of property is proportionate to the ser-
vices received.
Factories and Shops.
The frontages or areas of factories were measured
and also those of all shops in the shopping centres which
had not already been supplied by the Valuer.
4. WHAT THE FIELD STUDY SHOWED.
(i) Total Unimproved Value of Footscray.
The total unimproved value for the Municipality, ob-
tained by summation of the values for ratable properties
in all streets, was found to be £4,087,000. This is re-
garded as a minimum figure, as the average values used
per foot in streets or sections do not take account of
corner sites or other factors that make portions of streets
more valuable than others.
An approximate distribution of this total among the
various wards is given in Table No. 1 of the Appendix.
(ii) Equivalent Rate in the £ of Unimproved Value.
The current nett annual value rate of 2/3 in the £
upon the annual value of £738,000 yields a rate revenue
of £83,000. This amount, less the amount contributed
by certain special ratable properties which the local
Government Act specifies, must be rated on the annual
value basis, would have to be raised by the equivalent
rate on the unimproved value basis.
The special properties in the Footscray District are
the Gasworks and mains and the Tramways Board pro-
perties. The works and mains of the former property
have an annual value of £6,634 and the latter £448, giving
a total of £7,082 from which the rate yield is £790. The
total amount to be raised by a rate on the unimproved
value basis is, therefore, approximately £82,200.


Non-ratable
Ratable
Ratable but Vacant
WARD
Frontage
Frontage
(% of ratable)
(ft.)
(ft.)
(ft.)
length
NORTH
63,800
117,000
6.600
5.6
MIDDLE
47,400
93,600
6,600
7.1
SOUTH
51,300
153,000
20,500
13.4
NORTH WEST .
60,700
155,700
36,100
23.3
KINGSVILLE . .
. 78,500
290,500
152,700
53.1
TOTAL . . . .
. 301,700
809,800
222,500
27.5
The equivalent rate to return this amount is 4.83 d. in
the £of unimproved land value. As the total unimproved
value used is the minimum, it is considered that more
exact valuation, taking account of corner sites and other
factors, would reduce the equivalent rate at least to 4|d.
in the f, which convenient figure has been used in any
computations of rates in this study.
With this rate determined, a ready check can be
made as to whether a particular property would gain or
lose in rates by a change to the unimproved value basis.
With this rate the average annual rental value of the land
and the improvement upon it is 3.50 times the annual value
of the land in its unimproved condition. Any properties im-
proved to higher than this proportion will be found to
gain under the unimproved value rating, while those
improved to less than this average figure for the district
would lose under the change. The annual value unim-
proved is taken as 5% of the unimproved value.
Although the current rate in the £ on nett annual
value is 2/3, this will need a little modification to ensure
accurate comparison between the systems. This figure
is applied to the values at the last general valuation in
1937, and modified by supplementary valuations on pro-
perties which have been built, altered, or changed hands
since. The land values used are those of 1942. If a
general re-valuation were made at 1942 levels the annual
value of the district would be somewhat increased and
the rate in the £ of annual value needed to return the
same revenue as at present, would be lower. The possible
reduction would be at least Id. and probably 2d. We will
assume the latter figure which is less favorable to the
unimproved value system in comparisons.
This modified rate of 2/1 in the £ of annual value
means that, for greatest accuracy, the dividing line be-
tween loss and gain is 3.7 instead of 3.5. In many of the
graphs the line is shown at the latter figure. The
difference is not great enough to warrant redrawing them
but should be borne in mind.
(iii) Ratable and Non-Ratable Frontages.
The relative proportions of ratable and non-ratable
frontages to roads, as ascertained from the field study,
are as given below;
These figures for wards are not quite accurate as some
streets, which traverse two wards, have been included in
one or the other and not part to each.
The non-ratable frontages in the list above do not
include the squares of roadway at each intersection of
two streets. These have a total of an additional 168,000
feet frontage, which has not been split over the wards.
There are, finally, a total of 810,000 feet of ratable
1 1 outage to roads and 470,000 feet of non-ratable frontage.
Thus, the road frontage which does not contribute to its
own upkeep and of which the cost must be spread over
the ratable length, amounts to 58% of the ratable length.
(iv.) How Non-ratable Frontages are Distributed.
A table showing the approximate distribution of the
non-ratable frontages over various classes of property is
contained in the appendix, Table No. 2.
(v.) The Proportion of Vacant Land.
The proportion of the ratable frontages which is un-
built is very high. A high proportion would be expected
in the Kingsville ward which is the newest, and is de-
veloping. The North, South and Middle wards, however,
are very old and should have no undeveloped land. To
many people the extent of vacant land will be most sur-
prising, for we have been told by many people that there
is little vacant land in Footscray.
The high proportion of vacant land is particularly
important because such land has been found to contri-
bute to Council revenue only from a quarter to one-twenty-
fifth of the amount the same land would be called upon
tc pay if houses were built upon it.
This disparity in rates between built and unbuilt land
is important. The light rates upon unbuilt land neces-
sarily involve heavier rates upon built land. It becomes
very important, therefore, to consider whether the dif-
ferences in cost of the services given to each of these
two classes of property justifies the difference in the
scale of rates. This is treated in a separate section.
(vi.) Method of Measurement and Probable Error.
The method of measurement adopted in the field
study was a combination of scaling from the survey maps
and pacing. There is, therefore, a margin of probable
error which is comparatively small. An approximation to
this error is given by comparing with the known length
of all roads in Footscray, the totals found from the field
survey. The total length of all roads is known to be 122
miles. The total mileage of the non-ratable and ratable
frontages found from the field survey was 124 miles.
This puts the probable error as about 2 per cent. In the
cases of shops other than in Nicholson Street, the pos-
sible errors would be from 1 to 1J feet in the normal
frontage. This would be a probable error of 10%. For
this reason, in dealing with shopping properties, those
whose improved to unimproved ratios lie between the
limits 3.4 and 4.0 have been regarded as substantially
unaffected in their rates under either system. In Nichol-
son Street the probable error would not exceed 5%.
part ll—how houses are affected.
5. ERRORS IN PRELIMINARY CHECKS.
Great importance has been given in this inquiry to
the study of the relative rates upon houses under the
two systems. This has been necessary because houses
form more than 90% of all buildings in the district and
the effects upon them will probably over-ride all other
considerations.
For this special study upon housing, two areas were
chosen by the Sub-Finance Committee of the Footscray
Council. One of these areas was in the Kingsville Ward
and the other in the Middle Ward. Both areas were in
the more closely built portions of their districts, the
Middle Ward area containing no vacant lots.
These areas were both presented to the Group as
areas in which preliminary checks had indicated that
houses would pay more were a change made to the land
value rating basis. They were thus regarded as problem
areas.
It was found as a result of the special study that the
preliminary impression that houses would pay more in
these areas was groundless. In fact, it proved that
houses in both of these areas would make considerable
rate savings by a change to land value rating.
The reason for results turning out so differently from
what had been expected was that two important errors
had been made in the assumptions used in the original
approximations. The Annual Values which had been
used were those established at the last general valuation
which had been made in 1937, while the unimproved land
values used were those of 1942, which showed a very
considerable appreciation in the, interval. It was found
that the Annual Values had to be Increased generally by
15% to bring them into line with the 1942 figures and
even more in limited areas.
The second error lay in the estimate of the rate in
the £ of unimproved land value required to return the
same revenue as 2/3 in the £of annual value. This had
been assumed to be 6d. in the £ in the absence of any
definite figure as to the total unimproved value of the
district. The field study showed the appropriate rate
required to be 4 id. in the £.


Name of Street
No, of Built .Properties Which
4->
C r-H . 3J
<-H I- 1 O CC S 1—1 Q
4) . <U >
•S • O c g • +5 «-2
J b bi£ ? « Q
Av. Extent
lof Gain %
Av. Extent
of Loss %
Williamstown (east)
57
18
10
85
7
18
15
Chirnside (east) . .
70
5
4
79
4
25
10
Chirnside (west) . .
62
2
13
77
3
25
10
Coronation (east) .
54
2
2
58
8
35
30
Coronation (west .
56
—
1
57
-
35
—
Empress (east) . . .
71
—
1
72
2
24
—
Empress (west) . .
65
1
1
67
5
30
10
Qneensville (east) .
86
—
—
86
2
30
—
Queensville (west) .
78
1
3
82
4
26
10
Wales (east ....
53
2
1
56
5
30
24
Somerville (north) .
24
—
1
25
- -
17
—
Geelong Rd. (south)
36
—
1
37
5
20
—
Totals ....
712
31
38
781
45
—
—
Numbei
Street
Gain by 0
Change H>
o
Lose by §
Change m
in
Total
o’
Average “
Extent
of Gain
per Cent.
Average
Extent
of Loss
per Cent.
Gamon (West Side)
16
6
22
15
10
Station (South Side)
20
-
20
25
■—-
Tennyson (North Side)
19
-
19
15
•—
Tennyson (South Side)
17
-
17
15
—
Seddon (North Side)
17
-
17
10
—
Seddon (South Side)
11
-
17
18
—
Browning (North Side)
15
-
15
15
—
Hamilton (East Side)
20
-
20
14
—
Totals
141
6
147
—
—
Either of these two factors, singly, was sufficient to
completely change the nature of the incidence. The two,
working together, completely reversed the position.
In the study on these two areas every property has
been investigated and its annual value graphed on the
sheets forming the appendix to this study. No arbitrary
assumptions have been used in proving the incidence to
be as found. In the case of the area in the Kingsville
Ward, not even the 15% increase in Annual Values has
been applied but the ratable (1937) values for land and
improved properties have been used directly from the
ratebooks.
6. A LARGE AREA IN THE KINGSVILLE WARD.
Bounded by Somerville Rd., Williamstown Rd., Geelong Rd.,
and Wales Street.
This area is the oldest in the Kingsville Ward. The
houses are of very ordinary quality, being weatherboard
with galvanised iron roofs contrasting with the tiled roofs
of more recently settled sections of this Ward. In this
block there are 781 houses and shops. In the rest of the
Kingsville Ward put together there are only about 950
houses. It is evident, therefore, that the area studied is
very considerable. The streets in this area have been
laid out on a 33 feet frontage sub-division, which enables
direct comparisons of the rated values between proper-
ties to be used more safely than where frontages varied
greatly. There are, however, some variations in the
frontages, particularly in the few shops on Somerville Rd.
The results of the study in this area are summarised
below and the details for each property are given on
Graphs J to K in the Appendix.
Houses Would Gain Under Land Value Rating,
Of the 781 built properties in this section, no less
than 91 per cent, would gain a substantial reduction in
their rates by a change to land vaiue rating. This reduc-
tion would be of the order of 25 per cent. In 5 per cent,
of built properties, the rates would be substantially the
same under either rating system, while in only 4 per cent,
of the properties would there be a loss by the change.
On the other hand the 45 vacant lots among these
houses would pay approximately 3| times as much as
the nominal rates they now pay. It is evident that these
vacant lots are at present being bonussed in low rates
at the expense of the owners of built properties in this
area.
It should be noted that the figures above are based
upon the proportions of improved to unimproved value,
appropriate to the reduced net annual value rate of 2/1
in the £1 referred to in section 4 (ii) of this study. Had
the current rate of 2/3 in the £ been used the proportion
gaining under the unimproved value system would have
been even greater. On this basis, 723 would gain, 17
would lose and 41 would have rates substantially the
same.
Aggregate Saving for Area.
The total net annual value of this area, in 1942
values, amounted to £34,000 which, at the rate of 2/1 in
the f, would yield a revenue to the council of £3,550.
Of this amount, houses would contribute £3,510, and the
45 vacant lots only £4O between them.
The total unimproved value of this area amounted
to £147,000 which, at 4|d. in the £, would yield a rate
revenue of £2,900 for the section. Of this amount houses
would contribute £2,750 and the 45 vacant lots £l5O.
Thus, the net result in this area, if a change were
made, would be to reduce rates on the houses by £760
and increase the rates on vacant lots by £llO. The aver-
age saving over the houses would be 19/2, while the
vacant lots would contribute the same amount as if they
were built upon.
As this area comprises the streets in which land is
dearest and houses least valuable in this ward, it will
be evident that there will be hardly a house upon a normal
block of land in the rest of the Kingsville Ward, which
would not gain reduced rates under the site value rating
system. This is confirmed by the study made for each
street as described later.
7. A LARGE AREA IN THE MIDDLE WARD.
Bounded by Gamon, Station, Hamilton and Browning-
Streets.
This area contains 147 houses of average good quality
for the Ward. It is fully built upon and contains no vacant
lots. The summarised results of the study in this area ai’e
given in the table below.
Of th 3 147 Houses in this area, no fewer than 141
would gain appreciably by a change to the land value
rating basis. Thus approximately 97% of the houses in this
area gain by rate reductions of the order of 15%.
Aggregate Saving for Area.
The total net annual value of this area, at 1942,
amounted to £6,1-50, which, at 2/1 in the £, would yield
a rate return of £640. On the unimproved land value of
£27,450, the rate yield at 4|d. in the £ would be £545, and
the total saving in rates between these 147 houses would
be £95, this being an average extent of gain overall of
15%, Among the 141 houses gaining, the average saving
would be 13/6 per house.
Had the current rate of 2/3 in the £ of annual value
I een used, the saving would be even more substantial under
the land value rating system.
8. THE AVERAGE HOUSE IN EACH STREET IN
FOOTSCRAY.
A further exhaustive study was extended to each
street in Footscray, to ascertain how the house of average
frontage and average value for that street, would fare by
a change of the rating system.
This study involved finding the average frontages for
ea~h street. These were established from the field survey
by dividing the ratable length (less vacant frontages) by
the number of houses in the street, as a general practice.
In some streets, particularly those largely vacant, the
total ratable front was divided by the number of lots. In
Note. —Where the rated value was within 2 points of the
average line on the graph, whether above or below,
the rates have been treated as the same under either
system.


GRAPH A.


others, again, as where the streets had smaller shopping
sections mixed with residential, actual measurements were
made of a considerable number of properties.
The average annual rental values of houses in each
street were found from the Municipal Voters’ Rolls. An
average of 20 houses in each street was taken, where pos-
sible, and where less than that number exist in a street,
the averages of all in the street. The houses averaged
comprised the first 20 appearing in the Voters’ Roll
for the street considered. This rigid rule was followed
to prevent any personal element of selection influencing
the houses averaged.
To the average frontages, as ascertained, the average
unimproved values per foot were applied to get the average
unimproved value per dwelling site. One twentieth of this
amount (5%) forms the annual rental value of the site
alone.
By dividing this figure into the average rental value
of the houses, the result gives the number of times over
by which, under the annual value rating, the rates upon a
site with a house upon it are multiplied, as compared with
the rates on the same site if it had remained vacant.
These results have been plotted in a series of graphs
covering each ward in turn, and showing the extent to
which the land owner who builds upon his site is penalised
by the rating system for doing so. (See Graphs A to D.)
These graphs also show the comparative level on which
rates would rest with a change to land value rating. This
is indicated by the horizontal line at 3.50 shown on each
graph. A property having only the average degree of
improvement of the district as a whole would have an
annual value agreeing with this line. Its rates would be the
same under either system of rating. All streets in which
the value shown is above this line (so far as housing
properties are concerned) would gain under unimproved
value rating. The extent of the gain is in direct propor-
tion to the amount above the average line.
Similarly, properties improved to less than the aver-
age extent will have their rates increased up to the 3.5
line. The least improved of all is vacant land. The lower
line at 1.0 shows the present level at which such land is
rated.
On the graphs for the Kingsville, South and North-
west wards, a separate column is shown giving the per-
centage of the total ratable length which is still held
vacant in each street. It will be seen that practically all
streets have some vacant land, even in the longest settled
streets. In some streets the proportions still vacant are
very high. It is at the expense of such land that the
heavy reductions in rates on houses become possible.
9. AVERAGE HOUSES WOULD GAIN UNDER SITE
VALUE RATING.
Reference to the four graphs covering the wards shows
that out of 102 streets with houses in the whole of Foot-
scray, only in 8 streets (all of them in the North Ward)
does the average house have a rental value which brings it
below the 3.5 line.
The value of 3.5 corresponds to the present rate of
2/3 in the £, and has been used on the graphs. However,
as it has been pointed out that a re-valuation would enable
a rate of 2/1 to be used instead by the Council on the nett
annual value basis, the figure 3.7 appropriate to this gives
a more accurate idea of the general incidence.
With this modification, there are only 11 streets in
the North Ward, 3 in the South Ward, 12 in the Middle
Ward. 1 in the North-west Ward, and none at all in the
Kingsville Ward, in which the average house has a value
even slightly below the dividing line between loss and gain.
In the case of the 17 streets with values between 3.5
and 3.7, the difference is so small that it may be taken
that, for the average house in these streets, there is little
change in rates between the systems.
It is only in the eastern end of Geelong Road, Ballarat
Road, Leeds Street, Paisley Street, the northern end of
Nicholson Street, Irving Street, and Pickett Street, that
appreciable increases would be felt by average residential
properties. In the other 375 streets, average residential
properties would gain by a change to the land value rating
basis. In the great majority of these streets the gain would
be very considerable.
Even in the streets mentioned above there are consid-
erable sections which would gain under land value rating.
For instance, frontages are smaller and land values lower
on the south side of Geelong Road than on the north side.
The mansions on that side with larger frontages will in
general have the increased rates while the properties on the
south side gain reduced rates.
In Nicholson Street the position is similar, frontages
on the west side being generally less than on the east
side In Ballarat Road, which is a very long street, it is
the eastern end in which rates are increased due to the
larger frontages of the mansions in that section. Further
along this street, houses generally gain reduced rates.
It is significant to note that the streets listed above in
which rate increase would commonly attend a change
to land value rating, are those in which the wealthier
sections of the Footscray population reside, and which,
presumably, have the greatest “ability to pay.”
10. HOW TO FIND THE PERCENTAGE REDUCTION
IN RATES FROM THE GRAPHS.
The percentage reduction in the rates on the average
house in the street can be readily found from the graphs.
It is simply the amount above the dividing horizontal line,
divided by the total length of the line, and multiplied by
100 to bring it to a percentage figure.
Thus, in the Kingsville Ward, The Avenue is the
street where houses are most penalised by annual value
rating. They pay twenty-five times as much as the site
would pay if it remained vacant. The percentage reduction
in rates on houses in tfi’« street would be:
25 - 3.7
x 100 equals almost 90%.
25
Thus, the rates on houses in this street under land value
rating would be only one-tenth of what they are at present.
On the other hand, over half the ratable length of this
street is held in vacant lots, and upon these the rates
would be increased to 3is times what they now pay. At
present the owners of the vacant lots are being bonussed
by the rating system at the expense of house owners in
the same streets.
11. DECADENT AREAS BONUSSED BY ANNUAL
VALUE RATING.
Footscray is an old City, and contains many portions
in a blighted or decadent condition. The South Ward par-
ticularly contains areas in this class. That the annual value
rating system acts in such a way as to make this condi-
tion worse will be evident by further reference to the
graph D of residential properties in the streets in the
South Ward, and also to Plate 7 showing the problem area.
The first dozen streets will illustrate the tendency.
These streets contain a very high proportion of their
ratable length in vacant lots. These lots are very unsightly
and, combined with the high proportion of old dilapidated
dwellings, make the sections very unattractive to prospec-
tive home builders.
The result has been that land values in these sections
are lower than elsewhere in the South Ward, simply because
the area has such an air of decadence that no one wants to
live there from choice. Land values in these decadent areas
are, in some streets, as low as £2/10/0 per foot, compared
with £4 and £5 per foot commonly in other parts of the
Ward.
Yet it will be seen from the graph that houses in these
problem areas are penalised by the annual value rating
system to a greater extent than those in other areas. On
the other hand, the owners of the vacant lots which are the
primary cause of the decadence are given a bonus in low
rates at the expense of the house owners in these streets.


GRAPH B.


Rating System
Coronation
Street
Maryston
Street
The
Avenue
St.
Leonard's
Avenue
Annual Value Rating
Annual Value
£43
£46
£33
£50
Rate payable
£4/10/0
£4/16/0
£3/8/0
£5/4/0
Unimproved Value Rating
Unimproved Value . . . .
£132
£168
£32
£126
Rate payable
£2/12/0
£3/6/0
£0/13/0
£2/10/0
Difference in Annual
Charge
£1/13/0
£1/10/0
£2/15/0
£2/14/0
Increased capital cost of
house on annual value
system over unimproved
value svstem
£38
£30
£55
£54
It should be noted that the great gain in reduced rates
on houses in these areas, under site value rating, is purely
due to the depressed value of land, and not to the good
quality of the dwellings. This is shown by the low rental
values set on the dwellings. The few houses of good type,
as commonly found in other streets, are penalised to a
much higher extent than the average under the present
rating.
Site value rating, however, by offering no discourage-
ment to the improvement of the vacant or dilapidated
properties, would work towards improvement of the area.
Even more strongly operative would be the increase of
rates on the vacant lots by 3« times, which would tend
to make uneconomic the holding of such lots in the vacant
condition.
12. COST OF HOUSES INCREASED BY ANNUAL
VALUE RATING.
One important fact emerging from this study is that
the annual value rating system substantially increases the
cost of new houses. Moreover, the extent of the increase is
greater the further the house from the main body of
settlement.
It does this through the heavy rate charge annually
on the new dwelling, which is equivalent to a capital levy
on the property. It is not sufficiently realised that in many
respects annual charges and capital charges are inter-
changable. The imposition of an annual charge of a given
amount upon a house has a similar effect on the house
purchaser to increasing the price of his house by 20 times
the amount of the annual charge (assuming 5% interest
rate).
The extent of this added cost of houses will be seen by
considering the rates payable on average houses in a
number of streets in the Kingsville Ward, the particulars
being obtained from Graph A. Four streets are taken and
the full computations worked out so that the method can
be applied to other streets as desired.
The annual rental value is obtainable from column 3
of the graph, and to this figure the rate of 2/1 in the £
should be applied to get the rate payable under annual
value rating.
Multiplying the figure given in column 2 of the graph,
for annual value of the vacant site, by 20, gives the un-
improved land value of the site. To this figure the rate of
4ld. in the £ should be applied to get the rate payable
under land value rating.
The additional cost of housing is greater the further
from the main body of settlement. As the house becomes
older, or the land value round it rises with continued ex-
pansion of settlement, the difference tends to close up.
However, the fact that the annual value rating in-
creases the cost of housing at the outset, when all other
charges on the property are high, must be regarded as a
very serious disadvantage under existing conditions of
house purchase. It is at this stage that the home pur-
chaser has least equity in the property and the effect of
the rating system is to make it more difficult for him to
acquire such an equity.
It might be noted also, that home purchase is com-
monly embarked upon at an early age Defore earning
power has reached its peak. Annual value rating, there-
fore, tends to impose high rates initially on houses at a
time when the owner can least afford to pay them, and to
give reduced rates as the property deteriorates when
the capacity to pay is greatest.
13. EFFECT UPON PIONEER SETTLEMENT.
Particular attention has been given to the effect of the
rating system on pioneer settlers. Those who are willing
to accept the disadvantages of lack of municipal services
in roads, lighting, garbage and sometimes sanitary facili-
ties, entailed in building homes beyond the main settle-
ment, are deserving of perhaps more consideration than
those within the settled area.
It will generally be conceded that whatever system
gives lower rates to this class of house-owner is the better,
so far as the pioneering aspect is concerned.
Upon this item, the evidence is overwhelming that
the present rating imposes extremely severe burdens upon
these pioneer settlers. Reference to the street graph A
of the Kingsville Ward, shows that all streets beyond
the asterisk are those in such pioneer areas. These streets
are predominantly vacant land with a few isolated houses.
Most of the streets are unmade. It will be seen that the
houses in these streets, under annual rating, are called
upon to pay from 12 to 25 times as much in rates as the
sites would pay had they remained vacant. It has already
been pointed out how the cost of buildings in these streets
is increased.
Site value rating would reduce the rates on houses in
these streets to between one-tenth and one-third of the
present rates.
Nor would the increasing of the rates on vacant land
under site value rating act as a bar to holding of land by
these pioneer settlers. Houseow ners in these streets would
actually be far better able to take up and hold additional
lots than they are at present.
Two examples from different areas will make this
clear. The streets concerned are in the Spotswood and
Tottenham sectors respectively.
The Indwe
Avenue Street
Annual Value of Average House .. £33 £29
Unimproved value of site £32 £3O
Rates on House (An. Value Basis) .. £3 8 0 £3 0 0
Rates on House (Unim. Value Basis) £0 12 6 £0 12 0
Rate Saving Unimpd. Value Basis . . £2 15 6 £2 8 0
Rates on Vacant Lots (U.V. Basis) . £0 12 6 £0 12 0
Rates on Vacant Lots (N.A.V. Basis) £0 3 6 £0 3 3
Saving on house rates wmuld cover
payments on vacant lots to number . . 4 i 4
Thus, on their rates saving on the house, these pioneer
residents would be able to take up and hold a further 4
vacant lots without any more rate payment than at present.
Under these conditions there is unlikely to be any discour-
agement to the owning of land in these areas.
This result, in favoring the resident land owner, may
be considered preferable to the present system which favors
the absentee speculator. Land in these outer sections is
largely owned by such absentee speculators, who, under
unimproved value rating, would have no house-rate-reduc-
tion to offset the increases on their vacant holdings. Un-
ouestionably, the resident pioneer is of more value to the
district than the absentee speculator, and this feature of
the change will be viewed with satisfaction.
14. THE EFFECTS UPON THE BUILDING AND
ALLIED INDUSTRIES.
The building construction and allied industries are
seen to be burdened by annual value rating in a number
of ways, which all work cumulatively to the detriment of
these industries and those employed by them.
First is the direct burden of the rate incidence. Of
the total £83,000 rate-revenue, under annual value rating,
no less than £60,500 falls upon the buildings, and only
£22,500 upon the sites. Under site value rating, no part
of the rates falls upon buildings, the whole of the rates
being carried by sites. As compared with site value rating,
therefore, the building industries are penalised by annual
value rating to the extent of £60,500 for this City.


GRAPH C.


Ward
Holdings of Vacant Land Only,
Number of Annual Value
Holders of Holdings
Unimproved
Value
North . . ..
25
£538
£10,760
Middle . . .
22
£384
£7,680
South .. ..
61
£687
£13,740
North-west
226
£2,364
£47,280
Kingsville
336
£8,190
£163,800
Totals . . . ,
670
£12,163
£243,260
Ward
Number of
Holders
Annual Value
of Holdings
Unimproved
Value
North
50
£635
£12,700
Middle
36
£418
£8,360
South
86
£580
£11,600
North-west . .
95
£1,009
£20,180
Kingsville
143
£1,045
£20,900
Totals
410
£3,687
£73,740
This direct burden falls mainly upon the industries
concerned in maintenance and renovation of existing im-
provements. Apart from discouraging the making of re-
pairs and alterations, on account of prospective rate
increases, the heavy rate incidence upon the buildings im-
pairs the owners’ financial capacity to make the improve-
ments.
There is a further direct burden upon construction of
new buildings under annual value rating as compared with
site value rating, due to the increased cost of houses and
other buildings under the former.
In Section 12 it was shown that annual value rating
increases the cost of houses in Footscray by a variable
amount, commonly about £5O, through the general rate
alone. As the Metropolitan Board of Works uses the same
method of rating for water and sewerage purposes, there
is a further increase in cost of about £37, due to this rate.
The total increase in the cost of houses, as compared with
that under site value rating, is thus commonly about £B7.
By reducing the cost level of housing to such an extent,
site value rating would directly benefit the building con-
struction and allied industries. It would extend demand
for the products of these industries to a new population
group, whose income now compels them to tenancy, but
who would be enabled by lower costs to become home
purchasers.
The reduction of cost levels in this way would also
enable higher income groups to build better classes of
houses, or instal better fitments, without increasing their
annual charges. Similar considerations apply to the con-
struction of all classes of business and industrial premises.
The tendency to make sites available more cheaply
under site value rating also works in the direction of
stimulating the building construction industries. Other
studies, conducted by the Research Group, have shown
that both the numbers and values of building permits,
per acre available for building, are more than twice as
great in the districts rating site values as in their counter-
parts rating annual values.
Site value rating would, therefore, directly benefit
employment prospects of carpenters, bricklayers, plumbers,
plasterers, painters, electricians, glaziers and others em-
ployed in the building construction industries. It would
equally benefit employers and employees in the manufac-
ture and supply of materials such as timber, cement, bricks,
tiles, glass, paint, iron and steel, and other related products
used in the building industry. ♦
PART lII—HOW VACANT LAND IS AFFECTED.
15. THE EXTENT OF VACANT HOLDINGS.
The fact that vacant land is the only class of property
which would inevitably have to meet increases in rates
with a change to the unimproved land value basis justifies
a special section in this study.
As part of this study, an exhaustive investigation has
been made of the number and distribution of such vacant
holdings. The proportions in which such holdings are held
by residents and by absentees have also been determined.
There are some 4,400 vacant lots representing 25%
of the total holdings. Many of these lots are acres in ex-
tent, so that the proportion of vacant land is greater than
appears above.
The following dissection has been made from the Muni-
cipal Rolls, and summarises the holdings of vacant land
only for each ward. It does not include holdings of vacant
land held in conjunction with other built lots. Nor does it
include holdings less than £lOO unimproved value, which
is the qualification required to carry a vote.
Values given are for 1937, and do not take account of
appreciation to 1942.
Vacant Land Held in Conjunction With Dwellings,
In addition to the group owning vacant land only, is
another owning vacant land in addition to dwellings. The
two assessments are lumped together on the rolls, but an
approximation to the amount has been obtained by deduct-
ing the average rental value of houses from the total to
leave the land value. The result is given below.
These figures do not include very considerable areas
held vacant by a number of factories, and which cannot
be separated from the figures for their works. Again, the
values are for 1937, no addition being made for 1942
values.
It will be surprising to many to see the small propor-
tion of the Footscray residents who actually own land in
addition to their residence. Practically all such persons
will be included in the figure of 410 above.
Holdings Below the Voter’s Qualification.
The number of holders of vacant sites below the value
of £IOO which qualifies for a vote could not be found
exactly, but an approximation to it is given by the differ-
ence between the total number of ratepayers and the
number qualified to vote.
The total of ratepayers was 15,137, and the number of
voters on the roll was 14,325; the difference being 812. This
is the minimum figure for the number of land owners
below the voting qualification. But a check of the rolls
showed that there were approximately 740 ratepayers
duplicated on the rolls where two separate persons share
the same property. Hence there are in all about 1,550
holders of land below the voting qualification. These
holders are almost exclusively absentees, since residents
generally will be included in the table above.
The value of land owned by this group cannot be
ascertained exactly. A reasonable approximation is
obtained by taking the average between the minimum
value of a single site £2O, and the maximum of £IOO,
which would confer a vote, the average value being £6O.
This gives an approximate total of £93,000 for the un-
improved land value held by this group with an annual
value of £4,650.
16. TOTAL VACANT HOLDINGS AND THE RATE
INCREASE UPON THEM.
The total in the three classes of vacant holdings
above is an unimproved value of £410,000 distributed over
2,630 owners. To this should be added appreciation in value
between 1937 and 1942. This will vary greatly, in some
parts being little and in others a good deal. As an overall
average, the value of 15% found with residential properties
will be fairly close, bringing the total value in these groups
to £470,000 unimproved. These holdings contribute on the
annual value basis £2,440 in rates. On the unimproved
value basis, the rate contribution would be £9,300.*
This total still does not include vacant land held in
conjunction with factories. Nor does it include considerable
areas nominally counted as built although the buildings
are of little value, or only occupy part of the site.
* An independent check from the field study showed that
the unimproved value above was actually £520,000 and the
rate contribution under site value rating would be £10,300.


GRAPH D.


Distribution of Vacant Land Between Residents and
Absentees.
Ward
Number of
Holders
Residents
Number of
Holders
Absentees
Annual Value of
Holdings
of of
Residents Absentees
North . . . .
12
13
£367
£271
Middle . ..
15
7
£166
£218
South .. ..
40
21
£474
£213
North-west
148
78
£1,276
£1,088
Kingsville .
129
207
£1,250
£6,940
Total .. ..
344
326
£3,533
£8,730
Item Rates on N.A.
Rates on Un.
Value @ 2/1 in
Value @ 4|d.
in
£
£
Change
Factory
£2,156
£746
Dec. £1,410
Shops (Barkly St.) .
£288
£370
Inc, £82
Shops (Wmstn. Rd.)
£69
£14
Dec. £55
Vacant Land
£565
£2,154
Inc. £1,590
Totals
£3,078
£3285
Inc. £207
17. THE RELATIVE PROPORTIONS OF ABSENTEE
AND RESIDENT HOLDERS OF VACANT LAND.
An exhaustive analysis of the vacant holdings has
been made to find the proportions in which they are held
by residents and absentee speculators respectively. The
figures below dissect the holdings of vacant land only,
above £IOO in unimproved value.
Of the total annual value of £12,263 above, it will be
seen that no less than 71% is held by absentees. In the
Kingsville Ward the proportion is 85%.
Of the £3,687 annual value of land held in conjunction
with dwellings, the great bulk will be held by residents.
On the other hand, the great bulk of the minimum figure
of £4,650 in holdings below the voting qualification is
held by absentees.
An approximation to the distribution of the total
between residents and absentees is, therefore, £7,220 Resi-
dents, and £13,380 Absentees.
Thus, of the increase of approximately £B,OOO in rates
on vacant land under the unimproved value rating system,
£5,200 would be contributed by absentees living in other
districts, and £2,800 by residents of Footscray.
The study has shown that, whether owned by residents
or absentees, these vacant holdings are highly speculative.
The indications of high pressure land salesmanship are very
strong. One evidence of the speculative nature of these
holdings is the fact that no less than 213 of the 670
detailed above, are owned by females. These are extremely
unlikely to be holding the land with the intention of build-
ing homes in Footscray.
The main point of distinction between resident and
absentee speculators lies in the fact that with the latter,
their low rate bonus is spent in other districts than Foot-
scray, and is a clear loss to the district.
18. THE LARGEST HOLDINGS OF VACANT LAND.
All the holdings of purely vacant land exceeding £5OO
in unimproved value are listed in Table No. 3 of the
Appendix. There are 43 such holdings of which 24 are
owned by absentees and 19 by Footscray residents. The
rates now paid on this land are £822, and those payable
under site value rating are £2,900. Reference to the occu-
pation column shows that these holders are in a much
better position to pay more rates than the house and
factory owners who would be relieved by the change.
It will be seen that one holder (Sir Wm. Angliss)
holds more than all the other 42 holdings put together. In
fact, this one holder has more vacant land than the holdings
of all the other absentees put together (£4,900 out of
£8,730 annual value).
This holder occupies a unique position in Footscray
as an industrialist, owner of shop and house properties,
and as a land speculator. The magnitude of these opera-
tions merits a special section to consider the effect of a
rating change.
19. EFFECT UPON SIR W. ANGLISS INTERESTS.
The Angliss interests in Footscray comprise the meat
canning factory with an annual value of £20,700, and un-
improved value of £37,800. There are blocks of shops,
two in Barkly Street (17 shops), and the other in Williams-
town Road (6 shops). The former have an annual value
of £2,770 and unimproved value of £18,750. The latter have
an annual value of £660, and unimproved value of £720.
The vacant land, of which some 200 acres are still un-
subdivided, has an annual value of £5,437, and an unim-
proved value of £108,735 (allowing 10% appreciation on
the 1937 valuation figure). The comparative rate position
on balance would be as follows.
It would seem that the site value rating system is
more in accord with common sense than the annual value
method in the treatment of this individual. The site value
lating method gives this ratepayer lower rates in his
capacity as a manufacturer, in which he is performing a
public service and providing a livelihood for a great number
of employees. On the other hand it would increase his
rates in his capacity as a land speculator, in which he
performs no useful public service and gives employment
to none. It is further more appropriate to give reduced
rates on the Williamstown Road shops, which are on the
outer fringes of settlement, than to those in Barkly Street,
which have a turnover much greater.
On the other hand, the annual value rating penalises
this ratepayer in his capacity as manufacturer and rewards
him in his capacity as land speculator.
20. WEMBLY PARK ESTATE.
This is an area of land bounded by Geelong Road,
Robert Street, Francis Street, Richard Street, in the Kings-
ville Ward. It contains 576 allotments of land. It forms
portion of the land in the Angliss interests which was sub-
divided and of which a large part was sold to individuals
many years ago. In this whole block there are only 9
houses, 7 being in Robert Street.
This block was drawn to the attention of the Land
Values Research Group by the sub-Finance Committee of
the Council for special study. It was required to know
whether the increased rates on this vacant land would be
unreasonable or beyond the capacity of the owners.
The nett annual value (1937) for this block is £1,812
and the present rate at 2/3 in the £ yields £203. The un-
improved value is £29,000 and the rate on this at 4|d. in
the £ would yield £575, an increase of £372.
A dissection of ownership of holdings in this area has
been made from the municipal voters’ roll for all the streets
(other than the four bounding streets which extend beyond
this area). The results of this dissection are given in
detail in Table No. 4 of the Appendix.
Reference to this Table shows that there is not a
single genuine intending home builder among all these
holders. There is only one Footscray resident in the list,
and this a speculator to the extent of three lots. With
the exception of two other holders, all are located in
country towns in Victoria and N.S.W. These owners can
have no intention of settling in Footscray and have
obviously been induced to buy land in this city as a specu-
lation by unscrupulous laud salesmen.
The conclusion seems inescapable that this whole block
has not been built upon, purely because the lots have been
bought by speculators who wish to re-sell at a profit to
genuine home buyers. The net result here of subdivision,
is that of disposal from a large scale speculator to small
scale speculators.
The increase in rates on these lots cannot possibly do
anything but benefit Footscray residents, since they fall
almost exclusively upon absentees.


PART IV—HOW SHOPPING CENTERS ARE
AFFECTED.
21. THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE SHOPPING
CENTERS.
The main shopping centers in Footscray are, pre-
eminently, a short section of Nicholson Street between
Barkly Street and Irving Place on the West side, and be-
tween Hopkins Street and Irving Street on the East side.
Sales have been effected recently at over £350 per foot on
the West side, and £250 on the East side. Other less busy
but very prosperous streets are Paisley, Leeds, Hopkins
and Barkly Streets, and Anderson Street in the South
Ward,
In addition to these main centers, there are a number
of well defined subsidiary shopping centers. These centers
(which are listed later), are more numerous and take in
a much greater proportion of the total shopping properties,
than might at first be supposed.
Outside of the defined shopping centers there are a
great number of isolated shops scattered here and there
in residential streets. There are at least 194 of the total of
over 1047 shop and business properties, in this class.
22. SCOPE OF THE SHOPPING INVESTIGATION.
An exhaustive investigation has been made to find how
the rates are distributed under the two rating systems,
between the shopping centers and between sections of the
same centers. The incidence of the rates upon owners and
tenants has been investigated, and also the question of
“ability to pay.” The effect upon shop rentals has been
examined. The extent to which changes in the rates upon
other classes of property will be likely to affect business
in the shopping centers has been investigated.
Exhaustive treatment has been given to each property
in the main shopping center, and these properties are
tabulated. In those centers where increased rates are
common, special examination has been made of all proper-
ties carrying increases.
In addition, a series of graphs has been prepared,
covering every shop and business property in the main and
subsidiary centers, from which it can be readily seen
whether a change to site value rating would result in
higher or lower rates,
23. MOST SHOPS CARRY LOWER RATES UNDER
SITE VALUE RATING.
The investigation has shown that an overwhelming
majority of the shop and business properties would carry
reduced rates under a change to site value rating. Of the
total of 1,047 built sites studied, no less than 692 (66%)
would have their rates reduced by such a change, while a
further 69 (6%) would carry substantially the same rates.
Only in 286 cases (28%) would the rates be increased.
The results in each of the shopping centers are sum-
marised in the Table 6, together with the net result, for
that center, of balancing the rate increases and decreases.
Inspection of this table will show that it is only in
the main shopping center, on the West and East sides of
Nicholson Street, that really considerable increases in rates
occur. These increases are carried by 76 shop sites, the
increase averaging £62 per annum, which is an increase of
140%. This is a considerable increase and the ability to
meet it is specially investigated later.
Outside of this center, the only other areas in which
rate increases are common are in Leeds, Paisley, and parts
of Barkly, Hopkins and Anderson Street centers. These
centers are also specially examined later, but it may be
noted here that the increases are much more modest in
these centers, both as a percentage and in amount.
The table covers only sites which are built. In these
same shopping centers there are no less than 85 shop sites
vacant, the owners evidently holding in anticipation of
higher prices. Site value rating would increase rates on
these by 275%.
It may be noted that the streets in which reductions
in rates are general, under site value rating, are those
streets in which the turnover or general scale of business
is at a much lower level than in the main business centers.
This is reflected in the lower scale of land values.
Thus, site value rating tends to compensate the less
prosperous centers for their disabilities, whereas annual
value rating gives lower rates to the most favored business
centers at the expense of the less favored.
24. HOW INDIVIDUAL SHOP SITES FARE
The position of each individual shop site is shown for
the various shopping centers, on a series of graphs, L to
T, from which it can be seen immediately which properties
would gain reduced rates by a change to site value rating
and the extent of the reduction, or vice versa.
In those streets where rate reductions are general, it
has not been considered necessary to calculate the actual
amount of the rates for inclusion in this study, the relative
position being sufficient.
For those sections in which rate increases under site
value rating are common, however, a detailed treatment
has been given. Of these streets, Nicholson is the most
important, since the aggregate rates for this street would
be increased by £4,440.
Every property in the shopping sections of this street
has been tabulated in Table No. 9, which shows the owner
of the site and also the occupier and nature of business,
together with the respective rates under the two systems.
A further dissection is made for this and the other
streets, covering each property which carries increased
rates, tabulated in Table No. 7, according to whether
ownership is by: (a) a resident of Footscray; (b) a resi-
dent of some other municipality; (c) held as a part of an
estate or in the hands of executors.
25. INCREASES IN RATES FALL UPON THE SITE
OWNER AND NOT UPON THE TENANT
In considering the cases where increased rates occur
under site value rating, it should be borne in mind that
these increases fall upon the site owner and cannot gener-
ally be passed on to the tenant.
Even where the lease agreements stipulate that the
tenant is to pay the rates, it merely defers the owner’s
liability till a new lease is negotiated.
This fact is not sufficiently recognised by the general
public, although well understood by economists. The matter
is thoroughly dealt with in “Economics for Commerce,”
by J. K. Gifford, M.A., Lecturer in Economics, University
of Queensland, this work being a text book for students
at Melbourne University (see pp, 195-211).
It will, however, be obvious that the owners of the 76
sites having rate increases in Nicholson Street would find
it very difficult to get increased rents from their tenants
when there are 692 other shop sites carrying reduced rates.
Further, as the increased rates upon the 85 vacant
sites in shopping centers would tend to induce building
upon them, the competition for tenants for these new shops
would tend to reduce shop rents.
In this study, however, it has been found that the
general conclusions would be unaffected whether the
owners or the tenants bore the rates. In either case these
localities are able to bear the increases.
26. THE ABILITY OF NICHOLSON STREET SITES TO
CARRY HIGHER RATES AS COMPARED WITH OTHER
SHOPPING CENTERS.
The study shows that the rate contribution of sites
in this main center under annual value rating is out of
proportion with that required from other much less pros-
perous shopping centers.
The volume of business on Nicholson Street is many
times greater than in other shopping centers, and parti-
cularly than in the minor centers. So also is the wear


TABLE No. 6.
HOW BUILT PROPERTIES IN SHOP AND BUSINESS CENTERS WOULD FARE UNDER A CHANGE TO SITE
VALUE RATING.
Street Center
Total
Number
Number
Number
Total Rates Under
Built
Gaining
With No
Losing
Annual
Site
Change In
Sites
Site Val.
Change
Site Val.
Value
Value
Rates
Rating
Rating
£
£
£
Nicholson Street (West)
Barkly-Irving Place
37
—
—
37
2,092
5,124
4~ 3,032
Irving Place-Buckley . .
25
22
1
2
478 . ..
252
.. — 226
Nicholson Street (East)
Byron-Hopkins
5
3
2
—
58
40
.. — 18
Hopkins-Irving
39
—
—
39
1,244
2,896
. . d - 1,652
Paisley Street
.. + 255
Leeds-Nicholson
27
3
—
24
665
920
Leeds Street
/
Irving-Hopkins
28
3
2
23
426
642
. . 4" 216
Hopkins Street
North Side (82 on) ....
36
20
2
14
413
435
.. 4- 22
South Side (85 on) . . . .
25
9
1
15
517
547
.. 4- 30
Barkly Street
South to Geelong Road .
82
7
7
68
1,700
2,280
. . 4- 58U
South, Geelong Road on
39
33
5
1
288
175
.. — 113
Noith to Geelong Road
39
15
6
18
700
676
. . — 24
North, Geelong Road on
34
33
—
1
309
169
. . — 140
Anderson Street
North to Railway . . . .
22
3
5
14
298
433
.. 4" 135
South to Railway ....
29
9
8
12
490
490
.. —
Beyond Rly., Nth. & Sth.
15
15
—
—
96
65
. . — 31
Ballarat Street
Full length
35
30
5
—
240
118
. . — 122
Ballarat Road
Rosamond End
11
11
.. —
—
117
41
. . — 76
Irving Street
Full length
25
20
3
2
215
147
. . — 68
Bellairs Street
Seddon Station . . , . . .
6
4
2
—
31
22
. . — 9
Birmingham Street
Ful 1 length
12
12
—
—
88
34
— 54
Buckley Street
Victoria-Nicholson . . ..
56
46
7
3
340
181
— 159
Charles Street
Victoria-Gamon
27
21
1
5
267
198
. . — 69
Droop Street
Both ends
17
11
4
2
150
100
. . — 50
Gamon Street
Full length
21
19
2
—
146
85
. . — 61
Pentland Parade
Seddon Station
16
15
.. —
1
108
74
. . — 34
Somerville Road
Railway to W’stown Rd.
33
28
3
2
222
130
. . — 92
Williamstown Road on .
27
26
1
. . — 118
Stenhen Street
Full length
28
27
—
1
148
63
.. — 85
Victoria Street
Full length
38
34
2
. . — 107
Williamstown Road
Full length
19
19
—
—
163
48
. . — 115
Shops distributed in resi-
dential streets
194
194
—
—
1,230
464
. . — 766
Totals
1,047
692
.. 69
286
13,747
17,132
. . + 3,385
and tear on the roads from the extra traffic carried by
this street. The road has been specially constructed with
wood blocks on concrete to handle this traffic. Not only
is the capital and maintenance cost of this section to be
considered, but a considerable proportion of the costs for
other main roads are incurred on behalf of this area for
deliveries to and from it, and to enable customers to reach
it easily.
Notwithstanding these advantages to the site, and
extra costs to the Council, the average single shop site
in the main center contributes to Council revenue only as
much as 3 or 4 shops in the minor streets, and only as
much as 5 average type houses.
(The actual figures are given in Table No. 10 in the
Appendix.)
27. THE RELATIVE VOLUME OF BUSINESS
BETWEEN CENTERS COMPARED WITH THEIR
RATE CONTRIBUTION.
Some idea of the difference in the volume of business
between the various main and minor shopping centers, is
obtainable from the comparative statistics of business
done by the branches of the State Savings Bank, as pub-
lished in the Annual Report for 1944.
There are branches serving four of these shopping
areas. Footscray Branch (Barkly Street), Yarraville
Branch (Ballarat Street), Seddon Branch (Pentland
Parade), and Footscray South Branch (Charles Street).
The comparative statistics are given for these centers,
the actual figures being quoted first, followed by the rela-
tive volume of business, the Footscray Branch being con-
sidered as the standard 100.


State Savings Bank Statistics, Year ended 30th June, 1944.
No.
of
No.
of
Amount of
Branch
Trs nsactions
Depositors
Balances
Actual
Rela) ive
Actual
Relative
Actual
Relative
£’000
Footseray
171,864
100
30,825
100
2,175
100
Yarraville
60,742
35
8,818
29
676
31
Seddon .. ..
23,406
13
3,127
10
292
13
Footseray Sth.
15,990
9
1,638
5
140
7
The above figures are striking, but understate the
difference between the main center (Nicholson, Barkly,
Paisley, Leeds Streets) and all others. In addition to the
State Savings Banks, this main center holds branches of
the Commonwealth Bank, E.S. & A. Bank, Union Bank,
Commercial Banking Coy. of Sydney, Bank of New South
Wales, Bank of Australasia, National Bank and Commer-
cial Bank, whose figures should be added to those of the
main center, but are not available.
On the other hand there is only one of the other
shopping centers which has any other banking branch.
This is the National Bank in Yarraville.
Reference to the shopping center summary in Table
No. 6 shows that, in the main shopping sector comprising
Nicholson, Paisley, Leeds, Barkly (to Geelong Road), part
of Hopkins Street, there are 333 shop and business sites
(nearly one third of the total number).
Under annual value rating, this area contributes a
little over half of the total rates carried by all shops
covered in the study. The proportion carried by this
center is quite inadequate compared with the greater
volume of business done in this sector, and the other
centers are at present paying far more than their fair
share of the rate burden.
Under land value rating the 333 sites in the main area
would carry 80 per cent, of the rates on shop-sites, a
proportion much more closely following the difference in
volume of business. Not all of these sites would carry
rate increases, however, 82 receiving reductions in their
rates.
Site value rating, therefore, would give more equit-
able apportionment of rates between the shopping centers
as distinct from the incidence on individual sites within
the centers.
28. EFFECTS UPON THE BUSINESS CENTERS OF A
CHANGE IN THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE RATES.
It has been found that a change to site value rating
would bring important changes in the distribution of in-
come within the city, which would have an important effect
upon trading conditions.
It has been shown earlier that 80 to 90 per cent, of
the houses in Footscray would carry lower rates under
site value rating than under annual value rating. This
saving benefits the lower and middle income groups of
the population, whose spending is predominantly in the
local shopping centers. It is upon this group that the
shopping community relies for its trade.
On the other hand those receiving the rate benefits
at p esent, under annual value rating, are a comparatively
small group of higher income people whose spending is
largely in investments which confer no benefits to the
shopping community, and a much greater proportion of
outlay on goods is spent in other districts. Almost the
whole of the rate savings of absentee holders of vacant
land is spent elsewhere.
The actual rate saving by the individual house is not
a very large figure, but in the aggregate it means a very
large sum available for spending in the shopping centers.
The average saving per house in each street, after balanc-
ing gains and losses, ranges from nil to £3/10/-, and a
round figure of £1 overall may be used as a rough esti-
mate. (Individual properties in some cases will make much
greater savings than this average figure.) Applied to the
12,000 odd dwellings, this indicates that about £12,000
more would be in the hands of the income group whose
spending is predominantly local.
SOME RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES
(See Plate I opposite)
CHIRNSIDE STREET
Four consecutive houses, three of average
quality and one of poor type, all of 33ft.
frontage..
SCHILD STREET
Two houses, one of fair type but old, its
neighbour newer and of more modern type,
both of 42ft. frontage.
LENNOX STREET
A good type timber house with a large front-
age (66ft.) and nice garden improving a rather
poor street. Its neighbour is a poorer type
old timber house, also with a large frontage
(54ft.).
SOUTHAMPTON STREET
A good type of house, improving a rather poor
street. Opposite is an inferior type house
tending to depreciate the values of better pro-
perties. Both are of the same frontage (50ft.)


SOME RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES
PLATE I.
No. 41
N.A.V. Rate £4 1 0
U.C.V. Rate £2 12 0
No. 43
£3 16 6
£2 12 0
CHIRNSIDE STREET
No. 45
N.A.V. Rate £3 12 0
U.C.V. Rate £2 12 0
No. 47
£2 9 6
£2 12 0
No. 15
N.A.V. Rate £4 1 0 U.C.V. Rate £3 6 6
SCHILD STREET
No. 17
N.A.V. Rate £5 17 0 U.C.V. Rate £3 6 6
No. 1-3
N.A.V. Rate £5 1 0 U.C.V. Rate £3 19 6
LENNOX STREET
No. 5
N.A.V. Rate £3 7 6 U.C.V. Rate £3 4 0
No. 40 SOUTHAMPTON STREET No. 13
N.A.V. Rate £4 5 0 U.C.V. Rate £4 0 0 N.A.V. Rate £2 9 6 U.C.V. Rate £2 19 9


PLATE II.
SOME HOUSING CONTRASTS
No. 60
N.A.V. Rate £5 1 0 U.C.V. Rate £2 17 0
EDGAR STREET
No. 24
N.A.V. Rate £3 16 6 U.C.V. Rate £11 18 0
No. 191
N.A.V. Rate £3 12 0 £17 0 (vacant)
U.C.V. Rate £8 14 0 £4 15 0 (vacant)
HYDE STREET
No. 152
N.A.V. Rate £4 14 6 U.C.V. Rate £3 11 6
No. 108
Frontage 42ft.
N.A.V. Rates £2 9 6
U.C.V. Rates £3 15 6
No. 106 (part)
45ft.
£3 16 6
£4 0 0
STEPHEN STREET
Frontage
N.A.V. Rates
U.C.V. Rates
No. 104A (part)
50ft.
£5 17 0
£4 9 0
No. 104
50ft.
£5 17 0
£4 9 0
HYDE STREET
No. 162
N.A.V. Rate £2 9 6
U.C.V. Rate £3 19 0
No. 160
£1 2 0
£3 19 0
CASTLEMAINE STREET
No. 27
A Deteriorated Property (see page 17)


Street
Rates Carried by
Absentee Owners
Rates Carried by
Local Owners
Rates Carried by
Estates or
Executors
Annual
Value
Site
Value
Annual
Value
Site
Value
Annual
Value
Site
Value
£
£
£
£
£
£
Nicholson
(West Side)
640
1393
927
2197
515
1352
Nicholson
(East Side)
200
457
645
1470
353
869
Paisley .. ..
212
323
191
336
77
119
Leeds
84
167
262
410
32
83
Hopkins .. ..
112
169
61
82
241
329
Barkly (to
Geelong Rd.)
461
972
854
1368
30
42 '
Anderson
189
259
40
68
123
163
Totals .. ..
1898
3740
2980
5931
1371
2957
SOME HOUSING CONTRASTS
(See Plate II opposite)
EDGAR STREET
A fine modern brick home, improving a rather
poor street. Frontage, 36ft. Opposite is a very
inferior type house with four times the front-
age (150 ft.), depreciating the value of neigh-
boring properties.
HYDE STREET
A very inferior old house with a large front-
age (110 ft.), and beyond is a vacant lot of
66ft. frontage held by the same owner. This
is a poor usage of a corner site.
Opposite is an attractive modern home mak-
ing excellent use of a corner site and improv-
ing a decadent part of the Yarraville section.
Frontage is 30ft.
STEPHEN STREET
Four consecutive houses with a wide variation
in quality. On the left is a very inferior old
house with that adjoining also a little below
average quality. Both are favored by annual
value rating.
On the right are two good type timber houses
which are an asset to a rather poor looking
sector. Both are penalised by annual value
rating.
HYDE STREET
A poor type house with a vacant lot alongside
it. Both are of 30ft. frontage. This sector is
among the longest settled parts of Footscray,
but has many such vacant lots.
CASTLE MAI N E STREET
At the last general revaluation, made in 1937,
this house was valued and rated the same as
its neighbors. It would then have gained
under site-value rating. It has since been
allowed to deteriorate and the annual value
rates would be reduced on revaluation.
Although this income would be spent over all shops,
if distributed in the same proportions as present trade
between the various centers, about 80 per cent, would be
spent in the main center, Nicholson, Paisley, Leeds, Hop-
kins, Barkly (to Geelong Road). The summary on Table 6
shows that this area as a whole carries rate increases
totalling £5,529 under site value rating, whereas, on the
same distribution of trade as at present, it would receive
about £lO,OOO of the rate savings.
Even if the tenants of the shops in the main center
had to meet the increased rates on these sites instead
of the site-owners, the increased business would compen-
sate for the rate increases. As the charge falls upon the
site-owner, however, the tenants of the shops in these
centers must gain considerably by the augmented trade.
Nor does the spending of the rate saving above repre-
sent the full gain to the business community. The 714
shops outside the main center gain reduced rates to an
aggregate of £2,430 under site value rating. In contrast
to the main center in which the shops are largely run by
chain store organisations, these shops in minor centers
are almost exclusively locally run. In most cases, there
are residences attached and in any case the proprietors
are themselves local residents whose spending is with
other shops and local tradespeople. Both their rate savings
and profits from the increased spending in their shops of
householders’ rate savings are turned back largely into the
district.
Again, we have merely considered the present trading
position as static. In other Melbourne municipalities where
site value rating is in force it has been found that house-
building activity is twice as great per acre available for
building as in those using annual value rating. Increase
of houses and occupiers brings increased volume of busi-
ness and prosperity for the trading community. We make
no estimate of the extent of this benefit, although it must
be very considerable.
29. RATE INCREASES IN THE MAIN CENTER
WOULD FALL MAINLY UPON ABSENTEE SITE-
OWNERS.
If all site-owners were local residents, while site-
value rating would change the distribution of rates be-
tween individuals, it would leave the total trade of the
district unaffected, except to the extent that the individuals
previously benefited by annual value rating are largely
investors instead of consumers of commodities sold by the
shops.
Where site-value rating removes the rate burden from
local householders and places it upon absentee site-owners,
the aggregate spendings within the district are increased.
So far as purely vacant land is concerned, it has been
seen in Section 17 that a minimum of £4,500 increase in
rates would fall upon persons living in other districts.
A dissection of all sites which carry increased rates
within the main shopping streets, shows that over 70
per cent, of the increases fall upon absentees or estates
in the hands of executors, the beneficiaries being largely
residents of other districts.
The distribution is summarised below for the various
streets in which rate increases are common, and the de-
tailed figures for individual properties are given on Table
7 and Table 9.


Increases are: local owners, £1,842; Absentees, £2,951;
Estates, £1,586.
Of the total increase of £6,379, only £1,842 falls upon
locally resident owners and £4,537, on the other two
classifications.
Reference to the detailed tables shows that it is only
in Nicholson Street that considerable rate increases occur
on shops under site value rating, the amounts in other
streets being very small as a business cost.
There are only 11 local owners in this main center
and of these 7 operate the shopping business as well as
owning the site. These seven thus draw part of their
income from site rent as well as ordinary trading profits.
They are, thus, in a privileged trading position as com-
pared with their competitors and the increased rates merely
take a portion of the site-rent for municipal purposes, still
leaving them much more favorably placed than their
competitors.
This site rent is something not created by their own
efforts, but is due to the presence of a large population in
the district and to the various civic and state amenities
provided. It represents an income presented gratis to the
owner by the municipality, and no real hardship can be in-
volved if the municipality decides to take an increased
portion for its own needs.
The ability to meet additional charges may be illu-
strated in the case of Forge’s Pty. Ltd. This firm has a
large frontage (82 ft.), in the best situation and operates
a drapery store. The land is valued at £28,800, so that the
firm is receiving, in its returns, a site rent of £1,440,
apart from the ordinary business return of its competitors
on tenanted premises. Site value rating would increase
the rates by £373 up to £555. This is a very considerable
increase, but still leaves the owner with an annual income
in site rent of £9OO above his competitive trading profit.
The ability to carry this charge is indicated in the fact
that the owner, only this year, purchased the site of
Woolworth’s Stores in the same street, valued at £11,550.
The rates in this case are paid by Woolworth’s.
This firm has a much larger increase in its rates than
any other because it occupies as much as 5 ordinary shop
frontages in the most valuable section, and because the
premises were of very little value. They formed a fire-
risk, and were burnt out while this study was in progress.
When they are re-built, they will carry a substantially in-
creased rate under annual value rating, because the im-
provements will be new and modern.
Of the other local owners of sites in this street,
Scovell & Spurling are large investors in property in Foot-
scray, both vacant and built. Caldecott and Hudson also
are investors in other properties, some of which would
gain reduced rates under site value rating.
Of the absentee owners in this street, 10 are firms
whose _ head office is elsewhere, but which own the site
of their business. The remainder are individuals or in-
vestment agencies. As the firm’s income includes site
rent as well as ordinary business profit, they are well able
to absorb increased charges and are still better off than
similar firms on rented premises.
30. AGREEMENTS UNDER WHICH THE TENANT
PAYS THE RATES.
While it is clear that owners can afford to contribute
a larger part of a value which is due to the community
at large and not the result of their own efforts, the ques-
tion arises as to whether the owner always pays the rates.
It is true that owners cannot usually pass on to their
tenants rates falling on site values, but there are tem-
porary exceptions in cases where terms of leases require
the tenant to pay the rates. In these cases, of course, the
rent is reduced by the rates normally expected, and in fact,
the owner is really paying them just as he would in the
absence of an agreement. However, with a change in the
rating system, which increases the rates, under such an
agreement the tenant would have to pay the increase for
the balance of the term of his lease. This would not usually
be a long period as ordinary leases are commonlv only
for 3 to 5 years.
With this in mind, the terms of tenancies were inves-
tigated to find to what extent tenants would be called upon
to meet such increases temporarily, and whether
they could afford them. Irrespective of the extent of such
agreements, it has been shown in section 28 that, even if
the tenants were called upon to pay these increases, the
increased spending power in their shops would compensate
for the charge.
In considering ability to meet such charges, it is
considered that chain organisations, with a number of
branches either in the same or other districts, are better
able to afford the payment than those where the proprietor
must pay the whole amount from his own pocket.
Nicholson Street Tenancy.
A complete analysis of the conditions of the occupiers
of shops in the Nicholson Street shopping center is given
in Table 8. Distinction is made between occupiers who
are purely tenants and those who own their sites. This
Table also show's whether the firm is a chain organisation,
or under a single operator. It also shows whether the
owner or the tenant pays the rates.
The west side of this street is much more valuable than
the east side, and the increase in rates upon a normal
frontage is higher than on the east side. The average in-
crease on the west side is about £7O per annum.
Nicholson Street, West Side.
Between Barkly Street and Irving Place there are 37
shops, of which 25 are occupied by tenants and 12 owned
by the occupiers.
Of the 25 occupied by tenants, 15 are branches of
chain organisations, which could readily absorb the rate
increase if their contracts required it. Of the remainder,
1 is an hotel which is able to absorb the increase readily,
2 are proprietary companies, and only 7 are controlled by
single individuals.
Of the 15 chain branches, 9 have leases which require
the tenant to pay the rates, the other 6 are paid by the
owner direct. The hotel and one of the two proprietary
companies also pay the rates.
Of the 7 shops which are not chain branches or com-
panies, in the case of 5 the owner pays the rates; and only
in two cases does the tenant pay. As leases have not usu-
ally been renewed during the war, it will probably be found
that even these two are no longer required to pay the
increased rates.
Of the 12 owner occupied properties, 9 are chain
organisations, which can readily absorb the increases, 1
is a proprietary company, and the other two, Forge and
Scovell & Spurting, have been seen to be in a good position
to meet these charges.
Nicholson Street, East Side.
Land values on this side are only about two-thirds
of those on the west side and, in consequence, the rate
increases are much smaller. The average increase for a
16 foot frontage on this side would be about £37.
Between Hopkins Street and Irving Street there are
39 shops and business premises, of which 31 are occupied
by tenants and 8 are owned by the occupiers.
Of the 31 tenant occupied shops, 6 are branches of
chain organisations which can readily absorb the increases
if their contracts required it.
Of the whole 31, only in 7 cases does the tenant pay
the rates, the remaining 24 being paid by the owner
directly. Of the 7 in which the tenant pays, one is a chain
organisation.
In the remaining 6 cases in which the tenant pays the
rates, the increases range between £6 and £39. This would
form a comparatively small increase in their business costs,
this amount being from 4 to 16 per cent, of their net
rental value and considerably less of the actual rents they
pay. The increase in their case would be compensated by
the increased volume of trade referred to in Section 28.
Other Shopping Centers
Investigation shows that there are very few shops


indeed outside of Nicholson Street in which agreements
require tenants to pay the rates. Of these few cases a
number would receive rate reductions under site value
rating, while the increases in the remainder would be
small as business costs. These cases are also included on
Table No. 8.
In general, the position of the whole shopping com-
munity would be improved with the stimulation to business,
and the increased rates on properties would be carried
by the owners of the sites and not by the tenants.
31. HOW SHOP AND HOUSE RENTS ARE AFFECTED
BY RATES.
It has been shown earlier in this study that approxi-
mately 90 per cent, of the houses and 66 per cent, of the
shops would actually carry reduced rates under site value
rating, while a further proportion would have no appreci-
able change in their rates.
This limits to a very small figure, the proportion of
cases in which any attempt at increasing rentals would
be possible. The competition from the large majority of
sites which get rate reductions would tend to prevent
the owners, in the few cases of increases, from passing
them to the tenants.
Further, the owners of this very high proportion of
tenanted houses and shops could afford to take so much
less rent from their tenants and still have exactly the
same return as before.
The operation of the law of supply and demand would
ensure that the rate saving is shared by both owner and
tenant. On the other hand, in the minority of cases where
rate increases occurred, they could not be passed to the
tenant.
The inevitability of a trend towards reduced rentals
under site value rating will be evident from the following
explanation of the process.
How Rents are Fixed.
Although paid by the tenant in one sum, the rent for
a shop or house is a composite of two different rents, (a)
rent for the improvements, (b) rent for the site.
Both of these component rents are fixed by the inter-
play of supply and demand. The rent for improvements is
fixed by the number of people wanting houses and shops
compared with the number of houses and shops available.
This quantity depends directly upon the profitableness of
buildings as investments.
The rent for the site depends upon the demand for
shops or houses compared with the number of suitable
sites available. This supply is limited in the ultimate by
nature, but immediately by the number of owners willing
to sell.
The effect upon rents of rates falling on those two
items (a) improvements and, (b) sites, is diametrically
opposite in nature.
(a) RATES FALLING ON IMPROVEMENTS.
If a rate is imposed upon improvements, such as
houses and shops, demand for these improvements is un-
altered. The supply, however, is immediately checked.
The rate on the buildings reduces the return which the
owner would get by investing in buildings as against
other channels of investment. Supply becomes checked
until the demand of tenants raises rents to cover the rate
imposed on improvements and restores the margin of
profit to investors in buildings. Thus, rates falling upon
improvements are paid by tenants.
(b) RATES FALLING UPON SITE VALUES.
If a rate is imposed upon the site only, the demand
for houses and shops again remains unaltered. The effect
upon supply is entirely different. In the case of a rate
upon improvements, the site owner could avoid the charge
altogether by holding the site unbuilt. A rate upon the
site cannot be avoided in any way. In this case, an owner
who holds the site vacant or poorly improved is faced with
a payment in rates without a revenue from improvements
to cover the charge. The number of owners willing to sell
is immediately increased, and demand remaining as before,
the site rent is reduced. At the same time, owners who do
not sell but are induced to build, by increasing the supply
of buildings tend to reduce rents. Thus rates falling upon
sites must be borne by the owners of sites only.
32, THE DIAMETRICALLY OPPOSITE EFFECT OF
RATES FALLING UPON
(a) Improvements Only.
(b) Site Only.
Immediate Effects.
1. Vacant site escapes the
rate altogether.
2. Return to investment in
buildings is reduced by
the rate.
3. Capital investment in
buildings is reduced and
diverted to:
4. Increased investment in
sites.
5. Speculation in sites en-
couraged.
6. Price of sites increased.
7. Cost of building in-
creased.
Vacant site pays the same
rate as if built upon.
Return to investment in
buildings unaffected by the
rate.
Investment in vacant sites is
reduced and diverted to:
Increased investment in
buildings.
Speculation in sites dis-
couraged.
Price of sites reduced.
Cost of building reduced.
Final Effects.
8. Demand for buildings
constant.*
9. Supply of buildings re-
stricted.
10, Tenant pays the rate
charge in increased rent
for improvements.
Demand for buildings con-
stant.*
Supply of buildings in-
creased.
Site owner pays the rate
charge and tenants’ rents
reduced.
* Demand for buildings would actually be augmented to some extent.
33. THE AGGREGATE RATE BURDEN UPON
IMPROVEMENTS.
Under the net annual rental value system of rating
in use in Footscray, the major part of the rates falls upon
the improvements and only the minor part upon the site.
The study showed that in its improved condition the
annual rental value of the district as a whole was 3.7 times
that of the sites alone. That means, for every pound of
rates contributed by sites, there were £2.7 contributed by
improvements. Of the total rates raised, £60,500 fell upon
improvements and only £22,500 upon site values.
The proportion is not uniform over the district. In
houses and shops away from the main areas, as much
as 90 per cent, of the rate payment now falls on the
buildings. In the main Nicholson Street shopping center,
the greater part falls on the site and a minor part only on
the buildings.
This portion of the rates which falls on improvements
is already being paid by the tenant in his rent, except
where the rents may be below market rents. The effect
of transfer of rates wholly to the sites will tend to reduce
the rents to the extent that they now fall on improvements.
Even where no actual reduction of existing rents is made
immediately, it would occur by preventing increases which
would otherwise occur with the upward trend of market
rents.
In the main shopping center, where rate increases are
common, attempts to pass the increase to tenants would
be restrained by the fact that the tenant may decide to
move to another center, and that if the outgoing tenant
was not prepared to pay an increase, it would be difficult
to get another to do so. On the other hand, if the owner
had his shop vacant for a few weeks, the loss of income
would be greater than the amount of the rate itself.
It may be noted that there is a good deal more fluidity
between the main and minor shopping centers (so far as
tenants are concerned), than is generally thought. The
return to tenants is not greatly different, the vastly greater
volume of business in the main center being absorbed by
the site owner in higher site rent, leaving only ordinary
business profits with the tenants in whatever center they
may be.


Item
Footscray
Next Largest
City
Persons Employed .. ..
19,510
19,160
Salaries & Wages Paid .
Value of Land and
£4,761,899
£4,240,508
Buildings
Value of Plant and
3,147,107
3,350,823
Machinery
4,521,743
3,190,798
Value of Materials Used
11,261,448
8,946,655
Value of Production . .
20,011,945
17,174,416
A.
HIGHLY IMPROVED INDUSTRIAL PROPERTIES
For details, see Table II, List A.
GROUP
SUMMARY.
Number
Total Value
Total Value
Ratio
Annual
Site
Rate Excess
Group
of
of Sites
of Improve-
Impvmts.
Value
Value
Under Annual
Properties
ments
Sites
Rates
Rates
Value Rating
1st
10
£65,755
£1,114,087
17.2
£6,065
£1,298
£4,767 (368%)
2nd
11
34,156
374,524
10.9
2,119
674
1,445 (215%)
3rd
11
51,748
432,717
8.4
2,518
1,031
1,487 (145%)
4th
10
31,310
221,030
7.1
1,306
621
685 (110%)
5th
10
10,841
63,139
5.85
383
216
167 (77%)
6th
10
117,038
507,402
4.4
3,246
2,318
928 (40%)
7th
9
25,782
82,454
3.2
562
'512
50 (10%)
Total
71
£336,630
£2,795,353
8.3
£16,199
6,670
£9,529 (143%)
PART V.
HOW FACTORIES AND INDUSTRIAL
CONCERNS ARE AFFECTED.
34. FOOTSCRAY AS A MANUFACTURING CENTER.
Footscray is second only to Melbourne City itself as
an industrial center in the State of Victoria. In 1940-41,
it contained 231 factories. There were seven other muni-
cipalities with a greater number of factories, but the
magnitude and scale of operations of the Footscray under-
takings is considerably greater than for any other, with
the exception of Melbourne City. This will be evident from
the following factory statistics for Footscray, which, for
almost each item, are in excess of those for any other
Municipality. The figures are for the year 1940-41.
The industrial concerns of Footscray vary greatly
among themselves, as in every Municipality. Some are
modern, of pleasing appearance and an asset to the locality
in which they are situated. Others are old, dilapidated, and
eyesores, tending to depreciate values of residential and
other properties in their vicinity. Some have a high
degree of economic development of their sites, while others
have improvements altogether disproportionate to the
value of the sites occupied.
35. THE DEGREE OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT OF
THE SITE.
In this study the various industrial undertakings have
been classified and compared according to the degree of
economic development of the sites they occupy. That is to
say, according to the ratio which the value of the improve-
ments upon the site bears to the value of the site itself.
This is a vital measure of the desirability of under-
takings from a municipal and social viewpoint. Given a
particular site of an undertaking, the municipal services
provided will be practically the same whether the site
is poorly or highly improved. The interests of the district
and the community generally, however, are clearly best
served by a high degree of development of the site.
The study has, therefore, sought to find how the two
rating systems affect industrial undertakings, according
to their degree of economic development.
36. THE SCOPE OF THE FACTORY INVESTIGATION.
All considerable undertakings in Footscray have been
classified into the accompanying lists covering some 121
properties. Although this is only a little over half of the
total factories according to returns, the remainder (apart
from a very few small concerns which may have been
missed) appear upon factory returns only because they use
some machinery or employ more than four persons. For
all practical purposes, it may be taken that the investi-
gation has covered all factories.
All of these undertakings have been classified accord-
ing to the degree of economic development of the sites. In
some cases, firms have other holdings in the district in
addition to their works. It has been the aim in this study
to include all such holdings of an interest, as far as pos-
sible, to give a true overall picture. At the same time,
the degree of economic development of the sections has
been given separately.
37. INDUSTRIAL PROPERTIES CLASSIFIED.
When the industrial properties were classified accord-
ing to their degree, of economic development, it was
found that they fell into two distinct groups so far as the
incidence of the rating system was concerned.
All of those with an improvement to land value ratio
above about 2.9 were in one group which was benefited
by site value rating. It was found that the degree of rate
benefit in this group became more marked, the higher the
degree of improvement. This group includes all of the
factories which may be regarded as the greatest assets
of the district.
All of those with an improvement to land value ratio
less than about 2.9 formed another group which was
benefited in lower rates by nett annual value rating. In
this group the degree of rate benefit was found to increase
as the degree of improvement fell. This group includes all
the factories which are least improved and, from many
viewpoints, a liability to the district.
At about 2 9, the rates were found to be the same
under either system, and the disparity between the rating
systems became most marked in the extremes of improve-
ment to land value ratio. Site value rating was seen to
favor the best improved and to penalise the least improved
properties. Annual value rating was seen to favor the least
improved and to penalise the most improved properties.
These tendencies will be obvious from the detailed
Table 11, showing individual properties. Two lists are
given, List A, showing all concerns with an improvement
to land value ratio of 3.0 or more, all of which are
benefited by site value rating. List B, shows all concerns
with improvement to land value ratios of 2.9 downwards,
these properties benefiting under annual value rating.
The lists are summarised in groups of 10 and the
summarised results are given below.
It will be evident that there is a very wide variation
in the degree of economic improvement of sites within
the groupings. The first group has a very high degree
of development, probably nearly at the maximum obtain-
able from the sites. The others are capable of much
more development of their sites with advantage to the
district. Yet if they were as highly improved as those
in-the first group it is evident that their rates would be
increased heavily under annual value rating without any
extra Municipal costs commensurate with the increase.
The measure of the penalty imposed upon improve-
ments may be seen best by comparing the last group
with the second. These two groups have about the same
site values, but the second group has about four times
as valuable improvements. Yet, if the last group were
improved as it should be, the annual value rating system
would impose increased rates of about £1,400.


For details see Table II, List
B.
Group
Number
of
Properties
Total Value
of Sites
Total Value
of
Improvements
Ratio
Impvmts,
Sites
Annual
Value
Rates
Site
Value
Rates
Rate Excess
Under Site
Value Rating
1st
10
£24,080
£2,240
0.09
£136
£479
£343 (250%)
2nd
10
52,450
50,580
0.96
534
1,041
507 (95%)
3rd
10
25,268
37,572
1.49
327
501
174 (53%)
4th
10
19,651
35,051
1.8
278
371
93 (33%)
5th
10
178,332
452,903
2.55
3,276
3,546
270 (8%)
Total
50
£299,781
£578,346
1.93
4,551
5,938
£1,387 (24%)
Item Compared
List A
List B
Well Improved
Poorly Improved
Number of Firms ..
71
50
Total Site Values . .
£336,630
£299,781
Total Improvements
Value
2,795,353
578,346
Site Value Rates . .
6,670
5,938
Annual Value Rates
16,199
4,551
B. POORLY IMPROVED INDUSTRIAL PROPERTIES BENEFIT BY ANNUAL VALUE RATING
GROUP SUMMARY.
It is evident from this table that the less improved industrial firm’s properties are, the more they are bonussed
by the annual \alue rating system. This bonus is given at the expense of the firms with highly improved
properties in the first list.
38. THE EFFECT OF RATES UPON IMPROVEMENT
OF HOLDINGS.
Comparison of the two group summaries shows that
the annual value rating system has a pronounced anti-
social effect in discouraging improvement of factories, and
inducing the erection of poor structures with a low rating-
value.
There can be no question but that high improvement
ratios are in the best interests of any district for all
classes of the community. Where valuable buildings and
machinery are located, many more people are employed,
generally, than wheie there are poorer improvements. The
provision of the better improvements in itself, by giving
a greater demand for labor and for the products of other
industries, reacts to the good of the community generally.
Good quality modern, factories have better working condi-
tions for staff. They tend to make people content to live
near them, as against poor class factories which deteri-
orate the values around them.
Despite the desirability of stimulating improvement
of these factories, it is found that the annual value rating
system works strongly against this result. This will be
evident by collecting the totals for the two groupings of
industrial properties as under:
It will be seen that although there is little difference
between the site values of the firms in the two groupings,
the improvements in the first group are more than five
times as valuable as those in the second. The difference is
much more startling when the first group of 10 firms in
List A is compared with the first group of List B. The
improvements for the former are over a million pounds
in value, against a mere two thousand pounds in the latter.
Yet the annual value rates on the more highly improved
group are 44 times as great as those on the less improved
group.
39. ABILITY TO PAY EXAMINED.
It is often thought that because some firms are pros-
perous and have a large capital investment, the annual
value rating system will automatically rate them accord-
ing to their ability to pay. Even if this contention were
true, the discouragement of improvements seen from this
study would tend to outweigh it. However, closer examina
tion of the firms in Lists A and B shows that this con-
tention is quite fallacious.
The first ten firms in List A are prosperous firms with
a high capital investment and financial resources, which
permit them to make improvements.
But the same thing is true of firms in all sections in
Lists A and B. For example, compare the fifth group
in List A with the first. This group contains Common-
wealth Chemicals and Fertilisers Ltd., G. Bramall & Co.,
Laughton’s Pty. Ltd., G. Howling & Son Pty. Ltd,
Colonial Sugar Refining Company Ltd., Sheetleather Pty.
Ltd., all particularly strong financially.
These firms, too, are penalised by annual value rating,
but only to a small extent compared with those at the
head of the list. On the other hand, the firms in this
bracket are making comparatively poor use of their sites.
They have abundant financial resources to enable improve-
ment to be effected, but the rating system discourages
improvements which would be attended with greatly in-
creased rates.
Similarly, in the List B which is called upon to pay
increased rates under site value rating, the second group
contains Lord’s Quarries Pty. Ltd., Victor Leggo & Co. &
Farmers Ltd, Gibbins Farm Implements Ltd., Standard
Quarries Pty. Ltd., Co-operative Box Co. Pty. Ltd., Massey
Pty. Ltd., Boon Spa Pty. Ltd., Mitchell Agricultural Imple-
ments Pty. Ltd., Nobel (Aust.) Ltd. (1.C.1.), which are all
financially strong and able to make improvements or pay
increased rates.
Investment in Improvements or in Land Values?
It is not currently realised that strong financial firms
may have their capital invested either in buildings and
machinery, or in holding large areas of valuable land.
Capital investment in buildings and machinery per-
forms a definite public service. It creates a demand for
further materials to replace those used up and stimulates
all related industries. It gives added demand and sustains
demand for labor which tends to improve the financial
and working conditions of employees.
Capital investment in land does not have any such
beneficial effect upon industry, for no materials involving-
labor are consumed to need replacement.
The annual value rating system penalises most
heavily the firms which have their capital invested mostly
in buildings and plant, while rewarding with lower rates
those whose capital is largely invested in land values.
Those whose capital is entirely invested in sneculative
holding of land receive the greatest rate bonus of all. This
result is highly anti-social.
40. ANNUAL VALUE RATES INCREASE COSTS OF
PRODUCTION.
The study has shown that annual value rating is
responsible for a considerable increase in the costs of
production of factories over those under site value rating.
This increase is greatest for the most improved factories
and taners down the scale. The least developed and most
inefficient concerns actually receive a bonus.
A Capital Levy.
The effect upon costs of production will be best
illustrated by considering the first and most highly im-
p-’oved group of ten factories summarised in the Table A
of section 37. These ten firms between them pay in rates
£4,767 more under annual value rating than under site
value rating.


Group
Most Improved
Number
of Firms
in Group
Ratio
Improvements
Site Value
Total Value
of Undertakings
(Land and
Improvements)
Rate Difference
between A.V. &
Site Value
(See Note 1)
Rate
Difference
Capitalised
Per Cent.
Difference
In Costs
(Note 2)
Increase
Increase
Increase
1
. .. 10
17.2
£1,180,000
• £8,587
£171,000
14.6
2
. .. 11
10.9
409,000
2,605
52,000
12.7
3
. . . 11
8.4
484,000
2,677
53,500
11.1
4
. .. 10
7.1
252,000
1,230
25,000
9.9
5
. .. 10
5.85
74,000
301
6,000
8.0
6
. .. 10
4.4
624,000
1,668
33,000
5.3
7
. . . 9
3.2
108,000
90
2,000
1.8
District Average
2.80
—
Decrease
Decrease
Decrease
8
. . . 10
2.55
631,000
485
9,700
1.5
9
. . . 10
1.8
55,000
168
3,400
6.2
10
. . . 10
1.49
63,000
322
6,400
10.2
11
. . . 10
0.96
103,000
917
18,400
17.8
12
. . . 10
0.09
26,000
618
12,400
47.6
Least Improved
Subsidy
Subsidy
Subsidy
This is a high annual charge imposed on the firms
merely because of the degree to which their improvements
are above the average for the district. This additional
charge is equal to the annual charges which the business
would be called upon to carry with an increase in its
capital outlay equal to the charge capitalised. At 5%
interest this amounts to £95,340.
In effect, these ten most improved factories are being
subjected through the annual value rating system to a
capital levy of over £95,000. On the total capital value
of the land and buildings and plant, £1,170,000, this repre-
sents 8.1%.
This is only a part of the burden placed upon these
most improved factories. In estimating the full burden
imposed by the rating system, account must also be taken
of the Melbourne and Metropolitan Board of Works rates,
which are levied upon the same annual value, and are
additional to the general rate.
The rate imposed by this authority is 1/8 in the
pound, which means an additional charge of £3,820 above
what would be paid on the site value rating basis. This,
in turn, is equal to the charges for interest on a capital
outlay of £76,400, or an additional 6.5% on the capital
improved value of the undertakings.
The two charges together amount to an additional
annual outlay of £8,587, equivalent to an increase
in capital cost of £171,000, and an increase in the costs of
production of these firms by 14.6% of the capital value of
land, buildings and plant.
Relative Injustice Between Firms.
If the very considerable increase in costs shown above
applied equally to all factories and firms, there would be
no relative injustice between them. Actually, the increase
is concentrated over the most efficient and improved firms,
and tapers down to nil with those of only the average
improvement ratio of the district. With those less improved
than the district average an actual subsidy is given.
For example, in the seventh group of Table A in
section 37, the rate difference is only £5O, equal to an
increase in costs of £l,OOO for the General Rate, or only
1% of the capital value in land, buildings and plant of the
group. In the least improved group of all (the first listed
in Table B of Section 37), the rate bonus under annual
value rating as against site value rating is £343. This
is equivalent to a capital subsidy of £6,860, due to the
general rate alone. The position for the various groups
is shown in the summary below:
EXTENT OF INCREASE IN PRODUCTION C OSTS DUE TO RATING ON ANNUAL VALUES.
Summary for Each Group,
Note 1: The rate difference is the combination of the Municipal General rate and the M. & M. Board of Works
Rate as compared with site value rate. The General Rate alone accounts for 55 1% of the figures in the last
three columns.
Note 2: Percentage difference in cost is on the total value of land and improvements and not upon share capital.
INEFFICIENCY AND LAND SPECULATION
SUBSIDISED.
It is seen that the whole trend of the annual value
rating system is to subsidise those firms with large areas
of poorly developed land, and to greatly increase the
production costs of those adequately developing their
holdings. The proportionate subsidy to those with the
poorest improvements is extremely heavy—equivalent to a
capital bonus to 47.6% of the total value of the holdings.
These results are very disturbing, and must be
reckoned as a fundamental weakness of the annual value
rating system. They are characteristic of the system
itself, and not a mere peculiarity of the rating system in
Footscray.
Rates are commonly thought to be of little importance
in production, chiefly because it is assumed that they
apply with equal force between one firm and another, and
are a common factor. This view evidently needs complete
revision in the light of this study, which shows that a firm
in the most improved group will pay sixteen times as much
in rates as one in the least improved group holding land
of an equal total value.
41. PRODUCTION COSTS AND PLANT EXTENSIONS.
The figures already given for added costs of production
due to annual value rating, although striking, considerably
understate the full incidence upon production costs. In
them the excess rate payments under annual value rating
have been linked with the capital value of the whole
undertaking in land, buildings and plant.
The crippling influence of the rating system is only
seen at its full force when extensions of plant are under-
taken. This will be best seen by considering some actual
cases of plant extension.
During the last year three large firms made very
extensive additions to their plant and their rates were
revised in consequence. These firms were Imperial
Chemical Industries Ltd., H. B. Dickie Ltd., and Creamoata
Ltd. The ratable annual values were increased by £1,250,
£2,300, and £450 respectively, as a result of these ex-
tensions.
The following paragraph shows the proportionate
effect of the increased rates (general rate and M.M.B.W.
rate) compared with the cost of making the improvements.
. Per Cent.
Firm Capital Cost Increase Capitalised Increase
Imp. Chem. Ind. of Extensions in Rates Rate Increase on Cost
Ltd £25,000 £234 £4,680 18.7
H. B. Dickie Ltd. 46,000 432 8,640 18.7
Creamoata Ltd. 9,000 84.5 1,690 18.7
The proportionate increase in costs of production due


to the rates on improvements varies between one firm and
another according to the proportions in which the total
value is distributed between land and improvements.
But in respect of each particular extension, addition
or improvement, the mere fact of making that improve-
ment saddles the enterprise with an additional annual
charge in rates, under annual value rating, equivalent to
an increase in the capital cost of making the improve-
ments by 18.7 per cent.
This effect is inherent in the system, and not peculiar
to Footscray. It will operate in all localities, only the
percentage varying with the different rates in the £
imposed. For Footscray, the percentage is that quoted,
but for most other districts, where the rate in the £ is
higher, the percentage increase in costs will be higher.
The Footscray rates in the £ are relatively low, largely
due to municipal profits on sale of electricity being applied
to reduce rates.
With a Municipality using a rate of 2/6 in the £,
the extra cost would amount to 20.8%, and with a general
rate of 3/- in the £, the figure would be 23.3%.
This increase in costs of production due to increased
rates attending additions, extensions or improvements of
plant is of deep significance, for it affects plants great or
small. It faces even those poorly improved properties at
present gaining a bonus in low rates, as soon as they
develop their properties.
42. EFFECTS UPON MARKETS AND INDUSTRIAL
EMPLOYMENT.
The incidence of annual value rating, in raising costs
of production, reacts against the interest of employers
and employees alike. It means that reductions in costs
which should be obtainable from the improved machines,
plant and premises of the most enterprising firms, are
offset artificially by the rating system. This tends to leave
inefficient firms on the same level as those that do
modernise their plant and so lessens the incentive to
improve.
Reduction of costs to the most efficient firms, obtain-
able under site value rating, would tend to be passed to the
public, in whole or part, in lower prices. Lower prices
would tend to widen the markets with increased demand
for the products. Increased demand for products would
tend to greater employment than would otherwise be
needed.
Reference to the firms in Lists A and B of Table II
will show that those in List A give vastly more employ-
ment than their corresponding groupings in List B. This
follows as a matter of course, for where there is heavy
capital investment in buildings, plant and machinery, there
is generally a heavy demand for labor to operate and use
them. On the other hand, where there is little investment
in such plant there is little to require the services of
labor.
Under these conditions the incidence of the annual
value rating system seems opposed to commonsense, in
that it takes a heavy imposition from those firms which
have shown a willingness to make heavy capital outlay
on plant which will give a livelihood to many thousands
of people. On the other hand, it actually gives a rate
bonus to those firms which have shown no willingness to
make such expenditure.
By contrast, the site value rate being a definite amount
whether the property is improved or not, offers every
inducement to the fullest development.
43. FACTORY RATES COMPARED WITH MUNICIPAL
SERVICES RECEIVED BY FACTORIES.
Municipal rates are intended to be payments for
services rendered, and should, therefore, bear a definite
relation to the services received or available for use. This
angle is so generally forgotten and yet so all important,
that a special section is given to it in this study.
It is found that the rate contribution from the most
improved factories is altogether disproportionate to the
value of the services received, while that of the least
improved firms is well below the value of the services
received from the Council.
In the case of factories, the Municipal services
rendered are practically confined to road maintenance and
a share in the overhead charges of the Municipality. Other
facilities which are availed of by residential sections and
add to residential land values (such as parks and gardens,
public libraries, creches and baby health centers, garbage
collection, etc.) are little availed of by factories.
On the other hand, a large proportion of the wear on
the main roads must be credited to factories, owing to the
heavy usage by their vehicles. Nevertheless, that the
factory contribution is relatively too great, having regard
to the services rendered is evident from estimated main-
tenance and replacement costs supplied by the City
Engineer.
In the section of Whitehall Street between Lyons
Street and Francis Street, there are found thirteen of the
firms listed in Table 11. The estimated annual maintenance
cost on this section serving the factories is £5BO, which,
with an additional £196 annually as a charge towards
replacement at the end of its useful life, gives a total
annual cost for this section of £776. Under annual value
rating, the rate contribution of these firms is £4,160, under
site value rating, it would be £2,830.
Even if it be assumed that only the factories con-
tribute to local revenue in this section, and that the few
residences and two hotels contribute nothing, it is evident
that under site value rating, these factories contribute
four times the annual costs on the whole section of road,
while under annual value rating they contribute nearly six
times the cost.
Actually, it is not appropriate to debit the whole cost
of this section against the factories concerned. For a con-
siderable part of its length, this street is a main highway
to approach the City, used by all classes of vehicles and
not exclusively for factory traffic. Further, although the
annual costs quoted cover the whole length of the section,
almost a third of the length is not fairly chargeable to
these factories. Counting both sides of the street, there
are 140 chains of frontage of which 26 chains front the
Electricity Commission store yard, which is exempt from
rates. A further thirteen chains is frontage to Hanmer
Reserve and Yarraville Gardens which are municipal
property and non-ratable. The costs for these sections are
most appropriately to be spread over the whole Munici-
pality in proportion to the value of holdings.
While this does not take account of other municipal
services and the share of overhead expenses, it deals with
the main one concerning factories. It is evident that these
factories would not be escaping lightly under site value
rating, and that their contribution under annual value
rating is quite disproportionate to the value of services
received.
High Proportion of Revenue in Factory Rates.
Analysis shows that the 71 well-improved factories
of List A, Table 11, contribute, under annual value rating,
£16,199 of the total rate revenue, £83,000, i.e., 19.5 per
cent, of the total. This is an enormous figure coming
from less than half of 1 per cent, of the total holdings in
the Municipality.
Under site value rating these factories would con-
tribute £6,670, i.e., 8 per cent, of the total rate revenue,
which is still a high figure from such a small number.
The poorer group of factories in List B, Table 11, pay
£4,551 under annual value rating, or 5.5 per cent, of the
total, spread over the 50 factories or firms in the group.
Under site value rating their rates would actually be
increased to £5,938 or 7.1 per cent of the total rate
revenue.
It would appear that the relative rate share of these
two factory groups is much more equitable under site
value rating than annual value rating, having regard to
the relative numbers (71-50) of firms in the groups.
44. HIGH FACTORY RATES DO NOT MEAN LOW
HOUSE RATES.
Many people view with equanimity, high rates imposed
upon factories, in the belief that these high rates mean
correspondingly low rates upon houses. This view is
quite understandable, as the residents of the district, as


well as forming the great majority of the ratepayers, are
those who contribute most to its continued prosperity. If
the annual value rating system were found to give lower
rates to homes generally, that would be a strong influence
to nullify the disadvantages seen in its incidence on
factories.
However, it needs to be stressed that the facts shown
by the study are the very reverse of what has been
currently assumed. So far from houses gaining by the high
rates on factories under annual value rating, the over-
whelming majority of houses as well as factories pay
considerably more under annual value rating than under
site value rating.
The higher rates on good factories mean lower rates
not for houses, but for holders of vacant land, very poorly
improved land, and for owners of most valuable shop-
sites in Nicholson Street, as well as for the poorest and
least developed firms and factories.
Houses Gain More Than Factories Under Site Value
Rating.
It has been found that houses gain proportionately
greater reductions in rates than do factories under site
value rating. On the whole, homes have a higher improve-
ment to land value ratio than have factories, and it is
only the much larger size of the latter that makes their
rate saving look larger.
The highest ratio for any factory is the Victorian
Woollen Mills Pty. Ltd., with 29.0, and this high ratio is
only due to the land being cheaper than normal, as it is
on the edge of a swamp. There are only two other firms
with ratios of as high as 20. In fact, reference to the firms
on List A of Table 11 shows that there are only 19
factories with an improvement ratio of 10 or over in the
whole City.
By contrast, there are no less than 32 streets in which
the average houses have improvement ratios greater than
10, and ranging up to 25. In many other streets individual
houses often exceed these values. On the other hand, it
is very rarely that houses are found with such low im-
provement values as in the factories in list B of Table 11.
A further reference to the Housing Section of this
study shows that approximately 90 per cent, of the houses
would have rate reductions under site value rating. On the
other hand, only 59 per cent, of the firms and factories
gain reduced rates under site value rating.
These proportions are substantially the same as in
other districts in which the rate incidence has been studied.
45. THE TEN MOST IMPROVED FACTORIES.*
Some interesting features of the ten most improved
firms in Table 11, List A, should be remarked upon. The
most creditable factory in the district, in appearance, is
that of Warren & Brown Pty. Ltd., Engineers, which
appears fourth on the list. It does not head the list because
land values are relatively high in its locality in Ballarat
Road. It is a comparatively small concern alongside the
others in the group. The building is new and of a very
attractive appearance, and a decided asset to the district.
In this group of ten firms penalised most by annual
value rating are two others of the very few which have
shown some civic pride in the design and layout of their
factories. These two are the Olympic Tyre & Rubber Co.
Ltd., and Southern Can Co. Pty. Ltd.
The former has a splendid factory in Cross Street,
designed with a view to ornament as well as utility. It
stands back from the road and is set in well kept gardens
and lawn. The civic pride of the management has extended
to levelling off and turning into rock gardens and lawn,
at its own expense, the land on the opposite side of the
street, which belongs to the Railway Department.
This firm has a second factory which is not very
attractive in appearance, being surrounded by a galvanised
iron corrugated fence. It houses valuable machinery which
is heavily rated, but the buildings are not nearly in the
same class. Nevertheless, the “show” factory' carries
nearly twice the rates, although the site value is almost
the same in each.
SOME HOUSING CONTRASTS
(See Plate 111. opposite)
BAYVIEW ROAD
On the left are two very attractive working-
class homes with well kept gardens, penalised
by annual value rating.
On the right is an old type residence of equal
frontage, but much inferior quality and with
no garden. All of these three houses would
pay about the same under site-value rating.
HOTHAM STREET
On the left is a poor type house with a larger
than average frontage, 57ft. Such properties
depreciate the value of neighboring properties.
On the right is the adjoining house of good
type, with well kept garden and good frontage,
48ft.
BENA STREET
A very attractive worker’s home with well
kept garden, trellis work and ornamental per-
gola work which have increased the annual
value rates on this property to above the aver-
age for the street. On either side of this
house are vacant lots of the same frontage,
40ft. Compare the rates on the built and
vacant lots.
GEELONG ROAD
Geelong Road is, in the main, a very good
residential street, but is spoilt by properties
such as the fuel yard and large vacant lot
seen in the right hand photo. Such properties
contribute little in rates under annual value
rating.
CORAL AVENUE
A street of good, modern timber homes with
tiled roofs, all penalised by annual value rat-
ing. Frontages are 42ft.
HANSEN STREET
A street of good type modern brick and timber
homes with tiled roofs, all favored by site-
value rating. Such properties are an asset
to a city. Frontages are 42ft.


SOME HOUSING CONTRASTS
PRATE III.
Frontage No. 73 33ft. No. 75 36ft.
N.A.V. Rate £4 14 6 £5 10
U.C.V. Rate £3 5 0 £3 12 0
BAYVIEW ROAD
No. 79
Front., 36ft.; N.A.V. Rate, £2/18/6; U.C.V. Rate, £3/12/-
No. 14
N.A.V. Rate £2 14 0 U.C.V. Rate £5 17 0
HOTHAM STREET
No. 10
N.A.V. Rate £5 7 0 U.C.V. Rate £4 17 0
BENA STREET
No. 9 (vac.) No. 11 (house) No. 13 (vac.)
Frontages 40ft. 40ft. 40ft,
N.A.V. Rate £1 2 0 £5 1 0 £1 2 0
U.C.V. Rate £3 19 6 £3 19 6 £3 19 6
CORAL AVENUE
Nos. 1,3, 5 etc.
Frontages 42ft.
N.A.V. Rate £4 10 0 U.C.V. Rate £4 3 0
GEELONG ROAD
Fuel Yard Shop Vacant Land
Frontages 66ft. 18ft. 100ft.
N.A.V. Rate £2 5 0 £4 10 0 £3 16 6
U.C.V. Rate £8 0 0 £2 3 0 £13 10 0
HANSEN STREET
No. 67 No. 69 No. 71 No. 73
N.A.V. Rates £4 10 0 £4 14 6 £4 6 0 £4 14 6
U.C.V. Rates £3 7 0 £3 7 0 £3 7 0 £3 7 0


PLATE IV.
BUSINESS SITES WHICH ARE A CREDIT TO THE CITY
FIRE STATION IN DROOP STREET
Frontage, 111ft. N.A.V. Rate, £102; U.C.V. Rate, £22.
Y.W.C.A. RESIDENTIAL IN GORDON STREET
Frontage, 100 ft. N.A.V. Rate, £102; U.C.V. Rate, £l4.
AND SOME WHICH ARE NOT
ANDERSON STREET
Frontage, 48ft. N.A.V. Rate, £3/7/6; U.C.V. Rate, £9/10/.
BARKLY STREET
Shops:— 48ft. N.A.V. Rate, £6/1/-; U.C.V. Rate, £18/11/-
Vacant:— 45ft. NA.V. Rate, £5/1/-; U.C.V. Rate, £17/16/-
FINE THEATRE IN HOPKINS STREET
Frontage, 88ft. N.A.V. Rate, £145; U.C.V. Rate, £122.
BALLARAT ROAD
Frontage, 18ft. N.A.V. Rate, £10/1/-; U.C.V. Rate, £2/17/-
GAMON STREET
Frontage, 84ft. N.A.V. Rate, £2/16/-; U.C.V. Rate, £10.
BALLARAT ROAD
Frontage, 69ft. N.A.V. Rate, £2/14/-; U.C.V. Rate, £9/10/-


BUSINESSES WHICH ARE A CREDIT TO
THE CITY ARE PENALISED BY ANNUAL
VALUE RATING
DROOP STREET
A fine residential fire-station of which resi-
dents are justly proud. The municipality
makes a grant to the Fire Brigade, but takes
a large sum back in rates under annual value
rating upon such a well improved property.
HOPKINS STREET
On the right is a splendid theatre which is an
asset to the business section.
GORDON STREET
On the left is the Y.W.C.A. residential club
built by the Commonwealth War Workers’
Housing Trust at an inflated war-time cost of
£20,000. Buildings constructed at these modern
cost-levels are treated more harshly under an-
nual value rating than those built at lower
cost levels.
BALLARAT ROAD
A fine modern block of shops on the inter-
section with Summerhill Road. Although
right at the extreme boundary of the city, this
block is rated among the highest shops, apart
from N icholson-st.
BUSINESS SITES WHICH ARE NOT A
CREDIT TO THE CITY ARE FAVORED BY
ANNUAL VALUE RATING
ANDERSON STREET
Left, a poor timber building, used as a laun-
dry. A fire-risk spoiling a good shopping
centre.
GAMON STREET
Right, a poorly improved property owned by an
absentee firm in Werribee. A poor usage for
a main street.
BARKLY STREET
These inferior shops and vacant land adjoin
the fine Girls’ High School seen in the back-
ground.
BALLARAT ROAD
An unsightly junk yard on the intersection
with Droop Street.
(See Plate IV. opposite)
Southern Can Coy. is very well laid ou; and raises
the tons of its surroundings. It is set back from the
street v *.th well kept lawn and gardens.
The others in the group have their high ratio in the
costliness of the buildings and machinery, with the ex-
ception of the Central Wool Committee stores, which owe
their high ratio to the low cost of the land. These stores
are located on the extreme limits of the district, where land
is cheaper.
It should be noticed that in this group (and in all others
in the tables) there are firms which have a high degree
of improvement for their works, but which also have other
holdings of low improvement value, which tend to reduce
and offset the gain on the highly improved properties.
In some cases, in List B, the gain on the works is
more than offset by the increased rates on vacant or poorly
developed holdings additional to the works. This shows
the importance of taking account of all holdings in order
to get a true picture overall for the firms concerned.
* Most of these firms are included in the photographs of industrial
properties shown in Plate V. of this study.
46, THE TEN LEAST IMPROVED FIRMS.
Of the firms least improved, most have considerable
areas of vacant land associated with them. The first two
hold particularly valuable factory sites, completely vacant,
not even being fenced. At the head of the list is the
Australian Mercantile Land and Finance Coy. Ltd., a very
prosperous firm holding 8i acres. The second on the list
is a South Melbourne firm, with 2i acres.
Nos. 5 and 6 are timber merchants on main streets
(Gamon and Barkly), the latter being particularly un-
sightly and holding up the development of this important
shopping street. These classes of business have heavy
wear on roads.
The higher rates on the quarries are appropriate, as
the existing rates are quite disproportionate to the heavy
wear on the roads associated with this class of business.
The firms with ratios below 1.0 in the first twenty
firms of List B are mainly poor looking, and tend to drag
down the areas around them.*
Other Types of Poor Business Properties.
Apart from factories, there is a more numerous class
of poor business premises which contributes little in rates
on annual value rating, but would contribute more under
site value rating. In this class are woodyards, junk yards,
storage yards and a proportion of old business properties
which have become decadent and derelict, having only
demolition value. Such properties often occupy land in
good streets with a high value per foot. The rate con-
tribution from this class of property, in the aggregate,
is considerable under site value rating.
47. CONCLUSIONS REGARDING INCIDENCE OF
FACTORY RATES.
(i) The present annual value rating system operates
against the best interests of the district by bonussing
poorly improved factories through the rating system,
at the expense of heavily increased rates to the highly
improved factories and the home owners of the
district.
(ii) A change to site value rating would work towards
improvement of the district by encouraging better
and more frequent improvements to be made, in the
knowledge that the capital and production costs
would not be inflated by extra annual charges through
making the improvements.
(iii) Firms which were not willing to improve their
properties under site value rating would be called
upon to pay their fair share towards Municipal ex-
penses under site value rating.
(iv) Stimulation of improvements under site value rating
would mean added demand for labor and make the
district more attractive to live in.
* Many of these properties are included in the photographs of indus-
trial properties on Plate VI. of this study.


PART VI.
MUNICIPAL FINANCE ANALYSIS.
HOW RATE PAYMENTS COMPARE WITH THE
VALUE OF SERVICES RECEIVED.
48. THE NATURE OF RATES AND THE SCOPE
OF INVESTIGATION.
In considering the merits of alternative rating
systems, it is most important to bear in mind that muni-
cipal councils exist to render certain definite services to
the ratepayers, and that the rate payments are, in essence,
payments for the services received.
Some of these services are general commitments for
the municipality as a whole, of the nature of overhead
expenses, and the cost of these must be spread over all
ratepayers in some definite proportion.
Other services, such as road and street maintenance
and capital costs, are localised in particular localities, and
the payment for these may be shared in a different pro-
portion to that for the overhead and related items.
In equity, it should be possible to show that the rates
payable are at least roughly proportionate to the value of
the benefits received under whatever form of rating is
regarded as best.
Under both the annual rental value and the site or
unimproved land value rating systems, the rates are borne
only by property owners. In the former, rates are pro-
portionate to the value of the land and improvements
combined. In the latter, they are proportionate to the
value of the site exclusive of the improvements.
We have, therefore, to compare the rate incidence
upon two broad classes of properties, i.e., built properties,
and unbuilt or vacant properties, respectively.
The object, in this section of the study, is to find out
which of the two systems of rating requires a rate pay-
ment most closely proportionate to the value of the bene-
fits received.
With this object, municipal expenditure has been dis-
sected and classified into two distinct groups: (A) Items
connected with localised services, and (B) Overhead items
for the district as a whole.
49. THE METHODS OF COMPARISON USED.
Of the items connected with localised services, by far
the greatest is expenditure on maintenance of roads and
streets and replacement of the surface at the end of its
useful life. These items account for more than half of
the total expenditure in the category of localised services.
They have, therefore, been used as a basic starting point
to compare the adequacy of the rate contribution on built
and unbuilt sites.
Comprehensive figures for the average annual costs
for road maintenance and replacement at the end of the
useful life, for various classes of roads and streets, have
been supplied by the City Engineer. These costs have been
reduced to a cost “per foot of frontage” basis and compared
with the rate payment per foot of frontage for built and
for unbuilt sites.
A separate sub-section is devoted to the comparison
of road costs for these two classes of properties. Groups
of streets are considered in newly established residential
areas, older residential areas, and factory areas respec-
tively. In a later sub-section the other localised services
are examined and, finally, the appropriate share of the
general or overhead charges of the municipality is con-
sidered.
50. SHARING THE ROAD MAINTENANCE COSTS
BETWEEN BUILT AND VACANT SITES.
In most of the residential streets, the initial costs of
roadmaking are a special charge upon the individual
ratepayers concerned. Capital cost has therefore been
ignored in this comparison for such properties. The figures
used are exclusively average annual road maintenance
charges, and the annual share towards reconstruction of
the road at the end of its useful life.
Nevertheless, there are a good number of important
roads, the capital cost of which is met by the Council. It
would be appropriate to expect an extra contribution
beyond maintenance in these cases.
The Minimum Rate Share.
As the basic point in this inquiry, we assume that the
very minimum rate which can be expected of any rate-
payer must be sufficient to cover the maintenance cost and
share of replacement cost at the end of its useful life,
for the frontage of roadway (and footpath) serving his
own property.
In addition, the minimum must include not only such
cost for his own frontage, but also a pro-rata share of the
rate-exempt frontages, road intersections, opening roads
and others which do not contribute to council revenue and
for which the cost must be spread over all ratepayers.
The proportion of non-ratable to ratable frontages varies
widely in different streets, and the fairest allocation is to
use the overall proportion for the district as a whole or,
better still, that for the ward in which the street is located.
The proportion of non-ratable to ratable lengths in
the various wards was given in the Section 4 (3) of this
Study, and from it we find that the minimum share must
cover maintenance and replacement charges for an
additional 54 per cent. (North Ward), 50 per cent. (Middle
Ward), 33J per cent. (South Ward), 39 per cent. (North-
West Ward), and 27 per cent. (Kingsville Ward), above the
frontage of the particular ratepayer in question, as the
share of the non-ratable frontage costs.
It should be stressed that the appropriate rate figure
must be something higher than this maintenance cost. On
fop of this there will be some addition for the other
localised services and the share of the overhead expenses
of the Council. This figure merely forms the lower irreduc-
ible limit of the rate payment which may fairly be expected
for any property.
Rates on Vacant Lots Do Not Cover Annual Maintenance
Costs.
This Study has shown that in none of the residential
streets do the annual value rates on vacant land anywhere
nearly reach this minimum figure required to cover the
maintenance on their own frontage of roadway, let alone
any contribution to the other expenses of the Council.
It is not merely a matter of being slightly below the
required figure. In the great majority of the streets the
contribution of vacant lots under annual value rating
amounts to only between a quarter and a half of this re-
quired minimum figure.
This feature of the study is regarded as of the greatest
importance, not merely to Footscray, but to all municipali-
ties using annual value rating. If vacant and poorly im-
proved properties are contributing less than their own
maintenance costs, it means that the least desirable class
of ratepayers are being subsidised through the rating
system, at the expense of those who are an asset to the
district. This conclusion is supported by the other sections
of the Study.
ROAD MAINTENANCE AND REPLACEMENT COSTS
COMPARED WITH THE RATE YIELD OF VACANT
SITES AND BUILT SITES UNDER ANNUAL VALUE
AND SITE VALUE RATING RESPECTIVELY.
Comparisons are made of costs per foot of frontage.
(a) RESIDENTIAL STREETS.
These streets are all macadam roads for which the
district average maintenance costs are sad. per square yard
of road surface, and for which the provision for replace-
ment at the end of the useful life of the surface is 2d.
per square yard.
Annual values per foot, built and unbuilt, are obtained
by dividing the average annual values on the street graphs
of Section 8 of this Study, by the average frontages on the
same graphs A to D.


Width of
Metalled
Surface
Feet
Area
Per Ft.
Length
Sq. Yds.
Cost per
Cost per Ft.
Rate Yield per Foot Frontaee
Road or Street
Ft. of Road
d.
of Ratable
Frontage *
d.
Annual
Vacant
d.
Value On
Built
d.
Site Value
on Either
d.
SOUTH WARD
Blackwood ..
24
2.6
18.8
12.5
3.75
27.2
14 3
Dickens
24
2.6
18.8
12.5
3.75
28.0
14 3
Buninyong
26
2.9
21.0
14.0
3.75
30.5
14 3
Fehon
40
4.4
32.0
21.3
5.05
26.5
19 0
Gladstone
23
2.5
18.2
12.1
3.75
20.6
14 3
Frederick
25
2.8
20.2
13.4
3.75
24.0
14 3
Ducker
40
4.4
32.0
21.3
3.75
34.0
14.3
Gray
30
3.3
24.0
16.0
3.75
25.0
14.3
Hall
24
2.6
18.8
12.5
3.75
24.1
14.3
Hughes
28
3.1
22.4
15.0
3.75
23.1
14.3
Kent
22
2.4
17.4
11.6
3.1
25.9
12.0
Lennox
32
3.5
25.4
17.0
3.75
22.6
14.3
Marjory
15
1.7
12.3
8.3
4.2
23 2
16 5
Newcastle
24
2.6
18.8
12.5
3.1
21.5
12.0
Ovens
24
2.6
18.8
12.5
2.5
22,5
9.5
Powell
40
4.4
32.0
21.3
5.0
25.8
19.0
Simpson
24
2.6
18.8
12.5
3.75
25.4
14.3
Sussex
25
2.8
20.2
13.4
3.75
24.0
14.3
Tarrengower .. ..
24
2.6
18.8
12.5
3.75
23.1
14.3
KINGSVILLE WARD
Chirnside
25
2.8
20.2
12.8
5.0
28.1
19.0
Coronation
26
2.9
21.0
13.4
5.0
32.5
19.0
Empress
26
2.9
21.0
13.4
5.0
28.0
19.0
Edgar
38
4.2
30.0
19.0
5.0
22.6
19.0
Queensville
25
2.8
20.2
12.8
5.0
29.6
19.0
Geelong
25
2.8
20.2
25.6
6.25
25.0
23,8
Wales
28
3.1
22.4
14.2
5.0
28.8
19.0
Bena
20
2.2
16.0
10.2
6.25
25.0
23.8
Eirene
20
2.2
16.0
10.2
5.0
26.7
19.0
Kingston
20
2.2
16.0
10.2
3.75
21.2
14.3
Severn
24
2.6
18.8
11.9
5.0
25.2
19.0
NORTH-WEST WARD
Adelaide-
24
2.6
18.8
13.0
3.75
23.1
14.3
Swan
23
2.5
18.1
12.5
3.75
23.2
14.3
Southhampton
23
2.5
18.1
12.5
3.75
22.8
14.3
Everard
23
2.5
18.1
12.5
3.75
25.0
14.3
Eleanor
25
2.8
20.2
14.0
5.0
25.0
19.0
Leander
24
2.6
18.8
13.0
3.75
25.9
14.3
Stafford
21
2.2
16.0
11.1
3.75
24.9
14.3
Dudley
24
2.6
18.8
13.0
3.75
25.5
14.3
Liverpool
Summerhill .. ..
22
38
2.4
4.2
17.4
30.0
12.1
20.8
3.75
5.0
24.1
28.7
14.3
19.0
Market
31
3.4
24.6
17.0
5.0
25.7
19.0
* Figures for costs include the share for the rate-
exempt frontages to the average proportion for the Ward
in question. For each ratable property, this share additional
to that for its own actual frontage amounts to: South
Ward (331 per cent.), Kingsville Ward (27 per cent.),
North-West Ward (39 per cent.), Middle Ward (50 per
cent.), North Ward (54 per cent.).
The accompanying table gives comparisons of the
actual cost per foot of ratable frontage in residential
streets of the type of road construction which is employed
m the overwhelming majority of the residential streets.
The details are given fully in the table to enable the basis
of working to be readily checked. The last four columns
are the ones to be compared, these four showing the
average cost to the Council compared with the rate which
the Council receives under annual value rating and site
value rating respectively. All of these figures are reduced
to a figure per foot of ratable frontage.
The rate yield under annual value rating is shown
separately for vacant lots and for built lots (average). The
site value rates being the same for vacant as for built lots,
only one column is needed.
The streets for which particulars are given cover
compact blocks of residential streets in three different
wards. All of these streets have vacant lots. In some,
the vacant frontage is very large.
What The Table Shows.
Compare the column headed “cost per foot of ratable
frontage” with the next one which shows the rate yield
of vacant lots in these streets, under Annual Value Rating.
It is seen that in no case is the rate contribution anywhere
nearly adequate to meet road costs, let alone overhead
charges in which vacant lots should share.
On the other hand, compare the next column showing
the contribution of built properties per foot of frontage,
in all these cases the built properties contribute much more
than sufficient to meet the costs. It is evident that vacant
lots are not contributing their fair share of the council
costs in respect of their frontages, and that built properties
are compelled to make up the deficiency by contributing
more than their fair share to rate revenue.
It. will be evident that the last column, showing the
rate yield per foot under value rating, is a far nearer
approximation to the costs incurred than is represented bv
either of the other columns.
Further, as road charges form such a large part of
Council expenses for services rendered, and this service
is rendered alike to the vacant as to the built frontage the
enormous difference in rate contribution per foot on these
two classes of property cannot be regarded with
equanimity.
Can a rating system be regarded as economically or
morally sound which differentiates in the payment required
for the same service between built and vacant properties,
to the degree shown? If differentiation in payment is
justified at all, should it not rather be in favor of the built
property which is an asset to the district, rather than the
reverse? Is it economically sound to bonus vacant holders
at the expense of those who build?
* Each foot of road has. two feet of frontage.


Road Costs For Other Than Residential Streets.
The road maintenance cost can only be regarded as a
minimum figure which may be rightly expected to be
recovered in rates. In some classes of sites, it is reasonable
to expect considerably more than this amount to be re-
couped. For example, the shopping sections are focussing
points for traffic over the district and much of the wear on
arterial and subsidiary roads, as well as that actually
fronting the shops themselves, can be rightly debited to
these centers. It would, therefore, be inadequate only to
cover the actual maintenance on the frontage to these
centers in the rate receipts. Similarly, factory sites may
be expected to cover more than the bare road maintenance
on their own frontages.
51. THE OTHER ITEMS OF EXPENDITURE ON
SERVICES.
Municipal Expenditure Dissected.
Other municipal services which are localised in particu-
lar localities must be considered besides roads. These
services are listed below with the amounts provided for
each of them in the Accounts for 1944-45.
A. Items Connected with Localised Services.
Item Amount
(a) Capital Expenditure on Roads &
Streets,
(i) Recouped by special charge to
Ratepayer £250
(ii) Not paid for by individual Rate-
payer 9,269
(b) Maintenance Expenditure on Roads &
Streets 37,017
(c) Street Lighting 3,200
(d) Parks, Gardens, etc 12,944
(e) Street Cleaning 10,713
(f) Drains, Culverts, etc 2,950
(g) Garbage collection 6,690
(h) Baby Welfare Centers 1,920
(i) Health 5,769
(j) Municipal Baths 1,944
(k) Children’s Library 655
(l) Town Hall 1,850
£95,171
It will be seen that items (a) and (b) covering the
maintenance and reconstruction of roads and streets,
account together for £46,386 of the total expenditure on
services. This is almost half of the total gross expenditure,
and considerably more than half of the net expenditure,
taking account of revenue received from items (d), (i),
(j), (k), which return £7,100 between them. In normal
peacetime years, an additional expenditure would be in-
curred on footpath maintenance to about £3,500 annually.
The item (i) Health, principally covers sanitary pan
services for unsewered properties in the municipality, and
costs of meat supervision. A special charge of 33/6 per
pan is made for the former, and charges are also made for
the latter. The revenue received from this item is £3,032
and the nett expenditure is therefore £2,737.
52. THE MOST SUITABLE BASIS OF PAYMENT.
Of these services, roads and streets have already been
treated, and for this item it was seen that the site value
basis represented a closer approximation to the value of
the service than did annual value rating.
With regard to all of the remaining items, we have to
find the rating method which best approximates the value
of the service rendered. The value of these services will be
variable according to the distance from the point at which
the service is rendered. The effect of the availability of
each of these services is to make it more desirable for
people to live in the neighbourhoods with the street lighting,
the parks and gardens, welfare centers, baths and library.
The value of these services is evidently greater in their
immediate vicinity than remote from them. Hence, it is
reasonable to expect heavier contribution towards them in
their immediate vicinity than at a distance.
For all of these services, the effect is to increase or
sustain land values in their immediate vicinity, and beyond.
That the services have such an effect upon land values is
well recognised and needs no elaboration here. The effect
is greatest in the vicinity of the service and diminishes
by gradations with the distance.
So far as rates are required to cover these localised
services, therefore, the level of land values forms an ideal
measure of the value of the service received, and the rate
payment based upon site value is a most appropriate form
of rate payment.
The alternative form, annual value rating, bears little
relation, if any at all, to the value of this service to the
ratepayer. Under that system, the rate payment is far
more directly dependent upon the improvements made upon
the site by the owner. It is only affected to a very minor
degree by the variations in the value of the service received
as reflected in the land value. Thus, although two proper-
ties may be identical so far as site and the value of the
services to the site are concerned, the rate payment on
the one will be several times that upon the other, if the
former is more highly improved. Again, a house in the most
distant part of the district is called upon to pay only
slightly less in rates than if the same house were in the
central area, notwithstanding that the outermost parts
receive only a very minor fraction of the value of the muni-
cipal services received by the inner areas.
Of the services listed, garbage collection is the only
one paid for in the general rate, and only rendered to
householders. It might at first be thought that this would
justify a special and separate rate for the service limited
only to householders and not owners of vacant lots. Re-
flection will show that the value of garbage collection is
reflected in land values, which would be much reduced if
the service were not available or to be withdrawn. Again,
although garbage is only collected from the houses and not
vacant lots, the collectors have almost as much travelling
and work to do in serving the few houses in a largely
vacant street as they would if the street were fully built.
There seems no reason to think that the obvious suitability
of site values as a rate basis for the other services does
not apply equally to the payment for garbage collection.
53. THE OVERHEAD ITEMS OF COUNCIL
EXPENDITURE.
In addition to the expenses of the actual services pro-
vided, there are standing costs which the Municipality is
committed to, irrespective of these services. These costs
have to be distributed to the ratepayers in their rate pay-
ments. The items in this overhead class are listed below;
B. Overhead Items.
(a) Interest & Principal payments on
Loans • • • £31,030
(b) Staff, Wages, Salaries, etc., other
than already included under service
items 8,550
(c) Spencer St. Bridge contribution .... 201
(d) Infectious Diseases Hospital Con-
tribution 1,803
(dd) Heatherton Sanatorium Contribution 112
(e) Fire Brigade Contribution 2,454
(f) Donations, Various 2,013
(g) Printing, Stationery, Books, Tele-
phones, Advertising, Elections, In-
surance, etc 3,135
(h) Air Raids Precautions 1,935
(i) Retiring Allowances 235
(j) Part Wages Employees on Active
Service . . . 1,000
(k) Pay Roll Tax 1,650
Distributing The Costs.
These items have to be covered by rates from the
property owners quite independently of whether their lots
are"built or vacant, used or unused. In apportioning the
rates to cover them, the guiding principle, in fairness,
should be to apportion the charges according to the general
benefits received by the site owners from the existence of a


Classification
Amount
Most Suitable
Rate Base
1.
Road maintenance & re-
Cost, most
construction
.. £46,286
closely given
by site value
rating.
2.
Other localised services ..
.. 48,635
Site value rat-
ing.
3.
Overhead items
. . 54,118
£149,039
Site value rat-
ing.
(a) COSTS TABULATED.
Class of Area and Name
of Street
Land
Value
per ft.
&
Approx. Costs per Foot Front
Ward
Road
Mtce.
d.
Other
Services
d.
Overhead
Items
d.
Total
d.
Rebated
Cost
d.
Main Shopping Section
Nicholson (Barkly-Rly.) ..
350
27 *
1100
1210
2337
1290
North
Shopping Areas
Paisley (Nich.-Leeds) ....
75
11.5*
236
260
508
278
North
Barkly (Nich.-Victoria) . .
50
16 *
157
174
347
191
North
Victoria (Charles-Buckley)
10
21.6
30.8
34
86.4
47.5
Middle
Somerville (Wmstn.-Rly.).
10
35.2
27.2
30
92.4
51
South
Geelong Wmstn.-S’ville) . .
8
25.6
20.9
23
68.9
37.7
K’ville
Ballarat (Droop-S’hill) ..
10
10.8
22.3
26.7
59.8
33
N. West
Factory Area
Whitehall (Lyons-Francis)
5
26.6
13.6
15.0
54.2
29.7
South
municipal organisation. These benefits obviously vary with
location, being concentrated in the central areas and few
in the outermost sections. The differing degrees of benefit
are most faithfully recorded in the variations of land
value per foot or acre in the various parts of the district.
To base the rate payment needed to cover overhead
items upon the site value basis, therefore, appears the
fairest and indeed, the only logical means of distributing
the obligation.
The annual value method is sometimes claimed to
apportion the payment according to the income received
by the owner. It is noted that built properties bring in
cash income, whereas vacant lots do not.
This view overlooks the fact that the value of land
is itself due to the existence and continued operation of
municipal and other public services, and not to the in-
dividual efforts of the owner. This value is due to the fact
that the municipality and other public bodies have pre-
sented the owner with a nett income, of which the selling
price of the land is the capitalised amount. In the case
of the owner who builds upon his property, this income is
received continuously as he goes along. In the case of the
vacant holder, it is stored up and received finally in a lump
sum on sale. In either case, this income is real and is fairly
chargeable for municipal costs.
Annual value rating, however, charges rates many
times greater to the built property than the vacant one in
which the income is stored up. When sale of the vacant
lot is effected, there is no means of the municipality shar-
ing in the appreciated price. The result is that owners of
built sites are penalised as compared with those of vacant
sites. The position is aggravated by the fact that the actual
income of the owner of built property is also subject to
heavy income taxation annually, whereas the vacant holder
escapes any such contribution, and even on final sale is not
called upon to contribute for the taxation avoided over
the period. The nett effect is to disadvantage the owner
who develops his site as compared with the mere specu-
lator, and to give a premium to land speculation. Site
owners of built and unbuilt lots are placed on the same
footing under site value rating.
54. MUNICIPAL REVENUE OTHER THAN RATES.
The items of total municipal expenditure previously
listed may be grouped in the following three sections with
the most appropriate means of charging for each:
This expenditure, however, does not have to be wholly
met from general rates, being offset by considerable items
of revenue received from other sources. In the estimates
the sums available were set down at £67,564, and the sums
required at £149,714, leaving a balance of £82,150 to be
raised by the general rate, which in turn, required a rate
of 2/3 in the £ of annual value.
This rate in the £ is particularly low, and is brought
about by the fact that the sums available from other
sources to Footscray Council are much greater than for
most councils. They include no less than £30,553 profits
from the Electric Supply Department. In being a distri-
butor of electric power on such a. scale, Footscray is un-
usually favorably situated, and this revenue applied to
reduction of rates is somewhat fortuitous. Without this
profit and on the same basis as other municipalities, so
much more would have to be raised in rates, and the rate
in the £ required would be 3/1.
In arriving at the relative costs incurred for the other
localised services and overhead items on the same basis as
already done in section 50 for roads, the aggregate actual
expenditure must be used and the results rebated by the
share of the £67,564 revenue from sources other than rates.
55. THE COST TO THE COUNCIL FOR ALL ITEMS
COMPARED WITH RATE RECEIPTS IN VARIOUS
PARTS OF THE CITY—PER FOOT OF FRONTAGE.
The two tables below summarise the three classes of
expenditure per foot of frontage in various localities, and
compare the rate yield per foot under annual value and
site value rating. The first four columns of figures are the
approximate costs for the items and the last is the rebated
amount which the rates should be expected to cover after
making allowance for the other revenue referred to above.
A restricted number of streets are given illustrative
of various parts of the municipality, but the tendencies
shown are perfectly general and could be extended to all
streets.
Road costs are on the basis of average maintenance
and reconstruction costs having regard to the class of road
as in the previous list of Section 50. The “other service”
and “overhead” items are distributed proportionately to
the levels of site-value per foot.
Allowance has been made for the fact, shown earlier
in this study, that the proportion of rate-exempt property
varies widely in the different wards, and that those wards
with a higher than average proportion of rate exempt
property should bear a somewhat higher allocation of the
costs for these items and vice-versa. The average pro-
portion of rate-exempt property for the district being 37%,
the following multipliers are used according to the ward
concerned.
North Middle South North Kings-
Ward Ward Ward West ville
Per cent. Rate-
Exempt to Ratable 54 .. 50 . . 331 .. 39 . . 27
Multiplier Used . . 1.12 . . 1.09 . . 0.97 . . 1.01 . . 0.93


Class of Area and Name
Land
Approximate Costs per Foot Frontage
Ward
of Street
Value
per ft.
Road
Mtce.
Other
Service
Overhead Total
Items
Rebated
Cost
Residential (Macadam Roads)
Blackwood
3
12.5
8.2
9.0
29.7
16.4
South
Hall
3
12.5
8.2
9.0
29.7
16.4
South
Newcastle
21
12.5
6.8
7.5
26.8
14.8
South
Fehon
4
21.3
10.9
12.0
44.2
24.2
South
Simpson
Chirnside
3
12.5
8.2
9.0
29.7
16.4
South
4
12.8
10.4
11.5
34.7
19.0
K’ville
Coronation
4
13.4
10.4
11.5
35.3
19.3
K’ville
Edgar
4
19.0
10.4
11.5
40.9
22.4
K’ville
Geelongf
5
25.6
13.7
15.1
54.4
30.0
K’ville
Bena
5
10.2
13.7
15.1
39.0
21.4
K’ville
Kingston
3
10.2
8.3
9.1
27.6
15.2
K’ville
Severn
4
11.9
10.4
11.5
33.8
18.6
K’ville
Southhampton
3
12.5
8.4
9.3
30.2
16.6
N. West
Leander
3
13.0
8.4
9.3
30.7
16.8
N, West
Market
4
17.0
11.2
12.4
40.6
22.4
N. West
Summerhill
4
20.8
11.2
12.4
44.4
24.2
N. West
Unmade Streets with Houses
£
d.
d.
d.
d.
d.
Aston
1
—
1.4
1.6
3.0
1.6
K’ville
Brunei
X
—
1.4
1.6
3.0
1.6
K’ville
Blackshaw’s
x
—
1.4
1.6
3.0
1.6
K’ville
Braid
2
—.
5.5
6.2
11.7
6.5
K’ville
Cullen
1
—.
2.7
3.1
5.8
3.3
K’ville
Fontein
1
—.
2.7
3.1
5.8
3.3
K’ville
Indwe
3
4
—
2 1
2.3
4.4
2.4
K’ville
Kernot
x
—.
1.4
1.6
3.0
1.6
K’ville
Hex
i
—.
2.7
3.1
5.8
3.3
K’ville
Saltley
1
—
1.4
1.6
3.0
1.6
K’ville
Vernon
X
—
1.4
1.6
3.0
1.6
K’ville
Dongala
i
—
2.8
3.1
5.9
3.3
N. West
Napoleon
i
—
2.8
3.1
5.9
3.3
N. West
Oxford
i
— .
2.8
3.1
5,9
3.3
N. West
West
i
—
2.8
3.1
5.9
3.3
N. West
Sub-divided, But No Houses
Angliss
i
—
2.7
3.1
5.8
3.3
K’ville
Adeney
i
—
1.4
1.6
30
1.6
K’ville
Ballard
i
—
1.4
1.6
3.0
1.6
K’ville
Kidman
i
—
2.7
3.1
5.8
3.3
K’ville
Class of Area and Name of Street
Cost to be
Covered by
Rates (per ft.)
d.
Rate Yield per foot Under
Site Value Annual Value Rating On
Rating on Built Built Lots Vacant
or Vacant Lots (Average) Lots
d. d. d.
Main Shopping
Nicholson (see above)*
1290*
1660*
590
440
Shopping Areas ’
Paisley (see above)*
278*
356*
250
93
Barkly (see above)
191*
237*
125
62
Victoria (see above)
47.5
47.5
60
13.5
Somerville (see above)
51
47.5
70
13.5
Geelong (see above)
37.7
38.0
81
10
Ballarat Road (see above)
33
38.0
115
10
Factory Area (Specially Treated)
29.7
204
390
56
See Comment In Conclusions
(b) RATE YIELD COMPARED WITH COST
This table compares the rate yield per foot of frontage with the rebated cost above, i.e., the cost which should be
recovered in rates after allowance has been made for other revenue than rates, which offsets the actual cost.
t Side road maintenance only considered. This is a three lane roadway, and no allowance has been made for the
main central section towards which the Country Roads Board contributes part.
* See Footnote to Part (b) of Table.


Continued Comparison
Rate Yield Compared
With Costs per
Foot
Rate Yield per Foot Under
Cost to be
Recovered by
Rates (per ft.)
d.
Site Value
Annual Value
Rating On
Class of Area and Name of Street
Rating on Built
or Vacant Lots
d.
Built Lots
(Average)
d.
Vacant Lots
d.
Residential, Macadam Roads
Blackwood
Hall
16.4
16.4
14.3
14.3
27.2
24.1
3.75
3.75
14.8
12.0
21.5
3.1
Fehon
24.2
16.4
19.0
14.3
26.5
25.4
5.0
3.75
19.0
19.0
28.1
5.0
19.3
19.0
32.5
5.0
22.4
19.0
22.6
5.0
Geelong (K’ville Ward)
30.0
21.4
23.8
23.8
25.0
25.0
6 25
6.25
15.2
14.3
21.2
3.75
18.6
19.0
25.2
5.0
16.6
14.3
22.8
3.75
16.8
14.3
25.9
3.75
Market
Summerhill
22.4
24.2
19.0
19.0
25.7
28.7
5.0
5.0
Unmade Streets with Houses
1.6
2.2
4.2
0.6
0.6
0.6
2.5
1.25
1.25
1.0
0.6
1.25
0.6
0.6
1.25
1.25
1.25
1.25
1.6
2.2
8.5
1.6
2.2
9.4
6.5
9.5
25.0
Cullen
3.3
4.75
20.0
3.3
4.75
11.5
Indwe
Kernot
Hex
2.4
1.6
3.3
3.6
2.2
4.75
18.2
11.1
17.0
Saltley
1.6
1.6
2.2
2.2
6.0
9.7
Dongala
3.3
3.3
4.75
4.75
20.5
20.0
Oxford
West •
3.3
3.3
4.75
4.75
20.0 »
18.0
Sub-divided, But No Houses
3.3
4.75
—
1.25
0.6
0.6
1.25
Adeney • •
Ballard
Kidman
1.6
1.6
3.3
2.2
2.2
4.75
—
56. CONCLUSIONS UPON COSTS AND RATE
PAYMENTS.
In these comparisons, it is evident that rates based
upon site value rating very closely approximate to the
correct proportion of the costs and represent a far fairer
distribution than the annual value rating basis.
In practically all areas the annual value rates upon
built lots are considerably greater than the share of council
costs for which they are supposed to be a payment. The
rates on vacant lots, on the other hand, are much below the
council costs. In few cases only is the annual value rate
on built properties closer to the appropriate share than
are the site value rates, and in these exceptional cases the
disproportion of the annual value rates on vacant lots is
all the more accentuated. The conclusion seems fully
justified that it is a characteristic of annual value rating
to bonus vacant sites at the expense of built sites.
In the main shopping center, the rate contribution
under annual value rating, for both built and vacant
properties is much below the appropriate share. It appears
that these centers (on the surface view) pay a little above
the shared costs under site value rating, although the
margin is considerably less than the present deficiency
under annual value rating. Closer consideration of table
(a) shows that the road maintenance shown is absurdly
low considering that these centers are focal points for
the district, and that a large part of the maintenance on
main and subsidiary roads could be appropriately charged
against these centers. The actual road figure used is that
for the shopping street itself.
The disproportion between the costs and the rate pay-
ments is particularly marked in the unmade streets with
houses already built. The houses in these areas are par-
ticularly penalised by annual value rating, compared to the
value of the services received.
Even where no roads are provided and maintained as
yet, the annual value rate contribution upon vacant land
is only about a third of the appropriate share of the over-
head and other costs of the council.
The impression that factories would not contribute a
fair share under site value rating is quite erroneous. The
figures quoted relate to the whole section of Whitehall
* Road costs are only included on the actual frontage to these centers, but a considerable Portion of the mainten-
ance upon arterial and subsidiary roads may be rightly debited against the shopping areas w i y


Gain Under Site
Gain Under Annual
Class of Property
Value Rating
Value Rating
Number
Amount
£
Number
Amount
£
1. Houses
10,000
15,000
1,760)
2. Poor utility buildings not included elsewhere .
250)
11 900
3. Nicholson Street, Shop and Business
28
244
78
4,684
4. Other Shop and Business
750
3,046
194
1,896
5. Well Improved Industrial
71
9,500
6. Poorly Improved Industrial
50
1 400
7. Vacant Land only
—
—
4,400
8,000
Totals
10,849
27,880
6,732
27,880
TABLE No. 1.
UNIMPROVED LAND VALUE IN EACH WARD
The totals given below are approximate only, as
some streets, part of which lie in each of two wards, have
been wholly included in one or the other in the figures
below.
Ward
Unimproved Land Value
North
. . . £1,530,000
. . . £491,000
Middle
South
North-west
Kingsville
Total
. . . £4,087,000
TABLE No. 2.
DISTRIBUTION OF NON-RATABLE FRONTAGES
An approximate allocation of the non-ratable frontages
for which the cost must be spread over the ratable front-
ages is as follows.
Heading Frontage in Feet
Churches and Charitable 8,800
Municipal Parks, Gardens, Reserves . . .. 39,000
Other Municipal 3,400
Frontages to Railways . 23,800
Commonwealth Government 5,800
State Electricity Commission 3,300
Schools k Knn
Lost Fronts at corners
Roadway squares at street intersections
. . 168,000
Total
Street on the East side, between Somerville and Francis
Streets. They include four of the largest concerns:
Commonwealth Fertilisers Pty. Ltd., Imperial Chemical In-
dustries Ltd., Colonial Sugar Refining Company, Albright
and Wilson. Whitehall Street is the main road serving these
and other concerns, and there are 40 chains of it included
in this section.
While portion of the maintenance costs on other
arterial and subsidiary roads can rightly be regarded as
chargeable to these concerns, the fact that the site value
yield per foot is some six times that of a property with
normal depth, shows there is a very considerable margin
to meet council costs. It is evident that the higher rate
under annual value rating is extortionate, having regard to
the services rendered. Road services form the most im-
portant rendered to the factories, and in concerns of large
area, road provision per unit of area is comparatively small
(see Factory Section 43).
57. FINAL NOTE ON ROAD MAINTENANCE.
In recent discussions upon the merits of alternative
rating systems, it has been suggested by advocates of the
annual value system, that as the owners of vacant lots
fronting roads do not themselves use the roads, the cost
of maintenance should be entirely borne by the holders of
built property, and none by the owners of the vacant lots.
It has been inferred that the annual value method in which
the rates upon vacant lots are very nominal, is therefore
the better.
This contention is hardly likely to prove acceptable
generally since, even though the service is not actually
used_ by vacant owners, the fact that it is available when
required is capitalised into land values. Again, the usage
of the road in residential streets is mainly by the trades-
people serving the houses—dairyman, baker, butcher,
greengrocer, etc., and the wear on the surface is substanti-
ally the same in serving a few houses in a largely vacant
street, as it would be if the street were fully built with
houses. The fact that the tradesmen do traverse the street
is itself a factor that works to increase the value of the
vacant lots.
Further light upon this point has been provided by the
present study. The Footscray City Engineer has advised
that the light traffic, such as found on most purely resi-
dential streets, is actually beneficial to the road surface.
Indeed, if there is no traffic or insufficient road traffic
to keep the surface compacted and prevent cracks, the
sealing of the road is affected and deterioration hastened.
It is evident, therefore, that failure of vacant lot owners
to make use of the roads in residential streets is not a
virtue justifying low rates. It may, on the other hand, be
damaging and justify penalty rates.
PART VII—A BALANCE SHEET.
58. An Approximate Distribution of Rate Gains and Losses.
APPENDIX.


Name of
Owner or
Nominee
Locality
Where
Resident
Occupation
Annual
Value of
Land
Unim-
proved
Value of
Land
Angliss,
Sir Wm. Auburn
Director
£4,900
£98,000
Mason
Canterbury Manager
£250
£5,000
Siverson
Canterbury
(Nom.)
Manager
£108
£2,160
Loftus
Y arra-
(Nom.)
Turner
£95
£1,900
Lord, A.B.
& A.
wonga
Footscray
Contractor
£108
£2,160
Slatterie
Melbourne
and wife
?
£86
£1,720
Sayer, A.
& G.
Toorak
Manufr. &
£95
£1,900
Mitchell
Brighton
wife
Nominee
£90
£1,800
Hansen
Footscray
Builder
£80
£1,600
Binge
Footscray
Contractor
£70
£1,400
Milnes
Parkville
Manager
£71
£1,420
Murphy W.
& N.
Footscray
(Nom.)
Contractor
£50
£1,000
Furneaux
Footscray
Tanner
£70
£1,400
McDougal
Brim
Retired
£63
£1,260
Massey W.
& I. A.
Footscray
Coy. Dir.
£80
£1,600
Carter
Caulfield
& wife
Home
£62
£1,240
Hills
Footscray
Duties
Timber
£65
£1,300
Smith
Footscray
Merchant
Estate
£58
£1,160
Shillabeer
Melbourne
Agent
Contractor
£56
£1,120
Fowler
Bentleigh
Nominee
£49
£980
Westwood
Footscray
Estate
£47
£940
Bunting
Footscray
Agent
Director
£46
£920
Cronnolly
Footscray
(Nom.)
Laborer
£46
£920
Box
Essendon
Engineer
£45
£900
Spurling
Footscray
Tailor
£44
£880
Grassick
Kew
9
£42
£840
Harold
Abbotsford
Manufac-
£41
£810
Sleap
Wmstown.
turer
Traveller
£40
£800
Gray
Hawthorn
Home
£36
£720
McCubbin
Footscray
Duties
Clerk
£35
£700
McCubbin
Footscray
Butcher
£34
£680
Bates
Footscray
Laborer
£40
£800
Kay
St. Kilda
Manager
£32
£640
Fathers
Footscray
Contractor
£30
£600
Collie, G.
& W.
Melbourne
Manufac-
turer
£30
£600
Wales, A.
G.
Toorak
Director
(Nom.)
£30
£600
Weickhart
Robertson
Footscray
Bacchus
Manufac-
turer
?
£30
£29
£600
£580
Gaudion
Marsh
Footscray
Engineer
£28
£560
Lester
Footscray
Hotelkeeper
£26
£520
Kennedy
Ivanhoe
Secretary
£25
£500
Green
Carnegie
Home
£25
£500
Taylor
Werribee
Duties
Wood
£25
£500
Dealer
Voters’
Roll No
Locality
Residence
Annual
Value
No. of
Lots
327
Stratford
.... £6
2
405
Melton
.... £6
2
462
N. S. Wales
.... £6
2
610
Donald
.... £6
2
1102
Daylesford
£6
2
1061
Loch
.... £6
2
1301
Malmsbury
5
1653
Yea
.... £6
2
1880
Leongatha
2
1881
Leongatha
£12
4
1954
Corowa, N.S.W. . . .
.... £6
3
2196
Balldale, N S.W. . . .
£11
5
2226
Bacchus Marsh . . .
.... £29
10
2215
Neerim North
£6
2
2299
Warrnambool
£9
3
2306
Corowa, N.S.W. . . .
.... £6
2
2379
Elwood
.... £6
2
2498
Broadford
.... £6
2
2512
Footscray
.... £9
3
2558
Parwan
.... £6
2
2634
Coburg
£6
2
2748
Hamilton
.... £6
2
Roll
No.
Residence
No.
Lots
Roll
No.
Residence
No.
Lots
1353
Brighton .
. .. 1
156
Moonee Ponds
. 1
1538
Warragul
... 1
162
Footscray . . .
. 1
1553
Footscray
. . . . 3
375
Leongatha . .
. 3
2724
Kyneton .
. . . . 1
394
Footscray .. .
. 2
2742
Benalla .
... 1
442
Footscray . . .
. 1
2871
Kyneton .
. . . . 3
489
Jindivick .. .
. 1
1574
Regent . .
. . . . 1
490
Footscray .. .
. 1
1680
Kyneton .
. . . . 1
497
Brooklea .. .
. 1
1719
Kyneton .
. . . . 1
2043
Jindivick .. .
. 1
1845
Footscray
. . . . 1
2044
Ripplebrook .
. 1
1868
Yarram .
. . . . 2
2496
Lang Lang . .
. 2
1923
Footscray
.. . . 2
628
Footscray .. .
. 1
1961
Malvern .
. . . . 1
711
Carnegie . . .
. 5
1969
Elwood . .
. . . . 3
930
Footscray . . .
. 2
2873
Kyneton .
968
Footscray . . .
. 5
2883
Neerim . .
. . . . 1
1235.
Strezleckie . .
. 2
TABLE No. 3. .
LISTING ALL HOLDINGS OF VACANT LAND ABOVE
£5OO IN UNIMPROVED LAND VALUE
(Not including vacant land held in conjunction with
factories or other buildings)
These holdings have been listed at their rated (1937)
values, and do not include appreciation in value to 1942.
The Total Holdings above number 43, of which 24 are
absentees, and 19 are resident in Footscray. The total
annual value of these holdings is £7,312, and the unim-
proved land value is £146,240 at 1937 values. Rates on
present Annual Value basis are £822; on Unimproved Value
basis would be £2,900.
TABLE No. 4.
WEMBLY PARK ESTATE.
Dissection showing the extent of absentee speculative
holding in this estate. Holdings of annual value sufficient
to qualify for a vote are listed for those streets which
lie purely within the area bounded by Geelong Road,
Robert Street, Francis Street, and Richard Street.
There are holdings of lesser value which do not appear
on the Roll, but which may be expected to follow the same
proportions between absentee and local holders. The Voters
Roll No., District in which the owner lives, and annual
value of land as rated are given. The land is in Ballard,
Urwin, Stooke, Kidman, Angliss, Adeney, Sanderson,
Stanger Streets.
Total of 22 Holders —63 lots. Only 1 Footscray Holder
and this holding speculative.
TABLE No. 5.
ANALYSIS OF ROBERT STREET HOLDINGS.
The annual values here for single lots are £4 or £5, so
that almost all holdings in this street are covered. Most
are within Wembly Park Estate, but some in the extension
of Robert Street.
22 of 32 Holders are absentees. 13 Holders own more
than 1 lot.


Owned by Absentee or Firm with Head Officp
Uwned by Local Resident
in another District
An Estate or in hands of Evoonfors
St.
No.
Owner’s Name
Rates
| Annl,
Value
£
Under
Site
Value
£
St.
No.
Owner’s Name
Rates Under
Annl. 1 Site
Value 1 Value
£ | £
St.
No.
Owner’s Name
Rates
Annl.
! Value
1 £
Under
Site
Value
£
si. (WtiSlJ
78 Scovel & Sperling
82-90 Forge
110
182
177
555
80
92
Davis
56
42
42
49
49
113
121
113
113
124
124
202
112-118 McFee
1
I 172
449
94
98
108-10
166-8
Lloyd
Lees
Forge
Arnot
42
42
91
153
113
113
228
207
102
104
106
120-2
White Pty
Sassella Pty
Jones
City Mutual In
±60
130
132
138-42
152-54
ororen
Hendry
Brown
Ewars, W. A
Ewars, W. A
1 46
i 49
i 49
: ice
| 93
111
112
111
304
265
134
Herbt. Adams Pty, .
63
113
136
Botanical Invest
63
128
144-50
Patersons Pty
200
424
156-60
Sassella Pty
79
178
162-4
Clarke & Co
39
123
170-82
Allied Agencies
132
434
620
1393
927
2197
515
1352
NICHOLSON ST. (EAST)
107
117
119
155
159-63
Taylor
Griffiths
Eymer
Caldecott
Hudson
41
41
27
28
63
100
95
75
67
120
79-89
91
93-7
99
101
109
111-3
115
133
143-5
157
Shaw, J. W
Kidd & Co
Colehurst Pty
Batwood
Berbett Pty
E. L. Torr
Maples
Commercial Bank
Miller
Stewart
H. E. Caldecott
130
36
80
37
42
38
130
45
27
54
26
167
100
192
100
100
100
336
130
55
127
63
121-7
129-31
135-41
147-53
Mitchell
Buzza
Clark
Mitchell
108
45
97
104
252
111
254
252
200
457
645
1470
354
869
PAISLEY STREET
7
13
19
21-3
P. Frith
A. L, Frith
Aston
C. Munro
21i
21
19
40
29h
29
29
60
1-5
17
2
6A
A. T. Johnson
Schafer
Bank of N.S.W
L. A. Ward Pty
53
19
40
11
88
29
98
22
9-11
15
25
Armstrong
Malouley
Storey
39
19
19
59
29
31
27
Dobinson
19
34
12
Colonial Gas
32
50
29
P. Frith
21
41
14-6
E. L. Gauld
36
49
31-3
U. F. Society
37
57
4
Carroll
19
22
•
6
O’Callaghan
15
i
22
212 (
323
191
336
77
119
LEEDS
STREET
i
1
33—5
37
Wilson
Gilbank
28 I
14 |
38
20
29-31
41-3
A. Carter
Launder
22
20
50
44
25-7
53
Mitchell
Wittner
17
15
59
24
39
Rankin
8
20
45-7
Wittner
24
49
49-51
Ross . ..
16 |
49
57 & A Moroney
24
25
55
Shallard
12 |
24
59
Morgan
15
23
38
Douglas
6 1
I
i
i
16
61-3
48-54
56-66
Appleton
A. Johnson
Harris
27
75
55
49
96
74
84 |
167
262
410
32 j
1
83
TABLE No. 7.
ANALYSIS OF SHOP SITES IN MAIN SHOPPING CENTERS WHICH WOULD HAVE THEIR RATES INCREASED UNDER A CHANGE TO SITE VALUE
RATING.
Listing all owners of sites which would carry increased rates within the main Shopping Sections, according to the ownership of the Site
Sites which would carry reduced rates under site value rating are not included in this table. (See Footnote.)


Sites owned by Local
Site Owned by Absentee or
Firm with
Site part of an
Estate or
in hands
Residents
Head Office in another District
of
Executors
St.
Owner’s Name
Rates Under
St.
Owner’s Name
Rates Under
St.
Owner’s Name
Rates Under
No.
I Annl.
i Value
£
1 Site
Value
£
No.
Annl.
! Value
£
Site
Value
£
No.
•
Annl.
Value
£
Site
Value
£
HOPKINS STREET
129-31
Friedman . . .
19
32
125-7
T. V. Marson
24
38
145
J. & R. Davidson
16
26
133 & A
G. Mitchell . .
31
37
135
A. Dewar
12
20
155
J. & W. Shaw
15
19
137-9
G. Nathan . . .
27
34
141
N. Griffin
20
26
149-53
Dr. Box
45
67
126
J. Brodrick . .
11
13
130
N. Griffin
11
18
132-4
M. Davidson
30
37
136-4
142-6
148-56
J. G. Russell .
J. Goodman . .
J. Box
36
29
88
44
51
118
241
329
112
169
61
82
ANDERSON STREET
29-31
Haslam
24
30
53-55
Williams
27
33
34-6
R. Nickel
27
43
37-43
E. J. Smith .
52
56
47-51
P. Coxhead
29
32
38
Moran & Cato
13
25
23-25
Ridout
15
24
45
G. Wilson
11
13
26-30
Pedley
42
54
17-21
R. McPherson
20
26
32
H. M. Proctor
14
29
11-15
A. C. Holmes
14
19
1-3
G. Hunter
6
10
40
E. White
14
26
42
Simmers & Co
14
28
44
W. Long & Co
5
14
46-8
A. C. Holmes
25
28
189
259
40
68
123
163
BARKLY STREET
(To
Geelong Road)
163-5
Cakebread
30
62
159-61
E. Fraser
42
75
255-7
J. Cordy ....
30
42
173-5
Smith
32
67
167-9
National Bank
47
99
183-5
A. Clarke
45
50
171
Batty
16
33
187
Adler
• •
12
23
177-81
S. S. Bank
54
112
189
Hendry
12
23
195
Aust. Sewing Machines . .
15
21
191-3
A. H. Johnson
24
39
197-217A W. C. Angliss (Investors
273
Gilmour
8
25
Pty.)
180
234
289-91
Bowdern
26
43
215-21
A. Smith
49
109
293
Shall ard
8
13
223-9
J. Smith
55
89
299
Myall
10
16
235-41
Hooper
43
82
297
C. Whitehill
• •
10
16
295
A. Whitehill
9
13
301
O’Halloran
8
16
243-253B vV. Angliss
143
157
303-9
Sperling
33
111
259-71
Shillabeer
77
151
311
T. Marson
• •
12
14
275-5A
J. Gilmour
15
31
313-3A
Staropoli
16
20
315-9
D. Davis
26
39
327
Bills
10
17
329
Griffiths
••
10
17
321-5
Schwartz
30
47
164-82 1
F. Hills
44
154
216-26
Kleiner
55
69
196-8*
Bettess
• •
14
20
268
Crouch
8
10
228-32
Armfield
13
26
270-2*
Simpson
W. Angliss
7
18
234-6*
Griffiths
8
23
274-St
9
18
238-40
Sperling
19
25
242-50
Yeomans
21
75
252-6*
W. M. Whyte
10
28
461
962
854
1368
30
42
CHARLES STREET
98*
T. H. Murray |
4 |
16
71—77 Hinksnn
25
33
Notes and Symbols
* Indicates vacant shop site.
i - Indicates improvements are negligible or in
derelict
condition.


HIGHLY IMPROVED INDUSTRIAL
PROPERTIES
(See Plate V. opposite)
VICTORIA WOOLLEN CO. PTY. LTD.
Occupying \\ acres on the edge of swamp land.
Due to the low value of the site this firm has
the highest ratio of all (29.0) for the value
of the improvements/value of site. Note
the very poor condition of the road serving it.
WARREN & BROWN PTY. LTD.
A most attractively designed modern engineer-
ing works on relatively highly priced land. It
has a frontage of 100 ft. to Ballarat Road. The
ratio of value improvements/site is very
high (19.4).
OLYMPIC TYRE & RUBBER CO. LTD.
One wing of the very fine works in Cross St.
covering 10 acres in a garden setting. The
land seen in the foreground belongs to the
Victorian Railways Department, but has been
put under lawn and rock garden by the firm.
The ratio improvements/site is very high (21.2)
BRADFORD COTTON MILLS PTY. LTD.
A highly improved works occupying 5 acres at
the intersection of Moreland and Parker Sts.
The ratio of values of improvements/site is
20.8.
MAIZE PRODUCTS PTY. LTD.
The main works is highly improved, covering
2 acres in Moreland and Maribyrnong Sts, with
additional less improved holdings for storage
in the foreground and elsewhere. The overall
ratio of improvements/site is 16.5.
SOUTHERN CAN CO. (AUST.) PTY. LTD.
A very attractively designed factory in a gar-
den and lawn setting on Geelong Road. The
area occupied is acres. The ratio of im-
provements/site is 14.0. Evidences of civic
pride are attended with higher rates under
annual value rating.
CREAMOATA MILLS LTD.
A highly improved works on Sunshine Road.
The additions recently made and still in pro-
gress were attended with substantially in-
creased rates. The area occupied is 2 acres.
Ratio of improvements/site is 13.7.
PURVIS GLOVER PTY. LTD. AND BURLEY
MILLS PTY. LTD.
Two good quality small factories in Hopkins
Street. Purvis Glover is an engineering firm
with 66ft. frontage and ratio improvements/site
of 6.6 to 1. Burley Mills has 53ft. frontage and
a ratio improvements/site of 8.4 to 1.
POORLY IMPROVED INDUSTRIAL
PROPERTIES
(See Plate VI. over page)
VACANT FACTORY SITE
A valuable site occupying acres in a pro-
claimed factory area. It is on the corner of
Sunshine and Grainger Roads and is owned by
a South Melbourne firm. The improvements
are nil, not even fencing.
J. TAYLOR & SONS
A monumental works in Albert St. with 60ft.
frontage running through to Nicholson Street.
Such properties do not enhance the value
of the nearby residential properties. Ratio
of improvements/site is 0.20.
GIBBINS FARM IMPLEMENTS LTD.
Occupying 3-4 acres to Hopkins and Cowper
Streets. Buildings are W.B. and G.l. in a bad
state of repair. Note the hole in the roof
where corroded through. Ratio of improve-
ments/site is .080.
F. C. HILLS, TIMBERYARD
This property has 174 ft. frontage to Barkly-st.
in a most valuable business section. It is partly
vacant and partly under weatherboard buildings
of little value with a high fire risk. Such pro-
perties tend to depreciate values of nearby
business premises. Ratio of improvements/site
is 0.10.
MITCHELL & CO. PTY. LTD.
The improvements here are quite good in
quality, but only occupy a small part of the
total 11 acres. The ratio improvements/site
is 1.10.
VICTOR LEGGO & FARMERS LTD.
Occupies a large site of 9 acres and is rela-
tively poorly improved. It is situated in a
good residential section. Ratio of improve-
ments/site is 0.70.
IMPERIAL CHEMICAL INDUSTRIES (Nobel)
Occupying acres to Sunshine Road. The
ratio of improvements/site is 1.20. This firm
has another much more highly improved works
which would benefit under site value rating.
GOLDSBOROUGH MORT LTD.
A well improved wool store but occupying only
a small part of the acre holding, the rest
being completely vacant. The ratio of im-
provements/site is 1.55.


HIGHLY IMPROVED INDUSTRIAL PROPERTIES
PLATE V.
VICTORIA WOOLLEN CO. PTY. LTD.
Area: 1½ acres
N.A.V. Rate, £155.
Impts./Site, 29.0
U.C.V. Rate, £20.
OLYMPIC TYRE & RUBBER CO. LTD.
Area: 10 acres
N.A.V. Rate, £1040
Impts./Site, 21.2
U.C.V. Rate, £197
MAIZE PRODUCTS PTY. LTD.
Area: 2 acres
N.A.V. Rate, £780
Impts./site, 16.5
U.C.V. Rate, £170
CREAMOATA MILLS LTD.
Area: 2 acres
N.A.V. Rate, £114
Impts./site, 13.7
U.C.V. Rate, £30
WARREN & BROWN PTY. LTD.
Frontage, 100 ft.
N.A.V. Rate, £85
Impts./Site, 19.4
U.C.V. Rate, £16
BRADFORD COTTON MILLS PTY. LTD.
Area: 5 acres
N.A.V. Rate, £725
Impts./Site, 20.8
U.C.V. Rate, £126
SOUTHERN CAN CO. (AUST.) PTY. LTD.
Area: 4½ acres
N.A.V. Rate, £420
Impts./Site, 14.0
U.C.V. Rate, £107
PURVIS GLOVER PTY. LTD. AND BURLEY
MILLS PTY. LTD.
Purvis Glover: I/S 6.6; N.A.V. Rate, £27; U.C.V. Rate, £13
Burley Mills: I/S 8.4; N.A.V. Rate, £26; U.C.V. Rate, £11


PLATE VI.
POORLY IMPROVED INDUSTRIAL PROPERTIES
VACANT FACTORY SITE
Area: 2½ acres
N.A.V. Rate, £13
Impts./Site, nil
U.C.V. Rate, £50
GIBBINS FARM IMPLEMENTS LTD.
Area: 3-4 acres.
N.A.V. Rate, £28
Impts./Site, 0.80
U.C.V. Rate, £60
F. C. HILLS, TIMBERYARD
Frontage, 174ft.
N.A.V. Rate, £44
Impts./Site, 0.10
U.C.V. Rate, £155
IMPERIAL CHEMICAL INDUSTRIES (Nobel)
Area: 15½ acres.
N.A.V. Rate, £88
Impts./Site, 1.20
U.C.V. Rate, £174
J. TAYLOR & SONS
Area: ½ acre
N.A.V. Rate, £9
Impts./Site, 0.20
U.C.V. Rate, £30
VICTOR LEGGO & FARMERS LTD.
Area: 9 acres
N.A.V. Rate, £48
Impts./Site, 0.70
U.C.V. Rate, £107
MITCHELL & CO. PTY. LTD.
Area: 11 acres.
N.A.V. Rate, £122
Impts./Site, 1.10
U.C.V. Rate, £218
GOLDSBOROUGH MORT LTD.
Area: 20½ acres
N.A.V. Rate, £190
Impts./Site, 1.55
U.C.V. Rate, £285


Street
No.
Name of Occupier
Rates
Paid
By
Street
No.
Name of Occupier
Rates
Paid
By
WEST SIDE
EAST SIDE
(A)
TENANT OCCUPIED
(A)
TENANT OCCUPIED
90
S. E. Dickens (Chain)
T
79
J. D. Burns
.. .. T
92
Wright Bros. Ptv. (Chain)
T
81
H. Hall (Chain)
. . .. O
104
W. C. Angliss (Chain)
O
83
Winward
. . .. O
106
National Tailor Coy. (Chain) . . . .
T
85
Gleeson, K
. . .. O
108-10
Woolworths (Chain)
T
87
Liversage & Russell
. . . . T
112a
Gorham & Sons (Chain)
T
89
H. & D. Baker
, . . . O
112
Allenby (Chain)
T
93
Harkness
. . .. O
114-6
National Wines & Spirits (Pty.) . .
T
95-7
Ezywalkin (Chain)
... 0
118
Bon Tailoring (Coy.)
O
99
Cummings
. . . 0
120-2
Snow’s Ltd. (Chain)
T
101
Broadway .
. . . . 0
130
Bradley, E. S
O
109
Lopez
. . .. 0
132
Harzmeyer (Chain)
O
121
Lucullus (Chain)
. . . . T
136
Hamilton (Chain)
T
123
Madden
. . .. 0
138-42
G. J. Coles (Chain)
T
125
Spencer (Chain)
. . . . 0
150
Tnrnpr M
. . T
127
Crofts (Chain)
. . .. 0
152
Rene Allan
T
129
Newdick
.. .. T
154
Puntons (Chain)
O
131
Brodin
. . .. O
166-8
Courthouse Hotel
T
133
Irvin
. . . . O
170
Waters, J. M
O
135
National Tailor Coy. (Chain)
. .. O
172
Wright Bros. Pty. (Chain)
O
137
Sanders
. . . . O
174
Footscray Butchering Co. (Chain) . .
O
139
Cons
.. .. O
176
o
141
Ansips
. . .. O
178
Crofts Stores (Chain)
O
/145
Christie
. . .. O
180
Webb, E.
O
147
Colena
.. .. 0
182
Harris
O
149-51
Halliwell
. . .. 0
156
Needham
O
153
Goss
.. .. 0
155
Ferguson
. . . . T
26 Tenanted Properties.
157
Bailey
. . . . T
13 Rates paid by owners.
159
Red Cherry
. . .. T
13 Rates paid by tenants of which:
161
N. B. C. Trading
. . . . O
11 are chain organisations or hotels, 2 are individual
163
N. B. C. Trading
. . .. T
proprietors.
31 Tenanted properties.
(B)
OWNER OCCUPIED
23 rates
paid by owners.
8 rates paid by tenants of which;
78
Scovel & Sperling (Pty. Coy.)
1 is
chain organisation.
82-90
Forge’s Pty. Ltd. (Pty. Coy.)
7 are individual proprietors.
98
Lees, D. A. (Chain)
100
Allan’s Manchester Home (Pty. Ltd.)
(B)
OWNER OCCUPIED
102
White, R., Pty. Ltd. (Chain)
128
Storen, E. H. & Coy. (Chain)
91
Kidd, J. S. & Co. Pty. (Chain)
134
Herbert Adams Ptv. (Chain)
105
L. A. Ward Pty. Ltd. (Chain)
144-8
Paterson’s Ptv. Ltd. (Chain)
107
Stewart & Taylor
156-60
Sassella Bros. Pty. Ltd. (Chain)
111-13
Maples (Chain)
162-4
Clarke & Coy.
115
Commercial Bank (Chain)
94
Lloyd, P. W. (Chain)
111
D. P. Griffiths Pty. Ltd,
119
Eymer
143
G. & D. Stewart
PROPERTIES IN OTHER STREETS WHERE TENANT PAYS RATES.
HOPKINS STREET
BARKLY STREET
52*
Burleigh Mills
153
Davidson, Billiards Room
109*
Preston Motors
157
Watkins, Knitted Wear
116-22*
Miller’s Bon Stores
159
Goble & Nobbs, Chemist & Hairdresser
139
H. Conabere, Leatherware
161-3
Gordon & Son Pty. Ltd., Ironmonger
149
K. McLennan, Optician
4 83
Brown, Dry Cleaner (Chain 1
151
Warranee Tea Rooms
154*
Royal Hotel
132
T. Jane Pty. Ltd., Hardware
264*
“Mail,” Publishers
156
Commonwealth Bank of Sydney
320*
Footscray Motors
There are also six sites in Paisley and two
in Anderson Streets in which rates are paid by tenants, in the remainder
they
are paid by the owners.
* Signifies that rates are lower under site value rating.
TABLE No. 8.
SHOWING THE NATURE OF TENANCY OF NICHOLSON STREET SHOPS AND WHO PAYS THE RATES
UPON THEM.
Any firm having more than one branch, whether in Foots cray or elsewhere, is treated in this table as a chain
organi sation.


Occupier
Nature of Business
Value of
Ratio
Net
Rates Payable Under
Difference
—
Front
Land
Impvts.
(b)
Annual
Annual
Unimproved
in
(a)
(b)
(a)
Value
Value
Land Value
Rates
KAST JSiUE
Feet
£
£
£
£
£
£
Byron Street
73—
Solomon
*
S Dennis
Financier
15
375
2,525
6.7
145
16
7 h
Dec.
8?.
7 3 A-
—Solomon
*
( Oliver
Dealer
15
375
2,025
5.4
120
13i
7*
6
73B-
—Greenberg
Canning
Library
15
375
1/485
4.0
93
lOi
7i
99
3
75—
Est. J. Box
t
j Cunningham
Confectioner
19
475
1,125
2.4
80
9
9
77—
Est. J. Box
t
( Mair
Res.
19
475
1,125
2.4
80
9
9
.
Same
Hopkins Street
Total in Above Se<
:tion
2,075
8,285
4.0
518
58
40 J
Dec. 171
79— J. W. Shaw
81&A— J. W. Shaw
*
*
Burns
Hall Pty.
Grocer
Financier
400
80
44
9
57
1 1
Inc.
13
9
83—
J. W. Shaw
*
-
Winward
Pastry
146
16i
- L±
21
99
85—
J. W. Shaw
*
Gleeson
Milliner
108
9,600
16,440
1.72
172
19
25
99
6
87—
J. W. Shaw
•I*
Liversage
Tailors
See *
ote (1)
172
19
25
99
£
89—
J. W. Shaw
Baker
Hairdresser
200
221
28
100
99
91—
J. S. Kidd & Co
*
Kidd & Co.
Hardware
20
5,000
1,400
0.28
390
36
99
O 2,
64
53
59
63
58
55
59
62
206
93—
Colehurst Pty.
Harkess
Confectioner
s 335
( 372
38
91
101
99
95-7
—Colehurst Pty.
*
Ezywalkin
Shoes
39
9,750
4,390
0.45
42
99
99—
G. Batwood
Gumming
Chemist
20
5,000
l'640
0.33
37
100
99
101-
-Berbett Pty.
“Broadway”
Frocks --
20
5,000
2'500
0.50
375
42
100
99
105-
-Ward Pty.
Ward Pty.
Newsagent
20
5,000
3,000
0.60
400
45
100
99
107 — Taylor
109&A — E. L. Torr
t
*
Taylor
Lopez
Pastry
Fruit
20
20
5.000
5.000
1,340
1,800
0.27
0.36
367
340
41
38
100
100
99
99
111-3 —Maples Ltd.
Paisley Street
Maples
Furniture
40
17,000
6,000
0.35
1,150
130
336
99
99
115-
-Comml. Bank
*
“Commercial” Bank
22
6,600
1,400
0.21
400
45
130
95
85
54
48
117-
-Griffiths
t
Griffiths
Jeweller
16
4,800
2,500
0.52
365
41
99
119-
-Eymer
t
Eymer
Draper
19
3,800
1,000
0.26
940
27
75
63
63
99
121 | Est. Mitchell
t
Lucullus
Cakes
161
f 240
1 940
27
27
99
123
& Sons
t
Madden
Dairy Produce
16
99
36
36
36
12b I „
t
Spencers
Grocers
16
12,800
6,400
0.50
■
1
240
27
63
99
127
99 99
t
Crofts
Grocers
16
9/in
27
30
63
73
38
55
60
74
60
99
129
Est. Buzza
t
Buzza
Chemist
14
C 9
99
36
43
23
28
37i
Ul
37s
131
133-
135]
137
139
99 99
-Miller
Exec. Clark
99 99
99 99
t
*
t
t
t
Brodin
Irvin
Sanders
N.T.C.
Con’s
Beauty Salon
Modes
Drapery
Tailors
Cafe
14 j
14
13]
21
13
5,600
2,800
12,800
2,400
2,000
4,000
0.43
0.72
0.31
135
240
200
240
200
15
27
22i
29J
22 i
99
99
99
99
99
141
99 99
t
Ansips
Leatherware
17
200
22 i
28
26
26
26
26
60
65
62
63
63
63
63
67
63
40
80
99
143 j
145
147
149
151
Stewart
,,
Est. Mitchell
99 99
99 99
*
*
t
t
t
) Stewart
1 Christie
f Colena
1 Halliwell
] Halliwell
Pastry
Confectioner
Milliner
Silks
99
16
16
16]
16
16
•
6,400
12,800
2,900
5,200
0.45
0.41
240
225
225
225
225
99
99
99
99
99
37«
37
36
37
37
37
99 99
t
Goss
Confectioner
16
225
26
28 |
26
99
155-
-Caldecott
t
Ferguson
Stationer
17
3,400
1,400
0.41
940
99
37
157-
-H. E. Caldecott
*
Bailey
Lingerie
16
3,200
l'300
0.41
99f>
99
39
159-
] Hudson
t
( Red Cherry
Confectioner
19}
7,800
6.420
0.81
j 185
(370
21
99
37
19
38
101-3 j
Irving Street
t
\ B.N.O.
Stoves
39 J
(See Note 2)
42
99
Total Hopkins to Irving Sts.
149,150
75,430
0.50
—
( 10,991
...
1,244 )
—
2,896 I
—
Inc.
1,652
NICHOLSON STREET SHOPPING CENTER.
Comparison of the rates payable under annual value and unimproved land value rating systems.
Unimproved value rates at 4|d. in £; annual value rates 2/3 in £ (see Note 5).
Symbols Represent: * Absentee; f Local Owner; % Estate of Deceased or in hands of Executors.


Street Number and Owner of
Site
Occupier
Nature of Business
Front
Value of
Land Impvts.
(a) (b)
Ratio
(b)
(a)
Net
Annual
Value
Rates Payable Under
Annual Unimproved
Value Land Value
Difference
in
Rates
WEST SIDE
|
Feet
£
£
£
£
£
£
Barkly Street
(Note 6)
1
1
78—
Scovel & Sperling
t 1
Scovel & Sp.
Tailors
221
9,000
10,500
1.16
975
110
177
Inc.
67
80—
Davis
* 1
S. E. Dickins Pty.
Grocers
171
6,125
3,875
,62
500
56
121
99
65
82-90 —Forge
t
Forge’s Pty.
Drapers
82
28,800
3,700
.13
1,625
182
555
99
373
92—
Cant
* 1
Wright Bros,
Produce
16i
5,775
1,725
.30
375
42
113
99
71
94—
Lloyd Pty.
t
Lloyd, P. W., Ptv.
Produce
16s
5,775
1,725
.30
375
42
113
99
71
98—Lees, D. A.
t i
Lees, D. A.
Chemist
16i
5,775
1,725
.30
375
42
113
99
71
100-
-Armstrong
t
Allens Pty.
Manchester
16i
5,775
1,725
.30
375
42
113
99
71
102-
-White Pty.
*
White Pty.
Shoes
161
5,775
1,725
.30
375
42
113
99
71
104-
-Sassella
* 1
W. C. Angliss
Butchers
18
6,300
2,440
.39
437
49
124
99
75
106-
-Jones
*
Ntnl. Tailor Coy.
Tailor
18
6,300
2,440
.39
437
49
124
99
V t)
108-10 —Forge
t
Woolworths Stores
Stores
33
11,550
4,690
.40
812
91
228
99
137
112a 1 McFee Est.
t
f Gorham & Sons
Cakes
10
3,500
1,200 |
j 235
261
61h
99
3b
112
t
1 Allenby, W., & Co.
Butchers
14
4,900
3,100 j
.51
( 400
45
104
99
49
114-6 „
t
\ Natnl. Wines & Spirits Pty.
30
10,500
3,240
.31
687
77
207
99
130
118
t
1 Bon Tailoring Co.
Tailor }
) 370 1
118a
t
[ Wilson
Confectioner ]
22
7,700
1,200
.16
1
75 j
50
152
99
102
Paisley Street
120-22 —City Mutual As.
*
Snow’s Men’s Wear
Ltd.
29 S
10,412
9,590
.92
1,000
113
202
99
89
124-6 —Cwlth. Govt.
Commonwealth Bank
Not Rateable
128-
-Storen
t
Storen, E. H., & Co.
Boots
16
5,644
2,676
.44
406
46
111
99
65
130-
-Hendry
t
Bradley, E. S.
Chemist
164
6,687
3,053
.53
437
49
112
99
63
132-
-Brown
t
Harzmeyer
Confectioner
16
5,542
3,200
.58
437
49
110
99
61
134-
-Adams, H.
*
Herbt. Adams
Cakes
16ft
5,775
5,465
.94
562
63
113
99
50
136-
-Botanical Invsts.
*
Hamilton
Butchers
181
6,475
4,765
.73
562
63
128
99
65
138-42— W. A. Ewars Est.
t
G. J. Coles
Chain Store
46
15,600
3,200
.20
940
106
310
99
204
144-48 ) Paterson Pty.
Patersons Pty.
Furniture
48
15,800
5,440
.35
1,062
120
311
99
191
150
*
Turner, M.
Tobacco
18
5,760
1,100
.19
343
38
113
99
75
152-
-Ewars Estate
t
Rene Allan
Ladies’ Draper
24
7,200
1,000
.14
410
46
142
99
96
154
t
Puntons Pty,
Shoes
21
6,300
2,700
.43
450
51
124
99
73
156-
] Sassella
*
Needham
Fruiterer
6
1,740 |
158-60 J
*
Sassella Pty.
Butchers
27
7,300 j
4,960
.55
700
79
178
99
99
162-64 — Clarke & Co.
*
Clarke & Co.
Mercers
24
6,000
880
.15
344
39
123
99
84
166-68 — Arnot
t
Courthouse
Hotel
42
10,500
16,700
1.60
1,360
153
207
99
54
1701
Allied Agencies Pty.
*
J. M. Waters
Pastry
17'
175
20
63
99
43
172
*
Wright Bros.
Produce
15
200
23
72
99
49
174
*
Footscray Butcher. Coy.
20
225
25
81
99
56
176
*
.
Stern & Sterling
Fruit
14
■
21,400
2,080
.10
162
18
58
99
40
178
*
Crofts Stores
Grocers
15
162
18
58
99
40
180
*
Webb, E.
Milliner
14
1
125
14
45
99
31
182
99 99 99
*
Harris, T.
Estate Agent
12
]
[125
14
45
»
31
I
Totals Barkly St. to Irvi
ig Place 261,685
111,819
.42
18,615
2,092
5,124
Inc.
3,032
184-
—Viet. Railways
*
Lancaster
Chemist
24
720
1,280
1.70
100
11
14
Inc.
3
186
*
Brown
Fruit
14
420
1,580
3.70
100
11
8
Dec.
3
188
*
Moran & Cato
Grocers
14
420
1,580
3.70
100
11
8
99
3
190
*
Haddow
Florist
15
450
1,050
2.33
75
8ft
9
Inc.
2
192
*
Bancroft
Dyers
15
450
1,550
3.45
100
11
9
Dec.
2
194
*
Murrav
Hairdresser
15
450
1,550
3.45
100
11
9
2
196
99 99
*
Karagain
Fishmonger
15
450
1,350
3.00
90
10
9
99
1


Street Number and Owner of
Occupier
Nature of Business
Front
Value of
Ratio
Net
Rates Payable Under
Difference
Land
Impvts.
(b)
Annual
Annual
Unimproved
in
(a)
(b)
(a)
Value
Value
Land Value
Rates
198 ,, ,,
200
202- ] Dewars Estate
204- ) „
206-8 J „
210-12 — Taylor & Sons
214-22— Mitchell Est.
224 — Stone, J.
226—Webb
228 — Fraser
230 — E. Davis
232-4 — H. L. Caldecott
236 — “Advertiser Press”
238— E. G. & M. Fowler
Buckley Street
♦
*
$
t
t
t
t
t
t
*
*
t
t
*
Krantz
Clough
f Budd, W. K.
■{ Bruce Small
[King, H.
Vacant Sites
S Mitchell Buildings
| Fed. Hall, Hotel, 3 s
J. Stone
Webb
Moyvin School
Harmer
Morrison
“Advertiser”
Belgravia
Ladies’ Draper
Dentist
Cycles
Tailors
hops)
Umbrellas
Printer
Dressmaking
Pastry
S/H Furniture
Printer
Hotel
15
15
15 1
18
40 J
66
120
17
18
18
18
33
20
72
450
450
1,820
Rat
3,000
255
270
270
270
495
300
1,800
| 1,350
1,350
1
7,180
Note 7)
ed to Albert
21,800
745
1,610
490
1,230
2,005
2,440
22,600
3.00
3.00
3.95
St.
7.30
2.92
6.00
1.82
4.55
4.07
8.10
12.5
| 90
90
J 450
1,240
50
94
38
75
125
137
1,220
1 10
1 10
50
i
140
5i
104
4i
84
14
15
137
1 9
9
36
59
5
5i
5i
5i
10
6
36
Dec.
99
1
99
99
99
99
Inc.
Dec.
99
99
99
1
1
14
81
i
5
1
3
4
9
101
Totals Irving Place to Buckley St.
\
1
12,740
72,740
1
5.70
4,274
478
—
252
Dec.
226
NOtC 1 in hi the°mte in c C o?um S n ShOP N °’ 155 ar ° Und the ° orner in Hopkins Street formin S Part of the block. Rates are distributed only to the Nicholson Street shops
Note 2—This total includes shops 62, 60 and 58 in Irving Street, around the corner, forming part of this block
N°te only, being the difference between capitalised annual values and the unimproved land value at 5%. This tends
Note 4— By adding 1 to the figure in the ratio column, the ratio used in the graphs for the improved to unimproved annual value is obtained
Note 5 The modified rate of 2/1 in £ would reduce the A.V. total from £1244 down to £ll5O. The difference is insufficient to require recasting of the table.
Note 6—lncludes Shops fronting Barkly Street.
Note 7—lncludes Residence at rear. Buckley Street.


Street
Number of Shop
Sites
Proportion with
Dwellings
Total Annual
Value
Average Rated
Annual Value per
shop site
NORTH WARD
%
£
£
Nicholson (E. & W.)
89
21
17,190
193
(Barkly-Railway)
Paisley
27
48
3,261
121
Leeds
24
29
1,051
88
Hopkins
56
64
4,698
83.5
Barkly
114
48
9,393
82.5
Main Center . . ..
310
38
35,593
115
Droop
20
70
1,442
72
Irving
20
15
1,264
63
Geelong
7
100
406
58
16 Minor Streets ....
42
88
2,308
55
SOUTH WARD
Anderson
56
11
4,125
74
Ballarat
35
17
1,644
47
Somerville
36
36
1,704
47
Gamon
12
—
637
53
Stephen
22
27
934
42
MIDDLE WARD
Charles
22
36
1,329
60.5
Pentland Parade ....
14
43
684
49
Victoria
42
50
1,849
44
Buckley
52
62
2,082
40
16 Minor Streets ....
67
72
3,327
49
NORTH WEST WARD
Ballarat Road
13
92
1,009
77
Barkly
12 Minor Streets ....
47
75
2,923
62
27
74
1,197
44
KINGSVILLE WARD
Williamstown
16
37
1,024
64
Somerville
23
30
1,399
61
Geelong
11
36
520
52
7 Minor Streets . . ..
8
37
443
55
TABLE No. 10
RATABLE ANNUAL VALUES OF AVERAGE SINGLE SHOP SITES IN VARIOUS SHOPPING CENTERS.
Showing the relative contribution, under annual value ra ting, of shop sites in the various shopping centers. These
figures should be considered together with Section 27 on the relative volume of business in the centers.
The shop sites and ratable values shown have been taken directly from the Voters’ Rolls. Most, but not all, of
the shops in the streets have been included in the averages.
Number of sites and not establishments is quoted, i.e., a shop occupying street Nos. 2-4-6 counts as three sites.
The difference between the business potentialities of the above centers is shown by the figures in section 27,
and perhaps even more accurately, by the difference in land values per foot of frontage, viz, Nicholson Street
(overall in the section covered above) £3OO average. Other streets (approx, for both sides averaged).
Paisley, £B5; Hopkins, £4O; Barkly, £5O; Leeds, £5O; Anderson, £5O; Charles, £18; Other named streets, £10;
Minor streets, £4-10.
Thus, Nicholson Street is about thirty times as good a business center as the £lO streets, but contributes only
three to five times as much in rates, under annual value rating, per site.


Firm or Nominee
Front
Area
Land
or Value
(1)
Impvts.
Value
(2)
Annual
Value
Ratio
Rates
Under
(2)
Annual
Value
Site
Value
(1)
£
£
£
£
£
1. Viet. Woollen Mills Pty.
1 h Ac.
1,000
29,000
1,500
29.0
155
20
2. Bradford Cotton Mills
5 Ac.
6,400
133,600
7,000
20.8
725
126
3. H. B. Dickie Ltd.
(Mills)
4 Ac.
4,000
85,624
4,000
21.4
(Vacant Land) . . ..
97'
268
' 13
Overall
4,268
85,624
4,013
20.1
417
84
4. Warren & Brown Pty.
—
Engrs
100'
800
15,520
816
19.4
85
16
5. Port Phillip Mills Pty.
11 Ac.
2,000
38,950
2,050
19.4
213
40
6. Maize Products Pty.
Ltd
(Main Works) .. ..
2 Ac.
4,600)
141,900
7,325)
19.5
Aust. Woodpipe Site
264'
2,640)
132)
Storage Sites
219'
1,362
318
84'
0.2
Overall
8,602
142,218
7,541
16.5
780
170
7. Olympic Tyre & Rubber
—
Coy
Cross St. Works ..
9 Ac.
9,000
/191,000
10,000
21.2
Mephan St. Works . .
11 Ac.
8,250
107,750
5,800
14.2
Overall
17,250
298,750
15,800
17.3
1,640
340
8. Imperial Chem. Ind.
-
—
—
Ltd
Whitehall St. Works
9i Ac.
11,400
181,660
9,653
15.9
Storage
107'
535
865
70
1 6
Vacant Land
86'
400
20
Overall
12,335
182,525
9,743
14.8
1,010
243
9. Central Wool Commit-
—
—
tee Wool Stores ....
22 Ac.
7,700
112,300
6,000
14.5
620
152
10. Southern Can Coy. Pty.
4S Ac.
5,400
75,600
4,050
14.0
420
107
Group Totals (1-10)
65,755
1,114,087
58,513
17.2
6,065
1,298
Annual
Value Rates
exceed Site Value
Rates by £ 4,767 or 368%.
11. Creamoata Ltd. Mills
2 Ac.
1,500
20,500
1,100
13.7
114
30
12. Clensel Ptv. Ltd
i Ac.
250
2,950
160
11.8
17
5
13. Ammonia Products Pty.
i Ac.
250
2,950
160
11.8
17
5
14. Richardson Engineers
Works
21 Ac.
2,750
46,150
2,445
16.8
Foundry
1 Ac.
1,000
5,000
300
5.0
Storage
153'
715
965
84
1.3
Overall
4,465
52,115
2,829
11.7
293
88
TABLE No. 11
LIST A,
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTIES WHICH WOULD BENEFIT UNDER SITE VALUE RATING.
This table covers all industrial properties which
would under site value rating in proportion to the
degree to which the sites have been improved. The table
is arranged in descending order of the degree of improve-
ment as shown in the column headed “Ratio” (i.e., the
ratio between the value of the improvements upon the
site to that of the site itself).
The values of improvements shown have been obtained
by capitalising the annual rental value at 5 per cent., and
deducting the value of the land. This method is an approxi-
mation only, and results in understatement of the improve-
ment values for the most improved groups and
over-statement for the poorly improved properties. The
relativity within the group is substantially correct.
Where firms hold vacant land or less developed hold-
ings as well as their works, these holdings have been in-
cluded and the position overall is shown. Such holdings
are shown separately from the works wherever possible.
The figures in this table correspond to the entries on
the Municipal Voters’ Roll for the year ending August
12th, 1945.
Rate in £ used:
(a) Unimproved Capital Value or Site Value, 4|d,
(b) Nett Annual Value, 2/1. (The current rate is 2/3,
but revaluation in line with land values makes
the lower figure more appropriate—see Section
4 (ii) of the text).


Front
or
Site
Value
Impvts.
Value
Ratio
Rates
Under
Firm or Nominee
Annual
(2)
Annual
Site
Area
(1)
(2)
Value
(1)
Value
Value
14,A K.F.B. Metiers Pty.
6,000
11.4
621
191
Ltd
13 Ac.
9,700
110,000
J5. James Hardie & Co.
1
11.0
186
59
Pty
191 Ac.
3,000
33,000
1,800
16. Albright & Wilson Pty.
5 Ac.
9,875
103,205
5,654
10.5
585
195
17. Indust. Service Engrs.
140'
700
7,300
400
10.4
42
14
18. Airedale Weaving Mills
150'
900
13,600
725
15.2
Vacant Land
109'
420
—•
21
—
Overall
1,320
13,600
745
10.3
77
26
19. Hunter, Mfg. Grocer .
24'
96
904
50
9.4
6
2
20. Hardie Trading Co.
1,550
9.3
161
59
Pty
3 Ac.
3,000
28,000
Group Totals (11-20)
34,156
374,524
20,449
10.9
2,119
674
Annual Value
Rates exceed
Site Value Rates by £1, 445
or by 215%.
£
£
£
£
£
21. Joyce Bros., Sacks Pty.
250'
1,000
9,000
500
9.0
52
20
21A. Aust. Bobbins Pty.
9,000
500
9.0
52
20
Ltd
H Ac.
1,000
22. McEwan, Mfg. Grocer
66'
198
1,802
100
9.0
10
4
23. United Enginr, Ltd. . .
li Ac.
1,500
12,700
710
8.5
73
30
24. Burley Mills Pty
25. Vacuum Oil Coy. . . . .
53'
31 Ac.
530
37,200
4,470
312,800
250
17,500
8.4
8.4
26
1,820
11
740
26. Sulphates Pty. Ltd. ..
27. “Advertiser” Press ..
1 Ac,
1,000
8,280
464
8.3
48
20
6
20'
300
2,440
137
8.1
14
28. Kinnear & Sons Pty.
f
Ltd.
3,150
9.0
Works
6i Ac.
6,250
56,750
Vacant Land
?
780
—
39
Overall
7,030
56,750
3,189
8.0
332
140
29. Excellite Resins Pty.
li Ac.
1,500
11,800
665
7.8
70
30
30. Cosmos Knitting Mills
3,675
200
11.3
Works
65'
325
Vacant Land
33'
165
—
8
—
Overall
500
3,675
208
7.4
21
10
Group Totals (21-30)
51,748
432,717
24,223
8.4
2,518
1,031
Annual Value
Rates exceed
Site Value Rates by £1, 487
or by 145%.
31. J. Thompson Comb.
15,000
850
7.5
40
Eng. Pty
2 Ac.
2,000
88
32. Australian Estates Co.
7.3
531
244
Ltd
164 Ac.
12,375
90,125
5,125
33. Purvis Glover Eng.
Pty. Ltd.
3,925
220
8.2
Works, Moreland Rd.
95'
475
Works, Hopkins St.
66'
660
4,340
250
6.6
Overall
1,135
8,265
470
7.3
48
23
34. Morris, Pulverised Coal
32'
195
1,405
80
7.2
8
4
35. Parkinson & Cowan
Ltd.
1,225
6.3
Stove Works
4i Ac.
3,375
21,125
Gas Meters
1 Ac.
750
7,750
425
10.6
Overall
4,125
28,875
1,650
7.0
171
82
36. Graham Ferrum Co.
395
6.9
41
20
Pty
132'
1,000
6,900
37. Colonial Gas Coy. Ltd.
3,385
11.8
Works
51 Ac.
5,250
62,450
Shop
33'
2,475
3,165
282
1.3
Vacant Land
2 Ac.
2,000
—
100
—
Overall
9,725
65,615
3,767
6.7
390
193
[Continued Next Page


Firm or Nominee
Front
or
Area
Site
Value
(1)
Impvts,
Value
(2)
Annual
Value
Ratio
(2)
(1)
Rates
Annual
Value
Under
Site
Value
£
£
£
£
£
38. Alva Woollen Mills . .
20'
80
520
30
6.5
3
li
39. Sydenham Ice Works
80'
400
2,600
150
6.5
16
8
40. Taurus Bronze
55'
275
1,725
100
6.3
10
6
Group Totals (31-40)
31,310
221,030
12,617
7.1
1,306
621
Annual Value
Rates exceed
Site Value Rates by £6 85 or
by 110%.
41. Lee, Small Factory ..
33'
198
1,242
72
6.3
7
4
42. Aust. Block & Chain
Pty
21 Ac.
2,750
17,250
1,000
6.3
104
55
43. Union Can Coy. Pty.
Ltd.
Works
140'
700
5,540
312
7.9
Vacant Land
48'
200
—
10
Overall
900
5,540
322
6.1
33
18
44. “Rising Sun,” Works’p
84'
294
1,706
100
5.9
10
6
45. Hopkins, Odium Pty. .
21 Ac.
3,000
17,000
1,000
5.7
104
60
46. Youell & Son
1/6 Ac.
150
850
50
5.7
5
3
47. Mason & Cox Pty. Ltd.
2 Ac.
525
2,975
175
5.7
18
10
48. Schutt & Barrie Pty.
Ltd.
Chaff Mill
1 Ac.
1,000
3,000
200
3.0
Flour Mill
i Ac.
500
5,500
300
11.0
Overall
1,500
8,500
500
5,7
52
30
49. Bancrofts Pty. Ltd. .
1 Ac.
250
1,350
80
5.4
8
5
50. J. R, Bell & Co
182'
1,274
6,726
400
5.3
42
25
Group Totals (41-50)
10,841
63,139
3,699
5.85
383
216
Annual Value
Rates exceed
Site Value Rates by £167 or
by 77%.
51. Nelson, Engineer .. ..
55'
275
« 1,405
84
5.14
9
6
52. Barrow & Sons Pty. . .
i Ac.
500
2,500
150
5.0
16
10
53. “Mail” Printery Bldg.
57'
1,420
7,000
420
4.9
44
28
54. C’wealth Fertilisers
Ltd.
Works
51 Ac.
61,200
303,480
18,234
5.0
Land (Somerville St.)
330'
2,000
—
100
—
Land (Hyde St.) ..
330'
800
—
40
Land (Hyde St.) ..
60'
240
—
12
Land (Whitehall St.)
132'
1,680
—
84
—
Stables (Earsdon St.)
105'
800
900
85
l.l
Overall
66,720
304,380
18,555
4.C
1,930
1,320
55. G. Bramall & Co.
(Rubber)
4s Ac.
3,300
13,700
850
4.2
88
66
56. Laughton’s Pty. Ltd.
Works
240'
1,200
8,800
500
7.3
Land (Com’cial Rd.)
120'
660
—
33
—
Land (N.W. Ward) .
7
300
—
15
—
Overall
2,160
8,800
548
4.1
57
43
57. Thick, Engineers
O’Farrell St
41'
206
(1,323
84
3.7
9
7
Florence St
38'
151
(
58. G. Mowling & Son Pty.
4 Ac.
6,000
24,000
1,500
4.0
156
119
59. Colonial Sugar Ref.
Ltd.
Works
26 Ac.
31,326
128,674
8,000
4.1
Land (Middle Ward)
7
980
—
49
—
Overall
32,306
128,674
8,049
4.0
835
640
60. Sheetleather Pty. Ltd,
4 Ac.
4,000
15,640
982
3.9
102
79
Croup Total (51-60)
117,038
507,402
31,222
4.4
3,246
2,318
Annual Value
Rates exceed 1
Site Value Rates by £9 28 or
by 40%.
[Continued Page 45.


PLATE VII.


PLATE VIII.
BUSINESS COMPETITORS IN BARKLY STREET
Left —Frontage, 57. ft.
Right—Frontage, 54ft.
BARKLY STREET
N.A.V. Rate, £39/10/-; U.C.V. Rate, £28/4/-
N.A.V. Rate, £11/3/-; U.C.V. Rate, £28/10/-
SPECULATION IN VACANT SHOP SITES
Shops:— NICHOLSON STREET
Front., 73ft. N.A.V. Rate, £41/10/-; U.C.V. Rate, £36/-/-
Vacant:-
Front., 60ft. N.A.V. Rate, £11/2/-; U.C.V. Rate, £29/16/-
Shops:— SOMERVILLE ROAD
Front., 112ft. N.A.V. Rate, £50/-/-; U.C.V. Rate, £22/10/-
Vacant:-
Front., 81ft. N.A.V. Rate, £4/3/-; U.C.V. Rate, £16/-/-
PENTLAND PARADE
Vacant:— 93ft. N.A.V. Rate, £5/1/-; U.C.V. Rate, £17/16/-
Shops:— 98ft. N.A.V. Rate, £35/10/.; U.C.V. Rate, £20/--
Shops:— BUCKLEY STREET
Front, 50ft. N.A.V. Rate, £15/2/-; U.C.V. Rate, £9/16/-
Vacant: 50ft. N.A.V. Rate, £2/5/-; U.C.V. Rate, £9/16/-
Yard:- 60ft. N.A.V. Rate, £4/14/6; U.C.V. Rate, £10/16/-
Vacant:— VICTORIA STREET
Front., 48ft. N.A.V. Rate, £2/14/-; U.C.V. Rate, £9/8/-
8 Shops:-
Front., 41ft. N.A.V. Rate, £15/8/-; U.C.V. Rate, £8/1/-
BALLARAT ROAD
Front., 85ft. 6in. N.A.V. Rate, £3/16/-; U.C.V. Rate, £13/10/-


Firm or Nominee
Front
or
Area
Site
Value
(1)
Impvts.
Value
(2)
Annual
Value
Ratio
(2)
(1)
Rates
Annual
Value
Under
Site
Value
61. Scott & Sons Pty.,
Engineers
390'
2,300
7,700
500
3.4
52
46
62. Michaelis Hallenstein
Pty
26 Ac.
13,000
43,060
2,803
3.3
291
258
63. Craven Weaving Mills
Pty.
Works
52'
156
1,044
60
6.7
Vacant Land
52'
156
—
8
—
Overall
312
1,044
68
3.3
7
6
64. Holden & Lewis Pty.
214'
1,070
3,290
218
3.1
23
21
65. C. Ebeling & Sons Pty.
Stephen St
320'
1,600
(
Castlemaine St
100'
300
(5,760
383
3.0
40
38
66. Lloyd Bros. & Maginnis
Pty.
Works
4» Ac.
4,500
(14,250
950
3.0
99
94
Vacant Land
1 Ac.
250
(
67. Swallow & Ariel Ltd.
12 Ac.
1,750
5,250
350
3.0
36
35
68. Australasian Steel Pty.
40'
200
600
40
3.0
4
4
69. McCall, J. & Sons . .
1 Ac.
500
1,500
100
3.0
10
10
Total Group (61-69)
Annual Value
25,782
82,454
5,412
3.2
562
512
Rates exceed Site Value Rates by £50 or by 10%.
This list includes all large industrial concerns and most /of the small concerns which would benefit in rates
under site value rating—in considering it, comparison should be made at the same time with Table B, listing
the concerns which benefit in rates under annual value rating.
[Continued Next Page—Talde ll—List B.
SOME CONTRASTS IN BUSINESS PROPERTIES
BARKLY STREET
Two competitive printing firms side by side.
On the left is the excellent modern building
of “The Mail.” The building on the right is
of much inferior type. Frontages are almost
the same, as also are the municipal services
available to each. Yet, under annual value
rating, the better building carries nearly four
times the rates of its competitor.
NICHOLSON STREET
Showing four shops (Nos. 202-8) and vacant
land (Nos. 210-12) of almost as great frontage
forming part of a monumental mason's yard.
BUCKLEY STREET
Showing three shops (Nos. 25-29); vacant sites
(Nos. 31-33); and a woodyard (Nos. 35-37)
frontages being nearly equal for each group.
SOMERVILLE ROAD
A fine block of six modern shops at the inter-
section with Wiliamstown Road. Adjoining
are five vacant sites now used as a dumping
ground.
VICTORIA STREET
Vacant sites owned by an absentee compared
with built shops of nearly the same frontage.
The section is from Nos. 176-184.
PENTLAND PARADE
A section from Nos. 30-44, comprising a large
frontage of vacant shop sites and five built
shops on either side of it. These valuable
sites are owned by an absentee.
BALLARAT ROAD
A valuable corner site at the intersection with
Gordon Street.
See (Plate VIII opposite)


Front
Site
Impvts.
Annual
Ratio
Rates Under
Firm or Nominee
or
Value
Value
Value
(2)
Annual
Site
Area
(1)
(2)
(1)
Value
Value
£
£
£
£
£
1. Aust. Mercantile Land
& Finance Coy. Ltd.
8i Ac.
6,350
nil
317
—
33
126
2. James Flood Pty. Ltd.
2i Ac.
2,500
nil
125
—
13
50
3. Wales Quarries . . . .
132'
600
nil
30
—
3
12
4. Lewis Constructions
Pty
?
800
100
45
0.1
5
16
5. Bradshaw & Curwood
140'
1,120
80
60
0.1
6
22
6. F. C. Hills, Timber . .
174'
7,800
600
420
0.1
44
155
7. Taylor & Sons, Monu-
mental
60'
1,500
300
90
0.2
9
30
8. E. C. Lymn, Cooperage
1 Ac.
800
200
50
0.25
5
16
9. Mac’s Foundry . . . ,
198'
1,000
400
70
0.4
7
20
10. Bunting & Tickell
Works
80'
160
560
36
3.5
Vacant Land* .. ..
?
1,450
—
72
—
Overall
1,610
560
108
0.35
11
32
Group Total (1-10)
24,080
2,240
1,315
0.09
136
479
Site
Value Kates
exceed Annual
Value Rates by £343 or
by 250%.
11. Lord’s Quarries Pty.
Ltd.
Office & Works . . . .
180'
630
970
80
1.5
Vacant Land* .. . .
?
1,890
—•
95
—
Overall
2,520
970
175
0.4
18
50
12. V. Leggo & Farmers
Ltd
9 Ac.
5,400
3,800
462
0.7
48
107
13. Gibbins Farm Implts.
Ltd
3 Ac.
3,000
2,500
275
0.8
28
60
14. Standard Quarries Pty.
Ltd.
Works
34 Ac.
2,500
2,500
250
1.0
Vacant Land
9
1,400
—
70
—
Overall
3,900
2,500
320
0.7
S3
77
15. Co-operative Box Co.
Pty
8 Ac.
12,800
13,200
1,300
1.03
135
254
10. Massey Pty. Ltd., Egrs,
Works
180'
900
2,280
159
2.5
Vacant Land* .. ..
?
1,760
—
88
—
Overall
2,660
2,280
247
0.9
26
53
17, Boon Spa Pty. (Sayer)
Works
79'
500
2,840
167
5.7
Vacant Land* .. . .
9
2,260
—
113
—
Overall
2,760
2,840
280
1.03
29
55
18. Spicer Knitting . . ..
82'
660
740
70
1.1
n
I
13
TABLE No. 11.
LIST B.
INDUSTRIAL PROPERTIES WHICH BENEFIT IN RATES UNDER ANNUAL VALUE RATING.
This table covers all industrial properties which bene-
fit in rates under annual value, arranged in descending
order of gain. This order follows the degree of development
of the property in inverse ratio, i.e., as the ratio between
value of the improvements to value of the site itself in-
creases, the benefit disappears.
Where firms hold vacant land as well as their works,
these are included as well to show the position overall
for the interests concerned.
This table should be considered in conjunction with
list A, showing the concerns which benefit under site value
rating The note at the head of List A regarding the
method of arriving at the value of improvements applies
also to List B.
The figures in the table correspond to the entries on
the Municipal Voters’ Roll for the year ending August 12,
1945.
Rates used in £:
(a) Unimproved Capital Value or Site Value, 4|d.
(b) Nett Annual Rental Value, 2/1 in £.
(See Note at head of List A.)
(Continued.)
* Indicates appreciation on vacant land since 1937, taken at 10%,


Front
Site
Impvts.
Annual
Ratio
Rate Under
Firm or Nominee
or
Value
Value
Value
(2)
Annual
Site
Area
(1)
(2)
(1)
Value
Value
£
£
£
£
£
19. Mitchell Pty. (Ag. Imp.)
11 Ac.
11,000
12,500
1,175
1.1
122
218
20. Nobel Aust. Ltd. (I C.I.)
15i Ac.
7,750
9,250
850
1.2
88
154
Group Total (11-20)
52,450
50,580
5,154
0.96
534
1,041
Site Value Rates
exceed Annual
Value Rates by £50 8 or
by 95%.
21. A. R. P. Crow & Sons
Pty.
Stephen St
132'
660
1,540
110
2.3
Berry St
130'
640
—
32
—
Overall
1,300
1,540
142
1.2
15
26
22. Junction Joinery &
Timber Mills Pty. Ltd.
Geelong Rd
240'
1,680
1,420
155
0.85
Creswick St
150'
750
2,250
150
3.0
8 Shepherd St
40'
160
360
26
2.25
31 Shepherd St
42'
168
232
20
1.38
Vacant Land
7
100
—
5
—
Latrobe St
90'
360
—
18
—
Overall
3,218
4,262
374
1.3
39
64
23. Richards, Coachbuilder.
87'
870
1,130
100
1.3
10
17
24. Paderson & Co.,
Plastics
78'
234
306
29
1.3
3
5
25, C. H. Jennings,
Furniture Manufac.
66'
330
40
1.4
4
6
26. E. Murphy & Sons Pty.,
Carriers
Whitehall St
264'
1,320
4,280
280
3.25
Stephen St. (Stable)
66'
198
202
20
1.0
Simpson St. (Stable)
66'
198
122
16
0.6
*Land Kingsville Ward
7
880
—
44
—
*Land N.W. Ward ..
400
—
20
—
Overall
2,996
4,604
380
1.5
40
59
28. G. Hagg, Coachbuilder
81'
650
950
80
1.5
8
13
29. Goldsborough Mort
Ltd
1.55
190
285
Wool Stores & Land
201 Ac.
14,350
22,150
1,825
30. F. Long & Co. Engrs.
132'
1,320
2,160
174
1.64
18
26
Group Total (21-30)
25,268
37,572
3,144
1.49
327
501
Site Value Rates exceed Annual Value Rates by £164 or by 50%.
31. Butler, Timberyard ..
7
320
540
43
1.68
5
6
32. Bishop Implements Ltd.
2 Ac.
1,500
2,500
200
1.68
21
30
33. Duratar Pty. Ltd.
Works & Land . . . .
2 Ac.
2,000
6,000
400
3.0
Storage
1 Ac.
1,000
—
50
—
Overall
3,000
6,000
450
2.0
47
60
34. Aus. Porcelain Co. Pty.
21 Ac.
2,750
4,890
382
1.8
40
55
35. West F’cray Eng. Pty.
100'
1,000
1,860
143
1.86
15
20
36. Blacker, Fibro-plaster
175'
360
680
26
1.88
3
7
37. Footscray Monumental
Pty
li Ac.
1,250
2,350
180
1.88
19
25
38. Mephan Ferguson Pty.
Engineers
9 Ac.
6,750
12,750
975
1.89
101
134
39. Lewis, Wood Pulleys .
68'
408
792
60
1.95
6
8
40. W. L. Allen, Foundry
Co. Pty.
Foundry
83'
827
2,375
160
2.9
Storage
81'
486
314
40
0.65
Overall
-
1,313
2,689
200
2.05
21
26
Group Total (31-40)
19,651
35,051
2,659
1.8
278
371
Site
Value Rates
exceed Annual
Value Rates by t93 or
by 33%.
[Continued Next Page


Firm or Nominee
Front
or
Area
Site
Value
(1)
Impvts.
Value
(2)
Annual
Value
Ratio
(2)
(1)
Rates
Annual
V alue
Under
Site
Value
41. Mintaro Slate Co. Ltd.
£
£
£
£
£
42. Plain, Tannery
i Ac.
500
1,000
75
2.0
8
10
43. Wolfenden Bros. Pty.,
4 Ac.
250
550
40
2.2
4
5
Engineers
44. Elwood Timber Co. . .
41 Ac.
1,250
2.750
200
2.2
21
25
100'
400
1,000
70
2.5
7
8
45. Qualcast Pty.(Mowers)
3 Ac.
2,250
5,750
400
2.55
42
45
46. Federal Cask Co. Pty.
Storage
11 Ac.
2,600
6,400
450
2.45
Overall
349'
1,668
92
88
0.06
—
—
85
4,268
6,492
538
1.52
56
—
47. W. Angliss & Co. Pty.
& Investors Pty
-
Works, Lynch St. ..
54 Ac.
37,800
376,200
20,700
9.7
Shops, Barkly St. ..
18,750
36,650
2,770
2.0
Shops, Wmstn. Rd. . .
720
660
17.4
Land, Barkly St.
12,480
(274/8)
935
—
47
0.2
Vacant Land * . . , .
107,800
200
5,390
—
Overall
166,005
423,530
29,567
2.55
3,078
3,285
48. Grobbecker, Small Gds.
2.88'
833
2,307
157
2.76
16
16
49. Weickhart & Co. (Duff
Steel)
Works, 28 Hopkins St.
90'
720
1,280
100
1.8
Works, 44 Hopkins St.
100'
800
5,100
295
6.4
Vacant Land (N.W.
Ward)*
660
—
33
—
Overall
2,180
6,380
428
2.9
44
44
50. Footscray Ice Works .
33'
396
1,144
77
2.9
8
8
Group Totals (41-50)
178,332
452,903
31.552
2.55
3,284
3,531
* Vacant land appreciation assumed at an average of 10 % from 1937 valuation to 1942 values.
This list includes all large industrial concerns and most of the small concerns which benefit in rates under annual
rental value rating—in considering it, comparison should be made at the same time with Table A, listing the
concerns which benefit in rates under Site Value Kating.


GRAPH J.


GRAPH K.


GRAPH L.


GRAPH M.


GRAPH N.


GRAPH P.


GRAPH O.


GRAPH Q.


GRAPH R.


GRAPH S.


GRAPH T.


PART VIII. LIST OF GRAPHS, PHOTOGRAPHS AND TABLES INCLUDED IN THE STUDY
(A) Included with the Text
GRAPH A
Showing how the average house fares under
each system for each street in the Kingsville
Ward Page 6
GRAPH B
Ditto for each street in the North West Ward
Page 8
GRAPH C
Ditto for each street in the Middle and North
Wards Page 10
GRAPH D
Ditto for each street in the South Ward
Page 12
TABLE No. 6
Summary showing how built properties in each
shopping centre would fare under a change to
site value rating Page 15
PLATE I.
Eight photographs of residential properties
facing Page 16
PLATE 11.
Eight photographs of residential properties
facing Page 17
PLATE 111.
Eight photographs of residential properties
facing Page 24
PLATE IV.
Eight photographs of business properties
facing Page 25
PLATE V.
Eight photographs of highly improved industrial
properties, facing Page 36
PLATE VI.
Eight photographs of poorly improved industrial
properties, facing Page 37
PLATE VII.
Map showing the problem area of Footscray
facing Page 44
PLATE VIII.
Eight photographs of business properties and
vacant shop sites, facing Page 45
(B) Contained in the Appendix
TABLE No. 1
Unimproved land value of each ward
Page 32
TABLE No. 2
The distribution of non-rateable frontages
Page 32
TABLE No. 3
Listing all holdings of vacant land above £5OO
in unimproved land value Page 33
TABLE No. 4
Wembley Park Estate holdings
Page 33
TABLE No. 5
Analysis of Robert Street holdings
Page 33
TABLE No. 7
Shop sites in the main centre which would
carry rate increases under site rating, analysed
according to ownership by local residents,
absentees or deceaseds’ estates.
Page 34
TABLE No. 8
Showing the nature of tenancy of Nicholson St.
shops and who pays the rates upon them
Page 3/
TABLE No. 9
Rates payable on each property in Nicholson St.
Pages 38-40
TABLE No. 10
Rateable annual values of single shop sites in
the various shopping centres
Page 41
TABLE No. 11
(List A) Detailed list of industrial properties
benefitting under site value rating
Page 42
(List B) Detailed list of industrial properties
benefitting under annual value rating
Page 46
GRAPHS J-K
Two graphs showing how each property fares
in the large area studied in the Kingsville
Ward Pages 49-50
GRAPHS L-T
Nine graphs showing how each shop site fares
in each of the shopping centres of Footscray
.' Pages 51-59
Printed by The Mail Pi o ;r ee t, Footscray


All communications concerning this publication should be addressed to the Research
Director, A. R. Hutchinson, B.Sc., 32 Allison Avenue, Glen Iris, 5.E.6, or to the
Secretary, L. F. Bawden, 52 Guildford Road, Surrey Hills, E.lO.
Other Studies conducted by the Land Values Research Group are listed below:
RURAL No. I—SHIRE OF ROSEDALE (4d. each)
URBAN No. 2—CITY OF OAKLEIGH
RURAL No. 2—TOWN OF
URBAN No. 3—CITY OF &SS J
INTERSTATE STUDY, PUBLIC (6d. ea.)
COPIES OF THE ABOVE ARE AVAILABLE AT REDUCED RATES IN
DOZEN LOTS.


