

[Reprinted from the American Anthropologist, Vol. 10, No. 2, April-June, 1908]
SOCIOLOGY OF THE CHINGALEE TRIBE, NORTHERN
AUSTRALIA
By R. H. MATHEWS
In an article contributed to the Anthropological Society of
Washington in 1900, 1 I published a table showing the eight inter-
marrying sections of the Chingalee tribe, which occupies an exten-
sive tract of country about Powell’s creek and Newcastle waters, in
the Northern Territory, a name given to the northern portion of
South Australia. In 1905 I contributed another paper, 2 in table
11 of which I gave examples of marriages which I distinguished
respectively as Nos. 1,2, 3, and 4 wives.
During 1906 I completed some further investigations which
enable me to report that among the members of the Chingalee
tribe, the name of the section of a given individual is amended
or changed altogether when he or she has passed through the
ordeal of initiation. I will explain the circumstances which led up
to this important discovery, which has never before been reported.
For some past I have been collecting details of the sociology
of several tribes in the Northern Territory, Western Australia, and
the northwest portion of Queensland, by means of correspondents
resident in various places in the regions mentioned. I was fre-
quently puzzled to find that a correspondent in one part of a tribe’s
domain would send me the names of the eight sections with full par-
ticulars of their intermarriage and devolution, whilst another equally
capable informant in another part of the hunting grounds of the
same tribe would send me a set of eight sections, varying more or
less in the form of the names, but exactly the same in all other
respects. I concluded that there must be some reason for this dif-
ference, and asked my friends to make independent inquiries from
different individuals in the same locality, as well as from old and
1 American Anthropologist , N. s:, n, pp. 494-501, with map.
2 lbid., vii, pp. 303-304.


young members of the same tribe. After a good deal of patient
work on the part of my correspondents and myself, we found that
children of both sexes had a somewhat anomalous sectional nomen-
clature compared with that of the adults.
It was among the tribes about Hall’s creek, in the Kimberley
district of Western Australia, that my attention was first arrested in
regard to these apparent irregularities. One correspondent gave me
Chauarding for a section name which evidently corresponded with
Jungary of the table sent by another inquirer, and so on. lat
length succeeded in obtaining tolerably full confirmation of my con-
clusions, and am now able to supply an example of the variations in
the section names of the Chingalee tribe.
Table I
Masculine Section Name
Feminine Section Name
Cycle
Before Puberty
After Puberty
Before Puberty
After Puberty
Chukala
Chulamah
Tapala
_ Chupadee
' Chakade
Chunamah
Tampalillee
Chumade
Chungalee
Chula
Ongalla
Nungalee
Nala
Arlinginyu
Ehralee
Taralee
Naralee
Tungaree
Ambadee
Nungaree
Chimitcha
Chuna
Narbeeta
Ahmana
Namitcha
Nana
Champachina
Chemara
Nabachakadu
Chupadinnee
Nampachina
Nemara
I will leave the above
table to
in the !
> speak
section
for itself and pass on to
names of some tribes in
show analogous differences
the northwest districts of Queensland. In an article presented to
the Anthropological Society in 1899 I published a table of the
adult forms of the eight intermarrying sections in the locality men-
tioned, and I ask the reader to refer to that table. 1 Among the
blacks therein represented, Narachoo is used from birth to puberty
instead of Burralanjee ; Blaniwoo instead of Bolanjee ; Boonongoona
instead of Kommeranjee ; Warkee instead of Narrabalanjee; and
Thimmermill is the juvenile form of Yakamurri.
1 American Anthropologist , N. s., I, p. 596 ; Jour. Roy. Soc. N S. Wales, xxxiil,
p. 111.


In another paper published in this journal in 1900 I submitted
a table showing the adult forms of the eight sections of the Lunga
and other tribes in the Kimberley district of Western Australia, to
which the reader is referred. 1 In these tribes we find that the adult
form of the section name Jakara is known as Changarra from birth
to puberty ; Janima is Chau-an ; Jungary is known as Chau-arding ;
and Julimar is called Chu-a-ru until puberty is reached.
Among the tribes mentioned in both the preceding paragraphs,
there are two forms of all the male and female section names, the
same as in the Chingalee.
Referring further to the Chingalee marriage regulations I would
like to state that when Spencer and Gillen visited that part of Cen-
tral Australia they prepared a table to the effect of the one given
below. 2 The sections which marry one with another and the
denomination of the resulting offspring are of course identical in all
respects with the information given in my tables published in this
journal, 5 but Spencer and Gillen arranged the sections differently in
their table, for the purpose of making them fit in with paternal
descent.
Table II
Moiety Husband Wife Offspring
Chimitcha Chungalee Taralee
Willitji Ghuna Chula Tungaree
Tungaree JChampina Chuna
Taralee , Chemara Chimitch;
Chimitcha
' Chungalee
Chula
Chemara
Champina
Chimitcha
Chuna
Champina
Chemara
Chula
Liaritji
Taralee
Tungaree
Chungalee
Spencer and Gillen profess to have discovered that the first four
names in the “ husband ” column are called by the collective name
of Willitji, and that the remaining four men in that column are known
collectively as Liaritji, thus constituting two independent moieties,
1 Op. cit., N. S., 11, p. 186.
2 Northern Tribes of Central Australia, p. 100.
3 American Anthropologist , N. s., 11, p. 495, with map. Ibid., VII, pp. 301-304.
AM. jaXTH... n. s., 10—19


in each of which the fathers are said to transmit their moiety names
to their sons from generation to generation. This succession holds
good only while the four men of a so-called moiety marry No. 1 or
No. 2 wives; when we come to the progeny of No. 3 or No. 4
wives the succession of the men collapses altogether.
For example, let us suppose that each of the first four men in
the “husband” column of the above table marries a No. 3 wife.
Then we shall find that Chimitcha marries a Chuna woman and has
a son Chemara; Chuna espouses Chimitcha and has a son Cham-
pina; Tungaree weds Taralee and his son is Chula; and Taralee
marries a Tungaree wife and his son is Chungalee. These four
sons belong to the moiety Liaritji, as we see by the table, instead
of to the Willitji moiety like their fathers. If the four “ husbands ”
of our example had married No. 4 wives the result would have been
the same.
It is evident that half of a man’s possible wives and half of his
possible families would belong to the Willitji moiety, and half his
possible wives and families to the Liaritji moiety the section and
the moiety of the children depending altogether upon the mother
in every case that can possibly occur. We have therefore demon-
strated that the four “ husbands ” of our example are sometimes the
fathers of Willitji children and sometimes of Liaritji children, accord-
ing to the women whom they marry. Moreover, for incontro-
vertible evidence of the custom of marrying the four kinds of wives
which I have described as Nos. 1,2, 3, and 4, the reader is referred
to the list of living examples of such marriages reported by me in
a previous communication. 1
Whatever may be the signification of the terms Willitji and
Liaritji it is abundantly clear that they cannot be the names of two
independent moieties, because as shown above the sons of Willitji
men are liable to be scattered at random through all the sections of
the entire community. The partition'of the tribe into two parts,
Willitji and Liaritji, utterly fails either to prove descent of the sec-
tions through the men or to establish exogamy of the moieties.
Spencer and Gillen assert that the eight sections of the Warra-
1 American Anthropologist, N. s., vil, pp. 303-304. See also other lists in other
publications.


monga tribe are divided into Uluuru and Kingilli; that the Umbaia
are divided into Illitji and Liaritji; that the Wargaia are divided
into Uluuru and Biingaru ; that the Bingongina are divided into
Wiliuku and Liaraku, and so on. 1 Examination of the tables given
by the authors in all of these tribes fails to prove that a single one
of the so-called “ moieties ” has perpetual succession through the
men or through any other channel, without which any bisection of
a tribe must fall. I have elsewhere spoken of these tables as “un
melange confus et heteroclite.” 2 The classification of the women
into two sets or cycles as exemplified in my table of 1900, already
cited, is the only division known to me in which each set has im-
mutable succession within itself.
Another table can be formed by taking a category of four sec-
tions of women from among whom four specific sections of men are
bound to obtain their wives, whether of the No. 1,2, 3, or 4 desig-
nation. Such a table has previously been given in this journal, 3 to
which the reader is referred. That table does not, however, profess
to exhibit a partition of the tribe into two independent portions.
The quartette of men do not reproduce themselves in the next gen-
eration ; neither do the quartette of women. All that is aimed at
in the table of 1905 is to bring together the four different sections
of men and women who can marry one another, and enable us to
see at a glance who are the potential conjugal mates of any given
man or woman. Further study of the subject will reveal to us that
my table of 1900 does not'illustrate exogamy; neither does my
table of 1905 ; neither does Spencer and Gillen’s table. It is there-
fore obvious that notwithstanding our repeated attempts to divide a
tribe into two such parts that the men of one part shall marry the
women of the other part, and such women only, we are met with
disappointment in every case. The conclusion therefore seems in-
evitable that there is no absolute exogamy in any of the tribes under
discussion.
Parramatta,
New SduTH Wales.
1 Northern Tribes of Central Australia, pp. 101 and 102. From information sup-
plied by reliable correspondents I had previously reported the intermarrying sections of
all the tribes mentioned.
2 Bull. Soc. d' Anthrop. de Paris, VII, s6rie v, p. 173.
3 American Anthropologist, N. s., VII, p. 302.


