

Soils of Portion of the
Coleambally Irrigation Area, N.S.W.
D. C. VAN DIJK and T. TALSMA
SOILS AND LAND USE SERIES NO. 47
COMMONWEALTH SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL
RESEARCH ORGANIZATION, AUSTRALIA 1964


Soils of Portion of the
Coleambally Irrigation Area, N.S.W.
By D. C. van Dijk and T. Talsma
Soils and Land Use Series No. 47
Division of Soils
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organization, Australia
Melbourne 1964


Printed by CSIRO, Melbourne


CONTENTS
PAGE
Summary .. .. .. .. .. .. 5
I. Introduction .. .. .. .. .. .. 5
11. Environment .. .. .. .. .. .. 6
(a) General Physiography .. .. .. .. .. 6
( b ) Parent Materials .. .. .. .. .. 8
(c) Climate .. .. .. .. .. .. 9
(d) Vegetation .. .. .. .. .. .. ..11
111. Detailed Reconnaissance Map of Part of the Coleambally Area .. 12
(a) Description and Classification of the Soils .. .. .. 13
(b) The Mapping Units: Soil Associations .. .. .. ..20
IV. Soil Landscape Map of the Coleambally Area .. .. .. 21
(a) The Mapping Units of the Soil Landscape Map .. .. .. 25
V. Soil Properties Affecting Land Use .. .. .. .. 30
(a) Laboratory Analyses of the Soils .. .. .. .. 32
VI. Acknowledgments .. .. .. .. .. .. 39
VII. References .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 39
Appendix I. Summary of Analytical Data] .. .. .. .. 42
Appendix 11. The Phosphorus and Sulphur Status of Four Soil Types of
the Coleambally Area. By K. Spencer .. .. .. .. 43
Appendix 111. Common and Botanical Names of the Principal Plant
Species .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 45
Appendix IV. Definition of Terms in Soil Classification .. .. 46
Maps
Map 1. Soil Association Map, Part Coleambally Irrigation Area, New South
Wales
Map 2. Soil Landscapes of the Coleambally Irrigation Area, New South Wales


SOILS OF PORTION OF THE COLEAMBALLY IRRIGATION AREA, N.S.W.
By D. C. van Dijk* and T. TALSMA†
[.Manuscript received January 23, 1964]
Summary
Soil reconnaissance surveys in connection with proposed irrigation develop-
ments in the Coleambally area were carried out in 1954 and covered approximately
700 sq miles. The area is situated on the Riverine Plain close to the debouchment of
the Murrumbidgee River from the foothills of the Eastern Highlands. The main
physiographic features are virtually flat plains with an average gradient of 2-3 ft per
mile and narrow elongated sandy ridges which run in a westerly to south-westerly
direction. The soil materials on the plains are calcareous aeolian clay deposits called
parna, whilst those on the ridges are riverine sandy clays and wind-blown sands.
Two soil maps are presented: one shows in detail soil associations for a central
portion of the area, and the other the broad pattern of soil landscapes for the whole area.
The main soils of the plain sections are transitional red-brown earths with
interspersed grey and brown soils of heavy texture. The soils of the river ridge tracts
are “deep sandy soils”, red-brown earths, and solodized solonetz soils.
The soils are discussed with reference to irrigation experience and the research
findings in already-developed areas to the north with comparable soil forms. Samples
were taken from about 40 soil sites for laboratory examination.
I. INTRODUCTION
Soil surveys were carried out over about 400,000 ac representing the eastern
portion of the proposed Coleambally Irrigation Area during 1954 at the request of
the Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission of New South Wales. The area
is situated in the north-east corner of the Riverine Plain between the Murrumbidgee
River and the Yanko Creek, as shown in Figure 1. The eastern boundary of the
Coleambally area is about 15 miles west of the site where the Murrumbidgee River
emerges from the foothills of the Eastern Highlands.
Part of the area, comprising approximately 150,000 ac, was surveyed at the
level of a detailed reconnaissance (see Map 1). Subsequently, the soil survey was
extended to the south and west over an area of approximately 250,000 ac at the level
of a broad reconnaissance and provided material for soil landscapes which are shown
on Map 2. This map includes an area of approximately 50,000 ac in the north-eastern
portion of the Coleambally area, which was surveyed in more detail by the Research
Branch of the N.S.W. Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission. In the
western portion, use was made of information from a detailed soil survey of approxi-
mately 10,000 ac carried out by the Soil Survey Unit of the N.S.W. Department of
Agriculture.
Figure 2 shows the location of the areas covered by Maps 1 and 2 in relation
to the main physiographic characteristics of the region.
’Division of Soils, CSIRO, Canberra.
t Irrigation Research Station, CSIRO, Griffith, N.S.W.


II. ENVIRONMENT
(a) General Physiography
The generalized contours of Figure 2 show the fan-shaped morphology of the
section of the Riverine Plain in which the Coleambally Irrigation Area is situated.
This alluvial fan feature measures approximately 50 miles across and consists of
layered fluviatile and windborne sediments 300 ft and more in depth (Pels 1960). The
gradients on the fan range between 1 and 7 ft per mile, averaging 3 ft per mile in
the eastern portion and approximately 2 ft per mile on the far western plains.
Fig. 1.—Locality plan.
Broad depressional areas occur on either side of the Murrumbidgee fan, minor
ones to the north near Murrami and Griffith (van Dijk 1961) and a pronounced
extensive low area to the south, the “valley” of the Billabong Creek.
The fan-shaped surface morphology determines the general drainage pattern,
which is also shown in Figure 2. Distinction has to be made between the major
drainage system and a minor auxiliary pattern.
The major drainage system consists of the Murrumbidgee River itself, which
traverses the area in a westerly direction, and the Yanko Creek, which initially flows
in a southerly direction but turns to the south-west after a distance of 25 miles.
Both streams have considerably entrenched themselves below the level of the Riverine
Plain; they have developed bands of low flood-plains \—2 miles and more in width


Fig. 2. —Location of the surveyed areas.


and about 5-10 ft below the general plain. On these low-lying bands are found the
channels of the present strongly meandering river-courses and many abandoned
meanders or billabongs.
The auxiliary drainage pattern consists of numerous minor watercourses which
traverse the Coleambally area as more or less clearly defined linear depressions
(Fig. 2 and Map 2). They follow irregular courses across the plains and have
little relationship to the depositional pattern, which is discussed below. Prior to the
development of the area, this auxiliary drainage system carried water from the
Murrumbidgee system during periods of high floods. The system is important for
local drainage, which is apparent from the fact that the branches are generally better
developed towards the lower, western end of extensive plain sections.
There is a significant relationship between the fan-shaped morphology of this
portion of the Riverine Plain and the major soil pattern as shown in Table 6. A
physiographic classification of the plain sections according to their position on the
fan is given in Table 6 and the main soil associations are listed. The plain on the
apex of the fan, bypassed by the main drainage lines, is characterized by soils de-
veloped under good drainage conditions. The gilgaied clay plains, arranged in a
semi-circular zone around the apex plain, have soils indicative of poor drainage con-
ditions. The brown plains further down the fan have soils of intermediate drainage
status.
(b) Parent Materials
The parent materials on which the soils of the Coleambally area have developed
are all of sedimentary origin. Evidence from occasional deep auger holes, special
traverses, and recent deep excavations has shown that the nature of the depositional
materials of the upper 10-15 ft conforms to the general conditions on the Riverine
Plain as described by Butler (1958). Deposits of fluviatile origin have determined
the general shape of the area and have built up prominent surface features such as
the sandy river ridge tracts (see Map 2). These river ridges are, however, essentially
relic features and related to vigorous stream activities of the past (“prior streams”,
Butler 1950). Also, during this past period extensive dune systems developed on these
ridges by deflation from the stream beds and levees.
In spite of the riverine form of the landscape (Butler 1950; Langford-Smith
I 960), the greater proportion of the surface mantle does not seem to comprise riverine
material. This conclusion is based on the fact that on the plain sections between the
river ridges, the pattern of texture variation does not show the normal riverine
gradations typical of true flood-plains (Edelman 1950; Butler 1958). There is instead
a marked degree of uniformity on the plains, in terms of clay content and calcareous-
ness. The textural composition of the surface mantle for a number of profiles on
the plains is shown in Figure 3; these data do not reveal any consistent trends either
in position on the alluvial fan or in relation to prior stream patterns. It is concluded
that this mantle is part of an extensive aeolian sheet described as the Widgelli parna
(Butler and Hutton 1956). The aeolian nature of this mantle apparently imposes
a greater degree of uniformity on the soil materials than one of riverine origin. This
uniformity contrasts with the variable textures of riverine deposits in this area, found
firstly at the surface on the river ridge tracts described in Section IV (a) (i) below and


secondly beneath a depth of 3-5 ft in many places under the Widgelli parna, which
are related to' buried river ridges and their associated flood-plains.
The identity of the river ridges has suffered from partial burial with the parna
sheet. Furthermore, the original stream-bordering dunes have been remodelled by
secondary aeolian action: there are blow-out depressions, lunette-like features, and,
in places, extensive sand sheets extending over the plains.
Fig. 3. —Textural composition of parna clay on three traverses across the Coleambally area (samples
taken at approximately 20 in. depth). (a), North-south traverse in the western part of the area;
(b), north-south traverse in the eastern part of the area; (c), west-east traverse in the centre of the
area. For profile numbers see Appendix I; locations are shown on Map 2. A and B in ( c ) are averages
of diagrams (a) and (b) respectively.
(c) Climate
The Coleambally area is situated in the marginal areas of the winter-rainfall
region of New South Wales, between the 15-in. and 16-in. average annual isohyets
(Bureau of Meteorology 1941). Table 1 presents data of monthly average rainfall
for four localities of the district. This table shows that the average rainfall is some-
what higher for the winter period than for the summer period, but the average pre-
cipitation is otherwise rather evenly distributed throughout the year. The maximum
monthly average rainfall occurs consistently in June but there is usually a subsidiary
maximum in October and sometimes in August.
The summer precipitation, though relatively high, is of very limited use to
plants. This is due not only to the high evapotranspiration under the prevailing high
summer temperatures, but also to the fact that much of the summer rain comes from
occasional heavy storms of short duration. Unfavourable soil conditions aggravate
the latter factor because most soils have a rather dense loamy surface which resists
a quick penetration of the rain-water. Consequently there are heavy losses due to


Table 1
RAINFALL AND TEMPERATURE
DATA
Station
No. of
Years
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Jan.
Feb.
Mar.
Total
Summer
Apr.
May
June
July
Aug.
Sept.
Total
Winter
Year
Monthly and annual average rainfa
11 (in.)
Tubbo*
69
1-46
107
0-95
106
M3
1-24
6-91
1-28
1-41
1-76
1 • 18
1-42
1-23
8-28
15-19
Yanco*
76
1-53
M2
1 • 15
M0
0-95
1-32
7-17
1-32
1-47
1-83
1-36
1-42
1-39
8-79
15-96
Stud Park Northf
54
1-36
1-08
0-94
1-17
0-86
1-34
6-75
1-28
1-54
1-96
1-49
1-56
1-28
9-11
15-86
Leetonf
33
1-49
1-27
1-21
1-20
0-91
100
7-08
1-37
1-35
1-73
1-36
1-64
1-23
8-68
15-76
Percentage frequency of r
nonthly rain
fall totals greater than the effective amounts}:
Stud Park Northf
32
16
7
u
16
28
34
60
90
81
75
39
Average daily maximum £
md minimu
u temperatures (°F)
Leetonf (max.)
28
73-8
81-2
86-4
88-9
88-7
82-6
72-6
64-8
57-7
56-8
60-3
66-8
73-4
(min.)
* From Bureau of M
28
eteornlnav
49-7
r i<ucn
55-6
60-8
63-2
63-4
59-0
51-2
45-0
40-5
38-9
40-5
44-1
51-0
* From Bureau of Meteorology (1949),
t From Hounam (1947).
1 Hounam (1947): effecive r.inf.l, i. defined hem aa ,he nunf.ll nectary s ,a„ germina.ion mlnlai „ growth ,(„h.a, above ,he „i,,,.g poim.


Table 2
Percentage Chance of Receiving Rainfall
Average Rainfall
Station
<3 in.
< 5 in.
<7 in.
<3 in.
< 5 in.
<7 in.
Summer
Winter
Summer
Winter
(October-March)
(April-September)
Tubbo
9
33
56
2
9
29
6-91
8-28
Yanco
8
32
59
1
7
28
7-17
8-79
run-off, and surface ponding on the plains leads to excessive evaporation during the
hot, dry, and windy conditions which usually follow the summer rain-storms. In
addition, the summer and autumn rains in this district are very unreliable compared
with those occurring during the winter months. Table 2 shows the large difference
between summer and winter variability for two observation stations.
In consequence of these factors, the growing season in this district is very
restricted and this fact is well illustrated by the calculation of the “percentage frequency
of monthly rainfall total greater than the effective amounts” in Table 1. Hounam
(1947) based this calculation on Prescott’s criterion that for satisfactory plant growth
the factor PjE 0 75 must be greater than 0’54.
Further restrictions of the growing season for many crops are imposed by the
low-temperature conditions during the winter months. Records of temperatures
are not available for the Coleambally area itself, and those given in Table 1 are for
Leeton, which is situated about 10 miles north of the north-east corner of the Coleam-
bally area. The average coldest month is July; occasional frosty nights can be ex-
pected throughout the winter but there is still a definite frost risk during early spring.
Long, hot summers characterize the district. The highest average temperatures
occur during January and February, and maxima of 100° and over have been ex-
perienced during the months October to March; extremes of more than 110° have
been recorded fairly generally in the southern Riverina.
(d) Vegetation *
The following main types of plant communities (Moore 1953 a) may be dis-
tinguished: the tall woodland on the sandy ridges of the prior streams, the savannah
woodland in swampy depressions, and the grassland with occasional areas of shrub
woodland on the plains. A forest community consisting largely of river red gum
occurs on the present flood-plains of the Murrumbidgee River and the Yanko Creek
along the northern and south-eastern boundaries of the Coleambally area.
The tall woodland of the prior stream systems consists of Murray pine, needle-
wood, bull oak, rosewood, yellow box, and wilga. A large proportion of these sandy
ridges is partially or wholly cleared.
* The common and botanical names of the plant species mentioned in this section are given in
Appendix 111.


The distribution of the tree species within the remaining wooded areas shows
some relationship with the physiographic pattern of the ancient river ridges. Stands
of Murray pine are particularly well developed and dense on the sandy rises and
dunes, and a number of these stands are utilized in State Forests. Grey box and
yellow box are frequently prominent on low sandy areas and the distribution of
yellow box is clearly related to the presence of ancient stream channels, in particular
those of the Mayrung riverine system on the continuous Waddi, Tubbo, and Yamma
river ridges. Scattered river red gum has been observed along the Yamma river
ridge. Dominant grasses on the river ridge tracts are corkscrew and spear grass.
The savannah woodland in the swampy depressions is generally dominated by
black box, while grey box occurs in some swamps. Numerous swamps, in particular
in the western section, have no trees and carry as dominant species lignum and
roly-poly; the latter is particularly abundant on crumbly puff soils. Some of these
swamps may have been treeless from origin, but in other cases the trees were killed
by ring-barking, fires, or changes in the drainage conditions. Dominant grasses of
the swamps include wallaby grass and barley grass.
The dominant species of the grassland on the plains are wallaby grass, spear
grass, plains grass, barley grass, and windmill grass. The density and composition
of the grass cover are, to a certain extent, determined by soil conditions: the plains
with red-brown earth soils have a dense grass cover in which spear grass is prominent;
the plains with transitional red-brown earth soils have usually a rather sparse grass
vegetation in which wallaby grass dominates; puff soils are characterized by a large
percentage of plains grass, and thistles may be numerous. While the composition of
the grass cover changes with seasonal climatic conditions, Moore (19536) has dis-
cussed the influence of the intensity of grazing on the dominance of grass species for
the adjoining districts to the east and south.
There is uncertainty about the original natural extent of the grassland and it
has been suggested that a shrub woodland occupied most of the plains prior to white
settlement. For this reason the grasslands of the adjoining areas to the east and the
south are called disclimax communities by Moore (19536). The scattered occurrences
on the plains of boree, singly or in groups, are regarded as relics of the original shrub
woodland. More complete relic stands of this woodland with saltbush and boree
as dominant species are found on horse paddocks, e.g. near Argoon a short distance
east of the Darlington Point-Jerilderie road.
III. DETAILED RECONNAISSANCE MAP OF PART OF THE
COLEAMBALLY AREA
The detailed reconnaissance survey (Map 1) was carried out in the parishes
of Waddi, Tubbo, Mycotha, Boona, Eulo, Argoon, Peter, and Gidgell. During this
survey, soil inspections of auger holes to an average depth of 42 in., occasionally
exceeding 78 in., were made along traverses which were spaced 60-80 chains apart.
The auger holes were at 20-40 chain intervals along the traverses, somewhat closer
when investigating the river ridges, somewhat wider apart when traversing the plain
sections. At each site the soil was classified at the type level, a check was made of
topsoil variations in the immediate surroundings, and soil boundaries were drawn


on the basis of surface inspection and aerial photo pattern. The aerial photographs,
which were available at a scale of approximately 40 chains to 1 inch, were generally
quite useful on the plain sections but of restricted use on the river ridge tracts. On
the plains, the only limitation in photo-interpretation was that variations in degree of
puffiness did not show on the photo pattern; on the river ridges major changes in the
soil pattern were not discernible, in particular between the Thulabin, Danberry, and
Tenningerie soils in near flat topography.
(a) Description and Classification of the Soils
(i) The Soil Types. —All of the soil types mapped in this survey have already
been published. The soil types are listed, together with references to their fuller
description, in the second and third columns of Table 3, and are briefly described in
the fourth and fifth columns. The sampling and analytical programmes of this
survey were not designed to give detailed descriptions of each type. The samples
were taken along transects to show if there were any consistent trends in soil properties
within the district.
The soils are discussed in terms of their morphological similarity, their recur-
rent patterns of association, and generalized transects.* Discussion of the soil
associations is deferred to subsection ( b ) below.
(ii) The Principal Soil Groups and Their Distribution. —Twenty-two soil types
recognized in the area are classified as shown in the first column of Table 3.
(1) Grey and Brown Soils of Heavy Texture. —The two separate groups of the
grey and the brown soils of heavy texture (Stephens 1962) have been bracketed
together in this discussion. A clear separation of the two groups is impracticable in
this area because all kinds of transitional profile forms are as common as the main
types and, in addition, the grey and the brown soils of these groups frequently occur
together in an intricate and complex pattern.
There are two subgroups, the major one with crumbl; 'alcareous surface
horizons and the other with massive non-calcareous surface soik The crumbly soils
show virtually no change in texture from the surface downward with approximately
50-60% clay throughout (cf. subsoil composition in Figure 4(d)). The fine aggregation
of the surface soils, giving the “self-mulching” property, is usually best developed
in the drier season. In some instances the surface soils may be somewhat crusted
but usually the crust is easily broken up. In one soil type, Gogeldrie clay, the self-
mulching property is rather poorly developed. All soil profiles have in common
a very coarsely aggregated and dense subsoil.
The soils of this subgroup comprising the gilgai soils, Yooroobla clay and
Wunnamurra clay, and the heavy plain soil, Gogeldrie clay, occur extensively on the
plains in the eastern half of the Coleambally area, with the exception of the Ouren-
dumbee Plain. The lime percentages for the upper 10 in. of 10 gilgai soils were found
to vary between 0-5% and 2%, occasionally up to 3-5%, with slightly higher figures
for the deeper subsoil.
♦Definition of terms in Appendix IV.


Table 3
BRIEF DESCRIPTION OF THE SOIL TYPES
Great Soil Group
Soil Type
Reference*
Surface Soil
Subsoil
Topography
Grey and brown soils
of heavy texture
Yooroobla clay
3
4-6 In. brown clay, crumbly,
slightly to moderately cal-
careous, gradual transition to
subsoil
Brown heavy clay, fine blocky,
gradually becoming greyish
brown and coarse blocky to
massive with depth; moderately
calcareous throughout
Puff mounds on
moderately well-
drained plains
Wunnamurra clay
3
3-5 In. brownish grey clay,
crumbly, moderately calca-
reous, gradual transition to
subsoil
Brown-grey heavy clay, fine
blocky, gradually becoming yel-
lowish grey and coarse blocky to
massive with depth. Moderately
calcareous throughout
Puff mounds on poor-
ly drained plains
Gogeldrie clay
1, 9
2-3 In. grey or brown heavy
clay, moderately crumbly,
slightly calcareous, gradual
transition to subsoil
Brown-grey heavy clay, medium
blocky, at shallow depth becom-
ing very massive. Slightly cal-
careous throughout
Broad low flooded
plains
Wandook clay
7
3-5 In. light grey, light to
medium clay, massive. Non-
calcareous, abrupt change to
subsoil
Dark grey heavy clay, coarse
blocky, massive with depth.
Moderately calcareous below
20 in.
Swampy depressions
Transitional red-
brown earths
Willbriggie clay loam
5, 3
3-5 In. light brown clay loam,
weakly aggregated
Dark brown heavy clay, fine
blocky, gradually changing to
brown heavy clay, moderately
to highly calcareous below 16-20
Flat moderately well-
drained plains
Mundiwa clay loam
7
3-5 In. light brown clay loam,
massive
Dark brown heavy clay, medium
blocky, gradually changing to
dense brown heavy clay, slightly
calcareous below 18-21 in.
Flat moderately well-
drained plains


Coree clay loam
3
2-4 In. light grey clay loam to
light clay, massive
Dark brownish grey heavy clay,
medium to coarse blocky, gradu-
ally changing to yellowish brown
heavy clay. Moderately cal-
careous below 18-20 in.
Broad swampy areas
Morago clay loam
Morago clay
3.9
3.9
2-4 In. light grey clay or clay
loam, massive
Dark brownish grey heavy clay,
coarse blocky, gradually chang-
ing to yellowish grey-brown
dense heavy clay. Slightly cal-
careous below 20-25 in.
Flat, moderately well
to poorly drained
plains, subject to fre-
quent flooding
Red-brown earths
Birganbigil clay loam
7
5-7 In. brown loam to clay
loam, massive to weakly
aggregated
Dark brown heavy clay, medium
blocky and plastic, gradually
changing to yellow-brown dense
medium clay; moderately cal-
careous below 16-20 in.
Well-drained plains
and broad low domes
and lobes on mode-
rately well-drained
plains
Thulabin sand
3,9
8-14 In. grey-brown sand to
loamy sand, loose to slightly
compact. More or less bleach-
ed subsurface horizon
Strong red-brown to brown
sandy clay, well to moderately
aggregated, medium blocky, sub-
plastic in the lower part, often
black mottling on aggregates
and marked clayey root-lines
especially in lower parts.
Gradual change to subplastic,
yellow-brown, fine sandy clay,
moderately calcareous below
20-25 in.
On well-drained flanks
of river ridge tracts
and on well-developed
domes and ridges on
the plains
Thulabin sandy loam
3
6-12 In. brown loam to sandy
loam, massive. Thin bleached
subsurface horizon may occur
Similar to Thulabin sand. Tex-
ture is moderately to well struc-
tured heavy clay, slightly sub-
plastic in lower part. Moderately
calcareous below 14-18 in.
On well-drained flanks
of river ridge tracts
and on well-developed
domes and ridges on
the plains


Great Soil Group
Soil Type
Reference*
Surface Soil
Subsoil
Topography
Red-brown earths
(Continued)
Thulabin clay loam
3, 9
5-9 In. brown clay loam, mas-
sive. Sometimes a thin bleach-
ed subsurface horizon occurs
Similar to Thulabin sand. Tex-
ture is moderately to well-struc-
tured heavy clay, slightly sub-
plastic in lower part. Moderately
calcareous below 14-18 in.
On moderately well-
to well-drained lower
flanks of river ridge
tracts and on low
domes and ridges on
the plains
Tuppal clay loam
7
5-6 In. grey loam to clay loam,
massive. Somewhat bleached
in subsurface horizon
Dark grey heavy clay, medium
blocky, gradually changing to
plastic grey-brown medium clay.
Moderately calcareous below
15-18 in.
Swampy depressions
Cobram sandy loam
2
8-14 In. grey-brown sandy
loam, massive, frequently with
a bleached subsurface horizon
Brown, greyish mottled heavy
clay, medium blocky, plastic,
gradually changing to yellow-
brown sandy clay. Moderately
calcareous below 24-30 in.
Crest of prior stream
levees
Moira loam
2
5-7 In. brown loam, weakly
aggregated
Dark reddish brown heavy clay,
medium blocky, plastic, gradu-
ally changing to brown light
clay. Moderately calcareous be-
low 20-22 in.
On prior stream levee
between the crest and
the plain
Finley loam
6
7-12 In. brown loam to clay
loam, weakly aggregated,
sometimes slightly bleached in
subsurface horizon
Dark reddish brown medium to
heavy clay, crumbly to fine blocky,
gradually changing to yellow to
grey-brown fine sandy clay which
stays crumbly to fine blocky.
Moderately calcareous below
25-30 in.
Some low situations
of prior stream levees
Solodized solonetz
soils
Danberry sand
4
6-15 In. dull greyish brown
loose to slightly coherent sand
to loamy sand, frequently with
a light grey compact subsur-
Dark greyish brown to yellow-
grey mottled heavy clay with
sand, very dense and plastic,
medium to coarse blocky or well-
Lower slopes and level
flank sections of the
sandy river ridge
tracts
Table 3 ( Continued )


face horizon; usually a sudden
developed columnar structure,
transition to the subsoil
changing gradually to sandy
clay. Moderately to highly cal-
careous below 15-24 in.
Danberry sandy loam
4
6- 13 In. greyish brown to sandy
loam, massive. There may be
Similar to Danberry sand, less
sand in the clay
Lower slopes and level
flank sections of the
Danberry clay loam
a bleached subsurface horizon
sandy river ridge tracts
4
5-8 In. brown or grey-brown
clay loam to sandy clay loam,
moderately dense, often with a
bleached subsurface horizon
Similar to Danberry sand, less
sand in the clay
Lower slopes and level
flank sections of the
sandy river ridge
tracts
Wamoon sand
8
16-24 In. greyish brown loose
sand, paler in lower part. Fre-
quently there is a marked thin
bleached horizon in the lower
part
Red-brown, yellow-brown and
grey mottled dense heavy clay
with sand, coarse blocky; a very
dense, heavy clay with depth
Low flat interdune
areas on the river
ridge tracts
Deep sandy soils
Sandmount sand
2
Deep phase — 54-70 in. Pale
grey-brown, sometimes brown
to reddish brown loose sand.
A cemented horizon may
occur in the lower part. Shal-
low phase — 38-54 in., other-
wise like deep phase
A few inches of brown or red-
brown and yellow-brown mot-
tled massive sandy loam or clay
loam, gradually becoming a
loamy sand or loose sand.
Cemented zones frequently occur
High and low dunes
and ridges on river
ridge tracts
Tenningerie sand
8
14-38 In. greyish brown loose
sand, lower part may be
bleached
Brown, red-brown, and grey-
brown mottled massive clay
loam to sandy clay, moderately
subplastic, gradually changing
to light brown sand. Streaks of
the mottled clay may extend
downwards to the sand; cemen-
ted layers may occur
Low dunes and ridges
on river ridge tracts
* 1, Blackmore, Talsma, and Hutton (1956). 2, Butler et at. (1942). 3, Churchward and Flint (1956). 4, Churchward (1956). 5, Hawkins and
Beattie, unpublished data. 6, Johnston and Butler (1945). 7, Smith (1945). 8, Taylor and Hooper (1938). 9, van Dijk (1961).


Fig. 4.—Textural composition of four representative profiles:
(a) Tenningerie sand; (b) Thulabin sand; (c) Danberry sand; (d) Will-
briggie clay loam. Mechanical analyses were carried out as follows:
dispersion with Calgon; samples containing >5% CaCO3 were
treated with HCI (Piper 1950); clay and silt were determined with the
hydrometer, the sand fractions by sieving after application of the
beaker method of decantation (Piper 1950).


The soils of the second subgroup are confined to some small swampy depres-
sions. The texture of their dense surface clay horizons is slightly lighter than that
of the subsoil; lime concretions are only encountered in small quantities below a
depth of about 18 in. The main type representing these soils is Wandook clay.
(2) Transitional Red-brown Earths. —These soils are transitional between the
grey and brown soils of heavy texture and the red-brown earths. The depth of the
surface horizon of this group is only 3 to 4 in. The characteristic type of profile is
shown diagrammatically for Willbriggie clay loam in Figure 4 (d). The distribution
of lime in the subsoil is similar to that in the red-brown earths, and there is sometimes
gypsum in the deep subsoil, particularly in the western part of the Coleambally area.
The most widely distributed members of the group are Willbriggie clay loam
and Mundiwa clay loam; their grey counterparts, Coree clay loam and Morago clay
loam respectively, are found in broad swampy areas. The transitional red-brown
earths are the dominant soils of the plains, occurring in highest proportion in the
western and south-western sections of the Coleambally area.
(3) Red-brown Earths. —This group comprises well-differentiated profiles with
a loamy or sandy surface soil more than 4 in. deep changing abruptly to a clay sub-
soil. The surface soil may have a weakly developed bleached zone in the lower part,
while the subsoil is relatively dense to well structured and may even be subplastic.*
The average lime content of the subsoils of the red-brown earths is 2-5% with
maximum values of 4%.
The group of the red-brown earths not only includes brown and red-brown soils,
but also grey soils with otherwise similar soil profile characteristics. They have
developed on parna, on local aeolian sandy clay deposits, and on fluviatile loamy
and sandy clay deposits. The red-brown earth soils developed on parna clay are
widespread on the Ourendumbee plain in the high eastern portion of the Coleambally
area and the representative soil is Birganbigil clay loam. This soil also occurs on
scattered low domes on all the plains. Red-brown earths of somewhat lighter texture
with variable sand content, consisting of the Thulabin series, occur mainly in belts
which border the sandy dune complexes of the river ridge tracts and on high domes.
The textural composition of the surface soil and subsoil of a sandy member of this
series is shown in Figure 4 (b). Red-brown earths on fluviatile deposits occur as
narrow strips on the river ridge tracts, and this group includes Moira loam, Finley
loam, and Cobram sandy loam. The grey member, Tuppal clay loam, occurs in
swampy depressions, in particular in those which are associated with the river ridges.
(4) Solodized Solonetz Soils. —The soils of this group have a very marked texture
contrast between light surface soils and heavy subsoils. The surface soils are quite
variable in texture but are mostly sandy, and the subsoils are generally very dense
intractable clays. The textures of a typical soil profile are shown in Figure 4(c),
which should be compared with Figure 4(b) to show the difference between the two
soils in the ratio of coarse sand to fine sand. This difference has frequently been
noted in the field between the soils of the Danberry and Thulabin series. The depth
* Subplasticity is a particular stable form of a well-developed soil structure as defined by
Butler (1955): subplastic soil materials have consistence properties suggesting less clay than they
actually contain. For example, subplastic clays may have the consistence properties of loams.


of the A horizon is variable from 5 to 24 in., 8-12 in. being most common. Some
surfaces have a pronounced bleached zone in the lower part.
The characteristic feature of this group is the dense, coarsely structured clay
subsoil. Under dry conditions this tough clay may be broken by wide vertical cracks
into columns with a more or less rounded top, and these columns are frequently
capped with a thin bleached sandy-silty layer which is very brittle and powdery
when dry.
Solodized solonetz soils include the Danberry series and the Wamoon sand.
The Danberry series occurs in low marginal belts along the river ridge tracts, in par-
ticular on the southern sides of the continuous river ridges, and in isolated low
sandy areas in the broken river ridges; Wamoon sand is found in low areas adjacent
to sand dunes. A typical characteristic of the Danberry series is the unusually high
lime content in the subsoil with values of up to 6-10%.
(5) Deep Sandy Soils. —The surface sand of these profiles is usually more than
3 ft deep and the colour is a relatively uniform brown or pale grey-brown. A few
inches at the surface are somewhat darker owing to the accumulation of organic
matter, and the brown colour of the subsoil usually becomes more yellow with depth.
The subsoil may contain several clay bands or a single sandy clay layer, while there
are sometimes slight amounts of lime and there may be bleached and cemented
zones. Some profiles are undifferentiated sand to a depth of 10-15 ft and more.
The textural composition of a profile with a marked clay subsoil is shown for a
Tenningerie sand with an unusually shallow surface sand in Figure 4 (a).
The majority of the deep sands are of aeolian origin and occur as high and low
dunes. Since they generally belong to partly buried prior stream systems, such deep
well-sorted aeolian sands may also be found below the level of the present surface of
the plain. The soils comprise Tenningerie sand, Sandmount sand, and some miscel-
laneous profiles which, for lack of sufficient information, have not been classified yet.
There are also unclassified deep, gravelly or gritty, sand profiles which are found in
some low depressional areas on the river ridge tracts; these are ancient stream-bed
deposits.
(b) The Mapping Units: Soil Associations
The soil associations shown on Map I are a generalization of the detailed
study of the distribution of soil types. Each soil association is defined by the domi-
nance of one or two soil types, which, together with subdominant and minor types,
are listed in Table 4.* Besides a characteristic pattern in the occurrence of the soil
types in the associations, there are regular sequences allied to topographic relief
and drainage. The most common sequences of soil types are listed in Table 5. The
recognition of these recurring soil conditions facilitates the insertion of soil boun-
daries in the areas between the traverses which have not been investigated in detail.
These recurring sequences in the soil pattern are due to several factors, and
three basic cases may be distinguished; catenary or drainage sequences, parent
material sequences, and soil combinations. Catenary sequences are due to varying
drainage conditions in a uniform parent material, and an example is provided by
♦Definition of terms in Appendix IV.


sequence 2 of Table 5 which occurs on the parna plains. Similar catenas occur across
low domes (the two sequences 3 (b) and 3(c) of Table 5). Parent material sequences
are related to gradational variations in texture which are the result of certain depo-
sitional processes: sequence 3 (a) of Table 5 shows a range of soil types on a lunette
which is caused by an increase in fineness in texture from the crest of the lunette
down to the tail end on the lee side; a similar gradient in texture occurs across a levee
formation of the prior streams and the corresponding sequence of soils is indicated
in sequence 1(c) of Table 5. Finally, certain soil types happen to occur frequently
together and there may be gradational changes from one to the other, but there
is no constant relationship between them; an example is provided by the grouping
Cobram loam-Sandmount sand-Willbriggie clay loam (in the Cobram soil association
of Table 4), which is related to the accidental but repeated co-occurrence on the river
ridge tracts of levee deposits, stream-bordering dunes, and small patches of parna clay.
The soil associations listed in Table 4 may contain elements of all the types
of sequences described above, though one type would usually dominate. Many
sequences are of a composite nature, for instance, a change in drainage conditions
may be accompanied by a change in parent material. The understanding of the
occurrence and nature of the sequences increases the usefulness of the generalized
data. On this basis, and with limited field checking, many details concerning the
distribution of soil types can be obtained.
(i) Discussion of the Soil Pattern of Map 1. —The soil pattern on the plain
sections of this map is typical for the conditions of the “gilgaied clay plains” (see
second column of Table 6). There is, however, a small area with Birganbigil soils
belonging to the western tip of the Ourendumbee “apex plain” along the eastern
boundary of the map, and in the parish of Mycotha soil conditions prevail which
are characteristic of the “brown plains” to the west.
The detailed soil pattern on the plain sections is determined by the topography
of the plains: slightly elevated lobes and domes within the Wunnamurra association
carry Yooroobla clay and dull grey-brown Mundiwa or Willbriggie clay loam; those
within the Yooroobla association have brown Willbriggie or Mundiwa clay loam;
scattered domes within the Willbriggie association carry Willbriggie clay loam with
particularly well-developed structure and Birganbigil clay loam.
Examples of a particularly dense type of Mundiwa clay loam have been encoun-
tered in the eastern part of the Cararbury plain between the Waddi and Cararbury
river ridges; an increased incidence of Willbriggie clay loam with unusually well-
developed structure is found towards the western portions of the Argoon plain.
The northern map section shows an unusually complicated pattern of river
ridge soils. This complex pattern is due to the fact that in this area several prior
stream ridges branch out (see Map 2).
IV. SOIL LANDSCAPE MAP OF THE COLEAMBALLY AREA
The soil landscape* map (Map 2) is at a broader stage of generalization than
the soil association map and covers a larger area while including the latter. The
field investigations for the soil landscape map were carried out in two stages. During
’Definition of terms in Appendix IV.


Table 4
GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS OF THE SOIL ASSOCIATIONS
Soil
Physiography
Soil Types
Association
Dominant
Subdominant
Minor
Birganbigil
Flat well-drained plains
Birganbigil clay loam
Willbriggie clay loam
Thulabin loam and clay loam
Mundiwa clay loam
Tuppal clay loam
Wunnamurra clay
Cobram
Narrow belts with curves and slightly winding
elongated sandy rises and ridges on river ridge
tracts
Cobram sandy loam
Finley loam
Moira loam
Cobram sandy loam
Thulabin sandy loam
Tenningerie sand
Sandmount sand
Willbriggie clay loam
Danberry
Low flat sections and low slopes on the flanks of
the river ridge tracts
Danberry loamy sand
Danberry sand
Danberry sandy loam
Thulabin sandy loam
Thulabin clay loam
Sandmount sand
Tenningerie sand
Wamoon sand
Tuppal clay loam
Sandmount
High broken relief on river ridge tracts
Sandmount sand
Wamoon sand
Thulabin sand
Tenningerie sand
Thulabin sandy loam
Danberry sand
Tenningerie
Low broken relief on river ridge tracts
Tenningerie sand
Sandmount sand
Wamoon sand
Thulabin series
Danberry sand
Danberry sandy loam
Danberry clay loam
Tuppal clay loam


Thulabin
Well-drained slightly undulating sections and flanks
of river ridge tracts; occasional domes and lunettes
on the plains
Thulabin loam
Thulabin sandy loam
Thulabin clay loam
Birganbigil clay loam
Danberry series
Tenningerie sand
Tuppal clay loam
Tuppal
Swampy depressions
Tuppal clay loam
Wandook clay
Wunnamurra clay
Unclassified sandy soils
Gogeldrie clay
Willbriggie
Moderately well-drained plains with slightly lobate
surface relief, swampy depressions and occasional
domes
Willbriggie clay loam
Yooroobla clay
Coree clay loam
Mundiwa clay loam
Morago clay loam
Wunnamurra clay
Tuppal clay loam
Wandook clay
Birganbigil clay loam
Thulabin sandy loam
Wunnamurra
Poorly drained plains subject to frequent flooding
Wunnamurra clay
Yooroobla clay
Coree clay loam
Morago clay loam
Gogeldrie clay
Mundiwa clay loam
Tuppal clay loam
Wandook clay
Yooroobla
Moderately well to poorly drained plains subject
to flooding
Yooroobla clay
Mundiwa clay loam
Morago clay loam
Willbriggie clay loam
Coree clay loam
Tuppal clay loam
Birganbigil clay loam
Wunnamurra clay


Table 5
CHARACTERISTIC SOIL SEQUENCES IN THE COLEAMBALLY AREA
1. Sequences on the river ridge tracts
( a ) Sandmount sand-Wamoon sand-
Tenningerie sand
\
Dune system of the central section
Danberry series
Low fringe, usually on the south-south-east
side of the river ridge
Birganbigil clay loam
Transition to clay plain
(b) Sandmount sand-Wamoon sand-
Tenningerie sand
Dune system of the central section
Thulabin series
Nearly level fringe, usually on the north-
north-west side of the river ridge tract, very
gently sloping to the clay plain
Birganbigil clay loam
Transition to clay plain
(c) Unclassified coarse sandy soils
Stream-bed
(Sandmount sand)
(Scattered dunes)
Cobram sandy loam
Crest of levee
Finley clay loam
Levee sections in low situations
Moira loam
Back levee
2. Sequence on the plains
Birganbigil clay loam-Willbriggie clay'
loam (with varying % of Yooroobla
clay)
Yooroobla association
Coree clay loam (with varying % of
Wunnamurra clay)
>
Range of soils on the plains with an in-
crease in drainage restrictions and in
liability of flooding
Wunnamurra association
Gogeldrie series
3. West-east sequences across swamp-Iunet
te formations
(a) Tuppal clay loam
Swamp
Thulabin sand
Crest of lunette
Thulabin sandy loam
Thulabin loam
Range of soils on the gently sloping lee
Thulabin clay loam
y
side from the crest to the plain
Birganbigil clay loam
Willbriggie clay loam
( b ) Wandook clay or Coree clay loam
Swamp
Thulabin loam and clay loam
Birganbigil clay loam
Very low lunette or dome
Willbriggie clay loam
Plain
(c) Wandook clay or Coree clay loam
Swamp
Willbriggie clay loam
Slight rise
Wunnamurra association
Plain


the first stage, soil inspections were made along traverses spaced at five-mile intervals;
the along the traverses was of the same intensity as during the first survey.
During the second stage, reconnaissances were carried out in the strips of country
between the traverses using aerial photo-mosaics at a scale of 1 mile to 1 inch. Though
finer details of the soil pattern are often poorly reflected in the aerial photo-pattern,
the contrasts between broader units, such as plain soils, soils on lunette and swamp
combinations, on sand dunes, and on the fluviatile sections of the river ridges, show
up relatively clearly.
The range of soil materials and soil types in the area covered by the soil land-
scape map is similar to that in the area covered by the soil association map;.reference
concerning details of these aspects can be made to the relevant sections above (II(&)
and 111(a)).
(a) The Mapping Units of the Soil Landscape Map
The mapping units or soil landscapes of Map 2 are listed and classified in
Table 6. The classification is based on an analysis of geomorphological and drainage
conditions which are thought to be significant for the development of the soil pattern.
The river ridges are grouped according to the degree of continuity. The Waddi
and Yamma river ridges are largely continuous and their prior stream nature is
relatively well developed; often comparatively recent alluvial formations and sedi-
ments of the Mayrung formation (Butler 1958) are found. The Cararbury, Tubbo,
and Boona river ridges are moderately discontinuous, the Banandra and Gidgell
ridges are strongly discontinuous. The continuity of these ridges generally improves
towards the west. The name “broken river ridge” has been introduced for the dis-
continuous river ridges (van Dijk 1961).
The plain sections lying between the river ridges show a broad zonation in
relation to position on the alluvial fan as follows (see also Table 6):
On the crest of the fan: the Ourendumbee plain, having a greater proportion of
red-brown earth soils and well-drained plains (“apex plain”).
Mid section of the fan: the Jurambula, Cararbury, Gidgell, and Morundah
plains, having a greater proportion of gilgai soils and poorly drained plains
(“gilgaied clay plains”).
Outer belt of the fan: Boobalbundi, Argoon, and Yamma plains, having a
greater proportion of transitional red-brown earth soils, less gilgai and
moderately drained plains (“brown plains”).
The soil landscapes are described below in terms of soil associations which
are similar to those defined in Section 111(6) and listed in Table 4.
(i) The River Ridges. —With the distinction between continuous and broken
river ridges, there are concomitant differences in soil pattern. The continuous river
ridges (Table 6) have appreciable areas of the Cobram association corresponding to
the fluviatile pattern of levees and stream-bed which show relatively clearly on the
aerial photographs. The broken river ridges have only small areas of this association
or none at all.


Table 6
CLASSIFICATION OF THE SOIL LANDSCAPES OF THE COLEAMBALLY AREA
Soil Landscape
(Map 2)
Physiography
Soil Associations
(Dominant (italics) and Subdominant)
Characteristic Great
Soil Group
Waddi river ridge
Yamma river
ridge
Continuous
river ridge
Cobram, Sandmount, Tenningerie,
Thulabin
Deep sands
Red-brown earths
Solodized solonetz
Cararbury river
ridge
Tubbo river ridge
Boona river ridge
Broken river
ridges
Sandmount, Tenningerie, Danberry,
Thulabin
Banandra river
ridge
Gidgell river ridge
Danberry, Thulabin
Ourendumbee
plain
Apex plain
Birganbigil
Red-brown earths
Jurambula plain
Gilgaied clay
plains
Yooroobla, Wunnamurra
Grey and brown soils
of heavy texture
Cararbury plain
Yooroobla, Willbriggie
Gidgell plain
Yooroobla, Willbriggie, Wunnamurra
Morundah plain
Wunnamurra, Yooroobla
Boobalbundi plain
Argoon plain
Brown plains
Willbriggie
Transitional red-
brown earths
Goolgumbla plain
Yamma plain
Willbriggie and Willbriggie, light
subsoil phase
The major ridges are characterized by large areas with the Sandmount asso-
ciation; the soil pattern across the ridges is frequently asymmetrical with narrow
strips or isolated areas of Thulabin association on the north-north-west sides, and
broad belts of Danberry association on the south-south-east sides of the ridges (Table
5, sequences 1 (a) and ( b )). The minor ridges are usually dominated by the Danberry
association on low flat areas and the Thulabin association on slightly domed sections.
The distribution of the soil associations, as it varies with the variable topographic
conditions on the river ridges, is described below.
The Waddi river ridge has a dominance of the Sandraount association in the
far eastern section close to the low flood-plains of the Murrumbidgee River. Scat-
tered low dunes of the Sandmount association, some with uniformly brown deep
sands, others with pale grey-brown sands, are found on the middle section. Sand-


mount soils are also a prominent feature of a section of this ridge between 4 and 8
miles south-west of Darlington Point where traverses 6,8, 9, and 10 (Map 2) cross
the ridge. The Cobram association covers the larger part of the ridge in the vicinity
of Tubbo and Darlington Point, including the tributary ridge which splits off in a
northerly direction 4 miles south-east of Darlington Point, and on the far western
section. In the latter section, the continuity of the Waddi river ridge is interrupted
by the Gum Creek, which cuts across from north-east to south-west. Hawkins and
Walker (1958) discussed details of the depositional layering on a traverse across
this river ridge in the parish of Ugobit.
The Cararbury broken river ridge consists of a major northern branch and a
minor much-broken southern branch. Only the northern branch has appreciable
sand dune areas with the Sandmount soil association; the other soil associations
are, in order of significance, the Tenningerie, Thulabin, and Danberry. The Danberry
soil association occurs in a relatively large area on the eastern section of the northern
ridge. Hardly any surface exposures of the ridge are found west of the boundary
between the Cararbury and Boobalbundi plains.
The eastern section of the Tubbo broken river ridge consists for 5 miles of a
channel-like depression with the Tenningerie association. The following broad
central section is dominated by the Sandmount association but there are also extensive
occurrences of Danberry soils. The western part of the ridge has again a low topo-
graphy marked by the Thulabin and Tenningerie types, with short stretches of coarse
sandy stream-bed and levee soils. Small areas with Sandmount and Wamoon soils
were found along traverse 7 where the ridge broadens towards the west.
The Boona broken river ridge is the most prominent ridge feature of the Coleam-
bally area with extensive and high dune complexes of the Sandmount association.
The soil pattern is rather similar all along the ridge; the larger part of the ridge occurs
in the area shown on Map 1.
Small ridges, apparently joining the Boona system, are the Banandra and the
Gidgell broken river ridges, which are both exposed only in small widely interspaced
areas. The Banandra ridge has a dominance of Tenningerie and Sandmount soils
in the eastern half, Thulabin in the western half, and appreciable areas of Danberry
near the junction with the Boona ridge; the Gidgell ridge has Sandmount and Dan-
berry in the extreme eastern sections and Danberry and Thulabin soils in the remaining
western parts.
The Yamma river ridge has a somewhat broken appearance on the eastern
section where it enters the Coleambally area; some high dunes of Sandmount soils
occur here. Further west, the ridge is of perfect continuity but it is not a prominent
physiographic feature because the topography is generally rather low, and dunes with
the related Sandmount association occur only in small scattered localities. The broad
irregular sandy area on the south side, between the Yamma and Morundah plains,
seems to be dominated by the Thulabin and Danberry soil associations: frequent
occurrences of the Thulabin series were found on its western side along traverse 3,
and of the Danberry and Wamoon soil series on its eastern side along traverse 2.
Dune areas with the Sandmount association were observed on the eastern flank and
towards the southern boundary of the area.


Fine micaceous sandy soil materials occur widely, and at a shallow depth
below the surface parna, on the eastern section of the Yamma plain; the Finley soil
series was found on a few exposures of these materials along traverse 4 in the centre
of this plain.
(ii) The Plain Sections. —Scattered on the plains are numerous circular and
linear drainage depressions. Low ridges, broad rises, domes, and occasionally well-
developed lunettes frequently occur on the eastern sides of these depressions. Appar-
ently most of the sediments of these elevated areas are deflation material from the
depressions, and the sediments consist of parna or of various admixtures of parna
and riverine material, depending on the layers which were exposed at the site of
these low areas. In the depressions, Wandook, Coree, or Tuppal soils occur; on the
rises Willbriggie (on the grey plains), Birganbigil (on the plains with Willbriggie
soils), or Thulabin soils. The latter soils usually have developed on material derived
from riverine sediments and contain a high proportion of fine sand and frequently
some mica.
Apart from features related to aeolian action, which generally show west-to-east
developmental trends (Butler and Hutton 1956), there is occasional evidence of the
influence of sheet flooding on the surface development, which is revealed by opposite,
east-to-west trends. For instance, in the northern section of the Gidgell plain due
west of the Ourendumbee (apex) plain, clay sheets with an unusually high admixture
of coarse sand were found which strongly resemble the sandy splay deposits of the
Dallas river ridge in the adjoining area to the north between Yanco and Whitton
(van Dijk 1961).
The gilgaied clay plains (Table 6, second column), which are grouped in a belt
in a semi-circle around the apex plain (the Ourendumbee plain), are characterized
by a banded arrangement of the dominant soil associations. The following relation-
ship between these soil bands, which run roughly radially from the apex, and the
drainage pattern is apparent. Bands of Wunnamurra and Gogeldrie soils, 1-3 miles
in width, occur in broad depression areas in the centres of the Morundah and Gidgell
plains and in the southern half of the Jurambula plain. A band of Yooroobla,
including some Coree soils, follows a marked depression in the southern part of the
Gidgell plain. Bands of Yooroobla, Wunnamurra, and Coree soils, found on the
Cararbury plain and on the northern portion of the Gidgell plain, occur on each
side of well-defined drainage lines which apparently were major transit channels
for flood-waters.
More complete details of the general soil pattern are given below for each of
the plains.
The Ourendumbee “high” plain is dominated by the Birganbigil soil association.
An extensive area of Willbriggie occurs in the southern corner towards the Morundah
plain, and a complex pattern of Birganbigil and Willbriggie soils on the western tip
forms a transition to the Gidgell plain. Small sections with Wunnamurra and Yoo-
roobla occur on each side of the Boona river ridge; four well-defined linear depres-
sions traverse the central area from east to west, three running towards the Gidgell
plain and the fourth to the Morundah plain.


The Jurambula plain consists largely of the Yooroobla soil association. An
elongated area of Wunnamurra, partly adjoining the Boona river ridge, occurs in
the south-west section, and a strip of the Birganbigil association in the eastern portion.
The Cararbury plain is dominated in the eastern half by the Yooroobla asso-
ciation and in the western half by the Willbriggie association. The bands of Yoo-
roobla soils on each side of the Waddi and the Tubbo river ridges narrow suddenly
half-way across the plain; those along the Waddi ridge cut out entirely between
traverses 9 and 10, and those along the Tubbo river ridge finish a short distance to
the west of the Darlington Point-Jerilderie road.
Several small islands of river ridge soils are scattered in the western half of the
plain.
The Gidgell plain is dominated by the Yooroobla and the Wunnamurra soil
associations: the Yooroobla association occurs in three separate bands which alternate
with four elongated areas of the Willbriggie association, with one irregular band
of the Wunnamurra association in the centre of the plain. The Wunnamurra asso-
ciation occurs also in a short elongated area in the south-eastern section of the plain
as a link between the Wunnamurra association of the Morundah plain and the
southern Yooroobla band on the Gidgell plain.
The Morundah plain has extensive areas of the Wunnamurra association, which
covers most of the northern half and the central part of the southern half. Wide-
spread occurrence of the Gogeldrie clay soil type in this association was found along
traverse 1; this soil type is otherwise very restricted in the Coleambally area. The
Willbriggie association occupies the margins of the plain to the west, east, and south.
The Boobalbundi plain and the Argoon plain are dominated by the Willbriggie
soil association, which has generally a low percentage, 10-20%, of Yooroobla puff
soils. Unusually large-sized puff mounds were observed in the southern portion of
the Boobalbundi plain. The detailed pattern is rather complicated owing to the
presence of low depressions and domes. This results in many colour variants of the
dominant soil type, the Willbriggie clay loam, with a frequent occurrence of bright
red-brown, particularly well-structured forms of this type on slightly domed areas.
There are many interspersed occurrences of the Tuppal association, a few scattered
domes with the Birganbigil and Thulabin associations, a few extensive swampy areas
with Coree clay loam associated with 60-90% of Wunnamurra clay, and some areas
with a complex of Willbriggie clay loam and Coree clay loam.
The Yamma plain and, to a lesser extent, the Goolgumbla plain owe a number
of features to the presence of a major river ridge, the Yamma river ridge, on their
northern boundaries. Both plains have a relatively strong slope away from the
Yamma ridge to the south, towards the valley depression of the Billabong Creek
(Fig. 2), and as a result most detailed surface features show a pronounced southern
orientation. Narrow strips of riverine soils, amongst others Finley loam, occur along
traverse 4. Sandy domes with the Thulabin series occur in linear arrangements further
westward on the boundary of the Yamma and Goolgumbla plains. There are sandy-
topped parna soils in the northern sections of the Goolgumbla plain. Shallow
depths of sandy micaceous riverine clay below the surface parna sheet occur along
traverses 3,4, and 7.


The dominant soil association of the two plains is the Willbriggie; the detailed
soil pattern is rather complex owing to the irregular surface topography and fluviatile
influences. Several well-developed swamp-lunette formations, with the Thulabin
series on the lunettes, occur in the central part of the Yamma plain and in the western
portion of the Goolgumbla plain.
V. SOIL PROPERTIES AFFECTING LAND USE
Land-use experience in the Coleambally area is confined to extensive dry-land
grazing of the native pastures. The discussion below presents some general con-
siderations arising from experience in the adjacent irrigation areas of the Riverina
plains. Soil and land use assessments are given on the basis of analogy, particularly
for soil profiles, and are presumed admissible because of the resemblance of the
general environmental conditions of the Coleambally area and of the other irrigation
areas. The degree of similarity between the soils in these areas varies. There is a
marked identity between the soils of the Coleambally area, the Southern Murrum-
bidgee Irrigation Areas (van Dijk 1961), and the Jernargo area (Churchward and
Flint 1956). There is an identity to a lesser extent with the soils of the Denimein
area (Churchward 1958) and less again with those of the Northern and Eastern
Murrumbidgee Irrigation Areas (Taylor and Hooper 1938).
To facilitate the exchange of experience between the Coleambally area and
the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Areas, the soils of these areas have been grouped
together* as shown in Figure 5. The design of this figure is the same as that used in
the evaluation of the soils of the Southern Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area (van Dijk
1961). The soils are tabulated on the basis of observable physical properties of the
soil profile which seem to influence irrigation behaviour of the soils, for example the
transmission and retention of water. It appeared advantageous to consider the
properties of the surface soil and subsoil separately. Depth, texture, structure, and
consistence of the surface soil, and texture, density, and plasticity of the subsoil are
factors likely to be significant, and these are the criteria used in Figure 5.
Furthermore, the land classification as proposed by Butlerf has been super-
imposed upon the table of Figure 5. The colour names of the land classes have
been replaced by letter designations as follows: C for carmine, Y for yellow, P for
purple, G for green, and O for orange.
The surface soil properties mentioned in Figure 5 determine one of the most
important characteristics of irrigated soils, the tilth. A favourable, stable tilth is
found in the sandy-topped soils and the crumbly clay soils of classes C and O respec-
tively. A favourable tilth is also found in the sandy loams, loams, and clay loams of
classes Y and P, which have a firm, somewhat subplastic consistence. However, the
structure of these soils is liable to deterioration after prolonged and intensive culti-
vation. Unstable tilth conditions are found in the dense poorly structured clay loam
and light clay surface soils of class G.
♦These groups conform with the “soil families” (Table 5) as defined by the United States
Department of Agriculture (1951).
fB. E. Butler (1949). —Land classification for irrigation. CSIRO Aust. Div. Soils, Deniliquin,
unpublished mimeo.


It is important to note that the poor soil structures, which are common in
this area owing to the extensive occurrence of G-class soils, do not appear to be the
result of “alkali” conditions since the analyses of all samples showed very little
sodium and a dominance of calcium and magnesium in the exchange complex (see
Fig. 6 and subsection (a)(v) below).
The greatest contrasts in subsoil conditions are found between classes C and Y,
the main soil properties determining these contrasts being texture and the degree of
plasticity of the clay.
Fig. 5.—Soil types in relation to the land-use classes. Soils in the Coleambally area are in roman
capitals, soils in the northern and eastern Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area (Taylor and Hooper 1938)
in italic capitals, and soils in the southern Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area (van Dijk 1961) are indicated
by an asterisk.
In general, there is a good correlation between soil types and topographic
characteristics, but deviations occur and these are most frequent on the river ridges.
Some types, like Tenningerie, may occur on both high and low sites. This causes
significant dilferences in the drainage conditions and, depending upon the develop-
ment of the overall ground-water regime, such soils may give quite different responses
to irrigation. The shape or contour of the surface may also vary within a soil type,
and this too may have a marked effect on irrigation response. The latter aspects
cannot be considered here and hence the proposed land classification of Figure 5,
based only on soil criteria, should be applied with these reservations.
In general, it can be said that the soils of class C are well suited for citrus
culture and most other horticultural crops. The soils of class Y can only carry a


restricted range of horticultural crops, e.g. stone and pome fruits. The T-class soils
listed in the upper portion of Figure 5 are much less suitable for horticultural crops
than those in the lower portion; this grading within the Y class is more pronounced
the poorer the drainage conditions are. All F-class soils have been successfully
used for lucerne, pastures, cereals, and vegetables.
The soils of class P have a very restricted use for horticulture, but are generally
well suited for high-quality pasture development. Cropping on these soils has been
practised with success between pasture rotations, in particular on the Thulabin soils.
However, continued cropping on the soils of class P may lead to a deterioration of
the tilth and a development of surface conditions similar to those in the soils of class
G. The Willbriggie soils with well-structured surface soil and subsoil may be included
in class P as a marginal group; those which have poorer structures have to be included
in the G class.
The soils of class G, because of dense slaking surfaces, are likely to be difficult
for pastures, especially in establishment. They should prove suitable for rice-growing.
The soils of class O, being usually gilgai, need considerable grading,* but they gener-
ally prove very good pasture soils with lasting favourable tilth. These conditions
also permit a range of crops, including vegetables, to be grown without the risk of
deterioration of structure.
On the basis of this land classification, the following general land-use pattern
in the Coleambally area seems possible. The well-developed river ridges have the
main potential for horticultural development and cropping. The apex plain, the
Ourendumbee Plain, and the level portions of the river ridges allow high-quality
pasture development with limited cropping. The middle section, the “gilgaied clay
plains”, with a high percentage of crumbly calcareous soils, is good pasture soils
which offer considerable freedom in cropping. For the plains to the west and south,
having a dominance of G-class soils suitable for rice-growing, pasture development
will be less attractive.
(a) Laboratory Analyses of the Soils
General data are available for only a limited number of samples, which are
discussed with reference to experience elsewhere; of particular significance are the
research findings in the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Areas to the north. The main
aim of the soil sampling programme was to show general trends in profiles, along
landscape axes and between the major soil groups (see also the introductory para-
graph to Section 111(a)).
(i) Soil Reaction. —The results of pH determinations) - are shown in Appendix I
(column 2) and are summarized for the representative soil groups in Table 7. The
greatest variation in soil reaction is found in the surface soils of the soil types of
the first two groups of this table.
With few exceptions a gradual increase occurs in pH passing from the surface
to the deep subsoil in the grey and brown soils of heavy texture and in the deep
*lt was recently found that gilgai soils after grading may show severe deficiency in zinc
(Kleinig and Loveday 1962).
t Measured on a 1 :5 water suspension.


Table 7
SOIL REACTION OF REPRESENTATIVE SOIL GROUPS
OF THE COLEAMBALLY AREA
Soil Reaction
Soil Group
0-1 In. Deep
30-36 In. Deep
Range
Average
Range
Average
Transitional red-brown earths (10 profiles
of Willbriggie clay loam)
S-5-6-4
(occasionally
up to 7-0)
6-1
8-0-8-7
8-2
Grey and brown soils of heavy texture
(6 profiles of Yooroobla clay and 4
profiles of Wunnamurra clay)
6-1-8-0
7-0
8-3-8-S
8-5
Solodized solonetz soils (3 profiles of
Danberry sand)
S-9-6-4
6-2
90-9-1
9-0
Deep sands (3 profiles of Tenningerie sand
and 1 profile of Sandmount sand)
6-2-6-7
6-4
6-S-7-6
6-9
sandy soils, though at a different level, from neutral to alkaline and from acid to mildly
alkaline respectively.
A rather sudden increase in pH, from mildly acid to mildly alkaline, at the
transition from surface soil to clay subsoil is a common feature of the transitional
red-brown earths and solodized solonetz soils.
In the subsoils of all profiles the soil reaction becomes gradually more alkaline
with depth, but strongly alkaline soil reactions (pH > 9) were encountered only in the
deep subsoils of the three solodized solonetz soils sampled.
There are no consistent trends in pH geographically across the district.
(ii) Nitrogen. —There are considerable variations in total nitrogen content be-
tween the soils even of morphologically similar types (Appendix I, column 3), but
the average nitrogen status of the surface soils is low to very low. There are no con-
sistent trends showing across the district.
The results of the analyses are summarized on the basis of soil groups in
Table 8, and these show that common pedogenic trends are reflected in the averages
of the major soil groups. The average value for the red-brown earth soils corresponds
quite well with the modal value of this group given by Stephens and Donald (1958).
The soils with sandy surface horizons, belonging to the solodized solonetz soils and
the “deep sandy soils”, all have a lower nitrogen status, while the highest levels and
the highest averages are found in the calcareous clay soils of the grey and brown soils
of heavy texture.
The carbon ; nitrogen ratios* for the topsoils are generally low, varying between
7 and 12 with the majority between 8 and 9, in particular on the clay puff soils.
* Organic carbon was determined by the Walkley-Black method.


Table 8
NITROGEN CONTENT OF REPRESENTATIVE SOIL GROUPS OF THE COLEAMBALLY AREA
Percentage of Total Nitrogen
Soil Groups
0-2 In. Deep
2-4 In. Deep
Range
Average
Range
Average
Transitional red-brown earths (10 profiles
of Willbriggie clay loam)
0-05-0-12
0-09
0-03-0-08
0-05
Grey and brown soils of heavy texture (6
profiles of Yooroobla clay and 4 profiles
of Wunnamurra clay)
0-04-0-17
0-11
0-03-0-08
0-06
Solodized solonetz soils (3 profiles of
Danberry sand)
0-04-0-08
0-06
0-02-0-05
0-03
Deep sands (3 profiles of Tenningerie sand
and 1 profile of Sandmount sand)
0-03-0-08
0-04
0-02-0-03
0-03
Excessive use of acidic nitrogenous fertilizer has been found to be detrimental
to the horticultural soils in the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Areas. Connor (1954)
observed a decrease in pH from 7-0 to as low as 4-6. Groenewegen and Bouma
(1960) and Bouma (1960) found losses of calcium, magnesium, and potassium from
the topsoils and, as a result of the induced acidity, fixation of phosphorus. These
observations were made on red-brown earth soils with clay loam to light clay surface
horizons; the lighter-textured loamy to sandy soils, which dominate the proposed
horticultural areas in the Coleambally district, would be even more susceptible to
such detrimental changes.
(iii) Phosphorus. —The amount of total phosphorus* in the surface 4 in. (Ap-
pendix I, column 4) ranges between 0-01 and 0-04%, most soils having between
0-02 and 0-03%.
The three sampled solodized solonetz soils (Danberry series) and most of the
sandy soils are amongst those with the lowest values. The phosphorus status of
the transitional red-brown earth soils seems to correspond quite well with the modal
value for red-brown earths (0-02%, Stephens and Donald 1958). In the Murrum-
bidgee Irrigation Areas a low level of available phosphorus and a pronounced response
to superphosphate in similar soils have been studied by Spencer (1958); the same
conditions seem to apply to the Coleambally area, as tests on some representative soil
types have indicated (Appendix II).
These tests in conjunction with an assessment of the available sulphur (see below)
pointed to the need to consider differential fertilizer application. Five of the tested
eight sites, two with Thulabin, two with Willbriggie soils, and one with Sandmount
sand, all require ordinary superphosphate; for one site with Sandmount sand, sulphur-
* Total phosphorus; amount of phosphorus soluble in boiling concentrated HCI.


fortified superphosphate would be more suitable because of the severe sulphur
deficiency and the only moderate phosphorus deficiency. For the two sites on the
scalded river ridges, triple superphosphate seems most appropriate in view of the
absence of sulphur deficiency.
Further work is needed before these limited findings can be applied to the
farmer’s paddocks.
(iv) Sulphur. —Fine crystalline gypsum is frequently observed in the transitional
red-brown earth soils of the plains at a depth of 20-30 in. The salt distribution curves
for total soluble salts in this area (Fig. 7) suggest that sulphate salts in smaller or
larger concentrations occur generally at relatively shallow depth (18-36 in.) in red-
brown earth soils and at greater depth (30-60 in.) in grey and brown soils of heavy
textures.
Despite these subsoil reserves, surprisingly low amounts of sulphur were
found in the surface horizons of two virgin soils which were sampled for a general
study (Spencer and Freney 1960). One of these soils was a red-brown earth (Thulabin
series) from the plain immediately to the north of the Coleambally area, and the other
was a grey soil of heavy texture from a site near Deniliquin, to the south-west. To
verify these findings for the Coleambally area, four representative soil sites were
sampled in two localities, and the sulphur status was determined by Spencer (Appendix
II) using an Aspergillus niger assay. It was found that both the sites on the plains
and those on the river ridges revealed low sulphur values. Surprisingly high values
were obtained from the two scalded sites. Since it may be assumed that available
sulphur of organic origin should be low owing to loss of a large part of the organic
matter through the scalding process, it seems likely that most of the sulphur on the
scalds originates from salt accumulations containing sulphates. Salt accumulations
at the surface of crusted soils are not unusual in the Coleambally area (see (vii)
below).
(v) Calcium, Magnesium, and Sodium*. —Calcium and magnesium are the
dominant metal cations in the exchange complex in both surface soils and subsoils
of all soils discussed in this report. These two cations together generally amount
to more than 90% of the total of the four metal cations calcium, magnesium, sodium,
and potassium. In the surface soils, calcium dominates frequently over magnesium,
and the calcium to magnesium ratio generally decreases down the profile. The cation
exchange properties of some representative profiles are shown in diagrammatic form
in Figure 6.
Critical minimum limits of calcium for plant growth reported in the literature
are amounts of 5 m-equiv. of exchangeable calcium per 100 g of soil (for sandy
soils, quoted by Blackburn and Gibbons 1956) and amounts of exchangeable calcium
of 30% of the total exchange capacity in soils with low pH (quoted by Bettenay,
McArthur, and Hingston 1960). The calcium status of the loamy and sandy surface
soils in the Coleambally area is in most cases below the first limit but generally
* Exchangeable cations (only soils low in carbonate content (<O-3% CaCOs) were analysed):
leaching with normal ammonium chloride; sodium and potassium were examined in the extracts
by the use of the Eel flame photometer (Stace and Hutton 1958) and calcium and magnesium by
EDTA titration (Bond and Tucker 1954; Hutton 1954).


above the second. From the studies of Bouma (1960) it may be concluded that
critical conditions concerning both calcium and magnesium are likely to develop,
in particular, on the sandy soils after excessive use of acidic fertilizers.
Fig. 6. —Exchangeable metal cations in some representative profiles of the
Coleambally area. Profiles Nos. 30, 15, 19, 13, and 4 occur on a west-east
sequence across the area (30, 15, 19, 13: Willbriggie clay loam; 4: Birganbigil
clay loam; 2: Danberry sand; 5; Tenningerie sand).
The exchangeable sodium percentage of the surface soils ranges generally
between 0-2 and 4% with occasional values up to 6%. The high values seem to
coincide with more than average salt content deeper in the profile, as noticed in par


EXCHANGEABLE POTASSIUM IN
Table 9
THE SURFACE HORIZON AND UPPER SUBSOIL OF SOME
REPRESENTATIVE SOIL TYPES
Soil Type and
Profile Number
(see Appendix I)
Depth
(in.)
Total Exchangeable
Metal Cations
(m-equiv./lOO g soil)
Exchangeable
Potassium
(m-equiv./lOO g soil)
Tenningerie sand (I)
0-2
90
0-20
2-5
6-3
0-16
20-24
24-4
0-45
Tenningerie sand (5)
0-2
8-6
0-18
3-8
4-8
0-10
27-30
15-0
0-20
Tenningerie sand (8)
0-2
4-2
006
2-6
3-6
0-03
26-30
15-7
0-35
Sandmount sand (3)
0-2
7-3
0-12
6-14
4-4
003
30-42
3-0
0-04
Danberry sand (2)
2-8
7-6
0-18
13-19
24-9
0-69
Danberry loamy sand (7)
0-2
11-3
0-35
2-6
7-6
0-24
7-10
17-4
0-39
Birganbigil clay loam (4)
0-2
7-5
0-34
3-5
7-2
0-18
7-12
28-5
0-39
Willbriggie clay loam (13)
T
o
7-8
0-39
2-3
5-2
0-28
5-7
20-6
0-93
Willbriggie clay loam (15)
0-li
8-6
0-46
2-3
7-7
0-34
4-7
22-1
1-36
Willbriggie clay loam (19)
0-U
9-6
0-46
2-3 i
7-5
0-27
5-8
33-4
0-86
Willbriggie clay loam (30)
0-1
8-2
0-44
l-2i
6-4
0-35
4-7
29-3
0-70
ticular in the soils of the western portion of the area. The exchangeable sodium
in the subsoil never exceeds 6%; thus the values of all soil materials stay well below
the critical limit for alkali soils, which is 15% (Richards 1954).
(vi) Potassium. —The exchangeable potassium is generally considered to be
a good measure of the potassium status of the soil. Some surface and subsoil data
of exchangeable potassium for some representative soil types are given in Table 9.
This shows that there has been some accumulation of potassium in the first inch
of the surface. The lowest values occur immediately below the surface, and a sudden
and usually appreciable increase is found in all cases as soon as the clay subsoil is
encountered.


A response of pastures to potassium has been observed in soils which have
less than about 0-3 m-equiv. per 100 g (Rossiter 1951; Williams and Lipsett 1960).
Lower amounts in surface soils may be adequate where the clay subsoil, which
usually shows a much higher content, occurs at shallow depth within reach of the roots.
For the latter reason the potassium status of all soils of the plains, including some
heavy soils of the river ridges like those of the Danberry series, may be quite satis-
factory, despite the fact that some surface soils are marginal in overall potassium
content. On the other hand, in many of the sandy-topped river ridge soils early
deficiencies are likely to develop under intensive land use, on account of both the
low to very low levels of exchangeable potassium in the surface soils and the deep
occurrence of the potassium reserves in the clay subsoils.
Fig. 7.—Variation in salt concentration with depth in transitional red-brown earth soils along
north-south traverses in the eastern section (top diagrams) and the western section (bottom
diagrams) of the Coleambally area. The numbers in the legends refer to sample sites (see Map 2
and Appendix I).
(vii) Soluble Salts. —The laboratory data show that the salt concentrations in
the upper 12-18 in., i.e. the main rooting zone, of all profiles are generally very low.
The increase towards the surface in a few soils (e.g. soil profiles 25 and 30) indicates
that under certain seasonal and soil conditions, temporary high concentrations may
develop in crusted surfaces, in particular in some low swampy areas.
The salinity of the subsoils varies, but a grouping of soils according to salt
profiles, as proposed for the irrigation area to the north (van Dijk 1961), seems
to apply also for this area. This grouping places the red-brown earths and transitional
red-brown earths together, in contrast to the grey and brown soils of heavy texture.
The first group shows a steep rise in salt content at relatively shallow depth, between
2 and 4 ft, and the last has a slow increase to a maximum below 5-6 ft. The solodized


solonetz soils seem to occupy an intermediate position between the red-brown earths
and ths grey and brown soils of heavy texture.
Figure 7 shows that generally in the Coleambally area a slight to moderate
salinity can be expected in the lower part of the clay subsoils of the red-brown earth
soils and the transitional red-brown earth soils. On the other hand, the analyses of
10 profiles of grey and brown soils of heavy texture indicate low values of total
soluble salt down the profile to at least 3 ft; the salt content ranges between 0-01
and 0 -03 % in the upper part of the soils and between 0 -03 and 0 -09 % at 3 ft depth.
The regional variation in salinity is noteworthy, as illustrated in Figure 7.
The overall salt content of the soils on the western traverse is substantially higher
than that on the eastern. However, there is no regular variation in salt content along
each of the traverses from north to south, and salt distribution in the soils of the plains
does not seem to be much influenced by proximity to the prior streams.
The salt contents of the soils in the western part of the Coleambally area are
comparable with those of the soils in the irrigation areas 50-100 miles to the south-
west (Churchward and Flint 1956).
An appreciable proportion of the salt consists of chlorides as can be seen
from a comparison of the graphs in Figure 7. In general, the proportion of chlorides
to other salts decreases from the surface down to 3 ft. Sulphates seem to be a major
constituent of the salts in the deep subsoil, since the occurrence of free crystalline
gypsum has been noted between 30 and 36 in. in the profiles with the highest salt
content (profiles 9, 15, 27, 29, and 30). Nevertheless, there are some noticeable
variations in the ratio of chlorides to total soluble salts in Figure 7.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Mr. B. E. Butler, of the Division of Soils, CSIRO, Canberra,
who gave much advice both in the field and during the compilation of the manu-
script, and Mr. J. K. Taylor, Chief, Division of Soils, for helpful criticism of the
manuscript.
The authors are indebted to Dr. H. W. Dolle, of the Irrigation Research
Station, Griffith, who was responsible for the laboratory examinations, and the
cartographers of the Division of Soils, CSIRO, who prepared the illustrations and
the maps.
VII. REFERENCED
Bettenay, E., McArthur, W. M., and Kingston, E. J. (1960). —The soil associations of part of the
Swan Coastal Plain, Western Australia. CSIRO Aust. Div. Soils, Soils and Land Use Ser.
No. 35.
Blackburn, G., and Gibbons, F. R. (1956). —A reconnaissance survey of the soils of the Shire of
Kowree, Victoria. CSIRO Aust. Div. Soils, Soils and Land Use Ser. No. 17.
Blackmore, A. V., Talsma, T., and Hutton, J. T. (1956). —The cumulative effect of rice growing
on the two soil types in the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Areas. CSIRO Aust. Div. Soils Divl.
Rep. No. 1/56.
Bond, R. D., and Tucker, B. M. (1954). —The titration of calcium in the presence of magnesium
with EDTA. Client. & Ind. 40; 1236.
Bouma, D. (1960). —The effect of ammonium sulphate usage on the availability of soil phosphorus
to citrus. Aust. J. Agric. Res. 11: 292-303.


Bureau of Meteorology (1941). —“Climatological Atlas of Australia.” (Bur. Met.: Melbourne.)
Bureau of Meteorology (1949). —Results of rainfall observations made in New South Wales.
(Bur. Met.: Melbourne.)
Butler, B. E. (1950). —A theory of prior streams as a causal factor in the distribution of soils in the
Riverine Plain of south-eastern Australia. A list. J. Agric. Res. 1; 231-52.
Butler, B. E. (1955). —A system for the description of soil structure and consistence in the field.
J. Aust. Inst. Agric. Sci. 21: 239—49.
Butler, B. E. (1956). —Parna, an aeolian clay. Aust. J. Sci. 18; 145-51.
Butler, B. E. (1958). —Dcpositional systems of the Riverine Plain of south-eastern Australia in
relation to soils. CSIRO Aust. Soil Publ. No. 10.
Butler, B. E., and Hutton, J. T. (1956). —Parna in the Riverine Plain of south-eastern Australia
and the soils thereon. Aust. J. Agric. Res. 7: 536-53.
Butler, B. E., Baldwin, J. G., Penman, F., and Downes, R. G. (1942). —Soil survey of part of
county Moira, Victoria. Coun. Sci. Industr. Res. Aust. Bull. No. 152.
Churchward, H. M. (1956). —The soils of the East Murrakool district, New South Wales, and
their relation to land use under irrigation. CSIRO Aust. Div. Soils, Soils and Land Use
Ser. No. 19.
Churchward, H. M. (1958). —The soils and land use of the Denimein Irrigation District, New
South Wales. CSIRO Aust. Div. Soils, Soils and Land Use Ser. No. 27.
Churchward, H. M., and Flint, S. F. (1956). —Jcrnargo Extension of the Berriquin Irrigation
District, New South Wales. CSIRO Aust. Soils and Land Use Ser. No. 18.
Connor, J. (1954). —Effect of cultural practices on the manganese status of soil and citrus trees
under irrigation. Aust. J. Agric. Res. 5: 31-8.
van Dijk, D. C. (1961). —Soils of the southern portion of the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Areas.
CSIRO Aust. Soils and Land Use Ser. No. 40.
Edelman, C. H. (1950). —“Soils of the Netherlands.” (North Holland Publishing Co.: Amsterdam.)
Groenewegen, H., and Bouma, D. (1960). —The chemical composition of the soil in a factorial
experiment with citrus. Aust. J. Agric. Res. II: 208-22.
Hawkins, C. A., and Walker, P. H. (1958). —A study of layered sedimentary materials in the
Riverina Plain, N.S.W. J. Proc. Roy. Soc. N.S.IV. 90; 110-27.
Hounam, C. E. (1947). —Climate of the south-west wheat belt of New South Wales with special
reference to rainfall over marginal areas. Stud. Appl. Clim. No. 2.
Hutton, J. T. (1954). —The titration of calcium and magnesium by EDTA. CSIRO Aust. Div.
Soils Divl. Rep. No. 9/54, Part C.
Johnston, E. J., and Butler, B. E. (1946). —Report on soils of “Pine Lodge Estate”, N.S.W. Coun.
Sci. Industr. Res. Aust. Div. Soils Divl. Rep. No. 8/46.
Kleinig, C. R., and Loveday, J. (1962). —Responses of pasture legumes to zinc on calcareous
soils in the Riverina, New South Wales. Aust. J. Exp. Agric. Anim. Husb. 2: 228-33.
Langford-Smith, T. (1960). —The head river systems of the Murrumbidgee. Geogr. Rev. (N.Y.)
50; 368-89.
Moore, C. W. E. (1953 a) vegetation of the south-eastern Riverina, N.S.W. I. The climax
communities. Aust. J. Bot. 1; 485-547.
Moore, C. W. E. (19536). —The vegetation of the south-eastern Riverina, N.S.W. 11. The disclimax
communities. Aust. J. Bot. 1; 548-67.
Pels, S. (1960). —The geology of the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area and surrounding districts.
Wat. Conserv. Irrig. Comm. N.S.W. Bull. No. 5.
Piper, C. S. (1950). —“Soil and Plant Analysis.” (Univ. of Adelaide; Adelaide.)
Richards, L. A. (Ed.) (1954). —Diagnosis and improvement of saline and alkali soils. U.S. Dep.
Agric. Handb. No. 60.
Rossiter, R. C. (1951). —Studies on the nutrition of pasture plants in the south-west of Western
Australia. I. Aust. J. Agric. Res. 2: 1-13.
Smith, R. (1954). —Soils of the Berriquin Irrigation District, N.S.W. Coun. Sci. Industr. Res.
Aust. Bull. No. 189.
Spencer, K. (1958). —Phosphorus in soils of the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Areas, New South Wales.
I. Crop responses. CSIRO Aust. Irrig. Res. Sta. Tech. Pap. No. 1.


Spencer, K., and Barrow, N. J. (1963). —A survey of the plant nutrient status of the principal
soils of the Northern Tablelands of New South Wales. CSIRO Aust. Div. Plant Ind. Tech.
Pap. No. 19.
Spencer, K., and Freney, J. R. (I 960). —A comparison of several procedures for estimating the
sulphur status of soils. Aust. J. Agric. Res. 11: 948-59.
Stage, H. C. T., and Hutton, J. T. (1958). —Flame excitation methods of spectrochemical analysis.
(Mimeo.) (CSIRO Aust. Div. Soils: Melbourne.)
Stephens, C. G. (1962). —“A Manual of Australian Soils.” 3rd Ed. (CSIRO: Melbourne.)
Stephens, C. G., and Donald, C. M. (1958). —Australian soils and their responses to fertilizers.
Advanc. Agron. 10: 167-256.
Taylor, J. K., and Hooper, P. D. (1938). —A soil survey of the horticultural soils in the Murrum-
bidgee Irrigation Areas, New South Wales. Coun. Sci. Industr. Res. Aust. Bull. No. 118.
Truog, E. (1930). —The determination of the readily available phosphorus of soils. J. Amer. Soc.
Agron. 22: 874-82.
United States Department of Agriculture (1951). —Soil survey manual. Agric. Handb. No. 18.
Williams, C. H., and Lipsett, J. (1960). —The build-up of available potassium under subterranean
clover pastures on a podzolic soil. Aust. J. Agric. Res. 11: 473-84.
41
SOILS OF THE COLEAMBALLY AREA, N.S.W.


(1)
Soil Type
(2)
Soil Reaction/CIay Percentage
(3)
Total Nitrogen
(4)
Total Phosphorus
(5)
Depth of
Surface
Horizon
(in.)
Surface
Inch
Top of
Subsoil
Deep Subsoil
(30-36 in.)
Surface
(0-2 in.)
Subsurface
(2-4 in.)
Surface
(0-2 in.)
Subsurface
(2-4 in.)
1. Tenningerie sand
6-4/7
7-7/36
8-7/17
0-08
0-03
0-03
0-02
19
2. Danberry sand
6-4/5
7-9/43
9-1/42
0-06
0-03
0-02
0-02
12
3. Sandmount sand
6-5/n.d.
6-5/n.d.
6-5/n.d.
0-03
n.d.
0-01
n.d.
30
4. Birganbigil day loam
5-9/20
7-9/67
8-7/59
0-04
0-02
0-02
0-03
6
5. Tenningerie sand
6-2/7
7-4/24
7-6/21
0-04
0-02
0-06
0-03
21
6. Danberry loamy sand
5-9/14
7-2/40
9-0/48
0-09
0-05
0-01
0-01
6
7. Danberry loamy sand
6-2/13
7-4/42
9-0/48
0-04
0-02
0-01
0-01
7
8. Tenningerie sand
6-7/5
5-7/45
6-7/26
0-03
0-03
0-02
0-02
25
9. Willbriggie clay loam
7-0/24
8-5/69
8-3/48
0-08
0-08
0-03
0-03
4
10. Yooroobla clay
6-7/58
7-4/60
8-6/68
0-11
0-07
0-02
0-02
3
11. Willbriggie clay loam
6-2/23
7-0/68
8-1/43
0-11
0-07
0-02
0-02
4
12. Willbriggie clay loam
6-4/22
6-6/65
8-3/39
0-09
0-06
0-03
0-03
4
13. Willbriggie clay loam
6-4/23
7-0/69
8-1/69
0-07
0 04
0-02
0-02
4
14. Yooroobla clay
8-0/57
8-3/58
8-6/64
0-09
0-03
0-02
0-02
2
15. Willbriggie clay loam
6-0/24
7-0/73
8-0/59
0-05
0-03
0-03
0-02
3
16. Yooroobla clay
7-1/54
8-0/57
8-7/64
0-14
0-08
0-03
0-02
2
17. Willbriggie clay loam
6-0/19
7-3/70
8-1/62
0-07
0-06
0-02
0-02
4
18. Yooroobla clay
6-6/47
7-2/55
8-3/58
0-14
0-04
0-03
0-03
6
19. Willbriggie clay loam
5-6/21
6-4/68
8-0/61
0-09
0-05
0-02
0-02
4
20. Yooroobla clay
7-0/50
7-5/60
8-6/62
0-14
0-08
0-02
0-02
2
21. Wunnamurra clay
6-3/58
7-7/62
8-5/67
0-17
0-05
0-03
0-03
2
22. Wunnamurra clay
7-2/49
7-4/53
8-5/60
0-10
0-06
0-02
0-02
2
23. Tuppal clay loam
5-8/28
6-4/37
8-6/49
0-23
0-09
0-03
0-05
5
24. Wunnamurra clay
6-1/68
7-1/81
8-3/82
0-11
0-07
0-03
0-03
5
25. Coree clay loam
6-0/23
7-0/69
8-0/62
0-11
0-06
0-02
0-01
5
26. Wunnamurra clay
7-7/61
7-6/62
8-8/65
0-04
0-03
0-02
0-02
2
27. Willbriggie day loam
5-9/25
7-3/70
8-1/57
0-09
0-07
0-02
0-02
3
28. Yooroobla clay
7-2/55
7-9/57
8-4/64
0-10
0-06
0-02
0-02
2
29. Willbriggie day loam
6-1/20
6-9/69
8-1/53
0-12
0-06
0-02
0-02
3
30. Willbriggie clay loam
5-5/18
7-6/68
8-7/59
0-12
0-04
0-03
0-03
3
APPENDIX I
SUMMARY OF ANALYTICAL DATA


Table 10
TRUOG PHOSPHORUS (p.p.m.) IN FOUR SOIL TYPES TAKEN
IN THE COLEAMBALLY AREA
FROM TWO LOCALITIES
Soil Type
Locality
Sample
Mean
1
2
3
4
Sandmount sand
I
9
13
17
8
12
II
5
1
4
2
3
Scalded river ridge soil
I
9
7
9
10
9
II
5
9
5
5
6
Thulabin loam
I
4
7
2
7
4
II
2
1
3
3
2
Willbriggie clay loam
I
1
1
1
1
1
II
2
2
5
1
3
APPENDIX II
THE PHOSPHORUS AND SULPHUR STATUS OF FOUR SOIL TYPES OF THE
COLEAMBALLY AREA
By K. SPENCER*
The following soils were chosen for the assessment of their phosphorus and
sulphur status: Willbriggie clay loam, Thulabin loam, Sandmount sand, and a
scalded river ridge soil. Each of these four soils was sampled in two localities in
the Coleambally area (see Map 2, sample sites 31-38). In each locality, four samples
of each soil were collected within a chain square; each sample was bulked from six
cores, 1 in. diameter and 4 in. deep, which were taken from a square yard.
The soils were sampled soon after rain in November 1962 and the samples
were kept moist and refrigerated whilst awaiting analysis.
The “available” phosphorus was estimated by Truog’s (1930) procedure.
This test was calibrated earlier against plant response on soils, similar to those in the
Coleambally area, in the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area (Spencer 1958). The Truog
values were found to correlate well with the phosphorus status in the field using
vegetable crops. Soils testing more than 33 p.p.m. Truog P were shown to contain
adequate available phosphorus for vegetable crops. About half the critical value for
vegetable crops is commonly deemed appropriate for pastures, and this figure is almost
the same as the critical value of 15 p.p.m. P for pastures on the Northern Tablelands
of New South Wales using the same test (Spencer and Barrow 1963).
*Division of Plant Industry, CSIRO, Canberra, A.C.T.


Table 11
ASPERGILLUS SULPHUR (p.p.m.) IN FOUR SAMPLES OF FOUR SOIL TYPES
FROM TWO LOCALITIES IN THE COLEAMBALLY AREA
TAKEN
Sample
Soil Type
Locality
Mean
1
2
3
4
Sandmount sand
I
5
5
7
8
6
II
4
4
4
5
4
Scalded river ridge soil
I
63
26
75
21
46
II
33
28
38
16
29
Thulabin loam
I
4
5
5
3
4
II
3
4
7
4
4
Willbriggie clay loam
I
3
5
4
7
4
II
9
6
6
6
7
There is not the same background of experience available with soil tests for
sulphur status. Spencer and Freney (1960) found good correlations between the growth
of Aspergillus niger and the sulphur status of 24 soils from eastern Australia, Phalaris
tuberosa in pot culture being the test species. One of these soils was the Thulabin loam
from a site adjacent to the Coleambally area. A critical value of 30 p.p.m. Aspergillus
S was indicated in that experiment but recent unpublished experience on the Northern
Tablelands of New South Wales has suggested that more than about 10 p.p.m.
Aspergillus S is adequate for pasture plants in the field.
Results
“Available” phosphorus and sulphur values are shown in Tables 10 and 11.
The general picture of phosphorus status in these soils is one of marked de-
ficiency, relieved by an occasional value indicating the presence of barely adequate
available phosphorus for pastures. There are wide variations within sampling sites
in the case of Sandmount sand; Thulabin loam and the scalded river ridge soils appear
more homogeneous. One may anticipate that production could be doubled or trebled
over most of the area carrying these soils by the addition of a phosphatic fertilizer.
The available sulphur content of the surface soil is low in three soils (Will-
briggie clay loam, Thulabin loam, and Sandmount sand) and high in the scalded river
ridge soils.
For the appraisal of the sulphur status of these soils for plant growth, likely
subsoil reserves of sulphur in the form of sulphate will have to be taken into account.


Common Name
Botanical Name
Trees
Boree
Acacia pendula A. Cunn.
Box, black
Eucalyptus largiflorens F. Muell.
grey
Eucalyptus woollsiana R. T. Baker
yellow
Eucalyptus melliodora A. Cunn.
Bull oak
Casuarina luehmannii R. T. Baker
Needlewood
Hakea leucoptera R. Br.
Pine, Murray
Callitris columellaris F. Muell.
(syn. C. glauca R. Br.)
River red gum
Eucalyptus camaldulensis Dehn.
Rosewood
Heterodendron oleifolium Desf.
Wilga
Geijera parviflora Lindl.
Shrubs
Lignum
Muehlenbeckia cunninghamii F. Muell.
Roly-poly
Bassia quinquecuspis F. Muell.
Saltbush
Atriplex nummularia Lindl.
Grasses
Barley grass
Hordeum leporinum Link
Corkscrew grass
Stipa variabilis Hughes
Plains grass
Stipa aristiglumis F. Muell.
Spear grass
Stipa falcata Hughes
Wallaby grass
Danthonia spp.
Windmill grass
Chloris truncata R. Br.
Chloris acicularis Lindl.
APPENDIX III
COMMON AND BOTANICAL NAMES OF THE PRINCIPAL PLANT SPECIES


APPENDIX IV
DEFINITION OF TERMS IN SOIL CLASSIFICATION
A number of terms used in this report may be defined and related to each other
(see also for definitions U.S. Department of Agriculture 1951).
The basic, individual soil is the soil profile: a vertical section through the
soil, stated in terms of morphology and other properties.
Soils may be arranged in two different ways to provide (1) a taxonomic classifi-
cation and (2) geographic groups.
(1) Taxonomic classes are formed on the basis of morphological likeness;
this can be done at different levels giving the following classes:
The soil type (Section III(a)(i); Table 3) is a narrow grouping of soils which
have soil horizons similar in differentiating characteristics and arrangement in the
soil profile.
The soil family (grouping in Figure 5) is an intermediate grouping of soils
similar in the main characteristics, which may in particular be useful for the objectives
of applied studies.
The great soil group (Section 111 (a)(ii); Table 3) is a broad classification based
on genetic considerations.
(2) Geographic groups include mapping units and soil sequences.
A mapping unit varies with the scale of the map and generally includes several
taxonomic units. The unit is defined in terms of the kinds, relative proportions, and
patterns of distribution of the taxonomic unit. In the Coleambally area mapping
units were formed at two levels:
Soil associations at a relatively detailed level (Section III(A); Table 4; Map 1).
Soil landscapes for a broad-scale pattern (Section IV; Table 6; Map 2).
A soil sequence (Section 111(6); Table 5) is a grouping of soils which demon-
strates a frequently recurrent succession of soils along a transect.




