

Solar Water distillation: The roof type still and a
multiple effect diffusion still
DUNKLE, R


Solar Water Distillation:
The Roof Type Still and a
Multiple Effect Diffusion Still
108
R. V. Dunkle
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organization
Victoria, Australia
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews some of the work on solar
distillation of water performed at the Engineering
Section of C.5.1.R.0. in Australia. Heat and mass
transfer relationships within a conventional roof type
still are analyzed and discussed. The advantages of
a multiple effect diffusion still are pointed out and
an analysis presented to indicate the effects of tem-
perature, pressure, and diluent gas composition.
Data are presented for a small five effect diffusion
still operating with air and hydrogen atmospheres,
and some of the operating and design problems are
reviewed.
NOMENCLATURE
A = Area, ft 2
D = Mass diffusivity, ft 2 /hr
/ =* Ratio of heat transfer by conduction through
gas layer to that by evaporation
Gl = Atmospheric (long wave) irradiation, Btu/hr ft 2
G s = Solar (short wave) irradiation, Btu/hr ft 2
h c = Unit thermal conductance, Btu/hr ft 2 F
hf g = Latent heat of vaporization (water), Btu/lb
k = Thermal conductivity
M - Molecular weight
p = Pressure, psi
p w = Partial pressure of water vapor, psi
P T = Total pressure, psi
9 k = Heat loss from still by conduction through
base, Btu/hr
q e = Heat transfer by evaporation
q c - Heat transfer by convection (in narrow space
becomes conduction)
<7 r = Heat transfer by radiation
q D = Mass transfer rate, ib/hr
T - Temperature, R
T a = Temperature of ambient air
T g = Glass temperature
V = Molecular volume, for air V a - 29.9, water
V w = 14.8, hydrogen, Vn = 14.3
x = Distance between surfaces, ft
OC = Absorptance of still base for solar energy
C= Absorptance of glass cover for long wave
radiation
®-gs = Absorptance of glass cover for solar radiation
/3 = Volumetric coefficient of expansion, R - '
jj = Thermal efficiency of roof type still
fi - Viscosity, lb sec/ft 2
p = Density of gas, lb sec 2 /ft 4
a = Stefan-Boltzmann constant
T = Transmittance of transparent cover plus water
film for solar energy
= Reduced diffusion constant for air-water
system
1. INTRODUCTION
Solar distillation for production of potable water
from saline water has been practiced for many years,
but little attention has been paid to the basic mech-
anisms involved and to the possibility of significant
improvements in water output per unit area of solar
absorber. It has been demonstrated that it is possi-
ble to produce fresh water, but the problem is to pro-
duce large amounts of water at a reasonable capital
cost of equipment and utilizing a minimum amount of
land surface.


In the “outback” areas of Australia, transporta-
tion is very expensive, roads are extremely primitive
where present, electrical power is unavailable, and
fuels must be imported at high cost. With these facts
in mind, it would be desirable to have a saline water
conversion plant which requires no external power
for operation, other than a windmill for pumping bore
water into an elevated storage tank. Relatively
small units are required for stock water: the amount
of water needed at any given location is fixed by the
number of animals which can be carried by the avail-
able feed within grazing distance of the water supply.
The number of animals per square mile is very small
in the dry zones of Australia, and consequently the
stations or ranches cover very large areas.
This paper covers the early stages of the work
on solar distillation of water. The conventional roof
type still and the multiple effect diffusion still are
analyzed, data on a five effect diffusion still is pre-
sented, and some of the problems are pointed out. It
is believed that the multiple effect diffusion still
shows great promise for production of fresh water
from saline water in arid isolated regions.
2. CONVENTIONAL ROOF TYPE STILL
The conventional roof type still was analyzed to
see if there was any margin for improvement over the
reported experimental efficiencies. This type of still
has been in use for a very long time [l], but the ma-
jority of publications are of a descriptive rather than
an analytical nature. The type of still studied at
C.5.1.R.0. was developed by Bruce Wilson [2, 3] and
is very similar to those utilized by other experiment-
ers [4, s]. The still body is 4 ft by 6 ft, approxi-
mately 6 in. deep, and the glass roof has a slope of
roughly 10°.
The still is represented diagrammatically in
Figure 1. The still is irradiated with direct and
scattered solar radiation, G s , and long wave atmos-
pheric radiation, Gl. The longwave radiation is all
absorbed in the glass, but the major portion of the
short wave radiation, T G s , passes through the glass
and condensate film, and strikes the bottom of the
still, ottG,j, representing the amount of solar radia-
tion absorbed per sq ft of still area. A value of (XT
of about 0.80 appears reasonable for usual materials
and operating conditions.
FIG. 1-SKETCH OF ROOF TYPE SOLAR STILL.
Of the energy absorbed at the bottom of the still,
a portion q k , will be conducted away, part will go
into heating the water, and the remainder will be
carried away from the water surface by convection,
radiation and evaporation. This portion of absorbed
heat is transferred to the lower surface of the glass,
passes through the glass by conduction, and is car-
ried away by convection and radiation from the upper
surface of the glass.
The thermal circuit for this system is indicated
in Figure 2. To obtain the greatest yield of water
FIG. 2-THERMAL CIRCUIT OF ROOF TYPE SOLAR STILL.
from the still, the heat transferred by the evaporation
of water, q , should be made as large as possible.
Inspection of the circuit indicates that the heat in-
put, (XXG S , should be as large as possible; that is,
the bottom of the still must be highly absorbing, the
solar transmittance of the transparent cover plate and
water film should be high, and the short wave irradi-
ation, G s , should be large. The short wave irradia-
tion, G s , can be increased by the use of suitable re-
flectors, and an appreciable increase in water out-
put can be obtained by the use of a simple fixed re-
flector. The heat loss by conduction from the base
of the still can be reduced by thermal insulation or
by mounting the still directly on the ground and using
dry earth or sand as the insulation. It was found in
Melbourne that a still mounted directly on the ground
would average about 85 per cent of the yield of an in-
sulated still, the output dropping immediately after a
896


rain due to the higher thermal conductivity of the wet
soil and gradually increasing as the soil dried.
The equations for the various energy rates are,
assuming steady state conditions:
Heat balance on water—
aiG s A =q k +q e +q r +q c (1)
Heat balance on glass cover—
+7r+ 7c + a gL G L A + a gs G * A = 7c2 + 7rz
The radiation exchange within the still between
the salt water and the glass cover plate is given by:
q r = 0.9 {aT A - aTp A (3)
In an enclosed space where heat and mass trans-
fer occur simultaneously, the natural convection can
be correlated in terms of special Nusselts and
Grashof numbers [6]. The buoyancy term in the spe-
cial Grashof number is modified by the density effect
due to composition as well as temperature. In a
horizontal enclosed air space for 3.2 x 10 5 <Gr <
10 7 the relationship between the Nusselt and Grashof
numbers is
h'x rx 3 p 2 fg ßAT'
H (4)
Where AT'is an equivalent temperature differ-
ence which includes the molecular weight difference
in evaluating the buoyancy effect, and for the air-
water system is given by:
A T'= {T-T g ) + ( Pw T (5)
\39— p w /
where p w is the partial pressure of water inpsia at
the temperature, T, of the water surface and p w is
the vapor pressure of water at the temperature f g of
the glass. It will be noted that in this range of
Grashof’s number the size of the space does not af-
fect the heat transfer coefficient, and over the nor-
mal range of still temperatures (4) can be approxi-
mated by:
+ (6)
The convective heat transfer rate inside the
still between the water in the base and the glass
cover becomes:
q c = h ' A it-t g ) (7)
From the analogy between heat and mass trans-
fer, the expression for the mass transfer rate in lb
per hr is:
?D = 0.198 h'A (p w - p wg ) (8)
and the heat transfer due to evaporation is:
<7 e = 0.198 h'A (p w - p wg ) h {g (9)
The heat loss through the base of the still is
given by:
q k ~U b A(T-T a ) (10)
The heat balance on the glass cover of the still
can be written as follows:
a s G s + V-L G L + <t c + <Jr + <le =
ae gTg + h cZ (t g - t a ) (ID
Selecting a water temperature in the still of
155 F and an ambient air temperature of 76 F, the
equations are solved by trial for the glass tempera-
ture, t g , which is found to be 135 F. The following
heat fluxes are obtained:
Convection q c /t 1 =lO
Evaporation q e /A = 158
Radiation q r /A =2B
Conduction q k /i 4 =23
OCTG s = 219
and G s = 274
The thermal efficiency of the still is defined as
the ratio of the heat utilized in evaporation to the
solar irradiation:
<7„ 158 , ,
q = = = 57.7% (12)
AG S 274
An inspection of the magnitudes of the various
heat fluxes indicates that there is small scope for
improving the thermal efficiency of the conventional
still. The ratio of the evaporative to the convective
and radiative heat transfer increases with increasing
temperature, which indicates the merit of a reflector
to increase the irradiation and hence the operating
temperature of the still. The conduction loss should
be minimized, although a slight loss in performance
can be tolerated because of the cheaper construction
cost if the still is mounted directly on the ground
surface. The remaining factor, OtT, can not be sig-
nificantly increased, although any increase here
would result in a proportional increase in efficiency.
One important factor was omitted from the above
analysis, namely, the effect of air leakage. The ef-
fect of air leakage increases rapidly with tempera-
ture owing to the higher water content of the escap-
ing air, and would also be expected to increase with
wind velocity. It is important to minimize the air
leakage for high still efficiency.
3. MULTIPLE EFFECT DIFFUSION STILL
The conventional roof type still has the advan-
tages of simplicity, reliability, and absence of power
requirement, but has the disadvantages of a large
897


area requirement per unit of water distilled and a
relatively high capital cost. The feasibility of using
solar energy or hot water from wells in connection
with multiple effect stills is currently under investi-
gation as an alternate method of producing fresh
water. The specific still to be discussed here is a
multiple effect diffusion still which appears very
promising for saline water distillation. Maria Telkes
reports a similar still [7], but does not give a theo-
retical analysis or indicate how improvements in per-
formance can be obtained.
The multiple effect still consists of a series of
closely spaced parallel plates within a gas filled
enclosure, the first plate being heated and the last
plate cooled (Fig. 3). The impure water is intro-
duced at the top of each plate and flows down the
surface of each plate on the side away from the heat
source. Due to the temperature drop and resultant
vapor pressure difference across the gap between ad-
jacent plates, water will evaporate, diffuse across
the narrow gas space, and condense on the cooler
plate. The heat given up by condensation of the
water vapor is conducted through the plate and sup-
plies the heat necessary for vaporization in the next
effect.
The principal advantages of this still are as
follows:
(a) The still can operate at relatively low tem-
perature on the hot side, 130 to 160 F. This means
that scale formation is minimized, as scale formation
is much more rapid at higher temperatures. Corrosion
is also less rapid at the lower temperature. Further-
more, solar absorbers are much more efficient at
these operating temperatures than at higher tempera-
tures, and heat losses from the system are reduced.
(b) Use of an inert diluent gas of low molecular
weight serves to increase the mass transfer rate and
reduce corrosion in the system. This also greatly
simplifies the design as no total pressure differences
occur within the still.
(c) The system can be arranged so that all flow
is by gravity or thermal syphon.
(d) By using a multiple effect system, the size
of the solar absorber and the heat requirement per lb
of distillate is reduced.
(e) By use of a heat storage tank, the still will
work 24 hours a day and continue to work at reduced
output during cloudy periods.
4. MASS AND HEAT TRANSFER RELATIONSHIPS
As in the roof type still, the heat transfer be-
tween adjacent plates can be correlated in terms of a
special Grashof number [6]. For a mean temperature
of 150 F and an equivalent temperature difference of
20 F between the plates, the Grashof number for air
is 1.22 x 10 6 D 3 AT. For Grashof numbers below
2 x 10 3 , convection is suppressed and conduction
controls, in this instance corresponding to a spac-
ing of:
% = f 2 x IQ3 Y = 0.0434 ft
\2O x 1.22 x 10 B )
or 0.52 in.
This means that pure conduction and diffusion
will occur when the plates are spaced closer than
X A in. and the diluent gas is air. With other gases of
lower molecular weight, the transition from conduc-
tion will take place at larger spaces.
LEGtND
1 SALINE WATER INL£T
2 HEATING WATER INPUT
3 - OUTLET
A HYDROGEN GAS INLET
5 CONDENSATE. (FRESH WATER)
6 WASTE, (cone SALINE WATER)
7 CONDENSER
A PLATES
FIG. 3-SKETCH OF MULTIPLE EFFECT DIFFUSION STILL.


The mass diffusivity D in ft 2 per hr for a two-
component system is given by [B]:
14.6 T ( 1
Pt [Vj + V}) z + M bJ 3
The rate of diffusion of component A in lb per
ft 2 hr is given by:
w DM W P T dP w ( 14 )
“ RT P T -P W dx
or, substituting from (13):
m 14.6 T V >M W ( 1 1 \ y ’
W 1 —+ —l x
” R{vl> + v}Y\M w M b )
1 dP w
(15)
Equation (15) indicates that if a high diffusion
rate is desired, a diluent gas of a low molecular
weight should be selected. Since the diffusion rate
is proportional to the pressure gradient, the plates
should be spaced as closely as possible. The rate
of diffusion will also be increased by lowering the
total pressure in the system, but it may be preferable
to operate at atmospheric pressure due to the simpler
design.
By substitution of the appropriate constants in
(15), the equation for diffusion of water vapor in air
can be written:
(16)
T t wm
where
W w - the rate of diffusion of water vapor in Ib/hr ft 2 .
P wm = mean partial pressure of water vapor in space,
psi.
P £ = total pressure, psi.
Ax = width of space (pathlength), ft.
Ap w = partial pressure difference across space for
water vapor, psi.
y> A = diffusion constant for water-air system at one
atmosphere.
The value of is plotted versus temperature in
Figure 4. For diffusion of water in hydrogen, simply
multiply t p A by 3.34.
The heat transfer coefficient by evaporation is
defined as:
T U' kf a
h = ( 17 )
c Ar yiu
The ratio of the heat transfer by conduction to
that by evaporation, f, is plotted in Figure 5 as a
function of mean temperature for diffusion of water
through air or hydrogen for one atmosphere total pres-
sure. The thermal conductivity is independent of the
pressure, but the diffusion rate varies with pressure.
For any other pressure the ratio of heat transfer by
conduction to the heat transfer by evaporation is
given by:
'• - T& f M
r wm
The thermal circuit for the multiple effect dif-
fusion still is sketched in Figure 6 for the nth plate.
TEMPERATURE, °F.
FIG. 4-DIFFUSION CONSTANT FOR AIR-WATER SYSTEM AS A FUNCTION OF TEMPERATURE.


FIG. 5-RATIO OF HEAT TRANSFER BY CONDUCTION TO
THAT BY EVAPORATION.
The temperature at the surface of the condensing
film on the hot side of the plate is t n and the corre-
sponding vapor pressure of water is p , The temper-
ature drops through the condensate film, the plate,
FIG. 6-THERMAL CIRCUIT FOR DIFFUSION STILL.
and the salt water film with a final surface tempera-
ture, t' n , and a corresponding saturation pressure for
pure water, p'. The actual vapor pressure, p'', of
the salt solution is less, and p' p " can be visual-
7rn r n
ized as an opposed voltage source in the circuit.
The driving force for diffusion across the gap is
p''— P n+l > while the driving force for radiation and
convection (conduction) is t' n t n+l .
5. COMPUTED PERFORMANCE OF SIX EFFECT
DIFFUSION STILL
A six effect still with the sea water feed pre-
heated to 120 F and the mean temperature of the con-
densing plate at 100 F has been analyzed. The
ratio of feed to condensate on each plate has been
arbitrarily taken as 3.0, and the plate spacing is % in.
The unit thermal conductance for the plate plus water
films was estimated to be 270 Btu/hr ft 2 F. The
computed temperature and partial pressure distribu-
tions for a hydrogen charged still are shown in
Figure 7. The small drop in the vapor pressure
curve at the surface of each plate is due to the low-
ering of the vapor pressure by the dissolved salt.
The yield of water per sq ft of still area for each
plate is computed to be;
IF, = 0.63, W 2 = 0.54, W 3 = 0.47, = 0.44,
W s = 0.41, W 6 = 0.38,
or a total of 2.87 lb. This corresponds to the heat
requirement of 214 Btu/lb of water produced.
PLATE NUMBER
FIG. 7-CALCULATED DISTRIBUTION OF TEMPERATURE
AND PARTIAL PRESSURE OF WATER VAPOR IN
SIX EFFECT DIFFUSION STILL.


Plate
num-
ber
Plate
temperature,
F
Vapor
pressure
of water,
psi
Experimental
yield,
Ib/hr
Calcu-
lated
yie id,
Ib/hr
1
161
4.86
0.88
0.78
2
150
3.72
0.65
0.66
3
136
2.60
0.52
0.44
4
122
1.79
0.39
0.21
5
113
1.39
0.33
0.33
6
90
0.70
6. EXPERIMENTAL PROGRAM
A small five effect diffusion still has been con-
structed and operated for several months using an
electric heater rather than solar energy. Many prob-
lems have been encountered, and the reliability of
the still for long operating periods is not definitely
established.
Initially, the still was instrumented with three
thermocouples on the first and last plates, and one
each at the midpoint of the other plates. Unfortun-
ately, only a limited amount of data were obtained
before it was found necessary to remove the thermo-
couples from all but the first and last plates, due to
interference with the water flow at small plate spac-
ings. The following table gives the experimental
plate temperatures, water vapor pressures, experi-
mental yield of water from each plate, and calculated
yield of water from each plate, based on the meas-
ured plate temperatures for operation in air with
% in. spacing;
The correspondence between calculated and
measured yields is not good, but does indicate that
the predicted evaporation rates are adequate for de-
sign purposes. The differences are probably due
primarily to inaccurate temperature measurements and
lack of uniform spacing between adjacent plates. In
this run, the only spacers were at the two sides of
the 24 in. wide plates which were definitely not per-
fectly flat and parallel.
After removing the thermocouples from the plates,
a series of runs were made at two plate spacings in
air, and one plate spacing in hydrogen. The results
are plotted in Figure 7 in terms of total product as a
function of the overall vapor pressure difference be-
tween water on the heated plate and at the tempera-
ture of the condensing plate. It will be noted that
the distillation rate increases nearly linearly with
the vapor pressure difference. This is what would be
expected for a constant ratio of feed rate to distillate
rate. It appears that there is a slight increase over
the linear relationship. This could be due partly to
the fact that the heat losses increase linearly with
temperature, whereas the vapor pressure of water in-
creases much more rapidly with temperature. Also
the ratio of feed rate to distillation rate tended to
OVERALL VAPOUR PRESSURE DIFFERENCE, PSL.
FIG. 8 - TOTAL DISTILLED WATER VERSUS OVERALL
VAPOR PRESSURE DIFFERENCE.
decrease with temperature, resulting in lower heat
losses in the waste water.
The distillation rate shows the expected in-
crease with decrease in plate spacing, and again
when the air is replaced with hydrogen as the dilu-
ent gas.
The ultimate utility of the multiple effect dif-
fusion still depends upon the development of an
economical unit capable of long periods of trouble-
free operation. Many problems remain to be solved,
particularly with regard to the maintenance of proper
flow conditions over the plates. Problems of cor-
rosion, sedimentation, scaling, and salt deposition,
require further study. The necessary close spacing
of plates without product contamination presents a
difficult problem. This has been solved by the use
of cylindrical polyvinyl chloride spacers, but it is
thought that a microporous hydrophobic film would
enable closer spacing and hence higher distillation
rates.
The laboratory still has operated continuously
for periods of up to a month, but definitely requires
further development before it can be considered a
practical unit. Work is continuing on the problems
enumerated above. At the same time, the roof type
still is undergoing further study from the standpoint
of portability, reliability, and cost.


ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The author wishes to acknowledge the co-opera-
tion and advice of R. N. Morse in the direction of the
project, and the assistance of Jack Bannister and
Mark Dewhurst in the construction and operation of
the apparatus.
REFERENCES
1. “Apparatus for Solar Distillation,” Harding,
J., Proceedings of The Institution of Civil Engi-
neers, Vol. 73, Pt. 3, 1883, pp. 284-288.
2. “Desalting of Bore Water by Solar Distilla-
tion,” Wilson, B. W., C.5.1.R.0. Division of Indus-
trial Chemistry Report No. 71, 1954.
3. “Solar Distillation in Australia,” Wilson,
B. W., Transactions of the Conference on the Use of
Solar Energy, University of Arizona Press, Tucson,
Arizona, 1958.
4. Solar Energy Research, Telkes, Maria, Uni-
versity of Wisconsin Press, Madison, Wisconsin, Ist
Ed., 1955, pp. 111-118.
5. Solar Energy Research, Howe, E. D., Uni-
versity of Wisconsin Press, Madison, Wisconsin, Ist
Ed., 1955, pp. 107-109.
6. Heat Transmission, McAdams, W. H., McGraw-
Hill, New York, 3rd Ed., 1954, p. 181.
7. “Solar Still Construction,” Telkes, Maria.
U.S. Department of the Interior, Office of Saline
Water Research and Development, Progress Report
No. 33, 1959.
8. Absorption and Extraction, Sherwood, T. K.,
McGraw-Hill, New York, 1937.
Commonwealth of Australia
COMMONWEALTH SCIENTIFIC AND INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH ORGANIZATION
AUTHORS REPRINT*
•Presented at the 1961 International Heat Transfer Conference
held August 28—September 1, 1961, University of Colorado,
Boulder, Colorado, U.S.A. Papers presented for discussion at
this meeting have been published in International Developments
in Heat Transfer by The American Society of Mechanical
Engineers, 29 West 39th Street, New York 18, N.Y,
902
