

SOLDIERS
AND
SPORTSMEN








SOLDIERS AND
SPORTSMEN
AN ACCOUNT OF THE SPORTING ACTIVITIES
OF THE AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCE
DURING THE PERIOD BETWEEN
NOVEMBER, 1918, AND
SEPTEMBER, 1919.
"Prepared for the A.I.F. Sports Control Board hy
LIEUTENANT G. H. GODDARD ,
59 th Battalion ,
A.I.F.
With Compliments
A.I.F. Sports CoiArol Foard.
■ d 1 xx.x.x 1 . urvi\io x iutl nv/Rocr rvxv i
and Printed by The Rosebery Press, Ltd.,
19 Rosebery Avenue, E.C.




SOLDIERS AND
SPORTSMEN
AN ACCOUNT OF THE SPORTING ACTIVITIES
OF THE AUSTRALIAN IMPERIAL FORCE
DURING THE PERIOD BETWEEN
NOVEMBER, 1918, AND
SEPTEMBER, 1919.
"Prepared for the ALE. Sports Control "Board by
LIEUTENANT G. H. GODDARD ,
5 tyh Battalion ,
ALE.
1919.
Published by A.I.F. Sports Control Board, Horseferry Road,
and Printed by The Rosebery Press, Ltd.,
19 Rosebery Avenue, E.C.




FOREWORD
On being- directed by General Birdwood, G.C.M.G., K.C.8.,
K.C.5.1., C.1.E., D. 5.0., A.D.C., to write a foreword for this
publication, the opportunity is given me of expressing in brief
space some little appreciation of the work of the members con-
stituting the A.I.F. Sports Control Board.
The Board inaugurated soon after the Armistice had as its first
President, Brigadier-General T. H. Dodds, C.M.G., D. 5.0., who
took the liveliest interest in its early operations. He was followed
in the office of President by Brigadier-General T. H. Griffiths,
C. C.8.E., D. 5.0., who continued the good work of his
predecessor.
As the third and final President of the Board, taking over office
towards the termination of its activities, I am in a position to
realise to the utmost the high value of the work performed by the
members of the Board, and feel that I should be lacking in
appreciation should I not place something on record.
Of Lieut.-Colonel T. S. Woodburn, C.BJi., it may be said that
it was largely due to his personal efforts through the institution
he represents, namely, the already far-famed Australian Comforts
Fund, that the operations of the Board on such a vast scale of
sport was made possible ; the Australian Comforts Fund guarantee-
ing the major portion of the cost.
In Lieut.-Colonels N. Marshal, D. 5.0., M.C., C. V. Watson,
D. and R. J. A. Massie, D. 5.0,, the Board possessed three
officers who have been untiring in their efforts to further the
success of all sport carried out under the auspices of the Board.
Captain Savage, 0.8. E., M.C., the representative of the A.I.F.
Depots in the United Kingdom, rendered very valuable services
when acting as Manager of the A.I.F. Teams competing in the
Inter-Allied Games in Paris; and lastly the Board possessed as
Organising Secretary Major Middleton, D. 5.0., an International
athlete, whose wide experience and knowledge of sport has been
of incalculable value. To his untiring energy, sound judgment,
tact and strong personality may be attributed the organisation
and capable management which so materially affected the mag-
nificent successes of the Australian soldier sportsmen chronicled
on the succeeding pages.
C. H. JESS,
Brig.-General.
Commandant, A.I.F. Hdqrs., London.
Oct. 20th, 1919.




CONTENTS.
PAGE
Introduction ... ... ... 5
Chapter I. ... Inception
Chapter 11. ... Sport in France ... 13
Chapter 111. ... Rugby Football ... 22
Chapter IV. ... Golt ... ... 29
Chapter V. ... Boxing... ... 31
Chapter VI. ... Tennis ... ... 37
Chapter VII. ... Inter-Allied Games ... 51
Chapter VIII. ... Rifle Shooting ... 70
Chapter IX. ... Rowing ... 83
Chapter X. ... Cricket... ... 100
Chapter XI. ... Miscellany ... 111






A.I.F. No. 1 Crew
Winners of the King’s Cup for Allied Service Eights at the Royal Henley Peace Regatta, July 5th, 1919.
Standing: Lieut.-Col. Norman Marshall, D. S.O.. M.C. (coach): Licit F A House 12lb. (Jo. 2); Lieut T McGill 12st 10lb.
(No. 3); Sergt. A. E. Smedley, 8st. 11b. (coxswain); Gunner A. V. Scott, 13st. (No. 4), Sergt. A. R. Robb, 11st. 10lb. (bow),
Lieut. H. Ross-Soden (substitute).
Sitting - Major S. A. Middleton, D.S.O., 13st. 6lb. (No. 6); Capt. H. C. Disher, list. 1lb. (stroke); Gunner G. W. Mettam, 11st. 121b.
(No. 7); Lieut. H. Hauenstein, M.M., 13st. 9lb. (No. 5).


INTRODUCTION.
We in Australia are a long way from “ the hub of the
Universe.” Ordinarily, it costs a whole lot of money and takes
many weeks of travel for an ‘‘Antipodean ” to reach England.
But the past five years have caused so many changes and upset
things to such an extent that between two and three hundred
thousands of us have not only seen England and the Continent
free of cost, but have been paid for doing so.
In the past, if an Australian Sporting Organisation desired
to be represented at any championship gathering in Europe or
America, the very first item that had to be considered w 7 as the
expense—always enormous. The material for the representation
was never hard to find.
It can, therefore, be the more easily understood that, when
the idea was first mooted of giving Australian athletes, who
were serving in the A.1.F., an opportunity of pitting themselves
against representatives of European nations in all the branches
of sport, it was eagerly taken up.
The movement spread. Everybody was enthusiastic, and soon
there were teams in training for competition in almost every form
of popular sport.
The object of these pages is to describe the movement from
the inception, the successes and the failures, the joys and the
sorrows.
It is also to say a word of thanks to the generous Australian
public who, by their subscriptions, made possible the carrying out
of perhaps the biggest programme of sport that has ever been
undertaken. It is safe to say that there is in this old world no
greater sport-loving community than that of our own Australia.
They are ever ready to raise funds for any venture that has the
least chance of bringing further laurels to the land of the Southern
Cross. In this particular case they gave very generously, and
enabled over 200 picked Australians to compete against the rest
of the world, to win occasionally, to lose occasionally, but always
to command the interest of the other two hundred thousand whr
were awaiting return to “ God’s Demesne.”
G. H. G.




CHAPTER I.
INCEPTION.
WHAT greater problem can there be than that of keeping
a couple of hundred thousand home-hungry men contented : j
This was the problem which faced not only the Australian
Military Authorities, but also the Military Authorities of every
overseas dominion w T hose troops had come to play their part in
the war. They were men who had been away from home for
long periods, engaged on a ghastly business, and to say that
they were “ fed up ” is to put it mildly. The signing of the
Armistice in November brought a long sigh of relief. The war
was over. Soon we should all be back home again. But how
soon ?
This was another big problem. The army had been brought
over in small portions, extending over a period of a little over
four years. It was not reasonable to imagine that they could
all be returned to their homes In a day, or a week, or a month,
or even six months. It is sufficient to state that the men of the
A.I.F. recognised this. They knew that the best would be done
to get them home as quickly as possible. They knew that, their
turns would come, in order of enlistment, and having this know-
ledge they settled down to await the ship that was to tal-fe them
home.
It will be readily understood that to house, feed and clothe
these soldiers was not sufficient. They must be kept occupied —
in mind and body—in the w r ay that appealed most stronglv to
them. The purpose of this book is not to go into the details of
the methods used to keep them occupied. The excellent system
of non-military employment went a long way towards the solution
of the problem. By it, some tens of thousands of Australians
were enabled to enter the professional, manufacturing, industrial,
and scholastic life of the old country, to see below the surface,
to “ read, learn, and inwardly digest ” the methods employed


and generally to better fit themselves for return to their avoca-
tions of peace. But, of course, the numbers who were able to
avail themselves of this scheme were limited. What was to be
done on behalf of those others? How was their problem to be
solved ?
The fact that they were Australians, that they loved their
sport, more almost than their w r ork —(the “ almost ” is merely
to soften the blow) —made the solution possible. Unlimited sport
of the best kind, varied and made as attractive as possible—
therein lay the secret. It was thus that the A.I.F. would while
away the days. No better method could possibly be devised.
So it was that a very widespread movement began. Every unit
replenished its supply of sporting material and set about making
competition with its neighbour. Inter-battalion, inter-brigade,
inter-division, and corps competitions, in France, in Belgium, in
England, in Egypt, Palestine, and Mesopotamia—these were
commenced, fostered, and flourished. The truth of the old phrase
-—Mens sana in corpora sano —was never more fully exemplified.
Without making any invidious comparisons or giving illustrations
of unfortunate incidents which happened in other armies after
November nth, 1918, it can safely be stated that no army en-
gaged in this mammoth European quarrel negotiated this dan-
gerous post-war period so well as the A.I.F. The Australian
soldier has always been good food for the comic papers by reason
of his care-free style and his unwillingness to bow to “ the
pomps and vanities.” He can at least say that he knew how to
behave himself, and did behave himself, while waiting to be
returned to his country.
Now, after this little paean of praise, let us get on w T ith the
business in hand—viz., a brief description of this sporting move-
ment from the point of view of “ the onlooker, who sees most of
the game.”
Just prior to the signing of the Armistice, there was a move-
ment in Army circles in England to have an Army Boxing Cham-
pionship Tournament, and to open the entry to the armies from
the Dominions and the United States of America. A communi-
cation had been received at Australian Corps Headquarters con-
taining an invitation to send an Australian boxing team to take
part in these championships. The greater part of the Corps was
at this time out of the line, resting after their long spell of fight-
ing, which had commenced early in the year, and had continued
until the end of September or early in October. As was usual in
such cases, every unit had organised its sport, and inter-unit
competition was being carried on with the utmost enthusiasm.
Then the order to march was received, and while the Corps was
on its w 7 ay back to the line, the order to cease fire came along.


Everybody said a fervent “ Thank God,” and thoughts turned
again towards—well, first of all towards HOME, and then to-
wards Sport.
Major S. A. Middleton, D. 5.0., of the igth Battalion, a man
of world-wide repute as an oarsman and Rugby footballer, whose
efforts had played a big part in making a reputation in sport
for his own battalion, was summoned to Corps Headquarters,
and told on arrival to get busy and entertain several hundred
thousand soldiers whose jobs had been completed—in so far as
the fighting part of them was concerned. Major Middleton very
soon mapped out a scheme embracing a most extensive sports
programme for the men in the field. He also pointed out that,
in all probability, Army Championships would be held during the
demobilisation period, and no time should be lost in getting the
best Australian athletes together.
The winter was very soon at its worst, and this put a limit
on the amount of sport which it was possible to carry out. How-
ever, football (Rugby. Association, and Australian Rules) and
boxing were very soon going merrily along. A Corps Boxing
Tournament was held at Abbeville (France) from November 22nd
to 26th. Representatives were sent from all units in the field,
and, on the form shown there, a team was selected to go to Eng-
land. These men had to undergo further trials in England with
representatives of the Australian Imperial Force Depots in the
United Kingdom, and it was thus that the A.I.F. Team for the
Army Championships was selected.
This was the beginning. The policy laid down by Australian
Corps Headquarters was to have so many men engaged and
interested in sport that this form of passing the days would take
the place of drill in the training programme, to a very large
extent. This policy was welcomed, as might be imagined.
Almost anything that would take the place of drill w r ould have
been welcomed. As soon as this idea was adopted, it became
apparent that some form of organised control w'ould be necessary.
That was an easy matter with the Corps in the field. A Sports
Officer was appointed to each unit. In the cases of some batta-
lions each company had its Sports Officer. There were com-
pany, battery, battalion, brigade, divisional, and corps Sports
Officers. The five divisional Sports Officers, the Corps Troops
Sports Officer, and the Corps Sports Officer constituted a Com-
mittee for the control of sport in France. Divisional Committees
were formed on similar lines, composed of Brigade Sports
Officers, the Divisional Headquarters Sports Officer, and the
Divisional Sports Officer. Broadly speaking, the general policy
throughout the Corps was to encourage all forms of sport for


which there was a demand, or where it was considered that
interest could be created. On these lines, therefore, the officers
set to work.
The result of their efforts was very soon apparent. Inter-
platoon, inter-company, inter-battalion, inter-brigade, inter-divi-
sion, inter-corps, and inter-army competitions in various forms
of sport were held, and interest kept at high tension throughout
the whole of the winter of 1918-19.
An A.I.F. Boxing Team was sent to Brussels, and engaged in
a match against the Canadians. The A.I.F. men won.
A Rugby team representing the Corps was sent to Paris to
try conclusions with a French Army Team. Again the result
was in favour of the A.I.F.
Brigadier-General T. H. Dodds, C.M.G., D. 5.0., was, at the
inception of this movement, at Australian Corps Headquarters
in France. To his efforts at the earlier stage a whole lot of the
subsequent success was due. Before leaving France to take
command at A.I.F. Administrative Headquarters in London,
Brigadier-General Dodds had several conferences with Major
Middleton on the subject of sport. When he arrived in London,
Major Middleton’s scheme again came before him. The latter
impressed the fact that there would almost certainly be a big
sporting revival during the spring and summer of 1919. A senes
of International Championships was contemplated, at which the
A.I.F. would be expected to be represented. If they were to
have any success at all, it would be necessary to commence
organising at once.
At the request of Brigadier-General Dodds, Major Middleton
was sent from France to London on January 6th, 1919, and on
that day attended a meeting of the British Army Sports Control
Board at the War Office as the A.I.F. representative. The object
of this meeting was the inauguration of an Army Football Com-
petition (Rugby). Representatives of all commands of the British
Army and the Dominions Armies also attended, and the meeting
was presided over by General Harrington, who, at one time, was
chief of Sir Douglas Haig’s staff. A remarkable feature of the
meeting was that the general policy of encouraging all forms of
healthy sport during the demobilisation period, which was out-
lined, was on almost exactly similar lines to that which had been
already started among the A.I.F. Links in France.
The Rugby competition, for a cup presented by His Majesty
the King, was duly inaugurated.
It had now become necessary to have some Central Controlling
Body for the sport of the Australian Imperial Force in England.
It was apparent that the Rugby Competition was only the begin-
ning of big things. Major Middleton’s organising ability was


again called upon, with the result that a constitution was drawn
up for the Australian Imperial Force Sports Control Board.
A.I.F. Order No. 1539, of January 31st, 1919, read as follows; —
A.I.F. SPORTS CONTROL BOARD.
The following- proposals for the formation of an A.I.F. Board
of Control to encourage sport in all units and supervise organisa-
tion and selection of representative teams from A.I.F. for Inter-
Army Championships have been approved.
(a) The Board, to consist of President, two representatives
from Units in France, one from A.I.F. Depots in United
King-dom, one from and one representative
from Australian Comforts Fund, will be as under :
President : Brig - .-General T. H. Dodds, C.M.G., D.S.O.
France: Major (T./Lt. Col.) R. J. A, Massie, D. 5.0.;
Lt.-Col. N. Marshall, D. 5.0., M.C.
A.I.F. Depots in United Kingdom : Capt. J. E. Savage,
0.8. E., M.C.
London ; Lt.-Col. C. V. Watson, D.S.O.
Australian Comforts Fund; Hon. Lt.-Col. T. S. Wood-
burn, C.B.E.
(b) Major S. A. Middleton to be Secretary and Organiser and
to be additional member of the Board representing
A.I.F. Headquarters.
(c) Board to control all moneys paid into funds and to allocate
from general funds money required by each sub-com-
mittee.
(d) Audit of funds to be arranged by Board with Auditor.
(e) Board to nominate officer to control each sport when
number engaged warrants it. Such officer appointed to
be also one of specialist sub-committee of three appointed
by Board.
(/) Board and sub-committees to form General Sports Com-
mittee to meet when required for extraordinary business.
On February 28th, by A.I.F. Order No. 1570, Brigadier-
General Dodds relinquished the Presidency of the Board owing to
his having returned to Australia. His place was taken by
Brigadier-General T. Griffiths, C.M.G., C.8.E., D. 5.0., who
took command of the A.I.F. Administrative Headquarters.
The constitution of this Board put things on a sound foot-
ing, and enabled those in charge to organise along lines which
had hitherto beep impossible. A Sports Section was created at
Headquarters in London, and teams were got together. Arrange-
ments had to be made for their housing near suitable training


centres. Every man who came from France or Belgium, Egypt,
Mesopotamia or Palestine, to take part in any branch of sport,
was required to report at this section. From here he was passed
on to the various sub-sections, where he was tried out. If con-
sidered suitable he was retained upon the strength of the section.
If not, he was marched out to one of the camps for repatriation.
The work of the Administrative side of the Sports Section in
England was at all times heavy, and, quite unlike many Army
institutions, it was not at any time over-staffed.
It could not be expected that the Military Authorities would
provide the whole of the funds necessary for this venture. How-
ever, no difficulty was expected in raising sufficient money for
all purposes, and none arose. Cablegrams were despatched to
various sporting bodies in Australia asking for subscriptions.
The Australian Government was asked for a donation. The Chief
Commissioner of the Australian Comforts Fund was approached.
A Committee of Australian Citizens resident in London was
formed. Appeals were made in the various military districts in
Australia, through the Defence Department. It was very soon
evident that the scheme was not to fail from lack of financial
support. The response was most generous, and, although at
this period no idea could be formed as to the amount that would
be required or the probable extent of operations, it Avas considered
that there was enough money available and in sight to enable
the Board to go ahead. The financial side of the business was
carried out with the utmost care, and was subjected to frequent
audits by the Australian Pay Corps. Funds were jealously
guarded throughout the whole of the Board’s existence, and sub-
scribers may rest assured that the money was wisely expended.
The succeeding chapters are devoted to the various activities
of the different sections, and are necessarily curtailed. For the
information regarding sport in France and Belgium the writer
is indebted to Lieut. Roy Hendy, who was the Sports Officer of
the 2nd Division. Lieut, Hendy subsequently became Liaison
Officer between the A.I.F. Sports Control Board and the various
sub-sections in London, and did valuable work.




Reserve Rugby Team,


CHAPTER II.
Sport in France and Belgium.
A ball of some description was always a big- factor in the life
of the A.I.F. in the field. Wherever one or two were gathered
together, there was always a game of some sort in evidence.
One did not have to- go to the rest areas to find it. Games were
played as close up to the front line as was permissible, and
sometimes closer. The ball that had the biggest vogue was that
of the “ .303 mark VII, 5.A.A.,” but the “ game ” played with
that particular variety was not always the most enjoyable. In
fact, the number of players who were hurt made it the most
unpopular of all. The football, cricket-ball, hockey-ball, tennis-
ball, medicine-ball, punching-ball, billiard ball, “ bobs,” and
bagatelle balls and several others all had their devotees, and men
came and men went, but King Sport reigned during the whole of
the time. He was supported by all ranks, and proved to be a
useful sovereign.
When the time came that the game with the “ 303 Mark VII. ”
and other unpopular balls was banished from the day’s curriculum
it was found that there were plenty of others to fill the gap.
Sport had been so greatly fostered and encouraged throughout
the A.I.F. in France that a solid foundation had been laid for the
successful carrying out of the programme which was laid down
by the higher commands after the signing of the Armistice.
Early in January, 1919, the supreme British Command issued
copies of the constitution of' the controlling body of sport, styled
“ The B.E.F. Sports Board.” Its objects were ;
(1) To- improve the physical fitness of the troops in the
British Expeditionay Force by fostering athletics and to
encourage the provision in armies and smaller forma-
tions of competitions in all branches of sport in which
men compete for the honour of their unit.
(2) To instil the root principle of true sport, viz. ; “ Play
for your side and not for yourself ” by—
(a) Abolishing money prizes.
( b ) Encouraging the presentation to individual winners
and competitors of souvenirs of little intrinsic
value.


(c) Encouraging the presentation to winning teams of
trophies which shall be held by the unit.
(3) To support by advice and assistance any scheme which
may improve the general athletic standard.
(4) To produce units to represent the British Expeditionary
Force in the Inter-Force Tournament to be held in
England and to' control the final stage of the Eliminating
Competitions held for this purpose.
It was proposed to create various Boards of Control from the
platoon, by the recognised chain of command, to the Army, in
order to carry out these excellent intentions. The scheme was
not productive of as much benefit as might have been expected.
The channels through which it had to drift were so tortuous that
by the time it reached the platoon, that particular formation,
as such, had almost ceased to exist, owing to the effects of
repatriation and demobilisation.
However,, the work of promoting sport had not been in abey-
ance during the interregnum. It was in full swing along common-
sense lines, with the Brigade as the lowest formation controlling
recognised competitions in the Australian Corps.
With the completion of these competitions, divisional honours
were contested, and subsequently corps competitions in Australian,
Rugby and Association Football, Boxing, and Cross Country
Running were organised. The individual winners received medals
and the Division which received the highest aggregate of points
received a silver cup. These Corps Competitions were controlled
by the Corps Sports Committee, which was made up, as already
stated, of the Corps Sports Officer (Lieut.-Col. R. J. A. Massie,
D. 5.0.) and the Divisional and Corps Troops Sports Officers.
RUGBY.
In accordance with an arrangement made some time previously
with the French Rugby Representatives in Paris, an Australian
Imperial Force fifteen went to the French capital and played a
match against the French Army Team on January 19th, 1 9 1 9 >
There was not sufficient time to conduct test matches in order to
select the A.I.F. Team, so each Division was asked to submit
names of its eight best men. These were sent to a School of
Physical and Recreational Training, which had been established
near the village of Barbencon, in .Belgium, on January Ist, 1919-
After a fortnight’s training the following were selected and sent
to Paris :
Captain Beith, 3rd A.G.H. —Full-back.
Corporal D. C. Suttor, 2nd Div.—Three-quarter.
Private C. W. Leahy, 3rd Div.—Three-quarter.


Corporal J. M. Stevenson, ist Div.—Three-quarter.
Gunner J. Bosward, 2nd Div. —Three-quarter.
Private P. Noele, 4th. Div. —Three-quarter.
C.S.M. P. Buchanan, ist Div.—Half-back.
Private T. W. Flanagan, ist Div. —Half-back.
Lieut. H. Kirke, 2nd Div. —Half-back.
Lieut. J. R. Baird, ist Div. —Forward.
Q.M.S. Bond, sth Div. —Forward.
Gunner Lenthall, 3rd Div.—Forward.
Lieut. W. Cody, 3rd Div.—Forward.
Lieut. O’Toole, 2nd Div.—Forward.
Sergeant See, 3rd Div.—Forward.
Corporal R. Bradley, 4th Div.—Forward.
Private J. Thompson, sth Div. —Forward.
Corporal Dunn, ist Div.—Forward.
Private Quinn, Cyclists. —Forward.
Private Lyons, 4th Div.—Forward.
The team was under the management of Major “ Wally
Matthews, a well-known pre-war Sydney University player. The
match in Paris was a good, hard, fast game. The score of
6 points to 3 in favour of the A.I.F. hardly indicates the relative
superiority. The Australians were on the offensive during the
greater part of the game. It was only their lack of properly
concerted action and their inability to take full advantage of
opportunities offered, due to the shortness of the period of their
training, which prevented them from making their score a much
bigger one. Credit must be given to the Frenchmen for the
splendid defensive game they played, and for the numerous occa-
sions upon which they repulsed the onslaughts against their line.
At the conclusion of this match, the team was sent to England.
It played various matches against teams on the other side of the
Channel and also met the A.I.F. Headquarters Team. It was
from these two teams that the Australian Fifteen for the Inter-
Service Rugby Competition was selected. The result of this
team’s tour in England is dealt with in another chapter.
The Corps Rugby Competition was commenced in March, six
teams being entered. There was one from each Division and one
from the Corps Troops. The conditions were that each team was
to play every other team. The Divisions were scattered around
the country-side, but once the competition was got under weigh,
each team was concentrated at some central village—usually near
Divisional Headquarters—and trained assiduously. Matches ■were
played at various places, and the grounds were not by any means
ideal. One day a game would be played on a field covered with
a couple of inches of snow. At another time the snow would
give place to a similar depth of mud, and yet again the ground


would be frozen hard. Transport difficulties were overcome by
the provision of motor lorries by Divisional Headquarters, and
teams had often to undertake journeys of between twenty and
thirty kilometres—and even more—over bumpy roads, and return
after the game. The Army wag-on was not by any means a well-
upholstered or well-sprung conveyance, and it had no central
heating arrangements. The cold and general discomfort, how-
ever, were not at any time sufficient to overcome the enthusiasm
of the players, who always towed around a crowd of equally
enthusiastic “ barrackers.”
The teams visited one another in turn, and when the journey
to and fro was too great to be undertaken in the same day, the
home team quartered and entertained that of the visiting Division
The team of the 2nd Division went through the competition
undefeated, scoring 96 points to 3 against. Their line was
crossed only once —by the Ist Division team. The points scored
were :
Ist Div. 2nd Div. 3rd Div. 4th Div. sth Div. C.T. Total
Ist Division --- 2 2 2*2 8
2nd Division 2 2 2 2 2 10
3rd Division 2 2 4
4th Division 2 ,
sth Division 2 2 2 6
Corps Troops 0
On this result, points were allotted for the Corps Cup as
under:—
2nd Division 5
Ist Division
sth Division 4
3rd Division 3
4th Division 2
Corps Troops x
At the completion of the competition two teams were selected
to go into training at Chatelet, near Charleroi, in order that a
team might be selected to represent the Corps. The Fourth
Army, to which the Australian Corps was attached, invited the
A.I.F. to supply a team to represent the Fourth Army in a match
against the Second Army at Cologne. Capt. J. B. Lane, D. 5.0.,
was given command of the thirty-one men, who were billeted
together and trained for a short period. He selected his team,
took them to Cologne, and defeated the Second Army Fifteen by
21 points to 6. Incidentally, the team had an enjoyable and


instructive time in this Rhine city. They played an additional
match against a team from the Royal Air Force attached to the
Second Army. Australia was there to the extent of 41 points
to nil.
“ soccer. K
Association Football has always had its band of enthusiastic
followers. It found them in the Corps Competition, and they
made just as much noise about the business as any of the other
followings. Unlike the Rugby teams, which were selected from
the whole of a division, “ Soccer ” teams were drawn from units
of battalion or equivalent strengths. The 86th Army Brigade
(Artillery), which had been attached to the 2nd Division" for about
two years, was chosen to represent that division, and fully justi-
fied the selection by coming through the Competition with an
unbeaten record. Points were scored as under :
Ist Div. 2nd Div. 3rd Div. 4th Div. sth Div. C.T. Total
Ist Division - 2 2 2 6
2nd Division 2 2 2 2 2 10
3rd Division - 1 j
4th Division 2 1 2 5
sth Division 2 2
Corps Troops 2 2 2 6
The result of this Competition carried no points for the Corps
Cup. A special silver cup was provided by the Corps Head-
quarters and the 2nd Division annexed it.
AUSTRALIAN RULES*
The relative merits of Rugby, Australian Rules, and Asso-
ciation Football were debated as keenly on the battlefields and
in the back areas of h ranee and Belgium as they ever were under
the sunny skies of Australia. It was possible to make a good
guess at the State from which a man hailed by the vehemence
with which he supported a certain brand of football. The argu-
ment with the Kaiser was more easily settled than this one. The
patronising manner in which a supporter of one particular game
would ask another to “ come and see a real football match ” was
most amusing.
The competition under Australian. Rules was productive of
a very keen contest. Some difficulty was experienced in carrying
through the fixtures in consequence of the very large playing area
required. However, the A.I.F. was ever firm in its belief that
difficulties were made to be overcome, and the competition was
B


carried through to a successful issue. The ist Division won
after an exciting final with the 2nd Division, both teams having
previously been beaten once. Results .
Ist Div. 2nd Div. 3rd Div. 4th Div. sth Div. C.T. Totah
iSt Division 2 2 2 ” 6
2nd Division 2 “ .
3rd Division “ 2 “ ~, 2 6
4th Division ' 2 __ .
sth Division 2
Corps Troops .... 2
On this result, the following points were allotted tor the Corps
Cup “ . . e-
-Ist Division
2nd Division
Division • • 4"2
3rd Division 2 -
sth Division -
Corps Troops 1
boxing.
Boxing was always a feature of A.I.F. sport. Many of the
less belifeose spirits remember with a feeling of horroi-the com-
nulsory boxing bouts on board ship on the way to Egypt a
France On such occasions the pigmies of the various units we
!„ great demand as sparring partners. However much may be
said for or against compulsory boxing, the fact remains the
‘‘ the noble aft ” enjoyed a large measure of popularity, and
evidence of this was to be found in every camp which was
occupied not to find that within a fortnight
of the signing of the Armistice, an Australian Corps Boxing
Tournament was held at Abbeville in France. This partial ar
area was the home of the 3rd Division for many months after
November 1918. At the tournament, representatives were
selected and sent to England to try out Wl * men from the
Depots in the United Kingdom. It was thus that the tea
the All-Services Tournament was selected. Ihe men wen _
England in charge of Lieut. R. O. Roxburgh, of the 4 th Division.
The Inter-Services Tournament is dealt with in another chapter.
The Abbeville Tournament was highly successful. It was organ-
ised and controlled by the Commandant of the Area, with an
'The Tournament was not held until March and
bv that time many of the best men had been repatriated. How
eveJ the entries were good, and the men made up for what they
lacked in the science of the game by their whole-hearted s agging
“ desire to quickly finish the job. The Director of the Un.ver


site du Travail at Charleroi placed at the disposal of Corps
Headquarters a large hall, and the “ stoush ” was staged there
on March 10th, nth, 12th, and 14th to packed houses. The
Commander of the Fourth Army, General Rawlinson, was present
at the finals and presented the trophies to the winners. The
result was a win on points for the sth Division, as under :
Points. Points for Corps Cup.
sth Division 45 ... 6
Ist Division 28 . ... 5
4th Division 26 .. ... 4
2nd Division 22 ... ... 3
3rd Division 14 ... .. 2
Corps Troops 3 ... ... 1
The prize-winners w T ere ;
Heavyweight :
Sgt. Allison, sth Div Ist
Pte. Brinstead, sth Div 2nd
Light Heavyweight :
Pte. Walker, 2nd Div Ist
Pte. Nurse, Ist Div 2nd
Middleweight ;
Pte. Pope, sth Div , Ist
Pte. Broughton, 3rd Div 2nd
Welterweight :
Pte. Mignot, 4th Div Ist
Sgt. Cross, 2nd Div 2nd
Lightweight :
Pte, Moran, 4th Div. is t
Pte. Storen, sth Div 2nd
Featherweight :
Pte. Peakes, sth Div isr
Pte. Thompson, Ist Div 2nd
Bantamweight :
Pte. Glover, Ist Div , Ist
Pte, Sergeant, sth Div 2nd
There was only a small entry in the Officers’ Division, and
Army rations were said to have been responsible for the fact
that nobody could be found light enough for the Feather or
Bantam Weight Sections. The winners were :
Heavyweight.—Lieut. Scales, 24th Bn.
Light Heavyweight.—Lieut. Debit, 31st Bn.
Middleweight.—Lieut. Leeves, 56th Bn.
Welterweight.—Lieut. Davis, 53rd Bn.
Lightweight.—Lieut. Land, 51st Bn.


Encouraged by the popularity of Boxing Tournaments, those
in charge of the sporting side of Fourth Army Headquarters
called for entries from the various units for an Army Champion-
ship. The Australian and Canadian Corps, however, were the
only ones to register entries, and their clash took place, by
common consent, in Brussels, after several postponements, on
March 30th. The Australian team was in charge of Lieut. Dellit,
of the sth Division. Some splendid bouts were staged, and at
the termination Australia was there again with 5 bouts won and
2 lost. The A.I.F. men fared thus :
Heavyweight : Sgt. Allison, sth Div. —Lost.
Light Heavy : Pte. Walker, 2nd Div. —Won.
Middlweight : Pte. Pope, sth Div.—Won.
Welterweight : Pte. Mignot, 4th Div.—-Aon.
Lightweight ; Pte. Moran, 4th Div. —Lost.
Featherweight; Pte. Peakes, sth Div. —Won.
Bantamweight ; Pte. Moroney, sth Div. —W T on.
As each win counted two points, the Australian Corps won
the Championship of the Fourth Army with 10 points against
the Canadian Corps’ 4 points.
CROSS-COUNTRY CHAMPIONSHIP.
Marcinelle, which is a rather dirty suburb of Charleroi, because
of coal mines it contains, was the deciding ground of the Corps
Cross-Country Championship, The race was over a course of
approximately three and a half miles, and was held on hebruary
24th, 1919 —a bitterly cold day. The course was an exceptionally
good one for a cross-country run. It consisted of road, ploughed
land, grass track, cinder track, mud, hedges, fences, and small
creeks —sufficiently varied for the most fastidious. Twenty com-
petitors from each of the Divisions and Corps Troops 120 in
all —lined up for the start, and made a brave display in the
colours affected by the different contesting units. A terrific pace
was set, and the field soon thinned. The winner, Sergt. C. G,
Manley,’ put up a particularly finy performance, having about a
hundred yards to spare at the finish, while fifty yards separated
second and third.
The placings of the first four were :
Sergt. C. G. Manley, sth Div Ist
Pte. L. A. Dolton, 3rd Div. 2nd
R.Q.M.S. C. Griffiths, 2nd Div 3rd
Lieut. G. Fincher, sth Div 4th
The points for this run were awarded under Army Rules. The
number of his place at the finish was the number of points scored


by each marl, and the unit with the lowest number of points won
the premier honours. The easy victory of the sth Division will
be seen from the following - figures :
sth Division 534 points Ist
3rd Division 856 points 2nd
2nd Division . - I,ll6.points 3rd
Ist Division 1,202 points 4th
4th Division 1,847 points sth
Corps Troops 1,980 points 6th
Points scored for the Corps Cup were ;
sth Division 6
3rd Division 5
2nd Division 4
Ist Division 3
4th Division 2
Corps Troops 1
CORPS CUP.
On the aggregate of points scored in the Cross-Country Run,
Boxing, Rugby, and Australian Rules Football, the Australian
Corps Sports Cup was awarded. It was won by the Ist Division
by half a point from the sth Division. The order w r as :
Ist Division ig points.—lst
sth Division iB| points.—2nd
, 2nd Division 17J points.—3rd
4th Division points
3rd Division points
Corps Troops 4 points
By the time these competitions had been completed, the strength
of the units in the field had been reduced considerably by re-
patriation and demobilisation. The Corps Committee decided,
therefore, that no further Corps Competitions should be pro-
moted. Each Division, however, carried on with competitions
among its own units, and these went on until the last draft left
France for England to await embarkation for home. This was
accomplished by early June, and at that date the only Australians
remaining were the Graves Detachment (who had a few months’
work ahead ,of them) and some cadres to settle outstanding-
matters.
Now let us get on to bigger things—the international cham-
pionships, in which the A.I.F. men pitted their skill and strength
against the best from other countries and got more than their
share of victory.


CHAPTER III.
RUGBY.
The activities of the Sports Control Board were necessarily
of a wide and varied character. It was soon found that there
was sufficient material to provide good teams in no less than
ten branches of sport. This being the case, the idea of having
small specialists Sub-Committees to keep in close touch with,
and administer the affairs of, each Section was a very good
one. The Committees were responsible to the Board, and though
they were given fairly wide powers, they were required to submit
matters of policy or questions affecting atiy large expenditure of
funds to the Board for ratification.
When the meeting at the War Office early in January, 1919,
decided to institute a Rugby Competition for the Services and
the Dominions, Australia immediately entered the lists. A further
meeting of representatives of the various arms of the Services
and the Dominions was held at the Junior United Service Club
on February Bth. The A.I.F. was represented by Major W. F.
Matthews, and final arrangements for the competition were made,
dates and grounds being allotted and fixtures drawn.
It now became necessary to choose the best possible side to
represent Australia, This was not such an easy matter as it
may have seemed. There was a Headquarters Team in London
that had played a few matches and done rather w r ell. There was
also the Trench Team, which had come across from France,
after having had a couple of notable victories there. Neither
was a really first-class combination, although there was a lot of
excellent material. The four and a half years of war were
responsible for a loss of many of the finer tactical points of the
game, which had always characterised Australian Rugby. The
commencement of the competition was due at an early date,
and the best would have to be done in the short time at the
disposal of those in charge of the team.
A Sub-Committee, consisting of Major W. F. Matthews, Major
Keith W. Norman, and Lieut. L. W. S. Seaborn, M.C., was
appointed to direct. Lieut. G. Cummins was a member in the
early stages, but he returned to Australia. These officers worked
in a most whole-hearted manner to get the team playing with
the necessary co-operation and universal understanding of one


First Rugby Team.




another’s methods, but the time at their disposal before the
matches started was all too short. Try-out matches were played
between the two teams, and the best men were selected to play
for the A.I.F. in the Inter-Services Competition. The others
were formed into what was known as the Australian Reserve
Team. The teams, while in London, trained mostly at Chiswick
Park.
The Inter-Service and Dominion Forces Rugby Competition
was commenced on March ist. Entries were received from
Australia, Canada, "New Zealand, South Africa, the Imperial
Army (known throughout the competition as the Mother Country),
and the Royal Air Force. The draw resulted in Australia being
pitted against the Mother Country at Leicester on March Bth,
South Africa at Newport on March 15th, New Zealand at Brad-
ford on Marcn 22nd, Royal Air Force at Gloucester on March
29th, and Canada at Twickenham on April sth. The Team’s
Headquarters were at Warwick Square, and about fifty men were
quartered and rationed there while in London.
New Zealand and the Royal Air Force opened the competition
at Swansea on March ist, the former team winning.
The Australians and Mother County did battle at Leicester on
the Bth. The A.I.F. Team consisted of :—Full-back, Capt. B.
N. Beith, A.A.M.C. ; Three-quarters, Sergt. D. C. Suttor, 15th
A.S.C. (left); Pte. J. C. Watkins, 2nd D.A.C. ; Corpl. T. Sten-
ning, A.I.F. H.Q., (right); Corpl. D. Hickey, ist L.T.M.B. ;
halves ; C.S.M. P. N. Buchanan, 3rd Battalion, and Pte. T. W.
Flanagan, 9th Battalion; forw r ards : Lieut. W. T. Watson, 9th
Battery; Q.M.S. J. H. Bond, 30th Battalion; Pte. A. M. Lyons,
15th Battalion; Lieut. L. A. Cody, 26th Battery; Cpl. \. A.
Dunn, ist Engineers; Lance-Corpl. J. Thompson, 15th Field
Ambulance; Sergt. J. Murray, 7th Field Engineers; and Sergt.
G. E. See, 33rd Battalion. Major Matthews was in charge of
the team.
The match was a very evenly contested one, but the lack of
combined effort on the part of the A.I.F. men was very early
apparent. It was more noticeable in the case of the backs than
with the forwards. The pack, in fact, worked exceedingly well,
and their keenness was at all times good to watch. They were
lacking in finish and experience, however, and were badly served
by their backs. The finish was most exciting, the Mother Country
being awarded a penalty kick right under the A.I.F. goal post*
within a, minute o f the call of time. Scores were even up to
that stage. The kick was successful, and the Mother Country
won by six points to three. Australia’s score was an uncon-
verted try by Stenning in the second half of the game. Nine
thousand people watched the match which, as a first-class exhibi-
tion of Rugby, was disappointing.


The next match, at Newport on the 15th against South Africa
was a decided improvement on the opening effort. The A.I.F.
Fifteen had five changes. Sergt. Bradley and Pie. Quinn took
the places of Thompson and Murray in the forwards, Major
Matthews worked behind the scrum in place of C.S.M. Buchanan,
and Pountney and Bosward came in as centre three-quarters.
The Australians won a hard, clean game by eight points to five.
Although usually beaten in the scrum, the A.I.F. forwards played
splendidly everywhere else, and it was mainly by their work that
the game was won. The backs again lacked finish. Their
passing was faulty and badly timed, and the finesse necessary
to win big matches was not shown. Suttor and Bradley were
the scorers, and Stenning converted the try of the former.
According to programme the next match should have been
played against New Zealand at Bradford on March 22nd, but as
on that date there were two or three inches of snow over the
field, the match was postponed until April 9th. The next game
was against the Royal Air Force at Gloucester on March 29th,
and a surprise was created by the R.A.F. winning by 7 points
to 3. The changes in the A.I.F. Team included the substitution
of Sergt. Egan in the three-quarter line for Corpl. Stenning, who
had been injured, and Thompson again game back to the for-
wards in place of Quinn. The Australian team certainly had
a bad day. They literally threw away chances of scoring time
and again, due mainly to the faulty work of their rear division.
The pack was superior to that of the opposing side, both in the
loose and in the ruck, but there was absolutely no cohesion
between the forwards and backs. Suttor was the chief agent
in a score by Watson, passing the ball to him at the right time
after a good run. The R.A.F. did not cross the Australians’
line, but won by a field goal and a penalty goal.
At Twickenham, on Saturday, April sth, the Canadians opposed
the team, which was made up as follows:—Full-back, Beith;
three-quarters, Suttor, Pountney, Carroll, Egan; five-eighth,
Robertson ; half, Flanagan ; forwards, Bradley, Thompson, Cody,
Dunn, Lyons, Bond, Watson (Captain), and See.
The Prince of Wales and Prince Albert came along to see the
match, but they were not treated to a particularly interesting
exhibition. The Canadians were hopelessly outclassed to the ex-
tent of 38 points to nil. It was in this match that the A.I.F.
Team played really first-class football for the first time. Opposed
to a team that was not nearly so well together, the Australian
pack and backs worked with a perfect understanding, and had
their opponents on the defensive throughout the whole of the
game. It was a matter of comment at the time as to why the
team had not previously played together in such perfect unison.
The material was always there, and only needed welding into


shape. The reason for their early failures was not far to seek.
They were a team of young- players without any experience of
the little tricks that count. They had not played together long
enough to know anything about what are termed “ psychological
moments,” and they consequently lacked the necessary combina-
tion between the vanguard and rearguard. Tries in this match
were scored by Suttor (2), Robertson (2), Dunn, Bond, Egan,
Carroll, and Bradley (2). Thompson converted three of these
tries, and Bradley one.
After the match, the two Princes came on the field and spent
some time in conversation with the players. The Prince of
Wales is a very popular man with the Diggers.
Up to this stage of 'the competition, New Zealand had won
each of the four matches they had played, while the Mother
Country had won three, and had a very good chance of beating
South Africa in their fifth. It only remained for New Zealand
to beat the Australians in their match at Bradford, and the cup
presented by the King would be their property, without having
to play any more matches. The newspapers were almost unani-
mous in their opinions as to the New Zealanders’ ability to win
comfortably, and it must be confessed that they had everything
upon which to base such a forecast. However, the fast im-
proving Australian Fifteen were destined to be the fly in the
New Zealand ointment.
The match was played on April gth before 7,000 people, who
were treated to the finest game of the series. The final score
was 6 points to 5 in favour of the Australians, and the winners
were pressing hard at the sound of the whistle.
The teams were :
Australia. —Full-back, Beith; three-quarters, Carroll, Egan,
Pountney, Suttor; halves, Robertson and Flanagan; forwards,
Bradley, See, Thompson, Cody, Dunn, darken, Murray, Watson
{Captain).
New Zealand. —O’Brien, Stohr, Storey, Ford, Ryan, Sande-
man, Brown, Sellars, Hasell, Whittington, Cockroft, Wilson,
Beiliss, Gilchrist, Singe.
The result, in Australia’s favour, was brought about mainly
by the superiority of the forwards over those of the opposing
team. It must not be gathered from this, however, that the
backs were again weak. They seconded the efforts of their front
line in a truly delightful manner, and only just failed to score
on several occasions. Too much cannot be said in favour of the
Australian pack, who outplayed the New Zealanders in every
point of the forward game. In the first half of the play, Thom-
son and Egan scored tries for the A.1.F., neither of which was
converted, and Australia led at the interval by this margin. Early
in the second half the New Zealanders took the offensive, and


for a time seemed to have gained the upper hand. They scored
a fine try by Storey, which was converted by Stohr. From this
point the Australians rallied, and the game became very exciting.
On many occasions the splendid Australian forwards took the
play dangerously near the New Zealand line by mighty rushes,
and there were some highly spectacular passing bouts, rivalled
only by the stubborn and unfailing defence of the New Zealanders.
There was no further alteration in the score. New Zealanders’
loss of the match placed them in the position of having to play
another match in the event of the Mother Country team beating
South Africa, which they did on April 12th.
This was the end of the competition as far as the Australians
were concerned. It was generally conceded that they had been
unlucky in not having “ struck form ” early in the series. Their
defeat by the R.A.F. was almost inexplicable, ft is worthy of
note that they defeated all the Dominion Teams in the contest,
scoring 52 points to 10 against.
New Zealand played off with the Mother Country at Twicken-
ham on April 19th, and won the game and the Cup, the score
being gto 3. This gave them the right to represent the Armies
of the British Empire in a match against the French Army
Fifteen. The King and his four sons attended the match, which
the New Zealanders won by 20 points to 3.
The appended table shows the result of the competition, two
points being allowed for each win :
N.Z. M.C. S.A. R.A.F. Aus. Can. Total
New Zealand
Mother Country .
South Africa
R.A.F ______ 2 2 4
Australia 2
Canada
*New Zealand defeated Mother Country in final game.
The Competition was very successful throughout, and the games
were played In a thoroughly sporting spirit. At the commence-
ment there was a good deal of adverse press criticism on the rough
methods employed by the Australian ffeam. As the contest
advanced, however, the press criticisms found no fault
with the fairness of the Australian tactics, and they
went so far, in some instances, as to congratulate
jthe team on the spirit in which the matches were
played, and to admit the harshness of earlier writings on the


subject. The presence of the four Dominions’ teams in this
contest was a splendid thing for Rugby in England, The game
had suffered, along with nearly every other form of sport, from
the inaction of the previous four years; but this great contest
did more in a month to bring it back to its pre-war popularity
than the ordinary club games would have done in a couple of
seasons.
The competition for the King's Cup quite overshadowed the
other doings of Army teams in Rugby. Still, the Australians
did not confine their energies to these matches. They went
further afield. Their teams undertook a tour in Devon and Wales,
played matches around London, and engaged in several practice
matches. Glowing tributes have been paid by the managers and
officials to the manner in which the teams conducted themselves
at all times. Lieut. L. W. Seaborn, M.C., had charge of the
Reserve Team, and his energy was responsible for a whole lot
of the team’s success. Major Matthews managed the First
Fifteen throughout. The following are results of additional
matches played by the First Team :
Against Australian Flying Corps at Gloucester on February
15th. Won by 50 points to nil.
Against South African Army Team at Queen’s Club on Feb-
ruary igth. Won by 9 points to 8.
Against Leicester County at Leicester on February 22nd. Won
by 8 points to 6.
Against New Zealand Army “ A ” Team at Richmond on
February 26th. Lost by 9 points to nil.
Against Devon County at Exeter on April 12th. Won by 11
to 3.
Against Royal Naval Depot at Plymouth on April 16th. Won
by 14 to 10.
Against Maesteg at Maesteg on April 19th. Won by 18 to 3.
Against Pill Harriers at Newport on April 21st. Lost by 13
to 3.
Against Abertillery at Abertillery on April 23rd. Won by 1 x
to 3.
Against Ogmore Vale at Ogmore Vale on April 26th. Lost by
6 to 3.
Against Cornwall at Penzance on May 3rd. Won by 9to nil.
The record of the Second or Reserve Team also makes in-
teresting reading. They were responsible for breaking a record
by beating Llanelly on their own ground, the first time such


a thing had happened. Llanelly took their revenge by winning
two subsequent matches and the rubber. N Here are the results
of the Reserve Team’s games :
Against A.I.F. Depot’s Team at Warminster on February
15th. Won by 19 to 10.
Against 18th Wing. Royal Air Force, at Hounslow on
February 19th. Won by 52 to nil.
Against A.I.F. Depots at Warminster on February 22nd. Won
by 8 to 3.
Against New Zealand Army “B” Team at Richmond on
February 26th. Lost by 17 to 3.
Against Guy’s Hospital at Chiswick on March Bth. Won by
25 to nil.
Against Llanelly at Llanelly on March 15th. Won by 11 to nil.
Against East Midlands at Northampton on March 29th. Won
by 27 to xi.
Against Llanelly at Llanelly on April 12th. Lost by 11 to 8.
Against Exmouth and Exeter at Exmouth on April 19th. Won
by 19 to 3.
Against Devon County at Newton Abbott on April 21st. Won
by 21 to 3.
Against Teignmouth at Teignmouth on April 23rd. Won by
40 to 3.
Against Llanelly at Llanelly on May 3rd. Lost by 17 to 3.
The teams left England for Australia about the middle of
May, the intention at the time of their departure being that they
should play matches at Sydney and Brisbane before being dis-
banded.


CHAPTER IV.
GOLF.
If it were to be asserted, or even hinted, that Australians-
are not, as a rule, great golfers, there would most certainly be
a heated controversy ,on the point. It is necessary therefore to
qualify any statement of such a nature. It can be safely said
that the Australians who formed the Expeditionary Force which
took part in the War of 1914-1919 —men between the ages of
18 and 45 —were not, as a rule, badly addicted to the habit. Had
there been any facilities for playing while in rest billets, there
may possibly have been more exponents of the game. The fact
that there were not, and also that the young Australian generally
adopts a more vigorous form of sport, were the reasons why so
few expert players could be found to represent the Army of
Australia at golf.
The Sandy Lodge Golf Club at Northwood had kept open
house for Overseas Officers throughout the whole of the war
and demobilisation periods, and it was fitting that this club
should have fathered the big Active Service Tournament, which
took place on its links on April Bth, 9th, 10th, and nth, 1919.
The Competition was open to all branches of the Army, Navy,
Royal Air Force, and Mercantile Marine, as well as demobilised
officers and men, and members of the other Allied nations’ Ser-
vices who had served in any theatre of war, or a ship of war,
or of the Mercantile Marine.
The meeting was divided into a Championship Competition
and Handicap. It was thought at first that a very representative
team of good-class Australian golfers could be got together, but
the representation in this sport suffered along with others in
that a great number of first-class men who' would have been of
assistance were more anxious to return to Australia after their
long absence, than to stay and play in these games.
One other drawback was that the notice was short and, thus
early in the life of the Sports Section, there was considerable
difficultly in locating the best talent and having good players
made available when located.
The entry and performance in the circumstance was satis-
factory, and the courtesy of Mr. J. Francis Markes, the Secretary
of Sandy Lodge Club, was very much appreciated. This gentle


man had, through the war period, entertained a great number
of Australians at Sandy Lodge Club, particularly wounded men
•convalescing at a neighbouring hospital.
The following men were entered in the Championship : —Major
(. H. Brown, Lieut. E. J. Quirk, Lieut. C. H. Fawcett, Lance-
Corpl. F. A. Arthur, Pte. A. Murdock, Dvr. R. Murdock.
Four of these competitors w'ue eliminated early in the Com-
petition.
The representation was, after the first round, left to Lieul.
Eric J. Quirk, 24th Bn., and Lieut. C, H. Fawcett, 40th Bn.
In the qualifying round both these officers covered the course in
81 strokes, there being only three better scores among the 32
who qualified. These competitors then played off by match play,
and Lieut. Fawcett followed up his first success by beating Lieut.-
Commander F. R. Barry, of the Royal Navy, by two up and
one tb play. Lieut. Quirk was defeated by Lieut.-Col. H. M.
Ballinghall, British Army.
In the third round. Lieut. Fawcett went under to Capt. K.
Lister-Kaye by three up and two to play.
Capt. Lister-Kaye was one of the finalists, being beaten by
Lord Charles Hope. Beyond this the members of the A.I.F.
took little or no part in competitive golf in England.




Boxers and Wrestlers.
Standing: Pte. S. L. Chapman, Pte. J. R. Palmer, Sergt. W. Meeske, Pte. J. P. Smith, Sergt. C. H. Mullins, Trooper I. S. Lon-more,
Gunner L. W. Coghill, Corporal V. E. Plack, Pte. ,T. R. Warby.
Seated; Pte W. G. Kean Trooper T. C Watson. Sapper P. C. Young, Lieut. M. Smith, Capt. G. Coghill, M.C., Sapper J. C.
Pettybridge, Gnr. H. Cox, Sergt. A. W. Taylor, Corporal F. C. Hallam.
In Front: Pte. C. A. Peakes, Pte. R. Sellars, Trooper M. N. Steele.


CHAPTER V.
BOXING.
When the Australian, Boxing Team came to England from
France after the Abbeville Tournament in November, they en-
gaged in eliminatory trials with boxers from A.I.F. Depots in
the United Kingdom. The object of these trials was to get the
best possible team for representation of the A.I.F. at the British
Empire and American Services Boxing Tournament, which was
to be held at the Royal Albert Hall, London, on December nth
and 12th, 1918.
At about this time the epidemic of pneumonic influenza was
at its worst, and it was considered necessary to have a reserve
man in each of the eight divisions. The men went into training
at Norbury, on grounds and premises loaned by the London
County and Westminster and Parr’s Bank Athletic Club. The
club’s premises were very well appointed, and lacked none of the
essentials to thorough training. However, there were not more
than a couple of weeks in which to get the men ready, and the
best had to be done in the time. The Albert Hall Tournament
was promoted by the Imperial Services Boxing Association, under
the patronage of the King and a distinguished list of Presidents
and Vice-Presidents. The Australian representative on the Com-
mittee was Colonel W. W. Russell Watson, C. 8., C.M.G., V.D.
Lieut. R. O. Roxburgh was the A.I.F. representative among the
judges, and also managed the team at Norbury.
The A.I.F. Team, after many alterations, eventually appeared
as follows ;
Captain of Team.—Capt. C. R. Murphy.
Heavy Weight.—Corpl. R. G. Stephenson, D.C.M., 58th
Battalion.
Light Heavy W T eight. —Chief Petty Officer Monty Murton,
of H.M.A.S. “ Australia.”
Middle Weight.—Sergt. C. Godfrey, M.M. and bar, 15th
Battalion.
Welter Weight.—Pte. A. Tierney, 4th Battalion.
Light Weight.—Sergt. J. Miller, 4th Battalion.
Feather Weight.—Pte. C. A. Peakes, 31st Battalion
Bantam Weight.—Pte. A. Evans, A.S.C.
Fly Weight.—Pte. L, Aylett, 12th Battalion.


The net result of the Tournament was that the A.I.F. did not
win a single final, although they scored fairly well in the opening
bouts. They came out ahead of the other three Dominions on
the points allotted. The contesting teams, numbering nine,
were : —Royal Navy and Marines, Army, Royal Air Force, United
States Navy, United States Army, Australia, Canada, New Zea-
land, and South Africa.
In the Flyweight Divison, Pte. Aylett lost his first bout to
2nd Air Mechanic H. Groves (R.A.F.) after a close contest.
The bout went the full four rounds and Groves won on points.
The Bantam Weight representative was the well-known
Digger ” Evans, the hero of many' good fights in France.
He was compactly built, and boxed cleverly and severely. His
first bout was against Pte. J. Jones, of Canada.
Evans won with comparative ease. In the next round of the
contest he met the world’s champion, Sergt.-Instructor Jimmy
Wilde, of the British Army. At the end of the four rounds the
decision was given to Wilde on points, and that decision was
discussed for a very long time afterwards in Army circles. The
bout was perhaps the best of the tournament. The decision
went against Wilde in the final, when he met Seaman Pal Moore
of the U.S. Navy.
Pte. Peakes fought Sergt. J. Coles, of South Africa, in his
opening round in the Feather Weight Division and won on points.
In the next round he met Pte. Eddie Conlon, of the U.S. Army,
and midway through he received a heavy punch which greatly
distressed him. The referee stopped the bout and aw r arded it to
Conlon.
The Light Weight, Sergt. Miller, won his first bout against
Rifleman H. Gunn, of New Zealand, after an interesting battle.
He lost his next fight against Leading Seaman J. Smith, of the
Royal Navy, after opening well.
The Welter Weight, Pte. A. Tierney, won from Sergt. D.
Lawless, of New Zealand, after a rather poor display. In the
second bout 1 ierney was defeated by Sergt.-Instructor Johnny
Basham, the English Welter Weight Champion. Tierney had
had his eye cut in his first bout, and Basham played on this to
great advantage. However, Tierney made such a good show
that, whereas Basham scored 2 points for his win, the A.I.F.
man was awarded points for his lose.
Godfrey, the Middle Weight, was at one time a well-known
Australian boxer. He was drawn against Sergt.-Instructor W.
Fullerton, of the British Army. This was the last bout of the
evening, and Godfrey did almost as he liked with his opponent.
It was, therefore, a great surprise to the onlookers when Fuller-
ton was given the verdict. Godfrey was given a special medal.


Chief Petty Officer Murton, the Light Heavy Weight repre-
sentative, was well below the limit set for middle weights (n st.
6 lbs.). He had only been away from his ship four days when
called up to box. However, he gained the verdict over Sergt.
D. Boreham, of New Zealand, in his first encounter, after a
first-rate contest. Boreham was given an extra half-point for
his capital showing. In the next round Murton met Sergt. W.
Ring, of the Royal Marines, and both men fought every second.
There was little to choose between them, but the verdict went to
Ring and Murton got an extra half-point,
Sergt. Arthur Cripps was first selected as the Heavy Weight,
but Corpl. R. G. Stephenson took his place in order that he might
enter the Light Heavy Division. However, Cripps was pre-
vented by constant illness from taking any part in the show.
Stephenson won his first round on a forfeit from the New Zealand
Heavy Weight, Pte. Sid Fitzsimmon, and was drawn against
Sergt. J. Beckett, of the Royal Air Force. Beckett subsequently
became English Heavy Weight champion. Stephenson was very
nervous in the opening of the first round, but recovered slightly
towards the end of it. The bout was stopped by the referee in
the second round, and he awarded the fight to Beckett and gave
Stephenson an extra half-point.
When the points were counted it was found that the British
Army Team had won with 39. The United States Army was
second. The two Navies were next, and the Australians fifth,
well ahead of the other dominions, with zB| points. After the
tournament, the team was disbanded and the members returned
to duty.
The next meet of importance in England was again promoted
by the Imperial Services Boxing Association.
It was styled The Imperial Services Boxing Championships,
and was fixed for May 13th and 14th at the Northampton Insti-
tute, Clerkenwell, London. Australia was represented on the
Committee by Major S. A. Middleton, D. 5.0., who also officiated,
with Lieut. R. O. Roxburgh, on the Committee of judges and
referees. The element which contributed most to the non-success
of this tournament was lack of advertisement. From the point
of view of the boxing supplied, it was everything that could be
desired, and the entertainment was worthy of much bigger
attendances. The Honorary Secretary of the Imperial Services
Boxing Association was Colonel R. B. Campbell, D. 5.0., of
the Gordon Highlanders, an officer known throughout the whole
of the British and Dominion Armies as a wonderful exponent
of, and lecturer on, bayonet fighting and physical training.
In February, Captain Gordon Coghill, M.C., a well-known
New South Wales Boxer, began to organise a team in France
c


under the direction of Lieut.-Col. Massie. He collected ten men
there and brought them to England, where the team was com-
pleted, after a series of try-outs with boxers already in England-
The men went into training at Warwick Square, London, in the
middle of April, and representation of the A.I.F. in the tourna-
ment was made with the following entries :—■
Officers, Heavy Weight.—Capt. G. Coghill, M.C., 35th Bn.
Other ranks :
Heavy Weight.—Spr. H. Hardwick, 2nd Sig Coy.
Light Heavy. —Pte. D. A. Walker, 22nd Bn.
Middle Weight.—Pte. A. L. Pope, 10th A.S.C.
Welter Weight. —Dvr. R. J. Ramsay, 14th Bn.
Light Weight.—Tpr. T. C. Watson, 7th A.L.H.
Feather Weight.—Cpl. T. Godfrey, No. 1 Command Depot.
Bantam Weight.—Pte. A. Evans, A.S.C.
Fly Weight.—Pte. R. Sellars, 10th A.S.C.
On the first day, Capt. Coghill met Lieut.-Commander R. P.
Kingscote, of the Royal Navy, and knocked him out in the first
round. In the final, Capt. Goghill was pitted against Lieut.
J. T. Laing, 97th Infantry, Indian Army, formerly of the A.I.F.
Laing was sent down early in the first round, but boxed very
gamely right through, and was not far behind at the finish.
The verdict went to Coghill, on points.
The Fly Weight, Pte. Sellars, beat Seaman Patton, of the
Royal Navy, in his first bout, and met Sergt. Groves, of the
Royal Air Force, in the final. It was a lively contest, Sellars
gaining his advantage in the last round after the first and second
had been evenly divided. Sellars was given the verdict.
“ Digger ” Evans was again well to the fore among the
Bantams. He gained the decision over Gunner Moore (Canada)
in his first fight, beating him in every department of the game.
In the semi-final Evans met Pte. A. C. Hannam, of the Royal
Air Force. Hannam made an excellent showing, but was not
nearly so quick or experienced as the A.I.F. man. Evans won
on points. In the final his opponent was Pte. Mylne, of the
Royal Marines. Evans won comfortably.
Corpl. Godfrey, the Feather Weight, beat Pte. J. Sullivan
(South Africa) in his first encounter, but was beaten by C.S.M.
T. Evans, Army Gymnastic Staff, after a hard bout, Evans being
fitter, stronger, and more aggressive.
The Light Weight, Trooper T. C. Watson, was the runner-up
in his section. He beat Sergt. J. P. Stone, of the Royal Air
Force, in the first series, and vanquished Lance-Corpl.
Van Straaten (South Africa) in the semi-final. Watson’s oppo


nent in the final was Leading Signalman Smith, of the Royal
Navy. Smith had the longer reach, and made most of the run-
ning. He won a bright bout on points.
Driver Ramsay obtained a bye in the first round among the
welter weights, and was beaten by Pte. Housego, Royal Field
Artillery, in the semi-final. Housego’s superior speed, coupled
with his clean hitting, caused Ramsay’s undoing.
Pte. Pope also drew a bye in the first round of the Middle-
weight Section. He was beaten by Seaman Larby (Royal Navy)
in the semi-final, retiring in the third round after having taken
a good deal of punishment.
Yet another bye fell to the A.I.F. representative, Pte. D. A.
Walker, in the Light-Heavy-Weight Division. He met the same
fate in the semi-final as the other two who' had drawn byes. He
was beaten on points by Sergt. H. Rolph, of the Canadian Army
Gymnastic Staff. Rolph won rather easily.
The Australian representative among the heavy-weights was
Sapper H. Hardwick, who had come from Egypt for the inter-
theatre of war contests at Aldershot, and subsequently joined the
team at Warwick Square. He was a very well known New
South Wales amateur before the war, and joined the professional
ranks to fight the famous Les Darcy in Sydney. In his first
bout he opposed Gunner Copp, of the Royal Marines, and won
a popular victory after a hard tussle. In the final he met Sergt.
Clements, of Canada, and the decision was given against him.
The net result of the Australian part in these championships
was three firsts and two seconds from the nine entries.
The Prince of Wales was present at the finals, and distributed
the medals to the winners.
THE IDEAL SPORTSMAN.
At the end of April, 1919, boxing championships were held at
Aldershot, called the Inter-Theatre of War Tournament. For
this event men were brought from almost every part of the world
where British Forces were operating, but there were very few
Australians in the lists. Among those who came from the Army
in Egypt—a composite team of Australians and “ Tommies ” —-
was Sapper Harold Hardwick, and he won the heavy-weight
championship. There were about 400 competitors at this meet-
ing, and Brigadier-General H, A. Jones, of the Royal Army
Service Corps, presented a cup for the non-commissioned officer
or man who, on the votes of all competitors, approached most
closely the ideal sportsman. This cup was won by Harold Hard-
wick, and the incident was one of the most pleasing to Austra-
lians that happened during their long sojourn away from home.


Brigadier-General Jones, in presenting the cup, made a speech
which conveys a good idea of the distinction achieved by this
prince of sportsmen.
“ I decided to present a cup,” he said, ‘‘to the non-commis-
sioned officer or man among all the inter-theatre of war teams
who, in the opinion of the men themselves, was considered the
best sportsman.
“ The conditions drawn up by Colonel Campbell—no one knows
better what is required of a sportsman —are excellent. 1 wall
read them, because I would like the world to know what the
Army thinks a real, good sportsman should be. The conditions
were :
“ (i) He must play the game for the sake of the game.
“ (2) He must, play for his side, and not for himself.
“ (3) He must be a good loser and a good winner. He must
be modest in victory and generous in defeat.
“ (4) He must accept all decisions in a proper spirit.
“ (5) He must be chivalrous towards a defeated opponent.
“ (6) He must be unselfish, and always ready to help others
in every possible w 7 ay to become proficient in sport.
“ (7) He must be a cheerful comrade.
“ It has not been an easy matter among so many sportsmen
to decide who was the best of the lot; but there is one man who
has been chosen by ballot as best fulfilling the drastic conditions
laid down. His own comrades have voted, and they have decided
that the cup is to be presented to Sapper H. Hardwick, of the
Egyptian Forces.” There was a wonderful demonstration as
the winner went up to receive his trophy.
No more competitive boxing on a large scale was done by the
A.I.F. in England, although there were several minor bouts la
which A.I.F. men figured. This, however, was not under the
aegis of the Sports Control Board.
The next big attraction was the Inter-Allied meet in Paris,
which opened on June 22nd. The A.I.F. Team was kept in
training for this event. The games are dealt with in another
chapter, but very few of the men who figured in the Albert Hall
and Imperial Services Championships remained to take part in
the boxing events.
The Sub-Committee which controlled this Section consisted of
Capt. G. Coghill, M.C., Sergt. C. H. (“ Duke ”) Mullins, Lieut-
H. W. Checketf, and Lieut. M. Smith.




A.I.F. Tennis Team.
Standing: R. V. Thomas, Gerald Patterson (World’s Champion), R. Lycett.
Seated: S. N. Doust, Norman Brookes, P. O’Hara-Wood.


CHAPTER VI.
TENNIS.
Never was there such a triumphal march as that of the Austra-
lian tennis players through the big meetings in England in 1919.
Once they had settled down to the conditions they simply swept
all before them, and finished off the season by winning almost
every championship worth having. The one notable exception
was the Covered Courts Championship of England in April, in
which Australia took second place. In February, 1919, the
Sports Control Board set about the formation of an Australian
Tennis Team. There were some well-known players serving with
the A.1.F., and there were also some Australians serving with
the British Expeditionary Force whose skill with their racquets
had brought them to' the fore-front of the game. These men
were approached with a view to their joining the A.I.F. Team,
and there was never any hesitation in their acceptance. The early
organisation was done mainly by S. N. Doust, the well-known
New South Wales and Australian International player, who
had been resident in England for some years before the war, and
A. B. Jones, equally well-known as an International who served
with the Australian Field Artillery. A little later on, most of
the hack work was done by R. Lycett, the Australian Doubles
Champion.
A. B. Jones discovered very early in the season that he was
not in a fit state of health to go on with the game. He had
suffered from shell-shock and also had a bad bout of influenza,
which laid him aside. He had, perforce, to return home, being-
advised that the long sea voyage would probably be the best
thing for him at that stage. This loss to' the Australian repre-
sentation was a serious one, but it was counter-balanced by the
knowledge that the world’s champion, Norman E. Brookes, who
had served with the A.I.F. in Egypt, intended coming to Eng-
land to defend his title. He accepted the Board’s invitation to
play under its auspices, and was a strong member of what was
destined to become the world’s strongest tennis team.
The manner in which sport took possession of the United
Kingdom during the spring and summer of 1919 was remark-
able. The reasons were not far to' seek. The big factor was
undoubtedly the reaction after over four years of war and the


complete suspension of championship gatherings for four seasons.
Then, again, men had gone into the Army and had had oppor-
tunities of playing games which, had there been no war, they
would probably have never had a chance of playing. The latter
end of May and almost the whole of June provided delightful
weather. But these factors hardly account for the great “boom”
which the game of law T n tennis had during this season. It may
have been that the newspapers gave publicity to the delights of
the game in order to encourage more people to take it up to
restore the national prestige. Such headings as “ England’s
Lawn Tennis Slump,” “ Wimbledon Taken Over by Invaders,”
“ Our Lawn Tennis Prestige,” “ Colonial Domination, “ What
of the Old Country? ” “ Wonder-child of Australia Beats our
Best,” “ Little Talent to Hold Visiting Players,” showed clearly
that it was recognised that if England was to keep her place
among the leading nations at this splendid game, she must bestir
herself and look round for promising youngsters. There was a
pervading note of distress regarding the ages of the leading
English playeis at this time, and many of the newspapers com-
menced the season by discussing the prospects of vigorous youth
against wily old age and experience. The fact that the overseas
players were in some instances meeting men of double their own
aged was made a good deal of. All this newspaper advertisement
of lawn tennis had the effect of giving the game a wonderful
fillip and by the end of the season the effect was to be seen all
over the country. New courts were laid down and many new
clubs sprang into existence. Although the popularity of cricket
did not wane to any appreciable extent, there was a clamour for
more tennis at the public schools, and sporting writers entered
into controversy regarding the merits of the two games and the
reasons for Britain’s loss of prestige.
The first tennis in which the A.I.F. was interested after the
Armistice was an Inter-allied Military Tournament held at the
Tennis Club de Paris at Auteuil in December, igxß. Eighty
soldiers of the Allied Armies took part, being drawn from Eng-
lish, Australian, French, American, and Portuguese Armies. The
records of the tournament did not come to England until some
weeks after the event had been completed, and they were not
published in any great detail. It appears that the Australians
who took part in the singles were Capt. Docker, Major Whiting,
and Major R. W. Heath. The last-named went out in the second
round, retiring after he and his opponent, Lieut. A. Gerbault
(France) had each won a set. Capt. Docker beat Lieut. Le Bes-
nerais (France) 6 —2, 4 —6, B—6, but was beaten in the third
round by Lieut. F. L. Riseley (England) 6 —o, 6—l. Major
Whiting won his match in the second round againsj Lieut. J. S.
Brown, jun, (U.S.A.) 6—3, 6 —3, but was beaten in the next


round by Lieut. Max Decugis (France) 5 —7, 6—l, 6—2. The
final was won by Lieut. Andre Gobert (France) from Lieut.
Decugis 6—4, 2 —l (retired). The Australian pairs—Heath and
Lycett and A. B. Jones and E. B. Yencken—played in the
doubles. Heath and Lycett won the final from Gobert and Aymee
(France) 6— 2, 10 —8.
During the latter end of February, 1919, the Australian tennis
forces were marshalled in England by Messrs. Doust, Jones, and
Lycett. The big opening event of the English season was the
Covered Courts Championship meeting at Queen’s Club, London,
billed to commence on April 7th, and if entries were to be made
for this it would be necessary for the team to get in some practice
on the wooden surfaces of which they knew so little.
The team consisted of S. N. Doust, R. W. Heath, G. L.
Patterson, R. V. Thomas, P. O’Hara Wood, A. B. Jones, and
R. Lycett. It is not necessary to go lengthily into the tennis
performances of these players prior to the 1919 season. Doust
was well-known in England, America, and Australia. He was
in England prior to the war, and served with the British Forces.
Heath was a Major in the Flying Corps, and had played inter-
national (Davis Cup) and inter-state tennis in Victoria. Thomas
was one of the best-known South Australians. Patterson was
a practically unknown quantity in England at the commencement
of the season, but had come to the front in Melbourne before the
war called him away. O’Hara Wood was a Victorian inter-
state representative. Jones, of New South Wales, had played inter-
state and international tennis, and Lycett, of Victoria, was an
inter-state representative for several seasons. Just prior to the
Beckenham Tournament in June, the team was strengthened by
the arrival from Australia of Norman E. Brookes, Singles Cham-
pion of the World, and called “ The Wizard.”
In the Covered Courts Championships, Doust, Heath, Patter-
son, Thomas, and O’Hara Wood played in both singles and
doubles, Jones and Lycett confining their entries to the doubles.
The singles’ representatives all went through the first and second
rounds. In the third round Doust and Heath were drawn against
one another, and the former won 6 —4, 7 —5, 6—2. Patterson
easily beat E. D. Yencken. Thomas was beaten by A. E.
Beamish (2 —6, 7 —5, 7 —5, 11 —9), and Dodd, of South Africa,
beat O’Hara Wood 6—4, 12 —10, 7 —5. The elimination of
Doust occurred in the fourth round, where he was beaten by the
American, Watson Washburn, by 2 —6, 7 —5, I—6,1 —6, 6—3, 6—o.
Patterson was the only one of the team who survived, beating
Hon. F. M. B. Fisher by 7 —5, 6—2, 6—3.
In the next round (semi-final) Patterson beat Beamish 6— 2,
6—6— 3, and qualified for the final. His opponent was P. M.
Davson, who beat Washburn 6—o, 6— 3, 4—6, 7 —5.


The final of this event was a great match. Patterson’s re-
markable service had taken him through to the semi-final stage
without a great deal of trouble. He made the ball rise from the
wooden surface of the court with alarming speed, and none of
his opponents had been able to do very much with it. Davson
was a master of tactics and possessed a knowledge of wooden
courts second to none of the players of the year. He is an
architect by profession, and supervised the laying of the courts
at Queen’s Club. Patterson’s experience of these courts was
confined to a couple of weeks’ practice, but he was aided by great
vigour and strength and his tremendously powerful hitting.
Patterson started off well by winning the first four games, and
Colonial hopes soared high ; but soon after this Davson mastered
his opponent’s service in a commendably shrewd fashion. He
met the ball as close to the floor as possible, with the face of his
racquet almost parallel with the floor. By this means, and keep-
ing a stiff arm, he was enabled not only to return the service, but
to get pace on the return, and he thereafter stood up to the
Australian’s shots with the utmost confidence. Following his
usual procedure of rushing to the net after his service, Patterson
found himself passed at the side, or the ball placed at his feet
in such fashion that he was caught at what was at that time his
weakest point. His ground strokes had not been properly deve-
loped. He made good profit from anything that came to him
in the air, and was easily superior in volleying; but the English-
man saw to it that he did not get many opportunities in that
direction. Davson won the match in three sets (8 —6, 6—3,
6—2). Davson subsequently beat the holder of the Covered
Courts Championship (M. J. G. Ritchie) in the challenge round
by 6— 2, 6 —3, B—6.
In the Doubles Championship the pairing was Doust—Jones,
Lycett—Heath, Patterson—Thomas. O’Hara Wood partnered
an Englishman, G. T. C. Watt. They all won their matches in
the first round. Patterson and Thomas were beaten in the next
round by Hon. F. M. B. Fisher (N.Z.) and Major A. H. Lowe.
The scores were 6—2, 2 —6, 7 —5, 7 —5, 11 —9. Thomas was
rather off his game on this occasion, but Fisher played excellent
tennis and deserved most of the credit for the victory. O’Hara
Wood and Watt beat the brothers Yencken. In the third round
Lycett and Heath were drawn against Doust and Jones. Jones
was off his game, and the former pair won B—6, 6— 4, 6 —2. In
the semi-final Lycett and Heath beat O’Hara Wood and Watt
comfortably by 6 —o, 6— 1, 7 —5. Lycett and Heath then met H.
Portlock and W. A. Ingram in the final, and, in the words of
a well-known sporting journal, the latter were “ smothered be-
neath an avalanche of smashes, drives, and volleys.” The score
was 6— 2, 6—o, 6—o, and the same newspaper pertinently re


marked, “ If Lycett is not the best doubles player in flannels
to-day, it would be interesting to know who is.” In the chal-
lenge round Lycett and Heath beat Davson and Mavrogordato
6—4, 7 —5, 4 —6, 6—4, and won the championship.
In the mixed doubles the Australians were partnered by some
of the best lady players, the pairing being as follows : Lycett and
Miss E. Ryan (California), Doust and Mrs. McNair, Patterson
and Mrs. Satterthwaite, Jones and Mrs. O’Neill. Doust and
Mrs. McNair weie beaten in the first round by Capt. W. G.
Ireland and Mrs. H. Edgington by 6 —2, 10 —8. The others
won. Lycett and Miss Ryan beat Jones and Mrs. O’Neill in the
next draw by G— 1, 6—4. Davson and Mrs. Lambert Chambers
beat Patterson and Mrs. Sattherthwaite in the semi-final by 7 —5,
I—6,1 —6, 6—4. The final between Davson and Mrs. Lambert
Chambers and Lycett and Miss Ryan resulted in an easy win for
the latter pair (6 — 2, 6—-I). The challenge round against the
holders, E. Gwynne Evans and Miss' E. D. Holman, left the
challengers with the title after a one-sided game by 6—l, 6— 3.
The next engagement of the team was at the Open Tournament
at Roehampton, which lasted from April 19 to 28. Patterson,
Thomas, and O’Hara Wood were the representatives in the
singles, and the first-named won the final. His victims were
W. D. Urmick (6 —3, 6—l), H. J. Gilbert (6 —1, B—6), L. Ray-
mond (7 —5, B—6), Radcliffe (6 —2, 6—2), M. J. G. Ritchie (6 —3,
■6—3), and G. H. Dodd, of South Africa, in the final (6 —3, 7 —5,
•6 — 2).
In the final of the Men’s Doubles, Patterson and O’Hara Wood
beat Hon. F. M. B. Fisher and Lycett 6 —1, 6 —l. In the final
■of the Mixed Doubles, Patterson and Mrs. Satterthwaite were
the runners-up, being beaten by Ritchie and Mrs. Larcombe 3 —6,
7—5, B—6.
A match was played by the A.I.F. Team against the Purley
Bury Club at Purley on May 3rd, and won by the visitors by 8
rubbers to 1. The Australians were Heath, O’Hara Wood,
Patterson, Thomas, Doust, and a gentleman who preferred to
hide his identity under the name of “A. Dawson.” The results
were ; Heath and O’Hara Wood beat W. A. Ingram and F.
Wallers 7 —5, 6—3, beat M. R. L. White and P. J. Oakley 7 —5,
6—t , beat A. D. Prebble and Hon. F, M. B, Fisher 6—4, 6—2.
Patterson and Thomas beat White and Oakley 6—3, 6— 2,
beat Prebble and Fisher 7—5, 6— 1, beat Ingram and Wallers
6—2, 6 —4.
Doust and “ Dawson ” beat Prebble and Fisher 5 —7, 6 —3,
6— 3, beat Ingram and Wallers 7 —5, 6 —3, lost to White and
Oakley 3—6, 5—7.
It was at this time that A. B. Jones became too ill to play
any further, and towards the end of May he left for home.


Surrey County has always been a stronghold of lawn tennis
in England, and the match against the Australian Team, set down
for May 14th at Surbiton, aroused a good deal of interest. The
result was that the Australians did not lose a single rubber and
lost only one set. Scores :
Heath and Lycett beat R. J. McNair and G. T. C. Watt 6 2,
6— 4, beat M. J. G. Ritchie and F. V. Kirk 7 —5, 6— 3, beat
M. R. L. White and P. J. Oakley 3 —6, 6 — 3, 6 —4.
Patterson and Thomas beat Ritchie and Kirk 10 8, 6 1,
beat McNair and Watt 6— 2, 6—2, beat White and Oakley 6— 2,
6—2.
Doust and O’Hara Wood beat Ritchie and Kirk 6— 1, 9 —7,
beat White and Oakley 6—4, 6 —3, beat McNair and Watt 6—l,
6— 3-
The next victims of this powerful team were the Cambridge
University four. The match was played at Cambridge on May
17th, and Australia won by 3 matches to 1. The feature of the
day s play was a splendid game by Max Woosnam and Capt.
C. N. Thompson against Doust and O’Hara Wood. This went
the full five sets, and the Cambridge men won after a tremendous
uphill battle. Scores :
Thompson and Woosnam lost to Patterson and Thomas 4 — 6 y
3 6, 4 —6, beat Doust and O’Hara Wood 2 —6, 4 —6, 10—8.
6—3, 6— 4.
Major A. F. Yencken and E. D. Yencken lost to Doust and
O’Hara Wood 0 -6, o —6, I—6, lost to Patterson and Thomas
2—6, I—6, 5—7.
A match against Oxford University was set down for May
25th,, but owing to the departure of the A.I.F. Team for the
Continent it was cancelled.
The Surrey Championships at Surbiton next engaged the atten-
tion of the Australian contingent. . 1 his tournament commenced
on May 19th and lasted until the 24th. It was the first big event
of the year on grass courts, and as the Australian invaders were
known to have done the greater part of their play on lawns, they
were expected to do great things at this meeting. They did not
disappoint the crowds who came to see the play. Patterson,
Doust, Thomas, Heath, and O’Hara Wood played in the singles,,
and all survived the first, second, and third rounds.
In the fourth draw some of them had necessarily to go under
at the hands of other members of the team. Heath beat Thomas
6 —4> 6 —l, and Doust overcame O’Hara Wood B—6,8 —6, 3 —6, 6—3.
Patterson came out at the expense of M. J. G. Ritchie, whom he
defeated by two straight sets, 6— 3, 6—3. In the semi-final"
H. R. Roper-Barrett beat Heath 4—6, 7—5, 6—l, and Patterson
beat Doust 6—3, 6—4. The final was a complete and conclusive
victory for Patterson, the score being & —2, 6—3, 6—2. Barrett’s


age (46) was just double that of his opponent. There was a
very wide disparity between the services of the two, and Barrett
could never at any time do much against the smashing strokes
of Patterson.
The Surrey Championship had been held by Norman Brookes,
but he was not there to defend it, and Patterson carried it off
back to the same place, ft did not matter very much so long as.
the honour was kept “ in the family.”
In doubles the partners were Doust and O’Hara Wood, Pat-
terson and Thomas, Lycett and Heath. They all got through the
first and second rounds without trouble. In the third round Pat-
terson and Thomas beat O’Hara Wood and Doust 6 —3, 7 9,
6—2. Heath and Lycett beat Ritchie and Roper-Barrett 4—6,
6 —l ( 7 —5. The final then became an all-Australian affair, and
Patterson and Thomas beat Lycett and Heath 6 —4, 6—2. The
latter pair hardly came up to expectations in this event.
The triple event was supplied by the result of the Mixed
Doubles. All the Australians taking part came through to the
fourth round, where Lycett and Mrs. Satterthwaite scratched in
favour of O’Hara Wood and Mrs. “A. N. Other.” The final
was played between Doust and Mrs. McNair and Patterson and
Mrs. Parton, and the former pair won rather easily by 6—3, 6— 2,
The net result of this tournament was that the Australian team
annexed all the open events.
Their next engagement was a big inter-Allied tournament pro-
moted by the American Army Authorities in Paris. This com-
menced on May 26th, and was a cosmopolitan affair. The com-
petitors were ddawn from the Armies of America, Australia,
France, Servia, Roumania, Canada, and Czecho-Slovakia. There
were competitions for singles and doubles and an inter-Army
teams match. The tournament was productive of some surprises,
notably the defeat of Patterson by both O’Hara Wood and
Gobert. The courts were hard surfaced. In the first day’s play
Lycett, who came out in singles for the first time in the season,
beat Josef Kozeluh (Czecho-Slovak) by 7 —5, I—6,1 —6, 3 —6, n —9,
6 —3. Patterson beat Sweetser (U.S.A.) 6— 2, 7 5, 2—6, 7 5*
O’Hara Wood beat Steavens (U.S.A.) 2 —6, 6—4, 6 —2, 6 1.
Mishu (Roumania) beat Thomas 6—3, 7 —5, 6—B, 6—l. In the
second round Breck (U.S.A.) defeated Lycett 6 1, 6 3, 8 10,
3 —6, 6—3. Patterson won from Zemla (Czecho-Slovak) I—s,1 —5,
6 6—2, 6—2. O’Hara Wood defeated Mathey (U.S.A.)
6—3' 6—4/6—3. In the third round O’Hara Wood and Patterson,
the two remaining Australians, had the bad luck to be drawn
against one another. The match went the full five sets and was a
magnificent contest. O’Hara Wood displayed great versatility and
coolness, and won 6—4, 7 —9, 6— 2, 2 —6, 7 —5. The semi-final
round saw Gobert (France) defeat Washburn (U.S.A.) by 6— 2,


6—3, 4—6, 6—2, and O’Hara Wood beat Samazeuilh (France)
6—2, B—6. The final between Wood and Gobert found
the Frenchman right at the top of his form. He had one of those
winning days,” and could make no mistakes. O’Hara Wood
lost his volleying accuracy, found the net too often, and was
repeatedly passed in masterly fashion when he came to the net
Gobert won easily (6 —2, 6—2, 6 1).
In Doubles, O Hara Wood and Lycett commenced by beating
the brothers Kozeluh, of Czecho-Slovakia, 5—7, 6—3, 3—6, 6—4
6 2. Patterson and Thomas won from Stern and' LeGca' (Rou-
ma,miy 6 T‘ I ! n 6 ~' 1 * & ~ l ‘ Then L y cet t and Wood beat Mishu
and Eremie (Roumama) 6—4, 6—l, 6—3. Patterson and Thomas
went under in their next encounter to the American pair Wash-
burn and Mathey, who won after five sets by 3 —6, 64,4 6,
l2 ~ lo ‘ The final between the Americans and Lycett and
L> Hara Wood ran to four sets, and was productive of some fine
volleying. Lycett was at all times sure and steady and Wood
fitted into the picture admirably. Washburn and Mathey were
defeated by 6—l, 4—6, 6—l, 6—3, and the Inter-allied Armies
troubles Championship came to Australia,
Ihe team matches were played under Davis Cup Rules—two
singles players and one doubles pair. Each singles player played
both singles players of the opposing teams. There were seven
•entries. On the first day France beat Roumania, Australia beat
•Serbia by default, and Czecho-Slovakia beat Belgium. The
mermans drew the bye. In the second round, the Americans
beat the Czechoslovaks and the Australians beat the Frenchmen
In the latter match O’Hara Wood and Lycett beat Gobert and
ccugis 26, 2 6, 6 3, IO —8, 6—4 —a very great match.
It was a triumph of the game of “ up to the net and smash ” as
opposed to the back-line game. In singles, Gobert showed that
his first defeat of O’Hara Wood was not a “ fluke ” by beating
hun 6 4, 6—3, 6—2. Patterson beat Samazeuilh 2—6, 6—3
4 1 5—7. 6 —2. O’Hara Wood beat Samazeuilh 6— 2, 6—4’
1 2 > aad the wonderful Gobert was again right at the top of his
form when he met Patterson. The match was the most thrilling
of the series. Patterson in the fourth set was within two points
of taking the match, but Gobert played more steadily and cap-
tured the set at 7—5 and eventually won the match. The score
was 6—4, I—6, 5—7, 7 5, 6—4. Australia won the right to
meet America in the final, having beaten France by 3 matches
to 2. J 0
There was no dotibt after the first day’s play that Australia
would carry off the honours, for both the American representa-
Lves were beaten in the singles. Patterson had a hard match
with Washburn, with both men at their best, the result being in
doubt until the final winning stroke. The result in Patterson’s


favour was 6—i, 4 —6, 6—l, 4 —6, 7 —5. O’Hara Wood, after
losing- the first set at love, beat Mathey o —6, 8—6 t 6 —o, 6—4.
In the first doubles match, O’Hara Wood and Lycett beat Wash-
burn and Mathey easily 6 —4> 6 —1, 6 —2. It was not necessary,
therefore, to play the remaining two singles, the Australians
having won the necessary three matches out of five and gained
the Allied Armies Championship.
The individual events at this tournament were played at the
Etat Racing Club’s Courts, and the teams’ matches at the Stade
Francais, St. Cloud.
While the Paris events were on, Doust took part in the
Northern Tournament at Manchester, but retired in favour of
Mavrogordato in the third game, when the score was (Mavro-
gordato) 5 —7, 6 —4, 6 —4, 10 —12.
On June 4th Norman Brookes arrived in England from Aus-
tralia, heralded by a blaze of newspaper limelight, and settled
down to steady practice. He joined the A.I.F. learn, and started
in competitive tennis at the Kent Championships at Beckenham.
These were played on grass, and lasted from June 9th to 15th,
and Brookes played only in the doubles, where he was partnered
by Patterson. Lycett, O’Hara Wood, Heath, and Thomas also
entered, but no part was taken in the singles by any of the team.
The arrival of Brookes necessitated a re-shuffle of the pairings.
Ur. M. Gregg, who was to have been one of the team from its
inception, but was laid aside by illness, partnered Doust. Thomas
paired whth O’Hara Wood, Lycett with Heath, and Patterson
with Brookes. Doust and Gregg succumbed to the attack of
O’Hara Wood and Thomas in the first round (6 —3, 6 —4), O’Hara
Wood and Thomas in turn fell to the racquets of Brookes and
Patterson (6—3, 6—3), after the latter pair had disposed of Lycett
and Heath by 7 —5, 6—l. In the final Brookes and Patterson
won from W. L. Clements and Sir G. A. Thomas easily by 6—2,
5 T . The Mixed Doubles narrowed down to an affair in which
Australians battled against one another. Thomas and Miss Ryan
won from Doust and Mrs. “ R. James.”
The Loudon Championships commenced at Queen’s Club on
June 16th and lasted until June 22nd. Heath, O’Hara Wood,
and Thomas played in the singles. Heath was beaten in the third
round by Ritchie 6 —2, I—6,1 —6, 6 —4, 1 6 —o, while Thomas went
under at the same stage to> F. R. Crawford, of the Indian Police,
after a great struggle. The score in favour of Crawford w r as
3 6 t 2 6, 6 r, 10 — 8, 6 — o. Crawford had Thomas very ex-
hausted in’the last set, the latter being unable to get up to the
net, and the game, being deprived of Thomas’s volleying, resolved
itself into a base-line duel, which Crawford won. O’Hara Wood
was the sole representative of Australia left in, and he eventually
won the event. His victims in the respective rounds were ; Rev.


A. P. Sheppard (6—i, 6—i, 6—o), Capt. J. S. Cannon (6-i,
I > 6 3)» D. Mathey (6—i, 6—o, 6—3), Hon. F. M. B. Fisher
2 . 6 3, 6—o), O. G. N. Turnbull (6- —3, 3 —6, 7—c 6 1)
N. Mishu (2 6, 6—3, 4 —6, 6—3, B—6), and in the final, l!
Raymond of South Africa, 6—4, 6—o, 2—6, 7—5.
Ihe Doubles Final was narrowed down to Brookes and
Patterson against C. E. L. Lyle, M.P., and W. A. Ingram, and
they divided. The finals were played on a Sunday, owing to the
large entry and the rain having caused more than the week to
be taken up by eliminations. The mixed doubles final was be-
tween Thomas and Mrs. Larcombe and Doust and Mrs. “James,”
the former pair winning by 2 —6, 6—2, 8 6.
ALL ENGLAND CHAMPIONSHIPS.
Perhaps the greatest event of the tennis world—certainly the
greatest of British Empire tennis—is the annual fixture at Wim-
bledon. It attracts players from all corners of the globe. It is
their Mecca. The winners there can usually lay claim to the
titles of World’s Champions, for nobody would dare to show up
on those perfectly-kept courts who was not in the front rank of
exponents of the game. In 1919 the tournament began on June
23rd and ended on July 7th. There were 128 entries for the
Singles Championship, held by Norman Brookes, who had not
been called upon to defend it since he won it last in 1914. Pat-
terson, Doust, O’Hara Wood, Heath, and Thomas were the
A.I.F. men in the singles. Heath had a walk-over in the first
round, 1 atterson beat C. J. Gilbert 6 —o, 6—4, 6—o, Doust beat
G. W. Chesterman 6—o, 6—2, 6—l, O’Hara Wood beat Sir
ti. A. Thomas 6 1, 6—B, 6 —4, 5 —7, 6—3, and Thomas beat
J. C. Masterman 6—4, 2 —6, 6—3, 6—B, 9^-7.
Second Round : Patterson beat Roper-Barrett 7 —5, 62,7 3,
Heath beat Max Woosnam 6—4, 6—3, 7—5, O’Hara Wood beat
F- Walker 6-—i, 6-—o, 6— 2, R. V. Thomas beat C. J. Giitfin
(U.S.) 57, 2 —6, 6 —4, 7 —5, 7 —5, Doust beat F. L. Riseley
I —9 —7, 6—B, 6 —4, & —l.
Third Round : Patterson beat Mavrogordato 6—o, 63,7 5,
O’Hara Wood beat G. H. Dodd 5—7, B—6, 6—4, 6-1, Thomas
beat C. N. Thompson 6—2, B—6, 6—2, Heath beat B. I. C,
Norton 5 7, 3 —6, 6 —l, 6—4, 6— 2, Doust beat E. G. Bisseker
6 4) 6—l, 7—5-
Fourth Round : Patterson beat Doust 6— 2, 6 —o, 6— 2, Gobert
beat Heath 3 6, 6 4, 6—4, 6—l, O’Hara Wood beat Wash-
burn 12 14, 6—3, 6—4, 4 —6, 6— 3, Thomas beat W. Davis
2 6, 7 5) 7 5* 6 — 2.
Fifth Round; Patterson beat Gobert 10 —8, 6— 3, 6—2, Lieut.-
Col. A. R. F. Kingscote beat O.Hara Wood 6-A4, 3 —6, 63,
I—6,1 —6, 6—4, C. Garland beat R. V. Thomas 6—4, 6—o, 6-^-1.


Semi-final : Patterson beat M. J. G. Ritchie 6—i, 7 —5, I—6,1 —6,
6—3, Kingscote beat Garland 6 —l, 6 —4, 2 —6, 5 —7, 6—4.
The final was played between Patterson and Kingscote on July
3rd. In this match Patterson showed that, in addition to his
wonderful power of stroke, he could control his game in such a
fashion that the “ steadiness ” of an opponent was met with a
counter-irritant. He played so very effectively that he accounted
for King-scote in straight sets in fifty minutes. At times Kings-
cote showed that it was possible to return the awe-inspiring ser-
vice of his opponent with good effect. In lact, he captured three
games from it. But his brilliance in this respect was patchy,
and the service of the Australian was always the dominating
factor. He made full use of all openings presented to him,
brought off drives with a remarkable amount of top-spin, and
smashed gaily everything that presented an opportunity. Kings-
cote was quite outplayed by this tornado’ of hard hitting, and the
score against him was 6 —2, 6—l, 6—3. Patterson was right at
his best in this game, and quite cut-classed the Englishman.
By his win in the final, Patterson qualified to meet Norman
Brookes in the challenge round. This match was played on July
7th, and as Brookes had not shown his singles form to the public
prior to this match, everybody was in the dark as to how he was
likely to shape. The holder of the championship was rather
easily beaten, and experts who saw him in 1914 said that his
play on this occasion was much below that which he exhibited
then. The question of personality dominating a game of tennis
has been widely discussed at different times, and the personality
of Brookes has more than once been held up as an example. On
this occasion, however, it counted for nothing. Whether the
youth of Patterson was such as to counter any hypnotic effect,
or whether Brookes had lost the power which some writers would
have us believe that he once possessed, are problems for those
who wish to unravel them. The fact remains that Patterson,
at the zenith of his form, won the match from Brookes, who
seemed, on this day, to have lost a lot of his prowess. The
score (6 —3, 7 —5, 6 —2) is a fair reflex of the play.
Now to chronicle the Australian success in the Doubles.
First Round : Lycett and Heath beat C. N. Thompson and
Max Woosnam 7 —9, 6—2, B—6,8 —6, 6—4, Patterson and Brookes
beat G. J. Schemler and E. G. de Seriere 6— 1, 6—2, 6 1.
Thomas and O’Hara Wood beat Kingscote and A. D. Prebbie
6 —2, 6— 2, 6 —3.
Second Round: Brookes and Patterson beat F. T. Stowe and
Ipl. A. Davis 6—2, 6 —1, 6 —1, Thomas and O’Hara Wood beat
Washburn and Mathey 6—2, 6 —4, 6— 1, Lycett and Heath beat
H. Aitken and G. H. Dodd B—6,8 —6, 3 —6, 6—l, 3 —6, 6 —2.


Third Round : Brookes and Patterson beat N. Mishu and A-
j , V U^! ey A 6 ~ 1 ’ 6 ~°’ 7~5> Lycett and Heath beat C. E. L.
w 6 n ai l d V A Ingram 6 4, 7—5. 6-2, Thomas and O’Hara
Wood beat Davson and Mavrcgordato 2—6, 7 —5, 36,6 4,
9 7* '
Fourth Round : Lycett and Heath beat C. Garland and T. S.
Cannon 6— 1, 7—5, 6—4, Thomas and O’Hara Wood beat C [
Griffin and W. Davis 7 — s> 6—3, 4—6, 6—3, Brookes and Pat-
terson beat C. P. Dixon and F. L. Riseley 6 —3, 6—2, 6—l.
Semi-final : Lycett and Heath beat Hon. F, M. B. Fisher and
J* Ritchie 12 io. B—6, 6—3, Thomas and O’Hara Wood
beat Brookes and Patterson 6—4, 6—4, 3—6, 6—3. The result
ot the latter match came as a surprise to many people, but it
was easier to understand when it was remembered that O’Hara
Wood knew Patterson’s game inside out, and also that the losing
pair were not at this time an ideal doubles combination.
The Final became an all-Australian event, and, having lost its
international flavour, did not draw the crowd. It was a splendid
game and, because O’Hara Wood and Thomas had beaten the
powerful Brookes-Patterson side, they were the popular fancy,
they won but the game only proved that Lycett was the finest
doubles player of the season. The score, in favour of O’Hara
Wood and Thomas, was 6—4, 6— 2, 4—6, 62.
Mixed Doubles provided further triumphs. Results in which
the A.l.h. Team was interested were:
First Round: Lycett and Miss Ryan and O’Hara Wood and
Mrs. Craddock had byes, Doust and Mrs. McNair beat C. G. M.
umer and Mrs. Plumer 6—o, 7 —5, Thomas and Mrs. Larcombe
beat W. A. Ingram and Miss E«. D. Holman 6—3, 6—2.
Second Round : Lycett and Miss Ryan beat Mathey and Mrs.
Wolf son 6 1 6—4, O’Hara Wood and Mrs. Craddock beat
Silver and Mrs. Silver 6—l, 6—2,’ Doust and Mrs. McNair
beat Dudley and Miss Tighe b-o, 6—l, Thomas and Mrs. Lar-
combe beat Donisthorpe and Miss Ward 6—2, 6 1.
Third Round: Lycett and Miss Ryan beat Thompson and
Mrs. Cobb 6—4, 3—6, 6—3, O’Hara Wood and Mrs. Craddock
beat Norton and Miss Dransfield 6-4, b- 3 , Thomas and Mrs
Larcombe beat Doust and Mrs. McNair 6—l, 6—l.
Fourth Round : Lycett and Miss Ryan beat W. H. Laurentz
and Mile. Lenglen 2—6, 6 —4, 6— 2, Thomas and Mrs. Larcombe
beat O Hara Wood and Mrs. Craddock 7 —5, 6 —-3.
Fifth Round ; Lycett and Miss Ryan beat Thomas and Mrs.
Larcombe 6—2, 6—3, A. D. Prebble and Mrs. Lambert Chambers
beat M. Decugis and Miss Addison 6—r, 6 o.
Final : Lycett and Miss Ryan beat Prebble and Mrs. Lambert
Chambers 6—o, 6—o.


As a result of the tournament not a single championship title
from this meeting remained in England. Australia took the
Men’s Singles and Doubles. Miss Ryan, who partnered Lycett
in Mixed Doubles, came from California. The Ladies’ Singles
Championship was won by Mile. Suzanne Lenglen, of France,
and Mile. Lenglen and Miss Ryan took the Ladies’ Doubles
Championship.
After Wimbledon, tennis in England went merrily along for
a couple of months, and interest never flagged. The Australians
received an invitation to send a team to the United States to
take part in the Singles and Doubles Championship there, and
the invitation was accepted. Brookes, Patterson, Lycett, and
Thomas made the trip and left at the end of July for New York.
On August 19th a cablegram was received stating that Brookes
and Patterson had won the Doubles Championship of the United
States at Newton (Mass.) from the holders, Tilden and Richards,
the scores being B—6,8 —6, 6—3, 4 —6, 6—2. Both were beaten in
the Singles.
While the team was waiting for a ship to take them to
America, a grass court meeting was held at Roehampton, and
Lycett and Thomas entered for the Men’s Open Doubles. The
tournament lasted from July 9th to 12th, and the A.I.F. men
won the final from the South African pair, Raymond and Norton,
13 —n, 6—3. The Open Mixed Doubles final was fought out
by Lycett—Miss Ryan and Thomas—Mrs. Larcombe and won by
the former pair by 6—4, B—6.
After the departure of the team for America, O’Hara Wood
and Doust visited several tournaments and had a splendid run
of success. They played at the Nottingham Meeting from July
16th to 19th, and fought out the Men’s Open Singles Final,
O’Hara Wood winning 7 —5, 6—2. Together they won the Men’s
Doubles from W. L. Clements and C. P. Dixon 6— 2, 6 —-3.
They disputed the Mixed Doubles, Doust with Mrs. Larcombe
beating O’Hara Wood and Mrs. Satterthwaite 6— 2, 3 —6, 9 —7.
This was a decided triumph.
From July 23rd to 26th, the same tw 7 o players took part in
the Midland County Championships, held at Edgbaston. The
final of the Singles Championship found the two Australians again
battling for supremacy. Doust reversed the Nottingham result
by beating O’Hara Wood 6 —4, 6—4. The pair won the Doubles
Championship from Burton and Thompson, the score being B—6,
6— '2, 7 —5. In the Mixed Doubles final O’Hara Wood and
Mrs. McNair beat Doust and Mrs. Larcombe 6 —3, 7 —5.
The Northumberland Championships took place at Newcastle
from July 28th to August 2nd, and found Doust and Wood again
in the Singles final. However, Doust was taken ill on the last
day of the tournament and O’Hara Wood had a “ walk-over.”
D


The pair had won their way again to the Doubles final, their
opponents being Ritchie and Clements, who got the match with-
out playing for it. The Mixed Doubles was set down for decision
between O’Hara Wood and Miss Ryan and Doust and Mrs.
McNair. The former pair took the honours of what might have
been an interesting match.
The North of England Championships were decided at Scar-
borough from August 18th to 23rd* and O’Hara Wood was the
only Australian entrant. He achieved a really remarkable suc-
cess by winning the Singles, and being one of the winning pair
in both Men’s Doubles and Mixed Doubles. In the Singles he
defeated the South African, B. I. C. Norton 4 —6, 6— 2, 6
10 —8. He was partnered in the Men’s Doubles by M. J. G.
Ritchie, and they won from a South African pair, Raymond and
Norton, by 9 —7, 6 —4, 6—B, 6 —3. With Mrs. Larcombe in the
Mixed Doubles, O’Hara Wood was opposed by Raymond and
Miss Ryan, and the Anglo-Australian alliance was too strong
for the South Africa-cum-America partnership by 7 —5, 6—l.
This was the end of the important tournaments of the season,
in which Australians had played such a large part.
The Tennis Sub-Committee consisted of S. N. Doust, A. B.
Jones, P. O’Hara Wood, and R. Lycett.




A.I.F. Athletic Team.
Back Row: Drv.H.L.Parkinson,Bdr.A.McDonald,Lance-Crpl. T.W. soutar, Dvr.H.V.carroll,Lieut.R.D.Chalmers,Lieunt.
J.Brake,Dvr.L.J.Hume, Pte.J.J. Agnew,Pte.H.Bron
Middle Row: Lieut.L.V.R. spencer,Pte.L.A.Dolton, Bdr.W.Murray,sig. T. Fraser,Dvr.D.Turnbull,sergt.T.S.Hewitt,
Lieut.J.Scales.D.S.O., M.M.,Pte.C.Hubberd.
Front How: R.Q.M.S. C. Griffiths, Pte, W, Johnson, Statf-Sergt. C. G. Manley, Sergt. E. Carter.


CHAPTER VII.
INTER-ALLIED GAMES.
The Americans’ reputation for “hustle ’’ was considerably en-
hanced by the manner in which they staged their Inter-Allied
Games in Paris in June and July, i9 x 9* J anuar y that year
there was a field at Joinville-le-Pont, on the outskirts of the
French Capital, which had been used during the war as a military
training camp for French soldiers. The Americans hit upon the
idea of holding a big victory athletic festival, and of giving some
practical demonstration of their friendship for France. They
acquired this field at Joinville-le-Pont and in February they set
to work to build an immense Stadium in ferro-concrete. The
contract was let to a French firm. Trenches were filled in and
barbed wire entanglements torn down. A start was made on
February 24th, ninety days being the contract time for com-
pletion. Labour troubles intervened and caused a total stoppage
of work. What was to be done? The Armies of the Allies were
being rapidly demobilised and the games could not be postponed.
The engineers of the United States Army stepped into the
breach and carried the work through. By June 22nd they had
completed a splendid job —a stadium to last for all time, capable
of seating about 25>000 people. The Inter-Allied Games, on
Olympic lines, were held there from June 22nd to July 6th, the
concrete hardly having had time to set.
The A.I.F. Sports Control Board had received an invitation
early in the year to take part in these games and accepted. They
decided on representation in tennis, field and track events, swim-
ming, boxing, wrestling, tug-o’-war, and rowing. The Australian
successes at the Games were not many, in so far as their captures
of prizes were concerned, but they became the most popular group
of the competing nations. W hen the meeting was opened there was
a grand parade of athletes from all nations, numbering 1,500.
The Stadium was packed to its utmost capacity and another 20,000
people could not get in. When the A.I.F. Team appeared, clad
in their blue and gold, there was a great cry of Les Australiens 1
Vive les Australiens ! ’’ and their greeting by the French populace
was second only to that accorded to the athletes of France.
The competing nations were United States, Australia, Belgium,
Canada, Czecho-Slovakia, France, Guatemala, Hedjaz (Arabs)*


Italy, New Zealand, Portugal, Roumania, Greece, and Serbia-
Great Britain had one or two entries, but nothing organised on.
a large scale.
The thoroughness of the arrangements made by the Americans
was the outstanding feature. They had the light men in the
right places, and that was all that was wanted. There was a big
Inter-Allied Council to direct, and the Australian representatives *
were Lieut.-Col. Norman Marshall, D. 5.0., M.C., Lieut.-Col.
C. V. Watson, D. 5.0., and Major S. A. Middleton, D.S.O.
The Tower of Babel was suggested by the number of languages
spoken at a »meeting of the Council, but the cosmopolitan nature
of the American population allowed of their providing a liaison
officer, who not only spoke the language of the team to which
he was attached, but who understood its temperament and wants.
In this respect the Australian Section was splendidly served by
Capt. R. N, Platt, of the U.S. Marines, and Lieut. L. D. Morg-
ridge, of the U.S. Infantry. These two officers were the very
personification of politeness and efficiency, and succeeded in
making the Australians feel very much at home. They worked
incessantly to- this end, and there can be no question of their
popularity among the members of the team whose interests they
looked after. Lieut.-Col. David. M. Goodrich, of the United
States General Staff, was a good friend to the A.I.F. throughout
the whole of the preparatory and games period. He was Vice-
Chairman of the Council, and in a hundred different ways helped
to make the stay of the Australians very pleasant indeed.
The A.I.F. teams began to cross to Paris on June 10th and
had all collected at the Colombes Stadium by June 20th, where
they made their final training preparations. The U.S. Army
Authorities always had motor transport available to take men
to and from the railway stations and between the Stadium and
the Camps. It was only necessary to apply through the liaison
officers and cars were made available. The Atheletes’ Camps
were very comfortable. Every man had a bed, with a spring
mattress, blankets, and linen. At Colombes the teams were
housed in hospital marquees, but when, on June 21st, the whole
of the athletes-moved to the Camp at Pershing Stadium (Join-
ville-le-Pont) they were placed in small tents —three or four men
in each—with an abundance of room and every comfort. The
feeding arrangements were all in the hands of the U.S. Army,
who supplied food free of cost. It was cooked on American
lines and there were many peculiarly American dishes quite new
to A.I.F. men. At first these American foods enjoyed a large
measure of popularity, but after a few days the athletes found
that overfeeding with sweet corn, canned tomatoes and fruits was
not the best thing for training, and it was found necessary to


-obtain a g-ood deal of solid meat food in order to get them back
to normal.
At the Camp at Joinville-le-Pont each competing nation had a
double row of tents allotted to it. The Australians were sand-
wiched between the Greeks and Serbians. The Serbians sang
snatches of grand opera, and this was delightful —until 10 p.m.
After that hour men got sleepy. The Serbians never seemed to
worry about sleep, and nobody in the Australian lines was suffi-
ciently conversant with their language to tell them that sleep
was a necessity. The only way out of the difficultytherefore,
was to give them some sign which they would understand- After
a shower of tent-pegs and mallets, they took the hint. On the
other side, the Greeks held wordy warfare until far into the
night, and recommenced at daybreak. There, again, the lan-
guage of signs had to be brought into use, but it was resented
and had to be discontinued. An envoy went along to one of
the Greek tents in pyjamas, gave vent to a magnificent flow in
two languages —English and obscene —and finally convinced the
swarthy gentlemen that it was time tO' shut up. Thereafter all
was quiet.
The social side of life in the Athletes’ Camp was very pleasant.
The American Y.M.C.A. had provided an immense hall in the
camp, and the athletes foregathered there in the evenings to
eat free ice-cream and other confections, to flirt with American
Y.M.C.A. girls, to dance, sing, listen to a concert, or watch
a cinema show. The comic opera uniforms of the men from
the Southern European nations mixed with the drab khaki of
the English-speaking armies and the sky-blue of the French, a
thousand shaded electric lights shone on the whole scene, and
the tout ensemble made a most charming picture. This rendez-
vous was very popular, for the lights and joys of Paris were
taboo to men in hard training.
When the Games commenced, Lieut.-Col. C. V. Watson,
D. 5.0., was present to represent the A.I.F. Sports Control Board.
Owing to pressure of work in London, however, he was only
able to remain for three days. Capt. J. E. Savage, 0.8. E.,
M.C., was general manager of the team, and other officers of
the administrative staff were Lieut. R. Hendy and Lieut. G. H.
Goddard. Lieut. Hendy acted as the representative of the A.I.F.
Sports Control Board on the Inter-Allied Advisory Committee.
Capt. G. H. Wilkins, M.C., who wears the ribbon of North
Polar Exploration, was present in his capacity of official photo-
grapher, and Lieut. Lionel Short, M.C., was there as official
correspondent of the A.I.F. The A.I.F. Contingent consisted of
eighty-two members, nineteen of whom were commissioned


officers. The various sections were commanded as follows :
Boxing'; Capt. G. Coghill, M.C., 35th Bn.
Athletics : Lieut. R. D. Chalmers, 15th A.L.T.M.B.
Swimming ; Lieut. W. Longworth, 6th M.T. Coy,
Tug-o’-War : Lieut. C. J. Kelaher, 13th Bn.
Rowing : Lieut. O. J. Wood, 3rd M.G. Bn.
The opening day, Sunday, June 22nd, was devoted to ceremony
and the presentation to the French Government of the Stadium.
The Commander-in-Chief of the U.S. Army, General John J.
Pershing, first of all accepted the Stadium from the Y.M.C.A,
on behalf of the Army, and in turn handed it over to M. Leygues,
Minister of Marine, as a gift to the French Republic. President
Poincare was there, and made a short speech of thanks. The
parade of athletes and of French and American troops was a
grand spectacle, amid a blaze of colour and the flags of all the
Allied nations. Major-Gen. Sir Charles Rosenthal, K.C.8.,
C.M.G., D. 5.0., of the A.1.F., had accepted the invitation to
be present and was in the box allotted to Australia. There was
a big aeroplane parade over the ground and a mock battle in the
air. The function opened very successfully, and next day the
athletes settled down to the business on hand.
An account is appended of the Australian participation in the
various sections, with the exception of rowing and tennis. The
details of Australia’s part in those events appear in the chapters
devoted to those sports.
In comparing the times of the track events, it should be borne
in mind that the cinder track had only just been laid down, and
though it was watered and rolled for a couple of days before
the meeting commenced, it had not set properly and was not
at all fast.
ATHLETICS.
The A.I.F. Athletic Team was under the command of Lieut.
R. D. Chalmers, of the 15th Light Trench Mortar Battery, and
the personnel was as under :
Capt. A. F. Best, 58th Battalion; Lieut. J. R. Brake, 3rd Div.
Artillery; 2nd Lieut. L. R. V. Spencer, Australian Flying Corps ;
R.Q.M.S. C. Griffiths, 7th Field Ambulance; Sergt. C. G.
Manley, IothA.S.C.; Sergt. T. S. Hewitt, 39th Battalion ; Sergt.
E. Carter, 2nd D.A.C. ; Lance-Corpl. T. W. Soutar, 10th Light
Horse; Driver H. V. Carroll, 12th Army Brigade; Pte. L. A.
Dolton, 44th Bajttalion; Signaller T. Fraser, 20th Battalion;
Driver L. J. Hume, Ist M.G. Battalion; Pte. W. Johnson, 17th


Battalion; Gunner D. Turnbull, 14th Field Artillery Brigade;
Private C. Hibberd, 20th Battalion; and C. E. Bergmeier, an
Australian who served in the Imperial Army.
The parts played by this team in the various track and field
events are set out below. Each nation was allowed three en-
trants in each of the athletic and track events.
Hume, Carter, and Carroll were the A.I.F. representatives
in the too metre race, in which Ist and 2nd qualified for the
semi-finals. Carter ran third to Lindsay, of New Zealand, and
Haliburton, of Canada. Carroll was not placed in his heat, the
only A.I.F. man to qualify being- Hume. He ran second to
Butler, the coloured U.S. sprinter, who covered the distance in
11 sec. In the second semi-final Hume met a fast trio in Paddock
(U. S.A.), Howard (Canada), and Caste (France), who finished in
the* order named. The winner’s time was 11 secs., and the
A.I.F. was not represented in the final. The result of the event
was: Paddock (U.S.) 1, Teschner (U.S.) 2, Howard (Canada) 3,
and the time 10 4/5 secs.
1,500 Metres. —Manley, Chalmers, and Soutar were the Aus-
tralian entries. The event was run in two heats, with twelve
men in each, the first five of each qualifying- for the final.
Manley and Soutar were drawn in the first heat, but the pace
was too fast for the latter. Manley ran into fourth place. In
the second heat Chalmers ran third, but neither of the A.I.F.
men was placed in the final. The honours went to Stout (U.S.) 1,
Arnaud (France) 2, La Pierre (Canada) 3, the time being
4 mins. 5 3-5 secs.
no Metre Hurdles. —Best and Spencer carried the A.I.F.
colours., the former qualifying- for the final by running second
to Kelly (U.S.). Spencer did not get closer than third in his
heat. In the final, Best knocked several hurdles, which affected
his stride, and eventually fell. The result of the final was :
Simpson (U.S.) 1, Kelly (U.S.) 2, Wilson (N.Z.) 3, the winner’s
time being 15 x/5 secs.
200 Metres. —This event was run off in five heats, Carter,
Hume, and Carroll being the A.I.F'. entries. The two first-
named entered the semi-finals by running into second places in
their heats, and Carroll was placed sufficiently forward to secure
another run, being third. All three were put out in the semi-
finals, Carter being third to Howard (Canada), and Teschner
(U.S.), Carroll third to Haliburton (Canada) and Haddock (U.S.L
and Hume being unplaced. Each of the three semi-finals was
run in 22 3/5 secs. The final was won by Haddock (U.S.) from
Teschner (U.S.) and Lindsay (N.Z.) in 21 3/5 secs.
200 Metre Low Hurdles.-—This race was a new experience to
the A.I.F. hurdlers. The obstacles were only 2 ft. 6 ins. high,
and there were ten of them. Best and Spencer were the Aus


tralians who started. Brake had been entered, but met with
an accident that put him out of the running- for the whole of
the meeting - . Neither of the A.I.F. men displayed the easy style
of negotiating the fences which the Americans showed, but for-
tunately these low hurdles were also new to the contestants from
other countries, and both Best and Spencer qualified for the final
by running- into third places in their heats. The three places in
the final were filled by U.S. men —Simpson ist, Sylvester 2nd,
and House 3rd. Time 244/5 secs.
The Running- Broad Jump brought out twenty-five entrants,
Hibberd being- the only Australian. Hibberd’s best leap was
not g-ood enough to place him among- the front rankers, the
Americans again annexing all three places. Butler, with 7.557
metres, was ist; Worthington, 7.264 metres, 2nd; and Johnson,
6.62 metres, 3rd.
400 Metre Flat.—Bergmeier, Hume, and Johnson raced for
Australia, and each ran into second place in his heat, thus quali-
fying for the semi-final. They all went out in the second round.
The final was won by Eby (U.S.), with Spink (U.S.) second, and
Wilson (N.Z.) a good third. Time 50 secs.
800 Metres Relay Race. —Carter, Hume, Carroll, and Johnson
carried the light blue in this event, in which each man ran
200 metres. In their heat the Australian team were pitted
against teams from Roumania, America, and Italy. The race
was one of the most exciting of the meeting, and had the A.I.F.
men not been so slow in exchanging the baton, they might pos-
sibly have won. As it was, they had to take second place to
the Americans. The time figures in the heats made it possible
that the Americans and Australians would fight out the final,
but the Canadian team proved to be more speedy than it was
thought tO' be, and their last man fought out the finish with an
American. The 'latter won, and the A.I.F. team was third.
The world’s record of 1 min. 36 secs, for this event was broken,
the winning team’s time being 1 min. 30 4/5 secs. The old
record was established at the Olympic Games at Stockholm in
1912 by the Americans Sheppard, Reidpath, Meredith, and Lind-
berg. The team that won at the Inter-Allied Games consisted
of Haddock, Paddock, Torkelson, and Teschner.
The Cross-Country Run of 10,000 metres, with the first 500
metres and the last 1,000 metres on the cinder track at the
Stadium, brought out a big field. It was won handsomely by
a veteran French distance runner, Vermeulen, by 30 yards from
Bross, of Belgium, the winner sprinting the last 100 yards. Heuet
(France) was third, the winner’s time being 31 mins. 38 4/5 secs.
T. S. Hewitt, C. G. Manley, and L. A. Dolton took Australia’s
part in this event. Hewitt had just crossed from England after
running second in a Marathon Race from Windsor to Stamford


Bridge Athletic Ground, a distance of 26 miles 385 yards. He
was expected to do* well, but found the distance of 10,000 metres
.much too short. His stride was made for distances of 15 miles
or more. None of the Australians were among the first half-
dozen to finish,
Hibberd was the sole A.I.F. competitor in the High Jump.
There were twenty-seven triers, and the height fixed to be cleared
for qualification for the final was 1.67 metres (approximately
5 ft. 6 ins.). Three Frenchmen, three Americans, and one Italian
were the only ones to leave the bar undisturbed at this height.
The final placing was: Larson (U.S.), 1.84 metres, Ist; Labat
(France), Rice (U.S.), and Templeton (U.S.) bracketed together
2nd.
800 Metre Flat Race. —Bergmeier, Fraser, and Chalmers had
to contest this event with twenty-six others, the entry being
divided into three heats. Bergmeier was second to Mason, of
New Zealand. Chalmers was second to Scudder, of America.
Fraser won his heat, leading throughout, in 2 mins. All the
Australians thus entered the final, but none of them had suffix
•cient pace to run into' a place. The New Zealander, Sergt.
“ Dan ” Mason, won a popular victory over the Americans Eby
.and Spink in 1 min. 57 secs., with Bergmeier a close fourth.
By scratchings the entry for the 1,600 Metre Relay Race was
reduced to three teams —those from America, Australia, and
Canada. Chalmers, Johnson, Hume, and Fraser were the A.I.F.
quartette, and each ran 400 metres. The Australians took second
place to the Americans (F. Campbell, Mehan, T. Campbell, and
Teschner). The time was 3 mins. 28 4/5 secs.
A modified Marathon Race of 16,000 metres was on the pro-
gramme, and Hewitt, Griffiths, and Dolton were chosen from
the Australian team to take part in it. A field of twenty-three
went away on a cruise round the countryside, and, when almost
forgotten, they appeared back in the Stadium to do a few final
laps on the cinders before going off to dress for dinner. None
of the Australians was placed. The French long-distance cham-
pion, Vermeulen, again carried the tricolour to victory, and,
smilingly accepting the plaudits of the assembled thousands, he
seemed little distressed by the long journey. Faller (U.S.) was
second, Heuet (France) third, and Stout (U.S.) fourth. The
winner’s time was 55 mins. 11 4/5 secs.
The conditions of the Medley Relay Race were that each Army
was allowed to enter a team of four, the first man to run 200
metres, the second 400 metres, third 800 metres, and fourth
x. 600 metres. Hume, Carter, Bergmeier, and Manley formed the
Australian team, and once again they took second place. They
were beaten by the Americans (Haas, T. Campbell, F. Campbell,


aiid Shields), whose time was 7 mins. 43 2/5 secs. The French
team was third.
The French FI defensive grenade, with a total Ibaded weight
of 600 grs., was used in the Hand-Grenade Throwing Competi-
tion. and there was no restriction as to the method employed.
Two Australians, Sergt. G. W. Drysdale and Pte. B. Flick,
essayed the task of hurling the bomb further than the other
thirty competitors, but they were not in the same class as the
giants from the United States, who' filled all three places. It
was announced that the winner, Chaplain F. C. Thompson, had
established a new world’s record with his throw of 74.929 metres.
S. Thompson was second, with 73.915 metres; and Wycavage
third, with 70.4 metres.
SWIMMING.
The names of Longworth, Hardwick, Solomons —in fact, almost
all the names which appeared in the A.l.F.’s list of entries foi
the swimming events at these games —have long been known
in first-class swimming in Australia. This fact, coupled with,
the knowledge that Australians are considered, the world over,
to be in the front rank of natation, justified the hope that, in
this section at least, Australia would carry off the honours. Iht;
Americans, however, brought across from the United States,
Norman Ross, and he was solely responsible for the defeat of
the A.l.F.’s best.
The Australian Team was in charge of Lieut. W. Longworth,
6th Motor Transport Co., Australasian Champion and inter-
national representative. The other members w T ere : Sapper H.
Hardwick. 2nd Sig. Squadron. Australian Mounted Division, of
N.S.W., who held Australasian Championships over distances;
Sergt. G. W. Morris, Ist Pioneer Battalion, of Victoria, cham-
pion of his State over distances of from J mile to 1 mile; Driver
L. T. Solomons, 2nd Div. Motor Transport, ex-champion of
Australia over 100 yards; Gunner S. H. Springfield, 12th Battery,
Australian Field Artillery, of Queensland, long-distance champion
of the Northern State; Bombardier I. Steadman, 14th Battery,
Australian Field Artillery, champion of Victoria over 100 yards
and 220 yards; Lieut. J. Dexter, M.C., 53rd Battalion, a club
champion (Eastern Suburbs) in Sydney; Sergt. A. W. Barry,
A.I.F. Headquarters, who held the Australasian Championship
over 100 yards; Lieut. C. W. Lindsay, 3rd Machine Gun Bat-
talion, a Sydney sprinter of note.
These nine men presented a very solid formation to the other
Allied Armies, and as they were all tried men whose times over
the various distances compared favourably with the world’s best,
their chances were greatly favoured.


A.I.F. Swimming Team.
Standing: Bombadier I. Steadman, Sergt. G. Morris, Driver L. Solomons, Lieut. C. W. Lindsay, Spr. H. Hardwick.
Seated: Sergt. A. W. Barry, Lieut. J. Dexter, M.C., Lieut. W. Longworth, Sergt. S. Springfield.




The swimming - took place in the Lac St. James —one of a chain
in the famous and beautiful Bois de Boulogne. The course was
100 metres in length, marked off by ropes and floats, and hung
across with the flags of all the Allies. The water was “ fresh ” —.
this is only to distinguish it from “salt ” —and not at all
buoyant. It was very dirty, and, according to the remarks of
the competitors, a “ mouthful ” was sufficiently powerful to inter-
fere seriously with the functions of the human organs. The times
registered for the events are sufficient evidence that the course
was not a fast one.
Had Ross not been there, the A.I.F. would certainly have
cleaned up the whole of the prizes. As it was, they had to be
content with seconds and thirds in everything but the Teams
Race, which they won. It becomes necessary to explain why
they were beaten. There is no complaint, for the beating was as
decisive, fair, and above-board as possible. Ross himself sup-
plied the explanation when he said, “ The Australians are four
years behind the times in swimming.’’ Since that was the period
of their war service, the length of time in which they were
debarred the privilege of daily practice to keep pace with the
progress of natation, the explanation seems to be feasible. A
glance at the methods employed by Ross confirm this statement.
Some years ago the trudgeon stroke was the only one affected
by swimmers of sprints, and followers of the sport doubted
whether it was possible to maintain it over greater distances.
However, this doubt vanished when the stroke developed and
became the regular thing for all races. Then the “ crawl
stroke came along —developed mainly by the late Cecil Healy.
Again the doubt arose as to whether this stroke could be used
over distances of more than a hundred yards. Healy and others
dispelled all doubts on this score by winning long-distance races
with it, and its general adoption by all first-class men in Australia
came about. The next step in the progress of swimming was
the style adopted by the Hawaiian, Duke Kahanamoku, who
became a world’s champion sprinter and established new records
with a combination of all the best points of previously existing
styles and the addition of something to the “ kick.’’ This re-
quired a good deal of exertion, and again the sceptics doubted
whether the style would hold good over distances. This doubt
was strengthened by the defeat of Rahanamoku by a young
swimmer, T. Adrian, in Sydney in 1914* over a quarter-mile.
Now Ross has appeared with a development of the Kahanamoku
style, and has beaten all the A.l.F.’s exponents of other styles
over all distances. Longworth’s “crawl,” Hardwick’s powerful
trudgeon, and Solomon’s effective sprint “ crawl ’ were all of
little avail against this most modern style. Ross is a man ot
fine physique, over 6 ft. high and weighing over 13 stone, yet


he moved through the water without apparent exertion. He
made very little splash, and in the distance events he seemed
capable of unwinding a sprint at any stage of the course, although
his arm stroke did not quicken. It was apparent, therefore,
that the secret of his propulsion lay in the leg methods. Close
observation of this showed that he used a “ scissor ” kick while
rolling on the right side, and finished the reverse roll—which is
but slight—with a “ flutter ” similar to that employed in the
crawl.” His timing was perfect, and every movement of his
arms produced the maximum effect. The net result was that
he moved continually at an even pace, and his double-action
kick to a single-action arm movement, gave the impression to
those unacquainted with the technique of swimming that, com-
pared with other swimmers who used the crawl and single-action
kick, Ross was not at all extended. To sprint, he simply put
a little more snap into his kick.
Early in the carnival, Longworth had the misfortune of a
recurrence of an old ear trouble, which affected him so greatly
at the Olympic Games at Stockholm in 1912. However, he stuck
to his task in great style, and though obviously in pain at times,
he entered the water in all but one of his events, his ears being
plugged with cotton wool and covered with waterproof lugs.
Longworth’s placings in the three events in which he took part
were : Second in 400 Metres, second in 800 Metres, and first (in
team of four) in 800 Metre Relay Race.
Hardwick, who withdrew' from nomination in the boxing events
to follow his favourite sport, swam consistently. He was in the
winning relay team, was second in the 1,500 Metres, and third
in the 800 Metres.
Solomon confined his attention to the Sprint distance of 100
metres, and just touched off his confrere Steadman for second
place to Ross in that event. Detailed results are given below.
100 Metres. —Twenty-three entrants-were divided into four heats,
with an Australian in the first, second, and third heats. First
and second-placed men swam in the semi-finals. Steadman was
second to Ross, Dexter was second to Hinks (U.S.), and
Solomons won his heat from Wuyts, of Belgium. In the semi-
finals Solomon was drawn in the same four as Ross and was
placed second to him, the time being 1 min. 8 1/5 secs. Stead-
man and Dexter were second and third respectively to Hinks in
the other draw, the winner taking i min. 10 2-5 secs. All three
Australians qualified for the final, the two Americans and Massa,
of Italy, being the opposition. It was a great race, Ross winning
by a yard from Solomons, with Steadman a close third and
Dexter fourth. The time was x min. 4 3-5 secs.
Eighteen competitors came out for the 400 Metres, and they
were divided into three heats, with one of the A.I.F. men in


each. Hardwick was second to Ross in 6 mins, n secs., while
Longworth and Steadman won their heats eas’d}' in 6 mins.
41 secs, and 6 mins. 71/5 secs, respectively. In the final were
the three Australians, with Ross and Biddle, of America, and
Massa, of Italy. Ross was too speedy for the A.I.F. trio and
won by 5 yards from Longworth, with Steadman third and Hard-
wick fourth —all close together. Time 5 mins. 402/5 secs.
There were sixteen starters in the 800 Metres event, and Ross
again beat Hardwick in the heat, the time being 13 mins.
10 4-5 secs. An Italian swimmer of great pluck and stamina,
Bacigalupo, just beat Morris, of the A.1.F., in the second heat
in 13 min. 1/5 secs, while Longworth had matters all his own
way and won comfoirtably in his heat from Douglas (U.S.) in
14 mins. 71/5 secs.
The final again saw all the Australian entrants on the starting
board, but though Longworth stuck gamely to Ross for the
greater part of the journey, the latter won comfortably in
12 mins. 34 secs., with Longworth second and Hardwick third.
In the 1,500 Metre Race there were twenty starters, who were
divided into two heats. Hardwick and Morris were drawn in
the same heat as Ross. Longworth’s ear trouble had become
too severe for him to swim, and Springfield took his place. The
latter’s race with Bacigalupo in their heat was the most exciting
of the whole carnival. They plugged along for the whole fifteen
laps, stroke for stroke, and in the end had the spectators on
their feet cheering themselves hoarse. In the sprint home the
Italian secured the verdict by little more than a touch. Time
26 mins. 2 1/5 secs. Hardwick stuck to Ross for the greater
part of the journey in the heat, but the latter drew away in the
last few laps and won by about 20 yards in 24 mins. 30 1-5 secs.
Morris was third. Two Americans, three Australians, two
Italians, and one Frenchman entered the final. Ross and Hard-
wick soon drew away from the others, followed by Morris, and
Springfield with his Italian friend, Bacigalupo, again swimming
together. Ross won easily from Hardwick, but Springfield and
Bacigalupo again had the crowd on their feet in their great
struggle for third place. The Italian repeated his previous per-
formance by winning by a touch. Ross covered the distance in
24 mins. 222/5 secs.
Dexter entered for the 200 Metre Breast Stroke, but he failed
to gain a place in his heat against the swimmers from France
and America. Sommer (France) was first, Biersach (U.S.)
second, and Hallard (France) third, the time being 3 mins.
24 4-5 secs.
The test of national strength in swimming was provided in
the 800 Metre Relay Race for teams of four men. In this the
Australians showed their superiority, for although Ross had won


all the individual events, the Americans had no other swimmers
of similar calibre, and Ross could not win the event alone. As
a race it was a disappointment, and after the first two swimmers
had finished it became a procession. Steadman led off against
Hinks, of America, and when he had finished his allotted task
of 200 metres, Steadman handed over a lead of 5 yards to
Dexter. The latter, swimming well, increased this to 10 yards
when he was replaced by Hardwick. Then Hardwick increased
it again, and gave the last man, Longworth, a clear 40 yards’
start on the next man, an Italian, who was 5 yards ahead of
the American representative. Longworth was half-way through
his first 100 metres when Ross, the last man of the American
team, hit the water, and the latter, seeing that there was no
chance of overhauling the speedy Australian, contented himself
by displacing the Italian for second, and paddled in 40 or 50
yards behind Longworth. The teams competing were Australian,
Canadian, American, French, Italian, and Portuguese, and the
time taken, 10 mins. 594/5 secs.
Ross showed his versatility by winning the 100 Metre Back
Stroke, Gardner (U.S k ) being second, and Lehu (France) third.
None of the Australian team entered for this event.
The points scored in swimming were :
U.S.A. ; 5 firsts, 3 seconds. Total 21 points.
Australia : 1 first, 4 seconds, 3 thirds. Total 14 points.
At the conclusion of the swimming events at the Inter-Allied
Games, invitations were extended to the A.I.F. Team by the
leading swimming clubs of Brussels and Antwerp to attend car-
nivals in those cities. The clubs generously offered to defray
the expenses of the team and, with the sanction of the Board
of Control, the invitation was accepted. Longworth definitely
announced his retirement from swimming owing to his ear trouble,
and did not make the trip. Dexter was also absent from the
team, having returned to London to embark for Australia. The
Brussels Carnival was held at the Bain St. Savieur on July 12th,
and unfortunately for the Australian team —but fortunately for
Belgian swimming enthusiasts—Norman Ross, who had also been
invited, attended and repeated his performance of the previous
week by winning every event in which he started. The results
of the carnival were :
xoo Metres.—Ross (U.S.) i, Solomons (A.1.F.) 2, Steadman
(A.1.F.) 3.
400 Metres. —Ross 1, Bawens (Belgium) 2, Hardwick (A.1.F.) 3.
Relay Race.—Seven men; 350 yards: Belgium 1, A.I.F. 2.


On the following day at Antwerp the placings were ;
ioo Metres.—Ross i, Cobtz (Belgium) 2, Hardwick (A.1.F.) 3.
Relay Race (420 metres, seven men). —A.I.F. 1, Belgium 2.
The A.I.F. team consisted of Solomons, Hardwick, Steadman,
Morris, Springfield, Barry, and Lindsay, with Lieut. R. Hendy
in charge.
An event worthy of mention in connection with the trip was
the wonderful reception accorded to A. W. Barry in both towns.
Barry had taken part in matches in England against Belgian
teams just prior to the conclusion of the war, and it was generally
known among those interested in swimming that he had lost
a leg in action on Belgian soil at Messines. Ihe President of
the club in Brussels, introducing the A.I.F. team, dwelt at length
on this point when he came to present the ex-champion of Aus-
tralia, and the conclusion of his remarks was the signal for a
tremendous outburst of cheering which lasted for some minutes.
The team was royally entertained in both cities.
The members of the team, with the exception of Morris and
Springfield, then returned to England. Ihese two swimmers
returned to Paris and took part in a swim of 7 kilometres in the
Seine through Paris. There were sixty entrants, but the number
of starters was cut dow r n, by selection, to twenty-five. Ihe
übiquitous Ross was again in the van ( and won by about 10 yards.
Morris was in a good position until the last kilometre, when he
was seized with cramp and had to swim on his back for some
minutes in an endeavour to massage the seizure from his leg.
Many of the spectators were at a loss to und&rstand why the
Australian competitors sprinted at the start of this race. They
had overlooked the fact that four lady competitors had entered
and had been given five minutes’ start ! The result of the race
was ;
Ross (U.S.) x, Bacigalupo (Italy) 2, Morris (A.1.F.) 3, Costa
(Italy) 4, Vermeulen (Belgium) 5, Springfield (A.1.F.) 6.
BOXING,
Capt. Gordon Coghill, M.C., had charge of the Boxing Team,
which trained for about a month in London at \\ arwick Square,
and crossed to Paris a fortnight before the Games in order to
acclimatise. Sergt. C. H. Mullins,' known more popularly as
“ Duke,” a capable and experienced coach and manager of manj
well-known professionals, had charge of the training arrange-
ments of the team, and managed them with an iron hand.


Although only one representative was allowed in each division r
the team was a large one. there being one or two reserves in
almost every class. The result of the tournament was that Aus-
tralia gained one first and three seconds. Capt. Coghill enterea
the heavyweight class owing to a scarcity of big men, even
though he suffered at the time from rheumatism and neuritis.
In fact, he was in hospital in Paris for some time after the
event. He was the runner-up in his class, having met with
one of those accidents that happen to many good boxers. He
walked into a punch that everybody could see coming.
“ Digger ” Evans, the bantam weight, won in his class, but
had to work hard and fight ten rounds in each of his three bouts.
He was a most popular competitor among the representatives
of all nations Despite invitations in one bout to his
opponent to “ knock it off,” his happy smile never left his face.
The points gained by the teams from each competing Army gave
first place to the United States team, with three firsts and one
second (7 points). France and Australia were bracketed together
in second place, each having gained one first and three seconds
(5 points). Canada was fourth with two firsts (4 points), and
Italy fifth with one first and one second (3 points). The Rou-
manian and Belgian teams did not score any points.
In the Bantam Weight Division, Pte. A. Evans was the repre-
sentative, with Pte. C. A. Peakes (31st Bn.) and Driver R.
Sellars (10th A.A.S.C.) as reserves. In the first round Evans
was drawn against the American “ Babe ” Asher, whose chances
were greatly favoured by his countrymen. Asher had the advan-
tage of height and was a clean-limbed, highly trained lad; but,
to use an Americanism, Evans “ put it right across him,” and
won on points after ten splendid rounds. In his semi-final bout
Evans engaged the attention of a sturdy little Frenchman, Prie,
and won by a fairly comfortable margin of points after the full
ten rounds had been fought.
The final brought Evans in contact with Marrorati, of Italy,
and the bout was a good one. The Italian was considerably
worried by the superior speed and footwork of his opponent,
and could make no headway against the smiling “ Digger,”
who gained the verdict and the championship of the class on
points after ten rounds.
The Feather Weight representative was F. C. Hallam, and he
fought the first bout of the tournament against Cole, of Canada.
Hallam boxed strongly throughout, and his superiority was very
evident at the end of the tenth round. He won on points. In
the semi-final round Hallam met his Waterloo at the hands of
the United States Army representative, Fundy, who excelled in
footwork and had a power of steam behind a good left-handed
punch. Hallam lasted the ten rounds, but lost the bout.


Trooper T. C. Watson was the chosen representative in the
Light Weight class, with Lieut. “ Matty ” Smith, of the Aus-
tralian Flying Corps, and Pte. H. Cox, of the 3 Battalion,
as reserves. Watson was undoubtedly one of the cleverest
boxers in the A.I.F. team, and combined a clever use of his
hands with great agility. After receiving a forfeit in the first
round, he met Zoonens, of Belgium, in the semi-final. Watson
proved to be the better man. He sent his opponent to the boards
twice during the ten rounds, but the Belgian fought on gamely.
The verdict was in Watson’s favour.
In the final, Watson was matched against McNeill (U.S A.),
and the bout was one of the most attractive of the whole tourna-
ment. They were exceptionally evenly matched, got to business
early in the bout, and kept up a lively exchange of blows and
a fast fight throughout. At the end both men had fought them-
selves to a standstill. There was very little to choose between
them, and when the Stars and Stripes were hoisted in the American
corner, Watson had to content himself with second place. With
such a close contest there were bound to be differences of opinion,
and some of the Parisian dailies expressed their convictions that
Watson had won. However, the verdict went against him, and
he accepted it in the finest sporting spirit.
Sapper P. C. Young was the elite of the Australian team’s
Welter Weights, the reserve man being Lance-Corpl. A. Blatch,
of the 11qthT Howitzer Battery. In consequence of many scratch-
ings on the part of competitors in the early stages, \oung found
himself pitted against Prunier, the French professional, in the
semi-final. The latter proved to be a clever boxer, with a splendid
defence and a hard punch. He was well trained and came up
well after the intervals. When the bout had gone ten rounds
the judges disagreed, and the referee ordered another round.
Young, who had scored his points early in the contest, had taken
more than he gave in the last two rounds, and was the more
distressed of the two. Prunier made the extra round a merry
one from the gong, and won. He was subsequently beaten in
the final by a clever Canadian, Joe Attwood, after a great fight.
Lieut. H. W. Checkett, of the Australian Flying Corps, con-
tested the Middle Weight Division on behalf of the A.I.F. He
was a young amateur who suffered a good deal from nervousness
in the ring. His first engagement was with Harris, of Canada.
In the first round Checkett got in the way of a left hook, followed
by a heavy right cross to the point. He fell heavily, striking
his head hard on the boards, and took the count. The final of
this division was won by Eagen, of America, from Thomas, o
France.
A rugged fighter of the hard-hitting type, with a great capacity
for mopping up punishment as well as giving it, was Sappei
E


J. T. Pettybridge, of the Australian Wireless Section. He
carried the A.I.F. representation in the Light Heavy-weight
class. In the training camp he had been dubbed “ The Meso-
potamian Terror.” He had come to England from Mesopotamia
for the Army Championships, having won a heavyweight contest
in that area.
Pettybridge was pitted against Campagne, of France, in his
first encounter. The Frenchman withstood the avalanche of blows
aimed at him for less than one round. He was sent to the boards
by a heavy swing to the body.
In his second bout Pettybridge met Norton, of the U.S., and
was the victim of an unfortunate incident. There were some
heavy exchanges during the first two rounds, and two heavy
connections which Norton made with Pettybridge’s jaw left the
latter quite unperturbed. In the third round the Australian was
fouled and, alter receiving medical attention, was carried
off in a stretcher. Norton was disqualified and the fight
awarded to Pettybridge. It is but fair to state that nobody
regretted the incident more than the American. After being con-
fined to his bed for several days, Pettybridge agreed to meet
the other finalist, Spalla, of Italy, on the last day of the Games.
The Italians evinced a fine sporting spirit, and sent word to the
Australian Camp that they had no desire to press the matter
in their favour and call upon a man to fight when he \\as not
physically fit. Their attitude was greatly appreciated, but a.*,
the Games were to conclude, the match was staged. It was
evident at the outset that Pettybridge had not recovered. The
bout opened briskly with heavy exchanges. The Italian was a
tall, strong man with a terrific punch, but not much style. The
bout w T ent the allotted ten rounds, and Spalla w r on on points.
In the earlier stages of the Games there was a good deal of
excitement among the Australian section when it became known
that the heavy-weight, Capt. Gordon Coghill, M.C., had been
drawn against Georges Carpentier, the wonderful French heavy-
weight. It had been announced that Carpentier would represent
the Army of France in this class. Although the bout was post-
poned for three or four days to allow of his attendance, the
Frenchman did not appear, and Coghill won his first round by-
default.
Coghill’s condition at this time was not what it should have
been, and he was advised more than once by the trainer (“ Duke ”
Mullins) to withdraw from the tournament. However, he said
that he felt well, and the result of his first contest seemed to
bear out his statement. He met Arnold, of Canada, in the
semi-final, and knocked him out in the approved style in the


third round. In the final Cog-hill opposed Martin, of the U.S.
Army. The bout lasted for i min. 36 secs. Cog-hill met a heavy
right on his jaw and took the count.
WRESTLING.
The Games Committee provided wrestling- contests in Graeco-
Roman and Catch-as-Catch-Can styles. The A.I.F. entered four
men in the latter style. The rules provided for bouts of fifteen
minutes’ duration, and if a fall had not been registered in that
lime, the referee had power to decide on points awarded for
technique and aggressiveness. The A.I.F. wrestlers were
attached for training to the boxing team. Sergt. A. W. Taylor.
R.A.0.C., was the feather-weight, Sta,ff Sergt. A. Bridges,
A.A.M.C., welter-weight, Sergt. J. R. Palmer, sth Div. Sig.
Coy., middle-weight and Sergt. W. Meeske, Ist Aust. Con-
valescent Depot, light hea,vy-weight. Each of these men entered
the final, and each finished second to an American. Owing u>
a crush of events at the finish of the Games, the final bouts in
wrestling were rather badly staged on a mat ‘thrown down on
a vacant piece of ground outside the Stadium. Spectators
crowded round the edge of the mat, and the conditions were
anything but pleasant. There was a lot of “ barracking ” and
interference with the fresh air, and “ barracking ” at close
quarters is rather disconcerting. The results were :
Feather-weight : Taylor, who had received several forfeits,
opposed Littlejahault (U.S.) in the final. Preliminary sparring
for holds lasted for two' or three minutes, and then the pair went
to the mat, with Taylor underneath. However, all the efforts
of the American to place Taylor’s shoulders on the mat proved
futile. The judges awarded the bout to Littlejahault on points
at the end of fifteen minutes.
Bridges, in the Welter-weight Division, met Farley (U.S.) in
the final. There was a period of more than five minutes of hold-
seeking in the perpendicular, and then Bridges went to the mat,
with Farley on top. The Australian had the misfortune to
damage both his left wrist and left shoulder in his fall, and the
American rolled him on to his two shoulders.
Palmer was pitted against Prehm, the champion professional
Middle-weight of America, in the final of his class. This bout
lasted for eleven minutes, Prehm registering a clean throw.
The Light Heavy-weight, Sergt. W. Meeske, had an Aus-
tralian reputation as an amateur wrestler, and as he had been
doing well in his training and was in fine physical condition,
it was thought that he had more than ordinary chances of success.
He met Percault, of America, in the final. After the opening
rally of advantage-seeking, Meeske went down, but off the mat.


The referee ordered the contestants to return to the mat, with
Meeske down under. They remained in that position for two
or three minutes, and then Meeske became the aggressor and
pinned his slippery opponent down. He could not turn him,
however, and the balance of the contest was not interesting.
The verdict was given in favour of Percault.
America gained the team honours again with six firsts and
one second (13 points), Australia being next with four seconds
(4 points), and France third with one first and one second
(3 points.)
TUG-O’-WAR.
A fortnight before the Games commenced, it was thought that
there should still be sufficient material in the A.I.F. to form
a good tug-o’-wnr team, and Lieut. C. J. Kelaher, of the 13th
Battalion, was commissioned to get one together. He did his
work quickly, picking out a dozen likely looking men, and getting
them into daily work at Warwick Square and the Queen’s Club
ground. The team was got together on “ hustle ” lines, and
many of the men had no previous experience. They had a few
pulls against the Metropolitan Police and crossed to F ranee.
The personnel of the team was :
Sergt. B. W. Daniels, 4th Battalion.
Pte. R. M. Cuskey, 18th Battalion.
Dvr. A. McGill, A.A.S.C.
Corpl. G. Masters, A.A.S.C.
Pte. B. Flick, 3rd Battalion.
Lance-Corpl. E. Schumack, 35th Battalion.
Pte. A. Smith, A.M.T.C.
Corpl. W. V. Grose, A.I.F. Headquarters.
Reserves : Sergt. M. Healy, A.A.S.C. ; Pte. H. H. Car-
michael, A.A.S.C.
These men averaged well over 14 stone in weight. Their
first match w 7 as against the Greek team, and the Australians had
little difficulty in winning in two quick pulls, lasting 45 secs,
and 55 secs. They were considerably elated by this success, and
looked forward to the meeting with the Belgians in the second
round with the greatest confidence. The latter were much lighter
men than those from the land of the Southern Cross, and they
presented a well-trained appearance. In their pulls against the
A.I.F. team they gave a splendid demonstration of the success
of combined effort. They responded in a wonderful manner to
every signal from their coach. After their initial effort had proved
unsuccessful, the A.I.F. team “ went all to pieces,” and the
splendid combined work of the smaller men triumphed over the
spasmodic, individual outbursts of their heavier opponents. The


Belgians won two pulls, the first in a. little over a minute and
the second in 2 mins. 43 secs.
4}ie Belgians were too light to withstand the mcel\ timed
pulls of the giants from America in the final, and the latter won
the event. ,
The members of the Australian contingent were granted a few
days’ leave in Paris prior to returning to England after the
meeting, and on their arrival in England the teams were dis-
banded.’ The men went to the various depots to await
repatriation.


CHAPTER VIII.
RIFLE SHOOTING.
The Mecca of all riflemen in the English-speaking world is
Bisley. Annually for many years prior to the war there was a big
gathering of marksmen there from all parts of the Empire, and
Australia has sent some notable representatives at different times.
During the war the range and neighbourhood were used as a
school of musketry, from which many excellent instructors were
sent out to teach the New Army which was the business end of
a rifle. With the termination of hostilities, the question of
reviving the famous meeting immediately cropped up, and the
National Rifle Association got to work with the organisation of
what will long be remembered as the Victory Bisley of 1919.
In previous years the Dominions’ representation had been strictly
limited, especially in the case of Australia, by the amount of
money available for sending a team across. It was a very expen-
sive undertaking. In 1919 there were thousands of Dominions
men in England, or close by in France and Belgium, and the
only difficulty was in getting the best men for the representation
of the different parts of the Empire.
The A.I.F. Sports Control Board decided to enter a team,
and commenced the task of organising it in March. There were
some well-known riflemen in the Force, but not sufficient to make
up a large team > so the process of elimination had to be again
resorted to. Several men whose names had figured prominently
in the big rifle meetings in Australia were not available. They
had crossed the Great Divide while rendering the service to their
country for which their training with the rifle had so eminently
fitted them, and several instances of remarkable sniping have
been recorded to their credit. The men of the A.I.F. had been
trained to a different kind of shooting to that necessary to win
prizes at Bisley, and their capabilities as first-class competitive
shots were not generally known. The method adopted in the
formation of the team was to call upon the Divisions to nominate
a certain number of their best shots, and to select from this
number thirty men to represent the A.I.F. Lieut.-Col. C. V.
Watson, D. 5.0., was in charge of the organisation of the team,
and a whole lot of valuable work was done in the earlier stages,
by Staff Sergeants F. Harrison and S. Edw r ards, two well-known


The Rifle Team.
Back Row Cleft to right): Sergt. H. W. White, Staff-Sergt. G. F. S. Lee, Capt. R. McElwee, Chap.-Capt. H. H. Coles, Crpl. R. M Earle,
Lieut. C. Wilson, M.M., Lieut. F. M. Best, Crpl. W. W. King, Crpl. W. J. Campbell, Pte. P. H. Kleeman, Dvr. H. B. Ewart, Pte.
A. J. Tozer, Spr. C. Edwards, Pte. H. B. Ogilvie, Lieut. K. W. McKenzie.
Front Row: A/M J. W. Bell, Lieut. C. A. Beaument, Sergt. I. N. Eldridge, M.M., Capt. J. Brack, M.C., Staff-Sergt. S. Edwards. Major
O. F. Ford, Lieut. -Col. H. H. Beardsmore, D.S.O. (Commandant) Genl. Sir W. H. Birdwood, G.C.M.G., K.C.B., K.C.S.I., C.I.E.,
D.S.O., Col. C. R. Crosse, C.M.G., M.V.O., Capt. W. K. Findlay, M.C., Staff-Sergt. F. Harrison, Lieut. W. B. Suttor, 2nd A/M.
T. M. Mastertcun, Lieut, P. R. Came, Lance-Crpl. W. Green.




Australian riflemen with wide experience, including- previous visits
to Bisley. They had behind them the knowledg-e gained in their
earlier visits to this centre of marksmanship, and were able to
supply valuable information and advice.
In April, Lieut.-Col. Watson made arrangements with the
Secretary of the National Rifle Association (Lieut.-Col. C. R.
Crosse) for the housing of a large Australian contingent at Bisley
and the team went into residence there on May 6th. They had
comfortable cubicles, a large recreational room, and a mess hut.
Considerable delay occurred in commencing practice, owing to
the inability to secure rifles suitable for accurate shooting, and it
was not until a week later that practice began. The team found,
however, that everything possible had been done for their per-
sonal welfare, and their spiritual comfort was also attended to,
for a Padre was included in the team ! The Commissioners
of the Australian Comforts Fund and the Y.M.C.A. added an-
other to their very long list of good works by providing the team,
with mess furniture, extra food, and sporting material. Corpl,
A. Goode became Quartermaster of the “ outfit,” and nothing was
left undone that made for greater comfort. Arrangements hau
been made to draw rations from Aldershot, and these were
delivered daily by motor vans.
In the earlier days a good deal of difficulty was experienced
in getting together a suitable staff. Members of the team are
fond of quoting the case of one “ Digger ” who acted as cook.
He was certainly an excellent cook, and probably also an excel-
lent soldier, but the other members of the staff discovered a
certain amount of incompatibility of temperament between them-
selves and him. After he had cleared the kitchen on two occa-
sions with an axe, it was suggested that, as he had had quite
a lot of service, it was his turn for repatriation. The suggestion
was acted upon, and he went.
The nearest town to Bisley is Brookwood, which is some thirty
rniiles from London, noted principally for its asylum for the
insane (called by the “ Diggers ” the “ nut factory ”) and its
cemetery ! However, there was plenty of open space and fresh
air near to the Australians’ Camp, and, with an eye to their
maintenance of physical fitness, they had been supplied with plenty
of sporting material.
The N.R.A. Secretary (Lt.-Col. Crosse) placed his tennis court
at the disposal of the team and they enjoyed many good games.
The majority of them were very enthusiastic, but —that’s about
all! The West Hill Golf Club made every member of the team
an honorary member of the Club. As golfers they made a big
impression, both on those who happened to be watching them
and on the turf ! Individual matches or foursomes did not appeal
to them, so they started an innovation and went round in sixes


and sevens, each with a ball. There were always numerous
arguments, and the language, in the words of Bret Harte, was
“ frequent and painful and free.” For that reason, they pre-
ferred to have the links to themselves. “ Then,” said one
enthusiast, “we can play real golf.”
The City, London and Middlesex, North London, and Army
Rifle Clubs all made the Australians honorary members, and
everybody connected in any way with Bisley was most hospitable
to them. The Chairman (Lord Cheylesmore) and Secretary
(Lieut.-Col. Crosse) of the N.R.A. are but two of hundreds who
contributed towards the pleasure of the team’s stay. Cricket had
a big vogue, and the team won matches against many local
clubs and had a notable victory ox'er the Canadian team. The
social side of the life was thoroughly enjoyed.
After the team had been at Bisley for a week, forty long rifles
were obtained from the Tower of London. They were such a
poor lot that it was decided not to use them, and practice began
with the short rifles. All shooting was done without the use of a
sling, and, of course, without a rest. Difficulties cropped up
very early. Nobody could master the vagaries of the short rifle.
To make matters worse, the ammunition in use (marked R.L.)
proved to be very unsatisfactory. Barrels became badly nickelled,
and the shooting was erratic. Very few of the men could be
certain of making a score of 40 out of a possible 50, and the man
who scored 45 one day would find himself with 35 the next.
The team was commanded by Lieut.-Col. R. Beardsmore,
D. 5.0., V.D., who, however, was not made available till June
20th, rather late in the day, and the Adjutant and Shooting
Captain was Capt. W. K. Findlay, M.C., of the 40th Battalion.
As the one who had most to do with the early Administration,
Capt. Findlay had more work than anybody else, and he did it
in a very capable manner. The teams’ affairs were at all times
well managed, and it was due mainly to the Adjutant’s efficiency
that matters ran so smoothly. He was always courteous and con-
siderate, and the writer acknowledges his debt for most of the
information contained in this chapter.
With conditions for practice—in regard to rifles and ammuni-
tion —so- bad, it became necessary to make some alterations. A
new supply of ammunition, marked K.Z., was obtained, and the
improvement was evident at once. It was ascertained that all
other teams in practice had been doing equally badly with the
other ammunition, so there was no fall in the spirits of the A.I.F.
men.
During the stay at Bisley a match was fired against a team
from H.M.S. “ Excellent,” and the Australians won. A return
match was arranged, and the A.I.F. team went to Portsmouth,
where they were the guests of the officers and crew of the


“ Excellent, on which is the Naval School of Gunnery. The visitors
had a most enjoyable trip, and again won the match, which, like
the first, was fired with short rifles.
The difficulty of obtaining new long rifles was far harder to
overcome than that of obtaining new ammunition. A supply had
been ordered from the B.S.A. Company, and, although the team
awaited their arrival with patience, they came to hand only a few
days before the meeting opened. Capt. F mdlay had, meanwhile,
got in touch with the War Office, and discovered a supply of
unused long rifles. He secured the loan of a number of these,
and found them to be fairly good. However, it was rather late
in the preparatory period when they arrived, and they were after-
wards discarded in favour of the B.S.A. supply. Too muci
cannot be said of the work done during these troublous times
by Staff Sergeants Harrison and S. Edwards. They were un-
tiring in their efforts on the team’s behalf, first in obtaining
suitable rifles and afterwards in fitting and adjusting. The late
arrival of the B.S.A. rifles made it necessary that all fittings and
adjustments should be made just at the time when these men
should have been devoting the whole of their attention to prac-
tice • but they unselfishly gave up their time in the interests o
other members of the team. A lot of the success of the team is
due to their work in this respect and to their coaching. Capt.
J. Brack, Lieut. F. M. Best, and L/Cpl. Green also did a whole
lot of good work as coaches.
The Bisley of 1919 differed considerably from that of previous
years There wire 9 so many soldiers in England that it was
dedded to use the short rifle for the King’s Prize and other
important matches. This was the weapon used universally during
the previous five years on service, and the motives of the N.R.A.
were of the very best. Their decision, however, caused a lot o
controversy, and the competitors, taken as a whole were against
the restriction on the use of the long rifle. The chief argument
against the short rifle was that it was not, as a rule, an accurate
weapon. Short rifles had been turned out m enormous quanti-
ties during the war, and the opponents of the N.R.A. decision
contended that success with a short rifle was a matter more or
less of luck rather than a test of skill. The AT F team put forward
a statement that actually the short rifle, with Mark VII. ammu-
nition, would not group in a circle of five inches diame er. e
N R.A. realised that the rifle was not to be relied upon, at any
rate for ranges over 600 yards, and confined the shooting for
the King’s Prize to 600 yards and under. In previous years the
marksmen had to prove their skill up to 1,000 yards. On the
other hand, there was a large number of young men who had
found, upon entering the Army, that they could shoot well. _ All
their shooting had been done with the short rifle, and the Com


mittee of the N.R.A. was actuated, no doubt, by a desire to do
the right thing by these men and give them an opportunity of
competing for the prizes under the conditions with which they
were familiar and in accordance with what they had learned in,
the Army’s Musketry Schools. After all, the short rifle is the
weapon in use throughout the British Army.
The meeting opened on July 9th and continued until July 21st.
There was no shooting on July 19th, that being the day of the
official celebration of Peace in London. The early events in-
cluded the match for the Ashburton Shield, and about forty
Public School teams took part. Winchester College won, with
Charterhouse second. By this time there were some thousands
of competitors encamped at the range. The arrangements for
the meeting were excellent. Matches up to 600 yards were fired
on what was known as the “ Century ” range, consisting of one
hundred targets, and the long range matches took place on the
“ Stickledown ” range, of fifty targets. In addition there were
other ranges for the smaller competitions, such as running deer.
The A.I.F. team, after eliminations, was made up as follows
Lt.-Col. R. H. Beardsmore, D. 5.0., V.D. (Commandant), Capt.
W. K. Findlay, M.C. (Adjutant and Shooting Captain), Major
O. F. Ford, Capt. J. Brack, M.C., Chaplain Capt. H. H. Coles,,
Capt. R. A. McElwee, Lt. F. M. Best, Lt. C. H. Beaumont, M.M.,.
Lt. P. R. Came, Lt. K. W. McKenzie, Lt. W. B. Suttor, Lt. A.
Raw, Lt. C. Wilson, M.M., Staff/Sergts. S. Edwards, F. Harri-
son, G. F. S. Lee, Sergts. I. N. Eldridge, M.M., H. W. White,.
Cpls. W. J. Campbell, R. M. Earle, W. W. King, 2/Cpl. W.
Gribble, L/Cpl. W. Green, A/M.’s J. W. Bell, T. M. Master-
toun, Sapper C. Edwards, Dvr. H. B. Ewart, Ptes. P. H. Klee-
man, H. B. Ogilvie, and A. J. Tozer.
On Saturday, July 12th, the team took part in five matches,,
with a good deal of success. The results are set out hereunder.
The Stock Exchange, fired at 200, 500, and 600 yards, ten
shots at the short range and seven shots at each of the other
two ; Lieut. F. M. Best, with a score of 105, was ninth and won
£2; Cpl. W. J, Campbell was twenty-first with 103 and won
£2 ; Staff/Sergts. F. Harrison and G. F. S. Lee and Capt. J.
Brack each won £2 ; and L/Cpl. Green, Sergt. Eldridge, Sergt.
White, Sapper Edwards, Cpl. Gribble, Lieut. Came, Capt-
McElwee, Pte. Ogilvie, Cpl. Earle, and Staff/Sergt. Edwards £i
each. ,
The “ Daily Graphic,” ten shots at 200 yards : Capt. R. A,
McElwee, with 45, was eighth and won £2 and two framed
sketches, and Staff/Sergt. Harrison, with a similar total, was
tenth and secured similar prizes. Sergt. Eldridge, L/Cpl. Green
and Sapper C. Edwards each won £2, and Cpl. Earle, Air-


Mechanic Bell, Sergt. White, Lieut. Best, Cpl Campbell, Pte.
Ogilvie and Lieut. Came £i each.
The “ Graphic,” seven shots at 500 yards : Lieut. F. M. Best
was eighth with 33 and won £2 and two framed sketches; Cpl.
Gribble, Pte. Ogilvie, Lieut. W ilson, Sergt. Lee, Capt. J. Brack
and A/M. Bell each won £l.
The “ Daily Telegraph,” seven shots at 600 yards: Lieut. K.
W McKenzie headed the Australian list, being twenty-second, with
a score of 32, with which he won £2. Capt. Findlay was twenty-
fifth with 32' and won a similar amount, as also did Cpl. Camp-
bell and Capt. Brack. The following each won £1 ; Sergt.
White, A/M. Mastertoun, Sapper Edwards, Sergt. Edwards,
Lieut. Best, Lieut. Beaumont and L/Cpl. Green.
The Wimbledon Cup, seven shots at 600 yards, valued at ,£25,
was won by A/M. Bell, who scored the possible. Sapper
Edwards was second, with a score of 34, and won £5. Pte.
Tozer, Lieut. Suttor, Sergt. Lee and Cpl. King each won £l.
This was a particularly good performance. There were only
twenty-seven prizes, and in this, as in all other individua
matches, there were between 700 and 800 compelitois.
On Monday, July 14th, members of the team participated in
only two matches—the Prince of Wales and the Alexandra. The
former was open only to winners of medals in previous King s
Prize Competitions, and the only members of the team who were
eligible were Staff/Sergts. Edwards and Harrison. Sergt. Ed-
wards came thirtieth, with a score of 84 out of a possible 100,
and won £2. ,
The Alexandra w T as another match won by a member ot -tie
Australian team. It was of ten shots at 200 yards and seven
shots at 600 yards. A/M. Bell registered his second win with a
total of 79. He scored 46 at the short range and 33 at 600 yards.
His prize was £2O. A/M. Mastertoun was ninth with a score
of 76 and won £5. Sapper Edwards and Cpl. Green were 20th
and 22nd respectively and each won £3. Sergt. Eldndge, Lieut.
Best Sergt Edwards and Cpl. Gribble each won £2, and Cpl.
Earle, Sergt. Harrison, Dvr. Ewart, Cpl. King, Capt Brack,
Cpl. Campbell, Capt. Findlay, Pte. Tozer, Sergt. Lee and Lieut.
Raw £1 each.
The first stage of the King’s Prize was set down for decision
on July 15th, with two other matches, the Duke of Cambridge
and the Martin’s Cup. The Duke of Cambridge was of ten
shots at 900 yards, and when the scores had been tallied it was
found that Sergt. White and Sergt. Eldridge had tied with Capt
Hislop of the sth Battalion Royal Scots for first place with
scores of 47 each. A shoot-off placed Hislop first, Sergt. W hite
second and Sergt Eldridge third. Each of the Australians won
£5. Lieut. Best was twelfth with a score of 45 and won £2,


and prizes of each were won by Capt. Findlay, Sapper Ed-
wards, Lieuts. Raw, Wilson and Suttor, Pte. Ogilvie, Lieut. -
Col. Beardsmore, A/M. Mastertoun and Pte. Tozer.
The Martin’s Challenge Cup was open to teams of six men
from any one unit, and in the case of Australia a military district
was considered a unit. Scores made in the first stage of the
King’s, St. George’s and Queen Mary’s Competitions counted,
and the short M.L.E. rifle was used. The match was won by
the South Australian (No. 4 Military District) team with a score
of 833.
The shooting with the short rifle in the King’s Prize caused
many ejaculations of disgust from the old hands, and there was
a sensational incident when the barrel of the rifle used by Staff/
Sergt. Lee burst at his first shot at the 200 yards range. The
explosion was a loud one, and a piece of the barrel shattered a
telescope on the firing point close by, another piece narrowly
missing the head of the Range Officer. Fortunately nobody was
injured, and Lee only felt the back-blast. The rifle was new,
only 50 rounds having been fired from it, and the B.S.A. Coy.’s
representative, by whose firm the rifle was made, said that there
must have been some obstruction in the barrel to cause this
explosion. The first stage of the King’s was ten shots each at
200 yards and 500 yards, the best three hundred scores qualifying
for the second stage. The following Australians qualified, and
each won ; Green, Beardsmore, McElwee, Best, Eldridge,
Tozer, Kleeman, Harrison, Came, Ewart, McKenzie, Ogilvie,
Ford, Coles and Findlay. Prizes of jQi were won by Campbell
and Brack.
The first stage of the St. George’s Challenge Vase and the
Cheylesmore were fired on July 16th. In the latter match, open
to teams of four from one Unit, parties representing New South
Wales, Victoria and South Australia were entered, but were not
successful. It was a knock-out competition, fired at falling
plates at about 250 yards, the starting point being about 100
yards from the firing point.
The St. George’s provided ten shots at 300 yards and twenty
at 600 yards with the short rifle. In the tally-up, prizes of £2
were won by McKenzie, Bell, Gribble and Tozer, and £1 each
by Raw, Ford, Ogilvie, Kleeman and Eldridge.
Thursday, July 17th, was a big day. The second stage of the
King’s, Queen Mary’s, Kolapore Cup and Colonial Prize and the
Corporation of the City of London Competitions were all down
for decision. The final stage of the King’s Prize was fired on
the following day. The match was won by a New Zealander,
Sergt. L. Loveday, M.M., whose total was 253. He won the
Gold Medal, Gold Badge, and The second stage was ten
shots each at 200, 500, and 600 yards, and the competitors with


200
500
600
300
5 00
600
Total
Green
... 44
38
38
4 1
4 1
37
2 39
Beardsmore
... 41
44
42
37
4 1
3 2
237
McElwee
... 43
38
37
40
3 6
38
232
Best
47
35
40
35
38
231
Eldridge
... 36
42
39
33
39
38
227
300
5 00
600
Total.
Brack
46
49
138
Harrison
46
46
137
47
4 2
134
C. Edwards ..
43
46
132
Green
4 1
45
45
E3 1
44
40
130
S. Edwards ..
44
43
127
Eldridgc
4 1
41
I2 5
Total
346
356
35 2
io54
the first hundred aggregates fired the third stage of ten shots at
300 500, and 600 yards. hive Australians won badges and
money prizes as follows: Green £3, being 25th; Beardsmore
£2, 35th; McElwee £3, 57th; Best £3, Gist; Eldridge £3,
72nd. The scoring of these competitors in the second and final
stages is set out below :
Queen Mary’s Prize was provided for a competition of twenty
shots at 200 yards, fired in two consecutive series of ten each
at a figure 3 target in 30 seconds. King, Came, Eldridge,
McKenzie, and White each won £1 •
The Corporation of the City of London was of ten shots at
1 000 yards. Pte. Tozer, with a score of 47, came third and
won £ 5. Lieut. Beaumont (47) was fifth and won £3, Lieut.
Raw (47) was sixth and won £3, Cpl. Earle (46) tenth and won
r 2, Pte. Ogilvie (46) fifteenth and won £2, Sergt. Eldridge (45;
seventeenth and won £2. Prizes of £1 were won by Brack,
Wilson, White, Beardsmore, S. Edwards, C. Edwards and
Suttor.
The Rajah of Kolapore’s Imperial Challenge Cup was provided
for a match open to teams of eight, each firing ten shots at 300,
500, and 600 yards. It was won by England with a score of
1 060 from Australia with 1,054. Canada scored 1,009, South
Africa 965, and New Zealand 975. The match was very excit-
ing. The Australian team beat the English team at the 300 and
600 yards ranges, but were beaten by them at 500 yards by 18
points. At this range the English team put on the remarkable
total (under the conditions existing at the time) of 374 out of a
possible 400. The scores of the A.I.F. men were:—


900
1000
Total.
White
... 66
66
132
S. Edwards
... 63
68
13 1
Green
... 58
65
123
Mastertoun
61
60
121
Harrison
58
120
Gribble
57
118
Brack
... 58
59
ll 7
Best
56
x 16
Came
... 52
62
114
Ford
.... 52
58
110
Tozer
.... 52
56
108
C. Edwards
52
”4
Total ...
... 707
717
1424
The Colonial Prize of was won in this match by the A.I.F.
team.
The Mackinnon Challenge Cup has always provided an inte-
resting match. At the Bisley Meeting in 1914 it was won by
Australia, and as the A.I.F. team had been shooting better at
the long ranges than at the short during their practice, it was
thought that they had more than an ordinary chance of retaining
the Cup. The match was for teams of twelve, each man firing
fifteen shots at 900 yards and a similar number at 1,000 yards.
However, the Australians never at any time looked like win-
ning. The English team headed the list with a score of 1,497,
Australia being second with 1,424, and, next in order, Canada
1,398, Scotland 1,375, an d New Zealand 1,368. The individual
scores of the Australian team were :
In the teams matches the coaching of the English teams was
remarkably fine, and the judging of wind was an object lesson to
others. They invariably had two men down per target, and they
were fortunate in having coaches who were not firing in the
matches. The A.I.F. had to rely on members of the team. The
English system of having as many men down together as possible
showed to decided advantage, and probably assisted materially
in their win In the Kolapore Cup. Under this system advantage
can be taken of good spells of weather, it gives each man more
time, is not so tiring, and actually is faster. In every match the
Australians were last to finish, and the last two men down always
had a race against time.
The Wantage was a rapid-firing competition, ten shots at 200
yards. The target, 18 inches in diameter, appeared ten times
for intervals of three seconds each, with a similar time between


the appearances. Four shoots were allowed, the best to count.
Prizes of £1 each were won by Ford, Came, McKenzie, White,
and Green.
The Broad Arrow, also a rapid-firing- match, was of ten shots,
thirty seconds being allowed. Sergt. Eldridge won £l.
Yet another rapid-firing match was the Secretary of State for
War, ten shots at 500 yards in 45 sec. McKenzie and Eldridge
each won £i.
Unlimited entries were allowed in the Armourers’ Company
Competition, ten shots at 900 yards. Lieut. Raw scored 49, and
won the second prize of £5- A / M - Mastertoun with 49 was
third and got £3, Lieut. Wilson with 47 was twelfth and won
£i, and Capt. Brack with 47 was sixteenth and won £ l . A
similar prize was won by Sergt. Edwards.
The B.S.A. Match also allowed of unlimited entries and pro-
vided for ten shots at 1,000 yards. White was fourth with 47,
S Edwards fifth with 47, Ogilvie seventh with 46, and Raw
tenth with 46. Each of these competitors secured a prize ot £l.
In the J. H. Steward Challenge Cup, unlimited entries, ten
shots at 600 yards, Brack scored 46, came tenth and won £l.
The usual Sweepstakes were shot for daily. On July 10th
Sergt. Harrison scored 46 at 600 yards and got the first prize
of /'c L/Cpl. Green was second and Lieut. Best third in this
0 r „ r 0 rcsnectivelv On July nth Major
•event, winning £3 and £2 respectively. j y j
Ford made a possible (50) at 200 yards and won ,£5. On the
same day S. Edwards won the Sweepstakes at 500 yards and
annexed £5. After this date the team had very little time to
participate in these events.
During the meeting there was a good deal of talk about unrest
and threats of revolt among the markers, but the trouble was
overcome. There were occasions when mistakes occurred, and
the markers were often very slow to signal a shot, but beyom
that the A.I.F. team had nothing to complain about, ihe marker
question was the subject of a good deal of newspaper comment.
Owing to Bisley having been hung up since 1914, most ot the
old Staff had left, and the N.R.A. had great difficulty in organis-
ing a new one. It will be readily understood, therefore, that
some confusion occurred at the beginning. In the first stage of
the King’s, at 200 yards, an English Sergeant-Major, who was
first down on the first target, was marked a possible- ten bu
in succession. This caused a mild sensation at the time and
then it was reported that the telescope showed shots on the target
that were certainly not bulls. The target was examined, with
the result that the score was reduced to 44. This mistake was


brought about by the marker’s igmorance of the correct method
of scoring. He had marked a bull for each hit on the figure, as
allowed in the Army Musketry Course.
Major Ford’s possible at 200 yards in the Sweepstakes also
caused a good deal of discussion. He himself was very doubtful
as to its correctness, for he was unable to make anything like a
similar score at the same range with the same rifle on subsequent
occasions. With the uneven quality of the Mark VII. ammuni-
tion, it was considered very unlikely that anybody could hit a
five-inch bull ten times in succession at 200 yaids. However,
the other side of the question is that Major Ford may have been
lucky enough to obtain ten good rounds and get off ten good
shots. The difficulty of the Bisley conditions for the King’s.
Prize is shown by the fact that at 200 yards a five-inch figure
was used. At 300 yards it was an eight-inch bull; at 500 yards
a 16-inch figure, and at 600 yards an 18-in. bull. The usual pro-
cedure in Australia is an 18-inch bull at 500 yards.
The consent of the authorities was obtained to fire the match
for the Empire Challenge Trophy immediately after the Bisley
meeting. This trophy consists of a handsome shield, and was
presented in 1907 by the Commonwealth Council of the Rifle
Associations of Australia for competition among men represent-
ing the defensive forces of the Empire. The first Empire match
took place in Australia in 1907 and was won by Australia, with
an aggregate of 2,103 points. In 1909 Australia again won it,
beating New Zealand. In 1910 the match was decided at Bisley,,
and Great Britain won with a total of 2,177 points from Canada,
Australia, India, and Singapore in the order named. Great
Britain again won in 1913 with 2,210 points from Australia,
Canada and India. There was no match in 1914, for war broke
out just at the time a British team was to have sailed for Aus-
tralia. The conditions of the match are : Teams of eight, firing
ten shots each at 300, 500, and 600 yards on the first day, and
ten shots each at 800, 900, and 1,000 yards on the second day.
The teams entered were from Great Britain, Australia, Canada,
and New Zealand. A lead was taken by Great Britain on the
first day’s shooting, with a score of 1,043, Australia being next
with 1,0:2, Canada third with 987, and New Zealand last with
959. On the second day the English team commenced at the
800 yards in splendid style, and rather knocked over the hopes
of the Australians that they would pull up at the long ranges.
The Englishmen had an average of 47 at this range, and Aus-
tralia’s total was 358. At both the 000 and 1,000 yarns ranges
the home team increased its lead, and won by 72 points. The
scores were: Great Britain, 2,112; Australia, 2,040; New Zea-
land, 1,979; Canada, 1,936.


300
5 oo
600
800
900
1000
Total.
Harrison
... 40
44
47
45
44
37
2 57
Green
... 44
48
39
47
44
39
261
Best
••• 45
44
39
43
48
33
2 5 2
Eldridg-e
... 40
45
4 1
43
44
38
2 5!
Brack
43
43
40
49
39
2 54
S. Edwards ...
••• 43
3 6
46
48
48
38
2 59
C. Edwards ...
... 40
48
35
46
4 1
40
250
White
44
44
46
43
45
256
Totals
326
35 2
334
358
36 r
309
2040
Individual scores of the Australian team were
As a result of their participation in the 1919 Bisley, the team
won cash prizes valued at with half a dozen framed sketches
and five King’s Badges.
An analysis of their placings in the various events shows that
their shooting was very consistent throughout the whole meet-
ing. Members of the team gained four first prizes, seven second
prizes, three thirds, one fourth, three fifths, one sixth, one
seventh, two eighths, two ninths, three tenths, two twelfths, one
fourteenth, one fifteenth, two sixteenths, two seventeenths, one
eighteenth, one twentieth, two twenty-firsts, three twenty-
seconds, and three twenty-fifths. In the ordinary course of
events, twenty-fifth place seems a long way back, but when there
are between 700 and 800 competitors in an event it must be con-
sidered good. The list of placings given does not include sweep-
stakes prizes.
General Sir William Birdwood evinced a keen interest in this,
as In all other sporting activities of the A.I.F. He visited the
team on two occasions, the first during practice, and the second
during the meeting. On his first visit —June 13th —the G.O.C.
was accompanied by Lieut.-Colonel Beardsmore, and each mem-
ber of the team was presented to him. He expressed his delight
at seeing so many men who were with him on Gallipoli. Lieut. -
Col. Crosse, the N.R.A. Secretary, showed General Birdwood
over the range, and he inspected available sites for an Australian
Hut which it is proposed to erect on the range. The General’s
second visit was during the firing of the Empire match, and his
interest was at all times keen. At the conclusion of the meeting
he sent a telegram to the Commandant of the deam in these
words : “ Please convey my heartiest congratulations to all mem-
bers who have been shooting for the A.I.F. and have consistently
done so well and fully maintained the high reputation of the
A.1.F.”


On the last day of the Bisley Meeting (July 21st) the Minister
for Defence in the Federal Government (Senator G. F. Pearce)
paid a visit to the range, principally for the purpose of seeing
for himself the proposed site for the Australian Hut. Many
senior officers of the A.I.F. were also present during the meeting
at the invitation of the National Rifle Association. At the con-
clusion of the meeting the prize-winners received their Cups,
Medals, and Badges from the hands of Prince Albert.
On July 24th the members of the team were entertained at
dinner by Lieut.-Col. P. W. Richardson, 0.8. E., V.D., who
was Captain of the British Team which visited Australia in 1907.
Lieut.-Col. Richardson had taken great interest in the A.I.F.
men’s doings during their stay, and he entertained them royally
on this occasion.
The members of the team expressed their appreciation cf the
work done for them by Captain Findlay and Staff-Sergts. S.
Edwards and F. Harrison by making presentations to them. On
9th August the team left Bisley and embarked on the “ Ceramic ”
at Liverpool for Australia.




A.I.F. No. 2 Crew.
Standi ng ; Crp l. J.K.Cogle (6),Serget.E.J.Harrison (3),Sergt.G.M. Penny (2), Lieut.H.Ross-Soden (coach), Lieut.H.A.White
(4), Major W.A.Audsley, D.S.O.
eated: Gunner J. A. Begg (7), Lieut, H. R. Newall (stroke), Lieut, O. J. Wood (cox), Lieut. J. Howieson (bow).


CHAPTER IX.
ROWING
Yet another activity of the Sports Control Board was rowing,
jind Australians entered into this sport with characteristic enthu-
siasm. That they were successful is proved by their having won
the biggest event of the year. It was early suggested that there
should be a big revival, and the rowing men in the A.I.F. decided
to play a part in it. This decision led to early formation of
■crew’s, which were only completed after exhaustive trials. Un-
like most other forms of athletics there was little opportunity tor
any number of rowing men to engage in their particular form
of sport during the war. Cadets training for commissions at
Oxford and Cambridge Universities were the exception to this
rule. The rowing authorities at the various Colleges very gene-
rously allowed the use of their club houses, boats, and oars by
these prospective officers, who were enjoying a spell from the
front line. This generosity was freely availed of and greatly
appreciated, and, incidentally, many burly young Australians
were enabled to have their first paddles in first-class racing boats.
Undoubtedly these men will help to fill the casualty gaps in the
Australian rowing world later on.
During the war, however, there was very little competitive
rowing of first-class order in the United Kingdom. Among the
Services, the racing that took place was confined to the Head-
quarters Staffs of the various Military Organisations. On the
cessation of hostilities, however, some of the more enthusiastic
wetbobs ” of the Armies turned their attention to rowing, and
it was very evident that the golden opportunity for a race open
to members of the Allied Forces would not be lost. Very little
searching showed that there was a prospect of getting together
good crews, and early in the year the matter was taken up with
enthusiasm.
A meeting was convened in London on January 22nd by the
Leander Rowing Club, England’s premier rowing body, and
attended by officials and members of rowing clubs affiliated with
the Amateur Rowing Association and honorary secretaries of
regattas. The main question which came under consideration
was as to how the sport should be revived in 1919. At this
meeting a proposal, subsequently adopted, was made that a


Henley Peace Regatta should be held in July, and that races
should be included in the programme for amateur oarsmen of
the Allied Armies. It was subsequently decided to suspend the
competitions for the usual Henley trophies, such as the Grand
Challenge Cup for eights, Diamond Sculls, and other events
known widely as the blue ribands of the rowing world.
Prior to this decision having been taken, the French Rowing
Association had advertised a race to be rowed on the Seine in
Paris on April 27th open to soldiers of the Allied Armies. W ith
these two events already definitely fixed, there was something
for which to prepare, and the A.I.F. set about the task of collect-
ing and sorting out its oarsmen. With such a long period of
rowing stagnation behind them, this was not an easy task for
those who undertook the collection of a crew. Arrangements
were made by which the whole of the A.I.F. was canvassed, and
experienced men who were fit and willing to row were communi-
cated with, and eventually brought to London. Many gaps had
been made in the ranks of rowing men by casualties, and the
rigours of war had incapacitated others.
However, there was still some of the old brigade at hand to
lend their help and experience to the 11 unknown quantities
who volunteered in large numbers. The chief difficulty at the
beginning was to keep the best men In England. They had been
away from their homes for long periods, and were, naturally,
anxious to return. This, of course, was a difficulty not peculiar
to the A.I.F.
Assembling the prospective representatives of the Australian
Army a slow process. It was necessary to collect them
from their units in the field or the depots in England. However,
a start was made early in March with the training. The work
was done from the London Rowing Club’s shed at Putney, and
sufficient men had been secured to boat an eight-oar crew daily.
A sub-committee of experienced oarsmen was formed to take
charge of the rowing, and this consisted of Major E. W. lulloch,
M.C., a Victorian Inter-state representative, Lieut. O. J. Wood,
honorary secretary of the New South Wales Rowing Association,
and Lieut. H. Ross-Soden, a Victorian Inter-state oarsman and a
representative of the Olympic crew which rowed at Henley and
Stockholm in 1912. This Committee was charged with the work
of selection and coaching. By the time the narrowing down of
the aspirants had been completed and a party of oarsmen
selected, several weeks had elapsed. The next difficulty was that
of securing a suitable coach. Several oarsmen with sufficient
experience were in London, but were either required in the boat
or were not available owing to duty. This difficulty became so
serious that the question of securing a suitable coach from Aus-
tralia was seriously considered. It was necessary to inculcate


the principles of the established Australian style into the rowing
of the younger members of the crew, and because of this, the
coach difficulty was not easy of solution. It would have been a
very easy matter to engage the services of a man conversant
with any of the recognised English rowing styles, but since an
Australian style had been evolved, perfected, and brought to
Henley with such success in 1912, it was considered that that style
was the one which the A.I.F. should adopt, and no departure
from it was allowed consideration. The matter of sending to
Australia for a coach was not entertained for long, as the time
was getting short, and there would not be much time after his
arrival until the race. Eventually Mr. Stephen Fairbairn, an
Australian who had rowed with a Victorian Inter-state eight many
years before, offered his services, and these were gratefully
accepted. Mr. Fairbairn had been actively associated with Cam-
bridge University and Thames Rowing Clubs during his residence
in England. The work of definitely selecting a first eight from
the party, which had now been reduced to twenty, was proceeded
with. Capt. H. C. Disher, A.A.M.C., an experienced Melbourne
University oarsman, was selected as stroke, and together
with the rowing sub-committee and Lieut. H. Hauenstein, M.M.,
a New South Wales Inter-state and Olympic International oar,
acted as a Selection Committee.
By this time the Inter-allied eight-oar race promoted by the
French was close at hand, and it became necessary to make a
decision as to whether an Australian crew should be entered.
There was a good deal of Army enthusiasm regarding the race,
and Major S. A. Middleton, Organising Secretary of the Sports
Control Board, and Lieut. Harry Ross-Soden—both 1912 Olympic
representatives of Australia —visited Paris to obtain full particu-
lars regarding boats, course and conditions. On their return,
both officers reported against sending a crew, giving as their
reasons —
(a) What little training the A’.I.F. men had had, had been in
racing boats, and this race was to be rowed in heavy
clinker boats, without outriggers.
(b) The course was not satisfactory, as there were seven
bridges to be negotiated, and the stream, being very
fast, was very rough with any breeze blowing.
Although the members of the crew were very anxious to com-
pete in the race, it was thought that, owing to lack of training
and for the reasons given above, it would be unwise to interfere
with Henley training. All efforts were accordingly concentrated
on winning the King’s Cup at Henley.
The Paris Race was over a course of a mile and a half, and
was rowed with a strong current. Six crews entered, and they


were divided into two heats, first and second in each heat starting-
in the final. Crews from New Zealand, America, France, Por-
tugal, Newfoundland, and Alsace-Lorraine entered. France and
Newfoundland qualified for the final in the first heat, Portugal
being eliminated. In the second heat New Zealand and America
qualified at the expense of Alsace-Lorraine. The final was a
great race and was won by New Zealand by eight feet from
America. Twenty-five thousand people watched the race from
the banks.
Meantime, the Australian party continued its training at Put-
ney. A house was secured close to the boat sheds, and made
comfortable by the Commissioners of the Australian Comforts
Fund and the Y.M.C.A., and the party went into residence there.
The crews rowed from the London Club, along with the
Canadians, while the New Zealanders were training from the
Thames Rowing Club.
Early in May, Mr. Fairbairn, who was not in good health,
notified the Committee that he could not continue the coaching
of the crew. The Secretary of the Board, Major Middleton,
whose duties were multifarious, found time —or, rather, made
time—to go to the river from his office each morning and carry
on the coaching. He carried on for three or four weeks, and
then the services of Lieut.-Col. Norman Marshall, D. 5.0., M.C.,
were made available by the A.I.F. authorities in France, and he
arrived and took over the work. Arrangements were made with
the Thames Club for the hire of the Australian boat “ Q.L,
Deloitte,” which had been used by the successful Australian
crew in 1912 at Henley, and a second eight was hired from Jesus
College, Cambridge. Practice oars were bought from Norris,
of Putney, and racing oars from Ayling.
Rowing on the tidal waters of the Thames at Putney Is not
always pleasant. The 23 ft. drop of tide means a fast-running
stream and, more often than not, rough water. That being the
case, the crew welcomed the suggestion of an early move to the
more sheltered reaches of Henley. Arrangements were made
for the hire of a fine residence on the riverside —Wharfe House —
near the finishing mark of the Henley Course. The general
advice was all against this early move, owing to the belief that
crews “go stale ” there easily and quickly. However, it was
decided to do the last month’s training there, and a move was
made on June Ist. The bulk of the rowing party was given
a few days’ leave, and only those necessary for shifting house
were kept. Boats were carted by road to their new home, and
the goods and chattels taken by motor-lorry to “ the better ’ole.”
When the A.I.F. men arrived they found that the American crew
had already been in training at Henley for a fortnight.
Apart from the fact that there was no speed launch available


for the use of the coaches —coaching- had to be done from the
tow-path on bicycles —the move up-river was very beneficial.
Training continued under ideal conditions as to accommodation
and rationing. Wharfe House was in every way suitable for
the purpose to which It was put. A fine lawn sloped .down to
the bank of the river, where a pontoon allowed for the safe
launching of the boats. A small shed on one side ot the lawn
housed the boats and gear of the party, and the surroundings of
green trees and lawn, and the placid surface of the river, very
soon had a good effect on the crews. In addition, Wharfe House
was a fine vantage point from which to view the work of the
crew 7 s.
The chief event on the long Henley programme was the eight-
oar race for the Allied Forces. His Majesty King George \ .
presented a handsome Cup for the winners of this race. Other
events open to Service men were the Coxw r ainless Fours, Sculls
and Pairs, the two last-named events being open also to members,
of affiliated clubs. There was a second race for eights—the
Fawley Cup. The conditions for this event were not quite clear,
and an inquiry was made of the Regatta Secretary as to whether
an Australian crew 7 might be entered. His reply was in the
affirmative, and the A.I.F. No. 2 Crew was entered. However,
the Regatta Committee subsequently decided that the crew w r as
not eligible. This was unfortunate, as the Rowing Sub-Com-
mittee had been influenced in deciding on entering a second eight
for the Regatta by the belief that it would be eligible for this,
event. This course had been taken in preference to that of
making entries for the Coxwainless Fours and Pairs, and it was
proposed then to enter only one eight for the King’s Cup. The
advantage of having a second eight was that the first crew had
another against which it could try out. Then, again, coxwain-
less rowing is practically unknown in Australia, and was
thought wiser to adhere to the advice, Better the
know than the devil you don’t know.” All these considerations,
therefore, influenced the Committee in deciding in favour of two
eights, and the refusal of the entry of the No. 2 Crew for the
Fawley Cup created an unexpected position.
No. 2 Crew had been entered for the Marlow Regetta, which
was held a fortnight before Henley. The New Zealand crew
had also entered for this event, and the race held a good deal of
interest in that it would give an idea of the New Zealander’s
form. Prior to this regatta, and while the No. 2 Crew was
finishing its preparations, Nos. 1 and 2 Crews had several bursts
off the mark together, and rows of one minute’s duration. In all
of these the second crew proved the faster. Up to a certain
point this was to be expected, as No. 2 Crew was further advanced
in its training, having been rowing twice a day for some time,


while No. i, with still a fortnight to go before Henley, had only
commenced the daily second row, the danger of “ staleness ”
being always present. As a matter of fact, the Selection Com-
mittee had discussed the matter of making several changes in
No. x Crew prior to the trials with No. 2 Crew, but decided to
leave the latter combination undisturbed until after the Marlow
event had been rowed. After that it was decided that a full-
course trial should take place between the two crews.
MARLOW REGATTA.
Marlow Regatta was held on June 21st, a fortnight before the
final day of Henley. Every effort had been made to secure
entries from Henley crews, with the result that Australian, New
Zealand, and American crews figured among the contestants.
The course of this old-established regatta is a pretty one, being
just under a mile in length. The race for Service eight-oar crews
attracted the New Zealanders and Australian No. 2 Crew, and
was the best event on the programme. The Australians had been
showing great pace off the mark, and during their training they
were rowing very well over a mile stretch. The New Zealanders
were known to be a good crew, but they had done nothing by
which they could be judged. A good race was anticipated, and
the Australians expected to win. They did not !
At the start the A.I.F. men went away with the lead, striking
a very high rate, and showing out in front immediately, rowing
41 to the minute. At about half-way over the course the Aus-
tralians were about clear of their opponents, but they were rowing
a much faster rate of stroke than the New Zealanders. The Aus-
tralian stroke never steadied down, and in this race he asked
a little more of the men behind him than they could give. The
New Zealand crew, rowing a good steady 36 to the minute,
crept up gradually, till at 200 yards from the finish the crews
were level. Here the New Zealanders sprinted in grand style,
and won a well-rowed race by half a length in 4 mins. 17 secs.
The Australian crew in this event did not row up to the standard
shown in their trial spins. This was due, possibly, to the fact
that the rate of striking was much faster than they had pre-
viously been asked to do after the first burst off the mark.
Normally, the stroke should have been steadied down and
lengthened. Still, the fine rowing of the New Zealand crew
must have had something to do with the stroke’s anxiety to
keep the lead, once gained.
The crews were :
New Zealand. —G. H. Wilson, 10 st. 8 lbs. (bow); A. T. White
10 st. 9 lbs. (2); C. L. Lester, 12 st. 3 lb. (3); W. G. Coombes,
11 st. 6 lbs. (4); W. Patterson, 12 st. (5); S. B. R. Rutledge,


13 st. (6); J. T. Mcßoberts, 12 st. (7); C. A. Healey,
11 st. 12 lbs. (stroke); and A. H. Trussed, 8 st. 10 lbs. (cox).
Australia No. 2. —G. W. Mettam, 11 st. 8 lbs. (bow); G. M.
Penny, 11 st. 8 lbs. (2); E. J. Harrison, 11 st. 12 lbs. (3); A. V,
Scott, 12 st. 7 lbs. (4); W. A. Audsley, 12 st. 12 lbs. (5); J. K.
Cogle, 12 st. (6); T. McGill, i2st. 9 lbs. (7); H. R. Newall, 11 st.
(stroke) ;A. E. Smedley, 8 st. (coxwain).
The Senior Fours Race at this regatta was rowed in the cox-
wainless boats. Although they had very little knowledge of this
type of rowing, the A.I.F. men hired a boat from the lhames
Club, had a few trial spins, and decided to bout a crew from
the first eight, and the crew consisted of A. R. Robb, 11 st. 8 lbs.
(bow), S. A. Middleton, 13 st. 6 lbs. (2), H. Hauenstein,
13 st. 10 lbs. (3), F. A. House, 11 st. 8 lbs. (stroke). The United
States Army entered two crews, and New Zealand, Australia,
Thames Rowing Club, and Granta Rowing Club one each. In
the heat the Australian four were drawn against New Zealand,
and after an even start showed that they had pace enough. Early
trouble came from the steering, however. This was done from
No. 2 stretcher, and was very erratic, and the Australians, soon
after the start,’ fouled the New Zealanders, and both crews
stopped rowing. The umpire ordered a re-start at the place
where the foul occurred, and allowed the Australian crew the
advantage they had when the foul occurred. The Australians
thereupon went ahead and won.
In their second row the A.I.F. Four rowed against a veteran
Thames Rowing Club crew, and again bad steering brought
disaster. After they had led over the first part of the course,
the Australian steersman decided on an investigation of the river
bank, and brought his crew up with a crash into a punt moored
against the bank, and well off the proper course. Experientia
docet ! And Coxwainless Fours cannot be won without some
practice ! Thames Crew won the race, and they also won the
final from the American Army Crew No. 1.
A. S. Cox, the Australian sculling representative, had his
first row at this regatta, and met a fine sculler in D. C. Hadfield,
of New Zealand. Hadfield won his heat easily, and also annexed
the final.
The A.I.F. had the satisfaction of winning two of the minor
events at this regatta. The emergency men of the Henley rowing
party formed a crew for the Clinker Fours Race and won their
heat against a crew from the A.I.F. Wattle Club, an organisation
formed by the members of the Australian Headquarters Staff In
London. In the final they beat Thames Rowing Club crew. The
A.I.F. crew consisted of J. Howieson, 10 st. 9 lbs, (bow), H. A.
White, 11 st. 13 lbs. (2), H. K. Goyen, 12 st. 11 lbs. (3), R. J.
Clark, 10 st. 8 lbs. (stroke), A. E. Smedley, 8 st. (cox).


The A.I.F. Wattle Club won the Clinker Eights Race from
the Thames Rowing Club by half a length.
This regatta held a lot of interest for followers of the sport.
It was expected that a good idea of form would be gained from
the racing. The result, however, was a negative one, and the
experts gained no information except, perhaps, that the New
Zealand sculler, Hadfield, was an exceptionally good man.
HENLEY PREPARATIONS.
The fortnight after Marlow Regatta was a very busy one on,
the river, and preparations for Henley were in full swing on
the famous reach. The piles and booms on the rowing course
were put in order, and fresh crews appeared daily. Stands,
marquees, and entertainment tents appeared and transformed the
peaceful green banks into scenes of bustling activity. The grace-
ful white swans were collected arid moved to other parts of
the river until the time when quiet should be again restored.
When the entry lists closed it was found that a record had
been established. A week before the Regatta was due to com-
mence, riverside habitues knew enough about the form of the
competing crews to give the lie to the sceptics who had foretold
a dull regatta, with poor entries, poorer rowing, and lack of
interest. Instead of having the racing on only three days, as-
originally intended, the Regatta Committee was compelled to
extend it to a fourth day owing to the numerous entries. Fine
weather was all that was needed to make the Regatta a record
in every way. With characteristic perversity, the clerk of the
weather, who had supplied glorious sunshine during the whole
of June, turned on the taps on the opening day of Heriley,
and forgot to turn them off during the whole Regatta. The
racing was watched by crowds clad in mackintoshes, and the
river took on a very drab appearance when the showers came
along. The rain kept thousands of people away.
After Marlow Regatta the Selection Committee decided that
the two Australian crews should have their try-out over the full
Henley course. After the No. 2 Crew’s entry for the Fawley
Cup had been refused, it was decided to enter two crews for
the King’s Cup, but it was necessary to make them first and
second crews in ability, and not: merely in name. The wisdom
of having the best men obtainable in one crew is apparent. It
was obvious that some alteration in the No. 1 Crew as then
constituted would be necessary if they were to be a representative
eight. The try-out took place during the week following Marlow.
No. 2 Crew proved to be the faster. They had a slight lead at
the half-way mark, and drew away to finish a length ahead of
No. 1. To prove that this was not a chance beating, another


Alfred D. Felton.
Driver 4th Divisional Engineers A.I.F., Winner of the World’s
and English Sculling Championships with “Sportsman” Cup,
over Putney to Mortlake course 4½ miles on October 27th, 1919,
by 6 lengths from Ernest Barry holder of titles. Time 25 mins.
40 secs. Ernest Barry won Championship from Richard Arnst
on the same course in 1912 and has victories over G. Towns,
W. Albany, W. Fogwell, R. Arnst, E. Durnan, H. Pearce and
J. Paddon to his credit.
Alfred Felton was born at Sydney, 28. 8. 89, This was his first
attempt for World’s Championship honours.




trial took place on the following day. No. 2 Crew again won —
this time with a slightly bigger margin. By this time tnere
was little more than a week before the Regatta would open.
The Committee met and decided on three alterations in the first
crew —certainly a drastic action. The critics stared open-mouthed
when they heard of it ! The new No. 1 Crew went out on the
river for its first row and had their time taken. They returned
with their faces wreathed in smiles. It was the best row that
had been done on the course up to that time. From that day
there was continual improvement in the style, and the gam in
ability was accompanied by a corresponding increase of confidence,
both on the part of the crew and its supporters.
WALTON REGATTA.
The Walton-on-Thames Regatta was held on June 28th, and
because of its closeness to the Henley Carnival, did not attract
so many Henley crews as Marlow did. The Australian No. 2
entered for the Senior Eights, and A. S. Cox entered for the
Sculls. Thames Rowing Club was the only other entrant for
the Senior Eights, and the A.I.F. No. 2 Crew beat them over
the course —about a mile —by a bare length after a close race.
Cox was decisively beaten by Hadfield (N.Z.) in the final of the
Sculls. After this, all attention was directed towards Henley.
ROYAL HENLEY PEACE REGATTA.
With Henley rowing under normal conditions, pace and form
are fairly easy to judge, chiefly because it is easy to obtain
accurate information as to times taken for trial On the
1919 occasion, however, the man who lurked about the river bank
with a stop-watch found a good deal of evenness about the times
taken. Most of the crews entered for the King’s Cup had strong
followings. Canada and France were least favoured, and critics
divided their approval between the two Universities, Australia,
New Zealand, and America.
The Regatta was held on July 2nd, 3rd, 4th, and sth. The
opening day was devoted to heats of the minor events, and the
weather had changed from the sunshine of the previous six weeks
to showers, which made things very uncomfortable for spectators.
The Australian sculler, A. S. Cox, had been scratched, so that
the A.I.F. men had no personal interest in the first day’s racing.
The draw for the heats in the King’s Cup had, unfortunately,
pitted the two Australian crews against one another. They were
the first two drawn out of the hat, so that fate was not at all
kind in the beginning. The race was rowed at 11.5 a.m. on
the second day of the Regatta. As the crews had done all their


hnal hard work tog-ether, their capabilities were well known and
there was little interest in the race. It resolved into a strong
paddle, which No. i Crew won by three-quarters of a length in
7 mins. 31 secs. The Henley course is 1 mile 550 yards. It
was extremely unfortunate that the No. 2 Crew had not an oppor-
tunity of trying their pace against some of the other crews entered.
The other heats in the King’s Cup were between Canada and
Oxford University, New Zealand and Cambridge University,
France and America.
Oxford University and Canada provided only a moderately
interesting race. The University crew had a lead of half-a-length
at Fawley, which is about three and a half minutes’ rowing, and
from this point the result was never in doubt. The Canadians
rowed gamely, but were beaten by two lengths in 7 mins. 28 "secs.
The American crew soon got ahead of the French in their heat,
and scored a comfortable win by three lengths in 7 mins. 40 secs.
The best race of the day was provided by New Zealand and
Cambridge University. The All Blacks had a slight lead at
Fawley, and maintained it until the mile was passed. Then
Cambridge came with a great spurt, to win by three-quarters of
a length. Time 7 mins. 17 secs.
The draw for the second round resulted in Australia No. 1 Crew
being opposed by Cambridge University, and Oxford University
by America. Those who anticipated great races were not disap-
pointed. That between Australia and Cambridge was started first,
at 12.5 p.m. Rowing a slightly slower rate, the Australian crew
began to show out from Cambridge as soon as they settled down
after the burst off the mark. When half a mile had been covered
the Australian boat was half a length in front, and the coxwain,
in his anxiety to lose as little as possible by having the outside
position, came in too close to the other crew. In fact, the bow
oars of the Australian boat washed the stroke oars of Cambridge,
and there was imminent risk of fouling. Captain Disher, the
stroke, ordered the cox to pull out, and he did so —much too far.
Soon afterwards Australia again went into Cambridge
water, washing them a second time. The order by the stroke
was repeated, with the same result. The crew was eventually
straightened up in a position on the course well clear of their
opponents, and the race developed into a titanic struggle. At
the mile, Cambridge quickened their stroke, and essayed the task
of overhauling the Australians, who had established a lead of
nearly a length. It was a magnificently fought-out finish, the
Australian crew winning by three-quarters of a length. The time
was 7 mins. 24 secs. The erratic steering of the Australian crew
caused a lot of comment, and press criticisms were not favour-
able. Had the crews touched, there would have been no option
foi the umpire but to disqualify the Australians. There was.


however, not the slightest intention on the part of the A.I.F.
crew to interfere with Cambridge, and the unpleasant incident
was caused solely by an over-zealous coxswain.
In the other heat of the semi-final the Oxford crew defeated
the Americans. The latter led the way over three parts of the
course, but Oxford came with a splendid strong finish, and won
by a length and a quarter. Time 7 mins, 25 secs.
Oxford University and the A.I.F. No. 1 Crew were the finalists
in this historic race, and the chances were widely The
race was set down for decision at 12.30 p.m. on the finai day,
Saturday, July sth. Races at Henley, it might be mentioned,
are rowed against the stream, which flows at the rate of about
half-a-mile an hour. The Australian crew drew the outside
position again, known as the Berks station. The race was
followed in the umpire’s launch by Princess Arthur of Connaught,
and Australian soldiers turned out in force to view the event.
The crews got away to an even start, and, in accordance with
their previous record, the Australians were quicker to move, and
took a lead. They went ahead earlier than was expected, and
soon settled down to a slower rate of striking than their oppo-
nents. As they turned the slight bend in the course the Aus-
tralians swung into a line straight down the centre of the river,
and a great cheer arose from their supporters as the first indicator
showed them to be half a length ahead of Oxford. Before reach-
ing Fawley, which was passed in 3 mins. 25 secs., the Aus-
tralian crew had increased its lead to a full length, and thereafter
the result was never in doubt. Despite repeated efforts by
Oxford, the A.I.F. crew won by a clear length in 7 mins. 7 secs.,
which was the fastest time recorded for the full course during
the Regatta.
The Australian crew were firm favourites for the race. Oxford
rowed gamely, and very well, but the opinion among the crew
was that they met the Australians at their best. It was certainly
the best row that No. 1 Crew had done, their race against Cam-
bridge on the previous day apparently having improved them.
They gave a good exhibition of rhythmic rowing and had no
zig-zag steering to interfere with their efforts. Without undue
bustle for a lead at the start, they showed out early from their
opponents, and while rowing a slightly slower rate all the way,
they were always the faster crew, and settled into that powerful
racing swing and drive with length, which produces the maximum
pace in the Australian style of rowing.
July sth, 1919, was a great day for the thousands of Australians
who found their way to Henley. The Sports Control Board had
erected a stand for Australian soldiers on the river bank, and
this and a free afternoon tea provided by the Y.M.C.A. were
availed of by large crowds- Visitors Lo* Henley on that day had


an experience of the “ Diggers’ ” enthusiasm when the crew
won the King’s Cup. They went mad with delight. Another
stand had been erected on the lawn at the crew’s headquarters.
This commanded a fine view of the finish, and two-thirds of the
course, and was the scene of another wild demonstration wh*n
the Cup was won.
Princess Arthur of Connaught presented the Cup to Captain
H. C. Disher on behalf of the crew at the end of the day’s
racing, while each member of the crew, including the cox wain,
received a handsome medal.
Two members of the A.I.F. Wattle Club entered for the
Hambleden Pairs—H. H. Sharp (bow) and G. E. Rogers (stroke)
They created a mild sensation by beating the brothers Swann,
of Trinity Hall, Cambridge, in their heat, rowing very gamely
after being led most of the way. In the final they met the
brothers Buxton, of Third Trinity, Cambridge, and the A.I.F.
men were beaten by three lengths after a race that was not long
in doubt. All entrants in the pairs were handicapped to a large
extent, the Wattle Club pair by getting together only at the
eleventh hour and by inability to secure a suitable boat, and
the others by rowing in other more important races during the
Regatta.
Early in the training it was decided to leave coxwainless rowing
alone, and concentrate on the two eights. However, just before
entries closed it "was decided to enter a coxwainless four in order
to have a second string in the event of the eight-oar crews
meeting disaster early in the Regatta, and the following members
of the first eight made up the boat : G. W. Mettam (bow), S. A.
Middleton (2), H, Hauenstein (3), and F. A. House (stroke).
The steering was done by No. 2, but he had not had an oppor-
tunity of improving on his Marlow form, and made an early
start on a tour of investigation of all parts of the river except
that allotted to his crew. Before they had rowed twenty strokes
in their heat against New Zealand, the A.I.F. boat crashed into
their opponents’ craft. New Zealand claimed and were given
the race. The Australian crew had plenty of pace, but had not
had time to master the steering, and had very little practice
together. Taken right through, the opinion among Australians
is not favourable to coxwainless rowing !
The Regatta, despite bad weather, was a great success, and
quite an eye-opener to the thousands of Australians who visited
the historic course for the first time. The rowing partv had beer
a very happy family during the long period of training. There
was only one short break in training operations, when the crew
spent a few days at Birchington as the guests of Mr. W. S.
Robinson, an Australian who was ever ready to do anything he
could for Australian soldiers.


The King’s Cup.




Both at Putney and Henley the crews took the keenest interest
in their training-. Discipline was necessarily rigid, but all rules
were observed at all times, and changes in crews, causing keen
disappointment in some cases, were accepted uncomplainingly.
This admirable spirit and the total absence of petty bickerings
made the whole period of training a very pleasant one. A keen
interest was taken in the crews’ training by Senior Officers of
the A.I.F. and Australians resident in London, and they were
always helped on their way by heaps of good advice, criticism,
and good wishes. Many distinguished soldiers paid visits to the
crews’ quarters, included among them being General Sir Wm.
Birdwood, Lieut.-General Sir John Hobbs, Major-General E.
Tivey, Brig.-Generals T. Griffiths and T. A. Blarney.
The final composition of the A.I.F. crews was;—
No. i Crew. —Sergt. A. R. Robb, n st. 10 lbs. (bow); Lieut.
F. A. House, n st. 12 lbs. (2); Lieut. T. McGill, 12 st. 10 lbs.
(3); Gunner A. V. Scott, 13 st. (4); Lieut. H. Hauenstein, M.M.,
13 st. 9 lbs. (5); Major S. A. Middleton, D. 5.0., 13 st. 6 lbs. (6);
Gunner G. W. Mettam, 11 st. 12 lbs, (7); Capt. H. C. Disher,
11 st. 1 lb. (stroke); Sergt. A. E. Sntedley, 8 st. 1 lb. (cox).
No. 2 Crew.—Lieut. J. Howieson, 10 st. 11 lbs. (bow); Sergt.
G. M. Penny, 11 st. g lbs. (2); Sergt. E. J. Harrison, 12 st. 2 lbs.
(3); Lieut. H. A. White, 12 st. 5 lbs. (4); Major W. A. Audsley,
D. 5.0., 13 st. 3 lbs. (5); Corpl. J. K. Cogle, 12 st. 3 lbs. (6);
Gunner J. A. Begg, 13 st. 1 lb. (7); Lieut. H. R. Newall,
11 st. 6 lbs. (stroke); and Lieut, O. J. Wood, 10 st. (cox).
INTER-ALLIED ROWING.
While the crews were training for the blue-riband event at
Henley, the representatives of the American Army who had pro-
moted the big Inter-Allied Games in Paris made every endeavour
to induce the Service crews to take part in the Rowing Section
of their Games. In order to fit in with their programme and
not to clash in any way with the Henley event, the Inter-Allied
Regatta was fixed for July 17th and 18th. This gave the crews
twelve days in which to get their boats across to the Seine and
settle down in new quarters.
Very complete arrangements had been made by Lieut.-Cob
David M. Goodrich, Vice-Chairman of the Inter-Allied Games
Committee, a Staff Officer of the U.S. Army, for the transport
of the boats and crews. Lieut.-Col. Goodrich was a very promi-
nent oarsman of Harvard University, and he accomplished great
things in connection with this regatta. The Service crews’ boats
were taken by motor-lorries to Southampton, and there placed on
board an American destroyer and taken to Le Havre, to be again
placed on Jerries and taken to Paris. Unfortunately, delay


occurred in the last stage of the journey, and the boats only
arrived in Paris three days before the race.
Ihe course selected was on the Seine between the Pont de
St. Cloud and the Pont de Suresnes, a distance of about i mile
33° yards, close to Paris. There was a good stretch of water
and plenty of room for three crews to row abreast, the race being
rowed with a slight current. All arrangements for the housing
of crews and boats were excellent, large aeroplane tents having
been specially fitted up for the shells. It was rather unique in
the annals of sport to see athletes from all the Allied nations
messing together in one large hut. The feeding anangemems
were also first-class, and the whole show was a striking example
of American organisation and attention to detail.
The programme of races consisted of eights, fours (with cox-
wains) and sculls. The Australian Army entered a sculler and
an eight. Unlike Henley, the regatta w'as a purely Service event,
and professional athletes were allowed to compete with amateurs.
The entries for the eight-oar race consisted of crews from Czecho-
slovakia, Italy, Belgium, Australia, New Zealand, United States,
Canada, Portugal, France, with Cambridge University as the
representative of England.
Canada, Belgium, Italy, France, New Zealand, Portugal, and
the United States entered fours, and Cambridge University,
United States, New Zealand, Australia, France, Italy, and
Belgium sent scullers.
The racing did not attract a great number of Parisians to th«
river bank, but the regatta, being an Army concern, and in no
way a money-making venture, was not advertised. Rowing is
not a very popular sport in France, being confined to a few
enthusiasts. In any other country where rowing had a vogue,
such a remarkably cosmopolitan meeting would have drawn
thousands to the river. In this particular case the racing pro-
vided would have amply repaid them.
The Single Sculls Race held a good deal of interest by reason
of the fact that Hadfield, the New Zealand amateur, who won
at Henley, was to be opposed by A. D. Felton, the Australian
professional, among others. There had been a good deal of
rumour regarding Hadfield’s intention to turn professional to row'
Barry for the the world’s championship. Although many good
judges fancied Hadfield’s chance of success in the professional
spnere, it must be stated that the New Zealander never contem-
plated the change. The race between Hadfield and Felton w'as
early robbed of its interest by Felton striking a buoy marking
the course. He damaged his boat and had to retire. Hadfield
won this heat and subsequently won the final by a comfortable
margin.


The rowing- in the four-oared race was not of the highest
standard. The French crew did well to win from the United
States crews, whose performances at Henley had been rather
good.
The great interest of the regatta centred In the eight-oar race.
The English-speaking crews and the Frenchmen had already met
at Henley, and had learned to respect one another. The Aus-
tralian crew had altered very considerably since its win at Henley.
Middleton and Hauenstein, the two Olympic oarsmen, who had
supplied weight and experience, were not available, and the result
was that four alterations had to be made in the boating, two
new men being brought in from No. 2 Crew. This was unfor-
tunate, but would not have been so bad had the new crew had
an opportunity of getting together. As it happened, there was
no boat available after Henley Regatta, one having been sent
back to the owners and the other to Paris. Then the late arrival
of the boats from Le Havre added to the trouble. The crew had
not been afloat for eight or nine days, and had two and a half
days in which to learn the course and get into their swing. The
boating of the A.I.F. crew for this race was as follows ; Sergt.
A. R. Robb (bow), Lieut. H. R. Newall (2), Lieut. L. S. Davis (3),
Gunner A. V. Scott (4), Lieut. T. McGill (5), Lieut. F. A.
House (6), Gunner G. A. Mettam (7), Capt. H. C. Disher (stroke!,
and Sergt. A. E, Smedley (cox.).
The French crew had not done themselves justice at Henley,
being seriously handicapped by their late arrival on the river and
by having to row in strange boats. Of the Continental eights,
those from Portugal and Czecho-Slovakia did not appear to be
likely to be troublesome. The Italians and Belgians were reported
to be fast crews, but results showed that the Belgians were not
nearly up to their usual high pre-war Henley standard. The
Italians also had not the pace for the company in which they
found themselves.
The race was rowed in three heats, the winners contesting the
final. The Australians were drawn in the first heat against the
Czecho-Slovaks and Italians, and the crew's finished in the order
named after a rather tame race, in which the winners were never
extended. Time 6 mins. 482/5 secs.
New Zealand, Canada, Belgium, and Portugal lined up for the
second heat. The result was not long in doubt, for the New
Zealanders established a lead early in the race, and drew away
to win comfortably from the Canadians, who rowed gamely, but
never looked like being the winners. Belgium was third and
Portugal last. Time 6 mins. 37 secs.
The third heat saw Cambridge, United States, and France
facing the starter. This was the most exciting of the heats,
and was a magnificent struggle all the way between Cambridge
G


and America. The University crew won by half a length In
6 mins. 35 secs. The Trench crew had already been beaten by
the Americans at Henley, and again found that their pace was
not fast enough to keep up with the U.S. crew.
The final was rowed on the following day, July 18th, and those
who predicted a great struggle between the three British crews
were not disappointed. The race was held under perfect rowing
conditions—smooth water and no wind. The Australians drew
the central position, but there was no advantage in any of the
• stations, and plenty of elbow-room for all three crews.
Lieut.-Col. Goodrich, who had performed the arduous duties
of starter and umpire for all the events of the regatta (no sine-
cure, where it was necessary to carry an army of interpreters on
the umpire’s launch), got the three crews away to a wonderfully
even start. Cambridge went off at a tremendous rate of striking
for the first thirty strokes in an endeavour to gain a lead. When
the crews settled down Cambridge had a slight lead from Aus-
tralia, with New Zealand dropping back. They rowed in this
order to the half-way mark, where from the umpire’s launch it
was impossible b> say which of the two crews led. If the Aus-
tralians were in front at any time during the race it was at this
point. The New Zealanders had fallen away gradually, and it
was evident that they would take no part In the tremendous
struggle which was developing. It was also apparent that the
crew which could muster the better final effort would get the
victory. The two boats came dangerously close together, and
the umpire warned the coxswains to pull out in order to avoid a
foul. Over the second half of the course the crews rowed prac-
tically stroke for stroke —desperately hard, but good form and
high-class rowing. Cambridge undoubtedly led by a few feet in
the rush into the straight, and, by a magnificent effort at the
finish, raced across the line winners of a superb race by a third
of a length. The New Zealanders were about a length behind the
Australians. Time, 6 min. 26 3/5 secs.
There was terrific excitement among the spectators in the
reserve on the shaded bank of the river at the finish. Although
the A.I.F. men were beaten, their performance under many diffi-
culties rather enhanced than lowered their reputations as oars-
men. They were a very popular crew among the many assembled
at the camp.
, At Henley, the home of rowing, one expects to find perfection
in the regatta arrangements, and the experience of many years
has produced the very best. On an occasion such as the Inter-
Allied meeting, one is prepared to put up with many little Incon-
veniences. It was surprising to find, therefore, that the arrange-
ments were such that everybody was comfortable and contented.


The crews started from moored boats. The course was buoyed
off. Spans of bridges were numbered. A telephone was estab-
lished between the starter and judge. Results were signalled by
bombs and flags from the bridges. The whole arrangements for
the comfort of the competitors and visitors left nothing to be
desired. All this had been done at short notice, and done very
well indeed.
This regatta marked the end of the A.I.F. rowing, there being
no further races of an international character. The personnel
left for Australia by the steamer “ Euripides ” on September 6th.


CHAPTER X.
CRICKET.
The Englishman always takes his cricket very seriously. It is
almost a religion with him. For that reason, the cricket tour of
the Australian Service Eleven had more publicity through the
English press than any other sporting activity of the A. I.F.
There was a good deal of negotiation at the beginning of the
season. At first it was thought that an Eleven might be got to-
gether from the Army to represent Australian cricket, and play
the usual series of test matches against English Elevens. Nego-
tiations were opened with this object. Then it was announced
that several well-known cricketers who were with the A.I.F. in
England and France refused absolutely to stay and play. It was
the old difficulty. They had already been too long away from
their homes. When their defection was announced, the English
authorities refused to believe that the side could be a representa-
tive, first-class combination, and financial guarantees were not
forthcoming.
This was where the A.I. F.Sports Control Board came into
the picture. It was known that there were still many good men
in the force, despite the refusal of several of the best known to
participate. These men were anxious to play cricket on some of
the best English turf and try their strength and skill against the
counties. The Board decided that they should have their oppor-
tunity, and the Australian Imperial Force Cricket Team came
into existence. A tour was mapped out, and the team, playing
on a purely amateur basis, was supported financially by the Sports
Control Board. Financial considerations were at all times rele-
gated to the background. The team was anxious only to arrange
matches with the strongest possible Elevens in the British Isles
and try conclusions with them. When the arrangements were
being made, the clubs concerned were not asked for any fixed
proportion of the gate receipts. The matter was left entirely
to their discretion, the information being volunteered that any
sum which might be allotted to the A.I.F. Team would be placed
to the credit of the Sports Control Board’s funds, to be used for
providing sport of all kinds for representative teams in England.
The various counties and clubs acted generously in the matter,
in most cases they allotted 50 per cent, of the net proceeds to the


A.I.F. Cricket Team.
Back Row: C. S. Winning, H. S. Love, J. T. Murray, E. Bull, ,T. M. Gregory, E. J. Long, N. A. Oldfield.
Seated: C. T. Docker, C. E. Pellew, H. L. Collins (captain), C. B. Willis, A. W. Lampard, W. L. Trenerry,
in Front: J. M. Taylor, W, S. Stirling.




A.i.F. Their action was greatly appreciated. It was found
advisable to get in touch with somebody who knew the procedure
of arranging a fairly lengthy tour, and Mr. Howard Lacy, a
veteran member of the Mitcham Cricket Club, was communicated
with. Mr. Lacy had done much to keep the game of cricket alive
among the London clubs during the war, had arranged many
matches for the A.I.F. Headquarters Club, and had done yeoman
service for charitable objects and the public schools. At the invi-
tation of the Board, he became manager of the team, and they
could not have had a more capable or courteous head.
Early in May the team was got together, and its fixtures
arranged. These included matches against all the first-class
counties, the M.C.C., Oxford and Cambridge Universities, a tour
in Scotland and another in Ireland. The Irish trip was subse-
quently cancelled, and the team returned to Scotland and toured
at the invitation of Mr. Peter Dawson, spending about ten days m
sight-seeing and playing a couple of one-day matches.
It was thus early apparent that there was to be no difficulty
in finding opponents. Something like thirty fixtures had been
arranged in advance, the first match being put down for May
14th, 15th and 16th.
The team was made up of fourteen players, many of whom
had played Inter-state cricket in Australia. The only man of
International repute was C. Kelleway, who played in the Iriangu-
lar Tournament in 1912 (England, South Africa, and Australia).
He however, intimated that he intended remaining in England
only until the end of June, when he would leave for Australia.
He was appointed the first captain He batted nine times for the
team, and his form was always first class. He came out at the
top of the batting averages for the tour, but the averages of some
of the men who played as many as fifty innings compare very
favourably with his 56.11.
When Kelleway left the team his place was filled by H. L.
Collins. Collins had played for New South Wales more than
once, and toured America with Mayne’s Eleven. He
proved to be the right man in the right place, and when the
tour finished he had come out third in the batting
averages and headed the bowling. He was a popular leader,
and made his team a very formidable one before the
season ended. Among the other members of the team were
some well-known Inter-stafe men. J. M. laylor, an excellent bats-
man, with a free style that quite took the Englishmen’s hearts,
had played in Sheffield Shield matches for New South Wales
with success. J. T. Murray, a South Australian representative,
played well right through the season. C. E. Pellew was perhaps
the best-known of the South Australians. In addition to being
a magnificent batsman on his day (he had the highest individua


score for the tour), he was a very hue track athlete. W. S.
Stirling was the other South Australian in the team. He, too,
had played Inter-state cricket, and was a useful bat, good bowler
and a splendid field. C. T. Docker had played in Ceylon with
the Rev. E. F, Waddy’s Team, and had also represented New
South Wales, He was a useful bowler, and was well up in the
list at the end of the tour. E. J. Long was the team’s wicket-
keeper in all the earlier matches, and did very well behind the
stumps. He hailed from the mother State, and he was in Ceylon
with Waddy’s Team. J. M. Gregory was the fast bowler of the
team. He came from the family of that name which has made
such a fine record in Australian cricket. He took more wickets
than any other member of the team, although the average cost
was higher than for those secured by Collins. Gregory’s deliveries
kept the best of the English batsmen on the defensive, and he
was reputed to have been quite as fast as the late “ Tibby ”
Cotter. He had previously played junior Inter-state cricket,
being a member of the New South Wales “ Colts ” Eleven. He
was a hard-hitting, left-handed batsman, and a brilliant fields-
man. His record for the tour was a very good one. W. L.
Trenerry was another member of the team who had played with
the N.S.W. Colts. He batted well until the end of the tour, and
spoiled his average by notching a “ pair of spectacles ” in the
last, and perhaps most important, match of the tour. He was a
useful change bowler, and a good man in the field.
E. A. Bull played in Sheffield Shield matches for New South
Wales before the war, and proved himself worthy of his place
in the team. C. B. Willis proved to be the most consistent
batsman, and came out next to Kellaway at the head of the list
of batting averages. He was previously a Melbourne University
and Victorian representative, and often made runs on difficult
wickets when others failed. His style was not one to appeal
strongly to spectators, and he often stayed long at the wicket
without scoring, being content to stonewall and keep his wicket
up while the more venturesome hit out.
However, he knew how to punish loose bowling, and he made
his runs by careful cricket—the kind that wins matches. A. W.
Lampard, a Victorian Inter-state man, proved to be one of the
most versatile members of the team, and found form right at the
beginning of the season. He bowled and batted brilliantly in the
earlier stages, before other members of the team had found their
feet. However, he appeared to have gone “ stale ” towards the
end of the tour, and the strain of four months playing cricket
almost every day seemed to have been too much for him. His
later performances seriously affected his splendid averages, both
in batting and bowling, of the early part of the tour. W. A.
Oldfield, who did most of the wicket-keeping in the latter half of


the tour, finished with a splendid record. He had a difficult job
with Gregory bowling, but on more than one occasion he finished
a match with a clean slate so far as byes were concerned. He
also proved to be a very useful batsman and was, thanks to several
“ not outs,” well placed in the batting averages. He came from
New South Wales, where he figured as a promising “ colt ”
before the war. C. S. Winning joined up when Kelleway left to
return home. He was a medium-pace left-handed bowler and
got wickets freely. He was only a moderately good batsman.
His State was New South Wales, where he played first-grade with
Paddington.
In all, the team played 34 matches. Twenty-eight of these
were put down as first-class and the other six may be regarded
as minor fixtures. For the purposes of distinguishing between
the two, the statistics which are given in this chapter include
averages for first-class and others for all matches. The team
was defeated on only four occasions. The only county team to
lower their colours was that of Derbyshire. This was a rather
remarkable loss, for Derbyshire was not by any means a strong
county. The A.I.F. men had an off day. They required only
169 runs in their second innings to win the match, but they were
beaten by 36. Their most crushing defeat was that recorded
against them by the Gentlemen of England, at Lords’, on June
23rd. Thanks mainly to the bowling of J. W, H. T. Douglas
and M. Falcon, the home team won by an innings and 133 runs.
The Gentlemen put forward a very strong side for the match,
but the A.I.F. men were not expected to collapse in the way
they did. Their next defeat was at Hastings on September 3rd,
when they lost to a strong .South of England XI. by 122 runs.
They, however, took their revenge in a match against practicallv
the same side at Portsmouth, when the A.I.F. won by 10 wickets.
The fourth and last defeat was In the last match of the tour, at
Scarborough, on September 10th. In this match the Australians
were opposed by what was practically a representative English
Eleven, got together by Mr. C. I. Thornton. The tourists opened
disastrously and their first innings vielded only 81 runs, which
was their lowest score of the tour. The Englishmen replied with
187. In their second effort the Australians made a wonderful
recovery and scored 296 before being sent back. A fine finish
was provided. The Englishmen required 191 runs for a win,
and had lost eight of their wickets for 181, They scored the
remaining to and won bv two wickets.
The team opposed all the 16 first-class counties, and Surrey,
Essex, and Sussex were each played twice. Of these nineteen
matches, eight were won and one lost, the other ten being drawn
Essex was defeated on both occasions, while Surrey and Sussex
each drew on both occasions. The M.C.C. placed only a


moderately strong- side in the field and they were easily beaten
by ten wickets.
The hig-hest single Innings score was 733 for the loss of six
wickets against the Scottish Western District at Glasgow.
Against Cambridge University they scored 650 for the loss of
eight wickets, and against Surrey, in their first meeting, 554 for
seven wickets. An innings against Leicestershire yielded 551
runs for five wickets.
The highest totals against them were scored by Middlesex
(408) and the Gentlemen of England (402). In a one day match
at Inverness they dismissed the North of Scotland for 36, and
they sent the Somerset team back in one of their innings in the
match at Taunton for 64, Warwickshire made only 68 against
them on another occasion.
The Australians’ lowest tally was the 81 in their first innings
against the All-England Eleven at Scarborough. They totalled
only 85 on two occasions—against the Gentlemen of England
at Lord’s, and Somerset at Taunton.
C. E. Pellew had the two highest individual scores —195 (not
out) against Worcestershire, and 187 against Leicester. The
highest score against the team was made by England’s premier
batsman, John Hobbs, in the first match with Surrey at Ken-
nington Oval.
The statistics which are appended give the result of the tour
in detail. The Selection Committee throughout the tour con-
sisted of C. B. Willis (Victoria), C. E. Pellew (South Australia),
and E. J, Long (New South Wales)
RESULTS OF MATCHES.
Tf• x r , , Won Drawn Lost Total
First-Class Fixtures I 2 .. I 2 . „o
Other Matches o ~ 4 r
3 3 o b
Totals U 15 •;•••• 4 34
May 14, 15, 16, at Old Buckenham Hall.
. Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
Australians 227 2
*Mr. L. Robinson’s Team i 47 362 bx.' 509
twelve aside. Drawn, a Nine wickets down, b Eight wickets down.
x Innings declared closed.
May 17, 19, at Leyton.
. Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
Australians <3,
*F<s<spv 4 1 4 434
E,ssex 169 151 320
Won by an innings and 114 runs.


May 21, 22, 23, at Cambridge.
* Australians Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
/vusiranans 65oax sc o
C ambridge University 293 118 41 r
Won by an innings and 239 runs. a Eight wickets down.” x "innings
declared closed.
May 26, 27, 28, at Lord’s.
*. t .. Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
3 370 235 605
Middlesex 408 146 a
Drawn, a Four wickets down.
May 29, 30, at Oxford.
Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
Australians 39iax _
"Oxford University 152 247 b 399
Drawn. a Eight wickets down. x Innings declared closed. b Four
wickets down.
May 31, June 2,3, at the Oval.
Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
"Australians 230 5 54 ax 784
Surre y ; ; 341 128 b 472
Drawn. a Seven wickets down. x Innings declared closed. b Five
wickets down.
June 5,6, at Lord’s.
Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
Australians 297 66a 363
"M.C.C ! 33 228 361
Won by ten wickets, a No wicket down.
June 9, 10, at Brighton.
Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
Australians 289 77a 366
"Sussex 227 241 468
Drawn, a Fight wickets down.
June 12, 13, 14, at Manchester.
Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
"Australians 418 418
Lancashire 125 136 261
Won by an innings and 157 runs.
June 16, 17, 18, at Sheffield.
Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
Australians 265 170 a 435
"\orkshire 224 210 434
Won by one wicket, a Nine wickets down.
June 20 (no play), 21, at Southampton.
Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
Australians 136 136
"Hampshire 191 67a 258
Drawn (rain), a One wicket down.
June 23, 24, 25, at Lord’s.
Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
Australians 85 184 269
"Gentlemen of England 402 402
Lost by an innings and 133 runs.
H
* Signifies batted first, t Not a first-class match.


June 26, 27, 28, at Northampton.
xst Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
* Australians 297 314 611
Northamptonshire 246 169 415
Won by 196 runs.
June 30, July 1, at Glasgow.
Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
* Australians 733 ax 733
Scottish Western District 85 88 173
Won by an innings and 560 runs. a Six wickets down. x Innings
declared closed.
tjuly 2,3, at Edinburgh.
ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
Australians 360 360
Union XI 266 79a 343
Drawn, a 'Eight wickets down.
tjuly 4,5, at Partick (Glasgow).
ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
* Australians 357 357
A Scottish XI 113 113
Drawn (rain).
tjuly 7,8, at West Hartlepool.
ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
* Australians 354 336 a 690
Durham 269 , 269
Drawn, a Eight wickets down.
July 11, 12, at Leicester.
ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
■*Australians * 55 iax 28b 579
Leicestershire 224 224
Drawn. a Five wickets down. x Innings declared closed. bNo
wicket down.
July 14, 15, at Derby.
ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
Australians 125 132 257
lBl 112 293
Lost by 36 runs.
July 16, 17, at Hereford.
ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
Australians 405 405
*Mr. H. K. Foster’s XI 224 ax 131 b 355
Drawn. a Nine wickets down. x Innings declared closed. b Four
wickets down.
July 18$ ig, at Worcester.
ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
Australians 450ax..J 450
* Worcestershire 120 127 247
Won by an innings and 203 runs. a Four wickets down. x Innings
declared closed.
July 21, 22, at Birmingham.
ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
Australians 321 321
215 68 283
Won by an innings and 38 runs.
* Signifies batted first, t Not a first-class match.


July 24, 25, 26, at Nottingham.
Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
Australians 371 242 ax 613
tts 39° 62b 452
Drawn. a Eight wickets down. x Innings declared closed. b One
wicket down.
July 31, August 1, 2. at the Oval.
Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
■* Australians 436 2 6oax 696
Surrey 322 121 b 443
Drawn. a Four wickets down. x Innings declared closed. b One
wicket down
August 4,5, at Brighton.
Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
Australians 300 300
l2O 126 246
Won by an innings and 54 runs.
August 7,8, 9, at Canterbury.
Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
l9B 4igax 617
Kent 301 172 b 473
(Canterbury Festival.) Drawn. a Eight wickets down. x Innings
declared closed, b Five wickets down.
dAugust 13, at Greenock.
Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
Australians 284 284
Greenock 183 183
Won by iox runs.
TAugust 16, at Inverness.
Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
* Australians 196 178 a 374
North of Scotland 36 36
Won by 160 runs. a Five wickets down.
August 21, 22, 23, at Southend-on-Sea.
xst Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
l3O 447 ax 577
Essex 151 117 268
Won by 309 runs. a Eight wickets down. x Innings declared closed.
August 27, 28, at Clifton.
xst Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
Australians 147 64a 211
2Bl 281
(Clifton Festival.) Drawn (rain), a Five wickets down.
August 29, 30, at Taunton.
xst Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
B5 ;.. i44ax 229
Somerset 70 64 134
Won by 95 runs. a Five wickets down. x Innings declared closed.
September 1,2, 3, at Hastings.
xst Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
Australians 162 179 341
~*South of England 183 280 463
Lost by 122 runs.
* Signifies batted first. t Not a first-class match.


No.
Times
Most
of
Not
Total
in an
Inns.
Out.
Runs.
Inns.
Aver,
Ivelleway, C
9 •••
O ...
505 •••
168 ...
56. n
Willis, C. B
44 •••
4 ...
1652 ...
156* ...
41.30.
Collins, H. L. (Caot.)
44 •••
2 ...
1616 ...
127 •••
38-47
Pellew, C. E
40 •••
7 •••
1260 ...
i95* •••
38.1S
Oldfield, E. A
!9
7
382 ...
80* ...
3 i - 8 3
Taylor, J. M
39 •••
1
H87 ...
146
3 I - 2 3-
Gregory, J. M
' 3 6 •••
4 ...
942 ...
115 ...
29-43
Trenerry, W. L
37 •••
3
961
82* ...
28.2b
Lampard, A. W
35
3 •••
821
I I 2
25.65
Murray, J. T
34 •••
1
793 •••
L33 •••
24-03;
Docker, C. T
17 •••
7 •••
214 ...
52* ...
21.40
Bull, E. A
23 ...
2
395
42 ...
18.8a
Stirling, W. S
35 •••
3 •••
538 -
62 ...
ib.8t
Winning, C. S
24 ...
11
174 ...
30 ...
I 3-3 8
Long, E. J
19 •••
9 ...
no
14* ...
I I. OC>
No
Times
Most
of
Not
Total
in an
Inns
Out.
Runs.
1 nns.
Aver.
O ...
5°5 •••
168 ..
56.11
Wi]1i<5 r P,
... 5 ...
1829 ...
156* ..
41.56.
1988 ...
1426 ...
159 ••
40.57
ppIIpw r f
-
IQS*
• 37-S 2
OTHfipIr! W A
... 8 ...
448 ...
80* ..
. 32.00*
4 ...
1254 ...
I l8
• 3i-35
Taylor, J. M
46
I
1366 ...
146 ..
• 3°-35
2 ...
1204 ...
130* ..
. 30.10.
4 ...
1008
OS ••
• 27.24
68q ...
• 25.51
P u ] 1 F A
2
103 ..
y
37“1 •••
69 ..
. 25.00
3 •••
90c; ...
I 12
• 24.45
4 ...
768 ...
126* .
• 21.3:7
205
3° •
13.66
12
Long, E. J
IO ...
129 ...
1 4
TO */5
September 4,5, at Portsmouth.
Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
Australians 206 15a 221
*South of England 104 115 219
Won by 10 wickets, a No wickets down.
September 8,9, 10, at Scarborough.
Ist Inns. 2nd Inns. Total
* Australians 81 296 377
Mr. C. I. Thornton’s England’s XI. ... 187 191 a 378
(Scarborough Festival.) Lost by two wickets. a Eight wickets down.
BATTING AVERAGES FIRST-CLASS MATCHES.
G. Love (o and 2) also batted, whilst H. Heath took part in one game,
but did not bat.
BAITING AVERAGES ALL MATCHES.
The following also batted ; E. J. Cameron, 25, 4 and 50*; G. Love, o and 2 ;
and C. O’Connor, 4*. H. Heath played in one match, but did not bat.
* Signifies batted first, t Not a first-class match.
* Signifies not out.
* Signifies not out.


Collins, H. L.
Inns.
Overs
Mdns.
Runs
W'kts.
... 45 ...
728.5
164 ...
1755
106 ...
!6-55
18.19
Gregory, I. M. ..
Docker, C. T
... 41 ...
830
200.2
378.5
... 124 ...
... 35 ...
... 83 ...
2383
576
964
... 131 ...
Stirling, W. S. ..
... 37 ...
27 ...
44 ...
21-33
21.90
Winning, ( . S. ...
••• 33 •••
47 2 -4
106 ...
1164
52 ...
22.38
23. 57
Lampard, A. W .
... 38 ...
72 ...
1627
69 ...
Kelleway, (
IC )4-5
... 38 ...
548
... 18 ...
3(3.44
Trenerry, W. L.
... 14 ...
67.4
4 ...
221
-
3 J -57
61.00
Murray, f. T.
... 3 ...
15
2
61
I
Hull, E. A
27
50
... O
Pellew, C. E
4 ...
12
4
O ...
—
Inns.
Overs
Mdns.
Runs
Wkts.
Aver.
< 'ollins, H. L.
••• 52 ...
822
... 195 ...
J 932
... 127 ..;
15.21
Gregory, J. M. ...
... 46 ...
gog.2
... 134 ...
2608
... X5I ...
17.27
Willis, C. H
... 3 ...
11
... I
37
2
r8.5o
Docker, C. T.
... 19 ...
241.2
... 46 ...
644
34 •••
18.94
Stirling, W . S. ...
... 42 ...
43 1 - 1
IOI
1084
... 52 ...
20.84
"Winning, C. S. ..
... 35 ...
491. 1
... II2
1213
... 58 ...
20.91
O'Connor, C
... 3 ...
34-2
... I
I I I
22.20
Lampard, A. W.
... 40 ...
554-2
75
1 737
74 ...
23-47
Irenerry, W. L.
... 19 ...
96.4
9 ...
33°
II
30.00
kelleway, C.
J 94-5
... 38 ...
548
... 18 ...
3°-44
Murray, (, T.
... 3 ...
15
2
6l
1
61.00
Pel lew, C. E.
... 5 ...
25
8 ...
77
I
77.00
Hull, E. A
.... 3 ...
7
... I
27
O ...
BOWLING AVERAGES FIRST-CLASS MATCHES.
C. B. Willis (6-0-290) bowled in two innings, and H. Heath (3-0-11-0)
and J. M. Taylor (2-0-8-0) once only.
BOWLING AVERAGES ALL MATCHES.
J. M. Taylor (2-0-8-0), H. Heath (3-0-11-0), E. J. Cameron (6-i/-i6-o), and
E. J. Long (6-1-24-0) each bowled in one innings only.
“ CENTURIES ” FOR (27).
■fßull, E. A. v. Scottish Western District (at Glasgow), June 30 ... 103
Collins, H. L. v. Middlesex (at Lord’s), May 26 127
Collins, H. L. v. Lancashire (at Manchester), June 12 103
■fCollins, H. L. v. Scottish XI. (at Edinburgh), July 2 159
Collins, H. L. v. Leicestershire (at Leicestershire), July 11 121
Collins, H. L. v. Warwickshire (at Birmingham), July 21 no
Ceilings, H. L. v. Notts, (at Nottingham), July 24 118
Gregory, J. M. v. Northamptonshire (at Northampton), June 26 ... 115
Kelleway, C. v. Cambridge University (at Cambridge), May 21 168
Kelleway, C. v. Essex (at Leyton), May 17 126
Lampard, A. W. v. Surrey (at the Oval), May 31 112
Murray, J. T. v. Oxford University (at Oxford), May 29 133
dMurfay, J. T. v. Scottish Western District (at Glasgow), June 30 ... *l5O
-fMurray, J. T. v. Greenock (at Greenock), August 13 121
Pellew, C. E. v. Cambridge University (at Cambridge), May 21 ... *lO5
Pellew, C. E. v. (at the Oval), May 31 (retired hurt) *lO6


Pellew, C. E. v. Leicestershire (at Leicester), July 11 187
Pellew, C. E. v. Worcestershire (at Worcester), July 18 *195
fStirling, W. S. v. Scottish Western District (at Glasgow), June 30 ... *i2&
Taylor, J. M. v. Oxford University (at Oxford), May 29 104
Taylor, J. M. v. Mr. H. K. Foster’s XI. (at Hereford), July 16 ... *139-
Taylor, J. ’M. v. Essex (return), (at Southend), August 21 146
tTrenerry, W. L. v. Scottish Western District (at Glasgow), June 30 11&
Willis, C. B. v. Leicestershire (at Leicester), July 11 *156
Willis, C. B. v. Worcestershire (at Worcester), July 18 *129.
Willis, C. B. v. Notts, (at Nottingham), July 24 130-
Willis, C. B. v. Sussex (at Brighton), August 4 127
“ CENTURIES ” AGAINST (9).
Crawford, J. N., for Surrey (at the Oval), July 31 *144..
Gunn, G., for Notts, (at Nottingham), July 24 130
Hendren, E. H., for Middlesex (at Lord’s), May 26 135
Hobbs, for Surrey (at the Oval), May 31 * 2 °s
tKerr, J., for Greenock (at Greenock), August 13 103;
tKinch, T., for Durham (at West Hartlepool), July 2 105
Relf, R. R., for Sussex (at Brighton), June 9 102
Warner, Capt. P. F., for Middlesex (at Lord’s), May 26 (retired) ... 101
Wilkinson, Capt. C. T. A., for Surrey (at the Oval), July 31 103
WICKET “KEEPING FIRST-CLASS MATCHES.
Long, E. J., caught 18 and stumped n.
Oldfield, E. A., caught 16 and slumped 10.
ALL MATCHES.
Long, E. J., caught ig and stumped u.
Oldfield, E. A., caught 23 and stumped 11.
It will be seen from these figures that the tour was a great
success. Regarded at the outset as a rather second-rate com-
bination, the team very soon commanded the respect of the coun-
ties, and proved a great crowd-drawing attraction. With the
exception of the greater part of the month of July, they were
favoured with ideal weather, and they at all times played the game
vigorously and keenly. At the conclusion of the tour they were
entertained at a banquet by the directors of J. Wisden & Co.,
presided over by Lord Harris.
Towards the close of the season in England a cablegram was
received by the Sports Control Board through the High Com-
missioner’s Office, asking if arrangements could be made for the
team to engage in a six weeks’ tour of South Africa on their
* Signifies not out.
Instances marked thus t do not reckon in the first-class averages.
* Signifies not out. f Not a first-class match.


way home. By the generosity of the Minister of Defence (Senator
1 earce), who was then in England, the necessary permission was
obtained, and the passage arranged by the steamer “Ascanius,”
which left England towards the end of September. Lieut. E. J.
Cameron, a well-known Victorian cricketer and footballer, accom-
panied the team as manager. He had been associated with Mr.
Howard Lacy in the administration of the team’s affairs through-
out the season in England, and had done a great amount of
hard work in a quiet way. He contributed very largely towards
the smooth running of the team’s affairs in England.'
The tour in South Africa was guaranteed by Sir Abe Bailey
for the South African authorities, and was satisfactorily settled
very soon after negotiations opened.
The social side of the tour in England was very pleasant. The
members of the team were well received and lavishly entertained
wherever they went, and their behaviour was such as to make
them thousands of friends throughout the country. They made
a very fine reputation as a team of gentlemen.
OTHER MATCHES. *
In addition to the programme of the representative A.I.F.
Eleven, matches were fixed for three teams from A.I.F. Head-
quarters during the 1919 season. The matches were mostly
played on Saturday afternoons around London. The teams were
about the calibre of a first-grade or pennant team in Australia.
Lieut. E. J. Cameron (Victoria) and Warrant Officers W. J.
Munday (South Australia) and A. Douglas (Tasmania) were the
selectors, and each captained a team weekly. Games were pro-
vided on good English wdekets for about eighty players during
the season. Two of the teams had the privilege of a week’s
cricket at Oxford against various college elevens, and won the
six matches played.
Details of the matches are appended ;
A.I.F. HEADQUARTERS ELEVENS,
Results of Matches. —In one-day matches the result is taken om
first innings where only one innings played :
A.I.F. Score. Opponent’s Score. Result.
Kew 99 8 for 82 Drawn
Beckton 59 75 Lost by 16


A.I.F. Score. Opponent’s Score. Result.
Oxford—Trinity & New
Colleges 484 7 for 289* Won by 195
Authentics (Com. Colleges) 302 275 Won by 27
Christ Church & Magdalen 7 for 488* 198 & 109 Won by inns. & 181
St. John’s Queen’s 268 94 & 2 for 117 Won by 174
Brasenose, Oriel, and Uni- 178 & 1
varsity for 97 151 Won by 27
Keble, Wadham & Balliol 9 for 455* 262 & 195 Won by 193
Colyton 216 42 & 6 for 57 W T on by 174
Hounslow Garrison 8 for 240* 119 Won by 121
Heathfield 3 for 243 212 Wm by 7 wkts. & 31
Woolwich Polytechnic 4 for 194* 68 Won by 126
Afric Athletic 6 for 223 4 for 49 Drawn
Uppingham School 336 217 Won by 119
Sutton 195 233 Lost by 38
East Molesey 6 for 208 ’ 103 Won by 4 wkts. & 105
Saffrons (Eastbourne) 223 328 & 5 for 300 Drawn
Beckton 201 o for 129 Drawn
Heathfield 215 230 Lost by 15
Heathfield 6 for 293* 213 Won by 80
Beddington 104 & 4
for 130 157 Lost by 53
Honor Oak 208 6 for 357 Lost by 4 wkts. & 149
•Colchester 8 for 130 114 Won by 2 wkts. & 16
Young Amateurs of Essex 7 for 590* 47 & 269 Won by inns. & 274
Ealing Dean 196 86 Won by 110
Young Amateurs of Surrey 308 95 & 104 Won by inns. & 109
Mill Hill 84 . 57 Won by 27
Great Western Railway 2 for 145 38 Won by 8 wkts. & 107
W. H. Smith & Sons 7 for 234* 46 Won by 188
Highgate 124 231 Lost by 107
Mitcham 6 for 315* 159 Won by 156
Malden Wanderers 175 57 Won by 118
Shepherd’s Bush 142 & 210 198 Lost by 56
Edgware 149 123 Won by 26
Battersea 141 195 Lost by 54
Springfield Hospital 6 for 192* 55 Won by 137
Mitcham 5 for 319* 7 for 99 Drawn
Roehampton 230 1 for 69 Drawn
Springfield Hospital 132 91 Won by 41
Hampstead Montrose 294 118 Won by 176
Indian Gymkhana 220 93 Won by 127
Mitcham 8 for 224* 5 for 103 Drawn
Commercial Union Ins. Co. 7 for 319* 75 Won by 244
Spencer 147 129 Won by 18
Bishop’s Stortford 199 50 & 50 Won by inns. & 99
Hampstead Montrose. 184 159 Won by 25
Slbugh 9 for 222 9 for 215* Won by 1 wkt. & 7
Battersea 4 for 173* 127 Won by 46
Indian Gymkhana 2 for 265* 90 Won by 175
Commercial Union Co. 4 for 231 736 Won by 6 wkts. & 95
Spencer 97 191 Lost by 94
North Polytechnic 95 115 Lost by 20
Edgware 3 for 177 84 Won by 7 wkts. & 93
Sutton 97 199 Lost by 102
Chiswick Polytechnic 8 for 226* 88 Won by 138
*lnnings declared closed.
SUMMARY: Matches played, 55; won, 37; lost, u ; drawn, 7.


Centuries were made during the season by the undermentioned :
Beveridge, C. (X.S.W), 107* v. Magdalen & Christ Church Colleges, Oxford.
■Cameron, E. J. (Vic.), 103 v. Heathfield C.C. ; 101 v. New.
X Trinity Colleges, Oxford. /
Hanna, F. (Vic.), 130 v. Mitcham (VC.
Heath, H. (S.A.), 116* v. Heathfield C.C.
Love, H. K. (X.S.W.), 100* v. Cuaco C.C.
Munday, W. J. (S.A.), 107* v. Mitcham C.C.
Oldfield, W. A. (N.S.W.), 107* v. Hanpstead Montrose C.C. ; 129 v. New
X and Trinity Colleges, Oxford.
Sheppard, J. F. (Queensland), 121 v. Indian Gymkhana.
TTumper, S. (X.S.W.), rys* v. Magdalen X Christ Church Colleges,
Oxford ; 130 v. Young Amateurs of Essex.
Wheatley, G. (X.S.W.I, 126 v. Young Amateurs of Essex; 117 v. Uppingham
School ; TO7 v. Afric Athletic C.C. ; 105 v. Cuaco C.C.; 104 v.
Heathfield C.C.
* Xot out.


CHAPTER XL
MISCELLANY.
ATHLETICS.
When the Athletic Team returned from the Interallied Games,
in Paris, it was the intention of the Board to disband it. The
Army Athletic Association, however, made a request for entries
for Army Championships to be held at Aldershot on August 28th.
and 29th, and it was decided to retain some members of the team,
and keep them in training for the event. The members of the
team kept themselves fit, visiting several meetings around
London and annexing many prizes.
The Army Championships brought a large number of entries
from various Armies and home commands. The following
branches were represented : Army of the Rhine, Army of Black
Sea, Army of Egypt, Army of France and Flanders, Army of
Italy, Australian Imperial Force, New Zealand Expeditionary
Force, Aldershot Command, Northern, Southern, Eastern and
Western Commands, London District, Scottish Command, and
Irish Command.
The meeting was held on the Aldershot Recreation Ground and
arrangements were excellent. Rain interfered seriously with the
success of the gathering and the track was very heavy. The
Australian team was commanded by Lieut. R. Hendy, and con-
sisted of Lieut. R. D. Chalmers, Sergt. C. G. Manley, Pte. W.
Johnson, Signaller T. Fraser, and Driver L. J. Hume. Hume
won the 440 yards championship, Fraser was second in the half-
mile, Johnson second in the 440 yards, and Hume third in the
220 yards.
Hume and Johnson started in the 100 yards, but were put out
in the heats, each main gaining a third place. The same pair
entered the 220 yards, but Hume was the only one to qualify
for the final, being second to the New Zealander Lindsay in the
fastest heat. The final was won by Lindsay, with Major Har-
rison, Royal Field Artillery, second, and Hume third. The time
w T as 22 4/5 secs. Hume and Johnson both won their heats in
the quarter-mile, and they finished first and second in the order
named in the final. Phillips, of Canada, was third, and the time
was 52 1/5 secs.


Stand at Australian Crew’s Headquarters at Henley Regatta, 1919.
The Crew (No.1) that won the King’s Cup.




Chalmers and Fraser represented the A.I.F. in the half-mile.
Chalmers won his heat comfortably in 2 mins b 4/5 secs., while
Fraser qualified for the final by running- second to O’Brien, of
the sth K.R.R. Mason, of New Zealand, was third in this heat,
the time for which was 2 mins. 12 secs. The final was a splendid
race between Mason and Fraser. The New Zealander had too
much pace in the sprint for the tape and won by four yards
from Fraser. The time, 2 mins. 04/5 secs., was a record for
this particular Army event.
Chalmers and Manley qualified for the final of the mile by
running into third and second places respectively in their heats.
In the final, Chalmers set the pace for the first half-mile, but
made it too fast, and dropped out. Manley could not muster
a sprint at the finish, and was unplaced.
At the conclusion of the meeting Hume and Johnson were
selected to represent the Army in the 440 yards at the Inter-
Services Championships, and Fraser was chosen for the half-
mile. The meeting was held at the Stamford Bridge Athletic
Ground on September 4th. Fraser was again second to Mason
in the half-mile, while Johnson was second and Hume third in
the quarter-mile, the winner being Capt. A. T. Mitchell, of the
Royal Air Force. The time for the 880 yards was 1 min.
59 I /5 secs., and for the 440 yards 50 1/5 secs.
The performances of the four most successful of the amateurs
in England during the 1919 season are set out below :
T. FRASER.—First in half-mile at Stamford Bridge, May sth;
second, 100 yards, Herne Hill, June 4th; first, two mile relay,
Herne Hill, June 4th; first, half-mile, Vickers’ Crayford Meeting,
June 7th; first, half-mile and mile relay, New Cross, June 9th;
first, half-mile, Stoke-on-Trent, July 12th; third, mile relay,
Vickers’ Erith Meeting, July 19th; first, half-mile, Herne Hill,
July 23rd; first, half-mile, New Cross, July 24th; first, high jump,
Hayward’s Heath, July 30th ; first, mile relay, Hayward’s Heath,
July 30th; first, mile relay, Chiswick, July 31st; first, half-mile,
International Sports, Stamford Bridge, August 4th; first, mile
relay, Cricklewood, August sth; first, half-mile, and first, mile
relay, Dunstable, August 9th; first, mile team race, Stamford
Bridge, August 12th; first, 440 yards, Billericay, August 14th;
first, half-mile, Herne Hill, August 20th; third, tw r o mile relay,
Leyton, August 21st.
C. G. MANLEY.—First, three miles, Herne Hill, June 4th ;
second, half-mile, Highgate, June sth; first, one mile, Vickers’
Crayford, June 7th; first, two miles, Bath, June 9th; first, one
mile, Vickers’ Erith, July 19th; second, one mile, Herne Hill, July
23rd; second, half-mile, New Cross, July 24th; first, one mile
Stamford Bridge, Julv 31st ; second, one mile, International
Sports, Stamford Bridge, August -fth ; second, mile relay, Crickle


wood, August Bth ; second in half-mile, third in mile, and second
in mile relay, Dunstable, August 9th; first, mile teams race,
Stamford Bridge, August 12th; first, three miles, Herne Hill,
August 20th ; third, two miles relay, Leytou, August 21st; first,
half-mile, Stamford Bridge, August 7th.
W. JOHNSON. —Third, 300 yards, Stamford Bridge, May
24th; first, 440 yards, and first, two miles relay, Herne Hill,
June 4th; first, 440 yards, Vickers’ Crayford, June 7th; first,
100 yards, New Cress Hospital, June 9th; first, 300 yards, and
third, mile relay, Vickers’ Erith, July 19th; second, 200 yards,
Herne Hill, July 23rd; second, 220 yards, and first, mile relay,
Hayward’s Heath, July 30th; first, mile relay, Chiswick, July
31st; first, mile relay, Ivy Leaf Club, London, August 7th; first,
mile relay, Dunstable, August 9th; third, 440 yards, Cinema
Gymkhana, August 12th; first, 100 yards, Herne Hill, August
20th ; second, two mile relay, Leyrou, August 21st.
T. S. HEWITT.—Second, “ Sporting Life ” Marathon,
26 miles 385 yards, Windsor to Stamford Bridge, June 21st;
third, 14 miles, Stamford Bridge, May 24th; first, 10 miles,
Erith, July 19th; third, 10 miles, Chiswick, July 31st; second,
14 miles, Stamford Bridge, August 4th; first, 11 miles, Dun-
stable, August 9th; second, three miles, Herne Hill, August 20th.
In addition to these, Chalmers won the mile event at the Royal
Air F orce Meeting at Stamford Bridge on August 21st, and
Hume tied with Sergt. Wilson, of New Zealand, in the 100 yards
event, but was beaten in the run-off. From these performances
it will be seen that the four amateurs met with a good deal of
success in club racing in England. Fraser had nineteen firsts,
one second, and two thirds; Johnson ten firsts, three seconds, and
three thirds; Manley nine firsts, eight seconds, and two thirds;
and Hewitt two firsts, three seconds, and two thirds. These
totals are exclusive of successes at the Inter-Allied Games and
Army Championships.
TENNIS IN AMERICA.
The Tennis Team commenced its American tour very success-
fully. Brookes and Patterson proved irresistible in the U.S.
Doubles Championship and had a triumphal march to the final,
where they met the American pair, Johnston and Griffin. The
Australians won in three sets, 10 —8, 9 —7, 7 —5.
This gave them the right to challenge the holders, Tilden and
Richards, for the Championship of the United ..States. The
match was played on August 18th at Newton (Mass.), and resulted
in a victory for Brookes and Patterson after the match had gone
five sets. Scores were B—6, 6—3, 4 —6, 4 —6, 6—2.
The Singles Championship commenced a week later at the


Forest Park Courts, New York. In the first round all four Aus-
tralians, Patterson, Brookes, Lycett, and Thomas, came through.
Lycett and Patterson were drawn to play against one another in
the second round, but Lycett scratched. Brookes beat West-
brook (U.S.) 6—o, 6—o, 6—4, and Thomas beat Mahan B—6,
6 _ 2 5 t . In the fourth round Patterson was beaten by W dham
Johnston after five sets, the scores being 6—2, 3—6, 6—4, 4—6,
7 r Brookes was beaten by Tilden 3 —6, 6 —4, 7—5; 6 3.
in the fifth round. Thomas was beaten by R. N. Williams m
the fouth round 4—6, C-4, 6-o, 7—5-. Th e Championship was
won by WTlliam Johnston from W. T. Tilden 6 4, 6 4, 6 3.
An international match was arranged between Australian and
American teams, and took place at the West Side Tennis Club
Courts, Forest Hills, on September sth and 6th. Four singles
and two doubles were played, and the Americans won the lot.
Results were ;
WF. Johnston beat Lycett 6 —4, 6—3, 6 —4; R. Williams
beat Thomas B—6, 6—3, 6-1; Wm. Johnston beat Brookes
6_ 4( 7 _ 9 , 6—2, 6—2; Tilden beat Patterson 3—6, 6—3,
6 —4. 9 —7•
Wm. Johnston and Tilden beat Brookes and Patterson 6 4,
5 5 4i 6—3; Williams and Johnston beat Lycett and
Thomas 6 —2, 6 —4, 2 —6, 3 6, 6 o.
PHOTOGRAPHS.
Most of the photographs in this volume are the work of the
Australian Official Photographers, by whom the Sports Control
Board was treated with the greatest consideration. Major J L.
Treloar, 0.8. E., Officer in Charge of the War Records Section,
eave very valuable assistance to the sporting side of the A.I.K
in many ways, but particularly in the matter of helping the pub-
licity work.' He was ably seconded by Lieut P. Hay er, uho
had charge of the Photographic Section, and helped to keep e
name of Australia in the van.
board personnel.
During July the command of the A.I.F. Headquarters was
relinquished by Brig.-General T. Griffiths and Brl^e ne ral
C H Jess took over. General Jess then became President of
the Sports Control Board, and took a very keen interest m the
work right up to the conclusion of operations in the midd e o
September.


Capt. J. E. Savage, M.C., who represented the Depots
on the Board, resigned after a short period of service, owing
to pressure of duty, and his place was filled by Capt. F Antrel
M.C. *
CONCLUSION.
With the departure of the Cricket Team for South Africa at
the end of September, the activities of the A.I.F. Sports Control
Board came to an end. The Board had had a most useful career,
and had done its work well.
The various teams played as they had fought—to win—but they
lost more often in the playing than in the fighting.
THE END.








