

Bax 3
SOLEMN DECLARATION
OF MINISTERS
CHURCH OF ENGLAND
IN VAN DIEMEN’S LAND.
) 4-


i
-
y
1
\
\
'
■
r
m


SOL En I DE € L Al 5 A TlO A
OF MINISTERS
OF THE
CHURCH OF ENGLAND
IN VAN DIEMEN’S LAND,
ON THE PRESENT CONDITION OF THE
CHURCH IN THAT COLONY.
1851.
Mr
■-’’“M l-'h
v rni i i-'pvinL 1
L - l -^ v - l v-C U C VJN
HOBART TOWN :
PRINTED AT THE “ COLONIAL TIMES” OFFICE.




SOLEMN DECLARATION OF MINISTERS OF THE
CHURCH OF ENGLAND IN VAN DIEMEN’S LAND, ON
THE PRESENT CONDITION OF THE CHURCH IN
THAT COLONY.
Inasmuch as, by our office as Ministers of the Church
of England, we have solemnly engaged, “ with all
faithful diligence, to banish and drive away all erro-
neous and strange doctrines contrary to God s
wordand inasmuch as a book, called “ Steps to
the Altar,” has been given by the Rev. S. B.
Windsor, Warden of Christ s College, by the Rev.
W. Tancred, and the Rev. F. H. Cox, Ministers of
the Church of England in this City, for the purpose
of religious instruction, and in several instances as a
preparation for Confirmation; and as a book termed
“ Spiritual Communion” has been disseminated by
the Venerable F. A. Marriott, Archdeacon of Hobart
Town; and a book called “ Theophilus Angli-
canus”* is taught to the students at Christ's Col-
lege in this colony, and has been prescribed for the
instruction and examination of candidates for Holy
Orders in this diocese.
* The adoption of a book for catechetical instruction of students of
divinity in College, and for examination of candidates for Holy
Orders, is at once an adoption of its views by authority, and the
most practical recognition of its principles as a standard of correct-
ness ; and also the most efficient means of propagating and incul-
cating them, by infusing them into the future teachers of the Church
■with all the authority of ecclesiastical direction.


We, being deeply convinced that each of these
books* inculcates principles of a Romanizing ten-
dency, feel called upon to set forth passages which
we consider as calculated to undermine the evan-
gelical truths of religion.
* The editions of the books referred to in this declaration are those
of the copies most in use in this colony : — Steps to the Altar , fourth
edition, 1849. Spiritual Communion, London, James Burns, 1844.
Theophilus Anglicanus, third edition, 1845.


CONFESSION.
Steps to the Altar, p. 24.—“ 1. Have you committed any act of
uncleanness; used any unchaste words; indulged any impure thoughts
and fancies ? If so, how often ?
“ 2. Have you looked at dangerous pictures, or read wicked books ;
entered into amusements, or gone into company that might give rise
to temptation ? How often ?
“ 3. Have you indulged your flesh by eating or drinking more
than was necessary; by laziness and too much sleep ? If so, how
often ?
“ 4. Do you make much of your body, dressing gaily and expen-
sively, &c. ? Are you vain of your appearance ? Has this ever
led to any greater evil ? How often ?
Steps, &c., p. 15. —“ You will also do well to write down on
paper the sins, or, at least, the chief sins of which you become con-
scious, that they may not pass away from your memory.”*
Steps, &c., p. 118. —"I suppose you are to choose only such
a person as will faithfully keep any secret you shall commit to him,
and so it can be no public shame you can fear.”
Steps, &c., p. 120. “ Having made choice of such a Confessor,
who is every way qualified, that you may trust your soul with him,
you are advised plainly and sincerely to open your heart to him;
and that, laying aside all consideration of any personal weakness in
him, you are to look upon him only as he is a trustee from God, and
commissioned by Him as His ministerial deputy, to hear, and
judge,t and absolve you.”
* This passage is not in immediate connexion with the questions for
self-examination, but is evidence of the intention that the sins of
which a person might be rendered conscious by the prescribed
questions for self-examination, should be impressed upon the
memory. Reference to page 16, which gives the form in which
sins are written down, and among which “ vain and wrong thoughts”
and trifling errors are enumerated, will show that it is designed that
the answers to the above questions should be written down.
t Bishop Mant, the Commentator on the Prayer Book, and holding
High Church views, says, " By the Church of England, absolution
is practised, not as a judicial, but as a ministerial act: the Priest
performs the part, not of a judge, but of the authorised dispenser of


" That the manner of your confession he in an humble posture on
your knees*, as being made to God rather than man. And for
the matter of it, let it be severe and serious.”
Having considered these directions, we are of
opinion, Ist, That the suggesting to young persons
such inquiries as those above quoted, is entirely
unauthorized hy the forms of the Church of England.
2nd, That it tends to pollute the innocence of youth,
by putting into the mind improper ideas which
otherwise it might never have entertained ; and that
it would especially corrupt the ingenuousness and
delicacy of young females, by the suggestion and
consideration of impurity, and by disclosing to
one of another sex the most secret thoughts and
desires of the heart. 3rd, That it is an imitation of
the practice of the Church of Home.t
God’s pardon to those on whom God has promised and vouchsafed
to bestow it. The act of absolution is not judicial, but ministerial.”
—Churches of Rome and England compared, page 32. The Church
of Rome declares, “ If any one shall say that sacramental absolution
is not the judicial act of the Priest, but a bare ministry of pronoun-
cing and declaring that sins are remitted to him who confesses them,
provided only he believes himself to be absolved, let him be ac-
cursed.”—Council of Trent, ch. vi, can. 9.
* Garden of the Soul, p. 227.—“ The penitent, kneeling down at
the side of his ghostly father, makes the sign of the cross, and asks
his blessing. ‘ Frag, Fat her, give me your blessing, for I have sinned '
After this he accuses himself of his sins, either according to the
order of God’s commandments, or such other order as he finds
most helpful to his memory, adding after each sin the number of
times that he has been guilty of it.”
t “ Have you looked at immodest objects with pleasure or danger ?
Read immodest books or songs to yourself or others ? Kept inde-
cent pictures ? Willingly given ear to loose discourses, &c., or
sought to see or hear anything that was immodest ? How often ?
Have you frequented masquerades, balls, comedies, &c., with danger
of your chastity ? How often ?” &c.&c .—Garden of the Soul, p. 212.
These enquiries are extracted from a mass of questions, the cha-
racter of which can scarcely be conceived, and which should deter
from the suggestion of such enquiries all who would preserve the
purity of the young.
Reference to the “ Examination on the Commandments” in the


The advice to choose a Confessor to whom secrets
can be confided, and with whom the soul can be trusted ;
the direction plainly and sincerely to open the heart
to him, —which must be understood to comprise con-
fession of the sins referred to in the questions tor
self-examination*and the injunction to make
“ Garden of the Soul,” will show how closely, both in matter
manner, the questions are imitated in the “ Steps to the Altar.
The form of proposing the questions in the second person is tie
same in both books, “ Have you committed, &c.? Have you looked,
&c ? The prayer which precedes the questions is also in both, in the
first person. “ Cleanse my heart.” &c. If the questions were des.gned
for self-examination, and not for confession, they would more appro-
priately have been, “ Have / committed ? Have 7 looked, cc.
The similarity of the instructions in the “ Steps, and in the
“Garden of the Soul,” concerning Confession and Absolution,
removes any doubt of the questions in the former being designed
for the same purpose as those in the “ Garden of the Soul, _ p.
—namely, to enable the person who confesses “ to accuse himself to
his Confessor in the order of God s commandments.
* The injurious effect of suggesting and enjoining these questions
cannot be evaded by saving that they are designed for private self-
examination; for, Ist. To direct young persons to inquire whether
and how often they had committed acts of uncleanness, looked
at dangerous pictures, and read wicked books, used unchaste words,
and indulged any impure thoughts and fancies, is to turn their minds
to “ filthy and corrupt communications ,” to induce them to dwelt
upon and consider any impure fancies and thoughts which may have
entered their minds, and which otherwise they would have banished
and forgotten, and to make their memories a register of distressing
and corrupting impressions. . ~
2nd. To say that these questions are only designed tor selt-
exaraination, and not for confession, is a fallacious evasion ; for a
direction is given (Steps, p. 15) “to write down on paper the sms, or
at least the chief sins of which you become conscious, that they may
not pass away from your memory.” And at confession, even such
secrets as may be attended with shame are to be confessed (p. lib),
the soul is to be “ trusted with the Confessor,” and the heart ‘'plainly
and sincerely to be opened ” to him (p. 120) ;so that no doubt can be
entertained that these questions are designed, and would be under-
stood, to direct persons to scrutinise their secret impurities, even in
thought and fancv, or imagination, and to record them in their
memories, that they might confess them to the Priest.


the confession in an humble posture on the knees, in
order to receive a “Special Absolution” from a priest
supposed to be God’s deputy to hear, to judge, and
to absolve, would, in our opinion, completely change
the character of the religion of the Church of Eng-
land, would destroy the relation between the people
and the clergy*,—the latter forsaking the cha-
racter of ministers of the Gospel to assume the office
of Romish Priests, —and would introduce into the
Church of England the social evils which have
attended Auricular Confession in Roman Catholic
countries.
*The design of introducing into the Church of England the
practice of Auricular Confession by Tractarian Clergymen, and the
prevalence of that practice, will be rendered apparent by the follow-
ing extract of a letter from Mr. Dodsworth to Dr. Pusey : —“ You
" have been one of the foremost to lead us on to a higher appre-
“ ciation of that ‘ Church system,’ of which sacramental grace is
“ the very life and soul. Both by precept and example you have
“ been amongst the most earnest to maintain Catholic principles.
‘ ‘ By your constant and common practice of administering the Sacra-
“ ment of penance ; by encouraging every where, if not enjoining,
“ auricular confession, and giving special priestly absolution ; by
“ teaching the propitiatory sacrifice of the Holy Eucharist, as appli-
catory of the one sacrifice on the cross, and by adoration of Christ
“ really present on the altar under the form of "bread and wine; by
“ your introduction of Roman Catholic books adapted to the use of
“ our Church ; by encouraging the use of rosaries and crucifixes,
“ and special devotions to our Lord, as e. g. to his Five Wounds;
“ by adopting language most powerfully expressive of our incorpo-
“ ration into Christ, as e. g. • our being inebriated by the Blood of
“ our Lordby advocating councils of perfection, and seeking to
" restore, with more or less fullness, the conventual or monastic
life ; I say, by the teaching and practice, of which this enurne-
“ ration is a sufficient type and indication, you have done much to
“ revive amongst us the system which may be pre-eminently called
“ ‘Sacramental,’ ” —P. 16.


ABSOLUTION.
Steps, &c.. p. 17. —“ For those who are weighed down by the
burden of their sins, or find difficulty in guiding themselves, and so
• require further comfort or counsel,’ a remedy has been provided,
which, though bitter at the time, like all good medicines, conveys a
very great and lasting benefit. Such persons are directed to go to
the" Priest of their parish, or ‘ to some other discreet and learned
Minister of God’s word,’ and to make confession of their sins to him,
that they may receive Special Absolution, and such spiritual advice
as they may need.”
The words to which this passage refers are perverted. #
It is not said in the Prayer Book that persons are to
make confession of their sins to the Minister, that they
may receive “ Special Absolution,” but that they are to
open their grief to him, “ that by the ministry of God’s
Holy Word they may receive the benefit of Absolu~
tion , together with ghostly counsel and adviced In
the Ist Prayer Book of Edward VI., the words were,
“ that of the Minister he might receive comfort and
Absolutionwhich words were afterwards changed
to their present form, as Wheatley observes (p. 437),
“to show that the benefit of Absolution was not to
be received by the pronouncing of any form, but by
a due application and Ministry of God’s Holy
Word.”
Steps, &c., p. 120. —“ Before you are to receive the holy Sacra-
ment, or when you are visited by any dangerous sickness, if you
find any one particular sin, or more, that lies heavy upon you, you are
to disburden yourself of it into the bosom of your Confessor, who not
only stands between God and you, to pray for you, but hath the
power of the keys committed to him, upon your true repentance, to
absolve you in Christ’s Name from those sins which you have con-
fessed to him.”
Steps, &c,, p. 121. —“ The benefit of Absolution. —If we would
choose to believe rather than dispute, it would be a powerful cordial
* Vide Note A, page 25.


to every troubled spirit, by a particular officer from the kingdom of
heaven to be thus saluted ; and he that cannot value this absolution
from the Priest, can no other way receive satisfaction to his doubts
and fears, unless he expect to be assured of his remission by an imme-
diate revelation, or can be content to stay till the day of judgment
for the resolution of this great inquiry. Let it therefore cheer your
hearts, ye contrite ones, to hear this blessing from your spiritual
father; for, behold, it contains all that you do need or can desire.
Are you miserable ? Here is mercy. Are you sinful ? Here is
pardon. Are you liable to punishment ? Here is deliverance. Are
you desirous, but unable to do good ? Here is strength and confirma-
tion. Are you fearful of death and hell? Here is heaven and
everlasting life. And all this asked of God by one that He
hath commissioned to make this prayer ; so that your only care is,
that your repentance be such as your Minister believes it to be, and
then this absolution shall certainly be confirmed in the high court of
heaven, and not one word thereof shall fall to the ground.”
Th-eoph. Ang., p. 108.—“ When God has appointed certain
means for dispensing His grace, our salvation is tied to the use
op them. He remits the punishment of original sin by means of
the Sacrament of Baptism ; and in the case of actual sin, He confers
the grace of His own pardon by means of priestly Absolution, ordi-
narily and where it may be had, and whenever justly pronounced
and duly received; and thus He makes repentance available to the
true penitent, through the declaration and pronunciation of pardon
by the Minister of Christ, acting by His authority, at His command,
and by His power. Absolution does not give repentance, but makes
it effectual, as the loosing of Lazarus did not give him life, but the
full and free use of it.”
The declaration that “he that cannot value this
absolution from the Priest, can no other way receive
satisfaction to his doubts and fears, unless he expect
to be assured of his remission by an immediate reve-
lation,” is with great impiety to attribute to the act
of man the peculiar office and influence of the Holy
Spirit, “ The Comforter and to contradict the
declaration of Holy Scripture, that the possession of
the Spirit of God removes doubts and fears, conveys
peace to the conscience, and alone affords full assu-
rance of pardon and reconciliation.*'
* “ It is the office of the Holy Ghost to assure us of the adoption
of sons, to create in us a sense of the paternal love of God towards


« Being justified by faith we have peace with God,
through our Lord Jesus Christ. — Rom. v. 1.
“ For ye have not received the spirit of bondage
again to fear; but ye have received the of
adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, bather. Flic Spiiit
itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are
the children of God.” —Rom viii. 15, 16.
“ Hereby know we that He abideth in us, by the
Spirit which He hath given us. —1 John hi. 24.
us, to give us an earnest of our everlasting inheritance, love of
God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given
unto us. The Spirit beareth witness with our Spirit that we are the
children of God.’ As, therefore, we are born again by the Spirit,
and receive from him our regeneration, so we are also assured by the
same Spirit of our adoption ; and because being sons, we are also
heirs of God, and joint heirs loith Christ, by the same Spirit we
have the pledge, or rather the earnest, of our inheritance. Bp.
Pearson on the Creed.
“The Spirit of adoption, which constituted us sons of God,
qualifying us so to be by dispositions resembling God, filial
affections towards him ; certifying us that we are so, and causing us
by a free instinct to cry, Abba, Father, running into his bosom of
love, and flying under the wings of his mercy in all our needs and
distresses.” — Barrow on the Gift of the Holy Ghost.
“ The Spirit which God hath given us to assure us that we are
sons of God, to enable us to call upon him as our Father.”— Hooker
on Certainty of Faith. ...
“The Spirit of adoption is, first, a ivitness —Rom. vm. 1/;
second, a seal— Eph. iv. 30; third, the pledge and earnest of our
inheritance Eph. i. 14 ; setting a holy security on the soul, whereby
it rejoiceth, even in affliction, in hope of glory. Archbp. Usher,
Sum and Substance, &;c. „
The “Steps to the Altar,” “Theophilus Anglicanus, and the
Church of Rome, teach that assurance of the divine pardon—the sense
of justification and of sanctification, and the inward joys and peace
of religion,— are tied to absolution and priestly ministrations. The
Gospet the Church of England, and all Protestant Churches, teach
that these and all other holy sentiments and spiritual convictions
are infused into the hearts of believers by the Holy Spirit through
faith in the Lord Jesus Christ. No principle more clearly distinguishes
Romanism from the Gospel than the setting up of what is called the
Church, the Priest, and Absolution, between the people and the
Redeemer and Holy Spirit.


“ Hereby we know that we dwell in Him, and He
in us, because He hath given us of His Spirit.”—
1 John iv. 13.
The assertion that in the Absolution by the Priest
is mercy, pardon, deliverance, strength and con-
firmation, heaven and everlasting life; and that the
only care of the person who confesses should be,
that his repentance be such as the Minister believes
it to be, and that then his absolution shall certainly
be confirmed in the high court of Heaven, and not
one word thereof shall fall to the ground, is directly
Popish ; and would subvert the Gospel of salvation
by faith, and draw away sinners from the throne of
grace to the knees of their Confessor. It would
establish over their consciences the domination of
the Priest, leading them to depend entirely upon his
judgment of their spiritual condition, and to obey
his guidance and injunctions rather than to seek
from the Word of God for divine illumination and
direction.


PROPITIATORY SACRIFICE IN THE
LORD’S SUPPER; PRAYERS FOR THE
DEAD, AND FOR THE INTERCESSION
OF SAINTS.
Steps, &c., p. 69.—“ When the spiritual Sacrifice, the service
without blood, has been completed, upon that Sacrifice of propitiation,
we entreat God for the peace of all the Churches, for the good estate
of the world ; in behalf of kings, of soldiers, of the sick and afflicted;
and, in a word, we all pray and offer up this Sacrifice for all who
stand in need of help .”*
Steps, &c., p. 64.—“ And together with us, remember, O God,
for good, the whole mystical Body of Thy Son ; that such as are yet
alive may finish their course with joy, and that all such as are dead
in the Lord may rest in hope and rise in glory. ”f
Steps, &c., p. 69.—“ Give unto us all, O God, a portion of all the
good prayers in Heaven and earth, the intercession of our Lord, and
the supplications of all Thy servants.”
“Spiritual Communion,” p. 31.—“ Remember, O God, for
good, the whole mystical Body of Thy Son, that such as are yet alive
may finish their course with joy ; and that we, with all such as are
dead in the Lord, may rest in hope and rise in glory.”
“ Spiritual Communion” is “ dedicated to the me-
mory of those blessed ones whose bodies and souls have
been made clean and washed by the Body and Blood
of Christ in the Communion of the Holy Sacrament .”
* Thus the Rom. Miss. Ord. of the Mass.-—“ Grant that the sacri-
fice which I, though unworthily, have offered up in the sight of Thy
Majesty may be acceptable to Thee, and through Thy mercy be a
propitiation for me and all those for whom it has been offered through
Christ my Lord.” So also in the 22 nd Sess. of the Council of Trent,
can. 3.—“ If any one shall say that the sacrifice of the Mass is only
a service of praise and thanksgiving, or a bare commemoration of the
sacrifice made upon the cross, but not a propitiatory offering, let him
be accursed.”
f Thus “ the Rom. Miss., ord. of the Mass.”—“To these, O Lord,
and to all that sleep in Christ, grant, we beseech Thee, a place of
refreshment, light and peace : through the same Christ our Lord.”


Steps, &c., p. 83. —“ I have humbly offered unto Thee, O Lord,
the sacrifice of a troubled spirit, in union with the Sacrifice and
Sacrament of the Body and Blood of Thy Son, my Saviour.”
Steps, &c., p. 107. —“ The definition of a proper Sacrifice. —Sacri-
fice is, 1. Some material thing, either animate or inanimate, offered to
God. 2. For the acknowledging the dominion and other attributes of
God, or for procuring Divine blessings, especially remission of sin.
3. Upon a proper altar (which yet is rather necessary for the external
decorum than the internal perfection of the sacrifice). 4, By a
proper officer, and with agreeable rites. 5. And consumed, or other-
wise disposed of, in such a manner as the Author of the sacrifice
has appointed.”
Steps, &c., p. 110. —“ At, and in the Eucharist, we offer up to God
three sacrifices. One by the Priest only; that is the commemorative
Sacrifice of Christ’s death represented in bread broken, and wine
poured out.”
Steps, &c., p. 114. —“ The water in Baptism, with the blessing and
grace of God, has power in it to cleanse us from our sins. And
the bread in the Lord’s Supper, being set apart and blessed, becomes
the Bread that nourisheth to eternal life.”
Steps, &c., p. 66. —“The primitive custom was to receive in the
hollow palm of the right hand, which was supported by the left
crossed under it.”
Steps, &c., p. 38. —“ It is an ancient and good custom for those
who are about to receive this Sacrament, not to take any food in the
morning before they communicate.”*
Spirit. Com. p. 14. —“ And so be more fitted for the real recep-
tion of the Body and Blood of their Lord, when offered to him at
the altar by the Pastor through whom tlje ministry of reconciliation
is specially addressed to him.”
Steps, &c., p. 62. —“ Send Thy Holy Spirit upon this Sacri-
fice, that He may make this bread and this wine the Body and
Blood of Thy Christ.”f
Spirit. Com. p. 10. —“ Reverence is proved rather by bowing the
mind and body in adoration of a present God, than by reasoning on
the possibility and manner of his presence.”!
* “ Have you presumed to receive the Blessed Sacrament, after
having broken your fast ?”•— Garden of the Soul, p. 209.
t Roman Missal, ordinary of the Mass, —“ Which oblation do
Thou, O God, vouchsafe in all respects to bless, approve, ratify, and
accept; that it may be made for us the Body and Blood of Thy
most beloved Son Jesus Christ our Lord.”
+ These passages indicate an operation of the Holy Spirit upon the
bread and wine, in accordance with the Romish doctrine that


The term “ Altar,” applied to the Communion
Table, is a contradiction to the Book of Common
Prayer, in which the Table is in no case called an
“Altar;” the Reformers by the omission of this
word evidencing their care to atford no ground for
the notion of a propitiatory sacrifice in the Lord s
Supper.
The preceding passages assert that there is a pro-
pitiatory sacrifice in the Holy Communion; they sanc-
tion prayers for the dead, and for the intercession of
the Saints in Heaven ; and convey an impression of
the Real Presence in the Sacrament of the Lord’s
Supper, in accordance with the doctrine of the
Church of Rome.
The direction to receive the bread in the hollow
of the hands crossed, and not to eat any food before
communicating, we regard as an imitation of a su-
perstitious practice of the Church of Rome, and
as an unjustifiable addition to the prescriptions of
our Church.
Christ is present in the elements, changing their substance. The
Church of England leaches that Christ is present with the souls of
devout communicants, and that reception of His Body and Blood
“ by the faithful,” is “ the inward and spiritual grace” of the Sacra-
ment. It declares that “ The Body of Christ is given, taken, and
eaten, in the Supper only after an Heavenly and Spiritual
manner. And the mean whereby the Body of Christ is received and
eaten in the Supper is Faith.” —Article xxvifi. As the reception
of the Lord’s Body is a spiritual grace imparted only to the
faithful, to speak of the Lord’s Body and Blood being offered by the
Pastor to communicants at the Altar, when he presents to them the
bread and wine, is irreconcileable with the doctrine of our Church,
and consistent only with that of Rome.
The direction in reference to the Lord’s Supper, to “ bow the
mind and body in adoration of a present God,” is calculated to en-
courage the practice of the Tractarians in England of bowing to the
Altar, and to imply some such presence of the Divine Being in the
Sacrament as requires a bowing down in adoration to it.


RECOGNITION OF THE CHURCH OF
ROME.
Spiritual Communion, p. 12.— “1t is sufficient to mention Bishops
Patrick, Taylor, and Wilson, in the English Church, and such
spiritual writers as Challoner and the author of the * Spiritual
Combat’ in another branch of the Church.”
Spirit. Com., p. xiv.—“ That most holy Saint, St. Francis de
Sales, Bishop of Geneva.”
Theoph. Ang., p. 6. —“ The Church of Rome is a part of the Ca-
tholic Church, as the Church of Greece and the Church of England is,”
&c. —P. 5. “ The Catholic Church comprehends those of all nations
who are in the main points of religion one and the same. In respect of
faith and practice, as teaching all truth; as requiring obedience from
all; and as ministering by God’s appointment all His means of spi-
ritual grace.”
The English and Roman Catholic Churches are
declared in these passages to be parts of the
same Catholic body, which is described as teaching
all truth, and by God’s appointment ministering all
His means of spiritual grace,*
Dr. Challoner, author of the “ Garden of the
Soul,” a Romish book of devotions containing
prayers to the Virgin, with the other errors of Ro-
manism, and the author of the “ Spiritual Com-
bat,”t a similar work, are termed spiritual writers;
and St. Francis de Sales, whose works are of
* See Note B, p. 28.
t The following are examples of the teaching of the Spiritual
Combat. P. 43—“ Call aloud on Jesus and Mary, beg the assist-
ance of all the Saints.” .... “ When you behold an image of the
Blessed Virgin, offer your heart to that Mother of Mercy.”
“ Thank her for the assistance she affords to all those who call
upon her in their struggles with the enemy of mankind”—p. 62.
“ Jesus! Mary ! abandon not your servant; let me not fall a prey
to this temptation,” &c, &c.—p. 39.


the same character, is called a most holy Saint.*
Such commendation of the authors of manuals of
Romish devotions holds out a strong inducement to
the use of their forms of prayer. If, in place of being
warned against the unscriptural character of such
works, the members of the Church of England find
the authors of them thus commended, in books given
to them by their own Ministers, they are naturally led
to regard with favour the Romish system of religion.
Inasmuch as in the books called “ Steps to the
Altar,” “Spiritual Communion,” and “Theophi-
lus Anglicanus,” the most dangerous errors and
corrupt practices of the Church of Rome are incul-
cated or sanctioned, and are set forth among pas-
sages extracted from the devotional writings of emi-
nent Bishops and teachers of our Church, thereby
giving to such Romanizing teaching the appearance
of being sanctioned by such writers, and rendering
it more attractive by the spiritual and devout
character of those passages from their writings
among which it is introduced; and inasmuch as
in these books Romish writers are extolled and
held out for imitation, and the Church of Rome
itself acknowledged as a part of the same Church as
the Church of England, in the main points of reli-
gion one and the same, and set forth as having
Apostolic constitution and authority, involving in
the sin of schism those, at least, in Roman Catho-
lic countries who are not within its communion,—
we are deeply impressed with the conviction that
* The following is an example of the teaching of St. Francis de
Sales. Ninth Meditation. “ Behold likewise with your inward
eyes the Blessed Virgin, who with a motherly love exhorts you,
saying, Take courage, my child, despise not the desires of my Son,
nor so many sighs which I have cast forth for thee, thirsting with
Him after thy eternal salvation.”


the above-named books have a direct and powerful
tendency to undermine the Protestant faith, and
to pervert to Romanism the minds of such members
of the Church as may adopt their principles, and
yield to their influence.*
* Setting aside the unscriptural character of private confession and
absolution, as an intrusion of the Priest into the office of the Re-
deemer, to whom alone His people are to pour out their hearts, and
from whom alone they are to seek, or can obtain absolution, this
attempt to set up the confessional in the Church of England, is in
the highest degree dangerous to the domestic peace, to the freedom
of religious communion and confidence among the members of
our families. The spirit of mystery and secrecy would cast a
baneful cloud over the domestic circle, and the hateful idea of a
secret priestly influence and interference would intrude into the
closest connections of family and nature. Nor is the danger of this
evil only speculative,—it is imminent, —for the minister who believes
himself to be God’s deputy, to hear, to judge, and to absolve, and
that his absolution is the only means to give assurance of the re-
mission of sins, and that it conveys pardon, deliverance, strength,
Heaven, and everlasting life (Steps, p. 121), can never cease to
urge those whom he can influence, to avail themselves of the
blessings which he supposes he can impart. He is impelled, by
mistaken charity for the souls of his people, to induce them to
confess their sins to him, that he may grant them special absolu-
tion ; and the earnestness and zeal which he displays will be pro-
portionate to his sincerity and desire for their spiritual good. Of
all the human inventions of Romanism, as substituted for the spi-
ritual religion of the Gospel, this is the most spreading evil, and the
most dangerous to the young. Females, especially of a docile and
confiding temperament, disposed to veneration and devotion, are
peculiarly liable to surrender themselves to this assumed power of
the Priest—to yield to the insidious invitation—“ to trust their souls
with him.” A false or “ voluntary humility,” and the “ show of
wisdom in will worship,” (Col. p. 18) “ induce them to give up their
minds to spiritual bondage,” not “ holding the Head,” nor employ-
ing the faculties committed to them in learning the will of Christ in
His holy word, and seeking from Him spiritual instruction and
guidance, but striving to avoid the responsibility and duty of free
and intelligent devotion, by enslaving themselves to a Confessor
whom they falsely suppose to be God’s deputy commissioned to judge
and absolve them. It is deeply to be lamented that feelings in them-
selves amiable should by false teaching be made the foundation of a
system of religion, human in device, and affording to the conscience


PRINCIPLES OF THE PROTESTANT
REFORMATION.
As the words “ Principles of the Protestant Re-
formation” have been inveighed against as an un-
meaning phrase, employed by designing persons to
overturn the Altar and the Throne, we deem it
proper to state, that Protestant principles are, we
trust, well understood by the members of our con-
gregations, and that they are especially those truths
of the Gospel on which the Reformation is founded;
namely,—
no true and lasting peace. It is deeply to be deplored that persons
who might adorn the Gospel should be led, as too many are, to
devote themselves to the propagation of Romanism, vainly hoping
to effect that, which is exclusively the work of the Holy Spirit, by
a system of human ordinances, ritual observance, and supposed pardon
and spiritual blessings imparted by the absolution and ministrations
of the Priest. Such a system of religion can never change the heart
by a spiritual renewal; and, however specious its fruits at first may
appear, it never fails eventually to obscure the Gospel under a cloud
of superstitions, and to reduce the human mind to spiritual ignorance
and servitude.
The recognition of the Roman Catholic Church as another part of
the Church “ from which the Church of England never did separate
herself” (Theoph. Any., p. 189), and the appropriation and imitation
of Romish Manuals of devotion, have been the principal causes of so
many secessions to the Church of Rome. The Rev. Mr. Makinson,
and the Rev. Mr. Sconce, of Sydney, were induced by these princi-
ples to forsake the Church of England. The latter, in his reasons
for becoming a Roman Catholic, says, “ The study of Catholic
theology, and the use of Catholic devotions, ‘ adapted to the Engl'sh
Church’ induced him to yearn for a restoration of Christian unity,”
His sincere hope is that the unreasonableness and inconsistency of
“ High Church” principles will soon be generally apparent, and that
those who are Catholics at heirt will hasten to the one fold, &c.
“ The Oxford theology has been tried, and is found wanting. The
via media is losing its supporters one by one. They must be either
Catholics or Protestants ; they cannot continue any longer half one
and half the other.” “ Protestants are right in calling High Church-
men semi-Papists, and in declaring that Oxford theology leads to
Rome.”


Ist. The Cardinal Doctrine of Justification* by
Faith only—that “we are accounted righteous be-
fore God only for the merit of our Lord and Sa-
viour Jesus Christ, by faith, and not,” either wholly
or in part, “for our own works or deservings.” Re-
jecting the doctrines of justification through the
Sacraments, —of human merit, —of inherent right-
eousness, —and of works of supererogation.
2nd. That the Holy Scripture is the sole rule of
faith ;f and that every individual has the right to
read and interpret the Word of God by his own private
with the aid of the Holy Spirit. Denying
* At a meeting of a sub-Committee of the “Hobart Town Branch
Association ol the Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge,”
held in February last, for the purpose of making a selection of books
from the Parent Society’s Catalogue, Tract 619, entitled “ The Doc-
trine of Justification Briefly Stated,” by the present Archbishop
of Canterbury, having been proposed by a Lay Member of the
Committee, was rejected by the Rev. F. H. Cox and the Rev. W.
Tancred as Lutheran and unsound. The Tract was ordered by
the sub-Committee at a subsequent meeting; and a resolution passed
in the General Committee of the Association deprecating the calling
in question the soundness of the Tract by the Rev. F. H. Cox and
the Rev. W. Tancred, and disavowing their rejection of it.
t “ Scripture without any commentary,” said Luther, “is the
Sun from which all doctors derive light.” Such are the principles
of Christianity and the Reformation. According to these revered
voices, it is not the Fathers who are to be taken to elucidate Scrip-
ture, but it is the Scripture that must elucidate the Fathers. The
Apostles and the Reformers hold up the Word of God alone for
light, as they hold up Christ’s Sacrifice alone for justice. To think
of mingling any human authority with that absolute authority of
God, or any human justice with that perfect justice of Christ, is to
vitiate Christianity in both its bases. Those are the two funda-
mental heresies of Rome, and they are also those which some
teachers would introduce, though in a less degree no doubt, into the
bosom of the Reformation.— D’Aubigny’s History of the Reforma-
tion, pp. 271, 272.
x “ Though the Universal Church cannot err, yet any particu-
“ lar, and even the representative, Church (i. e., the Church as
“ represented by Councils), may.”— Theophilus Anglicanus, p. 26.


the authority of Tradition, or the right of any Church
or Minister to prescribe to individuals in matters
of religion in opposition to their own judgment.
3rd. Spiritual Worship, or seeking by faith in the
Redeemer all spiritual graces and gifts, believing
that the Divine blessing is obtained by faith exercised
in prayer and the ordinances of religion, not by any
necessary and inseparable effect of such religious
ordinances. Rejecting the notion termed “Opus
“ Though, a priori, it be admitted they” (fleneral Councils)
may err, yet, a posteriori, it is to be believed that they have not
“ erred in whatever, having been debated by them, has been uni-
“ versally received in the Church (as, for example, the doctrinal
“ canons of the first four General Councils) ; and though it should
“ be thought that they are in error, yet, until the error be plainly
“ shown to be against Scripture, for the sake of peace and for the
“ end or avoidance of strife, private opinions are to give way to
“ Public Authority. Though the Church may err, it does not follow
“ that she is not to be obeyed, for mater errans mater est. In con-
“ troverted points, we must stand by the determination of the
“ Church; for the preservation of her Peace and Unity is of the
“ very essence of Christianity.”— Theophilus Anglicanus, p. 28.
All the false doctrines of the Church of Rome are “ contro-
verted points if, therefore, on such points we are to stand by the
Church, even though she may be thought to be in error, it is plain
that the foundation of Protestantism is endangered. If schism be a
separation from the Catholic Church, of which the Romish Church
is part, and if schism be a mortal sin, and the Church even in error
is to be obeyed, and private opinions are to give way to public
authority, it is not easy to see how any individual can justly dissent
from the Church of Rome, or how the Reformation can be vindi-
cated—yet these are the principles inculcated by this book into the
future Ministers of the Church of England !
“Am I then to make my own mind the judge whether they”
(authorised expositors) “ are in error; and if not, to what tests of
doctrine am Ito appeal ?” “It is not our own private judgment, but,
first. Holy Scriptures, as received, guarded, and interpreted by the
Catholic Church from the beginning, ‘ according to the proportion
of faithand next, the consent of the Church herself, speaking in
her public expositions, creeds, councils, liturgies, confessions, and
writings of her early Fathers, Bishops, and Doctors, is the Rule of
Faith to which the teaching of individuals is to be referred.”-
Theophilus Anglicanus, p. 53, ed. 1845.


opcratum,” or that external forms or ceremonies
necessarily convey grace to those who receive them.
4th. That the Church—the congregation of faithful
men—is the body of which Christ is the head (Col.
i. 18), and consists of all who, being regenerated, or
born anew of the Holy Ghost, serve the Lord in
newness of spirit (Rom. vii. 6), and are children of
God by faith in Christ Jesus (Gal. hi. 26). Reject-
ing the opinions that the Church of Christ is limited
in any country to one denomination, or that those
only are members of the Church of Christ who have
received religious ordinances in any particular com-
munion, or that there is no salvation out of that body
which is called the Catholic Church.
sth. A godly jealousy of the character and office
of the Redeemer as the sole author of our salvation,
—as the one Mediator between God and man, and
as with the Father and the Holy Spirit the only
object of religious adoration.—Rejecting all devo-
tional addresses to the Virgin Mary, the Saints, or
Angels,—all dependence upon their merits or inter-
cession ; and especially condemning all superstitious
reverence for images or relics, and all additions to
what is prescribed in the Gospel of Christ, such as
Prayers for the Dead, the Sacrifice of the Mass or
Propitiatory Sacrifice in the Lord’s Supper, Purga-
tory, Penance, Auricular Confession, and Special
Absolution.
(Signed)
WILLIAM BEDFORD, D.D.,
St. David’s Church, Hobart Town, Senior Chaplain.
JAMES NORMAN,
Chaplain of Sorell.
WILLIAM BEDFORD, Jun., 8.A.,
Chaplain of Campbell Town.
* The signatures refer only to the declaration, ami not to the notes.


PHILIP PALMER, M.A.,
Chaplain of the Parish of the Holy Trinity, Hobart Town.
EDWARD FREEMAN, M.A.,
Chaplain of Brown's River.
HENRY PHIBBS FRY, D.D.,
Chaplain of St. George's, Hobart Town.
JOHN BURROWES, 8.A.,
Chaplain of Pontville.
WILLIAM RICHARDSON, 8.A.,
Chaplain of Avoca.
EDWARD P. DURHAM, 8.A.,
Chaplain of Hobart Town Hospital, Brickfields, and Female
Dep6t, Hobart Town.
WICKHAM W. HESKETH, M.A.,
Chaplain of St. Mary's, Macquarie Plains.
J. G. MEDLAND,
Chaplain of the Male Penitentiary, Hobart Town.
W. R. BENNETT,
Chaplain of O'Brien's Bridge
CHARLES M. BARDIN, A. 8.,
Chaplain of Bothwell.
ALFRED STACKHOUSE, M.A.,
Chaplain of Perth.
GEORGE WILKINSON, A 8.,
Chaplain of Evandale.
JOHN BISHTON, M.A.,
Chaplain of Westbury.
R. GURNEY,
Chaplain of Cascades.
J. FEREDAY, M.A.,
Chaplain of George Town.
R. R. GRANGE, M.A.
T. N. GRIGG, A. 8.,
Circular Head.
Hobart Town, July IsJ, 1851




NOTE A.
The passage of the exhortation in the Communion
Service, which is erroneously represented as justify-
ing the views of the “ Steps to the Altar,” is as fol-
lows :
“ Because it is requisite that no man should come to
the holy Communion, but with a full trust in God’s
mercy, and with a quiet conscience; therefore, if there
be any of you, who by this means cannot quiet his own
conscience therein, but requireth further comfort or
counsel , let him come to me, or to some other discreet
and learned Minister of God’s word, and open his
grief; that by the ministry of God's holy word he
may receive the benefit of absolution, together with
ghostly counsel and advice, to the quieting of his
conscience, and avoiding of all scruple and doubt-
fulness.”
Those who are withheld from the Communion by
any scruple or apprehension, and who feel that they
require further comfort or counsel than that which
their own knowledge or consideration can afford, are
advised to come to a Minister for counsel and advice,
and for the absolution of their sins by the ministry of
God’s word. They go to him that they may have
their doubts resolved, and that by the preaching and
application, or ministry , of God’s word, they may
hear and receive the promises of the Redeemer, and
by faith find pardon or absolution of their sins, and
so obtain “ a full trust in God’s mercy and a quiet
conscience.” 1 hey are not advised to confess their
sins to the Priest that they may receive special abso-
lution, but to make known to him their grief,—that
particular trouble or apprehension which keeps them


away from the Communion, and concerning which
they require his counsel, advice, and Scriptural
instruction.
The “ Steps to the Altar” inculcate essentially dif-
ferent doctrines.
Ist. Not only those who cannot quiet their own
consciences so as to come to the Holy Communion,
are directed to go to the Minister, which is the
advice of the Prayer Book, but all who u fnd difficulty
in guiding themselves ” are told to go to the Priest
and make confession of their sins Cp. 19)- The
words “ all who find difficulty in guiding themselves,”
would comprise the serious and humble-minded, and
so extend the invitation far beyond the intention and
words of the Prayer Book.
The members of the Church are also taught that
the Fast days may be kept properly by using con-
fession (p. 22.); and the whole of the form and direc-
tions about Self-examination, Confession, and Abso-
lution are to he read over every hriday before Com-
munion. As, therefore, Confession is recommended
to all who find difficulty in guiding themselves, and
as it is directed to be used on hast Days (p. 22,
note), i. 6., weekly or oftener ; and as every spiritual
blessing is ascribed to Absolution, (p. 121), all who
desire the benefits of religion, according to the prin-
ciples of the “ Steps to the Altar,” should come to Con
fession, and Priestly Absolution,—speaking of which
it does not shrink from saying, “ Here is Mercy,
Deliverance, Heaven, and Everlasting Life.
2nd. Persons are told to choose a Confessor, a
word not to be found in the Prayer Book.
3rd. The confession is to he made in an humble
posture on the knees, as being made to Cod rather
than man ; and the Priest is to be regarded as a
u trustee from God, and commissioned by Him as his
ministerial deputy, to hear, and judge, and absolve.
All which statements are conformable to Romanism,


and unwarrantable additions to the teaching of the
Common Prayer.
4th. The direction in the “ Steps to the Altar” is
not to go to the Minister for counsel and scriptural
instruction, but for Special Absolution (p. 19)-
sth. The penitent is not instructed, as in the
Prayer Book, to open his grief to the Minister, but
to make to him “confession of his sins” (p. 17-) Ido
is to regard his Confessor, not as a Minister of the
Gospel, whose counsel and instruction he is to seek,
and to whom, as to a fellow man, he may reveal so
much of his grief or scruples of conscience as he
may deem advisable, but he is to feel that he is con-
fessing his sins to God when he is revealing them to
the Priest, who is said to “ have power to absolve in
Christ s name from those sins which have been con-
fessed to him and therefore he must feel under a
most sacred obligation to disclose every offence of
which he is conscious, and of which he desires par-
don. He is to trust his soul with his Confessor, and
plainly and sincerely to open his heart to him.
(p. 120).
6th. Those who require ministerial counsel are
not directed in the “ Steps to the Altar,” as they are
in the Prayer Book, to seek for the absolution of
their sins through the ministry of God's word , but
through the Special Absolution of the Priest , who
is said to “ have the power of the keys committed to
him, upon true repentance, to absolve in Christ s
name from those sins which have been confessed to
him” (p. 120). They are not taught to seek absolu-
tion or pardon through the faith and repentance
ministered, or preached, to them from God’s word,
but are told that “ their only care is, that their re-
pentance be such as their Minister believes it to be,
and then their absolution shall certainly be confirmed
in the high court of Heaven, and not one word thereof
shall fall to the ground ” (p. 121).


NOTE B
While the Church of Rome is thus described as a
Sister Church, a branch of that which is said to be
one, holy and Catholic, all English Protestants who
are not of the Communion of the established Church
are declared to be Schismatics.— Theovh. An /r,
p. 32, &c.
“ Schism is a carnal work, and excludes from heaven.” Ibid.
page 33.
“ There is no schism which does not tend to generate for itself
some Heresy.”—lbid, page 32.
We may not say that schismatics are in the invisible Church.”
“ They are subjects of Christ, but rebellious ones.”—lbid. p. 35.
The graces which Schismatics may have, insunt Us, sed non Us
prosunt, verum etiam obsunt, they are in them, but not for them, but
they are even against them, as long as they continue Schismatics.”—
Ibid, p. 245.
“Preaching in schism is sinful.”—lbid. p. 247,
“ Salvation is only in the Church. There may not be more than
one Church in which salvation is offered.”—lbid. p. 29.
“ Nemo potest habere Deum Patrem, qui non habet Ecclesiam
Matrem.” —lbid, page 32.
“ It is a work of charity to schismatics to declare wilful schism to
be mortal sin, for such God declares it to be.”—lbid. p. 244.
In the Steps to the Altar, page 20, the following question is
proposed for self-examination on the Second Commandment. “ the
worship of God. Have you encouraged heresy or schism, by
attending the meetings of those who dissent from the Church of
Christ; by buying, reading, or lending their books, or in any other
way ? ”
While the authors of the “ Garden of the Soul”
and other Popish manuals are represented as spiritual
writers, or as most holy Saints, it is said to be a sin
in the sight of God to read a work of Henry, of
Baxter, of Bunyan, of Doddridge, or of Watts; and the
books which make these declarations themselves, con-
tain several extracts from Romish writers. There is
no question proposed in the “ Steps,” as to whether


Popish books are read or approved—whether the
idolatrous worship of the Virgin and of the Saints is
regarded with approbation, &c., although such enqui-
ries would come much more appropriately under the
Second Commandment than questions about schism.
Romanism is praised, while Protestanism and the
members of other Protestant communions are de-
nounced and condemned; and to dissent from the
Church of England is assumed to be the same as
dissenting from the Church of Christ—a position
repugnant to the feelings of all Evangelical members
of the Church.
When such principles as these are inculcated, the
real spirit of schism is engendered and diffused, —
when the younger members of the Church are taught
to feel as a sin to be confessed to God, the attending
a meeting, or reading a book of those who dissent
from the Church, they are instructed to regard the
other Protestant Communions as excommunicate,
and as objects of religious aversion and avoidance.
Under the pretence of not incurring the sin of
schism, they are taught to conceive its bitterest
spirit, and that against those who hold the same
evangelical faith as their own ; and while they are
instructed to entertain such feelings towards Pro-
testants, they are told that Popery, with all its reli-
gious and social corruptions, is one and the same
with the Church of England in the main points of
religion.


PROTEST OF CLERGYMEN, ADDRESSED
TO THE RIGHT REV. THE LORD BISHOP
OF TASMANIA.
Parsonage , Hohart Town ,
Ist July , 1851.
We, the undersigned Clergymen, solemnly protest
to the Lord Bishop of Tasmania against the perni-
cious tendency of the doctines inculcated in the fol-
lowing books, which have been distributed by several
Ministers of the Church of England in this diocese,
viz.—
“ Steps to the Altar,”
“ Spiritual Communion,”
“ Theophilus Anglicanus.”
William Bedford, Senior Chaplain.
James Norman.
William Bedford, Jun.
Philip Palmer.
Edward Freeman.
Henry Phibbs Fry.
John Burrowes.
William Richardson.
Edward P. Durham.
J. G. Medland.
W. R. Bennett.
Charles M. Bardin.
W. M. Hesketh.


TO THE REV. DR. BEDFORD.
Bishopstowe , July 14 t/t, 1851.
My dear Dr. Bedford, —
I beg to acknowledge the receipt of your note of
this day’s date, accompanied by a protest, signed by
yourself, and twelve other clergymen of the diocese,
against the doctrines of the following books, viz.—
“ Steps to the Altar,”
“ Spiritual Communion,”
“ Theophilus Anglicanus.”
The clergy will not, I trust, consider me as un-
mindful of the respect with which I desire to regard
the free expression of their opinions upon such sub-
jects, if, in this instance, I differ widely from their
estimate of the “pernicious tendency of the doctrines
inculcated in ‘ Steps to the Altar’ and ‘ Theophilus
Anglicanus.’”
The former little work is used in my own family,
and I see no reason why it should be discarded.
“ Theophlius Anglicanus,” when carefully studied,
and rightly understood, appears to me to be one of
the most valuable of the many works published by
my esteemed friend, Dr. Christopher Wordsworth,
to whom the Church of England is, perhaps, more
indebted than to any living writer, for a steadfast
and uncompromising advocacy of her real principles,
in contradistinction to the tenets and claims of the
Church of Rome.
With the work entitled “ Spiritual Communion,” I
am unacquainted. If, however, the objections raised
against it are of the same character as those which
have been advanced against “ Steps to the Altar,”
and which have been so conclusively refuted by Mr-


Tancred, I do not suppose that I should discover
anything seriously to object to it on the score of
doctrine.
1 here are, probably, few compositions to whose
every word any one of us would desire to give in an
unqualified adhesion. But I cannot join in your
condemnation of works, which, if I mistake not,
would have been regarded in the days of Hooker,
Bull, Jeremy Taylor, and the like, as identified with
the true teaching of the Church.
I remain,
My dear Dr. Bedford,
Faithfully yours,
(Signed) F. R. TASMANIA.




