

of the southern, in the name, and for the use of, his
Britannic Majesty, King George the Third.
The next visit that was made to these islands, was that
of the French navigator, M. Marion du Fresne, who landed
in the Bay of Islands on the 11th of May, 1 772. This
visit was attended with the most disastrous consequences,
as it ended in the murder of Marion, and a great number
of his crew and officers, apparently without any cause, after
they had associated with the natives with the utmost con-
fidence and familiarity for more than a month. Then-
deaths were avenged by a terrible slaughter of the natives,
who suffered themselves to be mowed down, without the
power of moving, by the musketry of the survivors. Crozet,
who succeeded Marion in the command of the expedition,
left New Zealand on the 14th of July, having first taken
possession of the north isle in the name of his master, and
given it the name of France Australe,
In the year 1773, Captain Cook was again in New
Zealand on his second voyage, and visited Dusky Bay on
the southern extremity of the great island, and Ship Cove
in Cook’s Strait, on its northern extremity, accompanied
by Captain Furneaux in, the Adventure. The ships were
separated by bad weather, and did not meet again upon the
coast. During their separation, Captain Furneaux lost a
boat s crew of excellent seamen, who were bj a
BMives, headed by a chief named Kahoora,
whether in cold blood, or in consequence of a quarrel, can-
not be known ; but it is very remarkable that in 1777, when
Cook again returned to the island, Kahoora visited him
with the greatest confidence, although it was publicly
known that he had promoted the destruction of Captain
Furneaux.’s men, and Cookw'as earnestly solicited by other
natives, to take vengeance on him as their murderer.
For twenty years after this period, there does not seem
to have been any intercourse with New Zealand on the
part of Europeans ; but in the year 1793, it was again re-
newed, in consequence of the establishment of a British
colony at Botany Bay, in New South Wales, distant about
a fortnight’s sail to the westward of New Zealand. The
government of New South Wales having attempted to
form a settlement on a small uninhabited spot called Nor-
folk Island, two or three days’ sail to the north-west of New
Zealand, became anxious to get possession of some of the
xiatives of New Zealand, in order that they might learn
from them how they dressed the flax of their country,—a
production which was also found to grow in great abundance
on Norfolk Island. A vessel was accordingly despatched
there, and two New Zealanders, Hoodoo and Toogee, were
induced to come on board. While they remained in the
cabin, “ blinded,” to use their own. expression, by all the
curious things they saw, the ship set sail, and in a short
time carried them to Norfolk Island. There, notwith-
standing _ the lawlessness of their capture, they were
treated with great kindness by the governor, Captain King,
and when made to understand that, what they were wanted
for was to teach and not to labour, they willingly gave all
the information they could on the subject of flax dressing.
This turned out to he very little. The operation was among
them the peculiar province of women; and as Hoodoo was
a warrior, and Toogee a priest, they gave the governor to
nndeistand that the dressing of flax never made any part
of their studies. They were, however, very communicative
about the geography and political divisions of their country.
One of them was able to draw on the floor of a room with
chalk, a kind of map of the northern island of New Zea-
land, which he afterwards transferred to paper, and which
was found to bear a great resemblance to Captain Cook’s
delineation.
1 hese interesting persons remained for several months
at Norfolk Island; but on the 12th of November, 1793,
were brought by Captain King in sight of their native
shores. 1 hey were soon surrounded by their countrymen,
among whom Toogee recognised, to his great joy, a female
relation of his mother’s, from whom he learned that his
family were in good health, but greatly distressed at his
apparent loss. It was remarked that though there were
upwards of a hundred New Zealanders on board and along-
side, Toogee confined his caresses and conversation to his
mother’s relation, and one or two chiefs who were distin-
guished by the marks on their faces, and by the respectful
behaviour which was shown them by the working men,
who paddled the canoes. Want of wind prevented the
vessel from taking the young men to their own part of the
country ; but Kotokkokie, the chief of the district near
Which they lay, having promised to convey them there,
3 they left the ship, and placed themselves under his pro-
tection, Toogee having rebutted Captain King’s suspicions
c that it might be a plan of Kotokokies, for getting them
1 and their effects into bis power, by the generous assertion
i that “ a chief neVer deceives.”
. About the beginning of the present century, New Zea-
’ ] f 1(1 was a g ain brought into connexion with England, by
!, e . whale-fishery which was carried on upon its coasts.
Hus led to amicable intercourse with the inhabitants, and
• it was represented to the governor of New South Wales,
, that by kind treatment they might be rendered Very friendly
* an d serviceable to the English. The government were
1 h a PPy to promote this object by sending them over cattle,
and whatever else was likely to bring about their civiliza-
tion, and give them a taste for the conveniences and en-
joyments of cultivated life. At last, a very powerful chief
of the name of Tippahee, who resided near the Bay of
Islands, and had shown his sagacity by promoting an ex-
tensive cultivation of the potato throughout his district,
expressed a desire to be taken with his five sons to see
Port the head-quarters of the government of New
South Wales. His request was complied with, and while
he remained there, he examined with the most inquisitive
attention whatever was most Wmthf of Eetk@. Reifig
taken one day to see a rope-walk, and shown the method
ot making small twine, some of which was made before
him, and the process explained, he was so affected by con-
trasting our superior skill with the ignorance of his own
countrymen, that he burst into tears, and exclaimed “ New
Zealand no good.” While at Port Jackson, Tippahee had
an opportunity of witnessing the extremes of civilized and
savage life, the one presented to him in the English, the
other in the naked race which inhabited the country, and
had for so many years disregarded the advantages of civili-
zation. They, in their turn, formed some extravagant
notion of the stranger, and dreaded to approach him. After
exciting great respect in New South Wales by his sensible
inquiries on all subjects, his shrewd and just remarks on
the jaws and police of the colony, and his desire for the
blessings of civilization, he returned to bis country.
lippahee ■was not the only New Zealander who, about
t time, was animated by the desire of observing civilized
society, and introducing civilization into his own country
In the year 1805, his young relative, Duaterra, placed
himself on board the ship Argo, which had come in the
pursuit of whales to the coast of New Zealand, and in
order to gratify his desire to see a country of which he had
heard so much, went in her, as a common sailor, to New
houth Wales, and served on board her for twelve months.
At the end of that time, he was discharged at Sydney
Love, and though he received no reward for his year’s ser-
vices, immediately embarked in another vessel that was
proceeding to the whale-fishery off New Zealand, and
served in her for six months more. After this, he remained
loi six months at home, but the Santa Anna whaler, having
anchored in the Bay of Islands, on her way to Bounty
Island, to procure seal-skins, Duaterra once more deter-
mined to try his fortune on the seas, and accompanied her
to her destination. He was there put on shore with thir-
teen Other persons to kill seals; and while the Santa Anna
returned to New Zealand and Norfolk Island, for supplies,
succeeded with his companions in capturing 8000 of these
animals. The Santa Anna was detained for many months;
and these poor men were left with very few provisions, and
no water _ but what descended on them from the clouds, so
that their suflerings and privations were of the severest
kind, and three of them fell victims to their hardships.
But as soon as she returned, and had taken in the seal-
skins, Duaterra forgot all his miseries in the prospect for
wjuch he had consented to undergo them, namely, that he
might visit England, and see King George.
In the month of July, 1809, Duaterra was in the
Thames. But the generous feelings of the devoted young
patriot were so rudely trampled on by the sordid spirits in
whom he had confided, that instead of succeeding in his
wishes, he was scarcely permitted to go on shore, and never-
spent a night out of the ship. After remaining a fortnight
in the river, he was discharged from the Santa Anna, was
sent tattered, unhappy, and dangerously ill, on board a
convict ship, which was about to proceed to New South
Wales, and as a discharge in full for all his services, was
promised two muskets when he should arrive at Port
Jackson.
It happened that the ReV. S. Marsden, senior chaplain
ox the British Colony at New South Wales was in Loudon
353—g


THE SATURDAY MAGAZINE.
at the same time, and had been endeavouring to effect by
a more deliberate plan, the same object which was pursued
with a kind of wild instinct by Duaterra : namely, the civi-
lization of New Zealand. He had made a proposal to the
Church Missionary Society, to establish a mission in that
country; and being now about to proceed on his way there
with two missionary settlers, was ordered by Government
to return to New South Wales by the ship Ann, a,nd
joined her at Spithead. This was the same vessel in which
Duaterra had embarked, and when Mr. Marsden came on
board, he was below, confined to his berth by sickness..
When Mr. Marsden first saw him, he was on the forecastle,
wrapped up in an old great coat, very sick and weak, had
a very violent cough, and was spitting blood. His mind
was very much dejected, and he appeared as if a few days
would terminate his existence. The kindness he now ex-
perienced, however, gradually restored him to health ; and
by the time the vessel arrived at Rio de Janeiro, he was
able to do his duty as a seaman, in which capacity he was
considered equal to most of the men on board. They
arrived at Port Jackson in February, 1810.
In the mean time, a very distressing event had occurred
at New Zealand. The circumstance to which we refer is
well known as the Massacre of the Boyd; and was occa-
sioned by the pride and vengeful treachery of a young 1
chief who had come over in that vessel from Port Jackson,
with three or four of his countrymen, and who had felt
Himself insulted by the captain, in being made to work,
and being flogged at the gangway. Nearly seventy English
were butchered on this dreadful occasion, and the ship was
afterwards accidentally blown up by the natives, who thus
perished, themselves, in great numbers. Nor did the loss
of life end here. Tippahee, whom we have already men-
tioned, happened to come to where the vessel lay in the
midst of the slaughter, but though he did all he could to
prevent it, he was afterwards punished as one of the guilty
party, by the total destruction of all his tribe by some
English captains. These disastrous events gave a sudden
check to the efforts which were in contemplation for-the
improvement of the New Zealanders; the scheme which
had been suggested to the Church Missionary Society was
left unprosecuted, and a dark cloud hung over the pro-
spects of the country.
It had been the endeavour of Mr. Marsden, whose return
to Fort Jackson we have recently mentioned, to collect
about him at Parramatta the young New Zealand chiefs
who occasionally came over to the country, to give them an
insight into civilized life, and to instruct them in such arts
as they were capable of acquiring. Hither he was accom-
panied by Duaterra, who continued with him, and applied
himself to agriculture for about ten months, but at the end
of that time availed himself of an opportunity to return to
his own country with three other New Zealanders, one of
\yhom was a son of Tippahee’s and a relation of his own. The
captain of the vessel in which they embarked, had agreed to
take them to the Bay of Islands, on condition of receiving
their assistance during a whaling cruise which he proposed
to make about the coast of New Zealand. But after they
had served him for about six months, and were just ready
to disembark, being now within two miles of the beloved
birth-place which Duaterra had so long and so patiently
desired to revisit, they were carried off in search of another
whale. Tantalized with a reiteration ot false promises,
and having rendered the captain such services as wornd
have entitled them to a share of oil, worth 100 Z. each, had
they returned to England, Duaterra and two of his com-
panions were left destitute ot everything on Nor folk Island,
and Tippahee’s son forcibly carried off to England. The
vessel which had been the scene of this iniquity was soon
taken by the Americans, after a severe contest, in which
the master was mortally wounded and the chief-mate killed.
Duaterra was found on Norfolk Island by a friendly cap-
tain, and once more restored to Mr. Marsden, to whom he
feelingly related all the troubles he had undergone. He
again remained with him for some time, and again confided
himself to the promises of an Englishman, furnished, as
he had been before, with a quantity of seed wheat and
various implements of agriculture. This lime he was not
disappointed, but after another five months’ cruise was
landed on his own shores, to the inexpressible joy of him-
self and his friends.
Duaterra now zealously devoted himself to the applica-
tion of that knowledge which he had acquired; and his
first business was to teach his countrymen the nature and
value of wheat, and to promote its cultivation. The chiefs
received and planted the seeds which he gave them, but
with very little expectation that it could ever by any pro-
cess be converted into biscuit, a substance with which they
had been made familiar on board the English vessels. They
soon became impatient for the produce, whatever it might
be, supposing it like the produce of other vegetables with
which they were acquainted, to grow about the roots. They
tore up the stalks, and finding nothing, cast them into the
fire with much contempt for Duaterra.
The only one who looked forward with any confidence to
receive the fruits of his labour was Honghi, the uncle of
Duaterra, a chief of large possessions and great power, and
celebrated and dreaded as the fiercest and most successful
of warriors, but who, though ferocious in battle, was at other
times all gentleness, and not more distinguished by his
mild manners and kindly affections, than by a natural
taste and ingenuity in such arts as he was acquainted with.
In due time their hopes were realized; but although the
grain was produced, there was no means of overcoming
the prejudices of the other chiefs by converting it into
bread. They tried to grind some in a pepper-mill, which
was borrowed from the captain of a whaling vessel: but,
not succeeding, Duaterra had recourse to his old and faith-
ful friend, Mr. Marsden, to whom he sent word what he
had done, with a request that he would send him a mill,
and some more implements of agriculture.
It was now thought high time to put in execution the
benevolent design which was conceived by Mr. Marsden six
years before. A small vessel was accordingly purchased on
behalf of the Church Missionary Society, and was sent
with the two missionary settlers, Messrs. Hall and Kendal,
to the Bay of Islands *. They took with them a steel mill,
and other articles which would be useful to Duaterra, and
conveyed a message from Mr. Marsden, inviting him to
come over with some other chiefs, and pay a visit to Port
Jackson. It would be hard to describe the joy and excite-
ment which were occasioned by this present and communi-
cation. It was a memorable day for New Zealand, when
Duaterra, surrounded by his admiring countrymen, first
ground his wheat, and made a cake of the flour which bad
been produced on his own country’s soil, and distributed to
his guests bread which his Own hands had sown, and
ground, and kneaded. So anxious was he to prosecute his
interesting labours, that he at first declined the invitation
to Port Jackson, wishing to remain for two years more, and
attend, to the cultivation of wheat in his own country. But
Honghi was anxious to accept the invitation, and Duaterra
was prevailed upon to go with him.
111*1814, after a short visit to Port Jackson, Honghi and
Duaterra returned with Mr. Marsden and his friend, Mr.
Nicholas, to whom we are indebted for much of our in-
formation, of the Bay of Islands, where the first station of
the Church Missionary Society was then established, and
Duaterra looked forward with triumph and joy to the future
prospects of his country. “ I have now,” said he, “ intro-
duced the cultivation of wheat into New Zealand; New
Zealand will become a great country in two years more; I
shall be able to export wheat to Port Jackson in exchange
for hoes, axes, spades, tea, and sugar.” Under this impres-
sion he made arrangements with his people for a very ex-
tensive cultivation, and formed his plan for building a new
town, with regular streets after the European mode, on a
beautiful situation which commanded a view of the harbour
and adjacent country; the situation for the church was
fixed upon, and the streets were all to have been marked
out before Mr. Marsden sailed for Port Jackson. But at
the very time when these arrangements were to have been
executed, Duaterra was stretched upon his dying bed. He
was struck by a disease and carried off in four days, after
an eventful and patriotic life, at the early age of twenty-
eight years.
Subsequently to this period. New Zealand may be said
to have been under the superintendence of the Missionary
Societies of England, who have received much positive
assistance from the various chiefs of their neighbourhood,
while it was only to be expected that their progress would
be greatly impeded by their wild and warlike charactei.
Honghi,- the friend of Duaterra, continued as long as
he lived the faithful friend of the Missionaries. Like
* A laro-e Panoramic View of this beautiful and interesting district,
from the drawings of Mr. Earle, made on the spot, has been painted,
for the purpose of being exhibited at the Great Room in Leicester-
square, London. To Mr. Earle, also, we are indebted for the
drawings from which two of the illustrations of the present number
are engraved.


Duaterra, he made a voyage to England, but unlike him,
was received with honour by the king, and enriched with
presents, which to him were of the highest value. He
returned to New Zealand with his warlike spirit rather
developed than repressed; and although his disposition
towards the Missionaries was of the friendliest kind, the
wars in which he engaged were such as to fill their hearts
with the bitterest sorrow, and spread terror and devastation
through their settlements. An attack which he made upon
the people of Wangaroa, in 1826, occasioned the destruction
of the Wesleyan Mission in that place, and his own death
about fifteen months afterwards, from the effects of a
wound which he received there. But it is stated that
nothing would ever provoke him to take the life of an
Englishman, and that his last moments were employed in
requesting his survivors to treat the Missionaries well, and
on no account to cause them to leave the island; nor does
it appear that since the first establishment of the Missions,
a single Englishman has been murdered by a New
Zealander.
The same cannot he said on the part of Europeans. So
flagrant were the atrocities which they committed, that in the
same year in which the Church Mission was established in
New Zealand, a society was formed in New South Wales, with
the governor at its head, for the express purpose of protect-
ing them against the barbarous conduct of the crews and
commanders of European vessels. But this society was of
so little avail, that it is stated by one of the Missionaries,
that within the first two or three years after their establish-
ment at the Bay of Islands, not less than a hundred, at
least, of the natives had been murdered by Europeans in
their immediate neighbourhood ; and this course has con-
tinued almost without intermission, in various parts of the
island, till the present time. In the year 1832, in order to
stop these proceedings, and to watch over the commercial
interests of the British, Mr. James Busby was appointed
by the British Government to reside as consular agent in
the northern island; and though it is obvious that the
presence of one gentleman, in one particular spot, can have
but little effect in repressing outrage and wrong over a
savage territory as large as Great Britain, his authority
has been of use on several occasions; and further mea-
sures are now in contemplation for effecting these desirable
objects.
INHABITANTS OP NEW ZEALAND.
Thk inhabitants of these islands evidently belong to the
same family as all the other islanders of the Pacific Ocean,
and hear a sufficiently strong resemblance to the Malay
inhabitants of the Indian Archipelago to prove that they
proceeded in that direction from the birth-place of mankind,
in Asia. Their forefathers, it is not improbable, were
among the first wanderers of the human race, and might
be prompted to trust themselves upon the ocean, while the
story of the flood was still familiar to their minds. The
account which we have of their traditions, strikingly
reminds us of the .Scriptural narrative ; they believe, we
are told, that the first man was made by three gods, that
the first woman was formed of one of the ribs of a man,
and that her name was Hevee, they have also traditions
about the flood, and the escape of one family only in a
canoe. The dove, likewise, is represented by them as instru-
mental in raising New Zealand from the bottom of the sea;
and it is very singular, that they baptize and name their
children on the eighth day.
Their belief in a Supreme Being is, in many respects,
accurate; they conceive of Him as a powerful invisible
Spirit, and call him Atiia. They also believe in the
existence of an evil spirit, whom they call Wiro, and to
whom they give the same attributes as are assigned in
the Scriptures to the enemy of man. With all this there
are mixed up superstitions of a very gross and ridiculous
kind, and dispositions the most awfully at variance with
true fully proving that, when once the human
heart has separated itself from the influence of divine
truth, it runs by its own movement into every species of
wickedness and perversion. At the same ,time, they have
qualities of a very superior kind, and which place them in
the very first rank of uncivilized nations ; they possess the
tenderest affections, and have a strong sense of honour
when once thev hold themselves engaged.
•,* t O O
A peculiar superstition which they call Taboo, while it
subjects them to many inconveniences, has been found of
great use in dealing with them; it is a superstition by which,
on particular occasions, they invest persons or things with a
kind of ceremonial sacredness. The tabooed person has
to separate himself much in the same way as those who,
under the Mosaic law, were tainted with ceremonial un-
cleanness ; and the tabooed thing, whether it be a heap of
provisions, a sacred burial-place, an article of domestic use,
or a tract of country, is inviolably defended against even
the touch of a New Zealander.
Their food is very simple, consisting chiefly of vegetables
and fish ; they bad no flesh meat, or fermented drink till
they became acquainted with the English, and even now
they only use pork on occasions of festivity, and naturally
dislike intoxicating liquors; indeed, they drink very
sparingly of any liquid. This simple diet, their freedom
from care and laborious occupation, the easy exercise which
they are constantly taking in the open air, and the natural
salubrity of their climate, keep their bodies in admirable
condition, as is often proved by the rapidity with which
their most severe and dangerous wounds may be observed
to heal. Their personal appearance is for the most part
very fine ; both men and women are tall and well made, and
some are very handsome, but their faces are disfigured by
tattooing: their general colour is a light brown. They have
a great many different articles of dress, all made of the flax
of their country, and suited to different seasons of the year
and states of the weather. The outer garment which they
use in cold and wet weather is very warm, and-completely
impervious to the rain, which it is made to throw off like
the eaves of a thatched house.
Their most striking social characteristic is the institution
of chieftainship. They may be said to have as many as five
different gradations of society; the superior and inferior
chief, the rangatira or gentleman, the common people, and
the slaves. 13ut although the upper classes have a con-
sciousness of superiority, and a feeling of honour which
distinguishes them from the lower, and possess many pri-
vileges, and often treat their inferiors with great barbarity,
there are no invidious distinctions to mar the freedom of the
social intercourse which all classes carry on with one another
When not at war, they are engaged in. the cultivation of
their vegetables, or collecting them in at harvest, or in
fishing, or constructing implements of war or agriculture,
or in making distant excursions by land or water, or in the
various festivities and amusements with which the tribes
occasionally entertain one another. Many of them possess
great humour and liveliness of disposition, and they will
sit for hours together in the most animated conversation.
A curse is the most unpardonable injury that one person
among them can inflict upon another; and a sense of
disgrace is so insupportable that they often relieve them-
selves of it by suicide. Such is the force of their affections
that, when they meet after a long separation, their feelings
burst out into an expression of the most agonized distress
they join their noses together, the mode of salutation
in the country, and remain in that posture sobbing and
shedding tears abundantly for half an hour ; the same takes
place, as might be supposed, previously to any separation
the women cry and gash themselves with sharp shells, till
the blood runs profusely over their whole persons. A more
Striking OF tiFFikli osllibition can hardly be witnessed
than one of their war-dances. The sounds of scorn apd
hatred which they utter, the ferocious expression of their
countenance, and the violent motions of their whole frames,
are all intended to inspire terror into their enemies, and to
work themselves up into the proper state of hostile energy.
They live in little villages scattered thinly over that por-
tion of the country which borders on the sea, the interior not
being inhabited. These villages are often on the top of a
mountain or jutting promontory, and within a species of
rude fortification which they call a Pah. Causes of war are
perpetually occurring between the different tribes, and
when war once begins, it passes from tribe to tribe till the
whole nation is in an uproar; and as every chief is bound
by a,superstitious sense of obligation to exact payment in
kind for the relations whom he has lost in battle, it does
not appear how a feud once begun is ever to terminate.
Happily, however, they have among them an officer bearing
the venerable character of a herald, or peace-maker, .and
his mediation is often employed to bring about an amnesty.
Our picture of this people would be incomplete if we did
not refer to their practice.of cannibalism: the usual objects
of this unnatural appetite are enemies slain in battle, but
on. a very slight pretence they will kill and devour their
own slaves. Their chiefs, also, have several wives, a practice
highly detrimental to the happiness of the country, and
which often leads to jealousy, child murder, and suicide.


INTERCOURSE WITH IMPROVING SOCIETY.
A brighter prospect opens upon our view when we con-
sider the New Zealanders under the influence of a civilizing
process. They are not only Susceptible, but exceedingly
desirous of improvement; they possess a curiosity, an am-
bition, and a power of observation and imitation, which
renders them admirable learners; and, as we have seen,
they will go through great difficulties and expose themselves
to great dangers, in order to effect the object which they
have at heart. 'When among civilized people, either at
Port Jackson or in England, they have accommodated
themselves with wonderful facility to all their habits, and
excite surprise by the propriety and even gentlemanlinesS
of their manners; and in their own country, wherever they
have the power, they are adopting the English dress, and
the manners and habits of our country. It is a pleasing
fact, and one which speaks volumes, that nothing meets
with a more ready sale at the Missionary stations than a
cargo of soap and English blacking; they enter largely into
commercial transactions in the sale of flax, timber, potatoes,
and pork, with the ships which visit their coasts, and such
is their credit, that some of them have been trusted with
£l5OO worth of goods. Notwithstanding the restlessness
of their disposition, they can labour very diligently and
effectively where they have a sufficient object in view, and
civilized man has already seen a New urging
the plough, and guiding a vessel through the trackless
waters; it is their greatest wish to have civilized people
dwelling among them, and, above all others, they prefer
the English. Their chief wish is to have Missionaries,
because Missionaries are, according to the African's defini-
tion, gentlemen, namely, such as speak good words and do
good actions; but. rather than have no English residents
among them, they would consent to have' bad ones. In
their intercourse with civilized man we observe in them a
feeling of equality without independence, a disposition to
value and respect him for the .advantages which he enjoys,
without being depressed with the sense of their own in-
feriority.
At the Missionary stations their moral character has ex-
perienced a wonderful improvement. As a people they
have become honest, and their observance of the Sabbath,
and propriety of demeanour at public worship are quite
exemplary. They are not only delighted to receive Christian
instruction themselves, but most anxious to communicate it
to others, and such is the influence of the Missionaries
among them, that they have even succeeded in preventing
hostilities between two rival tribes. The most pressing-
requests are made by the different tribes to have Missionaries
established among them, and they give as their reason,
that it is the only way in which they can be brought to
enjoy the benefits of peace and good order; and when the
Missionaries pay occasional visits to the distant villages,
they receive every assistance on their journey from the
natives who are so anxious.to receive them.
On some the effects of the preaching of the Gospel have
been most decidedly evinced in the striking change which
has taken place in their character, in their veracity, their
honesty, the subjugation of their temper, the tenderness of
their conscience, and their anxiety for the spiritual welfare
of others. Before the arrival of the Missionaries they had
no written language. Many of them have now learnt to
read and write, and are masters of the first rules of arith-
metic ; and several portions of the Bible and the liturgy
have been translated into their language.
The Church Missionary Society has at present twelve
stations on the eastern side of the North Island; they em-
ploy seventy-four teachers, of whom eight are clergymen,
and twenty-three native or country-born male catechists;
they have the personal superintendence of 1555 individuals,
either as communicants or in their schools. The Wesleyan
Missionary Society has four stations on the western side of
the North Island, employs twenty-one teachers, of whom
live are Missionaries, and sixteen natives; they have the
personal superintendence of 520 in dividuals.
AN ACCOUNT OS’ NAYTI.
In illustration of the effects produced on the New Zea-
landers by civilized society, we might collect most interest-
ing accounts of the displays of character and intellectual
development in such as have for a time wholly separated
themselves from their countrymen, and plunged into the
‘«.ocial circles of Great Britain. We, could speak of the
piety of Mowhei, the martial enthusiasm of Honghi, and
the dauntless courage and touching affections of Tepahi,
we shall, however, confine ourselves to an account of one
now resident in England, whose portrait accompanies this
paper.
Nayti is the younger son of Mahurengha Nayti, cousin-
german of Raupero, chief of the powerful tribe of Kawia,
who possess an extensive territory on both of the main
islands of the New Zealand group. He is about twenty-
five years old. Like his kinsman Tepahi, who visited
England in 1826, his only object in coming to Europe was,
as he says, to “ look at many countries and see new things.”
He arrived at Havre de Grace in the month of May last,
attended by Te-aki, a youth of about nineteen, who fell ill
during the voyage, and has remained so ever since. They
were brought to England by the New Zealand Association,
in the beginning of July, 1837.
When first brought to the rooms of the Association,
Nayti was a complete savage ; unshorn, very dirty, stupified
with astonishment, unable to express himself, or to com-
prehend what was said to him, and altogether a pitiable
object. Within five months he became far more civilized
than very many Englishmen; more cleanly, obliging, and
intelligent; with more respect for himself and others ; and
with elevated views as to the improvement of his country,
such as really deserve the name of patriotism. It is true that
he has had peculiar opportunities of benefiting by his stay in
England, having resided with a family whB»received him
as a friend, and who have spared no pains to cultivate his
excellent natural understanding. His progress has amply
repaid their attention to him. He once hated the Mission-
aries, (having been taught to do so by some English
ruffians at New Zealand,) but he now, entirely of his
own accord, goes to church alone ; and though it is not
pretended that he is yet a Christian, he thoroughly appre-
ciates the utility of missionary labours in his country.
During five months he has never offended any one by word
or deed ; nor, except from ignorance of our customs, has
be ever given occasion for correcting his behaviour. His
friends do not recollect a single case in which it has been
necessary to speak to him more than once on any point of
language or manners. He attends meetings of scientific
societies; and gives valuable information on subjects rela
ting to natural history. He has formed a numerous ac-
quaintance, and gained the friendship of several families.
He is often invited to dine with strangers, when his
modesty, self-possession, and never-failing but seemingly
unstudied politeness, gain general admiration. He is
devotedly attached to his country, and has been seen to
shed tears upon occasions when the improvement of New
Zealand formed a topic of animated conversation. The
wonders of England, and the kindness with which he has
been treated by every body, seem to have made a deep im-
pression on him ; and he now speaks with aversion of
those lawless British settlers in New Zealand, whom he
once admired as the highest order of human beings. The
subject that he best likes to talk about, is the changes that
would occur in the part of the country belonging to his
own tribe, if an orderly British colony were planted there.
There has been no check as yet to his progress in know-
ledge ; and all who have had opportunities of observing that
progress, are surprised at its rapidity. If he may be taken
as a fair sample of the moral and intellectual qualities of his
countrymen, no doubt can he entertained of their capacity
for perfect civilization.
INTERCOURSE WITH DEPRAVED SOCIETY.
But the intercourse of the English with the New Zea-
landers has its darker as well as its brighter aspect. We
have seen a good deal of the barbarous and unjust conduct
of civilized people towards these islanders, in the slight
sketch of their history which precedes. But still greater,
because more permanent evils are inflicted upon them by
those who visit and dwell among them, with no other object
than selfish avarice, and the unrestrained indulgence of
lawless and vicious habits. Numbers of such persons are
to be found among the crews of thb whaling vessels which
visit their coasts; nor are their masters altogether exempt
from the same criminality. Some of these men are so bad,
that they escape or are driven from the vessels on board
which they serve, and are let loose upon the island to carry
guilt and contamination wherever they go. Convicts, too,
who escape from the penal settlements in New Holland, go
and settle there. Grog shops are set up, and the same


species of low licentiousness is carried on as in the back
streets of our great seaports, and everything is done to
thwart the efforts of the Missionaries, and to debase the
native inhabitants.
Where such characters exist in a place like New Zea-
land, incalculable mischief is likely to be produced. There
being no law to restrain, and no power to coerce them, and
a people without any religious principle or prudential
morality to act upon, it is only reasonable to suppose, that
the progress of vice under their influence, will be more rapid
than the progress of true religion and virtue under the in-
fluence of the Missionaries; and that if something is not
done to restrain them, and neutralize the mischief they are
doing, the present system of misguided colonization will
end, as misguided colonization has always done, in the de-
gradation and extinction of the native tribes.
SYSTEMATIC COLONIZATION .OF NEW ZEALAND.
New Zealand offers so many inducements to settle there,
that were it not for the warlike character of its inhabitants,
it would long before this have been colonized by some
European power. It is now apparent that their warlike
character is not accompanied by hostility against the
English, and that they are highly susceptible of the bene-
fits of civilization. The consequence has been, that a
species of irregular colonization has been going on there
for some years, and is now rapidly proceeding, Attempts
have also been made to effect a more systematic settlement
within its shores. On one occasion, a French adventurer
conceived the romantic idea gf making himself the sove-
reign of the islands, and about twelve years ago a company
of English gentlemen purchased large tracts of country from
some New Zealand chiefs, for the purpose of laying the
foundation of a British colony. None of these plans have
succeeded, and New Zealand is still under the various
irregular influences of native violence, missionary instruc-
tion, and European outrage and demoralization.
A proposal for the systematic colonization of New Zea-
land, under the auspices of a Society called the “ New
Zealand Association,” is now before the public. The prin-
ciple on which they propose to proceed is, that the crown of
England should purchase land from the natives, and con-
vert it into British territory, to be governed by British
law, making, however, such exceptional laws in favour of
the natives, as will protect them from the consequences of
their own ignorance, and tend to their moral and social
elevation. It is also proposed to exert the utmost rigour of
British law over all lawless British subjects, wherever they
may he found upon the islands. While the Colonial
Government would support the ministers of the different
religious denominations of which the settlement may be com-
posed, they would secure for the islands a complete and
efficient church establishment, according to the doctrine
and discipline of the Church of England, and under the
superintendence of a bishop; and the Association hope to
obtain an Act of Parliament to enable them to carry their
purposes into execution.
Should they succeed in this object, their plans will no
doubt come more fully before the public, and various expe-
dients will be used for collecting such a set of colonists, of
9-11 classes, as will best promote their own ffilltllal happi-
ness and prosperity, the repression of European miscon-
duct, and the security and elevation of [the native tribes.
There can be no question, that the success or failure of
such a colony will depend on the characters of which it is
composed, the principles by which they are guided, and the
wisdom with which their principles are applied. Much
will be expected from the influence of a bishop and church
establishment in the colony : much also would depend on
the exceptional laws, for the benefit of the natives.
It is certainly time that something should be done, of a
character quite different from anything that has been done
already, to check the progress of destruction, and to introduce
a principle of reanimation among the savage nations of the
world. There is no topic of real history which is so calcu-
lated to seize the imagination, as the picture of those races
which still continue to retain about them all the romance
and mystery of the aboriginal state; and no object more
worthy of our exertions, than to atone for the cruel injustice
and oppression which these races have .sustained at the
hand of civilized man. From the discovery of America to
the present time, the uncivilized races of the world have
been undergoing a regular process of depopulation. The
beautiful West Indian islands, which were once tenanted
by a courageous and warlike race, have been wholly de-
spoiled of their native inhabitants, and are now the scene
of a cooler and more systematic species of oppression, exer-
cised on another race brought over to them for slavery from
the shores of Africa. Till a few years back, it was thought
an act of merit to kill a savage; and this opinion has
been acted on without a doubt of its justice in Newfound-
land, in Africa, and in New Holland; in Newfoundland,
as in the Caribbean Islands, the native race has become
extinct. In every part of the world where natives have
come in contact with Europeans, they have appeared to
melt away before the violent action of civilized man : their
spirits have been broken, their morals vitiated, their feelings
insulted; - they have been devoured by European diseases ;
they have been enslaved, recklessly murdered, cheated,
and deprived of the means of subsistence.
The cause of all this is quickly told; it is because civi-
lized man has been actuated in his intercourse with his
savage brother, by a blind, headlong desire for present
gratification, and future gain : he has been willing to treat
the savage as his equal, wherever by such a course he was
likely to benefit himself, and as a wild beast, wherever
such a fiction was more to his advantage or bis taste. One
reason for this is the naturally wild and lawless character
of those who have gong among them. The spirits which
animate mankind to encounter the perilous excitement of
foreign adventure, are not generally of that mild and
thoughtful disposition which would make allowances for
the peculiar circumstances of the savage, or impose re-
strictions on their own cupidity, which there was no law
to enforce.
Still there must be intercourse between the savage and
the civilized. We : cannot surround the savage nations of
the earth with a wall, and say to his civilized brother, Thus
far shalt thou go, and no further. Andit is very question-
able whether we ought to do so if we could. For we can-
not suppose that while the fairest portions of the earth are
little better than a wilderness, inhabited by thinly-scattered
races who know nothing of the hidden resources of their
soil, we are fulfilling the intention of that Being who com-
mands us to replenish the earth, and subdue it. “ The
Lord that created the heavens, God himself that formed
the earth and made it, he hath established it, he created
it not in vain, he formed it to be inhabited.”
Since, then, we must have intercourse of some kind with
uncivilized nations, we ought to examine, with the most
thoughtful and impartial consideration, how that intercourse
had best carried on, bow may we regulate the various influ-
ences which are likely to operate upon the savage nations of
the earth, so as to make them tend to their civilization and
refinement. One course has been to send them missionaries,
and we should greatly rejoice that missionaries have done
so much for them; but we have seen that the presence of
missionaries has not prevented the intrusion of the most
abandoned and lawless characters. It is plain, too, that in
attempting to civilize savages, a vast variety of operations
have to be performed, which do not belong immediately to
the office of a Christian instructor, such, for instance, as
building houses, ploughing and cultivating the soil, cutting
down and preparing timber for domestic use, and all the
arts of civilized life which it is most important than a savage
should learn.
The expense, too, of sending out and supporting missions
from the mother country, must be very great, and it does
not belong to the province of a missionary to support him-
self, by turning to bis own account the commercial produce
of the country; and if it becomes necessary to employ a
powerful force to keep in order the abandoned and audacious
characters, who have settled in almost every quarter of the
islands, these expences will be increased still further. To
all this it may be added, that where a small knot of people
are set down in the midst of a savage territory, of so attrac-
tive a character, and such rich produce, as to induce numbers
of adventurers to settle there, with no law to govern them,
they must find themselves in a very painful and perilous
situation, whether we regard the actual dangers by which
they are surrounded, or the outrage which their best feelings
must sustain, or the temptations by which they must them-
selves be assailed, to deviate from the pure, upright, and
self-denying course which they have set before them.
The great excellence which we observe in the works of
nature, is that a variety of useful and beautiful results are'
brought about by the working of the same law; and there
can be no greater recommendation of any human course,
than to imitate, in this respect, the works of nature. Now


PORTRAIT OF A HERALD, OR PEACEMAKER.
it seems not improbable that the Creator, by giving to savage
nations a vast superabundance of territory, with little or no
power of using it, while he has given to civilized nations an
extremely limited possession of territory, with great know-
ledge of its value, and great skill in its employment, has
pointed our attention to a mode in which their relative cir-
cumstances might be made to contribute to them mutua
advantage. Nor is the truth of this'idea at all affected by
the gross abuse of power which has made civilized man
assume possession of the territory of savage nations, without
conferring on them any benefit in return.
Hence will arise a most important question, a problem
in the science of human nature, on whose solution the best
energies of the wisest intellects might be worthily bestowed :
What benefits are we able, and what benefits ought we, as
a powerful and enlightened nation, to confer upon a savage
race, in return for the territory which they grant us ? and
having determined this, in what way ought we to proceed
in order most effectually to confer these benefits upon them.
To consider our consciences discharged by merely paying
down the price which they might demand, for the cession
of their territory, would be little less injustice than to take
it from them by force; to enforce British law upon them,
while they were in a state in which they would feel all its
severity and none of its benefits, would only be to aggravate
the injustice, and lash the New Zealander into a fuiy of
revenge, which could scarcely end in anything but the ex-
pulsion of the British, or the ruin of his own people, and
we should have over again the old and dreadful tragedy of
extermination. The benefits to be conferred on the New
Zealanders by the British settlers, should be measuied by
the benefits which the British settlers would derive from
their enjoyment of the soil. _ •••11 +
If the New Zealander can be induced to give Jus land to
Great Britain, and resign himself to the government of
Great Britain, everything should be done, from first to last,
to make him feel that he had benefited by the change,
and that he had not sunk in the scale of existence: he
portrait of nayti. See p. 262.
should be supported in the same relative position which he
had occupied before; be should be encouraged, but not
compelled, to resign his savage rights, for the milder and
more equal privileges of civil life; he should be governed
rather by rewards than punishments; he should be weaned,
but not forced, from his present wildness. If the common
people are taught how to labour, and to obey the laws, the
chiefs should no less be taught how to exercise legitimate
authority, and to make their lands available for the dignity
and happiness of themselves and their people. Ihis sup-
poses that, instead of the vast tracts of wilderness which
the chiefs now possess, they should be assigned fair portions
of the soil, leaving the remainder to become, under the
occupation of the British, the raw material of their social
and national elevation. It supposes, also, that to effect
these civilizing purposes, there should he a kind of rent-
charge on the land, for the benefit of its former lords.
Nor will this appear too much, if we consider the great
advantages which the British would derive from the pos-
session of such a territory ; indeed, the expenses which they
would thus impose upon themselves, would be amply
repaid them in the facilities which they would have for
establishing themselves, by having to do with a friendly
and an improving people. .
But, however wisely laws may be framed, it requires, for
their effectual operation, that they should be wisely admi-
nistered ; and it is especially requisite, that a people, emerg-
ing from savage life, should be ruled by example rather
than precept. It is obvious, therefore, that much will
depend upon the people who would form such a colony:
were it to consist of generous, sensible, and religious men,
of good education and elevated minds, and to be governed
by wise and liberal laws in favour of the natives, it would be
almost as certain to succeed, as it would be certain to fail
were it to consist of selfish and unprincipled men, and to
he governed by severe laws, which, though in appearance
the same for all, would, in reality, be destructive and ex-
terminating to the native.
END OF THE ELEVENTH VOLUME.
LONDON s Published by JOHN WILLIAM PARKER, West Straws | and Md bf all Rsolaiellcrt.
