

( *
v 1 ii




great rapidity, trying to shun the light; and if laid hold of
behind, and detained from reaching a shaded nook, turning
round the head and biting at the detaining object with an
angry hissing and whistling noise. It refused food and water,
and when an insect or a small bit of meat was forced into its
mouth, it was, as quick as possible, rejected. The moment the
bat found itself in shade or under shelter, it fell asleep. The
temperature of the inner portion of the mouth was Fab.,
while the surrounding air was 52°. The body showed 140
regular pulsations during the space of a minute; but whether
these arose from the action of the lungs or the heart, I was
unable to ascertain.
The extraordinarily small size of this specimen of vesper-
tilio induced me to weigh and to measure it. The following
was the result:—While alive (on the 18th June) the bat
weighed two pennyweights and seventeen grains ; eight days
later (on the 26th June) while still alive, the Aveight was only
two pennyweights and eight grains ; there being a loss of nine
grains, or about one grain in every twenty-four hours. It died
on the last-mentioned day, and the post mortem examination
gave many indications that, although the organs and tissues
were in full and good condition, the proximate cause of death
Avas probably starvation and unseasonable disturbance of the
animal’s natural state of hibernation. The specimen was a
male one. The body had the folloAving proportions:—whole
length, from tip of nose to root of tail, not quite one inch
and half; length of tail, one inch; extreme span of Avings,
six and three-quarter inches. The colour of the body, dark
brown on the back, grey on the under side, and lighter grey
under the chin ; feet black ; membrane of the Avings and tail,
purplish-brown in color, and not covered Avith hair, Avith the
exception of a few near the root of the tail. Dentition as
folloAvs:—
2. 2. 1. 1. J. 1. 1. _ 3. 3. I 14 _ „„
m - TsT c ‘ TTT f’ m - m - TT ITs“ 32
Incisors: upper, the first, tAvo lobed; the second, simple and
smaller; the loAver, three lobed and very small. Canine:
upper, strong, a little curved; lower, like the upper, but only
half the size of it. False molars : above, longer than the
true molars, sharp-pointed; below, the first, tAvo lobed and
smaller than the true ones, the second, sharp-pointed and
larger. True molars ; above, first and second nearly equal,
with three sharp tubercles externally and a loav sharp ridge
internally, the third with only two and half tubercles, but


otherwise like the two first. The lower molars have two
sharp-pointed ridges externally, and three ditto internally.
It appeared to me that this hat is very likely the smallest
of its kind yet known in Australia, and indeed, perhaps, even
the smallest mammal yet anywhere discovered. I compared
it with Gould’s “ Scotophilus picatus,” of which he says :
“ This pretty little hat, which is the smallest and one of the
most interesting of the true scotophili, inhabiting Australia,
&c.and Captain Sturt, on the same subject, says—This
diminutive little animal flew into my tent at the "depot, at-
tracted by the light. ... but the specimen before you is
full half an inch shorter in the body, and two inches smaller
between the wing-ends.
Should it be found that the specimen here in question is a
member of a yet undescribed species, I venture to propose for
it the name—Yespertilio pygmseus.
Explanation of Plate :
Fig. 1, 2, 3, natural size ; 4, magnified about double natural size; 5,
6, 7, 8, ditto four times; 9, 10, ditto eight times.
Melbourne, July 1858.
Art. VIII. — Some hitherto unknown Australian Plants.
Described by Dr. Ferdinand Mueller.
[Read before the Institute 18th August, 1858.]
StERCULIACEjE.
Methorium integrifolium.
Clothed with starry velvet-hair; leaves oval, almost entire,
short-stalked, beneath net-veined; stipules subulate,
deciduous, shorter than the petioles; cymes axillary,
sessile, few-flowered; teeth of the calyx acute, three
or four times shorter than its tube; column of stamens
straight.
On rocky declivities of the sandstone table-land of the
Upper Victoria River.
Leaves H-2 inches long, generally 1 inch broad, on both
pages of equal color. Cymes several times shorter than the
leaves. Calyx about j inch long, exceeding the linear-subu-


Some hitherto unknown Australian Plants. ■ 41
late bracteoles. Laminae of petals H line long, exserted;
claws biauriculate. Tube of filaments enclosed. Anthers
kidney-shaped. The fruit has not been found.
Halorageas.
Myriophyllum dicoccum.
Lower leaves pinnate, with capillary opposite or alternate
segments; upper leaves alternate, linear or lanceolate,
entire, toothed or pectinate; flowers axillary, sessile;
fruit consisting of two carpels, which are glabrous, trun-
cate, round at their back and hardly tubercled.
In lakes, rivers, and lagoons towards the Gulf of Carpen-
taria.
The habit of the plant is that of certain forms of M.
variifolium. Flowers at least in part hermaphrodite. Stigmas
purple, long bearded. Stamens seemingly 4. Fruits solitary,
about f of a line long, slightly tapering upwards, rounded at
the base, in exceptional cases augmented to 3 or even 4
carpels.
PoRTULACEAS.
Calandrinia uniflora
Annual, glabrous; stemless, or with an erect naked stem,
producing a bunch of leaves at the apex ; leaves longer
than the stem, terete, acute, glaucescent, without any
furrow; peduncles terminal, thin-filiform, thickened at
the apex, one-flowered, twice or thrice longer than the
leaves, with 3 or 3 cordate-lanceolate acuminate remote
deciduous bracts; petals 8-11, lanceolate, almost three
times longer than the orbicular-cordate sepals; stamens
numerous; style none; stigmas 3-6; capsule as far as
the middle four-valved.
On arid plains and ridges on the Victoria River.
Root pale, descendent, simple, with few fibres. Stem often
red, inch long, at times undeveloped. Leaves and
peduncles united, as the case may be, in a radical or terminal
fascicle; the former 4 inches or less long, hardly thicker than
one line. Peduncles erect, or adscendent, smooth, producing
the bracts chiefly in their lower part. The latter hyalinous,
clasping, very tender membraneous* scarcely one line long.
Sepals measuring two lines, rather acute, dropping in age.


Petals pink, about 5 lines long, persistent when faded. Fila-
ments considerably shorter than the corolla, of unequal
length, Avhite, capillary. Anthers sagittate-ovate, white, fixed
between their lobes, several times shorter than the filaments.
Pollen yellow. Stigmas white, filiform, about one line long,
adscendent. Capsule ovate or nearly globose, | inch long.
Seeds numerous, with their white funicles affixed to the
basilar placenta, shining, black, perfectly polished, lenticular,
measuring | of a line.
Myrtace^e.
Calycothrix arborescens.
Glabrous ; branchlets numerous, slender, spreading;
densely torulous-cicatrisate ; leaves very small, densely
imbricate, cordate- or rhomboid-lanceolate, acuminate,
with broad sessile base, above flat, beneath convex and
somewhat keeled; stipules exceedingly minute, subulate,
much shorter than the cicatrix, and to its centre inserted;
flowers polyandrous; bracteoles free, orbicular-cordate,
acuminate, not much longer than the pedicel, but nearly
three times shorter than the cylindrical calyx-tube;
lower portion of the calyx-lobes almost ovate, upper part
drawn out into a long acumen, but without a proper
bristle, somewhat scabrous, not reaching beyond the
lanceolate pointed white petals.
In arid bushy plains towards the sources of the Roper and
Limmen Bight rivers,
A tall, most beautiful shrub, sometimes forming a tree
fully 25 feet high. Leaves, in drying, extremely deciduous,
those of the younger branchlets §-l line, those of the older
ones 1-2"' long, all spirally arranged, their fall rendering the
thin branchlets like those of C. microphylla, strangely sculp-
tile by the innumerable little grooves of the cicatrices. Brac-
teoles greenish, scarcely longer than one line. Tube of the
calyx tapering towards the base, yet not towards the apex; seg-
ments of the limb pale yellowish-green, long. Anthers
roundish-cordate, terminating in two glands. Style longer
than the white filaments.
The nearest allied species is Cal. microphylla, A. C. In
C. arborescens and the following species is a clear transit to
Lhotzkya observable, which genus may well be united with
Calycothrix.


Calycothrix brachychaeta.
Leaves linear-triangular, crowded, glabrous or pubescent,
almost blunt, stalked; flowers sessile, collected in leafy
spikes; bracteoles free, dilated at the truncate and
ciliate apex, as long as the silky-downy tube of the
calyx, or but little shorter, pointed by the apex of the
keel; lobes of the calyx lanceolate, outside downy, gra-
dually terminating in a ciliate acumen, but scarcely in a
distinct bristle; petals white, lanceolate, acuminate,
almost as long as the calyx-lobes; stamens 15-20.
On stony ridges along the rivers Victoria, Fitzmaurice and
Roper.
A tall shrub. Leaves 2-3 lines long. Tube of the calyx
fi-2 lines long, slightly contracted towards the summit,
hardly longer than the lobes.
This species bears, amongst its numerous congeners, only
comparison with C. conferta and the following one.
Calycothrix achaeta.
(Sect. Lhotzkya.)
[Lhotzkya cuspidata, Ferd. Meuller, in Hooker’s Journal of Botany, 1856,
page 324.]
Hirtellous ; branchlets very short, crowded; leaves on
short stalks, very minute, densely imbricate, oblong-
triangular, almost blunt, above one nerved, beneath
scarcely keeled; stipules, none ; flowers sessile ; brac-
teoles free, obcordate, fringed, keeled, apiculate, £
shorter than the calyx-tube ; lobes of the calyx ciliate,
ovate or cordate orbicular, cuspidate by a short acumen,
not much shorter than the ovate silky-downy tube, with-
out manifest bristle; petals white, narrow, oblong-lan-
ceolate, of twice the length of the calyx-limb; stamens
12-17 ; gland of the anthers conspicuous, double.
On the sandstone table land of Arnhem’s Land.
A shrub 5-8' high. Leaves never much longer, often
shorter, than one line. Tube of the calyx about one line
long. Anthers round, yellowish. Style of equal length with
the longer filaments.
Referring to Chamaelaucieae, I may mention, on this
occasion, that the Homaloxalyx ericseus is to be combined
with Tryptomene, as Tr. homalocalyx.


Melaleuca symphyocarpa.
(Sect. Asteromyrtus.)
Branchlets almost terete and petioles slightly downy;
leaves alternate, shining, oblong-lanceolate, flat, blunt,
5-9 nerved, thinly veined, tapering into a broad but very
short petiole ; flowers in free axillary and lateral heads;
lobes of the calyx deciduous, nearly semiorbicular; pha-
langes penicillate polyandrous, orange, with a long and
thin claw; capsules honey, perfectly united in a globose
head, three-celled; valves short-exserted; seeds wingless.
On the sandy or gravelly banks of the Roper, Limmen
Bight and Macarthur rivers, also on sometimes inundated
localities of the neighbouring plains.
A large, very handsome bush, sometimes attaining the
size of a small tree. Bark fissured, black, not lamellar. Leaves
bright green, generally l|-2-| inches long and 6-9 lines broad.
Flowers varying from 8 to 15 in each head. Tube of the
calyx already in early age connate, yellowish or red, more or
less velvety; lobes green. Bracteoles downy. Petals spa-
thulate-orbicular, line long, glabrous, yellowish, half sur-
passing in length the calyx-lobes. Columns of the stamens
3-6 lines long, with the free portions of the filaments, which
are 2-3 lines long and fasciculately but not flatly arranged,
forming exactly a brush, at last deciduous. Anthers about
\ line long, purplish red, after foecundation black, didymous,
fixed with their back, terminating in a small gland. Pollen
almost free of color. Style smooth, orange or yellow, hardly
as long as the stamens. Stigma green, peltate. Fruit
heads measuring about half an inch, beautifully areolate by
the vertex of the capsules. Seeds brown, 1 line long, clavate-
filiform, truncate.
There exists no character by which Schauer’s genus Aste-
romyrtus can be separated from Melaleuca. The same in-
tenability of generic distinction is manifest between Symphy-
omyrtus and Eucalyptus, and the limits of the genera Lepto-
spermum and Fabricia are likewise so far infringed, that I do
not hesitate to unite them respectively.
M. globifera agrees in its brief specific characteristics,
offered by R. Brown, with Mel. symphyocarpa, but the former
is restricted to the south coast; nor does it fully accord with
the generic note promulgated by the immortal R. Brown, in
Ait on’s Hort., Kew, iv., 410.


Melaleuca minutifolia.
Glabrous; brancblets numerous, generally opposite, ex-
tremely slender; leaves very small, opposite, sessile,
ovate or lanceolate, acuminate, towards the base in-
curved, crowded, slightly spreading, deciduous ; capsules
spicate along the branches, globose-ovate, truncate or in
age almost hemispherical, three-celled; seeds wingless.
In barren localities of North Western Australia.
A tall shrub. Leaves about |-H lines long, in drying re-
markably deciduous. Brancblets at the insertion of each
pair gradually contracted, with rather conspicuous cicatiices.
It differs from Melaleuca tamariscina, its nearest congener,
as follows : the arrangement of the leaves is not a spiral one,
and after their fall the brancblets do not assume in conse-
quence that truly screwlike appearance which characterizes
Melaleuca tamariscina, although they are also singularly
grooved and often more slender still; the leaves are neither
closely appressed, nor are any of them blunt and subcordate,
nor is the fruit-rachis velvet-downy. I have not yet seen ripe
fruit of M. tamariscina, nor the flowers of either species,
from Avhich, probably, many other marks of discrimination
may be derived.
CuCURBITACEyE.
Cucumis jucunda.
Leaves cordate, undivided, somewhat angular, with minute
and remote teeth; petioles shorter than the leaves, or at
least of equal length with them ; tendrils simple, their
lower portion hispidulous; lobes of the calyx filiform-
linear; ovary velvety; fruit small, ovate, powdery-downy,
at least three times shorter than the peduncle; seeds
numerous, their length that of the third or fourth part
of the fruit diameter; funicle very short.
In Arnhem’s Land and on the Gulf of Carpentaria, parti-
cularly on the banks of rivers, also in eastern tropical Austra-
lia, and in Central Australia observed with certainty as far
south as Cooper’s River.
Stems long, trailing or climbing, as well as the branches,
with 5 blunt angles. Petioles, peduncles, stems and branches
hispid with short, spreading bristles. Leafstalks angular,
cylindrical, with a superficial furrow. Leaves H-4 inches
long and broad, above hispidulous-scabrous, beneath along


the nerves and veins imperfectly hispidulous, otherwise sca-
brous-doAvny. Tendrils inches long, upAvards spiral.
Flo Avers monoecious, a feAv congregated and arising from the
leaf-axis, with short peduncles. Lobes of the calyx 1-H line
long, appressed; tube villose, in the male flo Avers longer than
the lobes. Corolla yelloAv, deeply five-cleft, inside glabrous,
outside slightly doAvny or a little hispid; the lobes ovate,
apicnlate, Li inch long. Stamens of the male flowers gyrose,
connate Avith the rudimentary pistil; anthers 5, in pairs,
almost sigmoid. Disk of the female flo Aver yellow, patellar.
Style green, smooth, upAvards thickened. Stigmas three,
greenish, scarcely longer than 1 line, nearly ovate, flat in
front, convex at the back, each separable into tAvo. Rudi-
mentary stamens Avanting. Pepo rather SAveet, of a pleasant
taste, exactly egg-shaped, irregularly six-celled, scarcely
longer than one inch, not angular, simply green, covered with
very minute almost poAvdery hair, Avhich causes an acrid irri-
tant sensation to the taste, but are almost spontaneously lost
in age, Avhen the fruit assumes a pale colour. Seeds ovate-
cuneate, about lines long, surrounded by a slightly tumid
margin.
This cucumber is the Cucumis pubescens mentioned in Sir
Th. MitchelTs Trop. Austr,, p, 110, but evidently not the
true Willdenowian plant, as pointed out in the report on Mr,
Gregory’s plants from Cooper’s Creek. The genuine may
be sought, perhaps, in the folloAving species. It is possible
that the C. pubescens of Asa Gray, Unit, Stat. Expl. Exped.,
p. 646, belongs to this species.
Cucumis picrocarpa.
Leaves in circumference cordate, 3-5 lobed, their lobes
repand-dcnticulate, someAvhat angular; petioles as long as
the leaf, or at last someAvhat longer ; tendrils undivided,
everywhere hispidulous; lobes of the calyx filiform-linear;
ovary villous-AVOolly; fruit subtrigonal-ovate, with some mi-
nute scattered bristles, not half as long as the peduncle,
which is tumid at the apex; seeds very numerous, many times
shorter than the fruit-diameter ; funicle long.
In many parts of tropical Australia.
It differs from the preceding, besides in the above charac-
ters, also in the lobes of the calyx and corolla, which are of
tAvice the size, in finely Avhite-and-grey-spotted fruit, which
is constantly 3-3 inches long, regularly six-celled, of ex-


tremely bitter taste, whilst the seeds, notwithstanding the
double or triple size of the fruit, are barely as long as those of
Cucumis j ucunda, and are attached to a funicle which exceeds
their own length.
UIIBIACEiE.
Canthium vaccinifolium.
Glabrous; branchlets in two rows, recurved, more or less
spinescent; leaves thick coriaceous, small, orbicular or
ovate; peduncles axillary and terminal, 1-2-flowered;
pedicels shorter than the calyx; corolla to the middle
four-cleft; faux bearded; filaments shorter than the
oblong anthers; stigma bifid, with blunt base; berry
black.
In barren scrubby localities near the rivers Burdekin,
Suttor, McKenzie, Dawson, and Burnett, accompanied by
Canthium oleifolium.
A shrub 6' high or still higher, with numerous spreading
branches. Leaves blunt or emarginate, flat, entire, 2-5 lines
long, above slightly shining, beneath paler and opaque, one-
nerved, hardly veined, their stalk line long. Stipules
line long, 1 line broad, entire, deciduous, with a very
short acumen. Peduncles one line or less long. Pedicels
sometimes obliterated, at the base with extremely minute
bracteoles. Calyx tube half-ovate, without ribs, scarcely one
line long, with four very small acute teeth, one or the other
sinus occasionally producing also a minute tooth. Corolla
pale yellow, funnel-shaped, outside glabrous, inside above the
middle of the tube white bearded; lobes lanceolate-ovate.
Stamens inserted between the lobes of the corolla, Fila-
ments very short, glabrous. Anthers sulphur-yellow, blunt,
at the base a little emarginate, | line long. Pollen bright
yellow. Style filiform, green, smooth, H line long. Stigma
ovate, bifid, \ line long. Berry globose, succulent, 2-3 lines
long, rather sweet, with two nuts, which are nearly ovate,
black, slightly tubercled, very convex at the back, slightly so
in front, about H line long.
The plant may, with equal right, be referred to Canthium
or Psychotria.
Canthium coprosmoides ,
Glabrous; leaves thinly coriaceous, ovate, flat, entire, blunt
at the apex, tapering into the petiole ; peduncles none ;


pedicels axillary, solitary or two or three together,
scarcely as long as the calyx; lobes of the corolla 5,
rarely 4, half as long as the tube, above thin velvety;
faux bearded; anthers ovate, almost sessile; stigma
hemispherical; berry red.
In scrubs on ridges along the rivers Dawson, Mackenzie,
and Brisbane.
Shrub from 6-10 feet high. Leaves Ito inches long,
their stalk lines long, above dark-green and shining,
beneath a little paler, finely veined. Stipules from a broad
base subulate, lines long, deciduous. Calyx at first
hell-shaped, scarcely longer than one line, with five acute and
very short teeth. Corolla funnel-shaped, outside glabrous
and yellowish; its tube £ inch long; its lobes ovate. An-
thers § line long. Style bristlelike, glabrous, not exserted.
Stigma slightly concave in the centre, half a line in diameter.
Berry naked, 3-4 lines long, upwards a little broader, with
two nuts.
HoMALINEiE.
Blackwellia brachybotrys.
Leaves ovate or rhomboid, or round-ovate, tapering into a
short petiole, smooth, their margin repand; raceme
short, almost spicate; flowers small, slightly downy;
tube of the calyx hemispherical; its lobes 6-7, linear,
rather acute; petals but slightly or nearly half-exserted,
oblong-lanceolate; glands velvety; stamens 6-7; styles
4-6, below their apex slightly downy.
On granite rocks, near the origin of the Gilbert Liver—
rare.
A small tree with spreading branches; hranchlets grey,
brown, at last blackish, terete. Petioles 3-4 lines long, almost
terete; leaves thin-coriaceous, one-nerved, net-veined, opaque,
on both sides of equal color, 1-3 inches long. This species is
closely allied to Blackwellia axillaris (Lam. illustr. 413); it
differs principally in its short racemes, and in in the form of
the petals and calyx-lobes. Racemes terminal and lateral,
rarely longer than one inch, often shorter, on short peduncles,
with several or many flowers. Bracteoles at the base of each
pedicel ternate, brown, triangular, persistent; all, but parti-
cularly the lateral ones, very minute. Calyx 1 line long, its
lobes not touching each other with their margins in [estiva-
tion, at last spreading, as well as the rihless tube pale yellow


green. Petals 6-7, sessile, white, at least for a long while
persistent. Filaments capillary, smooth, one line long. An-
thers minute, didymous, white-yellow, affixed betwixt the
cells. Styles white, about a half line long, subulate, divergent,
with united bases. Yertext of the ovary free. Ovules several,
pendulous. Pipe fruit unknown, but only lor 2 ovules ad-
vancing to maturity.
Mr. Allan Black, the eustos of Sir Wm. Hooker’s herba-
rium, first pointed out the position of this plant in Homa-
linese, justly alluding to its resemblance with Homalium, and
observing that the homalideous order had not been previ-
ously noticed in Australia.^
liYTIIRACEiE.
Ammannia crinipes.
(Sect. Cornelia.)
Annual; stems adsccndant or procumbent; branches thread-
like; leaves linear or oblong, blunt, somewhat fleshy,
slightly scabrous, tapering into a very short petiole;
peduncles axillary, solitary, one-flowered, capillary,
crowded towards the summit of the branchlets, twice or
many times longer than the leaves; calyces tetragonous-
campanulate, bluntly four-lobed; sinus-teeth indistinct;
petals four, white, ovate; capsules very tender, nearly
ovate, perfectly immersed in the calyx, irregularly
bursting.
In moist, sandy flats, and on the sandy-gravelly banks of
rivers in Arnhem’s Land.
A singular little plant, from a few inches to a span high,
sometimes rooting along the stems.
LEGUMINOSiE.
Bauhinia Carroni.
(Sect. Lysistemon.)
Leaflets oblique-ovate, glabrous, longer than the petiole, free
to the base ; corymbs few-flowered, nearly sessile; pedi-
cels and calyces brownish-silky; tube of the calyx cam-
panulate, with attenuated base; its teeth 5, short; petals
imbricate, unequal, ovate and ovate-oblong, two or
three times longer than the calyx, not spreading, out-
ward scantily silky; filaments unequal, exserted, all
fertile, free; anthers oval; pods oblong, flat, few-seeded;
their stalks not adnate to the calyx.


From Newcastle Range to Darlings Downs, chiefly in the
Brigalow Scrubs.
A large shrub, or more frequently a small tree. Bark of
the bran chi ets smooth, at last black. Leaflets about twice
as long as the terete petiole, h-% inch long, rather tender,
green, opaque, 4-5-nerved, finely veined. Stipella in the
sinus of the leaflet-pair, shorter than one line, rusty brown.
Corymbs terminating the branches, but when the latter are
reduced to mere innovations apparently axillary or lateral,
feAV-flowered, Avith a short or no peduncle. Pedicels croAvded,
solitary, 2-3 lines long, upAvards gradually thickened, at the
base provided Avith three lanceolate-subulate bracteoles,
Avhich are shorter than one line, broAvn, silky, and early
falling, calyx 4-6 lines long, sometimes teethless and oblique
truncate, not membranous. Petals dark red, free, upper one
ovate, about J inch long, on both sides scantily silky, taper-
ing into a cIaAV shorter than one line. Lateral petals of the
form of the upper one, which they cover, but a little larger,
and inside glabrous. LoAver petals oblong-ovate, 4-5 lines
long, outside silky, inside nearly glabrous, Avith a cIaAV mea-
suring lines. Stamens all fertile, free, the upper ones
but little, the loAver ones long exserted. Filaments filiform,
dark or pale red. Anthers oval, versatile, hardly one line
long, yelloAV Avith red margin. Pollen golden-yelloAV. Stalk
of the ovary longer than the petals. Style pink, 2-4 lines
long. Stigma convex, oblique terminal. Pods tAA r o to four
inches long, one inch broad, blunt at the apex, acute at the
base; their stalk slender, often fully an inch long. Seeds
compressed, roundish-ovate, broAvn, smooth, 3-4 lines long,
slightly angular.
I name this stately plant to acknoAvledge permanently the
arduous services which Avere rendered by Mr. Carron in the
last disastrous expedition of Mr. Kennedy. A perusal of the
sorroAvful account, published by Mr. Carron, of this unfortu-
nate journey, Avill likewise render evident lioav far he, in
throwing so much light on the vegetation of North-East
Australia, deserves the small tribute of botany paid to him
on this occasion.
Bauhinia Leichhardtii.
(Sect. Lysistemon.)
Leaflets orbicular- or broad-ovate, as long as the petiole, free
to the base, at last glabrous; corymbs feAv-floAA r ered on
very short peduncles; peduncles, pedicels, and calyces


covered with a brown velvet; teeth of the hell shaped
calyx almost deltoid, as long as the tube; petals ovate
and ovate-ohlong, velvet-silky, not spreading, with short
claws; filaments free, all fertile; pods oblong, flat, few-
seeded, their stalk not adnate to the calyx.
Not rare in Arnhem's Land and around the Gulf of Car-
pentaria.
A small or middle-sized tree. This species, which I have
named in memory of Dr. Leichhardt, who, like Allan Cun-
ningham, referred to it repeatedly in his journal, resembles
very much the Bauhinia Carroni, but differs, besides in the
above notes, by the following characters :
The leaves are downy whilst young, someAvhat larger, the
pedicels longer, the pods broader, and the seeds larger.
Bauhinia Carroni commences with the Brigalow Scrub to
occur where Bauhinia Leichhardtii ceases to exist. Whether
the differences pointed out between the two species are, as it
seems unlikely, caused by the diversity of the climate in the
respective tracts which they occupy, remains yet to be ascer-
tained.
Bauhinia Hookeri.
(Sect. Lysistemon.)
Leaflets broad-ovate, glabrous, as long as the petiole, free
to the base; peduncles, pedicels, and calyces somewhat
downy; corymbs few-flowered, on very short peduncles;
calyx funnel-shaped, its oblong lobes scarcely shorter
than the tube; petals orbicular, spreading, outside
slightly silky, nearly three times longer than the calyx-
lobes ; filaments free, all fertile, and exceeding the
petals; anthers hastate-oblong; pods oblong, flat, few-
seeded; their stalks not adnate to the calyx.
In the Brigalow scrubs from Newcastle Range to the
Burnett River; also sometimes on trachytic rocks, between
basalt boulders, and in the dry gravelly beds of rivers.
A tree of small size, sometimes a shrub.
Branchlets terete, smooth, glabrous, gray. Leaflets |-1"
long, opaque, 5-7-nerved, veined. Stipella, lanceolate-
subulate, spadiceous, about 1 line long. Corymbs terminal,
solitary or twine, on short peduncles, few-flowered, of agree-
able scent. Pedicels solitary, 3-4 lines long, downy. Basilar
bracteole ovate-lanceolate, about 1 line long; the two lateral
ones inserted a little above the base of the pedicel, opposite,


52 Some hitherto unknown Australian Plants.
somewhat smaller, lanceolate-subulate, all deciduous. Calyx
green, not membranous, almost funnel-shaped, scantily
downy, valvate in aestivation, equally 5-cleft; its lobes lance-
olate-oblong, three-nerved, 3-4 lines long; tube oblong-
cylindrical, very indistinctly ribbed, about half an inch long.
Petals imbricate in aestivation, nearly of equal form, 9-10
lines long, pale red or nearly white, bi-lobed at the base of
the lamina, inside almost glabrous, their claw \ inch long.
Filaments compressed filiform, almost of equal size, about li
inch long, glabrous, towards the base pale, towards the apex
dark red. Anthers attached in the middle of their back, 3
lines long, hastate-oblong, yellow with red margin. Pollen
golden yellow. Style compressed filiform, red, about half an
inch long, smooth. Stigma peltate, smooth, green. Stalk
of the ovary downy, $-J inch long. Pod oblique-oblong,
compressed, 2-4 inches long, about one inch broad, 3-6-
sceded. Seeds shining-brown, smooth, oblique, kidney-
shaped or roundish-ovate, compressed, varying in length
between 4 to 7 lines.
I have in grateful veneration attached to this noble plant
the illustnous name of the of botanists, who has given
in our science one of the very few examples of unremitting,
ever disinterested labours continued to the most venerable
age.
It is yet unknown which species of Bauhinia extends to
exti a-tropical latitudes on Cooper 5 s River, where one member
of this genus was observed both by Captain Sturt and Mr.
Gregory.
Bossicea phylloclada.
Glabrous, leafless; branches broad-winged; branchlets
compressed, leaf-like, long-lanceolate, blunt, with alter-
nate remote large teeth, with a thick midrib and spread-
ing nei ves ; pedicels arising from the apex of the nerves,
solitary, naked towards the summit, provided at the
middle with two opposite bracteoles which are widely
remote from the basal bracts; keel and standard twice
as long as the wings; the former as well as the calyx
woolly fringed; pods stalked, oblique-oblong.
On the edges of the sandstone tableland, and on stony
declivities, and barren bushy undulations of Arnhem's Land.
A good-sized shrub, with many spreading branches; calyx
3 lines long; its upper lip large, with blunt lobes, the lower
one with narrow lanceolate teeth; corolla yellow, petals of


the carina spathulate-obovate, below the middle and at the
apex disjointed, | inch long, with long claws; wings ovate;
column of stamens slit in front; style capillary, glabrous;
stigma minute.
Mirbelia aotoides.
Branchlets terete, with appressed downs ; leaves scattered,
or fasciculate, linear, entire, scabrous, with refracted
margins, and a very short recurved mucro; peduncles
wanting; pedicels solitary or twin, shorter than the
calyx ; bracteoles linear, very short, fixed to the base of
the pedicel; upper lip of the silky calyx broad, emargi-
nate, or with two very short blunt lobes ; lower lip with
three deltoid teeth; wings about as long as the standard,
longer than the keel; pod smooth, short-stalked, per-
fectly two-celled, two seeded.
On sterile mountain ranges near the Burnett River.
A diminutive erect shrub, resembling somewhat the smaller
forms of Aotus villosa. Leaves 4-6 lines long, |-| line broad,
on very short, almost obliterated petioles, not distinctly
veined; calyx about 2 lines long; flowers seen in a faded
state only, apparently of the color of Mirbelia grandiflora;
vexillum broader than long, smooth; keel blunt; ovary and
style glabrous, the latter line long; pods measuring
nearly three lines; the septa arising from both sutures touch-
ing each other.
This ambiguous species forms a transit to Aotus on account
of its bractless calyx, and to Phyllota, which produces also no
strophiole. Amongst its congeners it is evidently in nearest
contact with Mirb. grandiflora, which seems, according to the
figure in Bot. Magazin. f. 3771, to be also devoid of calycine
bracteoles, but it differs in the form of the calyx and leaves,
and in a smooth ovary. No ripe fruit being found, it is not
certain whether the endocarp separates in the manner of
other Mirbelise. In some points it agrees with Mirbelia flori-
bunda, I may remark on this occasion, that the genus Oxy-
cladium is to be placed in the section Mirbelise, next to
Leptasema, differing from that genus and the allied ones in a
persistent replum of the pod, by which an approach of it is
manifest to Carmichselia. No species of Mirbelia have hi-
therto been detected in the territory either of the colony of
Victoria or of South Australia, although many species arc
known from East and West Australia.


Psoralea pustulata.
Suffruticose, erect, covered with short appressed hair and
conspersed with glandular tubercles and minute warts;
stems simple; petioles almost as long as the leaflets;
stipules large, hastate- or lanceolate-ovate, acuminate;
leaves consisting of three leaflets, except the uppermost,
which are simple; leaflets ovate or lanceolate, blunt,
with a short mucro, perfectly entire, ribbed by con-
spicuous lateral nerves; racemes rather dense, on short
peduncles, axillary, solitary, twin or ternate, hardly
three times longer than the leaflets; hractea nearly
round, acuminate; pedicels ternate, several times
shorter than the calyx; teeth of the latter acute, the
lowest a little longer than the rest; pod laxly enclosed in
the calyx, kidney shaped ovate, compressed, rostellate,
covered with sessile scutellar glands, connate with the
seed.
On the hanks of the rivers Victoria and Nicholson.
Stems several from each root, 5-10 feet high, flexible,
terete, without furrows, rarely branched, sometimes decum-
bent, as well as the petioles, peduncles and leaves tuhercled;
petioles 1-2 inches long; stipules 5-6 lines long; leaflets
cuspidate, inches long, f-l| inches broad, with pinnate
nerves, grossly dotted with immersed glands, flat, of equal
color on both sides ; racemes rarely divided ; bracts 2-3 lines
long, ciliolate, otherwise glabrous, glandulous; calyxes about
4 lines long, glandulous-tubercled, green, with bleaching
tube, upper lip bifid; vexillum round, glabrous, outside pale,
inside purplish, obscurely callous, with its deltoid unguis 4-5
lines long, surpassing a little the length of the wings and of
the carina; wings purple, oblong, with a roundish white,
basilar appendage, and a narrow unguis; carina straight,
blunt, adherent to the wings, divided towards the base, white
with purple summit; anthers round - didymous ; stamens
diadelphous, 9 connate to near the apex ; style smooth; pod
smooth, glandulous, 2-3 lines long; radicle half as long as
the cotyledones.
Psoralea leucantha.
Suffruticose, erect, glabrous, branched, dotted with glan-
dular points; petioles almost as long as the leaflets;
stipules lanceolate-subulate; leaves consisting all of three


Some hitherto unknown Australian Plants. ■ 55
leaflets, which are narrow-lanceolate, rather acute, mu>
cronulate, with entire or slightly repand or denticulate
margin, and thin lateral nerves 3 racemes on short pe-
duncles, axillary, solitary or 2-4 together, at last as long
as the leaflets 3 bracts broad- or lanceolate-ovate, acumi-
nate 3 fruit bearing pedicels nearly as long as the calyx 3
teeth of the calyx acute, those of the upper lip short 3
pods brown, kidney-shaped, ovate, rostellate, compressed,
wrinkled by sessile glands, longer than the appressed
calyx, connate with the seed.
On the sandy, sometimes inundated, banks of the Victoria
River, and its tributaries.
A strong-scented plant, several feet high, closely allied to
the preceding species. Corolla white 3 the keel with a blueish
spot at the apex.
Psoralea balsamica.
Shrubby, erect, covered with innumerable small brown
glandular warts 3 petioles about half as long as the leaf-
lets 3 stipules from a broad base linear-subulate 3 lower
leaves trifoliate, upper ones simple 3 leaflets oblong or
ovate, blunt, emarginate, ribbed by prominent lateral
nerves, terminated in a short mucro, irregularly denti-
culate, as well as the branchlets and petioles scantily
downy 3 corymbs hardly as long as their peduncle, axil-
lary and terminal with several crowded pedicels 3 the
latter ternate and much shorter than the calyx, as well
as their axis clothed with soft spreading down, almost
glandless 3 bracts small, glandulous, ovate-roundish,
acuminate 3 calyx downy, tubercled 3 its upper lip deeply
bifid, a little longer than the lower one 3 teeth all nearly
lanceolate, acute 3 pods broad-ovate, velvet-silky, com-
pressed, not rostellate, laxly enclosed in the calyx, con-
nate with the seed.
On the margin of rocky creeks flowing into the Nicholson
and Van Alphen rivers. .
A shrub, 4-8 feet high, not spreading, of a strong balsamic
odour. Leaflets 1-H inch long, densely conspersed with
glandular tubercles and subtile dots. Peduncles 1-1 2 inch
long, bearing flowers only towards the summit. Calyx near y
3 lines long. Mowers blueish. Anthers cordate-ovate. Mla-
ments diadelphous, connate to almost the apex. Style 1 line
long, glabrous. Pods measuring scarcely 2 lines.


Zornia chcetophora.
Glabrous, densely dotted with glands; stems erect, perennial,
many branched; leaflets twin, long or narrow lanceolate,
acute; stipules minute, triangular-lanceolate, acumi-
nate ; spikes terminal, on long peduncles, with numerous
flowers; bracteoles lanceolate, almost five-nerved, with
slightly ciliated apex and an acute protracted base;
pods 3-5-jointed, with copious long upwards scabrous
bristles, and also hispid; joints broad-semiorbicular;
seeds quite smooth, shining, brown-black.
On sand ridges and on the sandstone table-land in the
interior of Arnhem’s Land, and thence towards central Aus-
tralia.
A herb 1-2 feet high, with many dichotomous, slender
stems. Petioles often an inch long. Leaflets 1-li" long,
1-4"' broad. Peduncles 2-5" long, erect, or slightly spreading!
Bracteoles 3-4 long. Plowers yellow. Calyx membraneous,
whitish, ciliate, on the lower side somewhat downy. Stamens
only towards the base connate. Anthers of the shorter fila-
ments oblong-linear, of the longer ones ovate. Joints of the
pod 1£ " long. Seeds measuring 1 line.
Composite.
Pluchea. Cass.
(Sect. Oligantliemum.)
Involucre cylindrical, with narrow-lanceolate scales. Female
flowers 2-3, hermaphrodite sterile ones 1-2. Pappus
bristles of the fertile acheniums numerous, indistinctly
biseriate; those of the barren acheniums with no or
only one or two bristles.
Pluchea filifolia.
(Oliganthemum filifolium, Ferd. Mueller’s herbar. North Austr. Expd.)
Annual, glabrous; leaves thread-like; flowerheads axillary
and terminal; hermaphrodite flowers three-toothed,
female ones with an exceedingly narrow ligule; fertile
acheniums densely fulvous-silky.
In arid localities in the south-eastern part of Arnhem’s
Land.


Boot undivided, slender, often flexnose, a few inches long.
Stems a span long or shorter, spreading-branched, slightly
scabrous. Leaves alternate, very narrow linear, curved, in
consequence of their revolute margins filiform, i-1 inch long,
awnless. Peduncles more or less shorter than the involucre,
which is 4-5 lines long; its scales in a few rows, green, at
last brownish, sessile, with scarious margin, glabrous, the
outer ones very short, the inner ones gradually longer, the
innermost linear and running out in a subulate acumen.
Receptacle very small, convex, tubercled. Corollas about 2
lines long, whitish; female ones extremely thin, with widened
base, their ligules two-toothed, shorter than the capillary
branches of the style. Hermophrodite corollas filiform; their
style short-exserted, undivided. Fertile acheniums scarcely
longer than one line, with attenuate base and truncate sum-
mit ; their pappus 2 lines long, brownish-yellow. Barren
acheniums diminute.
Calotis plumulifera.
(Sect. Acantharia.)
Annual, dwarf, slightly hispid; stem erect, branched; leaves
oblong-lanceolate, perfectly entire or remotely toothed,
tapering at the base, the upper ones sessile; flowerheads
small, pedunculate; scales of the involucre lanceolate
acute; receptacle conical; ligules white; acheniums on
both sides woolly with plumose downs, at the margins
expanded into an acutely dilated wing, which is fringed
with feathery hair; awns numerous, capillary, shorter
than the achenium or nearly as long as it, unequal, in
their whole length ciliated by short spreading or re-
curved hair.
On the Murray plains.
An herb 2-4 inches high, with the habit of a Brachycome.
Root thin, simple, flexuose. Leaves to |of an inch long,
1-2 lines broad. Peduncles axillary and terminal, sometimes
an inch long, often shorter, bracteate by one or the other,
small leaf. Flowers in each head numerous ; the inner ones
about 1 line long, perfectly barren, although hermaphrodite,
with undivided style ; the outer ones varying from 10 to 20
in number, of which some are occasionally abortive. Ligules
with a lamina line long, line broad. Achenium-
wings with a sinus descending from the vertex to the outer
or middle point, thence tapering wedge-like, glabrous on


their sides. Bristles of the pappus generally more than 20,
the longest one line long.
Calotis tropica.
(Sect. Acantharia.)
Glabrous or slightly hispid; rhizome perennial, fibrillous;
stems numerous, erect, much-branched, angular; leaves
linear, acute, tapering into the base, the upper ones
gradually smaller, all entire; scales of the involucre
linear, acute, scabrous ; ligules white; acheniums small,
hispidulous, with a thick ciliolate margin; awns 8-10,
unequal, retro-aculeate, the longest three times shorter
than the achenium.
In North-West Australia, generally in dry beds of rivers.
An herb, about one foot high. Leaves from \to inch
long, line broad. Flowerheads small. Receptacle
broad-conical. Inner flowers sterile.
It is evidently allied to Calotis breviseta, of which the
brief diagnosis does not suffice for recognition. If the C.
tropica should prove a variety of that species, then still the
above record of this plant will be acceptable, as not only its
precise habitat Avas unknown, but also in showing how great
changes this species is apt to undergo. All the other species
of Calotis are restricted to extratropical latitudes.
Erigeron ambiguum.
(Sect. Euerigeron.)
Erect, branched, glandulous and hispidulous downy; leaves
sessile, lanceolate, quite entire or grossly and remotely
toothed; capitules corymbose, on long peduncles, hemis-
pherical ; scales of the involucre linear, acuminate, im-
perfectly fringed, almost as long as the ligules ; central
flo Avers few, indistinctly toothed; acheniums linear-
oblong, moderately compressed, scantily appressed-
hairy, half as long as the pappus; bristles of the latter
15-17, free, scabrous.
On the Gilbert River.
Probably a perennial herb. Lower leaves about 1£ inch
long, upper ones gradually shorter. Outer scales of the in-
volucre \ line, inner ones about 1 line long, scarious at the
margin. Female flowers very slender, with a short narrow


Some hitherto unknown Australian Plants. ' 59
ligule, apparently white. Achens fulvous, scarcely longer
than half a line. Pappus white.
Amongst Indian species nearest to E. Wightu, otherwise
resembling E. Philadelphicum and purpureum.
Ozothamnus decurrens.
(Sect. Euozothamnus.)
Leaves linear, short, spreading, truncate, with entirely revo-
lute margin, in a double line decurrent, wrinkled, rough,
shining; corymbs compound, terminal; flower-heads
ovate-cylindrical, at last bell-shaped, yellowish-white,
homogamous, with about 11 flowers; scales of the invo-
lucre blunt, with slightly tomentose back and hyaline
margins; achenes scabrous-papillose ; bristles of the
pappus 21-25, a little thickened at the apex.
In the desert scrubs on the Murray and Darling rivers,
and near Lake Alexandrina.
Branchlets angular and green, on account of the decurrent
leaves. The latter generally oidy from 2-4 lines, sometimes
half an inch long, hardly 1 line broad; the velvet of their
lower page only visible in the midrib. Peduncles thinly
tomentose. Elowerheads scarcely 3 lines long.
It differs from Ozothamnus retusus in shorter, more
wrinkled leaves, with broader decurrent lines, in neither
shining, nor glabrous, nor heterogamous flowerheads, and in
more copious pappus-bristles.
Oz. adnatus, to which Dr. Sonder referred this plant doubt-
fully in the Linnfea, 1852, p. 511, differs, according to D.
Candolle’s note of that species, in shorter and appressed
leaves, and in ovate scarcely yellowish flowerheads, being
besides not a desert plant.
AsCLEPIADEjE.
Bidaria erect a.
Stems erect, shrubby; branches with appressed hair; leaves
linear, nearly sessile, glabrous or somewhat ciliate at the
margin; umbels on very short peduncles, solitary or
twin; flowers small; faux of the corolla bearded; stigma
conical, longer than the stamens; follicles nearly terete.
On stony ridges along the Victoria River.
A shrub several feet high. Leaves from 2 to 4 inches long,
1-2 lines broad. Corollas nearly white.


Bidaria leptophylla.
Climbing; branchlets slender as well as the peduncles covered
with velvet hair; leaves linear, slightly downy; pedun-
cles as long as the umbel; corolla small, urceolate; its
teeth blunt, three times shorter than the tube.
At the sources of the Burdeken River.
. A mi % P lant ; several feet high. Stems terete, sometimes
rather silky. Leaves acute, opposite or, through imperfect
development of the branchlets, fasciculate, at last glabrous,
l ? -2 inches long, 1-2 lines broad, with flat margin. Umbels
with several or many flowers, solitary or twin. Peduncles
lialt an inch long or shorter. Pedicels longer than the linear-
subulate unequal bracteoles. Calyx with fine appressed
downs, scarcely longer than one line; its lobes lanceolate,
acute, appressed. Corolla lines long, outside glabrous;
tube ovate; inside with a line of hair; limb spreading only
lialt a line long with orbicular-ovate blunt lobes. Anthers
terminated in a white membrane. Stigma white conical.
ScROPHULARINAS.
Vandellia clausa.
(Sect. Bonnaya.)
Glabrous; stem simple, erect, producing leaves only at the
base, sometimes with a pair of small bracts near the
middle; leaves broad-ovate, repand or denticulate, the
lower ones the smallest; racemes terminal, solitary or
twin, with several or many flowers ; bracteoles solitary,
or the lower ones opposite, lanceolate or linear subulate!
several times shorter than the pedicels; the latter twice
o tour times as long as the calyx, and about as long or
not much longer than the capsule; calyx deeply five-
clett, with linear-subulate segments ; tube of the corolla
nearly cylindrical, almost three times as long as the
calyx; faux closed; sterile stamens totally adnate, form-
ing two slightly prominent carinas; anthers of the two
fertile stamens one-celled, coherent; capsules linear-
elliptical, rather acute, longer than the style; seeds
black, nearly ovate, angulate, transversely streaked.
On sand-plains, subject to occasional inundations, on the
V ictona River and its tributaries.


An annual herb, generally less than one foot high.
Largest leaves \ inch long. Bracts measuring in length
about one line, broader than the bracteoles. Corolla purple,
hardly half an inch long; the upper lip nearly semiorbicular,
slightly emarginate, half as long as the lower one; middle
lobe of the latter round-cordate, lateral ones orbicular-ovate.
Sterile stamens white, enclosed. Anthers one-celled, but
perhaps only by the confluence of divaricate lobes, but cer-
tainly not so clearly two-celled as in Yandellia scapigera,
which bears to Y. clausa the greatest resemblance, still is
furnished with 4 fertile stamens, as an examination of speci-
mens collected at Macadam Range has proved; two of the
filaments in Yandellia scapigera are furnished at the base
with a short filiform glandulous appendage. Its corolla is
white. The anthers are coherent in pairs. Lamels of the
stigma sometimes unequal. Capsule 3-4 lines long, about
three times longer than the calyx.
Yandellia lobelioides.
(Sect. Bonnaya.)
Glabrous; stem simple, erect, provided with leaves only at
the base, but towards the middle with one or two distant
pair of bracts; leaves broad-ovate, repand or quite
entire, the lowest the smallest; racemes few-flowered,
the terminal one solitary, in addition to which some-
times a lateral one, shortened to a corymb and occa-
sionally reduced to a single flower; bracteoles all oppo-
site, linear-subulate, many times shorter than the
pedicels; the latter four to six times longer than the
calyx; tube of the coralla upwards widened, twice as
long as the calyx; sterile stamens totally adnate, form-
ing two very prominent carinas; faux open; fertile
stamens with coherent one-celled anthers; capsule ovate,
shorter than the style; seeds brown-yellow, angular,
transversely wrinkled.
A companion of Yandellia clausa, to which it stands in
close affinity.
An annual herb, with the habit of a Lobelia, from a finger
to a span long. Bracts narrow-lanceolate, 1-H line long,
never missing, broader than the bracteoles. Segments of the
calyx linear-subulate. Corolla nearly half an inch long, blue,
rarely pink or white; its upper-lip semiovate, with two short
and acute teeth, or emarginate, plicate, often whitish, three


times shorter than the lower one; lateral lobes of the lower-
lip round-ovate, middle one round kidney-shaped, near the
faux with a white spot. Sterile stamens white, like those of
V. clausa without anthers; their apex exserted, yellow and
bent outward into a very short lobe. Lamels of the stigma
equal. Capsule about 2 lines long.
Vandellia plantaginea.
(Sect. Bcmnaya.)
Leaves all radical, glabrous, narrow- or spathulate- or ovate-
lanceolate, slightly repand or entire; scape rather long,
furrowed, with prominent angles, bractless,'or about the
middle with a solitary pair of bracts; raceme short,
terminal dense, almost forming a spike, glandulous-
downy; bracteoles longer than the pedicles; the latter
shorter than the calyx; capsule ovate, acute, of the
length of the calyx, shorter than the style.
In moist meadows near Macadam Range.
The root short, thick, and fibrillous, possibly perennial.
Scape one foot or less high. Leaves inches long, gene-
rally short-stalked. Raceme measuring h-2h inches. Corolla
blue. Capsule about 2 lines long.
This species is extremely rare, and the only flowering spe-
cimen which was found is deposited in Sir Wm. Hooker’s
herbarium, at Kew. It may possibly not be a congener, in
the strictest sense of the two preceding ones. In the bota-
nical collections of the North Australian Expedition, I
referred all three to Bonnaya, combining at the occasion with
it the genus Ilysanthes. I proceed now a step further, and
unite these plants and all the species of Lindernia, Ilysanthes,
and Bonnaya to Vandellia, because on the same grounds as
those which led to the separation of the above genera, others
also of this order (for instance, Gratiola) ought then to be
divided.
Mimulus debilis.
Annual, glabrous; stem slender, decumbent, quadrangular;
leaves small, distant, lanceolate-linear, entire, somewhat
scabrous, gradually pointed; pedicels thin-filiform, four
or many times longer than the calyx; flowers yellow.
In humid meadows and around swamps at Macadam Range,
Providence Hill, and the M f Arthur River.


Mr. Gellibrand’s Memoranda, tyc. ■ G3
A flaccid herb, about a span long. Leaves 3-4 lines long.
Pedicels measuring between one and two inches, the corolla
about half an inch.
Lentibularin^e.
Utricularia fulva.
Vesicles and radical leaves wanting; stem simple, erect, with
distant bractlike-scales; racemes with remote flowers,
flexuose; bracts almost cordate; bracteoles setaceous;
sepals round, acuminate, longer than the pedicels; upper
lip of the corolla bluntly bi-lobed, lower one indistinct
three-lobed; palate bearded; spur horizontal, subulate,
not compressed, capsule globose.
Around stagnant water near Macadam Range; rare.
An herb, from a span to a foot high. Corolla fulvous,
except the palate, which is yellow and dotted with red spots.
The U. chrysantha, which occurs in grassy flats on the
Victoria River, is a much taller plant, with bright yellow
flowers, and a differently shaped lower lip.
Art. IX.— Mr. J. T. Gellibrand’s Memoranda of a Trip to
Port Phillip in 1836. Addressed to His Excellency the
Lieutenant-Governor. From a MS. Copy presented to
the Philosophical Institute of Victoria by the Hon. Capt.
Clarke, R.E.*
[Read before the Institute, Bth September, 1858.]
Campbell Street, April 18th, 1836.
Sir — l have much pleasure in transmitting to your Excel-
lency, conformably with my promise, a transcript of the me-
moranda of my late trip to Port Phillip
document that it was only intended for the information of
the parties immediately interested, and was not intended as
an official document, but your Excellency is at perfect liberty
to make such use of it as you may consider the public inte-
rests of the aborigines may require.
* The MS. was unfortunately injured by a fire at the printers. Portions
which were quite illegible are left blank; doubtful words arc marked with
a ?—J. M., Ed.


There are some passages of a personal nature, which I
might have omitted; but I have refrained from doing so, as the
document would then have been only an extract, and not a
transcript.
Having thus the opportunity of drawing your Excellency’s
attention to many of the circumstances connected with the
settlement at Port Phillip, I cannot refrain pressing upon
your Excellency’s consideration the extreme importance of at
once combining with the first rays of civilization the ines-
timable advantages of religious instruction . The intercourse
with the aborigines has hitherto been conducted upon a
friendly footing, and they have evinced, as far as I have been
enabled to judge, those traits of character which are calcu-
lated to realise the prospect of their imbibing the best feel-
ings towards the whites; and looking to the progress which
has been made within the last few months, and the friendly
feeling which is maintained with all the tribes, I am firmly
impressed with the opinion that the foundation may be laid
at Port Phillip for spreading the truths of Christianity through
the whole continent of New Holland, and I am happy to
know that lam not singular in this opinion; for Mr. Reed,
of Launceston, who has recently visited Port Phillip, went
alone and unarmed with a large body of natives up the
country, and was with them several days and nights; his inter-
course with the natives was highly gratifying to him, and
when he left them, the women and children parted from him
with tears. I have received a letter from Mr. Reed, offering
a donation of £2O towards building a mission-house and
school-rooms, and an annual donation of a like sum for the
support of a missionary; and I know several gentlemen who
are prepared to contribute to the same extent, and I hope in
the course of a few days to lay before you a plan for the per-
manent establishment of one, if not two missionaries at this
interesting and important colony.
I have the honor to be, &c., &c.,
(Signed) J. T. Gellibrand,
MEMORANDUM OF A TRIP TO PORT PHILLIP.
Sunday, Jan. 17. —I embarked this morning, with my son
Tom, on board the “ Norval,” for Port Phillip, in company
with Mr. Wm. Robertson, Mr. Gardiner, Mr. Leake, Mr.
Malcolm, and Mr Mudie (the latter gentleman having the




