

British Commonwealth League.
(“To secure Equality of Liberties, Status, and Opportunities between
Men and Women in the British Commonwealth of Nations’’).
Some Problems of Government in
Relation to Women within the
British Empire
1. Existing Legal Inequalities between Men and
Women.
2. Employment: Opportunities and Disqualifica-
tions with special reference to the question of
Women's Wages in contrast to Men’s.
a. Women in Industry.
b. Women in the Professions.
c. Consideration of Women as Employers.
BEING
A Report of Conference
HELD
6th July, 1928
Headquarters—
17, BUCKINGHAM STREET, ADELPHI, LONDON, W.C.2.




British Commonwealth League.
Telephone : Regent 4375.
Honorary Organizer:
Miss M. Chave Collisson, M.A.
17, Buckingham Street,
Adelphi,
London, W.C.2.
CONSTITUTION.
Name.
British Commonwealth League.
Objects .
a. To secure equality of liberties, status, and opportunities
between men and women in the Biritish Common-
wealth of Nations.
b. To increase mutual understanding of common problems.
Methods.
1. To study —
a. The rights and status of women in the British
Commonwealth of Nations.
b. The extent and use of political power n relation to
issues affecting equality in Empire citizenship.
2. To take such action as may be necessary to achieve the
object.
Membership .
Membership shall be open to —
a. Any regular’y constituted Women’s Society in any
part of the Empire which is in agreement with
the obj ects of the League.
b. Individual men and women in agreement with the
object. They shall be called Associate Mem-
bers.
There shall be a Headquarters Group of Associate Members.
Overseas Members of affiliated Societies or Associate Mem-
bers shall be eligible to membership of the Headquarters Group.
Finance,
Societies affiliating shall pay a subscription of not less than
One Guinea per annum.
Associate Members shall pay a subscription of not less than
ss. per annum.
Overseas Members desiring to join the headquarters Group
shall pay a minimum subscription of ss. per annum.


Council,
The business of the League shall be conducted by a Council,
to consist of the Honorary Officers, one representative of each
affiliated society, and one representative of the Headquarters
Group of Associate Members. The Council shall meet annually
to elect its Honorary Officers and ten members of a Standing
Committee.
Standing Committee.
Each Society affiliated to the League and to the International
Woman Suffrage Alliance may appoint a member to the Standing
Committee. The Standing Committee shall have power to co-opt
from time to time additional members not exceeding in number
one quarter of the number of the whole Committee,
There shall be a Committee on Admissions, consisting of the
President and two other Members. The Committee shall be
appointed by the Standing Committee and their decision shall be
final.
Officers .
The Honorary Officers shall be President, Honorary Secre-
tary, Honorary Treasurer, and the Chairman of the Council,
Vice-Presidents .
Vice-Presidents shall be appointed by the Council,
Nominations shall be submitted from the affiliated societies:
not more than one nomination shall be accepted from each
Province or State,
NOTE. —The League has been formed to carry on the work
formerly done by the British Dominions Women Citizens Union
and the British Overseas Committee of the International Woman
Suffrage Alliance.


THE FUTURE IS MADE NOW.
British Commonwealth Teague.
“To secure equality of Liberties, Status, and Opportunities
between Men and Women in the British Commonwealth of
Nations.”
WHAT IS IT?
The British Commonwealth League is a Society formed to
deal w th issues of Equal Citizenship within the countries ruled
under the British flag. This involves the heavy task of bringing
women c'tizens to understand the meaning and extent of their
political power. The grouping represented by the British Com-
monwealth exercises enormous influence in world politics. The
influence and claims of the Woman Citizen must be understood
and exerted in this political sphere.
The British Commonwealth League represents the reorgan-
ization of two much older bodies: the British Dominions Women
Citizens’ Union and the former British Overseas Committee of the
International Woman Suffrage A 1 iance. It has therefore a fine
tradition of public service to follow and maintain.
WHY IS IT NEEDED ?
The British Commonwealth League is needed because an
International body cannot devote to Empire issues an undue
proportion of its time and funds. Otherwise the auxiliaries of
the International might justly claim the same right and funds.
The League continues in co-operation with the International
Alliance of Women for Suffrage and Equal Citizenship, BUT
DEVOTES ITSELF TO ISSUES OF EQUAL CITIZENSHIP
within the EMPIRE ONLY.
SHALL WE UNITE?
Citizens come and go from Overseas. Other bodies do
splendid work n looking after them socially. Most of these
bodies are constitutionally bound to avoid issues of political
citizen education. The League is non-party and non-sectarian,
but it believes in political education, and aims at giving every
woman who comes from overseas the opportunity of realizing what
her demand for citizen equality means in terms of power. It
aims also at helping the Home Keeping British woman citizen to
realize the enormous reservoir of strength and help through
educated opinion and common action on issues of Equal Citizen


ship which lies in the British woman citizen from Overseas.
NO OTHER BODY DOES OR CLAIMS TO DO this special work
of budding up within the Empire WOMAN’S POLITICAL power
as an instrument for good. The League aims at helping weaker
bodies to fight by taking united action.
HOW DOES IT WORK?
The programme includes: —
1. Conferences.
2. The establishment of a woman’s non-party political
centre. From this centre, where contacts will be
made from all parts of the Empire, women will
meet leaders and each other, and will be directed
to other bodies in which they have a special interest.
The League hopes to act as a clearing house and
strengthen existing societies.
3. Luncheons to consider and hear views from the Overseas
and English political citizen leaders.
4. Gatherings where views on the important issues affected
by the demand for Equal Citizenship can be plainly
stated and personally discussed.
5. Steady work for representation on all bodies where
Empire policy is laid down.
The League needs money and active personal help.
You can help:—l. As a Headquarters Member. (Minimum
Annual Subscription 55.).
2. By a Donation.
Write or call to see the Secretary, 17, Buckingham Street,
Strand. Telephone: Regent 4375.
THE FOLLOWING SOCIETIES SUPPORTED THE
CONFERENCE.
Australian Federation of Women Voters.
Australian Women’s Christian Temperance Un’on.
Association of Headmistresses in Secondary Schools.
Association of Assistant Mistresses in Secondary Schools.
Bermuda Women’s Suffrage Society.
Feminist Club, Sydney.
Industrial Welfare Department.
London and National Society for Women’s Service,
Montreal Women’s Club.
Montreal Women’s Club (Franchise Comm ttee).
National Council for the Unmarried Mother and Child.
National Union of Societies for Equal Citizenship.


National Union of Teachers.
National Union of Women Teachers.
Queensland Women’s Electoral League.
Racial Hygiene Centre of New South Wales.
Saint Joan’s Social and Political Alliance.
Society for the Overseas Settlement of British Women.
Victorian Women Citizens’ Movement, Australia.
Women Citizens’ Association, Kingston Branch.
Women’s Enfranchisement Association of the Union of South
Africa.
Women’s Eng neering Society.
Women’s Freedom League.
Women’s Indian Association.
Women’s International League.
Women’s League of New South Wales.
Women’s National Liberal Federation.
Women’s Non-Party Association of South Australia.
Women’s Service Guilds of Western Australia.
The following Resolutions were passed.
Franchise in Great Britain.
That this Conference of the British Commonwealth League
warmly thanks H .M. Government for the grant of Equal Franch se
to the Women of Great Britain, thus securing to them that
citizenship enjoyed in India and in all the self-governing
Dominions with the regrettable exception of the Union of South
Africa.
Nationality of Married Women.
This Conference of the British Commonwealth League urges
the Governments within the British Empire in sending in their
reports on Nationality to the Preparatory Committee of the first
Codification Conference of the League of Nations to state that: —
(a) There is a strong demand from Women’s Organisations
throughout the Empire that the law should give a woman the
same right as a man to retain or to change her nationality.
(b) That the British and Australian Parliaments have un-
animously adopted resolutions in favour of a woman retaining
her nationality on marr age with an alien, it to be open to her
to make a Declaration of Alienage.
(c) That many Members of the Nationality Committee of
the 1926 Imperial Conference were in favour of a change in the
law which would provide for the British woman an opportunity
of retaining her British nationality on marriage with an alien.
This Conference further urges that there should be no fur-
ther delay in setting up the Committee of Experts to which this
subject was referred by the 1926 Imperial Conference.
It further urges that the Codification Conference should
include Women Members.


Women and Representation.
This Conference of the British Commonwealth League urges:
1. —That women be appointed as De'egates and as Technical
Advisers and Accessors accompanying Ministerial groups attend-
ing Imperial and other Conferences.
2. That women be included on Commissions, Boards and
other Groups dealing with Empire Policy.
3. That in any plans for the establishment of an Empire
Secretariat or consultative body—all positions under, or in con-
nection with it, shall be open equally to men and women, at the
same rate of pay with equal opportunity of promotion: thus
carrying out the principle established in Act 7 of the Covenant of
The League of Nations.
Franchise in South Africa.
This Conference of the British Commonwealth League offers
to the Women of the Un : on of South Africa engaged in.the struggle
for the suffrage its heartiest sympathy: it deplores the loss of
Status imposed on enfranchised women when settling in the
Union of South Africa: it urges the Government of the Union of
South Africa to recognise their claim to full citizen rights: and
asks it to take the earliest opportunity of remedying this situa-
tion by admitting women to the full Franchise.
Franchise in Quebec.
That since (with the exception of Mexico) the women of the
Province of Quebec are the only women in the North American
Continent who do not enjoy full citizenship with men, this Con-
ference of the British Commonwealth League urges the provincial
legislature to remove the anomaly without delay.
Franchise in Bermuda .
This Conference of the British Commonwealth League offers
to the Women of Bermuda engaged in the struggle for the suffrage
its heartiest sympathy: it deplores the loss of status imposed on
enfranchised women when settling in Bermuda: it urges the legis-
lature of Bermuda to recognise their claim to full citizenship
rights, and asks it to take the earliest opportunity of remedying
this situation by admitting women to the full franchise.
Marriage , Maintenance and Divorce Laws .
That in view of the fact that Women’s Organisations in
Australia are working toward a Federal Divorce Law, this Con-
ference of the British Commonwealth League affirms the desira-
bility of co-ordinating the Marriage, Maintenance and Divorce
Laws for Britishers throughout the Empire.
This Conference recommends to the Standing Committee that
this co-ordination be considered at a future Conference, with
a view to its recommendations being sent forward to the next
Imperial Conference.


International Labour Conference.
This Conference of the British Commonwealth League is of
opinion that the International Labour Conference has acted
ultra vires in adopting at its Eleventh Session a Convention con-
cerning the Minimum Wage Fixing Machinery without incor-
porating in that Convention the Seventh Principle of its own
Constitution as set out in Article 427 of the Treaty of Versailles,
namely “the principle that men and women shall receive equal
remuneration for work of equal value ’’: and protests against the
adoption of the Convention in a form which sanctions the main-
tenance or creation, by Member States, ratifying the Convention,
of machinery with legal power to establish unequal wage rates
for women.
This Conference therefore calls upon each Government within
the British Commonwealth to lay before the International Court
of Justice the question of the competency of the International
Labour Organisation to disregard in its Convention on Minimum
Wage Fixing Machinery an essential principle of its constitution
as defined in Article 427 of the Treaty of Versailles.
PROGRAMME.
JULY 6th.
10 a.in. CHAIRMAN’S ADDRESS: Mrs. Corbett Ashby.
Resolution I. Equal Franchise in Great Britain.
Proposer: Dame Millicent Fawcett,
G.B.E.
Seconder: Miss Harriet Newcomb.
Resolution 11. Nationality of Married Women.
Moved by Chair.
Resolution HI. Women and Representation.
Proposer: Miss Ruby Rich (Australia).
Seconder: Miss Emilie Solomon (S. Africa).
Supported by: Mrs. McDonnell, J.P.
(Alternate Australian delegate to the League
of Nations.)
Subject: “EXISTING LEGAL INEQUALITIES
BETWEEN MEN AND WOMEN.”
Speaker: Miss Phipps, B.A. (Great Britain).
Resolution IV. Franchise in South Africa.
Proposer: Mrs. Cameron Swan (S. Africa.)
Seconder: Mrs. de Gray Stewart (Canada).
Resolution V. Franchise in Quebec.
Proposer: Mrs. John Scott (Canada).
Seconder; Mrs. di Righi (Australia).
Resolution VI. Franchise in Bermuda.
Proposer: Miss Seon (Bermuda).
Seconder: Mrs. Hughes (Great Britain).
Resolution VII. Marriage, Maintenance and Divorce
Laws.
Proposer: Mrs. John Jones, J.P. (Australia).
Seconder: Mrs. Minden Cole (Canada).


2 p.m.
4.15 p.m.
4.45 p.m.
JULY sth.
0 p.m.
JULY 6th.
8.15 p.m.
JULY 7th.
2 p.m.
10.30 a.m.
Subject : “EMPLOYMENT, OPPORTUNITIES AND
DISQUALIFICATIONS WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE
TO THE QUESTION OF WOMEN’S WAGES IN CON-
TRAST TO MEN’S.”
(a) Women in Industry.
Speakers: R. R. Bakhale, Esq. (Hon. Assistant Secretary of
the Trades Union Congress of India), Miss Elliot (Great
Britain). Mrs. de Gray Stewart (Canada)
Resolution VIII. International Labour Conference. Mov-
ed by Chair.
(b) Women in the Professions.
Speakers: Dr. Grace Boelke (Australia) Miss Ferguson
(Canada), Mrs. Abbott (Great Britain) and others.
Interval for tea.
(c) Consideration of Women as Employers.
Speakers: Mrs. Cameron Swan (S. African, farmer), Mrs.
Willson (Builder, Great Britain), Miss Stewart (Wholesale
and Retail Manufacturer, Australia), Miss Partridge (Elec-
trical Engineer, Great Britain), Mrs. Marshall Hole
(Rhodesia), Mrs. O’Regan (Decorator, Great Britain), Mrs.
Clegg (Farmer, Australia).
SOCIAL FUNCTIONS.
Reception at Crosby Hall, to meet The Duchess of Atholl,
M.P. (Pari. Sec. to the Board of Education), Viscountess
Astor, M.P., Miss Margaret Bondfield, M.P., Countess of
Iveagh, M.P., Miss Susan Lawrence, M.P., Mrs. Walter
Runciman, M.P., Miss Wilkinson, M.P., Sir Reginald
Wingate, K.C.M.G., G.C.V.0., and others.
DINNER at the Criterion Restaurant.
Guests:—
The Rt. Hon. Lord Sydney Olivier, P.C. , K.C.M.G., C. 8.,
General Sir George Macmunn, K.C.8., K.C.5.1., Lady
Heath.
Chair: Mrs. Corbett Ashby.
A GARDEN PARTY held (by kind invitation of Mrs. Percy
Bigland) at Jordans, Beaconsfield, in the lovely and historic
William Penn district. A halt was made en route at Cliveden,
where, by kind permission of the Viscountess Astor, M.P.,
the party had an opportunity of visiting her beautiful grounds.
COUNCIL MEETING at 17, Buckingham Street, Adelphi,
W.C.2.


REPORT.
FIRST SESSION: July 6th, 10-0 a.m.
OPENING ADDRESS.
Mrs . Corbett Ashby .
Ladies, 10 o’clock is an extremely early and strenuous hour
at which to begin work, but we have as you know a very long and
complicated Agenda. I apologise for being 10 minutes late but
I have been taken up with a little business procedure which
arose.
In making a very short Chairman’s address, I would like to
say on the occasion of this, our Annual Conference, that the
experiment of forming this British Commonwealth League,
which would bind together women of similar citizenship and
interests all over the Empire has clearly BEEN JUSTIFIED BY
ITS RESULTS. Difficult as it is for us to collect from an Empire
so wide, delegates for one particular occasion, the constant growing
communication and correspondence with every part of the Empire,
and the growing interest of the Women’s organisations in our
work, has proved conclusively that the experiment which orig-
inated in Mrs. Rischbieth’s idea from Australia and made
possible by Miss Collisson’s unbounded generosity in its first
difficult years has now shown us that its work is needed. For
the Women’s organisations here and everywhere will back up
our efforts. We are carry ing on the League in the ordinary woman’s
way. We are ACHIEVING ENORMOUS RESULTS with an
economy of means which is really remarkable. This is possible
only by the self-sacrifice of everyone connected with the League,
except its President. I turn up on occasions, but really the suc-
cess is due to Miss Solomon, Mrs. Sedman, and Miss Duncan,
and to the members of our Committee who give such an enormous
amount of time and trouble, and also to Miss Collisson who i not
with us to-day because she is actively engaged in our work in
Australia.
Now, if you want the League to flourish it must be through
your work and generosity. We feel that the work of women is MORE
URGENTLY NEEDED to-day than ever before, in face of new
problems and new difficulties. There are still parts of the Empire
where women are not recognised as full citizens and have not full
political responsibility. For this latter work great encourage-
ment is needed but there s the growing difficulty that where
women have full citizens’ rights, and we in Great Britain possess
them now, since a few days ago, there is a feeling that there is
no longer anything to do for a feminist organisation, now that


the important question of equal franchise has settled our particu-
lar problems, whereas the franchise is only a means to an end and
we have constantly to watch that the equality of women, the new
responsibilities of women, are interwoven into the texture of
daily life. The theory of equality, difficult as it is to have it
recognised in law, is infinitely more difficult to have recognised
in DAILY PRACTICE, and that is our part cular business
—TO TEACH CITIZENSHIP TO WOMEN, to teach them
the value of the responsibility which i > now put upon them, and
the opportunity which it gives. That is really our work, and now
to-day, amid all our resolutions for the coming work, may I re-
call to mind, first of all, the passing of a great leader, Mrs.
Pankhurst. I think we should like as a British Empire League,
formally to associate ourselves with those many resolutions of
thankfulness for her work and admiration for her work which has
made the path of so many of us easier than it would have been
without her leadership. Would you all stand a moment in
silence.
Then, too, I think we want to express our thanks, not only
to those who have passed on, but to the great living leaders of
to-day. Our idea of the British Comonwealth League is to bind
together the women of the Commonwealth in one great cause.
We have for long had to rely on the self-sacrifice and enthusiasm
of those women from overseas who are ready to come here to
London to meet us in council and co-operation, and lastly,
thanks to the generosity of Miss Maude Royden, we, in the
centre of the Empire, have been able to send at any rate to some
parts of the Empire, one of the greatest of British women, who is
able to carry a great message to women overseas on our behalf.
May we send to Miss Royden a message of gratitude and appre-
ciation that the door may be opened again and again until there
is no part of the British Empire in which the British Common-
wealth League has not been able to use her as their ambassador.
And now we hope that Dame Millicent Fawcett will, as
she had promised us, move the first resolution on our behalf.
I will give her another minute but meantime I would like to say
that in order that you may have pleasant recollections of your
Chairman, Miss Harburn will undertake the unpleasant duty of
ringing the bell when your time is up. We should like those
who take part in the discussions to limit their remarks to three
minutes if possible. Shall we leave Resolution I. for a few
minutes so that we may have the pleasure of having Dame
Millicent Fawcett moving it for us.
Resolution 2. Nationality of Married Women. (Moved
by the Chair.)
“This Conference of the British Commonwealth League
urges the Governments within the British Empire in sending
in their reports on Nationality to the Preparatory Com-
mittee of the first Codification Conference of the League of
Nations to state that:—


{a) There is a strong demand from Women’s Organisa-
tions throughout the Empire that the law should give a
woman the same right as a man to retain or to change her
nationality.
( b ) That the British and Australian Parliaments have
unanimously adopted resolutions in favour of a woman
retaining her nationality on marriage with an alien, it to be
open to her to make a Declaration of Alienage.
(c) That many Members of the Nationality Committee
of the 1926 Imperia Conference were in favour of a change in
the law which won d provide for the British woman an
opportunity of retaining her British nationality on marriage
with an alien.
This Conference further urges that there should be no
further delay in setting up tlmCommittee of Experts to which
this subject was referred by the 1926 Imperial Conference.
It further urges that the Codification Conference should
include Women Members.”
Chairman : Now I take it that we, as members of the British
Commonwealth League, are whole-heartedly and unanimously in
favour of this LIBERTY FOR A MARRIED WOMAN, to decide
for herself where her nationality and loyalty must lie. It is there-
fore considered suitable, in order to save time, that this resolution
should be moved from the Chair. What we have to do is not so much
to declare ourselves in favour of the principle, but to decide on the
active measures to be taken to bring it into effect. We have the
support of the British House of Commons and the Australian
Parliament. We know that part of the Dominions represented
at the last Imperial Conference declared in favour of it. We
have the report of the Committee of Experts and the Report on
Nationality sent to the Preparatory Committee of the Codifica-
tion Conference of the League of Nations, which laid down this
principle and the League Assembly Committee gave the recom-
medation that the spirit of the Codification should not confine
itself to the mere registration of existing rules but should aim at
adapting them, as far as possible, to contemporary conditions of
international life.
As the Committee is meeting next year, 1929, it is therefore
extremely urgent that women’s organisations in every country
should SEE THAT THEIR GOVERNMENTS ARE SOUND ON
THIS POINT, as it will be the recommendations of governments
which will largely influence the decision of experts. ‘ ‘To adapt them
to the contemporary conditions of international life” —that
means that they will take into account the opinion of govern-
ments as to the need for a change. It is for us, between now and
the Spring of 1929, to convince public opinion and governments
that such a change is needed. I feel that it is particularly our
business to press this point because we find the situation of
British women has been worsened by the fact that discrimination


was exercised against them and crystallised in the Aliens’ Act
of 1914. We must put no further difficulties in the paths of
those who come overseas. I take pleasure in moving this resolu-
tion.
No discussion followed, so the resolution was put and carried
unanimously.
Resolution 3. Women and Representation.
“This Conference of the British Commonwealth League
urges: —
(1) That women be appointed as Delegates and as
Technical Advisers and Assessors accompanying Ministerial
groups attending Imperial and other Conferences.
(2) That women be included on Commissions, Boards
and other Groups dealing with Empire policy.
(3) That in any plans for the establishment of an Empire
Secretariat or Consultative body—all positions under, or in
connection with it shall be open equally to men and women,
thus carrying out the principle established in Act 7 of the
Covenant of the League of Nations.”
Proposer: Miss Ruby Rich, Federal Vice-President of the
Australian Federation of Women Voters and also Dele-
gate for the Racial Hygiene Centre of New South Wales.
Mme . Chairman , Ladies It is my pleasure on behalf of the
Australian Federation of Women Voters to move this Resolution.
This Art. 7 Clause 3 states: “All positions under or in con-
nection with the League shall be open equally to men and women. ’
In speaking to this Resolution I desire primarily to stress
both its great importance and its urgency.
We know that the principle stands on the platform of our
B.C.L. to work for representation on all Bodies dealing with
Empire Policy, but I would venture to say that in spite of this
very clearly defined obligation of ours there are many women—l
refer more particularly to those in the distant parts of the Empire
—who through lack of opportunity to travel and get into touch
with Imperial matters —to get brought nearer to the Inter-
national Mind —have failed to grasp the value of Imperial and
International Legislation—which in the last analysis these
Conferences may claim to be.
These women —while no less Imperialistic in their Ideals—
give time and energy to work for reforms in their own country,
which same reforms would be aided a hundredfold through direct
representation on Imperial Conferences.
As stated we are asking for Assessors to go with Ministerial
Groups while we are also aware that there are different ways of
bringing our ideas to the consideration of the Conferences. I
refer to sending in Resolutions through our different organisations,
the giving of evidence, etc.


But if the sub-committees and Delegates being men (there
was only one woman on the sub-committee of the Imperial Con-
ference 1926, Miss Franklin on the Workmen’s Compensation
sub-committee) of what avail if they from lack of the woman’s
point of view turn down the recommendations sent in by Resolu-
tions or brought forward by evidence ?
NO! We want Reserved Seats for Women —and front ones
at that—on all conferences! For it is alone the Reserved Seats
for women that can put them in their proper place!
Again there are some women who would say Well! Bring
pressure to bear on your Prime Ministers, on your Ministerial
Groups. To which I would reply :No ! It is alone the Woman’s
voice that can adequately plead the women’s cause, that can
adequately represent the women’s needs!
And now let us glance at some of the subjects on the Agendas
of the Imperial Conference of 1926 and the Colonial Conference of
1927 —and let us see if they are matters that after all concern
women.
We note on the first Agenda the subject of FOREIGN RELA-
TIONS. Surely we made contributions to the War and have not
we women something to contribute to the work for Peace ?
WORK CONNECTED WITH THE PERMANENT MAN-
DATES COMMISSION OF THE LEAGUE OF NATIONS. In
this regard is it not interesting to note that on the committee of
the League of Nations dealing with the Mandates Commissions
there must be a woman Representative ? This ruling has existed
since the inception of this committee while Fru Anna Wicksell
Swedish expert in International Law has always been the woman
representative. And may we not say that what the League of
Nations thought fit to do in this matter an Imperial Conference
might follow with security ?
The next on the Agenda that I would quote is NATIONAL-
ITY QUESTION. Surely Women’s affair?
OVERSEA SETTLEMENT. Do not women emigrate?
And finally WORKMEN’S COMPENSATION which should
read Workpeople’s compensation and SHOWING OF EMPIRE
FILMS.
All fifty-fifty questions as far as women are concerned.
Let us glance now at the Agenda of the Colonial Conference
of 1927.
SCHEME FOR THE GRANT OF RETIRING ALLOW-
ANCE TO NURSING SISTERS. Unnecessary to ask if this be
a Woman’s question.
MEDICAL AND PUBLIC HEALTH QUESTIONS. In
1926 over 40 » women were engaged in Medicine in Australia
alone!
EDUCATION CONSTITUTION OF AN ADVISORY
COUNCIL TO COVER EDUCATION IN ALL THE COLONIES,
etc.


ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE SUPERVISION OF COL-
ONIAL STUDENTS IN ENGLAND. EXAMINATION
STANDARDS FOR THE LOCAL ENTRY OF CLERKS, ETC.
INTO THE COLONIAL SERVICES.
SERVICES OF BRITISH TEACHERS IN COLONIAL
SCHOOLS, and finally CINEMATOGRAPH FILMS.
Ladies, I would ask you, are not these singularly Women’s
Questions ? And I would go further and say that even on those
matters that are not specifically women’s, there can often be
received a definite contribution from the woman’s mind. At
random I take the subject of RESEARCH on one of these Agendas.
Why, in Holland a woman is at the head of the great Station of
Research into Tropical Plant Disease and only last week the
Innsbruck University conferred hon. membership on an English
woman geologist for research work that she had done in the
Austrian Alps.
In short, as you see, the entire field of Imperial and inter-
national Policy and relations is covered in these discussions.
Ladies, some of you may think that there are constitutional
barriers forbidding our representation on these Conferences.
Some of you may think that there exists a Constitution like an
immense architectural monument impossible to bombard. But
no. There is really no theoretically written Constitution, what
exists has gradually developed since some thirty odd years ago.
Let me read you what the Prime Minister of Great Britain, Mr.
Baldwin, said in his opening speech of welcome at the Imperial
Conference on 1926.
‘ ‘For my part when I survey the past and when I ponder
over the problems of Empire, I feel that our predecessors have
been wise to content themselves with gradual and steady
progress rather than to attempt to construct some theoreti-
cally written Constitution which could no sooner be framed
than it would have been superseded by the evolution of the
forces of growth in our midst.”
Let me repeat “which could no sooner be framed than it
would have been superseded by the evolution of the forces of
growth in our midst. ’ ’
Ladies, a splendid statement! A useful statement! A
fruitful statement! May-be a binding statement!
For is not the evolved status of women in the Empire a part
of the living forces of growth ? And since Women have become
an integral part of the system of Government may we not claim
from Mr. Baldwin that the Government carry on this Principle of
nearly 40 years and let the plasticity of their unwritten Constitu-
tion meet the demands of the evolved woman of to-day?
I verily believe that with the strength of the 5 million sup-
porters that you British Women have lately gained for our Cause
that the time is ripe for some definite action in this regard.
In conclusion I would say that we are not unmindful of
endeavours in this regard that have already been made by differ


ent organisations. We know that much was done last year to
get a woman representative on the Simon Commission, unfor-
tunately of no avail! But I would say this: —If we could but
leave this Conference determined definitely to educate the public
in this regard—not Just speaking to our own respective organisa-
tions —they are already converted —but going out into the high-
ways and bye-ways and making the majority understand our
point of view—in short creating a great driving force of public
opinion—a consolidated, enlightened public opinion—without
which one can never get very far —if we would do this I have no
hesitation in saying that as most other citadels have fallen so
will the one dealing with Empire Policy fall before us, permitting
then the Women of the Empire their full representation upon
these Conferences. This achievement would be a positive con-
tribution from our Organisation to the Woman Movement.
This would decidedly make for Empire Solidarity.
Ladies! We want Reserved Seats for Women on all
Conferences ! We want the woman’s voice to plead the women’s
cause !
Miss Emilie Solomon, South Africa, Vice-President of the
World’s Women’s Christian Temperance Union, in seconding,
said; I think it is unnecessary for me to say very much in second-
ing this Resolution after the very eloquent address to which we
have just listened, but there are just one or two words I would like
to say. I think we all realise that old established customs are
very difficult to change. In the times when women were entirely
occupied with their home duties they had very little participation
in public work, it was only natural that in all matters relating
to business in public affairs men should have been chosen to repre-
sent public opinion, but I think that more and more within the
last thirty years women have awakened to a REALISATION
OF THEIR GREAT RESPONSIBILITIES. They have real-
ised that the best interests of the home and family life are
represented by the presence of women in public life. We
are celebrating here at this Conference a wonderful forward
movement in Great Britain. I suppose there are only three in
the Hall to-day who still rank among the unfranchised women of
the British Empire. The barriers have been broken down and
women are taking part in all branches of public life, controlling
great business interests, and sitting in legislative and municipal
councils. And men are realising that they can make a very
valuable contribution to the discussions of those matters which
affect not only the welfare of the home but national and inter-
national questions. This is because I think we have learnt that
the safety and happiness of the home, which we are always told
is woman’s sphere depend very largely upon the way national
questions are faced, and we believe it is because of the difference
in the mentality of men and women and their different points of
view that 11 IS SO NECESSARY THEY SHOULD SIT TO-
GETHER IN THESE COUNCILS, AND DELIBERATE


TOGETHER ON ALL QUESTIONS OF PUBLIC WELFARE.
And so I have very great pleasure in seconding this resolu-
tion. It does not claim any special privileges for women. It is
only asking for equal opportunities and since we have shown that
we have the necessary qualifications it is only right that we should
be appointed to those posts referred to in the resolution. There-
fore, I have very much pleasure in seconding it.
The Chairman : It is a very great pleasure that we have with
us to-day Mrs. Carlile McDonnell, J.P., alternate Australian
delegate to the League of Nations and Federal Vice-President of
the Australian Federation of Women Voters, and Vice-President
of the Women’s Non-Party Association of South Australia.
Mrs. McDonnell is a living example of the necessity of having
women in these assemblies and what can be done to educate a
government if women’s organisations set to work. I think you
will agree with me it is a very great pleasure to have Mrs. Mc-
Donnell to support this Resolution. In her three capacities
and for herself, we give her a very warm welcome.
Mrs . Carlile McDonnell , J .P.: It gives me great pleasure
to support this Resolution. As vice-President of the Australian
Federation of Women Voters, I really represent all the citizenship
societies of Australia. The Australian Federation is the equiva-
lent of your National Union of the Societies for Equal Citizenship,
and so this Resolution is entirely in accord with the platform and
objects of all these Associations. I would like to tell you this—
that we of the Australian Federation are very proud of the
fact that although the question of the woman delegate to the
League had been proposed by various women’s organisations,
it really was owing to the pertinacity of our President that
Australia obtained the honour of sending the first woman delegate
to the League. Just at the time when the thing was in the air,
Mrs. Rischbieth happened to be in the capital and enjoyed an
interview with the Prime Minister and Cabinet Ministers and in
the end, by her pertinacity at the psychological moment, won
the day.
Imperial Conferences purport to represent the Nation but
they cannot do that if they have no women on them, in view of
the fact that women form more than half of the population in
Great Britain and of the preponderance of women in Australia.
I think we ought not to put men and women in watertight com-
partments and think their interests are separate. What affects
one affects the other. We have many able women in all the
Dominions well able to fill the positions on such delegations.
I would like to speak particularly on the third part of the
Resolution which deals with the possible Dominions Secretariat.
Of course, I gather that that idea came out of the last Imperial
Conference deliberations at which the possibility of such a thing
was mooted. Ido not know that any further steps have been
taken in the matter, but if such an Imperial Secretariat were
to be created, it would be of momentous interest to the Dominions


and I think particularly to Australia, for as I see it Australia
has rather a key position in the Empire for this reason: Australia
forms the southernmost borderline of the Pacific, the large inland
sea bordered by China on one side and America and Japan on the
other. Round the Pacific to-day are more than half the world’s
population and the world’s wealth. That being so, I think the
question is of great international importance. If such a body
were to be formed it is important that women should be on it
because it is a new venture. A right precedent should be started
and women should take their place on that Secretariat. I have
much pleasure in supporting that Resolution.
Mrs. Laughton Matthews, St. Joan’s Social and Political
Alliance: I should like to move an amendment to this Resolu-
tion, with which lam sure everybody is in agreement. In part
3 of the Resolution a few words should be added, namely, after
‘ ‘shall be open equally to men and women. ” ‘ ‘At the same rate
of pay and with equal opportunities of promotion. ” lam sure
this is in the minds of those who put forward the Resolution, but
in dealing with the Authorities it is very necessary to dot your
i’s and cross your t’s.
The Chairman : Those words are really inherent in the word
‘ ‘equally.”
Dr. Grace Boekle (Australia): seconding the amendment
said: Ido not think we can make it too clear that we mean equal
opportunities for promotion and pay.
Mrs. John Jones J.P. (Victoria): The State controls are
gradually opening up a number of privileges to women. Men
are working for women to sit on Commissions, but we have great
difficulty in finding women who have the exact and particular
knowledge required for that position. Also Governments are
tending to send only members of Parliament to Empire Confer-
ences. In Australia we have no women members of Parliament
in our Federal Parliament, although open to women for 25 years,
and it seems to me that we in our consciences should be very care-
ful to press upon our women the enormous importance of preparing
to stand for Parliament, because then we shall not give our Gov-
ernments the loophole of saying, “We are only sending Members
of Parliament. ’ ’ Now we women should prepare and have a better
chance of fulfilling our desire.
The Resolution with the amendment was carried unani-
mously.
Resolution I . Equal Franchise in Great Britain .
“That this Conference of the British Commonwealth
League warmly thanks H.M. Government for the grant of
Equal Franchise to the Women of Great Britain, thus secur-
ing to them that equal citizenship enjoyed in all the self-
governing Dominions with the regrettable exception of the
Union of South Africa.”


Proposer: Miss Harriet Newcomb, Founder of the British
Dominion’s Women’s Citizens’ Union.
I arise with regret, very great regret, to propose instead of
seconding this Resolution, for the absence of Dame Millicent
Fawcett is a very great loss to us this morning. We know what
she has done for the woman’s cause, not only in this country and
in every part of the Empire, but beyond that in many other
countries —in every country where the woman’s cause is known,
and she has always something to say to us which we take away
and never forget and, therefore, I regret very much that I have
to take her place.
My mind runs back to the day in 1911 when Miss Goldstein
saw the great work we had to do. She came over from Australia,
some of you may remember, to help the women of Great Britain,
in their very critical and difficult struggle to get the vote. It is
wonderful how quickly things pass from our minds. We take
it so for granted now that the fight is ended. She brought a
letter from the Prime Minister of Australia, Mr. Fisher, to the
Prime Minister of Great Britain, speaking of the good the woman’s
vote had done in Australia. That was an exceedingly
important letter at the time. Now Miss Goldstein’s work directly
she got to England was to organize a comparatively small body
—the Australian and New Zealand women’s voters’ Committee,
with the aid of Lady Stout of New Zealand, in order that the New
Zealand and Australian women might help the British women in
their work. And what is the British Commonwealth League
proposing to do ? To concentrate attention, not only on England,
for you are looking all over this great Empire and the very sub-
stance of the word “Commonwealth” for the British Dominions
is exceedingly significant. New Zealand and Australia did come
forward in those fighting days to try and help the women of
Great Britain. Now we want to help one another in EVERY
PART OF THIS GREAT COMMONWEALTH. Our Resolu-
tion this morning conveys our thanks to the Prime Minister and
Government of England for having granted the women equal
franchise with the men. We have to add “with the regrettable
exception of South Africa,’ ’ and hope this will be remedied before
we meet next year. There is one word I should like to add about
that. Ido not think that we, as yet, outside South Africa have
thought enough about South Africa. Our movement from the
very first has been a spiritual movement rather than a moral
movement. I think we should have thought more about South
Africa, that wonderful strange country, which seems to have a
spiritual force against the woman’s movement more strongly than
any other part. If we familiarise ourselves with the problems
there and lose no chance of getting in touch with South Africans,
putting it to them that we feel what a loss it is to every one of us
that South Africa still politically ignores women, I think we
shall have done a great deal. It is a matter for us individually
as well as for this great and growing Commonwealth League.


Seconded by Miss Clegg, London and National Society for
Women’s Service.
Mrs. Laughton Matthews, St. Joan’s Social and Political
Alliance: I want to raise a point and move an amendment. Is it
strictly accurate to say, “That equal citizenship is enjoyed in
every self-governing Dominion,” because Newfoundland and
the Province of Quebec have not equal franchise.
Chairman: Shall we say, “securing for them that citizen-
ship enjoyed by all the self-governing Dominions?”
Mrs. Jinarajadasa, Indian Women’s Association; That
raises another point: India enjoys equal citizenship but is not a
self-governing Dominion.
Chairman; Then it could read, “That citizenship enjoyed
in India and in all the self-governing Dominions, with the regret-
table exception of South Africa. ’ ’
The resolution as amended was carried unanimously.
The Chairman then called upon Miss Phipps to open the dis-
cussion on ‘ ‘Existing legal inequalities between men and women. ”
Miss Phipps, 8.A., Standing Council of the Legal Depart-
ment of the National Union of Women Teachers, Great Britain:
Madam, President, Ladies, in scanning fairly recent legislation in
Great Britain, the legal inequalities from which women now
suffer depend to a greater extent on custom and tradition than they
do actually on the law. First of all, there were a series of
MABLIED WOMEN’S PROPERTY ACTS, not so very recent,
by which women have been given power over their own incomes.
Several other Acts, very significant, have been passed since we
obtained THE FIRST INSTALMENT OF THE FRANCHISE
in 1918 now made equal in 1928. THE GUAREIINSHIP OF
INFANTS ACT 1927, gave almost the same power to Mothers
with Fathers, over their children. The MATRIMONIAL CAUSE
ACT, quite recently, has made divorce laws equal between men
and women, and the PROPERTY ACT, 1925 has equalised the
rights of men and women in respect of inheritance. But there
are however a few cases still existing of differential treatment.
ROYAL SUCCESSION.
As regards the throne, that is not a very important or prac-
tical question but, at the same time, though we find in England
a Salic Law which admits women to succeed, they have not the
same rights as men. They come after their brothers. Queen
Victoria would never have come to the throne if she had had a
brother. Princess Elizabeth comes before her uncles, but if she
should have a brother, he would take precedence. Perhaps that
is not a matter which concerns us very much but for the sake of
completeness it should be included.
Then the RIGHT TO SIT IN THE HOUSE OF LORDS


raises another question. There are between twenty or thirty
peeresses in their own right in this country who have not the
right to sit in the House of Lords. This question has twice
been raised since the passing of the Sex Disqualification
(Removal) Act, but has been negatived in spite of the very defin-
ite wording of the Act, which enacts that women shall not be
disqualified by reason of their sex or marriage from the exercise
of any public function, or from being appointed to or holding
any civil or judicial office or post. I think the House of Lords
have acted illegally and broken the Law in refusing this right.
As regards the Parliamentary Franchise that has been granted
this week we have now equal rights in that respect.
TRADES UNIONS.
I want to say a word or two about Trade Unions. There the
rules have not really the sanction of Law. They do almost
everything possible to keep women out. Printers have laws
against them, tailors won’t allow them to learn cutting, and then
they say, “Well, if you want a dress you always come to men.”
But that is only because they won’t allow the women to learn.
One thing they have succeeded in doing—in 1926 they got the
passing of the “Lead Paint Protection Bill,” which now has the
sanction of law, and keeps women out of sharing in any process
in which lead is used. It is supposed to be a protection for
women but really it is a protection for men in turning women out
of the best paying branches of that occupation. Experience has
shown that women could not be worse and very likely might be
better decorators.
NATIONALITY OF MARRIED WOMEN.
As regards married women there are several legal
differentiations between men and women in the partnership
of the marriage bond. There is the question of nationality. A
British woman is forced to take the nationality of her husband
IF AN ALIEN. This perhaps does not matter so much if she goes
with her husband and lives in his country but in this country it
matters very much indeed. She may want to be a teacher but
she is excluded from applying from certain University scholar-
ships. I have proof of that in our local department in the last
few weeks. Teachers must study at a University in London but
a woman married to an alien is not allowed to do it. If the
husband dies the woman may apply to regain her British nation-
ality, but up to two or three years ago a British woman married
to an alien was not even allowed to participate in the Teachers’
Pension Scheme, but that disability has now been removed.
As to the INCOME TAX of married women you could write
a book and talk all day about it. Some people have a very pleas-
ant fiction that woman is the darling of the law and that a married
woman is not obliged to pay income tax, but if the income is


taxed at the source she is not asked and cannot get it back. A
husband is liable to pay his wife’s income tax and occasionally
that is very inconvenient for the husband, but in most cases it is
very inconvenient for the wife. I will give you an example where
it is very inconvenient for the husband, but it is the law and is
not woman’s doing. It is but an example of the extreme illogical-
ness of the government. The legislature has not revised the laws
to keep up with the married woman’s Property Act. When
income tax is in question it is not her property and her husband
has to pay the tax. There was a case where a man went bankrupt
and he told the authorities that £30,000 of the sum for which he
failed was income tax payable in respect of his wife Rosie Collins.
She had taken advantage of the law. Can you wonder? He
could not pay it and he need not pay it and she would not and did
not. It showed up the stupidity of the law as the husband could
not pay it and had to go into the Bankruptcy Court. This was
very unfortunate for the man but in middle class families it acts
very unfortunately for the woman. If the husband knows the
amount of his wife’s income he makes a return. If he does not
know, he need not make a return, and they cannot make him pay.
If he does know, and returns the two incomes together, that may
bring the total income to the high rate of 4s. in the £,, whereas
if taxed separately, they would only pay 2s. or one may not have
to pay at all. The Inland Revenue takes off that 4s. from half
of the income, and it is from the woman’s part of the income that
the 4s. is deducted and she has no redress whatsoever, although
she would have to pay only 2s. if separately taxed, and it is her
half of the income the 4s. is levied upon. There is no redress, but
we have the case where the husband has not cared to know his
wife’s income, and has not made a return. He has paid his own
income but all the efforts of the authorities have not been able to
get from him and his wife, the correct amount. But people go
on and won’t do what I have done i .e. write seventeen letters to
the Income Tax Authorities refusing to pay and winning. The
only reason ever assigned by the Chancellor of the Exchequer for
not altering the law, and bringing it into form with the married
woman’s Property Act, is that they cannot afford to lose this
portion, though it acts to the detriment of the married couple or
the wife. The Chancellor says “it is too great a loss to the
Exchequer and we cannot do it.”
BANKRUPTCY.
Again with regard to bankruptcy there is the same fiction
that the married woman is the darling of the law because she can-
not be made bankrupt unless trading in her own name, and if
trading in her own name an adjudgment is made against her, that
judgment is not made against her personally, but against her
property, and by a rule of the law she cannot be imprisoned for
debt under Section V. of the Debtor’s Act 1869. But that is
not an advantage to a woman trader, because wholesale firms know
that law, and they realise the very great trouble it would be, to


have to recover debts from a married woman trader, so they are
not very anxious to deal with her. But it is not the woman’s
fault that that ridiculous law is the law of this country.
TORTS.
One other thing I would like to say when we are told about
married women’s torts —civil wrong independent of contract.
You know if you make a contract to do something, or perform a
certain mission, that is binding in law, but there are plenty of
things binding in law not as the result of a contract. You
cannot make a contract with your neighbour that you will never
utter a libel or slander against him. They are torts. The law is
that a husband can be sued with his wife, for any tort committed
by his wife, during the marriage, and that is supposed to be a great
disadvantage to the husband, and a very great favour to the wife,
by people who are out to look for proofs that women are the
darlings of the law. The reason is that before the Married
Woman’s Property Act a married woman had not control of her
own property, and so, if sued, she would not have the money to
pay damages, so it was necessary for the getting of these damages
to have that law passed. It is out of date now but it has not
been altered any more than the bankruptcy or income tax law.
Ido not suppose it will be altered, but do not allow it to be quoted
as a favour to women. It certainly is not I can assure you.
SEX DISQUALIFICATION (REMOVAL) ACT.
Then there is the Sex Disqualification (Removal) Act—
passed in 1919. Power was reserved in the Act to appoint men
only to posts in the Diplomatic Consular Services, the Modern
Civil Service, the Government Services of the Colonies and
Protectorates, etc. With the one exception of Miss Gertrude
Bell, who was Oriental Secretary in Irak, women have been
excluded from all these posts. One would have thought that
they were particularly suited to diplomatic positions. Perhaps
that was why they were excluded.
SOLICITATION LAWS AND POLICE ACTS.
Then the Solicitation Laws and Police Acts differentiate
between men and women of evil character, —between immoral
men and immoral women. When women are charged with solic-
iting they are charged as prostitutes, that is, putting their
character in evidence before they are tried, and that is contrary
to British Law in every other department, A man may be
convicted a dozen times, but a jury is not allowed to know that
until after the verdict is given, but a woman prostitute is charged
as a prostitute, and if there is a jury the jury knows she is a woman
of bad character. The Bill, The Public Places (Order) Bill,
brought in by Lady Astor in the House of Commons, and by
Lord Balfour in the House of Lords, was framed to do away
with that injustice, but it was not passed.


EXISTING LEGAL INEQUALITIES BETWEEN MEN AND
WOMEN IN THE UNION OF SOUTH AFRICA.
Resolution 4. Franchise in South Africa.
‘ ‘This Conference of the British Commonwealth League
offers to the Women of the Union of South Africa engaged in
the struggle for the suffrage its heartiest sympathy: it
deplores the loss of Status imposed on enfranchised women
when settling in the Union of South Africa: it urges the
Government of the Union of South Africa to recognise their
claim to full citizen rights: and asks it to take the earliest
opportunity of remedying this situation by admitting
women to the full franchise. ’ ’
Proposer; Mrs. Cameron Swan, Member of the Executive
of Women’s Enfranchisement League of the Union of
South Africa.
Mrs . Cameron Swan : This puts before you the fact that
women in South Africa do not yet possess the right to become
members of, nor to vote for the election of Members of Parlia-
ment, though they are taxed.
Mrs. Geffen —the first woman to be called to the Bar in South
Africa —in her book on “The Laws of South Africa affecting
Women and Children ’ ’ —tells us :
In order to understand the position of women under the laws
in South Africa, it is necessary to refer to the sources of that law:
Roman Rule, Ancient Germanic Customs —and enactments
passed from time to time in accordance with the changing ideas
of different eras.
In the early days of the Roman Law, women were always
under tutelage—no matter what their status, single, married or
widowed. There is no trace in Roman history of a law of primo-
geniture, and from earliest times, unmarried daughters succeeded
with their brothers to their father’s inheritance. Women were
given an equal standing with men under the law of succession, for
the laws of inheritance were solely on the basis of blood rela-
tionship, whether through males or females.
Certain laws of the Netherlands passed in the 14th or 15th
centuries show that women were still at that time under tutelage,
though later in some places —women of full age, just as in
Ancient Roman days—could choose their own guardians.
The functions of the Guardians were to assist the woman in
court: give consent to her dealings with her property, and gener-
ally to exercise the functions of the guardian of a Minor.
These laws fell into disuse —-unmarried women and widows
could lawfully act for themselves.
With regard to married women, however, the principle of
tutelage prevails to the present day in South Africa, so that a
married woman is deemed to be under her husband’s guardian-
ship, and cannot transact any business or appear in Court without


her husband’s assistance, unless before the marriage is cele-
brated, the husband’s power is excluded by an ANTE-NUPTIAL
CONTRACT. Except in these two important respects, women
are in a favourable position under South African Law.
All children, male and female, alike succeed to their par-
ents in EQUAL SHARES. DIVORCE is granted to women
on the same grounds as to men. This is no innovation, but
forms part of the Roman Dutch Law. Numerous statistics aim
at the suppression of immorality and provide for the maintenance
of a high “Standard of social life in South Africa.” Although
South Africa is not yet one of the great industrial countries of
the world, Statutory provisions exist for the preservation of the
health of women in industry and other employment. In brief,
although Reforms mainly in the direction of the Franchise are
required —South Africa ranks with all the most advanced Euro-
pean Countries in the position and protection which the law
accords to women.
The main distinction between the rights of men and women
come under the head of Public and Political Law, e.g., THE
RIGHT TO THE FRANCHISE.
During the period of minority, there are no important differ-
ences in the rights of the sexes.
The position of illegitimate children, however, differs in
certain respects from that of legitimate children. To take the
latter case first:—
Legitimate Children. The father is entitled to the custody
and control of the children and their property. The Mother’s
right is subordinate to his. The Court, however, is the upper
guardian of all Minors, so that if the Father is unreasonable, it
may grant relief. The consent of the parents is required for the
marriage of the minors—the Father’s opinion prevailing.
Illegitimate Children. The Mother is the guardian of illegit-
imate children, with full control over them. The Father, how-
ever, is obliged to pay maintenance for the illegitimate child and
support it. An illegitimate child can inherit from either parent
by will, but only from the mother, and mother’s relatives, if
there is no will.
ALTERED STATUS ON MARRIAGE.
The next point of importance is the effect of marriage on the
legal position of a woman. The domicile of a woman is that of
her husband. This is important in the case of Divorce. The
nationality of the woman is that of her husband. On marriage
she takes the status of the husband —keeping it in widowhood.
She becomes a Major on Marriage, i.e., is freed from control of
guardian such as parents or tutors, but falls under the guardian-
ship of her husband.
The marital power that the husband acquires on marriage
however is stronger than ordinary guardianship in several res


pects, e.g,, he has the right to alienate the wife’s unmoveable
property without applying to Court —he need not render accounts.
The husband then by virtue of his power acquires full control
over the wife’s property. The effect of marriage is that a com-
munity of property is established between the spouses without
the necessity of any transfer or delivery. Each spouse is the
owner of half. Under the Common Law —no gifts are allowed
between husband and wife, but special provision is made for
the cession of life policies. Among the duties of marriage is the
duty to maintain the children of a former marriage, but this
ceases on dissolution of marriage.
By means of an ante-nuptial contract, this community of
property may be excluded—also community of profit and loss
may be excluded —in fact in the contract there is a great freedom
allowed, as to the position of the property of the spouses, but the
woman only obtains full freedom to deal with her property when
the marital power is excluded, when drawing up the Ante-Nuptial
contract, otherwise that power is only considered diminished by
as much as is provided for, in the terms of the contract. This
marital power entitles him to pledge, alienate or mortgage the
wife’s property of whatever kind, without her consent, even if
community of property has been excluded or not.
The remedy is by way of an application to Court for the
separation of goods, or for an interest restraining the husband
from parting with the property . The wife has no locus standi in
judico. She requires the sanction of the husband to appeal in
Court whether as plaintiff or defendant. She cannot contract
save for food necessities, except with the express sanction of the
husband. She cannot open a banking account with her own
money, without the husband’s sanction. These disabilities she
escapes if the marital power is excluded on marriage contracts.
She also escapes from them if she is a public trader —with
the husband’s consent.
The grounds for SEPARATION are habitual cruelty or ill-
treatment or continual quarrels —making life impossible between
the parties.
A woman cannot claim any share of her husband’s property
if he dies intestate, i.e. without leaving a will.
The name of the father of an illegitimate child may not be
registered on its birth certificate without his consent.
Divorce .
The husband has the right to sue for damages against the
person who committed adultery with his wife—to compensate
him for the injury he has suffered and for the loss of his wife’s
society. A wife however is not correspondingly entitled to
damages against a female correspondent (Pepper v. Pepper &
Baker).
Administration .
No woman has occupied any important administrative post


in South Africa, nor are there as yet any Women Magistrates or
Police. South African Magistrates and Judges have to take the
highest legal examinations and must belong to the Service.
Women are now admitted to the Public Service. Their
scales of pay just as in the teaching Service, is lower than that of
men, who hold the same posts or have the same qualifications.
In the Capetown University, the rate of pay is equal.
Income Tax.
The income of a woman married with or without community
and not separated from her husband must be included by him in
the return of income he is required to render under the Act. If
however, either the husband or his wife make written applica-
tion to the Commissioner —returns of Income may be rendered
by any such husband or wife separately. Such separate returns
are separately assessed but the total tax payable in respect of
such assessment is not less than the total amount which would
have been payable by the husband alone, if both incomes had
been assessed as the income of the husband alone. Hence the
wife receives no benefits under the rebate system.
Offences against women and girls and sex Morality.
It is a defence to a charge of any of these offences if the
accused was at the time of the commission of the offence under
the age of 16 years, and if he puts up the defence that he thought
she was a prostitute—or over the age of 16.
Franchise.
I think you would like to have a short history of the Woman
Suffrage Bills in South Africa.
1921. Women’s Enfranchisement passed at second reading
for the first time in the history of South Africa, though the South
African party had accepted the principle of Women’s Enfran-
chisement in 1919.
1922. Mr. Feetham introduced a Women’s Enfranchise-
ment Bill before the House of Assembly. Lost by three votes in
the second reading.
1923. A bill was introduced by General Byron but lost by
ONE VOTE.
1924. General Byron again introduced his Bill. Carried
by six votes at second reading. Referred to select Committee.
The Bill amended by Committee came up for discussion on April
14th. Many members obstructed the debate. No division
reached. General Smuts when approached promised further
time. Dissolution of the government followed however within
three days.
1925. No women’s enfranchisement bill was introduced
this year, but an attempt was made to bring in a Suffrage amend-
ment to the Electoral Bill. The Labour Party defeated Mr.
Duncan’s amendment.


1926. Mr. Mullineux was refused leave to introduce an
enfranchisement bill for women. A Select Committee, however,
was instructed to make a report. They reported that there was
strong support for women’s enfranchisement, but they were unable
to estimate the strength of the movement against Women’s
Enfranchisement, as these women were unorganised. This
clause was indirectly a compliment, for organisation means hard
work and hard work demands much self-sacrifice, enthusiasm,
unstinted and unselfish labour on the part of its votaries. This
select Committee, however, recommended that votes be granted
to women of EUROPEAN DESCENT.
1927. The suffrage societies could claim some measure of
success this year as they had women of both races working side
by side for the vote. Hitherto the Dutch Women had said they
preferred to leave these things to their men.
1928. Mr. D. M. Brown, who had promised to pilot the
Bill this year died, and General Byron once again took up the
Women’s Cause. The Bill, however lost its priority by being
committed to a committee of the whole house. A deputation
waited on the Prime Minister who promised if returned to power
in 1930 to introduced personally a Bill. This is the first time a
definite promise has been made by any Leader in the House.
Truly the way of South African Suffragists is hard. They
are up against difficulties of race, of distance and of prejudice
which would induce a feeling of despair in fighters less persistent
and courageous than suffragists have proved to be in every
country.
Seconder, Mrs. de Gray Stewart, Montreal Women’s
Club : The Dominion of Canada has nine provinces and all women
in Canada have the Federal franchise.
The women of Quebec have neither provincial nor muni-
cipal suffrage, so they are very sympathetic to South Africa.
Mrs. Swan has covered the ground so thoroughly that I may say
there is nothing more to be said. At the same time, we need
not despair. The women of Boer nationality are beginning
to realise that they must work. We have had the same diffi-
culty. The French women have not wanted the suffrage and
that is why ,we have been held back for so long. I just feel
that everything that has been said applies to us. Constant
reiteration is the only way to secure the franchise and arouse all
the women to feel that they must have it. It is very often
wise to appeal to the men, not only as a right but as a matter
of expediency, because the woman’s vote is not merely a political
advantage. It is very useful to go to politicians and ask for
reforms with a vote behind you, because if they know we cannot
vote against them on election day they ignore us. But if they
know that several thousands of votes will be cast in favour of
the men who promise the reforms asked for, then they will
consider it and the women’s voice will carry. I second the
motion most heartily.


Question :
In the work of franchise, are you working for the franchise
of all women? Does that include native women or only Euro-
peans ?
Mrs. Cameron Sivan : The Women Suffrage societies are
working for it on same terms as it is or shall be given to men,
but of course politicians have tried to draw us into supporting
only a European franchise.
The resolution was carried unanimously.
Resolution 5, Franchise in Quebec.
“That since (with the exception of Mexico) the women of the
Province of Quebec are the only women in the North American
Continent who do not enjoy full citizenship with men, this
Conference of the British Commonwealth League urges the pro-
vincial legislature to remove the anomaly without delay.”
Mrs. John Scott, Proposer, Chairman of the Franchise
Committee of the Montreal Women’s Club : I just want to say to
you how happy I am to be here and to find that what I have always
said about our politicians is true. If Gilbert and Sullivan were
still alive they would find their best material for comic opera in
Canada, but I see that in England, too, you could have a very
nice opera of your own. I do not believe that this resolution
will help us very much in the Province of Quebec for this reason,
that the Province of Quebec prides itself on being antique. If
anybody says that the other Provnices do so-and-so, they say,
“We act differently.” One thing they do not like is publicity,
and if they hear themselves aired in the City of London it will
make some of us very unpopular.
ABOUT THE SENATE, that applies to Canada and not
only to Quebec. Our Senate is not an hereditary body, but
is appointed by the Governor of the day. Some months ago
five of our most eminent women, viz., Hon. Irene Parlby,
Minister without portfolio in the Government of Alberta,
Judge Emily Murphy, of Edmonton, well-known author, speaker,
etc., Mrs. Nellie McClung, of Calgary, author, reformer and
speaker, Mrs. Louise McKinney, of Alberta, first woman elected
to a Legislative body in the British Empire, and Mrs. Edwards,
whose book on Canadian laws regarding women is a classic,
petitioned the Government to obtain a ruling from the supreme
Court of Canada as to whether or not a woman was a person,
whereupon this distinguished and august body sent and sat three
weeks hatching out this egg and then the answer was ‘ ‘No”—not
a fit and qualified person to sit in the Senate. Think of the
Supreme Court of Canada sitting in scarlet robes draped in
ermine solemnly telling a woman she is not a person! What
an excellent Gilbert and Sullivan scene.
Now, with regard to the PROVINCIAL VOTE IN QUEBEC.
Last Session, for the first time the question was brought into the


Legislative Assembly and voted upon. Mr. W. Tremblay,
M.L.A. for Maisonneuve, sponsored the Bill and is willing to do
it again. As usual the Cards were stacked against us and the
vote as was expected was adverse, 39 to 11. Out of 85
deputies only 39, less than half, voted against the bill. The
Church has come out against it to our regret.
The Municipal Vote for Married Women.
We managed again to get an amendment to the City Charter
passed in the City Council and in the Legislative Assembly,
giving the municipal vote to such women, but again it was
defeated in the Legislative Council by a vote of 12 to 9.
Eligibility for School Boards and Councils of Public Instruction.
Widows, like myself, whose children are married, are
allowed to vote and so are spinsters, but not married women.
They have exactly the status of a slave. The Catholic Women’s
League inaugurated a movement last winter, but the reply given
by the Catholic Committee of Public Institutions was “The
time is not opportune.” But when will it be opportune? God
only knows, I don’t! I have great pleasure in proposing this
resolution.
Seconder, Mrs. de Righi, of New South Wales, Delegate of
the Australian Federation of Women Voters and Assistant
Treasurer of the British Commonwealth League.
It was only lately that I learnt —with great surprise—that
the women of the Province of Quebec had not the right to vote for
the Legislative Assembly—though possessing the privilege for the
Federal Assembly. We women in Australia have had the vote
for so many years and have become so accustomed to it, that it
does not occur to us that there are any women in the other
Dominions of the Empire who do not possess this right. We
Australians feel that Canada is in advance of us in many ways.
She is a very much older colony —with nearly double our popula-
tion , and has progressed further on the road we are both treading in
world affairs; therefore it comes with more of a shock to us
to realise that there is a Province in Canada in which women
are away back in the position of the women of the Middle Ages or
worse; in regard to themselves, their children and their pro-
perty I understand they have no rights whatever. We can only
hope that now Great Britain has shown the way in granting
Equal Franchise to her women, that the Legislative Assembly of
Quebec will follow suit, and that before very long, the women of
Quebec will also be able to hold a Victory Breakfast. I have
much pleasure in seconding the resolution.
Resolution 6. Franchise in Bermuda.
“This Conference of the British Commonwealth League
offers to the Women of Bermuda engaged in the struggle for the
suffrage its heartiest sympathy: it deplores the loss of status


imposed on enfranchised women when settling in Bermuda: it
urges the Bermuda to recognise their claim to full
cit.zenship rights, and asks it to take the earliest opportunfiv of
remedying this situation by admitting women to the full fran-
chise.’ ’
Proposer : Miss Moseley, owner and Editor of the “Nassau
Guardian,” The Bahamas.
I am only stepping in to fill in a breach at the last moment,
but could hardly refuse to do it, because I belong to a colony
very closely connected with Bermuda. The Parliament of
Bermuda is SOO years old, it is the oldest Parliament and one
of the only three colonies left with that Constitution which was
given to all the British Colonies in the Middle Ages before the
American War of Independence. The very early settlers in
Bermuda came down from the Bahamas, and brought with them
the germs of Representative Government and we have retained
it in every form of government in these Colonies. They were
never Crown Colonies. We have full control over our own
finances and everything else. I say we, but can hardly say women
have reached the same stage as men, but if you realise the problems
of that part of the world you will see why we are a little slow.
WOMEN ARE JUST AGITATING FOR A VOTE. Bermuda
is 17,000 square miles and its population is scattered over one or
two remote hills. In the Bahamas there are 44,000 square miles.
I say this to show the difficulties of getting all the women in the
Colony to feel the same way as the women in the Capital feel.
While in Bermuda they are agitating for the vote and have
got it introduced into the Legislature and have the support of
numbers of women, in the Bahamas they are not agitating but
have gone quietly along. We are getting to hold certain positions
and we have equal privileges and rights with men in every way.
In public committees of any sort women are represented and we
are trying to take the lead in matters of health and urge many
reforms even though we have not the vote. Almost the same is
true of Bermuda and we feel that men are beginning to realise the
qualifications of the women for representation. As a matter of
fact the demand has been brought forward, owing to the agitation
on the part of the women, and the men feel it is time to introduce
the question into Parliament. Though it has not got very far
there is no opposition, and we feel quite sure before another
Congress we shall have progressed a good deal further. We have
advanced in so many directions that I can say that our progress,
although gradual, has been steady. Our women have estab-
lished their right to representation, and full citizenship must
follow.
Seconder Miss Dawson, Delegate for the National Union of
Societies for Equal Citizenship.
I think the great disability is this: that when women go to
Bermuda from any other land, whether it is the United States or


wherever it may be, they lose their status because they have not
got the full rights in Bermuda for women and therefore women
cannot settle there. I think they should allow people who come
from the mainland to have the same rights. I have very great
pleasure in seconding this resolution and I hope we shall not have
to wait too long.
Chairman (in reply to a question said): In the Bahamas the
existing franchise made no distinction of colour. I think as a
rule the demand of the women’s organisations is that the franchise
shall be given on equal terms as it is or shall be given to men.
The resolution was carried unanimously.
Resolution 7. Marriage, Maintenance and Divorce Laws.
‘ ‘That in view of the fact that the Women’s Organisation
in Australia are working toward a Federal Divorce Law, this
Conference of the British Commonwealth League affirms the
desirability of co-ordinating the Marriage, Maintenance and
Divorce laws for Britishers throughout the Empire.
“This Conference recommends to the Standing Com-
mittee that this co-ordination be considered at a future
Conference, with a view to its recommendations being sent
forward to the next Imperial Conference.”
Proposer: Mrs. John Jones, J.P., Vice-President of the
Australian Federation of Women Voters, and Vice-
President of the Victorian Women’s Citizens’ Union.
It is a sign of the desire for the strenghtening of the bonds of
Empire that a special study is being made in England and else-
where at the present time of what is known as ‘ ‘The Conflict of
laws within the Empire.’ ’
The same reasons which make urgent a uniform marriage and
divorce law in Australia apply in a lesser degree to the need of
unified family laws for Britishers throughout the Empire.
New South Wales provides an example of the present conflict
of law as relating to divorce within the Empire.
A man and his wife married in N.S. Wales may be living in
England. The wife returns to New South Wales and demands
that her husband shall follow. If he refuses to restore conjugal
rights she may institute proceedings for divorce which if granted
renders the re-marriage of either party in N.S. Wales legal, but
should either party remarry in England or Victoria, that marriage,
unless by courtesy, is bigamous because non-restitution of
conjugal rights is not a cause for divorce in England or Victoria.
Therefore it is necessary that when Australia sees fit to set her own
house in order in regard to marriage and divorce laws, that she
shall consider current domestic laws in other parts of the Empire.
In the Australian Constitution power is expressly given to
the Commonwealth Parliament to enact MARRI iGE AND
DIVORCE LAWS FOR THE WHOLE OF AUSTRALIA, but
the theory has so far remained distinct from the practice —the
result being an absurd collection of anomalies relating to the
basic institution of our national life.


The intimate social relationships between our people in the
six States of Australia, intensify the urgent need for unified family
laws throughout Australia. For a quarter of a century Federal
Parliaments while having the power, have refrained from assum-
ing this, their great responsibility, the various states in the mean-
time, without any reference whatever to the people living on the
same railway line, but in another state have enacted various
statutes relating to marriage, separation and divorce.
So that contrary to the spirit of the Federal Constitution an
unequal system of privilege has grown up in Australia. Yet it
should be noted that the question of BANKRUPTCY, which also
comes under the concurrent powers of the Commonwealth Con-
stitution, has been successfully dealt with, and Australia is able
to say that she has probably the best bankruptcy law in the
world.
There is no text book I believe which deals with the varying
domestic laws of the six states of Australia. It is therefore
with much difficulty that a collection of the laws is made and
studied and by the time one has completed the task, the result is
most probably out of date. However, the chief points of in-
equal, ty as between the States are that whereas South Aus-
tralia, Queensland and Tasmania have varied very little from the
English laws, New South Wales, Victoria and West Australia
each allow six but VARYING CAUSES FOR DIVORCE: the
chief inequalities as between men and women consisting in the
working of the laws in relation to Domicile —this law is unequal
as between men and women in every State. Numbers of women
in Australia have suffered mental torture and material injustice
consequent upon the fact that a woman’s domicile is theoretically
that of her husband, even when he may have deserted her and
moved from place to place. Formerly the grants for divorce as
between men and women were unequal in all of the six States.
Simple adultery being sufficient grounds for a man to divorce his
wife, but a wife had also to prove an additional cause, such as
desertion or cruelty.
This inequality appears now only in the State of Victoria
and is unworthy of Australia in the year 1928, it being a relic of
one of the earliest legal injustices inaugurated against women in
the early 18th Century. We rejoice also that England has made
the Divorce Laws equal as between sexes and the present Govern-
ment of Victoria has promised to introduce a bill immediately to
bring Victoria into line with the other States in this question of
inequality between the sexes.
Contingent also on the working of the marriage, separation
and divorce laws we have the inequalities as between husband and
wife in the CUSTODY AND GUARDIANSHIP OF INFANTS.
The question of the custody of children will bear hardly upon
women until it is constituted in the law of maintenance, in regard
to which England passed a bill in 1925 : the same year practically
equal rights were given in England to both parents to apply for


guardianship. This Reform coming largely as the result of the
pressure of public opinion from women.
I hold no mandate from women in Australia as to the form
unified marriage and divorce laws should take for Australia.
Opinion upon this question is perhaps as divided among women as
among men—but the Australian Federation of Women Voters is
now working in the various States to secure from their own
Societies a consensus of opinion on this most important and
thorny question. As far back as 1923 the Australian Premiers
Conference affirmed the desirability that the Commonwealth
Parliament should bring forward a Bill for the unification of the
marriage and divorce laws in Australia, there seems therefore
no substantial reason for the regrettable delay of over a quarter of
a century.
The greatest departure in Australia from the English Divorce
code which still recognises adultery as the one ground for divorce
is to be found in the state of N.S.Wales and in Western Australia
where “Restitution of Conjugal Rights” primarily intended to
help a deserted party to regain his or her spouse, has become a
corridor for divorce and large numbers of divorces are now granted
for disobedience within three years in Western Australia, and for
no stated period in N.S. Wales. What is done in America,
France and Russia does not come into the question.
The British race have always stood for leadership in high
morality, and women of the dominions while asking for
‘ ‘equality’ ’ in marriage and divorce laws will do well to note that
England while refusing so far to loosen the marriage tie has seen
fit to equalise the laws relating thereto between men and women.
This seems the right order, but it has been strangely reversed in
some of the Australian states and it behoves wise women through-
out the dominions to examine well their own family laws, and
while seeking to remove the inequalities and injustices to remem-
ber always in the building of better laws, that the marriage con-
tract generally involves a third and innocent party, and that
the touchstone of good marriage and divorce laws is the effect of
such upon not only the original contractors, but also on the
innocent third party —the children.
Seconder: Mrs. Minden Cole, Member of the Franchise
Committee of the Montreal Women’s Club.
I should like to say that for 25 years I have followed every
step of the women’s movement in England and whenever I have
been fortunate to be on this side, I did what little I could for it.
In 1911 I carried a very heavy banner to the Albert Hall, and
looking back to those days it is very inspiring to see what has
been accomplished. I have been asked to say one or two words
about WOMEN’S LEGAL INEQUALITIES IN QUEBEC. We
have heard about women’s inequalities in England and South
Africa, but I think none are as hard as Quebec. I spoke two years
ago about the injustices women suffer in the Province of Quebec.
This was cabled over to Canada and one of the French papers in


Montreal came out with a column saying that Mrs. Minden Cole
didn’t know what she was talking about. So, in case anything
like that is said again, I have brought the Civil Code with me so
that anything I say can be corroborated. We start with the
LEGAL AGE OF MARRIAGE. In Canada a girl can get
married at 12 years of age, but for a boy the age is 14. Just
recently they passed a Law forbidding anybody under the age of
16 to go to cinemas. So a girl may be married and have children
and yet be unable to go to the cinema. Such a ridiculous situa-
tion ! It is rather difficult about the uniform Divorce Laws,
because in the Province of Quebec we have no DIA T ORCE LAW
at all. It says in the Civil Code marriage is indissoluble; the
only thing that can terminate it is the death of one of the parties.
The only way to get a divorce is by a SPECIAL BILL that can
be passed by Parliament so that only wealthy people can afford to
get divorced in the Province of Quebec. The only way to get
married is in the Church. The whole world is flooded with
American films. In Montreal 1 saw a film showing a couple
rushing into the registry office and rushing out again. Of
course, that is ridiculous, because you must go to a church.
All through the laws, woman is discriminated against in every
possible way. No child can get married without the consent
of the parents, but the father’s consent alone is necessary if the
parents disagree. Then, as regards MARRIAGE SETTLE-
MENTS, when you get married the better classes always
have a marriage settlement, but, even then, you have very limited
powers over your own property. I had that experience before
when my husband went to the war. I told my broker to sell my
stocks, but I was told that I had to get my husband’s order in
writing. A married woman cannot sell her own property without
her husband’s consent, but as a rule there is community of
roperty, but the husband has absolute control over it. He can
do anything he likes (here she read from the Civil Code). Then
take the question of CHILDREN. If a child is left without his
father they appoint someone to look after his affairs and no one
can be appointed Unless in direct line of descent. At one
of our many deputations I said that the men evidently think
that women cannot have two good things, they must choose
between a municipal vote and a husband. Immediately a woman
is married her husband assumes all obligations. The Franchise is
the most important thing at present, and until we get that we
cannot do very much to alter the code. It is a great inspiration
to be in London these days and meet all these women who have
done such wonderful things, and though I get very discouraged,
still when I see how wonderfully you have done here, I feel en-
couraged to go on till the end. May I thank you all for my visit
here.
Discussion.
Dr. Grace Boelke, Vice-President of the League of New
South Wales : I want to explain rather more fully a word which


was used in the case of Conjugal Restitution cases which are a
cause of divorce in New South Wales. Legally, the position is
that a man or a woman can take legal steps to make the one that
has left return to board and residence. That has been a cause
of divorce in this country. The case is taken to the court and
the judge has ordered the spouse who has left to return. The
spouse declines to do it and that constitutes legal desertion,
which is a cause of divorce. I was turned right over to the
support of conjugal restitution through my work as a doctor.
The first case was that of a man whose wife and children had been
patients of mine. He was compelled reluctantly to apply for
divorce, as she had left him and gone with another man, so he
brought a case of restitution. He obtained his divorce on legal
desertion, believing, and I agreed with him, that it was a safe-
guard to his children afterwards, and that the divorce was gained
in a cleanly way and not for adultery, of avoiding all the unpleas-
ant and filthy details. Therefore I ask you to consider carefully
the New South Wales custom of divorce for desertion.
Mrs. Laughton Matthews, St. Joan's Social and Politica
Alliance, pointed out that there were parts of the British Empire
in which there was no divorce law at all. As a delegate of St.
Joan’s Social and Political Aliance she could not vote for divorce.
She asked how you could co-ordinate a law of divorce when there
was no law of divorce. When a church lays down a law that there
is no such thing as divorce you cannot make that community fall
in with the civil law.
The Chairman : We know that there are sure to be extreme
difficulties, but this conference must take the view either that
it is desirable or not desirable, that there should be this co-
ordination in the Marriage, Maintenance and Divorce Laws for
Britishers throughout the Empire. We do not attempt here and
now to come into line as to the form co-ordination should take.
Mrs. McDonnell, J.P., Federal Vice-President of the
Australian Federation of Women Voters: We have not been
able, in Australia, to agree amongst ourselves as to what we
would wish the grounds of divorce to be. Each country has
made up its own mind to a certain extent. It would be most
important to co-ordinate the laws throughout the Empire. We
recognise that this co-ordination should be considered at a future
Conference. In the meantime we affirm the desirability of
co-ordination. It would be better to discuss the question care-
fully from all parts of the Empire.
Mrs. John Scott, Montreal Women’s Club: It seems to
me the serious point is this, that it is easier for the rich than for the
poor to get a divorce. It should be equal. In Quebec you can
get a divorce by paying for it.
The resolution was carried, the delegates of St. Joan’s
Social and Political Alliance refraining from voting.
The meeting then adjourned for lunch.


AFTERNOON SESSION, 2 p.m.
“EMPLOYMENT, OPPORTUNITIES AND DISQUALIFI-
CATIONS WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE QUESTION
OF WOMEN’S WAGES IN CONTRAST TO MEN’S.”
1. WOMEN IN INDUSTRY.
(a) In India.
R. R. Bakhale, Esq., Hon. Assistant Secretary of the
Trades Union Congress of India; I consider it a great privilege
to be here this afternoon and to speak before this great organisa-
tion of women, and I wish to convey my hearty thanks to Miss
Solomon for having done me the great honour of inviting me here
this afternoon.
I propose to speak to-day on WOMEN IN INDUSTRY IN
INDIA, and I do not propose to say anything about the women
engaged in professional activities. In my country there are
some advantages for women, engaged in professional work,
which the women engaged in industries do not at present enjoy.
You are all aware that India is pre-eminently an AGRICULTUR-
TURAL COUNTRY with its population of 320,000,000. 97% of
this population generally live on agriculture but, at the same time
we are gradually developing our other industries also, and we
have an industrial system on a fairly large scale, and when this
scheme begins to develop it is almost inevitable that women
should be trained for employment in these industries, and this
employment not only affects the life of the woman in India but
also affects, very considerably, the structure of our society.
Even in pre-industrial days and even to-day in those parts of
the country where India has not developed to any great extent, our
women used to work on agriculture, and have worked there as
members of a family or as neighbours of somebody else, but never
as employees as they are asked to do now. In the villages the
domestic work and the care of children used to be the primary
work of our women and any outside work used to be only a sub-
sidary object with them, but with the growth of India these
circumstances have considerably changed and there are many
various causes which have caused the women to leave the villages
and come to the industrial towns and cities.
One cause is the MIGRATION OF MEN to cities from their
villages. When men begin to move there is a tendency on the
part of their wives and sisters to come with them. Another cir-
cumstance is the low wages paid to men. Men with families earn
such a small living that in a city like Bombay it is impossible
for them to keep their families on the wages they get. Therefore
the women and children have to seek employment in the fac-
tories. A third cause is that with the GROWTH OF INDUS-
TRIALISM there is a great demand for labour and female


labour in my country, being rather cheaper than the labour
of men, there is a general tendency on the part of employers to
engage women as far as possible. Moreover, as women are the
chief custodians of the care of the children and management of
domestic affairs they are more particular about the wages and
naturally are very careful about their work, more careful than
the men.
I have just stated that India is not developed on a very
large scale, and naturally the number of women employed is
not very great as compared with the population in India, but it is
such that it considerably affects the life of the women engaged,
and the very structure of our society. The number of men and
woman employed under the Factory Act, which really governs
and controls the big factories in India is 1,500,000, nearly 12,000
of whom are women. In the mines, under the Mining Acts of
India, there are nearly 96,000 employees, of these 60.000. are
women and girls who work underground in the mines. I have
been getting the figures but, as a matter of fact, no figures are
available about the number of women engaged in domestic
work, building work, road-making, agriculture, and so on, but
roughly speaking, the number of women and girls engaged in the
industries covered by the Indian Factory Act and Mining Act
comes to nearly 550,000.
If you want the NUMBER OF WOMEN ENGAGED IN
THE INDUSTRIES I could give you a few interesting figures,
which will give you an idea of the industries in which there
is a large preponderance of women. In the plantations, for
instance, there are 89 to 100 men; in the tea gardens 94t0 100.
sugar plantations: women 68%; mines, 36 to 400; diamond
mines, 101 to 400 men; salt mines, 91 to 100; collieries, 39%;
textiles 29%; cotton fields 30%; fibre cleaning 99%; wool pro-
cesses 110%; calico printing works, 625 per 100 men, etc., etc.
You can thus see that the women’s employment is concentrated
on a few industries only. Generally speaking, the women are
given light work as compared with the work given to men.
You can take for an example the textile industry in Bombay.
In Lancashire, for example, there is a large majority minding
four looms in the weaving department. In my country there is
not a single woman in the weaving and spinning departments,
only in the winding and drilling departments, and the same of
other industries also. As far as the working conditions are
concerned, I do not think the women workers in my country are
placed in a very advantageous position as compared with the
position of men workers. The hours are the same in mines, 54
for both men and women. As regards wages, they are rarely less
than the wages of men and that is due to the fact that, generally
speaking, men and women do not do the same kind of work,
but when they do they receive the same amount of wages.
In the textile industry in Bombay the men get 2s. 2d. and the
women Is. 2d. an hour. These are the wages our women and


men get in India , but there are deductions amounting to 8 or 10
per cent. of the total wages. THE HEAVINESS OF THE FINES
FALL MORE UPON THE WOMAN THAN UPON THE MAN.
This is really the conditions of our workers. The employment of
women has naturally resulted in giving women two kinds of work,
domestic work as well as in the mills and factories, for nearly 10
hours a day.
Here, as well as in Japan, the women employed are
generally unmarried girls, though there is a large proportion of
women who are married, with husbands alive, and this really
throws a greater amount of work on them than on unmarried girls.
The result is that women suffer physically and morally. There is
a HEAVY MATERNITY AND CHILD DEATH RATE IN
BOMBAY, and on account of the long hours these women work
in factories and mines, there has grown up a bad and pernicious
system of drugging with opium their small babies in order that
they may not give trouble to their mothers. Now on account of
the migration of men and women frcm their villages, this has
given rise to a certain amount of looseness of married bonds.
There is terrible OVERCROWDING, families living
in one room tenements in Bombay and Calcutta, and on
account of there being a very large proportion of men and women
in these industries the bonds of morality are becoming rather
loose. But against that there are considerable ADVANTAGES
in the employment of women in these industries. They become
more free, they get more wages, and they become more
independent, socially as well as economically, and they
always find it is better to work in a large organised industry
rather than work as domestic servants or in small factories.
Personally, I am of opinion that there should be no restriction
in the kind of work women should do, and lam glad to say that in
my country at any rate there are no restrictions raised to the disad-
vantage of women. We are very backward in industry but when
the time comes, I am quite sure that women will do the same work
as you are doing in this country. We have not got MATERNITY
BENEFITS . There is no legislation which gives maternity bene-
fits to women employed in industries, and perhaps ours is the only
country in the world where industries have developed on a large
scale where no maternity benefits exist. A Bill was brought
forward but was defeated.
The only REMEDY for ameliorating the condition of
women workers in India is education and organisation. The
percentage of education for women is not even 2% and the
percentage of education among women in factories is not one
in a thousand who can read or write. Similar statistics of
their membership in Trade Unions show that there are not 1,000
regular members of Trade Unions, and in this connection I want
to seek the help of the women, appealing to the higher and middle
classes, and I also seek the help of such great organisations as the
one under whose auspices I have been privileged to speak to-day.


( b) In Great Britain.
Miss Elliot: I am afraid I cannot hope to give you con-
cisely and briefly as Mr. Bakhale has done, the conditions of
Great Britain. It is a privilege to follow someone who has
spoken as well as he has done. The conditions in Great Britain
are the result of our development and are very much more com-
plicated and the problems we are up against at the moment
are not as simple and straightforward. The number of women
workers in 1921, and I think the figure is about the same to-day,
was just over 5 millions. That included domestic servants.
It was 3,558,000 in 1911 and excluding domestic servants,
2,972,000, so that the number in a period of 10 years has in-
creased by half a million and it is very interesting indeed to go
through the different industries and see where that increase
has come about.
The great industry for women in this country is the TEX-
TILE INDUSTRY and as we should expect, looking at cotton
and wool textiles, there is comparatively little difference at
present to what there has been in the last 10 years. As
regards the metal trade and the manufacture of metals we find
an increase from 1911 to 1921 of 128% of the number of women
employed, as against an increase of 12|-% in the number of men —-
a very extraordinary difference. Apart from engineering, tex-
tiles, which are two of the great groups of this country, there is
a whole new sphere of employment in the new industry which is
growing up in connection with the production of artificial silk.
The figures have not yet been got out separately, but the figures
for silk in 1923 were 37,000 and 1927, 55,000, and I think it is
true to assume that the increase is practically entirely due to arti-
ficial silk.
In food, tobacco, etc., there is practically in every case an
INCREASE IN THE NUMBER OF WOMEN EMPLOYED.
That tendency is borne out by the figures given by the labour
exchanges. They are not particularly reliable figures, as all
sorts of other factors come in. More employers may go to the
labour exchanges and so on. You must remember that these
figures, or most of them, are during a period of great depression
and unemployment in this country. That you must bear in
mind the whole of this afternoon.
When we turn to the QUESTION OF WAGES we get into a
much more complicated field. We find that the average earnings
in 1906 for men were roughly 28s. per week and for women 13s. or
145., in both cases for a 54 hours week. In the actual rise for
men, taking a rough average rate for the whole of industry,
from 1914 to 1924, you can estimate 75% and you arrive at a
figure for unskilled workers of 375. 6d. to 555. and for skilled
workers 555. to 80s. Now it is impossible for me to give you
comparable figures for women. They vary so tremendously.
Women’s wages can be divided up fairly satisfactorily
according to FOUR GROUPS: The Trade Board Group which


covers about million workers. That was set up to deal with
sweated industries, and trade board rates will be the lowest
regulated rates in the country, and if we go down the rates as
they stand to-day it is true to say the women’s rates work out
at about 7d. per hour and the men’s at about Is. an hour. That
is in the Trade Board trades.
Then you come to the second great group f trades which is
governed by the Joint Industrial Council. You cannot have one
unless there is a very fair amount of organisation in the trade.
Their rates are the highest rates of these trades. In every case the
women’s rates are well over 100% more than pre-war rates and
the men’s 75%. Amongst the Joint Industrial Council trades you
find in the match and cable trades the advance on the actual amount
paid to women is very great, because they happen to be trades
very badly paid before the war. MATCHES was one of the
WORST industries. It has now achieved a fairly high rate of
for women, though the increase is somewhere about 200%
over pre-war rates.
The third group is organised under the Trade Unions, such as
engineering and textiles. In the textile this is the ONLY
TRADE in the happy position of givingEQUAL PAY FOR EQUAL
WORK, I suppose because women have demanded it from the
very beginning, I was very interested to hear that there were
no women employed in weaving in India because in England the
proportion of women on piece work in textiles is 90% while there
are only 58 % men on piece work; there are 50 % women in engineer-
ing and only 27% men. The piece work rates are as a rule 33-1-3%
above time rates but there is no real estimate of what the
average piece work earnings of a woman is. The rate varies from
245. to 28s. for a woman of 21; add 33-l-3%and you get 31s. 6d.
—the men 375. 6d. This gives just a vague idea. For skilled
workers the rate is £3. That very roughly and briefly is an indi-
cation of the kind of comparison which it is possible to make
between men and women’s wages, but in all these trades you have
to take into consideration that it is not fair to take our figures
exactly. It is very difficult to find an actual comparative figure
but I think two general conclusions are justified:—■(!) compared
with pre-war rates WOMEN’S RATES HAVE RISEN probably
20 or 25% more than men’s rates, and (2) they were so very low,
at the beginning, that even now we are not even near achieving
the same rate as men, and we have at the moment a definite
woman’s wage on which women are employed.
When we come to the questions of DISQUALIFICATIONS
of course it acts both ways. The fact that women have a lower
wage than men is an extraordinary disqualification for men,
and from the point of view of unemployment it is a qualification
from the employer’s point of view as they go for women’s labour
because it is cheaper. But we have now another aspect entering
into industry and making it more difficult. We are going through
a period when the MACHINE is becoming the DOMINATING


FACTOR in the factory. The speed of the factory is regulated
according to the machines. The output has increased so
tremendously as to be almost incredible. I saw a case where
the output increased by nine times and labour decreased by one-
half. Cases of that kind make you go a little deeper than the
phrase, equal pay for equal work. We are not going to get all
we want for our women through that saying. We have got to
corelate it to the machine. It is not a problem which applies
only to women. I know our unskilled and some of our skilled
men are up against this very same problem, and it is becoming
a problem for the semi-skilled and unskil ed and skilled man.
It i<; not a question between men and women and that is why it is
so extremely important that we should get our ideas quite straight
about this. Until we do there is no doubt, that while women
have not actually replaced m n in industry or any specific
operation or job, they are exploited in industry by the fact of the
existence of a woman’s wage lower than a man’s.
The objection to and the exploitation of juvenile labour have
become a very serious problem indeed and the solution of this,
of course, is quite obvious, the raising of the school age.
With regard to the actual disqualification of women, I
think the ONLY DISQUALIFICATION IN THE LAW OF
THIS COUNTRY, is the prohibition of night work. It is an
actual disqualification by law. I think the women in industry
think it is a moot point as to how far it is a disqualification as to
employment in large factories. The employers cannot work
women at night and he simply does not work his factory at night.
As regards the hour disqualification in the factory act, this
really does not apply now except to that branch of industry which
is not regulated in any way, because the hours are the same for
men and women generally, but there is that group of women not
organised and not covered by the Joint Industrial Council or by
wages boards, and the wages would shock even Mr. Bakhale,
especially in the catering trade where there are disgusting condi-
tions. ONLY ORGANISATION is going to help to bring them
into line with other workers. Therefore, to sum up briefly,
while women have made slightly better progress than men since
the war, we are a long way from having what we ought to have in
this country, but we are in a state of transition as thrilling as the
first industrial revolution must have been.
(c) In Canada.
Mrs. de Gray Stewart, Member of the Montreal Women’s
Club : I never think it wise when a speaker begins by apologising,
so I shall not apologise but will just explain that it was only a
very short time before sailing that I was asked by the Club to
which I belong to speak on this subject, and when I said I would
not have time to get the statistics, they said they would send
them, but unfortunately I have not received them. lam afraid
the Canadians would be rather ashamed of their speaker after


the wonderful speeches of Mr. Bakhale and Miss Elliot. What I
shall say will have to be very general.
In the first place, we are proud to say that in Canada women
are admitted to practically every industry except certain ones
detrimental to their health. By law women are NOT ALLOWED
to be employed IN MINES and we cannot imgaine it can be good
that women should be employed in underground work. Other
industries are repugnant to her but are not closed to her. Statistics
are usually very uninteresting things, but this afternoon I have
found them interesting, when I look at the bulk of information
given to me or found for me here in London.
The Statistical Bureau published some very interesting things
after the census in Canada in 1921. I was highly interested in
noting the number of women workers under 13 different heads-
each sub-divided into any number of divisions of women directly
employed in every one of these except labourers. There was
even a woman boiler maker and women engineers and women
carpenters. In DOMESTIC SERVICE, 135,000 were em-
ployed in Canada. The conditions for domestics are ideal.
They get good wages, well heated rooms and good food, but
unfortunately the supply never equals the demand and this fact
is so widely known that when girls come over from Continental
Europe, ignorant of our customs and mode of life, they demand
higher wages than our own Canadian girls who know what is
required of them. The result is that for the first 12 months the
girls change places half-a-dozen times before they adapt them-
selves to our conditions. Of course, wives give their services
free and are not included in domestic servants.
MANUFACTURING next heads the list —106,000 being
thus employed. In other sub-divisions a certain number of
women are put down as owners or superintendents. The oppor-
tunities for women in Canada, therefore, are unlimited. What-
ever her individual case may be there a woman can find scope
or her talent.
As regards AGRICULTURE, with the present labour-
saving macinery with which Canadian farms are so well equipped,
there is no reason why any woman with capital should not invest
in a farm and carry it on as well as a man. Many run their
farms and run them well. For some branches of agricultural
industry, women are better fitted. For bee-keeping no physical
strength is required. The labour is comparatively little and it
can be carried on quite privately in conjunction with other indus-
tries, such as gardening, flowers, etc. Another branch of farm-
ing, only developed in recent years and which there is no reason
women should not take up, is that of raising fur-bearing animals.
During the last few years silver foxes and chinchilla rabbits have
become quite an industry. It is not a difficult employment
especially for women with capital and they can make it a paying
concern. It is impossible to enumerate the number of professions
open to women in which success could be made.


In FACTORIES, the largest number of employees are women;
in textile factories they are paid by piece-work. In shoe factories
a very large number of women are employed and there are a very
great number of them in Montreal and the very large cities. In
fact, practically everything she wants to undertake she can carry
through and make a success.
As regards the INEQUALITIES, I know that women are
almost always paid less than men. I cannot give the statistics
but there are a few cases in which the remuneration is equal but
very few. If employment is offered to a woman it is usually
for motives of economy, for a woman is expected to take less than
a man. The same answer is given always, that women cannot
demand the same salary because they generally do not give as
good service as men. To my mind women are quite as conscien-
tious and more painstaking, but the average answer is that their
outlook is narrow and very few expect to continue in employment
and therefore they will not study the work and try to make a
success of it as a man will who hopes to rise in that particular
employment. Another aspect that men always take is “We
have to consider if women insist on equal pay, then the home is
going to end, because if a girl gets 2,000 dollars and is in love
with a young man, they are not going to give up their jobs, and
women are pushing men out of these same positions and rendering
it more difficult, and the age at which a man can marry will
advance and he cannot afford to get married and girls will not
care to do it.” I think there is some truth in that. I saw it in
some of the large cities and certainly it is far more difficult for
homes to be set up.
Minimum wage boards have been established and
women are on these boards. I think that is agreed, but
whether they will accomplish a great deal is another question.
At present, there is the Minimum Wages Board in the Province
of Quebec, and the wages in press work, lithographing, etc., were
raised from 9to 20 dollars a week. This is piece-work and so
the women will work the same as the men. They also fixed that
an inexperienced worker will not be considered inexperienced
after serving a year. After that, she can claim the min mum
wage of an experienced worker. A reference has been made to
the fact that children have been displacing women, but no boy or
girl is allowed to work in a factory under 14, they are kept at
school till the end of the term.
Resolution VIII. International Labour Conference.
‘ ‘This Conference of the British Commonwealth League
declares that the International Labour Conference has acted
ultra vires in adopting at its Eleventh Session a Convention
concerning the Minimum Wage Fixing Machinery without
incorporating in that Convention the Seventh Principle of its
own constitution as set out in Article 427 of the Treaty of
Versailles, namely “the principle that men and women shall


receive equal remuneration for work of equal value” ; and
protest against the adoption of the Convention in a form
which sanctions the maintenance or creation, by Member
States, ratifying the Convention, of machinery with legal
power to establish unequal wage rates for women.
This Conference therefore calls upon each Government
within the British Commonwealth to lay before the Inter-
national Court of Justice the question of the competency of
the International Labour Organisation to disregard in its
Convention on Minimum Wage Fixing Machinery an essen-
tial principle of its constitution as defined in Article 427 of
the Treaty of Versailles,”
Moved by the Chairman ; I have here a very carefully drawn
up statement on this matter and, though as a general rule I dislike
reading instead of speaking, lam going to read it through.
Two points arise out of this, first of all whether the Conven-
tion has been properly drawn up without any reference to a
fundamental principle, and second if we agree that this has been
done the question of what machinery we use in calling attention
of the International Labour Organisation to the point, and I
think this is a good statement drawn up, I may say, by Mrs.
Bompas.
This Resolution takes its stand on a technical point which
it is extremely difficult for delegates to consider at all unless
they have before them relevant documents, and I have not been
able to get them. In encouraging the creation of a minimum
wage, the International Labour Conference has certainly acted
ultra vires without stating definitely in the Convention that men’s
and women’s wages should be equal, I think it quite possible to
argue that it is in the preamble that we take our stand on the
technicality, I think we must be very careful that we are
correct or we should look quite foolish.
At the recent International Labour Conference in
Geneva, a Convention, drafted by the International Labour
Organisation was under discussion dealing with the
adoption of Minimum Wage Fixing Machinery. As drafted by
the 1.L.0., no reference was made in the Convention to the prin-
ciple of equal pay, which is nevertheless one of the principles
(No. 7) of Article 427 in the 13th Part of the Treaty of Versailles,
which lays down the principles which shall govern the work of the
1.L.0. An effort was made by several delegates tc have a refer-
ence to this principle included in Article I of the Convention, but
owing to opposition from the Conference this amendment was
dropped, though the Conference subsequently decided to insert
in the Recommendations following the actual Convention, a
paragraph as follows :
“The General Conference of the International Labour
Organisation thinks it right to call the attention of Govern-
ments to the principle affirmed by Article 427 of the Peace
Treaty that men and women should receive equal remunera-
tion for work of equal value. ’ ’


Many of the delegates who are themselves fully in favour of
the principle of equal pay, regarded this result as satisfactory,
but I need not point out to you the vital difference between an
actual Article of a Convention which is binding on every Govern-
ment which ratifies it, and a recommendation which every
Government is able to disregard at will when putting the Conven-
tion into force through its national law. The principle of EQUAL
PAY has been one of the guiding principles of the Alliance since
its foundation and there is no point on our programme which has
a greater active interest for the woman’s movement at this
moment. It is for this reason that we desire to call your atten-
tion to what occurred and to suggest to you a possible line of
action for rectification of what must be regarded as an unsatis-
factory position.
The question we wish to raise is to what extent the Inter-
national Labour Organisation is at liberty to refrain, when
drafting a Convention, from direct mention of one of the princi-
ples of the Treaty of Peace under which it was constituted. We
understand that the view taken by the I.L .0. and by the delegates
to the Conference as a whole was that this being a Convention to
fix methods and not to fix actual wage-rates, it was not incumbent
on it to incorporate any reference to the principle of equal pay
in their draft of the Convention.
On this point we would point out:
(1) That if the reference to the principle is germane to the
Recommendations it must be germane to the Convention
itself.
(2) That in no case will it ever be possible for the 1.L.0.
to deal with actual wage-rates, because these cannot be
fixed at any definite figure for international use. They
can never get nearer to the question of wages than they
do in this Convention and presumbly when the principle
of equal pay was laid down in the Treaty it was meant
to be applied in all cases where the question of wages
was under discussion.
(3) If the question of the amount of wages was not inherent
in the problem of methods of fixing them, there would
be no need of machinery. It is laid down in the first
Article of the Convention that it is to apply in cases
“where wages are particularly low,” which shows
that at the back of the machinery there is the idea of an
adequate amount and directly this idea is in question the
principle that that adequate amount must be the same
for both sexes is implicitly included.
The point, therefore, which we should like to raise is whether
the 1.L.0. is empowered to put forward a Convention dealing
with wages without incorporating in it the principle of equal pay
as laid down in their Charter in the Treaty of Versailles. It
would seem that this omission may render the Convention ultra


vires and that the point is of sufficient importance to justify the
demand for a ruling from the Permanent Court of International
Justice, which has the duty of interpreting the competence of the
I.L .0. under the Treaty. You will appreciate that this is a legal
point, which does not seek to bring into question the attitude of
the 1.L.0. on the question of equal pay in particular, but which
might equally well have been raised in regard to any other of the
points of principle in Article 427 of the Treaty which might have
been considered as inadequately met.
It is within the power of any Government, State Member of
the League of Nations, to raise this question direct with the
Permanent Court of International Justice, or for the Council of the
League to raise it. Will you therefore APPROACH YOUR
GOVERNMENT on this point and try to convince them that the
legality of the Convention must properly be questioned until the
point has been settled by the International Court,
We are aware that the matter is not an easy one, but if on
this first occasion when the 1.L.0. has atempted to deal with the
question of wages, women’s organisations fail to show themselves
alive to the principles of justice laid down in the Treaty of
Versailles, the impression cannot fail to be given that they are not
watchful of their rights, and if later on other derogations of the
principle occurred, it would be the more difficult to make effective
protest. Even if the International Court should rule that the
Convention is in order, it must give this ruling on the ground that
the principle has been adequately safeguarded, and that in itself
would be a re-affirmation of the principle. At the same time,
women would have shown their vigilance and have reminded the
1.L.0., the Government and the League of Nations of the exist-
ence and validity of this Charter.
Question : This resolution declares that the International
Labour Conference is acting ulta vires. I think it is very danger-
ous to pass this Resolution without consideration. I very much
doubt if it is correct.
Mrs. Jones: May I ask how we may be making a mistake,
when the Treaty of Versailles intended that to be taken as a
general principle.
Chairman: You areYpioting one Article of the Convention
and then an article of the Treaty of Versailles, setting up an
international amendment.
Miss Barry : Would it not be better to change the second
line and put, “is of the opinion,” instead of “declares” ?
This amendment was seconded .
Question : May I ask if you have had any legal opinion as
to whether we have a case. We are not very competent legally
to express an opinion.
Chairman : The Alliance has tried to get that, but unfor-
tunately we haven’t got the report in in time. We have asked a


Belgian and a Swedish Lawyer but the opinion has not yet
arrived.
Question : It seems to me a very important question to
decide at the end of a long day. Could we not leave this in the
hands of the Executive and ask them to consider the whole matter
again, and redraft the Resolution, as has been proposed, and take
legal op nion and give them power to act.
Chairman : The only alternative to the Resolution, which is a
very carefully thought out one, is either to proceed with this
Resolution or to pass a general Resolution.
Mrs. Abbott: I know their passionate hatred for equal pay
for equal work behind the scenes. It was more from the worker
than from the employer. The employer does not believe in it
but the workers thought it would wreck their convention. It is
the old suffrage situation back again. Your position is that you
have not got justice. You have an article in the Treaty which
mentions the right of the employee as well as the employer and
mentions an adequate wage and raises other fundamental prin-
ciples. But when the principle of equal pay arises to miss an
opportunity of taking a stand is to miss an opportunity which
may be disastrous to the economic position of women for years
to come.
The Resolution, after further discussion, with Miss Barry’s
Amendment was carried. 17 in favour, 5 against.
II.—WOMEN IN THE PROFESSIONS.
(a) In Australia. Dr. Grace Boekle, Vice-President of
the League of New South Wales.
Dr. Grace Boelke : Women in Australia have legally every
facility for practising in all or any profession, save and except
the profession of a Minister of Religion. I mean that any reli-
gious denomination may if it so deem wise, consecrate and elect
Women to the Ministry, but no 'egal sanction or compulsion
towards such consecration exists.
As you know we have both Federal and State Laws and
Constitutions. And Federally, we having full power of vote,
and have had it 25 years, there is no legal bar to the complete
enjoyment of all facilities in Federal concerns.
Perhaps the following account in New South Wales will
clearly represent the position in the States. In 1925 —the Con-
stitution was amended by Act passed by Ex-Council 22nd Decem-
ber: and by the Assembly 24th December: admitting Women
Members to the Legislative Council. This Act was assented to
on 27th January 1926.
The Act of November 1926 Provides —-(that save as otherwise
provided in any act) a woman shall not be disqualified by sex or
marriage from the exercise of any public function, or from being
appointed to or holding any civil or judicial office or post: or


from entering or carrying on any Civil Profession or for admission
to any incorporated Society—whether or not incorporated by
Royal Charter.
The Australian Act includes claims that the same wage
be paid to women performing the same work, or producing the
same amount of value or profit to their employer.
The Married Women’s Property Act of 1861 —a Married
Woman is capable of holding, acquiring or disposing of any real
or personal property as her separate property as if unmarried.
Her property is not liable for her husband’s debts, and her earn-
ings in any capacity or occupation apart from her husband’s are
her own.
Disabilities .
Women may not serve as Jurors. They have no legal claim
of their husband’s income : and no legal claim on income earned
by joint work unless proper deed of partnership has been drawn
up.
Victoria —31 st November 1926.
The Women’s Qualification Act was passed and is similar
to that of New South Wales.
South Australia .
By various Acts admitted to all Universities, elected as
Councillors of Municipalities, Justices of the Peace, Power to
practice the Profession of the Law, Practice and Register as
Medical Practitioners and as PubLc Notarys.
West Australia .
Fully allowed to enter —and practice in all Professions, etc.,
as New South Wales.
Tasmania.
May take all degrees at University but restricted in Council-
lorships and legal practice, but may be Justices of the Peace.
Queensland.
Admitted to all Degrees but have not yet been admitted as
fully as New South Wales.
(b) In Canada, Miss Ferguson, Member of the Franchise
Committee of the Montreal Women’s Club.
Miss Ferguson : It is a great privilege for me to be here
to-day, to have heard the interesting and illuminating speeches,
given by women from different parts of the Empire: and I am
pleased to convey greetings from their Canadian sisters, to the
members of the British Commonwealth League.
In Canada, professional women CANNOT be said to have
equal oppportunities with men, for although the Universities


grant Degrees to men and women on the same terms, yet rarely is a
good position, municipal, government, or educational given a
woman, no matter how well qualified she may be to fill it.
Public opinion has yet to overcome prejudice.
There are about 500 women on the staffs of the various
Canadian Universities, but few hold the more important and
higher paid positions, Therefore it is pleasing to note, that when
L’ Universite de Montreal formed a Public Health Department
with School for Graduate Nurses, a woman professor was appoin-
ted. This was a decided innovation.
In the Province of Quebec to which I shall refer more partic-
ularly, comparatively few women enter the professions, with the
exception of teaching and nursing.
There are two thousand registered nurses in the Province
and about ten thousand women teachers.
Women are NOT ADMITTED to the Bar, although nine have
graduated in law, the majority of whom are employed in legal
firms, or in the legal departments of large business corporations.
In Ontario and the Western Provinces, women lawyers meet
with varied success, and some have become outstanding members
of the Profession.
Women are not permitted to follow the courses in Archi-
tecture in McGill University, not that there is any opposition
on the part of the University Corporation, other than insufficent
accommodation for classes. The difficulty might be overcome
possibly, if there were a number of applicants. According to the
last census, there are only four women architects in the Dominion.
In the medical profession, the pioneers had very uphill
work, but amongst their number were talented young women,
possessing courage and perseverance, who gradually overcame
obstacles, and proved that women were an asset in the profession :
and to-day there are seventeen women physicians in the Province
of Quebec.
It may be of interest to learn, that when Medical Inspection
was introduced into the Schools of Montreal over twenty years
ago, women were given appointments.
There are about two hundred women physicians in Canada,
—a few of whom hold important positions in Publ c Health
Service, one being Chief of the Child Welfare Division, Dom nions
Department of Health, Ottawa —one is a magistrate in^oropnto.
Dentistry does not seem an attractive field to Canadian young
women —there are only three registered women dentists in Quebec.
With regard to the teaching profession: —There are about
fifty-two thousand women teachers in Canada.
Each Province has its own educational system.
In Quebec freedom of teaching exists and the system is a
dual one —Roman Catholic and Protestant —with two separate
Committees forming the Council of Education.
Women are represented on the Protestant Committee, but
not on the Catholic Comrmttee of the Council.


A DISCRIMINATION in salary, between men and women
teachers, prevails in a greater or lesser degree throughout the
Dominion and in Schools, where there is co-education, the
Principal generally is a man.
In Toronto the office of School Inspector is being ably filled
by a woman —one of the few instances of a woman receiving a
good administrative position.
A glance at statistics show the DIFFERENTIATION IN THE
SALARIES of men and women teachers, in various Provinces.
The average salary of female teachers in the Province of
Quebec is 1609 dollars and of women teachers 509 dollars.
In the Protestant High Schools of Montreal, where the best
salaries in the Province are paid, the maximum salary of women
teachers is only two thirds that of men, although the work is
identical.
In Ontario, the average salary of male teachers is 1645
dollars and of women 1142 dollars.
In Saskatchewan, the average salary of male teachers is in
urban schools, 1643 dollars, and in rural schools 1106 dollars:
of women 1180 dollars (urban) and 1006 (rural).
In Nova Scotia, the average salary of male teachers is 1074
dollars, and of women 638 dollars.
In the Provinces of Manitoba and British Co umbia, little
disparity exists in the salaries.
In Alberta, the highest salary paid to male teachers is 3600
dollars and the highest to women teachers 3000 dollars.
I am optimistic regarding the future of the professional
woman in Canada.
She is conscious of her disabilit’es and the power to remove
them.
As women n general recognise their indiv dual responsi-
bility in the matter, and place confidence and faith in the work
of their sisters in the professions, so will existing prejudice
gradually disappear.
Co-operation and concentration of purpose will bring success.
Some discussion followed.
(c) In Great Britain, Mrs. Abbott, Chairman of the Open
Door Council.
The general situation as regards the entry, pay and promo-
tion of women in the professions in Great Britain is a little difficult
to sum up. We may best, perhaps, understand it by the picture
of a Theatre, with the door attendants crying “Free entry for
all.” Once within the theatre, however, other voices are
heard .... “Gentlemen’s seats in the stalls and dress
circle; Ladies in the pit and gallery, please.” A few women
manage to get into the stalls or dress circle. But not many.
It is the difference, sometimes of rule, sometimes of custom and
convention, and prejudice within the professions that keep women
on a different level as regards promotion and pay.


The State as employer is the chief sinner in this respect, as a
brief review of the position of women in the Civil Service and the
Teaching profession will show.
The Civil Service.
There are some 73,000 women in the Civil Service. In spite
of continued agitation for equality of promotion and pay by the
women civil servants, and in spite of equality resolution passed
by the House of Commons, there is neither real equality of pro-
motion nor pay. The Whitley Reorganisation Scheme which was
supposed to improve matters in this respect resulted in the
degrading of women and the up-grading of men civil servants.
The women Principal Clerks and First Class Clerks were
de-graded to the Lower Clerical section (the original place of the
second class women clerks). The male Assistant Clerk—the
lowest grade under the old system —was raised to the Lower
Clerical Section. The men of the Second Division (Main Body)
who were originally the Lower Clerical Staff were raised to the
Higher Clerical Division. The Second Division (Higher Grade)
men and Superintendents —who previously were equal to the
de-graded First Class and Principal women Clerks —were raised
to the Lower and Higher Executive posts respectively. The
resulting increments in salaries to men were thus £lOO, £lOO, and
£lBO. To women the increment was £4O. Of Executive posts
there are practically one for every two men; and only one for
every eleven women. Though there is equality as regards entry,
there is neither equality of promotion nor equality of payment
in the Civil Service. An EQUALITY REORGANISATION
SCHEME is not only possible; it is comparatively easy. The
excuse of the tremendous expenses involved is constantly put
forward. But a gradual reorganisation on the equality basis
would in ten years time cost only £490,000; which, as the women
Civil Servants have remarked, is not a very high price to pay for
justice.
The Diplomatic and Consular Services, the Government
Services of the Colonies and Protectorates, the Indian Civil
Service, the Commercial Diplomatic Service and the Trade Com-
missioner Service are still closed to women.
The Teaching Services.
There are some 120,000 women in the Government Teaching
Services, of whom about 111,000 are in Elementary Schools.
There is ABSOLUTE EQUALITY as regards the NECESSARY
QUALIFICATION, work and responsibilities. But there is
neither equality of opportunity where the higher posts, such as
the headships of mixed schools, is concerned; nor is there equal
pay for equal work. For example; in Scale I Elementary
schools a certificated man teacher legins at £l6B per annum,
rising at the end of ten years to £276. A woman certificated
teacher starts at £l5O and her salary at the end of ten years is


£231. In short, the salaries of women teachers are assessed at
approximately 4-sths of the scale of men teachers and the incre-
ments for women are about f of those of men.
The Medical Profession.
At the end of 1921 there were over 2,000 women in the medi-
cal profession. There is in theory an equal held of work, com-
prising resident Hospital posts, Public Health and Government
Research, posts in Mental Hospitals, Medical Service in India,
Africa, etc., General Practice. In fact, however, resident and
research posts are more frequently Idled by men than by women;
and it must be remembered that far fewer women have at their
command sufficient capital to allow them to buy or to build up
a general practice than is the case with men. A large number
of women seek Public Health and Welfare posts under the Local
Authorities. Here, as throughout the range of posts open to
medical men and women, there is equality of pay. The British
Medical Association exacts an equal minimum salary for all such
posts, and the number of Local Authorities who, at one time or
another, try to employ a woman at a lower level of pay are
happily negligible. PREJUDICE against equal opportunities of
training for women medical students still exists, and is evidenced
by the recent decision of five London Hospital Schools to exclude
women students. In support of this exclusion wild statements
have been made in the Press as to the ‘ ‘failure of co-education”
though co-education is the only form of medical education in other
parts of the country; and as to the enormous wastage, estimated
at 50%, occasioned by marriage. The Medical Women’s Federa-
tion made two enquiries on this subject, and found that of
medical women in practice some 15% marry, and of these some
9% retire from work on marriage: a very modest figure.
Marriage, however, is a disability, whether the Civil Service,
the Teaching Profession, or medical posts under the Local Author-
ities be in question. Not because women marry and resign; but
because, in spite of the Sex Disqualification Removal Act,
women are dismissed from these services if and when they marry.
The Legal Profession.
The legal profession has been open to women in Great
Britain since 1921. In 1926 it was estimated that there were
77 women barristers, and this number increases annually. There
are still very few women solicitors. STATUTORY PAY-
MENTS ARE EQUAL. But for women, as for men, success in
the legal profession depends on the reputation an individual is
able to build up. While prejudice still exists, while women
barristers are “new,” it cannot be expected that they will
figure largely in important cases. They are in the position that
the pioneer woman doctor was many years ago. It is my personal
opinion that an increase in the number of women solicitors will
not only be of help to all women who need advice on legal matters.


but will also tend to encourage the employment of women
barristers. It is difficult to imagine the older fashioned type of
the man solicitor recommending the employment of a woman
barrister to his clients!
Other Professions.
Dentistry. There are still very few women dentists in this
country as compared, for instance with America. The estab-
lishment of Dental Clinics under maternity and child welfare
schemes will probably tend to increase the numbers of women
dentists. Women Dental Mechanics can earn from 30s, to £8
or £4 weekly.
Massage and Medical Gymnastics. Salaries are not high,
but compare favourably with the pay offered to nurses.
Record Reading. Openings are scarce. Several appoint-
ments in the Public Record Office are held by women.
Political Organisation. Many women are employed, but
very few hold first class posts.
Librarianship. An attractive career for women; but un-
fortunately prospects are not very hopeful. Trained librarians
receive salaries of from £250 to £6OO per annum.
Scientific Research.
Scientific and industrial research under Government; research
in physiology, bacteriology and biochemistry; at Universities
or Agricultural Colleges, offer fair prospects to women.
Veterinary Surgery.
Four women are fully qualified as Veterinary Surgeons.
There is room for both men and women in this profession.
House Decoration.
House Decoration appears a profession eminently suited to
women. Several firms of women decorators have recently sprung
up. But their activities have been LIMITED by the passing of
the Lead Paint (Protection Against Poisoning) Act of 1926. This
Act, which forbids the employment of women in any ordinary
decorative work in which lead paint is used, purports to
“protect” women —but in reality places a ban on their ap-
prenticeship in the painting industry, and puts firms employing
women at a great disadvantage.
Hospital Almoners.
This is one of the most promising branches of social work for
women. Salaries begin at £2OO and advance to £3OO or more.
Welfare Work.
Posts, other than those open to fully qualified medical
women, are available under the Public Health Departments.
Salaries run from £l50 —£250 for superintendents, and are about
£l4O for assistants. On the industrial side salaries run from


£l3O to £250 for assistants. Superintendents receive from £2OO
to £500; and there are a few posts in the highest ranks which
command from £SOO to £2,000.
Architecture, Astronomy and Aviation may be looked on as
undeveloped, but developing, professions for women.
At present the best opportunities for young women probably
lie in Veterinary work, Scientific Research, Almonership and
Welfare work.
Finally, it would be idle to suppose that because there is a
theoretical equality of entry into practically all the professions,
that the day of real equality of opportunity and of promotion is
with us. Women have much yet to do and to suffer before they
arrive at that day when nothing but merit will count.
The meeting then adjourned for tea.
111. CONSIDERATION OF WOMEN AS EMPLOYERS.
Mrs, Cameron Swan (S. African, farmer): The information
that I have to put before you is obtained from women who run
and own farms of their own. lam not a woman farmer myself.
Mrs. Hyde, who is one of our biggest women farmers, owns
a large farm in the Transvaal, some way from Johannesburg.
Long articles have appeared in the Press in which I have read
of the wonderful success of her farm and of her magnificent enter-
prise and organisation. These articles (I am sure many of you
have read them) give an idea of her success; she is the most
capable business woman I have ever met. She grows mealies,
lucerne, rotational crops.
The point I want to bring before you is this: The farm was
originally owned for many years by her brother-in-law; he devel-
oped it; it passed to her husband and was worked by him for many
years most successfully. Since her husband’s death four years
ago, Mrs. Hyde has run the farm, with a young man as Manager
to look after the natives and carry out her orders.
Miss Murray, of Elgin, Cape Province, has mixed farming.
Her relatives for many generations past have been farmers in
South Africa. Her relatives at the present time are farmers with
accumulated experience from which she benefits. Her father
financed her for ten years. Her farm is now a very profitable
one and a paying concern. She is willing, I believe, to accept
pupils and train them.
There are one or two places in the Union where women stu-
dents for farming can be trained. The Agricultural Colleges of
each State give intensive training to women in most agricultural
subjects during the holiday seasons. Salisbury Agricultural
College in the Cape Province is putting up Hostels for women.
I recently saw an article in the paper written by and English-
man just returned from South Africa after two years. He had
travelled extensively over the Transvaal, Orange Free State, etc.
He said “I cannot too emphatically stress the opportunities


awaiting immigrants to South Africa with small capital. Labour
is cheap and efficient and therefore cost of production is negligible
-—the majority of the natives have a good knowledge of the
English language and are quick to grasp new methods and adapt
themselves very quickly to changes. Moreover, they have
respect for young farmers with enterprising schemes, and work
all the more willingly for them.”
Farming requires a FAIR AMOUNT OF CAPITAL in case of
drought and pestilence and intitial cultivation of land. Good
returns undoubtedly can be obtained. The distance from one farm
to another is a drawback to a woman or women living alone, on
account of native labour and the uncertainty of their attitude to
a woman. The different languages of the natives may or may not
be a drawback. The distance from markets and transport
requires careful calculation and training. I know of one young
man —and if a man can do it a woman can do it—who bought an
acre of ground, planted vines, did the entire work himself, lived
in a tiny hut he built himself, cooked for himself, and certainly
has extremely good results. I remember the Head of one of the
Government Departments saying ‘T wish I had that young man’s
cheque in my pocket.”
Sir A, Bailey in Who’s Who gives as one of his recreations
‘Farming,’—l might add a rich man’s hobby.
What one man can do and succeed at, every man cannot
succeed at, neither can every woman, so no hard and fast rule
can be laid down as to whether women should start farming and
become employers of labour. It will very much depend on the
type of woman, as it does on the type of man, who comes to South
Africa as to whether they succeed or not.
We want women of the very best type, willing to learn before
they start, willing to accept the advice of other women and
people who have been resident in South Africa for several years,
in whatever they decide to undertake. There is flower farming,
fruit farming, cereal farming and mixed farming. I leave it to
you to see for yourselves what is best.
Mrs. Willson (Builder, Great Britain): During the present
century, we have heard of numbers of women who have gone into
business, and to my mind, that number will continue to grow as
education becomes more universal and we have more leisure.
We shall be freer to seek newer channels for our activities. It is
to be remembered that it is in our leisure moments we have time
to think, when we can sit and gaze into the fire. In this connec-
tion , may I say to you that women who may look very busy are
not always the progressive women. It is rather an extraordinary
statement to make that I do not know a better place to develop
ideas than sitting in an easy chair looking into the fire. If one
looked at the things our men, our husbands, do when they come
home. They sit and smoke and apparently rest, but lam not at
all sure that they are not creating an atmosphere that makse ideas
come to them by magic. If any one of us, by looking into the


fire, or anywhere else, can get a vision of doing something, we
must then leave the easy chair and the fire on one side and rouse
ourselves up and get into the job with all our energy. We all
know, whether in England or in the Colonies, that nothing suc-
ceeds anywhere like success. We have got to train our judgment
so that we think right at the right time. If we do not, we do
not meet with commercial prosperity.
Speaking as an EMPLOYER, that is one of the points for the
time being that I want to stress. I want to say to you that if a
job is sound financially, it will last for all time, but if a job is,
as Mrs. Cameron Swan said a few minutes ago, a rich man’s
hobby, that may or may not last according to the individual who
is working.
COMMONSENSE is, of course, the greatest asset to a woman
in business. Sentiment must be put on one side. Sentiment is
like jewels, one is all right in the right place, but it is bad taste
and bad business at the wrong time.
I happen to be engaged in the house-building trade. This is
a line of business in which finance plays a most important part,
and therefore you will understand why I stress finance. I need
not talk to you about the difficulties of hard work, and especially
to you from the Colonies, there is plenty of hard work but the job
is fascinating. At the moment, lam engaged on a scheme which
is nearing completion, that is in a district that eighteen months
ago I had never heard the name of, and during these eighteen
months about 160 houses have been erected, and I think it would
be fair to say that about 140 of them are occupied ; it only needs
about another ten houses to clear the Estate.
Difficulties have to be met and overcome; huge financial loads
have to be carried on occasions, risks have to be taken, but of
course, one’s commodity helps a great deal in any work. I
always look upon business as being rather like an obstacle race.
If an obstacle comes in my way, I have to get over it. If I was
giving advice I would say to many who get almost to the last
ditch, be quite sure you are at the last ditch.
So far as labour conditions are concerned, of course after all
that is one of the things vou would want to know something about.
I have not found the SLIGHTEST DIFFICULTY IN DEALING
WITH MEN. My wage bill usually is from £4OO to £SOO per
week. I knew that we employ Trade Unionists. Ido not ask
them what they are when I take them on. I start them on their
work and let them get on with the job. This is a large point
nowadays of course, when factory ideals and welfare work counts
more than it did a generation ago. All of us who are in business
naturally want to give to our people the best conditions we can.
We want to look after their bodies as well as it is possible to do so.
Having done that we have another difficulty. Whatever business
we go into we must not play ducks and drakes with it. We must
remember that having looked after the workpeople, seeing that
they have a decent job, we must play fair to our creditors, and we


must not do anything that would endanger their position and bring
discredit to women that are going into business.
I know that you people have been rather hurried this after-
noon, and therefore I do not want to stand too long before you,
except to say I went into the building trade without any know-
ledge of it. There was a great shortage of houses and people were
spending the whole of their time in manufacturing and selling
substitutes for brick, but as you know, great quantities of this
substitute can only be manufactured by the consent of the Trades
Unions concerned. But in spite of all, and without any training,
I decided to have a plunge in 1925. We now have about four or
five hundred houses. I think, of course, now, that I must see if
I cannot make house building my career for all time. I can
assure you that whatever I have done every woman should be
able to do, provided they will make it a FULL TIME JOB. I
think it was Mark Twain who said “Put all your eggs in one
basket for the time being and watch that basket. ’ 5
Miss Stewart (Wholesale and Retail Manufacturer, Aus-
tralia) : The speeches of my fellow sisters this morning have taken
me right back to the early days of my career. I want to tell you
this is my first visit to London. They say when an Australian
first gets to Trafaglar Square and then walks down the Strand,
he is disappointed if the pavements do not rise up and bow to
him. That may be true of an Australian, but I would like to tell
you that my impression of London is this, that if I had a thousand
years to live, and if I lived these thousand years in London, I
would never get used to it: London with its amazing open spaces,
the completeness of London is overwhelming, all of this has gone
to make the place so sacred to me that it would never become fam-
iliar to me.
In getting down to my subject—WOMEN AS EMPLOYERS
—it was my desire to travel that compelled me to start business. I
knew I could never marry a millionaire or come into a fortune. I
happened to be a tailoress, and lam not ashamed to tell you that
I had my 13th birthday in a factory; I have been working in a
factory since and lam working in a factory to-day. lam work-
ing WITH my staff to-day instead of my staff working with me. I
feel that they are working WITH me and not FOR me, because I
have never ceased to work, and naturally working in a business
and being a tailoress, I have felt the prejudice against a woman in
business and doubly so because tailoring is a man’s trade.
I won trust by working early in the morning and late at night.
I had to make stuff for the week, travel from door to door with
a hamper and collect £l2 or £ls, come back and make them
for the next week. I want to tell you too that everything
went to pay wages, and it was hard to find the wages that had to
be paid each week.
And now, when we come to prejudice, I must say that I
believe with all my heart that it is possible for a woman if she
puts the right price upon herself and she is worth that price,


to get it. Every man will pay it, and I have proved it. I
suppose there is not a business man in Perth who wculd
not come to my assistance. I will give you instances as to how
men have helped me. The first three years were very strenuous.
It reminded me of the time when I went to school trying to get
the dent out of a ball while it kept appearing in another place —
robbing Peter to pay Paul. Everybody that came to see Miss
Stewart wanted to know when she was going to pay them. Well,
to give honour where honour is due, I must recognise what this
man did for me. I was walking down the street one day when I
met him and he said I had a-face as long as a coffee pot. I said,
“So would you if you were £ls short of your wages.” He said,
‘ ‘Come with me and I will give you a cheque, ” I went to his
office, he wrote out the cheque and passed it to me and said ‘ ‘Here
you are, pay me back when you can, ss. a week will do me.”
That is one instance.
Another day I was discussing my troubles with a
man when he said “What would you do if you had money,
how much would you like.” I said, “About £80.” He said
“Send up to me and I will give it to you”. I said “Very well,
if you are prepared to risk it Ido not mind. ” I sent my boy
along to get this cheque. After a while, I was called to the tele-
phone, and I heard this man say, “Your boy is here ; if you want
twice £BO you can have it, or three times. ” I said, ‘ ‘Well, make
it double.”
I have in mind another instance, and that is one of the
merchants in Western Australia. One Christmas Eve I did not
know where to get my wages, so I went to see if I could collect a
cheque from this gentleman. He was enjoying himself with his
friends, but he came to me and said, ‘ ‘What do you want. ” I
said “I want my cheque.” He said, “This is Christmas Eve
and I am with my friends, I will send you your cheque.” But I
said I could not go back to my staff and say I had no wages for
them on Christmas Eve, and I got my cheque.
Well, as time went on, people began to recognise me for my
work. I have in mind a man who came from Melbourne with
stuff to sell. I said, “It is no use, I cannot have any of your
stuff, I am bankrupt and I would be taking it under false pre-
tences . ’’ He asked to see the stuff I was buying, and told me he
could do much better than that, and that he would send me £4O
of stuff when he got back. Well, he sent me £3OO worth and told
me to pay everybody else first and leave him to the last.
I mention these things, because I think it quite right that I
should. My business experience has proved to me at least that
the HONEST MEN in a community WILL ALWAYS LEND A
HAND and help the woman who does her best and tries to get on
in the right way.
I found it very hard working with the Arbitration Courts
and the Factories Acts and the different rules and regulations,
and I started to exercise my mind and wonder how to improve my


position, and I found that the only way was to MANUFACTURE
MY OWN STUFF. I picked on a site in Mary Street in Perth for
my factory, and then I tackled my bank, and took round plans and
specifications and gave an outline of what I could do, etc. They
asked me how much did I want, and I said “Seven thousand. ”
It was a large order and the Bank Manager hesitated, but in the
end said he would put it to the Board. The next day 1 had a
telephone message from the Manager to say I was a lucky woman :
the Bank was going to stick to me on my MORAL SECURITY.
To-day, I have heard a lot about the betterment of women,
and lam with you there. I believe that men and women should
work under the best possible conditions, but I am more concerned
about the time that a girl spends from 5 to 10 o’clock after she
leaves work. I would like when talking of work to talk about the
LOVE OF WORK and the COMPENSATIONS of work and not
about the IRKSOMENESS of work, and this is what I want to
bring about. I pay £3OO a week in wages, and I have left that
staff without putting anyone over them and I know they will stick
to me while lam away. When they said farewell to me, I told
them they could only tell me what they thought of me by the
work they did in my absence.
Speaking of women as employers I see no reason in the world
why women should not be just as successful as men in almost any
line of business. To my mind SEX DOES NOT ENTER upon
the question. Success depends upon the man or the woman.
Success in any business only means straight dealing, constant
application to work and common sense.
When I think of the interests work has given me, the friend-
ships I have made, the men and girls I have worked with, hearing
all their troubles and their joys, I wonder why people talk about
the monotony of work. Does a mother who is cooking for her
little son and doing the same things day after day for him think
of the monotony of it. Oh no: she is thinking of him as Prime
Minister one day.
I believe it is not many years ago since the male members of
our families thought it a disgrace for their daughters and sisters
to go to work, I would like to hasten the day when it is believed a
DISGRACE FOR A WOMAN NOT TO WORK, because I believe
it is work that brings all the wonderful compensations of life and
is the compensation that help us
To see a world in a grain of sand,
And heaven in a wild flower;
To hold infinity in the palm of your hand
And eternity in an hour.
Miss Partridge (Electrical Engineer, Great Britain). It
has been extremely interesting to me to listen to the speakers-
who have gone before me. It is a great pleasure to meet other
women employers, because of course there are not many of us.
and it is nice to come together, though I do think the considera


tion of women as employers should not really be discussed by tho
employers, but should be discussed by the employees. It would
be most instructive to us to hear what our staff think of women
employers. Now, legally and for general practical purposes,
it makes very little difference whether you are a man or a woman.
I consider that women have exactlv the SAME PRIVILEGES
AND OPPORTUNITIES AS EMPLOYERS as men have.
As employees, it is different, there are laws for men and laws
for women, but with employers, there are none. So that the real
consideration of a woman as an employer comes down to the
question of the human consideration In the matter cf law she
is not different from a man. As a human being, she is different,
and therefore it is the HUMAN problem and not the LEGAL
problem we have to consider.
Now, to-day, I had the pleasure of having lunch with a man
in my profession, of whom you have all heard. He was in
England absolutely the first Electrical Engineer in the land, and
he said to me, “Now, Miss Partridge, I will tell you something,
the way to be successful as an employer is to rule by love. Unless
your staff have confidence in you and will do things for you because
they like you, you will never succeed.” He said that quite
spontaneously and he was really discussing his own staff. I was
very interested in this little announcement. Another well-
known celebrated woman employer said to me about twelve
months ago. “Do you know, I think really the difference
between a man and a woman employer is that a woman is obliged
to rule by love whereas many men rule by fear. I always con-
sider our method the best though sometimes I begin to doubt it.”
I do not think she did doubt it, but wherever you go, you get
snags. But it comes back to this that the best way in any case
is to rule by love and the only way for a woman. She cannot rule
by fear. Her staff do things because they like the work, they
enjoy it because SHE WORKS WITH THEM and that is the
secret.
Now some women say , I have heard it said, that they cannot
get on because they are women, but Ido not honestly think there is
any woman these days who need say that. It may be true in the
past; when I first started there were certainly signs of sex diffi-
culties. But it is not true now; a woman who can do her job
need not worry. There are admittedly a few men who have said,
‘ T would not work under a woman, I should lose my self-respect.’ ’
Such a man is not really worth employing anywhere, so we lose
nothing. A good workman will work for anybody and the poor
workman will let the others have him.
Mrs. Marshall Hole (Rhodesia): The Colony of which I
speak to you is the youngest of all the Oversea Dependencies of
the Crown, being only thirty-nine years old. In that thirty-
nine years Southern Rhodesia has gathered to herself a white
population of more than forty thousand. You will readily


understand that in a new Colony possessing such a comparatively
small white population among roughly a million natives, the
openings for women employers of labour are few and far between,
Thi does not mean that there are no openings But it means
that a woman who goes to Rhodesia with the intention of starting
any sort of an enterprise must consider very carefully the position
before she goes out, and when she does go, she must regard herself
in the light of a pioneer and her enterprise as something of an
experiment.
The main industries of Rhodesia are MINING AND AGRI-
CULTURE. For some reason —and in these days I really don’t
know why it should *be so —women have not shown any great
interest in the mining profession. I only know of one, Miss Bow-
ditch, of Gwelo, who worked a small mining property entirely on
her own in that district. But I can see no reason why women
might not do very well in essay and laboratory work.
In agriculture I can point to a few women who have made
good in spite of the special difficulties which surround a woman
running a farm or ranch single-handed, where it is necessary for her
to employ native labour, because we have not yet been able to
break down the TRADITIONAL DISLIKE of African natives to
taking orders from a woman. Another great handicap is the isola-
tion of many farms and the distance to be traversed in going from
one to another or in getting to town, but this is rapidly being
diminished by motor roads and will I hope before long be still
further reduced by the use of aeroplanes. Yet in spite of such
difficulties, women have succeeded in the past and we hope that
many more will succeed in the future. Last year among the South
African and Rhodesian farmers who visited England was Mrs.
Worthington, who is farming on a considerable scale in Rhodesia,
and so definitely making good that she was chosen as a delegate.
Now considering openings for women in business, it must be
remembered that certain trades such as laundry work and market-
gardening are in the hands of a low class alien population, but
there remain many in some of which women have already made a
definite place for themselves, and in others the opportunity still
remains waiting to be grasped.
Already there are several millinery and dress shops in the
towns owned by women who are doing very well, and as the white
population of Rhodesia increases (as it is doing steadily and
continuously) there will be more and more openings. Good
nursing homes pay well and boarding houses run especially for
women workers such as secretaries and teachers are badly needed.
And that reminds me, lam informed that a secretarial college run
on thoroughly modern lines would stand a good chance of success.
I also want to tell you of Miss Cruickshank, who started a
few years ago a FRUIT DRYING FACTORY near Melsetter,
which, although it is the greatest fruit-growing district is still over
a hundred miles from the railway. Yet she is making a success of


her venture, and there should be room for others to follow where
she has led.
In conclusion I should like to add that Rhodesia is a country
where women are given a fair —almost an equal —chance with
men, to prove their competence in industry, and as the country
goes ahead there will be more and more opportunities for women
employers of labour,
Mrs. O’Regan (Decorator, Great Britain), I employ
women only in my firm of women decorators. We are all women
and we all work together. We do not employ men unless we
are obliged to, because we are quite a new profession and there
are not very many women. But, of course, this is rather strange
to me, because after all, the house and the home have always
been considered women’s sphere, and who can be more qualified
to judge what is nice in the house and home than a woman.
Women have always done a good deal of their own decorating,
papering and whitewashing, but until just lately, women have
not taken it up professionally. People say to us women,
“Is it true that your women do ceilings and climb up ladders,”
I think it is absurd. Of course they do. They do exactly
the same work as men do, paper, white-wash, enamel, etc.,
and they do it quite as well as men, their work is good and con-
scientious. We had a GREAT DRAWBACK by this LEAD
POISON ACT, the prevention of the use of lead paint by women.
It came into force last year, and it deprives all women from using
this white lead paint. They allow women who are already
decorators to go on using it, but all new apprentices and pupils are
not allowed to do so. Of course, the question of whether white
lead poisons, does not come into the point at all. WE WANT
EQUAL OPPORTUNITIES WITH MEN. If men are allowed
to use, women should be allowed to use it too. Of course, white
lead poison is a very terrible disease, but I think it is somewhat
exaggerated. Given good conditions and facilities for washing
and keeping clean, there is very little danger. Our women are
very happy and healthy, and all like their work and have improved
in health. Medically, they say, a woman is, if anything, less
susceptible to lead poisoning than a man. Why should they be
handicapped in this way? It makes it extremely hard for us,
because in the decorating of houses, some of our women use white
paint and the others are not allowed to use it.
The only thing I can add is, decorating being such a
new fashion, very few people know anything about us. A
woman decorator is quite a rarity, and unless we advertise and
make a great stir we cannot get enough work. But Ido think
it is up to all women who are interested in this question to
SUPPORT WOMEN’S LABOUR. Give a woman a trial and if
anyone asks you what you think of her work, you can say. But
I do think this is one of the COMING PROFESSIONS for women
and the most suitable they can enter.


Mrs. Clegg (Farmer, Australia): Having lived most of my
life in the Commonwealth of Australia and the Dominion of New
Zealand, I have come to the cone us ion that there is nothing so
uncertain as the position in those countries of an Employer of
Labour. Speaking from the point of view of one who has lived
far away from Great Britain, no doubt my point of view is quite
different from that of people who iive here. But Australia and
New Zealand, although thousands of miles away, keep in touch
daily with the British Isles and the inhabitants of those distant
countries look upon Great Britain as the centre of the Empire in
the same way that a very large and very interested audience in the
theatre watch the small stage in the limelight. I wonder if you
realise how closely the inhabitants of the Dominions watch all
the events that take place in Great Britain or if you realise how
faithful y we imitate the mode of living of people in England,
ENGLISH HOME LIFE is the IDEAL of every British woman in
whatever pajrt of the Empire she may live and the fact that
British women have established English homes in the Dominions
has made it possible for the Empire to keep the countries won for
us by our ancestors.
Speaking of country life in Australia and New Zealand, the
conditions of the present day are very similar, we imagine, to the
life that was led by our ancestors in England some years ago,
when all the food they ate was grown and produced on their own
estates and farms. In the country, we see the food growing up
round the homestead, the vegetables in the garden, the dairy
cows in the paddocks to give us mi k, butter and cream, and the
lambs grazing near the homestead for our meat supply, also our
hens in their up to-date semi-intensive houses to give us eggs
and make a change from a perpetual diet of lamb and mutton.
The woman in the country has to be able to go out and look over
a lamb and say, “Yes, I will have it killed on Friday and it
will feed the household for five days.” Not only that, but in
time of harvesting or any labour shortage on the estate, she has
to be able to be her own butcher and go into the meat house and
cut up the lamb into all the usual well known joints.
In fact a woman who employs labour in this country MUST
KNOW A GREAT DEAL: she must know the actual work of the
people she employs, and in many cases be able to take the place
herself of missing employees, if the estate is to be carried on
successfully. Two reasons why she must be so experienced are
because nowadays she must be able to teach her employee how
to carry out his or her duties properly, and because she may be
short-handed, and have to take her place beside all the other
workers. The wages of all labour in Australia and New Zealand
are at a much higher rate than wages in Great Britain. But
receiving a high wages does not always mean that an employee is
a skilled workman or workwoman.
Australia and New Zealand are new countries FULL OF
OPPORTUNITIES for making money, and many of the in


habitants will take a situation in good employment receiving
high wages and giving satisfaction in their work. Then one day,
they say to the owner of the Estate :“I ’ll be moving on. ” Many
people think they might be the lucky ones, and by constantly
moving on find the short cut to prosperity and escape the hum-
drum work on the land.
At present, two-thirds of the whole population of Australia
are living in the large cities and the COUNTRY is STARVED for
PEOPLE, and naturally there are far more men than women in
the country places. In the State of Queensland alone, there are
40,000 more men than women. Very many of these men have to
provide and cook their own food and their meals are usually
breakfast, grilled chops and tomato sauce —Dinner, Tomato
sauce and grilled chops, and for a change for tea, grilled chops
and tomato sauce. So when a woman is content to live in the
country and take up the task of helper and home-maker for the
men, she receives great respect and consideration frpm the people
she has to emp'oy. But —and there is always a But in being an
employer of labour —high wages and short hours leave all the
employed people with much spare time on their hands and money
to spend, and how can work on the land compete with the excite-
ment of the innumerable Race Courses in the cities for the men and
the equally numerous cinemas and Dance Palais for the women.
Labour for the land is particularly hard to obtain and the Em-
ployer of Labour has usually a very busy life, trying to make a
successful home in the country and this gives rise to the question
so often heard: Do people have to work so hard in Australia and
New Zealand.
These conditions show that there are many openings for
women in Australia and New Zea and if they are prepared to
learn the profession they want to take up before starting to
practice it. Domestic work has many openings; Bee-keeping
and growing flowers are two professions carried on by many
women already. Poultry farming is a very paying profession,
entailing constant work and supervision; Fruit farming is another
pursuit shared by women. Some go in for small diary farms to
provide country town shops with milk. But to carry on any
of these professions, the owner of the estate MUST KNOW HER
WORK and be able to help the labour she employs by example and
words. It is difficult to interest young men and young women in
country occupations for any length of time, and the employer of
labour after a succession of changes and training new employees
sometimes loses heart and says she would rather do all the work
herself. But this only leads to over-work when put into practice,
and not only scientific knowledge but infinite patience is required
to be a successful employer of labour.
In Australia and New Zealand, the conditions of life are not
difficult for the educated and trained woman. But for a woman
untrained in Domestic Economy, they are often overwhelming.
In an attempt to prevent many young women from becoming


overwhelmed and delicate by the duties thrust upon them in
these countries which are thinly populated, a friend of mine made
a will. leaving £20,000 to the Women’s Hostel of a University in a
large city in Australia, on CONDITION that EVERY WOMAN
student took a course of DOMESTIC ECONOMY as well as the
other subjects she was studying. There w T as an outcry at once
against this condition; many of the women students wanted to be
exactly like the men students and do one course only, leaving out
Domestic Economy. But finally the money was accepted on the
condition stated, and no doubt those young women will be grate-
ful to the giver of the money when it is their turn to employ labour
to help them in the professions they choose, because it is quite cer-
tain they must eat to live, and it is quite uncertain that they will
always find food provided for them. In Australia and New
Zealand, where labour is such an uncertain quantity, to
have the art of Domestic Economy at one’s finger ends is the first
necessity of every woman who chooses to live there.
Mrs. Proud (The Feminist Club, Sydney): It is my pleasure
and my privilege this afternoon, on behalf of the delegates here,
to thank you very sincerely and very thoroughly for what I should
think was one of the finest Conferences and one of the most charm-
ing and businesslike Chairmen I have ever had the privilege of
sitting under. That the business has been conducted in such a
wonderful and such a businesslike way, we can thank Mrs. Corbett
Ashby, especially as the time limit is perfectly splendid; that the
amount of work these delegates have done and the wonderful
information we have one and all received must make us all feel
to-day that our progress is amazing. When we have women
like Mrs. Corbett Ashby who will preside over these Conferences,
and have delegates to come from different parts of the Empire to
give us their experience and their knowledge, we know that the
unanimity of women knows no bounds and that our work in the
future will be a success, and to-day we do realise the amount
that has been achieved and can look forward to the future as
assured, and it is to be hoped that with such a future in our
hands we will use it, not only commercially, but spiritually.
Women are more spiritual than men, and we have in our
hands and before us such a wonderful privilege that I hope w r e
will all take it as seriously and as sincerely as we can, that we may
hand on something that will make the world better for
women’s work in it.
On behalf of the delegates, Mrs. Corbett Ashby, I wish most
sincerely to offer you our thanks and our admiration.
Miss Sen (India): I would like very much to second that
proposal of Mrs. Proud’s. Ido not know anyone who is more
eminently fitted to Chair this Conference than Mrs. Corbett
Ashby. This Conference, as we all know, stands for the principles
of women.
I have had the opportunity of meeting our Chairman several
times and I know that her interest in international problems does


not end with business. I know too that Mrs. Corbett Ashby is a
Libera] in the right sense of the word. I have watched closely
her study of many problems and my heart has gone out to her,
because I have realised that she not only supports the claims of
women against men, but of men and men and of race and race,
and ..therefore, it is a very great pleasure indeed to support this
vote of thanks to our Chairman.
Mrs. Corbett Ashby in closing the Conference made an
appeal to all those present to support the League financially so
that the work could be extended.
The Conference then closed.
SOCIAL FUNCTIONS.
The Social Functions attendant on the Conference were of
special interest. At Crosby Hall on the evening of July sth, a
brilliant reception was held, and the Viscountess Astor, M.P.,
Mrs. Corbett Ashby, Mrs. Garble McDonnell, M.P., and Miss
Sterling spoke. The Hall was crowded and we had a great many
distinguished guests.
The Dinner at the Criterion Restaurant on July 6th was well
attended, and our guests Lord Olivier, Lady Heath, General
McMunn, and Mrs. Corbett Ashby who presided, greatly interested
those present by their speeches.
On July 7th a large party motored to Jordans, by kind
invitation of Mrs. Percy Bigland, and en route visited the lovely
grounds of Cliveden by the kind courtesy of the Viscountess
Astor, M.P.
