

EMPIRE LITERATURE SOCIETY
<B> <B>
ADDRESS BY
MAJOR-GENERAL SIR C. B. B. WHITE
K.C.M.G.
CHIEF OF GENERAL STAFF
COMMONWEALTH MILITARY FORCES
ENTITLED
“Some Reflections upon
the Great War”
On Friday, Ist April, 1921, at St. James’ Hall, Sydney
iJjimejr:
William Homer, Printer, 29 Cunningham St.


?
; ,', V t :
’
V.
4»
/
—


Empire Literature Society
Patrons:
His Excellency
The Right Hon. HENRY WILLIAM FORSTER,
P.C., G.C.M.G.,
Governor-General.
His Excellency
Sir WALTER DAVIDSON, K.C.M.G.,
Governor of New South Wales.
The Right Hon. W. M. HUGHES, P.C„
Prime Minister of Australia.
The Hon. Sir WILLIAM CULLEN, K.C.M.G.,
LL.D.,
Chief Justice
Chancellor of the University of Sydney.
President:
The Hon. George Earp, C.8.E., M.L.C.
Committee:
Lieut-General G. L. Lee, C.M.G., D.S.O.
His Honor Judge Backhouse, M.A.
Professor Sir T. W. Edgeworth David,
K.8.E., C.M.G., D.Sc., D.S.O.
Brig.-General J. Lamrock, C. 8., V.D.
Brig.-General R. E. Roth, C.M.G., D. 5.0., V.D.
The Hon. Sir Thos. Hughes, M.L.C.
Lieut.-Colonel J. H. Strong, V.D,
Captain Chaplain Colwell.
Mrs. W. A. Holman.
Professor W. E. Cooke, M.A.
Government Astronomer
Mrs. George Earp
Mr. John Sulman, F.R.1.8.A.
Mrs. G. L. Lee.;
Mr. William Gillanders, B.A.
Mrs. John Waugh.
Mr. H. C. Macfie, F.C.P.A.
Professor M. W. MacCallum, M.A., LL.D.
Sir William McMillan, K.C.M.G.
Mr. Peter Board, C.M.G., M.A.
Director of Education.
Hon. Secretary:
Lieut.-Colonel J. H. Strong, V.D.


The Empire Literature Society
HAS FOR ITS OBJECTS
The dissemination of knowledge regarding the Empire
and national affairs.
The promotion of patriotism and a love of the Empire.
The union in fraternal bonds of the peoples of Great
Britain and the Dominions.
“ The British Empire is founded on honour and
affection, having above all for its basis the essential
principle of freedom.”
—Gladstone.
“One Life, one Flag, one Fleet, one Throne,
Britons, hold your own.”
—Tennyson.


Empire Literature Society
MEMBERSHIP APPLICATION FORM (Please detach)—
I beg to apply for membership of the Empire Literature Society.
Enclosed is the sum of
Subscription .... .... .... .... .... .... .... •2 * 6
Donation ( optional )
Total .... .... .... .... .... .... £
{Signed)...-.
The Hon. Secretary,
Empire Literature Society,
Atlas Buildings,
8 Spring Street, Sydney.
Rule 3of the Constitution provides : That the subscription shall be not


“Some Reflections upon the Great War”
Address by Major-General Sir C. B. B. White, K.C.M.G.,
Chief of the General Staff, Australian Commonwealth
Military Forces, to Members of the Empire Literature
Society, on Friday the Ist April, 1921, at St. James’
Hall, Sydney.
His Excellency The Right Honorable Henry William
Forster, P.C., G.C.M.G., Governor - General of the
Commonwealth of Australia, in the chair.
I am much obliged to the Empire Literature Society for
the privilege they have extended to me, I owe them some
apology for being so tardy in fulfilling their request. Long
ago they made me the invitation, which, unfortunately, I was
unable to accept earlier. With that persistency and resolution
which are British characteristics, they have held me to my
promise.
My intention is to submit for your consideration certain
reflections upon the Great War, mainly affecting the operations
in Gallipoli. I speak with some hesitation. Principles
governing the direction of war are constant; their application
is governed by means and by conditions. The circumstances
affecting any one Campaign are unlikely to be repeated.
Deductions from a single operation, or a single campaign, are
apt, therefore, to be misleading. Moreover, there is in each
one of us a natural tendency to make conclusions upon a
superficial survey. A close and laborious study is essential
to the extraction of true lessons; and, alas, in this country
few of us have the leisure or composure for thorough investiga-
tion. As far as time, facts and data admit, I have endeavoured
to avoid the sin of superficiality.
Before touching upon the Gallipoli Campaign, I wish to
refer to two or three matters of general interest, and firstly
to draw attention to the state of unpreparedness of the British
Empire for war in 1914. Ido so, not with the intention of
criticising governments or policies, but with the aim of bringing
to your notice a great danger, and one not easily avoidable in


great democracies. For some years prior to 1914 war clouds
darkened the horizon. Yet in 1906/7 British policy definitely
declared that the British Army was not maintained for opera-
tions in Europe. In 1911 a storm almost burst. It was
only averted by the definite statement of the British Cabinet
that in certain circumstances Britain would not refrain from
taking any steps necessary for the preservation of her honour
and the fulfilment of her obligations. And yet, even after that
firm declaration, and despite our tacit arrangement with France,
no change was made in military policy, nor does it appear that
the probable effects of British policy were candidly placed
before the public.
It is hard to understand this, and yet the fact remains.
Even Lord Roberts, who correctly read the writing on the wall,
did not dare to urge, as the basis of his plea for compulsory
service, that in the event of war our intervention on the Con-
tinent would be obligatory. In lesser countries, lesser in
stature and lesser in experience, excuse might be offered for a
failure to confide in the public the trend of policy, and its
probable results. The lessons of history' were apparently
disregarded.
It is interesting briefly to glance back and observe the long
process of instruction of the British people in European inter-
vention. From the earliest times there has been effort on the
part of nations to achieve a European supremacy. But the
principle of nationality as we understand it now, a principle,
mark you, that is firmly established, did not really come into
eixstence until after the Religious Wars of the 16th and 17th
centuries. Out of the development of the ideal of nationalism,
there grew, by a tacit understanding between nations, entirely
in their own selfish defensive interests, a doctrine 'of the
Balance of Power in Europe. It was a simple doctrine, and
merely meant that if any power threatened the independence
of another nation, the rest of Europe would combine against
it. The aims of the League of Nations are not entirely dis-
similar. In its case, however, the doctrine is defined in a
1 ‘ Scrap of Paper. ” The doctrine was not in all cases given
a practical application. Even in recent times Britain has
looked on whilst the doctrine was being denied. To wit:
British action during the partition of Poland in the 18th
Century, the breaking up of Denmark in 1864, and the con-
fiscation of Alsace and Lorraine in 1871. It is true, perhaps,
that these were not all great wars, but they certainly all did
jeopardise the peace of Europe, and consequently the balance
of power. Why, then, did Great Britain stand aloof?


We had better acknowledge the truth at once. Nations
will not go to war unless their own interests are vitally and
definitely threatened. Britain understood clearly the principle
of the maintenance of the balance of power. She failed
frequently to act in accordance with the principle, but when-
ever her own safety was threatened she was ultimately decisively
present. This sounds as an accusation of selfishness; as a
matter of fact Britain was following a natural law, and not
merely acting perfidiously in malice prepense.
What one finds it hard to understand as a conclusion is,
that the doctrine of the balance of power should, in the years
prior to 1914, have practically faded into the mists of the
nations’ memory. And even if there be excuse for the neglect
of the doctrine, how came it that the British public had become
insensitive to the knowledge that a European War might easily,
and in all probability would, threaten the Empire’s existence?
Such a knowledge was almost an intuitive deduction from our
experiences regarding the application of the principle of the
balance of power. If these lapses of memory and lack of
sensitiveness are failings of democracy, is there not in democ-
racy’s own interest something needed to repair the deficiency?
If to influence democracy simple and strong popular beliefs are
needed, is there not a great fear that truth may be hidden?
Coming nearer home, cannot similar deductions be drawn.
The rumblings of distant thunder were not unheard in Aus-
tralia, and yet evidences are not lacking that they were equalk*
disregarded, and the public were unaware of the demands which
might be made upon them; and worse, for when the storm broke,
improvisation in meeting those demands was forced upon it.
I repeat that it is not my desire to criticise policies or
governments. In all probability the people of the Empire
would not have concurred in a firmer or more decisive policy—
in the circumstances.
It is easy to say that the matter is settled by the education
of the public. The public have a way, which, truth to tell, is
perhaps more often right than wrong, of educating themselves.
I am only able to establish myself as a finger-post pointing out
the difficulties in the path. I wish that I could suggest a
panacea. But in leaving the solution of the problem in your
hands, and it rests with the thinking public, may I express what
appear to me to be three essential factors—candidness, con-
sistency, and courage.


There are two other matters for mention before beginning
on our study of Gallipoli. The first is that of training.
Before the war divergent views existed as to the amount of
training required, particularly of non-regular troops. The
divergencies have now all departed, for definite data is avail-
able.' The public should know this. It is more than wrong
that men should be put into battle imperfectly trained. I
have many bitter recollections of the war, and “they who have
seen the reaping, shall go quietly all their days.” But no
recollection is more bitter than the complaints of the men
themselves that they had not had sufficient training to give
them a fair chance. That complaint was made to me bitterly
before the battle of Lone Pine, and in such few hours that re-
mained to us efforts were made to repair the deficiency. But
time was not available, and the need of men was great, and
ever, in consequence, rests upon our consciences a deep sense
of the responsibility incurred.
Onq hopes most earnestly that wars hereafter may be
avoided. But hope of itself will not be an effective deterrent,
and, whilst the risk is present, a nation such as Australia, which
relies upon her citizen manhood for her protection, will be fail-
ing in her duty if she does not see that those citizens whom she
wishes to defend her are adequately prepared for their task.
The second point is this: This war demonstrated that, properly
trained and properly led, a citizen army is an effective instru-
ment for the fulfilment of national policy. The many
glorious pages of British history contain none more glorious
than the achievements of Australia’s national soldiery. But
unless adequate preparations are made beforehand, it takes
time to develop the strength of such a machine. And time in
war is not always available. Australia is committed, and I
believe wisely, to a policy of citizen defence. But do you, the
citizens of Australia, realise that not upon the Government, not
upon your handful of professional soldiers, but upon your own
shoulders rests the responsibility of making your force an
efficient one? How many of you are really interested in it?
To how many of you,is its organisation, training and prepara-
tion for war, a matter of concern ? May I warn you now that,
if in a time of trial, which God forbid shall ever occur, the
need for the employment of your forces should arise, the
responsibility that it is equal to the task is yours, and the
burden cannot be shifted to other shoulders.
I am now free to turn to the Gallipoli Campaign; it is of
veiy special interest to us in Australia. A Commission made


some investigation into the operations there, but I doubt if
many people have studied the origin carefully, and made a
clear deduction as to what was right, and what was wrong.
Gallipoli has always been regarded as a great adventure, and
generally speaking, it has been regarded also as a great failure.
It is very doubtful if either conclusion is correct.
You will remember that we were not at war with Turkey
until the 31st October, 1914. The entry of the Goeben and
Breslau past the Dardanelles must, however, have indicated to
those in authority that Turkey had some understanding with
Germany. If not before the outbreak of war, therefore, one
must assume that at all events between August and October
someone, somewhere, must or should have been earnestly- busy
in considering possible courses of action? The assistance we
could give to Russia by dominating Constantinople was obvious.
. . . (The Bosphorus, and not the Dardanelles, is, of course, the
true goal.) By holding the Bosphorus we could assure to
Russia the means of exporting agricultural produce and im-
porting war needs. It also cut the Sultan’s Dominions in
two, and there is no doubt but that the fall of Constantinople
would have a great effect on the Mahomedan world, and also
upon the Balkan States. A possibility of such great promise
deserved very thorough study.
The Navy began operations against the Dardanelles early
in November. Exactly why, it is difficult to ascertain. The
orders emanated solely from the Admiralty. On the 13th
December a submarine entered the Straits. At the end of
November the question of an attack or a feint against the
Dardanelles was considered and deferred.
On the 2nd January, 1915, the circumstances were entirely
changed by an urgent request from Russia for a demonstration
against Turkey. The object was to relieve serious pressure on
Russian forces in Trans-Caucasia by a temporarily superior
Ottoman Army. On 3rd January, in response to this appeal,
assistance was promised. This, therefore, was the first stage
in the “affaire.”
On the 3rd January, Admiral Carden, who was command-
ing the naval forces in the vicinity of the Dardanelles, was
asked whether he could force the Straits. He replied that
they could not be rushed, but that they might be forced by
extended operations. His more definite plan contemplated
operations extending over a month. On the 13th January a
decision was reached by the War Council that a naval expedition
should, in February, bombard and attack the Gallipoli Penin-


sula, with Constantinople as its objective. Steps were at
once taken to secure the co-operation of the French fleet.
On the 28th January the decision to attack the Dardanelles
by ships alone was definitely confirmed.
It is convenient here to make some inquiry into and con-
clusion upon the soundness of this decision. We are not
without guidance from history. In 1878 Admiral Hornby
made a report upon this very subject on the occasion of a
naval demonstration against Constantinople, made with the
consent of the Ottoman Government. The Dardanelles were
forced by Sir John Duckworth in 1807. But after the success
it was found that the ships could not be provisioned, and as
the Straits —his communications —were not held, Duckworth
had to leave as hurriedly as he entered. In their operations
against Port Arthur the Japanese considered the employment
of military force in the assistance of the navy as an essential.
Naval attacks upon Sebastopol, and upon Lissa in 1866 were
not successful. True it is that the forts at Alexandria, and
Manilla, and the shore batteries at Tripoli, had succumbed to
naval attack, but these fortifications were distinctly ill-manned
and ill-gunned. The teaching of history is fairly clear that
a naval attack upon good or even modern fortresses is an
unequal contest, and naval and military authority did not hold
any illusions upon the subject. To my knowledge, the
problem had been considered by the War Office in 1906, when
it was held that a purely naval attack would not be justifiable,
and that a combined operation would be difficult and costly.
The following passage from the report is significant:—“Military
opinion, looking at the question from the point of view of coast
defence, will be in entire agreement with the naval view that
unaided action by the Fleet, bearing in mind the risks involved,
is much to be deprecated.” How came so unsound a decision
to be made, then?
The answer, it would appear, must be: Hastiness, and the
superficiality of the non-expert. The need for some action
was pressing; and military forces were not available. It had
been deduced from the campaign in France that modem
artillery, and modern appliances, plus air co-operation, had
permanently destroyed the value of field fortifications. The
fall of the forts at Liege and Namur were cited as examples;
and, of course, the power of ships’ armaments had greatly
increased since the period of historical examples. The deduc-
tion was false; and we are compelled to the conclusion that a
purely naval attack was unsound in conception.


Despite the definiteness of the decision of 28th January to
operate by naval forces alone, opinion as to the means by which
the objective was to be achieved seems at once to have under-
gone fundamental change. In the minds of all responsible,
the purely naval operation ceased to hold sway, and the need
of military forces became daily more apparent. On the 16th
February, apparently due to a memorandum written by Admiral
Sir Henry Jackson, the question of the employment of military
forces was seriously considered. Sir Henry Jackson’s minute
indicated that whatever the success of the Navy, strong landing
parties with strong covering forces would be necessary to
complete the destruction of the forts. A decision seems to
have been reached that the 29th Division, hitherto intended for
France, should be despatched to Lemnos at the earliest possible
date; that arrangements should be made for a force to be
despatched from Egypt if required; and that the Admiralty
should make provision for a landing of a force of 50,000 men
at any point where they might be required. The only reason
given for this decision was that the troops mentioned should be
available in case of necessity to SUPPORT the naval attack on
the Dardanelles. It must be remembered that at this time
the purely naval operation had not actually begun. The
decision of the 16th February, although action thereon was
suspended on the 20th February, was undoubtedly the genesis
of the joint naval and military enterprise against the Gallipoli
Peninsula, and it is passing strange that this new stage should
have been entered upon before any results had been achieved
from the previous decisions for naval operations only. No
evidence is forthcoming as to the data upon which the strength
of the military force required for its somewhat vague mission
was determined. The only forces available were evidently
selected.
The naval operations began seriously on 19th February.
They were continued on sth, 7th, and 18th March, and the
results were not encouraging, despite the excellent and gallant
endeavours of the Fleet. The glory of those endeavours will
probably never be fully appreciated, because the Navy has made
little of them. The War Council held meetings on the 19th.
24th, and 26th February, and at each of these the need of
military action loomed larger. It was, at these meetings, for
the first time asserted that if the Navy were not successful in
forcing the Dardanelles, an army must be employed for the
purpose. The decision to use military forces in an auxiliary
capacity was not, however, definitely changed. It was not
until the 10th March that the actual despatch of troops was,


officially authorised. There has been much criticism of the
delay. The cause probably was undue hopefulness that the
need for the employment of military forces would not arise,
moreover, the situation in France made the despatch of forces
elsewhere very doubtfuly wise. Sir lan Hamilton was
appointed to command the troops being assembled in the
neighbourhood of the Dardanelles on the 11th March. The
instructions given to him, and dated 13th March, are interest-
ing. His army was only to conduct minor operations in
support of the Fleet. There obviously existed, too, in the
mind of those at Home, an optimism that the real work of the
army would occur before Constantinople.
On the 23rd March, owing to naval and military repre-
sentations, the idea of purely naval attack was abandoned,
and operations were suspended until adequate military forces
could be assembled. Thus another stage was reached. The
army was no longer to be an auxiliary only; a great combined
operation was agreed upon to obtain the results previously
hoped for from naval action; and thoughts of the Bosphorus
seem to have faded into the background. It is significant
that there was no meeting of the War Council between 19th
March and 14th May.
References to our endeavours to obtain Greek assistance
for Serbia, and later the co-operation of Italy, have been
omitted from this brief survey. Important as they are, they
do not affect the foregoing general considerations, from which,
alas, one is forced to the conclusion that we “drifted” into a
joint naval and military operation.
Without much greater study, calculation and preparation
such an operation should not have been undertaken.
The total military forces available when the decision was
made were some 128,000 men, including a Russian Army Corps
of 47,600. This Russian Army Corps, assembled about
Odessa, was to be transported across the Black Sea to some-
where near the northern mouth of the Bosphorus, when, the
Dardanelles having been forced, a second stage of operations
should begin. There is something delightfully vague about
this. How this force of a foreign power was to co-operate in
the subsequent operations was, apparently, not given very deep
consideration.
No one seems to have made any careful compilation of the
Forces which would be necessary. The strength of the Turkish
Forces about the Dardanelles was estimated at some 40,000


men, with a reserve of 30,000 about Rodosto. Vaguely there
seems to have existed an idea that a force of some 150,000
would be quite adequate for the task. Sir lan Hamilton was
not, however, supplied with a force of this strength! No
calculations appear to have been made as to the strength of the
Forces necessary to continue the operations —should fortune
so favour us —about Constantinople.
We have concluded that a decision to achieve the purpose
in view by purely naval action was unsound. It must be
concluded also that we drifted into a combined operation with-
out any clearness of view or precision of calculation as to
means. Our “after the event” criticism thus far has been
destructive. But the need for some action in the East was
pressing, both from the political and strategical points of view.
We are bound, therefore, to see if our aims and obligations
could not have been fulfilled otherwise. As a matter of fact,
several courses were available by which the desired end might
perhaps have been attained. Firstly by reason of our com-
mand of the sea, and our power to occupy various islands in
the vicinity, a well organised “bluff” might have achieved
almost as much as an actual operation, for a certain period.
Secondly, there was, practically unprotected, the little port of
Alexandretta (in the Levant, in the Gulf of Alexandretta), the
nearest point on the Ottoman coast to those rough uplands
east of Erzerum, where the Russians were hard pressed. It
may be interesting to you to'know that whilst in Egypt the
Ist Australian Division actually prepared plans for a landing
at Alexandretta. This was Lord Kitchener’s consistent idea,
from which he seems only to have been diverted by the optim-
ism of the advocates of purely naval attack at the Dardanelles.
But, alas, even at that stage of the war we did not realise the
need for large forces, and the force actually contemplated
amounted only to a Brigade of Infantry and a proportion of
other arms!
A glance at the map will show that Alexandretta was a
place of much military significance. From there the occupation
of Aleppo would have been practicable, and the communications
of the forces in Assyria and Palestine, as well as to some extent
those in Mesopotamia, would have been effectually cut. More-
over, it was the true strategical area for the defence of Egypt.
However, after but a few days’ brief enjoyment of the con-
sideration of this problem, our thoughts were diverted to the
third alternative, namely, the conduct of combined operations
against the Turkish forces at Gallipoli.


Before passing to the consideration of the choice of landing
places, some comment is necessary upon the policy of diversions
or detachments. We seem to have had, throughout our history,
a chronic penchant for other chances than the main one. The
operations at the Dardanelles have been compared to Welling-
ton’s actions in the Peninsula. The analogy is hard to find.
Wellington was fighting Frenchmen, in Gallipoli we were
fighting Turks, not Germans. Look back at the French War
between 1792 and 1815, and you will find that whilst the
Austrians and the Russians were fighting the French in the
low countries, we were beating the air in seizing the French
West Indies. Again, in 1807, when Napoleon was hard put
to it in Poland, and the fortunes could easily have been changed
by a single British Army; we were busy, vainly, in trying to
seize the Spanish South American Colonies, Indeed, between
1794 and 1808, instead of acting on the Continent, we seem to
have been frittering away our strength in aimless diversions.
It is difficult to assign reasons for our action, but involuntarily
it is borne in upon us that in time of war Governments are
always seeking short cuts to attain decisions. Abraham Lin-
coln suffered similarly—until he was disillusioned, when he
manfully gave up the task. The same thing will probably
happen again—indeed more than probably, for in national
wars the control of war is somewhat incumbent upon the
statesman. It is hardly practicable that the statesman 'shall
have a thorough military education; and there is something
pathetic in Mr. Lloyd George’s demand for a single book con-
taining the principles of war, in order that he might study it!
Better that he should not. Hereafter there will no doubt
exist a need for the spread of more military knowledge, but
that will not remedy the defects to which attention has been
drawn. The true solution of the problem is the education and
maintenance of a body of soldiers, having the entire confidence
of the Cabinet, in some form of General Staff, who will, before
and during war, be at the Cabinet’s right hand to present the
military case, who will bear the responsibility for their advice,
and be charged with the necessary calculation and provision of
means.
Having briefly surveyed the circumstances surrounding the
conception of operations against the Dardanelles, may we now
descend to the more purely military regions dealing with the
selection of landing places. The instructions given to Sir lan
Hamilton largely governed choice. Oddly enough, these
instructions show still a tendency to rely on naval operations,
and almost in the same paragraph they fall back upon the


auxiliary role at one time decided upon for the army. Super-
imposed on these are some very distinct references to the major
operations probable before Constantinople! They certainly
did not make Sir lan Hamilton’s task easy. The uncertainty
and vagueness to which attention has already been directed were
being transmitted to the actual operations.
Operations on the Asiatic side were “strongly deprecated.”
This was, perhaps, a pity; Asia was not wholly unattractive.
Liman von Sanders himself thought the Asiatic side offered the
best chances. Notwithstanding this opinion, he had but two
divisions disposed for its protection! Superiority of numbers,
therefore, would most speedily have been established here, for
the allied forces available amounted nearly to 100,000 men.
None of the adherents of this course have made it very clear,
however, as to how operations there would have opened the
Straits. It is open to doubt, of course, whether the capture
of the Asiatic forts would have been reasonably practicable, or
that, if captured, the guns on the Gallipoli side at Kilid Bahr
could have been silenced, Smyrna was inviting as a starting
point, but Smyrna is 150 miles from the Straits, and a line of
communication of that length would have exhausted more
troops than were ever likely to be available. Besika Bay,
almost at the mouth of the Hellespont, on the Asiatic side,
offered facilities for a landing, and was only 25 miles from the
Narrows. A little further to the south Yukeri Bay afforded
similar inducements, and was only 35 miles from the Narrows,
but even a line of communications of 30 miles makes great
demands upon troops for its protection. It is doubtful if, with
the resources made available to him, Sir lan Hamilton could
have attempted anything so ambitious. Nevertheless, one is
forced to the conclusion that in all probability the Asiatic side,
with adequate troops, would have been a sound military opera-
tion.
Bulair was a somewhat tempting objective. The lines
there had been built during the Crimean War, and had been
strengthened since. There is no doubt of the strategical and
tactical value of their position. Had it been possible to
attack these successfully, the Gallipoli Peninsula would have
been at our mercy, although it is true that it might still have
been supplied from the Asiatic side. There were many diffi-
culties confronting the selection of Bulair, however. Firstly,
the Navy were greatly opposed to the choice of any landing
place in the Gulf of Xeros; and it is believed good naval
reasons were adduced for this opinion. Even if troops had
been successfully landed, they would still have had a con-


siderable march —and that a flank march —to make before they
would be in a position to take the Bulair lines. Such a flank
march would, morevover, have been a somewhat hazardous one,
because the Turks had at Rodosto considerable forces, and the
power to augment them. It would have been extremely in-
convenient also, whilst attacking the Bulair lines from the
north, to have had to provide protection not only for a line
of communications, but to safeguard the attack from molesta-
tion. The Bulair lines were strong, and upon the information
available not likely to be overcome easily. The Bulgars had
tried to force them three yeares previously, when Thrace was
at their mercy, and they were not successful. It is doubtful,
too, if naval assistance of magnitude could have been afforded
to operations against Bulair, owing to the distance at which
ships were forced to stand out.
The Asiatic side and Bulair thus being ruled out, the
Gallipoli Peninsula remains, in the circumstances, as the obvious
military objective. That is was obvious had its disadvantages,
because it enabled the Turks to anticipate where attack would
probably be delivered. Five divisions were disposed for the
defence of the Peninsula, including Bulair. Gallipoli offered
many inducements, not the least being that it restricted the
operations, and restriction seemed desirable for a limited force.
Furthermore, the opportunities for obtaining the assistance of
the Fleet were greater on the Peninsula than elsewhere.
It remains to be considered, therefore, whether the places
actually chosen were the best available on the Peninsula. In
studying the question it has to be borne in mind that complete
and up-to-date maps and information were not available, and re-
connaisance was only possible from the sea, and that at some
distance out, owing to the fire to which ships were subjected.
Such information as was available to Sir lan Hamilton may be
classed as moderately good, bearing in mind that war is always
conducted, as it were, in a fog. History has made it clear
that a landing in face of determined opposition is doubtfully
practicable; is always an operation of extreme danger, in any
case. Experience has taught us, too, the necessity of getting
ashore in the first instance a suitable covering force, and this
postulates a wide front and suitable covering positions, in order
to enable the remainder of the troops to disembark. Without
going greatly into details, it will easily be appreciated that
very few places would be likely to provide all the facilities
necessary, and that in the choice of places a compromise had
to be made in favour of those which offered most. On such
bases Sir lan Hamilton selected the toe of the Peninsula for


one part of his and a locality, since become known as
Anzac, for another part. It will naturally be asked why Sir
lan Hamilton decided upon two landings, or rather upon two
main landing places. A brief study will satisfy the student
that in his original aim Sir lan Hamilton contemplated his
main operation from the toe of the Peninsula, and that his idea
in the Anzac landing was a flank attack, or perhaps the more
ambitious aim of an effort against the enemy’s communications.
He did, however, have at the back of his mind the idea that
Anzac might subsequently become the main operation, by reason
of its proximity to his objective—the Kilid Bahr plateau and
its guns. The toe of the Peninsula was favoured because it
protected the flanks of the operating force, and because it gave
greater scope to the Navy for co-operation. Probably a history
of the future will regard both these anticipated advantages as
illusory. It is not always well to be without flanks, and
experience showed, as ought to have been known, that the fire
of ships at such objectives is not as effective as that of land
guns. Moreover, there were guns on the Asiatic side capable
of counteracting to some extent the effect of the fire from the
ships. The great aim was to hit quickly and practically to
achieve our purpose by a “coup.” The toe of the Peninsula
was well attack was expected there, and the distance
to be traversed before decisive success could be attained was
not altogether inconsiderable.
As a flank attack an operation at Anzac was also open
to criticism; it is not militarily sound to attempt a flank attack
so far from the main operation. As a stroke against the
enemy’s communications there is more to be said in favour of
the operation, although it is true that such an undertaking made
greater demands upon the numbers available than can be
regarded as sound. The choice of Anzac as a position had
a great deal in its favour. A position further south would
have been more desirable still, but the only position available
was one closely in view from the plateau at Kilid Bahr, and
although it has since been reported that the Turks considered
such a place was the most suitable owing to the short distance
to be traversed, it is doubtful if a successful landing there
would have been practicable.
It is easy to be wise after the event. After seeing the
country one is impressed with the opportunities available from
a landing at Suvla. It is probable that Suvla as the one choice
might have been the best course, but in the circumstances of
Sir lan Hamilton’s operations it is submitted that perhaps the
wisest course would have been to have held the whole force


available to be put ashore at any place at which a covering
party was successfully landed. Had such a course been
followed the main operations would have been conducted from
Anzac, and whilst it cannot be asserted that ultimately they
would have been successful, one is forced to the conclusion that
they must there have attained a greater measure of success than
elsewhere.
The much of absorbing interest from which valuable
deductions can be made during our occupation of the Peninsula,
and particularly in connection with operations there in August,
1915, must be passed over. Some brief reference to the
evacuation of Gallipoli is, however, desirable within the
remaining time available. It is not intended to discuss the
merits or demerits of evacuation. A conclusion upon the
subject involves careful consideration of the political and
military situation in aril other theatres of war, and the necessary
data is not yet available for the purpose. We must, therefore,
assume that evacuation was a right course. The decision was
certainly not arrived at hastily. As far back as the 11th
October, Sir lan Hamilton was asked what his estimate of
probable losses would be in the event of an evacuation. Sir
Charles Munro, who replaced Sir lan Hamilton in charge of
the Mediterranean Forces at the end of October, after a study
on the spot, promptly decided in favour of evacuation, although
he anticipated a 30 per cent, to 40 per cent, loss in the opera-
tion, and he at no time swerved from this decision. Before
finality was reached, however, Lord Kitchener himself was
asked to go out to Gallipoli, and to give his advice from there.
Previously he had been very much averse to any such idea,
but on the 22nd November he cabled the Government advising
the evacuation of Anzac and Suvla. The retention of Helles
was, he thought, desirable in the interests of the Navy.
The decision to evacuate was no doubt a grave one.
History contains references to withdrawals which, ii not paral-
lels, furnish instructive teachings. In 1809, at Corunna, the
British army evacuated in the presence of the enemy. The
enemy was, however, a whipped one, and a harbour was at our
disposal. McClellan withdrew from Harrison Landing on
the James River in 1862, when he had been pushed back by
Lee and Jackson. The enemy forces were, however, required
elsewhere, and McClellan was hardly interfered with. On the
other hand, at St. Cas in 1758, in our own history, General
Bligh’s rearguard were practically all killed covering the
embarkation of our forces.
The Cabinet, from a study of history, had little to console
it, and it must therefore have been harassed by the opinion of


Commanders on the spot that in all probability our losses in
personnel and material would attain to some 30 to 40 per
cent The decision finally made on the 7th December was
therefore not only a grave one, but a bold one. It probably
succeeded by its very boldness.
A brief reference to the measures taken locally to give
effect to this important decision will conclude our study.
Upon Sir Charles Munro taking over Command, General
Bird wood took up the appointment of Commander of the
Dardanelles Army, that is to say, of the troops at Helles
Anzac and Suvla.
In obedience to the orders of Sir Charles Munro, General
Birdwood caused plans for the operation to be prepared.
Before the actual order was received, however, having some
knowledge of the trend of events, arrangements had been made
quietly to remove what may be termed troops surplus to purely
defensive action.
The plans submitted by the Anzac and Suvla commanders
differed materially. The commander at Suvla was in favour
of what might be called an orthodox method of retirement, that
is to say, a gradual one from position to position. General
Godley, who had taken over command of the Anzac Corps from
General Birdwood at Anzac, recommended that during a pre-
liminary period there should be removed direct from the front
line to the sea every person surplus to the barest minimum
necessary to hold the front line, and that this barest minimum
should be evacuated direct from the front line to the sea in two
nights, adequate naval facilities being provided for the purpose.
The plan proposed by General Godley was adopted.
At Anzac, accordingly, before 18th December, the garrison
of 42,000 men was reduced to some 20,000 men, which was the
predetermined number remaining for evacuation on the last
two nights. The final arrangements contemplated the despatch
of some 10,000 on the second night.
The frontage held at Anzac amounted to something between
10,000 and 11,000 yards, and, therefore, up to three nights
before the final embarkation there were available for defence
some 20,000 men, or two men per yard. As 10,000 men tvere
to be removed upon the second last night, there remained for
defence upon the last day some 10,000 men, or one man per
yard. From the point of view of numbers, Anzac was not by
any means defenceless up to the evening of the last day, but
practically from the 9th December we were in a parlous con-


dition respecting guns. Out of the 99 guns available 34 were
sent away at once, and between the period 9th December and
18th December, there was a gradual diminution. Twelve guns
were actually retained until the last day, and these, in addition
to 10, in bad order, which were destroyed before leaving, were
the sole artillery defence at the end.
During what may be termed the preliminary period, that
is to say, between the Bth and 18th December, various ruses
were adopted to “instruct” the Turk in becoming used to con-
ditions which would be prevailing towards the end. For in-
stance, measures were taken to accustom him to periods of great
restraint on the part of the artillery, during which very few
rounds were fired. Not that our artillery was ever very
vigorous, for our allowance of available ammunition averaged
from 1 to 4 rounds per gun per day!! In order to remove
any wrongful impression from his mind, at the end of such
period of calm, aggressive moments were indulged in. whereby
the few guns available fired with energy, and from different
places. 'Moreover, in the front line, so that the Turk should
not, at the end, become alarmed at the silence of rifle fire
(during the whole 8 months, neither night nor day, had the
rattle of musketry ceased), the men were instructed on no
account to fire or throw bombs unless they saw the Turk come
out to ascertain the cause of the silence. The Turk did come
out once or twice, and was received so warmly that no doubt
he made up his mind not again to be misled by any silence
in the Anzac trenches !!
As must be obvious, the first essential of the whole opera-
tion was to prevent the enemy obtaining information of the
removals between the Bth and 18th December. There was
great danger of intelligence leaking out from the places to
which troops were despatched upon evacuation. The other
requirements were the maintenance of normal conditions, and
rapidity of actual embarkation. Naturally, there was fear
that much reduced garrisons might be subjected to attack, but
the numbers available to the end gave confidence that a suc-
cessful resistance could be made. The experience at Helles,
in January, 1916, showed this confidence not to have been mis-
placed. There they were actually attacked on the night before
embarkation and successfully withstood it —so much so that the
Turk decided that evacuation was not being contemplated!!
The operation on the last night was carried out by the
organisation of the men in three parties, known respectively as
“A”, “B” and “C” Parties. Plans and calculations were
made for the withdrawal of these parties consecutively. As


each party left the remainder took over for the front vacated,
and by redoubled efforts simulated the greater number. The
unit organisation was retained throughout, and in case of any
molestation of the “C” parties, who rapidly become known as
the “Die Hards,” provision had been made for their embarka-
tion into rowing boats at convenient points on the beach, to save
their movement to a more central position where greater embark-
ing facilities existed. The plan was entirely successful.
No one will ever know how much we were indebted to the
Royal Navy for our success. But their efficiency and gallantry
are stirring recollections, and one is glad of an opportunity to
make them an acknowledgment. The Turk was quite unaware of
the departure of the trench garrisons for some hours after the
last man had embarked. This illusion was doubtless aided
by the many mechanical devices left for deception, and by the
explosion of certain previously prepared mines.
There are several matters in connection with the operation
which deserve comment. Firstly, Sir Charles Munro showed
great wisdom and strength of character in relying upon and
not interfering with the plan prepared by local commanders.
The men on the spot had drawn up their plans not only with
local knowledge, but with, perhaps, a more intimate knowledge
than higher commanders usually possess of the actual situation
in the front line. The confidence placed in them, and its
happy results, are instructive.
It must be confessed that the plan proposed by the Suvla
commander was strictly in accord with military teaching. In
the plan of the Anzac commander there was, however, nothing
opposed to military teaching. Both commanders had the same
principle, but varied the manner of its application. In the
case of the Anzac commander the great power given to defence
by modem weapons was taken fully into consideration, the
front line conditions were known, and the difficulties of quickly
“putting on” an efficient offensive had been properly realised.
Before Bapaume, early in 1917, the Germans effected a
withdrawal from the shell-tom area resultant from the battle
of the Somme. The British Forces were early aware that
something of the kind was taking place. Their effort to ‘ ‘feel ’ 7
the front, however, invariably met with the same result—quite
a vigorous resistance. As time went on it. of course, became
certain that a withdrawal was being effected, and yet, owing to
the fact that great numbers and great preparations are necessary
before one dare “mount an attack,” and bearing in mind that
the time of the year was mid-winter, it was not practicable,
without undue risk, to make the rapid and bold advance so
very desirable.


The third, and perhaps the most important, lesson of the
operation is the manner in which it demonstrated that the Aus-
tralian soldier, who, unhappily and erroneously, has come to
be regarded as averse to military discipline, can display real
discipline of the very first quality. The situation had been
explained to him. He had been instructed in the part he had
to play, and he kept his own council and carried out his orders
in their entirety.
It is feared that much has been criticised, and little praised.
This must not be construed into a belief that there was not in
the phases of the war under review, much upon which we could
take pride. The object has been to draw attention to dangers
which will inevitably confront us again, and to endeavour to
spread knowledge which may, when the time comes, aid a right
judgment. It was said at the beginning that Gallipoli was
neither a great adventure nor a great failure. Study of the
circumstances shows that instead of a great adventure it was
an effort to put into effect, without proper consideration and
preparation by experts, a great conception, for the fulfilment of
which there was need, but for which means were not at the
Empire’s disposal.
Militarily the result may, to some extent, have been a
failure. Militarily France failed in 1870/71, but from the
ashes of that defeat there arose the greater France of 1914/
1918.
Who will say that Gallipoli was a failure if from the
trials endured there, and in memory of the unconquerable spirit
of those who died, Australia shall have developed a nationalism
based on the highest ideals? And if that nationalism main-
tains and rests upon the same ideals as those which have made
the Empire great, and if it makes Australia an active and con-
tributing part in that great Empire’s glory, who shall dare to
say that Gallipoli was a failure?
At the conclusion of the address, a vote of thanks to the
lecturer, on the motion of the Hon. Sir William Cullen,
K.C.M.G., LL.D., Chief Justice, Chancellor of the University
of Sydney, seconded by Major-General Sir Charles Rosenthal,
K.C.8., C.M.G., D. 5.0., was carried by acclamation.
The President of the Empire Literature Society, the Hon.
G. F. Earp, C.8.E., M.L.C., then moved a vote of thanks to the
Chairman. The motion was seconded by the Yen. Archdeacon
D’Arcy Irvine, Vicar-General, and was carried by acclamation.
The proceedings were terminated by the audience singing
“GOD SAVE THE KING.”
