

SOME ABORIGINAL LANGUAGES OF QUEENSLAND
AND VICTORIA.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.,
MEMB. ASSOC. ETRAN. SOC. D’ANTHROP. DE PARIS.




SOME ABORIGINAL LANGUAGES OF QUEENSLAND
AND VICTORIA.
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.,
MEMB. ASSOC. ETRAN. SOC. D’ANrHROP. DE PARK.
(Read October 3, 1902.)
Last year I contributed to this Society a short description of the
Gundungurra, one of the native tongues of New South Wales. In
the following pages it is proposed to furnish the outlines of the
grammatical structure of some aboriginal languages spoken by the
native tribes of Queensland and Victoria.
The method of spelling adopted is that recommended by the
Royal Geographical Society of London, with the following qualifi-
cations :
As far as possible vowels are unmarked, but in some instances
the long sound of a, e, and u are indicated thus, a, e, u. In a few
cases, to avoid ambiguity of pronunciation, the short sound of u is
thus represented, u.
G is hard in all cases. R has a rough, trilled sound, as in
“hurrah!” W always commences a syllable or word. Yat the
beginning of a word or syllable has its ordinary consonant value.
The sound of the Spanish n often occurs; at the beginning of a
Eeprinted from Proceedings American Philosophical Society, Vol. xlii, No. 173


word or syllable I have given it as ny , but when terminating a word
the Spanish letter is employed.
Ng at the beginning of a word or syllable has a peculiar nasal
sound. At the end of a syllable it has substantially the sound of
ng in “ sing.”
Dh is pronounced nearly as th in “ that,” with a slight sound of
d preceding it. Nh has likewise nearly the sound of th in “ that,”
but with an initial sound of the n. A final his guttural, resembling
ch in the German word “ bach.”
T is interchangeable with d, p with b, and g with k, in most
words where these letters are used.
Ty and dy at the commencement of a word or syllable has nearly
the sound of j. At the end of a word ty or dy is pronounced nearly
as tch in “batch” or. “ditch,” omitting the final hissing sound.
All the details supplied in this article were taken down by myself
from the lips of the natives speaking the languages herein dealt
with —a tedious and laborious task.
The Murawarri Language.
In a communication to this Society in 1898 I described the social
divisions and laws of intermarriage prevailing in the Murawarri
tribe, together with a comprehensive list of totems, and will now
proceed to exhibit the structure of their language. This tribe
occupies an extensive region on the southern frontier of Queens-
land, between the Warrego and Culgoa rivers, reaching also some
distance into New South Wales. Languages similar in grammar to
the Murawarri, although differing somewhat in vocabulary, extend
northerly into Queensland for hundreds of miles.
NOUNS.
Number. —Nouns have three numbers, the singular, dual and
plural. Gula, a kangaroo. Gulabural, a pair of kangaroos.
Guladhunna, several kangaroos. The suffix dhunna is frequently
shortened to dhu, in rapid conversation.
Gender. —Men, a man. Mugin, a woman. Guthera, a small boy.
Gutheragamba, a small girl. The sex of animals is distinguished
by using, after the name of the creature, the words dhungur, male,
and guni, female, and these words take inflexion for number and
case.


Case. —The principal cases are the nominative, causative (or
nominative-agent), genitive, accusative, instrumental, dative and
ablative.
The nominative merely names the animal or thing, as, ngurun,
emu; dhaggun, padamelon; wirri, bandicoot; wagan, crow; mulli,
boomerang; kinni, yamstick; gundal, dog; gugai, opossum; ngura,
a camp; wungga, a bird’s nest.
Causative: Guladyu ngunna wirrunga, a kangaroo me scratched.
Instrumental: Mendyu wagan mullinyu bundhara, a man a crow
with a boomerang hit.
Genitive: Mugingu kinni, a woman’s yamstick. Wagangu
wungga, a crow’s nest.
Dative: Dhan yanna nguranggu, come to the camp.
Ablative: Dhirri yanna ngurango, go away from the camp.
Accusative: This is the same as the nominative.
ADJECTIVES.
Adjectives are placed after the nouns they qualify, and are simi-
larly inflected for number and case.
Nominative: Gundal kittyu, a dog small; gundalbural kittyubural,
a couple of small dogs; gundaldhu kittyudhunna, several small dogs.
Causative: Mugindyu thurdadyu guthera bundhara, a woman
large a child beat.
Genitive: Mengu thurdagu mulli, the large man’s boomerang.
Adjectives are compared by using such phrases as, thurda nhu,
kittyu nungga, large this, small that. Superiority is implied by
saying, thurdaburra, very large.
PRONOUNS.
Pronouns are inflected for number and person, and comprise the
nominative, possessive and objective cases, some examples of which
are given in the following table. There are forms in the first
person of the dual and plural to express the inclusion or exclusion
of the party addressed :
Singular.
Nominative. Possessive. Objective.
Ist Person Ngadhu Ngundi Ngunna
2d « Ngindu Ingga Bunga
3d “ Yallunggo Ngumboga Bunha


Dual.
f Ngulli Ngulliga Ngullinya
Ist Person Ngullinumba Ngulligilunna Ngullinyai
Ngullinumba Ngulligilunna Ngullinyanumba
2d “ Nula Nulaga Nulanna
3d « ..Yallabural Bulaga Burannha
Plural.
( Nginna Nginnaga Ngurranna
Ist Person p Nginnadyula Nginnagadyula Ngurranad'
Nginnadyula Nginnagadyula Ngurranadyula
2d “ Nura Nuraga Nuranna
3d “ Yalladhunna Dhurraga Dhurrana
There are forms of the pronouns signifying “tome,” “from me,”
“ with me,” and so on, as in the following few illustrations:
Dhangandhera dhiga, he brought it to me.
Dhirrithunggia dhigamil, he ran away from me.
Ngunnhura niambu, with me rests he.
Interrogatives: Ngannga, who? Nganngabural, who (dual)?
Nganngadhunna, who (plural)? Ngangagu, whom belonging to?
Minya, what? Minyanggu, what for?
Demonstratives: This, nhu ; that, nhurana. These demonstra-
tives are very numerous, according as the object referred to is in
front of, behind, near, or far from the speaker. Many of them
take inflexion for number and person
VERBS.
Verbs have the singular, dual and plural numbers, the usual per-
sons and tenses, and three principal moods —indicative, imperative
and conditional. There is a distinctive form of the verb for each
tense —present, past and future; but number and person are shown
by short pronominal suffixes to the stem of the verb. These rules
will be readily understood on perusing the following conjugation of
the verb, bundhera, to beat:
Indicative Mood —Present Tense,
t Ist Person I beat Bundhiyu
Singular.... J 2d “ Thou beatest Bundhind
/3d “ He beats Bundhibu
Thou beatest Bundhindu
' j We, inch, beat Bundhili
Ist Person We, excl., beat Bundliilinumba
* 2d “ You beat Bundhinula
3d “ They beat Bundhibula


1 We, inch, beat Bundhina
Ist Person | We, excl., beat Bundhinadyula
2d “ You beat Bundhinura
3d “ They beat Bundhira
You beat Bundhinura
They beat Bundhira
Fast Tense.
C Ist Person I beat Bundharanyu
Singular.... J 2d “ Thou beatest Bundharandu
(3d “ He beat Bundharabu
Future Tense.
!' ist Person I will beat Bunggunyu
2d “ Thou wilt beat Bunggundu
3d “ He will beat Bunggubu
It is thought unnecessary to give the dual and plural numbers of
the past and future tenses.
Imperative Mood.
Positive Beat
Bungga
Negative Beat not Bungga wulla
Conditional Mood.
I may beat
Wullawurri bunggunyu
Reflexive.
I am beating myself
I was beating myself
I will beat myself
Bundherriyu
Bundherriaiyu
Bundherriguyu
The inflexion continues through all the persons.
Reciprocal.
j We, inch, are beating each other Bumbullali
I We, inch, will beat each other Bumbullagi
Bumbullaguli
f We, inch, are beating each other Bumbullana
■^ ura * I We, inch, will beat each other Bumbullagu
Bumbullaguna
The second and third persons of the dual and plural also take
reciprocal inflexion.
The following examples show the native way of expressing the
English verb “ to be ” :


Present I am well Murrin indivu (well am I)
Past I was well Murrin indayu (well was I)
Future I will be well Murrin inguyu (well will be I)
ADVERBS.
Yes, kaila. No, wulla. Here, nunggo. There, ngurra. Now,
kunyegaila. By and bye, kunye. Yesterday, gunda. Tomorrow,
burda. A few days ago, buggera dhurungga. Long ago, muttya-
gaila. Perhaps, wullawurri. Slowly, mun-gi. Rapidly, kurdu-
gurdu. Where, dhirrungga ? Where (if two), dhirrambula?
Where (plural), dhirradhunna ? How many, minyungurra?
PREPOSITIONS.
In front, kurbu. Behind, billungga. In the rear, durungga.
Inside, mugungga. Outside, bullungga. Beside me, gurgungga
dhiga. Between, dhunnungga. Down, burrungga. Up, gunda.
Over or across (referring to a river, hill, etc.), gurrundha. This
side of, nhubaran. The other side, beyond, gowurrigurrundha.
Through, gaimyu. Towards, dhai. Away from, dhirra.
Several prepositions take inflexion for number and person : Be-
hind me, billunggadhiga. Behind thee, billunggabunga. Behind
him, billunggabuga. Behind us,' billunggangurriga, and so on.
CONJUNCTIONS AND INTERJECTIONS.
It is not thought necessary to supply illustrations of these parts
of speech.
NUMERALS.
One, yaman. Two, kubbo. Several, murabirri.
The Wamba Wamba Language.
This language is spoken among the remnants of the native tribes
about Swan Hill on the Murray river, and extending southerly into
the State of Victoria beyond Lalbert and Tyrrell creeks, the lower
Avoca river, etc. The people are divided into two phratries,
Gamaty and Gurgity, the men of one phratry marrying the women
of the other. For lists of totems attached to these phratries, the
reader is referred to a paper I contributed in 1898 to the Anthro-
pological Society at Washington. 1
1 “ The Victorian Aborigines: their Initiation Ceremonies and Divisional Sys-
tems,” American Anthropologist, Vol. xi, pp. 333, 334. Map of Victoria,
Plate V.


All the languages spoken in the eastern portion of Victoria are
identical in grammatical structure with the Gundungurra language
reported by me to this Society last year, although their vocabularies
are altogether different. Westward of the 145th meridian of lon-
gitude all the Victorian languages have the same structure as the
Wamba Wamba, with the exception of a strip of country on the
lower Murray river.
NOUNS,
Number. —Karrange, a kangaroo. Karrange bullang, two kan-
garoos. Karrange girtawal, several kangaroos.
Gender. —Wurtunge, a man. Laiur, a woman. Banggo, a boy.
Bannulaiur, a girl. Bupu, a child of either sex. The sex of ani-
mals is indicated by using the word mamo for jnales, and baba for
females; thus, willunge mamo, a male opossum ; willunge baba, a
female opossum.
Case. —The nominative : Wanne, a boomerang. Kenninge, a
yamstick. Wirrangin, a dog. Lurnge, a camp.
The Causative: Wurtulu karange dhakkin, a man hit a kan-
garoo. Laiuru bupu dhakkin, a woman beat a child
Possessive: Wurtua wanne, a man’s boomerang. Every object
over which ownership can be exercised is subject to inflection for
number and person, thus:
{ist Person My boomerang Wannai
2d “ Thy boomerang Wannin
3d “ His boomerang Wannu
Thy boomerang Wannin
His boomerang Wannu
This declension extends to all the persons and numbers, in each
of which one example will be sufficient :
Dual Our, inclusive, boomerang
Trial Our, inclusive, boomerang
Plural Our, inclusive, boomerang
Wannul
Wannangurkullik
Wannungur
Dative: Lurndal, to the camp.
Ablative : Lurnung, from the camp.
ADJECTIVES.
Adjectives follow the noun qualified, as kurwinge kurong-untu,
an emu large. Kurwinge bannutu, an emu small. They are in-
flected for number and case like the nouns, and comparison is
effected as in the Murawarri


PRONOUNS.
Pronouns have four numbers, singular, dual, trial, and plural.
There are double forms of the first person to include or exclude the
person spoken to. The following table shows the nominative and
possessive pronouns:
Singular.
Ist Person I Yetti Mine Yenneu
2d “ Thou Nginma Thine Nginneu
3 d “ He Kinyi or Kalu Plis Kikinga
Dual.
. „ ( We, inch, Ngulli
Ist Person... 4 w . - T &
} We, exch, Ngullu
2d “ You Nyula
3 d “ They Kalubu
Ours, inch, Ngullidha
Ours, exch, Ngulludhu
Yours Nyuladhu
Theirs Kinyebuladhu
They Kalubulang
Trial.
Ist Person J Wc ’ inCL ’ Yan g urkullik Ours, inch, Yanguradhukullik
( We, excl., Yandakkullik Ours, exch, Yandhadhukullik
2d “ You Ngutakullik Yours Ngutadhukullik
3 d “ The y Kaludhanakullik Theirs . Dhanadhukullik
Plural.
(We, inch, Yangur
Ist Person. • • j We> excl>> y andhank
2d “ You Nguta
You Nguta
3d “ They Kaludhana
Ours, inch, Yanguradhu
Ours, excl., Yandhadhu
Yours Ngutadhu
Theirs Dhanadhu
There are objective forms of the pronouns, signifying me, with
me, towards me, from me, and so on. Interrogative and demon-
strative pronouns are also various and precise.
VERBS.
Verbs have the same numbers and persons as the pronouns, three
tenses and three principal moods; as exhibited in the following
conjugation of the verb “ to sit
Indicative Mood —Present Tense .
Si st Person I sit
2d “ Thou sittest
3d “ He sits
Ng an gan
Ngangar
Nganga


Dual.
Trial.
Plural.
( We, inch, sit
Ist Person... -j exc j u g jj.
2d “ You sit
3d “ They sit
( We, inch, sit
Ist Person... j W e,excl.,sit
2d “ You sit
3d “ They sit
( We, inch, sit
Ist Person... j We>exd sit
2d “ You sit
3d “ They sit
Past Tense.
( Ist Person I sat
Singular .... J2d “ Thou sattest
(3d ‘‘ He sat
Future Tense.
/ Ist Person I will sit
Singular J2d “ Thou wilt sit
• /3d “ He will sit
Ngangangul
Ngangangullu
Nganganyulu
Ngangabulang
Ngangangurkullik
N gangandhankullik
Ngangangutakullik
N gangandhanakullik
Ngangangur
Ngangandhak
Nganganguta
Ngangandhana
Nganginan
Nganginar
Ngangin
Nganginyan
Nganginyar
Ngangin
The remaining moods are omitted, being similar in constitution
to those of the Murawarri.
This is the first occasion on which the trial , or triple , number
has been reported in the verbs of any Australian language. Mr.
J. J. Carey, from the MS. of the late Mr. F. Tuckfield, 1 published
a list of pronouns in what he calls the Woddowro language, but
which I spell Wuddyawurru, in which he shows an incomplete set
of trial pronouns. He did not, however, observe the double form
in the first person of the dual, trial and plural, which is now com-
municated by me in the languages of Victoria for the first time.
Among the native tribes on the upper Campaspe, Lodden and
Avoca rivers, instead of kullik being the sign of the trial, the word
baiap is employed, as, Ngurnabuingunyinbaiap, we three sit.
1 Assoc. Adv. Sci., Vol. vii, p. 842 and p. 853.
2 I have, however, previously discovered and reported the existence of two
forms of the first person of the dual and plural in the nouns, pronouns, verbs,
adverbs and prepositions of the Gundungurra, one of the native languages of
New South Wales: Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Vol. xl, pp. 140-148. .


Tyilbuingunyinbaiap, we three beat. It will be apparent that the
words baiap, or kullik are merely superadded to the suffix of the
plural.
In the Motu, one of the languages of New Guinea, Rev. W. G-
Lawes reports that the dual and trial of pronouns are formed by
additions to the plural. 1
If a line be assumed to be drawn on the map of Victoria from
Melbourne to Echuca, then the whole of that portion of Victoria
situated on the eastern side of that line has no trial number in its
speech, but in all the languages to the west of that line the trial
number obtains.
ADVERBS AND PREPOSITIONS.
In principle these resemble the same parts of speech in the
Murawarri and Gundungurra, and some of them take similar
inflexion for number and person.
Interjections and exclamations are not numerous and have been
omitted.
NUMERALS.
One, yuwaia. Two, bulle. Several, girtawal.
1 Motu Grammar (Sydney, 1896), p. 9.




