

fSnibmitp of (Quetnslanb
PAMPHLET No. 1
Some considerations affecting organization
for the production of Munitions
of War
BY
THE UNIVERSITY WAR COMMITTEE
PRICE THREE PENCE
BRISBANE :
ROBT. McGREGOR, PRINTER AND STATIONER
1915


PAMPHLET No. 1
Some considerations affecting organization
for the production of Munitions
of War
The manufacture of shrapnel shell in Queensland will
necessitate considerable reorganisation of local industry.
Factories, machines and skilled labour—to say nothing of raw
material—will be required and, unless there is careful re-
adjustment of production to meet the needs of the community,
extensive dislocation of industry may result. Consideration
must, therefore, be given to the best method of organizing
manufactures with a view to securing, -first, the maximum
output of the munitions of war, and, second, the minimum
disturbance of the normal course of industry.
With respect to such organization the following impor-
tant questions suggest themselves:—
(a) The possibility of producing munitions—
(l) On a commercial basis.
(2) As a national undertaking justified by the
necessity of obtaining munitions regardless
of cost.
(b) The organization of factories for the maximum
output.
(c) The organization of labour for the maximum output.
(d) The effect of (b) and (c) upon the normal course
of industry:—
(1) Commodities, other than munitions, required
for war purpose;
(2) Commodities required by the community for
its ordinary needs.
(A) THE POSSIBILITY OF PRODUCING MUNITIONS.
The sub-committee appointed to make enquiries as to the
equipment of local factories and the sources of supply of raw
material reports that such difficulties as exi c t do not appear
to be insuperable. If it be assumed for the purpose of dis-
cussion that Queensland is to undertake the supply of at
least 1,000 shells (common and shrapnel) per day, complete
except for the necessary explosives, then, for the time being,
the greater part of the steel would have to be obtained from
New South Wales. It would also be necessary either to im


port aluminium or to make the fuse caps of brass and to ad-
just the ballistic properties of the shell to the brass fuses.
That there is need for Queensland to manufacture at least
1,000 shells per day becomes apparent if we consider that
Germany and Austria, according to the latest advice, are
producing 250,000 shells (of all kinds) per day. For the
Allies to be able to overwhelm the enemy at any given point
aSO per cent, superiority is probably required. If Australia,
as a whole, were to produce 50,000 shells per week, her pro-
duction would amount to only about 2 per cent, of the neces-
sary total. None the less there is no doubt that this quan-
tity, even though proportionately small, would prove most
valuable to the-forces in the field, especially if made avail-
able at once. If no other purpose were served, such muni-
tions could at least be utilised as the nucleus of a reserve
supply with which to begin the campaign in the next Euro-
pean spring.
For Australia’s contribution to be of value (either dir-
ectly or in order to relieve England of some of the strain
of manufacture) it is urgently necessary that the actual pro-
duction of shells should begin within the next three months.
If this is to be done, Australia can look to no other resources
than her own. The metals required must all be obtained
locally, and the first duty of the factories will be to manu-
facture the requisite munition-making machines.
(Al) PRODUCTION ON A COMMERCIAL BASIS.
It is not easy to ascertain whether shells can be pro-
duced sufficiently quickly and in sufficient quantities under
normal conditions of trading. The probability is that the
task will prove impossible unless factories, labour and sup-
plies be specially organized. With respect to the factories
it is doubtful whether many of them could provide the extra
machines that will be required. Many of these machines
could none the less be utilised in normal production after
the war.
(A 2) PRODUCTION AS A NATIONAL UNDERTAKING.
Considered from the point of view of the nation’s needs
in the present crisis, the cost of the shell is a secondary con-
sideration. Cost of production cannot rightly be calculated
as in normal times since such factors as the lives saved, the
shortened duration of the war, and the consequent decreased
total expenditure must be taken into account. If Australia
can produce shell she must do so; it is her business to see
that the necessary organization of her resources is under-
taken and carried out.
(B) THE ORGANIZATION OF FACTORIES FOR THE
MAXIMUM OUTPUT.
The report of the sub-committee appointed to investi-
gate factory equipment indicates three alternative methods


of organizing factories for the special purposes of the war.
The first of these suggests a partition of the work amongst
existing factories, with a due regard to the capacity .and
equipment of each. This proposal commends itself as likely
to cause a minimum of disturbance, and as most speedily pro-
ductive of results. It presumes, however, in those appoint-
ed to administer the scheme an intimate knowledge of the
total equipment and resources. For this reason, a census
of factories and their respective plants will probably have
to be taken before they can be effectively organized to co-
operate in the production of shell.
It is assumed that each factory will work for at least
120 hours per week. Such -processes as forgipg the blanks,
hardening, nosing and filling will require to be concentrated
in a few centrally situated establishments. It would be pre-
ferable that these processes should be undertaken by those
factories whose equipment enables them to perform every
operation necessary to the complete production of shell.
Extra machines will need to be installed in other fac-
tories in order that operations of a kind may be grouped
together. Arrangements will also have to be made for the
transference of the product from one workshop to another so
as to ensure that there shall be no delay between successive
operations. Inspection and testing must be carefully or-
ganized.
Information is to hand of the necessary machines. As
special or extra machines are required the design and manu-
facture of suitable single-operation machines can be under-
taken. So far as designing is concerned, existing machines
of suitable types will be copied and simplified, where possi-
ble, for the special purpose in view. With respect to manu-
facture, it would be well if this work were at once assigned
to a suitable factory and the manufacture of special ma-
chines commenced immediately.
All workshops concerned in the manufacture of muni-
tions will be required to work under Government control.
This is obviously necessary in order to secure maintenance
of output, uniformity in quality of the product, and simplifi-
cation of inspection. Such factories would none the less re-
tain their present management and business organization.
(C) THE ORGANIZATION OF LABOUR FOR THE
MAXIMUM OUTPUT.
In order to secure the maximum output, it will be neces-
sary to keep all machinery running for 20 hours per day
(120 hours per week). This obviously will necessitate a very
thorough organization of the available labour. Men will
have to be trained to perform single operations, or groups of
operations, on particular machines; this training should be-
gin at once, even though the materials required are not im-
mediately available.


Manufacture on the lines suggested is only possible,
however, if the men concerned are willing to co-operate
wholeheartedly. Such co-operation on their part will in-
volve the relaxation of union rules relating to shift-work,
employment of non-unionists, employment of unskilled men
on machine operations, and so on. It can confidently be as-
serted that the workers concerned will cheerfully respond to
the call provided that it be clearly understood that the fac-
tories are not to reap increased profits from the relaxation
of union rules.
This, in itself, is an outstanding reason for Government
control of the factories engaged in the work. It has been
suggested that profits should be limited to a return of, say,
8 per cent, upon capital invested or to an amount equiva-
lent to the average profit made during the previous three
years. Allowance would, of course, be made for deprecia-
tion and wear and tear during the period of Government con-
trol.
Labour can only be effectively organized in this manner
if it be assumed that all men engaged in the engineering
trades have volunteered for special service for the purpose of
carrying on the war. This would apply equally to those en-
gaged in the actual fabrication of war material and to those
employed in carrying on the ordinary necessary work of the
community. A complete census of all men skilled and un-
skilled-connected with the engineering trade is the first
requisite. There should also be a register in which is set
out the particular work each voluntary ’abourer is competent
to do. By this latter means a considerable amount of skill-
ed labour might be discovered which is not at present em-
ployed in the trade, but has taken up other vocations.
It is estimated that at least 1,000 skilled and partly
skilled men, and 350 unskilled, will be required. This can-
not fail to affect other industries unless their needs be also
considered and provided for.
(D) THE EFFECT OF SPECIAL WAR ORGANIZATION
UPON THE NORMAL COURSE OF INDUSTRY.
This topic is obviously too large to be discussed in detail
here. The more important aspects of the problem, however,
call for special mention since organization for the manufac-
ture of munitions withdraws machines, labour and materials
from ordinary industries, and is yet dependent on their main-
tenance for support.
In particular, must the case be considered of: —
(1) Commodities, other than munitions, required for
war purposes. .
(2) Commodities required by the community for its
ordinary needs.


,(D1) COMMODITIES, OTHER THAN MUNITIONS, REQUIRED
FOR PURPOSES OF THE WAR.
The organization of industry proposed must be made to
include woollen mills, clothing factories, tanneries, and so
on, equally with engineering workshops. In these directions,
as in that of munitions, a specially large output of a special
-character is required and will not be available unless suffi-
cient care be exercised. Census and registration are as
necessary a preliminary here as in the former case.
(D 2) COMMODITIES REQUIRED BY THE COMMUNITY FOR
ITS ORDINARY NEEDS.
The maintenance of the ordinary industries of the country
is, in a sense, even more important than the development of
special activities. The possibility of maintaining special
production depends, in the last resort, upon the general
adequacy and efficiency of Australian industry.
Further, as the war goes on, our ability to continue the
struggle will be more and more determined by our condi-
tion of prosperity or otherwise.
Attention must therefore be drawn to the necessity for
discrimination in recruiting—whether for military or indus-
trial purposes. It is all important that we should run no
risk of exhausting our reserves —either of material utilities
or personal skill.
SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION.
Australia, at present, has at least three clearly defined
and interdependent spheres of activity. These are:—
(1) Military recruiting;
(2) The manufacture of munitions of war.
(3) The maintenance of ordinary and necessary in-
dustries.
Industrial organization of the kind proposed will ulti-
mately necessitate that every individual shall voluntarily
offer his services in some capacity. This does not imply
conscription if the country responds as it should to the call.
There are many spheres of usefulness and any individual
citizen might well be allowed to exercise his choice within
the limits of Australian requirements. But it is impera-
tively necessary that haphazard methods should be aban-
doned and the personal and material resources of the nation
organized for war. This implies as a fundamental basis for
industrial operation:—
(1) Limitation of profits;
(2) Relaxation of trade-union regulations;
(3) Census of labour and of machinery.
The method of production by contract has failed m
England to achieve the desired results and will fail in Aus-
tralia for similar reasons. Production under national control
is necessary.


A certain amount of decentralisation is also necessary
if national control is to succeed. The Federal authorities
have already formed a central Munitions Committee and pro-
pose to form local committees in each State. It might be
suggested that the composition of these committees should
be somewhat as follows:
The Premier of each State.
1 Military Officer;
2 Business Men;
2 Engineers—one skilled in factory organization and
the other in general mechanical engineering;
1 Chemist;
1 Representative of the Trade-unions.
Such Committees should have full managerial powers to
carry out organization upon general lines laid down by the
Minister for Munitions.
It must be conceded that to carry out such an organiza-
tion of industries as proposed will be a matter of some diffi-
culty and will involve sacrifice on the part of the nation. Our
present need is the justification of the proposal; it is more
than doubtful if the requirements of the war can be met by
any other means. In addition to this, however, such or-
ganization will be found to be a wise provision against the
aftermath of war. Only so shall we as a nation be able to-
deal with the industrial dislocation and paralysis that must
inevitably arise. As a disciplined unit, organized to work
for the benefit of the whole, we shall be m a position to meet
disturbing circumstances as they occur with courage and
confidence. Our credit with the world enhanced, we shall
emerge from the struggle self-reliant, self-supporting and
strengthened by the knowledge of duty thoroughly done dur-
ing a crisis in which every individual member of the com-
munity has played his part.
Since the above was written, the Commonwealth Au-
thorities have laid down an organization, the main features
of which are as follows:
A Central Munitions Committee has been appointed in
Melbourne, consisting of certain Departmental experts; and
a sub-committee is to be formed in each State under the
control of the Premier of that State. The State Muni-
tions Committee will send a permanent delegate to Melbourne
to sit on the Central Munitions Committee and so maintain
the necessary co-ordination between the States and the
Federal Authorities. Some of the States have already form-
ed their Committees, and it is expected that Queensland
will shortly fall into line.
