



SOME ACCOUNT OF THE
VINEYARDS AT CAMDEN,
ON THE
NEPEAN RIVER,
,fnrti| jKlilts Inntjf Wtsi nf liffcnnj;,
THE PEOPERTY OF
JAMES AND WILLIAM MACARTHUR,
LONDON:
PRINTED BY JOHN NICHOLS, MILTON PRESS, CHANDOI STRUT, STRANO




IniM slrrnnnt nf tip nt fronton.
Having early acquired in France and Switzerland a
general knowledge of the Cultivation of the Vine, the
proprietors planted their first Vineyard at Camden, in
1820.
But after many experiments in a there so novel branch
of agriculture, local experience was at length obtained :
the old Vineyard was abandoned, and the best varieties
of Vines having been selected, were transferred to a new
site in 1830, after the soil had been deeply trenched for
their reception.
This Vineyard comprises about twenty-two acres, and
is situated on a natural ten-ace, originally of alluvial
deposit, a fonnation which is of frequent occurrence on
the banks of several of the larger streams in New South
Wales.
The soil is a porous, brown, fine grained silicious loam,


of great depth, containing much decomposed vegetable
matter, proxide of iron, and probably a considerable
quantity of potash.
In sinking a well an opportunity was offered of ascer-
taining the condition of the soil to the depth of fifty
feet. Little change was observable for the first twenty
feet, but the presence of, vegetable matter became gra-
dually less apparent and the iron more abundant: the
soil, however, continued to be quite as porous as at the
surface. In descending further the change was more
rapid, becoming more ferruginous, with a considerable
admixture of alumina, until, at the depth of forty feet, it
appeared to he little but sand, clay, and iron, of a bright
red colour, and in such combination as to he perfectly
permeable to water, and consequently to the roots of the
Vines. At the depth of forty to fifty feet, water is ob-
tained freely by infiltration, apparently from the bed of
the river Nepean, which flows at about that level, in a
deep channel several hundred yards distance. During
periods of heavy rain this stream swells so much as to
overflow its hanks in certain places, and then forms
rapid currents between the chain of alluvial terraces, such
as the one described and the higher grounds behind.


rising to within a few feet of the surface of the former,
and forming them into a series of temporary islands,
some of them of great extent.
The soil of these terraces possesses in great perfection
many of the requisites for Vine cultivation in a hot
climate, which is also extremely uncertain with respect
to moisture. During the most rainy periods it is never
wet, nor after being duly trenched does it during the
longest droughts, even close to the surface, ever become
thoroughly deprived of moisture..
The great depth and porous character of the soil ren-
ders it permeable to the surface water, however abun-
dant, and capable of transmitting it back again by
capillary attraction to the surface as it becomes parched
by the great heats of summer. In less than twenty years
roots of the Vines were found to have penetrated fifteen
to twenty feet —how much deeper is not known. The
growth of the plants is luxuriant, more equal one year
taken with another than on the hill soils—their crops
abundant and certain, were it not for the liability of
damage from hailstones, from frosts late in the spring,
and rottenness in the fruit when a series of showery
weather happens towards the end of summer; the last


two accidents being of more frequent occurrence in low
than elevated situations.
About ten years subsequently to the formation of the
last mentioned Vineyard, another was commenced in a
totally different site and soil: it occupies part of the
slope of a hill of moderate elevation, the surface of which
has been formed into terraces, to prevent damage from
washing during heavy rains. The soil is a calcareous
loam, resting at about two to four feet upon shale,
passing into soft calcareous clayey sandstone, the soil
itself being full of fragments of decomposing rock and of
indurated marie or calcareous earth. Although very
expensive to form into Vineyards in a suitable manner,
this description of land promises to be productive and to
yield wine of very good quality. A similar description
of land exists in considerable quantities, throughout the
older portion of the Colony.
From the Vineyards here described eight specimens
of Wine have been transmitted to England under a per-
suasion that they would be received amongst the Colo-
nial products at the “ Great Exliibition.” They consist,
according to the account which accompanied them, of—


No. 1. A hogshead from the first Vineyard, made
from a grape imported from France called “La Folk”
mixed to the extent of about one-third with another sort
from Madeira, called the “ Verdeilho,” the former being
very productive and the latter remarkable for its richness
in the sacharine principle. Threeyears oldinMarch, 1851.
In the process of manufacture the grapes were crushed
by being passed through a machine of simple construc-
tion, which reduces them thoroughly without bruising
the stalks, and which, with the application afterwards
of moderate pressure to the “ rape,” separates the juice
from it with ease and expedition.
The Wine was fermented in large vats of hewn stone-
containing from 800 to 1600 gallons, in which it re,
mained until the tumultuous fermentation had subsided.
It was then drawn off into large store casks, containing
400 gallons, and suffered to continue the gentle stage of
fermentation until quite still. The casks were regularly
filled up, at short intervals, as the fermenting liquid sub-
sided. When the process was sufficiently comple it was
clarified with isinglass. Three years old in March, 1851.
No. 2. A hogshead from the same Vineyard, and made
in the same manner as the last, but • entirely from the
‘‘ Verdeilho ” Grape. Three years old in March, 1851.


No. 3. A quarter cask, the produce of the last de-
scribed Vineyard on the hill, from the “ White Muscat
of Lunelle.” The grapes were suffered to acquire a very
advanced stage of maturity, to the extent of shrivelling
on the bunches. To this Wine, during the tumultuous
fermentation, was added at different times very pure
Brandy of home manufacture, previously filtered through
charcoal to render it quite flavourless, in the proportion
of two pints of pure alcohol to the hundred pints of
Wine.
No. 4. A quarter cask from part of the same Vine-
yard, (where the soil varies from having a large admix-
ture of a kind of soft ferruginous gravel) made from the
“ Red and Black Muscat of Frontignac,” in the same
manner as the last, and with the addition of the same
quantity of spirit. Three years old, April, 1851.
No. 5. A quarter cask from the same Vineyard, pro-
duced from the “ Riesling Grape,” a variety imported
from the Rhine, where it is the sort chiefly cultivated in
the best Vineyards, made in the same manner as the
preceding. Two years old, March, 1851.
No. 6. A quarter cask from the same Vineyard, made
in the same manner as the last, from “La Folle Grape,”


mixed with the “ Muscat Noir de Frontignac,” in the
proportion of four to one. Six years old in March, 1851.
No. 7. A quarter cask of Red Wine, made from a
variety called the “ Seyras,” cultivated at the hill of the
“ Hermitage” (Tain). This Wine was fermented in vats
open at the top, but covered during the fermentation
with a canvas cloth, with the hulls deprived of their
stalks, confined in the centre of the fermenting mass by
means of a false head fitted to the inside of the Yat.
This latter process being adopted to secure sufficient
depth of colour to the Wine. It was treated afterwards
as the preceding varieties, but without having been fined
previously to being drawn off for shipment. Two years
old, March , 1851. ■
No. 8. A case containing, in bottle, samples of a Wine
made in April, 1844, from the same Vineyard and the
same kind of Grapes as No. 4, but in a still more dessi-
cated state, fermented in the same manner but without
the addition of any ardent spirits.


These Wines have a certain dryness and bitterness
peculiar to the Wines of New South Wales, to which the
palate becomes accustomed: but with age this bitter-
ness passes off, as in the specimens now in England.
The Wines at Camden are rarely fit for use until three
years old, and greatly improve by keeping. They are
very wholesome, and are extensively used by persons
who have acquired a taste for them.
It was on the estate whence these wines have pro-
ceeded, that the present proprietors, under the guidance
of their father, the late Mr. Macarthur, succeeded in
rearing those Merino flocks, the germ of which he had
in 1805 introduced into Australia, by means of sheep im-
ported in a vessel named by him the “ Argo.” They
have proved one of the chief sources of the Australian
wool trade, now grown into national importance, and in
the past year amounting to 36,000,000 lbs., valued at
two millions sterling.
But as this Colonial product necessarily depends on
the native pastures of the country, the colonists are de-
sirous of creating an export having a more immediate
relation to agriculture; and, whatever the difficulties
with which they have to contend in competing with the


numerous long established Wine growers of Europe, they
yet hope to succeed in like manner as they have already
succeeded with the “Golden Fleece.”
They will then have strengthened, by another legiti-
mate tie, the existing well-balanced relations between
England and her Australian possessions. For years have
they supplied the unmanufactured material, which gives
occupation to tens of thousands of Her Majesty’s sub-
jects.
Whether these Colonies can also hope to provide for
the benefit of every class here at home, and at an equally
moderate rate an other exportable product, remains yet
to be seen—so that even the tired artizan, in his hours
of relaxation from toil, may not unseldom exclaim, “ Go
fetch me a quart of (Australian) Sack.”
London, June, 1851.
Printed by John Nichole, Milton Press, 8 & 9, Chandoa Street, Strand.
