

SOME FOLK-SONGS and MYTHS from SAMOA.
f m-'iibocx
Translated by the Rev. G. Pratt.
With Introductions and Notes by John Fraser, ll.d.
[Read before the Royal Society of N.S. Wales, October 7, 1591 .]




SOME FOLK-SONGS and MYTHS from SAMOA.
Translated by the Rev. G. Pratt.
With Introductions and Notes by John Fraser, el.d.
[Bead before the Royal Society of N.S. Wales, October 7, 1891.']
XV.— Tangaloa-a-Ui —A ‘ Tala’
How sacrifices to the Sun ceased.
Introduction —1. The Polynesians were cannibals and they offered
human victims to their gods ; food also and other articles of value in


daily life were presented as offerings. It is strange that, all the world
over, the worship of the Sun had human sacrifices as one of its chief
features. The principle that regulated the quality of the offerings in
heathen worship is a simple one; for, whatever was the essential quality
or feature of the god, goddess, or demon to be worshipped, so must the
offering be of a similar or corresponding kind. In Rome, the goddess
Ceres got her appropriate offerings of grain; Bacchus had his libations
of wine ; Vesta, the goddess of the hearth, had her perpetual fire ; none
of these could be propitiated by the blood of animals or men ; but Apollo,
in his character as the far-darting and pest-producing Sun, was the
slayer of men; and human flesh would thus be no unwonted diet for him.
The Persians gave him white horses; the priests of Baal cut their bodies
with knives for him, covering themselves with gore; and in the religions
of many nations, nothing of less value than the life of a human being
could be laid on his altar. Another principle affecting these altar-gifts
was this, —the value of the gift must be in proportion to the heed of the
worshipper and the importance of his request. For a god that accepted
bloody sacrifices, a kid or a goat or a sheep might be sufficient in ordinary
circumstances; with an extraordinary prayer, a bull; but for any dire
emergency either in the family or the state, a human victim must be
presented, in order to avert calamity. Hence the efficacy of such a sacri-
fice as that of Iphigenia when offered to a very angry or a relentless god;
hence also the gift of their children to the fires of Moloch by pious
mothers; hence the ' hekatombs’ of the ancient Greeks; and everywhere,
the lives of men presented by themselves or by others to turn aside some
great national danger.
2. In this story, there is a fabulous account of the manner in which the
Sun was led to abandon his claim to a daily supply of human flesh. The
incidents are said to have happened in Atafu, which seems to me to be,
not any particular island, but some myth-land of wonder where, as we
learn from another tale, there are “no houses; the people sleep on the
ground; the sky is their house.” This view is the more probable because,
in this tale, there are four parts of the Atafu land, ‘ the black,’ ‘ the
brown,’ ‘ the fair,’ and ‘ the white ’; and XJi, the heroine of the tale, is the
daughter of f Sugar-cane’ and ‘ Yam.’ Seeing that the daily' aso ’of
victims was destroying all the families in Atafu, she resolved to approach
the Sun and try to get him to be satisfied with less costly food. In this,
with her brother’s aid, she succeeded, as the story tells. But lest the old
propensities of his solar majesty should return, she thought it prudent
to leave her home; and so, at last, after some adventures she reached
Manu'a, where she gave birth to a son, the great semi-divine Tangaloa-


I
a-Ui, and lie was the father of Ta‘e-o-Tangaloa, Le-Fanonga and others,
who are famed in Samoan myths.
Mr. Powell’s Summary—B. Ui was the daughter of a couple named
Fiso and Ufi. They belonged to and lived in the Atafu land, which
included Atafu'uli, Atafu mea, Atafu tea, Atafu sina. It was the cus-
tom of the people of Atafu to present a human sacrifice every day as an
offering to the Sun (‘ ua fai le aso ole La i tagata’); each family by turns
furnished a victim, either male or female. The families were thus gradu-
ally disappearing, and, in the family of Hi, there were only three sur-
vivors,—her old mother, herself, and her brother Lua-ma‘a. Some say
that, besides Ui, there was another daughter named Ala. The day was
approaching when one of these also must be sacrificed. They wept
together, each being unwilling that either of the others should die, and
each contending to be the victim. Then Ui said that she would endeavour
to induce the Sun to accept a substitute. Accordingly, with her brother’s
aid, she at once prepared her offering, which consisted of taro , some fish,
a fowl, and portions of the kava plant, together with the bowl for pre-
paring the kava drink, a drinking cup, a strainer, and some turmeric.
These were placed carefully in a basket; and, on the morning of the day,
when the sacrifice should be presented, very early before day-light, she,
accompanied by her brother, repaired to the altar of sacrifice, which was
on a mountain at some distance from the village and stood between two
trees, afetau and a fasa. Shortly after she had taken her seat upon the
altar, the Sun arose over the fasa tree. She immediately addressed him
in the following strain —
Le La e, maui mai,
E taumafa ola atu lau tagata,
Ua leai le aiga nai lou taumafa,
Le La fai atu;
Ui e, ta fia inu ‘ava, &c.
Which means
4. O Sun, approach, thy human being to eat alive ;
For of this family, through thy feasting, none survive.
To this the Sun replies :
O Ui, for kava, [not for blood,] I thirst.
The virgin immediately answers :
Here’s kava [grown] by a man of skill and labours many ;
It stood [grew] in the rocky ground ;
It stood devoted unto thee;
Its root-branches were of a rich and tempting hue;
This kava I’ll divide in pieces, and with shell will scrape it well;


Will wash it; and with the fibre-strainer rub it clean.
I’ll rinse well the mouth, and chew !
In a tava bowl, I’ll mix it;
And strain it out to cleanse it fully from the lees.
This kava I’ll now apportion !
O Sun, if thou wilt feast,
There’s this fish, the ‘ata'ata, [sacred to the gods,]
The fish that near the harbour waits ;
There’s this fowl, a fowl of many broods, full-grown and plump j
Oh then ! on these now turn thy [longing] eyes ;
For of this family, through thy feasting, none survives.
The Sun approached; he beheld a damsel well-attired, and beautiful in
person. He was smitten with her beauty and loved her. From that
time, the offering of human sacrifices to the Sun ceased.
5. When the Sun promised Ui that he would require no more human
sacrifices, she went home with joy and reported her success. "I am not
devoured, you see; the Sun said to me, —Sau ia, o le a ola le nu‘u; ua ifo
le aso ole La; ele toe faia, —■* Come here; your land shall live; the offer-
ing to the Sun shall terminate; it shall not be repeated.’ ” Her family
and the people generally rejoiced at the good news. But still her parents
felt anxious and distrustful, and they said, ‘ Come let us leave, and go
to some other land, lest the custom'should be renewed, and we, as it will
be our turn, become the first victims.’ Accordingly, Fiso and Ufileftin
a canoe, with Lua-ma'a, but Ui and Ala proceeded inland. When the
sisters had come to a district called Eurutu, and to a part of it where was
a boat-entrance in the reef, called Eutala, they saw on the beach two
idols. These belonged to a man named Lid, or, as others say, to two
men named Nimoa'i and Lavea'i, who were sporting in the rollers. One
of the idols was a trumpet shell (‘panea,’ Triton tritonis), which was so
placed on the shore that when the men shouted from the sea, the shell
re-echoed the shout. Ui took up the idols and concealed them in her
bag. When the owners found that the echo had ceased, they suspected
the cause and gave chase to the thieves, but the theft was denied. The
incensed loosers uttered this imprecation on the thieves of their idols,
(o le lai ma le panea, * the bird and the shell’): —
Le au manumanu le o atu;
Ua la goal a‘u mea ;
Au raai, a oi onatau ;
Ua la goal au tupua ;
Nei mau matutu lava i gauta;
A e oti i le sami.


Which means —
There is a band of covetous ones going on ;
They have stolen my things ;
Let them bring them to me, as is proper to do ;
[lf not, let my curse be upon them ; for]
They have stolen my images ;
Let them never get firm footing on land,
But let them perish at sea !
(The parents died at Eurutu.)
6. So they jumped into the sea and swam hither, [ i.e ., to Tau in
Manu'a]; and just as they arrived on the reef at the south side of Fiti-
uta, at a spot still called Lua-ma‘a on the south-east side of Saua, Ui
gave birth to a male child. She cast it on to the shore, between two
stones, which are now named Ui and Lua-ma‘a, for they two died there
on the beach.
7. Tangaloa looked down from heaven, saw the child lying in that
condition, took compassion on it, and sent Tuli and Fuia, his representa-
tives, to look after it. He also sent the ‘ Miti’ (a bird) and the ‘Unga*
(a kind of land crab); the Miti sucked the mucus from the child’s mouth
and nose, and the Unga divided the navel-string. Thus cared for and
adopted by the god Tangaloa, the child was called Tangaloa-a-Ui, i.e.,
Tangaloa the son of Ui. He grew up and took to wife Sina-a-Sa‘umani.
By her he had six children—(l) Ta‘e-o-Tangaloa; (2) ‘O Le-Fanonga; (3)
‘OLele; (4) Asi-asi-o-Langi; (5) Moe-u‘u-le-apai, (a girl), who became
the wife of Tui-Fiti, ‘king of Fiji.’ Her brother, Ta‘e-o-Tangaloa,
dreamed that his sister was ill-used by her husband, Tui-Fiti, and hence
he undertook the voyage celebrated in another solo; this he did in the
canoe of Tui-Afono, ‘ king of Afono,’ which is a village on the north side
of Tutuila, between Masefau and Yatia. The sixth child of Tangaloa-a-
Ui and Sina-a-Sa‘umani was a girl named Sina-Tauata.
The following is the poetic account of the effort of Ui and her
brother Lua-ma‘a to bring to an end the offering of human sacri-
fices to the Sun.
[Note. —Mr. Pratt recently handed the original text of this solo to a
Samoan native teacher, well acquainted with his own language, and asked
him to read it. On reading it through, the ‘ pundit ’ exclaimed, “ I seem
to have been reading a foreign language; only the old men understand
these words.” — Ed.]
XVI. —Le Solo i le La.
1. It is [still] dark, [but] the day is dawning;
2. The woman Ui and Lua-ma‘a


3. Start on their journey before daylight,
4. And take with them a bag [containing the offering].
5. Above them were the fetau and the fasa trees ;
6. They set up there their offering.
7. Ui sat up in the fasa tree at Sanga.
8. Sun, Sun, stand thou forth with thy [glorious] presence.
9. Thither he flew, intending to stand on the fasa.
TJi speaks —
10. O Sun, come here ;
11. To eat your man alive for food.
The Sun speaks—
12. 0 Ui, I desire to drink kava.
Ui speaks—
13. Let me explain about the kava ;
14. This is the kava [planting] of an industrious man ;
15. It stood in a rocky place;
16. It grew there and was reserved for a special use ;
17. The pieces of its root were scattered about;
18. I will split up these roots of kava ;
19. And I will scrape them with the kava scraper ;
20. And strain it out with the strainer, that it may be clear ;
21, I will rinse out my mouth; and now let me chew it.
La speaks —
22. 0 Ui, search the bag ;
23. Bring forth the ‘ fau ’ strainer from the bag ;
24. Strain out the kava.
Ui replies —
25. I am about to mix the kava with water,
26. But I will mix it in a ‘ tava’-wood bowl;
27. I will strain it that it may be quite clear.
28. Now I will proceed to portion out the kava;
29. Let me spread out the cold food [that goes with the kava],
30. O Sun, eat thou ;
31. There is a taro ; it is a ‘ maga-na‘a’;
32, There is a taro ; it is a ‘ fai-fai-tagata
33. There is a fish ; it is an ‘ ata'ata


34. There is a fish caught at the mouth of the reef-opening;
35. There is a fish hatched in the rock.
36. There is a fowl, full grown and plump,
37. Let your food be changed to that ;
38. Eat the bonito of the deep.
39. But, first, let me make an explanation [to you];
40. None of our family is here for you to eat.
41. Turn thy face this way ;
42. There is none of our family in [this] thy food.
43. ‘ Ui, come here to me, [says La,]
44. There is a chief in thy womb.
45. When he is born, call him Tanga ;
46. [ln] Atafu-uli, and Atafu-mea.’
0 !
Notes to Nob. XV. and XVI.
The numbers in these notes refer to the paragraphs of the ‘ Tala/ and
the lines of the * Solo/
3. Fiso and Ufi; ‘fiso’ is ‘sugar-cane/ Saccharum floridulum, and ‘ufi’
is a ‘ yam,’ Dioscorea.
Atafu — uli, * black ’; mea, ‘ reddish-brown ’; tea, ‘ bright, clear ’; sina,
< white/ Atafu, in geography, is the Tokelau group, three hundred miles
off from Samoa.
The Sun, ‘La’; cognate to this word are the Melanesian words lah
(Aneityum), ‘light,’ and lumi-lumi (Fiji), ‘to shine’; lahi (Motu, New
Guinea), ‘ flame/ and na-laume (Aneityum), ‘ flame.’ In the Aneityumese
word lah, the h (aspirate) stands for k, and leads us to the Samoan lagi,
‘sky/ lagi-md, ‘bright heavens’; that again is connected with the New
Britain word laga, ‘ clear, bright.’ Cognates in the Aryan languages are
Sk. raj, ‘to shine/ ranj, ‘to glow/ rakta, ‘ red, pure, blood ’ (c/. Melanesian
ra, ‘blood,’) Gr. lampas, ‘a torch,’ lampto, ‘I shine,’ Lat. luceo, ‘ I shine,
&c. The Egyptian Sun-god, as is well-known, is Ea.
Aso is ‘ a daily offering of food to a chief.’
Lua-ma e a means ‘ two stones.’
Taro ; the gifts here were — magasiva, ‘ the branching taro ’; ‘ ata‘ata,
* a particular kind of fish ’; tind-manu, * a mother hen ’; kava, the plant;
tanoa, ‘ a kava bowl ’; ipu, ‘ the kava cup ’; to, ‘ the strainer; lega, ‘ tur-
meric.’ Fetau is the tree Calophyllum inophyllum; fasa is a ‘ pandanus
tree.
4. Taumafa, ‘ eat/ a chief’s word; taute, * eat/ a high chief’s word.


Tava the name of a hard-wood tree.
5. Idols, ‘ tupua ’; these were not idols in our sense of the word, for,
although the Samoans set up images, they never worshipped them; the
‘tupua’ here were merely amulets, charms, fetiches, which were carried
about by the owner for his protection from evil influences.
Ua Id gaoi; la, ‘they two,’ meaning Ui and Ala.
7. Tuli is a Polynesian bird ; cf. ‘ Solo ole Va,’ note 2. Fuia is a bird,
the Sturnoides atrifusca. Miti is also a bird, the Lalage terat. Unga is
a ‘ soldier-crab.’ The Fnia is the lilaori Huia, and that is the tutelary
bird of one of the great Maori tribes.
Sina-a-Sa‘u-mani, ‘Sina [the daughter] of Sa‘u-mani.’ Here Mr,
Powell says in a note, “This is Sina-Tauata, the daughter of Sa‘u-mani.
There were two Sa‘u-manis, namely, Sa‘u-mani aitu ( aitu, ‘spirit’), a
widely known man, and Sa‘u-mani ali‘i (ali‘i, ‘chief’). The latter was
the son of Le-Fe‘e-mai-lalo, ‘ the Octopus from below.’ His wife was
Si‘i-si‘i-mane‘e ; she bore Sina who became the wife of Tangaloa-a-Ui.”
Fanonga means ‘ destruction Asi-asi-o-lagi, ‘he who visits the sky ’;
Lele, ‘ there.’
XYI.
Line 5. Fetau and fasa are native trees; as above. The fasa has a bright
red fruit, in appearance somewhat like the pineapple; the seeds are a
brilliant red and are in much request for necklaces ; girls are so fond of
the red colour, that they will wear chili pods strung round the neck,
even although the skin is burned thereby. The fasa grows in rocky places
near the beach, which also is a favourite place for the hava plant; see
Solo X., lines 3—5.
8. Presence; ‘ala‘ala,’ a title of majesty; lau‘ala c ala, * thy presence,'
addressed to chiefs.
15 —21. Grew, scrape, strain, rinse; see the Icava solos.
19. Kava scraper; ‘pipi-‘ava’; pi pi is a ‘cockle shell.’
23. Fan; the strainer here is made of fan, ‘hibiscus’; elsewhere (Solo
X., 15.) it is called the pulu strainer.
31. Manga-na‘a, manga-siva, and manga-lo are different kinds of taro.
XYlt —Malietoa-feai.
‘O le tala i le fa‘a-ifo o le aso o Malietoa-fe‘ai.
‘How the human sacrifices ojfered to Malietoa-the-fierce were stopped.
Introduction— l. The story of Tangaloa-a-Ui shows that human sac-
rifices were offered to the gods; this story tells us that great chiefs also
feasted every day on the flesh of men. What the gods do, chiefs may do
also. Here, the ‘ aso ’ was stopped through the contrivance of two brothers.


Mb. Powell’s Summabt.—2. Tupu-ai-vao was another person to
whom human sacrifices were offered, hut Fua-lau of Fale-alili informs me
that ‘ Malie-toa-the-fierce ’ and he were two different persons. Malie-toa
lived ‘ far far back,’ but Tupu only about ten generations ago; he daily
feasted on human flesh, like the king of Fiji. The story runs thus :
3. Malietoa-fe'ai was very oppressive; he had his man-eating day;
men were brought to him as food. The people of the west had all been
eaten up. A man of Sale-sa-tele, whose name was Tui, guessed that he
would soon come to Fale-alili. Then he and his brother, Yaea, made a
plan to put an end to his having a man-eating day.
4. There was inland a pig that came there through the marriage of
their sister to Atu-u'u of Siumu. They baked the head of the pig ,• then
they hung it up at a place where the king passed along. He looked at
it, and then desired it. A council of the people was held on one of the
days when the offering to the king should be made; then Tui and Yaea
proposed that they should be the first to provide the feast. The king
said to them two, ‘Of what use is your offering ; let a tray be set right
below my seat, and let it be placed before me.’ Then these two said to
the people, ‘ Let the pig be prepared, and let the two lumps of lard and
the liver be rubbed down together.’ The chief kept on asking for the
offering, but Tui said, ‘ Do you first eat the made-dish that is prepared.’
The chief wrongly thought that it was part of the offering, but it was
only the lard and liver of the pig. The king was pleased and said,
‘Friend, this is the first day that I have eaten good food; but go and
skin your offering of to-day.’ Then they two went and Tui deliberated;
the green cocoa-nut leaf was nearest to the body, but the dry cocoa-nut
leaf was on the outside. He brought it and placed it before the king.
He tore away the dry cocoa-nut leaf. The king looked down upon it,
and the eyes of Tui shone. Then he said, * Let this be the end of the
man-eating days; let the east and the west now live, since you have
found so good a substitute for human flesh.’ Ever since there has been
no man-eating day.
Notes to No. XYII.
Par. 2. Tupu-ai-vao is the * king from the bush.’ Malie-toa is the
‘ agreeable cock ’ or warrior.
3, Man-eating day or offering ; * aso ’; q.v., as above, p. 127.
Fale-alili a district in the island of Hpolu.
4. Pig; the usual present to the bride’s family at a marriage.
Skin; the aborigines of Northern Queensland also skin a human body
at their cannibal feasts.
King ; ‘ tupu,’ a high chief; tray ; ‘ laoai.’
Made-dish; ‘ ofu,’ native food, tied up in a leaf, ready to be cooked.
The ‘ tupu ’ thought it was part of the ‘ aso,’ and enjoyed it much.
I—October 7,1881.


Tui deliberated. There is a hiatus after these words ; the * tala’-maker
•hould have told us that Tui got his brother to place him alive in the
tray or basket, and to cover him up with cocoa-nut leaves so as to make
the whole look like the usual ‘ aso’; and the brother carried this offering
into the presence of the king and set it down before his seat. Then the
story goes on to say that the king removed the wrappings and found Tui
there, and Tui’s eyes beaming upon him. This touched Malietoa with
compassion as towards a friend, and he thereupon abolished human
•offerings.
XYIII. — Malietoa-fe‘ai. —A Solo.
1. You are a Fale-alili man ;
2. [So] listen to me ;
3. For our lives are about to be sung,—
4. [The story] about Fa‘a-vavau and Mate-mate.
5. Tua and Lo‘o were their parents ;
6. Le-tonu was their sister ;
7. She was married in Siumu to Atu-u‘u ;
8. By which marriage they got a pig;
9. They were married [and lived] in an inland village.
10. Then went Malietoa-fe‘ai [thither] to wash his head. [up.
11. Some one pointed out to him, lo!, the head [of the pig] hanging
12. Let us two eat of it, [said he],
13. But there is one drawback—-
14. That, if it is turned, we shall have no desire to eat of it.
15, O chief, [says Tui,] go into the house ;
16. Sit down pleasantly with them, and chat pleasantly with them,
17. While we two will take down the head and prepare it.
18. We will cook it with cocoa-nut juice poured over it;
19. And [for it] I will pluck the leaves of the best bananas,
20. Which I will bring hither in my hands;
21. [When] the head [is ready], I will bring it and show it to you.
Malietoa replies—
22. Friend, come gently hither ;
23. I am exhausted with hunger.
24. I will set up my staff of office —our Fale-atua ;
25. Now then, here is our Fale-atua ; leave it here ;


26. But let us have our first feast
27. On a pig that ran about at large inland.
28. Go up [inland] and get it;
29. Take out the two lumps of lard
30. And the liver; squeeze them out [for cooking].
31. Friend, when you have got your feast [ready],
32. Lay it out as on a tray ; lay it out
33. Close to the seat of Malietoa-fe‘ai.
34. Friend, walk gently hither ;
35. I am exhausted with hunger.
Tui says —
36. O chief, do you sit still and rest,
37. Till I uncover the prepared viands;
38. Then you will eat of them.
* * * * *
39. Malietoa ate, continued to eat
40. Well pleased, and he said,
41. ‘Friend, this is the very best of feast days,
42. [For] I have eaten good food [to-day].
43. Friend, tear off the skin of the dish you two [prepared],
44. Lo ! a dry cocoa-nut leaf is on the outside,
45. And a green cocoa-nut leaf is on the inside ;
46. Tui’s eyes are shining.
Malietoa says —
47. ‘ Friend, come now, since you have done so well,
48. Let those to the east live, let those to the west live;
49. And if you have any number of followers, you will so arrange
50. That your feast-offering shall not become a burden.’
Notes to No. XVIII.
Line 1. A Fale-alili man; lie would listen with interest to this song,
for the heroes of it, Tui and Vaea, were from that district of Upolu.
3. Our lives; i.e., this is an account of the way in which human sacri-
fices ceased there long long ago, and how ‘ the lives * (line 3) of the in-
habitants were thus spared.
4. Fa‘a-vavau means f everlasting ’ and appears to be a by-name of the
brother, Vaea, because the people’s gratitude held him in everlasting


remembrance. Mate-mate; Mr. Powell says here, * This Solo I got from
Tufu o Sapunoa, who tells me that Tui was named Mate-mate f the
schemer/ on account of his £ quick discernment,’ and Yaea was called
Laoai f tray-table/ because he placed his brother before the king in the
basket or tray.
6. Le-tonu; ‘ one who is £ straight ’in conduct.’
8. Married ; pig; ‘ married ’is here expressed by the word taw; which
in Duke of York island is taula, ‘ to marry’/ on a marriage the man gives
a feast —a pig—to the woman’s family.
10. For a head washing ; to them a very necessary thing; they make a
lather of the leaves of the toi tree or of wild oranges pounded up, and
with this they wash their heads clean.
13. Drawback; the word is pona, ‘ a knot,’ * a difficulty.’
14. Turned; the meaning is this —when the head is first cooked, it
comes out prettily browned ; but if it is baked again, it will become black
and so changed that it will not be desired.
15. Go into the house; Tui wishes him to go inside so that he may know
nothing of the counterfeit arrangements for the feast which he and his
brother are to make outside.
17. We two; i.e., the two brothers, Tui and Yaea.
18 —19. Cocoa-nut juice; this is a favourite condiment in Samoan cook-
ing ; and the food is put in the native oven wrapped in banana leaves.
The juice of a cocoa-nut seems also to have some sacred virtue in it; for
it is poured on the hand that has touched a dead chief, in order to take
off tabu. Bananas; two kinds are mentioned here — fa‘i, the general name,
and mamae.
22. Gently; this probably means that Malietoa’s fierceness need not
cause Tui any alarm.
24. Staff of office; ‘ to f o-to f o ’; this he sets up, as a sign that offerings
('aso/ lines 26, 31, 41) must be made and thus respect shown to his rank.
26. Feast; ‘ aso,’ a daily offering of food to a chief.
30. Lard, liver; these seem to be choice parts for a made dish.
33. Seat; on high occasions, chiefs sit on a chair or stool.
36. Sit still; ‘ noga,’ a chief’s word. Tui wants to get time to make all
his preparations, unobserved.
38 —39. Eat; ‘ taute,’ a high chief’s word.
48. Live to the east; i.e., no human offerings shall now be brought from
east or west.
49—50. So arrange that, when you become numerous, your offering of
pigs may not be burdensome on any one family, as the offering of the
human ‘ aso ’ had been found to be; for among the islanders, certain
families were devoted to the gods, and, being bound to furnish human
victims, soon became extinct.


XlX,— The Kings of Manu‘a and Samoa,
Introduction : —These genealogies are partly mythical, partly historical.
The account, for instance, of the progeny of Le-Fatu and Le-'ele'ele (No.
XXII.) is clearly fabulous, but the list of the kings of Manu'a (No. XX.),
given, as it is, by Taua-mTu, the official recorder, is, in the main, reliable;
so is also the history of the two £ Ali‘a brothers (No. XIX.), for that is
supported by the traditions of the Rarotongans themselves. In any case
these genealogical records are worth preserving, as they show us what
account the Samoans can give of their own ancestry.
Mr. Powell says, under date Dec. 10, 1870 : —Taua-nu c u, legend keeper
has given me the following particulars to-day :
The present Moa-Tui-Manu‘a is the thirty-fifth of that name.
Taua-nu‘u himself, in his boyhood, has seen the immediately pre-
ceding Moa, who was not only Tui-Manu'a, but also priest of the
gods ; about fifty years ago, he was killed in a war with Fiti-uta,
an inland village on Tau of Manu'a. His predecessor again was
Moa-atoa, ‘ the complete Moa ’; he lived to a great age, and in his
reign there was no war. Some of the early kings also lived to a
great age, but most of the more recent reigns were very short;
for it was the custom to elect only men of mature age and experi-
ence to the office. The first Moa had, added to his name, the
epithet l ali‘a-tama (tama, ‘boy’ ‘ ali‘a * ‘double-canoe’).
The following is the genealogy of Moa-Tui-Manu‘a, ‘Moa, king
of Manu‘a’:—
There was at Le-Faga, in the district of Fiti-uta, a band of
spirits dwelling in a cave, Lua-ai-aitu, ‘ cave for spirits’; these
gave birth alternately to men and spirits. Thus was born a man
named Le-Folasa, ‘ the prophet’; he had a son also named Le-
* This word corresponds with the Rarotongan kingly title f Karika
it is the same word. Sarha, whose malae in Manu'a was named Raro-
tonga, went on a voyage in a double canoe and never returned. This is
the Karika referred to in William’s “Missionary Enterprises.” The
Rarotongans have no s, but, in some instances, the k is substituted for itj
t.g., in Samoan, sapo is *to catch with the hand,’ in Rarotongan kapo; in
Samoan su is ‘ wet,’ in Rarotongan ku; hence Karika is the Samoan
Sari'a.—T.P.


Folasa, whose wife was Sina. By her he had a son called Le-Lo-
loga, ‘ the flood,’ ‘ the great rain.’ This son had several wives,
two of whom Pua, the name of a tree, and Auia-luma, ‘ going in
front,’ came to be with child at the same time (‘o le to-masaga,'
*to be both pregnant together in the same family ’). When that
was known, Le-Folasa prophesied that whichever of these chil-
dren should be born first would have the kingdom ( ao , ‘royal title,’
1 kingly dignity’).
O le a fa'aifo i le lagi Ao ; —the Ao is about to come down from the sky
Ai se fafine e luai fanau, —on the woman who shall first bring forth;
E taunu'u i ai Ao. —the Ao shall reach to her.
Pua gave birth to a son in the morning at Le-Faga, but, before
the child could be proclaimed king, a messenger came to call Le-
Lologa to Aualuma—a place between Le-malae-o-Sao and Le-Aua-
‘uli—where Auia-luma was in labour. So he hastened away; but,
just as he arrived there, he heard the shout of the young men (‘sia-
sia a taulelea’), proclaiming the new-born child as king. Le-Lologa
immediately exclaimed, ‘ The child of haste, not proclaimed with
deliberation ’(‘o le tarna ale failise, ae le aoa lemu ’). Le-Lo-
loga made light of the whole affair ; he returned to Le-Faga and
reported that the kingly title had already been given (‘ ua alaga le
tupu, ua e‘e,’ ‘ the king was shouted ; respect was paid ’). The
children were therefore named ‘o‘Ali‘a-taraa, ‘the younger ‘Ali‘a,’
who was Auia-luma’s child, and ‘Ali‘a-matua, ‘ the elder ‘Ali‘a,’
Pua’s child. The latter was also known as ‘Le tama ale aoa lemu,’
* the child of leisurely proclamation.’
The boys grew up and used to stroll about together in the
neighbourhood of Aua-luma, the younger being recognized as Tui-
Manu‘a and wearing the emblem of royalty, the ‘lau-fau’ (lau,
1 leaf fan, ‘the hibiscus tree’), —a head band or turban of white
cloth made of the inner bark of the paper mulberry. One day,
when they were strolling together, they came to a cocoanut tree
at a place called ‘O-le-lu‘u. Then ‘Ali‘a-matua said to his younger
brother, ‘ By-and-by, Tui-Manu‘a will not have anything to eat
( taute , ‘to eat ’ —a very high chief’s word); for lam weak in my
feet; I cannot go up the cocoa-nut tree to throw down a nut for


you ; what, if you just hang your turban on a tree and go up.’
‘Very good,’ said he; and, hanging the turban on a branch, he
climbed up. No sooner was he up, than the other boy seized the
turban and ran to Tau, and shouted out ‘ O my dignity ! I have
got my dignities’ ( £ lo‘u ao e, ua ‘ou maua ‘ou ao’). Here he
remained for some time ; at last his grand-father Le-Folasa sent
for him. He went to Aua-luma but with much dread, and, getting
there, he sat down outside the house. The Prophet called him in
and told him not to fear, for things had come right according to
the prediction that the first-born was to be king.
Le-Folasa then ordered him to occupy the one end of the house,
while ‘Ali‘a-tama was to occupy the other; these were to be their
seats of honour and distinction. After having stated that £Ali£a-
matua had, according to the prediction, a right to be Tui-Manu £ a,
since he was born before the other, he assigned to them their name
and dignity ; thus :
la igoa oe ‘Alba-matua, ia Le-Afio o Moa;
A o oe ‘ Ali c a-tama ia igoa oe, ia Le-Alofi o Moa.
" Be thou named Ali'a-matua, the Presence of Moa;
And be thou named Ali f a-tama, the Circle-of-chiefs of Moa.”
The former was thus declared to be king of Manu £ a; and the
other to have an inferior position as chief of Fiti-uta. In case of
a quarrel arising between them, neither of them was to encroach
on the territory of the other, but their battle ground should be
Le-Ava-tele, which is on this side of Le-Faga. ££ If either of them
should transgress this injunction, his land as a punishment would
be overrun with creeping vines, because that would be a fight
between brothers; and he should not get the kingdom”; [ i.e .,
“ A si £ i atu le taua e Tati, e saua lona lau £ ele £ ele ele au fue-fue ;
a si £ i mai le taua e Fiti-uta, e saua lona lau £ ele £ ele ele au fuefue,
aua £ o le tau ole uso. Ele maua le malo ese nu £ u si £ i taua.”]
Since then, there have been many wars between Tau and Fiti-uta,
but the land that began the war had continual calamities.
The following explanation of the names in legends XIX.—
XXII. about the kings of Manu £ a may be given here :


Tui-Manu £ a, 1 king of Manna.’ Tui and tupu both mean a * very
high chief,’ ‘ a king.’
Tui-Tau, £ king of Tan.’
Fiti-uta, £ Fiji-inland a village in the little island of Tan.
Le-faga, £ the Bay,’ in Tan.
Le-Foldsa, £ the prophet.’
Moa-atoa, £ the complete Moa.’
£ Ali £ a-tama, £ the younger £ Ali : a ’ (double-canoe).
£ Ali £ a-matua, £ the elder £ Ali £ a ’ (double-canoe).
Lua-ai-aitu, £ cave for spirits.’
Sina, £ white.’
Le-lologa, £ the great rain.’
Auia-luma, ‘ going-in-front.’
To-masaga, £ both pregnant ’ (masaga, 1 twins ’).
Pua, the name of a tree.
Aua-luma, £ the front cave ’ —a place.
Le-malae-o-sao, £ the forum of the principal chiefs.’
Auahili, £ the dark cave,’ —a place.
Lau-fau, £ leaf of the fan' or £ hibiscus’ tree.
0-le-Lu £ u, £ shaking,’—probably a place.
Afio, £ Presence,’ a little of very high dignity.
Alofi, £ Circle-of-chiefs,’ a little of less dignity.
Le-ava-tele, 1 the great boat-opening ’ in the reef.
Tufu-16-Mata-afa, i.e., Tufu of the family of Mata-afa.
Seuea, £ a native of Wallace Island.’
Fau-tau-sala, £ punished both together.’
La-ta-nonoa, £ the bands of us two.’
Lata-soa £ a, £ near mountain plantain,'—a proper name.
Futi, ‘ pluck out,’ —name of a man or woman.
Ua-le-galu, £ where the serf does not break,’ —a place.
Tutuila, one of the islands of the Samoan group.
Tui-fe £ ai, £ fierce king.’
Gauta-fusi, ‘ inland of the marsh,’ —a place. The marsh lands for
taro were generally near the shore.
Fola-le-la, £ spreading out the sun,’ —a man’s name.


Tui-tele, ‘ great king.’
Leone, a district and bay in the island of Tutuila.
Saga-polo-tele, a chief on Up6lu.
Upolu, one of the islands of the Samoan group.
Se-atu-mai-nu‘u, ‘one bonito from nu‘u.’
Se-atu-mai-aofa, ‘ one bonito from aofa.’
Se-atu-mai-fea, ‘one bonito from fea.’
Safata, a district of Tua-masanga, which is the central division of
Upolu, on the south side.
Yao-o-ali‘i, ‘ the leg of the chief.’
Tagaloa-tua-lafa, ‘ Tangaloa-back-flat.’
A‘ana-vae-ma, ‘ A‘ana-leg-white.’ A‘ana is a district in Upolu.
Savai‘i, a large island of the Samoan group.
Le-ulu-moega is the leading land in A‘ana.
Tui-A‘ana-tama-a-le-lagi, ‘ king-of-A‘ana, son-of-the-sky.’
Yae-toe, ‘ leg-again.’
Tui-Toga, ‘king of Tonga.’
Fa‘a-sei-sei, ‘ cause to slide along.’
Gutu-fagu, ‘mouth of a bottle.’
Sala-masina, ‘ cut off (punish) the moon.’
Tui-one-o-Up6lu, ‘ king of the sand (shore) of Up6lu.’
Tau-ili-ili, the name still of a district of Salea-‘ula in Savai'i.
Le-tua-masaga, the central division of Up6lu, containing many
towns and villages.
Tui-Atua, ‘king of Atua,’ a district in Up6lu.
Mata-afa; he is commonly called Tui-Atua, king of Atua, —the
eastern division of Up6lu.
Tau-fau, ‘ continually building,’—a man’s name.
Solo-solo, one of the chief villages of Atua, on a bay on the north
side.
Sa-Leota, ‘family of Leota’; there are chiefs of that name.
Tupua, ‘ an image,’ but not for worship ; this is still the name of
a great family in Savai'i.
Sa-Moe-ga-gogo, ‘family of Moe-ga-gogo ’ (‘bed of sea-gull’); a
high chief of the Atua division in Updlu.


XX.—The following is a list of the
Kings of Manu'a,
as I received it to day (July 13, 1871) from Taua-nu‘u.—T. P.
The name of the king. Meaning of the name.
Meaning of the name.
1. Tae-o-Tagaloa*
2. Fa‘a-ea-nu‘u (son of 1), “lifter up of submerged! lands.”
3. Sao-io-io-manu (son of 2), “safe as the bird over there.”
4. Sao-loa (son of 2), “ escaping right off.”
5. Le-Lologa (son of 3), “ the flood.”
6. ‘Ali‘a-matua (son of 5), “ the elder c Ali‘a,” or double canoe.
7. ‘AIi £ a-tama (son of 5), “ the boy (i.e., younger) ‘Ali‘a.
8. Fa‘a-ea-nu‘u)
. brothers as above.
9. ui pui po 1 gons of ? “ shut up by night.”
0. Sili-ai-vao j
Tkaligo .(son of 9)
12. Se-manu (son of 10), “ one bird.”
13. Fa‘a-toalia (son of 12)
14. Taliutafa (son of 13)
15. Ti'aligo.
16. Seuea (daughter of 14) “ a native of Uea ” (Wallace Isld.)
17. Salofi (brother of 16)
18. Taliutafa, (son of 17)
19. Talolo-mana
20. Yao-mana (son of 19)
21. Talolo (son of 20)
22. Talolo-fa‘a-lelei-nu‘u, “ Talolo who reconciles the lands.”
His was a long and prosperous reign, with no wars; all
the upper lands and those to the east were occupied
by a large population.
/Poumele
I JSegi
g Pule-ta-fi
Jolite
Pule-ta-faga-faga; he invented a kind of double canoe,
lolite
Tui-a-aitu “ king of spirits.’
Taalolo fana-ese “ go in crowds and err in shooting.”
Le-Yao, reigned from before 1830, “ the bush.”
* The Samoan g everywhere sounds ng. f /Submerged, i.e., conquered.


XXl. —The Progeny of Ali‘a-tama,
Who was the first Tui-Manu'a.
010-valu-tele ascended from below and became the wife of Tufu*
16-Mata‘afa in Muti‘e, chief of Piti-uta. She gave birth to two
girls named Seuea and Fau-tau-sala. Seuea became the wife of
Tui-Toga; the other girl became the wife of Aua-luma and she
gave birth to a girl named Lata-nonoa who became the wife of
Tui-Tau, by whom he had a daughter named Lata-soa‘a or I uti.
This woman, the daughter of Tui-Tau and Lata-soa £ a, became
the wife of £ Ali £ a-tama, who was Tui-Manu‘a. By her he had a
daughter named XJa-le-galu. She went to Tutuila and became the
wife of Tui-E‘ai of Gauta-fusi, and gave birth to a girl named Fola-
le-La. This girl became the adopted daughter of Tui-tele of Leone.
Saga-polo-tele came from Up6lu and took her to wife. [Another
version bears that she became his adopted daughter \ that, on one
occasion, she was dressing his hair, which, according to custom in
those days, was very long, and that his hair, falling on her lap,
caused pregnancy]. By her he had three daughters, Se-atu-mai-
nu‘u, Se-atu-mai-aofa and Se-atu-mai-fe £ a. The first of these
became the wife of Ama, chief of Safata. By her he had a
daughter, to whom was given the name of Vae-o-ali £ i. She became
the wife of Tagaloa-tua-lafa of Savaifi under the following circum-
stances :
Tui-A‘ana-vae-ma went on a visit to Savaifi. Two of his atten-
dants were named and Tutuila. This party was liberally
entertained by their Savaifi hosts, and a i.e., a heap of cocoa-
nuts piled round a cocoa-nut tree, was placed at the king s disposal.
Of these he gave Ape and Tutuila no share. This offended them,
and, to be revenged, they left him and went to seek some one else
as a husband for Vae-o-ali £ i. So they brought Tagaloa-tua-lafa,
who married her, and she became pregnant. Then they drove him
away again. The son whom she bore was taken to Le-ulu-moega
and named Tui-A £ ana-tama-a-le-lagi. When he was full grown, he
sought as his wife Vae-toe, daughter of Tui-Toga, the offspring or


descendant of Seuca, sister of Fa‘a-tau-sala. On this errand he
sent first her two female companions, Fa £ a-sei-sei and Gutu-fagu.
Afterwards he went himself and brought his wife Yae-toe to
Up6lu. By him she had two children, Sala-masina, a girl, and
Tui-one-o-Up6lu, a boy. This boy went to Tonga. But the girl
was sought in marriage by Tau-ili-ili of Le-tua-masaga. In Sala-
masina the two original branches of royalty were combined, and
she was heir to the four royal titles of Tui-A‘ana, Tui-Atua,
Malietoa, and Na-toali-tele. Her children were Taufau and Sina,
and from these two sisters most of the present chiefs’ families trace
their origin; from Taufau come the race of Tui-A £ ana, Mata-afa,
the Solo-solo chiefs, the Sa-Leota, &c. From Sina come the race
of Tupua and the Sa-Moe-ga-gogo, <fec.
XXII.— The First Samoans.
Under date March 21, 1871, Mr. Powell says,—Taua-nu f u gave me
to-day the following particulars, viz., that Le-Fatu and Le-‘Ele‘ele gave
birth to a boy and a girl alternately, who became husband and wife. Their
first two were Malae (fem.) and Yavau (mate.). These gave birth to
Faimalie (fem.) and Faitama'i ( masc.). Their next two were Tele (mase.)
and Malae (fem.). These gave birth to Valuta and Tiapa, Manu and
Mala, Lei, Pue and Ite.
Their immediate descendants may therefore be arranged thus :
Le Fatu ma Le- £ ele £ ele.
Malae and Yavau—Faimalie and Faitamai—Titi and Titi
Tele and Malae— Yalua and Tiapa— Sava and I £ i
„ Manu and Mala—
„ Pue and Ite— Le-Fale-tolu
Fe £ ema— Tui-Samata
Pu-lou-lou-lele and Malae-la—Losi
Another version of the progeny of Le-Fatu and Le- £ Ele £ ele, as
given by Fofo, is this :
Faimalie and Faitamad
Yavau and Tele or Nu £ u and Tele
Mamao and Laveai or II u
Valu £ a and Tiapa.


XXlll.— Samoan Customs,
Analogous to those of the Israelites.
1. Septennial observances.
Gen. viii., 10. And he stayed yet other seven days, tfcc.
Deut. xv., 1. At the end of every seven years thou shalt make
a release.
Septennial Observances op the Samoans.
1. The fire of f Naiufi ’ was kept burning continuously for seven days.
The * hTaiufi ’ was a very sacred kind of shark and so seldom seen, that,
whenever one was caught, the fishermen used to keep a fire burning
night and day for seven days.
2. The fire of a man who * eats men’ (a warrior ) was kept burning in
his honour for seven days. This was done for any one who made himself
illustrious in battle.
3. The number seven was also observed in all matters that concerned
the f aitu ’ or minor gods. Feasts to them were often appointed seven
days in advance; the order was given thus : — c Let the feast be made
seven days hence.’
2. Circumcision.
Gen. xvii., 10. Every man child among you shall be circumcised.
Joshua v., 2. Make thee sharp knives and circumcise again
the children of Israel the second time.
Samoa.—The Samoans also have circumcision for cleanliness
and manliness.
3. Bespeaking attention.
Gen. xxiii., 6, 11, 15. Hear us, my lord.
Samoa.—The Samoans use the same form of address.
4. The giving of names.
Gen. xxvi., 20, 22. He called the name of the well Esek [‘strife’].
Gen. xviii., 12. Therefore Sarah laughed within herself.
Gen. xxi., 3. Abraham called the name of his son Isaac.
Also Gen. xxix., 32 ; xxx., 24 ; xxxv., 18.
Samoa.—Names are given from circumstances attending birth.
Family names are hereditary. Names are given to places
from events associated with them.
5. The changing of namts.
Gen. xxviii., 19. And he called the name of that place Bethel;
but the name of that city was called Luz at the first.


Samoa—The Samoans change names for similar reasons.
■6. A feast at a marriage.
Gen. xxix., 22. And Laban gathered together all the men of
the place and made a feast.
Samoa. —The Samoans have a feast at a marriage.
7. Presents to great men.
Gen. xliii., 11—15. Carry down the man a present
Samoa.—Samoans always take a present when paying a visit
of respect or friendship to a superior.
8. Benjamin's mess.
Gen. xliii., 34. And he took and sent messes unto them from
before him.
Samoa,—Samoan meals are served as here recorded.
9. Natural eloquence.
Gen. xliv., 18 to the end. Oh, my lord, let thy servant, I pray
thee, speak a word in my lord’s ears, &c.
Samoa.—A Samoan orator, or the principal man in a family, has
naturally a readiness for such eloquence as this in similar
circumstances. Samoan orators have a habit of giving
details as here.
10. Embalming.
Gen. L, 2, 26. And Joseph commanded his servants the physi
cians to embalm his father. Also 2 Chron. xvi., 14.
Samoa. —Embalming was an ancient Samoan custom and was
called ‘atualala,’but is now lost. See Turner’s “Nineteen
Years in Polynesia.”
11. Mourning for the dead.
Gen. 1., 4, 10, 11. And when the days of his mourning were
past, Joseph tfcc.
Samoa.—The Samoans have different stages of mourning for
the dead. See Turner’s “ Nineteen Years in Polynesia.”
12. Doing reverence to superiors.
Gen. 1., 18. And his brethren also went and fell down before
his face; and they said, Behold we be thy servants.


Samoa. —The Samoan i/oga, ‘ bowing down, as an act of sub-
mission (from ifo ‘ down ’), is similar to this.
13. Tatooing.
Lev. xix., 28. Ye shall not . . . print any marks upon you.
Samoa. —The Samoans, as is well-known, tatoo their bodies.
14. Songs of celebration.
Num. xxi., 17. Then Israel sang this song.
Judges v., 1. Then sang Deborah ... on that day, saying, (fee.
Samoa. —The Samoans celebrate in song all important events
in their experience.
15. The invoking of a curse.
Num. xxii., 6. Come now, therefore, I pray thee, curse me this
people.
17um. xxiii., 7. Come, curse me Jacob, and defy Israel.
Samoa.—The Samoans have o le tagata nafai tu‘i, ‘the man
who devotes to destruction,’ like Balaam. They curse an
object of hatred or dread, and use enchantments against it.
16, New year offerings.
Num. xxviii., 11-15. And, in the beginning of your months,
ye shall offer a burnt offering to the Lord.
Samoa.—The principal feast of the year is that in honour of
Tangaloa-fua. See “ List of Months.”
17. Wizards, enchanters , c&c.
Deut. xviii., 10, 11. There shall not be found among you
an enchanter, a witch, or a charmer, <fec.
Samoa.—The Samoans consult persons who practise magical arts.
18. Messengers run.
Josh, vii., 22. So Joshua sent messengers, and they ran unto
the tent.
Samoa. —Samoan messengers, sent in such a case, would do
exactly the same thing. Young men, sent on a errand by
the council (fono) of chiefs in Samoa, would set off at a run.
19. Heads cut off in war.
Judges vii., 25. They brought the heads of Oreb and Zeeb to
Gideon on the other side Jordan, Also 2 Sam. iv,, 7, 8.
Samoa. —The Samoans do the same.


20. The use of slings and stones in war.
Judges xx., 16. Among all this people [of war], there were
seven hundred chosen men left handed; every one could
sling stones at a hair-breadth and not miss.
Samoa. —The Samoans use slings and stones in war.
21. Run-away wives.
Judges xix., 2, 3. And her husband arose and went after her.
Samoa. —There is a great deal of this sort of thing in Samoa,
and especially as in verse 3. A man goes after a fugitive
wife, and the wife’s family tries to keep him among them-
selves.
22. Stepping over the threshold.
1 Sam. v., 5. Therefore neither the priests of Dagon . . . tread
on the threshold of Dagon ; cf. Zeph, i. 9.
Samoa. —The Samoans step over the threshold of their houses
in reverential remembrance of Tae-o-Tangaloa. See ‘ Tala
i le Sega.’
23. A choice portion offood for an honoured guest.
1 Sam. ix., 22, 24. And the cook took up the shoulder . . and
set it before Saul.
Samoa. —Samoans reserve a choice portion for an expected
guest, a leg or a sirloin of pork, &c,
24. Demoniacal possessions.
1 Sam. xvi., 14, 15, 23. An evil spirit from the Lord troubled
him.
Samoan. —The Samoan wizards use charms to drive evil spirits
out of the bodies of those possessed by them.
25. Single combat in war.
1 Sam. xvii., 1-8. Choose you a man for you, and let him
cdme down to me, &c.
Samoa. —Armies place themselves opposite to each other, a
cleared space between ; champions are chosen to fight for
them.
26. Familiar spirits.
1 Sam. xxviii., 7 19. Seek me a woman that hath a familiar
spirit, &c.


Samoa.—The wizards pretend that they are speaking under the
influence of a spirit.
27, Use of parables.
2 Sam. xii., 1— 4. There were two men in one city; the one
rich and the other poor.
Samoa. —The Samoan traditions are often symbolical repre-
sentations of real events.
28. Relations between brothers and sisters.
2 Sam. xiii., 10. And Amnon said unto Tamar, Bring the
meat into the chamber, that I may eat of thine hand.
Samoa. —Brothers in Samoa scrupulously shun the doing of
anything unseemly in the presence of their sisters, and are
supposed to be above suspicion.
29. Long hair.
2 Sam. xiv., 26. The hair was heavy on him ; cf. also xviii., 9.
Samoa. —Young chiefs and others wear long hair.
30. Head officers.
1 Kings iv., 7. And Solomon had twelve officers over all Israel.
Samoa. —The office and duties of the tulafale somewhat resem-
ble this.
31. Funereal burnings.
2 Chron. xvi., 14. And they made a very great burning for
him. xxi., 19. And his people made no burning for him.
Jer. xxxiv., 5. But thou shalt die in peace ; and with the
burnings of thy fathers, &c.
Samoa. —The Samoans have burnings in honour of deceased
kings and chiefs o le lagi; but they withhold the burnings
in the case of cruel and despotic ones. Cf. the history of
Tui Manu‘a taalolo.
32. Calling the name of the chief who is to drink.
Jer. xxv., 17. Then I took the cup . . . and made all nations
to drink.
Samoa. —It is the custom at all feasts to call out the name of
the chief who is next to drink.
J—October 7,1891.


33. Rod or staff of office.
Ez. xxi., 10 et al. It contemneth the rod of my son.
Names of the Samoan Months. 1
January— Tagaloa-fua. 2
February —Fa‘alele; 3 Ta'afanua; 6 Nua ; Papu
March —Tulia ; 4 a feast to that god.
April —Le-Unu ; 5 a feast to him.
May —Ta £ af anua- 6 tele.
June —Malelega. 7
July —Sina. 8
August —Y aenoa.
September —Lau-popo; 9 a feast to him.
October —Le-Fanoga : 10 a feast to him.
November —Tagaloa-ta‘u ; x 1 a feast to him.
December —Tte; 12 a feast to him.
Notes.
1. A ‘ month ’ or ‘ moon ’ is masina.
3. ‘ The flying of the pigeons;’ fa'alele, ‘to cause to fly/
4. Tulia means * driven/ but here ‘ Tulia ’ is a god.
6. Ta‘a, ‘to run about on’; fanua tele, ‘ the big land/
7. Malelega, ‘the flight of the tame pigeon.’
8. Sina means ‘ white ’ and is probably the moon.
12. ‘lte, ‘to know ’; ‘i‘ite, ‘to predict/ hence, ‘ a prophet/
Samoa. —The Samoan to 1 0-to 1 0 , ‘ a rod or staff of office,’ is a sign
of authority.
2. Fua means ‘ fruit/ This is the season for great offerings to Tangaloa;
all the priests were wont to assemble then, and the food which had been
tabued for them was presented.
When they trampled on a thing made sacred, that is, when the tabu was
violated, people were afraid and said ‘By and by a calamity will spring
up, or a famine, or drought {lit. ’ the sun ’), or war/ &c.
5. Unu is a kind of ‘ tree/ Le-Unu is probably one of those whom the
Greeks and Romans called * Dryads/
9. Lau-popo; lau, ‘ leaf/ popo, ‘ dry’; the end of the dry season.
10. Le-Fanoga, ‘ destruction.’ See the myth about him, p. 107.
11. Ta‘u means ‘ renowned/




