

the Proceedings of the Linneaa Society of New South Wales,
1899, Part 3, July 26thl\
FURTHER OBSERVATIONS ON THE VEGETA-
TION OF LORD HOWE ISLAND.
J. H. Maiden, F.L.S., Botanic Gardens, Sydney.
Wz/i sit
(Plates xxxii.-xxxiii.)
[lssued December 9th, 1899.]




[ From the Proceedings of the Linnean Society o f New South Wales,
1899, Part 3, July 36th.]
SOME FURTHER OBSERVATIONS ON THE VEGETA-
TION OF LORD HOWE ISLAND.
By J. H. Maiden, F.L.S., Botanic Gardens, Sydney.
(Plates xxxii.-xxxiii.)
I offer a few brief notes on some Lord Howe Island plants to
which I have given attention since the publication of my former
paper (P.L.S.N.S.W. 1898, p. 112), together with a few additional
bibliographical notes of some interest to the botanist. May I
remind my readers, in passing, that there is, in the Santa Cruz
Group, a second Lord Howe Island (see Proc. R.G.S. xlii. 220).
JASMINES.
quadristaminea, Hemsl. —“ Blue Plum.” In my
former paper (p. 130) I gave an account of the Blue Plum, and
figured the fruits; I supposed it had not been recorded as having
been found on the island. I have since received a complete series
of botanical specimens, and find that the Blue Plum is referable
to JNotelaia quadristaminea, and a description of the fruit will be
found in Mueller’s Fragm. viii. 42, as Chionanthus. An amended
description is given at x. 89, as Mayepea. I cannot find that this
plant has anywhere been referred to by Mueller or others as
“ Blue Plum,”
Through Mr. J. G. Luehmann’s kindness I have received
specimens of leaves of (1) % Endiandra sp., Russell River, Queens-
land (Sayer); (2) large coriaceous ovate lanceolate leaves, 8 inches
long by 3 inches wide, New South Wales (Camara). Both are
accompanied by fruits of JNotelcea quadristaminea. They are, in
my opinion, incorrectly matched, but they afford clues as to the
occurrence of this species on the mainland. Up to the present I
have not received these characteristic fruits from an Australian
locality for certain.
*433ssypWSse*


ORCHIDEiE.
Dbndrobium gracilicaulb, F.v.M., var. Hovveanum, var.nov.
I brought some plants of the Lord Howe Island D. gracilicaule,
and have watched their growth. The Lord Howe Island plant
is stouter than the normal species; the pseudo-bulb is swollen at
the place of attachment to the rhizone to a much greater extent
than I have observed it in the normal species.
The inflorescence is more erect, and the individual flowers are
larger than those of D. gracilicaule. ■ The blotches of purple seen
on D. gracilicaule appear to be entirely absent, the whole flower
(with the exception of the labellum) being of a pale cream colour,
lighter than that of gracilicaule.
The labellum is marked with purplish lines the whole length
from the base to the point; in gracilicaule the marking only
extends half-way from the base. As a florist’s flower it is of
superior merit to D gracilicaule. I propose the name Roweanum
for this variety.
PALM.®.
Hedyscbpe Canterburyana, F.v.M. — l am now in a position
to offer an illustration of the inflorescence of this palm. It has
not been previously figured, and Plates xxxii.-xxxiii. are from
photographs taken by Mr. Wm. Forsyth in the Sydney Botanic
Harden at the end of February, 1899. This is the first occasion
in which this palm has flowered in cultivation, I believe, and it
has arrived at an opportune time, as a large number of specimens
of the inflorescence collected and attempted to be preserved for
me on the island have arrived in Sydney in a bad state.
From the flowers depicted in the photograph the following
description was drawn up :
Flowers bisexual, sessile in pairs or rarely single on the branches
of the panicle. Outer perianth-segments consisting of three short
acuminate segments, the inner ones more than twice as long,
ovate-acute, both of a pale yellow colour. Stamens 10-12, slightly
exceeding the perianth, with versatile anthers. Style rather
shorter than the stamens, with a small stigma (not trifid). Com-
pare B.FI. vii. 138; also my former paper, p. 139.


LyCOPODIACEiE.
Lycopodium varium, R.Br. —See Hemsley’s list, p. 260 {op.
■cit.); also B.FI. vii. p. 674. It would be desirable to enquire
whether L. varium has really come from Lord Howe Island, or
whether a mainland plant has not been substituted through
inadvertence.
L. nutans , Brackr., from Lord Howe Island, is in the herbarium
of the Botanic Gardens, Sydney.
Following are the bibliographical notes referred to
Baker, J. G. “ Ferns of Lord Howe Island.” Gardeners
Chronicle , 24th February, 1872, p. 253.
“ I cannot, from the dry fronds, separate one from the well-
known Alsophila excelsa of Norfolk Island.” He adds that this
is not a final judgment. The other is Hemitelia Moorei, Baker,
n.sp. These are the two tree-ferns referred to in Dr. G. Bennett’s
letter in the Gard. Chron. of 27th January, 1872. He describes
another new fern under the name of Deparia nephrodioides.
(The latter species was subsequently figured in Hooker’s leones
Plantarum , t. 1608.)
Baker, J. G. “New Ferns from Lord Howe Island.” Journ.
Bot xi. 16 (1873).
Two ferns collected by the Eclipse Expedition of 1871, viz. :
Todea {Leptopteris ) Moorei and Asplenium {Dared) pteridoides.
The former species was in 1887 figured in Hooker’s leones
Plantamim, t. 1697, and the latter at t. 1649.
Baker, J. G. “Tree-fern from Lord Howe Island.” Journ.
Bot. xii. 279 (1874).
“ The fine tree-fern described by Baron von Mueller in the part
of his Fragmenta just received (viii. p. 176) under the name of
Hemitelia Maenrthuri is identical with the Cyathea Moorei of the
yet unpublished 2nd Ed. of Hooker and Baker’s Syn. Filicum,
p. 453.”
Bennett, G. Gardeners' Chronicle , 27th January, 1872,
Dr. Bennett writes that Mr. W. Carron went in H.M.S.
“ Rosario” to Lord Howe Island. “My object is to direct your


attention to the discovery of two remarkable tree-ferns of the
genus Alsophila and supposed to be new.” Sketches are given of
“ Branched Alsophila ” and “ Alsophila sp.”
Iris Rohinsoniana, F.v.M.— Gardeners' Chronicle , 23rd March,
1872, p. 393, with two figures, gives a full account of this interest-
ing plant, now of course referred to Morce.a.
McFarland, A. Mutiny in the “ Bounty,” and Story of the
Pitcairn Islanders (Sydney, 1884).
At pp. 126, 127 are notes in regard to Pitcairn Islanders who
died (in the early thirties) at “ Lord Howe ” Island. The notes
are not botanical, but are interesting as referring to the early
history of Lord Howe Island, concerning which we have but
little information.
Moore, C. “ Vegetation of Lord Howe’s Island.” Journ. Hot.
vii. 299 (1869). (Reprinted from Card. Chron., 1869, p. 968).
Also, “Sketch of the Botany of Lord Howe Island.” Trans. Hof.
Soc. Edin. x. 365. Covering much the same ground as the pre-
ceding paper.
Shortland, Lieut., and Watts, Lieut., in “The Voyage of
Governor Phillip to Botany Bay, (fee. (1789).”
There is a brief note concerning Lord Howe Island at p. 94;
at pp. 180, et seq., there is an excellent map and chart of the
island, also a view of “ Ball Pyramid.” Shortland’s only allusion
to the vegetation is ... . “but it abounds with cabbage-
palms, mangrove and manchineal trees, even up to the summit
of the mountains. No vegetables were to be seen.” At pp. 223,
et seq., Lieut. Watts gives an account of the island, and says:—
“ This island is well covered with wood, the chief of which is the
large and dwarf mangrove, the bamboo and the cabbage-tree.
The different vegetables met with were scurvy-grass, wild celery,
spinach, endive and samphire.” These brief notes were more or
less adopted by other navigators prior to say 1860, who gave an
account of the products of the island.


P.L.S.N.S.W., 1899.
PL. XXXII.
HEDYSCEPE CANTERBURYANA, F.v.M.




P.L.S.N.S.W., 1899
PL. XXXIII.
HEDYSCEPE CANTERBURYANA, F.v.M.


