

ALLY
SLOPER
A MORAL LESSON
“Judy” Office, 73 Fleet Street.


THE CELEBRATED
RED HEART RUM.
JA
A
m
Miill
Th 3 Proprietors of the Red Heart Rum feel it due to the
Public to state that it is unlike other Rum, being free from
the usual bilious character; so that when this celebrated
Spirit is recommended by the Medical Profession, it will
be as well to remember that no other Rum has the special
properties of the Red Heart Rum.
This Spirit is peculiarly adapted to persons suffering from Cholera,
Low Fever, Diarrhoea, and Overworked Brain, it was specially
supplied to the sick and wounded in the late war between Germany
and France.
Sold only in Bottles , vjjiich hear the brand of Henry White & Co. on corks. j
capsules, and labels.
J. Q. TURNEY,
158 New Bond Street, W„ and 9 Austinfriars, E.C.
Price 425. per Dozen.


The Grand Gold Medal awarded, Paris 1870.
The Silver Medal, Netherlands 1869.
Le Diplflme de la Mention Extraordinaire, Amstesdam ISS9.
La Medallle d’Honneur, Paris 1867.
The Prize Medal, London 1862.
JOHN BRINSMEAD & SONS’
FULL TRICHORD UPRIGHT
GRAND PIANOFORTES,
With Metal Frame. Grand Construction.
Metal Bridge and Bars, Sostinente Sounding-Board.
New Piccolo Grand Improvement and Patent Perfect Check
Repeater Action.
PATENTED IN GEE AT BRITAIN, FRANCE, PRUSSIA, AUSTRIA,
ITALY, BELGIUM, AND AMERICA.
18 WIGMORE STREET, LONDON, W.
MANUFACTORIES :
1,2, 3, & 4 CHENIES STREET ;
3 HERTFORD PLACE; and the
BRINSMEAD PIANOFORTE WORKS, KENTISH TOWN.
GILBERT L. BAUER’S ENGLISH ORGANS, Price from Twenty Guineas.
NICHOLSON’S
1.
FREE.
I PATTERNS
50 to 52 St. Paul's Churchyard, London.
ESTABLISHED 184=3.
WUP?
0]
3k T? 10b
pRONjOJES THE qroWji-I op, PRESERVES,
ask any Chemist or n
FOF\ ROWLAND'S OIL
ROWLANDS’ MACASSAR OIL,
for promoting the growth, restoring, improving,
and beautifying the Human Hair. Price 3s. 6d.;
7s. ; 10s. 6d. (equal to four small); and 21s.
per bottle.
ROWLANDS’ KALYDOR,
soothing, cooling, and purifying, eradicates all
Cutaneous Eruptions, and Discolorations, and
realizes a Healthy Purity of the Skin. Price
as. 6d. and Bs. 6d. per bottle.
ROWLANDS’. ODONTO,
or Pearl Dentifrice, imparts a Paarl-like
Whiteness tto the Teeth, eradicates Tartar and
Spots of Incipient decay, strengthens the Gums,
and gives a pleasing fragrance to the Breath.
Price 2S. gd. per box.
Ask any Chemist or Perfumer for Rowlands’
Articles, and see that their signature is in Red
Ink on the wrapper of each, without which
none are genuine.


The GREAT FAMILY MEDICINE of the Age.
Are warranted not to contain a single particle of MERCURY or
any other MINERAL SUBSTANCE, but to consist entirely of
Medicinal Matters, PURELY VEGETABLE.
They have been used by the Public for nearly 40 years,
and have proved their value in thousands of instances in Diseases
of the HEAD, CHEST, BOWELS, LIVER, and KIDNEYS;
also in ULCERS. SORES, and RHEUMATISM; and in all
SKIN COMPLAINTS are one of the
BEST MEDICINES KNOWN,
as shown by the numerous remarkable Testimonials constantly
being received.
♦
ALSO
WHELPTON’S VEGETABLE STOMACH PILLS
Are particularly suited to Weakly Persons, being exceedingly mild
and gradual in their operation, imparting tone and vigour to the
Digestive Organs.
mm
NOTICE. —ALL BOXES issued by the Proprietors have
the Government Stamp pasted over each box instead of
being on the outside wrapper as heretofore ; and on each
respective box and on the outside wrapper are printed the
NAME and TRADE MARK of the Firm.
Prepared and sold, Wholesale and Retail, in boxes, price 7|d., is. rid., and
2s. gd., by G. WHELPTON & SON, 3 Crane Court, Meet Street, London;
sent free to any part of the United Kingdom on receipt of 8, 14, or 33 stamps.
SOLD BY ALL CHEMISTS AND MEDICINE VENDORS
A T HOME AND ABROAD.


JUDY.
EVERY WEDNESDAY.
TWOPENCE.


SLOPER AT HOME.
[The dear old man himself supplied the sketch for this picture—tears of love and paternal
fn e glistening in his eyes, as with simple pathos, he dwelt upon the details of the touching
scene How it is—if half the noble sentiments he uttered really came from his heart— SLOPER
should recently have been summoned to the Police Court for neglecting to contribute to the
support of Mrs. S., at present an inmate of St. Staiyercum-bag-o’bones Workhouse Judy’s
Office Boy regrets his inability to explain .] ’


SOME PLAYFUL EPISODES
IN THE CAREER OF
ALLY SLOPER,
LATE OF FLEET STREET, TIMBUCTOO, WAGGA WAGGA,
MILLBANK, AND ELSEWHERE;
WITH CASUAL REFERENCES TO
IKY MO.
PICTORIALLY PORTRAYED BY MARIE DUVAL,
AND
VERBALLY EXPLAINED (WITH MORAL OBSERVATIONS)
BY JUDY’S OFFICE BOY.
TRADE MARK.


WORCESTER STREET,
SOUTHWARK STREET.
IN BOTTLES AND
PACKETS,
Is. Bd. per lb.
Is. 6d. per lb.
Is. 4d. per lb.
SOLD BY
ALL GROCERS
IN THE
UNITED KINGDOM.
EXTRACT FROM
Dr. HASSALL’S REPORT.
“The aroma
and taste of this Coffee, and of the
beverage made therefrom, are very supe-
rior to those roasted in the ordinary manner.”


The Office Boy, apologetically.
T WOULD much rather my mother had done it
You.see, my mother has washed Mr. Sloper’s collar for years,
and knows all about him. Mrs. HIGGINS, in Little Pannikin Street,
used to wash for Mr. SLOPER before that, but she turned over the
business to my mother, and turned over the collar with it. When
Mr. Sloper’s collar first came to us, it had only one string. The left
string was put on by mother, and she has lately replaced the right
string. The left string, however, has come off since then, and
literally the right string is all that is left.
I would really much rather my mother had done it.
You see, my forte is scarcely literature. It is only recently I have
trodden in the flowery paths of poetic imagery—only since I have
had to make out the weekly shop-bill and list of contents, the sub-
editor being away for a holiday.
Properly my sphere is shutters.
But the thing has been forced upon me.


J. & P. COATS'
BEST SOFT SIX-CORD SEWING
COTTON.
Suitable for all Sewing Machines.
P. COATS’
EXTRA GLACE COTTON.
This Cotton being greatly im-
____ proved in quality and finish,
will be found unsurpassed for Machine or Hand Sewing.
On Reels, 100, 200, or 500 yards.
J. & P. COATS’
CROCHET or TATTING COTTON,
In Skeins or on Reels,
Of the Finest Quality.
To he had of all Wholesale and Ketail DRAPERS throughout the UNITED KINGDOM.


Advertisement.— Messrs, i. moses and a.
SLOPER (Friends of Man, &c.,) beg to announce
that they have taken an upper room at the “ J UDY ” Office,
where they will gladly receive contributions by cheque—
not crossed — P.O.O.’s, or in stamps, for General Appli-
cation to Charitable Purposes, principally in the
home department. Parties having an odd fiver or so they
don’t know what to do with, will find this a rare opportu-
nity of getting rid of it.
The peculiarity of the nature of these investments for
the good of mankind at large lies in the fact that the money
once deposited, the depositor is put to no further expense
or trouble, and never again hears any more about it.
N.B.—Parties are earnestly cautioned not to entrust
their money to any person calling himself either Moses
or SLOPER, whom they may have the misfortune to en-
counter upon the stairs. Money thus applied will not
benefit those for whom it is designed.
Judy prints the above only because she rashly agreed
to let Moses and Sloper the room in question and three-
quarters of a page for their advertisement. She, however,
eagerly avails herself of the remaining quarter-page to
warn her readers against sending anything at all, JUDY
knows nothing of the business carried on in the little back
room upstairs, and would very much like to do so. She
would also rather like to see some of the last month’s rent


The Little Wanzer again Triumphant.
THE HIGHEST PREMIUMS
AWARDED AT THE
VIENNA EXHIBITION, 1873,
HAVE BEEN GAINED BV
THE LITTLE WANZER
Sjjtrftle Undt-Stih!j Sibling glatjjhtts.
These Machines have been awarded the Highest Prize
Medals throughout the world wherever they have competed
with other Machines, having reached the climax of superiority
at the Vienna Exhibition, where, in competition with all the
chief English and American Machines, they have been
awarded the Two Highest Prize Medals given to any Com-
pany or Firm in the Sewing Machine Trade.
For Prospectuses and Particulars apply at the Plead Offices
of the Compa7iy,
4 GT. PORTLAND STREET, LONDON, W.,
Or their Branch Office,
BAST STREET, BRIGHTON.


THE BIOGRAPHY.
CHAPTER I.
OF WHAT IS NOT KNOWN ABOUT SLOPER.
IT is quite uncertain whether or not any ancestor of Ally Sloper came over
with the Conqueror. It is more likely, if he and the Conqueror had any
dealings together, that he came over the Conqueror.
I take it the Slopers are a wandering
race : we hear of them everywhere running
up large bills, but they never settle. Moses
also is one of a wandering tribe, upon whose
tail it would take you all your time to drop a
pinch of salt. If any of the Moseses owned
property, I doubt whether he was ever a
landed proprietor in the Sloperian sense. It
would have pleased me very much if I could
have found any record of past generations
of Slopers ever having had acres of their
own. The Sloper we know, who is com-
paratively toothless, save for a rugged stop-
gap here and there, says he used to have,
but has had them out. This, though, is but
frivolousness on the old man’s part, and
wholly unworthy of him.
I find, after much diligent research, that
there was a Sloperius among the Romans,
who professed to have invented what he
termed a Double Dinner Digester. As he
appears to have been ordered by the Civil
Tribunal to have the Digester tried upon
himself by way of punishment, one is led to
suppose that the invention was not generally
approved of.
During the time of the Crusades we hear
of another Sloper, of the firm of Choker
SLOPEK meditating (after HAYDON ).


and SLOPER, who seems to have come to grief for selling paper-soled boots to the
followers of Richard the Lion-hearted. Choker got off.
In the reign of King John some of the Moseses appear to have had a bad
time of it; but I find a Baron Sloper (the whereabouts of whose lands and
estates before this period is not readily to be ascertained) who was most particular
about the signing of the Charter. If it had not been for Sloper’s exertions
(according to Sloper’s account), there would probably never have been any
Charter at all.
Whether the Sloper in question managed somehow or other to sign himself
into some property is uncertain, but a century or so later we find another Sloper,
who was afflicted with wooden legs, exerting himself to the utmost to obtain the
repeal of a duty on silk stockings. Don’t go about saying there have never been
any single-hearted Slopers.
Gross fraud perpetrated upon poor GUIDO.
I pass over a Sloper in James I.’s time, who was indirectly mixed up with the
Gunpowder Plot, inasmuch as he appears to have sold a kind of spurious gun-
powder, made out of refuse coffee and other unlikely ingredients, to the wicked
conspirators, and to have subsequently petitioned King James to be placed upon
the Civil Pension List on this account, as a preserver of his Masjety’s sacred
person. He seems, however, not to have been placed upon the list, but to have
been put into the stocks instead.
During the Commonwealth I find the Slopers were mostly Puritans of rigid
principles, some of them holding posts in the Church, generally in connection
with the offertory plate ; and I find that there was a good deal of unpleasantness
after one of the collections, unjust and uncalled-for remarks having been made


upon the subject of a missing guinea when the collector chanced most unfortu-
nately to slip his foot and scatter the coin he was carrying up the aisle.
In the reign of Charles 11. I find a Mistress Sloper, who had something to
do with the back stairs of the palace; most likely she swept them.
This is SLOPER'S Female Ancestor.
I can rind no other Slopers who have distinguished themselves in bygone
times.
CHAPTER II.
OF WHAT IS KNOWN ABOUT SLOPER.
SLOPER was not born at Stoke Pogis.
Sloper’s grandfather was not the author of “Junius.”
Sloper was not actively employed in the charge at Balaclava.
Sloper does not write poetry for the “ Record,” or sputter for “ J UDY.”
Sloper never tried to get elected for Greenwich.
Sloper did not design any of the statues in Trafalgar Square, not did he re-
commend the formation of the Thames Embankment as a short cut to anywhere.
Sloper never spent a happy day at Rosherville.
Sloper never saw the Shah,
Sloper never loved a fond gazelle.
Sloper never took the pledge.
Sloper never saw Messrs. MOORE and BURGESS’S Minstrels perform out of
London.
Sloper never saw a dead donkey.
Sloper never deceived his Aunt Betsey, nor did he ever kick his aged
mother after he had knocked her down.
Sloper never sent anything anonymously on account of income tax.
Sloper never wore a paper collar.


“ Igive thee all, I can no more."
Sloper does not subscribe to any charity.
Sloper never heard the piteous cry of a female in distress, and saw that a
superior animal was brutally ill-treating her, but he took particular care to slip
round the first street corner and make himself scarce.
Sloper never forgot that though vice and chicanery may for a while succeed,
nay, even flourish, that in honesty and virtue alone is true happiness to be found,
and that the lowly-born labourer, with a clear conscience, lying upon his pallet of
straw, is far happier, and greatly more at his ease, than the purse-proud parvenu
in his gilded salon , sitting upon a sharp spike to slow music.
SLOPER the laurel crooned


CHAPTER III.
A COLLECTION OF TESTIMONIALS HAVING REFERENCE TO
SLOPER.
From the Iron Duke.
F.M. the Duke of Wellington presents his compliments to Mr. Sloper,
and begs to inform him that he (F.M. the Duke of Wellington) does not
remember seeing Mr. Sloper at Waterloo.
F.M. the Duke of Wellington thanks Mr.
Sloper for his many kind inquiries, but trusts, as
an overcoat and a walking-cane have been missed
from the hall, that Mr. Sloper will not call again.
From the Lord Chief Justice.
There is a fellow called Sloper, who says: “the
whole thing will be settled right off, if you will hear
what I have got to say about the Wagga Wagga
w’s.” Let him have a turn at Hawkins. I don’t
feel equal to it.
From Dion Boucicault.
The bearer, A. Sloper, wants to see the British
drama regenerated, and I think it will do him good.
Pass him to the upper gallery (back row), and make
him take his hat off.
From the Widow of Hugh de Brass Figgins,
Esq,, late Alderman , Turtle House , Peckham.
Dear Sir, —
I did not know you were so intimately
acquainted with my dear husband; but I am deeply
touched by the sentiments you express, and gladly
forward you the hatband you desire to wear in his
memory.
From Mr. Sangster, Umbrella Maker.
Sir,—
I think you must be mistaken. My shop-
men have no recollection of your having left your
umbrella here to have a new nozzle put on. A very
careful search has been made, and no article at all
resembling your umbrella can be found upon the
premises. If you call again, I shall send for a po-
liceman.
Graceful tribute to A. SLOPER'S
popularity. “SLOPER on a
stick —one penny!”
From the Inventor of the First Original Hair Destroyer.
Sir,—
I cannot entertain your claim to damages through having inadver-
tently applied the wrong mixture to your head. If it was the Hair Restorer you
wanted, you should have seen that you got it when you paid your money—(l
may add, I have no remembrance of the latter circumstance). At any rate, lam
willing to allow that the effect of the Hair Destroyer has been even unusually
surprising in your case, and shall be willing to pay you a liberal salary, if you will
attend daily as a sample of the efficacy of my patent.
5 1


From Mr. Charles Watkins, Photographist.
Dear Mr. Sloper,—
Pray do not wait any longer for the new clothes you have been talk-
ing about every time these ten years. If I may be allowed to express an opinion,
I should say that any change would spoil you. Do come soon, and bring back
the album you took away accidentally.
From the Author of “It’s Always too Soon to Never.”
I know no Sloper. i never heard of you. lam unacquainted with your existence.
I HAVE NO TIME TO WASTE upon the acquirement of that or other useless knowledge, I have NOTHING
FURTHER TO ADD.
From Judy’s Cashier.
Sm,--
Prevarication is useless. Mr. Moses received the right money, and
counted it twice over. The sixpence returned did not form part of your salary.
Please don’t be more fatiguing than you can help. lam very busy.
From Bouncer, Comedian.
Dear Old Man,—
I hear you think of taking a ben. You know my talents are always
at your service. Can take £ 2O, as it is for an old friend, with proper billing, of
course (twelve sheets understood). Your name ought to come out conspicuously.
Or, no, —on second thoughts, I don’t think that will matter if you make mine large
enough. Say:—
TO-NIGHT! BOUNCER!!
For other characters, see small bills.
From a Gentleman of Position in the Country.
I have been suffering for the last forty years from a complication of disorders,
of which the most virulent have been measles and teething, together with dim-
ness of sight and a bad leg. About three months ago I first bought SlOper’s
pictures, and was much amused by them. I then soaked them in vinegar, and
sprinkled them lightly with dry mustard and powdered starch, and applied them
hot to the place. This treatment I have since pursued with the greatest success,
and can now easily get in and out of bed when lifted. You are at liberty to
publish this letter, if it is of any use to you.
SLOPER "all there.”


CHAPTER IV.
FURTHER INFORMATION.
I MUST confess that in spite of the arduous researches I have made, and the
vast amount of labour I have expended thereon, I have really learnt very little
indeed about Sloper.
It would appear that Sloper, like the generality of
other people, was born very young, and that he after-
wards grew up and grew older; but Sloper himself
seems desirous of enshrouding his early youth with
almost unnecessary mystery.
Such statements as that he was won at a raffle, or
found tied to the knocker of the British Museum, must
be taken for what they are worth; but it is very certain
that, although application has been made to every re-
spectable person of the name of Sloper discoverable
in the United Kingdom, no one will father our Ally—
and, indeed, several of these persons seem to think it,
to a certain extent, reflects upon their patronymic that
he should exist at all.
The number of Slopers and friends of Sloperses
in fact, who have threatened to leave off taking in J udy’s
amusing journal, or to induce their friends and friends’
friends to leave off taking it in, if Sloper was not
The blissful babyhood of
little ALLY.
immediately concluded, nobody but the Slopers themselves could realize. At
the present moment several threatening letters lie under a paperweight at the
back of the shop, and some more in the waste-paper basket and coal-scuttle. The
point of these communications is that the writers have no objection to the name
being used, but they cannot for the life of them see any fun in the thing. This
is unfortunate, as other people do see a good deal of fun in it, and part with their
twopences with almost incredible liveliness whenever Sloper makes his appear-
ance on Judy’s back page. I believe if our Sloper would only die, there would
be general rejoicings among all the other Slopers in the United Kingdom, but
there is no fear of such an event.
Sloper is immortal.
There is another and darker mystery about Sloper. When, and how, did he
lose his hair ? He says that in early life he was very much frightened. The hair
of the prisoner of Chillon, Lord Byron tells us, went white from fright in a single
night; but it took two nights to make Sloper what he is. The first night his
hair became “ like drifted snow.” He was more frightened than ever the second
night, and plucked his silvery locks out by handfuls. What it was, however, that
had thus alarmed him, Sloper has never revealed. Upon other occasions, in-
deed, he has been heard to attribute his baldness to his having imprudently gone
to sleep with his head in a mustard plaster.
Some people assert that Sloper was never married. This is absurd : Judy,
my revered mistress, has herself twice (at long intervals) subscribed towards
Mrs. Sloper’s funeral expenses, while every member of the staff has over and
over again given his mite towards the education of one or other of his numerous
progeny.
It is true that Sloper very rarely speaks of his wedded life, but when he does,
he seems to imply that his wife’s relations have not acted handsomely towards
him. This he has urged, among other reasons, for so frequently anticipating his
salary.
Why does Sloper wear a white hat in mid-winter ?—is a question which has
been propounded almost as frequently as that relative to the miller of conundru-
mal memory. I have asked him the question myself, but he did not enlighten
me.
I—2


Sloper’s earliest recollections, he tells me, are of some sweet country place,
where, across flowery meads and between fragrant hedgerows, an elderly female
with long legs daily dragged him to school, and he thinks this perhaps may
have been his mother. Later in life he found out the tranquil spot where he had
spent his happy childhood, and expressed a willingness to settle down there among
the simple peasants, and to spend his declining years at their expense. They told
him, gently but firmly, they could not see it; and leading him to the extreme limit
of the ullage, kicked him into space, throwing his hat and umbrella after him.
Back view of SLOPER'S Ma taking SLOPER to School. She was a good woman!
Throughout his life Sloper has been cruelly misunderstood.
How and where Sloper first came into possession of the umbrella is very
doubtful. It is said that he was left alone with it in the upper boxes at the
Haymarket Theatre. It is also reported that a man gave it to Sloper to hold,
and immediately afterwards committed suicide, and that Sloper is taking charge
of it, in case any of the dead man’s heirs should ever turn up.
This, again, is contradicted by other statements made by A. Sloper, as, indeed,
are all the accounts extant relative to other portions of his wardrobe. Whether
the famous hat was ever new it is impossible to say, but one thing is certain —
nothing can absolutely spoil it, A glance through these pages will sufficiently
prove this fact.
I really wish to goodness my mother had been asked to do it instead of me !
It has been suggested to Sloper that he would look prettier in a turn-down
collar and a bright blue neck-tie; but he prefers keeping to the stock he is
familiar with. Surely Sloper wears a shirt; but who, except Sloper himself,
can answer this question ?
On closing this portion of the biography, I feel that I have left some things
pretty well as I found them, and other things, if possible, a little more so.


CHAPTER V.
OF SLOPER’S ARTS OF FASCINATION (AS REGARDS THE
FAIR SEX).
I like to think of Sloper as a young and ardent lover waiting round the
corner —(he is round-the-cornerishly-inclined to this day !) —for the object of
his young affections, a sweet little thing with pig-tails and
frilled pantalettes—the costume of those pleasant days
when Sloper was a child of innocence.
I should think that Sloper as a babe must have been
singularly beautiful, and more than ordinarily bold, and,
as a dashing lad—say of fourteen summers or so—was pro-
bably the pride and glory of those parts (wherever they were)
where he resided.
It distresses me more than you can well imagine that I
am so short of details, and so much in the dark as regards
those portions of our Sloper’s life which preceded his
first appearance in the pages of “Judyand once again I
cannot help saying I wish my mother had been appointed
as our old friend’s biographer.
That Sloper loved —and alas! loved vainly, hopelessly,
desperately, and despairingly —is certain. He himself
throws a halo of mystery over one of the passions of his
youth, which he yet vaguely intimates was for a Countess.
As a lowly errand-boy, it would appear he waited upon the
Countess in question at her palatial mansion, and she was
pleased to look upon him as she passed by to her carriage
—thereby raising a flame of unquenchable love in his young
bosom. It would appear, however, that this passion was
not reciprocated, and that an unsympathetic man-servant,
finding Sloper loitering round the premises some days
afterwards, slapped his head exceedingly!
That Sloper is extremely susceptible to the influence of
the tender passion is also very certain. We find him losing
his heart in every town he visits, and proposing marriage
with almost unusual recklessness. There is, too, evidently
something about Sloper which, to the female eye, is irre-
sistible. Perhaps it is his white hat—perhaps the way he
wears his stock, fastened, as the reader may have noticed,
with some abandon , at the back!
SLOPER as a youthful
lover on the look-out.
Whatever it may be, however, the fact remains : Sloper is never without an
admirer of the other sex—generally several at a time. Indeed, the voluminous
correspondence of an amatory nature arising from these innocent flirtations has
occasioned my revered mistress to seriously contemplate the employment of an
extra clerk.
At this moment there lies beside me a post-card addressed to A. Sloper, and
containing these few words :
“ To A. Sloper, Esq., ‘ Judy' Office,
“Dear Sir, —
“ I and my two younger sisters are much struck by your personal
appearance and noble deeds. We are making a collection of locks of hair for
our album, and have written to Sir Roger’s hairdresser. May we hope that you,
too, will favour us ?
“ Ever yours,
“Alicia, Constantia, and Aurora Louisa.”
This communication has been under discussion all the morning. Ought it to


be shown to Sloper ? Would it please him ? Do Alicia, Constantia, and
Aurora Louisa mean fairly by Sloper, than whose phrenological development
no billiard-ball was ever more destitute of hirsute adornment ? They must be
chaffing the old man ; and if so, it is very unkind of them !
Here is another communication:
Ingenious idea for utilizing SLOPER'S
wardrobe.
“My very dear Mr. Sloper,—
“You may be surprised—nay,
even startled—by the request I am about to
make; but we —my four daughters and self—
admire you so much, that that must be our
excuse. 4 We have lately taken a little house a
few miles from town, to which is attached a
small but pleasant piece of garden-ground, and
in one of its beds my youngest daughter has
planted your immortal name in mustard and
cress. Unfortunately, the lawless small birds
with which the neighbourhood unhappily
abounds threaten seriously to impair the sym-
metrical beauty of the design, and we have
been thinking—there being no male members
of our family—that, as it would appear by a late,
number of “Judy” that your hat was very
nearly done for, you might, perhaps, kindly send
it, and an old coat, should you have one to spare,
which one of my daughters, who has much ar-
tistic taste, might fix upon a stick on the boun-
dary of our garden-ground, which is divided by
a ditch from the brick-field beyond. An early
answer will oblige.
“An Anxious Mother.
“P.S.—My four girls send their kind re-
gards.”
Some other letters, however, are less suscep-
tible of misinterpretation—as, for instance—(l
quote from another card):
“ Dear Mr. Sloper,—
“We expect a few friends on Tuesday evening. A little music, tea
and shell-fish, and cellar-flap solo. The Duke is coming, and mamma will be so
glad to see you. You know I shall be delighted. , too.
“Yours affectionately,
“ Trotters.”
There is an air of the intensest gentility pervading this epistle, and a certain
refined delicacy of expression—(as, for instance, ‘ shell-fish,’ which a coarser pen
would have written ‘ winkles ’) —that shows the perfect lady at a glance. I could
have wished she had had a more pleasing nom d'amour than Trotters ; but
that, after all, is a detail of little moment.
If any more conclusive proof be yet wanting of our Ally’s popularity among
ladies of the highest rank and fashion, it will be found in the following, shown
by Sloper himself to his present biographer •
“ The Grange.
“ Dearest Mr. Sloper,—
“The Marchioness was charmed with you last night, and Lady
FLORENCE has done nothing but rave of your superb rendering of ‘ Let me like a
soldier fall! ’ with the artistic way in which you fell at its conclusion. Trusting,
however, you did not hurt yourself against the fender, we hope to see you at our
garden party to-morrow. Be sure and bring the bass viol you spoke of.
“ Au revoir/
“Maud Beatrice.”


We were all delighted with this letter at the office.
The head cashier and I shook hands with one an-
other all the morning, and I forgot to finish taking
down the shutters, one piece of which we discovered
still standing before the window late in the after-
noon. My revered mistress was quite as much
elated as any one, and then and there made Mr.
Sloper an advance of five shillings to purchase a
pair of lavender kid gloves, and a bottle of Mr.
Atkinson’s “White Rose” for his pocket-hand-
kerchief.
Our excitement was surely pardonable. All the
best of the female aristocracy, of course, subscribe
to “Judy,” but, as a rule, they are not in the habit of
falling in love with members of her staff. We felt
that Sloper’s affair with a Maud Beatrice, if
properly put about, ought to send up the circulation
several quires. Sloper thought so too, and pro-
posed drawing his commission in advance. Later
on, Maud Beatrice called in her carriage, and
took away (on credit) a set of volumes from the
commencement. Her silhouette , which she acci-
dentally dropped on her way out, is all we have seen
of her since. We have it framed in the back shop.
This is MAUD BEATRICE.
CHAPTER VI.
OF SLOPER AS A BLUSHING BRIDEGROOM.
I HAVE a good deal to do at the “Judy ” office; what with the shutters and onl
thing and another, I haven’t been able to give half the time I should have liked
to have given to the great subject
before me. A gentleman with lite-
rary tastes, who also runs errands
and does other odd jobs at our
office, has, however, rendered me
most efficient service, and has visit-
ed, at my cost, almost every public
house in the E.C. district, in quest
of information relating to Mr. Slo-
per ; and though he has certainly
not brought any information, I can
see, by the state in which he has re-
turned, that he has done his best,
and, it must also be allowed, has
spared (me) no expense.
It may be mentioned here that
Sloper, hearing of our inquiries,
and not knowing the object with
which they were instituted, was
seized with a sudden and violent
panic, which caused him to fly fami-
liar scenes and seek pastures new.
His patronage of an outlying hos-
telry in the environs of Holloway
about this time is well testified by
In search of SLOPER.


an unliquidated score in the possession of its landlord, a confiding man, only
recently started in business.
I have frequently said to myself, “ When Sloper dies, what will become of
the civilized world? What kind of Wednesdays will be those when we have no
longer the pictorial records of his pleasant adventures to enliven us when
Sloper is a thing of the past, the fertile mind exhausted, the busy brain at rest,
the white hat laid aside for ever, the long-enduring umbrella finally shut up?”
Yet such a time, dreadful as it is to contemplate, must surely come, and Ally
himself said, only a few days ago, he felt that he was breaking up. If there only
were a Sloper— a Sloper Junior —to follow in his father’s footsteps, to walk in
his father’s shoes (the old man certainly has had wear enough out of them), to
don the white hat jauntily, to shoulder the famous gingham ! But in spite of all
the stories put forward at various times by Mr. Sloper and Mr. Moses relative
to the numerical strength of Mr. Sloper’s family; in spite even of the frontis-
piece to this volume; it is extremely doubtful whether Mr. Sloper has any child
at all, and the delightful vision I have so often conjured up of a, long line of
Slopers perpetuated in marble is, alas! but the baseless fabric of a vision (if 1
may be allowed the use of poetical metaphor), or something similar.
Much SLOPER.- The Office Boy's dream.
I have thrown doubt even upon the idea of SLOPER ever having been married;
but upon the testimony of Mr. Moses, who, according to his own account, acted
as Mr. Sloper’s best man, that happy event was performed with much pomp
and ceremony.
We sat up with the old man,” said Mr. MOSES, “the night before, and beguiled


the fleeting hours with pleasant converse. Some of Mr. Sloper’s creditors were
present (Mr, Sloper was going to marry money), and they contributed the juice
of the generous grape in the form of sherry wine and hot gin-and-water.”
At a late period of the evening Mr. Sloper rose to his feet and fell under the
table. Having drawn him gently forth again, we set him up so that he could
keep his equilibrium against the wall with a little propping up, and he then said
a few words.
He was glad to see so many smiling faces round him. As well as he could
make out, everybody had got three or four each, or else it was that they kept on
jumping about so. He hoped to see all those smiling faces, and as many more
as they liked to bring, around the festive board upon many future occasions, as
long as they paid for what they had.
He had known Moses as man and boy. He knew him as a boy first, and
separately as a man. And he was a man. He had known other men, but not
men who were as much men as Moses. With Moses’s kind permission, he
would like to shake hands with him.
Here, Mr. Moses says, Mr. Sloper, who had been repeatedly propped up
during the utterance of the noble sentiments above recorded, fell under the table
again, whence he refused to be pulled, although Moses took hold of the old gen-
tleman’s feet for that purpose.
He was led away after this, and
laid gently down on his bed. Day
was breaking, Sloper was snoring,
the little dicky birds upon the chim-
ney-pots outside the window were
singing a joyful song, full of love
and hope. The whole scene was
touching in the extreme, and Moses
felt as though he could have wept.
When the hour fixed for the
happy ceremony drew near, Mr.
Sloper’s head ached a little, and
he was inclined to take a gloomy
view of things generally. He said
that he felt that he was unworthy of
the happiness in store for him, and
thought he would prefer to emigrate.
Mr. Moses, however, persuaded
his old friend to take a glass of
something short and have his boots
Beneath this roof our SLOPER slept.
cleaned (he had been to bed in them), and after this he felt more cheerful.
The bride was a widow lady, whose late husband had, a couple of years pre-
viously, retired from the tallow-chandlery to brighter spheres, and she was
reported to be very comfortably off. She was not, however, absolutely in the
flower of her youth, or, at least, was a fullish-blown flower of rather an imposing
cast of countenance, with, as Moses termed it, “ a nose of her own.”
In a wreath of orange blossoms she looked very charming, and, though ordi-
narily sedate, and even heavy, was on this occasion almost kittenish, and
skipped.
The bride’s family were averse to the happy union, and did all in their power
to prevent these two loving hearts from being joined in wedlock’s bonds, and it
was even rumoured that an elder brother was roaming round the churchyard with
a horsewhip, a circumstance which lent a certain charm, with even a spice of
danger in it, to the ceremony in progress. When Sloper heard of the man
with the whip he gave way a little at the knees.
To this day, Mr. Moses says, it has never been known for a certainty whether
Sloper misapplied the money subscribed for his wedding-ring, or whether he
really lost it; at any rate, it could not be found when the critical moment arrived.
It was a remarkable peculiarity of Mr. Sloper that he could not be induced
with any amount of persuasion to relinquish his hold upon his hat and umbrella


SLOPER’S MARRIAGE.
ALLY asks the Reverend Gentleman to kindly hold his hat and umbrella for a minute while
he looks for the ring.
whilst leading his blushing bride up the aisle, and the umbrella sticking out be-
hind troubled Mr. Sloper’s best man considerably, and was the cause of much
vexatious annoyance to the young lady friend of the widow who acted as her
bridesmaid.
When the moment came for Sloper to find the ring, his hands being hope-
lessly encumbered with these goods and chattels, he looked about despairingly,
and at last asked the officiating clergyman to be kind enough to hold them for
him for half a minute.
If the reverend gentleman in question indignantly refused all help with furious
pantomime, it surely goes to prove quite as much that divines are not wholly
exempt from the angry passions of the secular world, as that our Ally was in
some degree ignorant of conventional usuages in such cases. Whatever it proves,
in short, Ally, forcibly deprived of his effects by the pew-opener, was so racked
by misgivings respecting them, that he had no leisure left for anything else that
was going on, and answered anyhow in the wrong places—finally winding up, as
nearly as possible, married to the clerk!
With the view of checking Moses’s account of this business, I asked Mr.
Sloper whether Mr. Moses had ever been his best man ? “He has bested me
a lot of times ! ” said Ally.


CHAPTER VII.
OF THE REMAINS OF SLOPER: HIS HAUNTS, HIS HABITS,
AND HIS CUSTOMS.
Sloper once lived in the very same street previously inhabited by Doctor
Johnson. Since this has been known, there has been no appreciable difference
in the house-rent.
Sloper wished to take lodgings in Russell Square. They would not have him.
Sloper is often to be seen upon the Thames Embankment on a sunny after-
noon. Very frequently he has the place all to himself. Being of a pensive turn,
he loves solitude.
One of Sloper’s favourite summer lounges is Trafalgar Square, the statues in
which he much admires. Since the police objected to his washing his hands and
face in the basins of the fountains, he has, however, spoken bitterly—(and with
reason, surely !) —of the tyranny of despots. He complains, too, that they would
not even allow him to fish up the bit of yellow soap he dropped into the water!
Low down upon the right-hand side of the left-hand arch of Temple Bar —
going Citywards—you will find Sloper’s initials written in pencil. This gratify-
ing fact may be easily verified by any person having a few leisure hours at his
disposal.
One of Sloper’s weaknesses is for whelks. He is passionately fond of them.
I have asked him whether he liked them as a boy, but he says he did not —that
with him it is an acquired taste. He says any one might get fond of whelks with
a little exertion. You should swallow your whelks down without pausing for a
moment to reflect. Then, if it doesn’t stick in your throat, you will most likely
enjoy it.
There has been a great deal said from time to time respecting the limited
nature of Sloper’s costume. Let this document refute the shameful calumnies.
It has been said that Sloper never had another coat except the one so familiar
to the public. What, then, do you say to the indisputable testimony above ?


SLOPER'S biographer in the exercise of his official duties.
With this highly important documentary evidence, I feel that I cannot do
better than conclude this biography, which I trust will tend to enlighten those
who have read it—with respect to what, is to me highly unsatisfactory and hope-
lessly obscure.
CHAPTER VIII.
OF SLOPER IN HIS TRUE COLOURS.
Mv mother would have done it really well; but it is too late now, and as far
as has lain in my power I have done the right thing towards the miserable wretch
whose shameless career defiles these pages.
The despicable miscreant known as Sloper is, I need hardly say, the party I
allude to.
On turning over the preceding fifteen pages, it is just possible that the reader
may have been inclined to imagine that the sentiments I entertained towards this
degraded and deplorable old ruffian were not, strictly speaking, those which I
express at the present moment. I will not deny this.
I own that I was weak enough to harbour an almost maudlin affection for that
abandoned old man. We were as brothers. Before now, he has helped me with
the shutters. We used to borrow one another’s bootlaces.
Yes—l own it—l was fond of him, I admired him. I thought there was so
much character about his hat.
When he was having repairs done, he could have had my jacket and cap, and
welcome, but mother thought they would hardly suit him.
I had such confidence in him, I have over and over again left him alone in the
room with odd halfpence, and hardly thought it necessary to count them when I
returned.


And my affection for him was so long-enduring! Though I felt I could not do
it as well as my mother would have done, I was yet anxious to be the humble
instrument of putting Sloper before the public in his proper colours.
I had pictured Sloper to myself as a lamb-like child of innocence, though
bald. I didn’t believe there was any real vice in him. It seemed to me that
throughout he was led away by Moses. It was Moses who kept on getting the
old man into scrapes, and leaving him in them.
He was so easily led away, and I was led away too.
My duties at the office are none of the lightest. Constant attention is necessary,
and a sustained strain upon the higher mental faculties, which is enervating in its
results. Those shutters are more awkward than you could well imagine; and
though the sweetest-tempered lady in the world as a general rule, you should see
the fuss she makes if you happen to break a window-pane.
*******
I should not have minded whom Sloper had let in, if he had acted fairly to
me. There surely should be honour among—some people. But he is destitute
of honour. He has behaved basely and treacherously towards me. In one word,
he has managed, under false pretences, to draw all the money I was to have been
paid for this biography, and he has stuck to the lot!
If there were only time, I would re-write all I have written—unsay all I have-
said in the other seven chapters. But it is too late; and thus, with utter con-
tempt and loathing, I wash my hands for ever of
73 Fleet Street,
November, 1873.
JUDY’S OFFICE BOY.


SOME OF THE MYSTERIES
OF
LOAN AND DISCOUNT.
AS IKY Mo and ALLY SLOPER could
raise no more money on their own ac-
count, what was more natural than that
they should start a Loan Office, and
lend money to others?
IKY began with a splendid notion:
“Let’s advertise loans without the least
inquiry or the slightest security.”
And didn’t the public respond, too ? —Rather!


Though ALLY'S great idea of “Twopence for a Form of Application” didn’t seem
to answer at first.
This is a “Meeting of the Board.”
“Capital, One Million.”
This a view of the interior of the iron
safe.
And this is a faithful likeness of a
pair of boots with which Mr. SLOPER
became personally acquainted.—(N.B.
They had a would-be borrower’s feet
in them at the time.)


A
VERY SIMPLE STORY
THE LAMBLIKE MO.
It happened in this wise.
Mr. Isaac Moses chanced
tobe strolling alongalead-
ing thoroughfare, just
simply thinking of nothing
at all;
When he met a rustic
stranger, in whose face,
however, as Mr. Moses
subsequently allowed,were
easily discernible the signs
of the subtle cunning pecu-
liar to his class.
THE CRAFTY STRANGER.
ISAAC, however—simple and inge-
nuous child of nature!—was at once
taken in ; and what was more likely
than that they should go together arm-
in-arm to the nearest public house?
Here, with that generous impulse
which was ever one of his distinguish-
ing characteristics, Mr. MOSES would
insist on standing treat.


And then-the
oddest thing in the
world —who should
chance to drop in
but our old friend
ALLY SLOPER, who
had recently come
into a large fortune,
and meant to spend
it like a man.
Well—goodness knows why!—what
should they get talking about but skit-
tles? and then quite naturally they went
and had a game in a skittle-ground,
which, by the funniest chance, was at
the back of that very public house.
Only think, now, if SLOPER and
Moses had not been men of the strictest
probity, how that countryman might
have been cleared out!
As it was, however, the atrocious ruffian, under the pretence that ALLY did not
play fair- * * * Messrs. M. and S. were taken on stretchers to
the nearest hospital.
2


ACHILD
OF
MYSTERY.
Whatever may be said against Mr. Moses in other respects , it must always
be allowed that he studied the higher branches of the literature of his country with
benefit to himself and his surroundings. For instance , unless something very
like what follows had occurred., it is probable- But , of course , the sequel was
rather different. However— —
On hearing that the celebrated JOHN
SMITH was no more, it very naturally
occurred to ISAAC MOSES, Esq., that his
dear friend ALLY might be introduced
to John SMITH'S brother WILLIAM as
a disreputable relation whose existence
had hitherto been kept a secret for fear
of paining the family.
Unfortunately, the newspaper para-
graph contained a- misprint. It was
WILLIAM SMITH who died. John
Smith, who hadn’t died at all, was
much surprised when he opened the
letter addressed to his deceased re-
lative.


Here you may observe ALLY getting himself up as youthful as possible, so that
he mayn’t look much older than his supposed father
And here is JOHN SMITH making preparations for the reception of the interest-
ing orphan.
And here is the reception.
2 2


ALLY
SLOPERS
GOOSE CLUB
“Suppose,” said IKY MOSES to his
friend Mr. POTTS, the publican, in the
light airy style peculiar to him, “ we
get up a Goose Club, with this speci-
ality, that there shall actually be a
goose?”
“An eminent poultry-breeder of my
acquaintance,” he continued, “ shall
supply the bird in question.” A well-
known back view will probably give a
hint as to the identity of the individual
alluded to. Need we say that it was
ALLY SLOPER?


It was really an awfully jolly Goose
Club to belong to, for Mr. Moses pre-
sented every member gratuitously with
sixpennyworth of refreshment upon re-
ceiving the entrance fee of one shilling.
Yet after awhile the affair languished.
The above represents the state of the
subscription list at the end of the first
fortnight.
“Suppose,” said Ally, “we were to hang up a bird in the bar to give
the thing an air of reality?” “If we were to order it in the name of our
esteemed friend Mr. Potts, from the shop round the corner,” added
IKY MO, “and weight it judiciously?”
When the crisis came, cruelly unjust
reproaches were heaped upon the head
of the unfortunate POTTS, whilst SLOPER
and Moses effected a timely exit.
The bird was lost in the hurry of
retreat; but the canine party who
subsequently tried it for supper pro-
nounced it to be “uncommon gritty.”


SHAVINC
BY MACHINERY
Moses. f cl ten tee 0 «/*>
“It looks rather dangerous,” said
Sloper. “Not at all,” said IKE.
And yet nothing could induce Mr. S.
to have it tried upon him.


The public, too, were rather shy,
But very curious;
Till at last there was one made up his
mind to have a penn’orth.
IKY let him have it.
And this is how he looked when it was
over.
And this is how Mo and Sloper
looked when the gentleman had settled
his account.


IKY MO UNLOCKS
A SECRET.
Mr. MOSES, Negotiator of Private
Inquiries, was recently consulted by a
distinguished nobleman upon a subject
of the greatest delicacy.
And Mr. SLOPER, a gentleman of
singular tact and discretion, was en-
trusted with the conduct of the in-
vestigation.


With a certain sense of the fitness of
things which is peculiarly his own, he
began at the eyhole;
Only the door gave way a little too
suddenly.
Subsequently he returned with precipi-
tation to the street.
Later on he continued his investiga-
tions from a loftier altitude,
And would have been eminently suc-
cessful, had not the fire been lighted
below.
When last heard of, he was still pursu-
ing his inquiries.


ALLY
SLOPER
WORKS
THE TELEGRAPH.
Displeased by the way the
business has been conducted,
the Government recently dis-
charged all the young ladies,
and put the whole thing into
the hands of MOSES and
SLOPBR.
The following were the contents of the
first telegram sent during the manage-
ment of I. MOSES, Esq.: “ALLY, old
son, if you feel dry, and run to the price
of half a pint, come and share the same
with your devoted.”
This was the reply: “I don’t mind
putting my one d. to yours. Business
seems slack, so shall muffle the bell
and shut up shop. Be round in half-a-
two.”


TOUCHING DOMESTIC INCIDENTS DURING THE PANIC CAUSED BY ALLY
SLOPER'S ADMINISTRATION.
Here is Doveturtle, who couldn’t
get home to dinner as usual at five,
wants to telegraph, and can’t.
Here is the female Doveturtle—
her despair. Also the mental misery of
the olive-branches, who wonder what it
is all about.
Meanwhile the
British public,
lashed to fury
by the persis-
tent closing of
the office doors,
cried aloud for
vengeance, and
waved on high
the weapons by
which that ven-
geance should
be wreaked.
Meanwhile,
also, A. Sloper,
Esq., up to his
neck in neglect-
ed telegrams,
smoked the pipe
of peace, which,
it is needless to
say, was pre-
sently put out.
So, indeed, was
SLOPER.


SLOPER'S
SHILLING
DINNER.
There had been so many complaints about the high price of provisions, that
mo and Sloper, as general philanthropists*, felt called upon to make some kind
of effort: they did it thus :
It was at a West-end fish dinner that
IKY first started the notion.
“Well give ’em a fair chance, SLOPER
—fifteen minutes and a blunt knife.”


ALLY always maintained that
if they brought carpet bags, they
ought to be charged extra.
“Horse-radish!” cried one old gentle-
man. “Demme, sir, it’s the skewers
scraped up!”
There was one of ’em had two helps
of everything, and said she shouldn’t
have come if she hadn’t thought there
was to be a dessert.
One day Mr. SLOPER very nearly
gave his own hat away in a mistake
for another.
Every one allowed that there was
always lots of gravy.
But no wonder the dining-rooms did
not answer, when people made such
cruel misstatements.


ANOTHER
TO
SLOPER
It has often been remarked that the only thing wanting about
A. SLOPER was a showy Pin in his scarf.
While with a hand like that of IKY MOSES, it seemed a pity
he did not wear Diamond Rings.


Fortunately an exciting transaction in Jewellery gave Messrs. Sloper and
Moses a happy idea. Thus:—
Towards the close of a bright
spring day a newly married gentle-
man of pleasing exterior strolled
into Messrs. SLOMAN and JIM-
CRAX'S shop, and asked for a few
hundredweight of jewellery to be
sent home—
To his house in Mayfair, where a young
and lovely bride, bearing a strong family
likeness to IKY MOSES, anxiously awaited
their arrival.
Can you doubt that Messrs. SLOMAN and
JIMCRAX responded? Though they certainly
need not have engaged retired prize-fighters
as their assistants.
No wonder, therefore, that for some minutes
after the chloroform was administered, a good
deal of rough work went on. However, ALLY
landed the jewels.
RESULT OF TRANSACTION.
£ s. d.
Hire ofhousefor a month 10 o o
Ditto attire for lovely
bride x o o
Working expenses, stick as
new hat-band and cigar
for Sloper, &c o i si
Total expense £ll x3J
Jewellery, quarter cwt.,
sold at what it would
fetch 1 10 o
Profit, the wrong way
round. £9 it 3$
2 —2


IKY
A
HERO.
It had occurred to I. MOSES
that something might be made
out of a deed of heroism.
It was a plucky thing of the old man,
mind you, to take that header off the
Embankment—he who ordinarily ob-
jected to water, even in a washhand
basin.
“If somethink awful was to happen
to you, sir,” said IKY, “and I was to
rescue you, and we was to get up a
subscription?”
“Suppose, instead,”said Mr. SLOPER,
“somethink awful was to happen to
you, and I was to go in for the heroic?”
“Don’t make a hass of yourself, sir,”
said Mr. MOSES.
It was jolly thoughtless, though, of
I. MOSES, to be lighting his cigar at
that critical moment, instead of look-
ing out.


And when he did dive after his old
friend, he might as well have looked
where he was coming to.
Besides, if it hadn’t been for a boat-
hook- But even that was not as
pleasant as it looks.
Then, what SLOPER suffered after
the rescue ! Talk of Humane Socie-
ties, indeed! What do you say to this
style of rough-drying?
And, after all, somehow, some one
must have overheard a little difference
between Messrs. S. and M.; for it got
about that it was a got-up thing, and
nobody subscribed nothing whatever.
Only to think, too, of the damage
sustained by ALLY'S wardrobe.


THEATER.
Ally on Dramatic Authors: —“ IKY,
my dear boy, s’port the ’mortal bard.
You can get him cheaper than any on
’em.”
“ £50. —Any lady or gentleman with
theatrical tastes, who can command
this sum,” &c. —See Advertisement.
“I won’t deceive you, sir,” said MO;
“you’ve the very face for tragedy. A
little more eyebrow, p’raps; but that’s
all that’s wanting.”


“You see, my dear madam, we make
it a rule at our theatre only to engage
ladies who keep their broughams.”
The Free List entirely suspended. —
“The guv’nor says he can’t do nothink
better nor beefsteak for ‘dress circles.’”
When the night came, everything
had been “managed” but the gas. The
company wanted the money in advance.
“Come decent, Ike! Don’t you be
afraid. Your aunt will toddle down in
her bonnet, and we can tittiwate a bit
in the westibule.”
“We shall depend on you, ALLY, to
lead encores. Allow me to suggest, how-
ever, that you should get a little more
emphasis put upon your boot-heels.”
A Notice on the Green-Room Looking-
glass.—“Salaries next week.—(Signed)
I. MOSES.”


SHOPER'S MAGIC
“SLOPER, dear boy,” said his old
friend IKY, “ don’t you think it’s nearly
time you hit on a new move?”
“More than time, dear boy,” said
Mr. S.; “but what move is there left
to hit upon?”


“If we was to do a little tour with a
magic lantern?” said IKY.
“But where are we to get the lan-
tern?” said SLOPER.
“Let’s only pretend,” said Iky.
“Whack-fol-di-diddle-liddle-li-de!”
said Mr. SLOPER.
Triumphant reception of Sloper and Moses in the Provinces.
Sloper sticks up his first poster.
Portrait of proprietor of wall, who
orders SLOPER to lake poster down
again.


The eventful night arrives. Iky
MOSES is ready to take the money
twenty minutes before the appointed
time.
ALLY SLOPER is also prepared with
his introductory address, just to get the
people nicely seated.
The audience (one in number)
arrives. “Let’s let him wait a bit,”
said Mr. MOSES.
The audience, on hearing that an
accident has happened to the ma-
chinery, but that he will receive a free
ticket for next night, refuses to leave
the hall.
Sloper and Moses, therefore, lock him in, and make tracks,
Perhaps he is there yet!
And yet, although the above is actually the true state of the case, that boy goes
about at this very moment saying he was robbed of sixpence.


STOKER'S UMBRELLA
It has been stately in certain quarters y that SLOPER’s
umbrella is a delusion and a share, and thaty in point
offact, it isn't made to open. If such is the case, how
account for these incidents at Wimbledon i
As the old man would keep passing
in front of the targets, it saved his life
several times.
Many things were lost in the camp,
but ALLY did not lose his umbrella;
on the contrary, it increased in size.
Then he couldn’t find his .friends, and
had to bivouac under it.
Atmospherical Phenomenon.- It
came on to rain, and Ally inadver-
tently put his umbrella up.


THE COURSE OF TRUE LOVE,
rn m " , y
hj J) UfcTEp B Y
One day an
ideaoccurred
to IltY Mo:
“ There must
be lots of
ladies of pro-
perty who
would very
much like to
get married.”
And he
straightway-
started a
matrimonial
agency.
All that then
remained to be
done was to wait
for the lady of
property. (There
was a good deal
of waiting.)


At last a footstep was heard, and a
shadow seen on the wall.—Hush! she
comes!
“I'Ve got the very thing to suit you,”
said Mr. Moses. “The descendant of
a noble house—still in the bloom of
youth”
He meant his friend ALLY,
got up for the occasion.
They meet. It is! —no! —yes!—it is—the long-lost
Mrs. SLOPER!
Back view of Mr.
S. as he appeared
after making the
horrible discovery.


ALLY SLOPER
ON HIS
TRAVELS
Also, very properly, he took with
him that famous double-headed penny
of his, to toss with. Also a few pins—
very necessary when buttons come off.
Also toilet requisites, even to a—
luxurious extent.
The die is cast. ALLY and
Moses have parted for ever.
Moses was always getting
him into trouble, so ALLY
determined to seek solace in
a foreign clime. He at once
packed up.
JUDY, it is true, found the
bulk of the travelling ex-
penses ; but Mr. Sloper pro-
vided against emergencies an
IOU with amount blank.
Also one of Mr. Moses’s collars, for
State occasions.
Also other toilet requisites, to keep
up the credit of the London serio-
comic journal which he has the honour
of representing.


On this side of the North Foreland, it was really a treat to hear Mr. SLOPER
discoursing upon the wonders of the vasty deep.
On the other side of the Foreland, it is true, he was somewhat subdued.
N.B.—Those are SLOPER'S legs, round the corner; the rest of SLOPER, dread-
fully ill, somewhere in the background.
Meanwhile the boat urged on its wild career.
(To be very dreadfully continued


SLOPER
AT
HAVRE
Here are some little things chez FRAS-
CATI, of home and foreign manufacture.
Though you may not believe it, the back
view in the straw hat is that of a Parisi-
enne, and (entre nous) the view from the
front is ever so much uglier.


Here is another
style of Parisienne,
going to take a dip.
Oh, you little silly!
it’s ever so much
colder if you try it
a toe at a time.
Plongez done , Ma-
dame la Marquise!
There is probably plenty of life and
gaiety at Havre, if you look for it at the
right place, but that isn’t at noonday, in
the principal back street, of which this
is a faithful representation, from the
pencil of our special artist, A. SLOPER,
Esq.
As for the back streets at nightfall,
don’t stop out after dark, unless you
take a lantern with you. These are
three respectable inhabitants, of various
ages and sexes, going home to bed —
Papa lighting the way.


This is ALLY himself, en route for the trackless ocean. It will be observed that
he took the most cherished of his effects with him, fearing that they might not be
safe against the cupidity of unprincipled foreigners. The loss of that well-known
hat Would, indeed, have been a national calamity.
Remarkable appearance of Madame
ROBINSON, de Londres, in the last
fashionable bathing-dress, accompa-
nied by all the necessary parapher-
nalia to make herself perfectly com-
fortable, according to the customs of
our lively neighbours.
You’ve probably heard a good deal about the coquettish (or cocottish,rather)
bathing-dresses. This is more like the real thing. These caps are from nature,
upon A. SLOPER'S solemn word as a gentleman.


BADEN-BADEN
Micch as it may amaze Judy’s Two Millions Three-quarters and a half of
Subscribers, she begs to state, from information she has received , it would appear
that Ally is at Baden-Baden. How he got there , and got out of Switzerland
without going through the usual formalities with respect to the hotel bill But
no matter.
“Music hath charms,” JUDY'S Special
Travelling Correspondent wishes to
observe; but, when it begins at seven
o’clock in the morning, really and
truly-
And when it goes on all through the
day, and lasts till bedtime, and beyond
it far into the night, “Hang it all! you
know,” said Judy’s Special Travelling
Correspondent.


AT THE TRINK-
HALLE.
He. You think I
am making fun of
the famous waters,
do you? Not I!
Why, I only drank
one glass in all my
life, and it cured
me-
She. Of the desire
to drink any more?
He. Well, yes! I
think that was all
that ailed me.
THE AMUSEMENTS ARE GRATIS.
“What are you taking, sir?" said the
waiter. “The air, my good friend,” said
ALLY.
“You’ve forgotten my little pour-boire,
sir, haven’t you?” “Well, if you’re thirsty,
my dear boy,” said ALLY, “your’re at
liberty to drink the beer yourself—if you
ain’t afraid to.”
It is only in Germany where one finds the candles too long and the sheets too
short; but what are the odds as long as you’re happy!


THE
REASON WHY.
And you really
like to drink this
dreadful stuff?
Why? Is it because
you have been told
not to do so ?
Ruins are all very well in their way.
Some of them seen a long way off, seem
quite near; only, seen near, they’re a
long way off!
ALLY tried some rural walks. “It’s
lucky I’m not of a corpulent turn,” the
old gentleman observed, as he squeezed
through a mountain pass.
*****? What, with respect
to the Tables, do you mean? Ah, if
ALLY could only have got anybody to
take up his system I There was a sure
fortune in it (ALLY said) if it had only
been tried.
One solitary person regretted he
had not lost money at the Tables.
“Blest if I could ever raise enough
to have a try,” said JUDY'S Special
Travelling Correspondent.
3


SLOPER
IN
SWITZERLAND
It may be here
observed that Slo-
per’s tour, as de-
picted in this series
of illustrations, took
place about two
years ago, and that
the details were
published from
week to week, with
Judy’s comments.
For instance, Judy
said:
Extraordinary
to relate, SLO-
PBR is in Swit-
zerland. Still
more extraordi-
nary to relate,
JUDY has been
induced to pay
his travelling
expenses. The
results of his
experiences will
be found below.
“Oh, bother eggs and bacon,” said
ALLY; “haven’t you any beefsteak?”
“Well, you see, sir,” said the waiter,
“the beefsteak’s up there—nine thou-
sand feet above the hotel; and it’s
rather a winding road, too, if you’re in
a hurry”
One point of an alpenstock is to
inscribe on it the name of each cele-
brated place you visit; but why not
buy one already labelled, as Ally
did? The effect is just the same, and
it saves a deal of money, time, and
trouble.


When ALLY caught a glimpse of
this, he said, “There is the real Swiss
hat, if you like! with a pretty Swiss
face underneath, I’ll wager a half-
penny.”
Luckily for Sloper, though, nobody
was there to take his bet! This was
the face!
More Swiss hats! This is the
real, right down, old genuine un-
adulterated article. Very fetching
—on some people, perhaps.
The marvels of Nature are not quite free-
gratis in Switzerland. You pay, as at the toll-
gate on Waterloo Bridge, only it is about ten
halfpence instead of one, and the effect is, if
anything, grander.
DOGS OF ST. BERNARD.
“No, the race is not so pure as
it used to be,” said the reverend
gentleman; “nothing is as it was.
I found three bone buttons in the
subscription-box the other day!
It’s a sad world!”
Worthy of IKY MO at his best. Chamois—
very sham. Chamois got up to please the
tourist. Care to be taken, though, not to put
them too near the edge, for fear they blow over.
3 —2


EN ROUTE FOR SUEZ
A week later we find
Sloper at Constantinople,
and JUDY still paying his
expenses and issuing the
following
IMPORTANT NOTICE.
Judy is delighted to say
that, at an enormous expense,
she has secured the services
of Messrs. Moses and Slo-
per, whose Eastern expe-
riences are here depicted.
These pictures, taken on the
spot, Mr. Moses assures her,
at the risk of his life, will, she
trusts, afford general satisfac-
tion. In the meanwhile she
takes this opportunity of in-
forming Messrs, Moses and
Sloper that the last remit-
tance she intends to make is
now in the post. However,
Judy, enpassant, cannot help
expressing her pleasure in
hearing that I. Moses has
turned up again.
General view of Constantinople, to the best of Mr. SLOPER'S recollection.


ALLY SLOPER, even before he started, created a great sensation in his new
fez. Whether or no the possession of the fez in question can be traced to the
fact of Sloper having undertaken the duties of assistant at a cigar shop, next
door to Judy’s Office, for a minute or two, while the proprietor stepped out, the
world at large or the proprietor must decide.
Railway Official (with severity). “A
mistake, do you say ? You should have
counted your change at the time. We
can’t rectify mistakes afterwards.”
Mr. Sloper (with urbanity ). “Don’t
mention it, my dear boy—don’t men-
tion it. You gave me too much, that’s
all; but we won’t say another word
upon the subject.”
[And until this day it has never
been satisfactorily settled whe-
ther this was or was not a “ try
on ” of our old friend Ally's.
Daring equestrian feats of ISAAC
Moses, Esq., who crossed the Desert
upon the back of an untamed camel;
but it was rather too bumpy for Mr.
Sloper, who may be observed alight-
ing “permiscuously” in the rear.


This is a true likeness of a Turkish
lady in a walking-dress, and of the
boots she walked in. A is the lady,
B the boots.
Portrait of a chambermaid, sketched,
at the risk of his life, by Mr. SLOPER,
through an attic window of the Sultan’s
palace.
View of Thebes, and of Mr. Moses
(back view of the latter) in a contem-
plative attitude. There should have
been verses to this, but they did not
come in time.
View of Cairo by night. Mr. SLO-
PER and a few other jolly dogs out on
the ramble.


SLOPER
DOES
THE
DERBV
oLOPER always was a patron of sport. “It was born in me,” the old
gentleman has often said ; “ I was gee-upish
even as a child.”
ALLY was always a lady’s man, and
had some notion of taking down his
Aunt Sarah and eighteen-pennyworth
of curdled cocoa-nuts.
IKY, on the contrary, thought he
would prefer to encourage the fine
old English sports and pastimes.


“Why not go in for the usual form,
Mr. S., and give anythink to one against
anythink?”
“And after the race is over? ” said
ALLY. “As per usual,” said IKY.
The difficulty, though, was what they were to go down in. By a fortunate chance,
a friend of Mr. Moses’s, who had a conveyance, happened to be ill
in bed. Supposing they borrowed it? “ But it’s no good
troubling him first by talking about it,” said Mr.
Sloper, with his wonted kind consideration.
IKY drove. The
artist has diplo-
matically omitted
some portion of
the animal. What
remains leaves us
in doubt.
ALLY was too spirited to avail him-
self of the accommodation. Perhaps he
was afraid some of his carriage friends
would see him.
Only his boots were rather out of
order, and, after the first te[?] twelve
miles, he began to limp.


The worst of it was, then, that the animal began to be obstinate, and
both gentlemen had to get out and push behind.
Happily, a friend of IKY'S
had drawn him a plan of a
short cut to Epsom, by which
some miles might be saved.
Only the plan was hard to follow, and, as
luck would have it, when ALLY went to ask the
way, he fell upon a deaf and dumb man.
View of Iky and SLOPER up a bye-road, half-way there, late on in the after-
noon. The conveyance in the background. The Jerusalem nowhere, and nobody
robbed and plundered, after all.


MO AND SLOPER’S UNIVERSAL AGENCY.
Although Mr. SLOPER has ceased to act for JUDY in an official capacity , she is
pleased to learn that he and Mr. MOSES are getting on in the world. She has
been informed that they have taken extensive premises , and have opened an
Agency.
Note. As
will be seen by
what follows,
Judy had some
unpleasantness
with A. Sloper
on his return
from his
the particulars
of this little
matter it would
perhaps be more
generous to
plunge into ob-
livion.
View of premises : Mr. SLOPER'S famous hat runs some risks.
Mr. MOSES, she un-
derstands, who had fur-
niture warehoused, gene-
rously placed the same
at Mr. SLOPER'S dis-
posal. Mr. SLOPER
found the other neces-
saries.


An admirable idea occurred to Mr.
MOSES. Suppose a clerk were adver-
tised for—“Splendid opportunity of
learning a business. First year’s ser-
vices to be gratuitous. Premium only
£5” Portrait of bright active boy
who applied.
Portrait of another bright active
boy, who had been out before under
similar circumstances, but hadn’t suited.
However, MOSES took him and the
premium.
Portrait of parent of first boy, who
wanted to know whether the five pounds
were supposed to pay for the boy’s
board and lodging for the first year.
Portrait of the mother of the second
boy, who wanted her five pounds back,
and made a dreadful disturbance on
the stairs.
Appearance of premises occupied by the Universal Agency Company (Limited)
subsequently to the cutting off of the gas.


MO
AND
SLOPER
DO THE
OAKS.
“This sounds simple, don’t it, ALLY? —‘Send
your money to IKY MO, and ask no ques-
tions.” “Werry simple, if they does it,” said
Mr. SLOPER.
It was rather aggravating when
ALLY was being got up as a capi-
talist, that the funds didn’t even
run to a new hat-band.
Be mysterious, what-
ever you are. The bet-
ting profession would
go to pieces without a
good lot of this sort of
thing.
Tipping the Whis-
per.—“Keep it dark!
Back ‘The Buster ’!
It’s a moral!"


Before any race, you ’re safe to find ALLY
SLOPER at the arches. After the race-??
IKY'S last words were, “Give any-
think to one, as long as you pot the
stake.”
Of course the wrong horse came in first; but that’s the way with wrong horses.
One thing
is certain —
SLOPER
would have
lost a fortune
if he’d been
fool enough.
However, —
IKY made
tracks. It
was a pity,
though, poor
ALLY was
not a better
jumper.


HOW MO AND SLOPED WERE EMPLOYED ON
THANKSGIVING DAY.
Brilliant idea! Mr. MOSES opens a
shop for the sale of the best and cheap-
est seats in London, at No. 209 Fleet
Street. By some accident, however, it
would appear he had quite overlooked
the fact of there being only two hundred
and eight houses.
Persons who had eagerly bought the
sixpenny fauteuils were much annoyed.
“It must have been taken down by
those fellows at the Board of Works.”
Back view of SLOPER as he appeared
choosing the site for his stand on the
Thames Embankment.
But the route was changed. Despair
of SLOPER, who may be observed re-
moving his effects.
Picture representing the exact atti-
tude of a gentleman who took up his
position at 1 a.m., and made up his
mind to wait for the Procession.
Picture representing the same gentle-
man whilst the Procession was passing.
He would have been better had he
taken SLOPER'S stand—and less brandy.


Heartlessness of I. MOSES —selling
tickets for SLOPER’S stand to confiding
small boy.
Just indignation of A. SLOPER, repu-
diating all responsibility in the trans-
action. MOSES missing at the time.
JACKS-IN-OFFICE AGAIN!
The Cathedral authorities re-
fused to allow Sloper to fix his
stand on the steps outside.
MORE INTERFERENCE WITH THE RIGHTS
OF THE SUBJECT.
SLOPER not even allowed to knock nails
into Temple Bar. (Yet they whitewashed the
poor old thing themselves.)
View, showing exact appearance of the persons who had paid for places on
SLOPER'S Stand, at the identical moment the QUEEN passed.


WILKNS'S
WINDOW
After all, it would
seem as though SLO-
PER and MOSES
were not employed
on Thanksgiving
Day in the manner
just depicted, or else
the following is a
libel. It appears there
is a person of the
name of WILKINS,
who keeps a public
house, out of a win-
dow of which (with
some craning) a side
view of the Proces-
sion was obtainable.
WILKINS having advantageously let
the window in question, retired to bed
on Monday night, but was aroused, at
a small hour, by a ring at the bell.
A foreign nobleman, just come to
town, wanted a bed for the night.
If he would turn out the first thing
in the morning, there would be no
particular objection.
Charge eighteenpence.


“Will he keep his word, though?”
said Mrs. WILKINS. “It was very
stupid of you to trust him.”
“There’s our barman, you know,”
said Mr. WILKINS ; “I think he might
manage to persuade any one of his own
weight.”
Sure enough,
at daybreak the
barman roused
the foreign
nobleman.
“Don’t come
near me, my
good fellow.
I’ve come out all
over spots, and I
think it’s some-
thing catching.”
Here was a
pretty go!
And at daybreak the parties who had taken the room arrived. As they could not
have the room, they wanted their money back; but, unfortunately,
WILKINS had spent most of it!


Luckily, though, the foreign nobleman's medical adviser lived close at hand.
He was summoned at once.
But a consultation was required. Luckily again, the medical adviser knew some
other medical parties, and they were sent for.
“Funny smell of tobacco,” said
the old gentleman who had paid
for the room; “perhaps they’re
fumigating him.”
Perhaps they were. Anyhow, this is a view
of the patient, as seen from an opposite win-
dow. Could it be possible that Moses and
SLOPER, to get a room for eighteenpence, had
been guilty of-? (Language fails us.)


ANARCHY
IN
ISLINGTON
[Note. —Thefollowing
brief narrative of certain
dreadful doings out Hor-
ton way will probably not
be without interest to fu-
ture historians ,]
This is the
person.
This is the
populace.
For many days and nights Islington
had been the scene of brutal outrage.
Bands of ferocious miscreants, some of
them nearly thirteen or fourteen years
of age, had perambulated the leading
thoroughfares upon the Sabbath even-
ing, and, in spite of the determined
efforts of our metropolitan police, had
absolutely gone on like anything.
A report had reached the “ Judy”
Office, that a person in an unmis-
takable hat had been observed for
some time past addressing the popu-
lace in a highly inflammatory style.


The words of the demagogue acted like oil upon flames. The bloodthirsty
rabble rose as one boy, and sowed desolation broadcast. The rights of property
were set at nought, and upwards of one pennyworth of apples were stolen from
one stall alone at one fell swoop.
No wonder that the lawless
and demoralized youth in-
festing this ferocious suburb
should have been urged to
deeds of even more than usual
atrocity.
However, this was not all. Not only were the young and lovely Islingtonians
assailed by hordes of savage ruffians ;


But even persons of undoubted respectability, and of mature age, have had
things said to them they had never before heard the like of.
In such a case as this, who could better provide against emergencies than our
friend, I. MOSES, Esq., who was early on the ground, selling halfpenny canes?
The report that it was all a got*up thing between Mo and Sloper was, Judy
feels certain, a cruel calumny. Is a patriot any less a patriot because his name
happens to be Sloper ? Cannot a respectable tradesman, even though his wares
be halfpenny canes and his name Moses, take advantage of a good market, and
still be a benefactor of his species ? Perish the thought!
It was all very well before the slander was circulated;
Though poor Mo caught it hot, with his own canes, afterwards.


SLOPER IN SEARCH OF DR. LIVINGSTONE.
[Note.—lt may be re-
membered that before Dr.
Livingstone was found,
several persons thought
of going in search of him—
among others, Sloper.]
An idea occured to SLOPER.—Why shouldn't he take the management of the
LIVINGSTONE expedition?
He therefore bought a postage-card
(all at once);
And made application. (“How many
N's is there in manage?”)
Then bade a long farewell to his dear fiend MOSES;


And dreamed he did great things in the neigh-
bourhood of the Pyramids.
It may be unnecessary to
add that Sloper’s services
were not accepted after all
—(he puts too many N’s in
“ manage ”) but to make
up for his disappointment,
Judy let the old man go out
for her.— (For particulars,
see below.)
This is Sloper as he
appeared standing alone in
all his glory on the trackless
Desert.
This is also Sloper as he
appeared on finding he wasn’t
the only one on the trackless
Desert.
SLOPER crossing the country. Un-
seemly levity of natives in the rear.
SLOPER, in an unguarded moment,
uncovers his head. Panic among the
blacks.


Sloper in search of Dr. Livingstone.
How it was Sloper’s Letters (brimful of information) never
came to hand.
A native postman started with them all
right enough.
Then another native official took care
of the despatch and the postman too.
Then they passed through a third
official, sticking a little by the way.
But when they were finally posted in
the Postmaster-General, they seriously
disagreed with him.


Nothing could have been more open-hearted and cordial than ALLY was to
the natives. He tendered them the hand of friendship.
One of them shook it.
This is SLOPER'S sketch of
the course of the Nile, show-
ing the source discovered by
himself. In its present state
it seems to require explana-
tion.


Model in wood of an African beauty,
who had many offers, but died at last of
a broken heart.
Model (also in wood) of another
African beauty, celebrated alike for her
romantic adventures and the rigidity of
her principles.
Here we have
ALLY probing, as it
were, for the source
of the Nile among
rocky places.
Here, again, we
have a crocodile in-
advertently stirred
up in ALLY'S thirst
for scientific dis-
covery.
[Note. —It is to be regretted
that a magnificent and life-size
picture of Sloper slaying and
skinning the crocodile above
depicted, has been necessarily
left out of this work, the pages of
which, otherwise, it would have
nobly adorned.]
Sloper finds the source of the Nile. He always did go to the bottom of things.


Picture of Mrs. Sloper (the African
one). “Hallo! I say-” But then,
after all, perhaps one must conform to
the customs of the country. Only she
might have been a little better looking.
Portrait of Sloper sitting in council,
Drop your eye on the peacock s feather.
SLOPER improves the native mind.
He teaches the simple savage a pretty
little game with three thimbles and a
pea.
The simple savage is excited when he
loses.


Sloper hears for the first
time of a fine old African in-
stitution, called cutting off
the extremities.
[Note. —After this picture
was received at 73 Fleet
Street, it was only natural
some surprise should have
been experienced at seeing
Sloper turn up again with
all his ears on.]
Extraordinary courage of Sloper,
leading the way to the lair of the un-
tamable tiger. At this moment he is
telling his faithful blacks that the eye
of Europe is upon them.
Victory of mind over matter. SLOPER
subdues a savage beast by the power of
his eye. (The above is from a sketch
taken on the spot by a native, who ran
away.)
Triumphal return of Slo-
PER’S hunting party, bringing
with them the tail of the
slaughtered beast as a trophy.
“Hee! haw!” said somebody.
[NOTE. —It may be inci-
dentally mentioned that
JUDY'S Special Commission?*
seemed to have quite forgot
the purpose of his journey.]


The spread of civilization in savage Africa, under SLOPER'S superintendence, was
strikingly exemplified by the adoption of toilet requisites by the black fair sex.
Sloper provides good Cookery
for the Million.
SLOPER’S
liestarant.
Everything in and out of Season
at SLOPER'S.


Sloper opens a Loan Office, and an-
nounces himself ready to advance any
sum from £ 1 to £1,000, at a day’s notice.
View of exterior of business premises.
Sloper opens a Bank. SLOPER is
willing to take charge of the entire
native coinage.
SLOPER
opens a Di-
vorce Court.
Almost a third
of the King’s
wives avail
themselves of
it immediately.
[Note. —The question has frequently been asked why Sloper didn’t find
Livingstone. The question yet remains unanswered. One thing, however,
must always be acknowledged. Sloper was only absent from London four weeks.
If he really ever went to South Africa at all, he did a lot in the time.


SLOEPER
MISUNDERSTOOD.
It is much to be regretted that Mr. Sloper’s natural hindness of disposition
very frequently got him into trouble. For instance , having ascertained that the
circulation of a certain journal would bear improvement, he unhappily hit upon
a plan, with the following sad results : —
To begin with, what was more natu-
ral than that Sloper should have taken
away another gentleman’s hat, in a mis-
take, from the restaurant he frequents?
Was it likely he would willingly have
changed his own famous hat for an-
other?
It made it awkward, though, when,
on being searched, a couple of spoons
were found in Mr. SLOPER'S pocket.
Still, you know, it was all part of the
plan. The policeman, by the way, was
rather dull, and couldn’t see the point
of Mr. SLOPER'S explanation.


Strange to say,
the magistrate
was dullalso. He
had never even
heard of the
Amateur Casual,
and he couldn’t
be induced to
believe that
Sloper was an
amateur also.
And so ALLY
got a month.
However, Sloper didn’t mind, bless you! He knew his JUDY would under-
stand that his object was to ascertain from personal experience what the inside
of a gaol was like, and that his efforts in her behalf would meet with handsome
recognition.
For the first time this many and many
a long day SLOPER has been tubbed.
Never in his life before did he go up
so many stairs.


A report has been circulated preju-
dicial to Mr. Sloper, to the effect that
he tried to get the chaplain to change
his month into a fortnight;
And that he was not nearly as pious
when he found the chaplain couldn’t do
it. For a time, therefore, Sloper, was
completely extinguished.
But when the month was over, SLOPER once more stepped proudly forth (having
previously troubled the doorkeeper for a light). During the recess Mr. SLOPER'S
wearing apparel has been entirely renovated, and he trusts that the public will
look upon this unfortunate affair in its proper light.
[Note. — This is not the only occasion upon which A. Sloper has suffered
from unjust suspicions, and met with persons incapable of discriminating with
delicacy. Witness the “ Unprofessional Vagabond” episode, elsewhere illustrated.]


THE
LONG
LOST
It would appear that Sloper
is a long-lost son. Recently he
had been advertised for, and
immediately upon his return to
Europe replied to the adver-
tisement.
A recent accident having happened to
another Mr. SLOPER.
Our Mr. SLOPER puts in a claim as heir
to his estates.


Portrait of the long-lost SLOPER, in the
flower of his youth.
Portrait of the newly found SLOPER,
still in the prime of life.
The SLOPER Claimant explains his
loss of flesh by the fact that for some
years he was constantly in search of a
landing-place.
Affecting scene in court. SLOPER'S
maternal great-grandmother’s cousin
recognizes a long-missing family relic.
Worrier-General (to chief witness ):
—“How is it, Mr. MOSES, you wear
your hair so short?” “They mostly
do, sir, where me and Mr. SLOPER have
come from.”
The long-lost SLOPER was brought
up as a carpenter. “Now, on your
oath, have you ever nailed anything in
all your life?” “I've nailed a heap of
things, sir, in my time,” Said SLOPER.
4 —2


SLOPER'S
TRIUMPHAL
TOUR
N.B. —The above is allegorical; but
Sloper would have looked well, though,
if he could have got the wardrobe. The
helmet would have suited him parti-
cularly.
“Why, ALLY,” said IKY, “what’s
up with your thumbs?” “Never you
mind,” said Mr. S., “I have my reasons,
and I Ve been a-curlin’ 'on ’em."
SLOPER wants to know what’s
the most fattening sort of food?
Iky thinks half a dozen midsummer
oysters might swell him out a bit.
SLOPER tries half a dozen, and
swells much.
“Why, you jolly old ’umbug!” said
IKY —“blest if you don’t want me to go
a starrin’ tour with you, and pass you
off as the real Claimant!”


At the first place they went to, an old
lady gave . SLOPES, a hymn-book, a
packet of mixed hair-pins, and three-
pennyworth of fuzees. SLOPER gave
back the hymns. He said he wasn’t
worthy of them.
This is a portrait of the old lady.
She might as well have kept the hair-
pins herself. She needed them more
than ALLY, whose back hair is scanty.
You should have heard ALLY speak
about his poor children, It made the
stoniest-hearted weep. (IKY hired the
family; sixpence a head all round.
The reception on the way was most
enthusiastic. Please to observe this
staunch believer in the act of hooraying
like one o’clock.
At one place they took the horses out
of ALLY'S carriage. This is a half-
finished sketch of an enthusiastic ad-
mirer, who supplied the place of one of
the horses.
Worse luck, though, in the end they
met the real Claimant, who very quickly
proved ALLY to be a forger, liar, thief,
perjurer, scoundrel, and even marc.
ALLY withdraw gracefully.


SLOPER
TAMES
THE
UNRULY.
ALLY'S
first pupil
was all that
could be
desired in
the shape
of intracta-
bility. His
mamma, a
lady of
singular in-
telligence,
had the
greatest
faith in
ALLY, and
he at once
began ope-
rations.
Our dear old friend ALLY has hit
upon a system for bringing boys not
generally understood to a sense of
their situation. Music is the chief in-
gredient, and—there are others.
ALLY persuasive.
The Unruly impervious.


These are the other “ingredients” before mentioned.
N.B. —Very persua-
sive, indeed, if properly
applied.
N.B. —The Unruly ap-
plied them on our ALLY.
These are the ingredients after the first lesson.
This is ALLY after having had
his own ingredients tried on him-
self.
This is the Unruly more unruly than ever.
And ALLY has been paid in advance for his
board for a month, and has spent the money!


SLOPER'S
CLUB
Our old friend Ally recently got up a Club for “ The Better Ventilation of
Free Opinion upon Subjects of Political and Social MismanagementP Sub-
scription, Sixpence a Week, Payable in Advance.
One of the first persons to
join in the scheme was a
disinterested licensed vic-
tualler, at whose house the
Club was to have its meet-
ings.
They could not ODGER,
but all the other available
intellect was enlisted. For
instance, from the N *w
C*t;
Also-, from Wh*t*ch*p*l.
Without mentioning-, recently of
H*ll*w*y G**l.


There was a rule that any member
arriving five minutes late was fined a
halfpenny. It was very odd, too, how
nobody could ever help coming late,
according to SLOPER'S clock.
There was another rule, that all the
members should wear kid gloves. Sweet
effect caused by A. SLOPER under these
circumstances.
SLOPER was Treasurer, and this was the
box containing the funds.
Another rule was, that every one in turn should
stand treat all round. It was always a question
where A. SLOPER managed to get to when his turn
came.
These were the funds
when the box was opened.
The Club has since broken
up.


SLOPER
SPIRITS
Slope-r’s recent rapid movements in South Africa are now fully accountedfor.
He has gone into the Spirit business, in conjunction with Mr. I, Moses.
This is the portra[?] of a gentleman
who communed with the spirits in a
raw state.
Strange appearance presented by A.
SLOPER, Esquire, when gazed at by the
gentleman above mentioned, after the
communing aforesaid.


One rule ta the stances
was, that you should keep
your hands on the table.
Whilst doing so, several per-
sons felt mystic influences at
work in their pockets, and
subsequently missed small
sums.
GREAT AERIAL FLIGHT OF MISS TUPPY. (Mrs. GUPPY'S only rival)
Now she's off! Easy does it!
And so Sylph-like!
“Pretty .little airy spirit!
Fly! fly! fly! fly!”
The descent Sensation similar
to going feet first into the sea.
She reaches the earth suddenly.
Very nice, if it didn’t bump so.


Aerial flight of A. Sloper’s
double —more a man of straw
than even A. Sloper ; also the
Psychic Force, unseen, under the
personal superintendence of Iky
Mo.
“ Suddenly a shadow crossed
the blind, and raising my eyes,
I saw a well-known outline float-
ing as it were into space. I
trembled as I gazed, and a deep
sense of awe stole over me.”—
Extract from a Letter of Dr.
Sexton’s.
SLOPER sent his hat round easily
enough. He oughtn’t to have done it
in the dark, though, Moses said, unless
he had mended the hole in the crown.
IKY knew how to turn the tables. He
turned them on to poor SLOPER, when
the show burst up, and he and ALLY
had a row over the accounts.


SLOPER A
MAN
SANDWICH
The sandwich trade has its bright sides, particularly when such a pretty idea as
this is adopted.
This was an enormous idea of
ALLY'S.
Only, when the candle burnt down in
its SOCKET * * *!


This isn’t a nice situation when
somebody is calling “Mad Bull!” at
the other end of the lane.
And it’s not always pleasant to have
to walk on the Embankment on a
windy day.
Generally speaking, an advertiser
Ekes his boards shown the right way
up.
After all, then, it would appear that
ALLY'S umbrella was not made to open,
or else, why didn’t he use it?


This is the advertiser who searched in
vain for ALLY and his boards.
At last he found the boards with their
faces to the wall.
And when he found ALLY, goodness
knows what happened!
They say that ALLY retired from
business, after cooking his supper with
the timber.
[Note. —As years rolls on SLOPER seems to grow younger and younger. It
makes one’s heart quite light and gay to see the old man’s sprightly cheerfulness
as the warm weather approaches, and he puts forth his little venture, even as the
tree puts forth its leaf; for instance;—


SLOPER'S
SUMMERDRINK
No! dear old SLOPER is never
idle. There have been two or three
hot days, and he has invented a
summer beverage. Observe him in
the act of corking.
Here are the materials. Simpli-
city itself: a pinch of ginger to a
gallon of cold water.
The beverage is prepared. All that is
wanting now is a customer.
The beverage is still waiting, but
SLOPER is less hopeful.


Aha! here is the customer at last. “Take
care o’ the cork, old feller!”
Picture of SLOPER as he appeared
waiting for it to go off with a pop. The
customer had his doubts.
SLOPER disgraced. After all, it didn’t
pop. He was obliged to use a corkscrew.
Gross outrage perpetrated upon
Sloper by the customer, who said
the beverage was soap-and-water.
Attempted vengeance by Sloper,
resulting in destruction of stock-in-
trade.
“After all, though,” said ALLY, “if
you give the public its money’s worth,
you do well enough.” So the old man
bought sixpennyworth of real ginger-
beer, which went off during the night
—bang! No moral, as usual.


SLOPER'S
INVENTIONS
[Note. —This is
surely as good an
opportunity as any
other to allude to a
few little notions
knocked off by A.
Slopf.R in his over-
time. Some of them
really are as nearly
as possible practic-
able. However, sin-
gular to say, Slo-
PER never got any-
thing for any of
them. ]
Bright idea for hunting men; apparatus for raising a horse at the highest fences.
This is SLOPER'S Patent Soap, the
peculiarity of which is a most amazing
lather. i.
SLOPER'S Instantaneous Photography
does not even give you time to sit down.


SLOPER’S Patent Reversible Bed-
stead, enabling invalids to warm their
gruel without the trouble of getting out
of bed.
SLOPER’S astonishing invention for
enabling billiard players to grapple
with any number of impossibilities.
SLOPER'S Patent Adulterated Coffee Detector, which explodes with a tremendous
bang, if ten grains of chicory are surreptmously introduced.


IKEY MO. GOESIN
FOR
A CAPITALIST
For some time past, Judy regrets to state, a sad estrangement has existed
between two tried old friends. Alas, it is so !
ALLY won’t speak to IKY any more —no more will IKY ever again address a word
to ALLY.


“After all,” IKY said, “there are lots
of other people in the world.” And
scarcely a week had passed when he
saw an advertisement; “A capitalist,
having money at his disposal, wishes
to meet with another capitalist.”
“He shall,” said Iky. “I’ll write
this very day. It’s a lot of money—
but nothing venture, nothing have.”
The ink came in very handy.
Yes, the ink was very serviceable in
several respects.
Upon the threshold
MOSES paused. “ Lie
still, O fluttering
heart!” he softly mur-
mured. " I wish it had
run to a pair of black
kids, or even an odd
one; however, perhaps
bare hands, after all,
look more substantial.”


The dread portal. Within, imagine the capitalist awaiting IKY’S arrival. With-
out, picture to yourself Mr. I. Moses giving the last finishing-touch
to his toilet. Then he turned the door-handle, and * * *
“I ’ll be hanged if it isn’t that old humbug, SLOPER, after all!”
[Note. —It will, perhaps, be better to draw the curtain upon this harrowing
scene. Not another word was spoken on either side, but the people in the
offices below thought somebody upstairs was beating carpets.]


AT IT AGAIN.
This is ALLY trying on another dodge.
“Here’s a tender-hearted old cove
a-coming,” murmured ALLY to himself.
“But,” he subsequently ejaculated,
“I’m blessed if the old ’umbug ain’t
been and gave me a duffing 'alfpenny."


MO & SLOPER
TAKE A
HOLIDAY.
[Note. —It may be observed that Moses and Sloper soon made up their
'title difference. They never bore malice,]
“I don’t look as well as usual,” said
ALLY SLOPER. “It’s change of air
I’m wanting.”
IKU MO, too, had been suffering a
good deal lately.


It was rather wild of IKE to think he
could ride first with a third-class ticket.
Yet perhaps it was worth trying.
"Third’s good enough for me,” said
ALLY; but then he did not buy a ticket
a t all.
They had an awfully jolly time of it.
IKY began by borrowing a telescope.
ALLY very kindly offered to take care
of a gentleman’s sand-shoes while he
bathed.
“We lived like
fighting cocks, at
the best hotel,” said
Mr. Moses. “When
we were coming
away, poor ALLY
got his hat rather
crushed.”


THE DEED OF DARKNESS.
TABLEAU I.—THE SOLITARY MAIDEN.
She sat alone in pensive thought. Poor unprotected
one! with a long journey before her, too.
TABLEAU II.—THE SPRIGHTLY CAVALIERS.
Their names were IKE and ALLY. They sat on each
side of her, and made eyes.


TABLEAU III.—IN THE TUNNEL.
They simultaneously conceived the wicked design of kissing that solitary
maiden in the tunnel, and together knocked their noses.
TABLEAU IV.—OUT OF THE TUNNEL AGAIN.
The sudden bump hurt them dreadfully. They rubbed their damaged
nasal organs, whilst she smiled faintly.


TABLEAU V.—AT THE JOURNEY'S END.
Why did not she pull up her veil before, though? If she had-But no matter!
ALLY and IKE make tracks in opposite directions.
NS. —Another quarrel, but this time it will last for life.


SLOPER
AND
THE FRANCO-PRUSSIAN WAR.
THE following series of pictures represent one of the
most startling episodes in the career of A. SLOPER,
who, it is well known, was sent out during the late
Franco-Prussian War as Judy’s Special Correspondent.
With these few words of preface we leave Sloper to
tell his own story. Thus, to begin with, hear SLOPER
himself, just before he started :
“A. Sloper has much pleasure in informing the
civilized world, through the medium of “Judy’s ” widely
circulated journal, that he has been engaged, at an
enormous expense, as her Special War Correspondent.
A few of the gallant deeds which he feels equal to are
here depicted.”
And this is what JUDY said at the time :
“JUDY feels sure that the British public will share
with her the satisfaction she feels at having chosen so
able a Correspondent for her journal. She regrets to say,
however, that in consequence of a somewhat injudicious
though pardonable indulgence, upon the occasion of a
farewell banquet given to A. SLOPER, Esq., upon the
eve of his departure, the departure in question has had
to be temporarily deferred. A, SLOPER was confined to
bed at the time of our going to press, extremely poorly.
The promised deeds of daring are therefore put off for
the present.”
However, overleaf you can get some idea of what the
deeds of daring would have been.


ALLY
SLOPER
OFF TO THE WARS
A. ALOPER will take advantage
of any point of observation, what-
ever dangers may menace it.
In case of the accidental foundering of any vessel
on which A. SLOPER may be a passenger, he will be
found provided against emergencies.
A. SLOPER will everbe found in the very thickest
of the fray, pursuing his official career with unruffled
serenity. (For continuation of A. SLOPER seep. 115.)
Neither will any opportunity be neglected cf
obtaining the earliest information regarding the pri
rate movements of all parties concerned.
Whilst clinging to a fragment of the main-mast,
or any other portion of the said vessel, A. SLOPER'S
note-book will still be to the fore.


In the midst of the ragingest of raging
conflagrations, A SLOPER may be de-
pended on for a versatile and graphic ac-
count of the events of the hour.
Even upon the trackless desert, should
it lie in his way to the seat of war, SLOPER
will be found equal to the occasion.
In short, A. SLOPER will
hesitate at nothing, but, if ne-
c ssary, consult the canons
themselves in search of accu-
rate information.


ALLY
TO THE
FRONTI
J ud y regrets to say that, though at all times most anxious to look upon all
things in the most favourable light, she must own that she is to some extent dis-
appointed in Mr. SLOPER. Mr. SLOPER assured JUDY, upon his honour as a
Special Correspondent , that he had, to use his own words , “ made it all right ”
with both sides , and could forward accurate sketches of all important events.
Here Mr. SLOPER may be observed
making it all right with the French.
Here Mr. SLOPER may be observed
making it all right with the Prussians.


And yet another question arises : Was Mr. Sloper’s conduct of a nature to
justify the confidence reposed in him by the French army ?
It is true that no one could have ex-
pressed himself more willing to look
after the supplies.
And whilst they were in his keeping,
his strategic policy was admirable.
The only point
is-when the
Prussians sur-
prised him, were
the supplies in-
tact?
It cannot be denied that Mr.
SLOPER was at Friedswiller.
Most certainly Mr. SLOPER was
at Saarbrück.
s


But did he, or did he not, distinguish
himself?
And did he face the foe in the way that
JUDY had expected?
Here is a sketch made by Mr. SLOPER (according to his own account)
under fire.
Sloper has been taken prisoner , and is once more free //! One of several
gallant deeds will be found hereunder. The text, it should be observed\
is Sloper’s — the sketches are by our own Artist.
After a most heroic resistance,
Overpowered by numbers
(one Prussian),


SLOPER
A PRISONER.
Yet scorning to fly,
The gallant SLOPER fell
into the hands of the foe.
5 —2


His courage, however, did not forsake
him....
Nor did his strategic policy fail him at
this trying moment.
His negotiations were most favourably received;
And ALLY retired. Not wholly deathless, though; for who—oh! who—shall
restore the famous gingham to its pristine beauty, or give back to
the celebrated hat its former elegance of outline?
What, after all, is glory?


SLORES
RETREAT
EXTRACT FROM A LETTER FROM A. SLOPER, ESQ.
To Judy. Inside Metz, upon the Eve of the Battle,
Dear Madam, —Fearing, from statements that have reached me,T am sup-
posed, like some other Special Correspondents, to be all this time bottled up in an
off-court out of Fleet Street, I eagerly seize this opportunity of vindicating my
honour. lam happy to say that I have found a most graphic Artist, who will sketch
under my directions. The fluent pen of A. Sloper will supply the letterpress.
Here may be seen A.
Sloper describing the
situation and probable
tactics of the contendirg
forces previous to the
firing of the first gun.
It must be mentioned,
to save the reader unne-
cessary anxiety, that A.
Sloper and the Artist
occupy an eminence be-
yond the reach of danger.


Upon the same emi-
nence, also out of harm’s
way, a female native of one
of the suburbs of Metz, ac-
companied by her youth-
ful family, had also taken
up their positions early in
the morning, and though
regretting that any strife
should exist, were yet na-
turally anxious to see all
that was to be seen.
Strangeand
unaccount-
able beha-
viour of A.
SLOPER,, Ju-
DY'S heroic
Special, upon
the firing of
the first gun.
Equally remarkable behaviour of
Mr. Sloper’s friend, who stuck fast
half-way over a stile. It is supposed
that he was trying to find a short cut
to the thick of the fight.
Singular
change from
apathy to
quite the op-
posite on the
partoffemale
native upon
seeing how
near the
shots came.
Dreadful ac-
cident which
occurred by
the way to a
young lady
member of
the same fa-
mily.
Splendid instance of filial and bro-
therly devotion on the part of male olive
branches, who, of course, never dreamt
of leaving the field of battle until they
had seen their mother and sister safe
from all danger. Noble boys!


The annexed illustration
(from a sketch taken on
the spot, and forwarded to
Judy anonymously) repre-
sents the position of A.
Sloper, thegraphic artist,
and the native family, as
they appeared at the bot-
tom of the hill at the very
moment that the contest
was at its hottest upon the
other side. Judy’s onty-
reason for permitting its
insertion is to afford A.
Sloper an opportunity of
vindicating honour.
Trophy of the battle picked
up by the Prussians.
Trophy of the battle picked up
by the French.
Here A. Sloper may
be observed anticipating
the advent of a cannon-
ball, and avoiding contact
with the same by a simple
but ingenious process.
Great loss of life would
be avoided were this plan
more generally observed.
A. Sloper is here depicted taking a
careful survey of the progress of the
battle, and the flight overhead of the
deadly missiles. At this moment he is
making his memorable inquiry of—
“ How many more on you are there, if
you please ? ”
Finding that the flight of the deadly
missiles increased rather than decreased
as the day wore on, A. Sloper, equal
to the occasion, whiled away a tedious
hour or so with the morning paper.
He may here be seen wrapped up in a
leader.


AFTER
THE
BATTLE
JUDY eagerly seizes this opportunity of giving Micity to a series of heroic
deeds upon the paid of A. Sloper, Judy’s Special Correspondent. Upon the
occasion of the battle alluded to , A. Sloper performed several deeds of extreme
daring, and was likewise distinguished for a display of strategic policy of remark-
able cleverness.
THE EPISODE OF THE BOOTS.
1. —A. SLOPER, having noticed,
sticking up in the air, the boots of a
recumbent drummer-boy, casually ob-
serves that they are about his own size
and in good repair.
2. —A. SLOPER takes a nearer view
of the boots in question, and feels sure
the poor fellow would be much more
comfortable without them.


3. —Ever anxious to collect a trophy,
however, trifling, A. SLOPER proceeds
to collect the boots in question;
4. — One of which, after much jerk-
ing, leaves its owner with a suddenness
which discomposes A. SLOPER ex-
ceedingly.
5.- The ruffianly drum-
mer-boy, who was not dead at
all, but ignobly shamming, to
avoid active service, resents
these acts upon the part of A.
SLOPER.
6. —A serious difference of opinion occurs
between A. SLOPER and the drummer-boy, who,
in a dastardly manner, commits an unprovoked
assault upon A. SLOPER while he is down.
7. —Triumphant retreat of
cowardly drummer-boy, and
extremely unpleasant posi-
tion of A. SLOPER, left in a
ditch upon the ensanguined
field of carnage.
“You drop that hat, will
you, you great thief!”


SLOPER & MOSES
REUNITED
After the Battle of Sedan, A. Slopes
was found in possession of certain
articles of clothing, which even his
overwhelming powers of eloquence
failed to convince the French authori-
ties had been made for him by the
regimental tailor.
The course adopted with A. SLO-
PER was summary in the extreme.
It was decided that he should either
be immediately shot or join the
Francs Tireurs. For th< first time in
his life, A. SLOPER found himself
the owner of a gun. He may here be
seen as he appeared when wonder-
ing which end would go off first.


Ordered to the front, A. SLOPER marched boldly forth, cheered to the last by an
enthusiastic, though undersized, peasantry. According to the sketch for-
warded by A. Sloper, over a hundred persons are seen, bidding
him adieu. The above, however, is nearer the truth.
A. SLOPER in ambush. Woe to the
luckless one who shall come within
reach of his unerring aim ! He never
let a gun off before, but is full of con-
fidence.
Rather unfortunate occurrence; A.
SLOPER’S head, sticking up a little too
high, attracts the notice of some one
else in ambush-, who lets fly at it.
For a moment a well-known limb
was seen quivering convulsively.
What had happened to JUDY'S valued
contributor?
Alas, all was still ! Had SLOPER
found a hero’s grave? Would these
pages never more be enlivened by his
playful sallies and innocent hilarity?


No; he was yet un-
harmed. Prudence
had prompted him
to seek timely
shelter in a neigh-
bouring thicket.
For some time there
was a display of strate-
gic policy upon both
sides, which would not
have disgraced the most
celebrated Generals.
Presently, though, a
horrible suspicion of the
close proximity of danger
agitated his manly breast.
But a meeting, though
long postponed, seemed
inevitable.
There was no mistake about
it; some one else was in am-
bush on the other side of the
tree.
And when it came—Yes!
—No! Impossible, tho’
nevertheless true! The
other party was none other
than the long-lost Iky
Moses!!!
Here may be observed A.
Sloper (JUDY'S valued con-
tributor) narrating his nume-
rous hairbreadth escapes and
perilous adventures to the
friend of his youth, the newly-
found and fondly-cherished
MOSES.


SLOPER AND MO GO INTO THE SPY BUSINESS.
Disgraceful and outrageous behaviour of the said MOSES, who threw doubt
upon the narration above alluded to, and coarsely designated A. SLOPER a men-
dacious old humbug.
Moses’s and Sloper’s Schemes for taking Paris (to be sold to the Prussians).
Plan of Paris Bank, with weak points
indicated, easily broken into by the aid
of this guide as soon as the outer fortifi-
cations of the town have been disposed
of.
Plan of secret passage into Paris.
Key in the possession of A. SLOPER,
who is willing to take a price for it, if
he can come to terms.
Expression of countenance of Colonel SOURCROUTZ, who thought
there was more in it than met the eye.


Expression of countenance of Lieu-
tenant VON SPLUTTERBACH, who was
utterly astounded.
Expression of countenance of Cap-
tain SORSENGER, who was more asto-
nished than he had been for some time
previously.
Expression of countenance of Ensign
BUTTERBROD, who saw through the
whole thing from the first.
Expression of countenance of the officer in command, who
ordered out Mo and SLOPER for instant execution.


SLOPER
IN
RUINS
Everybody looked
for great things from
SLOPER when he
got among the Ruins
of Paris. This design
—to some extent alle-
gorical represents
feats of prowess per-
formed by SLOPER
in search of relics.
Sloper may be here
observed risking life and
limb with astounding
recklessness whilst rum-
maging the shattered
shells of houses riddled by
the Prussian shot. At
the bottom you may see
him breaking through in-
to a cellar. Do not be
alarmed, though, gentle
reader, the cellar is not
deep.


On his travels, it is said that Mr. SLOPER
found a grocer’s widow, not wholly destitute
yet, weeping over the ashes of her shop. “ If
we were to go into partnership,” said he,
“and you did the serving, while I sanded
the susrar? One ought never to despair in
this world ’
People are so malicious. They say that
SLOPER wouldn’t even go near a bombshell,
much less buy one, and bring it home in his
p acket.
If he never put a bombshell
into his pocket, how can you
account for this incident? Is it
a pure fabrication?
He met another good soul a
little farther on. “My lodgings
were there,” she said, pointing to
a ruin, “on the second floor—and
beautifully furnished —but it is
all gone.” “ If we could only find
the second floor, it would be
something,” said our philosopher.
This was the house, SLOPER
assures his JUDY, that he lodged
in. The Prussians had knocked
one side about a little, and the
Communists had rattled up the
other. “If there’s much more of
the same sort of thing going on,”
said he, “ the place will be barely
waterproof.”


Who said he didn’t bring
home bombshells ? Why, he was
met thus in Fleet Street, on the
day of his return, with a little
piece of the Column from the
Place Vendôme under his arm,
JUDY’S Office Boy can swear to it.
“What are you up to with that
pillar?” said JUDY'S Office Boy.
“I’m going to post it,” said
Mr. SLOPER.
It must, however, have been
some consolation to SLOPER to
know that his relics from Paris
went off like smoke with the con-
fiding British public.
JUDY was out of town at the
time, and with his ordinary se-
ductive arts, he pursuaded
JUDY'S Cashier to let him have
the use of half the window.
Wasn’t there something to do
about it when she came home
again unexpectedly, that’s all!
And the only circumstance
which causes JUDY to have any
misgivings upon the subject is a
curious report respecting a mys-
terious shape lately said to haunt
the site of the New Law Courts
at dead of night, in search of
odds and ends. Yet, again, what
can this possibly have to do with
the brickbats SLOPER brought
from Paris?


AT
DEAD OF NIGHT
AT 73,
One stormy night in the latter
part of the present century—the
other evening, in fact—
A mysterious stranger might have been
observed ringing the shop bell.
The office boy (kept on the premises)
having responded to the summons, ap-
peared at the door of JUDY'S sleeping
apartment, and, in a frightened whisper,
said, “Please, mum, you're wanted.”
Responsive to the summons,
JUDY, in a night-cap de circon-
stance (her pretty one was at the
wash), requested further parti-
culars. Then the awful news was
communicated to her: SLOPER
WAS DEAD!


"He died a hero,” said Mr. MOSES, with
simple pathos,
“His last thoughts were of you,
JUDY, moved to tears, took MOSES to
her bosom, and did the liberal thing.
“Completely riddled by the shots of
his inhuman butchers.
“And he deputed me to bring the
awful tidings.”
Scarcely, however,
had she completed the
transaction, when a
shadow thrown by the
nearest street - lamp
upon the pavement in
front of the door, at-
tracted Judy’s atten-
tion. She thought she
would have fainted.
Wasitpossiblethat she
had been the victim of
duplicity, and that the shadow but indicated a hidden substance round the corner.
If so, how explain to her readers the statements relative to deeds of daring whic
have appeared in this work? This horrible suspicion seems to strike at the
foundation of everything. If Sloper is yet alive, and still in the possession of
his hat and umbrella, what is the public to believe?


IN RE
SLOPER
After what had occurred, Judy felt it her duty to adopt harsh measures with
Isaac Moses.
Discovered at breakfast (1) by an intelligent member of the Double X division,
Mo was straightway led into the presence of the nearest police magistrate, and
asked to account for his conduct.
In a few simple
words, broken by
emotion, he des-
cribed Sloper’s
last moments
upon the “ensan-
guined field.”
Judy was
moved to tears by
this recital ; but
Judy’s solicitor,
producing evi-
dence (2 and 3)
picked up in Salis-
bury Court, asked
for an explanation


of their presence in that locality. Without going into this question, Mo called
witnesses to his character. One (4) had known him since he was a babe; they
had been as brothers. Another (5) had known him longer, and was ready to
swear to it. A third (6) (to whom Mr. Moses was engaged to be married) with
the confiding simplicity of her sex, declared her conviction that Iky was in-
capable of deceit.
To this Iky added a touching appeal on account of his happy and guileless
childhood (7), of which he gave some pleasing and touching details.
Judy and the young person Iky was to be married to wept in each other’s
arms.
Need Judy add that Mo retired from the Court without a stain upon his cha-
racter, and that Judy’s solicitor produced an unwilling witness (8) (about twenty


minutes too late), who certainly would have changed the aspect of affairs con-
siderably, if he had come sooner ?
Since then, JUDY has been in-
formed that MOSES and SLOPER
were observed in the vicinity of the
Court, dancing a cancan diabo-
lique (9).
Judy has done with them for ever* and she is told they are going to start an
opposition comic paper.


THE
SLOPER SENDS ROUND
it would appear that Moses suggested to Mr. Sloper that, oj all men in the
world to collect money for the “ Aid of the Sick and Wounded ,”
he surely was the most likely.
“And if you only had the pluck to
be a sick-and-wounded yourself, and
have your leg off,” said Mr. MOSES,
“you might make an awfully good thing
of it.”
“As far as a few scars go, I’m
your man,” replied Mr. S.; “and
I’m quite game to go in heavy for
sticking-plaister.”


But why did Mr. Sloper deceive
Mr. MOSES respecting his knowledge
of foreign tongues, and bring about
interviews which placed Mr. SLOPER
in a false position?
And, indeed, if Mr. SLOPER hadn’t
pretended he was a German when he
talked to a Frenchman, and a French-
man when he talked to a German, some
very unpleasant exposure might have
occurred.
Shall it be said that lovely woman did not respond as she ought to have done?
And yet, alas !’t was even so. Girls are so mean.


As it was, though, there was considerable unpleasantness. Indeed, it is even doubtful whether Mr, Sloper retired from the
scene with his customary dignity of deportment.
Note. —Upon reflection, does Sloper come out of these things with dignity? and how i? it that the poor old man, though always
in the right, invariably gets the worst of it? Perhaps it is no good pausing for a reply.


SLOPER GOES INTO
COMIC
LITERATURE
This is to give notice that in future Isaac Moses and Alfred Sloper
(Ally short) have no further connection with the paper or publication called
“ Judy.”
Mr. MOSES, “to supply a want that
has been long felt,” is going to start a
humorous journal, which “will not be a
servile copy of any existing publication.”
Mr. SLOPER also promises valuable
aid, and the thing promises to be “an
enormous success.”


They are to be assisted by several awfully funny fellows, who belong to a club
of which Mr. SLOPER is a member —(“The Mouldy Mouchers”) —men of un-
doubted genius, who sleep in their boots.
This picture represents A. SLOPER in
the act of proposing that the price of a
quarter-hundred of Silkstone should be
taken out in a copy of verses laudatory
of the emporium whence they came.
Here you have the British public
waiting impatiently for No. 1.
This picture represents pig-headed
proprietor of emporium in question,
who didn’t care a cuss for the verses,
and took away the coals.
And here is a derisive legend attached
to the publishing office of the journal
in question, by the British public afore-
said, after it lost what little patience
remained at the date of the foregoing
illustration.


SLOPER
THE ARTISTS’
FRIEND.
N.B. —Rising artists ought to look out for SLOPER.
Dear old SLOPER was all round the studios a week before sending-in day.
Always hit it off at lunch-time, too.
There was DAWSPM’S Great Sea Serpent, too long for any of the rooms.
This was SLOPER’S idea. "Get a bit in anywhere where there’s a spare corner,”


As good an old soul as ever lived, if
he had only left his umbrella at home,
and kept his hands off the wet paint.
“Lovely thing! Lovely! A matter
of two pound to square the Hanging
Committee, and your fortune’s made.
Absolutely lovely!”
“Want to be on the line, my dear boy ? Have the thing framed and give it into
my custody, and I’ll make it all right for you.”
Well, SLOPER, had it altered for him, and brought within reasonable limits.
says he. It is true he lost the head and tail, but then that was only an accident.


This is SLOPER
as he appeared
when in the act of
making it all right
for little SPLASHER.
Terrific rush upon the catalogues by
rising artists SLOPER had made it all
right for.
Desolation and despair of rising
artists on finding they are rather less
than nowhere.
Aspect of SLOPER
after having acci-
dentally run up
against rabid rising
artists.


SLOPER AT THE ACADEMY.
Dear old ALLY has visited the Academy at some one else’s expense. He
resorted to subterfuge with regard to his umbrella, which,
however, was unhappily detected from behind.
The Man and the Work.
Tittlebat, R.A., revels in the gi-
gantic. He has got up in the world by
the use of a step-ladder; but want of
space compels us to leave the best of
his work to the reader’s imagination.
Unlike Tittlebat, Mammothson
goes in for the infinitesimal. His
“ Babyhood of a Gnat,” in this year’s
Exhibition (it was to be found some-
where in a corner near the ceiling) was
a marvel of misdirected application.


This is poor POTTER trying to
get up an excitement about his
little effort, by posing all day
long in front of it. It wouldn’t
do, though.
“Live Birds,” by WINGER.
Where’s the salt-box?
There won’t be one of them
left when the show closes.
“The Moon,” by GREENCHEESE.
“Hallo! I say, there ain’t nothink to hang it up by; and blessed if I can
tell which is the right end up.”


SLOPER
ON THE
ICE
There has not been much skating this year, but Ike and Ally did pretty well
while it lasted.
You should have seen ALLY fastening
on a chap’s skates. “You’ve run the
gimlet into me,” said the chap. “I
don’t think I could pull it out agin
under a shillin’,” said Mr, SLOPER.
No one could have been more atten-
tive to the poor people who tumbled
down and hurt themselves than Mr.
MOSES was.
e


There was one party who was a great skater, and he came down to the ice just
to show the muffs how the thing ought really to be done.
Mr. MOSES took care of his overcoat, while he showed them. The
spectators were much impressed.


Only, unfortunately, there happened to be a weak place in the ice, and the clever
party went into it. Simultaneously IKY and the coat were missing.
The worst of it was, all the blame fell upon poor ALLY, who made futile
efforts to escape across the ice. He, too, got into a hole.
6—2


SLOPER AT THE CAMP.
Judy, at a great expense—(she paid his fare twice over) —sent Sloper down
to the Camp. The roar of the battle confused him, it would seem ;
he must have thought he was blank cartridge.
One thing must be owned: no-
thing could have been more com-
plete than SLOPER'S arrangements.
He was victualled for a month—at
Judy’s expense, of course!


It’s good fun sleeping under can-
vas, if it wasn’t for the gnats. Ques-
tion is, though, whether it is best
to be bitten quietly, or burnt alive
in one’s
bed by
Smith’s
(of Ours)
patent
process.
After the warfare is over, juvenue popula-
tion have the deuce-and-all of a lark with a
deadly weapon.
General Officer (stand-
ing up). “ Now, then,
all on yer, when I cries
out 4 Fire!’ you all cries
out ‘Bang’’ together,
and that blows the
enemy to blazes.”
The cavalry take possession of
the field. An insignificant small
boy utterly routed and put to
flight. Brayvo, cavalry !


Some good came of it all, anyhow. It gave Sloper a notion for a new gun, to
supersede all others. This is an imaginary view of Sloper and a Field-
Marshal managing a battle all to themselves. It will be
observed that the cannon-balls are falling about like
hail, yet Sloper is calm and unmoved !
I confess that I, for one, cannot
gaze upon the awful scene
without trembling.


SLOPER takes an engagement at a London Theatre. He was
to do the Conquest trick at the Great Sahara.
The apparatus!!
SLOPER, as per poster.
SLOPER rehearsing: his first leap.
AWFUL RESULT.
“No more, thank you. Not forme!”
said SLOPER.


SLOPER'S THE NOTION OF
FESTIVE SEASON
Judy is happy to hear that her old friend the irrepressible Sloper has been
chosen by a committee of benevolent ladies and gentlemen to superintend a soup
kitchen for destitute Fenians.
Judy cannot believe that this is a true picture of the plum pudding SLOPER
made, with view of plums at remote distances from each other.


Nobody has any right to say that
the above was what SLOPER called his
“stock.”
It is a shameful libel on Mr. SLOPER'S
soup to say that this represented the
raw material.
Note. —l know nothing more sweetly pretty than Sloper’s sentiments regard-
ing Christmas-time.
He says his heart, as it were, expands, and he feels as though he could love
almost any one —particularly nice girls.
He feels at Christmas-time as though everybody were his brother ; his breast
is filled to bursting with charitable feelings. He once called on Baron Roths-
child, and said,
“ Let us share our wealth, and dwell in peace and unity/
He was kicked out.
Sloper tells me that he generally tries to express himself in poetry at Christ-
mas time —(he uses Judy’s stationery for this purpose when left alone in the
back shop*)—but he cannot make poetry with satisfaction to himself.
He says he has tried Captain Warren’s Cooking Apparatus and Brown and
Polson’s Corn Flower, but he can’t make poetry.
He therefore generally sticks to prose, and it must be owned there is nothing
prosier than Sloper’s prose.
* I find the following, which I suppose i must call an unfinished poem, upon the back of one of our
invoices:
"december is the twelef month.
And janniary is the oneth.”
It will be remarked that there is much truth in the sentiment expressed, and it is to be regretted that
after saying so much, Slope* should have stopped where he has. He certainly might have gene six
months further.


SLOPER BEAUTIFIED.
For some time past, Iky has been saying, “ If you were only touched up a little
bit, you might easy land a rich widder lady, with your manners and conversa-
tion.” “ But I ain't over-sure I haven't a wife alivef said Mr. Sloper. “ What's
that signify ? ” said IKE.
Then IKY showed him what was
absolutely necessary, and these
even somebody might be run in
for.
SLOPER slept on it. And when he
awoke, he said to himself, “Why
should not I be beautiful?”
Why not, indeed? The confiding
barber round the corner could make
him luxuriantly curly.
There was a dentist IKY could get a
lovely set out of.


Then a little white and black, and a few roses artistically laid on;
Then a few more of the appliances of
Art;
Then an interval of half an hour;
And then Sloper, in all his beauty, was introduced to his widdy.
(N.B. —It came to nothing.)


THE “UNPROFESSIONAL VAGABOND."
When first Sloper proposed that he should make himself up as an “Unpro-
fessional Vagabond,” JUDY observed, in her quiet way, that he would not want
much making up. (This hurt his feelings.)
SLOPER as he appeared when artfully dis-
guised, The wig and beard were particularly
artful.
He thought he’d try the crossing-
sweeping dodge, to begin with. The
above represents A. SLOPER (JUDY'S
“ Unprofessional”) proudly taking his
stand, at dawn, at the Regent Circus.


This is A. SLOPER again, only a little
later on, when the legitimate proprietor
of the crossing put in an appearance.
ALLY SLOPER gives up crossings,
and tries it on with a halfpenny box of
LOWE-comotives. A provincial stranger
approaches.
The provincial stranger heeds him
not. ALLY gently but firmly forces his
h[?] upon his This annoys the
provincial stranger.
The provincial stranger turns upon
our ALLY with almost unnecessary se-
verity, and takes advantage of having
thick boots to act with some degree of
unkindness to A. SLOPER.


SLOPER in the hands of a meddlesome member of the police force. Another
nasty interfering fellow says the LOWE-comotives are a swindle, because
they don’t happen to light either on their own box or any other.
ALLY in the dock, endeavouring to
explain to the pig-headed magistrate,
who wanted to make out he was a “ pro-
fessional vagabond,” that lots of other
literary gentlemen have done the same
thing before.
Sad end of A. SLOPER, who only es-
capes a month’s hard labour by being
brought in a babbling maniac. Poor
ALLY left babbling.


ALLY SLOPER’S WIFE’S UNCLE’S LEG
OF MUTTON BONE.
"How is it, Ally,” said Mr. MOSES, “you never had a turn at your wife' s uncled
Drop in on him to-day at dinner-time. I’ll stand you a bitter,
so as you may be equal to the occasion.”
“SLOPER!” said the old gentleman. “Tell him to wait in the passage till
I've finished.”
So poor ALLY waited —


Whilst his wife’s uncle gorged.
Presently the page brought out the dish,
and left it on the dumb waiter.
“if I could get a corner off any-
where, thought ALLY, “it might
a lla y the pangs.”
“What an eater he is! How beastly
disgusting!”
“Hang it all, though, there’s just the
ghost of a picking on the bone, and
that’s better than nothing.”


SLOPER SURPRISED.
What was I doing of, sir? Oh,
nothink.”
The usual sequel!!!
SLOPER AFTER THE TEETOTALERS’ FETE AT THE
CRYSTAL PALACE.
“Leave you, dear boysh? Leave you in a condishun not to take care of your-
shelf! Never! Hold on to me, dear boysh, an’ I’ll
see you home.”


ALLY SLOPER’S
Preliminary Remark.
It may be necessary here to state
that for some time past it had been
painfully apparent to Ally’s
best and dearest friends that a
well-known article of his out-
door attire had been in — well, a
precarious condition.
Perhaps he had not taken his usual
care of it.
Even its owner had been seen to re-
gard it disconsolately, at night on a
door-step after hours.
It struck good
and kind JUDY,
therefore, that if
something were
stopped from the salaries of the other
contributors, for instance—
The Undecided The One and
Gentleman; Only Jones;


The Office Boy; The Honble.
ALICE-;
Mr. and Mrs.
FULLALOVE;
The volatile Editor, in
his Sunday clothes.
SLOPER, therefore, was casually invited to give his opinion upon various
styles of hats.
He looked equally charming in all.


The other hat was then, with every respect for the old man’s feelings,
delicately removed.
For all that, his emotion at the loss
of his ancient favourite was extreme.
Consequently JUDY could do no less
than restore to her faithful servant the
cherished article. He departed with it.
This is an apparition
reported to have been
seen by one of Judy’s
staff, very shortly after
the above occurrences.
(Still, it is very strange that nothing has since been seen or heard of
ALLY'S new hat.)
Judy can scarcely re-
gard it as anything
more than an optical
illusion on the part of
her informant.


SLOPER’S HEAD OF HAIR.
It recently occurred to Mr. SLOPER
that he really was getting very thin at
the top, and he therefore made up his
mind to give Mr. MOSES'S Balm of
Barlecona a fair trial.
Please to observe the process, and
ALLY SLOPER, Esquire, writhing under
the application. “ It’s bound to come,”
said IKY, “if there’s any scalp left at
all.”
Extract from a Letter addressed to I. MOSES, Esq., Patentee of the
Balm of Barlecona.
“ Dear Sir, —I have tried your invaluable Balm with the most beneficial
results. Pray forward another bottle of your admirable invention.
“ Yours faithfully,
“A. Sloper”


SLOPER SETTLES THE “ALABAMA”
DIFFICULTY.
Certain persons , in office, having suggested to JUDY that SLOPER was the man
for the negotiations, she gave the matter her consideration.
Strange to say, SLOPER thought so too ;
and I. MOSES had a notion he might as well
be Deputy Sub-Assistant Hon. Sec.
As soon as Plenipotentiary SLO-
PER arrived at New York, he fell
into the customs of the country.
“Bring me a brandy-smash, a
corpse-reviver, and a few spittoons
—large size,” said SLOPER.
The negotiations took place with Brother JONATHAN himself. “We’re here
incog., you know,” said Mr. S. “You had better, when talking, only allude to me
as ‘the duke.’ My friend here is ROTHSCHILD, the capitalist, but he wouldn’t like
it to go no further.”


“QUEEN VICTORIA sent me,”
said ALLY, in a confidential tone.
“Shall we liquor-up before we
begin?” “Stranger,” said Brother
JONATHAN, “air you Citizen
DILKE?”
The idea was that ALLY should
write a cheque on the Privy Purse—
(“ How many millions shall we say,
sir?”) —and that the commission for
the negotiation should be paid first,
in cash , at 6 per cent. N.B.—Since
then, it is said that ALLY SLOPER'S
cheque has been returned, and that
he could not cash the Pennsylvanian
Bonds NONATHAN paid him in.
AT A CAT SHOW
THE NINE-TAILED SPECIMEN.
“Ought to have been done away with long ago,” said Messrs. SLOPER and
MOSES.


ALLY ON THE RIGHTS OF WOMEN.
ALLY has been presiding lately at a Tea Meeting , after which he
addressed the assembly.
Nothing could have been more forcible than his arguments, except,
perhaps, it was his umbrella.


And the way he made his points was very convincing.
Rough sketch made on the spot, after
ALLY had brought his oration to a con-
clusion.
Appearance of ALLY after twenty-
seven cups of tea and fourteen rounds
of buttered toast.
Perhaps, after all, the umbrella got the worst of the argument.


SLOPER’S HOLIDAYS.
When SLOPER arrived in Margate, he found all the “school ” had got there before
him. Disgust of SLOPER, who thought he would have “had”
Margate all to himself
When SLOPER takes a chair, he will
have his pennyworth out of it.
Gross outrage perpetrated upon SLOPER
by the rising tide.


Imaginary sketch representing SLO-
PER during a raging storm with his
patent life-belt on.
View of SLOPER during a light gale,
when he really tried his patent on
himself.
Having heard that the sea-serpent has been seen by “the Rev. Mr.-, of
Kent,” his two daughters, and a gentleman of “ intelligent
observation and accuracy,”—
SLOPER takes steps to capture the
monster.
This is the monster bottled by SLO-
PER. Nothing more will be heard about
it until next season.


COMMON OBJECTS ON THE SEA-SHORE DISCOVERED BY
SLOPER.
A lonely maiden on a barren rock at
sunset. “A thing of beauty is a joy for
ever.”
Young native
gentleman with
his father's
things on.
Back view of a fair geologist picking
up a pretty pebble.
Little ladies prepared for paddling.
Pantalettes à la pegtop pulled on over
their petticoats.
“After all,” the old
man said, when he
got home again,
“there’s plenty of
nice fresh air to be
got in town if you
only know where to
look for it."


SLOPER AS A SWIMMER.
The irrepressible Ally proposes
to swim across to America. At first
the proposition is met with derision.
Please observe derisive small boy
behaving rudely to A. Sloper; also
dignified attitude of A. S. under
these trying circumstances.
Sloper makes a start.
The anticipated frantic en-
thusiasm of the populace is
unfortunately not realized.
Moses {in an undertone).
Jump in, will yer, yer jolly
old duffer!”
Melancholy appeara'nce of A. Sloper,
after he had done half a mile. However,
it is only fair to our champion to state that
if the Atlantic had not been so absurdly
broad, and the old man had only been
able to hold out, he might have done what
he proposed—quite easily!


SLOPER IN MORAL MOOD.
Portrait of SLOPER, the teetotaler’s friend, listening outside the door of
a wicked public house to hear if the law is being broken
within. May the good work prosper!
SLOPER'S friend, IKY MOSES, pro-
poses to take five shillings and say no-
thing about Mr. POTTS having allowed
Sloper to get drunk on the premises.
Mr. POTTS refuses, and gives Sloper
into custody. Virtuous indignation of
SLOPER, locked up while perfectly sober
and STILL THIRSTY.


Good and kind SLOPER meets a child
of tender years with a beer-jug and six-
pence, and proposes to get its beer for
it.
This is the child of tender years
awaiting SLOPER'S return. But where
is the jug? * * * The sixpence??
* * * SLOPER???
A splendid idea! SLOPERS starts a club—“ The Habituals”-
at which anything can be got out of hours.
Two men enrol themselves, and roll over in a heap upon the spot.


MR BLANKS
DRAMATIC
AGENCY
It would appear from his statement that our friend Ally, being still young
and unsettled, has been thinking of going on the stage, and resolved to try his
“'prentice hand” at Romeo, or some light lover.
He therefore called on Mr. Blank, who is in the habit of advertising that he
is prepared to provide any number of artistes with any number of engagements ■,
but, unfortunately, he never succeeded in obtaining a personal interview with
Mr. Blank, only with Mr. Blank’s boy, who was rather Impudent.


What was more natural than that. Mr. Sloper should borrow ten shillings of a friend, and straightway pay his five-shilling entrance-fee,
which that impudent boy took? Having done so, was it not natural he should want an engagement? Imagine him, then, calling, day
after day, for three weeks. You can’t blame Mr. Blank, if he happened always to be out on these occasions. It was exceedingly
unfortunate,
though.
Anxiety
meanwhile
told on poor
Ally, who
grew thinner
and thinner.
At length,
however, one
fatal day, he
happened to
arrive at the
office at the
same mo-
ment as Mr.
Blank.
Who do you
suppose Mr.
Blank was ?
No other
than Moses
turned up
again under
axialias/ The
scene which
ensued baf-
fles descrip-
tion! M. and
S. have now
parted for
ever.


SLOPER
A VICTIM TO
WRONGFUL
SUSPICION.
This is, to a certain extent, allegorical,
and represents Ally Sloper, Esquire,
on the look-out for anything that may
turn up.
Iky Mo gives Mr, Sloper a notion:
“If you was to get took up for the
murder, old man, and then, when it
turned out it wasn’t you, we presented
you with a little testimonial ? ”
N.B. —It may here be casually ob-
served that Mo and Sloper have
made up their little difference.


“You’ve only got to get yourself up spotty
and go about mysterious, and the police will be
down on you in less than two twos."
There were the witnesses
all handy. This one was quite
prepared to swear to ALLY.
This one picked him out
from a hundred quite easily,
without even looking at him.
This one
knew him
by his voice
long before
he heard
him speak.
This one
knew him
at a glance,
and would
have known
him better if
he had had
his glasses
on.
Sensation header of intelli-
gent officer seizing on SLO-
PER from behind.
7—2


SLOPER overpowered ! Triumph of intelligent officer, proud of his single-
handed capture.
Poor ALLY going through the playful
ordeal of wrongfully accused persons.
This represents the terrors of the tub.
Heart-breaking scene. ALLY suffer-
ing from a bad cold, is deprived of his
pocket-handkerchief. Fine old prison
regulation.
Mr. SLOPER still in the hands of Justice. The old man’s only hope is that
it won’t go too far. N.B.—If he had really murdered any one,
he says he would feel comparatively safe.


ALLY SLOPERS
NIGHTCAP
Note. —It may be observed that before the full point oj this episode can be
thoroughly appreciated, it is necessary to state that Sloper once upon a time
really did have a night-cap.
ALLY always did have a bad habit
of reading in bed.
The other night he woke up and thought
he smelt fire.


“Where the dickens can it be?” said A. SLOPER, Esq.
“Perhaps it’s up the chimney.”
“It smells like worsted; perhaps it’s the
linendraper’s at the corner.”
“I suppose it would be more of me if I went and lent a hand.”


“ Here goes!”
"GOOD GRACIOUS!”
WHEW!!!
"That was a hot job!"


SLOPER'S
CENTENARY.
AS IT MAY BE!!!
(if he ever has one.)
(N.B. —Will he ever have a statue, and will it ever be neglected ?)
These arc the stingy wretches who would give nothing to the memorial.


SLOPER’S HAUNTS
(which may become famous).
They’ve shown him the door here
often. The door may be shown to others
in days to come.
Here they knew him well. They took
in things of him, and he took them in
sometimes.
VIVE OF SLOPER'S HEAD
And of the five hairs he would never
part from,
(N.B. —They will be found just above
the nape of the neck.)
CURIOUS RELIC.
This was the comb that SLOPER used.
How it must have scratched his
poor dear head!


This is a portrait of the one solitary enthusiast who rejoiced at the idea of
Sloper having a centenary.
All these things were well known to SLOPER. He felt much when he parted
with them.
This is the poet, who came on the appointed day to the appointed spot, to read
something he had written in SLOPER'S memory, and found no audience.
Was it not ever thus ? Who is remembered after he is dead and gone?—not
even waiters ; but they, it is true, want so much remembering in life.
Well, after all, Sloper could not hope for others to remember him when he
has so often forgotten himself.


OUT AND HOME AGAIN.
Every year at the close of the London season all the world goes out of town.
Every year Mo and ALLY do likewise. And here, as per usual, is
Mr. MOSES having a little difficulty about the ticket.
When, in due course, all the world comes home again, ALLY and Mo also wend
their way to the great metropolis, and ofttimes then our ALLY, in pensive melan-
choly, would contemplate his battered hat—whether it would not be desirable to
summon to its aid the appliances of art? “They might put a sort of kind of
gloss on it with a hot iron for fourpence.”


ROMANCE AND REALITY.
One day, on Ramsgate Sands, ALLY
saw the loveliest of her sex in conver-
sation with a male person of mean
appearance.
Therefore was he thrown into jail,
and left there languishing. All hope
fled, until one day the prison door
opened, and a soft voice murmured in
his ear—
Need we say our ALLY wooed and
won her, forgetting, naturally enough,
that there was another Mrs. SLOPER
already. They could not understand
his forgetfulness in Court.
“Have I took for your chair, sir?”


AT THE
OXFORD AND CAMBRIDGE BOAT RACE.
Of course, Mo and Sloper went down last year ; in fact, they had a
kind of scheme on. Mr. Moses had found a splendid site,
and with a bit of a stand, a lot of money might
be made quite easily.
MOSES, of course, went down first, per rail, carrying with him six pennyworth of
nails and a hammer; while
Mr. SLOPER travelled by road, and carried the rest of the things. The stupid
old slow-coach was too late, after all!


SINGULAR EFFECT OF CLIMATE.
ALLY SLOPER had great trouble in finding lodgings this year at the sea-side.
Strange to say. whenever he was left alone in a room, his umbrella
began to swell!
ANOTHER DISAPPOINTMENT.
One o’clock!
Two!
The other day a lady wrote to
Judy to say that she had long
watched poor Mr. Sloper’s ca-
reer of undeserved misfortune;
and that, if he would meet her
at Charing Cross where the
yellow omnibuses stop, at one
o'clock precisely on Tuesday af-
ternoon, she would provide for
him for life. He was there to
the minute, and waited.


Three!
Four!
Five!
Six!
Seven!
Eight!
Nine!
Ten!
Eleven!
Midnight!
This must have been a cruel hoax.


A Hot Day with Ally Sloper at Winkleton-super-Mare.
SPRIGGS (the grocer’s) boy, sent
with groceries and special instructions
not to loiter by the way, saw such a
funny object on the sea-shore!
Need the reader be told that it was
SLOPER’s back view? “What a lark
if I dabbed a dab o’ treacle on it!"
said Spriggs’s boy. He did so whilst
ALLY was slumbering sweetly.
“Won’t it draw the flies—just!” said Spriggs’s boy; and wasn’t Spriggs’s
boy just right, that ’s all! Poor ALLY ! having
such a nice nap, too.


Agony of ALLY. “ That worrited, he
couldn’t get a bit of rest.” Wild delight
of grocer’s boy.
Worse agony of ALLY. Really too
much of a good thing —joking apart.
Wilder delight of grocer’s boy.
Concentrated double-distilled agony of ALLY. SPRIGGS'S boy accidentally
upset by a flourish of ALLY'S gingham.


Charitable act on ALLY'S part—fish-
ing out of ocean unpleasantly damp
grocer’s boy.
Rage and fury of excited SPRIGGS,
whose grocery had come to grief.
ALLY, restored to happiness, goes on with his nap. The only thing in SPRIGGS’S
boy’s basket the water had not spoilt was a papier moure —observe
ALLY turning that circumstance to good account.


A H-B AH-LO ON!!
Note. —For some time past there have been numerous inquiries at No. 73 Fleet Street, respecting the whereabouts of Ally
Sloper, The dear old man has been editing his memoirs. He has also been getting up a
balloon trip across the Atlantic.
You may imagine how surprised his friends
were, one day, to meet him taking a walk down Fleet
Street with the apparatus. It put out the other foot-passengers a
little, though.


ALLY went off a little before he meant to do so, and very nearly lock up the
man who supplied the gas. His good lady objected.
The grappling-irons caught another
gentleman. If he had bought his
clothes of a cheap tailor, he might
have come down—sooner.
For the first time in his life ALLY
wished he had a great coat.


ALLY has often been accused of
throwing sand in people’s eyes. What’s
the good of having a bad name for no-
thing?
The parties who subscribed towards
ALLY'S expenses somehow never saw
him start, and they pulled long faces
about it.
The question of the day is; has ALLY ever started, and if so, where
the deuce and all has he got to?
(N.B. —The rumour that he is at the present moment round the corner with
Moses, Judy sincerely trusts is without foundation.)


THE DEATH
of
SLOPER
During the last few days the greatest anxiety and excitement
have prevailed at 73 Fleet Street. For a whole fortnight, contrary
to all precedent, Mr. SLOPBR not only has not endeavoured to
forestall his salary (as he frequently does, two or three times a
week), but has not even been to draw it when due.
Every morning, the first inquiry of
the young and lovely J. was about her
missing ALLY.
All day long the office boy has been
upon the look-out, to the surprise of
passers-by.


All ALLY'S literary friends united in
thinking it so unlike SLOPER.
And JUDY'S principal financial man-
ager, over and over again declared he
couldn’t make head or tail of it
Moreover, there had lately been dark
reports respecting a Secret Society
to which Mr. SLOPER belonged.
Could it be possible that he
had fallen a victim * * *?
One thing was certain : a broken
bottle had been picked up on the
Thames Embankment, which, if it was
not actually SLOPER'S, had had gin in
it, nevertheless.
Furthermore, I. MOSES had
himself found a whalebone near
the Haymarket, which might, or
might not, have come out of the
umbrella.


And a trustworthy boy picked up a
boot in Battersea Park, suspiciously
like the ones that SLOPER wore on
gala days.
At last the dreadful truth was known.
SLOPER, deeply affected by a recent
want of confidence on JUDY'S part, had
committed suicide, confiding his wife
and family to JUDY'S care. She wept.
Then the family turned up. JUDY never heard, before, there was a family; but
she, nevertheless, provided them with a substantial tea and a shilling a
head all round. Thus set up for life, they left smiling.
Scarcely had they
departed, however,
when a well-known
voice at the cashier’s
window * * * *
“It was all a got-up
thing of that then
Moses!” Let MOSES
look out!
THE END.


WAYERLEY” "OWL” “PICKWICK” AND "PHAETON PENS.”
Just out, THE “HINDOO PENS,” Nos. 1,2, and 8.
1,200 NEWSPAPERS RECOMMEND THEM. For their names see “Graphic,”
17th May, 1873.
Standard says : “ The ' WAYERLEY ’ will prove a treasure.”
Examiner says: “ The ‘ OWL.’ We can vouch personally for the excellence of
this invention.”
Engineer says: “The ‘ PICKWICK ’ embodies an improvement of great value.”
Sun says : “The ‘ PHAETON PEN ’ must be termed a marvel.”
Stationer says : “The ‘HINDOO PBN,’ is quite a novelty, the point being cut
at a direct angle.”
Sold by every respectable Stationer, is. per box ; by post, is. id.
Patentees —M ACNIVE N AND CAMERON,
23 TO 33 BLAIR STREET, EDINBURGH.
EL
Universal
LI MAN’S
supplied to
General Garibaldi,
NATIONAL AID SOCIETY, &C. N
A)f all Chemists, is. i jd.
_ and as, gd. the
Bottle.
Embrocation,
FOR RHEUMATISM,
Gout, Lumbago, Sprains, Chapped Hands, Cuts, Bruises, and Chilblains,
ls the most efficacious Remedy extant. References Given.
KEATING’S
GOUGH
LOZENGES.
Known as unquestionably the Safest and
Best Remedy for
COUGHS,
ASTHMA,
HOARSENESS,
CONSUMPTION (Incipient),
ACCUMULATION OF PHLEGM,
DIFFICULTY OF BREATHING.
These Lozenges contain no opium nor any dele-
terious drug, therefore the most delicate can take
them with perfect confidence. No remedy is so
speedy and certain in its beneficial effects.
Sold by all Chemists, in Boxes, is. i ld., and
2 s. cut. each.
RECOMMENDED
BY THE
MOST EMINENT
OF THE
FACULTY.
O AIsTIDLES.
THE SAFEST, THE CLEANEST, THE BEST, AND THE CHEAPEST
CANDLES ARE THE
Westminster Wedge-Fitting Composites.
Sold Everywhere. Name and Address of nearest Vendor on application to
J. O. & CT. FIELD,
UPPER MARSH, LAMBETH, LONDON,
WHO SUPPLY THE TRADE ONLY. ■
A DELIGHTFUL and LASTING FRAGRANCE,
„ gVI% roP E“i°”'s%lS ,h T C AB LE T S
4 d ind 6d, each. Manufactured by
J C. & J. FIELD, Upper Marsh, Lambeth.
Order of your Chemist, Grocer, or Chandler.


RUPTURES—BY ROYAL LETTERS PATENT.
WHITE’S MOO-MAIN LEVEE TRUSS,
Perfected and Exhibited In the Great Exhibitions of 1851 and 1862,
Is allowed by upwards of 500 Medical Men to be the most effective invention in the Curative
Treatment of HERNIA. The use of a steel spring, so often hurtful in its effects, is here
avoided, a soft bandage being worn round the body, while the requisite resisting power is
supplied by the MOC-MAIN PAD AND PATENT LEVER, fitting with so much ease
and closeness that it cannot be detected, and may be worn during sleep. A descriptive Circular
may be had, and the Truss (which cannot fail to fit) forwarded by post, on the circumference
of the body (two inches below the hips) being sent to the Manufacturer,
JOHN WHITE, 228 PICCADILLY, LONDON.
Price of a Single Truss, 165., 215., 265. 6d., and 31s. fid. Postage free.
~ Double Truss, 31s. fid., 425., and 525. fid. Postage free.
~ Umbilical Truss, 425. and 525. fid. Postage free.
Post Office Orders to be made payable to JOHN WHITE, Post Office, Piccadilly.
ELASTIC STOCKINGS, KNEE-CAPS, &c.
Prices: 4s. fid., 7s. fid., 10s., and 16s. each. Postage free.
JOHN WHITE, MANUFACTURER, 228 PICCADILLY, LONDON, W.
VIENNA EXHIBITION.
First Medal for English Perfumery ( Progress )
AWARDED TO °
EUGENE RIMMEL,
•perfumer fa fJ.K.PI. (be Princess of ©Sales.
RIMMEL’S PRINCIPAL SPECIALITIES.
Ihlang-Ihlang, Vanda, Henna, and Velvetine, a superior imperceptible &
other perfumes, from 2s. 6d. iadherent toilet powder, is. 6d., & 2s. 6d.
Toilet Vinegar, is., 2s. 6d., and ss. Rimmel’s Lotion, for the skin, 2s. 9d.
Toilet Water, Lavender Water, Aguadentine, a new floral extract for
Florida Water, Eau de Cologne. cleansing and whitening the teeth, 2s. 6d.
Lime Juice and. Glycerine, for the Photochrome, a Pomade to restore grey
hair & beard to their original colour, ss.
Persian Fumigating Ribbon, is. box.
Fancy Crackers, Scent Cases, Christ-
mas Cards, Sachets, Valentines, &c.
ylist Published, Rimrnel's Perfumed and 111 um in cited Almanac{ Gcrnia n
Poets), 6d., by postjbr seven stamps .
96 Strand; 128 Eegent Street; 24 Oomhill, London. 76 King’s
RO ™nd£ S v?enna : SmoN. Road, Brighton. 17 Boulevard des Italiens, Paris.
rm
Hair, is. 6d., 2s. 6d. and ss.
Australian Hair Wash, is. 6d. & 2s. 6d.
Glycerine, Honey, Dugong, Carbolic
Windsor, and other Soaps, from 6d.
N.S.-
n
HOLLOWAYS PILLS
HOLLOWAY’S PILLS.— Aids to
Health. —So many disturbing causes are at
work to undermine the health that it behoves every
one occasionally to regulate his system. Professor
Holloway has placed this power within the reach
of all; his Balsamic Pills are equal to any emer-
gency. Come the evil from whence it may —from
food, atmosphere, or irregularity of life—it is gently
met and forcibly expelled by these perfect purifiers.
Holloway’s Pills have effected the most remarkable
recoveries in cases of wasting weakness, nervous
decline, and similar dangers of debility. Those
persons must surely place a low value on health and
life, who allow sickness to assault their constitu-
tions, when a trifle expended on these Pills would
banish it.
CORN & BUNION /o /
PLAISTERS,
Are the best ever invented
for giving immediate ease
and removing those /AVV Observe the
painful excrescences A
pbicb / -Sy j
6d. & Is.
BEE BOX. s _ ’
CV?
May be had of most Chemists*
WITHOUT WHICH
NONE ARE GENUINE.
BE SURE & ASK FOE YOUNG’S
Trade Mark
'4
GIVES RELIEF.
FORMS A STOPPING.
SAVES THE TOOTH.
Sold by all Chemists, Is. lid.
BUNTER'S NERVINE
N
STA
N
T
E
TOOT
H
H
E
CO
DESTROYS THE NERVE.
PREVENTS DECAY.
DOES NOT INJURE.
Sold by all Chemists, Is. lid.


DR. J. COLLIS BROWNE’S
CHLORODYNE
IS THE ORIGINAL AND ONLY GENUINE.
The Public are CAUTIONED against the unfounded statements frequently made “that the composition
of CHLORODYNE is known to Chemists and the Medical Profession.” The fact is, CHLORODYNE
was Discovered and Invented by Dr. J. COLLIS BROWNE (ex-Army Medical Staff), and so named by
him, and it has baffled all attempts at analysis by the first Chemists of the day. The method and secret of
the preparation have never been published. It is obvious, therefore, that anything sold under the name,
save Dr. J. COLLIS BROWNE’S CHLORODYNE, is a spurious imitation.
CAUTION.—Vice-Chancellor Sir W. P. Wood stated that Dr., J. COLLIS BROWNE was
undoubtedly the Inventor of CHLORODYNE.
CHLORODYNE is admitted by the Profession to be the most wonderful and valuable remedy ever
discovered.
CHLORODYNE is the best remedy known for Coughs, Consumption, Bronchitis, Asthma.
CHLORODYNE effectually checks and arrests those too often fatal diseases —Diphtheria, Fever, Croup,
Ague.
CHLORODYNE acts like a charm in Diarrhoea, and is the only specific in Cholera and Dysentery.
CHLORODYNE effectually cuts short all attacks of Epilepsy, Hysteria, Palpitation, and Spasms.
CHLORODYNE Is the only palliative in Neuralgia, Rheumatism, Gout, Cancer, Toothache, Menin-
gitis, &c.
J. C. Baker, Esq., M.D., Bideford.—“ltis,with-
out doubt, the most valuable and certain Anodyne
we have.”
Dr. M'Millman, of New Galloway, Scotland. —
“ I consider it the most valuable medicine known.’'
*** Earl Russell communicated to the College of Physicians that he had received a despatch from
Her Majesty’s Consul at Manilla, to the effect that Cholera has been raging fearfully, and that the ONLY
remedy of any service was CHLORODYNE.—See Lancet, Dec. i, 1864.
Sold in Bottles at is. i\d., is. 9 d., and 4?. 6d. each.
None is genuine without the words “ Dr. J. COLLIS BROWNE’S CHLORODYNE ” on the
Government Stamp. Overwhelming Medical Testimony accompanies each bottle.
SOLE MANUFACTURER,
J. T. DAVENPORT, 33 Great Eussell Street, Bloomsbury, London.
LOYSEL 7 S IP-A-TZBISTT 1
uvnpnQTATir
TEA AND COFFEE PERCOLATORS.
SIMPLEST AND MOST EFFICIENT YET INTRODUCED.
Manufacturers—GßlFFlTHS AND BROWETT,
BRADFORD STREET, BIRMINGHAM.
12 MOORGATE STREET, LONDON.
25 BOULEVARD MAGENTA, PARIS.
SICILIAN WINES
The great success which has attended the introduction of these Wines during the short period in which
they have been offered to the Public is a sure guarantee of their high quality and character.
RED WINES.— SANTA VENERA, 245.; MASTRISSA, 205.; MONTE
ZIRETTA, 14s.
WHITE WINES. CAVALLARO, 245.; NACARELLA, 365. and 485.;
ALCANTARA, 305., 365., and 545.; ALBANELLO, 425.; MARSALA,
235. per dozen. All bottles included.
Further information , contained in a pamphlet , entitled “SICILY AND SICILIAN WINES,
can be had of
B. RAINFORD, 20 Regent Street, Waterloo Place, S.W.,
Where the Wines can be tasted free of charge.


In Packets, Id., 2d., and 6d.; Tins, Is. each.
SYMINGTON’S PEA SOUP.
Seasoned
and
Flavoured.
Vu~u
TRADE MARK.
To which is added
Liebig’s
Extract of Meat.
iptha. sotj:p msr oite jsejzssttpjo'ei.
DIPLOMA OP MERIT, VIENNA, 1873.
CHEAPEST & BEST SAUCE INTHEWORLD
\\r&' 2A Bottles
SOLD EVERYWHERE!!
HAS A LARGER SALE THAN ANY OTHER SAUCE.
PROPRIETORS, GOODALL, BACKHOUSE &.C?,,LEEDS.
Extract from “FOOD, WATER, AND AIR," December, 1871. (By Arthur Hill Hassall, M.D.)
“THE YORKSHIRE Relish.—This Sauce well deserves the name of ‘ Relish.’ Then* are few better Sauces, while its
cheapness, having regard to its excellence, is remarkable.”
Hill
(Prepared with Haward*s Quinine.)
Highly recommended by many eminent Physicians, to be the best and cheapest Tonic yet introduced to the Public, an
has proved an invaluable and agreeable Stomachic to all suffering from General Debility, Indigestion, and Loss of Appetite
IN LARGE BOTTLES AT TWO SHILLINGS EACH. Sold by Grocers, Druggists, and Italian Warehousemen.
Prepared by GOODALL, BACKHOUSE, & Co., LEEDS.
From the Food Journal. —“ An honest and useful preparation, containing a proper portion of Quinine.”
From the Anti-Adulteration Revieiv. —“A valuable Tonic, and has become popular from its intrinsic goodness/
Arthur Hill hassall, M.D.—“We have tested this preparation, and can recommend it for its purity.”
Wentworth Lascelles Scott, Esq., F.C.S., F.A.S.L., F.R.S.S.A., &c.—“ A pure, wholesome, appetizing Tonic,
of agreeable flavour and reliable composition.”
From the Lancet , 17th May, 1837. —“ The samples we have examined have been of excellent quality, and remarkable for
unprecedented cheapness, which, in these days of dearness and scarcity, is certainly in itself a great and unusual recom-
mendation.”
Goo dal Is
♦
4
THE
BEST
PENNY PACKET IN THE WORLD.
For making delicious Bread, Puddings, Pastry, &c., with half the quantity of Butter, Lard, or Eggs. Warranted free from
Alum, or any other injurious ingredient.
Sold by Grocers, Druggists, and Oilmen, in id. packets, 6d., is., is. 6d., and 2s. Tins and Bottles.
GOODALL’S BRUNSWICK BLACK,
For Painting Stoves, Grates, Iron, Tin, &c. This invaluable composition is superior to any yet offered to the Public,
possessing great brilliancy, and thoroughly protecting the articles it is applied to. Sold in bottles at 6d. and is. each.
SOLE MANUFACTURERS:
GOODALL, BACKHOUSE, & 00., Wholesale Druggists, Leeds.


WHISKERS, MOUSTACHIOS,
BALDNESS.
Many hundreds of Testimonials from private persons, and Opinions of the Press
(London and Provincial), prove the fact that an unparalleled success has attended
Latreille’S system of producing Whiskers and Moustachios, and curing Bald-
ness. Full particulars sent free of charge to all applicants, town or country.
ADDRESS:
LATREILLE and Co., WALWORTH, LONDON.
“THE WONDER OE THE AGE.” By Royal Letters Patent.
DIR. CT. BALL & GOBS
PATENT IVORY AND LIGNUM VIDE EYE CUPS,
For the Restoration of Impaired Vision. All Diseases of the Eyes Cured under this safe and simple treatment,
i. Impaired Vision. 2. Presbyopia, or Farsightedness, or
Dimness of Vision, commonly called Blurring. 3. Asthenopia,
or Weak Eyes. 4. Epiphora, Running or Watery Eyes. 5.
Sore Eyes specially treated with the Eye Cups, certain cure.
6. Weakness of the Retina, or Optic Nerve. 7. Ophthalmia,
or Inflammation of the Eye and its appendages, or Imperfect
Vision from the effect of Inflammation. 8. Photophobia, or
Intolerance of Light. 9. Overworked Eyes. 10. Mydeopsia,
Moving Specks, or Floating Specks before the Eyes. 11.
Amaurosis, or Obscurity of Vision. 12. Cataracts, Partial
Blindness, the Loss of Sight. Any one may use the Ivory
Cups without the aid of doctors, and receive immediate bene-
ficial results where our directions are carried out. Used only
three minutes at night before going to bed. All instructions
sent along with the Eye Cups. Enclose stamped envelope for
particulars to
Mr. J. FLETCHER, Richmond Villa, Portfield, Chichester, Sussex,
Sole Patentee and Exclusive Agent for Great Britain for Dr. Ball’s Eye Cups and Medicines.
JDTTISrJSr & IHIIEWIBTT’S
LICHEN ISLANDICUS,
ICELAND MOSS COCOA.
(REGISTERED.)
In Packets, Is. 4d. a pound. In Tin Canisters, Is. 6d. a pound.
Strongly recommended by the Faculty in all cases of Debility, Indigestion, Con-
sumption, and all Pulmonary and Chest Diseases.
“ I have carefully examined, both Microscopically and Chemically, the prepara-
tion of Iceland Moss and Cocoa made by Messrs. Dunn & Hewett. I find it
to be carefully manufactured with ingredients of the first quality. The combina-
tion of Iceland Moss and Cocoa forms a valuable article of diet, suited equally for
the robust and for invalids, especially those whose digestion is impaired. It is
very nutritious, of easy digestibility, and it possesses, moreover, tonic properties.
“ Arthur Him. Hassall, M. D., Author of ‘ Food and its Adulterations.’"
PENTONVILLE, LONDON.
TRADE MARK.
TELESCOPES, MICROSCOPES ,
OPERA GLASSES, &c.
The celebrated “ENFIELD” TELESCOPE possesses Achromatic Lenses, and will distinguish a
church clock five miles off, landscapes thirty miles. This really good instrument is offered at Bs. 6d., or
carriage paid gs. 6d.
WORKING MODEL STEAM ENGINES, from 6s. 6d.
MAGIC LANTERNS and SLIDES in great variety.
No I Magic Lantern, shows a disc 3 feet diameter, complete with x doz. comic slides £0 7 6
No.’ 2 Magic Lantern, shows a disc 4 feet diameter, complete with 1 doz. comic slides o 1* 6
( No. 3 Magic Lantern, shows a disc 4 feet 6 inches diameter, complete with 1 dozen
N® 4°Magic Lantern, shows a disc s feet diameter, complete with 1 dozen slides... 176
descriptions 0/Larger Lanterns, Slides, &c., see Illustrated Catalogue, post free, 3 stamps.
GEORGE PALMER, 13 Market Place South, Birkenhead.


THE USE OF
THE GLENFIELD STARCH
ALWAYS SECURES
THE DELIGHT OF THE LAUNDRESS,
THE ADMIRATION OF THE BEHOLDER,
AND THE COMFORT OF THE WEARER.
EXCLUSIVELY USED IN THE ROYAL LAUNDRY.
TURKISH, OZONE OR SEAWEED, COMPRESSED AIR, AND
OTHER BATHS,
AT THE
WINTER RESIDENCE,
Hydropathic Establishment, Llandudno.
LOWEST RANGE OF TEMPERATURE IN WINTER.
January to March, and October to December. From Registrar-General’s Report.
For Terms , apply to the Manager ,
LIBERAL DIET AND COMFORTS OF HOME LIFE. LLANDUDNO,
GREENSILL’S FAR-FAMED MONA BOUQUET.
THE ORIGINAL AND ONLY GENUINE.
(Established 1852.)
The favourable reception and increasing popularity of this exquisite Perfume is a proof of its excellent
quality.
T. S. GREENSILL, 78 Strand Street, Douglas, Isle of Man, bona-fide Proprietor.
AGENTS.— London: J. Sanger & Son ; S. Maw, Son, & Thompson; Wm. Edwards; F. Newbery
and Sons ; Wm. Mather ; Barclay & Sons ; Whittaker & Grossmith. Liverpool : Evans, Sons, & Co. ;
Clay, Dod, and Case; R. Sumner & Co. ; Raimes & Co. Manchester: J. Woolley; Lynch & Bate-
man; Jewsbury & Brown. Edinburgh : Duncan & Flockhart. Dublin : M'Master, Hodgson, & Co.
York: W. M. Thompson ; Clark, Bleasdale, & Co. Thirsk ; Wm. Foggitt. Bristol; Ferris & Co.
Leeds : Goodall, Backhouse, & Co. Birmingham : Mr. John Churchill.
Trade Mark—Tower of Refuge, Douglas Bay.
RIDGES
PATOH.fi
DR RIDGE’S
PATENT COOKED
FOR INFANTS CA A H
AND INVALIDS. " W
SOLD EVERYWHERE.
RID
Stent
“GRAINS OP HEALTH”
REGISTERED.


Notice of Removal from Holborn Viaduct.
EIGHT PRIZE MEDALS.
hjmj
TO WORK BY HAND OR TREADLE.
TAYLOR’S PATENT
LOCK-STITCH
SEWING MACHINES
Are designed expressly for Family Work, and for that
purpose are unequalled.
This Machine has received Highest Awards at the
Vienna Exhibition.
PRICE LISTS FREE UPON APPLICATION.
97 CHEAPSIDE, LONDON, and Driffield, Yorkshire.
MARVELLOUS COCOA.
THE VERY PERFECTION OF PREPARED COCOA.
COLLIER AND SON’S
CHOCOLATE POWDER.
ESTAB9
iai2>«
1^
CHOCOLATE
RpowdeA;
rm
m
rk
C\6R_fc
CHOCOLATE
TRADE MARK.
Esc=
500,000
SAMPLE PACKETS of this INIMITABLE
CHOCOLATE POWDER were GIVEN AWAY
at the INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION of 1862.
Hundreds of thousands are now using it, finding it unequalled.
We respectfully solicit a trial, feeling assured that you will con-
tinue to use it. It is strongly recommended by the Faculty, strength-
ening the weakly and invigorating the healthy. One cup, or twenty,
made in one minute with boiling water only, milk or sugar not being
necessary.
Sold by Grocers and Chemists, loose, at is. per lb., or in I lb. square
tins at is. 4d. each. By Her Majesty’s Royal Letters Patent.
Established 1812.
TESTIMONIALS.
“James Collier and Son have patented a Chocolate Powder, which, for flavour, digesti-
bility, and facility of preparation, equals any with which we have hitherto met. The very
moderate price charged per pound puts this useful preparation within the reach of all classes of the com-
munity.”— The Homoeopathic World.
“COLLIER AND SON’S CHOCOLATE POWDER is a most delicate-flavoured and pure beverage,
and furnishes the body in a high degree with those nutritious elements which are so important for the
healthy growth of children, and for repairing the waste of human tissue in active adult life. We believe
that, to most persons to whom Cocoa is unsuitable for breakfast, it would be found most grateful and per-
fectly digestible, when taken instead of tea for the afternoon or evening meal.” — Dr. Ruddock’s Homoeo-
pathic Vade Mecum.
“ It is particularly easy of digestion by the most delicate.” — Press and St. James’s Chronicle.
Prepared, and Manufactured by tbe Proprietors,
T-A-IMIIBS CCOLXJIiEIIR/ <Sc SOlsT,
Manufacturers of Mustards, Cocoa, Chocolate, French, Eating,
and Fancy Chocolates, Chocolate Cremes.
Purveyors of Mustard by Special Appointment to tbe International Exhibitions, 1871, 2, & 3.
COMMERCIAL STEAM MILLS, LONDON.


GRATEFUL—COMFORTING.
EPPS’S
COCOA
BREAKFAST.
“There are very few simple articles of food which can boast so many valuable and
important dietary properties as Cocoa. While acting on the nerves as a gentle stimulant,
it provides the body with some of the purest elements of nutrition, and at the same time
corrects and invigorates the action of the digestive organs. These beneficial effects depend
in a great measure upon the manner of its preparation ; but of late years such close atten-
tion has been given to the growth and treatment of Cocoa, that there is no difficulty in
securing it with every useful quality fully developed. The singular success which Mr.
Epps attained by his homoeopathic preparation of Cocoa has never been surpassed by any
experimentalist. Medical men of all shades of opinion have agreed in recommending it
as the safest and most beneficial article of diet for persons of weak constitutions. By a
thorough knowledge of the natural laws which govern the operations of digestion and
nutrition, and by a careful application of the fine properties of well-selected Cocoa, Mr.
Epps has provided our breakfast tables with a delicately-flavoured beverage which may
save us many heavy doctors’ bills. It is by the judicious use of such articles of diet that
a constitution may be gradually built up, until strong enough to resist every tendency to
disease. Hundreds of subtle maladies are floating around us, ready to attack wherever
there is a weak point. We may escape many a fatal shaft by keeping ourselves well
fortified with pure blood and a properly nourished frame.”- — On Dietfin the “ Civil Service
Gazette .”
“ A Visit to Epps’s Cocoa Manufactory.—Through the kindness of Messrs. Epps.
I recently had an opportunity of seeing the many complicated and varied processes the
Cacao bean passes through ere it is sold for public use ; and, being both interested and
highly pleased with what I saw during my visit to the manufactory, I thought a brief ac-
count of the Cacao, and the way it is manufactu red by Messrs. Epps to fit it for a whole-
some and nutritious beverage, might be of interest to the readers of * Land and Water.’ ”
“ Manufacture op Cocoa. —We will now give an account of the process adopted
by Messrs. James Epps and Co., manufacturers of dietetic articles, at their works in the
Euston Road, London.”— See Article in “ Cassell's Household Guide."
MADE SIMPLY WITH BOILING WATER OR MILK.
BACH TIN-LINED PACKET IS LABELLED
JAS. EPPS & Co., Homoeopathic Chemists,
(ALSO MAKERS OF EPPS’S GLYCERINE JUJUBES, FOR THROAT-IRRITATION,)
48 THREADNEEDLE STREET, and 170 PICCADILLY,
ULOisriDOitsr.
CAMDgM PRESS, LOW DOW, W.W.
