

SOME OPINIONS
OF
LEADING MEN IN AUSTRALASIA
Regarding the Necessity of
Purity Instruction to the Young
Published by
The Australasian White Cross League
Sydney


Australasian White Cross League
Head Offices 56 Elizabeth Street, Sydney.
OBJECTS.
PROMOTING—
I. —Purity among Men and Boys.
II, —a Chivalrous Respect for Womanhood.
111, —The Preservation of the Young from Con-
tamination.
IV. —A Higher Tone of Public Opinion.
The Society emphasises obligations already) bind-
ing on Christians; it does not impose new ones.
THE “WHITE CROSS OBLIGATIONS.”
1. To treat all girls and respect, and
endeavour to protect them from wrong and degrada-
tion.
2. To endeavour to put down all indecent language
and coarse jests.
3. To maintain the law of purity as equally bind-
ing on men and women.
4. To endeavour to spread these principles among
my companions, and to try and help my younger
brothers.
5. To use every possible means to fulfil the com-
mand, “Keep THYSELF pure.'’
President: Dr. Richard Arthur, M.L.A.
Hon. Secretary: W. E. Wilson.
Hon Treasurer ; C. E. Groves.
Lecturer: R. H. W. Bligh.


Australasian White Cross League.
The following facts and extracts from letters re-
garding work accomplished by Mr. R. H. W. Bligh,
Lecturer for the Australasian White Cross League,
may interest those who have had some knowledge of
the work Mr. Bligh has been doing for fully 15 years
past, and may be a surprise to those who think that
nothing is being accomplished in assisting the lads
of Australasia to a right knowledge on sex matters,
which is of the highest importance if we expect our
boys to become good, faithful, pure fathers of the
next generation.
Mr. Bligh has during these years paid numerous
visits to New Zealand, Tasmania, Victoria, South
Australia, West Australia, and Queensland, as far as
Cooktown. He has also visited the chief cities and
towns in New South Wales.
Lord Northcote, Governor-General of Australia, in
1905, took an interest in the work, and subscribed
liberally. On 28th April, 1905, he sent the following
message : “His Excellency the Governor-General de-
sires me to thank you for the offer of Miss Hopkins’
book, ‘Power of Womanhood,’ and to say that he has
.already procured that publication.” (Signed) H. M.
Share, Private Secretary .
As early as 1904 the late Sir Harry Rawson, Gover-
nor of this State, took a warm interest in the work,
and subsequently became one of the Patrons of the
League. On the 23rd January, 1904, he wrote as
follows : “I enclose cheque for £$ towards the funds.
Please send me sample literature that I may show to
the Minister of Instruction, and other people who may
take an interest in the work.” Later on, on 30th
December, 1908, he wrote :
“Dear Mr. Bligh,—l have forwarded your letter and
the New Zealand Minister for Education’s letter on
to the New South Wales Minister, and hope he may


see his way to allow the lectures, for I believe in
them.—‘Yours truly, Harry Rawson.”
On the 20th February, iqoq, Sir Harry Rawson
wrote a manuscript letter as under : —*
“Admiral Sir Harry Rawson thanks the members,
of the Australian White Cross League for their kind
message. He feels certain that it will not be long
before the good work done by the League will be
recognised.”
On 28th August, iqoß. Lord Hopetoun’s Private
Secretary wrote as follows :
“I am directed by His Excellency to thank you for
your letter of the 27th August, and for the enclosures
you were good enough to send. His Excellency
wishes me to say that he will be pleased to allow his
name to be retained as one of the patrons of the
League after his departure from Australia.
“H. M. SHARE,
“Private Secretary.”
Lord Plunkett, the Governor of New Zealand, wrote
on 7th January, iqo6, from Government House, Wel-
lington, as follows :
“Dear Mr. Bligh,—l have much pleasure in stating
that, in my opinion, you are doing a splendid work.
“The four main objects of the White Cross League
should commend themselves to all, but I can under-
stand that some people may have anxieties as to how
you bring these objects before your audiences. With
such a feeling I have much sympathy, for I consider
that vitally important as it is for boys and young men
to have the plain truth told them, there is great
danger if it is told in a bungling or tactless manner.
“In your case, such anxieties’need not exist. I
am sure, after reading the letters of others who have
heard you and listening to one of your lectures myself,
that those who give you an opportunity of speaking
to boys and young men will never regret it. I
commend you and your work with great confidence.”
Lady Plunkett also expressed her approval of an
address which Mr. Bligh gave to ladies in the
following letter from Government House, Wellington,
dated, 21st January, iqo6 :
“Dear Mr. Bligh,—l have much pleasure in ac~


ceeding to your request and stating that, having heard
you lecture to women, I consider you treat your sub-
jects with great tact, and I wish your work every
success.
“Yours faithfully.
“VICTORIA PLUNKETT.”
Bishops in different parts of Australasia have ex-
pressed their approval as shown in the following- let-
ters. On 20th January, 1906, the Primate of New
Zealand wrote :
“The objects of the White Cross League have my
warmest sympathy, and from what I can learn of
Mr. Bligh, 1 believe he can be trusted to deal with
this most difficult subject in a manner calculated to
do good, and if so, the good is great indeed. Among
uninstructed young people, I have found that there is
not only no knowledge of the terrible consequences
of sin, but also no great consciousness of
sin itself in many cases (though, of course, all are
more or less aware that there must be something
wrong in act, the discovering of which would cause
them so much shame). I must leave it to the clergy
and others to afford such opportunities as they may
be able to think wise to provide, but I pray that his
efforts may be blessed in the checking of a too com-
mon social evil.”
Bishop Grimes, of Christchurch, wrote on 23rd
March, 1906 :
“Dear Mr. Bligh,—Since I last had the pleasure to
meet you, I have been travelling in the southern
part of my Diocese on what we call the Episcopal
Visitation ; this must be my apology for not sooner
complying with your request for a few lines from me
about your noble work for uplifting and preservation
of our youth and young men.
“I had not the advantage to hear you lecture, but
from what you told me about your plans and general
outlines, and from the most favorable report which I
received from the Director of our Boys’ School in
Christchurch, I am convinced that your lectures must
do much good.
“The vice against which you lecture, is, alas, one
of the most fatal of our day. God alone knows the
awful wrecks it brings about, or how many once
noble-minded youths are ruined, and bright intellects


shattered for life through its baneful influence. It
is our duty to raise our voices, in season and out or
season, against its terrible ravages.
“Allow me to wish you every blessing and success
in your God-like mission.
“Yours faithfully in Christ,
“J. J. GRIMES, S.M.”
After Mr. Bligh’s subsequent visit to New Zealand
he had an interview with His Grace the Archbishop
of Sydney, who sent him the following letter, dated
28th/ October, 1912: . .
“I have much pleasure in bearing testimony to the
work of Mr. Bligh in his educational work im~
Duritv, and I have every confidence in advising ex-
tension of his work.
JOHN CHARLES SYDNEY.
The Bishop of Bendigo, in the Synod of iQO3 r
remarked *
“During- the last year we were favored in this Dio*
cese by a visit from Mr. Bligh, the able and indefati-
gable secretary of the White Cross League. I con-
sider we owe Mr. Bligdi and the Committee who
worked with him a great debt of gratitude for the
crusade which he carried on against the evils of im-
purity. I sincerely hope and pray that with Mr.
Bligh’s departure may not come a falling off or
energy and devotion on the part of those brethren
who form the local committee. Also that Mr. Bligh
may visit us again, or that someone may be infleunced
bv God, the Holv Spirit, to take up the work amongst
us.”
The Bishop of Goulburn wrote on 27th June*
1905 : . .
“I am very pleased with the result of your visit
here ; let me know when you are likely to be in
Goulburn again.”
On the Ist July, IQI3, the following letter was re-
ceived from the Bishop of Hobart :■ —
“Mr. Dear Mr. Bligh,—l congratulate you very
deeply and sincerely on the success of your campaign
here. In Launceston you made, I know, a great
impression.
“With warm greetings, yours very sincerely.
J. S. TASMANIA."


Mr. Bligh also received the following letters from
Ministers of Education, or their Departments:—
The Secretary, Education Board, Auckland, wrote
on the 14th November, 1906: —
“Dear Sir, —I am directed to convey to you the
thanks of the Auckland Education Board for your
services in lecturing upon the objects of the League
to the pupils of the Normal School, and of other
public schools in the city and suburbs of Auckland/ 7
Mr. Boyle, Secretary, Education Office, Dunedin,
wrote on 30th January, 1908 :
“I have to inform you that the following reso-
lution was passed by the Education Board at its
meeting to-day : “That the Board give its cordial
approval to the work carried on by Mr. R. H. W.
Bligh on behalf of the White Cross League, and
express the hope that he will be given an oppor-
tunity to address the children in the schools under
the control of the Board. 77
Mr. W. T. McCoy, Director of Education, Hobart,
wrote on 12th February, 1913 :
“Teachers in charge of State Schools to whom
this authority may be presented, are authorised to
allow Mr. R. H. W. Bligh, of the White Cross League,
to address for half-an-hour such of the boys in at-
tendance as are over the age of twelve years. Boys
of eleven years of age in the 6th or sth classes may be
permitted to attend. 77
Mr. Geo. Fowlds, Minister of Education and Public
Health New Zealand, wrote to Mr. Bligh on igth
November, 1906 as follows
“From the opinions expressed by Headmasters of
Public Schools and others connected with Education
in New Zealand, I am fully convinced that your work
in this colony has been of a very beneficial character.
From all quarters I have heard nothing but praise of
your method of addressing the children of the Pri-
mary and Secondary Schools, and I am fully con-
vinced that your mission will have a lasting benefit on
the lives of those who have been privileged to hear
you.
“With every good wish,
“Believe me, yours sincerely. 77


Headmasters of schools throng-bout New Zealand
and Australia gave their opinions on many occasions,
and a few are selected as under :
Wellington, New Zealand,
13th August, 1906.
“In connection with the recent mission in Welling-
ton of the “White Cross League,” Mr. R. W. Bligh
delivered an address on “Purity” to the boys of SS
IV-VII. in our several schools.
“We are pleased to be able to state that the lec-
turer handled his difficult subject with a delicacy and
yet simplicity of language which made his meaning
unmistakably plain to his young hearers. His ap-
peal to their manliness was a most stirring one ; his
straightforward dealing with the various aspects, phy-
siological, moral, and religious, proved him to be
deeply in earnest for the good of the boys themselves,
but especially for that of our young nation.
“Mr. Bligh’s manner when speaking is sympathetic,
hopeful and inspiring.
“As co-workers with him in all that makes for the
true welfare of our scholars, we gratefully recognise
the power for good exerted by his addresses in arous-
ing a healthy spirit of enquiry, and in removing the
unnecessary ignorance which is so prevalent on sexual
matters.
“J. COSTIN WEBB, Headmaster, Normal School.
“A. C. BLAKE, Acting-Headmaster, Mount Cook
“Boys’ School.
THOS. H. GILL, H.T. Dis. High School, New-
“town.
“GEO. FLUX. H.T., Wellington State School.
“A. ERSKINE, Acting-Headmaster, Terrace,
“D.H.S.”
Mr. J. P. Firth, Wellington College, Wellington,
N.Z., wrote on 22nd Tune, iqo6, as follows :
“My Dear Mr. Bligh.—Your address this morning
to my boys on mental and bodily purity was most
impressive, and will be, I am sure, of great help to
many. It will be exceedingly valuable to me ; for
it shows me—what I have long looked for —the right
way of attacking the subject. While I was parti-
cularlv struck with the excellent plan of your intro-
ductory sentences, which put the boys into just the


right frame of mind, I admired no less the complete
boldness and the perfect good taste with which you
dealt with the sexual temptations and difficulties of
youth.
“You are doing work that deserves the grati-
tude and support of the whole community. As I
told you this morning (and the manner of the boys
showed that I was right in saying that I spoke for
them, too) lam deeply grateful to you. If you
will please accept the accompanying cheque for five
guineas to go to the funds for defraying the expenses
of your tour, you will, by allowing me to feel that I
am in a small way helping you in a great work,
add to my indebtedness.”
Mr. G. H. Crother, Headmaster of the Brighton
Grammmar School, Victoria, wrote on the 29th August,
1905 :
“Ifeel undier a great obligation to you and the
League for what you did this afternoon. I shall be
glad to be an annual subscriber to the League.
“Cheque for ,£l/1 enclosed.”
Mr. Q. H. R. Smith, Headmaster, Hawthorn Col-
lege, Auburn, Victoria, wrote on 15th September, 1905
as follows :
“Fifty-one boys have signed the White Cross pledge.
I was so pleased with the way in which you treated
your subject, and I am so convinced of the nesessity
for and value of your teaching, that it is doubly pleas-
ing to me to be able to send you so satisfactory a proof
of the success that attended your visit. I trust that
you will have like success in other Melbourne schools,
and thank you for your visit. ”
From Mr. W. Fisher, M.A., Headmaster, The Armi-
dale School, N.S.W., 18th May, 1904: —
“I have much pleasure in stating that Mr. R. H. W.
Bligh, Secretary of the White Cross League, gave an
address to the boys of this school, explaining the ob-
jects of the League. Mr. Bligh handled his subject
with delicacy and tact, and put matters to the boys
in a direct and manly fashion. I am sure that noth-
ing but good could result to the boys from Mr. Bligh’s
outspoken teaching, and I wish him all success in
his efforts to promote the usefulness of the White
Cross League.” A cheque was enclosed for £i/i/-:


From Mr. W. S. Littlejohn, Principal, Scotch Col-
lege, Melbourne, 7th September, 1905 :
“Dear Mr. Bligh,—l have your letter of yesterday
and I willingly accede to your request that I should
express some opinion as to what I have seem of youi
work, both here and in New Zealand. I take the
position that our boys should not be allowed to grow
up in ignorance, or w r ith perverted ideas, on a subject
about which they exhibit a natural curiosity, but that
they should receive judicious teaching and sympa-
thetic encouragement to fight for a pure and vigorous
manhood. The subject is a difficult one to handle,
and in unskilled hands there is always the risk of
doing more harm than good. Now, I honestly be-
lieve that your address to the boys is calculated to
give just the teaching required, that it lifts the subject
into a pure atmosphere, and removes prurient
thoughts, that it encourages the youth in the path of
virtue, while at the same time warning him of dan-
gers to be shunned and temptations to be fought.
I liked particularly your treatment of the sacred
mystery of birth, and your exposition of the right
attitude to the appetites and passions; it was well
and delicately done. Lyttleton, of Eton, I see,
adopts very much the same lines. I wish you God-
speed in your work, and I shall be glad to welcome
you again at Scotch College.”
Several times since then Mr. Bligh has been wel-
comed and given addresses at Scotch College.
Mr. W. Empson, Collegiate School, Wanganui,
23/8/06, wrote to Mr. Bligh:—
“I feel that I must write you a line to thank you
for all that you have done on my behalf. You
treated a difficult subject in a thoroughly open and
manly way, which I feel sure will bear good fruit by
awakening many to a sense of the enormous import-
ance underlying the matters which you so tactfully
dealt with.”
Mr. Stewart Corr, Headmaster, C. of E. Grammar
School, Guildford, W.A., . 20th August, 1909, wrote
as follows :
“Let me thank you most heartily for your address
to the boys here yesterday. I am quite sure that
your words cannot but have a good effect in warn


mg’ boys against the dangers of their youthful life.
“I like the plain statements of facts that you put
before them, without any heroics or attempt to
work on their feelings. You simply told them the
truth, but it was a truth that is always difficult for
a man to tell boys, the subject being such a delicate
one to deal with. Your method of dealing with the
question, however, was, I am sure, just the right
one, and our thanks are due to you for your efforts.’ 7
Mr. W. Davidson, Headmaster, Mornington, Dune-
din, N.Z., wrote on 22nd November, 1907: —
“It was not without considerable misgiving that
I consented to allow you to speak to the boys of
my school; but after listening to your lecture I am
convinced that you are doing good work — work that
will greatly help in the physical, mental and moral
uplifting of the boys of New Zealand. I consider
that you handled a difficult and delicate subject
wisely and well, and in future I shall be glad to
welcome you at my school. 77
Mr. C. C. Anderson, Headmaster, Scotch College,.
Claremont, W.A., 19th August, 1909, wrote to Mr;
Bligh:—
“I think it only right that I should send you a
line or two to tell you how much I enjoyed your
address this morning. The truths which you so
clearly laid before us are just what every boy ought
to know; and the attention with which the boys
listened from beginning to end is a sure indication
that what you told them will be remembered. I am
quite certain that your visit to Western Australia
will be productive of jnuch good. At any rate, on
behalf of the Scotch College, I offer you our best
thanks. 77
Mr. John Fisher, Headmaster, Otautau, N.Z., wrote
on 30/9/07: —
■“Having been present in my capacity as Chairman
of the Southland Education Board at two of your ad-
dresses, it gives me much pleasure in adding my
testimony to the excellence of your methods in
treating the great subject you have in hand.
“Your talks to the boys in our Public Schools, at
one of which I had the pleasure of being present^


must assist in moulding' and building up the charac-
ters of our lads on a true and solid foundation.
“The simplicity of the instruction given is such
that every boy can assimilate it, and acting upon it
their lives must be made better.
“I hope that the whole of our schools will open
their doors to you in order that you may give one
of these helpful talks to our young folks, in whom all
the hope of our future lies.
“With best wishes for every success in your noble
mission.”
At the request of the Admiral, Sir George King-
HalL the Hon. Secretary of the League arranged
for Mr. Bligh to address all the men of the fleet
who were just leaving for England in December,
1912, and two lectures were delivered in the hall
at Garden Island, Sydney Harbour, at which about
1,000 men attended. The Admiral expressed his
appreciation of the addresses, and a few weeks later
took the chair at a public meeting which Mr. Bligh
addressed in Hobart. On February Bth, 1913, Mr.
Bligh, when in Hobart, received the following letter
from the Admiral’s Secretary:—
“Naval Commander-in-Chief’s Office,
“Parliament Buildings, Hobart,
“I am directed by Admiral Sir George King-Hall
to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 3rd
inst., and in reply to inform you that His Excellency
will be glad to arrange for you to deliver a lecture
on board the “Cambrian” during the last week of
February after that vessel’s return from Sydney, if
convenient to you.”
The Commander of the Traning Ship “Amokura”
wrote to Mr. Bligh on 20th July, 1907, as follows :
“Please accept these few lines to express my
gratification and approval of the manner and sub-
stance of your address to the boys of the New Zea-
land Training Ship last week. I have often thought
that boys should be told the plain facts concerning
their advent to this world, also the changes of appe-
tite and desires during the passage from boyhood to
manhood.
“I think many young men have committed grave
errors through lack of knowledge in this respect. To
impart the requisite knowledge in the proper manner


is no easy task, especially to an ordinary person.
I have to admire the manner in which you handle
your subject, and impart the plain facts to your
audience, and trust that much good may be the re-
sult of your labours among the young men and boys
of this colony.
“Sincerely yours,
“GEO. HOOPER, R.N.R.,
Commander.
On the 12th April, 1912, the Minister of Defence
in New Zealand issued the following introductory
letter to Mr. Bligh:—
“TO ALL WHOM IT MAY CONCERN.
“I have much pleasure in introducing the bearer
of this letter, Mr. R. H. W. Bligh, lecturer under the
White Cross League, who is travelling throughout
the Dominion for the purpose of deliverng lectures to
men and lads on sex purity. Feeling assured that
Mr. Bligh will handle his subject in a careful and
delicate manner, I shall be glad if you will extend
to him such facilities as you in your discretion may
deem fit.
“ARTHUR M. MYERS,
‘‘Minister for Defence,
From the Department of Prisons, New South
Wales, the Comptroller-General, Mr. W. McFarlane,
wrote on 14th September, 1910, to Mr. Bligh as
follows: —
“Permit me to convey to you the most cordial
thanks of this Department for your kindness in
lecturing to the prisoners of Parramatta Gaol on
Saturday afternoon last, the 10th inst.
“It will, no doubt, be gratifying to you to learn
that lectures of the interesting and instructive charac-
ter given by you are very much appreciated by the
prisoners. They are also of great value in their
effect upon the good order of the prison, as the
privilege of attending them is only extended to the
well-behaved, and therefore is an incentive to good
conduct.”
Mr. Bligh started f9r a holiday trip to New Zea-
land on the 18th April, 1914, and on his arrival in
Wellington received the following letter from Mr,


Robinson, Chief Commissioner of Public Service:—
“Office of the Public S. Commissioner,
“Wellington, N.Z.
24th April, 1914.
■“The Hon. Minister of Education and Defence.
“Dear Mr. Allen,
“This will serve to introduce Mr. R. W. Bligh,
Lecturer on Social Purity, who desires to enlist your
sympathy in connection with his work. I have known
Mr. Bligh for a number of years, and have formed
a high opinion of his devotion to a worthy cause.
“I am, yours sincerely.
“D. ROBERTSON.”
With this letter Mr. Bligh received the following
from the Minister of Education and Defence, Mr. J.
Allen: —
“Dear Sir, —I have read through the different
testimonials and references you left with me with
regard to yourself and your work from different
gentlemen of high standing both in New Zealand
and Australia, and from what is set forth in them
I feel sure that your work as White Cross Lecturer
is exceedingly valuable. I wish you every success in
continuing your good work in our country.”
On the 3rd 1 August, 1913, His Excellency the Gov-
ernor of Western Australia took the chair at a meet-
ing in the Town Hall, Perth, organised by the C.
E. M. Society, to hear an address by Mr. Bligh.
His Excellency, who presided over a large attend-
ance, said he was delighted to see so many young
lads there that day. Their presence showed that
they were prepared to live pure lives and to learn all
they could. They must all agree that there was a
great deal to think about in what Mr. Bligh had told
them. He hoped they would profit by the lessons
given them that afternoon, and they could use their
influence for good amongst their companions who
were not present at the address. There was no
greater influence in the world than the influence of
boys amongst boys and of girls amongst girls. In
showing their desire to live pure lives they should
make up their minds to go one better and help others


to do the same. (Hear, hear.) He would like to
say a word to the parents. There was not the slight-
est doubt that what Mr. Bligh had told them was
perfectly true, and the blame to a great extent
was to be put on to the parents. If they took the
children into their confidence and taught them when
they were young, more good, he thought, would be
done that way than by any preaching by medical
men, clergymen or anyone else. They should talk
to others about what they had heard that day, and
try to influence parents to teach their children. If
they allowed them to grow up in ignorance it would
.only lead to acts of misconduct, and they would have
no sense of their duty to themselves or to those
about them. They should not advertise throughout
Australia that the young people of this State were
worse than in other parts of the world. A great deal
of harm was done by people writing to the papers
and making out that the young people here were
bad. He did not think they were a but even if such
were the case they should not advertise it to the
world. The movement which they were there to help
that afternoon, and which Mr. Bligh had made the
object of his life, could be promoted by intercourse
and by talking amongst themselves. Not by public
meetings, but by each of them making up his mind
to do his best to help others who might not be so
strong as they were. This was the second time he
had heard Mr. Bligh speak, and he felt certain that
those who were present that afternoon would gc
away better men and more determined to do their
■duty in this life and in this world.’ 7
Mr. Bligh has started work for a time in New
Zealand through the aid of a friend who sent him
two cheques to meet his expenses there. The Com-
mittee of the White Cross League in Sydney in issu-
ing a private appeal to a few friends in Sydney to
provide funds for at least six months’ work among
boys, youths and parents in New South Wales,
remark: “Surely the lives of the boys and girls of
our community are worth thousands of pounds, and
when we find a noble spirited enthusiast like Mr.


Bligh willing’ to give his services free of charge,
except out of pocket expenses, we shoulcT be willing
to provide his expenses for a six months ’ tour with-
out grudge.”
Will readers of this send along any assistance
towards this laudable work to the Hon. Secretary,
Mr. W. E. Wilson, 56 Elizabeth St., to the Treasurer,
Mr. C. E. Groves, 91A York St., or to the Chairman,
Dr. Richard Arthur, M.L.A., 211 Macquarie St.,
Sydney.
R. Hickson, Print., 10 Clarence-at., Sydney.
