

Ruuaio pa Mi
find...
Its General.
1905.
When Head, Please
Pass It On
%vinmimoc
cXcaiLizauaiv/^
x X. Xc
*‘\v


-The Salvation Army-
Originated in July, 1865, by WILLIAM BOOTH, now the
Army’s General has become the
LARGEST HOME 8 FOREIGN MISSIONARY SOCIETY II EXISTENCE
The purpose of the Army Is to force the claims of God
for Love and Service upon all who have forgotten Him ,
and to train all Its Converts to regular toil for the spread
of the Gospel.
the: salvation army
IS NOW IN OPERATION IN THE FOLLOWING
COUNTRIES AND COLONIES:—
Germany, Sweden, France, Denmark, Switzerland,
Iceland, Finland, Italy, Gibraltar, Belgium, Norway,
Holland, Malta, India, Ceylon, Java, Japan, Cape Colony,
Natal, Zululand, Mashonaland, Orange River Colony,
Transvaal, St. Helena, United States, Canada and New-
foundland, Uruguay, Hawaii, Argentine, Jamaica, British
Guiana, Bermuda, New South Wales, Victoria, New
-Zealand, Queensland, South Australia, West Australia.
Tasmania.
the, social agencies
‘ '.S' <comprlse the following:—
/v - t , r-
__ Rortict Tor DischargcfrTrisonm. Cabour Vards.
y Rescue Ioors for Tallot Ulomen. Ch ap Eodglna Rouses.
<< ' Romev for Old Wen. o t
industrial Romes tor Bov*.
Industrial Romes for Girls.
maternYtv Romes.
Samaritan Relief Ulork.
Tood Depots.
men’s Shelters.
Rospital Uisitation.
Gaol Uisitation.
nursing Romes.
Slum Ulork.
enquiries for Eost Triends.
Tndustrial Tarms and Colonies.
Ulomen’s Shelters.
etc., etc.
None of the Officers have any salaries guaranteed to them. They
have given up, in many cases, good situations and comfort able homes
in order to labour amongst the poor and destitute
THE ARMY HAS NO ENDOWMENT, AND IS DEPENDENT
UPON VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS.
The Australasian Headquarters Accounts are audited by a well-
known firm of Accountants and Auditors—M essrs Holmes and
M’Crindle Collins Street, Melbourne and Balance Sheets are issued
annually
The Headquarters Solicitors are Messrs. Johnson and Johnson,
\tlas Buildings, Collins Street, Melbourne.
Bankers : Bank of New South Wales. Melbourne


How the Army Grows*
Please note the following comparative statement,
showing the Army’s growth from the year 1874 to 1904
Number of Number of
ear - Officers. Nationalities.
1874 ... 60 ... 2
1879 .„ 340 ... 3
1884 ... 2,332 10
1889 7,869 29
1894 9,564 37
1899 12,825 44
STRIKING ARMY STATISTICS.
DECEMBER, 1904.
Countries and Colonies Occupied ... .„ 52
Languages In which Salvation is preached ... 30
Corps Circles and Societies 7,219
Officers and Cadets 14,051
Persons without rank wholly employed in
Salvation Army work 4,505
Local Officers 44,188
Workers among Children ... 17,416
Bandsmen ' ••• 17,818
Periodicals —(a) Number 64
„ (b) In Languages 28
„ (c) Total copies per issue ... 1,032,622
Social Operations—Number of Institutions ... 686
„ „ Number of Officers Em-
ployed in Social Work 2,041
Beds supplied (twelve months) 4,930,210
Meals „ „ _ ... 7,347,954


Grace‘Before*Meat
scheme:
is a simple plan for the purpose of aiding the
Social Work of the Salvation Army,
The BASIS of the proposal is the humble sum
of ONE PENNY, coupled to the willingness of
friends to place that sum each week in a neatly-
designed Box, which will be provided for the
purpose.
The Scheme is operated by duly Commissioned
Agents, either Soldiers or Friends of the Army,
who undertake, without fee or reward, to dis-
tribute Boxes and collect the proceeds each
quarter, sending the amount to the Headquarters
for the above-mentioned purpose.
Any person desirous of assisting the Army, and
who agrees to give NOT LESS THAN ONE PENNY
EACH WEEK, can be supplied with a Box by
applying to an Officer of the Army or to the
Authorised Agent.
The Agencies requiring assistance comprise the
following:—
Homes for Discharged Prisoners.
Rescue Work for Fallen Women.
Homes for Old Men. Industrial Homes for Boys.
Industrial Homes for Girls. Maternity Homes.
Nursing Homes. Slum Work.
Women's Shelters. Labour Yards.
Cheap Lodging Houses. Samaritan Relief Work.
Food Depots. Men’s Shelters.
Hospital Visitation. Gaol Visitation
Enquiries for Lost Friends.
Industrial Farms and Colonies. Etc., etc-


...THE TOTAL NUMBER OF HOMES...
in Australasia alone is now 67. These provide a
DAILY ACCOMMODATION for 3000 persons.
The Army is also AT THE SERVICE OF ALL
who need help, and in connection with its LEAGUE
OF MERCY in large cities, does a great amount
of work each week in relieving distress.
LONG’LOST FRIENDS have also been traced in
many scores of cases in all parts of the world.
...THE COST OF MAINTAINING...
these many institutions for the relief of the
SINFUL and SUFFERING is very great.
Every Week Over £l2OO is Needed.
By means of INDUSTRIES and the general work
of the inmates a large part of this sum is raised.
In SOME STATES the Governments also assist
by CHARITABLE GRANTS, and in other ways.
The balance has to be made up by the DONA-
TIONS and SUBSCRIPTIONS of generous friends,
by means of the Q.B.M. SCHEME, and in other
ways.
In addition to the cost of the Homes, there Is
the RESPONSIBILITY OF OVE SIGHT by Head-
quarters, and the many other demands for
SAMARITAN RELIEF WORK, etc.
To assist in MEETING THE DEFICIT we desire
to get 5000 PERSONS to take a Q.B.M. BOX.
These, at the rate of ONLY ONE PENNY PER
WEEK, would bring in £lOOO per year.
The WORK IS URGENT, and, however distress-
ing, DEMANDS our sympathy and assistance.
WHO CARES 7
If you do, and can assist, please send for a
G.B.M. Box.


WKat is an Auxiliary?
THE SALVATION ARMY AUXILIARY LEAGUE
Is Composed—
I.—Of persons who, without necessarily approving
of every single method used by the Salvation Army,
are sufficiently in sympathy with its great work of
reclaiming drunkards, rescuing the fallen, and helping
the sinful, as to give it their prayers, influence, and
money.
2.—Of persons who, although seeing eye to ©ye with
the Army, are yet unable to join it, being fully en-
gaged in the work of their own denomination, or els©
prevented by infirmities or circumstances from taking
any active part in Christian work.
Auxiliaries pay at least a guinea per annum, and
ai-e supplied every year, on payment of their subscrip-
tion, with a small leather pass bearing the official re-
cognition of Headquarters, together with their name
and number. This admits them to all Public Meet-
ings of the Army, and ensures a hearty welcome in
Army circles at home and abroad.
A small badge is sent to each member of the
League, which they are urged to wear as a sign of
membership.
We rely upon Auxiliaries to show their sympathy
and help by—
I.—Praying for the Salvation Army, at home and
abroad, for one another, and for the salvation of the
world.
2.—Making it known in their circle that they are
in sympathy with us by occasionally attending our
meetings, if possible, by defending us against misre-
presentations and slanders which are often believed
and circulated by misinformed people, who only need
to know the real facts to alter their opinion. Auxi-
liaries can always have the fullest information about
our actual doings if they will write to Headquarters.
Auxiliaries will be supplied gratis with copies of
our Annual Report and Balance Sheet for distribu-
tion, on application to Headquarters. Some of our
Auxiliaries have materially helped us in this way by
distributing our literature, thus helping to dispel


tho prejudice under which many persons unacquainted
with the Army are found to labour.
Some of our Auxiliaries have their hands full to
overflowing with happy work for God. But there
are others not so fully occup : ed who could materially
help our Slum and Rescue Work by gifts of clothing,
food and money; assisting us to raise funds for the
current work in order to meet the constant fresh op-
portunities which we are constrained to seize for
spreading salvation.
All the World or the Victory will be posted free
regularly each month to Auxiliaries as they may
choose.
For further information and for full particulars of
the work of the Salvation Army apply to—
THE COMMISSIONER,
69 Bourke-street,
Melbourne.
Investments.
How to invest money wisely, so that two very es-
sential results may be secured —viz., safety and good
interest —is a very important matter to all those pos-
sessed of this world’s goods, whether much or little,
and deserves the very closest and most careful en-
quiry.
How to achieve both these ends, and at the same
time be enabled to assist in spreading the Gospel, is
a question that must be, to very many of the Lord’s
followers, a very vital one indeed.
Feeling assured that this little book will fall into
the hands of a large number of oiir friends, who are
not only anxious to invest tlie savings of long years
profitably and prudently, but who are also desirous of
doing their utmost to extend the Saviour’s K ngdom.
we would like to call attention to the opportunity
afforded by the Salvation Army Property Fund, for
tho investment of any sums, from £5O and upwards.
DEPOSITORS
represent those persons who lend to the Array any
sums of money, and who, when depositing, receive ati


official deposit receipt, which is the equivalent of a
Bank Fixed Deposit Receipt.
The rate of interest paid to depositors is as high
as can be obtained at any ordinary bank.
We undertake to pay interest half yearly or yearly,
as depositors may desire, and the money will be sent
to any address in the Commonwealth or New Zealand.
Depositors are required to pay exchange upon re-
mitting to us, but we make the repayments free of
exchange.
MORTGAGEES
comprise those persons who lend us larger sums, and
who receive a properly executed mortgage deed over
some particular property.
Interest on mortgages is generally fixed according
to the current market rate for such investments, and
will be paid as may be arranged, and at any address.
We will always be pleased to submit particulars of
properties upon which mortgages could be arranged.
WHO IS RESPONSIBLE?
is a very natural question when the matter of loana
or mortgagee is being considered.
WHAT ARE THE ARMY’S
RESOURCES ?
is also another question suggested.
In reply to the first, we can say that the Commis-
sioner for the time is the properly-constituted and
legal representative of the Army in this country; he
acts as the General’s attorney in all places but Vic-
toria where the property is held under the “ Succes-
sory Trusts Act,” the Commissioner and Chief Secre-
tary being the trustees for all Army property in Vic-
toria.
The Commissioner is responsible for seeing that all
property obligations are regularly met, and upon him
rests the necessity for carefully conserving the best
interests of the Property Fund.
The resources of the Army comprise a great many
valuable properties in all the States and New Zea-
land.
In evetry town of any importance the Army owns
property, and the aggregate value now stands at over
£250,000.


This may suggest to the uninitiated that the Army
is a wealthy concern, having accumulated property to
this value in a little over twenty years, but it should
be remembered that we have been under an obligation
to borrow money to enable us to secure this property,
and this is the point that will be of special interest
to those with money to lend. They will naturally
want to know what the surplus of assets over liabili-
ties amounts to.
Taking the properties at their very lowest com-
mercial value, we are pleased to be able to state that
a surplus of at least one-third of their value would be
available after paying all mortgages and loans.
In addition to this, and many other assets valued
at thousands of pounds, we have a capital of nearly
£20,000 invested in our trade and printing businesses,
which we run purely with the object of assisting the
general spiritual work of the Army, and not in any
sense for personal gain.
All our properties are tenanted by the Army, with
one or two and we are therefore sure of
a regular and reliable income, the yearly rent roll
aggregating over £20,000. From this have to be paid
the interest on mortgages and loans, repairs, insur-
ance, and all other charges incidental to the proper-
ties, and from this also is provided a sinking fund for
the liquidation of liabilities.
Further particulars will be gladly supplied to any
friends seeking information, with a view to lending
money for the assistance of the Army work, and in-
vestors with the Army will always have the satisfac-
tion of knowing that their money has not been in-
vested or their interest earned in anything but a con-
cern that aims at making men happier and bringing
the world to a knowledge of God and His salvation.
All communications to be addressed to the Com-
missioner. 69 Bourke-street, Melbourne.
THE ARMY'S WORLD-WIDE SOCIAL
MACHINERY
Now comprises, in all parts of the world, 686 in-
stitutions, with a daily accommodation of 33,500;
2000 Officers and employees are permanently engaged
in this work; 5000 fallen women and 1500 criminals
pass through our different Homes in one year.


Legacies
Do you intend to make a will? If so, while con-
sidering your friends and relations, will you remem-
ber the Salvation Army ?
Here is an opportunity for many friends to per-
petually benefit this great work. How many there at©
who could easily make some slight provision for the
Army when drawing up their wills, thereby rendering
special assistance to a work w r hich will doubtless go on
for all the years until such work shall not be needed.
We have received legacies in days gone by, and
have deeply appreciated the interest which prompted
friends to remember us in closing up their earthly
affairs, but we are quite sure there are many others
who only need to know the channels the Army offers
for the disposal of such bequests, to enable them to
do likewise.
All kinds of property, without exception, may be
willed to the Salvation Army.
A lerjacy of money or other personal property may
be made in the following terms:
“ I give and bequeath to the person for the time
being in command of the Salvation Army in Aus-
tralasia the sum of pounds to be used ap-
plied or dealt with as and in such manner as he or
his successor in office for the time being shall think
fit for the general purposes of the said Salvation
Army in Australasia.”
When land (either vacant or with buildings) is in-
tended to be given the same may be expressed in the
following terms:-
“ I give and devise to the person for the time
being in command of the Salvation Army in Aus-
tralasia all that piece of land being etc. (here insert
a description of the land, preferably one taken from
the title deed) to be held let used sold or other-
wise disposed of or dealt with and the income and
capital moneys arising therefrom to be used and
applied as and in such manner as he or his succes-
sor in office for the time being shall think fit for
the general purposes of the said Salvation Army
in Australasia.”
If the testator desires that the property given by him
shall be devoted to some special fund or object in con-


nectiou with the Army he may in place of the words
for the general purposes” insert such words as:
“For the Social Work,”
“ For the benefit of the Pension Fund for dis-
abled Officers,”
“For the benefit of the Officers’ Siyk Fund,”
“For the benefit of the Officers’ Salary Supple-
ment Fund,”
or similar particulars of any other object or of anv
corps or building which may be indicated.
DIRECTIONS FOR SIGNING
WILL,
The Will must be signed at the end thereof by the
testator in the presence of two witnesses who, after the
testator has signed, must then sign their names and
write in their addresses and occupations in the presence
of the testator and of each other. The testator and the
two witnesses must all be present at the same time, and
the Will should be signed by all before any of them
leave the room.
If the Will is contained on more than one sheet of
paper, each sheet should be signed at the bottom, first
by the testator, and then by the two witnesses, and the
last sheet should contain the addresses and occupations
of the witnesses.
Any alterations in the Will should be initialled by
the testator and the witnesses.
It is not necessary for witnesses to read the Will or
to be informed of its contents, as they are only con-
cerned with witnessing the testator’s signature. Neither
husband nor wife, nor any person beneficially interested
under the Will should be a witness.
While the Commissioner will always be pleased to pro-
cure further information or advice for any friend de-
sirous of benefiting the Army by Will, and will treat
all communications in regard thereto as strictly con-
fidential, he strongly recommends such friends to pro-
cure independent advice from their own Solicitor as to
the preparation and execution of the Will. Trouble may
often be avoided in these matters by taking proper ad-
vice from a reliable solicitor.
“The healing of the world lies in its nameless
saints, and many of these, dead and living, are already
ranged beneath the standard of the Salvation Army.”
lb >li K IST HUC H A NAN.


The Sich. Officers
Benefit Fund.
ur *d was inaugurated with a view to assisting
Officers who may, by reason of sickness, be unable to
continue their work.
The object of the Fund is to meet special expenses
incidental to more or less prolonged periods of sickness
ot, at the least, one month, and to meet doctors’ ac-
counts where these are found necessary.
The Fund is administerd by a Council, which sits
weekly at the Territorial Headquarters to consider
' ec i t '' that may be made for assistance from
this Fund. Each individual request must be supported
by the recommendation of the Chief Officer im-
mediately responsible for the welfare of the Officer
seeking assistance. Grants are made only according
to a fixed scale.
Ihe income for the fund is derived from a weekly
payment of 6d. for each Officer in a Corps, Depart
merit or Social Institution. This weekly amount is not
paid by the Officer personally, but is either collected
by a special Sergeant or levied from Central funds,
which are capable of making the payment; a special
collection is also taken up at each Corps once a
quarter. Special donations from friends have also
materially assisted in putting the Fund on a sound
footing.
The Commissioner will be pleased to hear from any
fnend who might feel specially interested in this
Fund. The object of the Army is to provide all
reasonable facilities for Officers to renew their health
m order that they may be able to carry forward the
work with good health, and so have a better chance
ot succeeding.
Happiness lies in yourselves; in true freedom in
the absence or conquest of every ignoble fear • in
perfect self-government; in a power of contentment
and peace, and the ‘even flow of life’ amid poverty,
cxde disease, and the very valley of the shadow of
death. Can you face this Olympic contest? Are your
thews and sinews strong enough ?. Onlv by God’s aid
can you attain to this.”
Ej-ictktus.


GENERAL BOOTH,
Head of the Salvation Army.
(Reprinted by kind permission of Mr. W. H.
Judkins , Editor “ Review of Reviews
Melbourne.)
General Booth, head of the Salvation Army, has,
as I write, just left the shores of Australia, after
a triumphal march throughout Australasia. Crowd
ed and enthusiastic meetings, public receptions in
which Premiers, Ministers of the Crown, Mayors
and Councillors have figured largely, interviews with
the heads of State authorities over his great immi-
gration proposals, have been the order of the day.
The sight of the old, hoary-headed General, with
divine enthusiasm blazing from his eyes, and ex-
haling from every part of his person as he has
discharged himself in a volley of conviction and
passion at his audiences, has thrilled them in a
never-to-be-forgotten way.
Through the frigidity of contempt and scorn, and
the fierce fires of obloquy and scathing criticism
alike the Army has passed —as every great move-
ment and person at some stage passes—and has
emerged triumphant. Anyone writing the history of
Britain, and of many of the other nations of the
world in the latter part of the nineteenth and the
beginning of the twentieth centuries, will ruin his
reputation as a historian if he fails to give the Army


a very large place among the social forces which
have tended to swing humanity with a mighty lift
heavenwards. In almost every clime of the world
it works. The languages of the world are its lan-
guages, the world’s customs are its customs. White,
brown, yellow, black, all tints and colours, range
shoulder to shoulder beneath its flag. The roll of
its drum inspires the same sentiments in the hearts
of thousands of members of a score of nations, while
the songs of the ransomed which the Army teaches
rise from the lips of worshippers whose politics and
traditions are as hopelessly diverse as could be im-
agined.
Like a cyclone the Army has risen and swept into
the course of humanity, smashing to pieces like some
spiritual bomb the hard and fast notions of religious
propriety in which Christianity was becoming
embedded, whirling against the giant forces of evil
that had come to look upon the world as their own,
undermining and dynamiting social and religious
custom, which had locked up the social and spiri-
tual activities of Christian men, flattening out oppo-
sition, over-riding apathy, until it has established
itself in a few years as one of the most magnificent
engines of spiritual energy to be found in the wide
world.
The Army An Evolution.
The Army grew, it was not made. It was a de-
velopment, not the outcome of a settled plan. Its
growth was from within. The idea of the Salvation
Army, as such, was not an objective. When in 1861
the then Rev. William Booth started on his
life work, he had no more idea of the plan or form
or ultimate development of the Salvation Army than
the proverbial “ man in the moon.” That is the
secret of its success. It was a series of inspirations.
The man simply followed his vision.
General Booth started his career of sacrifice as
a minister of the Methodist Church. He was one
of the strongest evangelistic forces that the Church
has known. He was seized, as even few ministers
are seized, with a passion for the reformation of
the individual, and as a consequence his evan-
gelistic work was successful in the highest degree.


Crowds of conversions became the common-place.
So manifestly was the man prepared by God for
this particular kind of work that he and a large
section of the Conference urged that he should be
set apart for it. For a time this was done, but the
Conference afterwards decreed that he should settle
into circuit work. He loyally accepted the decision
of the Conference, especially as it was stated that
the question of surrender to evangelistic missions
would be reconsidered later, and that every facility
would be given him for doing his own peculiar
work. For three years he thus laboured, but
although it was with success, it was evident both to
himself, his noble wife, and those best calculated
to judge of the character of his work, that the
paths were too straight for him, that vastly greater
work was lying undone, and his energies were being
crippled. When, therefore, in one of those strange,
obstinate, indefinable moods, which even a Church
Assembly sometimes adopts, closing its eyes so deter-
minedly to a plain, unmistakable leading, that it
appears as though action was taken wilfully in face
of all reason, the Conference decided to continue
him in settled work, he cut the bonds that bound
him and was free.
Thus the Methodist Church, to its everlasting
loss, lost William Booth. While a Church As-
sembly is perfectly right in thoroughly weighing
the opinion of any particular individual that he is
fitted for a special work, and reserving its right to
guide and control the members of its Conference,
yet this particular Conference erred most sadly, and
blundered most egregiously in not allowing a man
so manifestly led by the Spirit to follow the Spirit’s
leadings. Not even a Church Court dare, without
running the risk of disaster, come between a man
and his Divine vision.
The Secret of Success.
In these later days, made wise by sad experiences,
Churches are beginning to recognise more and more
the necessity of allowing men with certain gifts to
devote themselves to their development, and to re-
cognise the “ diversity of gifts ” which the Spirit


confers, by setting aside certain individuals to do
certain work. In despair and fear that his life work
would be ruined, Mr. Booth, after ploughing his
way through stormy seas, arrived at the momentous
decision to follow his vision rather than the de-
cision of the Conference, and launched himself
voluntarily upon evangelistic work. Well for the
world it is that he did. Pecuniary outlook there
was none. From the point of view of worldly wis-
dom it was the maddest thing the man could do, to
throw up a valuable Church connection with an
assured income, to face uncertainty, and by his own
unaided efforts to carry on his warfare against evil.
But in that one fact lie the whole power and ulti-
mate success of the Salvation Army. That is its
secret. It was a case of a man following a direct
personal revelation, which no man on the earth
can ever dare to cast aside without disaster. The
success of any man in life is to be measured by his
obedience or disobedience to his own individual
heavenly vision. William Booth followed his, as
Luther did, as Wesley did, as thousands of other
reformers have done, although custom and the
Church have held up their hands in holy horror, and
inveighed against the folly and impetuosity of indi-
viduals following the advice which God Himself has
given to men's souls. Therein, we repeat, lay the
success of the Army. Had William Booth listened
to the voice of convention instead of conviction, the
world would have been vastly poorer. Because he
listened to the voice of his soul, rather than that of
the Church, the Army has risen and conquered. But
even William Booth did not project the Army. He
simply evangelised. Going where he w 7 as invited,
rousing tremendous enthusiasm, numbering conver-
sions by thousands, turning the world, wherever he
and his good wife went, upside down, it was not
until some time later, when he and Mrs. Booth de-
cided to focus their energies upon the drink-sodden,
depraved, submerged East End of London, that the
idea developed. Mission work succeeded, and as
the organisation grew larger, the idea of a great
Christian army took definite shape, and the question
of titles and of uniform followed as a matter of
course. The idea that William Booth sat down,


devised the idea of the Army, made himself Gene-
ral, and so established the huge order, must be put
aside. Here a little and there a little the organisa-
tion grew, until, in almost unconscious ways, it has
developed into the grand, massive, stupendous, soul-
saving, revolutionary, redeeming organisation that it
is to-day. '
The Army, Not tKe Man.
General Booth would protest most strongly that a
character sketch of himself should be a sketch of
the Army, and not of the man, and he would be
right. You cannot separate the two. The man is
the Army. In perhaps a less sense, the Army is
the man. It is not so as fully as some people
imagine, for so long as it keeps on its lines of mis-
sion work, the Army will live and flourish after
General Booth is dead. Living on salaries far be-
low that they w r ould enjoy if engaged in business
pursuits, or as ministers of other Churches, there
are in the Army thousands of men of keen intellect,
and superb organising and business power. That
this must be so, is evident from the success which
attends the vast operations of the Army. There is
brain as well as heart behind it. As far as its
business side is concerned, no organisation in the
world is conducted on finer business principles than
the Army. Everything is up to date. The right
man is, as far as possible, in the right place. Orga-
nisation and discipline are so perfect that men, for
the sake of the common good, accept or leave ser-
vice without complaint. An organisation like this
is built upon too enduring a foundation to sink when
one man, even its leader, goes to his reward. The
character sketch of General Booth, therefore, be-
comes in a very real sense a sketch of the Army,
and the story of its doings gives the key to the
character of the man who has brought it up to its
present position. But what has made the Army?
Its leader’s blind devotion to a divine inspiration
was undoubtedly the primal impulse, and has been
all through. In leaving the main road of stilted
propriety, the Army has made its success. And its
present success and future success lie in the mul-
tiplication by thousands of General’s Booth’s self-


denial and abandonment to the will of God. Salva-
tion Army Officers are where they are for the love
of God, and not for personal gain. There is no
personal gain in the Army. It is hard work and
little pay, and none but those whose lives are aban-
doned to the work of God would do it. There lies
its strength. Every unit is an enthusiast. The
Army is run for love, love first to God, and then
for humanity. Not a single Officer gets a large
salary. Even the highest salary would be con-
sidered small by a man of average capacity in
business. No one can stay in the Army because
of salary. If he has any brains at all he can earn
more money outside; but this is part of the secret
of its success.
The General’s Support.
It is as well to mention here that General Booth
has never received a penny from the Army. When
the organisation first took something like a definite
shape it was urged that he should receive a stated
salary. This, however, he sturdily refused, deter-
mining that he should never be a burden on it.
How he was to gain sufficient to keep his family
needs supplied, he did not know, but he determined
it should be done in some other way than through
the funds of the Army. He has, therefore, never
touched a penny of it for his own use. A few of his
friends, fearful of the privations he would undergo,
interested themselves on his behalf, and a sum of
money, about was set apart for his use
during his lifetime. At his death it reverts to the
owners. This returns the General a little over
a year, which has formed his total income.
A Wor King Creed.
The Army’s demands on the soldier are rigorous.
It believes in a clean body as well as a clean soul.
The soldier may neither drink alcohol nor smoke.
The doctrines of the Army are slight. They do
not top-hamper the organisation. Salvation by
grace is the chief one. Repentance towards God
and faith in Jesus Christ are the two main ele-
ments of its creed. It knows no sacrament as such.


The Army Officer’s whole life is his sacrament. The
natural outcome of the General’s passion for human
souls was a determination to purge the world of
social evils, and give submerged man a chance to
stand on his feet, and to get his breath again. So
General Booth drove the foundations of his organi-
sation deep and laid them strong by entering upon
the social uplift of man. There again he touched
a vital point. Precisely there had the Churches
hitherto failed. Their teaching had been lop-sided.
Churches had been magnificent, creeds extensive,
and ritual ornate j and hands had been raised to
heaven when they should have been feeling down in
the morasses for brother man floundering there.
Any institution which joins social work to spiritual
work is bound to succeed, for the two constitute
man’s whole duty. The cleansing of the individual
heart, of my own heart, the uplift of my own life,
and the most strenuous endeavour to uplift my
neighbour’s life and cleanse his heart, constitute not
my two chief duties, but my one chief duty. This
is the Army’s lesson to the Churches. The Church,
as the individual, which worships for its own sake
alone, is bound to go down. It is only by giving
that we get, by dying that we live, and it is not
only the Christian’s duty to gain salvation, but to let
his life overflow to his fellow-man. This the Arm\
has done.
Its Attitude to Social Eivils
Upon such questions as the Abolition of the
Liquor Traffic, the Evils of Gambling, and the
Social Evil, the Army speaks with no uncertain
voice. In New Zealand, during the years that have
elapsed since the Local Option battles began, the
Officers and soldiers of the Salvation Army have
been amongst the foremost in urging people to vote
“No License,” to smite the Liquor curse, and re-
move the reproach from the land. Some of m\
strongest friendships have been made with Army
Officers in New Zealand, who have fought with me
side by side in one of the finest and straightest of
battles that any country could witness.


XKe Great “Transference
Scheme.”
One of the host magnificent departments of Gene-
ral Booth’s work is his reclamation of those who by
stress of circumstances have been forced to the wall
—the poor of the great cities. It is a noble con-
ception to transfer people from congested popula-
tions to those parts of the earth that are crying out
for them. General Booth’s notion of calling the
movement “ A transference of population,” rather
than “An emigration scheme,” is a good one. The
very title given to the movement is a revelation of
its possibilities. The idea is one that some of the
new colonies might take up. Canada has shown its
wisdom in granting to the Army a large section of
land on which to plant its transferees. Granted
that the Army may make the undertaking a financial
success, it well deserves it. If, say, 100,000 acres
of land, near any of our great cities, could be
covered with a hard-working and respectable popu-
lation of some 10,000 souls, what a vast impetus
would be given to business enterprise of every kind.
With our millions of acres lying untilled in Australia,
it is little short of political madness for us to refuse
to permit the Army to carry out its schemes for
settlement on a large scale. The Army is willing
to guarantee that the class of man and woman sent
out shall be healthy in body and reputable in
character, the very type of individual who migrated
to Australia in the first instance, and who made it
what it is, the kind of person we want to populate
our vast under-populated country.
The Army’s Operations
It is impossible to give an idea of the extent of
the Army’s work. From Japan to Canada, from
Russia to Cape Colony and New Zealand the flag
of the Army waves, and its soldiers wear the cos-
tume of almost every nationality. But it will not be
amiss to give some hard business facts, which will
convey an idea of the massiveness of the organisa-
tion.
It has 18,000 Officers in active work almost all
over the world. Its Charitable Institutions include


Prison-gate and Rescue Work, Food and Shelter
Depots, Inebriates’ Homes, Boys and Girls’ Homes,
Farm Colonies, Emigration, Naval and Military
Homes, Slum Homes, Maternity Homes, Nursing
Work, Samaritan Brigades, Hospital and Benevo-
lent Visitation, Police Court, Indian Day Schools,
etc., etc.
In England and elsewhere it has Printing and
Lithographic works, employing men and women at
Trades Union prices. This department began with
the necessity for printing song-books, and now it not
only does that, but floods the world with literature
and prints its own War Cry, which, with other
periodicals, in a year reaches the enormous number
of over 4,000,000 copies.
It carries on its own Banking in England. The
necessity for this arose some years ago. Soldiers
and friends pressed the General to start the bank,
which has now grown into a promising institution
under the name of the “ Reliance Bank,” and which
does all kinds of banking and exchange business.
It composes, prints and publishes its own music
for its own musicians. The head of this department
is a converted infidel of rare musical and poetic
ability. The Army also manufactures its musical
instruments, and is one of the largest manufacturers
of brass instruments in London. Bandsmen are not
only not paid for their services, but make the re
pairs of their instruments.
The properties of the Army are enormous. In
the majority of countries where the Army works, it
does everything, buys, plans and builds, trains its
own architects and builders.
It has an Insurance Society with 2000 Agents
and Superintendents, with an annual premium ac-
count of All these things have origin-
ated as a result of the principle of self-support in
the Army. Exception is taken by some persons of
the Army’s entrance upon all these business activi-
ties, but there is no doubt that they rightly form
part of the great revolutionary movement for good
into which General Booth was led.
The Army’s profits are devoted entirely to reform
work, and no Officer is one penny-piece the better
off because of the financial success of the schemes.


And what shall be said of the institutions to be
found in every large centre for neglected and
criminal children, which always contain at least
600 children, but which are only a small part of
the huge crowd of such needy ones passing in at the
Army gates and out again to situations! What of
the Shelters where forlorn and homeless men and
women get resting places for the night and food !
What of the Homes which stand ever open for the
thousands of our fallen sisters, of whom 30,000
have been dealt with in 21 years, most of them
being permanently reclaimed; of the thousand and
one smaller agencies, which are continually at work
gathering in the derelicts from the streets ! Truly
the growth of the Army is wonderful.
The funds of the Army are administered by a
Board, and every account is subjected to the
minutest inspection. A reputable firm of account-
ants audits the books of the Army. General Booth
has always been most particular in seeing that the
financial side of the concern has been subjected to
the closest scrutiny. Associated with him in London
is a Board, which consults upon eveiy matter of
policy connected with the Army, Day and night,
ceaselessly, for the strain is never off, this central
committee, with brains keenly alert, watches every
development affecting the good of men the world
over. It keeps itself in constant communication
with every section of the Army. In every part of
the world the cables throb ceaselessly with the busi-
ness of this great army of social reform. The Army
is not a “ one man show.” Every year the organi-
sation grows larger and more effective, and it pro-
mises to become one, if not the most magnificent
factor in the great work of uplifting the fallen, and
aiding the destitute classes, of making earth more
like heaven.
Space forbids even the slightest detail regarding
this vast organisation, which is spreading all over
the world. . It is bound to succeed, for its only con-
sideration is the best interests of other people.
What a leavening influence an institution, worked by
men and women who give up their lives for the
glory of God, and love of their fellow-men, putting


aside financial gain, has, and will have, cannot be
computed in hard-and-fast mathematical terms.
The “ Army Mot Her.”
This article would not be complete without a
tribute to the character and work of the late Mrs.
Booth, or, as she is lovingly known by every Army
soldier, and by thousands of people outside the
Army, the “ Army Mother.”
Mrs. Booth, encouraged, aided and abetted her
husband in every good work. Indeed, in the best
sense of the term, she stood by his side. Together
they formulated their plans, together they made
their decisions, together they battled against oppo-
sition. A stronger and more beautiful combination
could not have been imagined. A pattern in her
home, Mrs. Booth was also a preacher of high
order. Intellectually she was a giantess. No one
can read her sermons and addresses and “ talks ”
without being impressed with the magnificence of
her intellect. To her, equally with her husband,
without doubt, the success of the Army is due. At
her death in October, 1890, the whole nation, in a
measure,. went into mourning, and the demonstra-
tion that was made at her funeral testified to the
magnificence of her life, and must be recorded in
the annals of English history as an event with a
bearing upon the life of the nation. Possibly through
her influence the Army is democratic. It practices
an absolute equality of sexes.
Communications upon any of the subjects dealt
with in this pamphlet should be addressed to the
Commissioner, 69 Bourke-street, Melbourne,


Any friend desirous of getting
extra copies of this Pamphlet can
be supplied upon application to
THE COMMISSIONER,
69 Bourke Street,
Melbourne.
T
S.A. Press.
