

AUSTRALASIAN ASSOCIATION FOR THE
ADVANCEMENT OF SCIENCE,
Hobart, Tasmania,
JANUARY 8, 1892.
PROCEEDINGS OF SECTIONS.
Section G.
Anthropology.
5. —SOME NOTES ON THE TANNESE.
REV. WM. GRAY.
noosLj




Section
S.—SOME NOTES ON THE TANNESE.
By REV. WM. GRAY.
Tanna, so named by Capt. Cook, is an island of the southern
New Hebrides. It is about 45 miles in circumference, and
contains now not less than 8000 inhabitants. So far as it is
known it must have been always one of the most densely
populated islands of the group. It is of volcanic origin.
There is in it a central range running with the island from
S.E. to N.W, nearly, with lower land, but very little plain
along the shore. The hills at the south end are probably
3000 feet high, and have the appearance of being the product
of volcanoes. Everywhere on the south end and eastern
side one finds hills composed of scoriae, now completely over-
grown with vegetation. Here and there streams of lava have
been poured out and afterwards covered with scoriae. But
most of the hills seemed to have been raised by such an
ejection of pulverised lava, as is now going on at the active
crater on Tanna. At the north end of the island the soil
seems to be the product of aqueous sediment. Along part
of the east coast, round the north end, and down the west
coast, the coral reefs have been raised in past ages. On the
west coast coral terraces are seen more than 100 feet above
sea level. We find nothing of this kind on the eastern side
of Tanna. But on the little islet of Aniwa (about 12 miles
E N.E. from the north end of Tanna, and about 15 miles
N.N.E. from the crater) we find the same kind of thing.
On the south of Erromanga, an island separated from the
north end of Tanna by a strait, fully 20 miles wide, six or
seven coral terraces may be counted, probably marking
successive elevations. These terraces are found about 800
feet above sea level on the south end of Erromanga. The
Aniwans have a tradition that Aniwa was connected with the
south end of Tanna, and there are traditions of a volcano,
probably a mud volcano' on Aniwa. At Port Kesolution, so
named by Capt. Cook, the harbour has been completely
destroyed by successive upheavals on the side next the crater,
which is about five miles distant.
With regard to the crater, now about 1100 or 1200 feet*
high, I need say little. The “ lake of fire ” seen by the party


that visited the crater on June 27th (1890) with Professor
Drummond, had entirely disappeared when I visited the
crater again on August Bth following. On July 26th there
was a severe earthquake shock felt throughout the whole
group (and perhaps a day or two earlier throughout the
Australian colonies). On August 7th, the day before my
visit, there Avas also a severe shock. When I visited the
crater next day, I found that the ledge of ground on which
Professor Drummond’s party stood to be photographed, and
where the professor narrowly escaped a blow from an ejected
lump of lava, had fallen right into the crater and had filled
up the “ lake of fire." But the pent-up fire had forced its
w r ay through thousands of tons of stuff’ and made an active
vent. The remaining portion of the ledge showed a suspicious
looking rent, making it apparent that another landslip would
soon occur.
The inhabitants of Tanna present a type of feature that
is distinctly Tannese, but difficult to analyse. Men in their
state of nature wear no clothing. All males are circumcised
between the age of five and eight. After that ceremony a
belt is worn. Part of the ceremony of circumcision consists
in teaching the lad how to use his belt. Any string or rattan
will do for a belt, but the belt proper is made from the bark
of trees and is sometimes ornamented. Males as w r ell as
females wear earrings and beads and other ornaments
suspended round the neck. Jade is highly prized for this
purpose. Youths and men divide the hair of the head, which
is generally crisp and curly, into locks about the size of a
number 14 wire nail (or an ordinary bodkin). These are
served with thin bands of the inner bark of a root much as
a sailor serves a rope, beginning at the root of the lock of
hair. As the hair grows, the serving is extended. In a good
head of hair, which makes a Tanna man remind one of
Assyrian figures, there are 700 or 800 such locks. This
practice does not extend beyond Aniwa, Futuna, and
Anietyum. Young girls wear a little double apron, made of
grass and other material. As the girl grows this apron is
enlarged till it becomes the complete skirt of the matron.
Certain occupations are the work of females, others of males.
The range of articles of food is considerable, but the natives
are chiefly non-flesh-eaters. It is mostly on high occasions
that they indulge in flesh as an article of diet, fish excepted,
which they eat when procurable.
Two dialects of the language spoken on Tanna have been


reduced to writing. The Kwamera dialect is spoken on the
south end of Tanna by at least 2000 people. It is expected
that an edition of the New Testament, through the long
labours of Mr. and Mrs. Watt, will be issued in this dialect
by the Bible Society of Scotland, about the end of this year,
1891. Other portions of scripture, with hymn book and
catechism in that dialect, have been printed by Mr. Watt
himself on a small press given to liira by the Glasgow
Foundry Boys’ Religious Society. The Weasisi dialect is
spoken by quite as many people on the east coast cfTanna to
the north of the volcano. The difference between these two
dialect is so great that one native does not understand the
other unless they know both dialects. A primer with
catechism and hymns, and a portion of Johns Gospel, have
been printed in the Weasisi dialect. Other portions of
scripture are preparing for the press, and a grammar and
vocabulary will shortly be in the hands of Melbourne printers.
These are to form part of a larger philological work by the
Rev. D. Macdonald, of Havannah Harbour. On the north
end of Tanna there exists another dialect, but not differing
widely from that of Weasisi. On the west coast of lanna,
opposite the Weasisi district, another extensive dialect is met
with, that might be described as a cross between the
Kwamera and Weasisi dialects, yet having characteristics of
it’s own. Between this west dialect and the Kwamera
dialect there are known to be at least four dialectic variations.
The language of Tanna is now taking up many foreign
words, chiefly English, which are invariably mispronounced.
Strange English words are often used as names, but so
corrupted are these one does not readily recognise them.
One hardly expects to discover “dinner” in Jina, “spade”
in Supeka, “ Punch ” in Finis, or “ snider ” in nairus.
Tanna is divided into a number of districts, each of which
has a name, reminding one of familiar tribal divisions of the
Holy Land. The people of these districts are wrongly called
tribes. The names of districts, so far as I know, are descrip-
tive of the district to which it is given, or of some feature in
it. The people living in such a district are called by the
name of the district, whatever the origin of the people. The
people here are the Nuraaragusimini, the people in the
district south of us are called the Numakasarumini. Numa
is about equal to the open field ,* gusi and kasuru are the
descriptive parts of the above names; mini is probably a
plural termination. In such a district families are to be


found who claim a spot in far distant districts as their native
place. Still the people in a district are in a strict sense, and
according to native idea, one people, though they have no
common chief. In such a district there are smaller divisions
indicated by the proximity of villages, or in a still smaller
division by the proximity of families. The distinguishing
feature of these smaller divisions is the use of a common
Imeiurn, or public square, the ayopa of the Greeks, the
forum, of the Romans, the gate and street of the Old Testa-
ment, the market place of the JNew, our own Assembly or
Town Hall. Literally the name means club-house , probably
from the past custom of keeping clubs there for use or
emergencies. There are scores of Imeiums in a single
district, many of which are now never or seldom used. At
the Imeiurn, the men generally eat their evening meal; there
always they drink their kava unseen by females; there the
councils are held and festivals celebrated. Where there is an
Imeiurn for a people, they have a chief.
There are two great divisions of the people which, to a large
extent, are geographical. These are known as the Num-
rikwenirnin and the Kauyameramin. The people living on
the south end and along part of the east coast of Tanna are
the Numrikwennimm. The Kauyameramin occupy the
opposite side of Tanna. Kauyamera is the name of a very
small black bird (possibly a humming bird) with bright
scarlet breast and long slender curved beak. It is connected
with the myth about Terarasamus and Matiktiki. The
explanation given of this name in connection with the division
of the people is, that the Kauyameramin decorate their faces
and bodies with red paint. The Numrikwen are not
supposed to use red paint for this purpose. The termination
mera means blood or bloody. Kuu is a root found in the names
of other birds, as kauyamit, “the owl.” I have been able to
get no explanation of Numrikwen. I should say that in
times of peace Kauyamera people are found living among
the Numrikwen. But all are afraid to go into one another’s
districts unless there are friends whose protection can be
claimed.
There is still another division which takes no account of
districts or the division just given. The people living on the
coast all round the island are Kwatahrenimin those inland
are the Nieli Asol/min, the people who make big feasts, or
Numatakeiyiv . These are undoubtedly names of division, like
our rustic. The exact meaning of Kwutuhren Ido not know,


but the idea it expresses when applied by the inland people
to the littoral inhabitants is, “ those fellows down below.
Nieli Asoltmin get their name from the high price they set
on their things. For a very small yam they expect a large
pig. All their sprats are mackerel in fact. The meaning
of Numatakeiyiv I do not know, except that it is one of
derision. A similar term to the above in pigeon English is
“ man bush.” Hence, a person who does a thing in awkward
manner is a “man bush.”
These divisions are of importance in matters of war. Ihe
Kwatahren and Numatakeiyiv are divisions that do not count
in war. The others all do. War may exist between two
villages in the same district, or between the people of one
district and that of another district, or the people of several
districts may be united in carrying on war against a single
district or several united districts. Still these are all called
small wars, and the indignities of cannibalism are not
perpetrated on the fallen foe. But a war between the
Numrikwen and the Kauyamera is a great war, the Crimea
of the Tannese. Then cannibalism is practised. One district
of the Numrikwen may be at war with another district of
the Numrikwen, yet both would carry on war against the
Kauyamera. In all wars it is life for life. But in the great
war it is any man of the Kauyamera for one killed in the
Numrikwen. If a man at the south end of the Kauyamera
region kills a N umrikwen the life of a man at the north end
will do to pay for him.
The instruments of war were various kinds of heavy clubs,
spears, the kanivah (the handstone of the Greeks), and bows
and arrows. Now these are all supplanted by the white
man’s musket of infinite variety of pattern and age, from the
flint lock to the Tower V.R. Snider. Some of these guns
that have come into my hands are almost as old as the
century, some of them are newest patterns made specially
for our island traders to sell at a large profit, and that collapse
before the native dupe has finished proving the superiority of
his new and hard-earned treasure. In the old pre-musket
days there were well recognised war tactics; now there is
but the one tactic of “ pot-shooting.”
It is at least a careless way of speaking to say that a
Tanna man is never happy except when fighting. That is
just the time when he is not happy. Rumour of war fills the
Tannese with unspeakable dread. The great wars are now
practically a thing of the past, and even the small wars are


diminishing. Mission influence is such that a missionary can
persuade his people to make peace. The Tannese themselves,
who really hate war, recognise the benefit of peace.
We come now to the religion of “ Man Tanna.” One
might visit every conceivable place on Tanna and not see
stone or stock that he would take to be an idol. Nor would
he see a temple of any kind nor hear a prayer. Are Tannese
then without a religion ? No. The Athenians in Paul’s day
were not more religious than our Tannese now. There is no
act of life that is not some way religious, from the birth to
the burial. But you must know Tannese in order to get an
idea of their religion.
Tannese have nothing that can rightly be called idols.
They have stones that some call idols. But our idea of an
idol is definite. The so-called idol stones of the Tannese
contain spirits. It is these spirits, not the stones, that are
served.
But to get an idea of what a Tanna man’s religion is we
must state the underlying principles of his faith. These are:—
1. Belief in the immortality of the human soul. Death
ends a great deal, but it does not end all. The spirits of the
dead hold intercourse with their friends on earth. A man
makes a house in his plantation, large enough to shelter a cat,
puts food there broken small, and asks his departed father to
come and make the things in his plantation to grow well. A
person does not dread the spirit of his friend, but he does fear
the spirit of an enemy.
2. Belief in Hades, called Ipwai. The entrance to it is in
the north end of Tanna in a cave. The spirits of the dead
go there, when is not certain. It is a sort of fairy land not
unlike this life.
3. Belief in one supreme divinity called Uhgen. It is not
however certain that Uhgen is a being. It is clearly the
supernatural power that is behind all things. A watch, a gun
lock, even a stone wall that a missionary will build, is nadi
man Uhgen, a thing made by God. The native mind does
not think of more than one Uhgen. But Uhgen com-
prehends the great supernatural power or powers for that
matter, conceived of as a unity, behind all things, and is
benevolent. But beyond that the native mind has not
reasoned out what his character is.
4. Belief that Uhgen has spoken to man. This is the key
to the understanding of a Tanna man’s religion. Ask about
any natural feature, the answer is “ Uhgen put it there.”


Ask who gave names to the Imaiums, “ Uhgen did.” Ask
about the origin of* any custom, “ Uhgen gave it to our fore-
fathers long ago.” Above all; where do Tannese get their
sacred stones? The answer is, “ Uhgen gave them to our
forefathers long ago.” But ask who makes bread-fruit, fish,
yams, rain, wind, sunshine, the answer is, “ Such and such a
man.” How does he do it? “Uhgen gave this power to
certain of our ancestors long ago.” In short, Ughen made
the world and committed, what we call Providence, to certain
men. On the caprice of these, their fellow men must depend.
It is these fellows that do all the mischief in human life.
5. We come now to consider the tools by means of which
these men, to w T hom the Providence of the world is committed,
execute their trust. The outward forms of these tools are
the “stone idols” for the most part. These are called
nauvetimin literally, perhaps, the lumps. The Tannese have
“ lumps ” for doing everything in the whole universe of
heaven and earth. There are some supernatural powers
possessed by the Tannese which do not require the aid of
“ lumps.” It was Uhgen that showed the ancients how to do
these things. This knowledge is strictly a revelation from
Uhgen. This knowledge consists of: —
1. Things that are Talismanic. There are certain stones
handled or carried about the person when engaged in war.
This will bring the enemy within range. There is a process
of capturing a butterfly which is an indication that the person
is to go to war and will be victorious. A small piece of wood
carried on the person will render him invisible to others while
he can see them. And so on ad infinitum.
2. Tubahans, what is now known as taboo. These are
without number, and most useful amongst a people who have
no courts of justice. The rule is, steal whatever you can
without it being found out. But a tiibahan is a more effective
barrier to petty thieving than the penalties of any police
courts. “ Thbahans ” are generally used to prevent cocoa-
nuts being taken (by stealth or) before a certain time. And
so with other things. The process is more or less this. Some
reeds are cut close to the root. The leaves are pinched off.
A certain leaf, known to the “ tubahaner,” is taken and the
prepared reeds rubbed with it. Some of the leaf so used is
put in a cocoa-nut shell and buried in the ground. Around
this spot some of the dressed reeds are set up stuck in the
earth, the tops tied together, and one cocoa-nut or more
suspended from the tie. This is called the root of the tiibahan.


The rest of the reeds are taken away to be used. These are
stuck in the earth wherever wanted. To every such tubahan
a penalty is attached, and no man will touch a thing so
tabooed.
The penalties, self-inflicted, vary with the “ tubahan.’’
The penalty may be wasting of a person’s limb or of the
whole body, boils, ulcers, ringworm, sore eyes, plagues of
gnats, flies, lice, toothache, pains and aches of all kinds—in
short, all the ills that flesh is heir to. The person who can
make a “ tubahan ” can also cure its evil, should another
happen in some way to transgress a “tubahan.” He can
cure either his own “ tubahan ” or the same “ tubahart ” set
by another person. If, the natives say, a “tubahan” sick-
ness be neglected, it will result in death. But what is usually
done is this—if a person has something wrong with him, a
“ tubahaner ” is consulted ; if he tries to remove the evil
and fails, the conclusion is that it is some other “tubahan.”
A succession of “ tubahaners ” may try and fail. Then the
conclusion is that it must be some foreign disease that no one
knows how to cure. If the sickness goes on, and death
ensues, the conclusion is that it was Nuruk, of which we
will speak presently. The points to notice are these :
(1) “ Tubahans” are the vehicles through which spirits
work. (2) No disease is therefore regarded as having a
physical cause. Though remedies are used they are used to
expel or appease the spirit causing the sickness or pain.
(3) The penalties for transgressing “tubahans” are all minor
diseases. I must add now, what 1 should have said earlier,
“Lumps” are sometimes used in making “tubahans,” but
they are mostly made without.
3. Nauveti nadi is a general term for the stones used in
producing influence in nature. But there are special stones
for doing particular things. Nauveti null for making yam ;
and special kinds of yams have their own stones. So with
wind, rain, sunshine, fish, turtle, and all kinds of natural
produce. The ceremonies connected with these probably
vary ; what they are we know very little. Space will not
permit us giving an instance of which we learned something
of their use.
4. Nauveti Nuruk is the prince of “lumps,” for it con-
tains the power of life and death. Recently a set of Nuruk
stones were dug up by a trader here, and given to me. The
large stone is called the body of the Nuruk. It resembles a
man sitting with his head drooping over his chest, just as a


weary sick man would sit. Its length is 8 in., and measures
about 11 in. in circumference. It weighs 4 lbs. It is a black
recent-volcanic stone of irregular structure. Some parts
being dense, others almost scoriaceous, and embracing little
black nodules of denser grain. The little stones are called
the children of the big stone. 4 is a black stone of fairly
close texture, 2in. long, Hin. high, and 1 in. wide, and
sufficiently like a person’s foot to be spoken of as the foot.
5 and (1 are almost alike, 2 in. long, nearly 3 in. in circum-
ference, and are recognised as representing members of the
human body. 7is a bard black stone, 1 £ in. long, thicker at
one end than the other, and is thought to represent the
knee end of the human femur. The four little stones are
minor Nuruks, capable of producing continued indisposition,
but not death. So much for the Nauveti Nuriik ; now for
their use and power.
I must say here that those stones are all the habitats of
spirits (I speak now after the manner of Tannese), and they
are in the possession of certain persons who are termed
yolnuruk, a nuruker. But he has no power over any one
until some thing that has touched or come from the body of
that person is brought to him. For this purpose the part of
a man’s food, his belt or garment, can be used. In fact a
stick he has had in his hand, a stone on which he has sat
may be scraped, and the scrapings taken to burn as Nuruk.
An unused part of a stick of tobacco is a common thing to
take. This is called taking the foot of a person.
Once taken there are regular Nuriik carriers, who, while
they are carrying the foot, will never cross fresh water.
That would render the foot useless. Hence, if a thing can
be washed, it is proof against Nuruk. The first Nuruk
carrier passes the foot on from carrier to carrier so that the
original taker may not be known. In this way it may be
carried far afield. And to make sure that the person’s death
be accomplished, the thing taken may be divided, one part
given to one “ yolnuruk ” and one to another.
There is some obscurity about the meaning of the term.
In this dialect numa nuruk is a dead leaf fallen from a tree.
In Kwamera dialect the word is nahak. In the west dialect
it is netuk. Tisei is the term used of the “ nuruker ” putting
the thing in the fire. Teserik itami is to burn a person's
nuruk. And the word for a scorpion is yeserik. These
words are evidently from two roots, cs and erik. That erik
and nelhki (foot) are from the same root may be fairly


assumed. Yet the form may be accidental; teles
nelhhi tami may not mean “he takes a person’s foot, but,
“he takes a person’s nuruk.” The scorpion’s tail is like a
nurilk when ready for burning. The word nuruk in some
of its meanings might be translated refuse.
When the “ refuse ” is put into the hands of the “ nuruker
he is told whose it is, and instructions are given to him as to
the length of illness wished. He now takes certain leaves,
known *to him only, and breaks these very small, and in the
same way the refuse. Then all are thoroughly mixed, as
cookery books tell us. The Nuruk stone is now rubbed with
this and transferred to a basket just above the fire. Ihe
prepared “ refuse ” is put in leaves and tied in shape like a
roily-poly pudding. The length depends on the duration of
the sickness. One end is put in the fire and the nurukei
watches it day and night. If it is burning too quickly, he
withdraws it. He may even take it out for a day or two to
oive his victim respite or time to go and search for his Nuruk ;
for when the Niiruk is not burning he may recover some-
what. The instant the Nuruk is all consumed, the victim s
sickness proves fatal. . wl
The object of taking a person’s N urilk vanes. AJM uruk-
burner mav covet the pig or gun of another man. He gets
his “ refuse ” taken, and then takes care that his victim shall
know it. The price of taking the Nuruk out of the fire is
the coveted article, which is given. Some one may simply
wish to torment a man, and he takes his Nuruk. In othei
cases a victim’s death is desired; then it is not easy to trace
the Nuruk For weeks the matter may be talked about
and no end of stuff paid to trace the Nuruk. When traced
sometimes the Nuruk is brought back to the victim, but
generally the Nuruker’s word is taken. He says what the
“ refuse ” was, and the victim is able to remember where it
could have been got; and so water is poured on tthe fire
and the victim recovers. A Nuruk stone may produce any
form of fatal disease, rarely, if ever, a single disease.
It is unusual to assume that everything connected with
Niiruk is a disception. Nothing can be farther from the
truth. The Nuruker believes in his own power, and so their
people. There is no scepticism amongst Tannese on any
religious matter : scepticism is a parasite of the Gospel. A
Tannese never thinks of deception being practised in these
matters. If a Niiruker says a man’s Nuruk has been taken,
he is able to present satisfactory evidence of its truth.


Indeed deception is not possible. If a man said lie had taken
someone’s IS firuk when lie had not done so, purely with hope
of getting pay, he could no more keep the secret to himself
than our proverbial woman. To tell another would be to
tell the man himself.
The coincidence between the burning of Nuruk and the
state of the victim is astonishing. A man’s Nuruk is taken
and he falls ill ;it is recovered, and he recovers. A man falls
ill without knowing that his Nuruk has been taken; search is
made for it; when found he recovers. So constant is this
that no native mind can resist the conclusion of their being
a direct and objective connection. And even men with minds
better trained than the unsophisticated native mind have
been unable to resist drawing the inference the natives draw.
Good intelligent Christians accept evidence of direct answers
to prayer Jess satisfactory and conclusive than that presented
in cases of Nuruk. One has to approach such evidence in
an immovable belief that there is no such connection between
the victim and his Nuruk before he can reject the evidence
that there is such a connection. Ido not affirm that there is
such a connection, but I do maintain that we must have
something more satisfactory than the stock explanations of
mental reflex action and imposture. Reflex action through
the mind there is; imposture lam well convinced there is
not.
Every Nuruk stone has a name. One is known as
Kasamkaseivia, other Kalaplaben (night or blackness),
Tagirakau (said to be a very powerful one, and one that
“peeps” when separated from its little stones), Numanii-
liluhuasul, and Kusasiva. The name of my Nuruk stones
has not been recovered. These stones are not at present in
the hands of a class, but every Nuruker is a chief, because
he is a Nuruker. He may also be a governing chief. These
supernatural’powers are widely distributed. One man is a
Nuruker, another makes rain, another fish, and so on.
Women sometimes are “ tubahaners.” The knowledge of
these things is handed down from father to son. The owner
of the Nuruk stones now in my possession died suddenly, with-
out a successor; hence, it was not known where they were
buried, till unearthed accidentally, and hence, the loss of the
name at present. Natives to whom 1 have shown these stones
shudder with terror at beholding them. All Nuruk stones
are not equally powerful. There is uncertainty in the native
mind as to the sex of these Nuruk stones, or rather the in-


dwelling spirits. Natives are of the opinion that they aie
male gender. Yet they feel that there must be something of
the female about them. They bring forth Nuruk stones.
The terms used to describe tlie burning of the Nuiuk suggest
that the stones or spirits are feminine. But I suspect that the
idea of sex does not apply to superhuman beings. They are
not limited as human beings are. A monster that can nsli
up a <>Teat island out of the sea can weather a storm, in
which sky and sea are mingled, in a frail bamboo canoe a
few inches long. So it is with sex as applied to superhuman
beings. To the belief in these we now turn.
5. Belief in superhuman beings. It is common to speak
of these as gods. To my thinking this is a mistake and
altogether misleading : they are human monsters possessing
superhuman attributes. They are the Noahs and Samsons
of the Bible run to unlimited extravagance. Ihey are the
heroes of Homer and Virgil. Diomede is said to have
u < # # , Seized in his grasp a hand-stone
A huge affair, which no two men could carry,
Such at least as mortals are now
— II. v. 302.
This exactly describes the feats of these ancient “ heroes of
our Tannese. These “ heroes ’* are not all of equal importance
Some of them are quite local such as Nupua, the ancestor of
the Numanagusimini, and Doligia the ancestor o tic
Nuraakasaruraini. Others again are not so local; such as
Karapanumei, who is known on Aneityum as Lnhujeraig
Still less local is Matikitki, known on Aneityum, iutuna, and
Aniwa. Indeed he is a character known throughout the
Pacific. We give below a tradition of Matikitki’s feats set
over against a local hero of Tanna, Teramsamus. It is
doubtful if the Tannese ever paid worship to these beings.
They certainly do not do so now r . . . ,
The story of Teramsamus and Matiktiki is given m the
Kwamera dialect, and taken down by Mrs. Watt from the
mouths of natives, who spend hours in the evenings reciting
such stories as these, which they there call kwananget. Hie
following is a fairly literal translation for which 1 am
responsible. I should observe that the present tense is used
as an historic past: — . . ,
“Teramsamus, having eaten all the inhabitants, goes and
looks for black people, eats them, then looks for white people
(this does not mean Europeans) and takes them and throws
them into a hole of a rock and shuts them up, and says to


thorn, that they are to wait for him till ho goes and makes
nikasi neri for their food. They remained in the cave and
sang and danced.
“ Matiktiki goes past and knows that lie hears dancing. He
says, ‘ Ho! Who are you?’ They dance, but say, ‘We
here.’ But he says, ‘ You are who?’ But they say, ‘We
here, our ancestor goes to make nikasi ner'i for our food.’
But he says, ‘ They say he goes to make nikasi neri for your
food, whereas he kills you and goes to make niparara with you.’
[Note: they in the cave understood Terarnsamus had gone to
get taro (neri) to prepare us food for them. Terarnsamus
intended they should so understand him, hut his real intention
was to get taro to cook along with them to take up the
flavour of the meat, just as we cook Yorkshire pudding].
But one says, ‘ Alas my father-in-law ! ’ But another says,
‘ Alas my father ! ’ Matiktiki stands and holds a fufau (a
white stone axe used for cutting out canoes) and breaks in
pieces the rock(?). They came out and, going up, ran until
they came to a place and saw a row of fish shorewards. They
ate and leave none of Terarnsamus food.
“ Terarnsamus ran and ran and cleans nikasi neri and goes
back to the hole of the rock and sees they are gone. But
says, ‘ . . . (bad language). I have spoilt all my
food ! ’ He runs and runs holding his head down westward
and feels it cold ; he runs eastward till he feels it hot; he
runs and eats his fish.
“ Matiktiki and the children (the fellows out of the cave)
run and feel they are tired (?) and look up and see a makopo,
(a variety of breadfruit) hanging. They go up and pidl out
its core and the children go in and fill up the space (a hole
six inches long and one and half inch diameter). Matiktiki
sits on tlie edge of the cave hole and puts in again the core.
“ Terarnsamus runs and runs and feels hunger biting him
greatly and looks up at that makopo and sees it hanging, says,
‘Let me pluck the makopo and cook and eat it and be
satisfied and search for my food ’ (the people who had escaped
from the cave). He goes and takes wood and heaps it
together and climbs and plucks the makopo and comes down
and lays on the fire and cooks it. The youngsters feel the
steam, which is killing them. Matiktiki says (telling them
what to do. The youngsters do his bidding) and the fire
goes out. Terarnsamus takes away the breadfruit and lays it
down and goes and looks again for wood. They pull out the
pore and come out and put the core in again and run and run


and look np at a she-oak tree and see it standing inland they
run inland (?). Matiktiki says, ‘Hasten for the she-oak.’
They hasten and hasten and come just there below. Climb-
ing - up it they.go all to the top. ]Vl'atik(iki has already seated
himself in the fork of the tree.
“Teramsamus looks for them, and was going hither and
thither, and goes up and looks down into a pool of water.
Matiktiki tosses frequently his crest of feathers. Teramsamus
(seeing Matiktiki reflected in the' pool) springs down and
splashes in the water-hole and comes up and was standing.
Matiktiki says, ‘Youngsters! laugh.’ The youngsters
laugh and say, ‘Hoe! What are you doing there after
having ran hither and thither ?’ He says, ‘ Alas! My
children. How do they make it to go there?’ They say,
‘ We went on the palms of our hands.’ He goes there on
his hands and splits them, and says ‘Alas I have split and
spoilt my hands. How do you always do it? 1 hey saj ,
‘We went on the soles of our feet.’ (The same thing befel
his feet, his head, and his knees). Matiktiki says 5> ‘We
Avent on this thing,’ and lets down a small rope to which lie
hangs on and goes up and cannot make the fork of the tree,
says, ‘ Alas my food ! You do tease me. Matiktiki takes
a fufau and cuts in two the small rope, and he falls down and
strikes on the ground.
“ They send forth a black dove ;it goes and shouts into Ins
ear, and finds that he lies and is silent. They send a bronze-
wing dove, and it wails and finds that he lies and is silent.
They send a miahi (an ant whose bite is very painful) ;it bites
him and sees that he lies and is silent. They a
kauyameta (see divisions of 1 anna; a small black bird
Avhose red breast is thus accounted for) ;it goes and stoops
and passes right through the body. 1 hey see blood stains on it.
They exclaim, ‘He is dead verily !' They come down and
go and behold, Matiktiki takes a bamboo fishing-rod (from
which he makes a knife) that he may lance the body. One
by one they rise till every one who had been eaten all came
to life.”
I had intended to give a native song and some information
respecting names of moons, winds, and so on. Also a list of
the names of relatives and the laws regulating marriage.
These have special interest for the hints they give and the
light they throiv on the interpretation of the Bible : but 1
must forbear,


1. Circumcision. —This is performed on boys after they
are five years of age, but generally before the boy readies
his teens. The boy must be old enough to be easily con-
trolled, but if it has not been circumcised early, no age would
exempt liirn. So universal is the rite that no male escapes
circumcision. Ido not know of any legend as to the origin
on Tanna. The objects in view are various. It is thought
to make a man fruitful. It makes the boy a real Tannaman,
and a man in the same sense as Latin vir. Only certain
persons can perform the rite.' A man who can circumcise
may have to be brought from a considerable distance. A
temporary house is made in some secluded spot near the sea,
preferably for the sake of the bathing. A single boy may be
done, but generally boys are kept until several can be done
at one time, generally about March, The operator holds
the penis with a leaf of grass put round the glans, the fore-
skin is divided on top lengthwise. The foreskin is then cut
down each side of penis so as to leave a wing of skin each
side. This appears to be gathered under the penis, where,
after it is healed, it forms a lump nearly as large as the gland
of the penis. The larger the operation, the more of a man
does it make the boy. There is a small feast when this is
done, and the boys are kept in an enclosure. The details
vary during this confinement. The men of the village keep
about the place, but two or three virgin youths are told off
to attend to the boys. Their food is prepared by a virgin
girl. The boys get flesh of no kind during their confinement.
The food is eaten by the boys in perfect silence. If a boy
were to speak, then his food would be taken from him and
thrown away. 1 have seen the boys feeding in separate
stalls. The boys are taught to put on the belt and tie up the
penis. Strips of cloth, or leaves, or grass even, are taken and
made into a bundle about as thick as a boy’s wrist and about
eight inches long. That is, the strips of cloth are laid side
by side. A cord, generally made of cocoa-nut fibre, is used
to bind these together. Beginning at one end—the top —
the cord is wound round the bundle of strips of cloth. When
about half wound the penis is inserted in the free end of the
bundle, and the winding completed. The belt is then put on so
as to hold the whole against the lower part of the belly. To
void urine, and to bathe, this bundle has to be untied (about
half way) and taken off. When once these ceremonies are
over, it would be a shame and disgrace to let anyone see
the penis. The boys are kept in confinement till the penis


completely heals, which it generally does in about a month ; at
least that is the normal length of confinement. If the wound
does not heal, as sometimes happens, there is a farther
detention; when once healed the boy is ready to come out.
But should it happen, through bad weather or anything else,
that the things desired for the final feast cannot be got, the
boys will be kept in until these can be got. There is a feast
when they are brought out. If the father or guardian of a
boy is so minded he can make the feast a very important
one. I have had the exceptional opportunity of examining
two subjects. Circumcision as here practised is no safeguard
against disease. The knob below the penis is of service for
suspending it with the belt, but it must be more or less an
obstacle in cohition. I should mention that the boys are
taken out of the enclosure daily to bathe in the sea. While
this is being done conchs are blown to warn off females, who
must not see these boys at this time; and, generally the
night before the final feast, the blowing of conchs is kept up
nearly the whole night. There is no single term for circum-
cision in our dialect of Tanna. Kos nitum (nitum is name
of penis wrapper), “ one takes the nitum, ’ is a common
expression ; others are —kahngipen tatamehli noa manpanga,
“shut up to lie within the manpanga;” tawal, “he feeds on
pudding,”—probably having reference to the mode of cooking
the food for the boys. On Aneityum, Futuna, and Aniwa
the practice was the same as now on Tanna; but on
Eoromanga the practice differs. There the rite is delayed
till manhood is reached. Then it is a matter of individual
choice, an exhibition of heroism, and a challenge of purity.
An operation is performed on girls w'hen very young, but
its exact nature 1 do not know. It is supposed to make
coition easier, and in the case of common prostitution, where
a woman must receive scores in a day, it is supposed to make
coition tolerable.
2. Kava. —The plant, so far as I know, is the one well known.
Only the root part is used. I have seen a kava root —
that is, the whole bunch plucked up —which would be a good
lift for four men. It is an article of great value here. About
an hour before sunset preparations are made to get the kava
ready. The root of kava is divided into pieces about the size
of a large mutton chop. Each man takes a piece and care-
fully brushes off all earth sticking to the root; then each
man chews his share until it is completely saturated with


saliva, and the fibres severed. This is put into a small wooden
trough, A virgin boy (the bands of a married man are
regarded as perpetually unclean, and no female must see a
man drinking bis kava) pours water over the mass, and mixes
all with his band, squeezing it through his fingers for a time.
Then he dips into the liquid a bunch of fibre such as is used
for making cordage. This soaks up the liquid, which is wrung
into a cup made with fresh banana leaf. This cup is made
by gathering the sides into both hands just as one would
make a pouch with a handkerchief. As there are still some
fibres in the liquid, these are got rid of by drinking it through
a tube, made of the new unrolled banana leaf, just as boys
drink through a straw. A person drinks about two cupfuls
(20 oz.) at a time. The first washing of the marc in one
trough will give three such drinks. Water is again added
and enough made for three more m6n. When this liquid is
exhausted, the dry powdery marc is thrown out, the trough
put in the house, and the bundle of fibre hung up to dry.
Each individual, when drinking, stands a little apart and yells.
Each man has his own peculiar shout. A chief here has
taken to imitating the whistle of the A.U.S.IN. Company’s
steamer “ Truganini.” Then each man sits down to eat his
evening meal. The Tannese like to drink their kava just as
the sun sinks out of sight. After the kava has been drunk,
all conversation ceases on the part of the drinkers. Those
who have not taken any, speak to one another in wdiispers
and laugh, often’ at the antics of the “ drunks,” under their
breath. Women are excluded from the public square. The
pungent taste and stringent effect of the kava cause incessant
spitting for the first hour after drinking it, A man will sit
on a log with a large pudding in his hand, staring into vacancy,
slowdy striving to eat an enormous mouthful of food. He
will give two chews and then pause, much as a horse will
cease eating to listen. Then he goes at it again—two chews
and a pause. At last the whole goes down with a gulp, and
he expectorates straight out with a vengeance that would heat
the proverbial Yankee hollow. The expectorating is done
with a whish peculiarly its own. The effect on an onlooker
is peculiar. A still evening settling into the gloom of night;
half a dozen privileged youths bursting with fun ; a dozen or
more men sitting round a fire looking at one another without
seeing one another; the gulp of deglutition and the whish of
expectoration that seems to come in between the chirps of
innumerable crickets. In the rnidst of one such scene a


violent earthquake made the eartli heave and the trees sway
to and fro.
The effect on individuals depends on the quality of the
kavaf-root, the strength and quantity of the potion, and the
idiosyncrasies of the individual. Chewing the root paralyses
the sense of taste and feeling in the tongue. If the dose has
been sufficient (I speak from observation and enquiry—my
experience has never extended beyond chewing a bit of small
root), the eyes soon become affected and things go round, as
natives say. The speech becomes slow and thick ; the legs
are partly paralysed; the gait is irregular, very much like
the steps of a landsman newly on board a ship pitching in a
heavy sea. The effect lasts for some hours, but gradually
subsides. The power of kava can be very much increased
by the addition of leaves, flowers, &c. of other plants. An
almost powerless draught of kava can be so intensified to
produce something equivalent to the delirium of our
“drunks.” When a man has “got ’em badly,” he has to be
thrashed into his senses, and has for days thereafter a violent
headache. I once had to do with an English trader who was
thus drugged. Pie had been boasting that the kava had no
effect on him. So the natives added the leaf of a plant
imported to Tanna, and then gathered to see the “ fun.” The
man nearly tore the house down and saw “ snakes” all night.
It took him several days to recover. The flower of the rose
apple is also used in kava to intensify its effects, and there
are other plants so used.
So far as I can gather, the use of kava never produces an
effect similar to the craving for drink. No man would ever
think of touching kava till the evening hour. Anyone can
give up its use at will. The drinking of it is a sort of
sentiment—a thing a good Tannaman ought to do. Natives
have compared it to our use of tea, and have said they feel
weak without, and strong with, kava. There are doubtless
religious beliefs connected with its use. Perhaps they have
the idea that drinking kava protects them from the influence
of evil during the darkness. I have not yet found traditions
of its introduction to Tanna. In any case that must have
taken place long since. The use of kava is referred to in
ancient folk-lore and songs.
3. War I wish to revise my reference to war in another
part of this paper. What is stated there was true at the time
that it was written; but later experience has taught me a


few things that did not present themselves to me before :
(1) There is, I believe, a necessity for war in the conditions
of the life of these people. Human nature is just human
nature, and wrongs must arise. Indeed, it is not the sense
of right and justice, but fear and sentiment, that keep down
wrong. And when wrongs do arise, as they must, how are
they to be adjusted? War is the only thing that can adjust
them by satisfying the public conscience. Compare David’s
legacy to Solomon, 1 Kings, ii. 5-9. (2) The victory depends
almost wholly on the falling of chiefs. Recently a chief was
shot, and in 24 hours after hundreds of people fled from their
homes, and chief after chief went over to the enemies of the
people of the fallen chief, on whose (the chief’s) side they
had been till he was shot. (3) In such a case the separating
of the people is absolute. Thei’e is no longer any hesitation
as to the side on which a man is. If there was any doubt
such a man would be driven out or killed. (4) When things
have come to this pass war is beyond the control of every-
one, and must be fought out. This sometimes happens
among civilised peoples. Cannibalism is then practised on a
fallen foe, should he come into the hands of those who
wounded or killed him. There are various ways of heaping
indignity on a fallen foe. One is to dig up his corpse and
give it to dogs and swine. Another is to mutilate the dead—
sometimes those who are not dead. But the greatest of all
indignities is to eat your enemy. But I suspect there is a
limit as well as a significance in eating human flesh. From
what 1 have just heard I suspect that females are forbidden
this. More, it is only eaten by certain chiefs, whose is this
privilege, in the same manner as turtle can be eaten only by
certain persons. But there is probably the belief that eating
a piece of your foe confers strength on the eater. In relation
to cannibalism it must be remembered that these natives are
not troubled with our fine feelings about food. In this
respect they compare with Chinese.
4. Uhngen. —l am not in a position to supplement greatly
what 1 said on this head. The word, so far as I know, may
be said to have been taken entirely out of common use, but
it has a tendency to come back in a roundabout way. The
word uhngen (“ kumesen ”in Kw. dialect; “ uihngen,” west
dial.; “ supwe£ ” or “ stipe,” Efati to south end of Epi;
“ Nohbu,” (?) Erromanga; “ Tatapua,” part of Emai , Aniwa,
and Futuna ; “ Nethuing,” Aneityum ) is no longer a simple


adjective or verb, and in all its common uses it has now
behind it the superhuman idea. Natives will say of certain
things, Uhngen ticinol, “ Uhngen made it.” But doubtless
the word had first of all a common use, as much as our God
had, which made it suitable as a description for a thing that
is superhuman. This is shown now in that the word with its
superhuman meaning is taken to express a common thing.
Thus a mole or wine-mark on the body is uhngen (noun).
A stain on the floor that cannot be washed out is uhngen
(noun). A window fixed so as not to open is said to be kol
uhngen—.“ one made it uhngen.” There is also an undefined
idea that a person after death will be made uhngen* (I
cannot say an uhngen, because such is the native mind that a
thing may be one of a lot and still the whole lot). Some-
times uhngen is applied to complicated mechanism, as a
watch or gun-lock. I used to think that this was because of
its being something superhuman, but it may signify nothing
more than that such a thing is hard to undo. These uses
point to fixity, eternity (past and future) and perhaps super-
humanity, as root meaning. Ido not hold that “ Tatapua ”
is the same word as uhngen, yet it may be. Natives, I
think, take them to mean the same thing. Nor do I hold
that “ Nohbu ”is the same. I have doubts as to its meaning
being the same. “ Nethuing ” is given by the early mis-
sionaries on Aneityum a meaning different to the above, but
the natives identify the two. I have no doubt about
“ Supive ” both as to etymology and meaning.
5. A Correction for p. 17 of MS. —lnstead of “Nuriiker
he is told whose it is, and is instructed ” &c., read “ he is not
told whose it is, hut instructions ” &c.
6. A Native Song in Kwumera Dialect. —lt was first
collected by Mrs. Watt and then sung over to me. The
words in v. 1 are, so far as the Tannese know, without
meaning. They are sung first to give the tune, and may be
repeated before any verse. The tune resembles that in
Bateman’s Hymn Book for “ Come to Jesus just now.”
The song is not more than four years old. The subject is
the shooting of Yehtu (called Yeru in the song) by Push
The song is in the Kwamera dialect, but Yeru was a man
speaking the Weasisi dialect. Hence there is an attempt to
use some Weasisi words.
* This is the meaning Dr. Gunn puts on Tatapua.


Ua ren ren rao
Ua ren ren rao
Ua ren ren rao
Ua ren rao
Ren ren rinrao
“ Awe ! N uit keikei!
Awe ! Nait keikei!
Awe ! Niut keikei!
Iripen iau
Yakatereng paison.”
In kuri rineivi;
In kiiri rineivi;
In kuri rineivi,
Ravahi meven;
Ritmaha ravoheraka
Pupum ti-ratiuta;
Pupum ti-ratiuta;
Pupum ti-ratiiita—
Rinahti 3 Yeru,
Mahti niiprei nirils.
“ Awe ! kaha Pusi;
Awe ! kaha Pusi;
Awe ! kaha Pusi—
Rinaruke 3 Yeru,
Miirani neiriis.”
“ Awe nima unak !
Awe nima iinak !
Awe nima unak!
Yima afwe Pusi
Raruki 7 iau.”
These words have no meaning
so far as we know.
“ Oh, beloved Niut 1
Lead me there
That 1 may feel the poison.” 8
The evil spirit prompted
He takes (it) and goes.
Rumaha takes (it) away.
By and by he will ascend 4
99
He has shot at yeru
And shot the trunk of a nirus. s
“ Aha! my grandfather Pusi;
He has shot Yeru
And shoulders his snider.”
“ Oh, my kindred !
That fellow Pusi
Has shot me!”


Yeru ramasuk—
Yeru ramasuk—
Yeru ramasuk:—
Makwein abomos :
Awe, niiruk Nupau ! ”
“ Awe, niiruk Nupau !
Awe, nurtik Nupau!
Awe, niiruk Nupau!
Niiruk Niipau! ”
“ Awe, Tata Yeru ! ”
Kahu ramasuk,
Kahu ramasuk,
Kahu ramasuk,
Makwein abomos:—
“ Awe mirak Yeru ! ”
“ Awe, 9 nima imak !
Awe, nima imak !
Awe, nima imak!
Ti-arier
Mata nokweikwei.”
“ Awe, yakinamapau!
Awe, yakinamapau!
Awe, yakinamapau!
Nima imak ti-o
Muvhi iau.”
Yeru keeps crying :
99
And calls long :
“Oh, my child Nupau ! ”
“ Oh, my child Nupau !
“ My child Nupau ! ”
“ Oh, my father 8 Yeru.”
Kahu keeps crying,
99
And calls long :
“ Oh, my father-in-law Yeru! ’
“Oh, my kindred!
99
Stand you tliree there
And look at the raw flesh
(of the wound).”
“ Alas, I have become weak
99
My kindred do ye (some-
thing)
And take me.”
Notes on the song. I Niut is probably the spirit of a
dead person supposed to give help to his descendents
when a bowl of kava has been set out for the spirit to
drink. 2 Faison is our word poison. 3 Renahtl is a
mixture of two dialects. The part uhti is the word in


No.
Weasisi Name.
Kwamera Name.
Adelde Date
Jewish Name.
1
Mauk-irnei
Kuramai
1886
It began.
July 31 ...
Aug. 29...
Sept. 28 (?)
Ab.
Elul.
Tisri.
2
3
Mauk-itau
Mauk-eibiung
Taneyau (?)
Kakuseriakuseri ...
4
Mauk-Iaulau or lulu
Kurarurar
Oct. 27 ...
lies van.
5
Mauk-luslus
Tam tain n kii
Nov. 26 ...
Kislev.
Tebet.
Sebat.
Adar.
Nisan.
Yiar.
6
Veritum
Veretam
Dec. ...
7
Naungwa
Nahna
Jan. 5 (24)
Feb. 4(23)
Mar. 6 (25)
Apr. 4 (23)
May 4 (23)
8
Veru
Vfti’ix
9
Yati
Tamtam an on
10
Neusi
N euvsi
11
Keafakelabakel ,..
Pakerpaker
Sivan.
12
Kaiyahnulul
Kamneru
June2(21)
Tamuz.
Weasisi for “ strike ” or shoot, but rin (instead of ticin
(c=g in gate) ) is the preformative in Kwamera
dialect. In the next verse rinarukt is used, which is
the verb and preformative, both of the Kwamera
dialect. *Yeru was shot on rising ground and carried
to a friendly village where he was afterwards buried.
s Nirus is a tree, the bark of which is poisonous, and
would prove fatal if allowed to touch one’s skin.
6 Neirus is a corruption of our word snider. 7 Present
tense is used to describe a thing that is past. B Nupau
and his wife Kahu have arrived. These are his words
in answer to Yeru. ®Yeru speaks. Although sung in
this order, I suspect that v. 10 should follow v. 11,
which should follow v. 6. Natives sing the verse that
comes first to mind; so that we may find the song
very puzzling on this account.
7. Moons or Months. The following is a table of names:—
Notes on the Months.
(1.) Mauk-imei. —See (2) under general remarks for mank.
Imei seems to mean “ a field.” A piece of ground is numei.
The word is prefixed to the names of tribal districts, e.y. Numei-
Kasarumhni, “the land of the Kasanimeni.” A roof-gutter
is a numei nann, “ the place of water.” The grate of a stove
is a numei ningum, “ the place of fire ; ” literally it is “ moon of
the field” Natives begin to prepare new plantations. I


identify it with kuramai of the Kw dialect. Two moons may
pass by under this name.
(2.) Mauk-itau. —The moon for making mounds in which
the yam is planted. These mounds are called nitau , “ a
hillock.” In 1890, Mauk-itau began in the end of September.
I am not certain that Taneyau is its equivalent in the
Kwamera dialect.
(3.) Mauk-eibiung . —The moon for training the yam tendrils.
A staging of reeds is made as shown here, and on this the
yam tendrils are trained. To do this is to eihiung. The
Kwamera name, I take it, means to “ tie with a rattan,” —
aims , “ a rattan,” ehu, “to tie.” In 1890, this month began
on October 16th.
(4.) Mauklaulau or Mauklidu. —There is some uncertainty
about the meaning of this name. I first took the name to
describe the state of yam tendrils which cover everything, as
melons cover the ground where they are planted. But it may
have reference to the work of the month—“ hoeing,” from
kahlu, “ a hoe.” This agrees with the Kwamera name,
kurarurar, which means “ hoeing.” In 1890, this moon began
November 13th.
(5.) Maukluslus. —Luslds is the term applied to the yam
“seed.” The new yam roots have begun to form and the
plant is independent of its parent “ seed,” which the natives
now remove. In cases where a whole large yam has been
set, the yam will be quite good. It is taken away to be used
for food. This moon name runs a great risk of being left
out of the count; I identify it with Tamtamuku in Kwamera
dialect. Compare Weasisi tumnumut, “ rotten.” It is the
end of the old days.
(6.) Veritum. —Every thing is full of sap,vegetation luxuriant,
rain abundant. Given to Mr. Watt (Kwamera) as a month
of the old days. Food is plentiful. Ter urn means to be
“full of water,” as a water-hole, cup, or basin.
(7.) Naungwa . —It is described by natives as the month
when the trees are forming their fruit. It is given by the
Kwamera natives as a moon of the old days which it can
hardly be, unless we make a difference of two or three months
in reckoning. That is the Kwamera people are that much
earlier than the people here. Nahua is their name for it.
Nowan is a general term for fruit of a tree; ana is to bear
fruit; Kwamer dialect nul-wan and ukua are the correspond-
ing words. Doubtless there is but one root in the name of
this moon and in the words just given. Hence we translate


it as “ the fruiting moon.” It is to be observed that there is
not space for a moon in the list between December 25th and
January sth. The explanation is that I began to keep a
record of the moons beginning with January 1886 and after-
wards arranged the list to suit the Tannese year. Hence
Naungwa would begin January 24th, 1887. To remove this
difficulty, let the reader begin with Naungwa.
(8.) Neru. —Same name in both dialects. The only clue
that 1 have as yet to the meaning is in the adjectives hikis
“ iramatured,” and matu “ dry ripe.” That is, during this
moon the fruits may be immature or they may be dead ripe.
In 1889, it was a hikis moon.
(9.) Yati. —The first yams are ripe and the name seems to
have reference to the tubers going down into the soil on end.
I have set down Kwamera Tamtamanen as its equivalent
though I have no reason for connecting the names except
that the Kwamera people speak of watering (kamufi) the
yam. This probably is a phrase to describe some ceremony
performed to cause the yam tubers to swell out. This or the
month earlier would be the time w-hen this would be done.
So here, kuveri nime, “ soak the breadfruit,” which is such a
ceremony as the above.
(10). Neusi. —Samenamein both dialects,and same occupa-
tion—dancing. 1 derive the name from us taka , name for
“ dancing ” with a certain kind of club, the taka. These
dances are practised for several weeks and end in a feast.
These dances were in full swing in the end of April and
beginning of May this year (1891).
(11.) Keafakelabakel. —The Kwamera name would indicate,
I think, a reference to sandiness. Two kinds of yam are
ripe, narnu, and kauyekc. The people at Kwamera made this
month begin in 1889, on July 28th. But the people a little
west of Kwamera held that Kuramai began that date. But
both agreed as to what was done during Pakeryaker. No
cultivation goes on.
(12.) Kaiyaknulul. —l put down here the Kwamera
Kamneru simply because I have no other place for it. It is said
there is one name wanting in the Kwamera list. But this is
doubtful. The difficulty of 12 moons instead of thirteen is not
felt, because when there is doubt, two moons are put under
one name. 1 know neither the meaning of Kaiyaknulul nor
Kamneru. During Kaiyaknulul the plantations are neglected,
the ground is dry and dusty. Compare maululul, “ dust.”
But the natives told Mr. Watt that, during Kamneru , the


yams were all planted and the food was scarce, which would
indicate a position for it between one and four. Kaiyah-
nulul, I find, may mean “ gathering up little sticks,” and may
have reference to the practice of gathering up the reeds of
which the yam trellis are made. See Fijian dictionary under
Vula.
Some general remarks.—l. The natives have various ways
of reckoning the seasons and year, A common one was to
speak of the old and new days. The “ new days," my an ivi,
are reckoned to begin about December and end in June.
There is, however, no certain date. Natives are guided in
speaking of these seasons by the state of vegetation. When
trees and plants begin to grow anew, they say the “ new
days” have come. Again, they speak of the “long” and
“ short ” days. The “ long days,” my an rurus, are from the
end of October to the middle of February. The natives
during this period can take two spells of work in their plan-
tations—one in the forenoon, rest in the heat of day, and
work again in the afternoon. About March 21 and Septem-
-20 the day is exactly 12 hours long, the sun rising and
setting at six o’clock. About December 22 the day is 13h.
12m. long; about June 21 the day is 11 h. 48m. long. The
years are counted by the number of yam crops. Practically
the year begins with Maukimei, the end of July, That is
the time when the natives begin their new plantations.
(2.) It will be noticed that in the names of the moons, mauk
or mauuk (mauung = “ moon,” Weasisi dial., but mokwa, in
Kw. dial.) is prefixed from one to five. This corresponds to
what the natives call the old days , niyan nowas. But the k
may belong to the verb = kirnei, etc. Then translate, for
the field, for training, etc.
(3.) A moon is named according to the state of vegetation.
Hence, a moon may be shifted back or forward or drop out
of count. In 1889 Mauklulu and Maukluslus were put
together. Indeed it may be Mauklulu in one district, and
Mauklitsliis in another. See also under 11.
(4.) It is only the older people who know the names of the
moons, or which is which. And indeed there is often much
difference of opinion among these as to which is which moon.
On Aimoa—a Mahori colony—there are no such names.
The moons are named on Erromanga and Futuna (?).
Whatever the importance attached to these names in past
ages very little notice seems to be taken of them now.


8. Winds. —Terms of navigation. These must go together,
for it is likely that some names of minor winds are terms
used in navigation. There are four main winds—Luatu,
Tonga, Tukalau, and Balabu.
(1.) Luatu embraces all winds from N.W. x N. to N.E.
,x N. It is comprised of the following winds : Luat-matua
(matua is to steer a canoe with the paddle, the helmsman
sitting in the stern with the paddle in the water close by the
side of the canoe. The effect is that ofafish fin). It extends
from NW.xN. to N. x W. Luatu-alall (the Luatu
turning round) from N. x W. to N. x E. Luatu-umlai.
I do not know the meaning of umlai. But this wind is
specially humid. It extends from N. x E. to a little past
N.N.E., Luat-natonga. It is the junction of Luatu and the
Tonga. From a little E. of N.N.E. to N.E. Atu, in this
dialect, means “to belay ” a rope. Whether the fastening
of a rope gives the name to the wind or the wind gives the
term used for fastening a rope, I cannot say. But in certain
circumstances a canoe would go on with no more trouble to
the mariners than the setting and fastening of the sail.
(2.) Tonga. This is a word appearing all over the Pacific,
varying in form and meaning. Here it is the name of the
wind from N.E. x N. to S, x E. And if we identify
Tilka (lau) with Tonga then we must include the wind
round to S.W. x W. Meantime I exclude Tukalau. The
Tonga, however, must be divided into two parts: —
(a.) Nntonga. From N.E. x N. to E. x S. The sub-
winds of this division are neither numerous nor well defined.
First we have Luat-natonga , bordering on the Luatu. Then
Natonga ruan , “the white natonga,” about E.N.E., and
Ulltonga Natonga, bordering on the Uli-tonga, about E. x S.
(b.) The Uli . From E. x S, to S. x E. The
sub-winds are numerous and well defined, which is always
the case with the people who get their winds over the land,
from adjacent islands, or through straits. This is not so
when the winds come off an expanse of ocean. The sub-
winds are:— Uli-tonga-natonga or urn natonga , from E. x S.
to a little south of E.S.E. Uli-tonga-Pitan (Uli-tonga
woman), about S.E. x E. Uli-tonga Yeruman (U. t. man)
about 1° S, of S.E. Uli-fafa (fafa is the name of a wood
brace used to support the mast in the rig of a native canoe)
is a wind between S.E. x S. and S.S.E. There is also the
term “ tataiyii rafafa or rafara ” w hich I would translate,
running with the fafa set.” (Fiji, papa, “a board”).


(3.) Tukalau. —Tokalau is given in Fijian as the east wind,
natokarau as N.W. wind on Aneitynm. Here it is certainly
a S. wind, extending from S. x E. to (uncertainly) S.W.
x W. The sub-winds are:— Uli-tonga urn Tukalau , border-
ing on the Uli-tonga, about S. x E. to S. x W, Balab-
tukalau, is one of great uncertainty as to limits, and extends
from S. x W. to S.W. x W.
(4.) Balabu. —This extends from S.W. x W. to N.W. x
N. A Balabu always produces a smooth sea here, but it is at
the same time a fine sailing breeze. Aneitynm, noperihapu
is a N.N.W. wind. Bale may be from the root of a word used
here to describe the rough sea falling. (See hale, Fiji, “to
fall.”) Abu may be the root which signifies dark, cold, See.
The sub-winds must be put in tw r o classes :
(a.) Balabu. —These are Balab-tukalau as given above.
Then Balah matua (Matua, Samoan, north wind), about
W.S.W. Balab-luamuni, between W. x S. and W, Balaba-
aben (black), about W. xN. Balah nisi, about N.W. x W.
(b.) Tukalautu. —Compare Fijian Tokalaulutu, N. or N.
E. wind, Samoan To’elau and To’elau-lafalafa, N.E. wind;
Aneitynm (see the whole list in Diet., p. 113), Na taka ran,
N.W. wind. The surprising thing is that a Tukalau should
be put in this side of the compass.
9. Terms of Relationship and the Law of Marriage.
1. Aunt.
A person can have no aunt. The relative we so call must
be (1) a mother, Iten (ri’ni, Kw.; nana, An.) is the term
used to speak of another person’s mother. It is applied to
a man’s own brother, and to the sisters of his mother, and
to the wife of his father’s brother. The person himself
would call such a person Yuma (mama, An.) In the
Kwaraera dialect a child would say Nana, one more grown
would say Yuma, and an adult would say Kana. (2) She
must be a mother-in-law. [Thun (Cush, Kw.; nanfagavai,
An.) is the term used to speak of the sister of a man’s father
or the wife of the brother of a man’s mother. (See Mother.)
2. Brother,
(«.) A Mans Brothers. —( l) Pian (piavini, Kw. ; nosoa,
An.) A man’s brother (and a woman’s sister) without con-
sidering whether the brother is senior or junior.* Likewise
* Pian Is rather a companion, contemporary, neighbour, than a relative.


all male cousins who are children of the brother of a man’s
father, or the sister of a man’s mother, are his brothers.
(2) But Noat an is used for any such brother who is older
than the man himself. (Breiani, Kw.; nosoatasore, An.
The same term is used for a woman’s elder sister.) (3.) And
Noatahnn (brasini, Kw.; nosoatasore, An.) is used for any
such brother (in the ease of a woman for her younger sisters)
who is younger than the man himself.
(b.) A Woman s Brother. Nomnnin (pomani, Kw. ;
nokave, An.) is the term used for a woman’s brother of any
age, and for her cousins who are sons of her mother’s sister
or of her father’s brother.
3. Brotiier-in-Law.
(a.) A Mans Brother-in-law.—Nevin (yafuni, Kw. ;
nosafe, An.) is the brother of a man’s wife (and is the man’s
cousin) and the husband of a man’s sister (also a cousin).
This is brought about by the marriage law. A man may
take to wife the daughter of his father’s sister, but not the
daughter of his father’s brother; she is counted to be his
sister. Or he may take to wife the daughter of his mother’s
brother, but not the daughter of his mother’s sister ; she is
his sister.
(b.) A Woman can have no Brother-in-law. —The man
that can take her sister to wife can be her husband. So can
the brother of her husband be her husband. They are her
cousins, and must be either sons of her father’s sister or her
mother’s brother. See diagram under Wife.
4. Child.
(1.) Puti (Kw., small; so far as I know there is no such
distinction in W. dial.; tentamanea, An.) is the young of
lower animals while “ small.” (2.) A child without reference
to sex or parentage, Netin (tini, Kw. ; tentama, An.) (3.)
A. child distinguished in sex but not parentage. Male child,
shahakahn (yakun auhi, Kw.; tauseviasisi, An.) ; a female
child, pitakaku (bran auhi, Kw,; nof ine, An.) (4.) A child
distinguished by the sex of the parents—(a) A son is the
yamati of a man and the yakuti of a woman (notariki and
tentama, An.) There is no such distinction in the W. dial.
( b) A daughter is the brati (nofine, An.) of a man and the
yakuti (tentama, An.) of a woman. No distinction is made
in the child of the woman. No such distinction in W. dial.
(5.) A parent, father or mother, addresses his male or female


child as netik (narlk, Kw. ; tukutariki, An.) (See Son,
Daughter, Cousins.)
.5, Cousins.
Are either ( a) sacred, nevin (husband and wife’s brother),
neowim (wife and the husband’s sister). Such persons are
sacred to one another. For example, A is the husband, B
the wife, C the wife’s brother. In the presence of C both A
and B must be modest in dress, speech, and behaviour.
(h.) Marriageable Cousins. — Sisters’ children do not many
one another; they are counted brothers and sisters. Children
of two brothers do not marry, they are brothers and sisters.
But the children of a man can marry the children of his
sister.
6. Daughter.
For the terms see under Child. A man calls his own
girls and the girls of his brother his daughters. A woman
calls all her own girls and the girls of her sister her daughters.
The man and woman are in turn called father and mother.
7. Daughter-in-Law.
(a.) A man’s daughters-in-law are his nieces who are
daughters of his sisters or cousin-sisters, or wife’s brother—
ra'-niau anien (same term for sons-in-law, kiinkanien, Kw. ;
noraimutu An). They can become the wives of
his sons.
( h .) A woman’s daughters-in-law are the daughters of her
brother or husband’s sister nau l wein (brasini, Kw,;
nosoatasore (An). But the same term is used for the
nephews also.
8. Father.
(1.) Tata (tara, Kw.; tatu, An.) is the term a man or a
woman uses when speaking of his father. (2.) Tirnin (rimini,
Kw. ; tamaua, An.) is used when a man speaks of the father
of another person. Same term is used by women. (3.) A
man’s father, his father’s brothers, and his father’s cousin-
brother’s and the husbands of his mother’s sisters, are his
fathers. The same with the woman.
9. Father-in-Law,
(a.) A man’s father-in-law —Un (mcrani, Kw.; tohnana,
An.) He may be the brother or cousin-brother of his
mother, or the husband of his father’s sister or cousin-sister.
(&.) A woman’s father-in-law must be her mother’s brother


or cousin-brother, or the husband of her father’s sister or
cousin-sister. The same terms are used.
10. Grandchild.
Numwtpon (miponi, K\v.; tampupuna, sing., fatupupuna
pi. An.) is the term, but the sexes are not distinguished.
11. Grandfather or Mother.
(1.) Kaha (Kw.; pua‘An.) is the term a man uses to
speak of or to his grand-parents. (2.) Tupun (rupuni Kw,;
tupuna, An.) is the term a man uses in speaking of the grand-
parents of others.
12. Husband.
Ha i neauwa' , l / i (kunsuaru, Kw.; nenuane An.) is the term
used for a woman’s husband. But it applies to all his
brothers. A woman can marry any of her cousins who are
sons of her father's sister or mother’s brother.
13. Mother.
(1.) Yuma (W. and Kw.; mama, An.) is the general term
used by a man or woman speaking of one’s mother. In the
Kw. dialect a child will say, Nana, a person more grown
will say, Yuma, an adult will say, Ka‘na.
(2.) Iten (ri‘ni, Kw.; Nana, An.) is used when one
speaks of the mother of someone else. (3.) A man’s own
mother, the sisters, or cousin-sisters of his mother, and the
wives of his father’s brothers are his mothers. So with the
woman.
14. Mother-in-Law.
(a.) A man’s mother-in-law —Uhun (cusi, Kw,; nen-
nanfagavai, An,). She must be his father’s sister or cousin-
sister, or the wife of his mother’s brother or cousin-brother.
A man has the right to take to wife the daughters of all such
persons. See diagram.
(b). The same term is used for a woman’s mother-in-law,
and the relatives are the same.
Nephews and Nieces.
(a.) Those that are sons and daughters. The children of
a man’s brother, or cousin-brother, and the children of a
woman’s sister, or cousin-sister, are counted as sons and
daughters. And the terms used for children of a man or
woman are used for such nephews and nieces. See Child,
( h .) Nephews and Nieces who are Sons-in-law and
Daughters-in-law , —(l.) A man’s nephews and nieces are


called jRa nmuanien (kunkwamen, K\v.; novaimutu, An.)
There is no distinction of male and female. These are the
children of a man’s sister or cousin-sister, or woman’s brother
or cousin-brother. (2.) For the same children a woman uses
Nauwein (brasim, Kw., the term for younger sister; nosoa-
tasisi, An.) These nephews and nieces become the sons-in-
law and daughters-in-law of a man and his wife. These
terms are applied to them, though the marriage with the
children of the man and his wife may not be consummated.
16, Sister.
(a.) A Mans Sisters . — Nauvenin (pivini or pini, Kw, ;
nokave, An.) is the daughter of a man’s own mother, the
daughter of any other woman who is the wife of his father,
the cousin who is the daughter of his mother’s sister or
cousin-sister, the cousin who is the daughter of his father’s
brother or cousin-brother.
(b.) A Womans Sisters. —(1.) Pian (piavim, Kw.; nosoa,
An.; see Brother a. (1.) is used for sister or cousin-sister
without considering whether senior or junior, A woman’s
sisters are her own sisters, the daughters of her father by
any other woman than her mother, the daughters of her
father’s brother or cousin-brother, and the daughters of her
mother’s sister or cousin-sister.
(2.) But Noatun (breiani, Kw. ; nosoatasore, An.) is used
for any such sister who is older than the woman herself.
(3.) Noatahan (brsini, Kw. ; nosoatasisi, An.) is used for
any such sister who is younger than the woman herself.
17. Sister-in-Law.
(a.) A man can have no sister-in-law. That relative (his
wife’s sisters or his brother’s wife) can be his wife— nuwein.
(b.) A woman’s sister-in-law (her husband’s sister or her
brother’s wife) is Neauwun (Purkumani, Kw.; rufeima, An.;
dual, noma, sing.) It is the corresponding relation that makes
a man’s brother-in-law, which see.
18. Son.
For terms, see Child. A man calls his own son, the sons
of his brother or cousin-brother, and the sons of his wife’s
sister or cousin-sister, his sons. Likewise the woman calls
her own son, the sons of her husband’s brother or cousin-
brother, and the sons of her sister or cousin-sister, her sons.
(See Daughter.)


19. Son-in-Law.
(a.) A Mans Sons-in-law — Ra'niauanien (see Nephew
and Niece.—A man’s sons-in-law (the same term is used for
his daughters-in-law) are the sons of his sister or cousin-
sister, and the sons of his wife’s brother or cousin-brother.
(b.) A Womans Sons-in-law — Nauwein. —They are the
sons of her brother or cousin-brother, and the sons of her
husband’s sister or cousin-sister. The same term is used for
a woman’s daughter-in-law.
20. Uncle.
A person can have no uncle. That relative must be (1) a
father—timin (father, father’s brother or cousin-brothers,
and a mother’s sister’s husband, or the husband of her
cousin-sister.
21. Wife.
The term is Nuwein (rukweini, na’npitaugwa‘ti, kimbra-
ncma, Rw.; tafoinafune, nanufune, An.) Nuwein is always
the man’s cousin, the daughter of his father’s sister or cousin-
sister, or the daughter of his mother’s brother. The law of
marriage is that the children of two brothers or two sisters
do not marry ; they are counted as brothers and sisters.
But the children of brothers and sisters marry. The children
are betrothed in infancy, and are expected to wed when
grown up sufficiently. Cousins who are children of brothers
or children of sisters, and adopted children are reckoned as
real children. Tannese rarely marry any one outside the
common marriage law—that is, a stranger. Bather than do
this they will marry a forbidden relation. Men have taken
to wife a niece who was the widow of a deceased son. In
fact every relationship, except that of brother and sister by
the same mother, is at times ignored.
The following diagram illustrates the source from which a
man’s son can take a wife. HSH = the husband’s sister’s
husband; HS = husband’s sister; HB = husband’s brother;
HBW = husband’s brother’s wife; H = husband; W =
wife, and so on. S = son ; d = daughter. HSH, &c. are
contemporaries.
Had time permitted 1 would have examined the principles
on which these relations are based and the terms used to
express them. In order to make reference easier, I add a
Vocabulary of Terms.
In regard to these notes I must acknowledge my obliga-
tions to Mr. and Mrs. Watt, our co-workers on Tanna.


More especially is this the case in respect to my notes on winds
and relationships. If I have failed to state correctly the
information thus obtained, it is because I have failed to
remember or grasp what I have been told; but 1 have
taken great care to be as correct as possible.
The Vocabulary of Terms
1. Brasini (Kw.), see noatahan.
2. Brati (Kw,), in the Kwamera dial., is the daughter of
a man (see Gen. 20 15, “ Brati tara, mata repuk-o‘ma
yakuti ka‘na ’). See daughter, son, and native
names forthese. -No‘tama, Aniwan word.
3. Breiani (Kw.), see Notun.
4. Cusi (Kw.) See uhun.
5. Fatupupuna (An.) See grandchild.
6. Iten, his mother. See mother.
7. Kaha, my grandfather, my grandmother.
8. Ka‘na (W. and Kw.), my mother. Used by an adult
speaking of his mother.
9. Kunkwanien (Kw.) See nephew.
10. Kunsuaru (Kw.) See husband.
11. Mama (Aniwan). See mother.
12. Merani (Kw.) See father-in-law, mother-in-law.
13. Nana (Kw. and An.) See mother.
14. Nanufune (An.) See sister-in-law, wife.
15. Nanfagavai (or nemfagavai) (An.) See mother-in-law.
16. Narik (Kw.), ray child. See child, son, daughter.
17. Nau‘wein, a woman’s nephews and nieces who are
children of her brother. Therefore her son or
daughter-in-law, which see.
18. Nauvenin, a man’s sister. See sister.
19. the sister of a woman’s husband or her
brother’s wife. See sister-in-law.
20. Netin, the child of either man or woman, whether male
or female. See child.
21. Nevin, the brother of a man’s wife, and the husband of
a man’s sister. See brother-in-law.
22. Noatahan, a man’s younger brother or a woman’s
younger sister. See brother and sister.
23. Noatun, a man’s elder brother or a woman’s elder sister.
See brother and sister.
24. Nofine(An.) See child, daughter, son.
25. Nokave (An.) See brother.
26. No‘ma (An.) See sister-in-law, husband.


27. No‘tama (An.) See daughter.
28. Nomanin, a woman’s brother of any age. See brother.
29. Nontariki (An.) See child, son.
30. Nosafe (An.) See brother-in-law.
31. Nosoa or Nosot (An.) See brother, daughter-in-law,
nephew, sister.
32. Noraimutij (An.) See nephew.
33. Numwipun, a man or woman’s grandchild, male or
female. See grandchild.
34. Nuwein, a man’s wife, her sisters, the wife of his
brother, cousins who are daughters of the sister of
a man’s father or daughter of the brother of a man’s
mother. See sister-in-law.
35. Pian, a man’ brothers of any age, a woman’s sisters of
any age. It means the one who is a man’s equal.
See brother, sister, cousin.
36. Piavini (Kw.) See brother, sister.
37. Pitakaku, female child; pi. Pitalkala*.
38. Pivini (Kw.) See sister.
39. Pomani (Kw.) See brother.^
40. Pua‘ (An.) See grandfather.
41. Purkumani (Kw.) See sister-in-law,
42. Puti (Kw.) Used of the young of lower animals while
small. See child.
43. Ra‘neauwa‘li, husband, a woman’s cousins who are sons
of her father’s sister or mother’s brother.
43a. Ra‘niauanien, the children of a man’s sister or wife’s
brother, male or female. See nephew, younger sister,
son-in-law, daughter-in law, nieces.
44. Ri‘ni (Kw.) See mother.
45. Rimini (Kw.) See father.
46. Rukweini (Kw.) See wife.
47. Suahakaku, a male child, pi. Sua’lkalab See child.
48. Tamana (An.) See father.
49. Tampupuna (An.) See grandchild.
50. Tara (Kw.) See father.
51. Tata (W. and An.), my father. See father.
52. Tentama (An.) See ciiild, son, daughter.
53. Tentamanea (An.) See child.
54. Timin, a man or a woman’s father. See father.
55. Tini (Kw.) See child.
56. To‘nana (An.) See father-in-law.
57. Tupun, a man’s grandfather or mother. See grand-
father.


58. Tupuna (An.) See grandfather.
59. Uhun, mother-in-law, the sister of one’s father, the wife
of the brother of one’s mother. See aunt, mother-
in-law.
60. Un, father-in-law, the brother of one’s mother, the
husband of the sister of one’s father. See father-in-
law.
61. Yafimi or Yafweni (Kw.) See brother-in-law.
62. Yakut! (Kw.) The child (male or female) of a woman.
See child.
63. Yamati (Kw.) The son of a man. See child.
64. Yuma, my mother. See mother.
WILLIAM GRAHAME, JUN.,
ACTING GOVERNMENT PRINTER, TASMANIA.




