

egiregias antmas, jjuar sawjaine nobis
banr patriam pepmre suo
SOME CARILLON RECORDS
1928-1933
Including matter introductory to a book that was made,
in ten examples, out of specimen copies of printed documents
used at the Inauguration and at the Unveiling of Rolls of
Honour, and on the occasion of recitals before Anzac Day,
1933. The book, entitled " The First Five Years of Carillon
Music at Sydney University : Programmes and Some
Other Documents," may be seen in a few libraries, and,
particularly, at the British Museum, the National Library,
Canberra, the Mitchell Library, Sydney, and the Fisher
Library of the University.
ANZAC DAY
1933
AUSTRALASIAN MEDICAL PUBLISHING COMPANT, L.IMITBD
Seamer Street. Glebe


THE SONG OF THE BELLS
(CAMPANARUM CANTICUM : Sydney University
War Memorial Hymn)
Tune: "St. Edward." Sydney H. Nicholson, Mus.Doc.
Verse and Paraphrases: Professor F. A. Todd.
... atttmas, quae sattguuw twins
Ijattr patnam p?p?rm stw, bmirat? suprmts
tmttt?rtb«o. Verg. Aen. XI, 24-26.
Lauda fortem, plange caram, Valiant dead who live in story,
Vita dulcem morte claram,
Hoc sollemni munere
Ring'd with light of love and glory,
Hymn we now in wistful pride,
Solemn strains of honour raising,
Sons of Alma Mater praising
Who to save our country died.
Almae Matris iuventutem,
Suo patriae salutem
Peperit quae sanguine*
With this solemn office praise the brave and mourn the beloved young
manhood of Alma Mater, dear in life and glorious in death, who with their
blood won salvation for our country.
Redit annus, sonat hora,
Campanarum vox decora
Exaltetur cantico:
Hark the hour remembrance bringing,
Hark the Bells of Memory singing
Youth triumphant in the test:
" Illi non gemebant sortem, " Men who saw the task and failed not,
Ipsam non tremebant mortem: Men who looked on death and quailed not
Dormiunt in Domino. God hath welcomed into rest.
The year comes round, the hour is sounding, let the beautiful voice of
the Bells be lifted up in song: " THEY did not lament their lot, even at
death they did not tremble: they are asleep in the Lord.
" Studiis qui pacis nati,
Tubae sonitu vocati
Vadunt in pericula,
Atrox caelum perferentes
Hostis tela contemnentes
Dum servetur patria.
"Student-soldiers, peace resigning,
Heard the call and unrepining
War's relentless fury braved,
In the trenches steadfast ever,
From the battle flinching never,
So their country might be saved.
" Born for the pursuits of peace, when summoned by the trumpet-call
they march away to dangers, enduring grim skies and scorning the shafts
of the enemy, if only their country may be saved.
Transierunt. Ne lugete
Quorum corpora quiete
Sunt sepulta placida:
"Wherefore let no sound of weeping
Stir the calm where they are sleeping.
Sorrow not, for 10, they wake,
Vitam surgunt in supernam Lifted up to life supernal,
Gloriamque sempiternam Living on with name eternal —
Mortui pro patria." Men who died for Country s sake.
" They have passed on. Sorrow not for those whose bodies are buried
in calm peace: they rise to life above and to glory everlasting, men who
died for their country."


The Origin of the War Memorial Hymn
1. On Anzac Day, April 25th, 1929, the first anniversary of
the War Memorial Carillon, The Times (London) printed both the
Latin and the English metrical version of the Sydney University
War Memorial Hymn under the headings " The Bells of Sydney "
and " An Australian War Memorial," and with the following
introduction :
" As to-day is Anzac Day, and is observed throughout
Australia, we print below the Sydney University War Memorial
Hymn, which was composed for Armistice Day last year, when
the magnificent War Memorial Carillon of Sydney University
was played for the first time. This hymn, or ' Campanarum
Canticum,' is the work, both in Latin and English, of Professor
F. A. Todd, of the University, and will be sung every year
at the celebrations to the tune of 'St. Edward,' as arranged
by Mr. Sydney H. Nicholson, Mus.Doc."
2. On April 27th The Times printed the following letter :
" Sir, —I think it may interest some of your readers if I
may be allowed to supplement your account of ' The Bells of
Sydney ' by a brief explanation as to the music.
" Some years ago the late Rev. H. F. Westlake, Custodian
of Westminster Abbey, unearthed from the Missal of Abbot
Litlyngton a Sequence for St. Edward's Day, provided an
excellent English version, and asked me to write music for it.
This has been sung ever since in the Abbey on St. Edward's
Day and the Feast of the Dedication of the Church (Holy
Innocents' Day), in procession, passing the grave of the
Unknown Warrior.
" Last year I was asked by the authorities of Sydney
University, of which my father was the co-founder and first
Chancellor, to arrange short melodies based on some complete
tune for the quarter and hour chimes of the new War Memorial
bells. Feeling that I might lay myself open to a charge of
vandalism were I to treat some well-known tune in this way,
and also that for this purpose some connexion with the Abbey
would be appropriate, I took my St. Edward's Day tune as
the basis for the quarter chimes, the complete tune being used
at the hours. Professor F. A. Todd then wrote the new words
for the tune which appear in your article to-day, and the
resulting ' Campanarum Canticum ' thus provides an interesting
link between the Abbey, the early history of the Sydney
University, and the service rendered by its sons during the
Great War.
Yours faithfully,
College of St. Nicolas, Chislehurst. SYDNEY H. NICHOLSON."
To supplement the information above, the Committee of the War
Memorial records that the Hymn is an interpretation of the message of
Dr. Nicholson's melody heard every hour and the most familiar
utterance of the Memorial. The second stanza begins " Redit annus,
sonat hora " because the Hymn was intended to be sung after the two
minutes silence on Armistice Day, but it has been sung also on Anzac
Day and at the Commemoration of Benefactors. The English
paraphrases were later additions, merely to help those to whom the
Latin original presented difficulties.


Reprinted from the "Sydney University
Union Recorder" of 20th April, 1953.
THE WAR MEMORIAL CARILLON
OF SYDNEY UNIVERSITY
Sydney University War Memorial
Carillon becomes five years old on Anzac
Day, 1933. It was installed in the Great
Tower of the University on Anzac Day
(25th April), 1928, in honour of members
of the University who served in the
Great War, and especially as a memorial
of those who fell while on active service.
It also commemorates certain units of the
fighting forces and other army services,
as well as relatives of friends of the
University, who were not University
members. It has led to the foundation
of two similar memorials. The first, at
Bathurst, in New South Wales, has had
to wait a long time for the building of
the special tower required. The second
was dedicated, and began playing, on
Anzac Day, 1932, at Wellington, in New
Zealand. Sydney University Carillon and
Bathurst Carillon are the work of the
old English bell foundry which is now,
and has been for long past, under
the name of John Taylor and Company,
at Loughborough, Leicestershire. From
this, many of the greatest bells, and
carillons of widest range, have gone to
towers dispersed through the world.
Sydney University War Memorial
Carillon is a "four-octave" instrument
and has sixty-two bells. Of these, thirteen
duplicate the highest octave. The full
range is therefore forty-nine notes. The
heaviest bell weighs about four and a
quarter tons and has the note G sharp.
The next, A natural, weighs three and
a third tons. There are twenty-six other
large bells. The smaller ones, including
the thirteen duplicates, thus number
thirty-four. The lightest bell weighs
thirteen and a quarter pounds. The total
weight of bells is twenty-six and two-
thirds tons (59,730 pounds). The instru-
ment comprises an additional nineteen
tons of steel girders, and a good deal
more metal has been used in the con-
struction of various other parts. These
include a four-faced clock and its
striking and chiming gear.
The cost of bells, framework, clock
and all mechanism, preparation of the
tower for the reception of the carillon,
with the installation itself and the bring-
ing of the whole instrument into regular
use for the last five years, as well as
the maintaining of it in first class con-
dition, has been met out of the War
Memorial Carillon fund. So also has
been the provision of the two great
bronze Rolls of Honour in the Archway
of the Tower, with some architectural
reconstruction consequent upon their
installation in that place. The carillon
fund, which reached a total of over
£21,000, is now exhausted, and there is
still a good deal remaining to be done.
The urgent need is for the beautifying
of the only room in the tower not yet
brought up to War Memorial standard.
It is the Muniment Room, in which will
be kept the Book (or Books) of Remem-
brance, and other minor memorials, as in
a shrine. It requires a new ceiling and
floor, panelling for the walls and stained
glass work for the great oriel window
over the archway. The cost of this
development of the War Memorial to a
practical completion might be £3,000 and,
like that of a bell in the carillon, could
be made an individual gift in memory of
an individual whose name might be
attached.
Many of the bells were given in
memory of individuals, as new ones, to
a total of five, may still be given; for
example, the bells named after Alan David
Mitchell, John Hay. The great bell is
called A.1.F., after the whole Australian
Imperial Force. Some bells bear the
names of sections of the University,
for example, Arts, Medicine, St.
Andrew's College; and there are others
of more general reference, for example,
The Red Cross.
In musical range, weight of metal, and
completeness of playing mechanism,
Sydney University Carillon stands very
high on the list of the world's greatest
instruments of bell music. The
mechanism includes a "standard" key-
board with pedals like those of an organ
and with wooden levers arranged in two
rows after the fashion of the black and
white keys of a piano. There is a
separate ivory keyboard, of the same
type as that of a piano, and an automatic
player using ordinary-looking paper
music rolls that have been specially
planned and cut for it. They are
operated by an electro-pneumatic device,
which provides the power for the hand-
played ivory keyboard. The standard
keyboard gives fuller scope for the
musical self-expression of the carillonist.
There is quite distinct automatic
mechanism for striking the clock-hours
and playing the chimes at the quarters.
The music of the chimes is that of
the University War Memorial Hymn
composed by Dr. S. H. Nicholson,
Warden of the English School of Church
Music, and formerly Organist and Master
of the Choristers at Westminster Abbey.
The Latin words of the hymn were
written by Dr. F. A. Todd, Professor of
Latin.
When the fifth year closes for the
Sydney University War Memorial
Carillon, the total of "numbered" recitals
each with its printed programme will


be 166, an average of more than one a
fortnight. Many other recitals of special
character have been given, with or with-
out printed programmes. This record is
very gratifying. It would have been
impossible in a. country like this, remote
from every country in which the art of
the carillon is understood and carillonists
can be trained and given a livelihood, if
there had not been among the under-
graduates of Sydney University who had
had some general musical training, a
spirit of devotion to the War Memorial
and a capacity for working hard upon this
new and strange instrument of music
until they struggled into some mastery
of it and were able to keep it in improv-
ing and honoured use. The first five
years of the Sydney University Carillon
most honourably close with four
graduate carillonists, two of whom were
undergraduates when they began their
carillon studies, and four undergraduate
carillonists, one of whom is just about
to graduate. All are honorary, and three
have only just begun giving independent
recitals after having successfully stood
the testing and been promoted from their
first status as "students of the carillon"
to the public playing grade of "Assistant
Honorary Carillonist". The number of
ordinary students of the carillon has
since grown to be larger than ever
before and there is now serious difficulty
in finding practice time, even on the
practice keyboard, for all the under-
graduate aspirants. Applications from
persons outside the University have had
to be declined through lack of means for
practice.
The Sydney University War Memorial
Carillon, at the end of five years of
constant work, has a sufficiency of good
players, assurance of a reasonable succes-
sion of such players, a fairly well sup-
plied library of music, a considerable
repertoire and a gratifyingly large body
of listeners at its recitals. It is fulfilling
its trust —that of being a perpetual fount
of beauty in honour of all whom it com-
memorates.
VISITING CARILLONISTS, 1928-1933.
BARKER, BRYAN, while Assistant Carillonist at Loughborough, Leicestershire, selected
to visit Sydney and play the Carillon at its inauguration on Anzac Day, 1928,
also to instruct pupils. He remained four months after the inauguration, gave
23 public recitals and taught Mr. J. G. Fletcher and Mr. K. M. Branch, under-
graduates. He has since been Carillonist at the Mercesburg Academy,
Pennsylvania.
WATKINS, GEARYS, a holder of the diploma of the Carillon School at Malines,
Belgium; now Carillonist at the National War Memorial at Wellington, New
Zealand. She kindly gave two public recitals in Sydney, at Christmas, 1930, on
her way home from Europe, and allowed the Honorary Carillonists and students
of the Carillon the benefit of her advice.
BALL, CLIFFORD, Mus. Bac. (Birmingham), a holder of the diploma of the Carillon
School of Malines, Belgium; Organist, Carillonist and Musical Conductor for
Cadbury Bros. Ltd., Bournville; selected in England to play the Wellington
Carillon at its inauguration; afterwards, by courtesy of his firm, he visited
Sydney and gave a series of five public recitals, during which he also kindly
assisted Honorary Carillonists and students of the Carillon in their study of the
instrument.
HONORARY CARILLONISTS.
RANCLATJD, A. B. 8., B.Sc., 8.E., Honorary Carillonist from 1928.
FLETCHER, J. G., Honorary Carillonist from 1928, Busby Musical Scholar, 1930;
8.D.5., 1931.
BRANCH, K. M., Honorary Carillonist from 1928; B.Arch., 1931.
CARPENTER, ENID PHYLLIS, 8.A., Assistant Honorary Carillonist, then Honorary
Carillonist, 1931; M.A. and Wentworth Travelling Fellow, 1932. Absent on leave
from 1932.
GORDON, J. LINDSAY, Assistant Honorary Carillonist, then Honorary Carillonist, 1931;
Busby Musical Scholar, 1932. To receive degree of B.A. on 6th May, 1933.
ASSISTANT HONORARY CARILLONISTS FROM 1932.
SHEA, L. T., Medicine I, 1932; Medicine 11, 1933.
GORDON, J. D., Arts I (evening), 1932; Arts II (evening), 1933.
KERSHAW, A. S., Arts 11, 1932; Arts 111, 1933.


EVE OF ANZAC DAY, 1933.
Sydney University War Memorial Carillon has been installed
and at work for nearly five years. In that time it has been served
by a number of people who accepted the duty of keeping it
continually in act and use, on the supposition that a Memorial
which does not speak its purpose as it was intended to do is simply
a failure, either by the fault of its designers or by that of its
attendants. This one has not failed in either way. In design
and construction it is most capable of honouring, by the beauty
of its song, the memories that it exists to perpetuate. It has been
kept in full and harmonious voice by those without whose attentions
it could not find means and opportunities of singing. At the end
of the first five years there are more co-operating than ever before
as its servants.
The following pages are, in the main, the programmes, in
chronological order, as issued for the one hundred and sixty-six
ordinary public recitals and for a few more that had some special
character. Such a collection gives a convenient summary of what
has been attempted, in a musical sense, and affords some hint as
to the service that the Carillon has had from musicians, professional
and amateur.
The early programmes, to the date of August 28th, 1928, were
all played by Mr. Bryan Barker, who came from England as first
visiting professional carillonist. His pupils, and their pupils after
them, and the pupils of their pupils —a third musical generation
in descent from the original players —have quadrupled, and more,
the original series of recitals, and have developed a repertoire of
wider range. The influence of visits paid by two other professional
carillonists, Miss Gladys Watkins and, especially, Mr. Clifford Ball,
is also strong and enduring. The honorary carillonists of Sydney
have been eager learners from them both.
Apart from honorary carillonists, the honorary officers
responsible for the care of "the instrument and its library of music
and technical and other books, also for the work on the records
of the Memorial, have been :
Honorary Curator: Assistant-Professor G. F. Sutherland,
A.R.C.S.
Honorary Librarian : Miss Beatrice Wines, B.A.
Honorary Mechanical Supervisors: G. C. Barnes, H. Taylor
(retired 1931), S. E. Hutchinson (from 1931)
Honorary Archivist: G. E. Hall, B.E.
During the last few weeks of the period Mr. A. Cousins, 8.A.,
kindly took over the work of Honorary Archivist in place of Mr.
Hall, who was going on a trip to Europe and was likely to be away
for some time. Mr. T. Wilkins, 8.E., also accepted an invitation
to become Honorary Electrical Engineer.


NATIONAL DAYS.
The following national days have been the occasion of Carillon
recitals, not all of which have been numbered.
Anzac Day, April 25th.
Empire Day, May 24th.
King's Birthday, June 3rd.
Thanksgiving Day, July 7th, 1929 (for the King's recovery
from illness).
Anniversary of the Great War, August 4th.
The national day of :
Italy, November 4th, 1930 and 1931, afterwards April 21st.
Poland, May 3rd, from 1929.
Yugoslavia, June 28th, .1930 and 1931.
United States of America, July 4th.
France, July 14th.
Belgium, July 21st.
Czechoslovakia, October 28th
Finland, December 6th, from 1930.
SPECIAL PROGRAMMES.
Special programmes, unnumbered, have been given on the
following dates : July 18th, December 25th, 1928. April 7th,
August 23rd, September Ist, September 6th, 1929. April 22nd,
May 3rd, June 12th, July 26th, July 31st, August 19th, September
30th, October 29th, November 20th, 1930. On August 9th, 1931,
and again on August 7th, 1932, there was a recital in honour of
the GALLIPOLI MEMORIAL, incorporated by gift of a Committee
associated with the Third Battalion A.I.F.
ARMISTICE DAY.
On Armistice Day the order of observance at the University
includes the playing of Chopin's Funeral March, arranged for the
Carillon, in memory of those who gave their lives during the Great
War. After a ceremony, including the Two Minutes Silence,
in the Great Hall, the Academic Procession, followed by all others
attending, moves to the Quadrangle, through the archway of the
Great Tower, where it salutes the Rolls of Honour of the University.
Then, crossing the Quadrangle to the western wall, it faces the
Great Tower, and all present stand listening to the Carillon. When
the Funeral March is finished, the Procession disperses and a recital
of other music follows, without printed programme.


Specimen Programmes
These are selected as programmes representative of the work
done on the Standard Keyboard of the Sydney University Carillon.
(A) PROFESSIONAL MUSICIANS.
(a) Mr. Bryan Barker— Twentieth Recital, on August 28th,
1928, at 8.15 p.m. —1. Campanarum Canticum, S. H.
Nicholson. —2. Remember, Lord, our Dead, Arthur Maquarie. —
3. Fantasia : " The Bells " (suggested by Edgar Allan Poe's
poem and composed for the War Memorial Carillon), Ernest
Truman. [Through lack of time for preparation, this was
not played at the recital. It was the third of a set composed
for the bells by Mr. Truman, City Organist.] —4. The London-
derry Air. —5. The Merry Peasant, Schumann. —6. Softly
awakes my Heart, Saint-Saens. —7. Minuet in G, Beethoven. —
8. National Dance, Mozart.- —9. Serenade, Schubert. —lo.
Fantasia in D Minor (composed for the Carillon), Bryan Barker.—
11. Berceuse de Jocelyn, Godard. —12. Pizzicato, from
" Sylvia," Delibes. —13. Abide with Me, Monk. —14. Funeral
March, Chopin. —GOD SAVE THE KING.
(i) Miss Gladys Watkins —Sixty-sixth Recital, on Sunday,
December 21st, 1930, at 3.15 p.m.—l. Minuet and Trio,
Mozart. —2. " Caller Herrin." —3. Rocked in the Cradle of the
Deep, J. P. Knight.— 4. Prelude on the Scale of " C," Gladys
Watkins. —5. He shall feed His Flock, " Messiah," Handel. —
6. Allegro, Scheppers. —7. Drink to me only with thine Eyes.—
8. Serenade, Schubert. —9. Love's Old Sweet Song, Molloy-
Felton. —lo. The Bells of St. Mary's, A. Adams. —ll. Cam-
panarum Canticum, S. H. Nicholson.— GOD SAVE THE KING.
(c) Mr. Clifford Ball —One hundred and thirty-fifth Recital, on
Thursday, June 30th, 1932, at 1 p.m.- —1. Andante Cantabile, Jef
Denyn. —2. Humoreska, Dvorak. —3. Consolation (" Song with-
out Words "), Mendelssohn.— 4. The Lass with the delicate
air, Arne. —5. Cradle Song, Schubert. —6. He shall feed His
Flock, Handel. —7. Serenata, Haydn. —8. Minuet in G,
Beethoven. —9. Prelude in A flat, and Nocturne in E flat, Chopin. —
10. Gavotte, De Fesch. —GOD SAVE THE KING.
(B) AMATEUR MUSICIANS.
(a) Mr. J. G. Fletcher, Honorary Carillonist, afterwards Busby
Musical Scholar —Fifty-fifth Recital, on Tuesday, February 11th,
1930, at 8.15 p.m.—l. Hymns : (a) O Salutaris, S. Webbe
(the elder), (b) Spirit, Divine, Attend our Prayers, J. B. Dykes,
( c ) When Jesus our Lord, Handel—2. Gavotte in A major
(from the " Masque "), Handel. —3. La Serenata, G. Braga. —
4. Songs: (a) Cheer boys, Cheer ! (b) Passing By, Edward
C. Purcell, ( c) The Vicar of Bray, (d) The Minstrel Boy. —5.
Tuim'lende Klanken, J oh. W. Meyll. —6. Cebell, from sth
Suite, Henry Purcell. —7. Rondo from a Sonatina, Clementi.—
GOD SAVE THE KING.
(b) Mr. K. M. Branch, Honorary Carillonist —Sixty-third Recital,
on Sunday, October 12th, 1930, at 3.15 p.m. —1. Hymns :
(a) O God of Bethel, (b) O Sanctissima.—2. Largo, from
" Xerxes," Handel. —3. Songs: (a) The Bell-Ringing, (b)


Genevieve, (c) The Broken Ring, (d) A Czechoslovakian Folk-
Song.-—4. Theme and Variations, K. M. Branch. —s. Ave
Maria, G. Marras. —6. The little Sandman, Brahms— 7 .
Two Bell-Songs from the Netherlands : (a) 't Carillon van
Duinkerken, (h) Beiardlied (Chant du Carillon d'An vers). —
GOD SAVE THE KING.
(c) Miss Enid P. Carpenter, Honorary Carillonist —One hundred
and thirty-sixth Recital, on July 3rd, 1932, at 3 p.m.-—l.
Prelude, be Vries. —2. Hymns : (a) Lead, Kindly Light, (6)
Rock of Ages.—3. Folk Songs : (a) Ye Banks and Braes, (b)
Londonderry Air, (c) John Peel. —4. Serenade, Schubert. —
5. Valse Chromatique, Godard. —6. Barcarolle, from " Tales
of Hoffmann," Offenbach. —7. Sea Shanties: (a) Blow the
man down, (b) Shenandoah, (c) Bound for the Rio Grande.—
GOD SAVE THE KING.
((f) Mr. J. Lindsay Gordon, Honorary Carillonist, Busby Musical
Scholar —One hundred and forty-third Recital, on Wednesday,
August 17th, 1932, at 3.30 p.m. —1. Hymns : (a) All People
that on Earth do Dwell, (b) We Plough the Fields and Scatter. —
2. Songs : (a) Drink to me only with thine Eyes, (b) Ye Banks
and Braes, (c) Believe me if all those endearing young Charms,
(d) The Bells of Aberdovey, (e) Who will o'er the Downs ?
3. Cradle Song, Schubert. —4. Intermezzo, from " Cavalleria
Rusticana," Mascagni. —s. Compositions for a Four-Octave
Carillon : (a) Andante Cantabile, Jef Denyn, ( b ) Prelude in
D Minor, Staf. Nees.- —6. Campanarum Canticum, S. H.
Nicholson. —GOD SAVE THE KING.
(e) Mr. A. S. Kershaw, Assistant Honorary Carillonist —One
hundred and sixty-second Recital, on Palm Sunday, April 9th,
1933, at 3.15 p.m.—l. All Glory, Laud, and Honour, Teschner. —
2. Ride On, Ride On in Majesty, J. B. Dykes. —3. See, the Con-
quering Hero Comes (from " Judas Maccabeus "), Handel. —4. Eia
Mater (from " Stabat Mater "), Rossini. —5. Jerusalem the
Golden, Ewing. —6. Les Rameaux, Faure. —7. Palms of Glory,
Raiment Bright, Lubeck. —8. Consolation (Lied ohne Worte),
Mendelssohn. —9. Hallelujah Chorus (from " The Messiah "),
Handel. —10. Saviour, Again to Thy Dear Name we Raise,"
E. J. Hopkins. —GOD SAVE THE KING.
(/) Mr. J. D. Gordon, Assistant Honorary Carillonist —One
hundred and sixty-third Recital, on Maundy Thursday,
April 13th, 1933, at 8.15 p.m. —1. Lead, Kindly Light.—2.
Blest are the Departed (from " The Last Judgment "), Spohr. —
3. Take Up Thy Cross, the Saviour Said.- —4. Cast Thy Burden
Upon the Lord (from " Elijah "), Mendelssohn. —5. Ave Maria,
Bach-Gounod. —6. The Angel's Dream, Rubinstein. —7. Thy
Way, not Mine, O Lord. —8. Adagio Cantabile, Beethoven. —
9. Nun Danket Alle Gott. —10. Now the Day is Over. —
GOD SAVE THE KING.
(g) Mr. L. T. Shea, Assistant Honorary Carillonist—One hundred
and sixty-sixth Recital, on Friday, April 21st, 1933 (Italian
National Day), at 1.15 p.m.—l. The National Anthems of
the Kingdom of Italy, namely: (a) Marcia Reale, (b)
Giovinezza. —2. Caro mio ben, Giordani— 3. Miserere, Verdi. —
4. Canzoni : (a) La Ricciolella, (b) Santa Lucia, (c) Forsi
Pirchi Nun M'Ami. —5. La Donna e Mobile, Verdi. —6. Marcia
{" Norma "), Bellini. —GOD SAVE THE KING.


Some Programmes for National Days
THANKSGIVING DAY.
SUNDAY, JULY 7TH, 1929, at 9.30 a.m
Hon. Carillonist: Mr. J. G. Fletcher.
Music from the order of service His Majesty the King has been
pleased to approve for use in thanksgiving to Almighty God for
His good providence, whereby our Most Gracious Sovereign has
been delivered from a severe illness, to the comfort of the whole
Realm, and for the signal love and loyalty of his people made
manifest in the time of trouble.
1. O God, Our Help in Ages Past.
2. God Save the King.
3. Psalm 91.
4. Te Deum Laudamus.
5. Praise, My Soul, the King of Heaven.
Chiming and other bell-music will follow while the church bells of the
City are sounding.
GOD SAVE THE KING.
F£TE NATIONALE BELGE
21 Juillet 1930, h 13 heures 20 minutes
RECITAL DE MUSIQUE BELGE
en l'honneur du
CENTENAIRE DE L'INDEPENDANCE NATIONALE
en presence de
MONSIEUR LE CONSUL GENERAL DE BELGIQUE ET
MONSIEUR LE CHANCELIER DE L'UNIVERSITE.
Carillonneurs honoraires :
MM. J. G. FLETCHER ET K. M. BRANCH.
1. (a) De Vlaamsche Leeuw.
(b) Artevelde Lied.
(c) Le Doudou.
Ces pieces ont, de meme que le chant national " Vers
l'Avenir," ete harmonisees specialement pour le carillon
de quatre octaves par MM. les professeurs de l'Ecole de
Carillon de Malines h l'instance du Gouvernement Beige
qui en a gracieusement offert les partitions k la bibliotheque
de carillon de l'Universite par I'entremise de Monsieur
Segaert, Consul General de Belgique en Australie.
2. Compositions musicales pour carillon editees par l'ecole de
Carillon de Malines dirigee par Maitre Jef. Denyn.
(a) Thema met variaties - Gustaf Nees
(b) Menuet ------ Jef van Hoof
(c) Andante cantabile - Jef Denyn
3. Valeureux Liegeois.
4. CHANTS NATIONx\UX BELGES
(a) Vers l'Avenir.
(b) La Brabangonne.
GOD SAVE THE KING


THE NATIONAL DAY OF THE JAPANESE EMPIRE
Wednesday, April 29th, 1931, at 1.15 p.m.
Hon. Carillonists :
MR. J. G. FLETCHER and MR. K. M. BRANCH.
The Japanese music played at this recital is taken from a large
selection made specially for the Sydney University War Memorial
Carillon by the College of Music, Tokyo, at request of the Consul-
General for Japan, Mr. K. Inoue, to whose courtesy the University
is much indebted. The notes and translations have been kindly
furnished by Professor A. L. Sadler, Chair of Oriental Studies.
1. KIM I GA YO (National Anthem).
The Japanese National Day is the birthday of His
Majesty the Present Emperor, who was born on April 29th,
1901, and is the 124 th Sovereign of the Dynasty to rule the
Empire since the beginning of its history with the Emperor
JIMMU, circa B.C. 660.
The original and translation of the words of the Anthem
Kimi ga yo wa
Chiyo ni yachiyo ni
Sazare ishi no
Iwao to narite
Koke no musu made.
2. Folk Songs :
Till the pebbles smooth
Grow into a rugged rock
Covered thick with moss
Shall our Emperor's reign endure
Over this Imperial Realm.
(a) Sayonara (Farewell)
(b) Funa Nori Uta (A Boat Song).
(c) A lullaby of Tokyo district.
(d) Another of Kyushu.
(e) A popular melody.
3. Oedo Nihonbashi.
The most famous bridge in Japan is the NIHONBASHI
(" Sunshine Bridge " or " Bridge of Japan ") in the centre
of EDO (the old name for Tokyo when it was the capital of
the Tokugawa Shogun). It was built in 1604 and from it
all distances were measured.
4. Tenj in Sama.
The name of the Tutelary Deity of Literature. The song
is one for pilgrims going to the Shrine.
GOD SAVE THE KING
RECITAL IN HONOUR OF THE GALLIPOLI MEMORIAL,
incorporated, by gift of a Committee associated with the Third
Battalion A.1.F., in the Sydney University War Memorial Carillon.
SUNDAY, AUGUST 9TH, 1931, AT 3.15 P.M
MR. J. G. FLETCHER, Busby Musical Scholar, Hon. Carillonist.
1. GOD SAVE THE KING.
2. Chopin's FUNERAL MARCH, in memory of all who gave their
lives for Australia during the landing on Gallipoli,
and the occupation of the peninsula, and, especially, in
the actions fought between August 3rd and August 10th,
1915,


3. HYMNS :
(a) Kol nidrei.
(b) Tan turn ergo.
(c) Abide with me.
(d) 0 Valiant Hearts.
4. NATIONAL SONGS :
{a) Australia will be there.
(b) Scots wha hae.
('c) The Londonderry Air.
(d) All through the night.
(e) The British Grenadiers.
(/) Rule, Britannia !
5. SOLDIER SONGS :
(a) The long, long trail.
(b) Madelon.
(c) Boys of the Dardanelles.
(d) Pack up your troubles.
6. ST. EDWARD'S SEQUENCE, including the melody of the University
War Memorial Hymn, Campanarum Canticum.
GOD SAVE THE KING
Special recital, mainly from recent gifts of music of
Czechoslovakia to the Carillon Library, on the
occasion of
THE NATIONAL DAY OF THE CZECHOSLOVAK
REPUBLIC.
Friday, October 28th, at 1.15 p.m.,
by
MR. K. M. BRANCH, B.Arch., Hon. Carillonist.
Number 152
1. THE CZECHOSLOVAK NATIONAL ANTHEM :
(a) KDE DOMOV MUJ.
(b) NAD TATROU SE BLYSKA.
The meaning of {a) is " My Homeland," and it is the Czech
part of the National Anthem. The meaning of (b) is " There is
lightning above Tatra," and it is the Slovak part of the National
Anthem.
2. Folk Songs :
(a) Tece voda.
The water flows from brook to river.
(b) Rada.
/ love you.
(c) Marjanko.
Mariana.
(.d) Na brehu Ryna.
The Rhine Song.


3. Christmas Carols, from a set for choirs of wo mens'
and children's voices :
(a) Gloria ! Co to ?
Glory in the Highest ! What has happened ?
A traditional song of the villagers of Alexovice, in the district
of Krumlov. On Christmas Eve all retire to bed except the head
of the house. At midnight he sings " Gloria ! Gloria ! Gloria ! "
and the others, as if then awakened, reply " What has happened ? "
Then the others take up the song " Something unheard of. The
Angels are singing joyfully, Gloria! Do not be afraid. You
Shepherds and all here rejoice. The King of Kings is born. He is
resting in the crib. Gloria ! Gloria ! Gloria I"
(b) Pasli ovce Valasi.
Shepherds (Valasi) watched their flocks.
This is one of the most popular carols. In South-East Moravia
there is a district in which the whole population is called Valasi.
The singular Valach, as well as that plural form, will always be
associated with shepherd-life. There is a national costume of the
district. The people seem to have a gift for music. In pictures a
Valach is usually represented with flute and flock of sheep.
(c) Narodil se Kristus Pan.
Christ the Lord is born.
Another very popular carol regularly played in the churches
in Czechoslovakia at Christmas.
4. " Christmas Stars," from a collection of Czecho-
slovak songs, so named :
(a) Vesele vanocnf hody.
A merry Christmas feast.
(b) Zpev pastyru.
Shepherd's Song.
(c) V pulnocni hodinu.
At midnight.
(d) Poslechnete mne malo.
Listen to me a little.
A girl brings to the farmer and his wife tidings that Christ is
born : "A beautiful Infant is lying on a bed of hay and is being
cared for by the Blessed Virgin and Saint Joseph." The words of
the refrain are a humorous reference to the shepherds who brought
their bagpipes to do honour to the Babe, and could not be stopped
from playing their own tunes and keeping time for themselves
with their feet, in spite of the discord they made, in their devotion
and joy.
5. Svaty Vaclave.
The Hymn of St. Wenceslas
This most beautiful religious composition is said to have been
in use since shortly after 1200 A.D.
GOD SAVE THE KING.


The Ivory Keyboard
All the Honorary Carillonists, except MR. A. B. B. RANCLAUD,
who first specialised on the ivory keyboard, have used only the
standard keyboard. A specimen of Mr. Ranclaud's selection of
pieces, for rendering on the ivory keyboard, is : 1. (a) Theme and
Variations in D Minor, Handel, ( b ) Gavotte and Minuet in F,
Ernest Stephen. —2. (a) Melody, Paderewski, (b) Serenade, Mosz-
kowski.—3. Prelude in C Sharp Minor, Op. 16, Anton Vodorinski. —
4. The Harmonious Blacksmith, Handel. —5. Ave Verum, Elgar.
These are not from a single programme, but serve only to indicate
Mr. Ranclaud's idea of appropriate programme material.
A regular recital, number 147, was contributed by PROFESSOR
C. E. FAWSITT, who offered for that one occasion only to demon-
strate the characteristics of the instrument when it is played from
the ivory keyboard. The recital was given on Wednesday, September
21st, 1932, at 1 p.m., and was attended by representatives of the
Bathurst Soldiers' Memorial Carillon, which is to have an ivory
keyboard. Professor Fawsitt's programme contained the following
pieces : 1. Campanarum Canticum, S. H. Nicholson. —2. Haiden-
Roslein, Schubert. —3. Excerpt from Act 11, Scene 11, " Lohengrin,"
Wagner. —4. Melody (as played every hour, before the clock strikes,
from the Belfry at Bruges), Haydn. —5. Aria from " The Magic
Flute," Mozart. —6. Turn ye to me (Old Scots Melody). —7. For a
Dream's Sake, Cowen. —7. Berceuse, Grieg. —GOD SAVE THE KING.
The Notes of the Carillon
The thirteen bells of highest pitch are in duplicate. The number
of bells is therefore sixty-two, and the number of notes forty-nine.
The total weight is 26 tons 13 cwt. 1 qr. 81 lb.
Note. Weight.
Note. Weight.
G# ... 84 il9
A ... 66 220
1 2 10!
66 2 20J
1 1 Hi
1 0 17i
Ajt ... 60 0 22|
B ... 48 2 19
C ... 41 0 121
C# ... 34 3 17|
D ... 30 3 131
2 16!
30 3 131
1 271
1 23|
D$ .. . 24 3 9!
E ... 20 0 16
F ... 18 0 9|
Fjt ... 15 1 22
1 12|
1 8|
G ... 13 0 1
G$ ... 10 024
A
A$
B
C
Cit
D
Dit
E
F
F#
G
Git
8 3 7
7 2 21
6 0 15
C
c#
D
5 19
4 3 9
3 3 21
Dit
E
F
Fit
G
Git
3 2 6
2 3 11J
2 1 11
2 1 4J
2 0 13
1 3 13


Composers
The following is a list of composers representative of the names
appearing on the printed programmes of the Carillon :
Aletter, Arne, Ascher; Bach, Balfe, Bryan Barker, Barnby,
Barrett, Batiste, Beethoven, Bellini, Bendel, Benoit, Bertini,
Braga, Brahms, K. M. Branch, Burgmiiller; Carse, Chopin,
Clementi, Clifford, Collan, Corelli, Costa, Couperin, Czerny ; Daguin,
De Fesch, De Gruytters, Delibes, Denyn, Diabelli, Donizetti,
Durand, Duyssens, Dvorak, Dykes; Eberwein, Elgar, Elvey,
Ewing ; Faure, Felton, Fibich, Filitz, Franck ; Gade, Van den
Gheyn, Ghys, Giordani, Gluck, Godard, Gossec, Gounod, Greene,
Grieg, Grunn ; Handel, Hasselar, Hassler, Mischa Hauser, Haydn,
Hay§§ 5 Heller, Herold, Hiller, J: Van Hoof, Hopkins ; Iljinsky ;
Jensen ; Kersbergen, Ketelby; Lampe, Leenaerts, Lemare,
Leybach, Liibeck; Marras, Mascagni, Massenet, Mattheson,
Mehul, Melartin, Mendelssohn, Metcalfe, Meyell, Meyerbeer,
Moszkowski, Mozart, McDowell ; Nees, Newton, Dr. S. H. Nicholson,
Nicolai; Offenbach; Pacius, Paderewski, Pleyel, Edward C.
Purcell, Henry Purcell; Raff, Rameau, Reineke, Rimsky-Korsakoff,
Rogers, Rossini, Rubinstein ; Saint-Saens, Scheppers, Scholefield,
Schubert, Schumann, Shield, Shrubsole, Sibelius, Silcher, Smetana,
Spohr, Stainer, Steibelt, E. F. Stephen, Sternhuis, Strauss, Sullivan ;
Tate, Teschner, Thomas, Toselli, Tozer, Truman, Tschaikowsky ;
Vandeplas, Verdi, Vigueri, Vodorinski, de Vries ; Wagner, Walton,
Gladys Watkins, Webbe, Weber, Wennerberg, Werner, Wilson,
Wambach, Woodforde-Finden ; Zingarelli.
The number of traditional songs, of unknown authorship,
which has been played cannot well be set out in connection with
a list of composers, though it is not negligible. Similarly beyond
useful detailing are many hymns and songs of an authorship that
is known but has no wide musical significance. It is perhaps
sufficient to say here that the carillon programmes have been well
filled with hymns and folk-songs and other popular melodies of
different countries. It is a part of carillon policy to familiarize
public audiences and members of the University with time-honoured
religious and secular music, of quite popular character, which has
most entered into the life of nations distinguished for their musical
sense. Australians have inherited the British musical traditions, but
might be helped in developing a characteristic folk-song, or other
forms of music, by getting to know and love some of the most
beautiful traditional melodies of many other peoples. As an
open-air instrument, the Carillon has certain advantages from this
point of view. They are being used.
The War Memorial Committee of the University desires to
thank all the Sydney newspapers that have made generous reference
to the Carillon and Carillonists during the five years here recorded.
In particular, it would like to express gratitude to the Sydney
Morning Herald, which from the Inauguration to the last Recital
has followed every step of the progress made, and gained for it
an increasing public interest and approval.


d
-HCO HOIOO —
3P
O
I
cr
OP
O O 00 l> O lO 'M
co
Q
D
PH
£
o
J
1—1
Pi
<
o
H-)
<
M
o
S
w
co
CO
o
TH
w
H
<M
>-)
2
D4
<
o
H
■*JT
Ct
Ci
iH
2
<
25
Q
25
W
X
H
o
25
O
PAYMENTS.
By Printing and Stationery, including Programmes
for Public Recitals . . . . . . . . 720
,, Postage, Duty Stamps and Cables . . . . 352
,, Advertising and General Expenses .. . . 334
,, Carillon, with Expenses of Testing, Delivery and
Erection, including Alterations to Tower, and
Inauguration . . . . . . . . . . 16,907
,, Tower Clock with Striking and Chiming Mechanisms 1,213
,, Two Honour Rolls and Improvements to Archway 1,481
,, Engagement of Carillonists . . . . . . 250
,, Music, Furnishings, Insurance, Maintenance and
Repairs, etc. . . . . . . . . . . 450
,, Balance at Commercial Banking Co. of Sydney, Ltd. 2
£21,713
H. M. BERESFORD,
Hon. Treasurer.
S
<
£
>•<
H
>—i
CO
W
>
D
>•
W
71
Q
tn
H
O-I
w
O
25
HH
W
X
H
2
o
«
T n
H
25
W
2
2
C
PH
Q
25
C
(/}
H
ON
W
O
w
&
OH
o
H
25
W
2
w
H
<5
H
CO
RECEIPTS.
£ s. d.
To Donations . . . . . . . . . . . . 17,770 16 0
,, Interest, and Profit on Redemption of Stock . . 3,942 7 0
£21,713 3 0
May 2nd, 1933.
n&>
