

SOME
FACTS AND FIGURES
RELATING TO
VACCINATION.
ILLUSTRATING ERRORS OF THE ANTI-
VACCINATIONISTS.
BY
ALFRED J. TAYLOR, F.L.S., F.R.G.S., &c.
(Librarian Tasmanian Public Library.)
“ I live to learn.”
Hobart :
Calder. Bowden & Co , Printers, 177 Liverpool-street, and at Zeehan.
1891.




SOME
FACTS AND FIGURES
RELATING TO
VACCINATION.
ILLUSTRATING ERRORS OF THE ANTI-
VACCINATIONISTS.
BY
ALFRED J. TAYLOR, F.LS., F.R.G.S., &c.
(Librarian Taniitanian Public Library.)
“I live to learn.'


DRAKE!! & CO
Corner of Murray and Collins Streets,
HOBART.
RTERS OF DRUGS, CHEMICALS, PERFUMERY,
BRUSHWARE, ETC.
Manufacturers of the now Celebrated Cough
Remedy,
CARRAGHEEN, or Irish Moss.
■ ♦
This preparation has the largest sale of ang
proprietary medicine in Tasmania,
AND
NO HOUSEHOLD SHOULD BE WITHOUT IT.
SOLD IN BOTTLES, Is., Is. 6d., and 2s. 6d. each.
N.B. —All the Latest Pharmaceutical Specialities
and preparations hept in Stock, and the
dispensing of Physicians’ Prescriptions made
a Speciality.


INTRODUCTION
|N order that the public may not be deceived by
i the specious arguments advanced by Anti-Vacci-
nationists, I submit the following facts and
figures for consideration.
It is a matter for regret, I think, that the com-
pulsory clauses of the Vaccination Act are no longer of
any effect, owing to the action of a few individuals who
have taken up the Anti-Vaccination cry in the hope of
gaining a little political support.
ALFRED J. TAYLOR.
Hobart. February, 1891.
N.B.—Copies of this pamphlet may be obtained free
of charge at all booksellers.




N considering many matters that have to do with the
welfare of the masses, my attention has necessarily been
drawn to factors that have to do with the conservation of
physical health under present conditions of life ; and among
these and particularly deserving of notice are the
precautions that may be taken to prevent the contraction
and spreading of disease.
The protection against small-pox afforded by vaccination has
been so fully demonstrated that it seems almost like waste of time
to add further proof to that already given of its efficacy.
Unfortunately, the self-assertiveness of a number of well-
intentioned but mis-guided individuals has been felt even in such
matter of serious moment as this, and a very large number of
people—who have little time or ability to consider the subject for
themselves —have been persuaded that vaccination comes, not as
a friend, but as a foe in disguise, and that the evils attending its
practice far exceed the never-to-be-forgotten plagues of Egypt
recorded in Holy Writ.
Anti-Vaccination Societies are now as plentiful as black-
berries. They publish a Literature of their own ; they have their
representatives in Parliament, and they are not always careful
enough as to the means they employ to attain their ends.
I do not say that all anti-vaccinationists are deliberately
dishonest. Neither do I assert that in their foolish crusade
against vaccination they are equally deserving of reprobation.
But what I do unhesitatingly assert is this : That a very large
majority of them have been, and are being, led astray by men
grossly ignorant of the subject they profess to understand, and
many of whom do not hesitate—by a “ vicious ” use of figures,
and by grossly garbled evidence —to persuade the masses that
statistics and the testimony of facts are on the side of those who
would abolish vaccination altogether.
It ill becomes those of us who know better to stand idly by
while this undermining work is going on.
Fortunately, we are in a position to test the value of the
evidence placed before us by Anti-vaccinationists ; and as one of
the most intelligent of the leaders of that party, Dr. Alfred
Russel Wallace, L.L.D., has declared in his “Essay on Vaccina-
tion,” published in 1885, that “the utility or otherwise of
vaccination is purely a question of statistics ,’ to statistics let us
appeal in essaying once more a fall with error.


STATISTICS.
Now, statistics are only of value when they are used fairly.
1 have already referred to the “ vicious ” use which may be
made of figures ; and a simple illustration of this may be given by
a reference to what has been fittingly termed “the percentage
swindle ” —a weapon anti-vaccinationists have not hesitated to
make the most of. This particular form of “ statistical fraud ” is
illustrated in the following table published by Dr. L. J. Keller,
and which professes to give the death-rates at the various ages
mentioned :
Between 2 and 3 years j Of vaccinated children 30 per cent. died.
° J (Of unvaccmated „ 19 „ „
(Of vaccinated „ 15 „
” ** ” 4 ’> |Of unvaccinated „ 9 „ „
(Of vaccinated „ 14 „ „
” 4 3? 5 j? |Of unvaccinated „ 10 „ „
(Of vaccinated „ 11 „ „
” 5 33 10 3j j un yaccinated „ 10 „ „
fOf vaccinated „ 8 „
” 33 5 33 |Of unvaccinated „ 8 „ „
Upon the face of them these figures would seem fair enough to
anyone unacquainted with the many ways in which statistics may
be manipulated. The percentages are certainly striking, but
Dr. J. C. McVail has shown that the 30 per cent, really only means
3 deaths in 10 cases in the instances referred to; the 14 per cent.
1 death in 7 cases, and so on.
Not only so, but it will be seen that Dr. Keller omits any
reference to the first two years of life—-the death-rates during
which were as follows under the same table :
Between . and 2 ears I Of vaccinated children 33 percent, died.
J {Of unvaccinated „ 38 ~ „
the percentages in these cases meaning 3 deaths in 9 cases, and
18 deaths in 47 cases. It evidently suited Dr. Keller to omit
results that would have interfered with the uniformity of his table
—an omission “ specially suggestive,” as McVail remarks, “in
view of the great importance he attaches to this age period ” in
another paper he (Keller) has published.
The “percentage swindle” may be even more clearly shown
by another table relating to the years 1872-3.
Ist Quarter —1 case, 1 death. Percentage of deaths 100.
2nd „ 16 cases, 11 deaths. „ „ 69.
3 r d 33 16 ~ 9 j, 55 53 56-
4lb 5, 16 ~ 7 53 33 33 44■


Can anything more clearly indicate to how large an extent the old
saying is true that “ figures may be made to prove anything ?”
Taken alone, the bare percentages would be calculated to mislead
and leave an impression anything but correct, as demonstrated by
another example:—
By adding the number of cases in the first quarter for the
year 1874 —namely, one (a case that recovered) —the percentage
for the years 1872-3 and ’74 (first quarter) would have been
reduced to 50 per cent.; and a vaccinationist, by quoting the
figures relating to the year 1874 only, would be able to show 100
per cent, recoveries for the first quarter of that year.
Another misuse of statistics is illustrated when totals only are
given without reference to the factors that can alone give import-
ance or value to such totals. Thus, for example, “ Population
forms an essential datum in the presentation of all vital
statistics.”*
What then can be the value of such Statistics as the following
quoted by Mr. P. A. Taylor in the course of a speech he made in
the House of Commons in the year 1883, and relating to the
small-pox mortality for three decades ?
1851-60 - - - 42,071
1861-70 - - - 34,786
1871-80 - - - 57,422
In making use of these totals, Mr. P. A. Taylor made no
reference to the fact that while in the middle of 1851 the popu-
lation was 18 millions in 1881 it had risen to over 26 millions.
Nor did he explain that he was showing an increased mortality by
comparing a period containing a serious epidemic with periods
free from epidemic.
Anti-vaccinationists, as a rule, are not slow so to arrange
their periods of division and comparision that the results shall
bolster up their specious arguments. Thus, for example, Mr.
Tebb in the case of London carefully selects the year 1853 (a year
exceptionally low in its death rate for small-pox) and compares
it with a decade covering the year 1871 (with its exceptionally
high death rate), and argues from the comparison that small-pox
has become seven times as fatal as formerly. Dr. MWail has so
thoroughly exposed the use that has been made of this method of
dealing with the subject that I cannot do better than refer my
readers to his recent very able work f for further information.
*Newsholme, “ Vital Statistics/’ p. 293.
f “ Vaccination Vindicated.”


Perhaps the most dangerous form of “ Statistical Fraud ,r
affecting this question is that in which the mind of the masses is
influenced by a reference to figures that seem to show beyond all
doubt that certain forms of malignant disease have increased
since the introduction of vaccination, and that the increase has
been directly due to the practice of vaccination. For example,
Dr. Alfred Wallace gives the following list of
ANNUAL DEATHS IN ENGLAND PER MILLION
LIVING:
Average of 5 Tears.
1850-4
1855-9
1860-4
1865-9
1870-4
1875-9
1878-80
Small-pox
279
199
191
148
433
82
40
Syphilis- -
37
51
64
82
81
86
84
Cancer - - - -
302
327
369
404
442
493
510
Tabes Mesenterica-
265
261
272
316
299
330
341
Pyaemia, etc.-
20
18
24
23
29
39
40
Skin Disease -
12
15
16
17
18
23
22
Total -
636
672
745
842
869
971
997
Progressive Increase -
0
36
109
206
233
335
361
Now, taking the figures relating to Syphilis and Cancer, any
inexperienced person —having regard to the Totals given—would
naturally draw the conclusion that these two diseases had con-
siderabiy increased co-incidently with the practice of vaccination.
Simple folk would fail for want of knowledge to realise the mis-
leading nature of such figures. In the first place it is a well-known
fact that Cancer has a special predilection for those who are
advancing in years ; and in the second place it is a fact, and one
that quite upsets the contention of the Anti-vaccinationists, that
the mortality among those under five years of age has diminished
by 40 per cent.; that in the second and third quinqueniads of
life there has also been a decrease, and that it is “only after we
pass 25 years of age that the mortality begins to rise.’' The
importance of these qualifying factors will be realised when it is
seen that it is just during those years when the influence of
vaccination on the system lessens that the lise in mortality from
cancer becomes more pronounced. “At the age when vaccination
is most powerful,” writes Dr. McVail “cancer has decreased 40 per
cent., and in the last period of life when vaccination has its least
effect, cancer has increased 60 per cent. Moreover,” he continues,
those belonging to this period of life, namely 75 years, and who
died in the last decade, were born in the beginuing of the century,
when only a small percentage of the people were vaccinated at all,
many having been inoculated, and many having had natural small
pox. And yet it is among this very class that cancer shoivs its
greatest increase.'’


Another difficulty which anti-vaccinationists have to get over,
in order to make good their contention that the increase of this
disease is directly due to vaccination, is the fact that while
vaccination has spread alike among males and females, cancer
among males has “ risen 62 per cent in twenty years, while the
rate for females has only risen 43 per cent.”*
But there is yet another circumstance qualifying the importance
of the totals relating to cancer given in Mr. Wallace’s table.
“There can be no doubt,” writes the Registrar General for
England, “ that a considerable part in this apparent increase is
simply due to improved diagnosis and more careful statement of
•cause’ on the part of medical men. Year by year the number of
deaths ascribed to tumour, abdominal disease or other similarly
imperfectly stated causes, has been undergoing diminution, and
there has been, of course, a corresponding addition to the
mortality under the more definite headings.”
So much for the alleged increase of cancer as caused by
vaccination. Now, let us turn for a moment to the statistics
relating to syphilis.
The trump card of the anti-vaccinationist is the allegation
that syphilis has largely spread through the practice of vaccination ;
and a man of Mr. Alfred Wallace’s standing in the scientific
world does not hesitate to refer to vaccination as a vera causa for
rapidly increasing syphilis and cancer. Can we wonder, when
statements such as these are being made by leaders of thought,
if parents who are ignorant of the actual truth of the matter
refrain, even at the cost of great hardship to themselves, from
subjecting their children to the risk of contracting the loathsome
diseases they are made to fear will attend vaccination ? It is not
the parents who are to blame, but those who cause them to fear
the only protection that can save them from a disease almost as
bad as syphilis—a protection as safe as it is certain.
As with cancer, so with spyhilis, bare totals are advanced to
bolster up the argument. Thus, Dr. C. T. Pearce, in one of his
tracts, gives the following :
“ It will be seen that there died of syphilis in the
Under one year old. Of all ages.
“ Five years, 1860-4 4,504 6,425
„ 1870-4 7,009 9,271
“ In the first, period, therefore, nearly two-thirds of the
whole number were under one year old (the year of
vaccination), while in the second period, when the vaccin-
ations had greatly increased, no less than seven-ninths of
the whole number of deaths were of infants not a year
old.”f
* English Registrar General’s Supplement, 1871-80, p. cxiv.
•[Vaccination Tract, No. 8, p. 5.


Passing over the fact that nothing is said of population in the
periods referred to, and that Dr. Pearce describes per cent, as
“no less than seven-ninths,” and 70 percent, as “no less than
two-thirds,” I cannot do better than give the further exposure of
these figures in Dr. McVail’s own words, the answer is so crushing
and complete.
“This looks plausible,” he writes, referring to the table
quoted above, “but the plausibility is only on the surface. For
while the first year of life is indeed the ‘year of vaccination,’ the
sophism consists in the unstated inference that the syphilis deaths
occurred after vaccination, and possibly, therefore, owing to
vaccination. But in England the vaccination age is three months
and in Scotland six months. This divergence of practice permits
of some interesting comparisons.
In the first place, what percentage of deaths from syphilis
take place before the vaccination age? The mortality-tables of
the Scotch Registrar-General furnish statistics for the ages 0-3
months, 3-6 months, and 6-12 months, as well as for subsequent
complete years of life. Here are the figures for three recent
years :
DEATHS FROM SYPHILIS IN SCOTLAND AT
CERTAIN AGES:
Year.
0-3 Months
3-6 Months
6-12 Months
1-2 Years.
All Ages.
1882
109
44
39
' 16
244
1888
107
51
23
16
240
1884
117
57
26
14
276
Totals
333
152
88
46
760
Per Centage -
43-8
21-3
11-6
6
100
In Scotland, therefore, no less than 65 per cent, of the deaths
from syphilis at all ages take place before the age of vaccination.
And in the second half-year of life, when the infantile community
ought to be decimated, the deaths fall to 11 '6 per cent., or less
than one-fifth of those in the pre-vaccination half-year.
But as vaccination takes place three months earlier in
England than in Scotland, there should occur during the first six
months of life in England a much greater proportion of the total
syphilitic mortality. The published records do not supply the
facts, but through the courtesy of the Registrar-General I am
enabled to give them for the same three years. The following
table shows that in England 6434 per cent, of the deaths at all
ages from this disease took place in the first half-year. Thus—
the Scotch figures being practically the same—the earlier English


vaccination has had no effect whatever in raising the syphilitic
mortality of infants. And if it be suggested that the fatal influence
ought to be exhibited in the second half-year, we find that in
England again the mortality is not greater than in Scotland —the
percentage being xi’3 and ir6 for the two Kingdoms. In the
second year of life the rates are again similar, being 6 per cent, in
both cases.
DEATHS FROM SYPHILIS IN ENGLAND AND
WALES AT CERTAIN AGES, (a)
Year.
0-3 Months
3-6 Months.
6-12 Months
1 1-2 Years.
All Ages.
1882
893
529
244
125
2,227
2,313
1883
980
518
275
139
1884
994
487
252
152
2,280
Totals
2,867
1,534
771
416
6,820
Per Centage -
42
22-5
11-3
6T
100
O) From the English Registrar-General in reply to a request.
The great similarity of the percentages of these two tables is very
striking. . . . And they demonstrate beyond the possibility
of reasonable doubt that the earlier performance of vaccination
in England than in Scotland has no effect whatever on the com-
parative infantile mortality from Syphilis in the two nations.
But the utter powerlessness of our home vaccination as a
propagator of Syphilis may be proved even more clearly by means
of another comparison. I)r. Pearce has pointed out that the
mortality has increased somewhat more rapidly under one year of
age than at all ages combined. The question is, —In what part
of the first year of life has the main increment taken place ? The
Scotch Registrar’s tables again supply the answer, which is all the
more pointed, as vaccination is not compulsory until the middle
of the year. The Scotch Registration Act took effect in 1855 and
the Vaccination Law was passed in 1863.
DEATHS FROM SYPHILIS IN SCOTLAND 1855-9, 1880-4.
Uuder One Year of Age.
All other
All Ages.
Five Years.
0-8 Months
3-6 Months
6-12 Mo.
Ages.
( Deaths
142
81
42
116
381
1855-9
1 per cent
87-3
21-3
11
30-4
100
1880-4
j Deaths
| percent
540
242
147
284
1,213
44-5
20
12-1
23-4
100
Thus the deaths from Syphilis have grown from 381 to 1,213, an
increase much more rapid than that of the population. Further,


the population over one year old used to contribute 30 per cent,
of the Syphilis deaths, and now it contributes only 23 per cent.
Seven per cent, has thus been transferred to children under one
year,—‘the year of vaccination.’ But on looking at the figures
it will be seen that the whole seven per cent, is accounted for by
infants under three months of age —the three months of non-
vaccination.
Thus vanishes the last shred of the statistical argument that
vaccination is a cause of Syphilis.” (Vaccination Vindicated pp.
1368.)
I think I have said sufficient to show with what care the
arguments of Anti-vaccinationists, based upon the Statistics they
adduce, must be received, and how calculated they are to mis-
lead.
GARBLED EVIDENCE.
As a rule, however, the masses pay little attention to
statistics, and not less dangerous therefore than the “ Statistical
Frauds ” I have referred to are the misrepresentations made by
men who stand in the foremost ranks of the Anti-Vaccination
party. Strange to say, Dr. Alfred Wallace is one of the greatest
sinners in this respect, and I will give one illustration of the
misrepresentation I am now referring to from a pamphlet by this
author, who quotes a Dr. Vernon, of Southport, to the effect that
he (Dr. Vernon) “ had never known an infant of one year of age
recover from small pox.” Now what Dr. Vernon continued to
say in his lecture was this :■ —“ I don’t say they never do ; but my
personal experience so far is that if they are well vaccinated they
don’t have it, and if they have it without being well vaccinated
they die. As for the effect of thorough vaccination, I have seen
well vaccinated children at the breast—with their mothers
plentifully broken out —(/.<?., with smail pox) and the children as
well as possible, and still being suckled with perfect impunity.”
And yet in works published by Wallace and Mr W. White, Dr.
Vernon is made to pose as an Anti-Vaccinationist !
Driven back from point to point, Anti-Vaccinationists fall
back upon assertions that diseases which have developed after
vaccination have been directly due to vaccination.
Most Vaccinators could probably give experiences of cases
similar to the following, which is recorded by Dr. McVail : —“ In
1885,” he writes, “I was asked by a parent, a very intelligent
man, to vaccinate his fifth child. I was to be careful as to lymph,
because after the vaccination of the fourth child by a practitioner
in another town ill-health had ensued, including opthalmia.* I
* Is it net probable that this child may have been suffering from iritis
(the age of live months being the age at which syphilitic infants are most
liable to suffer from iritis) and that the rash on the fifth child was due to
congenital syphilis ?—A. J. T.


fixed a time and called for the purpose of operating, but for some
reason of convenience the matter was delayed for a fortnight.
On calling at the fortnight’s end I found the child’s head covered
with a skin eruption, which ultimately extended over the brow,
and was tedious in healing. The delay saved my reputation
and that of vaccination. The father frankly owned that had
the child been vaccinated as originally arranged he would have
had no hesitation in setting the skin disease down to the
operation.”
Before the English Select Committee of 1871 a story was
retailed by the Rev. W. H. Rothery on the authority of the
father, James Horrox, silk-dyer, Middleton, it having been
attested before a magistrate, and Mr. Rothery saying of the
parents “ Better people Ido not think I could find. They are
religious people, and are, I believe, incapable of falsehood.” The
statement of Horrox was to the effect that a child of his had been
fatally poisoned by being vaccinated from a syphilitic subject;
and he also stated : “Six other children were vaccinated from the
same child as mine; not one of those survived vaccination.”
Dr. McVail gives us the sequel to this story (Vac. Vin., p. 135):
“ There was here something tangible to investigate,” he writes,
“and Dr. Seaton went to Middleton to probe the story to the
bottom. He discovered that ‘it was all moonshine ; neither the
vaccinifer, nor any of the children had any syphilis.’ Only other
five had been vaccinated from the same source, and they had all
died long after vaccination, the cause being respectively measles,
convulsions, hereditary consumption, typhoid fever, and teething.
Thus, there was ‘ not the smallest reason for believing that the
deaths of any of those children resulted directly or indirectly
from the effects of vaccination.’ ”
Before the same Committee Mr. Corington, secretary to the
Anti-Vaccination League, gave in evidence the following case: —
“ Mr. Wiggins, of Bradshaw-street, Northampton, had a daughter
vaccinated when twelve months old; she was quite well at the
time of vaccination, but five days afterwards syphilitic appearances
presented themselves.”
Now, as Dr. McVail points out, primary syphilis has an
incubation period very much longer than five dags. The case,
therefore, could not have been vaccinal. He also reminds us
that should the first symptoms of syphilis consist of skin eruptions,
“ snuffles,” &c., then the disease cannot be primary at all, but
must be congenital, “ as, of course, in a primary case, the initial
lesion never varies in its essential features.”
In the year 1883 the Registrar-General of England considered
it worth his while to refer to the deaths ascribed rightly or


erroneously to “cow-pox and other effects of vaccination. ”*
“These” (to quote his own words) “amounted in all to 55 in
the course of 1883. In 1881 and 1882 they had been respec-
tively 58 and 65 ; making a total of 178 deaths in the three years.
In that period the number of vaccinations amounted to about two-
and-a-half millions, so that the deaths ascribed to this process were
less than 71 to a million vaccinations ” (46th Annual Report).
As still further showing how very small is the risk of
communicating disease by vaccination, the following experiment
by Dr. Robert Cory, and published in Dr. Buchanan’s Report for
1882, is worth recording.
Dr. Cory is Public Vaccinator at Surrey Chapel, and in order
to test the possibility of transmitting syphilis by lymph not mixed
with blood, he inoculated himself from an “ emaciated child
unquestionably syphilitic,” but without active symptoms at the
time of the experiment. The attempt failed, there being no
production of syphilis. Another inoculation from a child with
active symptoms also failed, as did a third experiment of the
same kind. Last of all he selected one which had been suffering
for weeks from a syphilitic skin eruption, and which had two open
syphilitic sores. In three weeks, symptoms of the disease mani-
fested themselves on Dr. Cory.
Vaccination from the first chiid would have been harmless,
even supposing such an “ emaciated ” vaccinifer had been selected.
As to the other three, the Reporting Committee (including Mr.
Hutchinson),! say they were “in such a condition of obvious
syphilitic disease as would certainly have precluded their use as
vaccinifers by even an inconsiderate and reckless vaccinator.”
Driven back to their last stronghold, Anti-vaccinationists claim
that any reduction in the number of deaths from smallpox, have
been due, not to vaccination, but to improvement in sanitary
precautions, and they loudly protest that the only precaution
necessary to take against the introduction of the scourge, is proper
attention to sanitary matters.
If this be true, how is it that in Ireland, which may be re-
garded as the best vaccinated country in the world, typhus fever
continues its hold, although smallpox has been, practically,
stamped out.? And how is it that while smallpox has steadily
decreased for the years during which vaccination has any effect,
beyond those years the number of deaths from smallpox have
increased ?
* Ret urns of which are given in the Registrar-General’s Reports under
" Zoogenous Diseases.”
f One of the greatest authorities on syphilis.


That this is so, I cannot better show than by quoting
directly from the 43rd Report of the Registrar General for England.
Dividing the series of years 1847 —80, into three sub-periods,
the first 1847 to 1853, inclusively (in which, though gratuitous
vaccination was offered to the public, recourse to it was purely
optional); the second, 1854 to 1871 (in which vaccination became
obligatory, but without any effectual means of enforcing the
obligation being instituted); and a third period commencing
with 1871, during which the the obligation was more rigidly
enforced, owing to the compulsory appointment of vaccination
officers, he gives the following table, calculating the death-rates
from smallpox in each sub-period at successive life periods.
MEAN ANNUAL DEATHS FROM SMALL POX AT
SUCCESSIVE LIFE-PERIODS, PER MILLION
LIVING AT EACH LIFE-PERIOD.
Age.
Sub-Period.
All
ages.
0
5
10
15)}
25
45 and
up-
wards.
1. Vaccination optional
66
22
OD
tf-
Ci
Cw
305
1,617
337
94
109
2. Vaccination obligatory
but not efficiently
enforced (1854-71) -
223
817
243
88
163
131
52
3. Vaccination obligatory
and more efficiently
enforced by vaccina-
tion officers (1872-80)
156
323
1S6
98
173
141
58
Entire period of obliga-
167
135
tory vaccination, 1854-80
198
633
222
92
55
“These figures show conclusively,” he writes, “that, coincidently
with the gradual extension of the practice of vaccination, there
has been, in the first place, a gradual and notable decline in the
mortality from small-pox at all ages ; in the second place, that
this decline has been exclusively among persons under io years
of age, and most of all among children under five, in which group
the rate fell no less than 80 per cent, in the interval between the
first and third sub-period; and thirdly, that after the age of ten
years the mortality, so far from having declined, has actually
increased, very slightly among persons of from io to 15 years of
age, but very greatly for persons older than this ; and lastly, that
the increase has been the greater the more advanced the time of
life. Thus, again comparing the third with the first sub-period,
the rate for persons from 15 to 25 years of age rose 59 per cent. ;
from 25 to 45 years it rose 114 per cent.; and after 45 its rise
was no less than 164 per cent. These striking changes in the


rates at successive periods of life are, it will be noted, not petty
differences, nor mere matters of decimal points or the like, but
enormous changes, of such magnitude as utterly to preclude all
explanations which would refer them to chance fluctuations or to
errors in registration. How, then, are they to be explained ?
Some persons who are opposed to vaccination have attempted to
account for the decline in small-pox mortality by referring it, not
to vaccination, but to the general improvement that has been
effected in the sanitary conditions of life. It is evident that such
explanation will not account for the striking changes disclosed,
unless it can be shown that similar changes, corresponding in
respect of direction, of extent, and of the life-period at which they
occurred, have manifested themselves in the general death-rate,
or, more precisely, in the death-rate from all other causes than
smallpox. For no one can possibly suppose that the general
improvement in sanitary conditions can have had exclusive in-
fluence in the reduction of smallpox and left the other causes of
mortality unaffected.”
After giving further tables bearing upon this point, he con-
tinues : —“ Taking the deaths at all ages, one-seventh part, and
one-seventh part only, of the reduction in smallpox mortality may
be claimed as possibly resulting from other causes than vaccin-
ation ; for, while the death-rate from other causes fell 7 per cent.,
the death-rate from small-pox fell 49 per cent. The hypothesis,
then, that would explain the great fall in small-pox by referring it,
not to vaccination, but to general sanitary progress, must be re-
jected as utterly untenable. There can be no rational doubt but
that the death-rate from this disease fell, not only coincidently
with, but in consequence of the extended use of vaccination ”
(pp. xxii. xxiii).
THE PROTECTIVE INFLUENCE OF VACCINATION.
Having said so much by way of combating the position taken
up by Anti-vaccinationists, we may now with a good grace fall
back upon our own position and consider the direct evidence that
can be adduced to show the protective influence of vaccination.
I might quote reliable figures to show that the epidemic in-
fluence of small-pox has greatly diminished since vaccination has
been practised; or statistics to demonstrate the fact that in
countries where vaccination is most perfectly carried out, small-
pox is least mortal. I might quote returns relating to the Army
and Navy, which alone are conclusive upon the point, but I would
prefer giving a few telling illustrations'that will be readily under-
stood by those who have not the time or the patience to wade
through voluminous statistics.
We are often taunted by Anti-vaccinationists with deliberately
ignoring the epedemic of 1871. Dr. Seaton, Medical Officer of


the Privy Council and Local Government Board for 1874, fur-
nished a report on the epedemic 1870 —3, which Anti-vaccination -
ists Will do well to study. The analysis given, affords most con-
vincing evidence of the protective influence of vaccination.
The following facts are conclusive as evidence in the same
direction :
During the years 1870 —9, which included the epidemic
referred to above 10,504 persons were on an average permanently
employed in the General Post Office, London—all of whom had
to be re-vaccinated on admission. Not a single fatal case of
small-pox occurred, and only ten mild cases were seen during the
period. *
It may be contended that after all the Post Office officials
ran very little risk.
But the same cannot be said of those whose duties brought
them into daily contact with small-pox patients. I allude to the
nurses engaged in the small-pox hospitals ; and the evidence
upon this point is worth referring to
“During the epidemic of 1881 (I quote these statistics from
Quain’s Diet, of Med.) no persons were engaged in the Homer-
ton Fever Hospital in attendance upon the small-pox sick ; all
these, with two exceptions, were re-vaccinated, and all but these
exceptions escaped small-pox. The experience of 1876-7 was of
the same kind; all re-vaccinated attendants having escaped,
whilst the only one who had not been vaccinated took the disease
and died of it. So in the epidemic of 1881, of 90 nurses and
other attendants of the Atlas Hospital Ship (small-pox), the only
person who contracted small-pox was a housemaid who had not
been vaccinated.” (p. 1442.)
Taking a wider survey.—Certain important investigations have
recently been carried on in London, touching the protective
effects of vaccination, and small-pox hospitals have supplied evi-
dence of the immunity conferred from small-pox by re-vaccination
upon attendants on the sick. Take the following
“Of 734 persons thus employed,” says the account quoted,
“79 had previously had small-pox, leaving 665, of whom 10 were
not re-vaccinated ; all but these 10 escaped small-pox, and all
these 10 were attacked.”
Even more striking is the following instance related by Dr.
Chance and recorded in the London Times and Lancet for 1881 :
“The master of a ship sailing from London to New York had
before sailing taken on board the vessel a son suffering from small-
pox. The surgeon, unwilling to denounce the master and have
the case removed from the vessel, sought to obviate the evil effects.
* Ency. Brit. 9 ed. v. 22 p. 164.


its presence in the ship might have upon the crew by re-vaccinat-
ing them. Unfortunately, the supply of vaccine lymph he was
able to procure was insufficient for the re-vaccination of the whole
of the men, and, as the event proved, while the re-vaccinated
escaped the contagion of the disease the men who had not been
re-vaccinated suffered from it, the greater number contracting the
malady, and three died.”
Coming nearer home I need not do more than refer to the
experience in Sydney when the “ Preussen ” was unfortunate
enough to have smallpox on board. Of the passengers detained
at the quarantine station :
Passengers.
Attacked.
Died.
Never vaccinated
19
15
9
Deficient vaccination marks ...
59
16
3
Good, or fairly good vaccination marks
150
29
0
Vaccinated and re-vaccinated
55
4
0
Had small-pox before
13
3
0
Of the six unvaccinated patients who recovered one has lost the
sight of both eyes, and another of one eye All the unvaccinated
children under one year old attacked died.
During the outbreak of small-pox at Launceston, Tasmania,
we had another proof of the value of vaccination if we are to
judge the question by statistics as recommended by Mr. Alfred
Wallace.
I take the following from a Parliamentary paper containing a
report of the returns relating to vaccination, etc., of the cases
treated: —
“ The total number of patients and suspects admitted into
the establishment was 72. The average number of inmates,
exclusive of staff, was about 55 ; on the nth of October these
were thus classed :—Patients, nine ; convalescents, nine; and
suspects, thirty-seven.
Four other cases of small-pox also occurred in Laun-
ceston, two of which had ended fatally before the establishment
of the Mowbray Hospital, and the other two were nursed in their
own homes. There were, therefore, thirty-three cases in all,
of which eleven, or 33 per cent., proved fatal.
Of the 33 cases, ten were persons who had been vaccin-
ated in infancy, one of whom died; four of persons who had been
vaccinated or re-vaccinated after childhood, none of whom died;


sixteen were of persons who had never been vaccinated, of whom
seven died ; and three were of persons whose record was doubtful,
but who bore no marks of ever having been vaccinated, all of
whom died. Thus, of cases of
Persons who had been vaccinated in
infancy - - - - - 10 per cent. died.
Persons who had been vaccinated
after childhood o per cent. died.
Persons who had never been vac-
cinated - - - - ‘43 per cent. died.
Persons who bore no marks of
having been vaccinated - - 100 per cent, died
Or: of
Persons who certainly had been
vaccinated 7 per cent. died.
Persons who actually or virtually
were not vaccinated - - 52 per cent. died.
In regard to the single case of death among the vaccinated
patients, it should be mentioned that the man was otherwise
unhealthy, and his vaccination dated back more than 40 years.
There are no means in Tasmania of satisfactorily estimat-
ing the relative numbers of vaccinated and unvaccinated persons.
But of the 76 people above mentioned (being the 72 admitted to
the Mowbray establishment, and the four cases treated in Laun-
ceston), information as to vaccination has been furnished of 74,
the number of vaccinated being 45, and of unvaccinated and
unmarked 29. Of the 45 vaccinated, 25 were vaccinated in
infancy and 20 in after life. Taking 74 as the number exposed to
infection, it appears that—
Of 25 people vaccinated in infancy 10 developed the disease,
being 40 per cent.
Of 20 people vaccinated in after life, none developed the
disease.
Of 29 unvaccinated people, 23 developed the disease, being
79 per cent.
And it must be borne in mind that the six unvaccinated people
who did not develop the disease were all vaccinated as soon as
practicable after it was known that they had been exposed to
infection.”—(Report by Mr. Mault, Inspector under Board of
Health, pp. 3-4).


IS THERE DANGER IN VACCINATION?
It may safely be said that the chief danger arising from the
practice of vaccination at the present time is that for which the
anti-vaccinationists are directly responsible. By their literature and
misrepresentations they have helped to shake public confidence
in the operation.
As a consequence parents neglect to have their children
vaccinated until a scare occurs; and it is then that danger arises
that the operation may be performed hurriedly , carelessly , and with-
out due regard to conditions.
I shall never forget what happened in Tasmania in the year
1887. For some time previous to the outbreak, anti-vaccination-
ists had been preaching their pernicious doctrines, and as a con-
sequence very few persons troubled about vaccination. During
the six weeks immediately preceding 19th September, the total
number of vaccinations in Tasmania reached only 179; but for
the six weeks immediately succeeding the number of vaccinations
rose to 6,513. Well do I remember how mothers who had pre-
viously declared their willingness to go to gaol rather than have
their children vaccinated —crowded round the doors of the vacci-
nation depots from morning till evening; and how as a conse-
quence communication was made to head quarters that the supply
of lymph was insufficient —and it had to be sought for anywhere.
Those who are rich can always secure their children being
vaccinated properly and safely by the medical attendant of the
family ; but the poor have to trust to the depots, and are subject
to the risks I have referred to.
COMPULSORY LEGISLATION.
The remedy for this can only be found in legislation, under
which vaccination must be made compulsory, at least for those
who are unable to protect themselves —the children of the State.
Under such legislation, wisely and properly administered, the
work of vaccination may be carried on systematically and with
less danger to the child than attends the very common practice of
piercing the ear for ear-rings.
Let our legislators look to it that this all-important question
is not trifled with, for with them rests the responsibility, and
with them must rest the consequences of neglect.




