

/r~\


“SOMETHING TO DO.”
LECTURE BY SIR CHARLES GAVAN DUFFY, M.P.
On Monday evening, 27th November, Sir
Charles Gavan Duffy delivered a lecture
in the Temperance Hall, Melbourne. The
lecturer, accompanied by the Eight Wor-
shipful the Mayor of Melbourne (James
Paterson, Esq.,) and several leading mem-
bers of the Corporation and other well-known
citizens, came on the platform at eight
o’clock, and received a hearty welcome.
The Mayor presided, and the lecturer spoke
as follows:
An eminent Englishman, who spends
his summers in London in intellectual
work, and in winter escapes to the orange
and olive groves of the South to pursue
his studies more comfort, lately ques-
tioneJ me on the resources of this country, its
industries, the habits of the people, and its
social and public institutions. When I
answered his questions to the best of my
ability, he broke into scornful laughter, and
swore we were blinder than the shepherds
and stockriders who, forty years ago, squatted
by the creek of some future goldfield,
ignorant that under their feet lay treasures
to furnish the outfit of a nation. With your
climate and soil, he said, you might compete
with France and Italy in their choicest pro-
ducts ; you might adorn your lives with
social comforts and graces impossible in a
climate like that of England, where life for
half the year is a struggle with the elements ;
you might make your country the chosen re-
treat where Englishmen of the midddle class
would long to spend the evening of life
among a kindred people, instead of flying, as
we do now, to some continental city, and
encountering the perplexities of a foreign
language and foreign habits to escape from
the East wind and the Income-tax. One man
(my philosophic friend went on to say) like
Sir Arthur Helps, or Count Eumford, or above
all, Dr. Arnold, if he had turned his dream of
transferring himself to Australia into a fact —
one such man would alter all this. He
would gather a few sympathetic labourers
around him, and how often have a few men with
a fixed purpose changed the face of the world.
After a little time in every town and hamlet
there would be a group of recruits to practise
his teachings ; drawing-rooms and workshops
would become his normal schools, and you
would soon see judges, bishops, and minis-
ters of State, as well as professors, jour-
nalists, and artisans, exhorting the people
to help on his work, and setting the ex-
ample by helping it themselves. I assured
my friend that, if he had a little “ colonial
experience,” he would mitigate his enthu-
siasm ; that we are sceptical in the colonies
of philanthropists with an ingenious schema
for reforming us out of hand ; and that we
are not disposed, as a rule, to put much
trust in any social custom or industrial en-
terprise which had not its habitat already
somewhere between the Isle of Wight and
the Giants’ Causeway. My friend, I fear,
suspected me of being a Philistine, indifferent
to the interest of “ sweetness and light,”
but that was not quite the state of the case.


They tell a story of a newly-landed immi- flock or unshipping a windlass, simply by
grant in America who assured an inquisitive
Yankee that he was mistaken in believing
there were any bogs in Ireland; and when a
friend remonstrated with him in private, he
rejoined, “ Begorra, me boy, I wasn’t going
to let a stranger run down the country!”
Like my compatriot, I was not disposed to
pamper the pride of this European philoso-
pher by making unhandsome admissions ;
but here in private, among ourselves, we
may confess, without scruple, that it is not
the height of wisdom to persist in cultivating
only the customs and the crops which
flourish in the British islands under Austra-
lian skies, where more profitable crops would
ripen with greater certainty, and where
simpler customs would make life longer and
pleasanter; and that the philosopher was
not much at fault in contending that the
great aim of statesmanship ought to be to
make the most of our country. How to
make the most, or, at any rate, how
to make more, of our country, is precisely
the “ something to do ” of which I have
undertaken to speak to-night. This is
the land, in which most of us must live
and die, and which will be inhabited by our
children after us; it is prudent, even in the
lowest sense of that respectable virtue which
we call thrift, as well as in the highest sense,
which is called statesmanship, to take care
that under our management it yields its full
quota of profit and enjoyment, and of
public reputation, which also is an element
of national wealth. This newest New World,
taught by the examples and warnings of two
civilised continents, “ heir of all the
ages,” ought to be ashamed of itself if it
lags behind in social, moral, or material
advancement. Let us begin with the
fundamental question of national re-
sources.
I profoundly believe that our soil,
seamed with gold and clothed with whole-
some pasturage, which produces nine o r
ten millions worth of bullion and wool,
would in time yield another nine or ten
millions annually without displacing a
cultivating the crops for which the soil
and climate are fittest. Before the gold
discovery, we took the grass and left the
gold behind; now we take the gold and
the grass, and leave behind something
as productive as either. Columns of
statistics are not persuasive, but the mind
grasps broad results. For example, the
olive is grown in Italy, Spain, and France,
and generally in the countries bordering
the Mediterranean, and it has been proved
by experiment that it grows to equal
perfection in Australia. If I read you the
number of kilogrammes of oil produced,
and the amount of liras for which it is sold,
who would remember the figures to-
morrow ?■ But take the case this way, and
it becomes one to ponder on, I think. The
oil expressed from the little brown berry
in Italy yields as large an income annually
as the goldfields of Victoria. Spain, long
distracted with revolution and a disputed
succession, ill taught and ill governed, gets
as much from her olive groves, her orange
groves, and her nut groves as Victoria
from her whole clip of wool. If you add
the vineyards of Spain to her olive planta-
tions the result attained annually in
pounds sterling exceeds our national
revenue for two years. France transmutes
her fruit into wine, brandy, and confections,
and with less vine-land than Victoria,
obtains more for them in a season than we
do for gold or wool in a series of years. I
might push the inquiry into the smaller
countries of Europe, but I prefer leaving
these facts standing, like finger posts, to
point the way we ought to go. Whatever
grows in France, Spain, or Italy will grow
here, and in most cases grow on soil worth-
less for wheat. The olive, for example,
would flourish on deserted goldfields, and
after it has attained a certain growth it gives
no more trouble; 1 have hundreds of times
seen women and children gathering the fruit
as a frolic rather than a labour. It has
been asked, where would we find a market for
olive oil, as the countries which chiefly use


the article produce it at home. Well, to matories into workshops and farms for
begin, in England, which paid a million and
a half sterling for this oil in 1873. In India
the consumption is still greater. There is
a market even in Australia for more than
we can manufacture for years. Dried fruits,
confections, scents, sericulture, all the
southern industries follow in the wake of this
one. And the fault will be ours if they do not
follow fast. It is little more than a genera-
tion since merino sheep were introduced into
Australia, by the forethought of Captain
McArthur, and when George Washington was
drilling his colonial levies the cotton plant
was as new to the Southern States of
America as the olive is to us to-day. We have
had our local experience also; over half a
million gallons of wine were made in Vic-
toria last year, embracing more than two
dozen varieties, and the other day wine was
only grown by an amateur here and there as
a plaything. There is a crop not belonging
exclusively to the South, but which thrives
well in southern countries, and for which
there is as steady and certain a demand as for
wool. I was born and reared in a province
where the blue blossom of the flax plant is
seen on all hands and recognised as an em-
blem of prosperity. The farmers of Ulster
receive nearly a million and a half for their
annual crop, but so far are they from supply-
ing the whole home demand that the import
of flax into the United Kingdom from foreign
countries exceeds in value our export of gold
or wool. I am well aware that exhortation
on this subject cannot do much; that a
single man, or a man here and there, can
scarcely plant olives or grow flax with profit;
that, to be successful, these industries must
he organised here as they were organised in
the first instance in the countries in which
they have taken root. But I think they can
be organised ; I think it is possible to intro-
duce, not merely the special industries, but
the special trades of Southern Europe (about
which I shall have a word to say later),
without appreciable cost or risk to anybody.
The way to do it is a very simple way ; let
us turn the penal establishments and refor-
trades and industries which do not
exist here at present. We have a huge re-
serve of cheap labour at our disposal; the
labour of men and boys who are already
housed, clothed, fed, and tended by the State.
Is there any valid reason we should not
employ it t ? On the contrary, that any one of
them in good health should escape his tale
of work is a blunder and a reproach.
Every adult convict costs the country six-and-
thirty pounds a year, and if he does not sup-
port himself, some honest man outside is
supporting him. The supreme law that man
should earn his bread by the sweat of his
brow was not, as far as I know, intended to
include an exception in favour of criminals.
There are difficulties of course; we may well
believe that convicts don’t like work, and are
not compliant pupils, but as they must eat
three times a day, and have no right to eat
if they will not do their best to earn their
bread, that difficulty is by no means insur-
mountable. True philanthrophy never
separated itself more peremtorily from the
maudling mimicry of that virtue, than when
Florence Nightingale declared that “we
ought no longer to lodge thieves at the ex-
pense of the people whom they robbed.” It
is a thrice-told tale that elsewhere they are
boarded and lodged at their own proper cost.
Prisons have been made self-supporting in so
many cases in the United States, Belgium,
Switzerland, Holland, France and England,
not to speak of instances nearer at hand,
that it is needless to discuss this point. It
has been done, it can be done, and it ought
to be done. There is just as little
novelty in the proposal of making
these establishments workshops; so many
aa sixty trades are taught in French prisons,
and about forty in English prisons. The
novelty would be to get the thing not
described, but to get it done. It has been
objected at home that prison factories com-
pete unfairly with free labour, bat that
objection will not apply to a proposal to
introduce industries which do not exist
among us. Here is the muster roll of


available labour. In the penal establish- flinching from work ; and, on the other hand,
ments there are 1500 convicts, of whom over
a thousand are sentenced to more than a
year’s imprisonment, and they, at any rate,
are fit subjects for this experiment. Of this
thousand, a large majority have been
repeatedly convicted, so many as a third of
them five times and upwards ; and they are,
in fact, professional thieves, who retire into
gaol periodically, as a gentleman goes to
Queensoliff or Sorrento for a little repose
from a laborious pursuit. The short-sen-
tence prisoners take their recreation more
frequently, A multitude of them go to gaol
four, five, and six times a year ; in fact, the
gaol is their family mansion. Is it not a
grim joke that every one of these profes-
sional gentry takes his ease at the cost of
some industrious man outside, who, as it
were, carries him on his shoulders ? It is a
pity to speak of penal establishments and
reformatory and industrial schools in the
same breath; I only do so because, in both
establishments, there is labour over which
the Executive has complete control. Among
the children who are wards of the State there
are nearly fifteen hundred of an age to
receive industrial training. They cost an
average of about £2O a head. A few of them
are employed in raising farm produce and per-
forming other necessary work for the institu-
tions which shelter them. In the training-ships
we rear three hundred boys as sailors, and
then hire them out, not to man a mercantile
marine, but to black shoes, weed gardens,
drive stock, and, in a few instances, to be
apprenticed to trades. When their naval
training is complete, about three out of every
hundred become sailors, and ninety-seven
find their apprenticeship to sailoring was so
much time wasted. This is surely not a wise
economy of money or labour, nor is it a rash
presumption that we might improve on this
system. The training ships are about to be
abandoned, and the opportunity of doing
better is at hand.
With respect to prisoners, I would have
the State to be a just, temperate, inex-
orable master—one who would permit no
no capricious or undue severity—a master
who would send the perverse and slothful to
drain swamps or build fortifications, but who
would not permit one man who did his best
indoors to be subject to the fatal demoralisa-
tion of working in a chain-gang under the
public gaze. The experiment which I pro-
pose is an economic one, and I am not bound
to insist on the moral results in the case of
adult convicts ; but surely the moral results
would not be inconsiderable? Idleness is
the mother of mischief, nowhere so certainly
as in a prison. Whoever has seen prisoners
prowling up and down their narrow yards
like wild animals, or standing in scowling
defiance under “ the fierce light that beats
upon ” a. gaol, can estimate the change
that would remit them to some tranquil
pursuit, and that would launch them
into the world again equipped with
with some calling by which they could live.
In the House of Commons the Home Secre-
tary, three or four years ago, stated that, of
ninety convicts dismissed from one English
gaol, seventy-five had attained some degree of
efficiency in trades of which they previously
knew nothing. That is a piece of statistics
which seems to me to shine like a lamp set
on a high place. It is true we have done
something in Pentridge in the same direc-
tion ; but only enough to encourage us
to do better. With respect to the boys,
the case stands upon quite different grounds.
There are seven hundred children in the
reformatory schools whose parents, for the
most part, are dead, in gaol, absconded, or
living in public shame ; or, what is perhaps
more tragic, whose parents cannot restrain
them from vicious courses. You, who stand
in loco parentis to these children, what will
you do with them ? If you teach a boy to be
skilful in the details of a new industry, or
even of an old one, you give him an endowment
which may lead him to honest independence.
But if you rear up a fatherless child without
any lawful calling by which he can live, you
train him to become a thief. What choice,
indeed, has he ? I may class with the children


in the reformatories the whole body from more stringent. At one-and-twenty the
whom they are recruited—the "Larrikins.”
Our costly education system has certainly not
reached them yet, and when you do reach them,
there is somethingmore essential to teach them
than the rule of three. Habits of industry,
to wit, of personal cleanliness, and of
veracity, for the character of children does
not depend so much on education as on dis-
cipline. Habit, as the Duke of Wellington
in his practical way declared, is not merely
as strong as nature, but ten times as strong.
Send them to school, and let it be an in-
dustrial school, make them apprentices as
well as scholars, train them in morals and in-
dustry as carefully as in the English
grammar or the multiplication table. lam
far from advising all work and no play, which
makes Jack what the proverb tells us. Some of
the brightest and most cheerful children I
have anywhere seen were in the industrial
schools of France and Belgium, where work
alternated with gymnastics, lively sports, and
pleasant songs, and where holidays are fre-
quent ; for it is the common testimony of
competent witnesses, that with something to
do in which they feel themselves of use,
children are healthier, happier, and better
conducted than in idleness. I think the most
determined secularist would scarcely deny
that these are schools in which religion ought
to be taught, elsewhere will the motherless
orphans learn their duty to God and their
neighbours t We scarcely realise, I fear, the
tremendous importance of this problem.
In Europe, and especially in France, the
most dangerous element of the population
is “ nobody’s son.” It is he who burns
palaces and murders hostages; and, I have
no doubt, on another stage he is yelling for
the Claimant and Dr. Kennealy. In
Europe the State takes precaution against
the Gmiin and the Street Arab on grounds
of public economy. If he is not taught
to support himself he becomes a permanent
charge - to the State, when he ripens, in
good time, into a pick-pocket or a burglar.
But with us the motive for action is far
larrikin becomes a citizen; he will mix
with the general population, sit upon
juries, vote at elections, and, perhaps, turn
the scale in the most vital, social, or political
contests. I wish some gentleman, with a
turn for social statistics of a speculative
class, would calculate how much we might
possibly gain on this transaction. The gain
of the school becoming self-supporting, for
example; the gain of manufacturing good
citizens instead of dangerous ones; the
gain of not letting loose a generation who
must live by plundering society; and the
gain of not rearing a following for some
future Boss Tweed to be dictator of Vic-
toria. Who will tot us up this sum ? If
we will make this experiment, the modut
operandi is not difficult. Let us bring
skilled artisans from Southern countries to
teach these industries; that is the principle;
the details will be obvious to anyone who
who has considered the subject. The pre-
sent expenditure, better economised, would
probably bear the cost. After a little it
would be far more than sufficient. As fast
as boys were trained they might be ap-
prenticed to landowners for a moderate
period at reasonable wages; and when we
have reached this stage the end will be at-
tained ; the great factor—competition—will
do the rest. One collateral result would be
to increase largely the land available for
settlement. A German population have
made prosperous homes in a district long
pronounced fit only for sheep; and southern
industries will utilise far worse soil. In
the Pays de Waes, near Antwerp, the
inost thickly-populated part of Europe,
I saw soil, originally a coarse sand,
clothed by human industry, not only
with verdure, but with harvests. Farm-
ing has not proved so productive or so
attractive a pursuit in Australia as it ought
to be. Whatever renders it more productive
and more attractive will tend to make men
love their homes better and become more
steadfast denizens of the country. When


Fuseli! was asked by some busybody what trous civil war did not equal her previous gain
it was he mixed with his colours to make
them so effective, he replied that he mixed
brains with them. I believe that brains are
the most quickening compost we could apply
to our agricultural produce. Let no economist
fear that the State would be dabbling in for-
bidden work if it initiated this experiment.
The State does substantially the same thing
in Germany, France, and America, in Austria,
Belgium, and Switzerland; not for the
criminal classes alone, indeed, but for all
children educated in the country. And
before many years, we will have to follow
this example on as large a scale, and teach
the rudiments of industry in our public
schools. Belgium is rivalling Yorkshire
in woollens, Switzerland is beating Coventry
in ribbons, foreigners are brought to Bir-
mingham to take charge of the finer
branches of the iron trade, because, in these
countries, industrial training has been the
care of the State. In Germany, Prance, and
Belgium, the elements of useful arts and
sciences, practical chemistry, applied mathe-
matics, mechanical drawing, and, in some
cases, modelling, are taught in the public
schools. A boy is trained to become a first-
class artisan just as carefully as another is
trained to become a first-class engineer. In
Austria there are three classes of agricultural
schools, the highest to train boys who are
destined to become owners or stewards of
great estates, and the lowest to train
peasants in the elements of agriculture and
horticulture and the management of small
farms; and at the universities there are
lectures on husbandry and agricultural
chemistry as regularly as on classics or
science. Among us it is a subject of wonder
that the owner of a great estate should have
imported an agricultural chemist. It was a
wise and liberal experiment doubtless ; but
how much better would such an expenditure
pay the owner of the whole public domain 1
When the fundamental questions of public
policy are settled, this is the direction in
which a country may most profitably employ
its intellect. All America lost in her disaa-
by the cotton plant. All England lost in her
contest with Napoleon was replaced by
the invention of the spinning jenny.
France, after being plundered by Prussia,
and loaded with an immense debt, has the
most prosperous population in Europe, be-
cause they are engaged with ceaseless indus-
try and thrift in employments in which the
climate and soil co-operate with them.
And now let us turn from profit to plea-
sure. To make the most of the country
Includes the duty of making it a place where
we can live our lives with the greatest at-
tainable satisfaction and usefulness. And
the first condition of success is that our
habits should conform to the climate, for as-
suredly the climate will not conform to them.
If the Fitzroy Gardens were in the south of
Europe they would be the resort of the cul-
tivated class for an hour or two every day
for nine months of the year; there would be
music at a fixed time; summer refreshments,
served with tempting cleanliness and ele-
gance, would be attainable ; and you might
rely on meeting your friends for a little plea-
sant talk in the intervals of work. If Bourke-
etreet were in the south of Europe it would
be brilliantly lighted in the evening, and
there would be twenty or thirty caf6s orna-
mented like a theatre, and where you would
be as free from rudeness or grossness as in
a drawing-room ; and each of them, though
open to every comer, would probably be the
favourite haunt of a particular profession, or
a class, or a political party, who would mus-
ter when the business of the day was over.
If the Flagstaff Gardens were in Paris or
Florence, there would be little open-air
theatres, where the class who work hard all
day would recreate themselves with some
cool beverage, and see a little drama into the
bargain; and the class with more leisure
would drop in occasionally and share their
enjoyment. I forewarn my good friends, the
Good Templars, that unless they supplement
their pledge with some innocent recreation
which people can enjoy in common, it will
jprove only a temporary bond in the end. 1


have been in France and Italy in all seasons stranger would scarcely notice that a tree
of the year, and -I never but once saw a
drunken man, never a drunken woman, and
till lately almost never a rude or surly one.
Am I wrong when I infer that the humanis-
ing habits of amusement which enter into
their daily life have something to do with
these pleasant results ?
The reign of the Commune has somewhat
disturbed their good humour and politeness, I
fear, though not their sobriety. Last year, for
example, I was crossing a crowded part of the
Euedußac, immediately in the rearof a water-
cart returning from work. The driver looked
behind, and either because he thought I was
a German, or because he disapproved of my
appearance generally, he squirted a shower of
muddy water that splashed me from head to
foot. There is no place you can reckon upon
prompt punishment for such an offence so
surely as in Paris, and a sergent de ville
would have speedily squared the account
between us, but I went my way and made no
complaint. I have been always inwardly
persuaded, however, that a fellow who could
wantonly ruin one of Poole’s coats and a hat
from Lincoln and Bennett’s, must have
begun his downward career by burning the
Tuileries. Intemperance threatens to become
a national vice in Australia, and without the
smallest extenuating circumstance. In the
clammy chill of a Scotch or Irish winter, it
is no wonder that men imperfectly clad and
ill-sheltered had sometimes recourse to the
whisky-bottle; but under a southern sky,
where is the excuse ? The only permanent
remedy, I believe, is a change in our national
habits, by which we may gradually come to
eat and drink and live as men do in other
countries where oranges and grapes ripen in
the open air.
If Melbourne were a continental city its
streets would be shaded by umbrageous trees,
which the corporation would take a just
pride in rearing and guarding. The munici-
pality of Paris has 60,000 trees under its
control, which it grows, transplants, and
tends sedulously from youth to age. And
after all the devastation of the seige, a
was injured, so skilfully have gaps been
filled up. The memory of the cultivated
traveller carries away from a country nothing
more pleasant to recall than beautiful trees.
The elms of the Champs Elysees, the flower-
ing chestnuts at Beechy Park, the noble pines
of the Scottish Highlands, the arbutus of
Killarney, and the gigantic palms of Monte
Carlo compete in interest and beauty
with the Parthenon and the Colosseum;
and trees grow nowhere better than under
Australian skies. London, which has
made immense strides in decoration
during the last twenty years, has adopted
a charming novelty in the shape of win-
dow gardening. In the private part of
Piccadilly, and in all the fashionable squares
and streets, nearly every windowsill is occu-
pied during the season by a handsome box, in
pottery or iron, containing choice flowers in
fall bloom. The effect in brightening the
appearance of the streets has been compared
by a poet to smiles on the human counten-
ance. The boxes, I believe, are supplied by
contract, and changed from time to time so
as to maintain perpetual bloom and beauty.
Any lady who will imitate this device, say in
the eastern end of Collins-street, will be a
public benefactor. London, indeed, has
emulated the South more than any Aus-
tralian capital; the latest fashionable re-
creation, garden parties, is just a custom of
the South, restricted within narrower limits.
If Melbourne were a continental city, we
should eat and drink less, but better. I
heard one of the wisest men now living in
the British Islands complain that the skill
and statesmanship of these days did not suf-
fice to furnish London with a glass of en-
tirely pure water. If he were here he might
complain, I think, that with our boundless
resources in corn land, our prize wheat, and
prize flour, our skilled artisans, and
abundant capital, it is not possible to get a
loaf of bread possessing the lightness, crisp-
ness and sweetness of the bread eaten by the
middle and upper classes nearly everywhere
in Europe. In every club in Loudon, and


in every first-class hotel, yon are served with idea of the philosopher, that Australia
French bread; and French bread does not
require merely a French baker, but flour im-
pregnated with the sunshine of the south. It
cannot be made with English flour. We
have the sunshine and the flour, why have
we not the bread ? We eat bread at least
twice a day, and it would not be unworthy of
a little care that we might eat it of the best
quality.
Apropos of French bread, I am tempted
to relate a surprise which once befel
me. It has become, as you know, a well
established tradition that in Galway, men are
so accustomed to duelling, that it is a com-
mon thing in that belicose city to order coffee
and pistols for two, or pistols for two and
coffee for the survivor. I know something
of Galway, and I don’t think that coffee is
the beverage they prefer in those parts, but
in Brussels I stumbled on the true origin of
the tradition. In that little capital there is
a larger proportion of the population in mili-
tary costume, and a greater variety of uni-
forms than I have seen anywhere else on the
globe, and the first time I breakfasted at the
Hotel du Parc, two warriors stalked into the
salle a manger, and one of them, to my pro-
found surprise, called out in an authorative
voice, “ Garcon du caf6 et des pistolets pour
deux, toute de suite." “ Waiter, bring coffee
and pistols for two without delay." Here was
the Galway story complete in everything but
the locality,and with my own eyes and ears for
witnesses. But a little inquiry dissipated the
marvel. The warriors only wanted their break-
fasts, as pistolet is the local name for a roll of
fancy bread. I wish we could have a pair of
pistols with our coffee in Australia. And
apropos of coffee, the Australian mail steamers
stop once a month at the next town to Mocha.
Have we Mocha coffee ? I might press the
question farther, it stops where the delicious
mango, as succulent as a strawberry and
twice as large as an orange, may be had.
Have Australians tried to grow the
mango in Queensland, where it would
flourish ? If we made the most of
the country, is it a dream, that
might become the sanatorium of India and
the British Islands; and Melbourne and
Geelong, Sandhurst and Ballarat, or
Sydney, Adelaide, Brisbane, and Hobart
Town become the successful rivals of Nice,
Naples, Pau, and Mentone? It costs less
in time and money to reach Melbourne
from London or Bombay than it cost to
reach Naples when Naples formed part of
the grand tour of every gentleman of for-
tune. In most towns of Southern Europe
there is at present a large colony of English,
Irish, and Scotch basking in the sunshine.
In Nice the principal thoroughfare is called
"La Promenade des Anglais; in Cannes,
Mentone, and San Eemo, the chances are
that the language you hear casually spoken
on the streets is English; and if you see
a long-legged cavalier, dressed in tweed,
escorting a lady mounted on a donkey, you
may accost him without troubling yourself
about irregular verbs or the gender of
nouns. Hotels on all hands invite you
with clap-trap names, such as “Hotel de
la Grand Bretagne," “ Hotel des lies Brit-
anniques," "Hotel de I’Angleterre,” or
nakedly, “ Hotel Victoria,” and “ Hotel
Westminsterand the best restaurant in
the Eiviera is called " London House.”
The page in gaudy livery, flying along the
street with a parcel, has " The English
Tailor ” embroidered on his collar; the
most flamboyant signs announce “ The
English Grocer," or " The English Phar-
macien" ; le Pilule et Vounguent de Holloway
is placarded in the windows; Guinness*
porter and Bass’ pale ale compete with the
native wines; and there are generally two
English churches, one Evangelical, the
other Eitualistic, so that nobody’s taste
may be balked. Is it hopeless, I say, to
expect that these colonies of middle class,
middle-aged persons, who have earned the
right of retirement, might be induced to drink
their sunshine here instead of in a country
where they are foreigners—in a country
where, since the war, living is exceptionally


dear ? Not dear, mark you, relatively to some
ideal standard, but dear relatively to Paris
or London. And not merely dear, but very
often bad. The French are a remarkably
thrifty people, it must be confessed, but
this virtue is not so attractive when it
takes the shape of stale vegetables and un-
ripe fruit, palmed upon you at a table d’ h6te
to save a few sous in marketing. I
mentioned on a former occasion that
the Bishop of Adelaide, in the English
Church, informed me that he sometimes sent
an overworked clergyman to Melbourne to
recreate himself in our National Gallery.
That significant fact indicates, I think, what
we might do for the capital, and for the
colony, and ultimately for the continent.
Make them more attractive; add to their
substantial advantages the {esthetic graces
which sweeten and elevate life, and give it
more intensity and variety.
But practical sagacity interposes with the
question—suppose these southern luxuries
and conveniences be desirable, how are we to
get them, or even to begin to get
them 7 I believe a singularly favourable
opportunity is at hand to make such a be-
ginning, and it is for this reason chiefly that
I have recurred to a subject upon which I
spoke so recently. In May, 1878, there will
be a Universal Exhibition held in Paris, and
if the sole object with which the exhibition
is held were to aid Australians in making the
most of their country, it could scarcely
correspond more effectually with that pur-
pose. It will contain models, plans, and de-
signs of buildings, furniture and utensils,
and of all the articles of utility and luxury
employed in southern countries indoor and
outdoor. Let me specify a few. There will
be models of chateaux, villas, and cottages.
Models of colleges, exhibiting the furniture
and internal arrangement, and accompanied
by the books, maps, and instruments em-
ployed in teaching. Separate models of in-
dustrial, technological, agricultural and
horticultural schools, with all the utensils
and books appertaining to them. Plans and
models of the methods employed in southern
industries, in expressing oil, in preserving
fruit, in irrigation and drainage, with all the
customary tools and machinery, and so on
throughout the entire life of southern countries,
social and industrial. On each article the
current price will be marked that a stranger
may know with certainty the ordinary cost.
Why should we not seize this occasion to
obtain an inestimable museum of southern
art and industry ? Suppose we procured
models of public and private edifices, tinted
to show the exact colours and materials em-
ployed. A plan is only intelligible to experts;
a picture, with its perspective and colouring,
is misleading; but from a model the skilled
and unskilled can obtain a tolerably true
impression of the edifice it represents. There
is no sort of reason why we should go on
building unsuitable or'inconvenient houses
instead of copying suitable ones, the result
of many thousand experiments in successive
generations. An Australian gentleman builds
an English mansion, and when he adds a
verandah, he has attained his ideal of grace
and convenience. An Italian gentleman, of
less than half his income, when the hot
winds blow, sits in a summer salon of
exquisite proportions, lined and floored with
slabs of cool marble, looking out upon
gardens where hedges thirty feet high, like
leafy walls, cast a perpetual shade, and the
air is cooled by a flashing fountain or an arti-
ficial stream fed from a reservoir, and scented
with the perfume of odorous plants. The
boundaries of his fields are marked by trees
laden with pleasant fruit, or by forest trees
looped together by the swinging tendrils of
the vine.
With models of Italian villas and plans
of Italian grounds in our museum, we
would emulate* them sooner or later. In
this land of large incomes we might have
also the luxury of mural painting. In
southern countries, not only the walls of
rooms, but the outer walls of chateaux, are
often ornamented with frescoes. By what
skilful use of pigments the colours are made
capable of resisting the atmosphere is
probably unknown here. We have arti-


sans, who can do to perfection any work in
which they have been trained, but work of this
class they have had no opportunity of seeing.
In many modern French houses the cornices
and centre-piece of the ceiling, which collect
dust and stains, and get chipped and frayed,
are represented on the level surface by
skilfully blended colours and lines, which
give the same precise effect as cornices and
centre-pieces without the cost or incon-
vience. If I affirm that you would not
detect the difference between the reality and
the imitation it will seem a strong thing to
say, yet it is true. But the brush does more
startling things than this. There is a
marvellous panorama of the siege of Paris
exhibited in the Champs Elysfies, where, within
a building not larger than the Theatre Royal
in Bourke-street, you see the whole city and
suburbs, not as in a picture, but as you might
see them in the sunlight from the Arc de
Triomphe ; and in the fore ground, within a
lew yards of the spectators, where a battery
of cannon is shown, there is one gun which
was actually employed in the siege intro-
duced among the guns painted on canvas,
and I positively affirm that you cannot, with-
out infinite pains and many mistakes, pick
out the real gun from the painted ones.
We should, I submit, have specimens
of every class of mural painting in our
Industrial Museum, and the exhibition
of 1878 will supply them, or render it easy
to obtain them. With the models we might
import a housepainter or two from Genoa or
Florence, who would teach students in the
schools of design to decorate houses in the
continental method. With models and a
teacher, indeed, any of the objects of conve-
nience or ornament proper to the south could
be made in our industrial schools. Foun-
tains, for example, arbours, pavilions, and
aviaries of remarkable beauty are manufac-
tured at a trifling cost where they are in
general demand; for taste is the art of pro-
ducing agreeable results without more cost
than ugly or painful ones. In Turin there
is a fountain which I visited many times ; it
consists of jets of water springing from a
skilful arrangement of undressed blocks of
stone —nothing more ; yet if we had a model
of it, I fancy it would be reproduced in scores
of places within the range of the Yan Yean.
In a Belgian graveyard I was much struck
by an iron cross, imitating unbarked wood,
rising out of a cairn of rough stones, inter-
mixed with, and partly covered by, wild
flowers; no materials could be simpler ; but
if it were within our reach, it would put to
shame some of the clumsy and costly monu-
ments we erect. In Belgium a pleasant and
civilised appearance is sometimes given to
the naked gloom of a schoolroom by
transparent sun-blinds, on which are
painted historical portraits, mathema-
tical diagrams, and other simple illus-
trations which enter into the daily busi-
ness of the place. If the lesson deals, for
example, with the history of the country, the
heads of popular leaders, from Philip Van
Artevetde to Charles Rogier, are shining in
the sunlight; if it speaks of the erection or
destruction of some historic edifice, the
growth of architecture, from the simplicity of
Greek art to the florid beauty of Gothic
(which is nowhere seen in more perfection
than in that little kingdom), is exhibited on a
sunblind. If we had a set of these blinds in
our museum, some Minister of Education
would be sure to utilise them for the benefit
of the public schools. And so with all the
kindred exhibits ; for an opportunity of im-
provement is seldom altogether wasted in
this community; some of the seed is sure to
fall on good soil. A dozen years ago, when
it was proposed to establish schools of design,
the project was received with little favour in
the Legislative Assembly, but when it was
carried to the industrious classes by Judge
Bindon and a few other energetic men, it
spread far and fast; and there are now fif-
teen hundred pupils, including jewellers,
carvers, engravers, carpenters, painters,
coachsmiths and their apprentices (the very
class the projectors had in view), and over
two dozen schools distributed throughout
the colony. By appealing to quite a different
grade, the leisured and rich, one energetic


lady will probably succeed in establishing
the southern industry of sericulture; and
another by silent, fruitful labour, is doing
even more important work in training a class
of servants who will carry order and com-
fort into a hundred households. In fine,
why should we not make our Parliament
House, when it is completed, an edifice in
which the perfection of Southern art and
ornament might be seen, instead of a model
of deformity and discomfort as it is at present?
The lecture to-night has been dry and serious,
because it aimed less to please than to
suggest “ something to do.”
Do you think the things I have ventured
to suggest, or any of them, ought
to be done ? If so, you can help to
get them done; for public opinion is a
stream fed from many rills of private
opinion. The will of a community does
not necessarily perorate or pass resolu-
tions ; it is sometimes as invisible as steam
or wind, but like these unseen giants,
nothing can long resist it. If you go home
to-night persuaded that the things sug-
gested are right and necessary, they are
the nearer being done for that belief.
A friend of mine, corrupted by the comic
literature of the day, says he has no doubt
we would be excellent Southerners by this
time if Columbus had given ns a chance by
turning his attention to the South Pacific
when he went out discovering continents,
but that I am asking too much from a colony
born the other day. A time, he says, will
come for these reforms. So I have heard
before; but when will it come ? When will
we begin to live from day to day, and taste
a little of the leisure and refreshment
of life as men are accustomed to do
elsewhere under genial skies ? Next
year, is it ? or next decade, or next gene-
ration ? Let us live a little to-day and to-
morrow, my friends ; for, of all dreams, the
most delusive is that long holiday, with end-
less “ cakes and ale,” which we picture as
our reward and recreation when we have
“made our pile” and retired from work.
