

Some Reminiscences of
BURNS
The Toet of Humanity
So, Bums, until the end of time
Thy fame shall still abound;
In voice unborn, in untried clime.
Thy song shall still resound.
—Andrew Mercer
richt guid book on Scotland's Bard whose heart was warm and true.
Whose name will ever be revered by Folks like me an' you.
READ'S RARE BOOK SHOP, 131 ANN STREET, BRISBANE


A Scottish Toast
To the granite Rock of Scotland
To the Thistle in the North.
To the Magic Faeries Border,
To the Laird beyond the Forth.
Where the snowflake seeks the mountain.
And the Storm the wind-swept tree.
Where the wild glen meets the river—
And the river meets the sea.


SCOTLAND'S BARD.
What is it that appeals at once to the innermost recesses of the
heart in so many of Burns's poems? Why is he so mindful of the
poor, and humble, so contemptuous of the rich and haughty? Why,
above all else, is he loud in his praise of Scotland, and of all that
is noble in the home life of his day? The answer is found at once
in his early training at his mother's knee, and under the powerful
moral influence of his father. This influence is seen to perfection in
later years when Bobbie composed "The Cotter's Saturday Night",
which is an actual picture of the poet's home life.
Robert Burns first saw the light on the 25 Jan., 1759, in a humble
cottage at Ayr, a cottage built by William Burnes*, the poet's father,
with his own hands. Robbie was the eldest of seven children nurtured
in an atmosphere of hard, honest toil, miraculously combined with
a certain real culture inculcated by candle light at the patient feet
of his father. Added to this Robbie was sent to board and lodge
with the schoolmaster at Ayr, so that he could eventually return
and teach his brothers and sisters at home. The family had many
ups and downs, but never once did they allow poverty to interfere
with the even tenor of their home life. As Robbie says—" Nothing
could be more retired than our general manner of living." Scot-
land is indeed personified in the poet's history which remains for
all time as an intensely uplifting story. Two intimate letters stand
out in Robbie's life. This is the only known letter to his father dated
27th December, 1781, from Irvine and it is part of an apology for
missing New Year at home. "I have but just time and paper to re-
turn you my grateful thanks for the lesson of virtue and piety you
have given me, which were too much neglected at the time of giving
them, but which, I hope, have been remembered ere it is yet too
late."
That is the real Robbie in spite of his many diversions. His
father's death affected him deeply as may be seen in this letter
to a cousin dated Nth February, 1784. "On the 13th inst., I lost the
best of fathers. Though, to be sure, we have had long warning
of the impending stroke, still the feelings of nature claim their part;
and I cannot recollect the tender endearments, and parental lessons
of the best of friends, and ablest of instructors, without feeling
what perhaps the calmer dictates of reason would partly condemn."
There you have the dignity of a poor peasant, and the seed of
that language destined later to blossom into the flower of all poetry,
which is Burns. The poet's mother, Agnes Burnes*, also played
her part, being "a very sagacious woman" and entirely devoted
to her family. To-day when the name and fame of Robert Burns
are world wide it is interesting to note that the poet's father was
much worried about his son's future, and often said so, although
it was purely from love of his children. To-day Robbie himself has
long gone to his well earned rest, but his memory lives for aye in
the hearts and minds of all who love and revere the land of the
heather.
Old Spelling


THE "CUTTY SARK" and BURNS.
Those of you who have enjoyed "Tam o' Shanter" may be
interested to learn that the famous tea clipper mentioned above took
its name from the poem.
The figurehead of the old sailing ship represented Nannie, the
witch in "Tam o' Shanter". Here are the lines
Her cutty sark o' Paisley ham,
That while a lassie she had worn,
In longitude tho' sorely scanty,
It was her best, and she was vauntie.
BURNS—POET OF HUMANITY.
Of the many poets who have added lustre to the language of our
race Robert Burns stands alone. He stands alone because of his
intense humanity, his fearless outlook, and his great love for the soil
of his native Scotland;
O Scotia! my dear, my native soil!
For whom my warmest wish to Heaven is sent!
Long may thy hardy sons of rustic toil
Be blest with health, and peace, and sweet content!
Then again we see his discerning wisdom in this earnest
prayer;
"O wad some power the giftie gie us,
To see oursels as others see us ... ,
As for brotherly understanding who can forget the oft repeated,
"Man's inhumanity to Man makes
countless- thousands mourn
Robert Burns will ever be rememberd by these quotations alone
for they are the sum total of human personality. To think that a poor
humble ploughman reared in surroundings of hard toil should so
inspire the world is indeed the acme of achievement. Regard the
beauty of his simple pathos in nature: Do you remember the Moun-
tain Daisy turned by the plough?
"Wee modest crimson tipped flow'r,
Thou's met me in an evil hour;
For I maun crush amang the stoure
Thy slender stem:
To spare thee now is past my pow'r,
Thou bonnie gem."
The spirit of Burns is much needed in our troubled world today.
Listen to Robbie's words;
The deities that I adore
Are social Peace and Plenty;
I'm better pleased to make one more,
Than be the death of twenty.


Truly is he Scotland's own contribution to immortality in the
realm of all that dignifies and ennobles mankind. May he ever
rule our hearts and minds by the beauty of these lines;
O Thou, in whom we live and move,
Who mads't the sea and shore;
Thy goodness constantly we prove,
And grateful would adore.
And if it please Thee, Power above,
Still grant us, with such store,
The friend we trust, the fair we love,
And we desire no more.
Many years have rolled away since the death of Robert Burns.
This is how Robbie once anticipated his passing;
When death's dark stream I ferry o'er,
A time shall surely come,
In Heaven itself I'll ask no more
Than just a Highland welcome.
. .No wonder men have raised magnificent monuments to his
memory on earth. He will surely be remembered in Heaven if only
for this;
I thank thee, Author of this opening day!
Thou whose bright sun now gilds the orient skies!
Riches denied, Thy boon was purer joys,
What wealth could never give nor take away!
Yet come, thou child of poverty and care;
The mite high Heaven bestowed, that mite with thee I'll
share.
EXACT COPY.
THE FAMILY BIBLE REGISTER OF WILLIAM BURNES.
"THE BIG HA—BIBLE"
William Burnes was born 11th November, 1721.
Agnes Brown, was born 17th March, 1732,
Married together, 15th December, 1757.
Had a son, Robert, 25th January, 1759.
Had a son, Gilbert, 28th September, 1760.
Had a daughter, Agnes, 30th September, 1762.
Had a daughter, Anabella, 14th November, 1764.
Had a son, William, 30th July, 1767.
Had a son, John, 10th July, 1769.
Had a daughter, Isabel, 27th June, 1771.
The next entry is in the Poet's handwriting—
William Burness departed this life, 13th February, 1784, aged
63 years, 2 months, and 22 days.


The above spelling of the Poet's surname is interesting and
apparently is common to the family in Kincardineshire, being pro-
nounced in two syllables in the North of Scotland. But the Ayr-
shire people persisted in using ''Burns", being the one syllable com-
mon to the South. So Robbie agreed to conform to the Ayrshire
spelling, which change was made not long before the publication of
his poems in Kilmarnock, in July, 1786. This date is taken as proof
positive of the change seeing that Robbie signed the minutes as
Depute Master of the Masonic Lodge, Tarbolton, on Ist March,
1786, using the signature, "Robert Burness."
THE POETS FATHER.
There is a celebrated letter written by Robert Burns on 2nd
August, 1797, an extract from which reads thus—"My father was of
the North of Scotland, the son of a farmer, and was thrown by
early misfortunes on the world at large, where, after many years
wanderings and sojournings, he picked up a pretty large quantity
of observation and experience, to which I am indebted for most of my
little pretensions to wisdom." Hard toil was ever the lot of William
Burnes and yet Robbie's father must have been a man of remark-
able will power as witness this striking tribute from an eminent
pen of that day; "In all that has been recorded of William Burnes
we see the traits of one of nature's gentlemen. Under an exterior
which extreme reserve rendered somewhat repulsive, the elder
Burnes carried an intelligent mind and genial affections. Some
general idea of the Poet's home life may accurately be gained
from the following:
"They were a remarkable family in the district, keeping more
by themselves than is usual in the same class. Their superior in-
telligence and careful culture, with a certain refinement of manner
which they maintained amid the daily toil of farm labour, caused
them to be respected and looked up to as people of a superior
stamp. No wonder Robert Burns was able to depict the changing
scene of life so clearly, so truly. "No wonder many of Robbie's
poems dwell in the land of reality, as well as the field of imagery.
And when we come to find that his poor father, in spite of unspeak-
able toil, failed financially, we can quite imagine the feelings of the
poet-son as he wrote these poignant lines,- —"After three years
tossing and whirling in the vortex of legislation, he was just saved
from the horrors of a jail by a consumption, which, after two years
promise, kindly stepped in and carried him away to where the
wicked cease from troubling and the weary are at rest!
William Burnes was buried in Alloway Kirk which later in-
spired Robbie to compose the famous "Alloway's Old Haunted Kirk",
which contains that beautiful line, "where the rude forefathers
of the hamlet sleep". Such was the father of Robert Burns, and this
is his son's last tribute, —


Oye whose cheek the tear of pity stains,
Draw near with pious reverence and attend!
Here lie the loving husband's dear remains,
The tender Father, and the gen'rous Friend.
The pitying heart that felt for human woe;
The dauntless heart that feared no human pride.
The friend of man, to vice alone a foe;
For ev'n his failings leaned to virtue's side.
The original tombstone which Robbie erected over his father's
grave was carried away in chips by visitors eager to possess some
relic of the Burns family. The present stone was subsequently
erected by Mr. David Auld, of Doonbrae, and it bears the above
affectionate epitaph, which, as mentioned above, is his famous
son's final tribute.
TWO UNPUBLISHED POEMS.
It is seldom in these days that a hitherto unpublished poem of
Bobby Burns come to light. Mrs. John Moffat, of St. Andrew's,
Scotland, claims to be the possessor of such. It was copied by Mrs.
Moffat's grandfather, the late Sir Edward Sanderson, well nigh a
hundred years ago. The verses are prefaced by the following
words:—
Composed by Robert Burns, and presented to the nobleman
addressed upon being called up from the servant's hall (where he
had been sent to dine with them) and add to the entertainment of
the company along with which company he had been asked to go
on an excursion to Bass Rock. On presenting which, he put on his
hat, turned o;n his heel, and retired. The verses are as follows:
"My Lord! I would not fill your chair
Tho' ye be proudest noble's heir.
I come this night to join your feast
As equal of the best at least;
'Tis true that cash with me is scant,
And titles trifles that I want.
The King has never made me kneel
To stamp my manhood with his seal.
But what of that? The King on high
Who took less pains with you than I,
Has filled my bosom and my mind
With something better of the kind
Than your broad acres, something which
I cannot well translate to speech,
But by its impulse I can know
'Tis deeds, not birth, that makes men low,
Your rank my lord is but a loan;
But mine thank heaven is all my own,
A peasant, 'tis my pride to be;


Look round and round your hall and see
Who boasts of higher pedigree;
I was not fit, it seems, to dine
With these fox-hunting heroes fine,
But only came to bandy jests
Among your lordship's hopeful guests.
There must be here some sad mistake
I would not play for such a stake —
Be a buffoon for drink and meat,
And a poor earlie's tax-paid seat;
No! Die my heart, ere such shame
Descend on Robert Burns's name.
According to the ''World's News" of February, 1925, what is de-
clared to be an unpublished poem by Robert Burns has been dis-
covered in a remote settlement in New Zealand. It was found
among the effects of the late Mr. Donald Grant, Waikomaiti, Otago.
The poem is supposed to have been written by Burns on his
deathbed. It is addressed to Miss Jessie Lewars, a friend and neigh-
bour of the Burns family in Dumfries, who attended the bard in His
last illness. Among the verses are the following;—
Howen often, in the dreary night,
I clasp my burning hands
Upon those throbbing sleepless lids,
O'er eyes like glowing brands;
And wonder in my weary brain,
If haply, when I'm dead,
My old boon friends for love of me
Will give my bairnies bread.
Oh, did the poor not help the poor,
Each in his simple way,
With humble gift and kindly word,
God pity them, I say.
For many a man who clasped my hand,
With pledges o'er the bowl,
When the wine halo passed way
Proved but a niggard soul.
Oh, wilt thou gang o' nights, Jessie,
To my forsaken hearth,
And be as thou hast been to me,
The truest friend on earth?
Sae sweetly in your linnet voice.
You'll sing my weans to rest,
While Jeannie leans her weary head
Upon thy loving breast.


THE LAST MOMENTS OF BURNS.
The hour of death comes to all of us sooner or later. Books
have been written dealing with the final scene in many a distin-
guished bedchamber. Last utterances from the dying have become
of historic import in the annals of many countries. There is truly
an atmosphere of supreme influences in the all-prevading presence
of the Messenger of Death. Some of these influences have actually
presaged a joyful deliverance from long bodily suffering. But the
feelings in the hearts of those who look on are usually tinged with
sorrow. There can be few deaths sadder than the death of Burns
especially in the light of that immortality which was eventually to
surround his name. Who is there today who knows not the name
of Robert Burns? Where is the capital city which has not something
to perpetuate the memory of Scotland's Great Bard? To-day we
see him enthroned not only amid the glories of Literature but in
the hearts of men. In such circumstances the story of his passing
is in striking contrast set as it is in an atmosphere of tragedy.
Robert Burns died on the 21st July, 1796. Here is an authentic
account of the passing of a truly great man. "Though Burns now
knew he was dying, his good humour was unruffled, and his wit
never forsook him. When he looked up and saw Dr. Maxwell at
his bedside, 'Alas!' he said, 'what has brought you here? I am but
a poor crow, and not worth plucking'. Soon afterwards he saw
Gibson, one of his brother-volunteers, by the bedside, with tears in
his eyes. He smiled and said, 'John, don't Jet the awkward squad
fire over me.'
"The household presented a melancholy spectacle: the Poet
dying; his wife in hourly expectation of being confined; four help-
less children wandering from room to room, gazing on their miser-
able parents, and but too little of food or cordial kind to pacify the
whole or soothe the sick. To Jessie Lewars, all who are'charmed with
the Poet's works are much indebted: she acted .with the prudence
of a sister and the tenderness of a daughter, and kept desolation
away, though she could not keep disease. The end was approach-
ing rapidly. A tremor pervaded the Poet's frame; his tongue,
though often refreshed, became parched, and his mind, when not
roused by conversation, sunk into delirium. On the second and third
day after his return from the Brow the fever increased and his
strength diminished. On the fourth day, when his attendant, James
Maclure, held a cordial to his lips, he swallowed it eagerly—rose
almost wholly up—spread out his hands—sprang forward nearly the
whole length of the bed—fell on his face and expired. He was
thirty-seven years and seven months old, and of a form and strength
which promised long life; but the great and inspired are often cut
down in youth, while "Villians ripen gray with time."
"l went to see him laid out for the grave; several elder people
were with me. He lay in a plain unadorned coffin, with a linen


sheet drawn over his face; and on the bed and around the body,
herbs and flowers were thickly strewn, according to the usage of
the country. He was wasted somewhat by long illness; but death
had not increased the swarthy hue of his face, which was un-
commonly dark and deeply marked—his broad and open brow
was pale and serene, and around it his sable hair lay in masses,
slightly touched with grey. The room where he lay was plain and
neat, and the simplicity of the Poet's humble dwelling pressed the
presence of death more closely on the heart than if his bier had been
embellished by vanity and covered with the blazonry of high ances-
try and rank. We stood and gazed on him in silence for the space
of several minutes —we went, and others succeeded us not a
whisper was heard." Such is the sad yet dignified record of a
poignant scene which must have touched the innermost chords of
the human heart. The great poet had breathed his last upon the
earth he so enriched, and within the bosom of the nation he so
immortalised, by his own immortal pen. As lames Montgomery
so aptly records and pleads for his beloved Robbie—
"Peace to the dead! —In Scotia's choir
Of minstrels great and small,
He sprang from his spontaneous fire,
The Phoenix of them all!"
Sad as is the scene above recorded, most surely there is yet
one more to witness. Let the chronicler speak:
"On the evening of the 25th July, the remains of the Poet were
removed from his house to the Town Hall, where they lay in state
until the next morning. His interment took place on the 26th of
July; nor should it be forgotten, in relating the Poet's melancholy
story, that, while his body was borne along the street, his widow
was taken in labour and delivered of a son, who survived his birth
but a short while." Just as they were lowering Robbie's remains
into the grave they appeared hesitant as if loth to part with a man, a
genius, they were honouring too late. But it has ever been thus and
is the same to-day. Robert Burns has done more for Scotland than
any of his race and, what is more, he has done much to soften
the heart of man in every clime. To-day he lives as he never lived
before and in the beautiful lines of Andrew Mercer we see the clear
light of truth and equity.
"Burns! like the lark, thy home was low,
like her thy song was sweet;
The daisy on the mountain's brow
Was not more "neighbour meet."
"So, Burns, until the end of time,
Thy fame shall still abound!
In voice unborn, in untried clime.
Thy song shall yet resound."


As we gaze in silence on the many memorials erected to the
Poet of Humanity, Andrew Mercer's final verse rings true in our ears.
But we must also include one verse from Hugh Ainslie to crown this
brief survey of a great human soul: —
What heart hath ever matched his flame?
What spirit matched his life?
Peace to the Prince of Scottish Song,
Lord of the bosom's lyre!
144th ANNIVERSARY OF HIS DEATH.
2 1st July, 1796-1940.
"Don't be afraid. I'll be more respected a hundred years
after I am dead than I am at present."
R. 8., July 1796.
CHRONOLOGY OF
BURNS’S LIFE AND WORKS
January 25.—80rn in a clay-built cottage, raised by his father's own hands,
on the banks of the Doon, in the district of Kyle, and county of Ayr. A few days
after his birth a wind arose, that crushed the frail structure, and the unconscious
Poet was carried unharmed to the shelter of a neighbouring house.
1765.—(setat 6.)
Sent by his father to a school at Alloway Miln —taught by one Campbell—same
year placed under the care of Mr. Murdoch.
1766.—(7.)
May 25.—His father removes to the farm of Mount Oliphant, in the parish of
Ayr, leased him by Mr. Ferguson, of Doonholm.
1768.—(9.)
In the absence of Murdoch, he is taught arithmetic in the winter evenings by
his father, who instructs him also in the knowledge of History and Geography. On
hearing Murdoch read the tragedy of Titus Andronicus, he is so shocked at the recital
that he threatens to burn the book.
1769.—(10.)
The latent seeds of poetry cultivated in his mind by an old woman, who resides
in the family, and who had the largest collection in the country of tales and songs
concerning devils, ghosts, fairies, witches, warlocks, apparitions, giants, enchanted
towers, &c. The recital of these had so strong an effect on his imagination that for
ever afterwards, in his nocturnal rambles, he kept a sharp look out in suspicious
places.
1772.—(13.)
Sent to the Parish School of Dalrymple, for improvement in penmanship. Resumes
his studies with Murdoch, in the town of Ayr. Revises his Grammar, and acquires a
knowledge of French. Attempts the Latin, but makes little progress.
1773.—(14.)
Forms several connexions with other younkers, who possess superior advantages,
but who never insult the clouterly appearance of his plough-boy carcase, the two
extremes of which were often exposed to all the inclemencies of the seasons. They
give him stray' volumes of books, and one (the late Sir John Malcolm), whose heart
not even the Munny Begum scenes have tainted, helped him to a little French. Part-
ing with these young friends, as they occasionally went off for the East or West
Indies, was often a sore affliction, but he is soon called to more serious evils. His


father's farm proves a ruinous bargain, and, to clench the misfortune, he falls into
the hands of a scoundrelly factor, who afterwards sat for the picture he drew of one
in his Tale of The Twa Dogs. He becomes a dexterous ploughman for his age,
but his indignation boils at the insolent threatening letters of the factor, which sets the
family all in tears.
1774.—(15.)
Is the principal labourer in his father's farm—suffers great depression of spirits
—is afflicted with head-ache in the evenings—forms his first attachment for Nelly
Blair, a bonnie sweet sonsie lass, the tones of whose voice make his heart-strings
thrill like an yEolian harp. Composes his first song in praise of his Handsome Nelly.
1775. —(16.)
A Collection of Songs, his vade mecuin —these he pores over, while driving his
cart, or walking to labour, song by song, verse by verse, carefully noting the true
tender, or sublime, from affectation and fustian. To this practice he owes much of
his critic craft. Hitherto, he was, perhaps, the most ungainly, awkward boy in the
parish—no solitaire less acquainted with the ways of the world.
1776.—(17.)
He goes to a country dancing school to give his manners a brush, strongly
against the wish of his father, who was subject to strong passions, and, from that
instance of disobedience, took a sort of dislike to him, which, he believes, was one
cause of the apparent dissipation which marked his succeeding years—the great mis-
fortune of his life was to want an aim—the only two openings by which he can
enter the temple of fortune are the gate of niggardly economy, or the path of little
chicaning bargain-making. A constitutional melancholy makes him fly solitude, and
he becomes a welcome guest wherever he visits —his greatest impulse is un pen-
chant pour I'adorable moitie du genre humaln— ■ his heart is completely tinder, and
eternally lighted up by some goddess or other. At the plough, scythe, or reap-hook,
he fears no competitor, and spends his evenings after his own heart. His zeal,
curiosity, and intrepid dexterity, recommend him as a confidant in all love adventure,
and he is in the secret of half the loves of the parish of Tarbolton.
1777. —(18.)
May 25. —His father removes to the farm of Lochlea. The young poet composes
the ballad "My father was a farmer upon the Garrick border;" and the best of all his
songs—-"It was upon a Lammas night."
1778.—(19.)
Spends his nineteenth summer on a smuggling coast at a noted school in Kirkos-
wald, where he learns mensuration, surveying, dialling, &c., but makes a great
progress in the knowledge of mankind. He falls in occasionally with the smugglers,
and learns to fill his glass and mix without fear in a drunken squabble, yet he goes
on with a high hand with his geometry, till the sun enters Virgo, a month always
a carnival in his bosom, when a charming filette, who lives next door to the school,
oversets all his trigonometry, and sets him of at a tangent from the sphere of his
studies. Returns home considerably improved—engages several of his schoolfellows
to keep up a literary correspondence—pores over a collection of Letters of the Wits
of Queen Anne's reign.
1779.—(20.)
Vive I'amour, et vlve la bagatelle, his sole principles of action— Tristram Shandy
and the Man of Feeling his favourite books. Poetry the darling walk of his mind—
usually half-a-dozen or more pieces on hand. His passions now rage like so many
devils, till they find vent in rhyme. Composes "Winter, a Dirge," the eldest of his
printed pieces—The Death of poor Mailie, John Barleycorn, and several songs.
1780.—(21.)
..November.—Forms, in conjunction with Gilbert, and seven or eight young men,
a Bachelor's Club, in Tarbolton, the rules of which he afterwards draws up—the de-
clared objects are—relaxation from toil—the promotion of sociality and friendship,
and the improvement of the mind.


1781.—(22.)
Midsummer.—Partly through whim, and partly that he wishes to set about doing
something in life, he joins a flax-dresser in Irvine, of the name of Peacock, a relation
of his mother—where he spends six months learning the trade.
December 27.-—-Writes a remarkable letter to his father, in which he states that
the weakness of his nerves has so debilitated his mind that he dares neither review
past wants, nor look forward into futurity. He is quite transported at the thought that
ere long, perhaps very soon, he shall bid adieu to all pains, and uneasiness, and
disquietudes of this weary life; for he is heartily tired of it, and, if he does not very
much deceive himself, he could contentedly and gladly resign it. He concludes by
saying, "My meal is nearly out, but I am going to borrow till I get more."
December 31.—His shop accidentally catches fire, as he is giving a welcome
carousal to the new, and is burned to ashes, and, like a true poet, he is left without
a sixpence.
1782.—(23.)
The clouds of misfortune gather thick around his father's, head; and he is visibly
far gone in consumption. To crown the distresses of the poet, a belle fille. whom
he adores, and who had pledged her soul to meet him in the field of matrimony, jilts
him, with peculiar circumstances of mortification. His constitutional melancholy
is now increased to such a degree that for three months he is in a state of mind
scarcely to be envied by the hopeless wretches who have got their mittimus — depart
from me, ye accursed! He forms a friendship with a young fellow, a very noble
character, but a hapless son of misfortune, whose mind was fraught with indepen-
dence, magnanimity, and every manly virtue. He was the only man he ever saw
who was a greater fool than himself, where woman was the presiding star; but he
spoke of illicit love with the levity of a sailor, which hitherto he had regarded with
horror. Here his friendship did him a mischief, and the consequence was, that
soon after he resumed the plough, he wrote "The Poet's Welcome to his Illegitimate
Child." Meeting with Fergusson's Scottish Poems, he strings anew his wildly-
sounding lyre.
1783.—(24.)
April.—Commences his Common Place Book, entitled: "Observations, Hints, Songs,
Scraps of Poety, &c. By Robert Burness; a man who had little art in making money,
and still less in keeping it."
June 21.-—-Writes to his cousin, James Burness, that his father is in a dying
condition; and sends, probably for the last time in his words, his warmest wishes for
his welfare and happiness—He becomes a Free Mason, being his first introduction
to the life of a boon companion.
1784.—(25.)
January.—-Writes his "First Epistle to Davie, a Brother Poet," in which he alludes
to his Darling Jean. The first idea of his becoming an Author started on this occasion.
February 13.—Death of his Father; whose all went among the hell-hounds that
growl in the kennel of Justice —He makes shift to collect a little money in the family;
and he and his brother Gilbert take the neighbouring farm of Mossgiel, on which he
enters with a full resolution, Come, go to, I will be wise! —He reads farming books,
calculates crops, attends markets; and, in spite of the devil, the world, and the flesh,
he believes he would have been a wise man; but the first year, from unfortunately
buying bad seed, the second from a late harvest, they lost half their crops. This
overset all his wisdom, and he returns, like the dog to his vomit, and the sow that
was washed to her wallowing in the mire. He now begins to be known in the
neighbourhood as a maker of rhymes, and the first of his poetic offspring that saw
the light was The Holy Tuilzie or Twa Herds, a burlesque sham imitation of a quarrel
between two reverend Calvinists, both of them dramatis personas in his Holy Fair.
Holy Willie's Prayer next makes its appearance, and alarms the Kirk-session so much
that they hold several meetings, to look over their spiritual artillery. Unlucky for him,
his wanderings lead him on another side, within point blank shot of their heaviest metal.
This is the unfortunate story that gave rise to his printed poem, The Lament. He


is compelled to perform penance in church —inveighs against the clergyman for re-
buking him—writes his "Epistle to Rankine" and his song "The Ranting Dog the
Daddie o't"
1785.—(setat 26.)
Espouses the cause of Gavin Hamilton against the Auld Light Fanatics; and
produces, in succession, The Kirk's Alarm, The Ordination. The Holy Fair, &c. —His
Address to the Deil, and Death and Doctor Hornbook.
April I—2l. Writes his Epistles to Lapraik, and, in the course of the year,
Halloween, The Jolly Beggars, The Cotter's Saturday Night, and various songs.
1786.—(27.)
March 20—Encloses Mr. Robert Muir, Kilmarnock, his Scotch Drink, with a wish
that the may follow, with a blessing, for his edification.
April 3.—Writes to Mr. Aiken that his proposals for publishing by subscription,
he is just going to send to press, and signs his name, for the last time —Burness.
April 20.—Encloses Mr. John Kennedy, his Mountain Daisy (entitled in the MS.
The Gowan) as being the very latest of his productions, and composed while hold-
ing the plough.—His connexion with his monny Jean. She presents him with Twins
■ —Anger of her father—The distress of the Poet—Performs penance a second time in
the Kirk for his incontinency—ls called upon to find security for the maintenance
of his children—ls unable to raise the money, and the alternative is expatriation, or
a jail—Prefers the former.
August I.—Publishes the first Edition of his Poems—Realizes above £2O, and
takes out his passage for Jamaica —Composes the last song he believes he shall
ever measure in Caledonia, "The Gloomy Night is gathering fast; when a letter from
Dr. Blacklock fortunately arrives, which overthrows ail his schemes, by opening new
prospects to his poetic ambition. His poems everywhere received with rapture—Cul-
tivates friendship with Professor Dugald Stewart, Dr. Blair, Dr. Robertson, Dr. Gregory,
Mrs. Dunlop, &c.—Visits Katrine, the seat of Dugald Stewart, where he meets Lord
Daer, and Mrs. Stewart of Stair, whom he celebrates in his Song, Flow gently, sweet
Alton Composes the Lass of Ballochmyle, and forwards the Song to the heroine,
Miss Alexander is treated by her with coldness, which he resents with bitterness.
November 28. —Arrives in Edinburgh
1787.—(28.)
January 7.—Writes to Gavin Hamilton that he feels a miserable blank in his heart,
from the want of his bonnie Jean. "I don't think," he says, "I shall ever meet with so
delicious an armful again. She has her faults; but so have you and I; and so has
everybody."
January 14.—Attends a Grand Masonic Lodge, &c.-—Received with acclamation
as the Bard of Caledonia—Resides with his friend Richmond, in the house of Mrs.
Carfrae, Lawnmarket, in a single room, at the rent of 3s a week—Meets the Duchess
of Gordon, and his conversation completely carries her off her feet.
April 4 Publishes the second Edition of his Poems, of which 300 copies are sub-
scribed for—Commences his second Common Place Book
May 6.—Sets out on a Border Tour, in company with Robert Ainslie, Esg.—Pre-
sented by the Magistracy of Jedburgh with the freedom of the town —his reception
every where triumphant.
May 13.—Visits Dryburgh Abbey, and spends an hour among the ruins, since
hallowed by the dust of Scott.
June 8. Returns to Mossgiel—The family of his bonnie Jean now court his
society—Returns to Edinburgh, where he obtains permission to erect a tombstone over
the grave of Fergusson. The architect was two years in completing it, and the Poet
was two years in paying him; for which they are quits. "He had," says the Poet,
the harcLesse to ask for interest on the sum, but considering that the money was due
by one Poet, for putting a tombstone over another, he may with grateful surprise,
thank heaven that ever he saw a farthing of it." Proceeds on his first Highland Tour,


by way of Stirling, to Inverary—Visits the Harvieston ladies, and becomes acquainted
with Miss Chalmers.
July.—Spends this month at Mossgiel— Writes his Epistle to Willi© Chalmers.
August.—Re-visits Stirling-shire, in company with Dr. Adair of Harrowgate—
Visits the ruined Abbey of Dunfermline—Kneels down, and kisses with sacred fervour
the stone which covers the grave of Robert Bruce—Shewn at Linlithgow the room
where the beautiful and injured Mary Queen of Scots was born —Crosses the Forth,
and arrives in Edinburgh.
August 25.—Sets out on his third and last Highland Tour, in company with his
friend Nicol —Visits the Duke and Duchess of Gordon —Dines with them, and forgets
his friend Nicol, who, in a foaming rage, induces the Poet reluctantly to turn his
back on bonnie Castle Gordon, with a vexation he was unable to conceal.
September 16. —Arrives once more in Edinburgh, having travelled 600 miles in
22 days-—Composes verses on Loch Turit, and Bruar Water —Forms an intimacy with
Clarinda —Is overturned in a hackney-coach, by a drunken coachman; and is con-
fined to his room for six weeks with a bruised limb —Writes his celebrated Letters to
Clarinda —Contributes numerous Songs to Johnson's Musical Museum.
December 30. —Writes to his friend Brown that Almighty love still reigns in his
bosom; and that he is at this moment ready to hang himself for a young Edinburgh
Widow. (She turns out to be a married lady, whose husband is absent in Jamaica.)
December 31.—Attends a Grand Dinner to celebrate the birth of Prince Charles
Stuart, and produces an Ode on the occasion.
1788.—(29.)
March 30.—Composes (partly on horseback) The Chevalier's Lament.
April 13. —Settles with his Publisher, Creech, and receives upwards of £6OO, as
the produce of his Second Edition—Advances £2OO to assist his brother Gilbert; but,
when afterwards solicited to become bail for him to a considerable amount, he is
compelled to decline in justice to his family.
May 25.—Takes the farm of Ellisland.
August 3.'—Marries his bonnie Jean, and contributes many of his best Songs to
the Museum.
1789.—(30.)
July.—Receives an Epistle, part Poetic and part prosaic, from a young Poetess,
Miss Janet Little, which he does not well know how to answer, being no dab at fine-
drawn letter-writing.
September.—Writes the noblest of all his ballads, "To Mary in Heaven," Lines
on Friar's Carse Hermitage, &c.
October 16.—Contends for the prize of "The Whistle," at Friars Carse—Drinks
bottle for bottle in the Contest, and celebrates the occasion by a Poem.
December 20.—Writes to Provost Maxwell that his poor distracted mind is so
torn, so jaded, so racked and bedevilled with the task of the superlatively damned, to
make one guinea do the work of three, that he detests, abhors, and swoons at, the
very name of business.
1790.—(31.)
January 25. —Communicates to Mrs. Dunlop some interesting particulars of the life
and death of Falconer, the unfortunate author of the Shipwreck—Finds his farm a
ruinous affair—His "nerves in a cursed state," and a horrid hypochondria pervading
every atom of both body and soul —Resumes his intercourse with the Muse, and writes
in November his inimitable Tam o'Shanter, the best of all his productions—ls appoint-
ed to the Excise —Has an adventure with Ramsay of Ochtertyre.
1791.—(32.)
April 11.—Birth of a third son—Becomes a member of the Dumfries Volunteers,
and their Poet Laureate—Writes several patriotic Songs, and his "Scots wha hae wi
Wallace bled"—Fires off his "Five Carlines," and other Poliical Squibs, and satirizes


both Whigs and Tories—Visited in the .summer by two English gentlemen, who dine
with him, and partake freely of his Whiskey Punch —They forget the flight of time;
lose their way on returning to Dumfries, and scarcely count its three steeples, al-
though assisted by the morning dawn.
August 25.—Sells his crops at a guinea an acre above value —A strange scene
of drunkenness on the occasion—About 30 people engaged in a regular battle,
every man for his own hand, and fight it out for three hours—ln-doors folk lying
drunk on the floor, and decanting until his dogs get so tipsy by attending them that
they can't stand—Enjoys the scene—Relinquishes Ellisland, and removes to Dumfries
—ls invited by the Earl of Buchan to assist at the coronation of the bust of Thomson,
on the 23rd of September—Apologizes, but sends an Ode for the occasion—Presented
by Lady Winifred Maxwell Constable with a valuable snuff-box, on the lid of which
is a miniature of Mary Queen of Scots, as an acknowledgment for his "Lament"
of that ill-starred Princess.
1792.—(33).
February 27.—Puts himself at the head of a party of soldiers, and captures, sword
in hand, a French Smuggler—Communicates to Francis Grose, Esq., the celebrated
Antiquary, three remarkable Witch Stories relating to Alloway Kirk.
September.—Commences his celebrated Correspondence with George Thomson,
and composes for his Collection of Scottish Songs upwards of one hundred and
twenty of the finest lyrics in the language.
September 10.—Writes a remarkable letter to his friend Alexander Cunning-
ham, in which he gives him his ideas of the conjugal state. "Ah, my friend! matri-
mony is quite a different thing from what your love-sick youths and sighing girls
take it to be!"
December B.—Birth of his Daughter.
1793.—(34.)
Publishes a Fourth Edition of his Poems, in 2 vols.—Makes an excursion through
Galloway and the neighbouring country, in company with Syme of Ryedale, the
same who related to Sir Walter Scott his story of The Sword Cane-—Continues pouring
forth his beautiful Songs to the Museum of Johnson —Admonished by the Excise that
his business is to act. not to think, in allusion to his political opinions—Rejects the offer
of an Annuity of 501. to write Poetical Articles for the Morning Chronicle.
December. —Writes to Mr. Macmurdo that he does not owe a shilling to either
man or woman.
1794.—(35.)
February 25.—Writes to Alexander Cunningham commencing with these words:
"Canst thou minister to a mind diseased?" and stating that for two months he has
been unable to wield the pen.
May.—Publishes a Fifth Edition of his Poems, finally corrected with his own hand.
At Midsummer he removes from the Bank Vennel, Dumfries, to Mill Hill Brae.
June 25. —Writes to Mrs. Dunlop from a solitary inn, in a solitary village, in
Castle Douglas, that he is in poor health, and that he is afraid he is about to suffer
for the follies of his youth.—His medical friends threaten him with a flying gout,
but he trusts they are mistaken.
1795.—(36.)
January.—Writes his manly song "For a' that and a' that."
In the Autumn he loses his only daughter—Writes his Heron Ballads.
In November he is visited by Professor Walker, who spends two days with him,
and writes a description of the Poet's appearance.
December 29.—Writes to Mrs. Dunlop that he already begins to feel the rigid
fibre and stiffening joints of old age coming over his frame.
1796.—(37.)
January 31.—Becomes the victim of a severe Rheumatic Fever —Rack'd with
pain—Every face he meets with a greeting like that of Balak to Balaam: "Come,


curse me Jacob, and come, defy me Israel"—lmplores his friends in Edinburgh to
make interest with the Board of Excise to grant him his full Salary—His application
refused!
July s.—Affecting interview with Mrs. Riddell at Brow.
July 7.—Writes to his friend Cunningham:—"l fear the voice of the Bard will
soon be heard among you no more! You actually would not know me. Pale, emaci-
ated, and so feeble as occasionally to need help from my chair—My spirits fled,
fled!" —Goes to Brow for the benefit of sea air.
July 12.—Writes to George Thomson for Five Pounds, and to his cousin James
Burness for Ten Pounds, to save him from the horrors of a jail!—Sends his last letter
to Mrs. Dunlop, stating that, in all probability, he will speedily be beyond that
bourne whence no traveller returns.
July 18.—Returns to Dumfries in a dying state —His good humour is unruffled,
and his wit never forsakes him. He looks to one of his brother Volunteers with a
smile, as he stood weeping by his bedside, and says, "John, don't let the awkward
squad fire over me!"
July 21.—His Death.
July 25.—His remains removed to the Town Hall of Dumfries, where they lie in
state, and his funeral takes place on the following day.




Scotland, thy mountains, thy valleys and
fountains
Are famous in story—the birth-place of song.


Compiled and Published by
READ'S RARE BOOK SHOP
131 Ann St., Brisbane
Wholly set up and
Printed in Australia by
The Read Press Pty. Ltd.
610-616 Ann St., Valley, Brisbane.
