

EARLY RECOLLECTIONS
AND
GLEANINGS,
FROM AN OLD JOURNAL.


SOME RECOLLECTIONS OF MY EARLY DAYS.
WRITTEN AT DIFFERENT PERIODS.
By A. A. C. D. BOSWELL.
I am so thoroughly Australian in heart as well as by birth that
my mind often wanders from present scenes, and memory is busy with
the primitive surroundings of my early life, the happy years of my
childhood, and the still happier years which followed all clothed in
sunshine and decked with flowers. A short account of how these years
were spent may some day be of interest to my children, who at present
are strangely indifferent to the land of their birth—for in this busy age
the present seems all absorbing.


ABOUT MY ANCESTORS.
Before entering on my own recollections, I must say something of
what I have heard from my parents, and give a few particulars of their
respective families.
My father, George Innes, was the eighth son of Major James
Times, of Thrumster, Caithness, and Margaret Clunes, and was born in
1803. If so, he was just 20 years old when in 1823 he sailed for Sydney,
N.S.W., a passenger in a ship of which his brother, Captain Archibald
Clunes Innes, 3rd Buffs, was Captain of the guard of soldiers in charge
of the convicts who formed the unhappy freight. lam not sure of the
name of the ship, bnt think it was the Eliza, nor do I know any par-
ticulars of the voyage. I have often wondered how my grandmother
consented to let her son go out so young and almost alone to such
banishment, for my uncle fully expected to go on at once to India. As.
it happened, he never went; he was appointed to some arduous duties
in Van Dieman’s Land (now Tasmania), and two years afterwards he
nearly died from an illness brought on by over-fatigue and exposure,
while there.
Meantime my father had taken up a grant of land at Winburn-
dale Creek, near Bathurst, and had there built a cottage and a milk
He had also established an out station for cattle at Umbiella Capita-
In November, 1825, he was married to my mother in St. John’s Church,
Parramatta. They were a very young couple, and went at once to live
at Yarrows, near Bathurst, which place he had named after a place
near Thrumster. My Innes relations seem to have smiled on this early
marriage and to have loaded the young people with gifts. I remember
a huge wooden chest, which we as children used to regard with much
interest, as having been sent from home, full of good gifts to our parents-
Grandmamma Innes had six daughters and ten sons. Of these one
son and one daughter died young. The two eldest sons were soldiers, and
were killed in battle before the birth of the two youngest girls, who
were named for them, Gordonia (Gordon), and Williamina. John, the


third son, died of consumption, and his mother then insisted on Robert,
the fourth, who had become a soldier, retiring from the army. He did
so, and lived and died at Thrumster. He married Henrietta Wemyss,
and had an only daughter, who succeeded him.
In 1815 a blank commission was sent to my grandfather for any
of his family. He determined that Archibald, the 6th son, a hoy at
school in Aberdeen, should accept it. I have often heard my uncle
tell how he was brought home, measured for his uniform, hurried up to
London, and, before his fifteenth birthday was a month passed, found
himself on his way to Belgium to join the forces under Wellington, and
■arrived at Waterloo the day after the battle had been fought and won,
“just too late,” he always added, regretfully. James, the fifth son, was
a doctor. He married a Miss Macleod, and left one son and three
daughters. The son is now General Macleod Innes, Y.C., R.E. The
seventh son died young. My father was the eighth; the ninth, Peter,
lived to be a General and died unmarried ; the tenth, Hugh, a promising
young man, died of consumption. Of these 10 sons, two grandsons
only lived to grow up, so the Inneses are not an increasing family; and
my grandmother’s brothers, Cluues, have not left a single descendant.
Of my six aunts, the eldest, Anne Clunes, outlived all the other
members of the family, and died at Thrumster in 18 , aged 8
Aunt Jane died at Bletchingley, Surrey. She is buried at Godstone,
where also rests her sister Barbara, wife of Sir George Macleay,
K.C.M.G., of Pendell Court. He was knighted after her death. He
erected a lovely monument to her memory in Godstone Church. Mar-
garet died young, and Gordina when 18 years of age. Williamina, the
youngest, married Mr James Greg, and died at Tours, France, leaving
three sons and three daughters. The youngest, Marie, married Captain.
Chariot, a French officer, and has several children, the others all died
without having any family.
My grandfather Campbell’s family came originally from Perth-
shire, and were a branch of the Bredalbane Campbells. The family
property of Lochend, on Lake Menteith, was sold by his father, who
bought the small estate of Inistore, near Appin, in Argyllshire, and
■called it Lochend. He married Margaret Fogo, who was aunt of Sir
John Moore. My grandfather, John Campbell, was their eldest son.
He married about 1800 Annabella, daughter of Col. John Campbell of
Melfort. They went to live in Kingsborough House, in the Isle of


“ ERRATA.—For Sir Thomas Macdougal,
Brisbane, read General Lachlan M'Quarrie.
Mrs M'Quarrie’s brother, Sir John Gamp
bell of Ainds, married my grandfathers
sister.
** Fort Williams read Fort George.


»Kye, where their numerous family was born. They remained there
till about 1816, and moved then to Lochend on the death of his father.
Eight sons and five daughters were alive when, in 1821, they deter-
mined to emigrate to Australia, encouraged in the idea by the
Governor at that time who was a friend and relation of my grandfather,
Sir Thomas Macdougal Brisbane. I have often listened with delight
to my mother’s description of her early days at Kingsborough, though
inwardly rejoicing that she did not exercise towards us the same rigid
discipline that her mother saw fit to adopt towards her children. My
grandfather was a warm admirer of Prince Charles Edward, and living
in Kingsborough House, which had once sheltered him, gave a reality
to the tales they heard about him, and impressed them deeply on the
minds of the elder children.
When they left Skye, ray grandfather took with him to Lochend
as a household treasure an old-fashioned mahogany writing table
which the Prince was said to have used when at Kingsborough. This
table he took to Australia, and after many long journeys and strange
adventures it was brought back to Scotland in 1865 by me, and is now
at Garrallan, Old Cumnock. He had also a tartan coat of Bonnie
Prince Charlie’s, which, unfortunately, was left in a cabinet or old
chest of drawers that was sold unopened after he left Lochend. The
person into whose hands it fell cut up the coat and distributed the
pieces; a small piece only has been recovered by a member of the
family. -
My grandmother was the second daughter of Col. John Campbell
of Melfort, in Argyllshire. Her father was a soldier of some distinc-
tion, and was for several years Governor or Commandant of Fort
William, where a strong garrison was kept after the Rising of ’45.
He married somewhat late in life a very young girl, Colina, daughter
of John Campbell, Auchalader, Perthshire. It is told of her that
when her first baby was born she was still so fond of her doll that one
day she was standing with it at an open window when her husband
looked up from below, and naturally supposing it to be the baby, he
called to her to be careful. Her answer was—“ Here, catch it,” at the
same time throwing the doll out. The poor man grasped at the supposed
infant unsuccessfully, and fainted on seeing it fall at his feet. We
must, however, believe that this youthful bride made a good wife and
mother, notwithstanding her childish beginning, for of her nine sons


one was General Sir Colin Campbell, another Admiral Sir Patrick
Campbell. Three were brave soldiers who were killed in Indian wars.
The youngest son was General F. Campbell, who held important
appointments at Woolwich, and died there in 1866. Five of her
daughters married, and two of them died unmarried at Hampton
Court Palace.
I have heard my mother say that when the family started from
Lochend on their distant journey, their first stage was to Inveraray,
from whence they crossed to St Catherine’s, and travelled to Loch God-
head in a coach, thence by boat to Glasgow. From Glasgow they
went to Edinburgh by the canal, and from Edinburgh to London by
sea, in what was then called a Leith smack, a comfortless little coast-
ing vessel, and finally embarked in May, 1821, for Tasmania, then only
known as Van Dieman’s Land, and a penal settlement. My grandfather
■and Mr George Ranken chartered the ship in which they sailed, and, in
addition to their own families, took a few passengers and retainers.
The Captain also took two or three passengers, and had his wife on
board, so that there were several conflicting interests which helped to
enliven the voyage, and to make it less tedious, if also at times not
■quite so agreeable as it might have been had the party been differently
constituted.
The Lusitania put in at St Jago, where all enjoyed a delightful
time and made many pleasant excursions, enjoying especially the fruit
and flowers so abundant in that fine climate. I have now in my
possession a few pretty little shells picked up at that time by my dear
mother and long treasured by her. My grandfather’s party received
great attention from the American Consul, who was much fascinated
by one of their number. No especial incidents marked the voyage
after leaving St Jago, but of course, when crossing the line, all the
old-fashioned ceremonies attending the visit of Neptune to the
strangers on board were carried out, in some cases rather roughly. A
warm and life-long friendship began on the voyage between my mother
and Mr and Mrs George Ranken. They were but then newly married,
a handsome young pair, full of life and energy. He was a son of Mr
Ranken, of Glen Logan, Ayrshire.
My grandfather’s family party consisted of his eldest daughter,
Mrs Macleod, her husband, and three children, three grown-up


daughters and a little girl, and four sons under fourteen. Not one
of that party ever saw home again but my mother. Three older sons
were soldiers in India, and one little boy was left in Scotland. He
followed afterwards with his foster-mother, and was drowned when
bathing while still a child. Of the three soldier sons two died early in
their career. The eldest, General Sir John Campbell, C. 8., outlived
all the rest of the family except his youngest sister. He died in
Edinburgh in 1878. All my other uncles and aunts died in Australia,
and most of them had large families. I may here refer to Miss M. O.
Campbell’s book on the Campbells of Melfort, in which there is at least
an outline of the family and of their descendants. The voyage lasted
more than six months, so that Christmas was approaching when the
Lusitania arrived at Hobarttown, and very thankful the weary passen-
gers were to find themselves on terra firma. My mother has often
spoken of the beauty of the place and their delight at being established
for a time at Restdown (now Reston), near Hobart, while my grand-
father went on to Sydney with Mr Macleod, the Rankens, and other
passengers. They there took up grants of land, which in those days
were freely offered by the Government to all free emigrants desirous of
settling in the colony. This being the case, on my grandfather’s
recommendation several of those who went out in his service received
small grants of land, and some of their descendants are now wealthy
and influential people, having been much more successful than any of
his own family. Mr Macleod rejoined his family in Van Dieman’s
Land. They went to Norfolk Island for a time, then to New South
Wales in 1835, and finally settled in Gipp’s Land.
My grandfather’s grant was situated near Parramatta, then a small
settlement or town-ship called Rosehill, about 15 miles from Sydney.
He retained the native name of Bungarrabee. He there built a house and
established a dairy farm, receiving from Government as many assigned
or convict servants as he required. A certain number of cows were
handed over to him till he was able to provide what was necessary for
carrying on the establishment. This he was to do by breeding and
buying, the arrangement being that after a term of years the same
number of cows was to be returned as had been lent. At Bungarrabee
he was joined by the rest of the family, and for a time all seemed to go
well with them. My parents were married in St. John’s Church,
Parramatta, on 25th November, 1825. Miss E. Macarthur, of Elizabeth


Farm, was one of the bridesmaids, my aunt Isabella the other. My
mother was just 20, my father two or three years older. A handsome
young couple they were, and began life with every prospect of success.
My grandparents did not live long to enjoy their new home: both died
at Bungarrabee and are buried in Parramatta. After their death the
place was sold and the family scattered.
To Speak for Myself.
I have often heard discussions as to the time of one’s life to which
memory can go back, and to the certainty with which these early
recollections can be depended on. For my own part I can remember
one event before I was quite three years old, a very important one to
me—the birth of my only sister—and a few incidents when I was four.
Perhaps had these not been impressed on my mind by hearing them
spoken of afterwards, they might have faded away, but from my fifth
birthday I am certain of my own identity, and can follow the course of
the events in which I have been interested or have taken any part, and
from the time I was nine I have many old letters and journals with
which to refresh my memory. I was born at Yarrows, near Bathurst,
in New South Wales, in 1826, in September, which in that favoured
land is a sweet spring month, when all nature is fresh and gay. The
sombre green of the trees, which never shed their leaves, is then
relieved by wild flowers of every size and hue, from the gaudy waratah
to the lovely fringed violet, and every garden is gay with flowers and
blossoms.
We left Yarrows while I was still an infant, and I never saw the
place again. The house was situated on Wimburn Dale Creek, where
also my father had built a mill, but I suppose it did not thrive, as our
next home was for a time at his cattle station in a very inaccessible
place called Capita, or Capertee, about sixty miles from Bathurst.
Umbiella was the name of the station. I have a sketch of it as it then
looked, but have no recollection of having lived there. I have passed the


place in after years, when it was a cattle station belonging to Sir John
Jameson. We were then living at Glen Alice, the adjoining station,
which was a grant of land taken up by my uncle, Dr James Innes, who
came from India, but who afterwards decided that he would not re-
main in Australia, and eventually transferred the land to my father.
From Umbiella we went to Parramatta in 1829 to stay with my uncle,
Major A. C. Innes, who was Police Magistrate there. He had then
quite recovered from a long and dangerous illness, through part of
which in 1827 my mother had helped to nurse him with all the anxious
care of a real sister. This kindness he always gratefully remembered,
and during his whole life showed the affection and interest of a true
brother in all that concerned her. My earliest recollection is of his
house, where in July, 1829, my only sister was born. No doubt my
impressions are all the clearer from having seen the place often in after
years: I was then not quite three years old, and my first recollection of
my dear mother was at this time. We went soon after to live in Sydney,
where we had a pretty cottage in Princes Street, with a deep verandah.
In October, 1829, my uncle was married to Miss Margaret' Macleay,
a daughter of the Colonial Secretary. My baby sister, I have heard,
was christened the next day, and named Margaret Clunes, after my
uncle and new aunt: this also was the name of my grandmother
Innes, they being the god-parents, and many years afterwards we found
in her a kind and excellent friend.
I remember several events that happened during our residence in
Sydney. The first was hearing of the death of King George the Fourth,
and being immensely pleased at getting a new black sash. Another
was finding one of the beads of a pretty cornelian necklace which I had
broken and lost. Wishing to keep it safely, I pushed it into my ear.
Fortunately I at once told what I had done, and my father rushed off
for the doctor, and meeting his friend the doctor of the regiment then
stationed in Sydney, brought him in. He happened to be in full
uniform and was a most imposing individual, which probably is the
reason of my remembering about the bead. It was also my first recol-
lection of my father.
At that time we had frequent visits from a New Zealand Chief,
Tagarouti by name, a tattooed warrior and very terrible to some people,
but I was not at all afraid of him, and one of his companions was so
groat a friend of mine that on one occasion he went with us to the fruit


market and there nearly brought us into great trouble. A man car-
rying a sack of corn or potatoes accidentally knocked me over, when
the New Zealander rushed at him, and would have killed him had not
the bystanders at once interfered. These men had come from New
Zealand to Sydney with the Rev. Samuel Marsden, who was one of the
first clergymen to devote himself to missionary work in New Zealand.
We did not live very long in Sydney. I next remember myself at
Kiloshiel, near Bathurst, the home of my mother’s great friends, Mr
and Mrs George Ranken. We must have spent some time there, for I
quite well remember my fifth birthday, 16th September, 1831 j and St
Andrew’s Day, the 30th November, on which day there was a great
picnic of all the grown-up people of the district. Branches covered
with cherries were cut from the trees that grew in the little garden in
front of the house, and we children helped to pick a supply to be car-
ried off in baskets. Some other days I remember we devoted to gather-
ing quantities of roses to be made into rose-water and pot-pourri, the
old-fashioned sweet-smelling English or cabbage rose. Mr Ranken had
a small still, and was always trying experiments. His family then
consisted of four boys and three girls—Jessie, the last, arriving during
our stay with them. On my fifth birthday I was allowed to join the
boys at their lessons, and got from their tutor my first copy book. In
the afternoon we gathered flowers in the orchard, and, coming home, I
tore some of the trimming off my new white frock, which grieved me
much, as my mother had just embroidered it for me.
From Kiloshiel we went back to Capita to live, but not to our
former station nor to Glen Alice, I don’t know why. I think that
Umbiella had been sold, and that the house at Glen Alice was not'
good enough; probably there was only a stockman’s hut there, so we
took up our abode at Warrangee. It was not a very nice place, though
the new house was thought very good. It was built of weather-board
and shingled, and consisted of three rooms in a row, with three small
rooms or skilleens. The old house or hut stood at right angles, built
with slabs and covered with bark, and had three rooms also, but no
skilleen. These rooms were a kitchen with a huge open fireplace, store,
and the women-servants’ room. The men lived in huts by the river some
distance off. The end room of the house was the only room with a
fireplace, and the only public room; the centre room was ray mother’s,
and we two children occupied the little room off it; my uncles had the


•other room. We had at this time a very nice servant, who had been
my sister’s nurse, and our cook was a clever Irish woman, Kitty Coner
by name, the wife of an old soldier who was then constable there.
My father, being a district magistrate, always had one or more con-
stables under him. Ann, our favourite, was going to marry our
shoemaker, a very decent man ; both were English, and both also were
convicts. Ann leaving us was thought a good time for making a
change in the household arrangements.
An immigrant ship was expected in Sydney—the first, I think,
that brought young unmarried women to the colony. Two were at
once secured for us. We children were no longer to be brought into
contact with prisoner servants. We shed many tears at parting with
our dear good Ann, but welcomed the new arrivals, who were to be so
very superior. Such creatures they turned out, these “ Red Rovers ”
as they were called from the name of the ship they came out in. They
were not a success, and those “ True Patriots,” who had left their
country for their country’s good, were fearfully jealous of them. Of
our two specimens, the one was full of airs and most objectionable; I
do not know what became of her. The other speedily bestowed her
affections on an old ticket-of-leave man, a sort of ’vet. or quack doctor,
who made a fair living roaming through the country, where he was
known as the “karagee,” the native name for the doctor or medicine
man.
At Warrangee we had no fruit or flower garden, but on the banks
of the river grew splendid melons and pumpkins. There, first the
history of Cinderalla stirred my childish mind to wonder, and I gazed
upon the huge pumpkins with mingled awe and expectation.
We had among our men servants a poet, a genius—really quite a
remarkable youth. Unhappily he never rose to the heights expected
of him. He had much kindness and consideration shown to him,
poor creature, but his motto alas was “Evil be thou my good.” I shall
only say of him at this time that during our stay at Warrantee he was
bitten by a snake. He was of course brought up to the house at once,
my mother being the best doctor within sixty miles. She had a good
medicine chest, and books which she consulted, and had much ex-
perience and good common sense. On this occasion she managed so
successfully that the patient recovered, after keeping every one up and


in great anxiety for the whole night. I believe that brandy was'
poured down his throat, and he was made to walk up and down the
whole night, kept on his feet by two men, otherwise he could not have
been kept awake, being so drowsy and almost insensible.
Boucher was the name of another constable we had for a time—
an old soldier who had been stationed at St Helena just after
Napoleon’s death. He had many interesting things to tell of the time-
he spent there. Poor solitary old man, his memory has been kept-
green all these years by his gift to me of a little basket made from a
cocoa-nut, which was elaborately carved. I still possess it, but the
moss with which it was filled, and which Boucher himself had gathered
from Napoleon’s grave, has perished long ago.
One other recollection I must give of our time at Warrangee, the'
one that has most often come back to me. It is of the visit of Arch-
deacon Broughton, afterwards the first Bishop of New South Wales.
He was making a tour through some outlying stations, and spent twa
nights with us. Every one was invited to attend an afternoon service;
it was held in the open air in front of the house. All our own people,
of course, were present, and a few from the nearest station. The
beautiful service was read most impressively and a short address given
from the tenth chapter of Acts—St Peter’s vision of the sheet let down
from heaven containing all manner of creatures, the special lesson
being that we should not despise any of God’s creatures, for he that
feareth God and worketh righteousness is accepted of Him. I was
only six years old, but I never hear or read these words without-
recalling that strange scene and congregation.
We must indeed have been rolling stones in those days, for our
next resting place was Erskine Park, on the South Creek, not far from
Liverpool. Here I spent my seventh birthday, September, 1833. My
sister was then a merry little girl of four, and many romps we had
together. I cannot say that I remember our journey there. Probably
we travelled from Warrangee in a caravan and camped out some nights
on our way. In the spring we all made a grand expedition to the
Woollombi, by Windsor and Wiseman’s Ferry. My youngest and only
unmarried aunt was then staying with her sister, Mrs P. Grant Ogilvy,
and the object of our journey was to visit Aunt Isabella and bring
Aunt Anna back to Erskine Park with us. She lived after that chiefly


with her brothers, till in 1837 she married Mr Arthur Ranken, now of
Lockyersleigh, near Goulburn, N.S.W. We had a charming journey,
and slept several nights in the bush in or under our caravan. Never
having re-visited these places, I cannot attempt to describe the beauti-
ful scenery, of which some remembrance haunts me as if seen in a dream.
The lovely weather made our scrambles in search of ferns and wild
flowers quite delightful, when we encamped for the night or rested at
mid-day. I especially remember a great cabbage palm or Seaforthia
which we carried back with us in triumph.
I have a little sketch of Erskine Park which serves to keep it
fresh in my mind; it was done by Mr William Hardy, a frequent
visitor and great favourite with us all. The house was a cottage with
,six rooms and a deep verandah, a plan very commonly adopted in those
days. There were numerous out-buildings, a kitchen, dairy, servants’
rooms, and stabling, the last of a rough and ready kind, as I found out
one day to my cost. I was peeping through a broken weather-board
to look at a new horse which had been with difficulty got into the
stable. The creature kicked out a board which struck me in the face,
and prevented any future wish on my part to visit that somewhat
dangerous ground. I have since been told that my uncles had taken
the place with the intention of forming a depot for Valparaiso horses,
which were at that time being brought to Sydney in great numbers,
rough and unbroken, and there breaking them in. Some turned out
well and brought high prices, which repaid the risk and loss on others.
I do not think this speculation was a paying one. There was
also a dairy, chiefly to supply butter to the Sydney market. The
house was situated on rising ground: opposite, at some distance, was
Bailey Park, and the South Creek ran in the valley between. On a hill
at the back of the house were many wattle trees; we used to gather
quantities of fine pale gum from these. The place was overrun with
a hateful plant known to us then as the cotton tree.
About this time it was decided that I should be sent to school. I
-cannot remember that the prospect either pleased or troubled me. We
had begun lessons regularly at Warrangee; our mother taught us, and I
could write very well and was altogether rather precocious. My
parents were returning to Capita with the intention of settling per-
manently at Glen Alice, but the house they were building was still un-
finished, and they could not accommodate a governess, so they took
only my little sister with them to their new home.


Early in 1834 I found myself settled at school in Bridge Street,
Sydney, under the care of Mrs Evans, and her friend and partner, Miss
Ferris. Mr Evans had a large bookseller’s and stationer’s shop, and we
occupied the rest of the house, which at that time was thought hand-
some, and in a fashionable street. Our house faced the old Government
Stores or Depot, and close by flowed “ The Tank Stream,” now arched
over and made into the main drain of that portion of the populous city.
We were quite near the old Government House and Macquarie Place,
where lived the leading Government Officials : these houses were back
from the street, and had pretty gardens and deep verandahs, sheltered
by climbing roses, and other flowering plants. Ido not remember that
I ever was in the old Government House, but I made many happy
visits to our kind friends Mr and Mrs Macleay at Macquarie Place. He
was then, and for many years, Colonial Secretary : one of his daughters
had married my uncle, Major Innes. They were then living at Lake
Times, Port Macquarie. Miss Macleay, afterwards Mrs .Harrington,
was very kind to me. I have since heard that she wished to adopt
and educate me herself. She died in 1836, only a few weeks after her
marriage. Miss Kennethena Macleay (dear kind Aunt Kenny) was also
very good to me. I remember sitting on the floor in her room and watch-
ing with the liveliest interest while her hair was being dressed in the
fashion of that day: at the back a wonderful erection, supported by a
high backed tortoise-shell comb, and in front curls. Her hair was very
red, and she was not pretty, but I admired her very much.
My parents went to Capita after leaving me at school, so when Easter
came I could not go home for the holidays, and had a very vague idea as to
what would become of me when everyone else went home. Nothing hap-
pened as was expected. Very wet weather came on, the Tank Stream
overflowed its banks and rushed into the basement of our house. Late
one Saturday night an alarm was raised that the foundations were
giving way. Many houses were flooded, and people were being taken
out of the water. I really do not know if we were in any danger, but
a party of soldiers came to our rescue. No doubt it was great fun for
some of the youn fe officers, and I know that some of the girls enjoyed it
too, and were delighted to be carried off in their strong arms to a place
of safety. I was a miserable little urchin, but of course, I had to be
rescued too. I was one of four who were most kindly received by Mr
and Mrs W. H. McKenzie, of the Bank of Australasia. She was a Miss


Hawkins, a friend of my mother’s. The rain continued to fall in tor-
rents, the old guard house was swept away, part of the barrack wall
came down, and damage was done everywhere. It was a terrible
Easter Sunday for many, but we were comfortably housed, and next
day I was sent for by Mrs Macleay, and spent in her house one of the
happiest times of my young life: all were so kind and clever, and all
their surroundings were so refined and luxurious in comparision to any-
thing I, who had lived mostly in the bush, was accustomed to.
There was a grand dinner party given during one of my visits at
Macquarie Place. I was deeply interested in watching some of the
preparations for it, and still remember the lovely fruit and flowers,
though they were not used in the same way then as now, to decorate
the dinner table. I saw pomegranites then for the first time; when
freshly gathered and very ripe they are very different from the withered
halls generally seen in this country. Dessert was laid out on the
library table ready to be taken to the dining-room after dinner and
placed on the shining hoard after the tablecloth had been removed, as
was the custom then and long after. I had dined daintily in the
library, and after dinner I was sent for by the kind old gentleman,
and, standing beside him, shared the feast. In the drawing-room
I was much noticed by Mrs Sturt, aftewards Lady Sturt, wife
of Captain Charles Sturt, who was then absent with an exploring
party near the Murrimbidgee River. There was much interesting
conversation on the subject, all the more interesting to those present
as one of Mr Macleay’s sons was with Captain Sturt. I enjoyed
more than anything the drives to Elizabeth Bay, a lovely spot
beyond Wooloomooloo, where Mr Macleay was then laying out fine
gardens and grounds, and preparing to build a large and handsome
house. When completed it was for many years quite the finest house
in the colony, and must always remain one of the loveliest situations.
There I used to play while the elders of the party were occupied about
the grounds, and the time passed all too quickly.
During the Easter holidays Mrs Evans moved from the house in
Bridge Street, and when the school reassembled we found ourselves in
a large and convenient detached house standing in its own grounds.
Albion House, Miller Point, Darling Harbour, was the address. No
doubt the place has changed long ago beyond my recognition. I have
never seen it since I left it for good the following year. I was not


happy there. I still had my playfellows, Anna Cox and Mrs Evans’
eldest girl. Mr Evans had been married before, and a daughter of
his, about sixteen, was one of the elder girls. She was always gentle
and good to the little ones, but the school increased greatly, and there
were too many big girls, some vulgar and disagreeable. Such a
mixture was a great mistake; they persecuted the little ones, and one
very bad thing was their continual telling of ghost stories and murders,
and declaring that the house was haunted. Then when all were
trembling with fear and excitement some one was dared to go upstairs,
or one of the little ones was sent a message and made to go alone. I
professed to have no fear, but I had a severe illness in that house and
thought I saw a ghost in my bedroom, and wonder now that it did not
more seriously affect me. I told Mrs Evans all about it, and she saw
how foolishly and thoughtlessly the girls had behaved, and put a stop
to it. There was a horrid girl there who used to slap me. One day I
struck her in return, and we had a regular fight. I never had been in
a passion before and never have been since; murder was in my heart,
fury in my eyes. I was only eight; she was twelve or fourteen, but I
was victorious, and thoroughly ashamed of myself for long afterwards.
One girl only of my schoolfellows I met in after years; her family had
a sad history. Another that I liked very much, and who was nearer
my own age, was drowned in a ship lost at sea—no tidings ever came
of any of those who were on board.
I had been at school more than a year when one joyful day my
father arrived to take me home for good. How gladly I turned my
back on that page of my life. I was a very tall girl, nearer nine than
eight years old, and felt very important during our journey home,
while I occupied the seat beside him in his neat gig, and chatted gaily
of many things. We were all to go shortly to Bathurst to stay with
our good friends, the George Itankens, at Saltram, a place recently
bought by him from Mr T. Icely, and on which stood a house much
larger than that at Kiloshiel. But first I must tell of our safe arrival
at home and the warm welcome I there received from my dear mother
and charming little sister. My happiness was complete. I had been
at Glen Alice before, but not since the house was begun. I found it
still unfinished, but very comfortable, and the garden beautifully laid
out and well stocked with vines and fruit trees. It was then mid-
winter.


On the 26th of July we started for Bathurst. Our first stage was
twenty-five miles to Cullenbullen, where we were most kindly received
by Mrs Dalhunty, her grown-up daughter, and her son, Dr Dalhunty,
very nice English people, and their house a picture of English neatness
and comfort. We rested there a night, and next night we were to
stop at the Green Swamp, at an inn about fifteen miles from Bathurst.
The weather was very cold and damp. We two children were in the
.gig with our father, mamma rode near us on her pretty cream coloured
mare, “ Rowena,” and the groom, George F. M., before mentioned, rode
behind. A blinding shower of sleet came on, our horse shied, and the
wheel of the gig came in contact with a fallen tree—the .gig upset, I
somehow fell under it, the others were thrown out. My first recol-
lection on awakening was to find my face cut and bleeding, and my
mother trying to discover if any of my bones were broken. The groom
had been sent off to the inn to beg them to send a conveyance for us,
while he went on to Bathurst for the doctor. It was late in the
■evening when Dr Busby arrived, and by that time we had all cheered up.
He found I was not badly hurt, a deep cut on my forehead, which left
an ugly scar, and some scratches and bruises, which soon disappeared,
being all the damage. Uncle Dalmahoy came out from Bathurst with
the doctor, and it being Mag’s birthday, and as a reward for my bravery
after the accident, he was good enough to present us each with a half-
sovereign, a gift treasured for years, and finally spent in the purchase
of two tiny gold lockets. He was our favourite uncle, not because of his
gifts, but because he loved us.
We spent three months at Sal tram at this time. My father went
to Yass to purchase sheep for his station near Capita, called I think,
Boorroobin. One day the gentlemen returned from the Settlement
bringing the good news that Major Mitchell, the Surveyor General and
party had returned safely from an exploring expedition into the far
bush. There was great rejoicing and excitement throughout the
colony, as the explorers had discovered a fine pastoral country to the
South East. People talked of at once taking up and stocking the new
country, part of which was named Australia Felix. It is now absorbed
into Victoria. Mrs Ranken’s family then consisted of four boys and four
girls. The two eldest boys were at school, or just going: they still had
their former tutor, Mr Darney, and the girls had a charming governess,
■an old friend and companion of their mother, who had come from Scot


land to live with her, and to help her with her numerous family, and
the duties and pleasures of a large establishment. Aunt Annabella
was staying at Saltram, also Isabella Johnstone, and a delightful
family lately come from Scotland lived at Delta Cottage and were
constantly there. It was a large and merry household. In September
Mrs Ranken gave a dance. I can remember many of the guests and
their dresses, and how we children criticized them. There was a pretty
Miss Brooks, with long fair hair. I saw her many years afterwards as
Mrs Zouch, and a grandmother. There were two Misses Stewart and
and two Misses Piper, and Miss De Philipsthal. The latter wore a short
yellow dress and black shoes with sandals, her hair dressed high with
bunches of curls at each side. Miss Geddis, Ann Macarthur, and many
others were present. Aunt Anna, I suppose, was really the belle, and the
dance was given partly in her honour, as she was going to Sydney to stay
with her eldest sister, Mrs McLeod. Mr McLeod had for some time held a-
Government appointment in Norfolk Island, but it was far from being
a desirable place of residence, and he had just returned to Sydney with
his family. This lovely island was then a Penal Settlement, a place of
punishment for the worst class of criminals, and a station for a strong
body of soldiers who kept guard over them. Mr McLeod was wise to
leave. He then settled for a time at a place called Maryvale, near
Liverpool, where we visited them in 1839.
But to return to Saltram. We stayed there till October, 1835,
and soon after our return home we were happy in being put under the
care of an excellent governess. Her name was Miss Willis, and lam
sure no children ever had a kinder or more painstaking teacher. My
mother, too, found her helpful in many ways, and an acquisition in our
isolated home. We children threw ourselves with zeal into our work.
I panted for information, and read greedily every book I was allowed
to have. We read many times the histories of England, Scotland,
Greece, and Rome. The story of “ Elizabeth, or the Exiles of Siberia,”
was an especial favourite, and we had many other nice books, consider-
ing the time and the place. Miss Willis had a guitar ; she was not
very proficient, but she taught us to play nicely and to sing some simple
songs. For grammar she had a mania. I think I learned every word
of a large Murray by heart; her zeal never flagged. We played at
spelling lessons ; the spelling Bees of recent years would, lam sure,
have been a joy to her. One of our amusements was that we each


•wrote a letter every week. I have a few of these compositions beside
me now; many were to imaginary people. Those we really wrote and
sent had also to be copied into the letter-book. In those days of
exorbitant postage very few went beyond it. I have seen a letter
for which seven and eightpence postage was paid. I shall give an
example of one of the letters that was sent. It is number fourteen,
dated 16th of April, 1836, and was addressed to my uncle, Major
Innes, Lake Innes, Port Macquarie :
It gives me very great pleasure to write to you, my dear uncle, and papa
tells me I must send you the little drawing I have just finished this afternoon.
Had I known it was to be sent to you I would have taken more pains with it.
We have got a governess now. I like it much better than being at school,
because Ido not require to leave dear papa and mamma. lam learning to play
the guitar ; I found it very difficult at first. I made my fingers so sore and my
arms ache, but now my fingers have got quite hard at the points, and I am getting
on very well with it. I can play the accompaniment to “Ye Banks and Braes ”
and to “Ah Vousdirais,” “Rondo,” and a few other little airs. lam reading
the history of England, and have got the length of James the First, who began
the reign of the family of the Stuart’s in England I like my studies very much
indeed ; they are a pleasure to me. Miss Willis explains them as Igo on, which
makes them easy to be understood. I think I like geography better than any of
my other lessons. I have gone through the four quarters of the globe with Miss
Willis, and I begin again on Monday at the map of Europe and through each
country, beginning at England. My sister gets on very well with her lessons.
She writes very well indeed, and seems to have a great taste for drawing. She is
also learning to play the guitar. I wrote to Grandmamma in December, and
since then I have written to aunt Jane. They cannot have got my letters yet*
and very much pleased I shall be if my aunt writes to me. I intend to write to
one of my aunts soon. I hope my dear little cousins are well. I suppose
Gordina begins to run about now. Papa, Mamma, and Margaret join me in
sending their love to you and my aunt, and kisses to my dear cousins. Goodbye,
my dear uncle.—Believe, me, etc.,
A. A. C. INNES.
The next letter is to my aunt Annabella, then staying with her
sister, Mrs M'Leod, in Sydney.
Gflen Alice, Capita, May 17th, 1836.
My Dear Aunt,
I am quite glad to have an opportunity of writing to you.
I fancy I have got so much to communicate that I scarcely know which subject
to commence first. I received your nice letter when the drays came back from
Sydney. I assure you I was very proud of it, and Maggie thought herself quite
a big lady because she had got a letter from you. She kissed it over and over
again, and went about showing it to every one.


I am making a basket of cardboard, which I intend to present to Mr
Ranken ;it is nearly linished. I have painted an Indian tare on the one side, and
that pretty blue flower called native flax on the other. On one end I have put a
little purple aster and on the other I have sketched the Deil in the Bush, which I
intend to paint. I think it will look very pretty. Miss Willis paints all the
native flowers we can find for copies for us. If I have time I shall endeavour to
take one from nature to send to you. lam getting on very well with the guitar,
and can play several long pieces, besides three pretty waltzes and the accompani-
ments for three songs. I assure you I never look off the book now when lam
playing. Miss Willis had a great deal of trouble with me at first. lam so glad
I can do it now.
I write a long letter every week : it is sometimes three pages and sometimes
four. I wish you were here to read them ; I think they would amuse you, there
is something about you in almost every one of them. In the one for this week I
have you lost in the bush with Margaret, Miss Willis and me, at Hunter’s River,
where we are supposed to be on a visit to Aunt Ogilvie, after having spent a
month in Sydney with Aunt McLeod. I have written to her after going to
Hunter’s river : the letter this week is in answer to one I imagined Nancy to have
written to me.
Margaret is a very good girl, she improves in reading, and indeed in all her
lessons ; you cannot think how well she says her notes. She made us laugh to-
day when we were sitting drawing. Miss Willis told her to take pains and draw
nicely, for it was to be sent to her aunt, and she answered—“ You may think
what pains I am taking, for my arm is pains all over. ”
Mamma is very busy getting trees planted out. She hopes you do not forget
to collect all the seeds you can find for her. Our garden looks very well at present.
There has been a great deal of rain. We have plenty of green peas, and all kinds
of vegetables. The fowls are not laying, so I am very little use as a hen-wife.
All here join in kind love to you, and I remain my dear Aunt, Your most
affectionate niece.
Just one other short letter I must give, written to my father at
Cullen Bullen:—
June 29th, 1836.
My Hear Papa,
Mamma is very anxious to get some cuttings of the Cluster
Rose or Honeysuckle, and any other pretty thing you can find in Mr Dalhunty’s
garden. We have sent several times for some, but have not been able to get any
to grow : this is such a delightful season, Mamma thinks they would be sure to
grow now. We went to the Creek about a fortnight ago, and got a great many
beautiful shrubs and runners, and we have made the place look so pretty. Wo
are all quite impatient for your return, so do make haste and come. Mamma is
quite well, and unites with Margaret and me in sending you a thousand kisses.
Believe me, dear Papa, your most affectionate daughter, A. A. C. Innes.


Observe the confidence with which we claim a share of our neigh-
bour’s most cherished possessions, but I must add that we were always
ready and willing to give anything in return. It was a mutual pleasure
to give and receive seeds and plants, and my dear mother delighted in
her garden. I quite well remember our expedition to the Creek, allud-
ed to' in my letter to my Father. It was a lovely sheltered stream,,
flowing from one of the many hills which surrounded our happy valley.
After rains it ran rapidly, forming many little sparkling falls, and fill-
ing deep water holes bordered with flowering shrubs and creepers, but
only as far as it was under the shade and shelter of the hill. High up,
these hills had a rocky crown up which we never penetrated, but we
scrambled along the banks of more than one ravine, and found many
lovely wild flowers. I have drawings of many of them, and we from
time to time transplanted many varieties of them to our garden and
shrubbery; some were flourishing when in 1841 we left Glen Alice for
good. We really had a beautiful garden in front of the house, but not
too near, and the ground between was prettily laid out with lawn and
shrubbery, all planned by Mr John Maclean, at one time head gardener
in the Botanical Gardens, Sydney, and afterwards holding a govern-
ment appointment at Norfolk Island, where unfortunately he was
drowned.
In 1836 we had a very happy Christmas. Our uncles came over
from Warrangee, and Mr Andrew Brown, and Mr David Archer from
Wallerowang. We dined for the first time in the large central room
of the house, though it was not yet plastered. We were allowed to
adorn the lathed walls with evergreens and flowers, which looked bright
and pretty, Our house was comfortable, but by no means commodious,
even after the dining-room was finished. There were only five rooms,
a wide back entrance, and a deep verandah in front. We sat a good
deal in the verandah, which was sheltered by many lovely creepers.
Early in 1837 we went to stay at the White Rock, near Bathurst*
to be present at the marriage of my aunt, Annabella Campbell, to Mr
Arthur Ranken, which took place on 7th March. This was the first
marriage at which I was present. It took place, of course, in the
house. The Rev. K. Smythe performed the ceremony. Isabella John-
stone and Ann M‘Arthur were bridesmaids. Ido not remember who
was best man. The bride was dressed in a rich white silk dress, the
skirt rather short and full, low bodice, and bell-shaped sleeves. Her


hair, which was dark and very abundant, was dressed very high on the
top of her head, and supported by a high-backed tortoise-shell comb,
short curls in front, a tulle veil falling gracefully over her shoulders.
The bridesmaids were both tall, and had their hair dressed in much the
same style. The bridegroom wore white trousers and vest, and a dress
coat of blue cloth, with brass buttons and lined with white silk. The
happy pair went to Glen Alice for their honeymoon. We followed in
about a fortnight. This was our first visit to the White Rock. We
also stayed a week or two with our kind friends at Saltrum, but I cannot
remember if it was in that or the following year they were preparing
to go to Scotland.
When once settled at home we resumed our lessons with renewed
vigour. Towards the end of the year, to our great regret, Miss
Willis expressed her wish to leave. She said she was desirous
of taking lessons in music and drawing, and finally she took a
situation in a large school in Sydney. We had visions of her returning
to us at some not distant period, but to our surprise she married a
Wesleyan minister, a widower, with several children, and no doubt
made an excellent wife and step-mother. She was so full of sentiment
and of a romantic love story of her early life that this seemed a very
common place conclusion to come to.
After Christmas we looked forward with anxious interest to the
arrival of our new governess. Papa was to bring her from Sydney,
and at the same time my eldest cousin, Annahella Macleod, to visit us
and other friends at Bathurst; also, to our great delight, another cousin
of our own age, Williamina Macleod, who was to share our studies
under this new governess. Our castles in the air in this particular
soon collapsed. A young lady appeared who I recognised at once as
the girl who mended our clothes and taught us plain sewing at Mrs
Evans’ school—a sort of help, and quite unfit to be a governess. She
excused herself by saying she expected to find us little children requir-
ing only a nursery governess. It was very annoying, but she was only
too glad to leave at once.
We went to the White Rock, Bathurst, again in March, 1838, and
stayed there three or four months. Our journey there is one of the
first I remember of our numerous expeditions round “The Peak,” as
the road which led to and from Capita was then called. Nothing could


bo worse than this road. We always had to sleep one or two nights in
the bush, if anything more than one gig and one or two horsemen were
of the party, as it took three men to help ami encourage one good horse
up and down these hills. On this occasion we were a large party.
Uncle Dalmahoy Campbell and Mr Jones had come to our assistance ;
each of them had a gig, and we had one too, also a dray, with a tent,
bedding, and various supplies, to enable us to camp out for one or two
nights. It was really very enjoyable, and we made light of any small
inconveniences. We did not stay a night at Cullen Bullen, as we were
so large a party, but we had dinner or tea there, and I was much im-
pressed by Miss Dalhunty’s appearance and with the very pretty house
and garden.
Arrived at the White Rock we found the house full to over-flow-
ing. It is a mystery to me now how we were all stowed away. The
place took its name from a quantity of beautiful white quartz which
cropped up in the green grass, not far from the house. At that time
no one associated quartz with gold, and no thought of the future wealth
of the gold diggings, afterwards to be opened up in the Bathurst
district, had dawned on any one’s mind. AVhen we were staying there
the year before, it was uncle Dalmahov’s house. He gave it up when
aunt Anna married, and my youngest uncle (Moore) having lately
married, ho and his wife were living there. She was a Miss De Lisle,
only child of Major Do Lisle of the SOth regiment, a very kind and
amiable girl, but at that time quite unfitted for the life she had, I think
rather unwisely stepped into. The house was built on the bare hillside
and quite unimproved around. The river Macquarie flowed not far off
to the right as one looked from the verandah, to the left lay the road to
Bathurst, which was about four miles distant. AVe seldom went to
the Settlement, as it was then generally called, but we spent many
hours by the river fishing or watching for a platytus to appear, or lying
under the great blue gum trees, gathering manna. At the back of the
house, some distance off, lay Queen Charlotte’s vale. There were some
pretty homesteads there, surrounded by cultivated fields, and standing
mostly in gardens gay with flowers. On March 31st, aunt Anna’s
eldest boy was born. He was a great joy and interest to us all till
they left for their own home at Glen Logan, Lachlan River.
I remember, with pleasure, a visit I paid at this time to Airs
AVilliam Lawson at Macquarie Plains. She was a Aliss Icely, a friend


of my mother. No one could be kinder than she always was, and I
enjoyed myself extremely. She then had four children, all younger
than I was. It was a pleasant walk from there to Woodlands, the
home of their nearest neighbours, Mr and Mrs Street, whose children
were more my own age. Another event of interest was the marriage
of Miss Anne Hawkins to Mr F. MacArthur. Two dances were given
in honour of the happy occasion, to the second of these given by Mrs
Evernden (a sister of the bride), four little girls were invited, ladies
being scarce. I was much delighted at being one of the number, though
too shy to show my pleasure by dancing. I wore a white silk dress
with pale blue sprigs on it. Andrewina Piper and Julia Bowler were
quite at home and danced all the evening. The bride was tall and
handsome, and a great favourite with everyone. I never saw her again,
as she went with her husband to Yass. Years afterwards a daughter
of theirs married a son of our friends, Mr and Mrs George Ranken, of
Saltram.
In June Aunt Fanny had a little son. It was mid-winter and
very cold, and I had dreadful chilblains. We were all glad to find our-
selves at home again. We now had a new governess, Miss Smith by
name, young and trained to be a governess, full of theories, and of her
own importance, but we got on very well with her. She gave us plenty
of work to do, and had no peace of mind till we had learned by rote the
whole of Magnell’s questions, and could say “King’s Reign,” with
dates, without a mistake. At this time we got a piano. A most
laborious business it was conveying it round The Peak, and scarcely
worth the trouble. Papa bought us also a pretty guitar, but Miss
Smith despised it, as she also did our efforts at drawing from nature.
She gave us stiff designs to copy, taught us to shade finely with pencil
and to draw from copies, trees rare and wonderful, while our much-
loved wild flowers were left unnoticed and our paint boxes set aside.
During this summer our dear father was not at all well. He had been
in Sydney for change of air most of the time that we spent at the White
Rock, so as to avoid the sharp cold of Bathurst and Capita, but had
not derived any permanent benefit from it.
A curious incident happened during our visit to the White Rock.
The household was rather oddly constituted. We had a maidservant
with us (a prisoner, as all servants, male and female, then were), and there
was in the house a very smart English housemaid named Sarah. Uncle


Palmahoy, who happened just then to be staying in the house, had his
manservant, who acted as groom to him, but who at that time was assist-
ing to wait at table, etc. lie was an honest, trustworthy man, though
occasionally he yielded to the besetting sin of his class, and became for
the time incapable of attending to anything. There was a nurse, a
respectable elderly woman, whose time was full} - occupied with my aunt,
Mrs Moore Campbell, and her infant; there was also another woman
servant, a laundress, but I forget if there was a man or woman cook.
The kitchen, laundry, and servants’ rooms were quite detached from the
house and from each other, forming altogether three sides of a square ;
further back was a large stable built of slabs and covered with bark.
Those were very primitive times.
The house was built on the slope of a hill and was of brick.
It consisted of four good-sized rooms divided by a wide passage,
and two verandah rooms. In front and on half of each side
there was a deep verandah raised five or six steps from the
ground, the back door being level with the ground; the verandah
rooms opened oil’ the verandah and were the same width. In some
houses these rooms had a door leading into the back rooms of the
house, but this was not the case at the White Hock.
On the evening in question we were all assembled in the
only public room (it being too cold for us to sit in the verandah),
which in that climate often supplies the place of a second room.
I was sent a message to my mother’s room, which lay immediately
behind, and I there found Sarah, the housemaid, kneeling before
an open trunk. I did not speak to her, but asked on my return
if she had been sent to look for anything. My mother went
to see what she was doing, and came back at once saying there
was no one in the room, but she missed from it a large camphor-
wood trunk in which she kept her best dresses, jewels, and other valu-
ables. The gentlemen went to assure themselves that the box was not
there. The servants were called in—all were at hand, and apparently
quite ignorant of any theft. Sarah in particular was very much
concerned about it, and denied that she had opened the other trunk,
though she owned to having been in the bedroom a few minutes before,
when she was sure that all was right. -Vs the loss was a serious one,
Adams, Uncle Palmahoy's groom, was at once despatched to Bathurst
for the mounted police, the distance, I think, being about four miles.


In a very short time Captain C and two troopers arrived. They
examined the houses and cross-questioned the servants, but without
gaining the slightest information. They then visited a cottage about a
quarter of a mile distant, at the foot of the slope on which the house
was built, and quite near the river. There they found three or four
people sitting quietly, who expressed much astonishment and interest
at hearing of the robbery. As it was quite dark nothing more could
be done that night. Next morning the troopers came out again, and
Sarah now gave a rather garbled tale of having seen two strangers the
evening before who passed the house and gone towards the river and
disappeared, going up the river and not towards the cottage before
mentioned. The ground was hard and stony round the house, and
unenclosed, so there was no way of tracing any footsteps. There
was no doubt that the trunk had been taken out by the back door,
the supposition being that someone in or belonging to the house had
there handed it over to his or her accomplices, as when the robbery was
first discovered no one was missing.
For two days search was made in every likely and unlikely spot,
and a strict watch kept upon the cottage, about whose inhabitants the
police did not seem to be quite satisfied, but they showed no excitement
and went about their usual occupations, apparently unconscious that
they were suspected. On the third morning when we were at break-
fast, an old man, who lived at the opposite side of the river and farmed
his own ground, came up to the front door and asked to see one of the
ladies, so my mother went to speak to him, and to her surprise, he pro-
duced a China crepe shawl belonging to her, and which had been in the
missing trunk. He said that early in the morning he had noticed some
crows collecting in one of his fields, and thought from the way they
were going on that there must be some dead animal there, but on going
to the spot, he found only this shawl, which he supposed had attracted
them by its pink colour, and hearing that a lady at the White Rock had
been robbed, he came to inquire if that article belonged to her.
Here was a clue; it was evident that the box had been opened in the
neighbourhood, and most likely at our side of the river, as there was
neither tree or shelter on the other side, near where the shawl had been
found. We followed farmer Hall to the spot, then returned and searched
on the bank and bed of the river, which in some places was nearly dry,
though there were many deep pools and stretches of deep water. In one


part there was a sort of island where the stream divided, and must have
flowed for years in separate channels, for there were several good sized
trees of easurina or swamp oak growing among the drift wood and
stones. It was quite a narrow strip with no vegetation. Here, strange
to say, the trunk was found, come upon quite unexpectedly hy one of
the party. It was not hidden, hut just set down hy a tree, and con-
cealed by the stones and roots, which were much of the same size and
colour. The box had been broken open but was closed, and much that
it had contained was still left in it, noticeably two unmade up pieces of
silk, and one very handsome silk dress. The jewel box and all it con-
tained had been taken, also a gold watch and chain. The trunk was
carried home in triumph and the police were again called in, but they
could learn nothing further of the robbers.
It was two or three months before we heard anything more of the
matter, but eventually all was explained, and most of the things re-
covered, and with them some other things that had also been stolen,
one being a ring that a lady friend staying at the White Rock had
missed and supposed she had dropped off her finger. This is how the
discovery came about. A woman travelling to Sydney hy the coach
asked someone to wind her watch as she had lost the key. The watch
was a handsome gold one, with a long chain attached, as was then the
fashion. When a key was handed to her she did not know' how to use
it. As the same woman took a brooch to be mended which answered
the description of one of those stolen, the police were put on her track
and found she had all the missing jewellery still in her possession.
It had been baked at once into a damper, a kind of large unleavened
loaf commonly used in the bush, and so hidden had more than once
passed under the eyes of the police, for the trunk had been taken to
the cottage first suspected and searched. Sarah and a friend had
carried the trunk out of the bedroom and given it to two men w'ho
were w'aiting for it outside. My having discovered her had nearly
caused the failure of the whole plan, as they had scarcely left the house
when the trunk was missed. They hastened down the hill and opened
it the moment they reached the cottage, and at once baked the jewels
into the damper. Two men wdio were accomplices and who had warn-
ed them that the loss of the box had been discovered, carried it at once
to the bed of the river, and set it down where it was afterwards found.
The others had hardly settled down in the cottage when the police paid
them their first visit, and as they had not dared to go again to the


river, they failed to secure the rest of their booty. The accomplices
who carried off the trunk had helped themselves to some things, but in
their hurry had dropped the pink crepe shawl after they had crossed
the river in their homeward flight. Sarah and three others were tried
and punished for the robbery, which had been instigated and planned
by her.
Extracts from an Old Journal.
I shall now make some extracts from an old journal which I be-
gan to keep about January 1839. I was then more than twelve years
old, my sister nine and a half, and two happy, contented children we
were with every reason to be so, wsAt that time we were alone at home
with Mamma and our governess, dear Papa, who continued very delicate,,
having gone again to Sydney to consult a doctor there. We were ex-
pecting him back, when a letter came to say that he was not so well,
and had been advised to spend the winter at Port Macquarie. His
brother, Major Innes, had kindly asked us all to stay at Lake Inries,
and arrangements were being made for us to start as soon as possible-
This was indeed important news, for though such a journey had some-
times been spoken of it was not expected that it would ever take place,
but now our dear father was ill, and we thought this visit to the sea-
side would be sure to make him well again, so all was bustle and
pleasant preparation. Margaret and lin our own way were very busy
too, our gardens and various pets taking up every spare moment from
needle work and lessons. How well I remember one lovely moonlight
night sometime in February—the moon was at its full, the air soft and
balmy, fragrant with the scent of many flowers—Mafgaret and I had
gone to bed leaving our window which opened on to the verandah quite
open, when we heard the sound of wheels and presently a gig drove
past and stopped. We were instantly in the verandah and clinging
round the dear traveller’s neck, for a moment not observing that he had
a companion with him. Soon we were arrayed in more suitable costumes
and seated in the dining-room. We sat up very late, and Papa gave us
each a handsomely bound Annual which he had brought from Sydney
for us, and with which we were much delighted.


I shall now give you the best account I can of our journey which
was delayed till the beginning of March. The day before we started
a dray was sent off with a tent and provisions of all sorts for us as we
expected to spend two nights in the bush before arriving at the place
about twenty miles distant where a carriage and horses were awaiting
our arrival to convey us more comfortably and rapidly on our journey
to Sydney. It was a lovely morning in the first week in March when
we set off in a large and comfortable carriage and five, in other words
a large dray well piled with mattresses and pillows, and drawn by five
strong bullocks. A steady old driver walked at one side, carrying a
long handled whip which he waved over them, or cracked cheerfully
from time to time, another man following ready to assist in any way.
Miss Smith, Margaret and I were seated in state in the dray, Papa and
Mamma followed in the gig, a friend and our groom rode. Ours cer-
tainly was a very slow conveyance, but we had only nine miles to go,
and really a dray is not a rough carriage, for the great wheels move so
slowly and seem so little affected by going over a stone, or sinking into
a wide rut, that we never thought of being afraid. The gig soon flew
past us, and on our arrival at Coco Creek, where we were to encamp
for the night, we found the tent pitched in a wild but sheltered spot,
near some tall swamp oak trees, the branches of which were waving
mournfully in a gentle breeze. Two bright fires were soon kindled.
The horses were tethered to the neighbouring trees, or were set loose
with hobbles on, which rattled as they made their way to the water
holes in the bed of the creek, forsaking for a time the provinder that
had been brought for them, the bullocks also moving leisurely in the
same direction. A carpet was soon spread under the tent and two
trunks set as tables near the entrance. On them we spread a snowy
•cloth and began with eager haste to arrange the good things that had
been so liberally provided for our refreshment. It was not like the
bush scenes I have enjoyed both before and since, for we had taken
everything we could think of to make us comfortable. The little brass
kettle was soon handed up with tea, a basin of sugar and a bottle of
milk, while wine was drawn for those who preferred it. The first
evening all our provisions were cold, but a coop with softie plump
chickens in it promised that if we should be detained longer than we
expected we need not starve. The weather was still too hot for us to
carry with us any uncooked supplies.
As soon as our repast was ended we had to get our beds ready.


and many were the discussions as to where our heads should be and
where they should not be. All being satisfactorily arranged, we
retired to rest, and in a few minutes I forgot that I was not in my
own snug bed, and slept profoundly till roused by the men lighting the
fires and bringing in the cattle. We soon started up, and, seizing
clothes and towels, flew to bathe in the clear, cool stream. We soon
found a sheltered palm, and there arrayed ourselves as expediously as
possible. How well I remember kneeling on the soft green bank to
say my morning prayer. There are times when even the most thought-
less must feel impressed by the omnipotence and omnipresence of God.
I shall never forget that morning prayer under the shade of the green
swamp oak trees in the wild bush. Returning to our tent, we made a
hearty breakfast. Everything was soon packed, the horses harnessed,
the patient bullocks yoked together, and it was still early when we
resumed our journey, leaving few traces of our last night’s resting
place but the smouldering fires and the trodden-down grass. This was
all very delightful: as yet we had had no difficulties.
Before I proceed I must explain that there were only two
ways of leaving our happy valley (unless by a very circuitous
route), as it was entirely surrounded by mountains. One of
these roads was known as “The Hole,” the other as “The
Peak.” “ The Hole ” was the best as well as the shortest way,
but only available for persons walking or on horseback, for there
was one tremendous hill up and down which no vehicle could be
taken, and down which no one could ride. We were consequently
obliged to travel by “The Peak,” which was for many miles a succes-
sion of hills and hollows and dangerous sidelines. We were not long
in arriving at a steep hill designated “The First Pinch.” Here we all
dismounted and scrambled up as best we could, while the dray followed,
the men cracking their whips and shouting to the bullocks. At every
pause they made, and these were not infrequent, some one was ready
with a large stone to stop the wheel from slipping backward. The gig
was light, and two horses drew it up with comparative ease, but the
poor bullocks laboured up with the heavy dray. Meanwhile we walked
on, loading ourselves with flowers and berries, a branch of some bright
evergreen that had attracted our attention, or perhaps a handful of
the flinty and variagated stones over which we were walking, all to be
thrown away at the next steep hill, where hands and feet were in


requisition. Sometimes one of us would be entrusted with a horse to
hold or lead, not at all an easy task. Here and there was a deep
gulley between the steep hills, and perhaps a few hundred yards of
level ground would delight us after our labours. In one of these places
places we rested for a short time, but were obliged to press on owing to.
the great want of water, as none was to be found where we halted.
Fortunately we had brought with us a keg and a large stone jar full of
water, and as we had also some light wine and some home-made beer,
we felt no anxiety about ourselves, and we still hoped that the cattle
would be able to find some water hole at which to refresh themselves.
Mamma and Miss Smith rambled on, while we children rested and had
a little drive in the gig to overtake them : it felt like flying after our
late creeping pace, but we did not long enjoy this flight, as more hills.
presented themselves, and we again scrambled up to watch the
progress of the rest of the party.
I have hitherto spoken of the difficulty of going up a hill,,
but going down, especially for a loaded dray, was quite as
difficult; the wheel had to be locked, that is prevented from
turning, by a chain which fastened it to the dray, which is
then dragged down the hill with a grating sound and a tremulous
motion of the dray and its contents. If the descent happened
to be long, a small tree was often cut down and fastened behind the
dray, thus adding to its weight and so keeping it back. It was as-
tonishing the number of these trees to be seen lying at the foot of some
of these steep hills which had been brought down in this way and
were of no further use.
But to return to ourselves, the sun was fast declining and we
began to fear that we should not be able to reach Ely or Erly Flat,
the place we had intended to stop at, and where we were sure of a
good supply of water, yet everyone was anxious to get on, as the
want of water, even for one night, is a most serious- evil, and especially
so after a day of fatigue such as ours had been. The point was, how-
ever, settled for us by some part of the dray or harness giving way.
I forget now the immediate cause, but I know that the effect was that
our stone jar was broken, and all the precious water it contained of
course was lost, and that we were compelled to stay where we were till
the next day. Deep were the lamentations over the broken jar. Un-
less one has experienced something similar one can scarcely realise


our dismay at the loss of our only sure supply of water. As it was im-
possible to reach the Flat, our only hope lay in the Reedy gully, an old
camping place about half a mile off. We managed to arrive there be-
fore dark, and while some attended to the animals and lit the fires,
others set off in quest of water. We were all very thirsty, wine we
could not drink, and the beer had been given to the men, who were
worse off than we, from being unable to indulge in their usual and most
refreshing quart pots full of tea. We waited for some time hoping for
water. At length the first party returned, their little keg still empty.
Then we ate our supper, but would have given it all for a little water.
Suddenly we remembered that there was a box of grapes we were taking
to a friend on the way. The grapes had been bagged on the vines and
so kept fresh after all the others were finished. At first we were de-
lighted with them, but they were so very ripe and sweet we were soon
more thirsty than ever. At last, tired and dispirited we went to bed
and happily were soon sound asleep.
About midnight we were awakened with the joyful cry of
■ “ water, water. ” A second party had gone out and now returned
in triumph with their keg full. They kindly brought some to
us first, and we thankfully took a few mouthfuls. Next morning
we rose with the pleasant hope of getting some tea. Great was
our surprise on looking into the pannikin in which the water
had been brought to us to see nothing but green slime, and that with a
very offensive smell. We could not bear to think that we had tasted
it, for now all declared we would rather go with faces and hands un-
washed than touch such stuff. However, a night’s rest had very much
refreshed us, and as we had got over the most difficult part of the road
we set out again in high spirits. The poor horses and bullocks looked
anything but cheerful, though refreshed to a certain extent by a heavy
dew. It really was wonderful to see them some hours after when we
came near some water holes how they quickened their paces and seemed
impatient to reach them. We wondered if, as most of them had
travelled on the road before, they had sufficient instinct to remember
it as a place always well supplied with good water.
Here we rested for a few hours and that night reached
the place where the carriage was waiting for us. It was then
known as the “Water Holes,” there being a succession of ponds
■or small lagoons prettily situated at the roadside. I remember


seeing some lovely water lilies floating on these ponds. There was
a good hut there, a sort of accommodation house, some paddock
and a nice little garden, but as we had every convenience for camping
out, and the weather was good, we did not go to the house, hut we got
some fresh supplies and new milk from the owner. This, though not a
public house, was a place of entertainment, and there were a great many
drays encamped near the ponds, some taking down bales of wool, others
taking back supplies from Sydney to distant stations. The place was
a sort of junction where roads met from various distant up-country
stations. It really was astonishing to see some of the large wool drays
how they were packed, and often on the top of all was to be seen a
woman and two or three small children. How they got up was a mystery
to me, and being up, how they travelled on such roads and met with sc
few accidents was still more wonderful. Each dray was drawn by from
eight to twelve bullocks, in charge of a driver and another man.
We had now emerged into comparatively civilized regions, and
next morning had everything that was to be sent home again packed
into one of the drays, which at once started back by the road we had
so lately come. The other dray went on to Sydney with our luggage,
etc., we taking with us in the carriage only what was absolutely
necessary for the journey. We soon set off at a smart pace, my father
following in the gig with the groom. We stopped for luncheon at
Cullen Bullen, where we were most kindly received by Dr Dalhunty,
his mother, and sister. It was a very pretty place, and quite my ideal
of a country home. lam told that now it has gone to ruin, the owner
dead, the family scattered, and the place sold.
We were so late in resuming our journey that the sun had set
before we reached the inn at which we were to stop that night. This
Was a large, hare-looking house at the junction of our road with that
from Bathurst, long known and celebrated as Malachi Ryan’s, but
its celebrity was not flattering, as though not haunted by ghosts, it
was so infested with creatures more likely to disturb one’s rest that I
Wonder now why anyone stopped a night there. One traveller declared
be had been dragged out of bed, another kept up a continual fight to
Prevent himself from being devoured alive, and a nervous lady, being
left alone with her invisible tormentors, could think of no expedient
save that of ringing a small hand-bell all the weary night to frighten
them off.


To add to our discomfort on arriving at this wretched place,,
the gig had not overtaken us, though we had waited several times in
the hope of it coming up, and Mamma was getting very anxious, though
we could not say what was to be apprehended. As time wore on our
anxiety became painful when (it cannot he said to relieve our fears),
dear Papa walked in, but so pale and lame, that we saw at once he had
met with an accident. He had indeed had a most wonderful escape.
A road gang was at that time making in one part of the road a new
piece some feet lower than the old, and had neglected to put a paling
along the side of the upper road. Over this bank the horse had stepped
in the uncertain moonlight, drawing the gig down after him. It was
a miracle that they were not all killed. Poor Papa was very much
bruised and shaken, which in his weak state of health was very
alarming. The man with him was not very much hurt, hut the horse,
a splendid creature, we feared could not recover. However, with great,
care and attention, he became in time as well as ever. The gig was
smashed to pieces. Fortunately the place where the accident happened
was quite near the inn. We spent there a miserable night, but were
able to leave next morning. Miss Smith had to sit on the box of the
carriage to leave more room inside, and in this way we reached Penrith
on the third or fourth day. We there crossed the Nepean river in a
punt, and stopped the night in a large and comfortable inn. Of the
scenery on the road I cannot remember anything, as we were shut up
in a close carriage, and could only hope at some future time to see it
under more favourable circumstances.
Our last day’s journey was from Penrith to Liverpool, rather off
the direct route to Sydney, which lay through Parramatta by the
western road. We children and Miss Smith were to be left at Mary
Yale, near Liverpool, with my Aunt Mrs Macleod, while our parents
went on to Sydney to await the arrival of our dray with our luggage,
and to complete the arrangements necessary for our voyage and stay
at Port Macquarie. It was St. Patrick’s day, and' several carriages
passed us taking people to Sydney to attend a grand ball given on the
occasion by the sons of Erin. I remember wondering if I would ever
go to a ball, and thinking it such a very grand event.
Arrived at Mary Yale, we found that my aunt and her two eldest
daughters had gone to the ball, from which they returned next day.
We spent two or three weeks with them very pleasantly. There


was a large family of all ages, and my aunt was most kind and
indulgent to us all. We went often to Liverpool, where we
were always most kindly welcomed by Mrs Andrew Allan ( nee
Bayley), a very beautiful woman, who looked most interesting
in her widow’s cap, surrounded by her six beautiful children,
and it was a great joy to us to take tea with them. We visited,
also, a Colonel and Mrs Mackenzie ; one of their girls was
about my own age, and we struck up a warm hut short-lived
friendship. We remained at Mary Vale till the steamer was adver-
tised to sail for Port Macquarie, when we proceeded to Sydney, but
were there detained for several days by stormy weather. We stopped
at the old “ Royal Hotel,” George Street, and part of the time had
rooms opposite, which were quieter. We had some shopping to do for
ourselves, which was a great treat, and Mamma got us pretty grey silk
pelisses, and neat poke bonnets of fine straw, trimmed with straw-
coloured ribbon.
It was the middle of April before the important day arrived
on which for the first time we went to sea. We had not made
up our minds that we would be very ill, and partly in consequence felt
very well, and slept till we reached Newcastle; we went on hoard very
late, and no doubt were asleep before we left Sydney harbour. At
Newcastle the steamer stopped to take in coal for that and the return
voyage, so after a good breakfast we landed and walked up to the
little white church on the hill. From the ground on the north side
there was a splendid view, looking straight across the harbour to the
north shore, up the river, and to Nobby’s on the right. Nobby’s was-
a little island at the entrance to the harbour on which there was
a lighthouse, and to it the Government meant to make a breakwater,
in the hope of improving the harbour by contracting and deepening
the entrance. We saw a chain gang at work, but somehow this com-
pulsory labour never seemed to effect much. We put out from New-
castle about twelve o’clock and spent a wretched day at sea. Next
morning we arrived off Port Macquarie, crossed the bar without diffi-
culty, and on landing found my uncle’s carriage waiting to convey us
to Lake Innes, a distance of some seven miles. My dear, kind uncle
Major Innes was himself driving. My aunt received us most kindly,
and we were charmed with the beauty of the place and our surround-
ings. The family then consisted of my uncle and aunt, their two little


girls, a boy about a year old, and our aunt Barbara Innes, who
had come from Scotland some time before for the benefit of her health.
She was tall and very handsome, and afterwards married in April,
1842, Mr George Macleay, a brother of my aunt, Mrs Innes.
We spent at this time seven months at Lake Innes. At first our
dear invalid benefitted so much by the change of air and scene, that as
he walked about the lovely gardens, or drove quietly to the beach with
my mother and aunt, we flattered ourselves that he would be soon quite
restored to health. We girls soon settled into our usual routine of
■daily lessons, sitting either in the day-nursery or deep verandah on to
which it opened. My cousins spent most of their time out of doors.
Gustavus had a Scotch nurse, who I remember used to work at what
she called “Ayrshire flowering.” She used two little wooden hoops,
over one she stretched the muslin on which she was going to work,
and the outer hoop was then slipped over the muslin and kept all firm.
The girls had a governess, Miss Paine by name, a truly good woman,
but more than eccentric. She was devoted to my cousin Gordina, then
a dear little girl of four, and I have no doubt her teaching influenced
the child’s whole life, for she was different from other people from her
earliest years, and as near perfection as mortals can attain. Dido, on
the other hand, was somewhat under the influence of a lady who came
every week to give her music lessons, and stayed always one night.
This lady had been known to aunt Barbara under very different cir-
■cumstances. She was the daughter of a Baronet and made a very un-
fortunate marriage, her husband being finally “ sent ” to the Colony,
and was then a “ Special ” at Port Macquarie. Being a man of good
education he was employed there as a clerk. She had dutifully followed
him, and they lived together in a pretty little cottage near the settle-
ment. I never saw him, nor do I know his proper name. People
situated as they were naturally adopted an “ alias.” She was a bright
little woman, and the weekly visit to the “Lake” made a pleasant
break in her dull and changed life.
We all went very often to the beach, which was distant almost two
miles from the house. I shall never forget the first time I went there,
and my first view of the great Pacific Ocean, and the rolling surf, as it
boiled and foamed and then spread peacefully over the sparkling yellow
sands. I was very ill soon after we went to the Lake, and was con-
fined to bed for some days. I then first became acquainted with our


dear old friend Dr Stacey. When I was able to go out again our first
drive was to the beach. I was not allowed to go down to the sand, but
rested on shawls and cushions under a sheltering tree. There I first
beheld the open ocean, looking due east over the wide Pacific. I had
lately been on the sea, but as we went below while still in the harbour,
and remained there till we were ready to land, I had not realised its
vastness.
Early in August my father was so well that he proposed that we
should all return home the following month in the early spring. My
uncle went up to Sydney to arrange about a steamer calling for us ;
but alas, our hopes were doomed to speedy disappointment. Our dear
invalid became suddenly worse, and, after suffering much for a few
days, died on the 17th of August, aged 37, and while my uncle was still
absent. This was indeed a terrible blow to us, and changed all our
plans. In November it'was settled that we should return for a time
to our home, Miss Smith to remain in Sydney and follow us later on.
This, I may here say, she did not do, but married soon after, and we
at Capita ran wild for nearly eighteen months. Then we went to live
at Parramatta, where for nearly two years we attended a day school,
and finally in January, 1841, returned to Lake Innes.
I quite well remember our return voyage to Sydney in November,
1839. It was in a tiny sailing vessel called the “Elizabeth Cohen,’’
crowded with passengers, and sick and miserable we all were. Two
people played cribbage loud and long in the cabin off which our little
den opened. I had never heard of the game, and wondered much what
they could be talking about. The steward was a very superior man
and very attentive to us; he was, in fact, part owner of the schooner,
and when we arrived in Sydney late on Sunday evening, and no one
came to meet us, he insisted on our going to his house for the night,
and his nice, pretty little wife made us very comfortable. Early next
morning Uncle Dalmahoy Campbell came for us. He had already
been to the schooner in search of us, and had there secured our luggage.
He took us to the Royal Hotel, where some other friends were staying,
and we remained for two or three days. While we were there Aunt
M'Leod’s baby boy was christened by Dr M“Garvie “ Charles Colin.”
It was a sad christening ; his mother had died only a few weeks before,
and Aunt Isabella, who was with her at the time, had promised to
take the baby and his sister Williamina, aged about eight, home with


her to the Wallombi for a time. Mamma offered to take her name
daughter, Lorn Edith, with us to Capita, a temporary break up of the
M‘Leod family being necessary, as Mary Yale was let to other tenants,
and all their plans were changed. Before they moved we spent a week
or two with them again. My two grown-up cousins were very kind to
ns, but it was a sad and changed household since our last visit, and we
were only too well able to sympathise with them. I was then a very
over-grown girl of thirteen, 5 feet inches in height, and not
very strong; Margaret was ten, and stout, fair, and rosy. Uncle
Dalmahoy came with us to Mary Yale to see his nieces, and to make
arrangements for our journey back to Capita. He had not long
returned from an overland journey to Adelaide, one of the first ever
made with cattle, and one which I fancy was very successful. Either
then or on a second journey Mr Evelyn Sturt, a brother of the explorer)
was his companion.
We started from Liverpool about the end of November in a neat
caravan, a sort of spring cart, with a high arched frame above, covered
with canvas, Uncle Dalmahoy driving in it his beautiful grey horse
“Block,” Mamma sitting beside him, and we two girls and our little
cousin inside. We went by the usual route known as the Western
Road, stopping first at Penrith, then up Lap stone hill to Victoria and
Hartley. Near the latter place we left the main road to Bathurst by
Mount Lambie, and turned into the Mudgee road, thus avoiding
Malachi Ryan’s comfortless inn. That night we arrived at Waller-
owang, the residence of our good friends Mr and Mrs James Walker.
I do not remember having been there before, as they were absent when
we went to Sydney, but my parents had often stopped there when Mr
Walker was a bachelor. Some years before this he went home and
had quite lately returned, bringing with him from Scotland a very
charming wife and two little girls. She was most kind and hospitable
to us, and in the evening sang some beautiful old Scotch songs, among
them “The Flowers of the Forest,” which I heard then for the first
time. The eldest girl, Allison, was big enough to ride on a pretty
little donkey, so next day several donkeys were brought up for our
amusement, and we scampered about on them with much satisfaction
to ourselves. Mr David Archer, who was staying at Wallerowang,
was most kind and patient in mounting us and helping to manage our
steeds. He was going to Louie, a cattle station of Mr Walker’s on the


Castlereagh River, and, fortunately for us, it was arranged that he
should go with us by Capita, and so help us on our journey round the
Peak.
We rested at Wallerowang for some days,' and our groom came
to us from Glen Alice, bringing with him a good strong horse, so
Uncle Dalmahoy determined to make an effort to make the whole
journey in one long day; the distance was not really great, not more
than thirty-five miles, but the difficulty lay in the bad road. The days
were long and the moon at its full, so we set off very early, driving our
two good horses out-rigger fashion, not at all a good plan, I think,
especially on such bad roads. However, all went well till we
had gone nearly half way, when we had to descend a very steep
hill. There were so many worse yet to come, where we would
be obliged to walk, that my uncle persuaded us to remain in the
caravan, unfortunately as it turned out, for an important piece of the
harness broke and the horses became restive and plunged. Mamma was
thrown out on to the back of one of them, but escaped quite unhurt,
and my uncle held them steady by main strength till Mr Archer helped
us out at the back of the van. After that the horses made a bolt. One
of the shafts was broken, and a wheel so injured that it was impossible
for us to go any further with it. Most providentially we had just
passed a neat little spring cart and horse, driven by an old man, named
Jack Hall, who was well known on the road as a sort of hawker and
carrier of light goods. His cart was nearly empty, so he agreed to take
us on to Capita, and we transferred at once to his care our not very
bulky luggage, and started again at a slow pace, leaving the gentlemen
to take the caravan to a place of safety at a roadside hut in the
neighbourhood.
What a weary journey that was. Our friend Jack Hall
preferred keeping his own steady old horse in the shafts to making use
of one of our fiery steeds, so he was helped up the hills, and the cart
held back going down till at last we reached in safety the foot of the
much dreaded “First Pinch,” after which the road was fairly good.
We had one other misadventure before this point was reached. At a
steep side line ending in a sharp turn and a deep gully, in spite of every
effort the cart upset. Of course, there was no one in it, and no great
harm was done, but we got a great fright. Our two horses were given
•to me to hold, while all hands helped to right the cart, and set free the


fallen horse, which lay helplessly on its back, so complete was the over-
turn. The horses I held became restive, plunged and neighed, and
finally pulled their bridles out of my hands. I was terrified, fearing
they would be lost, even if they did not hurt themselves or us, but they
were soon caught, and then I was mounted on Mr Archer’s huge but
quiet animal. There was a valise strapped in front of the saddle, and
the off side stirrup was thrown over to support my right foot, the left
foot resting firmly in the near side stirrup leather. It was a long and
weary ride, eerie too in the pale moonlight, which threw strange shadows
across our path. Mamma sat with the children in the cart, tired too,
but always patient. At last, about midnight, we found ourselves in
safety at our own door. Mr and Mrs Duncan, our overseer and his
wife, and our Highland maid servant, who were living in the house in
our absence, had gone to bed, having giving up all expectations of see-
ing us that night, but they soon roused up and gave us a warm welcome
and a good supper, which was much required, after which, worn and
weary, we soon retired to rest.
Next morning Uncle Dalmahoy was very tired and much bruised
and strained from his great exertions in holding back the horses at the
time the harness broke; we felt we owed our lives to his great strength
and bravery. My mother busied herself in attending on him, which
helped to turn her thoughts from our sad home-coming. He remained
with us for a week or two, and helped my mother in making such ar-
rangements as were necessary: he and my uncle, Major Innes, were our
guardians, named by my father. I have heard that his will was never
read, as the office in Sydney in which it was left was burned down, and
most of the papers kept in it destroyed.
We soon settled down in our solitary home, cheered by the pleasant
prospect of a visit from my aunt, Mrs Arthur Ranken, who had pro-
mised to come with her children from their home at Glen Logan, Lach-
lan River, and stay with us while my uncle was absent on a journey to
Port Philip (now Victoria). They came early in 1840, and remained
with us most of the time till we left Glen Alice for good in April, 1841,.
the children being a great joy to me, especially George, the eldest boy.
I have an old journal detailing all the interests and occupations of
these months, but will not enlarge upon them here, although my
recollections are very pleasant of the primitive way in which we lived.


Still I cannot altogether omit a short sketch of our doings. We were
still very remote from any settlement, and there was no station of any
importance near us; but we now had half-yearly visits from the Rev.
Colin Stewart, a most worthy and devoted Presbyterian minister. He
lived near Hartley, but spent most of his time in travelling through
the country. When he came to us we had a service in the verandah,
attended by all who could possibly come. On one occasion Mrs
Maclean came from Warrangee to have her baby christened. The
service was in Gaelic, and the child was called lan, but instead of
keeping to that pretty Highland name he was afterwards called
Jonathan, his father and an uncle being named John. Occasionally
we went over to Warrangee to see the family. They had come out
from Skye to claim the property on the death of their relative, Mr
John Maclean, who was drowned at Norfolk Island, and were now
comfortably settled there. Mrs Maclean often came over to consult
my mother, who spoke Gaelic perfectly, and they had very little
English.
We were very much thrown on our own resources. My sister and
I had some lessons to do most days, and we drew and practised by fits
and starts, albeit much at our own sweet will. I read greedily such
books as we possessed, chiefly the “ Waverly Novels,” which then and
always interested me. I read most of them aloud as well as to myself.
We had Cooper’s novels also, which fascinated me then, but somehow
I have never read them since, and have no wish to do so. I feel I
would not now be in sympathy with them. I regret that some of the
books we had were denied to us, among them Shakespeare, which
seems strange to me now, but my mother was old-fashioned in
her ideas and somewhat of a disciplinarian. We spent much of our
time out of doors, where our interests were very varied, in the fields
and gardens, and among all living creatures, from -the native blacks,
who often came about the place, to the birds and insects we met with
in our walks.
We grew our own wheat, and the sowing, reaping, and grinding in
steel handmills interested us, and I may say that we watched the rise
and progress of our bread from the time our seed was sown till it came
out of the oven. The making of potato flour was another great joy.
We watched also the manufacture of our candles, dips and moulds,
from the melting and hardening of the fat to the lighting of the wicks,


and were proud to assist in such a share of the work as was permitted
to us. The dairy was another great interest, and we often rose early
to go with our little cousins to the milking yard for mugs of new milk,
warm and frothy, from our favourite cows. Butter and cheese were
made for home use, and occasionally for the Sydney market. We had
a variety of jams and jellies, dried apples and peaches, and preserved
grapes for use till late in the season by covering them with paper bags
while still on the vines, which bags we had, of course, to make. We
had a great variety of poultry, and more eggs than we could possibly
use. Delicious cakes were of every day use, sugar being the only
thing we had to buy. Our Highland maid was a famous baker of
bread, and made also delightful rolls and scones. Sometimes we
children made a cake and had it baked in primitive fashion on the hot
hearth under an inverted pot with hot coals placed on the top.
Sometimes we had a damper, which is always best when made from
steel-mill flour, and must be baked on the hot hearth and covered with
wood ashes. It is a kind of unleavened bread made like a large round
scone two or three inches thick.
Our house was very well furnished, and we had had great' pleasure
in seeing the manufacture of much of the furniture from a large log of
cedar which was brought up from Sydney in one of our own drays while
the house was being built. There was a saw pit not far from the
house, and on to the frame which surrounded it the log of cedar was
rolled, and there cut into boards of the required thickness. These
boards were seasoned for the proper time, and then worked up by a
cabinetmaker, who was engaged from Sydney to make what was re-
quired. He was assisted by our carpenter, George Miller. They had
good designs to work from, and the result was a handsome sideboard, a
large wardrobe, a chest of drawers, and other things. My mother had
a very pretty davenport which was bought in Sydney at the sale of
things belonging to a Mr Kenworthy, an American, from whom my
father bought also a number of delightful books.
In writing of these old days, I may here add that in after years
people have often asked me about our bush life, and what they were
pleased to call “those terrible times,” when there were only convict
servants. Ido not remember them as terrible times at all. We were
always well and kindly served, and I can even now recall to mind the
names and appearance of some of those who, if they left their country


for their country’s good, were often sent out for very small offences,
and found comfort and prosperity in the distant land to which they
had been banished. No doubt there were some sad exceptions, but
these people would not have done well anywhere. I was eight years
old when I came home from school to Glen Alice, and for six years
after that we lived there with only convict servants, excepting that
during the last two years we had our Highland maid, who I have before
mentioned, and who might have been called lady’s maid had such a luxury
been known in our benighted wilds. Our chief favourite was our old gar-
dener, a perfectly honest, kindly man. He worked early and late, and
was always ready to help us with our gardens. He delighted in bring-
ing in the first ripe fruit, and never failed to present us with a Sunday
posy. He was an Englishman, and elderly even when I first remem-
ber him. I have since been told that his offence was bigamy, then
punished by transportation for life. When he left Glen Alice he went
to Wallerowang and there helped to form a very pretty garden, which
I saw many years afterwards, but the busy hands that had planted it
were at rest, our old gardener having died in the service of our friends,
Mr and Mrs James Walker. In the same hut with the gardener lived
the shoemaker, also an Englishman, very civil and obliging, but only
seen by us when sent for, as he worked for others besides our people)
and remained on after he got his “ ticket-of-leave.” We had a black-
snith, an excellent workman, quiet and respectable, and we often
looked in to see him at work at his forge, which was in a large commodious
shed, in which were fixed two steel hand mills for grinding wheat.
When the blacksmith got his freedom he married our laundress, a good-
looking, clever woman, and they went to a distant part of the country,
where no doubt their descendants are doing well. George, the groom,
also English, was an especial favourite. He always treated me as if I
were a little princess, and took the greatest pains about breaking in a
horse for me. The merits of the said horse were so great that a large
price was offered for him, and he was sold, and I had again to content
myself with our old pony. I don’t know what became of George; there
was another of the same name from Aberdeen, before this time, a poet
and a ne’er-do-weel. I mentioned him before. We had also George
Miller, a Scotchman, a carpenter, and a very decent man, who helped
to build our house. He made us a beautiful bedstead for our dolls, and
many other charming, if clumsy toys, which delighted us. At one time
our cook was an old soldier, clean and orderly. He came to grief for


striking his superior officer, a corporal, who probably was not more
sober at the time than himself. When with us he had no opportunity
of indulging in anything stronger than tea, and I never heard of Mac-
guire as otherwise than well behaved. He was the only Irishman with
us at that time, but later on many were sent to the country for rioting,
and what may be called political offences. We had two bullock drivers
who also did the farm work. When the drays went to Sydney, which
they did every spring immediately after shearing so as to be back by
Christmas, two other men accompanied them for protection, and to
help with the bullocks, camp fires, etc. It was considered a great
favour to be allowed to go. Once the gardener went and brought back
a number of trees and vine cuttings from the botanical and other
gardens. My mother was a devoted gardener, and every year we had
many beautiful annuals in flower, and many an hour we devoted to
watering them and sheltering them from the hot sun. We had also
two or three shepherds and their hut keepers, who came to the home
station for rations, clothing, etc.: sometimes the stores were sent out
to them. Dan Taylor was the old shepherd’s name. He brought us in
more than one little lamb to be fed and petted, and then to our grief
taken back to the flock, where they soon forgot us. There was one un-
satisfactory individual among our men, Hutchison by name. He ran
away, or took the bush, which was the expression commonly used for
such escapades. He did not become a bushranger, as he was soon caught
and sent back to the prisoner’s barracks, and we saw him no more.
Before that we had two Englishmen, father and son, poachers, very
handsome men, but surly. They were not long with us. Ido not re-
member any others that were not quite satisfactory. I must not omit
to mention James Horn, a very little man, but with a large heart and
a brave spirit. On one occasion, the Christmas after my father’s death,
when we were having but a sad time at Glen Alice, a large supply of
spirits had arrived with other stores at a neighbouring station where
there was only an overseer in charge. It was the custom to give a
dinner and some spirits to the men on Christmas day. Somehow
they had got too much spirits, and the consequence was they broke
into the store and took more. A scene of riot and confusion
followed, in which some Irishmen vowed that they would take the lives
of the Englishmen present. Our shoemaker, who was among the
number, made his escape, and, as soon as he could, made for his own
hut, which was perhaps two miles distant through the bush. Horn


■was at that tima living with him and the old gardener, and at once
undertook to come up to the house (about half a mile further) to warn
us of possible danger, and to protect us in case the mad creatures
should make their way over to us ; they knew that we had wine in
the cellar, and that we were a helpless household. My aunt, Mrs
Ranken, was with us, and two young children, a little Highland nurse,
and a prisoner woman. Our own party was my mother, my sister, and
myself, our cousin Edith M‘Leod, Christina, our Highland maid, and a
prisoner woman—in all, five women, four girls, and two little children.
I shall never forget our fear and anxiety when Horn came up and told
his tale. It was a bright moonlight night, excessively hot, even the
verandah felt airless, being sheltered by creepers, so we had made
ourselves seats out of doors with some cedar planks that had been set
up against the end of the house to season for future use. There we
were seated about nine o’clock when Horn arrived breathless, to say
that the shoemaker had escaped from Umbiella with his life and was
much hurt, and that the men from there were in pursuit of him. He
told how the gardener and he were barracading themselves in their
hut, and he had come up to warn and protect us. We could do
nothing, so we sat a while longer in the moonlight, starting at every
sound, and then we girls were sent to bed, the elders sitting up till
daylight. Horn walked round the house from time to time all night,
but no one came near to alarm or disturb us. At last a new day
dawned, and we felt new confidence in our fellow creatures, and
regretted that we had ever mistrusted them. When they heard of our
alarm I think, poor creatures, they felt it was only because they had
been drinking and did not know what they were doing that we
doubted them, for in their sober senses everyone showed us good
feeling and respect, and people came from long distances to my dear
mother for help when sick and in trouble, and she was always ready to
do anything in her power for them. It comforted her in her sorrow to
be of use to others. She was only thirty-three when my father died,
a nd she returned a widow to the home they had built and beautified
together, looking forward to many happy years. We left it for good
not long after, as it was still quite too remote to be a suitable home for
Us - I should have mentioned that our overseer and his wife and young
family lived quite near us. His house adjoined the store, and he had
to remain there to protect it if necessary. Though the store had a
lock our house had none ; in the front French windows opened on to


the verandah; the back door had a latch and a string. I believe
there was a bolt, but it was seldom used, and I must say that except
on that one occasion, when we gave way to quite unnecessary fears, we
felt always strong in our weakness, and I am glad to say were quite
justified in doing so.
When we left Glen Alice, Mr John Duncan, our good overseer,
remained for a time to carry out the final arrangements and deliver the
cattle and horses to their respective purchasers. The sheep were driven
by my uncle’s orders to a station of his at Beardi Plains, a long and
weary journey. Our old shepherd, Taylor, was in charge, and such of
our assigned servants as remained to us. The others had got or were
entitled to their tickets-of-leave, and easily found employment with
good wages. Glen Alice was let to Mr Russell for a time, then for a
term of years to a company lately formed by Mr Benjamin Boyd. They
added stabling and enclosures suitable for a depot for horses, and finally
the place was sold to Mr John Maclean, of Warrangee. I never saw
it again, but my mother revisited it in 1848. I have a letter of hers
describing her journey and her visit to Capita.


Parramatta.
I shall now pass on to the time we spent in Parramatta, where we
lived from April, 1841, till January, 1843. Uncle Dalmahoy came to
Capita for us, and we made one more long journey under his care. He
had married Miss Goodsir the year before and settled in Parramatta,
which was one of the reasons for our going there. My aunt was then in
Sydney with her mother, so they kindly let us have their house for a.
month, that we might have time to look for a suitable home for our-
selves.
The Parramatta races took place a few days after our arrival, and
caused us much excitement, as we had never seen anything of the kind
and were very fond of horses. We had an uninterrupted view of the
racecourse, as there was only a piece of rough unenclosed ground be-
tween it and my uncle’s house, and with the aid of a good telescope, or
spy-glass as we then called it, we could quite well distinguish the
different horses, and even some of the riders. Race cards had been
given to us, and the horse we chose as our favourite was called “Giggler, ”■
a very pretty creature. It did very well at first, but disappointed us
greatly by bolting off the course, and so losing the race.
My mother finally decided on taking a cottage on the Western Road.
It was then temporarily occupied by Mrs Bowerman and her family.
She had let her beautiful place “ Mona, ” on the Parramatta river, and
they were on the point of sailing for England. The chief attraction of
this house was that it was near my uncle, and also near Madame
Lubecki’s school, which my sister and I were to attend. As winter ad-
vanced we found our cottage cold and damp; Margaret had a bad
attack of rheumatic fever, while I had a cough and was obliged to give up
my drawing lessons. I think we all missed the free and open-air life we
had led at Glen Alice. In the summer holidays my mother took us to
visit her sister, Mrs Ogilvie, at Wallombi. We went by steamer to
Morpeth, and drove from there. We enjoyed this change immensely,
and quite recovered our health and spirits. My aunt had only one
little girl, and it was then decided that they should come and visit us.
on she joined my mother in taking Treganna House, in George
Street. This was a large, commodious house with a good garden in front
and at one side, and a small green field at the back in which there were


some pretty trees—among others two known as locust trees. They had
long pods full of beans which the Germans call ‘Johanes brodt,’ and
they certainly looked more suitable for food than live locusts, which
some people suppose John the Baptist to have eaten.
Parramatta, though one of the oldest townships in the colony,
was then very straggling and unformed. George Street extended from
the Domain to the steamer wharf. The river was not navigable further
up. The soldiers’ barracks, a huge brick building, stood near the
wharf. The street consisted chiefly of dwelling-houses with gardens in
front. On the north side was the old-fashioned Inn known as the
“ Red Cow,” and long kept by Mrs Walker. It was apparently only a
cottage in a garden, but, no doubt, was commodious and comfortable.
Nearer Church Street were two good shops, originally dwelling-houses
with deep verandahs. One of these, called “ Nibblock and Tapps,” was
a general store, and very much frequented by us. I have still three
very pretty little Worcester vases bought there. Nearer the Domain
was Mrs Nash’s Inn, more pretentious than its rival, the “ Red Cow.”
The coach for Sydney started from it, and there lived a tame magpie,
a wonderful talker, well-known to all who entered the house. I was
there several times when a child, and well remember how fascinated
we were by it, though I suffered more than once from its vicious
attacks. It had a horrible habit of hopping after children and pecking
at their feet.
The band played sometimes in the Domain, but my mother did
not often take us to hear it. I remember one day meeting a soldier’s
funeral, and, being very much impressed by the solemn music and the
muffled drums, I felt quite shocked when, on their return from the
cemetery, the same procession passed us marching gaily to a lively
quick-step. We used very often to walk in the Government Domain.
Not long after we settled in Parramatta there was a terrific storm, and
the wind was quite alarming, sweeping all before it. Fortunately the
area of its devastations was not very wide. We had a most interesting
day in the Domain to see the traces that it had left. Our friend, Dr
Bute Stewart, had arranged to meet there the Rev. Mr Clark, and Mr
Dunlop, the astronomer, and he kindly invited us to join them with
his daughter, who was taking out luncheon for the party. They had
bad a busy morning measuring trees and distances, and ascertaining
all particulars of the storm. We often called on Mrs Dunlop at the


Observatory. Ido not remember how we became acquainted with her.
She was a kindly woman ; her husband, somewhat rough and coarse,
but clever, and they were hoth very Scotch. Sir Thomas Brisbane was
the means of establishing the Observatory in Parramatta, and of ap-
pointing Mr Dunlop.
There was no Presbyterian Church in Parramatta when we went
there. The Rev. Mr Allan, the minister, held a service on Sunday
morning in a private house, but it was not well attended, in fact there
was not much room, and Mr Allan was far from eloquent, and could
not carry on an extempore service. He afterwards joined the
Episcopal Church. Mr Tait succeeded him. He was very popular,
and a small temporary church was built near the river, which was
largely attended.
Early in 1842 Uncle Arthur Ranken brought his family from the
Lachlan to be near us, while he went again to Port Philip. Lome, the
fourth son, was born in March, and named after my mother. We were
devoted to them all, and delighted when, later on, they joined us at
Treganna House. George, the eldest, was a very stirring boy, and,
though only four, was then sent to an infant school for two hours daily.
Much to our satisfaction, our uncle, Mr Macleod, took a house in
Macquarie Street, and his family, scattered since their mother’s death,
re-assembled. We were very glad to see them all again and to renew
our acquaintance with our two eldest cousins. They were delightful
girls, and always very good to us. Our pleasant and intimate friends,
the Patersons, were another large family. Mrs Paterson was a Miss
Macleod, Talisker. We all liked her very much. Three of the elder
girls were at school with us at Madame Lubecki’s. I must say I
enjoyed my time there, as I liked my lessons, and we had some very
nice companions. Agnes Paterson was our particular friend ; another
was Charlotte Stewart, a very nice and clever girl. One of our friends
rejoiced in the very peculiar name of Hectorina. She was very pretty
and amiable, and lived with a sister w r ho was quite devoted to her and
gave many little dances to amuse her and her young friends. I was
sometimes allowed to join, and enjoyed myself very much. There was
no lack of partners, as many of the young officers stationed at Parram-
atta enjoyed these informal little gatherings. Hectorina had many
admirers among them, and was in despair when the regiment was
ordered to India.


While we were still in our cottage on the Western, Road our
friends, Mr and Mrs Ranken, of Saltram, returned to the colony from
Scotland. They had hurried back on account of the illness of their
fourth son, and he, poor fellow, died on the voyage. They brought-
with them their two little boys, leaving three sons and four girls in
Scotland for their education. Mrs Ranken came to see us, bringing
with her Mr Hugh Hamilton, a young friend who had come from Ayr-
shire with them; I remember so well our disappointment that it was
not one of her own boys, our former friends and playfellows. Had a
glimpse into the future been given to us, we might have seen him
twelve years later standing with Margaret in the old church as bride
and bridegroom, myself as bridesmaid.
At the end of the year 1842 the rest of the Ranken family
returned to Sydney. . The climate of Scotland had proved too severe
for the girls. Agnes died before they sailed, and Susan on the voyage.
The others, with their governess, Miss Otto, spent a quiet Christmas
with us before starting on their homeward journey. I never saw
Somervell (the eldest son) or the two girls again. Miss Otto went-
back to the Cape; the ship had put in there for a week oh the voyage
to Sydney, as was the custom at that time, and she had there met friends
who induced her to return and settle there. Miss de Philipsthal then
became their governess.
Just before Christmas my aunt, Mrs Ogilvie, met with
rather an unpleasant adventure. She had occasion to visit her
home at the Wollombi, and took the usual route by steamer to
Morpeth, driving the rest of the journey. At that time gangs of
bushrangers were out in various parts of the country, but she had no
fear of meeting with any of them. The road was fairly good, though
not much frequented. About noon they saw three men sitting by the
road side. As they approached the men rose; one of them ordered the
driver to stop, and then stood at the horse’s head. The others stood at
each side of the gig and demanded their money and valuables. My
aunt had on a gold watch and chain, also several rings, all of which
they took, except one ring that she managed to slip into her mouth.
They did not interfere with her small amount of luggage and were
quite cool, saying only to the driver as they were leaving, “ Now, hurry
up and don’t look back.”


The robbery was at once reported to the police. Some time after-
wards Mrs Ogilvie got notice that they were in possession of a watch
which answered the description of hers, and went to Sydney to claim it.
.She was then taken to Carter’s Barracks, where several prisoners were
paraded before her, and she was asked if she had ever seen any of them
before. She at once pointed out one as the man who had robbed her,
and thought she recognised another. In both cases she was right, but
fortunately had not to appear against them when they were tried
■She got her watch back but nothing else, and much lamented the loss of
-an old and curious seal, which was a family treasure.
Lake Innes.
In January, 1843, we left Parramatta after a residence there of
nearly two years, and went to Lake Innes, Port Macquarie, to visit
my uncle and guardian, Major Innes, and to consult him as to our
future plans; the result being that we remained at Lake Innes, which
from that time became our home for some very happy years, and round
which cling many fond memories, but we could not see into the future
when somewhat reluctantly we again broke up our home and bade
adieu to the many kind friends we then had in Parramatta.
On Thursday, 26th, we went to Sydney, my mother, myself, and
sister, and our faithful maid, Christina Ross. There was at that time
a weekly steamer to Port Macquarie, and we expected to sail that
■evening. However, we found that the 26th, being the anniversary of
the foundation of the Colony, on which day a great regatta always took
place, our steamer had been engaged for some pleasure excursion, and
the sailing delayed for twenty-four hours, so we enjoyed the sight of the
regatta, and had an extra day in town. We left next night and
stopped at Newcastle next morning to take in coal for the voyage,
and landed for a short time, but looked with very little favour on our
surroundings. In after years I thought it a very delightful place, and
there spent more than ten of my happiest years.


Early on Sunday morning we sighted our port, and crossed
the har before ten o’clock. There was no one waiting to receive
us, so we went to the hotel to await the arrival of the carriage,
which we thought might be bringing some of the party from
the Lake in time for church, but no one appearing, a messenger
was sent off to tell of our arrival, and we, feeling rather sad
and neglected, partook of some refreshment. As soon as possible
a carriage dashed up to the door, driven by my uncle, who had
come to meet us, and he explained that the steamer had passed un-
observed by anyone at the Lake, so they were not expecting us when
our messenger arrived. In a few minutes we were comfortably seated
in the carriage, and in an hour had stopped at the entrance gate, which
was overhung by tall bamboos. Here we alighted, as the large gate
was rarely opened. The drive had cheered us, but a feeling of sadness
lay beneath, and our dear mother, I am sure, recalled sorrowfully the
day, nearly four years past, when we had all arrived there with my
father, hoping that the change to a milder climate would restore his
failing health. After four months of hopes and fears he was taken
from us, and we went back to our home at Glen Alice in much
sorrow; now we were returning to our kind friends at Lake Innes,
and there was a prospect of our settling near them. What a lovely
afternoon that 29th of January was! There had been some rain in
the early morning, and now as we walked up the wide approach the
air was cool and fresh, laden with the sweet scent of roses and
heliotrope, the leaves of the evergreens glittering in the sun, and a
thousand gay flowers lending brightness to the scene. At the right hand
the ground sloped away, and at the foot of the slope lay the lake,
calm and bright in the glad sunshine. It was a lovely scene, and
often as I have looked on it since with admiration, it never seemed
fairer to me than it did on that day.
We were shown into the library, where my Aunt received us
most warmly, while presently Dido flew in and stood transfixed be-
fore us. She explained afterwards that she had expected to see t.wo
little girls, and when I, being five feet eight, stooped to kiss her, she felt-
inclined to cry with disappointment. She was then nearly eleven, but
looked much older. Geordy was near eight, and Gustavus almost five-
Two younger boys had died in infancy. St Clair was bom in January,.
1840, and named after Aunt Barbara and Vivian.


When we left Parramatta it was with the idea of settling in a house
of our own, in or near Port Macquarie. We took all our furniture with
us, or rather it followed in a sailing vessel, and on its arrival was stored
till we required it, most of it for more than eight years, as it was soon
decided that we should remain for some time at Lake Tunes, my uncle
and aunt making us welcome in the kindest manner. Aunt Barbara
Innes had married my aunt’s brother about two years before, and was
still very much missed. My uncle was more than pleased that my
mother should in some measure fill her place, as he liked having young
people about him, and called us always his four girls. During our long
stay under his hospitable roof his kindness never flagged. He placed my
mother at his left hand at table saying, “Whoever may come to this house,
remember that is to be always your place,” and so it always was. I
being very tall, was so far considered to be grown up that I dined at the
late dinner, Margaret came to dessert with my cousins, and the four sat
one at each side of my uncle and aunt. Dido was a tall girl for her
age, in fact never grew any taller, and looked always as old as
Margaret, who was nearly three years her senior. Gustavus was very
devoted to his aunt Lome, and to Margaret, calling the latter his fair
cousin, and meaning it literally, as she had then a most fair and delicate
complexipn. Gordina was at once and always my especial friend. Mar-
garet and Dido, being nearest in age though most unlike in everything
else, agreed in being fast friends.
Shortly before our arrival their governess had left, and my aunt
had herself undertaken the education of her girls, so her mornings were
very fully and pleasantly occupied. In the afternoon she often rode,,
and the children walked with their maid, or they all drove to the beach..
She also spent much time in the lovely gardens, where there was always
something to plan or to superintend. She was an admirable house-
keeper, and had many letters to write. There was a good library in the
house, and a regular supply of books from the Sydney Library.
When it was settled that our stay should be indefinitely prolonged,,
my sister and I were included in the schoolroom party. I was then
sixteen, and there I learned and said my lessons and did sums and
translations in the good old-fashioned style for four years. We three
elder girls worked together; no doubt I was in advance, but Dido was
clever and ambitious, so we kept wonderfully together. My aunt was
a strict disciplinarian, and as long as she lived I stood in awe of her.


She carried on the schoolroom work admirably, and allowed no trifling
or idle moments. How she managed to devote the morning so entirely
to us, having so many other claims on her attention, is now a mystery
to me. We flew to the schoolroom at ten o’clock from the breakfast
table; she followed in half an hour and remained till one o’clock. We
at once read together the Psalms of the day, said texts, Collects, a
hymn or portion of Scripture; then followed quickly our various lessons,
which we had prepared before breakfast or the previous evening; then
we did sums for half an hour while she devoted herself to Gustavus;
after that we wrote to dictation, our interest in this never flagging, and
■our anxiety about our mis-spells was never-failing. I undertook to
hear my youngest cousin practise daily and to assist her with her
lessons. She was a sweet child, and developed into a charming woman.
In the afternoon my mother took us in hand, and worked, rode, or
walked with us, so we formed a very happy family party, and were
<juite independent of interests or excitements from the outer world.
We were, however, very far from being dull or destitute of
amusement or society. There were gentlemen staying in the house
very often, but we seldom saw them except at dinner and in the
evening, and we never knew who might appear then, as some rode out
from Port Macquarie, others came from their stations to spend a few
days, or to await the arrival or departure of the steamer, which for
several years went regularly once a week between Sydney and Port
Macquarie, arriving at the latter place early on Saturday morning and
leaving on Monday as the tide or bar suited. We got letters at that
time only by the steamer, but afterwards an overland mail was estab-
lished, also weekly, by Raymond Terrace and Manning River.
Since our visit to Lake Innes in 1839, the house had been added
to and the grounds enlarged, both being beautified in many ways.
The last addition comprised a large bed-room and dressing-room, and
•over them the schoolroom and maid’s-room. My room openfcd from the
schoolroom, and below it was the china-room, which was entered from
the back court, the whole surmounted by a small square room which
we called the “ look-out, ” as the upper half of each side was of glass, and
■each afforded a wide view. To the north one looked over the flower
garden to a thickly wooded and level tract of country, through which
lay the road to Port Macquarie; to the south, in the distance lay Camden
Haven and the sea; to the east the hill between us and the sea, on


■which stood the flagstaff; to the west was the beautiful sun-lit lake, with
lovely hills in the distance. The house now consisted of twenty-two
apartments, all well and suitably furnished. This did not include
bachelor’s hall (a sitting-room and three good bed-rooms), which opened
into the garden and was quite separate. There some of the frequent
visitors kept a supply of clothes; for others a good supply was kept by
my always generous and lavish uncle, for he loved to keep open house
and to share with others the good things that fortune had showered on
him. In after days, when times had sadly changed, he often said, “ I am
no worse off than so-and-so, and look at the pleasure I have had, and
have given to others, while he had neither”. One of my uncle’s pleasures
was to send a horse at once to any new arrival in the township, to be
kept as long as they required it. This was really a boon to some of
the young officers stationed at Port Macquarie, and much appreciated
by them. Occasionally people rather imposed on his kindness. Once
a man wrote and said the horse did not suit him, and described what
he wanted, so, as horses were very plentiful, my uncle only laughed and
sent another, but somehow the story got about.
The year 1840 was a time of unexampled prosperity in New South
Wales. My uncle took a house in Sydney for the winter months.
They had horses and carriages and a very large establishment, and
were entertained by a large circle of friends, all of which they enjoyed
to the full. At this time they bought many beautiful things, pictures,
plate, etc., and a really magnificent set of Chinese china made to order,
which comprised dinner and dessert, breakfast, tea and coffee sets,
each complete, also hot water plates, and a set of three large and very
beautiful bowls, with the Innes crest in colours on each. This china
was very costly and was used only on special occasions.
I have by me a rough plan of the house and grounds, stables and
outbuildings, which gives some idea of their size and extent. There
was a wide double verandah to the front of the house, which faced the
Lake and the setting sun. A verandah extended along the whole of
the south side. The drawing-room was a large square room at the
corner, 20ft. by 24ft., with two French windows to the west, and two to
the south, opening on to the verandah. It was upholstered in yellow satin
damask. Between the windows to the west stood a cabinet and tall
handsome mirror; opposite was the fireplace, above which was another
mirror. Between the south windows hung a very fine picture by Paul


Veronese, representing Achilles when in hiding at the Court of King
Lycomedes, and dressed as a girl, betraying himself to Ulysses, dis-
guised as a pedlar, by drawing his sword. I remember a stranger who
had travelled a great deal in Italy standing amazed before it the first
time he entered the room, and exclaiming, “ What, a Paulo, and here !”
He supposed he had arrived at the end of the earth or of civilisation..
There were other good pictures in the house—one in the dining-room
had a musical box concealed in a somewhat clumsy frame; in the
library there were some family pictures, none of them large or remark-
able ; a pretty picture of my grandmother Innes in water colours, my
uncle and three of his brothers in oils, and some others. There were
three large bookshelves from the floor to the ceiling filled with many
choice books.
When we went to Port Innes in 1843 times had changed, and the
Colony was in a very depressed state, so the establishment at Lake
Innes had been very much reduced. Everything seemed to us very
luxurious, but we were told that nearly half the servants had been-
dismissed. There was still a butler and two footmen, a piper, who
assisted when wanted, and two Spaniards who were attached to the
stables, but appeared in livery at times. They looked very smart, and
waited well. My Aunt had a maid (the butler’s wife), and my cousins
had a nice Highland maid who came to the Colony in the same ship
with our maid, Christina Ross, and afterwards married the piper. There
were also two housemaids and a laundress. All the years we were at
the Lake my Aunt and we four girls all wore white dresses, which en-
tailed a good deal of work, but if the climate made it almost necessary
it also favoured the laundress; we wore alpacca or fine merino in
winter, changing invariably on the 14th of May and 15th of October.
Among our most favourite and frequent visitors were the Messrs
James, Patrick, and Hugh Mackay, who lived about twenty miles in-
land on the way to New England, at a place they called Big House,
after their old paternal home in Sutherlandshire. With them for a
time lived their cousins, Messrs William and Gerard Robertson. Mr
Patrick Mackay arrived in the Colony in 1839, and Mr James Mackay
came to Port Macquarie in January, 1843, only the week before we
did. Mr Robert Graham was an older resident, and we used to see
him at Lake Innes when we were there in 1839, and admired him at a
humble distance. Mr William M'Kenzie, afterwards Sir William


M'Kenzie of Coul, and he were partners, and called their place on the
Maria River “ Coulfintray,” a name provocative of many weak jokes in
our almost tropical climate. Mr Gray, the Police Magistrate, lived in
Port Macquarie, and Mr Robert Massie, C.C.L. for the Macleay, was
often with him, and they generally rode out together to dinner. There
was a military officer stationed at Port Macquaire and a resident Com-
missariat Officer, also a Colonial surgeon. The clergyman was a Colonial
chaplain appointed by Government, the district being still a depot for
invalids, and a chain gang at work at the dam completing the road to
New England. It was hoped that Port Macquarie would become the
established port for the shipment of wool, etc., to Sydney, and that
the drays from New England would from there take back the neces-
sary supplies to the stations. As time went on these hopes were
doomed to disappointment, as transportation ceased, and Government
gradually withdrew its support from the district, the invalids died off,
and the road to New England was finished. It never was a good road,
and there were no men available for keeping it in repair. To crown
all, the bar gradually became almost impassable, so the traffic from
New England was diverted to Morpeth and Newcastle, and Port
Macquarie sunk into comparative insignificance.
In March, 1843, a splendid Comet appeared and was visible for
about three weeks. We saw it first on Friday, 3rd, at about six o’clock.
We had just returned from a long day at the beach when we were
called to the front of the house to see a wonderful appearance in the
sky. Looking due west over the Lake we beheld a really splendid
Comet. It disappeared in about two hours, following as it were the
setting sun. I give the following particulars from a journal kept at
the time:—
“Saturday, 4th March, 1843. This has been a beautiful, bright,
clear day. In the evening we all watched anxiously for the Comet.
It appeared before seven o’clock, at first faintly, but as the night became
darker we saw it distinctly. It is indeed magnificent. The tail looked
even longer than it did last night. The star to which the tail is at-
tached is small, that is to say it does not appear to us larger than the
other stars or brighter, but the tail is beautiful, springing upwards
from the star like an aigrette of light. We thought the whole length
of the Comet, when the star reached the horizon, was half the distance
to the Zenith, and the breadth of the tail at the widest part one fourth


of its length. Last night there was a long thin streak of light from the
tail which looked like a continuance of it, though it came from one side
only, and in a slanting direction.
“ Monday, 6th March. The Comet not so bright, owing I suppose
to the moon being older and the light from it stronger.
“Wednesday, Bth March. Saw the Comet very distinctly. The
tail was visible long after the star had disappeared. The weather is
still very fine.
“Friday, 10th March. Extremely warm all <J»y. We hear that
some of the people in Port Macquarie firmly believe that the world is
coming to an end, and say it was prophesied a hundred years ago that
a Comet would appear in 1843 which would destroy the world. This
sounds very alarming, but we heard nothing about it till the Comet ap-
peared, and now it is easy for anyone to prophesy. We half hoped the
Comet would not be seen to-night, for though it is very beautiful and
we have a certain amount of pleasure in looking at it, we have also an
indescribable dread of it. There was a great deal of lightning to-night,
and some heavy clouds.
“Saturday, 11th March. Got up early to gather flowers. The
heat was dreadful. After breakfast it increased so much we began to
think there must be some truth in the report that the Comet is to burn
ns up. When my aunt came to the schoolroom she told us a great
■deal about comets, and said that though this one may possibly be the
■cause of the great heat, there is no danger of the world being destroyed
by it. People had often before imagined the end of the world was at
hand, but of that day and hour no man knoweth. We saw the Comet
again to-night: it is very splendid. It appears later every evening and
is longer visible and higher up. The tail seems longer and thinner, but
is still bright and beautiful, though the moonlight just now partially
•eclipses it.
“Monday, 13th March. A lovely morning and tolerably cool.
We quite enjoyed it. I cannot help feeling silly about the Comet. We
saw it again to-night, but it does not now look so large and bright as
at first.
“Tuesday till Friday it rained almost continuously, so we did not
«ee the Comet.


“ Saturday, 18th March. When I awoke this morning I was de-
lighted to see the sun shining as if there had never been a cloud. We
saw the Comet, though very faintly. It was higher than usual, and if
we had not known where it was likely to appear and looked particularly
for it, I do not think we should have discovered it.
“Sunday, 19th March. We went out after dinner to see if the-
Comet was still visible and were much surprised to see it distinctly (the
moon had not risen). There were two streamers of light from it which
we had never observed before, the one on our left as we stood opposite
to it seemed to come from the star, the other on the right from the tail
and much higher up. They were in a circular form and soon became in-
distinct. The star was sometimes very bright. We also saw the stars
through the upper part of the tail of the Comet.
“Tuesday, 21st March. Saw the Comet this evening. It was very
faint.
“ Friday, 24th March. Saw the Comet, and observed stars dis-
tinctly through the tail.”
After this the Comet is not mentioned again in my journal.
In June, 1843, the election of members took place for the first
Legislative Assembly in the Colonies. Queensland was then part of
New South Wales, and Victoria also sent representatives, but at the
time our interest centred entirely in the fact that my aunt’s father, Mr
Alex. Macleay, late Colonial Secretary, was one of the candidates for
the counties in which Port Macquarie was included, and was coming
to meet and address the electors. All was pleasureable excitement and
expectation. My uncle went up to Sydney to be his escort, and they
were expected to arrive on the morning of the 17th.
Unfortunately, the weather was very bad. They had a long and
stormy passage, arrived late, and found the bar impassable and the boat
harbour unsafe. They lay off the port all night, and finally a few of
the passengers, including my uncle and Mr Macleay, were landed early
next morning. The boat narrowly escaped being swamped, while the
steamer had to take refuge at Trial Bay. The weather all night was
wild and stormy, the waves rolling heavily on the beach, making a
tremendous roar. In the morning we could see that at Canden Haven


the headland was crowned with white foam, which dashed incessantly
against it. My aunt had had a wakeful and anxious night, and we
were all in a state of great excitement when a messenger arrived to say
that all was well and the carriage approaching. The travellers were
most warmly welcomed, and looked nothing the worse of their rough
voyage. Mr Macleay was just as I remembered him nine years before,
when I was a little school girl at Sydney. Mr Gray and Colonel
Gordon dined with us; the latter came down in the steamer and landed
with my uncle. He is in the Engineers, and came to Sydney quite
lately as successor to Colonel Barney.
I shall now give some extracts from an old journal kept at the
time:—
“Monday, 19th of June.—When we went down this morning,
Bruce was in the verandah playing a grand pibroch. Mr Macleay is
delighted with the bagpipes; he speaks Gaelic quite well, and so does
Colonel Gordon. The gentlemen went to the settlement and did not
return till late. In the evening there was a dinner party, eight gentle-
men besides the four in the house, my aunt, and mamma.
“Tuesday, 20th June.—l was scarcely awake when Bruce began to
play under Mr Macleay’s windows, and we had the full benefit of “Johnnie
Cope ” and some fine pibrochs. Afterwards he played in the verandah,
the gentlemen quite enjoying it. In the afternoon my uncle, aunt, and
Gustavus drove to the beach with Mr Macleay. . I went off to gather
flowers, as I had offered to fill the large epergne as a special decoration
for the dinner table. I had no idea of the difficulty of the undertaking,
but, with Jane’s assistance, succeeded very well. She got me some fine
hollyhocks from the new garden, about two feet high, which formed the
centre. The large crystal bowl was filled with fine white salt, and the
stems of the flowers supported in it; when all was completed I saw it
placed on the dinner table with not a little complacency. There was
again a large dinner party, and after-dinner speeches with much cheering,
followed by music and dancing, in which Mr Macleay, and my aunt,
my uncle, and my mother joined. I had never seen Mamma dance
before, though she often sings while she teaches us some reel steps-
Mr Macleay showed us an old country dance called “ The Country
Bumpkin,” which amused us very much. I cannot give a very
instructive description of it,But it is danced by six ladies and six gentle


men, the gentlemen in the centre of the circle wearing a hat which he
puts on one of the others, who then takes his place, and so on. I danced
with Mr Salwey, who is most amusing. He had never seen the Highland
dress till this evening. After looking at Bruce for some time, he asked if
it was not very unusual to wear top boots when in full dress ! I must
explain that he is very short sighted. Colonel Gray, Capt. Gordon,
K.N., Capt. Jobling, Dr Carlyle, Mr Acroyd, Mr Evans, Mr Gray, Mr
Salwey, and Dr Richardson were of the party.
“Wednesday, 21st June.—Was again awakened by the sound
of the bagpipes. The gentlemen went to Port Macquarie to attend a
lunch given by Mr Macleay. We went up the hill to enjoy the fine
view and fresh air, after the fatigues of the night before. The burning
of fallen trees is getting on splendidly and is a great improvement.
Margaret and I dined to make up the party, as some of the expected
guests did not arrive. It was my first dinner party, and I quite enjoy-
ed it. Capt. Wauch, Capt. Jobling, Mr Montgomerie, and Mr Purves
were among the guests. After they had gone, Capt. Gordon proposed
dancing “Shawntrews,”but as he could only dance it to a tune which no
one could play, the dance was given up, and Bruce danced “ Gillie
Callum,” over the poker and tongs crossed on the floor, instead of over
drawn swords. Mamma sang, and we all kept time. We were quite
delighted, and Bruce danced so well and lightly.
“Thursday, 22nd June.—The weather continues as fine as could
possibly be wished for. Bruce played some pibrochs early for Mr
Macleay’s benefit. I had no idea the bagpipes could sound so beautiful,
though I liked them at all times, but the sound is quite different in
the open-air, when the piper is walking up and down, and the drone,
that I hated above all things, is swelling and sinking so grandly. I
quite wonder now that when I first heard them I thought the sound so
dreadful and uncouth. After lunch we went to the garden for flowers
to fill the epergne very splendidly, as there was a large party expected.
Mamma brought some beautiful evergreens from the back of the hill.
My aunt asked us if we had pink sashes, as pink was her father’s colour,
and she wished us very much to wear pink. Margaret had one but I
had not, so was going to wear white, when my aunt brought me a very
handsome pink satin one which I joyfully accepted, and we four girls
appeared very gaily, to the envy of the gentlemen, who begged for a
bow to wear to-morrow. Mr Graham, Capt. Gordon, Capt. Wauch and


others dined here. Mr Gray returned to his never-ending subject of
Highlanders, declaring he was half a Highlander himself. I looked
incredulous, upon which he assured me that ladies should not believe
what gentlemen say to them. lat once agreed that I could not believe
that he was even half a Highlandman, and he got so excited about it
that I thought in a short time he would have convinced himself that
he had been bom and bred, and perhaps was still living, in the High-
lands. We had no dancing this evening, and retired early to make up
favours to be worn at the election to-morrow. My aunt provided us
with a roll of pink ribbon and a pattern, and we worked away very
merrily. I made one for Mr Macleay of which I felt very proud, and
Dido made one for her papa. All the others were marked for our
mutual friends, not forgetting one for Pine. My aunt came in several
times while we were working, bringing first materials, then biscuits and
hot wine and water, but her last visit tended more to the amusement
of the party, she being the bearer of a letter for Christina which con-
tained a proposal, couched in the most condescending terms, and con-
cluding with, “Your loving husband that is to be.” I only make so free
with it as we think it was written to tease her, though in truth she
has no lack of admirers and proposals. I must now say something of
the dinner-party to-day, though rather late. The table presented a
splendid appearance, being laid very handsomely for eighteen persons.
The epergne was quite beautiful, and when placed in the centre of the
table the flowers were as high as the lamp. I must own I was rather
glad when it was removed. There were two silver wine coolers with
light wines, and branch candlesticks with wax candles, and four silver
side dishes: we had two soups and an immense variety of dishes. Bruce
and the butler waited, and we had four footmen in livery. I felt quite
dazzled, as I had never been at so splendid an entertainment before.
“Friday, 23rd June.—This evantful morning dawned with all the
brightness of the finest spring day. We all rose early, roused by the
strains of the bagpipes. We had a great discussion as to how the
pipes should be decorated for the day’s performance, as all the pink
ribbon had been used up except a few scraps saved from the horses’
favours. I think it wonderful there was so much, as it was by
mere chance that my uncle named that colour, the important matter
being quite forgotten till yesterday in the novelty of the election,
though he was then told that one of the long-sighted ladies in Port


Macquarie had seen Mr Macleay’s colours flying on board the steamer
when she arrived. We all appeared with great pink bows and favours,
which were distributed to the gentlemen present, and the rest sent to
Port Macquarie, for which place they all set off immediately after
breakfast—Mr Macleay, my uncle, and Captain Gordon in the close
•carriage, the other gentlemen on horseback. We afterwards heard
that they had not gone far when they were joined by six horsemen
bearing flags, who rode before them all the rest of the way. We went
to the front gate to see their departure, and found there an admiring
•crowd of natives profusely decorated with pink calico, which looked
very gay. One man had a long streamer tied to the end of the tuft of
grass on which they roll their hair, and which floated from it gracefully
in the breeze. Upon our return to the house we set to work busily to
dismantle the pink room. It has been arranged that the steamer is
not to leave till to-morrow evening, and there is to he in the morning
here a cold luncheon in honour of Mr Macleay’s 80th birthday, which by
a happy coincidence will be to-morrow. A large party is expected, and
tables are to be laid in two rooms. Margaret and Dido undertook the
•decoration of the pink room after the bed had been taken down and
'the furniture removed. It really is a very pretty room, with a half
glass door opening on to the verandah. One of the windows looks out
npon the prettiest part of the garden, the other into the back verandah
and back court. The blind of this window is to he pinned over with
pink roses, which will have a very pretty effect, and prevent inquisitive
people from attempting to lift it. After lunch we went up the hill,
intending to finish burning the tree, as there was so little left, but
found that we could not do it without assistance, so we invited one of
our countrymen to our aid, as there was a small party encamped quite
near. Two gentlemen and a lady presently appeared, and under our
able superintendence soon made up a very respectable fire. When we
returned we found the gardener busy ornamenting the rooms with
beautiful evergreens; Mamma had been out with Geordy and Tay in
■search of them.
“Saturday, 24th. June.—l got up as soon as I could see, hut as the
morning was very dark found to my horror it was nearly seven o’clock.
We all hastened to the garden where we at once commenced operations
by attacking all the China rose bushes within our reach, and robbing
them of their gay bloom. The ornamenting of the breakfast table had
■been entrusted to me, so I provided myself with a large quantity of the


choicest roses, and filled a number of champagne glasses and ger-
glasses with them, and stole from the gardener some of his .choicest-
buds; he had just come in, steps in hand, to put fresh flowers among the
evergreens, as pink is to be the prevailing colour. It was a most for.
tunate choice, as pink roses are so abundant. When I had filled the
epergne, which looked exceedingly pretty, I went to see how the good
people in the other rooms were getting on. Mamma had joined them,,
and was making a wreath to ornament the library mirror. Dido was-
busy pinning roses on the blind, Margaret arranging them in the fire-
place, Gordina bustling about in everyones way, and Gustavus trying
to sweep away the fallen leaves, Mr Mackay and Mr Robertson looking
on complacently.
Once more we went to the garden and again returned laden
with the chosen flowers, some of which we placed on the breakfast
plates, and when my aunt came down she said everything looked
extremely well. My mother had decorated the library and made some
beautiful wreaths, one of which was hung over Mr Macleay’s picture,,
with which he was well pleased, as well as with the quantity of his
chosen colour displayed upon the breakfast table. After breakfast I
got the steps and adorned the chandelier in the drawing-room. Some
more roses being still required for the vases, we went in search of
them, fearing there might not be even one left, but to our surprise
there were still plenty, and had I not known of the quantities that had
been gathered I would scarcely have missed them. All being in readi-
ness, I thought I would go quietly to the schoolroom and finish my
letters before the arrival of the guests, but had scarcely collected my
scattered ideas when I was called down again. There was a host of
people in the verandah, and in the drawing-room were Captain Geary
and Mr G , the latter a strange-looking person who appeared to
be keeping strict guard over a hideous hat. When Mr Montgomerie
appeared he was most indignant that no favour had been ticketed for
him. I tried in vain to apologise for the mistake, which I could not
account for. At last Mamma kindly gave him hers, and Dido pinned it
on, and he was restored to smiles and happiness. The procession to
uncheon soon after commenced. My uncle said that we cousins had
better go to his office, which adjoins the pink room, where Mr Mackay
was to preside, and that a small table was ready for us; there
we feasted right merrily till a loud and long “hip, hip, hurrah”
*rom the next room, responded to by one from the dining-room, warned


us it was time for us to retire. We met Mr M‘Kenzie, who had made
his escape, and was anxious to return at once to Port Macquarie to his
friend and partner, Mr Graham, who had met with an accident and so
been unable to join the party. Lunch in both rooms went off with
great eclat, and then the whole party went out to the lawn. When we
went down again we found about twenty natives assembled there and
dancing vigorously, while Bruce played. When they had finished.
Dido proposed that we should dance a reel, and at once the whole party
seemed inspired with a wish to join, and really there could not have
been a gayer scene; we four girls in white frocks and pink sashes and
bows flying through the dance pursued by nimble partners, mine a
gentleman in green whose name I do not even know, occupied one end
of the verandah, the rest being crowded with onlookers who had not
been happy enough to find partners, while another party, all gentlemen,
danced upon the lawn. The natives who had before been figuring
there now lay upon the grass and looked on with admiring eyes.
Bruce marched about in his Highland dress, his bagpipes decorated
with a pink scarf besides its tartan ribbons. The verandah posts were
also gay with streamers, some of which had mottoes printed on them,
such as “ Macleay for ever.” But now the merry scene is at an end, the
carriage is approaching, the music stops, my green partner makes a
profound bow, and in a moment all appears confusion, all are intent on
securing their hats, their coats, their gigs, their horses, and such shak-
ing of hands, such cordial goodbyes. The six flag-bearers advanced and
seized their colours, and in a few minutes more all were in readiness to
start, and the carriage door was shut and the horsemen mounted.
Bruce was in one of the gigs, but minus his pipes, which Capt. Gordon
flourished triumphantly aloft. All the horsemen but four rode two and
two in advance of the carriages, some carrying flags. One of the gigs
also went before, while the others and two riders followed, and other
two rode on each side. In this order they marched through Port
Macquarie, and by that time Bruce had regained his pipes and played
his best and liveliest.
“Well, all the good people having departed, we took a parting
look round the deserted rooms, which presented a miserable contrast to
the freshness and beauty of the morning; then we changed our dresses
and went out for a walk, and to visit our fires on the hill. In the
evening the servants had a dance and supper in the hall, and so ended
this gay and eventful week—assuredly the most lively that I have ever
spent.


“Monday was such a lovely day, we had good hopes that the
•steamer had had a return passage good enough to make up for her
stormy passage down. Mr P. and Mr H. Mackay left. In the after-
noon we walked to the beach and had a most delightful bathe in the
sea, and afterwards gathered some pretty shells. Mr Gunn, who we
•call Pine, otherwise the friend of the family, came out to dinner. I
discovered what I thought was a brown ball in one of the high branches
•of the Norfolk Island Pine trees. My aunt said it was a seed cone,
*0 Mr Patrick positively exerted himself so far as to ascend and bring
it down, though not without breaking the pretty way in which it grew.
A greener one was discovered which Mr Hugh determined to try for,
-as my aunt was anxious to get a perfect one. He is very tall, and of
course heavy, so I really feared that the slender branches would give
way with him, but with his brother’s help and Mamma’s parasol they
succeeded in getting it off. It is very pretty, and marked much like a
pine apple and has a very resinous smell.
“June 30th.—The fine weather still continues; the steamer landed
a mail this morning, and went on to the Clarence. My aunt heard of her
father’s safe arrival in Sydney, quite well after all his fatigue here, and
delighted with Port Macquarie and his visit to her. Of course nothing
is talked of but the elections, and the different parties likely to be re-
turned to represent the country in the new Legislative Assembly. I
may here say that Mr Macleay was elected for Port Macquarie, and was
afterwards the first Speaker of the Legislative Council.”
After the election we had a very quiet time, and during the rest
•of the winter and spring took many delightful walks, thus acquainting
■ourselves as far as possible with our immediate surroundings, selecting
.sheltered spots in which to hold our birthday picnics, and noting the
places in which the wild raspberries and Cape gooseberries grew most
abundantly. Our favourite walk then and always was to the beach,
about two miles from the house. There we often bathed or gathered
shells and seaweed, or dug for cockles, which sometimes we carried
home and had cooked for the schoolroom tea—tough morsels and indi-
gestible, but that in no way interfered with our love for them.
The poultry yard and “cultivation,” a sort of home farm, was
situated about half way to the beach, and bounded on two sides by the
marshy ground at the end of the lake, which sometimes flowed from


Oati Creek into the sea. This marsh extended also for some distance
north at the back of the hill, on the west side of which the house was
built. A sandy flat lay between the swamp and the sea.
At the poultry yard were two cottages built on a piece of rising-
ground, one for the men who worked in the fields, the other for the
Haloran’s. There were pig-sties and sheds for the poultry, but I must
own both pigs and fowls enjoyed a good deal of freedom. Haloran
was a quiet, elderly Irishman, he had been one of my father’s
assigned servants, and left Capita with our sheep. I don’t quite know
how his wife found her way to the colony, hut there she was, and a
decent, industrious creature, more than content to find herself so
comfortably provided for, and quite happy among pigs and fowls, or
as she herself called them, “ The pigs and the rest of the poulthry.’ r
In the fields grew oats and lucerne for hay, also maize and Indian
corn, Bruce having the charge or oversight of all. After passing the
cottages we went through a gate, and almost immediately entered on a
kind of bridge or roadway made on wooden piles. This road was
formed during the early days of convict labour, when Port Macquarie
was for a time a penal settlement and there was very little work for
the men to do. The bridge extended for quite a quarter of a mile
through a marshy swamp, then we got on to a sandy road raised
above the surrounding damp flat. A broad, deep ditch had been cut
at euch side, and the soil thrown on to the roadway. The ditches were-
often quite full of water, and the road generally very damp; being
white sand and full of small roots, it was never dusty. The sandy
flat extended to the sea, and in spring and summer was gay with
lovely flowers of many kinds; we often crossed the ditches and
gathered as many as we could carry. In December it was always full
of magnificent Blandfordias.
28th October, 1843.—My uncle arrived from Sydney, bringing-
with him Captain Hemry and Mr Heale. The former was very kind
to the little Laurentz Campbells when taking them home from the-
Cape some years ago. The latter has been a great traveller, and is
most conversational, telling us of many of the interesting places he had
visited in Europe, South America, the East and West Indies, and New
Zealand. He spoke of the murder of the English settlers there a short
time ago. Everyone seems to agree in saying that they were the ;
aggressors, but blame the natives for killing them after they had sur


rendered. I was happy to hear Mr Heale’s praises of Sydney and its
beautiful harbour. It is wonderful to think that less than sixty years
ago there was not a European in the country—and now! but why
boast ? As both the gentlemen wished to see something of this part of
the Colony, my uncle has kindly arranged to take them to Yarrows
and to Tilbuster.
31st October being Hallowe’en, before going to bed we young
people assembled in the old nursery to have our fortunes told, and
found Helen with eggs, water and glasses, prepared to read the fates of
all who came to her. Her own had been told before we came into the
the room; of course the bagpipes were there, to say nothing of the
piper. We began by each taking a wine-glass and half-filling it with
clear water, then we dropped into it part of the white of an egg. The
fortune-teller is then supposed to see in the glass any initials that may
be appropriate, besides other remarkable objects, such as a church or a
ship. In my glass various letters were said to be seen very distinctly,
so I felt no interest in any of them. Margaret followed with two;
Dido had none given ;it was not necessary. Then we all set off to the
new garden to pull up cabbage stocks, and returned in triumph with
very straight and flourishing specimens, mine certainly the largest.
We then got each a piece of shortbread into which a ring had been
baked. Helen’s piece contained the ring, so she of all the party is to be
married first (and so she was). On this occasion we did not “ duck for
apples”; we did not learn till afterwards of the modem and more agree-
able plan of dropping a fork into one of the floating apples. Next
morning we searched for the slips of paper we had buried in the lawn,
each with a name written on it, but alas ! only one was to be found,
and everyone but the fortunate finder was inconsolable.
7th November.—Got up very early to finish a pair of cuffs I have
been working as a birthday gift for Mamma. There is a most beauti-
ful cactus in flower at the pink room window, the outside a brilliant
crimson, but I do not know of any colour so lovely as the centre; it is
so bright and soft and beautiful, with a kind of purple bloom over it.
The new swarm of bees has already half-filled its box with beautiful
white wax. One pursued Dido, who made her escape, but it stung
Margaret. They never interfere with me. I gathered some ripe straw-
berries for my uncle.


On Sunday, 13th, our visitors left after an early breakfast. The
steamer from Clarence waited off the bar for them, and we all felt quite
sorry to say good bye, probably never to meet again. They had visited
Yarrows and Rolands Plains with my uncle, and we had taken them
to the beach, but the most delightful and unexpected treat to us was
that we all went out more than once on the lake. The boats were
kept generally under water, but one was soon raised and got ready;
we stepped gaily in, and the gentlemen pushed off. The boat glided
.gently through the tall rushes into the open lake; it was a most
delightful-afternoon—the sun shining brightly and the wind cool and
refreshing, scarcely a ripple on the smooth surface of the water, on
which we saw multitudes of wild ducks swimming and diving for their
food. They were very tame, and allowed us to approach quite near.
We also saw some black swans sailing gracefully about; they, however,
:soon spoiled their appearance by taking flight. The air is certainly
not their element, for they stretch out their long necks and flap their
wings, allowing the white feathers under them to be seen. We were
not very successful in our fishing, though we saw some fine fish jumping
■among the reeds; one odd looking little thing we got was called a cat
fish. We sailed almost round the lake, which looks much larger when
•one is on it than it does from the land : then we “ hove to ” in a little
bay, where the lines were again thrown out to fish, and we all tried to
throw out lines of another description. Mr Heale told us of an amus-
ing game called “bout-rimer.” One of the party gives out two or
four words that rhyme, from which every one present is expected to
make a verse, each line ending with one of the words given. We were
not at all equal to the occasion, though the words seemed easy enough,
being clime, time, flower, bower. This is the only one I remember,
-and will serve as an example; —
In fair Australia’s sunny clime,
The morn we rove mid shrub and flower.
At eve we dance in lady’s bower,
Gaily and swiftly flies the time.
-and with us it passed merrily till it was time to leave. After dinner,
■of course, we danced and found ourselves quite perfect in Sir Roger de
Coverley, which Captain Hemry had taught us. We kept it up for an
hour with unabated spirit. I wondered at Bruce going on for so long
with apparent ease. He played “The Flowers of Edinburgh,” not
knowing the correct time, but I have had a hunt through an old book


of reels and found “The Haymakers,” which is the same thing, and he-
is to learn it. The steamer not appearing on Saturday as expected
gave us time for another delightful sail on the lake, and a most amusing
afternoon in the library, where Mr Wemyss recited “Young
Lochinvar,” while Mr Heale furnished the action. The arrangement
is that the person reciting stands with his hands behind his back, and
someone standing behind him thrusts his hands forward instead. When
Mr Heale recited the opening speech in Richard III.: “Now is the
winter of our discontent,” Captain Hendry acted remarkably well; he
pulled down his waistcoat, adjusted the collar of his coat, buttoned it
up, then threw it open, and finally took out his handkerchief and
wiped his forehead. It was most cleverly done by both, and really
very absurd and amusing.
We had another attempt at bout-rimer, without much success,,
but that it amused some of the party. The following was the best
effort:—
To the Temple of Parnassus I shall never climb,
For the verses I write are all wanting in feet;
I wish I could write what would last for all time,
And leave to mankind a memorial sweet.
About this time some of my former love for drawing began to-
revive, and Dido and I resolved to paint at least one wild flower every
week, beginning with the charming little blue commelina. We collected
flowers and berries of every description. Mr Hugh Mackay brought
us some of the large purple fruit that grows near liighouse. It is
called by some people the “ native fig,” not from any resemblance
it bears to that fruit, for it is much larger and is more the shape of an
apple or plum, and has three long hard seeds embedded in the pulp..
It certainly is very pretty; the skin is very thin and of a bright rich
purple colour, something like a large purple plum. They require to be
kept till they are soft, when the skin peels easily off. The fruit itself
is of a yellowish colour, streaked with pink. I thought it rather good,
but dry, and with the slightly resinous flavour common to all the native
fruits. I had no idea till now that there was any so large. The trees,
I believe, are loaded with them, and the leaf is dark and glossy.
On St. Andrew’s day we five cousins and Mr Mackay walked to the
poultry-yard, the whole family—ducks, geese, pigs, chickens, and baby
—were flourishing, and did Mrs Haloran credit, but she complained


c?'lly of the young turkeys dying. “ Sure it breaks my heart entirely
to fcfee them dhropping off, and me rare-ing them so noice.” The last-
time we walked down she was very long in coming to open the gate for
us. We managed to open it ourselves, and mamma said to her : “You
see you were not smart enough.” “’Deed, ma’am, and that’s the truth,
and that’s what was keeping me back, thinking if I could come in these
rags” (displaying a robe of faded yellow, much tom, and bare feet),,
adding, she always wore her wedding shoes and stockings.
We were then on our way to the beach to bathe, and before we
entered the water mamma gave a ring she was wearing to Jane to keep-
for her, and Jane put it into Gustavus’ shoes. When we were nearly
dressed she asked if anyone had taken the ring, but no one had seen it..
In vain we searched, crawling carefully over the sand where we had
been. Our fear then was that it had fallen into the sea, where Jane-
was dipping and wringing our bathing dresses, when she remembered,
about it. At last we gave up all hope of finding it, and returned home.
Next morning, on entering mamma’s room, the first thing I saw was.
the ring. How delighted I was. Lahye (the butler) had gone to the
beach very early with Jane and Christina, and had sifted the dry sand
where we had been standing, having first drawn a circle round the spot,,
and was fortunate in finding it. Happily, the tide had been very low
during the night with no wind to drift the sand.
Mr Mackay showed us a stock whip, which he is going to send to-
Scotland. After displaying his own talents in cracking it, he asked if
I would try. It was by no means the first time I had handled a stock
'"'’hip, and I rather astonished him by the masterly manner in which I
cracked it
We have been much amused at hearing of the golden idea,
which some people “at home” entertain of Australia. Two gentle-
men who arrived in the colony early this year said to my aunt the other
day, “It is no wonder we are disgusted with the country.” We
thought we had only to pick up money, it increased so fast, and with-
out troubles or annoyances. They explained that their cousin, who-
oume out before they did, was expected to write at once and tell them
what he thought of this fine country. As he did not do so, out came
his brother to share in his supposed good fortune, but still they sent no
word home. Come, thought the other two—“ They shall not keep all
those good things to themselves, no doubt they are quietly picking up
the guineas, we had better loose no more time.” I wonder if they


thought theV had found a gold mine, with a mint complete, concealed of
•course, but sending forth a golden harvest in showers. Well, one left
•a merchant’s office in which he had every prospects of becoming a
partner. The other had just become a W.S. in Edinburgh. Both
determined to start off at once to Sydney, and astonish their friends
t>y their brilliant success. But 10, they were met by the cry of “bad
times.” All the guineas had disappeared, if there had never been any!
What was to be done 1 They could not go back, so to make the best of
■a “ bad job,” they have lowered their ideas so far as to become
settlers” (wretched word) and deferred the pleasures *of gathering
guineas till they have worked for and deserved them. “ Bad times” is
at present the too general subject of conversation; every one takes an
interest in it, and it is melancholy to hear of the number of people who
are absolutely in want of the necessaries of lifp, who lately were in
■affluence. No one seems to have an idea as to how it will all end.
December 16 th.—l have been devoting a great deal of time to
my friends lately, and had twelve letters ready when we were told the
parcel was not to be sent for a week. My uncle returned from
Sydney on the 2nd April and went off again on the 11th. Meantime
we have had a great many people coming and going—Mr Wemyss
Mr Graham, the Messrs Mackay, Mr William Robertson (who insists
■on helping us to “pluck” flowers every morning), Mr Gray, Mr M'Lean,
-and aMr Watertson, who came out to dinner. We have danced
nearly every evening. Gustavus now dances very well, and his kilt
is very becoming. Bruce has made him a sporan, of which he is quite
proud. My uncle calls him “Young Lochinvar,” but that is quite
wrong, as that gallant young knight was certainly a Lowlander.
We make pleasant raids into the new garden every afternoon.
The first ripe figs were gathered on the 6th, but now there are Chinese
peaches and mulberies, as well as quantities of figs. I cannot say I
like the flavour of these double blossomed peaches. The Moreton Bay
chestnut is now in flower, of a scarlet and yellow colour, and grows in
-clusters on the bare branches without leaves near them.
We all love our morning in the schoolroom, and have got a new
geographical lesson to prepare for Saturday. Instead of drawing
names of places from a bag and merely telling their whereabouts, we
•each get three names given to us on Monday, and on Thursday give some


interesting information about each place, and get new ones to prepare
for the following Monday. My first were rather varied—Ramillees,
New York, Yittoria. I liked the next week better, Jamaica having
fallen to my lot. I think I shall have to look into “ Tom Cringle’s
Log ” for a description of some of its glories. Our dictation just now
is about Sir Roder de Coverley. We begged for it, as we all like the
•country dance of the name; of course, we like Sir Roger himself, and
have a particular regard for his ancestor, who was said to have been
the first to introduce the fashion of making love by squeezing the
hand—(l was going to add I wish he had left it alone).
I must say something here about Gustavus’ tortoise, which he is
devoted to, but I think the poor creature leads a wretched life. He
has now got a string fastened to its shell, and it is fastened to a tree..
If it tries to make a hole for itself in the soft earth it is pulled out at
once in case it should be choked. Then water is brought out for it,
but no sooner does the poor thing approach water than fears are
entertained in case it should be drowned. I wonder what it lives on 1
It has a most unpleasant odour, and we often wish it could escape
and be seen and smelled no more by any of us.
I have once more tuned my guitar and made resolutions about
practising it regularly, but all our spare time is at present devoted to
our gardens, which quite repay the trouble we take with them. We
are rejoicing also over many lovely wild flowers. At Christmas the
gay Blandfordia Grandiflora is in its full glory, and the lovely fringed
violet, which is a marked contrast, is also very plentiful.
On 23rd December my uncle returned from Sydney, accompanied
by the Honble. Captain Hope, a brother of the Earl of Hopeton,
-and certainly the tallest man I have ever met. On Christmas
day most of the party went on the lake for a sail. I stayed
at home to fill the epergne, but first had to go the lower lawn
to be initiated into the art of catching grasshoppers, which is a very
laborious undertaking. I would go as many months without fish rather
than undertake to catch half-a-dozen grasshoppers. Mr Massie and
Montgomerie dined, in addition to our house party. It was very
late when dinner was announced, the cook imagining it was a holiday
(and making it one) had gone to sleep.


On New-Year’s day we were all up very early, having arranged t
walk to the sandy flat off the beach road to get native flowers. Mr
Hugh Maekay went with us and Margaret—only fancy Margaret! She
tried to escape, but could not. Mrs Haloran, of course, hast ;ncd to open
the gate and wish us many happy new years, adding, “ Ye’ll have a fine
bogie (bathe) this morning.” So we told Mr Hugh he had been pro-
moted, as he was now a Companion of the Bath ! We got a great many
f-'o, blandfordias and some ipomoeas, and got home in time to arrange
flowers for the library and decorate the breakfast table. In the after-
noon I arranged the flowers for the epergne. They really were splendid,
but alas! before they reached the dining-room the airy fabric was
upset. The tallest blandfordias which supported a long wreath of
passion flowers was raised so high that they touched the top of the
door and went over at once—rather a trial to my temper at the moment.
Mrs M‘Leod, Miss Marion, and Hector arrived at 4 .o’clock to dine
and stayed all night. Mr Alec. Maclcod, Mr Gray and Capt. Hunter-
were in time for dinner. We were a party of sixteen. Afterwards we
danced, first on the lawn and then in what was the pink room, but is
now our dancing and recreation room. I danced the Haymakers with
Gustavus, but had some fear of losing him among so many grown-up-
people.
2nd January.—l was not dressed in time to see Mrs M'Leod before
she left, which was at 6 o’clock. I raced down to the gate, but was just
too late. Got some grenadilles and gathered leaves for my “ beastie,”’
and Captain Hope brought me a fresh branch of gum tree for it. It Is
an immense red caterpillar, with some purple and some black spots on
it It has a hard tail, which it strikes against the side of its box if
you touch it, It is a sphinx. Captain Hope found it and brought it
in. I cannot say that I have much regard for the creature, but I mean
to keep it and see what it will turn into.
The gentlemen all left about 2 o’clock. It seems quite an age
since we have been alone. I believe the first action of each and all of
us was to take a good sound sleep. Then we went to the garden and
got a liberal supply of grapes.
sth January.—Everything has been taken out of the drawing-room-
and the floor taken up, as the joists which support it were giving way-


They have been attacked by white ants, and I wonder they did not
give way long ago, for, on opening a chiffoniere which stands in the
room, the lower part was found to be quite filled with earth and these
destructive little creatures. They had made their way through the
floor and through the bottom of the chiffoniere. Dwarf walls of brick
Are to be built to support the new joists, and these are to be coated
with tar. The earth deposited in the chiffoniere was quite hard, but
pierced by many narrow tunnels, and embedded in it was a set of
beautifully carved ivory chessmen, which, with some other things, had
been put carefully away. With time and trouble the chessmen were
restored, but nothing else.
Sunday, 7th January. —Went to church, but the heat was so
great we drove, as Gordy said, “tremendously slowly.” Dido did not
feel well, so I went with her to The Stores, where the horses are
-alway put up. We were shewn into a nice cool room. Mrs Gloag
received us very kindly, and was most pleasant, and I think glad to see
us. She does not seem to know any one in Port Macquarie. Mr Gloag
showed us rather a curious ornament, which at first I thought was
china. He said he kept it in rememberance of a favourite horse which
was drowned at the wharf. The ornament was made from the shoulder
bone of the horse, and is painted to look like a clergyman in his gown.
It is very well done, and has a very good effect. I have often seen
bones of the same shape lying about and called “the Parson,” but had
no idea why, and that it was so good an outline of one.
9th January.—Got up very early and walked to the beach, where
■we had a delightful bathe, but came back starving and exhausted, as
~we had forgotten to take anything with us to eat. We meant to spend
a very quiet evening, but Dr Stacy, Mr Solway, and Mr Graham ar-
rived. My uncle had returned the day before. Mr Graham is most
indignant with Mr , who we think so clever and well informed.
It seems that when he leaves home he locks his door (an unpardonable
offence), and not at all usual in the bush. He had also been known to
seal up the key, so that no traveller may be admitted during his.
absence, and there is no food to be had, unless you take some of the
servants’ rations, which, of course, is out of the question. Lately Mr
41. and Mr R. were travelling in that direction, and finding the
hospitable owner of the station was from home, and the door of his
house locked, they attacked a passion vine which he had trained with


great care, so as to give the fruit the full benefit of the sunshine, and,
in my opinion, behaved very greedily by eating it all.
Friday, 19th January.—There was a violent thunderstorm. My
uncle, coming back from the settlement, got quite wet through. Capt.
Hope, who had walked to Tacking Point, also got a benefit. He
brought back with him some beautiful white flowers (calouthe), which
we discovered in the vases after dinner, and I immediately came up-
stairs to sketch one, as they fade very rapidly.
27th January.—We have had some miserably wet days, and only-
one walk to the beach, where we had a delightful bathe. When we
were dressing we thought we saw some people coming towards us and
were in much excitement, when, to our surprise, they proved to be
three large native dogs. One had a large fish in his mouth; all were
very bold, and came quite near us.
Our schoolroom work progresses. We have begun mathematics,
but my present knowledge extends little beyond the fact that “ a line
is length without breadth.” We, however, proved the first question
with my aunt’s aid. She has more patience than any one I know.
We are now having Cowper’s “ Praise of the Country,” which is.
difficult after the school pieces we have had lately. I generally have
some confidence in my memory, and will now have an opportunity of
trying it.
Lately we met Mr Murrigat again (a black fellow), but he
did not show much anxiety to renew our acquaintance, though he
explained to me how his wife, Ellen, “ when she was a little boy” had
had the first joint of her little finger cut off to enable her to roll up her
fishing tackle with more ease.
The home mail is in, and mamma has had a letter from her Aunt-
Louisa, an old maid who lives in Devonshire. I narrowly escaped
having to answer it at once. I have been asking abo&t some of
ancestors, and find that Grandpapa Campbell’s mother was a Miss
Fogo, aunt to Sir John Moore, who, therefore, was his first cousin,
first and second to my mother, and first and third to me. Well, I
would be proud had he been my twenty-third, but even Scotchmen, I
am told, do not count kin beyond the sixteenth generation.


Jam-making has been the order of the day. I had some mending-
to do—oh ! hateful task—but could not resist joining the party in the
garden, who were gathering grapes. Afterwards we were very merry
picking them off the branches and weighing them and the sugar pre-
paratory to the boiling which Christina and Helen undertook, and
mamma superintended.
29th January.—When we sat down to breakfast this morning
Captain Hope was not to be found. Someone suggested Tacking Point
as the attraction, and sure enough about ten o’clock he returned, bi ing-
ing a large bunch of beautifully fresh white orchids, one of which I
began at once to paint. My aunt had shewn him my first attempt, and
all he said was: “It may be well drawn, but no one would recognise
in it the flower that grows at Tacking Point.” So naturaliy I was
disappointed, and anxious to do better, especially as he had so kindly
brought us these lovely fresh flowers. Happily, the result was satis-
factory to all, and the critic pronounced that it would do very well.
The steamer could not get out owing to the state of the bar or the
tide, or both, so the gentlemen who were going to Sydney came back
and we had a very merry evening, ending with a Christmas game
called flour pudding, for which Captain Hope was answerable. My
experience of it is that once a year is once too often. A basin of flour
was brought into the dining-room and turned out on a large dish, and
sixpence placed on the top. Each person then cuts a slice in turn; the
unfortunate who cuts down the sixpence has then to have the pleasure
of rubbing it off the dish with his nose. At first all were most careful,
then someone jogged his neighbour’s elbow—down came the sixpence.
Some flour was thrown in return, and it ended in a grand game of
romps for a few minutes, each trying to shew the effect of powder on
their neighbour’s head. Captain Hope fared the best; he is so tall.
Then a glass of water was upset; the floor became a slide, and we flew
from the room.
Tuesday, 6th February, 1844.—1 have been thus particular in
recording the date, as this was one of the most eventful days of my
life, so far at least as being in great danger of losing it goes. The
■weather had been wet and stormy for some days, but as it had cleared
we set off about four o’clock for a walk to the beach, taking our bath-
ing dresses with us, as we hoped we might be able to bathe. The roads


were very wet and we did not keep very well together, so when we
arrived at the heach Christina and the children were already in the
water, but keeping well to the edge of the waves as the sea was dread-
fully rough. Dido and I got ready, though we thought we ought to
wait for my mother, but seeing her on the bank we quieted our con-
sciences and raced down to the water and were soon over heads and
ears dashing about. We next began to explore our bathing place, for
the whole beach had been very much changed by the late storm. Our
bathing place-is usually a gradual sandy slope towards the sea, but to-
day it was gravelly with a steep descent of about two feet, and further
•out a sand bank, which when the tide receded was left almost dry, thus
leaving a narrow channel, the water in which was in continual agita-
tion from the waves dashing in at each end and meeting. Dido had
■scrambled off to some rocks in the direction of Cati Creek. Ido not
know what tempted me to follow, but it was fortunate I went, for no
sooner had I caught her hand than a great wave lifted her completely
off her feet, and I had great difficulty in balancing myself on a rock
upon which only one foot was resting, while the water washed about with
what appeared to me unusual force. Howr thankful I was for being
tall: it was the first time I had ever found the advantage of it.
Dido was completely out of her depth and quite powerless. Fortunately
she did not attempt to move. I held her by the shoulder and
had just sufficient strength to keep her head above water. We
were about a minute in that frightful position, and I scarcely know
how we got on shore. We spoke not a word, and scarcely looked at
•each other till we were far up on the dry sand, and then Dido said she
had never been so frightened or felt so near death as the moment
before, the feeling of having nothing to rest her feet on was so dread-
ful. I agreed that we had no doubt been in great danger, and for a
moment we were very serious, then our fears vanished, and we were
■dipping in the water as madly ever. I cannot think what possessed
us, or where my small portion of . common-sense had flown to ; it really
was a tempting of Providence, ,hut my mother joined us and we felt
reassured again. She was showing us how to swim, for the tide was
coming in, and the water in the little channel was now pretty deep.
■Suddenly Margaret exclaimed, “ there is a large wave coming!” I
scrambled in as fast as I could, but it overtook me. On recovering
from the shock I looked round for the others, and saw Mamma beside
me. I closed my eyes again and heard her exclaim, “ Dido!


Annabella!” I looked up. Oh ! who can describe the horror, the
agony of that moment ? Dido was floating some yards from us quite
helplessly, being borne out to sea by the force of the receding wave.
An indescribable feeling of horror crept over me—l felt as if it de-
pended on me to save her. I started forward, but she was out of my
sight. In a moment she rose again; her face was turned towards us,
her arms stretched out. The sight gave me fresh courage; another
plunge, and I, too, was quite out of my depth, and as completely at the
mercy of the waves as my cousin. I stumbled on some sharp rocks ;
the pain was unheeded. My only distinct remembrance is on rising
again finding myself almost within arms length of her. I bent forward,
but she sank, and in a second rose at least a yard further out. Oh 1
that fearful moment; it makes me shudder now when I think of it. I
felt perfectly sick—sank again, and almost gave up all hopes of reach-
ing her. Mamma was struggling on beside me, sinking and rising, and
equally determined with myself not to return without Dido. But
what must Margaret’s feelings have been ; she it was who first warned
us of the danger, and now stood almost petrified. She saw Dido swept
oft’ by the wave, and Mamma and me rush after her, saw us all rising
and sinking, not knowing which of us might first be washed for ever
from her sight. She describes it as the most frightful nightmare. She
tried to scream, tried to move forward, but was unable. When she
came to herself again she was still standing in the same spot with her
hands tight clasped, but we? We were safe, on the beach. A wave
had washed Dido towards us. I had caught her outstretched hand,
and extending the other to my mother we had together been washed on
shore. The moment I felt we were in safety my full tide of animal
spirits returned, and I felt—l cannot say how I felt. I could neither
laugh or cry, but I was very happy and thankful. My dear mother
was quite overcome. She knelt upon the sand and thanked the Most
High for our happy deliverance; she looked so pale and ill that I was
beginning to feel very much alarmed about her. Then she rose and
called Dido to her. Margaret, in her joy, was dragging her as far
from the sea as she could. We were all now assembled, an odd-looking
group in our wet bathing dresses, and our long hair streaming round
us. Mammji sat on the sand very pale and her lips perfectly blue.
Diflo was just recovering her recollection, for though she showed
wonderful presence of mind while in the water, she says that just
us someone caught her hand she had given up all hope of being


saved, the pain of the water coining in at her ears, nose and
mouth being quite stupifying. It must have been a terrible feeling.
Margaret stood, her hand pressed to her forehead, while Gordy and Tay
were pictures of horror and suprise. Christina joined us at that moment.
She had not observed us till we had reached the shore, and her first
idea was that we had been attacked by a shark, as we were so dreadfully
cut and bruised. She said, “ Deed I didna know what to think when
I saw you, I didna know whether to laugh or to cry, for I thought a
shark had bit my mistress, so I counted her feet, and then Miss Anna-
bella gave me such a queer look I burst out laughing ”; and so it was
Christy’s laugh that broke the spell. We then all hurried off to dress, and
to leave the beach. I took one parting look at the sea. The water seemed
to boil over the very spot we had been bathing in, which by its forma-
tion allowed the waves to rush in on three sides, and sometimes they
met with a tremendous crash: it really was quite frightful. We held a
consultation as to where, when, and how, our adventure should be re-
lated, but we met my uncle and aunt before we reached the bridge, so the
whole story was told at once to our infinite satisfaction. It was a most
-delightfully calm evening when I came upstairs, and I could not help
throwing up the window and looking out. The moon was under a
cloud, but the stars shone brightly, while the sea was roaring dreadfully.
How nearly we were being left in it this evening, and what deep cause
of thankfulness we have that we were not drowned. Assuredly we had
0 *
no part in saving ourselves. Had Dido not be thrown towards us when
she was, she must have sunk, and we would have followed. No doubt
we would have been thrown back on the beach, as the tide was coming
in with great force. But where and how ?—who can tell 1 I cannot
bear to think of it.
I wish I could imitate Cardinal Chigiij who, it is said, wrote for
fifty years with one pen. I do not think he could have used it much, for
mine requires to be mended very often, and I cannot always get a pen.
knife. Much to our surprise, the ponies have at last been brought in,
and Dido and Margaret have had some delightful rides. I have been
spending a week with Mrs M'Leod in Port M‘Quan’e, where I remained
after church on Sunday. In the afternoon we took a long walk, as
there was no second service. After tea Mrs M'Leod read prayers and
then a sermon.
On Monday Mr Hugh took me for a ride round Tacking Point


He had a very restless young horse, and I had Cupid, a spirited pony,
which my uncle has lent to the boys. The road was quite charming, part
of the way being through a scrub of lofty-leaved evergreens, festooned
with graceful runners. A pathway had been cleared, but was rapidly
growing up again. At the top of the hill a magnificent sea view broke
-on me quite unexpectedly; then we went down to the level sands, and
no sooner had Cupid passed the little creek than he set off at full speed
towards the rock. I did not attempt to stop him, and enjoyed the
gallop very much, but was surprised at his readiness to stop and turn
as soon as we reached the rocks till I heard it was a sort of training
ground, and he had been accustomed to gallop there. • I think they
should have told me.
One day we rode to Thrumster, which is rather a pretty place. It
belongs to my uncle, and is called after his father’s place in Caithness.
The house is too near the road to New England, but there is a good
garden. It is about seven miles from Port M'Quarie, and the same
•distance from The Lake. Mr and Mrs Taylor, now of Terrible Valley,
New England, used to live at Thrumster, and when they left there was
an idea that we should settle there, but 1 am glad to say it was not
carried out, We rode out by the long bridge and passed a large dry
swamp, which, I believe, is some day to be converted into a race
course.
Next day we rode to Pdackman’s Point, but had to return at once,
as all the gentlemen were engaged to play cricket. There is a great
extent of water, where the Wilson and Hastings Rivers meet, and Goo-
loowa, Captain Jobling’s cottage, looked very pretty across the water.
Coming back we admired the evergreens on each side of the road : they
really are beautiful. The principal flower is the purple Ipomrea, which
is convolvulous and of a lovely colour. The vine grows most freely from
tree to tree, its glossy leaves waving in rich masses covered with
flowers. There were also quantities of myrtleberries, which grow in
clusters, the branches bending under their weight. One day we made
a variety of calls. Mrs Ackroyd is still a great invalid, and Marion
kindly goes every day to read to her. The Ditmas family have at last
started for New England : they have been going for the last six
months. We were invited to tea by Mrs Richardson, but did not go
till quite dark. We found a large party already assembled, and we
were seven. Tea was handed round in the drawing-room by an old


man, who handed also muffins and biscuits, hut he seemed to think
that because I did not take two cups of tea I could not eat two pieces
of bread and butter.
After tea we looked at some prints, and talked or were silent till
it was proposed that we should dance, so we adjourned to another
room which was not very spacious, and Mr Gorman played the flute
while we danced a. set of quadrilles. Then Miss Fatherini was pressed
to sing, hut drew back with apparent unwillingness till they ceased to
ask her. Then she supposed she must sing, and finally began “ She
Wore a Wreath of Hoses.” We danced again, and ended up with a
game called “ The Rusty Rapier.” Trays were brought in with
sandwiches, itc., before we left. We had a pleasant walk home,
though the air was keen and cold, and the night pitch dark.
Next day we rode again to Tacking Point, taking the beach road,
which is quite beautiful, but the path is some parts was dangerously
steep and narrow. We were a large party, and enjoyed a good gallop
on the sands. ,At 4 o’clock went to the Manse, where Mr Purvis read
the 6th chapter of “ Watts on the Mine,” and part of the Ist book of
“ Milton’s Paradise Lost,” which he explained, and afterwards ques-
tioned the members of his class. He also read some selections on
Memory and Testimony. lam sorry I shall not have an opportunity
of attending another of these interesting readings.
On Saturday morning, about 8 o’clock, I had the satisfaction of
seeing the steamer pass my window. Miss M’Leod arrived by it, and
others of the wedding party are expected next week. This house is
two storied, and joins the hotel, which occupies the corner of the chief
street near the landing pier. There is only a wide road between the
verandah and the sea. I admired the view very much one morning
as we watched a boat loaded with grass coming from the opposite
shore —it was drawn into the current, and then carried rapidly down
past the house. The men stopped, and landed the grass. It was a
Government boat, and there were men in waiting, who soon carried
off its contents.
In the afternoon it was proposed that we should call at Gooloowa,
which I was glad to have an opportunity of doing. Mr Hugh escorted
us, and instead of going by the old long bridge, we crossed the new
one, which is scarcely finished—it forms a dam also, and will be a fine


wide roadway, very different from the old one; there is a flood-gate in
progress. Arrived at Blackman’s Point, we signalled for a boat,
which soon arrived to “ row us o’er the ferry.” It was manned hy an
extraordinary-looking black boy, very short and badly made. He had
one long finger, which clasped the oar, while the others were compara-
tively useless. This Point is formed by the junction of the Hastings
and Wilson Rivers. The Marie joins the Hastings higher up. We
were some time crossing, and together they form a fine sheet of water,
very clear, but quite salt, and the tide comes up beyond Gooloowa.
We walked up a sloping green bank to the cottage, which is situated
in a pretty flower garden. There is a little island near the house,
and another covered with mangroves further up. These, with the
wide river and the distant hills, made a very pretty picture. We
walked in the garden, then had some cake and wine, and the Misses
Jobling shewed us some of their pretty work—imitation Brussels lace,
and very fine open worked knitted stockings and edgings. They have
a good collection of butterflies, really worth having, and were delighted
with the curious creature Mr Hugh M‘Leod took over to them. It is
green, and has a fat body, long anthers, and six legs, each like two
small cactus leaves, quite as prickly, and exactly the colour. It
certainly is the largest insect I have ever seen. The horses during our
absence were tied up in a little yard at the side of the water. I was
glad to find myself mounted again, as I seem not at all fond of being
on the water.
Mr Gray and Mr Hay came in to spend the evening. The latter
lost his way yesterday returning from Rolands Plains, and had to spend
the night in the bush. He had neither a light or provisions, and his
adventure was not an enviable one. He says he put his great-coat
over his horse. It reminded me of a picture I have seen in a comic
annual of an old woman standing in heavy rain while she sheltered her
ducklings under her umbrella. I was quite sorry to say good-bye to
my kind friends. Mrs M‘Leod’s industry is untiring. During that
week she knitted three pairs of gloves for her sons, a tiny pair and a
pair of long socks for baby Marsh, to he worn when travelling, for, of
course, she is coming to the marriage ; besides this, she worked a
square in Mamma’s friendship cushion, and a corner for Hector to
ground. Marion was'busy finishing a patchwork table cover of silk
the pieces cut in diamond shape of three different shades. These,
■when sewn together, form rows like boxes. The effect is very good.


She kindly gave me the patterns, and we at once looked out all our-
pieces of silk and began to make one for ray aunt.
18th July.—My uncle, Mr Taylor, and Mr James Mackay left for
Yarrow, and two Messrs M‘Leod were to join them. Lachye would
think they meant to take the place by storm. We took a long walk,
and visited the myrtleberries, which are now in full bearing and quite
beautiful. We picked some Cape gooseberries. The plants are now
spreading so rapidly that people begin to say they must be indigenous.
Sunday, 28th July, was Margaret’s 15th birthday. We celebrated
it by a great cake-making, a feast and games at “les graces,” it being,
too wet to go out. Gustavus presented her with a string of small
shells and two bead rings, all threaded by himself. My cuffs were
finished in good time, and much admired.
The weather during the whole of July was very cold. I find by
my journal that the 22nd was the coldest night of the season. Next
day we were going to ride, and I went to the garden to cut a spruce
stick to serve as a riding whip, but rain came on, and continued with
little intermission for more than ten days. One day we ventured as-
far as the beach. The road was in a dreadful state, and at the
poultry yard there was quite a little lake, in which the geese were
swimming with evident enjoyment. Coming home there was a shower
and a beautifnl rainbow over the sea. Next day the rain fell in
torrents all day, and during the night the wind rose and burst open
one of the windows on the look-out, and I was awakened by the rain
dropping on to the school-room floor. The following day was one of
the calmest and brightest I ever remember, but, of course, we could
not go to church. We hear of floods everywhere, rivers impassable,
and bridges under water.
Thursday, Bth August. —Had a delightful ride yesterday, and
Dido and I have been busy to-day drawing the flowers and berries we-
brought home. Mr Purvis called and told us Miss Marion M‘Leod has.
had a very bad fall from her horse. Her face is much cut and bruised,,
which just now is particularly unfortunate. I have been very busy in:
my garden, but the mischievous puppies have scratched up all the
seeds. I cannot have even the poor satisfaction of beating them, for
in the first place I cannot catch them, and in the second because my
cousins would highly disapprove.


14th.—Our mania for gardening is over, and we have returned to
“ Les Grace” with double vigour. We have each got a new hoop,
which we have covered according to our own taste and means. 1 kept
up 379 with my aunt. We were surprised to hear that Lady, the
bloodhound, had returned. It is curious how she found her way back,
as she was taken by boat up the Marie, and could not know anything
of the road. Her ungrateful puppy, Hector, did not recognise her.
On the morning of Saturday, 17th August, we received invitations
from Mrs M‘Leod for Tuesday, 20th, to Miss Marion’s marriage. This
we expected, but great was our surprise to hear there was to be a double
marriage—Agnes Paterson to Mr Norman M‘Leod—and that the bride
and her father had just arrived by the steamer, and wished Margaret
and me to be her bridesmaids—an office which we, of course, willingly
accepted, our greatest difficulty being that our straw bonnets were
newly trimmed with straw-coloured ribbon, and there was no white to
be got. Some of the dresses in preparation were not yet finished, but
Mrs Bruce took up her old place in the nursery with Chirsty and Jane,
and, with mamma’s able help and supervision, all were ready in good
time. Of course we young people were equally .busy. The household
on Monday was astir by four o’clock. I finished the pincushion I was
making for Miss Marion, and marked her initials and the date with
pins. Margaret made a kettle-holder for her, and kindly gave up to
me the cuffs I had worked for her birthday present, that I might give
them to Agnes, and she gave her the collar to match. Then, as 1 was
to bp first bridesmaid, I thought it necessary to sew some lace on to my
handkerchief. Gustavus had a new velvet jacket for his kilts. When
everything was collected we were amused at the display of white
dresses, no less than eight to be sent oft' in the cart, with neck ribbons,
bows, berthe’s, A-c., and a great variety of shoes: in short, two large
trunks full. We could not drive to Port M‘Quarie in our bridesmaids’
dresses, and had to change again for the dance in the evening.
On Tuesday, 20th August—the eventful day—we set off for Port-
M'Quarie about nine o’clock. The roads were not so bad as we ex-
pected, but we had to turn off at the sandy flat, as the bridge was still
under water. The morning was sufficiently cloudy to make us anxious
about the weather, but was otherwise pleasant. The long bridge was in
such a delapidated condition it was thought it would not be prudent
for us to cross it in the carriage. However, on arriving there, we


found Bruce and two other men waiting for us, who, for greater
security, walked by the horses’ heads, and we soon found ourselves in
safety at the other side. The servants, who had preceded us in the
cart, had all things in readiness at The Stores, and assisted us to dress.
We then drove to Mrs M‘Leod’s house.
The brides had not yet appeared, but the bridegrooms sbone forth
iu all the splendour of white inexpressibles, and new coats, not to
mention black beaver hats and white kid gloves. Miss M‘Leod and I
drove to the church with the brides. Mrs Marsh accompanied my
aunt, as also Margaret, and my cousin. My uncle drove, and Mr M'Lean
sat beside him. Mrs Paterson went in Mr Grey’s gig, and all the rest
of the party walked. Arrived at the steps leading up to the church,
there was a great arranging as to how we were all to proceed. Mr Hugh
M'Leod took Miss Marion, he being her especial brother. Mr Pater-
son had apparently forgotten his part and had to be called forward to
offer his arm to his daughter, and the procession moved on up several
short flight of steps to the church door, where we were met by Col.
Grey, Miss Grey, and the Misses Jobling, who were also Marion’s
bridesmaids. Mr Cross had not yet put on his gown when we reached
the altar, and when he did appear had to rest to recover his breath.
However, he got through the ceremony better than was expected. It
sadly failed in the solemnity it should inspire. I could scarcely help
smiling at his precision about the ring, “ Now sir the ring, put it on
the book—on the book sir. Now, sir, take it off the book, and put it on
the fourth finger of you wife’s left hand, put it over the knuckles, and
hold it there and say after me with this ring <tc,” the same to both
the bridegrooms. Unfortunately both the rings were rather small, and
there was some difficulty in putting them over the knuckles. After
the usual congratulations they went into my uncle’s pew to sign the
register. Mr M'Lean signed first, and the clerk, who did not seem to
be very au fait at his duties, desired Agnes to sign hers under it, which
would have been an awkward mistake.
Mrs Paterson’s baby was christened before we left the church
(Magnus Lloyd) Mr and Mrs Mordaunt M'Lean, and Mr Sal way being
sponsors. There were thirty of the marriage party, including little
Aleck Paterson and Gustavus, who both appeared in Highland dress.
There were a great many people looking on in church, and a crowd of
•children and servants. The newly married people went home in the


carriage we came to church in. Some of the ladies accompanied my
taunt. I was honoured with a place in his worship’s gig, and every one
■else walked. Now I must describe the dresses worn on the occasion.
Marion’s was of worked Indian muslin over a satin slip, a large white
satin cardinal or demi-cloak, trimmed with swan’s down, which I thought
looked rather heavy. Agnes wore a white figured chalis, trimmed with
gimp, and tassels at the sleeves, a small pointed cape of the same
material setting off her pretty figure. Both brides wore white drawn
silk bonnets with a fall of lace or veil sewed round, and both looked
very well. The bruises on Marion’s face had happily quite disappeared,
and she looked very pretty, but older than her husband, which she is by
more than a year. He is not yet twenty-one, and notwithstanding his
sedulously cultivated whiskers looks very boyish. Marion had four
bridesmaids, her sister, Miss Grey, and the Misses Jobling. They all
wore white, with watered silk scarves and neck knots, on each of which
the bride had worked a tiny spray. Margaret and I wore white
checked muslin, with lace cardinals lined with french white, and straw
bonnets trimmed with the before mentioned straw coloured ribbon.
We had cake and wine immediately on our return from the church.
The cake was large and uncommon looking—a small cake on a large
one. They made Agnes take off her ring, and I passed a great many
pieces of the cake through it for the benefit of those unmarried friends
who wished to dream on it. In due time we were marshalled into
lunch. There were two tables, and I, being a first bridesmaid, was
placed between Mr Norman M‘Leod and Capt. M‘Lean. There were
little bouquets of flowers tied with white ribbon on each plate. The
cake was raised in the centre of the table, supported by an array of
smaller ones. The table was literally covered. I do not think it
would have held another glass, for in every crevice were placed
custards, jellies, and creams. At one end was the largest turkey I
ever saw, well supported by hams, tongues, chickens, ducks, pies, tarts,
puddings, blanc mange, and various fruits. In fact,
The table groaned with costly piles of food,
And all was more than hospitably good.
The ladies withdrew, and were soon joined by the gentlemen after they
had done due honour to the newly married pairs by drinking their
health with three cheers, and they had returned thanks after the most
approved style.


Now came the question as to how the afternoon could be most
agreeably wasted. It was with no little satisfaction we heard there
were carriages and gigs for all. The wind was high, the roads muddy,
and we did not wish to spoil our white dresses. The bridegrooms each
seized a gig and whisked oft’ their brides so rapidly that they were out
of sight before we were packed into our carriages. Fortunately, there
was a good proportion of very little people—Miss Grey, the Misses
Jobling, Dido, and Margaret inside, while Gordy and I sat on the box
with Mr Magnus M‘Leod driving, and six gentlemen outriders. We
took the Tacking Point road, and had not gone very far when we
stuck in the mud, and two traces were broken. Fortunately, Roderick,
who had got another gig, overtook us. Into this gig we had all to
step by turns and drive a few yards, the ground about the carriage being
so muddy. After all, M r Magnus and Mr Hugh had to pull it out,
while H ector rode back for fresh traces. Roderick drove off in triumph,
taking Miss Annie Jobling and Margaret, while we five distressed
damsels looked enviously after them, and were left to make our way as
best we could along the muddy road, though I own I saw no advantage
to be gained by walking at all, especially as my shoes were very thin
and rather tight. At length the carriage re-appeared, and Mr Gray helped
us in again. Our escort re-mounted their impatient steeds ; smack
went the whip, whirl went the wheels, and we returned to the town in
great style, passing the other carriage in which my aunt and mamma
had been making some calls. What is a drive without an adventure,.
especially on such an occasion ?
Meantime, for our greater convenience, our trunks had been taken
to Mrs M ‘Leod’s, and we were shown into a room to change our dresses,
where our chief anxiety was disinterested attempts to get each other
dressed and out of the way, in which I was so supremely successful. I
was just down in time to get a cup of coffee before dancing began.
The verandah was completely covered in with flags and sails, and
lighted by lamps : it looked very well.
We began to dance about eight o’clock. The brides and bride-
grooms opened the ball. They should have danced a minuet dr some
such old-fashioned piece of elegance to complete their return to the
almost obsolete custom of remaining to join in the wedding festivities.
The brides, of course, wore their wedding dresses, with pretty lace
berthes, and looked vey well. Agnes and Miss Stephen were the rival


belles. The first has the best figure, but Miss Stephen has a profusion
of beautiful fair hair, and is very graceful—certainly a great contrast
to her brother, who is short and dark.
I must, of course, say something of the dresses worn on the
occasion. Mrs Richardson appeared in black satin, made also too
fashionably for our uneducated tastes. It looked as if she had a row
of tiny aprons pendent from her waist, or an assortment of large
reticules, while a small flower garden flourished in her hair. Mrs
Purvis and Mrs Gorman wore light coloured satins. Mrs March, a
figured white satin, her wedding dress I suppose. Mrs Danvers, all
in black, looked ghastly; another lady wore a pretty light blue silk,
on which there was a sad want of trimming. Her appearance re-
minded me of the Irish lady’s question when invited to dine at
house—“ Do they strip their necks for dinner ?” Hers was extra well
done, and there was neither lace nor ornament to relieve the eye. Miss
Fatherini’s dress was high necked and long sleeved, her hair, as
usual, raised on a wall of plaits above her forehead, in imitation of a
laurel wreath. You will think there was a scarcity of young gentle-
men when I say that Capt. M'Lean was my best partner, but I have
rather a penchant for old gentlemen, and may add that with his light
brown wig arid nimble dancing, no one would have supposed he was
celebrating his son’s marriage. After supper I played a set of
quadrilles and some waltzes. I must not forget to say that as soon as
we returned from church Miss M‘Leod put on green stockings. Ido
not know the origin of the custom that when a younger sister marries
the elder wears green stockings! Mr Solway’s dress in the evening
was unexceptionable, but I am told that in the morning Mr Cross
asked him if he really meant to be God Father in the coat he had on.
Wednesday, 21st August.—Slept most profoundly, and awoke at
last to the recollection that the day we had been looking forward to
for so long was now over. We certainly had enjoyed it, and would
remember it with pleasure, but my head ached, and my feet were
swollen. I could not get on my dancing shoes, and the others had
been sent away together with our dark dresses, so we had to put on the
white ones. Fortunately it was a -good day. All was in confusion
packing and tidying, so we said good-byes to those who were leaving
by the steamer, and went to see Mrs Gorman. Her sister had already
left for the morning on horseback with her brother, and expected to


sleep that night in the Bush. We then went to the Stores, as my
uncle wished to see Mamma. We found him in his office, and had a
peep at the celebrated glass house. I had no time to notice anything
but the great size of the building. It seemed greatly out of proportion
with the rest of the town, as does also the Royal Hotel, which is a
handsome brick building. Called on Mrs Richardson, who seemed to
be holding a levee, then by appointment to meet the carriage at Mrs
M'Leod’s, but finding the broken traces were still unmended, we
remained to lunch, making a paity of 13, which is said to be unlucky,
at least in so far as that the same 13 will never sit down together
again. In this present instance this more than probable. Colonel and
Miss Grey came out to the Lake for a few days, her first visit. She
sings very sweetly, and we all liked her very much.
On Saturday, 25th, a quantity of loquats were preserved, and we
helped to pick and prepare the fruit. After lunch my uncle took us
out on the lake, and allowed us to row ourselves, which we enjoyed
immensely. The water was like glass, and reminded us forcibly of the
lines in Parnell’s Hermit, beginning—
Thus when a smooth expanse receives impressed
Calm Nature’s image on her watery breast,
Down bend the banks, the trees depending grow,
And skies beneath with answering colours glow.
As we divided the water with our oars we watched them all “in thick
disorder run.” We saw a large flock of wild ducks which allowed us
to come quite near them.
Monday, 26th August.—Resumed our usual occupations with
renewed pleasure, and declared it as quite a holiday to have lessons
again. However, on Wednesday we were quite happy to receive Mrs
M'Leod and a party of eight, who arrived soon after lunch to spend
the day, and dine. Others arrived later, so we were a party of sixteen,
and seven in the schoolroom, where the three young gentlemen were
delighted to take tea. I called on them on my way down to dinner
and was much amused at the way in which the boys started up ex-
claiming 4th, sth, 6th. After some explanation I found they wanted
to engage me for the 4th, sth, and 6th dances, and as this was to be
their last evening here, I gave the required promise. When the
dancing began this gave great offence to the elders of the party, and
.Mr Hay made a formal complaint of me to myself ! At dinner I sat


opposite Mr Alister M'Lean, and when the epsrgne was removed felt
much inclined to say “ how do you do ” to him. It was a gorgeous
erection of flowers. I was thankful to see it carried off without
accident, as it was that in which I was most concerned.
On Friday Hector and Harold came to lunch, and to say a last
farewell. They are going to Sydney, and Mrs M‘Leod intends soon to
go on a round of visits to her sons and married daughters.
Wednesday, 4th September.—Played ‘Les Graces’ with Mr Graham
before breakfast, and he kept up 1500, when the bells sounded and we
had to stop. We have since then had some very pleasant rides, and
been several times on the Lake.
On the 6th Mr Gray called and he told us that the post boy who
every one supposed had been drowned, or robbed, or killed, or had run
away, had only been detained by the Commissioners on account of the
floods. We saw a wild pheasant on the gravel in front of the house, the
first I have ever seen, it is rather a pretty bird, brown, with a long tail.
Mr Hugh M'Leod has given Dido his pet cockatoo. It barks like a
dog, and makes the usual pretty speeches in its own praise, though
Gustavus comes in triumphantly declaring that Cockey had said that
he was a pretty boy.
7th September.—The gentlemen left after breakfast to attend Dr
Carlisle’s funeral. He died on Thursday morning rather suddenly, and
was buried to-day at Hamilton. A great many people were present,
Mr Purvis officiating, as Mr Cross could not do so without permission
from the Bishop. It is a strange desire, I think, wishing to be buried
in a lawn or garden, when living within easy reach of a Churchyard.
Mrs Dutton (Mrs Stephen’s eldest daughter) is also buried at Hamilton.
She was, I believe, a very beautiful girl, and was married at the early
age of fourteen. She died when only seventeen—her tombstone bears
the single word “ Claudia”—hers was a brief sad life.
11th September.—My uncle returned from Sydney, bringing with
him Mr Sydney Darling, a nephew of Captain Dumareso, and son of
the Governor of that name. He is fond of boating, and my uncle has
taken us out on the Lake several times. One day the wind was very
high and contrary, so we were thankful when at sundown we were landed
in perfect safety. The gentlemen were very good in rowing, but we


breathed a sigh of relief, when, next day they all rode off to Hollands
Plain.
One evening Mr Darling put on his full uniform for our benefit;
it is the handsomest I have seen, and the wearer looked handsome too,
but so very tiny.
Lake limes, 17 th September, 184-1, Tuesday—" Well, I reallyam
quite eighteen now, and I have been wishing all day that yesterday
had been my sixteenth birthday; so you see that already I have ar-
rived at the age when ladies wishes to be thought younger than they
really are. My wishes are much more extensive than that, for I not
only desire to be thought young, but to be so. There are also some
new ideas gaining ground in my wise head, and, seriously speaking, I
feel there is much room for improvement and correction, and I hope
my endeavours may be strengthened, and that I may not only feel but
act on those feelings.
We resumed our usual studies. I think we spend the mornings
more agreeably than most people. About four o’clock the steamer was
seen passing slowly south, tugging a small sailing vessel which is not yet
completed. Enjoyed a walk by myself in the garden, which is looking
beautiful with honeysuckle and other spring flowers, and the lovely
Cape bulbs just coming into flower. The sandy flat near the beach is
gay with many colours, this being the best month here for wild flowers..
20th September.—Mrs M'Leod and Roderick arrived to spend a
few days. She, of course, brought an ample supply of work. My
uncle and Mr Fenwick arrived at dark from Yarrows, the latter as
fond as ever af waltzing. I longed to present him with a pair of
gloves.
On Sunday, 22nd, we went to church. The wind became so
boisterous we could scarcely hear a word of the service. Between
twelve and one o’clock it blew a hurricane; fortunately it subsided,
and we got home safely.
On the 23rd Jane left for New England with her brother. She
came to my room before daylight to say good-bye. We shall miss her,
though she is so remarkably quiet, besides which we shall have some
of her duties to perform, such as keeping the schoolroom in order. She


is not strong, so her brothers, who are married, wish her to visit them.
I have just finished painting a curious looking green flower. It grows
about 8 inches from the ground, with only one flower on each stem—
(Pterostylus). We have gathered lately a quantity of Cape gooseberries
and wild raspberries at the back of the hill. Mr Fenwick told us a
story of Midgee Brown, a black boy my uncle used to take about with
him, and who he dressed very smartly and spoiled very much. One
day at the club in Sydney, where there happened to be a good number
of gentlemen staying, Midger began asking them for money. Some
gave it to him, others promised to do so. Mr Fenwick did neither,
upon which Midger asked indignantly why he had not given him half-
a-crown. He replied that he could not afford it. Oh, then, said
Midger, if you are a poor man and cannot afford to give half a-crown,
I will give you one, putting his hand into his pocket as he spoke.
However, he did not take it out again—imagine the impertinence of
this creature. We have been busy pasting some pictures into Mrs
M'Leod’s larger scrap book, which she left with us ; it is really a most
interesting collection.
Monday, 30th September.—Went to church yesterday. There has
been a small gallery put up for the Seraphines, but I do not observe
any difference in the music. I never saw so many people in church,
and there was a great assemblage at the church door after service and
much shaking of hands, as Mrs M‘Lewi’s family are leaving to-day—a
double hands-shaking, as good-bye was even more necessary than “how
do you do.” We had to walk across the bridge ; it is now in such a
delapidated condition, and instead of finishing off the dam so that it
can be used, it is being made wider.
There was an immense fire at the lake last night. It looked quite
splendid. The natives had set the reeds on fire, and at one time it
was feared that the boat house was in danger, so men were sent down
to clear a space round it. We had strawberries and cream to-day;
there is every prospect of a good crop this year. The bees which
swarmed on my birthday have been most industrious. The honey
looks beautiful, and the wax perfectly white. On Saturday morning
when my aunt came to the schoolroom she said we were all to go to
the drawing-room at once and wait for her, as she had something very
particular for us to do. We, of course, were all anxiety to find out
what it was, but did not feel any wiser when she reappeared bringing


!i saucer with whitening in it, some water, and several white cloths-
Now what do you think we were going to do ? To clean the windows !
We set to work very busily, Margaret and Dido, Gordy, and J, but
my partner was so little I had to get Mr Hugh Mackay to take her
place, and though I say it that should not, we were the most industri'
ous of the party, and cleaned no less than seven French windows
without breaking a single pane. My uncle came to see us, and
nodded approval, and we all quite enjoyed ourselves. I have no idea
why we were set to this work, or who usually did it.
After lunch we got ready to ride. I never saw such a wild
creature as Mr Hugh’s horse. After kicking and plunging it broke
away, and set off at full gallop, and though Mr Patrick and one of the
grooms went after it they could not catch it, and he had to take
another. We rode to Tacking Point.
Murrigate has brought us another young swan, and a supply of
reeds, which he cut up very scientifically for its use. This is the
fourth we have had this season. Two died, and one got away when it
was half grown, so we hope it got safely to the lake.
Bth October.—We finished learning the fifth book of Milton’s
“Paradise Lost,” and are all delighted with it, though we do not
exactly “dance for joy.” Our other poetry lesson just now is Gold-
smith’s “ Deserted Village,” which is a very favourite piece of mine.
Gathered Cape gooseberries, and worked in my garden, which has
some beautiful bulbs in flower, but I cannot persuade “ Sweet
William” to flourish in it, much to my regret. Some time ago I made
an ornamental fence of peach sticks to divide it. Like Robinson
Crusoe’s hedge, they are all growing.
About this time my uncle made up his mind to have a vineyard
of 30 acres planted, which was the extent thought desirable at that
time to have in full bearing before starting seriously to the business
of wine-making. The first thing to be done was to select the ground,
and have it cleared and trenched. The spot chosen adjoined the fruit
garden, and was bounded on the west by the road to Port M‘Quarrie.
The ground was covered with small trees and shrubs, and in it stood
three gigantic blue gum trees, the hugest on the property, and I think
the largest I have ever seen. It took weeks to dig them out by the


roots. I see by my journal that the first fell with a tremendous crash
on Bth Oct., and I regret very much that the measurements were not
taken at the time. It took a long time to prepare the ground. I never
saw it in full hearing, but I know it was planted with the choicest
vines. After my uncle’s death in 1857, his son, who was a great
temperance advocate, would not have any wine made, and allowed the
vineyard to become overgrown. Eventually it was, I believe, destroyed
by a bush fire, and the wine-cellars went to ruin. There were other
small vineyards started in the neighbourhood about the same time, but
I do not know with what result.
15th October.—The 15th anniversary of my uncle and aunt’s
marriage. Of course we had a holiday and a pic-nic. We found
luncheon laid out in state in our newly-discovered bower near the
Lake. It is formed by swamp oak trees. On our way home we found
a beautiful passion vine growing luxuriantly over a fallen tree, and
with a quantity of fruit on it.
Mr H. Mackay has made a stand for measuring horses marked in
inches and half inches, and we have all been measured by it. lam
sft. B|in., but I am determined to drop the I am sure it must be
a mistake. Dido is equally sure that she is sft. 2in., though, that badly
marked stand made her only sft. lin. After dinner we danced, but
we had all been up so early and so busy all day. We were quite tired.
18tb October.—Dr and Mrs Richardson came to lunch and to spend
the afternoon, bringing their eldest son and little girl. It was a fare-
well visit, as they all leave for Sydney next week. They will be very much
missed. Dr Richardson is a very old friend of ours. He is a colonial
surgeon, and was stationed at Bathurst in 1826. We walked in the
garden ; the weather is delightful. All nature seems clad in its gayest
dress. The acacias are lovely, with their graceful drooping flowers.
Honeysuckle, jesamine, and all roses are in their prime, and the scent
of orange, lemon, and shaddock blossom quite delightful. The Cape
bulbs are still in great beauty. They are various in colour, and planted,
as they are in beds they look rather gaudy. The creepers that were
planted at the new arches are growing fast, and those that were planted
two years ago have quite filled in some of the arches, giving them the
appearance of a wall where they have not been pruned or trained. The
various passion vines are coming into flower, and there are masses of
other vines and creepers—Maurandia, Barclayana, Cobia, <tc.


21st.—It was oppressively hot all the morning, but a three o’clock
a thunder shower cleared the air delightfully. I love the scent of the
earth after rain.
A fresher green the smelling leaves display,
And, glittering as they tremble, cheer the day.
26th October.—Mr Grey brought us the music and a paper with
a description of the Porkie, the new dance he has been talking so much
about. We now discover it to be the Polka. I have copied the music
and am learning it, though we do not think it particularly pretty. It
is a Polish dance, I believe, and, judging from the pictures of the dancers,
one would require to see it danced and to be taught before attempting
it. Walked to the poultry yard and visited the old man who now has
charge of it instead of Mrs Haloran, who, poor woman, has been very
ill and moved into one of the cottages at the back of the house. The
man was a sailor in Nelson’s own ship, and wounded at, I think, the
battle of Trafalgar. I was amused at his way of speaking, and thought
that the speeches one reads of as being made by sailors are not far
wrong. Our old sailor used such long words. He invited us to inspect
the coveys of chickens, and described the audaceousness of the native
dogs, which thought nothing of coming pattroling up and down between
his house and the pig sties. Finally he accompanied us to the gate, and
said he was quite out of Baccy—also expressed his surprise that the
Mistress did not “consider to allow him proper drinking vessels for the
fowls, for indeed Miss, I have never nothing, nothing unless I take a
broken bottle, or Miss, the heel of my shoe.”
Of course we kept Hallowe’en, but the fortunes predicted are so
very different from last year that my faith has been rather shaken in
them.
We have devoted the last few day’s to the study of the Illustrated
London News. Dr Stacy kindly lent us a large parcel of them. One
of the chief subject in these numbers is her Majesty’s progress through
the different counties, with drawings of the splendid archway through
which she passed. It is quite a Court paper, even the Queen’s fowl-house
is there, and drawings of her favourite, pets.
2nd November.—We heard from my aunt, Mrs Ranken, to-day.
She has another son; he was born on the 19th of last month. We


were much surprised to hear of the dreadful flood there has been on
the Lauchlan. They were all obliged to hasten from the house at
Glen Logan, leaving clothes, boots, and everything but a few blankets
snatched hastily from the beds. They had then to walk 10 miles to
the nearest shelter, the rain pouring in torrents and the water often
knee deep. Annabella M'Leod, who was staying with my aunt, wrote
the letter, and had promised to send further particulars of the flood
and their flight. We have great cause for thankfulness that they
escaped without accident.
It is reported that some families lower down the river have been
swept away. The accounts from the Hawkesburg and Argyll country
are truly distressing. Near a place called Gundagi, a shepherd who
had gone out in the morning with his flock, was unable to return home
owing to the rise of the water which was rapidly surrounding the hut
in which were his wife and four children. His anxiety about them
was very great, for though he was within a short distance of the hut
the rapid current prevented the possibility of his approaching it. The
next morning he was thankful to find his family were all in safety in a
tree into had been helped by a man who, fortunately, ar-
rived at the hut intending to spend the night there. They remained
in the tree four days till the water subsided, their only food being a
fowl they caught by chance, and were obliged to eat raw.
Sunday morning we spent in the schoolroom, and wrote out from
memory as far as we have learned of the 119th Psalm. It is by far
the most difficult we have yet learned. The constant repetition of the
same words, or words with the same meaning, make it most puzzling.
Monday, 4th.—We all three rode to the beach. We went as far
as Grant’s Head. The outlet to the sea at Cati Creek is quite closed, and
safe to ride on for the first time for two years. At Ten Miles Creek we
went up the bank from the beach and rode to the furthest point from
which we could see Camden Haven River, and to the north Tacking
Point. Our beach seemed quite in a bay coming home. We met some
natives near the bridge, who had just set the grass on fire, and the
flames frightened our horses.
Thursday, 7th Nov., 1844.—Dear Mamma’s birthday! I had got a
cord and tassel from Sydney, and finished the bag I worked for her
while she was away. Dido painted a bunch of violets for her. Of


course we had luncheon out of doors, and there were many suggestions
as to where we should pic-nic, but it was to hot to go far. We had the
usual pies and pastry, but an unusual addition in a basket of oysters,
and a jug of beer. In the evening we all played casino.
This was my dear mother’s 39th birthday, which then appeared to
us to be quite old. Now after a period of more than sixty years, I
know that she was almost young, and a very handsome woman, above
the middle height, healthy, active, and handsome in face and figure, a
graceful rider, and Bruce (who was a judge) openly proclaimed that
she danced better than any of us. I still remember with admiration
thq calm dignity of her manner she had laid aside her widow’s cap and
deep mourning, but she always wore black. I think it was the follow-
ing year that one of the numerous visitors to the Lake wrote to her
proposing for one of her daughters. There was no hesitation as to the
reply, but she thought it right to show the letter to my uncle. “ Bless
me, he exclaimed, you astonish me, I though he was your admirer.”
She was deeply wounded and said reproachfully “have I ever given any
one reason to say such a thing of me,” while he hastily corrected him-
self—“ Your friends, friends I should have said. The writer of the
letter little knew the annoyance he had given them both.
Bth.—The furniture has all been taken out of the library, and we
were set to work to make a new carpet for it; a desperate undertaking
it was, but we were all so anxious to assist that we were quite in each
other’s way. I was surprised at getting a little box from Port
Macquarie, favoured by the Rev. Mr Woodward, the newly-appointed
clergyman, and opened it in doubt if it was for Dido or myself. It
contained a crayon drawing, a bust of Lord Londonderry, from
Charlotte Stewart, and a long letter giving me all the Parramatta
news.
11th.—A dinner party in house of Mr Friell, who has just come
from India. He has brought a number of coolies with him, intending
to settle in this country. He is introduced to my uncle by his brother,
Dr James Lines, and Aunt Jane Alicia. We have all got new
riding habits of brown merino. I think I liked our old blue camlet
better. Dido has till now always worn brown holland, and we all wore
Panama hats. Our Scotch caps, made from a pattern of Aunt
are quite a success. They are made of black velvet, drawn into a band


of tartan satin round the head, and at the crown a large flat button
with a cord and tassel to match the tartan. Gordy and Gustavus do
not ride yet. They spend much of their time adorning their new bower.
Jane used always to go with them, but now they are supposed to be
old enough to take care of themselves. One afternoon they gave us a
dreadful fright. Mamma and I were alone in the garden when we
heard the most piercing screams coming from their direction. I
thought it was scarcely possible for them to make so much noise, but
ran at once to their aid, and found a great pig, which a man was try-
ing in vain to drive past them. He belaboured it with a stick, it
squealed, and the children screamed, but they did not dare to move till
they saw me, and we flew home together. Another day they had quite
unconsciously a much more real cause for alarm. A man who was
passing found them watching a death adder that was lying in the sun a
few yards from their bower. After that the bower was abandoned for
a time. I must say I never saw a death adder, which is really a deadly
snake, but I have seen many Diamond snakes, and black snakes with
red stripes, but never at any time in the house. A gardener mowing
the lawn was bitten one day, but with no serious result.
November 14th—We all went to Port Macquarie to see the
coolies who had been brought down from India by Messrs Friell &
Sandeman, and who were living in a row of houses at the back of the
store until arrangements were made for establishing them on a station
in Queensland, or what was then known as Darling Downs. I was
surprised at their appearance and dress, or want of dress. They are of
different castes. Some are copper coloured, who, 1 think, are the best
looking, while others are quite dark and have better features. They
are of different heights too, a few' being very tall, and others equally
diminutive. Mr Sheriff, who is in charge of them, pointed out some
who are tradesmen—blacksmiths, carpenters, ike. He also made them
show us their pipes, which are curious. One was a cocoa nut shell
carved and polished and filled with water, two tubes coming out from
opposite sides. They show r ed us some brass and copper plates of a large
size, and some small china cups. They seemed pleased to see us, and
not at all disconcerted at being brought out to be stared at. Some
had on scarlet caps with a gold band. A few wore muslin turbans, but
only one w'ore what I supposed to be their full dress, a white kind of
jacket, and in addition to the dress worn by the rest, a long piece of
muslin tied round his waist, the end coming down over his feet. They


have odd looking shoes of coloured leather, turned up at the toes, and a
buttonhole in them. Afterwards they showed us their musical instru-
ments. There were two kinds of drums called by them “Tholuck” ; one
was held by a woman who sang and beat time on it. Her husband
sang with her, and another man sat by with a kind of violin with three
strings, on which he scraped with all his might. It is called a
“ Surungie.” Their singing was not unpleasant. I thought the woman
rather good looking; she had the division of her hair rubbed with red
paint, which at first I thought was a cut. Her toe and finger nails
were also tipped with red, and she wore bracelets and earings. Those
of our party who were riding went home by Tacking Point and the
beach.
Saturday, 29th November.—Mr Grey called, and he is delighted
with Mr Woodward, but not at all pleased at his having altered the
position of the pulpit in church.
Mamma has heard again from my aunt, Mrs Ranken. She writes in
very low spirits. They have returned to Glen Logan, and she says her
chief employment ever since has been getting things picked up out of
the mud in the house, and off the grass, such as towels, sheets, and
children’s clothes, and having them washed in the river. They had to
abandon everything in their hasty flight—all their clothes and books
are completely ruined, as the water rose to the height of 4ft lOin. in
the house, and left nearly a foot deep of mud. Trunks that had been
placed on table for safety, were floated off, and the contents scarcely
recognisable ; her wedding dress, originally white silk, is now of all the
colours in the rainbow, a handsome brocaded and shot silk having
bestowed most of its varied colouring on it.
22nd.—Di and Mrs Jamack, Mr and Mrs Woodward, and the
Misses Woodward called early and remained to luncheon. We after-
wards walked in the garden, and I had a long talk with Miss Wood-
ward about Parramatta and friends there. They have also been at
Bathurst. They are both very agreeable, and pretty too, with beautiful
eyes, the eldest serious looking, but Miss Emily all animation.
24th November.—Went to church, but were very late. The pulpit,
or rather the reading desk, has been moved, and the clerk now sits in
a pew beside it. We enjoyed the service and the impressive way in


which Mr Woodward read and addressed himself to the congregation.
There was an unplesant interruption by one of the invalids taking a fit
and having to be carried out of church. Port Macquarie was at that
time still a depot for Invalid Prisoners, and the congregation largely
consisted of these men, the chain gang, soldiers and Government officials
who were in charge.
Thursday, 28th.—We set out early and rode to Camden Haven
River. The sun was very hot and we found that our pretty Scotch
caps were not meant for shade : we might as well ride in a wig ? How-
ever, we were delighted with our expedition. We crossed Grants
Head, which juts out into the sea, and against which the waves beat
loudly. At the other side there is a beautiful little valley sloping to
the sea, and some cattle grazing on it made it quite a pretty picture.
Camden Haven River is some distance further on. I was surprised to
find the entrance so narrow. However, there was a tolerably sized
vessel with two mast at anchor in the basin. Here we dismounted and
rested so long that we had to gallop a good part of the way home.
Wednesday, 18th December.—l scarcely know myself, I have
been so industrious of late; in fact, we have all been equally busy.
Dido has wrought wonders in the shape of a new white dress and other
garments, the great thing being to have as many new things as possible
for New Year’s Day. She has also made herself a bustle almost as big
as herself, and I, not to be outdone, have put a new width into mine.
I have also made two dresses. During my uncle’s absence we have
dined early, and, having the house to ourselves, have sat in the
verandah near the library, which is always shaded and cool. One of
party reads aloud while the others work. Our book is “ The Old
Curiosity Shop.” We are deeply interested in “Little Nell,” and
enjoy it doubly when my aunt reads. On Friday evening, the 20th,
we were all called to the front of the house to look at the comet. It
was very small and insignificant compared to that of last March, but we
•stood watching it till an envious cloud hid it from our view. We
saw this comet several times afterwards, but it was never very bright.
It appeared always high above our heads, and disappeared upwards.
On Monday, 23rd, my uncle returned from New England, bringing
quite a numerous Christmas party, as we hoped he would do. We
were all delighted to have him home again, and to see him looking so


well. It rained heavily all night, and on Christmas day was still so-
wet we could not go to church, but after luncheon it cleared sufficiently
to allow us to go to the new garden for fruit—apricots and Chinese
peaches.
Thursday.—We took a long ride. The beach was in splendid
order for a good gallop.
On Friday the Misses Jobling came to spend a week with us.
They are very nice girls, but so very tiny, tbe tallest scarcely five feet.
Mr Graham and Mr Fenwick went for them, and all were delayed at
Gooloowa by a thunderstorm, which had kept us in also. Next
morning we devoted to needlework, as the rain still continued, and one
read aloud. The gentlemen sent us in a splendid basket full of fruit,
an attention we much appreciated. When we went down to lunch we
found the party increased by the arrival of Mr Gray and his two
shadows, Mr Hay and Mr Massie. Mr Archer had also arrived to
stay for a few days, so we sat down a party of eighteen. It was then
arranged we should go on the lake. I was excused, as lam not at all
fond of boating, but joined them in a delightful ramble before dinner.
The new footman, George, who has been here some weeks and is a very
good servant, went off very hastily to-day, having appropriated a
number of things, chiefly clothes from Bachelors’ Hall, and distributed
them as Christmas gifts.
Now I must describe as well as I can, our adventures of Sunday,
29th Dec., 1844.—T0 plunge at once into the subject, as we were
nearly doing into the mud, I must tell you we set out for church in the
large carriage, eight ladies and Gustavus, my uncle driving. There
were five gentlemen riding, but we are not allowed to ride on Sundays.
Instead of turning off the old road as we have usually done of late, we
went straight on, thinking that the road had been repaired, and the
drains on each side cleared which led to a wooden bridge about a mile
from the town. The water there had risen considerably since the forma-
tion of the dam, and the late rains had increased it. On coming in
sight of the bridge the extent of water certainly looked very alarming.
It was to late to turn back, unless by taking the horses out of the
carriages and standing in the water. The ditches on each side were
full of water which overflowed the road, and made it dangerous to turn,
so my uncle determined to push through if possible. Some of the


gentlemen who were riding went on before to encourage the horses.
At first I felt rather afraid, but in my anxiety to convince Dido who-
was in the rumble with me that there was no danger, I had almost
succeeded in convincing myself, when suddenly we came to a stand
still in water about 18 ins. deep, and the carriage which was leaning
very much to my side seemed likely to go over. Happily, the wheels
sank so deep in the mud that we soon found we had nothing to fear in
that way. The question now was how we were to be got out of the
carriage. It was quite evident that the horses were not able to draw it
out of the mud. As soon as we stopped Mr Patrick Mackay and Mr
Archer, who were behind, cantered up to the carriage, and in so doing
splashed us a great deal more than was necessary. The latter immedi-
ately dismounted and proposed that he should take us oft' on his horse.
Mr Patrick no doubt though of doing the same but found his right
foot so unwilling to touch the water, that he changed his mind. On
looking round after seeing Dido safely mounted on Mr Archer’s great
horse, I saw that Mr Hugh had pulled off his coat and carried
Gustavus to a place of safety, and was now carrying off Miss Jobling
in triumph. I could not help laughing, though the spectacle we
presented was far from amusing. The carriage, of course, was the most-
prominent object, leaning very much to one side, and entirely sur-
rounded by water, my nncle standing in his'place on the box encourag-
ing his horses to be steady. Margaret sat beside him pale and anxious,
the party inside laughing and bewailing their fate in the one breath.
Presently Mr Hugh returned, and my aunt resigned herself quietly to
his care. Meantime Mr Archer had brought back his charger, but
could not persuade him to go near enough to the carriage. Miss Ann
B from the rumble was handing books and parasols to Mr Patrick,
which he took the first opportunity of replacing in the carriage. That
young lady after a great scramble was placed on the saddle, and the rest-
less steed led through the water, and in her eagerness to dismount she
nearly tumbled off backwards. Mr Patrick took little Gordy off before
him on Cupid. Mamma and Margaret were now the only two left. The
former was with some difficulty put on % horseback, for the creatures
would scarcely approach the carriage, and Mr Archer’s frantic entreaties
that she would place her hand in his foot, did not convey to her mind
that he wished her to place her foot on his hand so that he might help-
her into the saddle. Mr Hugh carried Margaret, hard work, for she is
tall, and in addition to the difficulty of walking in water knee deep, he


sank over his ankles in mud at every step. And there on the rising
ground at the safe side of the bridge sat Mr James enjoying the scene
amazingly, and, as my uncle said, looking like the grand Turk smoking
with an air of calm indifference and saying to himself, “ Its all fate;
if they are to stick in the mud there they will stick; if not, they’ll get
out without me.” All being safely landed, my uncle desired us to
move on. We waited only to see him urge his horses to make one
more effort, but they could not move, and the poor creatures seemed to
be thoroughly subdued and disheartened. We had a hot, dusty walk
of a mile and a half to the settlement, and met a party of men on their
way to my uncle’s assistance. The gentlemen who were with us turned
back with them to see the carriage drawn safely out of the mud-
Some of our party had ridden over to ask for aid, and we heard after-
wards that the men we met had been brought out of church, so no
wonder that when we entered after the sermon had commenced every
one thought it their duty to stare at us. No doubt we looked rather
remarkable with fiery red faces and dishevelled hair, our white dresses
crumpled and bespattered with mud. On coming out of church it was
arranged that we should walk till the carriage overtook us, which we
did, taking the route by the long bridge; but our chapter of accidents
was not yet complete, for Mr Fenwick put Gustavus on his horse,
which he led, but forgot to take further notice of him, being too much
engaged paying attention to Miss Jobling. The consequence was that
Gustavus fell off and sprained his wrist. We had scarcely recovered
from the alarm we were thrown into by this accident when, fortunately,
the carriage overtook us.
It was three o’clock before we found ourselves safely at home, the
distance from the church being quite seven miles. The horses behaved
beautifully, but my uncle declares he will never have the large carriage
out again without four horses. I think it is as well he had only two
on this occasion, as four would probably have doubled our difficulties.


I shall pass briefly over the next two years, 1845-46. The
■country was still in a very depressed state; transportation had practi-
cally ceased, and everywhere the want of labour was severely felt. An
emigration scheme had been started by Mrs Chisholm, an energetic and
philanthropic lady, who took much personal trouble in carrying out the
good work, but at first only single female emigrants were brought out
by her. Many people who had once been prosperous had lost all they
possessed and were leaving the colony in disgust or dispair, others saw
a dawning prospect of better times and braced themselves up to make
a fresh start.
Nothing of any great personal interest happened in our own
immediate circles, but there were, of course, events of more or less
.social importance in the district and neighbourhood.
Early in 1845 Mr Friell married Miss Emily Woodward, and they
went at once to live in Sydney. Mrs and Miss Stevens left Hamilton
and went to Sydney, where soon after the latter was married to Mr
Hay. Mr Hay was succeeded in Port Macquarie by Lieut. G. J. de
Winton, a very fascinating young man, handsome and clever.
Fortunately his arrival was accompanied by the announcement of his
engagement, so as far as I know no hearts were broken, especially as
he spoke quite openly of “ The Adorable Fanny,” who eventually he
married. His cousin also married another “ Adorable Fanny,” which
sometimes caused a little confusion. Mr Wright succeeded Mr de
Winton, but we preferred our little friend Mr Montgomerie to any of
his brother officers.
During these two years we improved our acquaintance with many
of our more distant friends and neighbours, and their families, who,
like ourselves, were rapidly “growing up.” Major and Mrs Kemp
came from the Macleay, and brought a son and daughter. Mr Oaks
and his sister came also from the Macleay, and Mr and Miss Ducat—
the latter brought with them sometimes their aunt, Miss Gray, a
delightful old Scotch lady, so bright and sympathetic; we loved to
hear her quaint speech. We always breakfasted rather late; one
morning my uncle said to her, “I am afraid you must be very hungry.”'
■“ No, no, Major,” she replied, “ I’m not to say hungry, but I’m just


appeteezed.” Mrs Scott, a friend and neighbour of the Ducat’s, came-
occasionally with them ; she sang charmingly, and we all liked her-
very much, but she had a large family, and could not easily leave
home. Mr Archibald Boyd paid a farewell visit to the Lake before
leaving the Colony. He was most agreeable, and a great conver-
sationalist. He told many good and amusing stories.
In July, 1846, the new Race Course was opened. I believe the
races were fairly good —they certainly were well attended. We had a
very gay time, and enjoyed ourselves immensely. The house was quite
full, and my aunt gave a dance, to which every one within a distance
of fifty miles came.
I think it was during the previous summer we had the pleasure of
carrying out the long promised visit to Tilbuster, which is situated in
a rich agricultural district about thirty miles from Port Macquarie.
We crossed the river in the punt at Blackman’s Point, and rode through
Roland’s Plains, where there are many farms and pretty homesteads.
I had never before seen so much ground under cultivation. The house
at Tilbuster is small but very pretty, some of the rooms pannelled with
cedar. The place had a special interest in being my aunt’s “ marriage
portion,” given by the Government, and named after her old home in
Surrey. In 1839, and for some years after, a law was in force giving
a small grant to parties marrying with the intention of settling in the
colony, but not obliging them to live on the land. The Manager lived
in the house at Tilbuster, and under him in the old days were a large
number of convict servants who farmed the land and grew the wheat,
maize, and hay required for the contracts taken by my uncle to supply
the various Government officials, soldiers, and invalids then resident in
Port Macquarie, also a large number of convicts who were employed in
making the road to New England, and other work.
A few years before our visit to Tilbuster a great disaster befel
that flourishing establishment. I have heard my uncle say it was the
first of the many misfortunes which followed. The crops had all been
gathered in, the barns were full, and stacks of wheat and hay stood
ready to be thrashed or carted away, when a terrific thunderstorm broke
over the farm, and the barn was struck by lightning, the whole of the
out buildings and their contents were destroyed by fire, the cottage only
being saved. The following year crops failed throughout the whole


■colony, prices rose, and contracts that had been made when the barns
were full had to be carried out at a very serious loss. But all this was
in the past and did not trouble us at the moment, as no trace of the
fire remained. There was a charming view from the house, which was
situated on rising ground, and our one annoyance was that some people
insisted that the place we looked at was prettier than Tilbuster. No
doubt it looked prettier from Tilbuster, than Tilbuster looked from it,
and we could not agree as to whether the view from or the view of a
place constituted its beauty. I say the former.
That autumn Mr John Macleay, a cousin of my aunt’s, came to
stay at the Lake. He was very delicate, and it was hoped that his
health would improve in the fine air and pleasant surroundings. Un-
fortunately this hope was not realised, and, as a sea voyage was re-
commended, he sailed for London. Our friend, Mr Gunn, went with him.
Poor Mr Macleay died during the voyage. We were all sony. He
had interested us greatly ;he was so gentle and handsome. I spent
many an hour reading aloud to him.
In 1846 our friend, Mr William Mackenzie, went to China, and
his partner, Mr Robert Graham, married Miss Grey, and took his
bride to the Cape, where they settled permanently, but before that
Colonel Grey had brought both his daughters to stay with us. I shall
never forget Maria’s first visit. She was then about 16, and the
prettiest little creature imaginable, with beautiful grey eyes fringed with
long black eyelashes, and over-arched by eyebrows, black and shapely,
while her hair hung in masses of flaxen curls. She was barely 5 feet
in height, and when she spoke her face became radiant with smiles
and dimples. We all succumbed at once to her many charms. That
evening she wore a dress of pale green challis, with a pattern on it of
large bunches of flowers, and made with a short waist, and full short
sleeves—anything so quaint and pretty I never saw. She was like a
picture, and so unconscious of her own attractiveness.
After dinner the sisters sang to us very sweetly. Maria sang a
perfect second, though she did not know a note of music. Both the
girls were good French scholars and well read, as Colonel Grey
possessed a good library. Their education had been carried on under
his direction, assisted by an accomplished and eccentric gentleman,
who for some time employed himself as tutor to their brothers. Bessy


wrote some pretty poems, not without merit, and together they com-
posed a parody on what was then a very favourite song, “ The Last
Whistle”—which they called “The Stockman’s Last Bed.” I here
give a copy of it.
THE STOCKMAN’S LAST BED.
TUNE —THE LAST WHISTLE.
Whether stockman or not, for a moment give ear,
Poor Jack’s breathed his last, and no more shall we hear
The crack of his whip or his steed’s lively trot,
His clear go a-head and his jingling quart pot.
He rests where the wattles their sweet fragrance shed,
And tall gum trees shadow the stockman’s last bed.
When drafting one day he was gored by a cow;
Alas, cried poor Jack, its all up wfth me now;
I’ll no more return to my saddle again,
Or bound like a wallaby over the plain.
I’ll rest where the wattles their sweet fragrance shed.
And tall gum trees shadow the stockman’s last bed.
My whip must be silent, my steed he will mourn,
My dogs look in vain for their master’s return.
Unknown and forgotten, unheeded I’ll die,
Save Australia’s dark sons none will know where I lie.
I’ll rest where the wattles their sweet fragrance shed
And tall gum trees shadow the stockman’s last bed.
Oh ! stranger if ever on some future day,
When after a herd you may happen to stray,
Where lone and forgotten poor Jack’s bones are laid
Far, tar from the land where in childhood he played.
Tread lightly where wattles, there sweet fragance shed,
And tall gum trees shadow the stockman’s last bed.
But it was as a “ Siffleuse ” that Maria most distinguished herself
and astonished us. In these days she might have rivalled the lady of
American fame, but when we were girls, no lady was supposed ever to
do such a manly thing as to whistle, so perhaps our having to listen to
her with closed doors or in the open air when none of our elders were
near, added a charm. Her brother Charlie was equally accomplished,
and when they whistled a duet together it was inexpressively charming,
unlike any music I ever heard, so thrillingly clear and effective.


In the winter of 1864 my cousin, Nancy Macleod, was married to
Mr George Sharpe. She wished me to be one of her bridesmaids, but
I could not go to Sydney at the time. The family lived in Cumber-
land Place, where later on, I paid them a pleasant visit. At the
entrance door the house appeared a modest two-storeyed dwelling.
From the windows at the opposite side, there was a most extensive
view over Lower George Street and Campbell’s Warhf to the harbour.
We looked into a large garden with fine orange trees, in it stood a
house which was then occupied by Mr John Campbell and his sister,
we seemed very high above it. I suppose all this has been swept
away long ago, and the garden built over. I did not see Mr Macleod,
who had returned to Gipp’s Land, where he was building a house at
Baimsdale, to which he shortly after took his large family.
It was at this time I paid my first visit to Tivoli, and became ac-
quainted with Captain and Mrs Dumaresq and their family, my loved
and valued friends. Mrs Dumaresq was my aunt’s sister; their father,
Mr Alexander Macleay (formerly Colonial Secretary), was then
Speaker of the Legislative Council. A large family party went to the
opening ceremony while I w-as at Tivoli. It is interesting now to re-
member that we saw Mr Robert Lowe, afterwards Lord Sherbrooke,
take his seat as member for St Vincent. He had previously been
nominated a member by Sir George Gipps, but had resigned, and was
afterwards elected.


We had a very merry Christmas time 1846-47. My uncle brought
a party from New England with him; we also had the Messrs Mac Kay
and two Messrs M'Douall staying with us, and the usual visitors came
from Port Macquarie to dine. We rode almost daily. Dido has a
delightful new horse called “ Dandy”; no name could be more appro-
priate for he is such a gay, prancing creature—a bright chestnut,
Margaret is faithful to her “ Black Prince”; I am devoted to “ Cupid;’’
“TipooSaib” rules over Gordy, and Gustavus has abandoned “Don
Juan ” in favour of Tremaine.
We did not fail to welcome in the New Year, but early that morn-
ing the steamer left Port Macquarie, and with it went most of our guests
After that we had Major and Mrs Kemp, Colonel and Mrs Gray,
and Mr and Mrs Dunsmuir to stay, and a variety of people at lunch.
One day Mr Raafe and Mr Vivian Cox joined the party at dinner;
they had been on the lake all day taking observations. Mr Raafe is
full of a grand plan for turning the lake into a harbour, the entrance to
be from Cati Creek. Considering that the channel is now entirely
filled up with a wide belt of sand, there is some reason to fear a bar, but
he proposes to turn the River Hastings from its present course and
bring it into the lake, which would require a canal only three miles
long. This scheme might answer. Thirty feet more depth of water
than there is a present is the quantity required, but a sanguine castle-
building imagination can easily picture its completion. Fancy a fleet
at anchor in our peaceful lake, the swans with their sombre plumage
driven off by gay little pleasure boats, all softer sounds disturbed by
the splashing of the steamers’ paddles and the tinkling of their bells,
not to mention the horrid noises of a populous town, which is to spring
up as if by magic on its banks. Adieu to the acres of reeds which will
he submerged and hide for ever their diminished heads, adieu also to
the beauty of this lovely spot which would be quite marred by such
improvements. The good town of Port Macquarie has my best wishes
that it may still continue the “ Metropolis” of this district, and I think
my good wishes will be fulfilled.


We enjoyed Mr and Mrs Dunsmure’s visit very much, though it
"began very unfortunately. The day after their arrival he was thrown
from his horse and dislocated his shoulder. We were greatly alarmed
at the moment, but by the end of the week he was so much better
that it was arranged we should go to Tilbuster for a few days. How-
ever, this had to be given up, as a heavy rainfall caused the rivers to
rise so rapidly it was impossible to cross them. Happily we had not
started. Mrs Dunsmure was very young, very girlish and pretty, full
of fun, and much amused at her own importance as a married lady.
One day we rode to Hamilton, then occupied by Mr Salway. The
house has a deep verandah and wide passage through it. It is situated
on the bank of the river Hastings below Blackman’s Point, and,
being so near the sea, the water is brackish and rises and falls with the
tide. There is a fine vineyard, with a good variety of grapes. One kind
was very large, and tasted rather like Passion fruit. Another day wo
went round by the beach, Tacking Point, and the Settlement—a charm-
ing ride—which our friends much admired.
On 22nd January, 1847, our pleasant party broke up.
My uncle and Gustavus, Colonel and Mrs George Grey, Mr
and Mrs Dunsmure left for Sydney by the steamer. Maria
and I went to see them off, and found ourselves in quite
a crowd. All the ladies of Port Macquarie had come on board to
say good-bye to Mrs Friell. All the gentlemen were there, of course.
The trades people had taken just a few minutes holiday to see what
was going on. All the nurses and children were irresistibly attracted
to the wharf, and the idlers, of course, had nothing' else to do. Mrs
Friell sat in state on deck, adorned with many jewels, ear-rings, chains,
etc. Captain Gordon amused me by whispering “ she’ll soon unship
all that.” We were very sorry indeed to say good-bye to Colonel
Grey, who has been offered a Government appointment in the north.
It is sad for him to be, as it were, beginning the world again and
going he scarcely knows where. Port Curtis is, I believe, his des-
tination, but very little of a satisfactory nature is known of this new
Settlement. The first people who went to it returned long ago, as they
could not find a sufficient supply of wood and water. Colonel Barney
has been appointed Governor or Commandant. Mrs Grey in the mean-
time remains at Huntington with the rest of the family. Before this our
_good friend, Dr Stacey, had left the district, much to our regret, taking
with him his large family. He went to Newcastle, where he practised


for several years very successfully. His eldest daughter was an ex-
tremely pretty girl. The eldest son stayed often at the Lake : he went
to India with horses.
In February we heard from my uncle, who was still in Sydney,
that it had been arranged that he was to accompany Sir Charles
Fitzroy (the new governor) and party on their proposed tour to Beardie
Plains, the Peel River, and New England, and to arrive here with
them, via Yarrows, about 28th February, by which time it was
expected that Lady Mary Fitzroy, Dr and Mrs Dawson, and Colonel
Mundy would have arrived by steamer from Sydney. We heard of
their arrival at Newcastle, but that the weather was then so extremely
bad it was doubtful if they could carry out their journey: finally it
was abandoned, and the whole party returned to Sydney. It was
afterwards decided that all should come to Port Macquarie by steamer
about Ist March, and the Governor with a party of gentlemen start
from Lake Innes to New England, via Yarrows, leaving Lady Mary at
the Lake.
On the morning of 14th February we were much excited by the
arrival of a messenger from Port Macquarie to say the Maitland was
outside the bar, all her colours flying, and no doubt the Governor was
on board. We were filled with dismay, for he was not expected till
March, and we were expecting a variety of things for use or ornament
during their visit, and last, though not least, Mr Tozer had not yet
gone to Sydney to choose the champagne for the luncheon which was
to be given to his Excellency. But all is well that ends well. Aunt
Barbara Macleay and Mr Wm. Macleay arrived with my uncle, and we
have all been very merry and busy completing the various preparations.
We have been half buried in curtains, and rejoice now at seeing them
grace their respective windows. The curtains, I may say, are all made
of clear book muslin, the hems bound or lined with glazed calico of
different colours in each room. My cousins have given up their room,
and been moved into our pretty school-room, and I am glad to say the
smell of paint in the long passages is fast disappearing.
Wednesday, 3rd of March, 1847.—Dear Gordy’s twelfth birthday.
I had scarcely time to wish her many happy returns of the day I was
in such haste to gather fresh flowers, and was still busy with them
when a messenger arrived to say the carriage was coming up the road,


but as he had started from Port Macquarie the moment the steamer had
safely crossed the har, it was nearly an hour before they appeared.
The party from Sydney consisted of His Excellency, Sir Charles
Fitzroy, who is immensely tall and stout, and reminds us of our old
friend, Mr Wm. Mackenzie; Lady Mary, who is also very tall and
stout, and has but slight remains of the good looks for which she was
remarkable in her youth, when in Ireland with her father, the Duke of
Richmond, then Lord Lieutenant; Mr George Fitzroy, their son, who
is tall and slight and very good looking; Colonel Mundy, Adjutant
General, a gentlemanlike looking little man, and Dr and Mrs Dawson.
The former we had all seen before, and liked extremely ; no doubt we
shall be equally pleased with her. The whole now form a party of 18
at breakfast. The dinner party consisted, in addition to those in the
house of Mr Woodward, Mr Wright, Dr Gaamack, Mr Grey, Mr
Massie, and Mr Taylor. Mr Grey sat at the head of the table, Mr
M ‘Kay at the foot, it being the fashion in these days for the lady and
gentleman of the house to sit at the sides (in the centre), with the chief
guests at either hand. We danced for a short time, and then went to
our rooms, but not at once to bed, for I put on my dressing gown and
went in search of water melon (not to the garden), which we thor-
oughly enjoyed.
Thursday, 4th March, 1847.—T0 our great joy was as fine as the
day could be. We spent the morning in the drawing room end of the
verandah, where Lady Mary has established herself with her work.
She is most industrious, and is now preparing for the annual fancy
bazaar for the School of Industry, which is to be held on or about the
Queen’s Birthday. She has enlisted us all in her service, and declared
she would not have come down to breakfast yesterday, but that she
wanted to be beforehand with Mrs Dawson who is also collecting for a
stall, and who she heard was not to appear till after breakfast. lam
making a pincushion cover in imitation Brussels lace, which should be
handsome. Such knitting, crocheting, and work of every kind was
never seen! We are threatened with two conflicting manias, one for
fancy work, the other for the Polka—a new dance, for not to
know it “ argues yourself unknown.” We are to learn it at once, and
Mrs Dawson has kindly offered to be our teacher. She is most good
natured and such a stout little woman, all full skirts and stiff petticots—.
this too is a new fashion. Our visitors are rather shocked at our


primitive style of dress, especially as Margaret and I are so tall, so we
have written for a supply of stiff muslin, and Lady Mary has sent for
her polka music.
Our dinner party to-day consisted of Messrs Fenwick, Massie,
Grey, Major Kemp, Capt. Wauch, Briggs and Geary, Rev. Mr Purvis
(P), and Mr Bigney (R.C.) We had never seen Capt. Briggs before,
though he has long been a settler on the M'Leay, and has two sons and
a daughter almost grown up; he is a tall, fine-looking man. Strange to
say, he is an old friend of Mrs Dawson’s, who knew him years ago in
the West Indies, and was surprised to meet him here, and to find the
slender ensign had changed into so stout and grave-looking a Captain.
The Governor and most of the gentlemen went to Port Macquarie to-
day. I believe an address was presented and all that, but I have heard
no particulars. Mr Mackay drove with Lady Mary, and my aunt and
Maria and I rode with Mrs Dawson, who rides well, but had not been
on horseback for eight years.
Friday, sth March.—Lady. Mary, lam glad to say, is much better,
She has been an invalid for some time, and yesterday was not well.
Mrs Fenwick and Mrs Kemp called and stayed to luncheon. Mrs Purvis
kindly brought us out the music of the polka, and when the others
went to ride I remained at home to learn to play it, and to write my,
journal. They returned at dark, delighted with their ride, as the
beach was in such good order. Mr Grey, the Messrs Oaks,
Halloran, Freeman, Goram, Dr Fattorini and the Rev. Mr Currie
dined here. Strange to say I had never seen Dr Fattorini before, though
at one time he was a constant guest here, but I seemed to recognise
him at once and danced the first quadrille with him. We are still in-
defatigable dancers, and ended the evening by trying to learn the
polka. I played while Mrs Dawson and Mr Fitzroy danced. I
wished I had an eye in the back of my head, as it was all lost on me
where I was sitting. Lady Mary was kind enough to shew me the
proper time, and when her books come we are to learn and to copy
some pretty polkas from them. Mrs Dawson is also to get hers, and
teach every lady here to dance, so I begin to agree with Colonel
Mundy, who says it is a kind of madness, and when it first appeared in
England old and young were alike infected by it. He told us that a
fashionable dancing mistress (I forget her name) had made thousands
in one season by teaching it.


Saturday, 6th March. —We were to have gone on the Lake this
morning, but it proved very warm, and, as the gentlemen wished to
keep themselves cool, it was deferred. The Governor, my uncle, Dr
Dawson, Colonel Mundy, and Mr Fitzroy went to Port Macquarie about
one o’clock to attend a public dinner (or luncheon) given to his
Excellency. We did not envy them. Aunt Barbara went to drive
with Lady Mary, and the rest of us adjourned to the dancing-room
with Mrs Dawson, and there polked till I was dreadfully tired, though
I was also chief musician ; then we took a comfortable nap for an hour,
after which I went out to gather flowers, as we must each have a
bouquet, and Sir Charles cannot dine without a fresh buttonhole. Lady
Mary is also very fond of flowers so I tried my skill again after my
lesson from Mr Fitzroy and succeeded very well. He presented me
with a minature broom of various coloured flowers, which I told him I
thought a poor compliment after Dido’s remark when he was making
it, that “surely he meant it for a lady with monstrous hands,” and
indeed he was not far wrong in bestowing it on me. Lady Mary has
most beautiful hands and feet, and always wears rings, which reminds
me that Maria Grey has brought down a ring to shew to us, which
belongs to Robert the Bruce. The Earl of Stair gave it to her grand-
father. It is the most clumsy thing imaginable, a large torquoise set
in gold. We were to have dined earlier and supped with the gentle-
men. However, they returned before dinner was announced and joined
us. I have been trying to get some account of their entertainment,
but no one gets further than Colonel Mundy’s speech in which he
declared he was half tempted to exchange his cocked hat for one of
cabbage tree, and his sword for sheep shears ! Mr Wright who returned
thanks for the ladies muttered it all to himself, and Mr Grey, who was
in the chair, proved himself to be so unaccustomed to public speaking
(though he did no say so) that I shall make no further remark.
Sunday, 7th March -My Aunt’s birthday, but as I was not able
to appear at breakfast I did not wish her many happy returns till I
was saying good night. Two carriages full went to church. It was
excessively hot. In the afternoon Mr Woodward held a service here.
He preached in the drawing room at an open French window, and the
people who came had forms in the verandah, but I doubt if they heard
a word he said. His text was from Genesis “and Joseph was Governor
over the land.” He concluded by saying that he had arrived in this col


•ony in gloomy times, which he was glad to know were now brightening,
and he trusted that the colony would prosper and that a Joseph had
arisen among us, and “ may God bless His Excellency the Governor of
this territory” (not in good taste). Mr Taylor and Mr Massie called.
Monday, Bth March.—l may say I dressed in the dark, for it was
a dull morning and we were all. down by six o’clock to see the gentle-
men before they started on their journey to New England. As they
did not go off at once, we had time to observe, if not admire, their bush
costumes. The Governor wore a very light coat, and I had the honour
of tying on his veil of blue purse silk (netted by Miss Icely), and the
best thing possible for keeping off flies, as it is so cool and light. Mr
Fitzroy appeared with a great green veil, wrapped round a tall white
hat. I thought it must be a kind of mourning, a green willow I had
heard of, but green crape never. It’s size is admirable.
Contrived a double debt to pay.
Curtains by night, to save his eyes by day.
He wore long boots with a great piece cut out under the knee, and dark
cornered unutterables, a stable jacket and waistcoat of small black and
white check, a coloured shirt and neckerchief, and in this behold a bush-
man’s costume of the year 1847 ! I wish I could have made a sketch such
as Dido has got from Colonel Mundy. It is taken from his bedroom win-
dow with Campden Haven etc. in the distance, but in the foreground is
Mr litzroy fast asleep. We were all anxious to secure such a treasure,
so it was put up for auction unreservedly to the highest bidder, each
one to be in ignorance of the other’s offer, and Mrs Dawson to decide-
(Age before honesty). I offered a pen wiper, Maria a pin cushion.
Margaret a watch guard, Dido a knitted purse (winner), Gordy a watch
pocket. We were in despair, but I have won a “philipe” from him, and
mean to insist upon its payment. Sir Charles and Colonel Mundy
drove as far as Thrumster. They all stop at Yarrows to-night. It was
dull and cold but no rain. In the evening we had the Polka, and then
cards.
Tuesday, 9th March.—lt rained and so there was no going out.
Lady Mary gave us a long and interesting account of the earthquake
in Antigua, which took place while Sir Charles was Governor there.
She has promised to send for a newspaper that was printed at the time,
and which gives, she says, a most faithful account of the event. She


told us of a lady, a friend of hers, who had a most miraculous escape
She had been for some time a great invalid, and was still confined to
her own room, where she was sitting in her dressing gown and slippers,
when her attendant, a coloured man, rushed in and pulled her out of
her easy chair, which almost instantly sank through the floor, and the
whole of that part of the house fell in ruins. The lady escaped from a
window by a ladder put up to it for her, by a man who fortunately was
near. She scrambled down, and with difficulty reached an open space
under the shade of some trees. In a few minutes what had so lately
been her comfortable home became a mass of ruins. People who visited
the spot afterwards could scarcely imagine how she had made her escape
and that she did not suffer from the fright and excitement she had gone
through. Her husband, Sir Robert, who was in the town when the shock
took place, instantly mounted his horse and galloped to his country
house, which he that morning had left in beauty and fancied secure
to find now only scattered heaps of rubbish. You may imagine his
dismay till a kind neighbour told him of his wife’s safety and led him
to where she had taken refuge.
Thursday, 11th March.—We had a delightful picnic at the beach
in honour of it being the anniversary of Lady Mary’s wedding day.
The carriage and four started about two o’clock with her Ladyship, my
Aunt Barbara and Dr Dawson. We were glad he could stay
long enough to be of the party. Mamma, Airs Dawson and we four
girls, Mr Mackay, and Mr Macleay followed on horseback. I was
astonished when we arrived at the beach to find on the bank overlook-
ing it a long table spread with an excellent and substantial cold lunch,
to which was added hot currie and potatoes. The cart had been sent
down early and the whole party looked quite formidable. We found
those who had driven down seated on the bank admiring the wide sea
view which is magnificent; near them was drawn up the carriage with
the four horses in the back ground. There was a fire, round which
hovered the cook, radiant with smiles at his own importance; beside him
was his Sunday coat which he slipped on whenever he came forward,
not that he was required to help to wait as we had four footmen, two
of our own, Lady Mary’s, and Dr Dawson’s. Her maid and Christina
were also there, and as we rode up a man appeared from a clump of
trees where I noticed three others reclining, helpers we suppose, but
they nearly caused me to fall from my horse, for what with the surprise
of coming suddenly on them, and the fluttering of flags, poor Cupid


took fright and wheeled round so suddenly that I was thankful to find
myself still on the saddle and not under his feet. After lunch we had
a canter on the beach to try if it was firm enough for the carriage to go
down, but Elton, the coachman, who is a splendid and experienced
driver, thought it would be wise to wait for a few days when the tide
would suit better. Finally we rode home, and on as far as the race-
course where we saw some horses galloping. In the evening we varied
our amusement by a game at fright which I won, after enduring much
anxiety of mind in case the bright and beautiful penny for which we
were playing should escape from my greedy grasp.
On Friday all the young people except myself and Mrs Dawson
rode to Blackman’s Point to invite Miss Jobbling, who came next day
with her brother—a very nice boy, but shy, and nothing would induce
him to be presented to Lady Mary. It was his eighteenth birthday,
and Mrs Macleay’s, in honour of which we had decorated the break-
fast table with flowers. Mrs Freeman called with her son and
daughter, the boy a compound of awkwardness without bashfulness
such wonderful bows he made, and why should he fear Lady Mary.
The Queen had visited the Bluecoat School when he was there, and
had said to him, “ What is your name, little boy f’ “ Frank Freeman,
ma’am, said I,” and well might he be proud! Dr Dawson left for
Sydney. Mamma drove to Port Macquarie with him, and went to see
Mrs Gorman, who is ill. On the return of the carriage Gordy was
presented with a doll, Aunt Barbara with a parcel of sweets and two
mouse traps. Who they came from lam not at liberty to tell, for the
truth is we do not know.
Sunday, 14th, was dear Gustavus’ ninth birthday. He is at school
at Stroud. We drank his health after dinner in addition to that of
the travellers, which has been our toast for the last week.
Monday, loth, proved a delightful day, which we were glad of, as
it had been arranged that Lady Mary was to have a drive on the beach.
The tide answered early, so we set off immediately after lunch, and she
enjoyed it extremely, having no fear, but when my uncle heard of their
exploits he was very angry, as it really was dangerous to take four
spirited horses unaccustomed to the sea and the surf. Our ponies dash
along in any state of the tide or the weather, being well used to the
beach. The whole party were to have ridden to-day, but some of th»


ponies were not to be found. Mrs Dawson had to take mamma’s
favourite Duchess, but did not like her, and came back from the
bridge. Mr Grey, Capt. Briggs, and Mr Wright accompanied the
others to Tacking Point.
Tuesday, 16th.—The drawing room has the appearance of a school
of industry. Lady Mary is our leader, and has finished two work bags
already. She sits in what we call the flirting chair, a work table before
her covered with gay silks and wools. Mrs Dawson generally occupies
the other side of the chair, and is busy now with a crochet antimacasar.
Aunt Barbara and Margaret are busy at a frame working a gay piece
for a cushion. Mamma is working a bag, Dido a purse, Annabella a
pincushion, Gordy a collar, and Aunt Margaret occasionally sits down
with her netting. The gentlemen sometimes condescend to look in, but
at present they are quite occupied boating. In the evening we
continue our polka lessons, but as I am musician, and as we still have
only one tune, I am not making much progress in either accomplish-
ment.
Wednesday, 17th March.—Mrs Wauch and her two daughters
arrived before luncheon, all looking prettier than ever. It is not
flattering her to say that she looks like their elder sister. Mrs Wauch
left, but the girls are to remain. Our travellers were expected this
evening, and we rode past Thrumster thinking we might meet them,
but were disappointed. Miss Wauch drew a sketch of our party next
morning. She uses her pencil with much freedom, and her sketches are
clever and spirited, though the likenesses are not good. Invitations
have been issued for an evening party here next Friday, which we
expect to enjoy very much. Mrs Dawson is in despair about her
mosouitoes bites ; she really has suffered much from them. Her arms
would be a feast for a cannibal, they are so plump, and parboiled by
this time by constantly dipping them into hot water. We have never
been so annoyed by mosquitoes before, and suppose they are attracted
to the drawing room by the lights, the windows being constantly open
and the room full of people.
Thursday, 18th March.—Mamma and Mrs Dawson were just sett-
ing off with Lady Mary to Port Macquarie, when an express arrived
from my undo- ordering the carriage to be sent to Thrumster to meet
them, and saying that Sir Charles had sprained his ankle in New Eng


land, which, of course, we were very sorry to hear. Later on Lady
Mary and Mrs Dawson drove to Thrumster, and before sunset the
whole party had returned, but without the escort we had expected from
New England. The Governor did not appear at dinner. He must
have suffered great pain having his foot so long hanging in the stirrup.
Mr Fitzroy also has met with an accident. The horse he was riding
threw up its head and struck him so hard that he fell off quite stunned.
His teeth were loosened and his lips swelled, which is slightly dis-
figuring, but will soon be all light. They say it is quite cold in New
England, and they had large fires night and morning. We were
delighted to have Maria Grey back. She rode down with my uncle,
and came up to the advance party just in time to see His Excellency
get into a gig they had borrowed for his comfort, and out of which he
had been most unceremoniously thrown by the horse stumbling. It is
marvellous that he was not hurt. He seems an excellent traveller and
takes all things very cooly. The steamer arrived at Port Macquarie
early this morning. We were surprised when the letters and parcels
appeared, as all eyes were watching a steamer near Camden Haven,
which was thought to be the “ Maitland.” Lady Mary has got her
music books, and played us several charming polkas. There was also
a large assortment of silk, wools, etc., for various members of the
family, and Mrs Dawson has received a large portmanteau which con-
tained, among other matters, an assortment of stiff petticoats. Among
the arrivals by the steamer were Mr Paterson and family—l 7in num-
ber, including Mrs Norman M‘Leod and her two children. I shall be
so glad to see them. She is to spend a month or two in Port
Macquarie. The weather continued wet to our dismay, and I never
heard heavier rain than fell all night.
Friday, 19th, was at least tolerably fine. We spent the morning
getting our dresses in order, tacking robes to them the same as we had
at the last large evening party, but trimmed with steel beads and gimp
instead of flowers, trimming gloves, etc., etc. We young people dined
in the dancing room in the middle of the day, and dinner was laid there
for twelve at seven o’clock, then it was converted into a refreshment
room with tea and coffee, punch and negus, cakes, etc. The dining
room carpet was taken up, and chairs placed at the top of the room for
the Governor and Lady Mary, which left quite enough room for the
dancers, as the room is rather long. Our only fear was that some tall


persons might knock their heads against the chandilier, a handsome new
one, for which the room is rather low. I danced with Col. Mundy, Mr
Fitzroy, Mr Macleay, and some other pleasant partners. Then I fell a
victim to others, four dances did I go through with Mr Oaks, and
might have imagined myself engaged in a serious flirtation, only he was
married last August. Mr Ducat took me to supper ;he only received
his invitation at eleven o’clock, and rode forty miles to be present.
Mrs Freeman sat opposite, and was most amusing in her remarks.
The supper was laid in the verandah next to the drawing room, and
was completely closed in with strong canvas, and the table laid from
end to end. Everything was excellent, and set out with the greatest
taste. The Governor retired immediately after supper, and Dr Gamack
examined his ankle, which he pronounced to be severely bruised
and sprained. He must have suffered a great deal of pain from
it, but he was most pleasant to every one during the evening,
and to my amusement, I may say confusing, complimented me on our
■expertness in making up our late importation from Sydney, meaning
the stiff petticoats, which had been got for the occasion, and in which
we had been pronounced so sadly deficient. Fashionable people seem
now to think they cannot put on too many, and some wear hair cloth
bustles. They say the proper criterion is to see your bustle when you
look' over your shoulder. Lady Mary wore a white dress with blue stripes
round her skirt as high as her knee, and blue ornaments, and looked
very well. Mrs Dawson shone forth in white book muslin with a tunic
skirt trimmed with lace and roses, We kept the dance up till three
o’clock. We had Helen and Jessie Paterson, chaperoned by their
sister, Mrs Norman M‘Leod, the very Agnes of former days, looking
as young and pretty as when we were her bridesmaids nearly three
years ago. Mrs Taylor, we thought, was very pretty.
On Saturday our party began to disperse, Capt. Waugh sent for
his daughters, and Mr Taylor came for his wife, bringing his children
with him. It was arranged we should ride to Blackman’s Point that
we might show it to our Sydney friends, but we started too late, and
Mrs Dawson was afraid to be out by mooidight. After dinner we
danced and I played a polka, the very last and I have never yet seen
it danced.
Sunday we did not go to church. Sir Charles had an easy chair
placed in the verandah near his dressing room. A table and sofa were


also brought out, and we all visited him there, His foot was very pain
ful. I gathered some figs for him in the afternoon, and sat with him
while the others went to the lake.
Monday, 22nd March.—Our visitors left. We accompanied them to
Port Macquarie, as the Governor had kindly asked for us, and we were
glad to escort him ; but after we joined the main road were in dread of
meeting an escort from the town, in which case we were to take another
road. Happily the horsemen did not appear till we reached the
Mound, so all was wall. We said good-bye in the steamer, and there
was great cheering as she moved from the wharf. That, and Mr
Wright’s gallant array of soldiers so astonished my pony that his be-
haviour quite frightened me, but we made our way quite safely to
Fort Fitzroy (two cannons on a hillock), and from there watched the
steamer cross the bar—a pretty sight, the colours all flying, and an
awning all over the deck. One tiny wave broke beautifully on the
deck, and now they are gone. We hope they have enjoyed their visit
even half as much as we have. They have individually and collectively
left a good impression here. We got home hot and hungry, and
Maria declares I am always tired, hungry, or sleepy.
Wednesday, 30th March.—The house has now been restored to its
usual state. My aunt occupies her own rooms, and the yellow room
shines forth in its own proper colours. The schoolroom looks quite
empty, and as for me, once more sole occupant of the upper regions, I
constantly over-sleep myself, as there is no one to disturb me. Yesterday
Dido and Mr Mackay, Cousin William and I rode to Cati Creek, which
is once more running into the sea, and quite impassable. And now
that the week is ended, how have we spent it 1 I say copying music;
but there is still a greJit deal of work for the bazaar going on.
On Sunday my uncle returned. He went to Sydney with the Gov-
ernor’s party. Aunt Barbara received letters from Scotland in answer
to those she sent home by Mr Gunn. It is just eleven months since he
sailed from Sydney. Aunt Williamina asks her if we 1 wear any stiff
petticoats, and says she never wears less than two corded and stiff
starched and one of horse-hair. We weie amused to hear my uncle
regretting that he had not ordered a supply for us when in Sydney,
and mamma is commissioned to do so. I quite dread my own appear-
ance so puffed out.


Monday, 29th March.—Mrs Gamack called. Her husband is
Colonial Surgeon in Port Macquarie in succession to Dr Richardson.
She was formerly Mrs Cox, and an old friend of my mother. She told
us they are to leave Port Macquarie on Ist 51 ay and also the Waldrons,
It is thought that Mr Wright will also be moved then. The Gormans
(Government Surveyor) leave soon, and Mr Purvis talks of returning to
Scotland. If all this comes to pass poor Port Macquarie will be quite
deserted.
Wednesday, 31st March.—Mr James Mackay appeared ; he has
been detained by floods. He left Mr Hugh going to Fitzroy Downs, a
new country further north than the Boyne. We were sorry to hear
the report confirmed of the loss of the steamer Sovereign at Brisbane.
She is a complete wreck, and almost all on board have perished—
among them Mr and’Mrs Robert Gore and their two children. They
left their eldest child with her grandmother, Mrs Baldock, about six
months ago, when Mrs Gore went to the bush for the first time. Poor
little girl, she little knows what she has lost; it is indeed a sad affair.
Forty lives, it is said, are lost, but the particulars are not yet known.
The steamer, which had been wind-bound for two or three days, was
Just leaving the harbour when the accident occurred. The boilers
burst or some of the machinery broke down. Mrs Gore’s body had
been found and only one other when the account was written. A few
people had been picked up alive but much injured, and conveyed at
once to the hospital.
On Wednesday evening we went by appointment to see Mr Stokes.
He shewed us all his cellars and appliances for wine making, which
are on a much more extensive scale than we had imagined. We tasted
some of the wine, which is said to be very good. There was a light
wine like the palest sherry and one very dark, both made from the
same grape, which he calls the black muscat of Jura. He ferments
the one with the skin on, the other is merely the juice pressed gently
from the grape: it is the richer and better of the two. There was
also some wine made at Hamilton by .Mr Salway—horrid stuff I
thought it.
At a short distance from the house there is a large store with a
cellar below extending the whole size of the building. In the cellar
-are large casks arranged at each side, and in the centre of the upper


floor there is a wide trap door down which these casks are lowered,
but which is now practically closed and a ladder placed, down which
we were invited to descend. Above were 14 huge casks filled with
this year’s wine, which has only just ceased fermenting. There were
also two vats for pressing the grapes in. I thought the whole place
smelt horribly. The wine is racked off into clean casks about every
six months, and any that does not promise well is made into brandy.
I looked particularly at the still, which is the first I have ever seen.
There is a small detached house for it, and another wine store which
we also visited, besides a good sized room devoted to bottled wine.
We were all much interested in everything we saw. We carried off
some early roses and mignonette in remembrance of our visit, and
Aunt Barbara got a root of musk plant; she gave me a piece of it for
my garden, but Isabella threw it away, and with it a bird’s nest I had
found when riding, the most lovely little nest I have ever seen, made
chiefly of moss. It was too stupid of her.
The steamer was detained two days, I cannot say to our grief, as
dear Mamma and Aunt Barbara were going to Sydney in her, not to
mention cousin William. On Saturday morning they left. It was a
lovely day, and about one o’clock we saw the steamer passing the hill,
and put up our flag to salute them.
Friday, 2nd April, 1847 was dear Dido’s 15 birthday, but being
Good Friday it was decided not to keep it till to-day. We all rode to
Tacking Point before luncheon, one of the grooms following with a
basket of provisions. We met my uncle who had been in the settle-
ment, and he chose a shady bank near a little creek with nice, clear
water where we rested and" had our lunch. Afterwards we went in
search of flowers and berries, and Dido and I tried to make a sketch
from the green hills at the point. Returning, we rode along the beach
as far as Cati Creek, which is still riming into the sea. Mr Mackay
crossed it and coming back his horse got into a quick sand. Of course, it
began to plunge, and to our terror he was thrown off, and for a second
was completely under water. However, he managed to wade across
afterwards, and though completely drenched neither horse or rider
were hurt.
Friday Bth, —The steamer arrived bringing letters from dear
Mamma, also a large assortment of goods for Christina, who has at last


consented to wed Mr Michael Fay, and according to custom on these
occasions is collecting together as many things as if she was going to-
sail round the world with him.
The newspapers gave long accounts of the wreck of the Sovereign .
It took place on the 11th March in the South channel at Morton Bay
Bay, and was attended with a dreadful loss of life, 4-1 persons out of 54
on board being drowned, among them Mr and Mrs Robert Gore whose
meloncholy fate has excited much sorrow and compassion even among
strangers. A Mr Richard Stubbs, the only cabin passenger saved
seems to have had more than usual presence of mind,, and speaks of
having tried to lash two bales of wool together, a hopeless effort in the
boiling surf. Mrs Gore’s body and that of her eldest child were washed
at once on shore and buried by the survivors in the sand, also that of a
sailor, but no others were found for several days. As it was not possible
to remove them Captain Wickham read the burial service over them
the next day. Two poems have appeared in the Sydney newspapers
on the subject of the wreck. One is particularly touching as preserving
the last words of Mrs Gore, and truly in contemplating her death
though attended with such awful circumstances one is almost tempted
to exclaim, may my last end be like hers.
On Sunday 11th Mr Woodward preached a beautiful sermon from
Ist Corinthians, xv., 51, “Behold I show you a mystery. We shall not all
sleep, but we shall all be changed.” Of course he referred to this sad
and dreadful shipwreck.
Thursday 15th.—Rode to Blackman’s Point; quite a large party as
we were joined by Messrs Massey, Sal way, and Wright, who all came
out to tell us about an oystering party they had been at that morning,
but the only information I can give is that Mr Salway, who was the
leader of the expedition, proved that the oyster bed which he prided
himself upon as being known to few, was unknown to himself, and I sup-
pose that dreading such a dicovery he had provided for his friends a
delicious chicken pie which happily quite contented them.
The next entry in my journal is Thursday, 28th of June, more
than two months. Six weeks of this time we spent in Sydney. No
doubt we wrote and received many letters telling of our doings while
there, but I cannot find any.


When Lady Mary Fitzroy was with us she kindly invited
Margaret and me to pay her a visit in May, and Mrs Dawson pressed
us very much to stay with her. My aunt was unwilling to promise we
should go, and finally Sir Charles took up the matter, and amused us
very mnch by saying he would make a promise to come to the Lake
-again before they left the colony, if we were allowed to go to the
birthday ball. If not, he certainly would not come back. It was
impossible to say no to this proposal, though it put sincerity to the
test, and I felt it was well we did not live in the palace of truth.
In May Mr George Fitzroy sprained his ankle, and the ball was
put off. My uncle, however, said we had better go to Sydney as
arranged. Mamma was there, and we had other visits to pay. He
seemed to think with Lady Mary that it* was quite important we
should “ come out,” an expression I had never before heard. So to
Sydney we went, and our first visit was to my cousin Mrs Sharpe, who
then lived at Darling Point. We stayed also at Tivoli with Mrs
Dumeresq, and with Mrs Dawson, but we never got as far as
Brownlow Hill, and only called at Government House as-the Governor
was at Parramatta nearly all the time we were in Sydney.
Mrs Dawson chaperoned us to a private ball on the Queen’s birthday,
and to an afternoon dance on board a man-of-war. We did not go to
stay with her till June, when the postponed birthday ball took place
at Government House on the 18th, and was a very brilliant affair.
We found dancing in a large and crowded ballroom very different to
our dances at the Lake, though we had no lack of partners. Our
mother was at the ball, the first and only time I ever saw her in full
evening dress. She wore black velvet and white lace, and looked
noticably handsome. Margaret and I wore white book muslin dresses
-over many stiff petticoats, white lace berthes trimmed with white
.satin, and white satin sash pinned in front, and pink roses in our hair.
We enjoyed ourselves very much, and remained after the ball was over
to supper with the Government House party, who were very lively and
amusing.
While we were staying with Mrs Dawson she gave a dance and a
very large dinner party, at which the Governor and Lady Mary and
other Government officials were present. Captain William Blyth
■O’Connel took me into dinner (grandson of Governor Bligh of Bounty


fame), his wife was a sister of Mrs Robert Mackenzie). Lady O’Connel
also gave a dance to which we went, and we had many other invitations
but were obliged to hurry home before the end of the month.
To continue from my journal, we landed at Port Macquarie
about seven in the morning on Monday 28th June, and
found the carriage waiting to take us out to the dear
Lake. I was charmed to be at home again and soon the
rememberance of our visit to Sydney seemed more like a dream than
reality, except that dear Mamma had remained there. We were
absent exactly six weeks and enjoyed ourselves very much. Every one
was so kind and attentive to us, but we were disappointed in not going
to Brownlow Hill, neither did we see aunt Barbara or uncle George
We had a very good pjissage from Sydney (28 hours), but then had to
anchor 10 hours off the bar, as we could not come in till daylight. We
missed Mr James Maekay who was so kind to us on our way to Sydney.
We found Miss Kemp here and her brother, also Mr Capel Smith, and
the Messrs Maekay. Maria Grey and her brother came in the evening,
also Mrs and the Misses Waugh, and Miss Ducat, all this preparatory
to the Races, which took place the following day. I did not go as my
aunt was very unwell, but our party thought them very stupid as all the
horses we were interested in lost or ran away. The gentlemen, all but
my uncle, went to the Race dinner. Those staying here came out to
join us in a dance. My aunt was better and Bruce played, as he said
if his master did not go to dinner he would not go. Mrs Bruce was
here too with her boy, a fine little fellow, who bids fair to play the
pipes well if one can judge of the strength of his lungs by the noise he
makes.
On Wednesday 30th we all went to the Races chaperoned by Mrs
Waugh. The first was a Hurdle race and only two horses started
and at the hurdle immediately before the stand off fell both the riders,
Much to our disgust our favourite ran off and could not be caught for
some time. The other was seized by half a dozen people, his rider re-
mounted and won at his leisure. The next race was won by Dr
Gamacks “Phantom.” We wished he had been present as his satisfaction
might have enlivened us. Hector Macleod’s pony “ Robin” won a race,
and “ Raekay ” cantered round for the last, no other appearing against
him, and so ended the sports of the day. It seems doubtful if they will
be renewed next year, as the population of the district is diminishing so


rapidly and the interest taken is very little now that the novelty has
worn off.
July Ist.—Maria Grey and her brother left this morning. All the
others of our party went from the Racecourse, as the intended dance
here was not to take place, so now we are alone again though we had a
large party at luncheon, the four New Englanders who we saw on the
course yesterday, Mr Grey and Mr Massey. It is unfortunate the New
England party should have chosen these races for their visit; they
were so had and the Lake so dull : my aunt being ill, and my uncle
worried about business matters, prevented any extra gaiety here. Of
course we did not cart; about the dance, hut a visit to the Lake or a
party here is always looked forward to with pleasure by our friends.
Mr M‘l)onald, the C.C.L., New England, is a very clever man. Unfor-
tunately he is very short with a small hump on his back just at the
waist. It was owing to this peculiarity that he at one time possessed so
much influence over the natives about here. They had some time pre-
viously a very favourite and powerful chief who had the same deformity,
and they, according to their established superstition, imagined that at his
death he had “jumped up ”or risen again a white man. Mr M‘Donald
encouraged them in this belief and added to his popularity with them
by studying their language and customes. Mr Bligh is just a youth
clerk of Petty Sessions under MrM'Donald. Mr Elliot was formerly A.D.C.
to Sir Charles Gipps, good looking and agreeable. Next comes Mr Gold-
finch, goldenhaired, whiskered, and eyebrowed, I thought it was a nick-
name, and Mr Derby the hero of yesterday's hurdle nice. After lunch
we had some music and then put on our habits, intending to show our
new acquaintances the delights of the beach and the beauties of Tacking
Point, but found it was too late for them to return to the Settlement by
that route, so we accompanied them as far as Halcyon Place, where we
said good bye, hoping for a merrier meeting at some future time. Mr
Maister has l>een here for a day, and Mr Marlow, the latter lost his
horse at r .J'od’s which delayed him. Mr Tod himself wo have not seen
but we hear he brought letters to Annie Jobling telling of the birth of
her nephew.
On Monday, sth July, 1817, our nice Highland maid, Christina
Ross, was married to Mr Michael Eahye. Mr Purvis performed the
ceremony in the drawing-room, where Bruce and Helen were married
just three years ago. Christina has been with us ever since she ar>


rived in the Colony, nine and a half years ago; we shall miss her
dreadfully. I had said long ago that when she married T would ho
her bridesmaid, so when the day was fixed she reminded mo of this,
and I said if my aunt did not object I would ho most happy to keep
my promise. So I drew off her gloves and cut the cake—the two great
duties of a bridesmaid. The bride, who is tall, fair and handsome,
looked very well in her dress of white muslin, with a handsome worked
cape She wore a cap trimmed with white satin ribbon, a white satin
sash and bows. After the ceremony we all went to the dining-room,
where we drank the health of the bride and bridegroom, and wished
them happiness. Strange to say, I had never seen the latter till
yesterday, though he has been an admirer of Christina for some time.
He is tall and dark and young. His father was a soldier, who got a
small grant of land from the Government, and settled at Roland
Plains, where he has a good house and farm, to which they went at
once. Ido hope she will be happy. I wish Mamma had been here.
12th July.—l am dreadfully tired to-night. We have had some
very fatiguing reels. Tf Baron Monchauson’s dog ran his leg off, I
have nearly danced my feet oil', and all in the vain hope of thereby
curing my chilblains. I have also been working very hard in my
garden. 1 have dug up all my ground nuts, and am much disappointed
at the smallness of the crop. Mr Woodward called, and is in high
indignation with the Bishop (Broughton), who lately refused to con-
firm some young ladies at Bathurst, because they had been seen in a
Presbyterian Church—a crime, in the opinion of such a High Church
man, on Puseyites, as he must be.
My uncle has returned from Yarrows. It really is wonderful the
amount of work he gets through, mentally and bodily. It is most
trying to think that much of this has been thrown away through what
appears to be the wrong-headedness of some people who ought to have
known better.
loth July.—We have had letters from dear Mamma. She is going
to Bathurst this week to see Aunt Annabella and her family, who are
all there on their way from Glen Logan to St. Clair (near Singleton),
where they arc now going to live, I wish they had come to Sydney
before we left Sydney.


Wednesday, 28th July, 1847, Margaret’s 18th birthday. I have
just been writing to Maria Grey, whose birthday it also is, to wish her
many happy returns. They still argue as to which is the elder. I say
certainly Margaret, as Maria was born in Edinburgh. Yesterday we
were all invited by “ Sir Gustavus and Lady Gordina Innes ” to an
entertainment at their Bower. ' It was quite a gay scene, with flags
flying, and festoons of shells and flowers. The guests behaved with
the greatest propriety, but I heard afterwards that one of them carried
off the dinner table, a novel way of shewing appreciation of the feast.
I have lately been reading a charming book, Steven’s “ Central
America,” about the wonderful antiquities of that country. I could
scarcely tear myself away from the contemplation of some of the
curious sketches of carved stone pillars and what appears to be altars.
I have copied a few of them. There is a book here just now lam very
anxious to read—“ Glimpses of the Old World,” by an American. It,
of course, is very different, as history throws light on much of it. I
have learned from it the names of the Seven Hills of Rome, and how I
may remember them by a word made from the initial letters YE—Q
CAP—O, which stand for Venicual, Equaline, Querinale, Celian,
Aventine, Palatine, Capitoliux.
On 6th August my uncle and Gustavus left in the steamer for
Sydney. We shall miss the dear boy very much. He is now at school
at Stroud, and quite happy with nice boys of his own age. Gordy and
he gave a farewell tea at Banqueting Hall, a charmimg spot, from
which there is a lovely view of lake and sea, and Mr Mackay has gone
to Sydney to see some horses shipped for India, among them Willesby
Rockey and Sir Bertram, the last a beautiful creature. I have been
busy knitting edging, and am now working a collar for Aunt Barbara,
and as usual making many plans for drawing and working. lam
too apt to procrastinate, and forgot the good maxim—
Time was, time is, and time will cease to be—
Time present is the only time for me.
31st August.—Mr Smith has been reading aloud to us every
evening from after tea till 10 o’clock, and has finished “ Martin
Chuzzlewit.” It is just the book for reading aloud, and he reads very
well. I think even the author would say he had done it justice. We
have had some fun appropriating characters from it. Margaret is


Mercy, I am Charity, Dido is Miss Todgers, and patronises Mr Smith,
who is pronounced by all to be her “ youngest young man ” (no doubt).
Saturday night, 11th September, 1847.—1 t seems like a month
since last Saturday. On Friday forenoon, the 3rd, Mr Purvis came
out and told my aunt of her mother’s death, which took place at Tivoli
on 13th August, exactly three weeks before. It was indeed a sad
shock to her, as she had no idea that Mrs Macleay was seriously ill.
The last letters, dated 12th, merely mentioned that she was not very
well, so nothing fatal was. apprehended. Mr Purvis also said that
when he left the Manning my uncle was daily expected there, which
kept us very anxious expecting him hero any moment. On Saturday
night my aunt was very unwell, and I think the past week will long
be remembered by us as one of the most unhappy times of our lives.
On Sunday, 12th, my aunt was better, and we had the morning
service in the school room as usual. Then as her feet were very cold
we persuaded her to have a hot bottle for them, and to take a rest on
her sofa in her dressing room. In a few minutes we heard her calling
for Dido, and on running down found that the cork had flown out of
the bottle and the hot water run out over her feet. We got flour
immediately ami covered them from the air, and this proved a
wonderful remedy. In the midst of our anxieties a steamer appeared
in sight, and never did we greet one with greater satisfaction. The
wind was fair, the day was fine, but alas the tiresome bar was too
rough for her to get in, as we heard her waiting till seven o’clock.
Next morning Mr Smith went to the Settlement before breakfast.
The bar was if anything worse, the same report again in the evening.
On Tuesday morning we heard that a boat with great difliculty got
within speaking distance of the steamer. My uncle was on board, but
Captain Parsons had decided to run up to Trial Bay as they were short
of water. This was indeed a dismal prospect, but at eleven o’clock, to
our surprise and joy, my uncle arrived. He had landed in one of the
steamer’s boats, which really was dangerous in the state of the weather.
That evening the steamer got in, hut stayed only one day, and was off
again on Thursday morning, taking my uncle with her. His visit
seems like a dream, a pleasant one indeed, as it has left my aunt much
better. We had letters from dear Mamma, who had just returned to
Sydney, but not in time to come by the steamer, which was fortunate.


Thursday, 16th September, 1847.—And now begins a new era in
my existence. lam no longer an infant, but a full-grown child, ar-
rived at the so-called years of discretion. My aunt kindly said we
might have luncheon at the beach, or do anything we liked better; so
with one consent, we spent the morning working in our garden, and
after luncheon rode to the sandy flat near the Settlement. Mr Salway
went on to ask if a steamer passing had left a mail. It had not, and
Mr Smith helped us to gather some wild flowers, which I have been
drawing. An amusing poem has come to hand, the subject, “ The Port
Macquarie Races,” telling how four happy young squatters set out,
accompanied by two flunkeys, on donkeys. Two black boys, as pack
boys, and a fat individual, came from Dundee,
So hurrah fur the road, and although we’re now sorry,
We’ll banish all care when v/c reach Port Macquarie.
Monday, 4th October.—There is a most violent storm raging out-
side. We have been very anxious about the “Mary Ann,” which left
Port Macquarie on Thursday, taking with her twenty passengers, and
having jiccommodation only for six. Mr Smith left in her ; he has
been here more than three months. He has just heard of his father’s
death. We are very sorry for him, so far away from his home and all
his own people. He is only twenty, and does not like this country,
especially the bush.
I may here add that we never saw poor Mr Smith again, and to
this day 1 sometimes wonder who he was, and what became of him.
He got safely to Sydney, and there reported himself to the gentleman
who introduced him to my uncle, and who did so in the hope that em.
ployment might be found for him on one of his out-stations. This was
tried, but failed. A place was now found for him in an office in
Sydney. He then went to Melbourne, but returned to Sydney. The
day he arrived there he called on the lady with whom he had previously
boarded, and asked her if she could give him a room as before. It was
then arranged that he should bring his luggage, etc., from the steamer
that night or next morning. Ho never returned, and from that hour
no one has seen or heard of him. Every inquiry was made at the time.
He never went back to the steamer for his luggage; if any inquiries
or letters ever came from England we were not told ; in fact we knew
nothing whatever of his people, not even their name, which I am pretty
sure was not Smith. Once he said to me in deep indignation, “ I cannot


stand young B . He despises me because I cannot rub down and
saddle my horse. He knows nothing of books, and the work in which
I have spent my life. Mathematics and languages mean nothing to
him ; he is as ignorant as my father’s grooms.” I believe he had been
at Addiscombe and expected to go to India, but why he was banished
from his home and prospects I cannot even guess. He was a gentle-
manlike youth, and my uncle, I know, was anxious to be of use to him.
October 16th.—Got up very early and churned, which means also
that I skimmed the milk, and made up the butter. Lately I have
taken charge of the dairy and like it very much. It began to rain this
evening, real steady rain, the first we have had since February, eight
whole months, quite unusual in this district; but alas for my castle
building, the next day was as fine as possible and the rain had not
sunk into the earth one inch.
Friday, 22nd October. —Here I am once more established in my
own snug little room, with everything so neat and comfortable, and the
cause of my being here again is so delightful, dear Mamma has
returned after being away six mouths and a half—how glad and thank-
full we all are to see her again. Saturday and Sunday it rained
steadily, which will be good for everything but the hay, which they
began to cut yesterdaj’. T got up early to plant seed in my garden.
Wednesday 27th.—Mr Salway left yesterday for the Macleay.
We have returned with great zeal to our burning off; it really is most
laborious work. I can do little but sleep or eat afterwards which
shows it agrees with me. Mamma is looking so much better than when
she went to Sydney. She was at a Jewish marriage while there, and has
described the ceremony to us. It is true that there is a glass handed
round, the contents of which the bridal party drink, the bridegroom
then throws it on the floor and stamps on it, thereby signifying that
when the broken glass reunites the parties then joined shall separate.
The service was partly in English, and partly in Hebrew, and in sub-
stance much like that in our own prayerbook.
October 30th—Mr Charles Grey came out to call yesterday, and
was amazed to find we had not breakfasted ! He stayed till four o’clock.
Mr Marlow came out to say good-bye: he is going to Sydney and from
there to New Zealand. We shall remember him by his amusing song,
“The King of Otakiti.” Mr Mackay is still here,


Thursday, 4th November.—Our burning off has been put an end to
by a very tragic event, a branch of a large tree falling on poor
Eliza. She had just trotted up the hill with her pretty little foal,
when a great branch from a half burnt tree fell on her and broke her
back. We were all at the lake at the time, and though we regret
Eliza’s fate very much (she was the prettiest of our cream coloured
ponies), we are very thankful we were not on the hill at the time.
November 12th.—We have all had influenza, and hear it has been
very bad in Melbourne and Sydney. We were very sorry to have the
report of Rodrick M'Leod’s death confirmed. It said in the .paper,
“ From want of medical advice,” which seems odd if they are still at
Gaelong, as there must be doctors there as it is now a populous place. We
heard afterwards that he was at an out-station far from any Doctor.
29th November.—Nothing particular has happened of late, except
that we have all had influenza. My uncle is still away, and my aunt
speaks of spending Christmas in Sydney, which I hope they may all do,
otherwise they will not see the Dumaresq boys who go to England in
the Agincourt. Mrs Onslow, too, will not be remaining much longer
in this country, and she is taking her eldest daughter, Georgy, away
with her.
The weather has been very stormy, but we have had two short
rides, as Dr Fattorini, who has been here, several times lately, reconr
mends it. My aunt has had influenza very badly. All the Tisdale
family have it now. The baby, of which they are very proud, was
christened last Sunday “ Eliza,” after Dido. So impressed was Mrs
Payne (the godmother) with the honour, that on being asked by the
clergyman to name the child she said “ Miss Eliza,” not liking I
suppose to be too familiar. It reminded me of the story of a good
woman who on a similar occasion answered “ Lucy, Sir.” Lucifer !
exclaimed the clergyman, indignantly; not at all. I will give the child
a good Christian name, and promptly christened the little girl George
Washington.
I continue to teach the children, -who come now to the Servants’
Hall, which is more convenient than the verandah. We were much
amused lately by the Churchill children. Dido was teaching Sarah to
read the sentence, “ Ann is a good girl,” which she told her to spell A


■double n and g double od, but Sarah would say always A, n, n. So
Dido turned to her brother, and said—“ I air sure you know, Henry,
what you should say when you see two n’s together?” “Please ma’am,”
said the delighted Henry, “ I would say there’s two pullets.”
6th December.—My uncle has written to say he will bring
Gustavus home with him by the next trip of the Phoenix, the Clarence
River steamer, which now lands passengers at Port Macquarie. This
puts an end to the expectation of going to Sydney at present.
Friday, 10th December.—Poor Gordy, who we thought had quite
recovered, has had a relapse. Dr Fattorini stayed all night, and says
he finds the lake air agrees so well with him he will come out to stop
every other night. Poor man, he has suffered so much pain that any
relief from it is eagerly seized. I must say he is very clever, and
agreeable. He brought out his two youngest children one afternoon—
Clemence and Eugene. They are very nice looking. The latter is my
aunt’s god-son.
14th.—Mr Patrick M‘Kay has returned from New England, and
tells us Mr Taylor has been thrown from his horse and broken his leg
badly. The family had just arrived safely at their station.
Friday, 17th December, 1847.—Dr Fattorini called, looking
wretchedly ill. He told us that a report had reached Port Macquarie
(from the Menning) that the Governor’s carriage had been upset, and
Eady Mary thrown out and killed on the spot; but this is too shock
ing a tale to be believed on so slight a foundation. Reports of this
kind are almost always exaggerated. Teasdale killed a death adder
to-day on the hill. It really was quite pretty, of a yellowish-brown
colour, spotted, and not more than 14 inches long. The prettiest snake
I have ever seen was one that came from under the nursery verandah.
It was slate colour, and very long and thin. Old George fired a gun at
it. When it heard the report it raised its head about two feet from
the ground for a moment, then quickly disappeared.
Monday, 20th.—Mamma and my cousins walked to the beach and
brought back some beautiful pieces of sea-weed. We have now a good
many varieties dried and fastened neatly into a book. They look so
pretty. It quite repays one for the trouble of arranging them, We
expected my uncle and Gustavus on Thursday, and the carriage was


sent to Port Macquarie for them, but the bar was so rough that a boat
could not go out for them, so they went on to the Clarence in the
steamer, and did not arrive till the following Thursday, and narrowly
escaped having to return to Sydney.
Much to our regret my uncle has confirmed the report of the
awfully sudden death of poor Lady Mary Fitzroy. The family had all
been staying at Government House, Parramatta, and were going to
Sydney to spend Christmas. About 10 o’clock on the morning of the
9th, Lady Mary entered the carriage, a heavy travelling chariot. It
had been some time at the door and the horses were restless. Sir Charles
who was to drive was seated on the box with Mr Chester Master, his
A.D.C , beside him. A servant sat behind. Scarcely had the grooms
released their hold upon the horses, when the leaders made a bound
forward and set off at full speed down the hill to the entrance gate.
Had the road been straight possibly the accident might not have
happened, but unhappily at the gate there is a sharp turning, and there
the carriage which had been swaying from side to side all the way down
the hill upset heavily, throwing all in it out with great violence.
Mr Fitzroy who had watched them from the house rushed down fol-
lowed by all who were near, but alas before he arrived life had fled, and
the fond mother who had but a few short minutes before gaily bade him
good-bye, now lay a bleeding and mangled corpse, blood flowing from
her mouth and ears, and her chest crushed in by part of the carriage
which had fallen upon her. Who can describe the horror of such a
moment 'f Sir Charles whose fall had been broken by his having kept
hold of the reins, although much hurt managed to reach the spot, and
there gazedon her in speechless agony. Poor Mr Master lay at a short
distance crushed insensible and bleeding, but life was not yet extinct.
Several doctors were immediately on the spot, but nothing could be
done for him and he died the same evening without regaining even
momentary consciousness. The footman was but slightly hurt.
This dreadful event has caused universal sorrow throughout the
Colony. Lady Mary had travelled so much in the country and become
personally acquainted with so many of its inhabitants that they feel as
if a dear friend had been snatched away from them. All who
had seen her, and all who had heard of her, unite in bewailing her
sudden and melancholy end, not that they sorrow as those without
hope, for no one but a true Christian could have possessed the many


virtues of this most kind and excellent lady. This most sad accident
occurred on Tuesday, 7th December. The funeral took place on the
10th, when the remains of Lady Mary Fitzroy and Lieut. C. Chester
Master were deposited in the same vault in the Parramatta burying
ground, attended by an immense concourse of people, whose grief was
best expressed by their silent and orderly conduct. My uncle, who
was present, describes the scene as most affecting, and so far on this
sad occasion had self been forgotten by all, that the people who came
from a distance were unable to get anything to eat, the shopkeepers,
instead of profiting by such an unusual concourse of people coming
to their town, had neglected to make any preparations for them. The
bakers had no bread, the hotelkeepers no supplies, and every shop was
shut, and people talked together in whispers. My uncle went to see
the Governor ; he is in the deepest affliction. He said, “It is only one
short week since I handed her into the carriage to go to a wedding’’'
(Miss Macarthur to Mr George Lesley), and they were then hastening
to Sydney to be present at the wedding of Miss Baldock to Mr Carlo
O’Connel. Poor Miss Baldock, hers has been a sad, sad bridal. In
the beginning of the year her marriage was put off owing to the loss of
her sister and brother-in-law in the wreck of the Sovereign, and now it
has taken place on the day of Lady Mary’s funeral.
The year closed rather sadly: we spent a very quiet
Christmas, and had no house party. On the 31st Colonel Grey
brought Maria to spend a week with us, he had returned some
time before, finding the new settlements quite unsuitable for his
family. On New Year’s day the usual guests rode out to dinner.
The kindly welcome was unchanged, but we all felt that “ bad
times ” meant something we had never before realised—in as far
as they had brought cares and anxieties to our elders—and other
troubles might follow.
It had before this been definitely arranged that my uncle, aunt,
and cousins were all to go to Sydney for three months, leaving
Mamma, Margaret, and me in possession, with occasional visits
from Mr Patrick Mackay during their absence. Meantime we
were busy helping in their preparation, and Gordy took me to her
pea hen’s nest, which she had lately found with five eggs in it,
and gave me many instructions about managing it. The pea-fowls,
dear delightful creatures, are to be my especial charge, and
Margaret is to take charge of the parrot.
Dido and I had letters from Aunt Jane Innes, who always ;
writes to us both on the same day, addressing one as Miss Innes i


of Lake Innes, the other, Miss limes at Lake limes —she tells us
of Mr and Mrs Benjamin Wemyss, and their son and heir, and she
also mentions Mr Gunn as still in search of a situation —poor
“ Pine,” he is always on the same errand.
10th January, 1848.—We were all up atddarn,w r n, which, after
all was wiser than our former plan of sitting up all night, so as
to be up in good time in the morning—l said good-bye to Mr
Salway and Captain Parsons who left about 5 o’clock. Mr Hugh
also left before breakfast. At Bmy uncle, aunt, and cousins took
their departure leaving us disconsolate. We have made many
resolutions to be very industrious during their absence, and after
taking a farewell look at the steamer from the flagstaff, we sat
down to work at the patchwork tablecover, which, though it is
not unpicked every night like Penelope’s web, seems likely to be
as long in hand. We went out to gather some fruit and found
the trees covered with parrots. There was little to be got after
them, as when once they have tasted it they will not consent to
be driven away.
13th.—Rainl Rain 11 Rain! 11 Delicious, for it does not
keep one in the house. I have been working hard in my garden,
and then had a delightful bath, but oh 1 so cold. In the
evening we had a dreadful fright—George and the cook being
rather excited—the former locked the back door at 8 o’clock, and
much to our relief, took his departure. Presently we heard
voices in the back yard—and someone attempting to open the
back door. Mamma went to the office window, and said there
was a strange man in the back verandah. This did not tend to
reassure us as the noise at the back door continued. She at last
went to ask who was there, and found that old George had just
arrived on the scene with the key of the back door, and was try-
ing ot open it for Mr Mackay, who was quite wet through, having
ridden the whole way from the Macleay, about 70 miles, in the
pouring rain. We were delighted to see him, as we feared the
rivers would rise and prevent him returning, which they would
have done had he waited another day. And now, what could we
give him to eat? The cook had forgotten to bake, but was so
civil, and wished to do anything and everything—but did nothing.
George threw down the pantry key declaring he would away to
his bed, and we might manage things as we liked, which was just
what we could not do; but at last some food was got, and we re-
tired to bed, well pleased to have the young gentleman safely
back to look after the household, our short experience of George
and the cook not being satisfactory.
14th January.—Got up very early, gathered up all the fallen
apples, and picked all the ripe raspberries, then went to visit the
pea hen, and to my horror found her standing up in her nest.


while a perfect stream of water flow r ed over the five precious
eggs. I flew to mamma to ask her what I should do, and she
advised me to remove them at once, which I did, carrying Mrs
Pea with me, but she refused to sit in the nest we had prepared
for her, so we got a hen who seemed quite delighted to take her
place, much to our relief: all this time it continued to pour, and
so on for the rest of the day.
17th January.—The Lake has risen to a great size, covering
whole banks of reeds which have encroached on it. We are afraid
it will break through again at Cati Creek. Picked some rasp-
berries which continue to ripen in spite of the rain.
Saturday, 22nd January.—No pen or pencil could do justice to
the beauty of this perfect day. It was clear, cloudless, lovely,
and we enjoyed it all the more as we had not seen much of the sun
for nearly a fortnight.
sth February.—l wrote such long letters to my cousins that
my journal has of late been quite neglected. We had a great dis-
appointment this morning when the last returned from Port
M'Quarie and we heard a passing steamer had not called, and that
the Mary Ann which the cook announces daily he was seen from
the hills, has not yet arrived. Great was our surprise when later
in the day we received a large packet of letters, “ Favoured by
Mr Hugh Mackay,” who we supposed was at Moreton Bay I He
had come overland from Eaymoral Terrace.
On Sunday all the children appeared at afternoon service—
and I heard them their hymns and Catechism. The Churchills
made most startling remarks. To-day I was shewing them a
picture of David and Goliath, when Henry burst forth into the
history of “ Jack the Giant Killer,” whose exploits he related with
great glee. My children, Teasdales, are slower in expressing their
ideas.
7th February.—Mamma has had the grapes picked to make
wine, but the birds have been so destructive she fears there will
not be much. I picked some fresh apples for a squab pie, and
prepared some grapes for jam, which occupied me till lunch was
ready. Afterwards finding that the cook was out, I carried my
materials to the marble slab, and determined to make the pie
myself—but before I tell what this famous squab pie was com-
posed of I shall give my opinion of its merits by saying that though
it is possible I may make another, it is highly improbable I shall
taste it. Mr Hugh was of a different opinion, or pretended to be,
for he dined on it—and insisted on doing so. The pie is made of
layers of apples and beef steak covered with pie crust, and baked,
pepper and salt of course, but cook says I should have added an
onion.


9th February.—We all went to the stables with Mr H.
Mackay to see his new horses—“ Musselman,” “ Colonel,” and
f‘ Gustavus,” and a mule “ Jacko,” which he got from Captain
Parsons. Rode to Cati, the beach apparently good, but full of soft
patches which we call quicksands, of which I have the greatest
horror; saw an empty barrel, several trees, and a log of cedar,
which have been washed ashore during the late storms. I rode
“ Chimpanzie,” a creature that I hate.
11th February.—The steamer is still detained in Port
M’Quarie: the bar is so rough, and only 8 feet of water on it —the
steamer requires 10£.
Valentine’s Day.—But not a valentine appeared at the Lake.
However, we need not despair, as last year mine did not arrive till
April. We all rode to Blackman’s Point and found Miss Jobling
alone—she leads a most solitary life. I rode “ Dandy,” and
Mamma had “ Bolter ” —our own horses being still absent with-
out leave. I must say that however superior my neighbour’s
horses may be, I much prefer my own.
r
15th February.—We had a very early breakfast as the gentle-
men wished to start immediately on their long journey, but it was
3 o’clock before they set off, leaving us quite disconsolate—“ Who
will fill their vacant places, who will sing their songs to-night ”?
We went to the gate for a parting look. Mr Patrick led
“ Imperial,” with a great pack on its back—it looked like an
elephant with a howdah. Mr Hugh rode “ Gustavus. I do not
envy him his long journey which he expects will take at least a
fortnight.
Friday, 18th February.—There was no dew last night, which
is quite unusual when the weather is fine. • The great event of the
day was that the gardener when moving the lawn found the pea
hen sitting on five eggs. Her nest is sheltered by a branch of the
Norfolk Island pine trees. We are surprised at her laying again so
soon. The pea chicks are not yet five weeks old—they are lovely
little things, and so strong—they fly both far and high, and roost
in a tree at night which their good foster mother does not approve
of—she took to the eggs most kindly, and the whole five came out.
Now they are just beginning to shew their crests. We have just
heard that the Mary Ann has been obliged to run to Trial Bay, the
wind is so strong and the sea so rough. The cook, who is too often
in a state of oblivion, has crushed two of his fingers in attempting
to put a large log of wood on the kitchen fire. He insists in
keeping on a huge fire as if he was preparing to roast at least a
baron of beef.


20th February.—A lovely day with a north wind, the first we
have had for weeks. Gathered some figs, which are just now both
_good and plentiful. There is a beautiful pink and white lily in
flower in the garden, the first we have seen.
21st February—Where do you suppose I went first this morn-
ing? To the stable yard, but only to look at my friends there—
yesterday I was more active. Shankland (the groom) being away,
and the cook gone to visit the Churchills, I thought the poor horses
would fare badly, so went to see after them, and found that they
had not had anything to eat. I got them some of the grass the
gardener had just mowed, which they quite enjoyed. Fortunately
there was only one horse, and Mr Hugh’s mule—anyone would
have laughed at my endeavours to feed them, but not a soul was
near. I could not help thinking of the great change a few months
had brought. We then thought it quite an event to visit the
stables, and always with my uncle, and we never ventured near
the large entrance gates, but now I went in and out, looked at the
new stables, and got some corn from the old. The busy scene was
quite deserted, and no one knew I had been there. Mr Patrick
Mackay, to our surprise, arrived about sunset, having seen his
brother well started. He brought me a letter from Maria Grey,
who tells me that her little brother, who she began to teach only
a month ago, is already in words of three letters. Margaret, who
has not been very well, has had a visit from Dr M’lntyre, who has
forbidden her to take milk in any shape. He says it does not
agree with everyone in this climate, and of late we have used it
freely—in butter, cream, curds, etc. She had a most painful rash
on her right shoulder, which spread round half her body.
Friday, 3rd March, 1848. —Dear Gordy’s birthday. She to-
day enters her teens. We spent a very quiet day: very different
from this day last year when the Governor and party arrived. My
cousins mention having seen him in Sydney, and that he was look-
ing very sad.
4th March. —Mr Massie called and remained for some time,
making himself very agreeable. He amused us very much,
explaining the performance of Punch and Judy. I wonder it has
not yet been introduced in Sydney. He then told us of his visit to
Captain Jobling the last time he was down staying with Mr Gray.
It had been raining for some days. At last a bright morning
dawned to the joy of every one, especially the teller of the tale,
who proposed to Mr Gray and Mr Salway that they should all go
and dine at Gooloowa, N.B. It does not appear that they were
invited or expected—but they all agreed to go, and that it would
be most agreeable to go all the way by boat, so they got some black
boys tfho pulled them up the river—this they found very delight-
ful. They were well received by Captain Jobling, and had a very


good dinner, but alas! before they had quite finished, the clouds-
which had been gathering suddenly broke, and rain fell in torrents.
Mr Massie rose and joined Miss Jobling in the drawing-room, then
seeing no prospect of the weather clearing, returned to the dining-
room to hint that it was time to go. Mr Gray rose in a bearish
humour, not liking to be disturbed over his wine, and as no one
asked them to remain they walked down to the wharf. Their boat-
was gone: they called, they stamped, they cooe’d—but no one-
answered. At last the punt came from Blackman’s Point, and
they crossed to the other side. Of course, there were no horses:
for them there, as they had come from the settlement in a boat
There was nothing for it but a walk of four miles on a road they
had in the morning pronounced unfit to ride on—and where they
now had to wade in muddy water sometimes over their ankles—
and sighed poor Mr Massie, “ I had on a pair of smart new boots,
and my trousers strapped down.” Fortunately Mr Salway had"
provided himself with a mackintosh, and Mr Gray, indignant with
the proposer of this expedition, marched on in silence. It turned
out that the blacks had taken the boat to a sheltered place, where
they secured it, and then crept into a hollow log for further shelter
for themselves, not thinking that their services would be required'
while the rain continued.
sth March.—Poured without intermission all day. In the-
evening received letters by the Mary Ann which set at rest our
anxieties as to the arrival or non-arrival of the steamer. Our
party are still all at Brownlow Hill. For the next five days the-
rein continued more or less heavily—everything in the house feels
damp—and a smell of paint pervades the whole place. Out of
doors the birds have eaten up all the peaches, and have now
attacked the few figs left by the rain. The frocroyas are growing
so tremendously, that if they do not flower soon, they will be like
Jack’s bean stalk, and grow up out of sight. The cook has been
behaving very badly. The other day he went out after putting the
bread into the oven, which had not been properly heated, and
there he left it until it was too hard and dried up to be used; where
the people get the spirits is more than we can imagine, but one or
all of them are continually more than half intoxicated.
Friday, March 10th.—We were on the ‘ qui vive ’ the whole-
morning, each sound we heard we thought might be the carriage
arriving. The steamer had been distinctly seen rounding Tacking
Point, and while we wondered at the delay each gave a finishing
touch in their own especial department—and when all was in
readiness we found that the steamer had existed only in the
imagination of those who said they saw it —a sort of flying Dutch-
man that takes various shapes according to what they are expect-
ing. At night we had a terrific thunderstorm, wind and rain in
equal violence. It poured without ceasing for hours, and the


thunder and lightning were dreadful. None of us could sleep, and
at last Mamma and Margaret came to my room to get a candle
lighted as their matches were damp—we found that one of the
schoolroom windows had been left open and the wind having
changed the rain was blown in. This was the first flood—but
every bedroom was inundated through their fireplaces, and we
wandered about like ghosts, with basins and house cloths in our
hands drying up the water as it came in, till about 4 o’clock, when
the storm abated.
23rd March.—This is the third Thursday we have retired to
rest hoping that the next morning we should welcome home my
aunt and cousins—may the third bring its reputed good fortune.
On Wednesday, 15th, the Maitland passed here, but could not get
into port till the following Monday owing to the bar—she left again
yesterday, taking with her all Dr Fattorini’s family. The Mary
Ann, which left two days earlier, took 21 passengers, only five of
them intending to return to the district. Alas! Poor Port
M'Quarie! It is indeed a diserted village. As this was the last
trip of the Maitland it makes the time of the return of the family
more uncertain than ever, as now they can only come in a steamer
that will stop and land them (it actually was the 27th April before
they arrived).
29th March—We walked to the poultry yard and found that
the native dogs had been very troublesome and had carried off four
ducks and some fowls. Thomas, the old sailor, shewed us some
tiny ducklings.
31st March.—Made two pine apples into jelly—when peeled
they weighed 3£ lbs. each. The gardener weighed several lately,
the heaviest weighing 4 lbs. 1 oz. They are very fine and plentiful
but none of us like them. I made the jelly as we do apples, but it
never jellied properly, and is more like honey both in colour and
substance. In the evening had a delightful ride. We have been
busy tidying up Lantana Bower, but so many young plants have
sprung up they quite spoil the place, and are likely to become a
nuisance.
Ist April—Forgot the date, and so fell a victim to a wicked plot 1
Christina came out to see us and stayed till Monday, which was
fortunate for us as the horrid cook had gone off after setting bread
and never came back to bake it. So she helped us, and fried some
chops while I laid the table for dinner. After waiting in vain for
George, we found he had gone to bed! It really is too provoking,
they just do as they please, knowing the difficulty there would be
in getting others to fill their places if they were sent away.
2nd April.—Dido’s 16th Birthday.—Churchill has brought us


some sweet potatoes, the first I have ever seen. They are large
and of a round shape, which he says is because he has left them in
the ground since last season, and that generally they are smaller,
and more oval.
Monday, 10th April.—l have a tragic tale to tell of the pea
chicks and the good black hen, their foster mother, who dis-
appeared during the night. We heard the peacock making a
noise, and supposed something had disturbed him, but thought
the young birds would be quite safe, as they roosted on a tree quite
near the nursery verandah, but a native dog must have attacked
them. Some of the feathers of the hen were found near the front
gate, but no trace of the pea fowls. Those that are left are
wandering about miserably in search of their lost friends. Mr and
Mrs Purvis called, bringing their two fine little boys.
11th April.—We drove to Port M'Quarie, where Mamma
wished to see after her goods and chattels, and to make some calls.
We waited in Mrs Gloag’s room while she went to see poor Chris-
tina whose little baby has died. We called on Mrs Paterson, and
saw all the family, a large party of little creatures. Helen was at
home, and shewed us some of her drawings. From Mrs Purvis
we heard of Mr Wilson, the artist, who has been growing raison
grapes and figs at the Macleay, but unsuccessfully, in preference
to following his profession. He has now decided on establishing
himself in Sydney. Mr Purvis has had his likeness taken, and
took us to see it. The style is coloured chalks, not quite life size,
and we thought it good. Mr Wilson shewed us a bird he had got at
the Macleay and thinks it is the first of the kind that has been shot,
as they are very rare and shy. He intends to send this specimen
home to Mr Gould, the famous ornithologist. It is of a brownish
colour, with green and bronze feathers on its back and neck, has
long legs, and a very long bill rather hooked. I could not examine
it as closely as I would have liked to do. Mamma called on Mrs
Scott who has taken a house for a month for change and sea bath-
ing. A large bunch of bananas has been brought in. We have
also picked some ripe Loquats.
Friday, 21st April.—Disappointed again, but again is the hope
renewed that we shall see them all to-morrow. There was some
rain in the morning and a beautiful rainbow. Had the tale been
true that there is a pot of gold at each end of a rainbow, we might
have made our fortunes, as both ends were within the grounds
round the house. It has just struck me that in one sense it may
be true, and possibly gave rise to the saying, for the rain that
accompanies the rainbow causes the earth to produce what is
worth many pots of gold. We have received a newspaper in which
there is a letter from some one at Wellington describing the effects
of a bite from a death adder, and mentioning poor Mrs Morrissy,


whose death we had already heard of. She was servant once at
the White Rock, a soldier’s wife, and very superior woman. She
survived only three hours after she was bitten. She was walking,
after dark, from the house to the kitchen, when at the door of the
latter she trod on something which, from the sound it made they
thought was a cat; but she insisted that it was a snake, and on
searching carefully, they found that she was only too right. It is
supposed that the sting is in the tail. The wound it made was
very small, just below the ankle bone; it was sucked immediately,
and a piece cut out. She was kept moving about till, feeling a
numbness in her limbs and excessive fatigue, she begged to be
allowed to rest. Her eyelids became quite paralysed, and in three
hours after the bite she expired so gently and without pain so that
those around her could scarcely tell when she ceased to breathe.
She from the first thought she could not recover.
Sunday, 23rd April.—We got a letter from Mr Gloag telling
us that the steamer had passed in the morning, taking Major Innes
and his family on to the Clarence River. This was a blow, but we
consoled ourselves with the hope that in a few days they would all
be with us.
24th April.—Christina and her husband came out to see us.
His farming has been a failure, and he has taken a place as store-
keeper at Innes Creek.
Thursday, 27th April.—We all rose very early so as to be in
readiness to receive our travellers, but were still in our dressing-
gowns when George announced that the carriage was in sight, and
before we could go to receive them my aunt and cousins were in
the house, and after all our preparations we were taken completely
by surprise. My aunt is well, but thin; Dido is stouter. Mr
Onslow only has come with them, as he intends to return overland.
They did not dislike their voyage to the Clarence, where they were
well entertained at the Grafton Hotel.
May Day.—The grey dawn was breaking when we got up,
and, of course, we all washed our faces in the “magical May
•dew.” Already we have forgotten the last four months, and
everything seems quite as usual. We have had some delightful
rides, and after dinner, music—Margaret and I sang a duet. My
cousins saw the Misses Gore at Tivoli, and are charmed with them
and their singing. I wish I could hear Miss Isobell; every one
says she sings exquisitely. We have received a parcel containing
two handsome knitted shawls, afterwards came a letter from
Christina saying they were from her—it is really too kind and
generous of her.
Thursday, 4th May.—We all rose very early to see Mr Onslow


who started for Sydney overland. He had promised to return
and bring his family here at the end of the month, if he can get a
steamer to call at Port M'Quarie with them. My uncle thinks
this can be arranged, and if they come Miss Macleay will come
with them. I may here say that Mr Onslow did not succeed in
getting a steamer going north to call and land passengers at Port
M'Quarie, as it involved also calling for them. So they all went
back to India without our seeing any of them again.
Not long after my uncle and aunt returned from Sydney the
cook gave notice that he wished to leave. This was most unex-
pected and annoying, as he was a most capable man, and a good
cook, though of late his conduct had not been altogether satis-
factory. Edwards, the gardener, had already left, and now cornea
the reason of their departure, and an explanation of their extra-
ordinary conduct during my aunt’s absence and at other times
previously. In the wine cellar was a large cask of port wine—a
pipe I believe it was called. It had stood there for some time,
and arrangements were now being made for having the wine
bottled and laid carefully away. There was some unexplained
delay in preparing the bottles. At last all was in readiness. The
cask had been tapped some months previously, but when the brass
tap was turned it did not act. A new air hole was made in the
top of the cask, but still no wine flowed out. Then a long reed was
got, and lowered down from the new spieket; it shewed that the
cask was empty all but about 12 inches, the height at which the
brass cock had been inserted. It was quite impossible that the
cask had leaked. The question was—what then had become of
the wine. Naturally my uncle was very much annoyed. All sorts
of conjectures were started. My aunt had always kept the key of the
cellar herself locked safely in a drawer in her storeroom. During
her absence the key was left in Mr Patrick Mackay’s, who had
opened the door only once, just to see that all was right, which
apparently it was. No solution of the mystery had occurred to
anyone, when old George said “ he wondered that no one had ever
considered that there might be a way from the kitchen to the
cellar, it being directly below. On close examination this was
found to be the case. The wicked cook, trusted and well treated,
had, with the aid of the gardener been carrying on a system of
robbery for months—possibly years. They had cut a small trap
door in the wooden floor of the kitchen in a comer, which being
quite unsuspected was easily concealed. They had been equally
clever in hiding their place of entrance to the cellar which was
large and rather dark, and well filled with cases of various sizes—
many of these cases were found to be entirely empty or to contain
only empty bottles and straw. Ido not think George had assisted
the other two, but he must have had strong suspicions of their
doings, and partaken often of the stolen wine, with which they no
doubt plied him when they intended to visit the cellar. It was


thought that the cook disposed of the wine in the settlement or had
a depot somewhere; he had opportunities of taking it when he
went in his cart for wood. He had a horse and cart for his own
use, and was always very obliging in going messages to Port
M’Quarie, and bringing in wood.
Some quiet months followed. My uncle was often away.
Port M’Quarie was almost deserted. Gustavus was at school, and
our friends the Messrs Mackay had gone to the far north. The
green door (entrance from the garden to the back verandah and
back door) no longer swung merrily on its hinges, giving notice to
us in the schoolroom that Bachelor’s Hall was occupied, and as
day after day passed we used to wonder if our lives would be al-
ways so uneventful. Sometimes as we four girls sat on the hill by
the flagstaff and looked out over the wide Pacific, we built castles
in the air, and wove romances for the future, Dido’s imagination,
being always the most vivid. A change came all too soon, and al-
though nothing startling ever happened, things were never the
same to any of us again.
My mother had promised to visit her sister, Mrs Arthur
Eanken, in September, at St Clair, her new home near Singleton.
In August Aunt Barbara invited Margaret and me to stay with her
at Brownlow Hill while Uncle George was absent at his sheep
station on the Murimbidgee. We had other invitations, especially
one from Mrs Eanken at Saltran, and from my aunt that we should
join mamma at St Clair. So, quite unexpectedly it was decided that
we three should go together to Sydney in the little schooner,
Mary Ann. I little thought then that dear Lake Innes would never
he my home again. I re-visited it once only five years afterwards.
With an account of this visit, I will conclude this portion of my
Eecollections.


VISIT TO LAKE INNES IN 1853.
In November, 1853, my mother and I were living in
Parramatta: my only sister was married in August o£
that year to Mr Hugh Hamilton, and they went ofi
at once to his home in the Far West. I would have
felt very lonely, but that I was looking forward with pleasure to
being present before Christmas at the marriage of my favourite
cousin, Gordina, which was to take place from their beautiful home
at Lake Innes. I was waiting for a favourable opportunity of
going to Port M'Quarie, when we heard from my uncle, Major
Innes, who was in Sydney, that he had failed to make an arrange-
ment with the captain of a steamer passing north to land us there,
so I must make up my mind to take my passage with him in the
“ Mary Ann.” When Port M'Quarie was a flourishing
place some years previously, a steamer went regularly every week
between there and Sydney, the voyage averaging thirty hours: but
times were changed, and passengers now had to content them-
selves with a small schooner, which was a regular trader, and made
the passage sometimes in twenty-four hours, sometimes in ten to
eighteen days. The mails were conveyed overland from Raymond
Terrace once a week, and many people who could undertake long
rides and possibly a night in the bush, took the overland journey
in preference to risking themselves in an uncertain voyage. When
sufficient inducement offered a steamer passing north would some-
times stop opposite the boat harbour, and the pilot boat would
then be taken out to her for passengers. Most people contented
themselves with the “ Mary Ann,” and my mother, who had
sailed in her several times, being satisfied, I set off in high spirits
to join my uncle in Sydney. He was staying at Petits Hotel, kept
at that time by excellent people, who not long before had shown
him the greatest attention during a severe illness he unfortunately
had when staying there, so I drove up to the door with great con-
fidence. I there found my uncle and our old friend Mr Patrick
Mackay, who I had not seen for about five years; he had just
arrived from the Burnett on his way to Port M'Quarie, most
opportunely for me as it turned out, for my uncle found at the last
moment that he could not get away from Sydney, being detained
by important business, so he said Mr Mackay must take his place
in the Mary Ann, and look after me; there was no time to be lost
as the vessel had already hauled off from the wharf.
“ Obedience without reply ” being our old-fashioned motto, a
cab was at once ordered, and we drove down to the wharf in time
to see our schooner disappearing from our view. A message, how-
ever, had been left to say that she would take in passengers off


Darling Point; so away we dashed to the Government domain,
not knowing very well where to go to, and fearing to lose time by
returning to enquire. At Lady M'Quarie’s chair we secured a boat,
and were rowed off to the Mary Ann where we explained to the
captain that my uncle had been detained in Sydney, and that Mr
Mackay would take his place, a berth having previously been
secured for me. The day was most lovely. The harbour is always
beautiful, and we being amply provided with every comfort on
deck, thoroughly enjoyed the sail to the Heads. It seemed like
a dream to me to be sitting there talking of the times past, present,
and to come with one I had so little expected to meet, and who
years before we had known so well. When we lived at Lake
Innes Mr Patrick Mackay spent most of his time there, and was
quite the spoiled son of the house, though then only aspiring to
become a son-in-law. This I may tell you he did in due time be-
come, but when we took this unexpected voyage together, there
seemed some uncertainty about it; however, we were quite in-
clined to take a bright view of all things, and about four o’clock
when the captain informed us that the wind was dead against us,
and that he determined to anchor for the night in Watson’s Bay,
I was rather pleased, and suggested to Mr Mackay that we should
land at once and walk up to Tivoli, and take our friends there by
surprise. This proved a very happy thought. We were received
most warmly, and they were much amused at my presence of
mind in coming off so promptly. We dined at Tivoli, and dear
kind Captain Dumaresq himself, with others of the party,
escorted us back to the landing place. There we found the boat
in waiting, and soon got safely back to the schooner, which we
then heard might sail at any moment, as they waited only for a
change of wind, so I was glad I had not been persuaded to sleep at
Tivoli. It was a lovely night, but I was very tired and glad to rest,
and had scarcely laid my head on my pillow when I fell sound
asleep.
At daylight I was awakened by a continual knocking at the
door of my little cabin, I could not think where I was for a moment
till the sounds on deck, and a voice speaking from a boat at the
side of the ship roused and reminded me. Then came Mr Mackay’s
voice, “ Wake up, Miss Annabella, I must speak to you,” so I
jumped up and opened the door, and there he stood convulsed with
laughter, and yet looking somewhat annoyed. “ Here’s a pretty
mess,” he said. “Do you hear those men in the boat?” “Of course,
I do,” I said, “ but I have nothing to do with them.” “ I don’t
know how that may be,” was his reply, “ for it is a police boat,”
and a detective who came in it, says he must and will see you.
He is in pursuit of a runaway couple, fortunately I do not answer
the descprition of the man, but the lady is tall and fair and about
twenty-five, what do you say to that ”? I was quite frightened
and said, why does not the captain tell him who I am? Well, the


truth is the captain was obliged to own that he had never seen
you before, and that you had come on board in a boat from Lady
M'Quarie’s chair.” Now, these people whoever they are, were
traced to the domain, and a boat is known to have been in waiting
for them at Lady M’Quarie’s chair; it is altogether very awkward,
you must see the man, and answer clearly every question he asks
you. lam awfully sorrj, but don’t be frightened, as it will all
come right.” So I agreed to see the man at once, though inwardly
quaking; He was very civil, but stared at me very hard when he
was reading a description of the runaway lady, which certainly
applied to me most unpleasantly, as did also my account of my
proceedings the previous day, with what was supposed to be her
plans. However, I gave my name with perfect composure and
referred him to my uncle, Major Innes, who of course he knew,
and he, agreed to make further inquiries in Sydney and departed.
The captain immediately drew up his anchor and tacked out of the
harbour, and we never heard anything further on the subject, but
at the time it was to me a most disagreeable adventure.
Once out at sea, of course, I succumbed to my fate, but was
not very bad, and lay quite still till the following day, when the
feeling that we were approaching well-known regions roused me,
and wrapping myself in my plaid I took up my position on deck.
Mr Mackay was most kind and attentive and as interested in every
thing as I was. We passed Camden Haven, noticed the dear old
beach, and the hill at the back of the house, and finally rounded
Tacking Point, and came in sight of our destined haven while the
sun was shining brightly. The wind was fair but very light, and as
we approached the bar I could see that our captain was in some
doubt as to whether we could get into Port M’Quarie that night,
the tide being very low and still going out. After a short consulta-
tion with the mate, they agreed that we must lay to till daylight.
I could have cried with vexation, and wanted to land at once in the
boat, but allowed myself to be comforted with some tea and assur-
ances of a good night and an early landing next morning; then I
crept off to my tiny cabin, again threw on my dressing-gown and
laid myself down in the narrow but comfortable berth and fell
asleep. About midnight I was awakened by a frightful thunder
storm. The wind rose, the vessel rolled, and noise and confusion
prevailed on deck. I heard an order given to make for Trial Bay,
and my heart died within me. But the morning broke bright and
calm, and we were delighted to find ourselves in sight of our port.
Everything looked fresh and smiling, we soon recognised many
well known land marks, and by eleven o’clock had safely crossed
the bar, and were drawing up to the wharf from which I had sailed
more than five years before, little thinking then that I would be
so long away. (That alas! is long, long ago, I shall never see my
dear native land again).


Five years had not made many changes in the quiet little
township, except the one that was of chief interest to us at that
moment. The old clergyman had retired, and his successor, Mr
O'Reilly, occupied a pretty cottage quite near the church, and in
a few weeks this cottage was to be the home of my cousin, to be
present at whose marriage was the object of our journey. As there
there was no one to meet us it was evident we were not expected,
so Mr Mackay got a gig from the hotel and we drove off at once to
the Lake, a distance of seven miles, every moment bringing back
to our remembrance the many happy rides and drives we had
taken along the well remembered road. At last we came in sight
of the tall bamboos at the avenue gate. I was wild with excite-
ment, and seeing two figures in the garden jumped from the gig
and flew towards them. They were dear Gordy and Gustavus,
who had not observed us, and were more than surprised to see me,
and to hear that Mr Mackay had come also, for they had not thought
of my arriving in the Mary Ann, and knew nothing of his being in
Sydney. Dido was in the house, then as now, always on hospitable
thoughts intent, and I soon found her, and when my aunt received
me with her own warm and affectionate welcome, my happiness
was complete.
I shall not enlarge here on my delightful visit; six happy weeks
had passed—my holiday was over, and the Mary Ann in which I
was to return to Sydney was only waiting for a fair wind; as long
as the weather-cock pointed to the N.E. we knew that we were
safe, but at last it changed and I found myself again on the sea.
Mr Mackay was again my “ companion de voyage,” but there were
several other passengers, among them a pleasant girl, sister to the
” Jessy ” with whom I had travelled to Wellerowang the previous
summer. The weather was intensely hot, so we determined to
keep on deck, she giving up her cabin to her invalid brother for
whose health they had been staying at Port M'Quarie. I may
here mention that he quite recovered, and had afterwards a very
strange career.
The wind was so fair and the sea so calm that we were all quite
well, and when at midnight, after being out thirty hours, we drew
up at the wharf near Fort Street, we all declared we would like to
land at once. Miss S. had very kindly proposed that I should go
home with her, which invitation I gladly accepted. Mr Mackay
and her brother escorted us to their door. Here instead of knock-
ing or ringing the youth proceeded to push his thin fingers through
the Venetian shutters, and before long drew out the bolt and
opened the window of the dining room (not for the first time, I
fear). He then sprang nimbly in, and opened the front door for us.
At this crisis a policeman appeared on the scene, and we had to
explain to him that we had just landed at the wharf, and were
entering the house quietly for fear of alarming anyone. As the


house was the home of some of the party, and as we did not look
like burglars he very properly waited till he saw that we were well
received, and the door and window safely closed and bolted. Once
in the house we had a most cordial reception from the good mother
whose kindness to me I shall never forget. She gave us a good
supper of cakes and hot toddy, in spite of it being summer in our
country—it was the New Year with her, and it ought to be cold.
Next day being Sunday I rested with them, and went to their
church, and on Monday I bade adieu to these most kind people
and arrived safely at home in Parramatta where my dear mother
was glad to see me.


BUSHRANGERS.
Of course from time to time we heard a great deal about bush-
rangers, but I never saw one nor were we in any way troubled by
them. All our friends were not so fortunate, and I have heard my
husband speak of two occasions on which he, a most peaceable
man, had serious encounters with them. The first took place at a
station called West Lowlands, in the Dandenong District, not very
far from Melbourne, in Victoria (then known as Port Philip, and
only partially settled). I have newspapers containing an account
of this affair, and also some additional particulars written by Mr
Boswell. From these I have taken the following account:—
Early in 1842 a party of gentlemen, Dr Grimes, Messrs
Smeathman, Rumbolt, and Boswell, met at the station of Messrs
Alec and Campbell Hunter, and were by them most hospitably
entertained. They had all been recently in Melbourne, and their
conversation naturally turned on the subject of a gang of four bush-
rangers who had lately appeared in the neighbourhood, and whose
depredations were exciting much alarm and comment everywhere.
Next morning Mr Boswell was the first of the party to appear,
and found a most sumptuous breakfast prepared for them. He was
standing at the door waiting for the others when he observed some
mounted men galloping towards the hut. On their near approach
he knew at once that they were the bushrangers, and called out to
his companions, “ Here are the bushrangers.” Resistance was out
of the question as the only weapon they could command was an
old single barrelled gun, so they all stood at the door waiting the
approach of the horsemen. They galloped up to the door of the
hut, pulled up and dismounted; four of them rapidly cocked their
guns and pointing them at the inmates exclaimed, “ Bail up you
stringy-bark* settlers,” “ We suppose you know who we are?”
They then ordered the whole party and Mr C. Ryan, who they
had brought with them, to arrange themselves along the paling in
front of the hut, and one of their number, pistol in hand, set about
searching their pockets for money, but found none (their recent
visit to Melbourne had exhausted all). Williams, the captain of
bushrangers, conducted the search, and was distinguished by a cap
with red braid round its edges, he had a row of pistols crammed into
his belt, and held in his hand a splendid double barrelled gun,
and rather surprised one or two of the settlers who had gold rings
on their fingers, by whispering, “ Don’t say a word about them
* “ Stringy-bark,” Colonial slang, signifying inferior or contemptible.


things drop them on the ground.” To the demand for money all
but one replied that they had none. He, unfortynately owned five
shillings. ” Out with it,” said the robber, but search as he would
he could not find it. “ I know I had it last night.” “ Then down
on your knees and look for it.” So poor R, who was very short-
sighted had to obey the ruffian, and, eyeglass in hand, searched
on the ground for the lost coin, while every now and then a pistol
was exploded at the back of his head, which caused him to jump
up with the idea that he had been shot. The captain of the band
then took the tallest of the settlers’ party (Dr Grimes), and hold-
ing a pistol at his ear, conducted him to the back of the hut, there
he interrogated him, saying, “ I understand that you gentlemen
are travelling with a sum of money to purchase cattle, and I insist
on it being given up to me.” Dr Grimes replied, “ I can assure
that I have no money, and I do not think that any of our party
have any.” After bouncing him for a bit the robber became con-
vinced of the truth of the statement, and on Dr Grimes giving his
word of honour that he had no money on him, and did not believe
that any of his friends had, he was allowed to return to the rest of
the party.
By this time the bushrangers had discovered that breakfast
was ready, and ordered the servant to place it on the table. Then
while three of them partook of the red herrings and good roast
duck, one with a gun loaded and cocked kept guard over the cap-
tives. A short time sufficed to get the guard and the captured
settlers on good terms with each other, and observing that the
bushrangers carried some square gin bottles with them containing
spirits, negotiations were opened with them to give the settlers a
” ball ”or glass of spirits before they left. The terms of this
arrangement were being merely discussed when the captain of the
gang started up, shaded his eyes with his hand, and looking up the
road called out, “ Stand to your arms men, an armed party is
coming,” and looking up the side of the paddock they all beheld
an armed party on horseback approaching at a gallop. As the
unfortunate settlers stood between them and the men in whom
they were in pursuit, some of the former suggested that they
should be allowed to move out of their not very desirable position,
and this they were allowed to do on giving their word that they
would not take part in the coming fight. “ Off with you,” shouted
the captain, and at once a scamper was made for the nearest
shelter.
To account for the appearance of the rescuing party we must
go back to the previous evening, and to the Club House, Mel-
bourne, where a number of gentlemen were assembled discussing
the accounts that had just been brought in of the recent depreda-
tions of bushrangers who had unexpectedly appeared in the Plenty
district. Mr Powell, Commissioner of Crown Lands, and a party


of mounted police were known to be in the West Port district in
search of a gang of bushrangers. But it was doubtful if a new
gang had sprung up, or if the one they were in pursuit of had
doubled back. The question now was what could be done to check
these daring maurauders? This was soon decided by five of the
party volunteering to start without delay in pursuit of the bush-
rangers and to capture them alive or dead. The names of these
heroes were Snodgrass, Fowler, Chamberlain, Gourley, and Thom-
son. Before setting out they took the precaution of having them-
selves sworn in as special constables. They started about ten
o’clock p.m., and crossing the Merri Creek reached Heidelburg.
Then by the Yan Yan arrived about daylight at Bear’s Station,
which the bushrangers had visited the previous night and where
they were told of what had since taken place, namely, the sticking
up of the houses of Messrs Wills, Shirwin, and Roland, and that
it was supposed the bushrangers were now on their way to
Hunters. At Bear’s the settlers procured a guide and determined
to follow, and Mr Charles Ryan proposed to join the party, there
was some delay in catching his horse, and though he followed at
once at a gallop, he missed his friends. Coming on a hut he asked
of the inmates who were standing at the door if a party of gentle-
men had passed that way. Yes, the man said, they are just down
by the creek, so he hurried off in the direction indicated, but in-
stead of seeing his friends he found himself in the midst of the
bushrangers. “ Hullo young fellow,” they cried, “ Are you one
of the settlers we hear have come out to take us? We’ll soon
settle your hash, but first we’ll make you take us to Campbell
Hunter’s station, so on you go.” They made him exchange hats
with one of them, and putting him at their head galloped off at
once to Hunters. This accounts for Ryan appearing there with
them.
But to return to the rescue party. On approaching the hut
they saw some horses tied to the fence, and had no doubt they
were within hail of the bushrangers. It was at once decided they
should gallop up to the door and if possible take them by surprise
and capture the party. The bushrangers however were on the
alert, and when they reached the hut and were in the act of dis-
mounting, they found themselves confronted by four men each
presenting a double barrelled gun at them; the five made a rush,
and as they did so eight shots were fired at them, but happily none
took effect. The robbers then tried to re-enter the hut, and three
of them succeeded in securing shelter there. Williams, the captain,
made for an adjoining store. He was pursued by Mr Gourley, at
whom he fired a pistol at such close quarters that the powder
scorched his face. Gourley then knocked him down and they had
a hand to hand struggle. Williams again fired, but the bullet was
turned by a powder flask carried by Gourley. Mr Snodgrass then
came to his friend’s assistance, followed by another of the party,
who fired at and killed the bushranger. During all this time brisk


firing has been going on between the three men who had secured
themselves in the hut and the party outside, but without fatal
results. Mr Fowler was hit twice, and Mr Chamberlain slightly
wounded.
Meantime tales had reached Melbourne of the latest depre-
dations of the bushrangers and great excitement prevailed,
and anxiety as to the fate of the five brave volunteers who had
started off the night before to attempt their capture. At midday
another party started to follow and support them, and later on
various others started in pursuit, so it was that about three o’clock
the first of these parties arrived at Hunter’s station. The bush-
rangers then saw that it was useless to resist any longer, and others
appearing with some policemen they gave themselves up, and were
taken under a strong escort to Melbourne Jail. Mr Fowler was
conveyed to the house of a friend, and attended by a good doctor,
and there he was carefully nursed and eventually recovered from
his wounds.
Of the four bushrangers, the leader of the gang had been shot,
and the verdict returned at the Coroner’s inquest was justifiable
homicide. The other three were tried in Melbourne early in May
and condemned to death, which sentence was carried out in June.
They were the first in that colony to suffer that terrible doom. Sad
to say they were all fine young men, well able to earn an honest
living had they been willing to do so. They had met in Melbourne
quite accidentally, and while loitering about there hoping that some-
thing to suit them might turn up, they fell under the influence of a
bad man, a receiver of stolen goods, who encouraged them to start
on a career of bushranging by offering to receive and dispose of
their plunder, and to shelter them at any time should they be
pursued or suspected. For a short time all their plans seemed to
prosper, but the bitter end soon came to the robbers, while the
receiver was also apprehended, and his house searched, with the
result that a quantity of watches, jewellery, and other stolen
property was discovered, and the man condemned to 14 years trans-
portation to a penal colony.
The settlers who were instrumental in the capture of these
men were publicly thanked at the trial by the judge, and were
enthusiastically entertained by their friends at a public dinner,
where a letter was read from the Governor of New South Wales
thanking them for their gallant conduct. So ended the first bush-
ranging episode in the colony known as Victoria.
Mr Boswell’s next meeting with bushrangers took place about
two years afterwards at Glen Logan, Lachlan River, N.S.W., then
the- residence of Mr Arthur Ranken. Dr Tenant, my uncle,
Charles Campbell, and he, were staying there at the time. They


were all in the sittingroom about nine o’clock in the evening, when
suddenly an armed man appeared on the verandah, who stepped
up at once to the open French window, pointed a gun at the
assembled party, and called, “ Don’t move or I shoot.” Of course
some one started up, the gun went off, the lamp went out from the
concussion, and my uncle Charles fell exclaiming “ I am shot.”
Before anyone could move, a door was opened from an inner room,
and Mr Ranken appeared. Fortunately he had a lighted candle
in his hand. He was amazed to find what had occurred, for he had
left the room only a few minutes before to bathe his eyes, as he
was suffering from blight. They at once raised Uncle Charles,
and the doctor found that he was wounded in the side, but not
seriously. He was assisted to bed and a slug speedily extracted
from the wound. Fortunately he soon recovered satisfactorily.
Nothing more was heard that night of the bushrangers; they had
attempted to break into the store, but were alarmed at the report
of the gun, and the arrival of their own comrade who had been left
to keep guard in the house, who said he feared he had shot one of
the gentlemen, on which they all mounted their horses and
galloped away off without delay.
The same men, known as Scotchie’s Gang, soon after “ stuck
up ” and robbed the station of a small settler who lived not very
far from Glen Logan in a well settled district. This gentleman
was alone when the bushrangers appeared. He had been busy
plaiting a rope of horse hair of which he was very proud, boasting
often of its length and strength. This rope the bushrangers at
once took possession of, and bound him firmly into his chair, and
to the table, after gagging him—as they feared he might give the
alarm to his servants. They then proceeded to rob the house and
store, and he heard them gallop off with their booty. They had
left the lamp burning on the table before him. At first this
cheered him, but as the night wore on it became a source of great
alarm. It was a fat lamp of the most primitive kind, namely, a
tin can filled with fat in which a thick cotton wick was fastened.
This wick began to smoke, the fat was nearly exhausted, and the
danger was that the bottom would come out of the can and the
table take fire, perhaps set his chair and then the hut on fire while
he was perfectly helpless. At length the day dawned, his servant
managed to get the door opened, others appeared, and he was soon
released from his painful position. The precious rope was unin-
jured, but he never again boasted of its length and strength. Soon
after this “ Scotchie’s Gang ” was captured and lodged in Bath-
hurst Jail. The leader expressed a wish to see Mr Ranken, and
on Uncle Arthur going to see him, said he was extremely sorry
when he heard that Mr Campbell had been wounded, as the gun
had gone off entirely by accident. He added—“ We would not have
stuck up Glen Logan, but at the time we were very hard pressed
for provisions.”


About this time a rather amusing story was circulated of the
sticking up ” of a gentleman who was known as a great dandy,
and always dressed in the latest fashion. He was riding alone on
a not unfrequented road, when three men appeared who ordered
him to dismount. One took his horse, and the others demanded
his clothes, and insisted on his taking them off at once, everything
but a fine flannel vest which he was thankful to be allowed to keep.
After much entreaty, they gave him a newspaper which he
happened to have in his coat pocket: and thus thinly clad and bare-
footed, he was obliged to walk to the nearest house.


THE GREAT FLOOD
OF THE
LACHLAN RIVER IN OCTOBER, 1844.
THE following description of the great flood of the River Lachlan
I /
in-J-884 was written by Mr P. C. Boswell soon after it took
place. Mr Boswell was then a squatter on the Lachlan, and happened
at the time to be staying at Glen Logan, the hospitable home of his
friend and neighbour, Mr Arthur Ranken.
To account for the number of young children, I may explain that
Mrs Ranken had five little boys, the eldest only six years old. Her
niece, Miss Macleod, who was paying her a visit, had brought with her
a brother aged seven; he was the oldest of the party of 13. Mrs
Hood, the overseer’s wife, had five, and a servant two.
As soon as possible some of the party, who had taken refuge at
Mr Sloan’s, returned to Glen Logan and began at once to dig the mud
out of the house. In it they found books, crockery, boots and shoes,
children’s clothing, and anything that had been within the reach of
the water. These things were spread out of doors and soon dried
in the hot sun, but most of them we*e quite useless.




During the winter of 1844 there had been a great fall of rain,
more especially in the months of July, August, September, and
October. The creeks and rivers were all full, and many of them were
flooded. About the first week in October the rain set in more heavily
than previously, and all the creeks and rivers became flooded to a
height seldom before seen. The week from the 7th to the 14 th of
October was one continued fall of rain, but the night of the 13 th ex-
ceeded anything that had heretofore been known; from sundown to
snnrise it was one incessant fall, as heavy as the generality of thunder-
storms. The river Lachlan, at Warrick, the place where I witnessed
the flood, has its bed enclosed by banks varying from twenty to fifty
feet in height ; it is in general a very sluggish, slow flowing river, and
during the summer ceases altogether to run. During this winter it
had been frequently flooded, which was the term used when it was im-
possible to cross it on horseback without swimming your horse.
On the night of the 13th it wanted twenty feet of the brink of the
hank, but as that was considerably lower than it had been in a flood
three years previously no alarm was entertained of it overflowing its
banks, and we kept watching it the greater part of the day, admiring
it as an imposing sight, without any fear that it would eventually be
necessary for us to consult our safety by flight to the higher ground.
The morning of the 14 th set in beautiful and clear, scarce a cloud to
be seen in the sky. After the terrible night’s rain the bright sunshine
was most agreeable. The river had risen during the night, but not so
much as we expected. This might be accounted for by the circum-
stance of the opposite bank being a good deal lower than the one on
our side of the river, and having the water spread prevented it rising
in height. It, however, continued to rise, and about nine o’clock it
wanted only three or four feet of the top of the bank. From the rain
having ceased, and the fineness of the morning, we still thought the
water would begin to subside before it rose sufficiently to overflow its
hanks, and that there would be no necessity for us to abandon the
house, which was situated within a few yards of the river’s bank.
.Nothing could be more magnificent and imposing than the appearance
The Great Flood of the Lachlan River in
October, 1844.


of the river at this time; it extended in one solid sheet of water more
than a hundred feet in breadth, roaring and tearing along in its career
as it found its way among the trees that lined the banks, and bearing
with it the wreckage of innumerable trees, logs, etc.
Towards ten o’clock a message arrived from the nearest station,
about half a mile higher up, with the information that the river there
had overflowed its banks, and that the hut was some depth under
water, and asking us to give what assistance we could. We accord-
ingly proceeded up, but on approaching the hut found such a strong
stream rushing past it as to prevent the possibility of our reaching it.
We, however, had the gratification of seeing the inmates in full flight
beyond the reach of the water, taking with them in a cart such of their
property as it was possible to remove. As we proceeded along the
plains we observed a large pool of water in the middle of them, which
we imagined had been left there by the previous night’s rain. On our
return we noticed that it was rapidly increasing in size, which at once
convinced us that it was the overflow of the river, and as the direction
this stream was taking was immediately in front of our house and
would, if it went on, cut off our retreat from the high land, we made
haste back again. On reaching the house we found the river still a
foot from the top of the bank, but all the people had begun to feel
alarmed, so it was resolved we should retreat at once towards the high
land, previous to proceeding to Mr J. Sloan’s, which was situated upon
a point of high land that ran into the river below this. Our arrange-
ments accordingly commenced, and the female part of the establishment
were ordered to make ready to leave the house. As all the horses
belonging to the place had gone over to the other side of the river a
few days before it became impassable, it was necessary to procure one
elsewhere, and I started to Mr Sloan’s for that purpose. Meantime a
light cart was got out, and what blankets and other things thought
necessary were put into it. Much, however, was not taken, as we
expected to find a sufficient supply at North Logan. The cart was
then drawn out by the three men of the party to the ridge, a distance
of about a quarter of a mile. This was easily accomplished, as the
load was not heavy. The women and children followed in two detach-
ments, but so rapidly was the water rising from the overflow, or back
water coming from the front of the house, that though the first party
reached the ridge dry, the second had to wade almost up to their
knees. After they had got to a place of srfety, the men returned to


the house to bring more blankets and provisions, as well as to pile up
on beds, tables, etc., what might be damaged by water should it enter
the house. Towards three o’clock I returned with the horse which I
had borrowed. By this time it had again commenced to rain heavily,
and a more miserable spectacle than the whole party presented could
not well have been seen. There were thirteen children, the eldest not
seven years old, five women, two of them ladies little accustomed to
such rough usage, and four men. They had erected two temporary
tents by throwing a couple of blankets over a pole. In one of these
were women and children wet to the skin, without a change of
clothing either wet or dry, and shivering at every blast of wind. The
other tent contained the blankets, provisions, etc.
No time was lost after my arrival, and the horse being yoked to
the cart we at once made et start. All who could walk were obliged to
do so, so there were only in the cart Mrs Rankin, Mrs Hood, and the
infants, and even of these, I may say that all who could even crawl
were obliged to get out, for the ground had become so soft as to cause
the draft on the horse to be exceedingly heavy, added to which the
horse was one of the most provoking jibbers I ever saw, and whenever
the weight became a little severe it stopped at once, and all the
whipping and coaxing in the world would not cause it to move till it
thought proper, so it was only by fits and starts that we progressed on
our weary journey.
On passing the lower plains we perceived that the water had made
a complete circuit, so that only a portion of the centre of the plain was
dry, and on it were assembled about a hundred horses and a hundred
and fifty cattle, a portion of them enclosed in a paddock, and all in a
considerable state of alarm, as their restlessly moving backwards and
forward and lowing indicated, as the water increased upon them. I
rode through the water to them, it was still fordable though rapidly
increasing, and pulled out a post of the fence thinking they would of
themselves find their way out, but instead of that they seemed to have
a perfect horror of the water, and though the distance
and the dry land was at first only trifling, they gradually retreated
before the flood, so that their situation became most perilous. I
endeavoured to drive them to the dry land, but in this I should not
have succeeded had not P. and T. come to my aid, and it was not till
fter many unsuccessful attempts that we succeeded in driving nearly


all the horses to the dry land. As for the cattle, we could make no
hand of them, and by this time the water had so increased as to make
it a matter of safety for ourselves to regain the road. Having accom-
plished this, we made for the rest of the party, when another difficulty
awaited us. The driver of the cart had slightly mistaken the way, and
getting into soft ground the cart and horse were bogged, the former up
to the axle, the latter to the girths. After unfastening all the harness
we managed to make the horse struggle out on to firm ground, and by
dint of sheer strength we pulled the cart out and finally got it on to
the beaten road, which for about two miles further we were able to
keep, and so continued to get on a little better than we had been
doing; but our mishaps had occupied a good deal of time, and the
shades of night were now quickly advancing. About a mile from Mr
Sloan’s we had to abandon the cart. The road there crossed a slight
bit of creek usually considered of no account, but now so flooded as to
present a formidable obstacle. To attempt to take the cart off the
beaten road was now out of the question, the road had become so soft
that a horse could barely struggle through it alone, much less with a
cart or dray, or with any weight however light after him, so we packed
all the contents of the cart on the backs of our two led horses,
greatly to our satisfaction at this time a number of Mr Sloan’s men
came up most humanely to our assistance, though they could have had
but little idea of our great distress, and it was certainly most gratifying
that they had so much consideration as to venture out in the rain to
our assistance. At last, about an hour after dark we reached North
Logan. Unfortunately, neither Mr Sloan nor his wife were at home,
but on the plea of our distress we took possession of his house, nor were
we the only ones who were there driven from their houses by the
floods, for all within reach had to betake themselves to the same
shelter, so that there were fifty people dependant on Mr Sloan’s hospi-
tality. By those who had arrived before us we were most kindly
received, and as none of us had any dry change of clothes they at once
tendered to us whatever it was in their power to give.
Having partaken of some food and made as equitable an arrange-
ment df blankets and sleeping apartments as our situation admitted,
we were glad to take ourselves to rest after the fatigues and anxie-
ties of the day. Before doing so we were thankful to find that the
rain had cleared off and the water gradually subsiding, but at day-
light next morning it again commenced to rain, and continued the


whole day, The flood was still slowly subsiding, but from the quantity
of rain falling we could anticipate nothing else but that it must again
rise, and before night it had risen again all it had fallen the previous
day. All this day we found it quite impossible to leave the house.
The state of the weather altogether prevented the possibility of our do-
ing anything about the house or stock, and we were fain to content
ourselves with our own reflections, which - were none of the most agree-
able, especially as some of us had stock and stations lower down the
river, and knew that besides other creeks and tributaries, the Blubula,
nearly as large as the Lachlan, emptied itself into that river a few miles
below where we were, added to which the ground in the neighbourhood
of the river was so flat that not a hill was to be reached within a distance
of many miles.
No circumstance of any moment occurred that day, except a report
that a cooey had been heard several times from the opposite side, but
we had no means of rendering any assistance, however willing we were
to do so. Next morning, the 16th, the rain and clouds had
disappeared, and the sun shining brightly gave a lively and ex-
hilarating appearance to everything, and had a corresponding effect
upon our spirits, though the flood was still gradually increas-
ing. As early as possible we were up and had breakfast. Mr
Mr Rankin, Hood, and myself started for Warrick ; as we rode along
we saw the melancholy effects of this destructive visitation, in the
quantities of fencing washed away, laid flat on the ground, and covered
with drift and wreck. All the flat or alluvial land was covered with
water, and not a living thing to be seen unless a few cockatoes and
other birds which flew screeching past us perfectly bewildered at such
a novel sight. At length we reached the plain which was one sheet of
water, forming a lake a couple of miles in each direction. This being
a great rendezvous for stock, and usually covered with numbers of
cattle and horses, affords a gay and lively sight, so that the contrast
now was very great, and presented a melancholy scene of desolation.
As we proceeded we heard first the lowing of cattle, and then saw those
we had left the morning of our flight standing in the water. They had
obtained footing about the middle of the plain, where they had stood
the two previous nights and days, and were now lowing most piteously,
being answered from the dry land by some of their more fortunate
■companions. The water seemed to be nearly up to their bellies, but
far from making any attempt to regain the shore it was only occa-
sionally we could perceive any movement on their part.


Conceiving that by wading our horses, and perhaps swimming a
little, we might reach them and drive them to the shore, we stripped
and endeavoured to do so, but though the horses used were occasion-
ally accustomed to swim the river, and were counted good swimmers,
they would not face the sea of water before us, and as soon as they got
out of their depth refused to obey the rein, and finally rolled over, dis-
mounting their riders. We had therefore to abandon that attempt.
Next we collected all the cattle we could find, and, driving them
backwards and forwards along the margin of the water, tried to allure
the others to come ashore, but though they answered their lowing they
seemed so completely paralized with fear as not to make a single
attempt, though by this time they must have been over thirty hours
without food. All this while the water was steadily increasing.
Finding all our efforts useless we desisted, and went a little further
on to have a view of the house. We found that it was completely
surrounded by water, as far as we could judge over three feet deep
within it, so we had hopes that the things that we had piled up were
still in safety. Returning again to the cattle, we reached the place
opposite to them just as the water had risen so high that they were
swept away. At first they seemed quite bewildered, and swam round
the spot trying to regain their footing. We instantly collected what
cattle we could in the hope that they would see them and make for
them. For some time they appeared not to notice them, hut at last a
large bullock with good high horns started off in the wished-for
direction, followed by all the rest. Onward they came, their heads
and horns only being visible above the water. In this order they
gradually neared us in a compact body and lowing most lustily as they
came. The first part of their swim was clear of trees, but as they
neared the dry land they had to pass for a short distance through
among them. Many got foul of them for a little, but eventually all
contrived to struggle ashore except three, who took a different direction,
and when about half way across either got exhausted or bewildered
and sank. A number of cattle swimming presents to me always a most
lively and exhilarating appearance, but if I had on former occasions
admired the sight I was on this occasion much more gratified, after
concluding that they must all perish when swept away from the place
where they had footing. The distance they swam might be from a
quarter to half a mile. Afterwards, when the water dried up, I went
to the spot and was astonished that the cattle had never made the


attempt to reach the ridge land, the distance to the eye appearing
scarce a stone-throw.
Having found we could do nothing further that day, we returned
to North Logan. The waters still continued to rise, but as the whole
day had been dry we hoped that the flood would soon reach its highest
point and begin to subside. The next day the water had fallen con-
siderably, but we judged it must be still too high to allow of us
reaching the houses at Glen Logan. After breakfast, having nothing
better to employ myself, I sauntered up the road towards Glen Logan
to view the scene of havoc made by the flood. Wherever the water
had left the land a deep coating of mud remained, in many places
completely covering any grass which before was very long and rank.
In other places the grass was laid flat and saturated with mud,
altogether giving a dull and dismal appearance to the plains. Immense
quantities of drift drywood and logs lay heaped against many of the
trees, and occasionally a huge dead tree might be seen suspended from
a branch of another tree at a considerable height from the ground.
On nearing Glen Logan I met a man on horseback coming in the
direction from the house. He informed me that by swimming and
wading he had contrived to reach the house. I therefore resolved to
make an attempt. I stripped off all my clothes, stowed my shirt in
my hat, tied my neckcloth with my knife round my waist so that
I should be at perfect freedom if I had far to swim. I then selected a
good long stick with which I might grope before me, so as to avoid
breaking my shins over fallen timber; thus equipped I started. After
wading nearly half a mile, where at its deepest the water did not
reach above my waist, I gained dry land, and found that it was dry
all the rest of the way to the house. On reaching the house a scene
of desolation and destruction presented itself which I had little
anticipated. The first thing I saw was the end of the kitchen fallen
down and all the bricks lying in a heap. With difficulty I forced the
dining-room door open. The floor was covered about a foot deep with
mud, in which was strewed all the books that were in the room; the
table was upside down, the sofa on one side, the sideboard had parted
company with its legs, the upper part having floated away as far as it
could, leaving each in a separate corner; chairs topsy-turvy filled up
the rest of the motley mass, presenting altogether about as ludicrous
an idea of destruction as could well be conceived. The bedrooms and
other apartments had all fared as badly, and not a mattress in the
house but was saturated with water and mud.


On afterwards measuring the height to which the water had risen
we found it to be four feet ten inches, so that almost nothing was saved ;
had the water reached only three feet the greater part of the things in
the house would have been above its reach, but it just rose high enough
to destroy everything. It was not the water alone which had done the
damage, but such immense quantities of mud and sand was floated in
along with it that not a single thing remained untouched, even in a
chest of linen, the very centre pieces were in many places coated with
mud. The smell from the mud was most disagreeable, and even
after many months it was very perceptible. On my first arrival at the
house I did not perceive a living creature but very soon a tame
cockatoe came skimming past screaming a welcome, but he looked
wretched and dejected as if he had come through a good deal. A few
fowls that had flown into the trees and so saved themselves afterwards;
appeared. Finally half a dozen geese came strutting into the garden,
wondering no doubt how they were allowed to go about so quietly on
forbidden ground. A dog and a cat afterwards came to light, but the
poor pig had been swept away into oblivion. After a few days the
house was put into some kind of order, but many things in it were
completely destroyed. Wherever glue had been used it was melted and
the things useless, and the veneered furnitnre was either blistered or
broken off.
By this time communication to the different stations was again
opened up. At all of them various perils had been encountered, Grant’s
station opposite North Logan had fared the worst ; eleven hundred sheep
were swept away, and the inhabitants, three in number, were obliged
to take refuge in trees, where they remained four nights and three days,
and were at last rescued by the blacks, who took them off in bark canoes.
A soon as the water had fallen sufficiently to allow of our crossing
the river, Hamilton, Thornhy, and I were carried over by some blacks
who had come to the place. We took our saddles with us and contrived
to catch a horse each, on which we started down the river. We found
considerable difficulty in travelling where the flood had reached, as a
thick coating of mud remained, varying from one to two feet in depth,
and which made the labour to the horses very severe. In some places
we had to dismount and lead our horses, forcing them to plunge through
the mud as best they could. We found it impossible to follow the
regular road, so had to take a circuitous route. We met only a few


people; many of them had their dangers to recount. From no one
could we get any information regarding our own stations, but from
what they had themselves witnessed they could give us little cause for
hope, and we could anticipate nothing but that most of the people,
especially where there were women and children, had been drowned,
whilst with regard to the stock we dared not not even hazard an
opinion. On the second day we reached Tomanbil, H. Hamilton’s
station, where we were overjoyed to find all the people alive and every-
thing comparatively safe. The men had considerable difficulty in
saving themselves. In endeavouring to escape to a neighbouring hill,
or rather hillock, the dray and bullocks got swept away, and were
carried about three or four hundred yards before they again grounded.
One of the men could swim, the other could not. They endeavoured
to unyoke the bullocks, hut could not do so; they then lashed them
till they broke their yokes. All, except a very quiet bullock, which
could not be got free, escaped, the poor animal remaining with its
head above water for some time, only eventually to sink from fatigue and
was drowned. The man who could swim, becoming alarmed at his
situation, sprang off the dray, leaving his unfortunate companion.
By swimming and relieving himself by resting on trees as he reached
them, he at last gained the roof of his own hut, where he remained till
the water subsided. As for the other unfortuuate man, he remained
standing on the dray for three nights and three days. He had the
greatest difficulty in remaining there, though he lashed himself to the
side with his stock whip, the only means he could command. Once it
broke and he was carried away. Fortunately he contrived to seize
hold of a tree, which, being a good deal bent to one side, he was able
to climb, and there remained till he was rescued; he suffered greatly
from the sun and from hunger, and his feet were so swollen that he
could not walk for many weeks afterwards.
We were overjoyed to find here that the height the water had
reached was insignificant compared to Glen Logan. Where the ground
was level about 2| feet was the utmost extent. The cause of this was
the great flatness of the country, which allowed the water at once to
spread without meeting with any impediment.
At Glen Logan the higher land rose to a height of 20 or 30 feet ;
about half a mile from the river. This of course confined the flood, but
lower down the river there was no land higher than the top of the river


banks, except a few small sand hillocks, so the flood meeting no impedi-
ment stretched away at once a distance of 10 or 15 miles, and con-
sequently never reached a very great height. To this cause we were
indebted for the preservation of all the lives, as well as nearly all the
stock.
Shortly after I reached my own station where I found that I had
been more fortunate than most of my neighbours, as besides all the
people being safe, they had piled up all my stores, so that the water
touched pothing. The people on the station, consisting of two men,
one woman, and three children, had taken refuge on one of those sand
hills about half a mile from the hut. They were there six days, and
had consumed all their provisions, and had resolved to kill a horse they
had with them when they observed the water beginning to subside,
and they were shortly afterwards able to get fresh supplies.
The loss of life during this flood was providentially small, three or
four men at the outside, and strange to remark most of those lost their
lives in endeavouring to escape. One man was swimming his horse
over the creek, the horse rolled over, and he being unable td swim
could not regain the land; another abandoning his horse got into a deep
place and there was drowned.
The loss of stock was exceedingly small. The greatest was the
eleven hundred sheep, before mentioned, of Mr Grant’s. On the
Lachlan River there must be ten thousand to twenty thousand head of
cattle, and I am sure I go to the outside mark when I name one
hundred as the loss, and of those the most part were old cows and
calves. I afterwards saw some horses that had stood for some time in
the water. The whole skin was peeled off their legs as if they had been
scalded. Several of them died from the effects, and the others were
totally useless.
When we consider that the water in many places extended to a
distance of ten miles on each side of the river, making a sheet twenty
miles in breadth, we have to be thankful to Providence that the loss
has been so small. When I saw the flood at its height at Glen Logan
I certainly thought that few lives could be saved, and that all the
stock must inevitably perish.
