

Some Problems of
Northern
Australia.
The Right Rev. GILBERT WHITE, M.A.,
Lord Bishop of Carpentaria.
Being a Paper Read before the Victorian Branch of the
ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY OF AUSTRALASIA,
13th September, 1907.
/Ifcelbounic:
Printed by Urquhart & Nichoeson, 192 Little Collins Street.




Some Problems of Northern Australia.
By The Right rev. Gilbert White, M.A.,
Lord Bishop ok Carpentaria.
Read before the Victorian Branch oj the Royal Geographical Society of
Australasia , 13th September , 1007.
Let me preface my remarks by saying that I do not profess
to speak in any way as an expert. My sole qualification for
addressing an audience on the subject of Northern Australia
lies in the fact that I have resided in the far north for
twenty-two years, and that during that period I have been
a very constant traveller, and am acquainted with all parts
of Northern Queensland and the Northern Territory, except
the north-western corner of the latter. My only excuse for
giving my opinion lies in the fact that, while an expert speaks,
of course, with infinitely greater authority in his special sub-
ject, it is not possible for any one man to be an expert on all
the many subjects that are involved when we speak of the
problems of Northern Australia, and, therefore, the opinions
of an ordinary man of average intelligence and powers of ob-
servation may possibly be some little value, in so far as he
is able to speak of the conditions of the north as a whole,
and without the preponderating factor of his own particular
subject of study.
I plead guilty indeed to a strong feeling on the subject of
our past and present relations to the aboriginal inhabitants;
but I shall try not to let this warp my judgment, and with this
exception, I do not know that I have any axe to grind, or the
desire to serve any end but the increase of knowledge, and
the welfare of my adopted country, for 1 had the misfortune
to be born, not in this, but in another distant colony of our
great Empire.
I propose to speak, first, of some geographical features of
the far north; then of the question as to whether the white
man can permanently live there; then of the conditions of


labour and industry; then as to the aboriginal inhabitants,
and their place in the Commonwealth; and, finally, as to the
problems of defence and communication.
I must begin by defining my terms, and say what I under-
stand by Northern Australia. Any definition must be more
or less arbitrary, and I propose, on this occasion, to take the
20th parallel of latitude, passing through Bowen and Charters
Towers, in Queensland, through the Murchison Ranges, in
Central Australia, and between Broome, to the north, and Roe-
burne, on the south, in Western Australia. I have selected
this line because it has always seemed to me that the climate
becomes markedly cooler as soon as Bowen is reached in
travelling southward; at any rate, the cool season is much
more strongly marked there than it is further north. This
division would make Northern Australia consist roughly of
an area about 1600 miles from east to west, and 550 miles from
north to south, from which must be deducted a space nearly
400 miles square for the Gulf of Carpentaria, and another area
of about the same size for the rounding of the corners. Per-
haps we shall not be far out if we say that Northern Aus-
tralia in this sense comprises about half a million square
miles.
I am not competent to speak of the West Australian portion,
but I understand that it is very similar to the South Australian
portion.
The first and most salient characteristic of Northern Aus-
tralia is that, while the rainfall is large, increasing in volume
as we go north, it nearly all falls between the Ist of January
and the 31st of March, the rest of the year being for practical
purposes rainless. The rain comes with the N.W. monsoon,
and ceases with the setting in of the S.E. In the Queensland
division the coastal rains, from the Herbert River to Cook-
town, are torrential, from 16 to 20 inches, and more, in 24 hours
being by no means unheard of. On the great plains which
border the western and southern sides of the Gulf, the rains
are less heavy, but so constant that a drought of such a charac-
ter as to affect the pastoral industry in these regions has, I
believe, never been known.
In the central and western division the rainfall is less, and
severe droughts have been experienced in the interior when
the wet season has been early and light. Thus, Lake Woods
is at one time a vast sheet of water twenty miles across, and
in other years a great plain of burning grass.


I should like, in this connection, to direct attention to a
book written many years ago by Canon Tristram on the Land
of Moab. He shows that the country on the east of the Dead
Sea, which is now an arid waste without grass or habitation,
and intersected by dry watercourses, was once filled with a
very dense population, which grew their own food on the spot.
The rainfall was apparently the same then as now—namely,
a tremendous downpour at one time in the year —but it was
so utilised by a system of dams that it lasted all the year
round. The whole conditions were most strikingly like those
of Northern Australia, and the methods adopted and causes
which led to the present condition of the country are well
worth a close study.
A few words as to the character of the country. Along
the eastern coast of Queensland runs a coastal range averag-
ing from 1000 to 2000 feet in height, but rising in places to
from 3000 to 4000 feet. In places this range approaches to
within a few yards of the sea; in other places, especially where
rivers make their way through, there are very rich lands be-
tween the foot of the range and the coast. In many cases
such lands, the ranges themselves, and often a certain area
of the tableland behind them, are covered with dense tropi-
cal jungle containing large and valuable timber. A consider-
able quantity of this land has been cleared and utilised for
sugar, and above the range for maize; but some comparatively
small areas below the range, and some very large areas above
the range, are still untouched. The mountainous tableland ex-
tends inland for about 100 miles, and in it are situated the
great mineral fields of Charters Towers, Ravenswood, Herber-
ton, Chillagoe, Georgetown, Maytown, and Ebagoolah. Ex-
cept at Charters Towers and Ravenswood, none of the mines
have gone down any depth, and a great future appears to lie
before mining in the north.
To the west of the mountains a vast alluvial plain, inter-
sected by the Mitchell, Gilbert, and Flinders Rivers, stretches
down to the waters of the Gulf. Most of it is good cattle coun-
try, but much of it has been inadequately utilised, because
squatters have been allowed to take up small blocks of coun-
try surrounding the best waterholes, leaving the intervening
country useless, whereas with a juster division the same water-
hole would serve for two, or even for four, blocks of country.
Much of the land is suitable for agriculture; but little has been
done, because, owing to the long, dry seasons, the land must


be irrigated if it is to be of much use. White men will not,
like the Chinese, consent to the long hours of labour neces-
sary to do this by hand, or even by horse power, and most of
the selectors are not in a position to afford machinery.
Along the eastern side of the Northern Territory, adjoin-
ing the Queensland border, is a block of some 50,000 square
miles of tableland, good pastoral country running out into poor
desolate country as it approaches the overland telegraph line
on the'west. On the north-west there is fine, rich land and
splendid cattle country on the Victoria and Daly Rivers,
bounded on the east by the rugged ranges of the mineral
country about Pine Creek. Along the northern coast the
country is swampy and well watered, and should grow rice in
abundance; but the north-east corner, or Arnhem Land, is
barren and covered with low, dense scrub, A large English
company, the Arafura Co., lately made an attempt to stock
the country, but soon gave it up in despair, and are now en-
gaged in removing the remnants of the cattle.
Of the West Australian portion I am not qualified to speak,
but it does not differ much from the Northern Territory, save
that the proportion of good land is, I believe, smaller.
The general aspect of Northern Australia from the sea is
singularly barren and uninteresting. Usually it consists either
of a fringe of mangroves or of a sandy beach, backed by low
trees or sand dunes. Fresh water, curiously enough, is often to
be found a few feet from the surface of the sand, just above
high-water mark. You may sail for 100 miles along a coast with
which you are well acquainted without seeing a single mark by
which you can identify your position. The eastern coast of
Queensland, as far as Cape Melville, is, however, a striking
exception. Lofty ranges rise in many parts almost from the
water’s edge, and the scenery in the Hinchinbrook passage,
and near Cairns and Port Douglas, is perhaps unsurpassed of
its kind in any part of the world.
Thursday Island, again, is exquisitely beautiful. The nume-
rous islands of all shapes, sizes, and varieties of vegetation,
the extraordinary colouring of the water, the waving palms,
the strange beauty of the coral reefs, where the scarlet and
orange parrot fish flit like birds through waving forests of
giant seaweed, combine to form a picture whose charm those
who have not seen it can scarcely realise.
Again, the tropical jungles, which are chiefly confined to
the coast, near Geraldton, Cairns, Port Douglas, and the Dain-


tree, with their huge trees laced together by creepers, their
great blue butterflies and strange mantides, their shady re-
cesses, cool in the height of summer, and their bubbling
streams, form a storehouse for the naturalist and artist, as
well as for the timber-getter and the selector.
The first of the problems of Northern Australia that con-
fronts us is this, Can the white man live and work in the far
north, and can he bring up there children who are healthy,
and fit to become parents in their turn? Of course, the'ques-
tion is in many ways one for medical experts; but, still, the
opinion of an ordinary observer may not be without value.
First, perhaps, I may be permitted to give my own personal
experience. I have lived for twenty-two years in Charters
Towers, Townsville, Ingham, Herberton, and Thursday Is-
land, have travelled over all parts of Northern Queensland
and much of the Northern Territory, and have slept out in the
open in all sorts of swampy and presumably malarious dis-
tricts. I have never had fever, have always enjoyed excellent
health, and believe that I am physically stronger and better
than I was when I came to the north in 1885.
I believe that the same is true of thousands of other men.
I have frequently worked all day in the open air with a tem-
perature of considerably over 100 deg. in the shade, and felt
no ill effects.
Of course, a sharp distinction must be drawn between the
high uplands, where the climate in winter is often cold and
bracing—at any rate, at night—and the low-lying coastal
lands; but, speaking generally, and including all the low lands,
I think that there are no places in the north where a man can-
not retain fair health and do a fair, if not vigorous, day’s work
if he has good food, and abstains from heating and intoxicant
drinks. Having said so much, I feel bound to introduce quali-
fications. Although a man can retain his health, and do a fair
amount of work, I do not believe that he can enjoy the vigor-
ous, robust health, or do the same energetic work that he can
do In a cooler climate. It is scarcely fair to argue from Char-
ters Towers, which is comparatively high, and also on the ex-
treme southern border of the country I have indicated, but
I consider that this applies to all the coastal towns and to the
inland towns on the Gulf of Carpentaria and in the Northern
Territory.
When we turn from men to women and children, the diffi-
culty becomes very much more marked. While many men


seem to be able to work on in the north for twenty or thirty
years without a change, and without any perceptible injury
to health, the women are, for the most part, anaemic, and con-
stantly ailing. This may be in part due to the fact that women
take less exercise, and are necessarily less in the open air,
than men—a supposition which is strengthened by the fact that
those who stand the climate best (and there are many women
who seem to retain excellent health) are chiefly those who
take much exercise, and live much in the open; but this rea-
son evidently does not cover the whole ground. Open air and
exercise are in many cases insufficient to keep women in even
tolerable health, and there can, I think, be no doubt whatever
that the climate of the north does tend to produce and inten-
sify diseases peculiar to women, and especially to make child-
bearing more difficult and dangerous than in the south.
Neither can the health of the children be said to be satis-
factory. They grow too fast, and are pale and lacking in life
and vigour, unless they get a change to the south.
The result of these facts is that there is a great exodus of
women and children from the north as the hottest season of
the year comes on, conducted at great expense, and also at the
cost of a serious break in the continuity of the family life.
Many of these families do not return, but spend several years
in the south, while the father, in the north, is earning means
to support the household.
I cannot withhold a tribute of admiration for the quiet, un-
ostentatious unselfishness with which thousands of men are
working on year after year in the north without a holiday, in
order to keep their wife and children in a better climate;
while we cannot wonder much if in some other cases the con-
tinual absence of the wife from her husband and her re-
fusal to share in the hardships of his life leads to misunder-
standings and infidelity.
It is difficult to assess the exact value of an hour’s labour
in the north, as compared with the south, but no one who has
watched the unloading of a vessel at a northern port can
doubt that, while the men may be giving the best they can
under the circumstances, the employer does not receive the
value in the time that southern experience has given him a
right to expect.
To sum up, then, it would appear that white men can live
and work for long periods ofvyears, or even for a lifetime, in
the north without serious injury to the health if they exercise


care and temperance; but the fact that the climate is generally
injurious to women and children will, it seems, be likely to pre-
vent any satisfactory permanent settlement. Hence, white
labour will always be costly, because the white man will al-
ways be looking out for an opportunity to go south, in order
to found a home in a place where he is not constantly ob-
liged at great expense to send his family away for a change.
In other words, I should conclude that, although white men
can work in the north, it cannot, except in the case of the
highlands, such as the country round Herberton, be called
properly a white man’s country, nor is the white man likely
to make a permanent home in it unless under the pressure of
necessity, or the attraction of constant high wages.
Of course, a distinction must be drawn between the kinds
of work that a man does, some kinds of work being much
easier than others in a tropical climate. Among the most suit-
able kinds of work are cattle work and mining.
Probably work among cattle is the healthiest of all northern
occupations, but the trouble is that it is just the occupation
where there is least demand or opening for married men.
Mining, as most of the work is done under cover, is not un-
suitable work for the tropics if adequate ventilation be secured ;
but here again the frequent roughness and inaccessibility of the
country, the difficulties of transport, and the constant changes
militate heavily, except in the few instances of the larger
towns, against healthy and natural family life. The majority
of miners elsewhere are either single men or men living away
from their families.
Unfortunately, the most profitable and most suitable kinds
of agriculture, such as the growing of sugar, rice, cotton, cof-
fee, etc., involve a kind of labour for which the white man
is least suited in a tropical climate.
Much discussion has taken place over the question of labour
on the sugar plantations; but the real issue is often ignored.
The question is not whether or no the white man can work on
the sugar plantations in the north, but whether he will do so.
There can be no question that the work of cutting and
trashing is extremely hard and exhausting. The labourer has
to bend down to cut the cane close to the ground under a
wall of cane eight or nine feet high, which excludes every
breath of air, under a fierce sun at the hottest time of the year,
in a moist, steamy atmosphere, where the slightest exertion
produces violent perspiration; then he has to lift and carry the


heavy bundles to the cart or truck, and at another time enter
between the stifling rows of cane to clear away the trash.
There can be no question that this is most exhausting work.
I have ridden in the early morning through the canefields at a
slow walk, and had my horse burst out into a lather of sweat
with the heat. In spite of these conditions, the white man
can do the work if the inducement is sufficient; but it seems
to me absurd to expect that he will do it for the same pay,
or for anything like the same pay, that he will work for under
ordinary conditions. The great majority of men simply will
not tackle the work, but throw it up after a very brief trial.
A small percentage, as far as I can ascertain from my obser-
vations, will stick to it for a season, but rarely for longer.
A very great proportion of men who come from the south
to work on the sugar fields are utterly unwilling to do any
kind of work, and, therefore, it is scarcely fair to argue from
them; on the other hand, the fact that these are the only men
to be got shows that honest labour does not care for the job.
A good deal might be done to mitigate the hardships of
the labourers’ position. At present he has, when honestly in-
tending to work, some real grievances—(x) The labour is not
continuous throughout the year, and, therefore, he cannot
bring up his family if he desires to do so; (2) no accommoda-
tion is to be found for a family, and little or no decent accom-
modation even for a single man. To remedy this means, of
course, extra expense, and you come back to the fact that
white labour in the tropics means dear labour, and that the
chief products of the tropics will not pay to produce with dear
labour.
There are two industries which seem to offer a possible field
for white labour if systematically developed—fishing and pearl
oyster cultivation. At present the Chinese in Port Darwin
catch great quantities of fish, which they dry and export.
There is an unlimited demand apparently in China and the
East for dried fish, and the warm waters of Australia abound
with fish and with countless islands suitable for fishing sta-
tions. There does not seem to be any reason why the indus-
try should be left to the Chinese, as there is no special hard-
ship in a fisherman’s life in the tropics.
With regard to the cultivation of the pearl oyster, all the
conditions are favourable, and it is work which can be done
by the white man, who does not like the labour and risk of
diving. Of course, two conditions are necessary—first, that


the cultivation area should be leased for a sufficiently long
period under stable conditions, so as to allow for adequate
compensation for the heavy preliminary expenditure; and,
secondly, that efficient protection should be afforded against
poaching by means of a steam patrol. Without these condi-
tions, which do not at present prevail, nothing can be done.
It has been suggested that the difficulties of labour in the
north might be overcome by the importation of Italians. This
appears to me but a poor and very temporary makeshift, even
if possible on any large scale. All experience tends to show
that no labourer will work long under worse conditions than
those that obtain elsewhere in the country. The Italian will
soon find out that he can work under easier conditions in the
south, and will either drift south or demand that his wages
should be raised to compensate him for his inferior position,
nor do I think these demands unreasonable. In any case, the
difficulty will soon recur, and it is open to question whether
we are wise in introducing a large Italian element into our
population.
It appears to me that some larger and more statesmanlike
treatment of the question is necessary. It is no use to blink
facts and suggest remedies which do not touch the real diffi-
culties.
So far as I can see, there are only two alternatives before
the people of Australia with regard to the northern part of
their land. It is a standing danger as it is, and it must be
occupied in some way or other if we are to retain it.
The first alternative is to recognise fully that Northern
Australia is not naturally a white man’s country, but to de-
termine that, for the sake of the rest of Australia, the condi-
tions must, as far as possible, be altered to attract and retain
a permanent white population by the oifer of special privileges
and inducements at, of course, a heavy pecuniary cost to the
Commonwealth. If the country wants an all-white Australia,
it must be prepared to pay the price. It is fatuous folly to
think that by simply passing laws it can alter natural condi-
tions, or enforce its own ideas on other nations. If we want
a white Australia, we must pay to support and to defend it.
We must support and foster northern trades and industries
artificially, and not because they have any claim in them-
selves to be so supported. We must have an army of offi-
cials who are not really wanted, but who occupy the ground;
we must subsidise steamships to bring up goods at a cheap


rate, and must carry them by rail at a nominal cost ; we must
build railways, which will never pay, but may once or twice
in a century be of great strategic importance. In fact, we
must be like a man who has a fine house of his own, but feels
impelled to buy an inferior one next door, and pay heavy
rates and taxes upon it, lest it should fall into the hands of
undesirable neighbours. He has also probably in mind the
undefined hope that the bargain may one day turn out better
than he expected.
This is one alternative, a very costly and burdensome alter-
native, but for all that an intelligible and consistent policy,
and one that may possibly in the end be justified by its results.
The only other alternative, so far as I can see, is to employ
indented coloured labour from one of the eastern British pos-
sessions. Under this policy the north might become popu-
lated and productive, and wealthy enough to pay for its own
defence, which includes that of the whole of Australia. It is
not without objections. I myself would infinitely prefer a
white Australia were it possible, which I do not believe it
to be; but there are certain advantages. It would probably
lead to the employment of a much larger white population in
the north as ploughmen, waggoners, mechanics, engine-drivers,
clerks, overseers, etc., than is probable under any other sys-
tem. These would live under better conditions of housing,
permanence of employment, supply of necessaries and luxu-
ries than would otherwise be possible. Other nations would
be deprived of the argument that we are not using the land,
and our foreign trade would be largely stimulated.
I do not presume to say which of these alternatives ought to
be adopted, though personally favouring the latter; but I
do say that those responsible for our national policy ought at
once to boldly adopt either one or other of these alterna-
tives, or else propound an adequate third policy.
The present policy of drift and do nothing is, and must be,
most disastrous. We have no time to lose. Events are mov-
ing quickly, and we are mad or fey if we neglect any longer
President Roosevelt’s warning to look to our northern terri-
tories.
Before concluding with what I have to say on the subject
of defence and communications, I wish to speak briefly of the
native inhabitants of the north.


The position of the aborigines in Australia has been in the
past singularly ill-defined. They have not been recognised
as possessing any rights. The land which they have held
from time immemorial has been taken without process of law,
and without any compensation given. They have been told
to move on, lest they should disturb the cattle, and moving on
has too often meant death. When the land became settled
tardy efforts were made to provide for the few that remained,
but only of late years has Australia attempted to face the
problem, even in some small degree.
This neglect has been justified by two assumptions, neither
of them, I believe, warranted by facts; first, that the abori-
gines are incapable of social, industrial, and spiritual progress,
and, secondly, that they must necessarily disappear in a few
years.
As to the first, it has been completely disproved by the
success of those missionary settlements which have been grap-
pling with the problem on common-sense lines during the past
fifteen years, such as the Anglican Mission at Yarrabah, the
Presbyterian at Mapoon, and the Lutheran at Cape Bedford.
At Yarrabah, near Cairns, we have an industrious and indus-
trial community of 400 aboriginals cultivating some 70 acres
of land, and also carrying on a large fishing industry. We
find all kinds of social organisations—drill, gymnastics, fire
brigade, rifle corps, native police court, with aboriginal jury
and judge assessor, and council for administration. We find
the homes of the married people as well kept as those of the
ordinary white man. We find the same people working on
year after year without any desire to leave, or any of those
relapses into savagery which we used to be told always occur,
and, more remarkable still, we find some five or six colonies
sent out to the neighbouring islands and adjacent spots within
the reserve, and we find these colonies of 20 or 25 persons
reproducing the life of the mother community, and carrying
on its full social and industrial life without more than a weekly
visit from a white missionary.
As regards the second assumption, we find that the popu-
lation at Yarrabah, so far from diminishing, is beginning to
increase slowly. The question arises whether, as regards the
60,000 aboriginals still left in the far North of Australia, it
is yet too late to give them such a place in the Commonwealth
that they may not only receive justice and mercy themselves,
but be of real and permanent service to the whole State.


Now few persons will, I suppose, be inclined to deny that
the unpeopled and unknown condition of most of the far north
is an acute danger to Australia. While much of the land is
barren and useless, there are great areas of good and fertile
land, of which we are making no use whatever, and which
are a standing temptation to anxious foreign countries who
do not know what to do with their surplus population. Japan
and China are close at hand, and who knows how soon China
may become as formidable as Japan? Germany believes that
her future lies in a colonial Empire. Personally, I believe that
no greater danger threatens Australia than this empty and
unprotected state of the north.
The white population of the whole Northern Territory of
South Australia amounts, according to the last census, to 830
persons, and that of the N.W. of West Australia is, I believe,
still smaller. Now I think it will be admitted that could we,
without affecting the good lands suitable for cultivation, with-
out affecting the question of white immigration and settle-
ment, and without importing any aliens, add in a few years a
population of 40,000 or 50,000 persons, earning their own liv-
ing by agriculture, combined with hunting and fishing, well
disposed to the Government of the country because well
treated by it, developing certain industries, which the ordin-
ary white man will not touch, because they do not produce
sufficient profit to justify high wages, scattered in half a dozen
central and many other small groups over the more desolate
and neglected regions, recognising that the territory on which
they lived was their own, and that they would not be dis-
turbed in it, regarding themselves as loyal members of the
Commonwealth, and taught in school their place and office
in it, well drilled, accustomed to ride and run immense dis-
tances, knowing every rock and water-hole, keen to detect the
least sign of a strange foot, and capable of a very real trust
in and affection for the white man who is worthy of their
trust. Could we place such a population throughout Northern
Australia, we should without prejudice to other and larger
schemes have done a great deal to safeguard the north, and
to justify, in the eyes of the world, our retention of it.
I believe that all this could be done at comparatively little
cost to the Commonwealth. The Church is able to find good
and capable men who are willing to give their lives to the
work of helping and teaching the aboriginals, without any ade-
quate remuneration, because they regard it as a religious voca-


tion. Let the Commonwealth extend and help the work
already done to some extent by the Queensland Government,
which aids some six or seven stations, Anglican, Presbyterian,
and Lutheran.
Let the Commonwealth Government provide for an Abori-
ginal Department, and furnish materials for building, tools,
school instruction, and food for the natives while and in so
far as they are working to support themselves, for some years
must elapse while trees grow, and land is fenced and indus-
tries are developed.
Let the religious bodies concerned provide men to superin-
tend the work, provide them with salary, food, dwelling-
houses, and churches, with the understanding that if the sta-
tion should be shifted or closed by the action of the Govern-
ment through no fault on their part, due compensation would
be made for expenditure in building.
Let small colonies be sent out from the central colonies as
soon as men were sufficiently trained to carry on alone the
work and industry of the central community.
Let all the men be drilled and encouraged by small rewards
to prepare for the conditions of a possible invasion; let it be
the duty of the superintendent to compile a map of the whole
district, with all information needed for military purposes; let
each station be connected by telephone with the central sta-
tion, and through it with the overland telegraph line —a work
which could be done by the natives themselves.
It is not, of course, suggested that the blacks would be of
service as soldiers, but they would be of great value for pur-
poses of intelligence and communication. At present a large
body of troops might land, and for weeks no one know of
their presence; but this would be impossible if the plan sug-
gested were adopted. In addition, these stations would pro-
vide rational employment for the horde of half-castes, who are
a scathing comment on the cry for the maintaining the purity
of the Australian blood, and a menace to the country.
A grant of £5OO for initial expenses, and of £5OO a year
for the maintenance of each central station, would probably
be sufficient.
It would have, of course, to be understood that various reli-
gious bodies must have entire freedom, so far as their reli-
gious teaching and training is concerned. It is absurd to sup-
pose that you can get men of power and originality to devote


themselves to such work unless you leave them free to teach
and train in their own way. No difficulty in this way is ex-
perienced in the Queensland Missions, which are, of course,
subject to the fullest Government inspection.
The scheme is only possible if there be fullest accord be-
tween Church and State, and the attempt on either side to
take more than it gives would lead to disaster.
I commend the scheme to the consideration of the Com-
monwealth authorities. It is no mere speculation. It has al-
ready been partially worked out in Queensland, and I suggest
that it should be further developed there and initiated in the
Northern Territory and Western Australia.
It seems to me that it would be at once a much-needed act
of justice to the aboriginals, and also a real source of strength
to the Commonwealth.
Of course, the Queensland provision forbidding trespassing
on reserves would have to be adopted, and the reserves would
have to be of sufficient size, not less than 500 square miles, to
allow free movement and adequate hunting within their area.
I know, of course, that as things stand, the Commonwealth
has by the Constitution no concern with the aborigines; but
if a national policy were agreed on, this difficulty could doubt-
less be overcome by agreement among the States.
Let us now return to the questions of accessibility and de-
fence with regard to Northern Australia. Few people in Mel-
bourne realise, I think, how near it is to the East, and how
impossible of any adequate protection from the south.
The following distances in sea miles have been kindly fur-
nished me by your Hon. Secretary, except that to Formosa:—
Port Darwin to Hong Kong 2,320
„ „ Formosa 2,200
„ Philippine Islands .. .. 1,150
„ „ Melbourne 3,030
Thursday Island to Dutch New Guinea .. 112
„ „ „ German New Guinea 860
„ Melbourne 2,230
I venture to think that these figures are worth dose atten-
Port Darwin is 700 miles nearer to China, and 800 miles
nearer to the Japanese in Formosa, than it is to Melbourne—
that is to say, supposing a Japanese fleet left their own waters


at the same time that an Australian fleet left Melbourne, the
Japanese fleet would arrive at least two whole days earlier
than the Australian fleet. Should the Japanese at any time
acquire the Philippine Islands, and we must remember that
the United States would be only too pleased to be rid of them,
it would bring Japanese territory within about 1,000 miles of
the Australian coast.
Now, these facts are very serious. A¥e enjoy our present
immunity from invasion solely to the influence of Great Bri-
tain. Should at any time Great Britain be involved in Con-
tinental difficulties, and her fleet be even temporarily un-
able to take the offensive, or should she become tired of be-
ing saddled with the responsibility of standing sponsor for
a State which, helpless itself, is constantly, on the strength of
her protection, passing legislation affecting other countries,
contrary to her interest and desires, then our position will
indeed be a critical one. North Australia, as things now are,
is a standing temptation to nations in want of an outlet for
their surplus population. China and Japan stand only 2,000
miles away; Germany only 800; and if it should at any time
absorb Holland and its colonies (a not impossible contin-
gency), only 112 miles away. Suppose an Asiatic force landed
in Northern Australia, say, before or during the wet season.
It might be weeks before we were aware of the fact; it would
be another fortnight at least before we were on the spot. Even
supposing we had command of the sea, what could we do?
In a month or two the land would be under cultivation and
producing crops, and we should find it very difficult to find
much sympathy in Europe for any appeal to international
law. The reply would be probably, even in the case of an
Asiatic power, almost certainly in the case of a European
power—“ You made no use of the country yourselves; why
should you grudge it to others?”
It is because I regard this as a very real peril that I look
with alarm on the attempt to absorb interest in the proposal
to build a railway from Port Darwin to Adelaide, which
would, I believe, be of little use, and would divert interest
from the true line, which ought to be made without delay,
from Port Darwin, over the well-grassed tableland, down the
western border of Queensland, towards Sydney and Mel-
bourne.
I have travelled over the whole course of the proposed Ade-
laide line, and I believe that the greater part of the country


will never be anything but a dry and useless desert, whereas
the other line passes through good country, and would be
joined by all the lines that run out west in Queensland and
New South Wales. If anyone is enthusiastic about the Ade-
laide route, let him just travel over it as I have done, and
he will quickly change his mind.
The other great strategic point in the north besides Port
Darwin is Thursday Island. A glance at the map shows that
all sea-borne traffic from the eastern seaboard of Australia to
China, Japan, and the East generally must either pass within
a few miles of Thursday Island, or else go far away to the
East round the point of New Guinea. It is and must always
be the first and last port of call between Australia and the
East.
Do we realise its importance? We have a fort, it is true,
with three old-fashioned guns and one small modern gun,
and an average garrison of about 50 men; but we cannot afford
any repairs, and I have more than once suggested the advisa-
bility of putting up a big notice-board at the entrance of the
channel, with the inscription—“ The enemy are kindly re-
quested only to attack by day, as we cannot afford a search-
light !” Perhaps the days of chivalry are not altogether past.
Will nothing wake the people of Australia to the fact that
they have a great and rich country, which is the envy of other
nations, and that if they are too slothful and careless to take
the trouble to defend it, they richly deserve to lose it?
The fort itself is admittedly in the wrong place, and there
has been talk for years of moving it to a better strategic posi-
tion on Goode Island, but nothing has been done. It is sup-
posed to be a coaling station, but there is no coal, except in
one private hulk. An adequate supply of water for the boilers
of warships is a matter of vital importance, but no attempt at
storage has been made, so that, in spite of the enormous rain-
fall during a great part of the year, ships can get no water.
Of course, the military authorities are in no way to blame.
No one realises more keenly than they do the miserable inade-
quacy of our preparations for defence; but nothing can be done
without the consent of the people of Australia, and their re-
monstrances fall on deaf ears.
Australia is like a sleepy, well-fed man playing cards by a
warm fire after dinner. A servant comes and tells him that an
outhouse is on fire. He simply says—“ All right; we have


plenty to spare.” Another conies to say that the fire has
spread to the stables. He says—“ Put it out as best you can,
and don’t bother me.” Soon it will spread to the house itself,
and then it will be too late.
I have tried, very inadequately. I fear, to show that we have
in the far north a vast area of half a million square miles, cap-
able, with white and coloured labour combined, of enormous
development, and with white labour alone of considerable de-
velopment in parts, if we are content to largely assist and sub-
sidise that labour to counteract the disinclination to work
under tropical conditions.
In its present unpopulated and defenceless condition, the
north is an acute source of danger to Australia.
The population (except round and inland from Cairns) is
steadily decreasing, and our statesmen have as yet given no
hint of any steady and consistent policy with regard to it. No
one is likely to embark capital or desire to settle in the north
under present conditions, and if they are to be improved no
time should be lost in setting about the task.
I plead for a national policy. If we cannot have what I
consider the best policy, let us combine to do our best with
the second best-only let us cease to drift, and compromise
and play with the matter.
Only by steady adherence to a well-thought out, consistent,
and unchanging policy can we hope to remove or diminish the
imminent danger in which, we stand—a danger which bids fair
to make a white Australia far more impossible than any sys-
tem of indented labour.
In conclusion, I would appeal to all political parties to com-
bine and lay aside mere party politics on this serious and press-
ing question. It is suicidal for the scanty crew of a lumber-
ing merchantman to be quarrelling among themselves when
piratical craft are hovering round looking for an easy place
to board. Only by united effort and mutual willingness to
sacrifice our own interests and our own particular theories
for the common good can we hope for long to preserve this
continent as a whole for ourselves and for our children.
If we are too much occupied in amusement to have time to
think, too lethargic to act, and too blind to recognise the value
of discipline and self-sacrifice, then we shall have to give way,
not unjustly, to those who are more in earnest than our-
selves,


In conclusion, I desire to thank this society most heartily
for permitting me to have the honour of addressing it, and
this audience for its patience in listening to what I had to say.
However imperfectty expressed, it represents genuine experi-
ences and genuine convictions on what I believe to be a sub-
ject of the greatest and most growing importance.
After the reading of the paper,
Senator Chataway expressed his sense of the honour done to him, in
a place where he was a complete stranger, in being requested to address
a few remarks to their society. He had listened with much interest to
the paper of his Lordship the Bishop of Carpentaria, and agreed with him
that it was impossible for Australia to continue her policy of drift in
connection with her tropics. The tropical problem was not peculiar to
Australia, Other nations had similar problems. Land was required for
the ever-increasing peoples of the world, and, as pointed out by Benjamin
Kidd, the Sociologist, it was necessary to cultivate the tropics to produce
foodstuffs in increasing quantities for the inhabitants of the more tem-
perate portions of the world. The problem of more closely developing
her tropics was being solved by Queensland before Federation, and the
Americans in Hawaii, the British in the West Indies, and the Americans
in the Southern States, all attempting by close settlement to solve their
shares of the problem. He was not ashamed of the part Queensland
had played. She started with large plantations, and used indented colored
labour. Then white ploughmen and mechanics took land up on the
plantations, decreasing the coloured labour requirements, and going far
to establish white people in the tropics. In one district, known to their
Chairman, the proportion of Polynesians to whites had fallen from 43 to
16 per cent, between the years 1881 and 1901, while the population had
doubled, and the products of the soil quadrupled. That was done before
Federation, and it was good work. Similar evolution was proceeding
in other districts in Queensland, but the Commonwealth had stepped in
and declared that the best results could be obtained by a short-cut. This
view had yet to be justified, and he, for one, feared that in the more
northern districts many of their farmers would leave, and Chinamen
would take their places. As to whether a white man could or could not
work in the tropics, the real question was, first, whether he would, and
then whether it were possible for white men and women to live genera-
tion after generation in the tropics and maintain a sturdy and healthy
race. The question could only be settled after many years. Meanwhile
what his lordship had said regarding the women was only too true. A
medical friend of his (Senator Chataway), after fifteen years’ practice
in Mackay, which was not very far north, wrote:—“The tropical problem
is a great one. The writer believes that until some arrangement is
made whereby all white residents in the tropics can earn enough to
make themselves comfortable to the point of luxury, or to leave for
a better clime after a term of years, we shall have steady deterioration.”
One thing was certain, namely, that they could not carry on pioneering
in the tropics without a heavy list of fatalities amongst the white men
employed. He himself could remember the terrible death-roll when
places which now were comparatively healthy were being first opened


up and settled. It was not an armed invasion of the north that he
greatly feared, so much as that in the field of diplomacy some nation
would wring concessions from them affecting the huge vacant areas
of the north. Japan was looking for an outlet for her people, as had
been shown by recent events in the Pacific. In April, 1904, the official
gazette of Japan used these striking words:—“ People are not to hold
land without using it. If the Australians will not open their eyes and
listen to reason they may some day be surprised to find themselves in
trouble from which the mother country may refuse to extricate them,”
Many of them would also remember the striking remark of a famous
Japanese Admiral on an official visit to this country, when he summed
up the position in the words:—“Australia is a great country, with a
small population; Japan is a small country, with a great population.”
Surely the warning to be read between the lines was sufficient Austra-
lia had also control of New Guinea, and undoubtedly hoped some day
to throw the mantle of her protection over the South Sea Islands. She
had her share of the tropical problem to solve, and she could not neglect
it. She must put her hand to the plough, and not look back or shirk
the work. He reminded them of Kipling’s message to the American
people—a message which, applied in its broadest sense, should be taken
to heart by the people of Australia. They could apply it not only to
the aboriginals and Papuans, but also to the lands themselves. He would
recall Kipling’s words—
Take up the white man’s burden,
Send forth the best ye breed;
Go, bind your sons to exile,
To serve your captives’ need;
To wait in heavy harness
On fluttered folk and wild—
Your new-caught, sullen peoples,
Half-devil and half-child.
On the motion of Mr. H. Gyles Turner, seconded by Mr. J. S. But-
ters, a hearty vote of thanks was tendered to the Lord Bishop and Sena-
tor Chataway.
The following leading article appeared in “ The Argus ” on Mon-
day, 16th September:—
A special Australian phase of a great world-problem was touched
upon by the Bishop of Carpentaria in his address to the Royal Geographi-
cal Society of Australasia on Friday evening. His lordship appealed
for a great national policy of development in the rich northern terri-
tories of our continent. Other peoples cast hungry eyes upon these ter-
ritories, and we must prove to the rest of mankind our moral right to
hold them. Unless we can establish “ effective occupation ” we shall
either lose them or be forced to fight desperately for their possession.
Up to the present, Commonwealth action in respect of them has been
purely negative and destructive. Polynesian islanders, whose labour
has hitherto contributed so much to the cultivation of the tropical belt,
have been banished. Chinese and Japanese coolies, whose densely crowded
native lands are within as easy range as Melbourne of Port Darwin, are
rigidly excluded. Yet practically nothing has been done of a construe-


tive or building-up nature. Beyond prohibition of the kanaka and the
Asiatic, Commonwealth policy has been simply a policy of drift, without
positive aim or direction. As a result, the population of the north is
actually decreasing. The reason for this national inefficiency is obvious.
We have not as a people clearly thought out the principles which should
guide us in our relations to yellow and dark races. A natural and jus-
tifiable horror of the corruption of our blood through miscegenation,
and an equally natural and justifiable desire to maintain the standard of
our own European civilisation, have prompted us to promulgate what is
known as the “ White Australia ” doctrine. With the main purpose of
the doctrine all Australians are substantially in agreement, but so far
the tendency of its most clamorous champions has been to ignore every
aspect of the racial question save one —to think of nothing but exclu-
sion, restriction, and deportation of Asiatics, Africans, and Polynesians.
Before we can solve successfully the problem of our future inter-
course with peoples around us of different hue and different ideals from
ours, we must not only face boldly all the material facts of our own posi-
tion as owners of tropical regions, but the high moral issues involved in
the dealings of race with race and nation with nation. We are not
the only people who are called upon just now to grapple with this great
racial problem. All the white peoples are confronted with it in a more
or less acute form. It is an inevitable outcome of what may be termed
the geographical illumination of the world. In the old days, when the
East and the West were separated the one from the other by toilsome
overland marches and precarious oversea voyages, when the distance
between them was measured by journeys lasting several months and full
of unknown perils, each went its own way without troubling about the
other. The racial question, in its modern form, has been opened up by
the telegraph, the railway, and the steamship, which, like the nerves
and the arteries of the body, convey information and sustenance from
one part to another, uniting all parts into one organic whole. What is
going on in Pekin or Tokio is reported in Melbourne nearly as soon as
occurrences in Sydney or Perth. Products of various kinds are con-
stantly interchanged between Japan and America, China and Australia,
Europe and Asia. Peoples who have had alien histories and alien
traditions, virtually uninfluenced one by the other for centuries, are now
brought into touch with each other and forced to admit a certain com-
munity of thoughts and interests. Commerce, with its mutual gains, is
the chief attractive force, but counteracting it there is the repulsive
energy stored up during long ages of isolation.
So long as the “ white man ” felt absolutely confident of his supe-
riority; so long as Asiatics and Africans admitted that superiority; so
long as the new channels of communication laid the yellow and black
dominions open to “ white ” enterprise, but not the “ white ” dominions
to yellow or black enterprise, just so long was the repulsive energy held
in check. The coloured races felt the antipathy, but were, or thought
themselves, after the conquest of India and the compulsory opening of
China and Japan, powerless to resist the European; while the Euro-
pean, conscious only of his dominance, and feeling no dread of Asiatic
competition, displayed his racial antagonism only in social aloofness.
Now a vital change seems to be passing over the “ white ” communities


dwelling near the . teeming empires of Asia, They are losing their old
self-trust—their old consciousness of racial superiority. Under the in-
fluence of fear, they are beginning to vent racial antipathy in crude
and sometimes even brutal exhibitions. The whole Pacific coast of
North America, from British Columbia to California, is apparently seeth-
ing with hatred—a hatred obviously born of vague dread—for Asiatics
of all kinds. A few months ago Japanese children were excluded from
San Francisco public schools, and Japanese property in the city was
deliberately wrecked. The week before last Hindu mill-hands were chased
out of Bellingham, in the State of Washington, by a mob of white work-
men, who drove them over the Canadian border. Now the most serious
and anti-Asiatic outbreak of all has occurred in Vancouver, where, under
the leadership of American labour agitators, local rioters have made
disgraceful attacks upon Japanese merchants and traders, and forced
them to defend with arms their persons and their property. It is most
unfortunate that a great world-problem, which must admittedly tax the
capacity of the ablest and most conscientious of statesmen, should have
become the plaything of irresponsible agitators and midnight brawlers.
Street riots, incendiarism, and assaults can never settle it.
Even if the Canadian and American mobs temporarily drove the
Japanese off the Pacific coast, the problem would be no nearer than now
to solution. As a Japanese ex-Minister pointed out when the recent war-
scare arose in the United States, the American and Japanese nations
become more and more dependent upon one another every year. A
Japanese wears American cloth and eats American foods every day of
his life, while Americans obtain from Japan tea, silk, and numberless
articles in common consumption. Huge vessels, splendidly equipped, run
up the Pacific coast to Japan. Are they to carry passengers and goods
on the outward journey only, while no Japanese are to come across by
them the other way ? What is the good of building such ships or seek-
ing to establish a trans-Pacific trade if the West Coast Americans are
determined to go back to the old system of racial compartments which
existed in the ages before steam and electricity? This fear and antipathy,
so marked in North America, do not exist in the Southern republics,
where the population has already Indian and negro strains. If the " white
north” dams up the inflowing Japanese stream, its course may be de-
flected south. Then there may arise in Latin America a strong Japanese
and pro-Japanese element distinctly hostile to the United States, and a
possible source of danger to it.
Our own practical phase of the problem varies from that of Pacific
America, but we, too, must steadily keep facts in view. Among those
facts are the “ empty north ” of our continent and the enormous difficul-
ties, as shown by the Bishop of Carpentaria, in the way of developing
it as a “ white .man’s country.” Of these, the worst is the effect of the
climate upon the women and children. Any attempt to people the north
with a white working population for the tropical belt would mean a per-
sistent loss of life and vitality. The population would have to be con-
tinually recruited from the south —a severe strain upon regions already
under-populated. There is, besides, the moral question whether we are
justified in dooming any portion of our people to such a fate as would
be theirs who had to “ effectively occupy ” the whole of our northern


territories. The whole problem, in its world aspect as well as in its
Australian aspect, is pre-eminently a moral problem. Whatever solution
any white race may attempt must not only be economically and politi-
cally sound, but morally right. If there be, as we suppose, an overruling
Providence in this world, it is absolutely certain that any morally wrong
course must be destined to failure. No nation can, any more than any
individual, kick successfully against the moral purpose of the universe.
