







1914.
VICTORIA.
DEPARTMENT OF MINES.
BULLETINS
OF THE
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF VICTORIA
(H. HERMAN, B.C.E., M.M.E., F.G.S., Director).
ISSUED BY
W. DICKSON, SECRETARY FOR MINES, UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF
THE HON. J. DRYSDALE BROWN, M.L.C., MINISTER FOR MINES.
No. 29.
SOME DAYLESFORD MINES.
By H. S. HITELAW AND W. ARAGWANATH.
WITH PLANS AND SECTIONS (IN ENVELOPE.)
By Authority:
ALBERT J. MULLETT, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.,
4596. —PRICE, 1s.




CONTENTS.
Pays
The North Cornish Mine ... ... ... ... ... 5
The Rising Star Mine... ... ... ... ... ... 9
Christensen’s Ajax Mine ... ... ... ... ... 13
The New Cornish Mine (Mitchell’s Shaft) ... .. ... 15
The Ajax Mine ... ... ... ... ... ... 23
The Old Jubilee Mine ... ... ... ... ... ... 25
Steele’s Pioneer Mine, Yandoit ... ... ... ... 26
Connell’s Mine, Spargo Creek ... ... ... ... ... 29
The Lady Staughton Mine, Spargo Creek ... ... ... 29
The Spargo Creek Mine, Spargo Creek ... ... ... 30
PLANS AND SECTIONS (IN ENVELOPE).
Plate I. Plan of North Cornish Mine.
11. Transverse Section of North Cornish Mine.
111. Plan of "Rising Star Mine.
IV. Transverse Section of Rising Star Mine.
V. Plan and Sections of Christensen’s Ajax Mine.
VI. Transverse Section of Christensen’s Ajax Mine.
VII. Plan of New Cornish Mine.
VIII. Longitudinal Section of New Cornish Mine.
IX. Transverse Section of New Cornish Mine.
X. Plan, Longitudinal and Transverse Sections of the Old Jubilee
Mine.
XI. Plan and Transverse Section of Steele’s Pioneer Mine.
XII. Longitudinal Section of Steele’s Pioneer Mine.




SOME DAYLESFORD MINES.
THE NORTH CORNISH MINE, DAYLESFORD.
By H. S. Whitelaw.
The North Cornish Company’s shaft is within the Daylesford town
boundary, 13 chains S.S.E. of the post-office. It is about 1,000 feet deep,
and originally belonged to the Victoria Cornish Company, whose north
boundary is now about 30 feet south of the shaft. It was sunk to work
the continuation of the Cornish group of reefs, which were highly payable
in the mines to the southward. Three reefs have been worked
(Plates I. and II.). The first met with was the Fearnot
(or Fearnought), which passed through the shaft at about
30 feet from the surface j this reef appears to be identical
with the Roman Eagle reef shown on Norman Taylor’s plan of the gold-
field.* At about 1,000 feet S.S.E. of the shaft, the main Cornish reef
striking about N.W. bifurcates. Northwards from this point the western
branch of the reef (which strikes about N. 35 0 W.) is known as the
Roman Eagle (the Fearnot?), and the eastern branch (which strikes about
N. 25 0 W.) as the Black or Cornish reef. The Cornish reef passes
through the shaft at 480 feet, and the Eastern reef at 800 feet from the
surface. The track of a fourth reef (the Crown?) was cut in the 974-ft.
eastern cross-cut at 152 feet from the shaft. There are levels at 256 ft.
8 in., 276 ft. 8 in., 317 ft. n in., 398 ft., 488 ft., 556 ft. 10 in.,
625 ft. 11 in., 695 ft. 5 in., 764 ft. 11 in., 834 ft. 11 in., 904 ft. 5 in.,
and 973 ft. 11 in. ; reference to these will general!} hi made to the nearest
foot, omitting the inches.
318-/1. Level. —No information is available as to the work done above
317 ft. 11 in., where a flat reef was met with from which 219 tons of quartz
yielded 108 oz. 15 dwt. (Quarterly Reports of the Mining Registrars).
The east cross-cut at this depth has fallen in at 30 feet from the shaft. At
12 feet east of the shaft a level in si.are has been driven southwards, and
at 50 feet along this there is a west cross-cut to an east back on which is a
rise, now fallen in. In the level a few small auriferous spurs pitching
40° S. were cut.
3gB-/t. Level. — At the 398-ft. level there are east and west cross-cuts ;
the former extends to the Cornish reef-track which, where intersected,
carries no reef material and has not been driven on. The west crosscut
has fallen in at 120 feet from the shaft; it was driven in search of the Fear-
not reef, which it failed to discover. It would appear from the transverse
section of the mine that about this depth the Fearnot reef, which dips
westward and at shallower levels cuts across the beds, would cross- the
Cornish anticline, and then continue downwards as a pug back or as a
bedded reef. As such it might have been seen but not recognised as the
Fearnot.
488-/1. Level. —At the 488-ft. level there is a cross-cut west which has
fallen in from the plat. The Cornish reef crosses it at 3 feet from the
shaft. A south level on the reef which is only a few inches wide, has
fallen in.
* Quarter-Sheet 16 N.E. ; and Report on the Geological Survey of Daylesford Gold-fidd, Prog. Kept.
Geol. Surv. Viet., No. VIII., pp. 6-20. 1894.


Ore crushed.
Gold per
1
ton.
Total.
Remarks.
Tons.
| Oz.
dwt.
gr.
Oz.
dwt.
1,208
! 0
7
12
453
8
Quartz
31
5
8
5
167
14
Pyrites
1,570
0
2
12
197
17
Quartz
23
3
4
2
73
14
Pyrites
3,320
0
3
6
542
16
Quartz
82
2
7
2
193
1
Pyrites
557-ft. Level. —At the 556-ft. 10-in. level the footwall of the Cornish
reef is 50 feet west of the shaft. The reef is from 2 to 3 feet wide, and
dips 50° to 6o° W. It is not worked directly over or under the
cross-cut, but appears to have been sloped over the north level from a point
20 feet from the cross-cut. Southward it is said to be connected with the
Cornish workings. At this level (north of the cross-cut) it cuts the beds
both in strike and dip. A crushing of 85 tons of quartz yielded 20 oz.
of gold; 138 tons yielded 29 oz.; and 753 tons averaged 4 dwt.
2.83 grn.
626-ft Level. —At this level the reef with accompanying spurs is over
20 feet wide. The eastern side was cut at 97 feet west of the shaft.
Southward the level has fallen in. Northward the reef and country are
parallel in strike (N. 20° W.) for a distance of 40 feet from the cross-
cut. Thence the reef strikes north. From the cross-cut to 60 feet north it
is overhead and side (west) sloped. At 60 feet north there is a rise, and
at 90 feet a rise and winze (to the next level). At no feet the level has
fallen in. From this level 600 tons of quartz averaged 8 dwt. 11.4 gr.
per ton. Between this level and the level above, 1,016 tons averaged
5 dwt. 1.86 gr. per ton.
695-ft . Level. —At this depth the levels on the reef, at 170 feet west
of the shaft, have fallen in. The following are the results of crush-
ings from between this level and the levels above :
765-ft. Level. —The Cornish reef is 200 feet west of the shaft at this
level. The south level and the workings to the west of the reef have fallen
in. The north level is open for a length of 100 feet north of the cross-
cut. At that point there is a rise on the reef, which dips 55 0 W.
Beyond the rise the level has fallen in. In the main cross-cut at this depth
a system of auriferous spurs (flat makes) was passed through, commencing
Fig. 1.
at the east back at 35 feet from the shaft and extending to the Cornish
reef. The spurs vary in thickness from half an inch to 3 feet, are 1 nearly
horizontal transversely, and pitch in a southerly direction at an angle of
about 7 0 . They have been worked north and south from four points


Ore crushed.
Gold per ton.
Total.
Remarks.
Tons.
Oz.
dwt.
gr.
Oz.
dwt.
2,840
0
5
18
818
10
Quartz, from 695ft. to 765ft.
80
o
18
16
234
14
Pyrites
2,730
0
6
19
927
1
Quartz, from 626ft. to 765ft.
73
3
16
8
278
12
Pyrites
2,610
0
5
9
701
8
Quartz
40
4
0
22
161
16
Pyrites
3,520
0
3
9
594
0
Quartz
118
2
8
22
288
12
Pyrites
1,270
0
4
18
301
12
Quartz
37
2
14
1
. 99
19
Pyrites
1,079
a
6
13
348
0
Quartz
1,109
0
6
13
353
1
Quartz, from 657ft. to 765ft.
34
3
3
1
107
3
Pyrites
655
0
4
1
131
4
Quartz
29
2
18
4
87
6
Pyrites
in the main cross-cut —80 feet, 120 feet, 150 feet, and 180 feet west of the
shaft. This work was done by the original company, with what success is
not known by the present, manager, who, however, with a view to prospect-
ing them on their northern continuation, has driven a cross-cut east from
the level on the Cornish reef at a point 85 feet north of the main cross-
cut, where a small auriferous spur was exposed in the footwall of the reef.
The cross-cut was driven 60 feet, and from the face a rise was put up 20
feet, at which height another small spur was cut in a 4-ft. bed of sand-
stone (see Fig. 1). This is one of the system driven on from the main
cross-cut at 120 feet west of the shaft, and as it contains a good sample of
coarse gold, a drive south has been started on it, and a crushing is now
going through the battery.
The following are the results of crushings from this level and- above
it:—
$35-fi. Level. —The west cross-cut at this depth is 292 feet in length,
and appears to have reached the Cornish anticline, since the beds in the
end dip west. The country here, between the Cornish reef (at 240 feet
west of the shaft), and the face of the cross-cut, is fractured by faults
which may have reversed the dip of the beds, but the general appearance
of the strata is suggestive of folding and subsequent rupture. The north
level on the Cornish reef has fallen in. The south level is 62 feet long,
and the reef has perhaps been stoped overhead for that length. At the
face of the level there is a rise on tire reef which dips 55 0 to 6o°
W., the slates dipping 55 0 E. The beds containing the spurs, which
are being prospected at the 765-ft. level, are nearer the shaft in this cross-
cut, and in them, at 75 feet west of the shaft, a rise has been put up in
faulted country. At 15 feet above the floor of the cross-cut a west-dipping
spur 4 inches to 4 feet thick was cut. A drive was put in, with a
rise at 25 feet north of the cross-cut. This was auriferous all through,
and encouraging but hardly payable prospects were obtained in the vicinity
of a small cross fault.
In the shaft between the 765-ft. and 835-ft. levels, the third reef,
known as the Eastern reef, was passed through. This reef cuts through
the beds in the cross-cut at 13 feet west of the shaft. It dips westward
at 68°, and has not been worked at this level, though gold was seen
in breaking it down.


gojf-ft. Level. —At 904 ft. 5 in. there is a crosscut west extending 10
feet beyond the Eastern reef, which was cut at 46 feet from the shaft. A
level has teen driven south on the reef as far as the Cornish shaft. For a
distance of 100 feet south from the cross-cut the reef strikes north and south,
crossing the country, which strikes S. 25 0 E. It then strikes with the bed-
ding. Records of the yields are not in the possession of the manager, who,
however, states that he has been informed that the reef was rich. It has
been extensively worked in the Cornish lease.
Q74-ft. Level. —Two cross-cuts have been driven at a depth of 973 ft.
11 in. The western, which is 95 feet long, cuts through a spur in the plat,
and through the Eastern reef at 75 feet from the shaft. The flat spur is
gold-bearing (very rich specimens it is said were obtained underfoot going
south), and gold was seen in the Eastern reef. The eastern cross-cut is
305 feet in length, and cuts lode-tracks at ‘152 feet and 172 feet from the
shaft. It was driven in search of the Crown reef, which is being worked with
good results in the Cornish mine. When the track at 152 feet was met with
the position was considered to be too far west for the continuation of the
Crown reef, and the manager is doubtful now whether the cross-cut has
gone far enough to reach the reef. However, the relative positions of the
lode-track and the Cornish reef in the mine closely agree with those at
the surface. There are no levels at this depth.
The Future Working of the Mine.
With regard to the future working of the mine, the accompanying trans-
verse section, Plate 11., is instructive. It shows that the reefs are fault reefs
dipping west through beds on the eastern side of the anticline, the axis
of which dips to the west. The pitch is to the south. In workings from
the Fearnot shaft to the south (for position see Plate I.), the Fearnot,
which is the most western reef, proved payable from near the surface to a
depth of about 400 feet, where it crossed the anticline and was lost. The
payable shoot in the Cornish reef extends from about the 557-ft. to the
765-ft. cross-cut, below which it enters slates and becomes small and un-
profitable. The Eastern reef, where it crosses the beds in which the Fear-
not and Cornish reefs were payable, was gold-bearing, and, in the central
portion, rich. The Crown reef in the Cornish slates is non-auriferous. It
has not been seen where it cuts the beds in which the Fearnot, Cornish,
and Eastern reefs have been profitably worked.
Apart from prospecting, the whole of the mining appears to have been
confined to the reefs where they cross a narrow zone of rocks between
the shaft and the anticline. This zone is about 100 feet in width, and is
composed of comparatively thin beds of slates and sandstones bounded on
the west by slate beds 50 to 60 feet wide, and on the east by a series of
slate beds about 230 feet wide, which I have called the Cornish slates for
convenience and since they will prove useful as a horizon. These beds
are exposed in every cross-cut in the mine, and it would appear from the
position above and below the reefs that the Cornish fault displaces the
country about 100 feet horizontally, and that the Eastern reef displaces it
about 25 feet. In both instances the rocks on the hanging wall side of the
reef have moved upwards.
The Cornish reef in the Cornish and western slates exists as little more
than a track, and carries very few spurs, while in the interbedded sand-
stones and slates it. bulges, and with its associated spurs has been worked
in places for a width of 30 feet. As in the case of the Cornish reef, the
length and height of the shoot in the Eastern reef are terminated by the
reefs running from favorable into unfavorable country.
8


As the known shoots in the three upper
reefs have apparently been worked out,
and as the spurs between the Cornish and
Eastern reefs are at present too small to
pay working expenses, the company should
consider the advisability of deepening the
shaft with a view to prospecting the Crown
reef where it intersects the productive beds
referred to. This would be at a depth of
between 200 and 300 feet below the 974-ft.
level.
Fig. 2, which is a sketch transverse sec-
tion, illustrates the mode of occurrence of
shoots in tire reefs in the North Cornish
reef. It also shows how faulting has
lengthened the shoot in the Cornish reef;
if there had been no displacement, the
length of the shoot would have been about
one half of what it actually is.
1 '28.1.13.]
Fig. 2.
THE RISING STAR MINE.
By H. S. Whitelaw.
The following information is extracted from the History of the
Daylesford Gold-fields, by Mark Amos, published in the Reports and
Statistics of the Mining Department for the quarter ending 31st December,
1890;
“ During the year 1877, a very important discovery was made of a
reef at Blind Creek, a locality about ii miles south-west from Daylesford,
giving rise to the formation of the Rising Star Company. The reef was
discovered by Messrs. Rollen, Massimino and party, who struck the lode
at a depth of 18 feet from the surface, and raised 20 tons of quartz which
went 1 oz. 3 dwt. to the ton ; another crushing gave 1 oz. 7 dwt. to the
ton. The reef was from 2 to 3 feet in thickness, and underlay west.
The quartz was solid, the gold being found principally near the foot-wall
(slate), and associated rather freely with black jack, galena and irdn
pyrites. After the first two crushings, the party sank a new shaft and
erected a small battery of eight stamps, with pumps, &c. The lode now
was better defined, viz., 4 feet in thickness, a crushing of 30 tons realizing
1 oz. to the ton. At this stage the present company was organized—
-14,400 shares being issued. Mr. E. Roberts was appointed manager in
November, 1879, under whose able supervision a degree of success has
been attained not commonly met with. The new manager found there was
ample room for more efficient management and a more suitable plant.
Sinking and driving was then carried on to a considerable extent up to
iBBr. The general characteristics of the lode at the lower levels are as
9


follows ; —The payable shoots or splices of stone are principally composed
of heavily mineralized quartz, bearing coarse gold, iron and arsenical
pyrites, and a large percentage of galena. When the lode is wide the
foot-wall portion in most instances is a composition of slate leaders ami
mundic seams. The richest stone is generally found in the hanging wall
and near the slate; as the depth increases the stone becomes more solid.
The company has an excellent plant comprising seven boilers and five
engines—viz., one 20-in. cylinder, iB-in., x6-in., 14-in., and 10-in, ;
also i,ooo feet of pumps, and seven of Halley’s tables. During the
year 1882, a large extent of prospecting was accomplished. At the 450-ft.
level the lode was 10 feet wide when the crushings averaged 16 dwt. to
the ton. Up to January 1886, the main shaft had been sunk to a depth
of 630 feet; declared in dividends; ,£5,000 expended in
machinery; 98,805 tons of quartz crushed, realizing 32,953 oz. of smelted
gold, 732 tons of pyrites returned 2,433 oz., and stripping copper plates
769 oz. The underground workings comprise 5,322 feet of main driving,
989 feet of cross-cutting, 2,500 feet of rising, 750 feet of main shaft-
sinking and 1,030 feet of intermediate driving. The thickness of the reef
has varied from 3 to 25 feet; in one instance it was sloped 30 feet wide.
The company have employed 100 men continuously for ten years, and made
no call on the capital. The average yield per ton of quartz throughout
is 6\ dwt. A new main shaft is now being sunk to strike the underlie
of reef, to the west of old workings.”
The new main shaft referred to in the above extract is 350 feet west
of the old engine shaft, and is about 820 feet deep, with levels at 472 ft.,
522 ft. 6 in., 607 ft. 3 in., 657 ft. 2 in., 744 ft. 2 in. and 797 ft. 8 in.
The sill of the shaft is 1,940.55 feet above sea-level and 50 feet above
the sill of the old shaft (Plates 111. and IV.).
The only work done from the new main shaft on the Rising Star
reef is at the 744-ft. 2-in. level, where the reef was cut at 82 feet east
of the shaft. Levels at this depth were driven 290 feet north and 500 feet
south along the reef, which varied in width from a track to 6 feet, and
over the whole length driven on is unpayable. P’our rises were put up
from this level to the bottom level from the old shaft (630 feet below the
sill) and prove that the payable shoot worked from the latter does not
continue to this depth. The reef was again seen at the 797-ft. 6-in. level,
where it is small, does not show gold, and has not been driven on.
Like the majority of reefs in this district the Rising Star is a fault
reef dipping about 1 in 2 westerly across the bedding of the slates and
sandstones, and striking generally with the main axial lines. When there
is no pitch of the country the strike of the reef is more or less parallel
to that of the beds; where the country pitches in either direction the reef
crosses the strike of the rocks, the angular divergence between the strikes
being greatest where the pitch is steep. The general pitch of the country
in the Rising Star mine is southerly and the greatest angle of divergence
between the strikes of the beds and reef is about 20°. The average strike
of the reef is N. 20° W. and that of the beds is N. 13 0 W. The outcrop
of the reef is between 50 and 60 feet west of a syncline and about 570 feet
east of the Rising Star anticline.
The group of rocks in which the reef was payable outcrops between
the old and the new shafts and is about 200 feet wide. Above and below
these rocks the reef proved unpayable, i.e. did not return 5 dwt. per
ton. The reef was richest near the surface and, as shown in a table
10


Ore crushed.
Gold yield.
Depth.
Tons.
0 z.
650
603.
Surface to 50ft.
1,469
6:16
50ft. to 100ft.
43,306
18,521
200ft. to 300ft.
38,243
12,729
400ft. to 500ft.
44,429
9,500
500ft. to 600ft.
2,869
768
600ft to 700ft.
The dimensions of the payable shoot are —height 500 feet, width 2 to 30
feet, length 200 to 400 feet.
of yields from the quartz reefs of the Daylesford district between March
1887 and June 1890, there was a gradual decrease in average yields
with depth as shown in the table;
Fig. 3. —Longitudinal section of the Rising Star mine, looking cast. Seale, 240 ft. to 1 in


At all depths of openings from the old shaft, levels were extended
north and south beyond the limits of the payable shoot. The reef con-
tinues in both directions but is not payable. The explanation is that it
has run out of the productive beds; it is not likely again to prove
remunerative unless it re-enters these or intersects other favorable beds.
The plan and section show that this is unlikely to happen along its longi-
tudinal extensions for considerable lengths; and experience of the Dayles-
ford reefs shows that it is improbable that a new shoot will make within
a reasonable depth below the bottom level, as within 100 feet of sinking
the reef will cross the Rising Star anticline and dip with the western
country. In west-dipping beds, so far as prospecting has gone, the fault-
reefs are not payable. Further prospecting of the Rising Star reef
within the Rising Star lease is therefore not recommended.
Fig. 4.—Cross section of the Rising Star mine, looking north, showing the probable position of the
shoot in the Rising Sun reel Scale, approx., 240 ft to 1 in.
However, the possibilities of the Rising Sun reef may be referred to.
Within the company’s ground this reef has not been prospected at the
surface. It runs roughly parallel in dip and strike with the Rising Star
reef, and should outcrop at about 30 feet west of the old shaft. At
600 feet below the surface it is coo feet west of the Rising Star reef.
It was first seen at the No. 2 level, 60 feet east of the new shaft; it
crosses the shaft at 607 feet, and the Rising Star anticline at 650 feet
below the surface. At each of these depths it was prospected by short
drives but, though auriferous, was not payable. The rocks in which it
has been prospected are those in which the Rising Star reef proved
unpayable. The rocks in which the Rising Star reef was payable lie
between the No. 2 level and the surface, and where they are intersected
by the Rising Sun reef, the chances are that there exists a payable shoot
of gold. This reef where it can be seen is as well defined and looks


*
as promising as is the Rising Star reef in the same belt of country,,
and I see no reason to doubt that in the same favorable beds it will
prove as rich as the Rising Star reef. The old shaft is well placed for
prospecting it and a cross-cut west at a depth of about 200 feet should
cut it in the productive beds at about 120 feet from the shaft.
The Rising Star anticline has been traced from the mine to the town-
ship where in places it appears to unfold and become a syncline. It has
a strong northerly pitch over nearly the whole distance of 2 miles. Its
position in the central portion of the field is between the Ajax and
Cornish anticlines, and it is 40 chains east of the former.
The mine is now closed down and the machinery is being carted
from the lease. The machinery consisted of one 24-in. cylinder, 48-in-
stroke pumping engine with condensers attached; pumps ioj-in., drawlift
11 in.; one 18-in. cylinder, 36-in. stroke winding-engine working 9-ft.
drums; two boilers (Cornish) 26 feet x 6 ft. 6in., steam pressure 70 lb.
With this machinery and the tanks attached to the cages, 26,000
gallons of water could be lifted from the mine per hour. At this rate
the workings would be unwatered in five months. When the company
started baling at the beginning of March, 1912, the water stood at 70 feet
from the surface. It took until the end of the following October to'
repair the shaft, to place pumps in position between the 522-ft. 6-in. level
and the surface, and to drain the bottom bevel.
When the mine ceased working water was making at the rate of
C,ooo gallons per hour.
[25.4.13.]
CHRISTENSEN’S AJAX MINE, DAYLESFORD.
By H.S. Whitelaw.
The Christensen’s Ajax Company was formed to prospect tjje continua-
tion of the reefs worked with good results in the Ajax and Nuggety group
of mines to the north. Up to date it has not proved payable, only one
crushing having been put through, when 600 tons yielded 10£ ounces of
gold.
It would appear from surface indications and the mine plans that the
reefs worked in the older mines continues through, and have been seen in,
the Christensen’s Ajax workings, but a survey of the mine does not reveal
the reason why the payable shoots are not continuous. A survey of the
parent mines would probably show that, coming southward, the reefs pass
from favorable into unfavorable country; it would, at any rate enable one
to locate the favorable beds in Christensen’s Ajax mine.*
The main shaft is 50 chains west of the Daylesford Post-office, 45
chains south of the Ajax mine, 670 feet west of the outcrop of the Ajax
reef (called at this end the Welcome reef), and 190 feet east of the Ajax
anticline at the surface. It is about 500 feet deep with levels at 153 ft.
1 in. (No. 1), 250 ft. 11 in. (No. 2), 322 ft. 9 in. (No. 3), 404 ft. 8 in.
(No. 4), and 484 ft. 8 in. (No. 5); see Plates V.. and VI.
Prior to the formation of the present company (18.12.08) the reef
shown on the plans as the Main or Nuggefy reef was prospected from its
outcrop to water-level (about 100 feet) over a length within the lease
of about 600 feet. Records of this work are not available, but as the reef
has been stoped here and there, it was probably payable in patches. It is
a fault-reef dipping 1 in 2 through east-dipping strata.
• A survey of the parent mine will shortly be undertal:en.—H. H., 15.12.13.


•
At the No. i level the hanging and foot-walls are 20 feet apart, at the
No. 2 level 15 feet apart, at the No. 3 level 35 feet apart, at the No. 4
level 20 feet apart, and at the No. 5 level 8 feet apart. There are walls
within these walls and each one carries a few inches of reef-quartz from
which, in places, spurs branch out. Similar characteristics prevail in the
northern mines with the difference that both the reefs (verticals) and spurs
(flat makes and wings) in certain beds contain gold in payable quantities.
Most of the work at the mine has been done at and above the No. 1
level, where the reef has been driven on to the boundary 200 feet north
and 420 feet south. It was from this level, and an intermediate 70 feet
above, that the crushing referred to was taken.
At No. 2 level there are levels 300 feet in length; at No. 3 level, 710
feet in length; at No. 4 level, 350 feet in length.
Levels Nos. 1 to 3 are connected by rises and winzes, and the ground
between them is so cut up that there is hardly room for the existence of a
gold shoot of any magnitude. At Nos. 4 and 5 levels the indications are
not such as to warrant further prospecting of this reef. At a few feet
below the latter the reef will probably cross the Ajax anticline at about
too feet west of the shaft. Reefs in the Ajax belt so far have not proved
profitable on the western side of the anticline.
To the east of the Nuggety reef, several lode-tracks have been dis-
closed in the cross-cuts. At No. 1 level three have been prospected, two
in the main cross-cut and one 170 feet east of the reef at 210 feet south
•of the main cross-cut. The last showed encouraging prospects when first
rut, being about 8 inches wide, and carrying a fair sample of gold and a
good percentage of galena. It has been driven on north and south for a
length of 65 feet over all, and is only a track in the faces. When dis-
covered it was supposed to be the continuation of one showing in the main
cross-cut at 175 feet east of the shaft, but my plan shows that it is more
likely to be separate and distinct, and, if it lives, to be found to the east
of the face of the main cross-cut. It is somewhat deflected in strike near
its intersection with an east back (called the ‘ 1 indicator ”) north of the
cross-cut, but like the main reef, with which it is roughly parallel, it
crosses the strata from south-east to north-west, the angular divergence
between the strikes being 20°. It is intended to extend the main cross-
cut in search of this track. Still further east is the Welcome, which is
probably a continuation of the Ajax reef. At the surface it is 670 feet
east of the shaft, and in the No. 3 cross-cut it is 485 feet east of the shaft.
The last 120 feet of this cross-cut is inaccessible, having fallen in beyond
where the country is fractured by a dyke. The reef, according to the
•manager (Mr. Christensen), dips 1 in 2 to the west, and is about 8 feet
wide. It has not been prospected, a somewhat remarkable fact seeing that
it appears to be an extension of a reef that was rich in the Ajax and other
mines to the north. Observations and measurements made during the pro-
gress of the survey make it appear that it is to the east of the Nuggety
reef that operations, to be profitable, must be directed, and it may be
found that the Welcome (Ajax) reef in the Christensen’s Ajax ground, at a
greater depth than has yet been attained, intersects the beds in which it
was payable in the Ajax mine. It is along this line of intersection that
gold deposition in the form of shoots should be looked for.
Much of the gold won from the Ajax-Nuggety group of reefs was con-
tained in spurs (flat-makes and wings) branching from the hanging-wall
side of the “ verticals.” These generally have a southerly pitch; several
have been seen in the Christensen’s Ajax mine, and three have been pros-
pected, but have not proved of value, at the No. 1 level.
[29.4.13.}


NEW CORNISH MINES LTD. (MITCHELL’S SHAFT)
DAYLESFORD.
By. W. Baragwanath.
This property is situated south of Daylesford, and is partly within the
township boundary. The work at the time of the survey was confined to
prospecting at Mitchell’s shaft and pumping at Bonnard’s shaft, the shafts
on the northern portion of the property being idle. A survey was made
of the whole of the accessible workings in Mitchell’s shaft as a result of
which I append the following notes:
Several formations traverse the property, but in the absence of defi-
nite information I will first give a description of the workings, reserving
till the conclusion a correlation of the lodes, &c. The shaft is sunk in an
anticline which has a southerly pitch where exposed in the gullies both to
the north and to the south. From surface observations, the syncline to
the east is 1,330 feet distant from this anticline, while the syncline to tha.
Fig. 5.—Sketch section of Mitchell's shaft. Scale, about 600 ft. to 1 in.
west is 350 feet distant, and is succeeded by minor folds (Fig. 5). At No.
2 Level, 271 feet from the surface, the anticline is 35 feet east of the shaft.
At No. 3 Level, 331 feet from the surface, the anticline is 50 feet east of
the shaft. On the west side of the shaft a black slate with a laminated
quartz vein (back) dips west at 45 0 ; this is regarded as Collier’s lode.
A plat cut at 475 feet from the surface exposes two western legs, the
upper one 6 inches thick, and the lower one 3 to 4 inches; from the dip
of these I anticipate that the centre will be located within 6 feet of the
east side of the opening. (See Plates VII., VIII., and IX.)
At 525 feet from the surface a plat is cut; 10 feet above this plat on
north side of the shaft, an auriferous saddle or spur in the anticline was
worked in a slate formation overlying a coarse sandstone and pitching
south. The lode was worked north about 60 feet from the shaft, but these
workings were mostly closed.
At 560 feet from the surface a plat was cut in hard sandstone with-
quartz spurs, and a drive -was put in southerly to intersect on its southerly
pitch the saddle which had been worked in the level above; a rise was put
up from this drive, but details of the workings are not available.
At No. 4 Level, 650 feet from the surface, a cross-cut easterly passed
through the anticline at 15 feet from the shaft.


At No. 5 Level (720 feet) and No. 6 Level (795 feet), the anticline lies
4o the west of the plat, while at No. 7 Level (892 feet) and No. 8 Level
<l,OOO feet) the fold shows in the plats. From this section it appears as
if the general inclination of the axial plane is to the east, but that slipping
■on certain beds has had the effect of bringing it back to .vertically below
iits position on the surface within 1,000 feet of sinking.
At Nos. 4 (0 8 levels cross-cuts have been put out easterly, the longest
ibeing that at No. 8 level.
No. 8 Level (1,000 feet).—-Regular, easterly dipping country shows
throughout; the strata consist of alternating slates and sandstones,
occasionally in beds of considerable thickness, with black slates occurring
at intervals. Much slipping has taken place on the black slates, and thin
■laminated quartz veins (backs) show. A sandstone with slate breccia is
■exposed at 650 feet in the cross-cut; this bed is 4 feet wide. Some of
fhe fragments are angular, others are contorted, and some are rounded.
Quartz spurs are numerous, especially from 350 feet to 450 feet in the
cross-cut, and they appear in part to occupy incipient faults. Much water
as draining through at this point, and this seems to indicate an abundance
: °f stone overhead. A rise at this point is desirable. From 460 feet to
540 feet a bed of grey slate occurs, corresponding to the bed exposed in
the eastern end of Nos. 4 and 5 levels; at all places along the eastern wall
it carries a black slate, which is important since it is the one on the inter-
section of which with the Cornish lode two rich shoots (known as Devy’s)
■were located and w-orked five or six years ago. At 625 feet from the shaft
a well-defined pug or lode-track with an average dip of 65° to 70°
•west was cut ; a parallel wall occurs 5 feet from this on the west side,
and, immediately beyond: the wall, auriferous spurs were met with in a
•wide bed of slate. At 15 feet east of the pug or lode-track a rise was
■■started to intersect other veins and to test the lode-track. Drives 73 feet
.north and 65 feet south on this showed the walls to be continuous and
associated with broken country and quartz spurs, some of which were auri-
ferous. The line of strike of this lode-formation shows it to be identical
with that cut at 320 feet east of Bonnard’s shaft in the 702-ft. level,
where auriferous spurs were worked in slate under the lode, but no attempt
lias been made to prove the intersection of these spurs with the main wall.
At the 966-ft. level in Bonnard’s shaft short drives were put in north
and south on what appears to be this Crown lode at 245 feet from the
shaft, but from information gained during the survey it is apparent that
arising on the formation would be preferable to driving.
At 122 feet east of Mitchell’s shaft a drive bearing north-westerly was
put in for a distance of 140 feet along a good wall (‘‘ a counter ”*) dipping
’west at 75 0 ; a rise connects to the level above, and passes through
spurs. Southwards the same wall with large bodies of stone on the west
side was followed for 200 feet, when a cross-cut easterly was put in 85
feet, cutting a black slate wall agreeing with that passed through in the
main cross-cut at 250 feet from the shaft. At 40 feet in this southern cross-
cut a rise was started on a highly graphitic wall with veins pitching south
at 15°.
A good wall dipping west at 70° with crushed strata and quartz
showing, was met with 12 feet east of the shaft; it appears to be the track
-of the Cornish lode. No driving has been done on this, nor has the
northern drive at 122 feet been continued far enough northerly to intersect
this main lode-channel.
• A counter-lode or counter is a convenient term used locally for a fault intersecting the lode
obliquely ; strike usually N. 40° W., dip 70° B.W. See p. 20.


No 7 level (892 feet). —This level connects by a northerly drive along
the Cornish lode to Bonnard’s shaft, 966-ft. level. The cross-cut east
passes through the same strata as the lower level, and at 70 feet east of
the shaft the track of the Cornish lode, which dips west at 70 0 , was
driven on. The strata east of the lode dip easterly at angles ranging from
■35 0 to 45 0 . To show how nearly horizontal is the intersection of
Fig. 6. —Sketch section along east side of drive.
the strata and the lode, it may be noticed that the eastern wall of the
drive on the lode carries the same thin bed of sandstone with quartz spurs
for over 100 feet (Fig. 6). In the northerly drive at 130 feet from the main
cross-cut, a cross-cut (No. 1) east passed through auriferous spurs and leaders,
with a southerly pitch in slate for a width of 30 feet; at 70 feet east of the
lode the spurry country ended with a back carrying 3 inches of laminated
quartz, and dipping east at 50°. At 350 feet north of the cross-cut a
rise was put up on the Cornish lode, which here dips 65° west. From
this rise, at 60 feet above the main level, and ro feet from the lode, a
cross-cut east passed through a black slate back apparently identical with
that met with in the short east cross-cut (No. 1) on the main level; the
cross-cut ended in a big slate at 58 feet from the rise.
In the rise 100 feet above the 892-ft. level, an old drive (795-ft. level,
Mitchell’s shaft, 864-ft. level, Bonnard’s shaft) was met at a point where
some auriferous spurs are reported to have pitched underfoot. These
spurs, which were highly mineralized and in kindly slate, were being
opened up during the survey, while the cross-cut was being extended to
make a connexion for ventilation and economic handling with a new drive
at the 795-ft. level.
In the main cross-cut, at 130 feet from the shaft, some rising and
stoping were done on a continuation of the belt of country which was in-
tersected in No. 1 cross-cut from the north drive. At 160 feet east of the
shaft, a drive on the same wall (counter) which was driven on at 122 feet
east of the shaft at the 1,000-ft. level, formerly connected to No. 1 cross-
■cut. A winze from, this drive connects to the level below.
7 Level. —The cross-cut at this level passes through strata Paving
an average dip of 65°. At 115 feet east of the shaft, the track of the
Cornish lode was passed, and a drive was put in northwards on spurs in
slate 15 feet east of the lode-track. Southwards, at Ixs feet from the
shaft, the drive turns easterly from the Cornish lode-track on a counter
■or wall parallel to that followed by the drive northerly at 215 feet from
the shaft, showing a well-defined lode, 10 feet wide, with numerous spurs
in the footwall, highly mineralized and associated with black slates; more
work, especially rising, is desirable in a westerly direction towards the
Cornish lode.
At 215 feet east of the shaft the drive follows a counter for 200 feet,
and then meets the track of the Cornish lode-wall dipping west at 70°;
For 40 feet the drive follows this wall, but the drive on the lode beyond this
point is now closed. A cross-cut east for 45 feet through slate met a wall
■dipping 57 0 east; a drive is being put in along this wall to connect


with the top of the rise from the Bg2-ft. level. The main cross-cut at
250 feet from the shaft intersected a small auriferous spur pitching south
at 12 0 in a bar of hard sandstone. The face of the main at
260 feet is still in hard sandstone dipping east.
720-/1. Level. —The cross-cut east at this level appears to have cut the
Cornish lode at 165 feet east of the shaft, where drives north and south
were put in; at 185 feet and at 240 feet are old workings, but no infor-
mation as to their nature and extent was obtained. From 286 feet to 356
feet a bed of slate shows in the cross-cut with a black slate and laminated
quartz vein (back) dipping east at 6o° in the face ■ this back agrees with
that met at 540 feet in the 1,000-ft. cross-cut.
650-//. Level.— This level corresponds to the 725-ft. level in Bonnard’s
shaft. The cross-cut east from the shaft, after passing through the anti-
cline at 15 feet, exposes beds dipping regularly to the east at from 45 0
to 65°. A number of laminated quartz veins on black slates (backs)
show between 50 feet and 3ro feet. At 190 feet from the shaft the Con
nish lode was met, with spurs on the footwall in sandstone country to 220
feet. At 255 feet from the shaft a drive extends northwards along the
western edge of a large bed of slate, dipping east at 45 0 to 55 0 ;
150 feet northwards the drive intersects the underlying sandstone bed
which here carries quartz spurs pitching south at 12 0 ; at 250 f:et
from the main cross-cut a long cross-cut was put out westerly, connecting
with the main cross-cut by parallel drives on the Cornish lode, but these
workings have now collapsed and are inaccessible. At 25 feet above the
level at this point, the bottom of Devy’s shoot of stone was met with. At
15 feet north of this cross-cut a counter comes in striking north-westerly,
and at 40 feet north of the cross-cut a three-way rise intersected Devy’s
shoot 38 feet above the level. At 60 feet further along the drive the Cor-
nish lode-wall, which dips 55 0 to 6o° west, is met with, and the
drive continues straight for 250 feet; cross-cuts from this wall passed
through auriferous spurs at from 20 to 40 feet east, and these were sloped
above and below the level. A winze below the drive from the point where
the cross-cut goes east to Bonnard’s shaft, connects to the 864-ft. level.
South of Bonnard’s shaft, a number of spurs occur in east-dipping strata.
Fig. 7.—Sketch section, showing the shoot (Devy’s) at the intersection of the Cornish lode and the
big slate bed


From observations in this level, it is apparent that the rich shoot of gold
worked above the level was found at the intersection of the Cornish lode and
the big slate bed (Fig. 7). From sections in the company’s oflice at the mine,
it appears that the formation consisted of a huge spurry mass wholly con-
fined to the slate, and that the black slate on the wall on the eastern side
was regarded as the eastern wall of the lode. At the south end of the
drive from Bonnard’s shaft nice slates occur, and a rise has been put up
on these for some distance. From 23 feet above this level in Bonnard’s
shaft, Angwin worked a shoot of gold which appears to have occurred in
the same state bed as Devy’s. Angwin’s shoot is said to have ended at
Bonnard's shaft. The most southerly workings on this make are now
utilized as a bob-chamber. Above the 650-ft. level in Mitchell’s .shaft, no
cross-cut has been put in to the Cornish lode, which is extensively worked
from the old Cornish shaft to a depth of 525 feet as far south as due east
of Mitchell’s shaft.
The uffer Levels in Mitchell’s shaft were confined to Collier’s and the
Sandstone lodes. What is known as Collier’s lode showing at the 331-ft.
level is merely a back, and would reach the cap in 70 feet of rising on its
dip at a point about 10 feet below the 27i-ft. level.
In the 331 -ft. Level, at 35 feet east of the shaft, a mineral seam 1 inch
thick occurs. Nothing has been done to test the anticline above the level.
At 70 feet east of the shaft a drive was put in on what is known as the
Sandstone lode, apparently a large, spurry formation associated with a
nearly vertical fault.
At the 27 i-ft. Level a drive north on the Sandstone lode at 80 feet from
the shaft shows a body of stone over 6 feet in width extending for over
60 feet from the cross-cut. In the north face of the drive there are two
parallel walls about 2 feet apart and dipping 73 0 west across the
strata, which consist of black slates and sandstone dipping 55 0 east.
To the south is a large body of lode and spurs. Sloping was carried on
between this and the lower level in a body of low-grade stone.
At the 21 o-ft. Level a drive south at 25 feet east of the shaft starts in
west-dipping country, but at about 60 feet east-clipping country appears;
it is not clear whether this reversal in dip is caused by a fault. A winze
sunk in this drive follows an east leg 3 feet in width which dips east at
40° for about 20 feet, where a fault, the Sandstone lode, intersects it;
below this, occur large masses of spurs, which were stoped in part to the
level below.
But little work has been done in these upper levels, and owing to the
state of the workings I was not able to make more extensive observations;
sufficient evidence was obtainable, however, to suggest that systematic work
on the anticline would reveal makes of stones by rising, and rising on the
walls of the Sandstone lode would intersect spurs, some of which may be
auriferous.
Correlation of the Lodes.
All the workings have been confined to east-dipping strata. The anti-
cline lies close to the shaft; it pitches southwards at 12 0 to 20°,
and the strike of the axial line is N. 20° W. Lines of fault occur
parallel in strike to the axial line and dipping on the average westerly at
70°; these form the main lode courses, the Sandstone, the Cornish,
and the Crown. Collier’s reef at the surface appears to be associated
with the anticline, and if it is a break parallel to the Cornish lode,


Fig. 8.—Sketch section showing
apparent displacement of the fold on
the Sandstone reef fault line.
nothing has been done to test it at a depth;
but from information obtained I am of
opinion that a succession of eastern backs was
worked to a depth of over 200 feet on this
line. Further eastern backs show in the levels
below this, but have not been exploited.
The Sandstone reef, which is found on a
fault-plane, outcrops about 60 feet east of
the anticline, and appears to intersect the
axial plane about 350 feet from the surface;
below this point it is probably parallel to the
bedding. The anticline is probably shifted
upwards about 90 feet on the upper side of
the fault (Fig. 8).
The Cornish line of lode, as stated above, occurs along a fault plane,
which strikes N. 20° W. and dips 70° west across easterly dip-
ping strata. The intersection of the lode and the beds is horizontal.
Shoots of payable stone occur at the contact of the lode with certain beds.
The last worked shoot (Devy’s), above the 650-ft. level, was found at the
contact of the Cornish line with a wide bed of slate below the fault. From
the correlation of lower beds in the section, the upward movement of the
hanging-wall country is apparently about 70 feet. I cannot see any con-
nexion between the strata above the fault and the auriferous shoot.
Fig. 9. —Sketch plan showing the relation of the main lode and “counters.”
The term “counter-lode” or counter is used locally for certain
breaks or faults intersecting the lodes obliquely. The general strike of
these faults is N. 40° W., and their dip is 70 0 south-westerly.
They appear to act as feeders to the main line. A counter-lode was driven
on at the 1,000-ft. level, 122 feet east of the shaft, and the same lode
was driven on at 892-ft. and 795-ft. levels ; auriferous spurs were found
at both the upper levels near the junction with the main lode, but the drive
at
As might be expected, shoots of stone in these counter-lodes were short
and pitched south rapidly owing to their sharp intersection with the con-
taining strata. What appears to be a parallel counter-lode was driven on
south at the 795-ft. level. As to the influence of these junctions oft the


gold shoots, it may be noted that a counter, here carrying no stone, formed
the southern end of Devy’s No. i shoot, and that a similar counter occurs
at the southern end of No. 2 shoot. Mr. Edwards, the underground
manager, who supplied me with much data concerning old workings and
pointed out the above, also showed me a counter in a drive south of Bon-
nard’s shaft which would account for the termination of Angwin’s shoot
above the 725-ft. level.
That the shoots of gold worked
were confined to the contact of the
lode with certain beds is beyond
doubt, and other similar points for
favorable deposition should occur.
Auriferous or other spurs conform
in pitch to the pitch of the fold,
i.e., i2° to so 0 S., and do not
appear to have any connexion
with the lode channels. Apart
from the intersection of counter-
lodes and spurs, there is nothing
to warrant the opinion that the
auriferous shoots pitch south; the
shoots will be found along a hori-
zontal plane except where the in
tersection occurs in the apex of
the anticline, such as will be
found on the Cornish lode just
below the x,oooft level.
Fig. 10. —Diagrammatic section showing
position of auriferous shoots in the Cornish
reef and suggested positions in the parallel
reefs. Scale: About 200 ft. to 1 in.


Fig. 12.—Plan corresponding to the section in Fig. 11.
Suggestions for Future Work.
For future work, now that the mine has been so extensively explored,
I would suggest that—-
{a) A rise should be put upon the Crown lode at the i,oooft. level.
( b) If possible, this lode should be tested below the i,ooo-ft. level.
This might be done by sinking an incline winze on the lode.
From the indications in the old workings, a favorable position,
analogous to that of Bevy’s shoot in the Cornish lode, occurs
within 200 feet from the point where the Crown lode is inter-
sected in the cross-cut. A counter shows in the main cross-cut
120 feet back from the lode; on the footwall side of the
Cornish lode, this counter was the southern end of No. i shoot.
Fig. 13.—Sketch Section showing the intersection of the big slate and the Crown lode.
22


(c) A rise should be put up at the southern end of the 795-ft. level in
the large body of stone.
(d) The spurry country at the top of the rise above the 892-ft. level
at 350 "feet north of shaft should be tested.
{e) The south drive at the 650-ft. level should be continued, and a rise
put up in footwall country for new shoots of stone in the same
belts of slate as v, ere proved to the north.
The old workings from the Argus shaft do not appear to have been
carried on below 660 feet, at which depth I can And no record of the lode
being cut when the mine was closed in 1886. Of the upper workings in
Bonnard's shaft I have little information; if not already tested by levels
above, I would suggest that —
(/) A rise be put up on the Cornish lode at a point 100 feet south of
Bonnard’s shaft (725-ft. level), and 100 feet west, i.e., above
the winze to the 860-ft. level.
[75.22.70.]
THE AJAX MINE, DAYLESFORD.
By W. Baragwanath.
The Ajax mine is situated about x mile north-west of the centre of
Daylesford township, and is the most northerly of a series of mines which
have caused a strong revival in mining in the Daylesford district during
the past four years. The returns from the Ajax mine, between October,
1906, and March, 1911, were 92,152 tons crushed for 48,163 oz. of gold.
Latterly, the returns have fallen below the average ; this must not be
taken as an indication that the resources of the mine are becoming
exhausted, but merely that the location of rich shoots has not kept abreast
of stoping operations. That a very considerable amount of prospecting
work has been carried out is apparent, but in a number of places further
prospecting is advised.
In structure the mine presents many points of likeness to the Cornish
belt, which lies about a mile to the east. A series of west-dipping faults
intersect the east-dipping strata, and along these faults large bodies of
quartz occur at many points, while at others only a few inches show.
Commonly a ‘ ‘ pug ' ’ or plastic clay is associated with the fault line, but
the pug is absent in many places where the fault crosses hard sandstone.
The quartz associated with the faults is usually laminated near the course
of the break, frequently along one wall; next to this is a breccia of quartz
and country rock, and then spurs intersecting the adjacent strata.
Besides the formations associated with the faults, a number of well
laminated reefs, usually small, occur along the bedding planes, accom-
panying black slates. These reefs are similar to the legs of the saddle
reefs of Bendigo, but in the mine under review they seldom reach a width
of over 4 inches.
The two above-mentioned formations dip respectively 6o° west
and 6o° east. Besides these, a flatter series of veins or spurs
occurs; they dip westerly at an angle of about 45 0 , but occasionally
become nearly horizontal in an east and west direction, though they invari-
ably have a marked pitch, averaging about 26° to the south. These
spurs vary very considerably in geologic age as well as in metalliferous
contents. The quartz is usually white, but in places there is a rough
banding, which might be accounted for by the recurrent opening of a
Assure. Close to the faults, spurs may be noticed intersecting the strata
23


at all angles; these are of only local significance, and are quite distinct
from those above-mentioned, which may be traced for a hundred feet or
more laterally, with a thickness of several feet.
The strata in which the payable lodes occur dip easterly. An anti-
cline passes west of the shaft, and is 376 feet away from it at the
surface. At the No. 2 level (300-ft.) it is 310 feet west of the shaft, and afc
No. 7 level (726-ft.) it is only 210 feet away, thus proving the anticlinal axis
to have a very decided list to the east in depth. The strata consist largely
of wide belts of slate, through which occur narrower beds of black slate
alternating with belts of quartzite or very hard crystalline sandstone. In
the black slates fossils are fairly abundant both on the surface and in the
material from underground, where not crushed by fault movements. The
chief fossils are graptolites, principally the three and four branched
varieties of Tetragraptus fruticosus, associated with Phyllograptus typus.
Portions of Crustacea also occur. These fossils indicate that the beds
belong to the Bendigo zone of the Lower Ordovician.
The dip of the strata varies from 40° to 75 0 east, being on an average
less than usual in the Ordovician elsewhere on the gold-fields. This may
be accounted for partly by the easterly list of the anticline.
No cross-courses were noticed, nor any dykes, although the latter
are common in the district.
The average strike of the strata when some distance east of the fold
is N. 20 0 W.
The strike of the anticline is N. 14 0 30' W., with a northerly pitch
of 20".
The strike of the lodes where they have proved profitable averages
N. 28° W., but two distinct lines, probably counter-lodes, occur, striking
north and N. 40° W. respectively. At their intersections with the main
lodes these counter-lodes mark the termination of the payable quartz; they
show at the north end of No. 5 level where they strike north; at the south
end the lode has a bearing of N. 40° W.; at the end of the west cross-cut,
at No. 6 level, is a lode striking north and south.
Two main lines of lode have been worked in the mine. Both occur
along fault planes, and are designated the Eastern and Western lodes.
The shoots of payable stone in these lodes do not appear to be associated
with a bed of slate, as was noticeable in the Cornish mine, but they
seem rather to agree with a fairly defined zone of slate and quartzite. Thus
the two shoots of rich stone, one on the Western and one on the Eastern
lode, are found in the same belt of country. The richest stopes on the
Western lode were at about the No. 2 (300-ft.) level, while on the Eastern
lode No. 4 level was the best. In transverse section these rich stopes are
seen to occur on the intersection of an alternating series of slates and
quartzites dipping about 50° easterly, with lodes dipping about 6o° to the
west.
As a preliminary guide to future prospecting, I would suggest an
eastern cross-cut at No. 7 or 8 level; the extension westerly of the cross-
cut from the north drive at No. 5 level; a cross-cut easterly from the
south drive at No. 3 level, on the Western lode, to intersect a belt ot
spurry country worked to the north; an extension of the bottom cross-cut
west for a further distance of 30 feet to cut the Western lode; and pros-
pecting the flat vein in No. 4 plat to the north of the shaft.
In conclusion, I desire to thank the mine manager, Mr. P. Lewis,
for the kindness shown to myself and party and for the assistance readily
given during my survey.
[**.5.7/.]
24


THE OLD JUBILEE MINE.
By W. Baragwanath.
The Old Jubilee Mine is situated to the east of the Ballan-road, on
the southern municipal boundary of Daylesford, about i| miles from the
town. The shaft is sunk to a depth of 450 feet, and levels opened out
thus :
No. 1 level, 264 ft. 2 in. from sill.
No. 2 level, 344 feet from sill.
No. 3 level, 424 ft. 1 in. from sill.
Intermediate, 473 ft. 3 in. from sill.
No. 4 level, 524 ft. 1 in. from sill.
For plan, longitudinal and transverse sections see Plate X.
In No. 1 Level a plat is cut on the north side of the shaft. A drive
bearing east of north leads from the plat to where old ground, the workings
of a former company, was broken into at 170 feet from the shaft. At
130 feet north of the shaft, a rise 20 feet above the level cut a small
synclinal formation, upon which rising and stoping were being done at the
time of the survey. The fold pitches north at 27 0 , and is acute. The stope
at 37 feet south of the rise broke through to former workings; in this stope
black slates and irregular spurs were noticed associated with the syncline.
If the syncline continues with the same pitch, the old ground met with in
the north face would be on the same formation. At 30 feet north of the
shaft, cross-cuts east and west were put in. The western cross-cut exposes
east-dipping strata for 60 feet, where the face is mullocked up. Eastwards
the synclinal fold occurs, at 18 feet from the drive, and is followed at
50 feet by an anticline. At 60 feet, drives northerly and southerly were
put in on a lode-formation consisting of a west-dipping fault in east-
dipping strata, where a quantity of stone has been extracted; the old
rises and winzes shown on the plan were noted, but no record of values
or extent of the stone, or of the total extent of the workings, was
obtainable.
No. 2 Level (344 feet below the sill). —The plat is cut on the north
side of the shaft, and a cross-cut runs 20 feet east to the drive. The
southern workings were closed, but to the north a lode track having an
average strike of N. 20° W. was surveyed for 170 feet; a fall
of rock in the drive at this point prevented the face being reached. Old
workings, rises, stopes and winzes occur along this level. The lode
formation is up to 6 feet wide in places, and has an average dip ol
45 0 westward.
No. j Level (424 feet below the sill). —The plat is cut on the north
side of the shaft, and the cross-cut runs west for 50 feet. Drives,
southerly no feet and northerly 300 feet, showed a formation dipping
westerly at from 40° to 50 0 . Near the cross-cut a block
of payable ground was stoped out by tributers, but the 'workings are
closed. From 150 feet north to near the face, spurs in sandstone have
been stoped. These appear to be closely associated with the lode-track.
The sandstone dips easterly. In the southern drive, underhand stoping
shows on what are apparently east-dipping spurs.
An intermediate level, 473 ft. 3 in. below the sill, was opened to
test a vein which carried gold where cut in the shaft, and which was
supposed to be identical with that stoped below No. 3 level. Drives,
50 feet north and 30 feet south, failed to disclose payable stone.
No. 4. Level (524 feet 1 in. below the sill). —The plat is cut on the south
side of the shaft, and exposes a syncline pitching north at 30°.
The cross-cut west passes through east-dipping strata for 130 feet to
where the lode formation is driven on southerly for 80 feet and northerly


for 380 feet. The formation varies in width ;at 130 feet north of the
cross-cut it has been taken out for a width of 15 feet; at 250 feet north,
upwards of 20 feet of lode and spurs show ; while in the northern face,
at the time of the survey, the lode-track consisted of less than 6 inches
of rubbly quartz in hard sandstone dipping east. On the western side
of the drive, a black slate carrying a laminated quartz vein 4 inches wide
showed several coarse specks of gold at the intersection or a small spur
In the east cross-cut from the shaft an anticline is exposed 46 feet
east of the syncline; it pitches north at 35 0 , and the strata dip east for
47 feet to the face.
A feature in the geology of the mine is the occurrence of a series of
decomposed dykes with a general east and west strike. The movement
on the lode-track has been subsequent to the introduction of the dykes,
and it is noticeable that the portion of the dyke on the eastern side or
foot-wall of the formation is 27 feet further north than the part on the
hanging-wall side. This may have been produced by a longitudinal move-
ment along the lode-track, but it is more probable that an upward move-
ment of the hanging-wall side of the lode has occurred, since the syncline
and anticline exposed in No. 1 level appear to agree with those exposed
in Nos. 3 and 4 levels. A movement of about no feet would produce
this. Subsequently a north and south movement, irregular in degree,
appears to have taken place; the details of this I hope to work out when
the field is surveyed throughout.
On the surface, at 350 feet west of the shaft, an anticline occurs;
it is probably identical with that exposed in the Ajax group of mines,
but owing to the disturbance in the vicinity of Stony Creek basin I am
unable to say definitely if this is the case until further surveys are
completed.
In conclusion, the existence of west-dipping faults with large bodies
of stone similar to the Ajax and Cornish lodes is evident; they appear
to have been tried in part, but owing to the high pitch of the folds and
the track cutting this folded country, such shoots must necessarily be
broken and short.
Further prospecting to the west is suggested in the upper levels, say,
at No. 2, where a cross-cut could be put out to the anticline; while driving
south at No. 4 level would intersect country not yet exposed in the mine.
A rise above No. 4 level from the north drive would intersect in 100 feet
of rising more country than 300 feet of driving, and, it appears to me,
would be a quicker and better means of testing.
[18.8.11.1
STEELE’S PIONEER MINE, YANDOIT, NEAR DAYLESFORD.
By W. Baragwanath.
The Steele’s Pioneer Company’s mine is situated at Yandoit, a small
hamlet 9 miles N.N.W. of the township of Daylesford.
Steele’s reef was first opened up towards the end of the fifties, and rich
yields were obtained*. In January, 1861, the Mining Surveyor reports
the sale of the original property for Several of the adjoining
claims obtained good yields, but in April of that year an average of
15 dwt. to the ton was regarded as “ barely payable.”
Again in the eighties an attempt was made to open up the lode, and a
long cross-cut was put out east at 200 feet from surface. Some of
these old workings were repaired and utilized by the present company,
who found several splices of stone to the west of the main lode, and ob-
tained payable returns from them.
* The Gold Fields of Victoria in 1863, p. 126. Anon. Melb., 1863.
26


The present main shaft is sunk 525 feet south of the old Steele’s
shaft. Four levels at 96 feet, 148 feet, 244 feet and 420 feet from the
surface have been opened out, and short cross-cuts put in to the lode. The
lode showing in these workings consists of a bedded formation, on which
slipping has taken place, dipping west and having a strike of N. 2 0 E.
Each level exposes a lode of exceptionally inviting appearance, the stone
being laminated throughout and highly charged with iron-, arsenical-, and
a little copper-pyrites, with galena and “black jack” (zinc blende) in
places, and usually a little fine gold. (See Plates XI. and XII.)
As stated above, the lode is typically a bedded one, but faulting, with
upward movement on the hanging-wall side, disguises in part the true
nature of the formation. The old workings of the former companies were
inaccessible, but plans and sections of these were kindly supplied by Mr.
J. Howells, the manager. The shoot of gold from which the rich yields
were obtained occurred in the northern portion of the mine, and appears
to have been situated where slipping on the hanging-wall side has caused
a small extent of folded country to be in contact with the lode. This small
fold or roll shows in a cross-cut east from the 200-ft. level in Steele’s old
shaft.
In the present main shaft the cross-cut east at No. 1 Level (96 feet
below the surface) passes through east-dipping strata nearly as far as the
lode, where a crumpling shows. The lode at 33 feet from the shaft has a
dip of 59° west, and the strata of the footwall dip east at 6o°. Drives
north and south show the lode to be from r foot to 3 feet wide.
At No. 2 Level (148 feet from the surface) the cross-cut shows that the
strata and lode dip -west, the lode being 10 feet east of the shaft. At this
level the drive north shows the lode to have a slightly undulating pitch
first to the north, then horizontal, then southerly. In the north face the
lode and strata on both walls dip 74 0 west, the lode being 2 feet wide.
A stope taken out above this level proved the formation to be barely pay-
able.
At No. 3 Level (244 feet from the surface) the lode is 10 feet west of
the shaft, the plat being cut in a sandstone bar, which dips west. The
north drive at this level shows a well-defined wall without a bend or break
for upwards of 700 feet. The lode and strata are coincident for the whole
distance, and the general average dip of the lode is 70° west. Lenti-
cular makes of stone were met with in driving as shown on the section.
At 530 feet north of the main shaft a rise connects to Steele’s old shaft,
and secures good ventilation.
When sinking the main shaft below No. 3 level, three faults were
passed through ; these displaced the lode until, at 410 feet, it was met
with in the shaft.
At No. 5 Level (420 feet below the surface) the lode was
5 feet west of the shaft, and was driven on north for 270 feet; its
average dip is 55 0 to 65° westwards. Striations on the wall (slick-
ensides) dip north at 70°. At 150 feet from shaft, the fault pitching
north (marked Con the section) was met with. This fault displaced the
lode above it until, at 260 feet from the shaft, the northerly pitch of the
slide completely cut out the lode from the drive. \ rise was put up on
the slide at this point, and the lode was located above, but after a few
more feet of rising, another fault (A) was met with. By rising on this
fault the lode was picked up; it was here nearly vertical, and was inter-
sected by a, formation dipping east consisting of black slate and quartz.
Ten feet above the fault these formations widened out, and an intermediate
level north and south at this point (90 feet above 420-ft. level) showed the
lode to be auriferous. Work at this point was in progress during the
survey.
27


In the west cross-cut at No. 5 level, the strata west of the lode have a
uniform eastern dip for 100 feet, while all east of the lode for 180 feet
dip west. That the of dip is due to folding there can be no doubt,
but the syncline is not yet apparent, and slipping on the west-dipping beds
has caused those dipping east to overlap.
In the eastern cross-cut at 90 feet from the shaft a lode 6 feet wide
was cut; 20 feet further east another lode 7 feet wide was passed through,
and drives were put in 70 feet north and 240 feet south along this. Both
these lodes are bedded formations dipping west at 65° to 70°, and
are nicely laminated, with minerals throughout, but they are not payable.
At 197 feet south of the cross-cut a rise was put up 80 feet on a large body
of stone. From its dip this line of lode appears to be some feet west of
the Eastern reef as worked to shallow depth, but a change in dip may
occur between the points observed.
With such permanent and recurring for-
mations, the mine is yet in its infancy, but
the location of the gold shoots has yet to
be determined. From general analogy to
ether lodes at Daylesford and elsewhere,
shoots of auriferous stone may be expected
where a lode dipping wegt meets strata
dipping east, if the nature of the intersect-
ing beds be favorable. Although Steele’s
lode, as exposed, has the appearance of a
bedded lode, there can be no doubt that a
masked fault exists along the hanging
wall.
Between A and B in the sketch section (Fig. 14) some small folding is
passed through, but the reef on the whole is bedded. Between C (No. 5
level) and D (below bottom level) the reef will be conformable with the strata
on the footwall, but it will be cut at an angle by the beds on the hanging
wall. In this position I would expect shoots of different values to be
found. No indication can be obtained of the extent of this belt in a
vertical direction, but a considerable length is assured.
Future work should consist of shaft-sinking with all expedition; the
extension of No. 5 cross-cut east towards the anticline; and cross-cutting
west from No. 4 plat.
By shaft-sinking the Eastern lode would be met in the shaft at about
200 feet below No. 5 level. This lode is much stronger than Steele’s and
possibly more faulted, and consequently there is more likelihood of further
auriferous makes being met with where the east-dipping strata override
on the faulted lode. The extension of No. 5 cross-cut would give a good
idea of the strata which, so far as proved, consist of likelydooking black
and grey slates with fairly coarse sandstones, much squeezed and mineral-
ized. The cross-cut west from No. 4 plat should cut the reef in the back
of the cross-cut above slide A.
In the eastern cross-cut a mineral spring of good palatable water highly
charged with gas occurs at 100 feet from shaft.
[27.12.10.]
Fig. 14.
28


CONNELL’S MINE, SPARGO CREEK.
By W. Baragwanath.
Connell’s mine is situated on the eastern bank of the Werribee River,
about half a mile south-easterly from the Mineral Springs Hbtel, on the
Ballan to Daylesford road, about 12 miles north of Ballan and 11 miles
south of Daylesford.
The workings of the mine consist of a number of shallow shafts, now
collapsed, and surface cuts, with an adit level about 80 feet below the
crown of the hill. In the surface cuts east- and west-dipping strata are
exposed, and a hand bore was put down some years ago in an anticline
looking for saddle reefs, but without success. Spurs, some probably auri-
ferous, occur both in the slate and in the sandstone beds.
In the adit level seme spurs associated with a vertical fault have been
stoped above and below the level by a former company —McDonald and
party. An anticline was passed through in the tunnel about 250 feet from
the entrance; very little stone was cut in this level, but the eastern face
exposes what, in my opinion, is the most promising cut in the tunnel, i.e.,
a large bed of black fossiliferous slates, dipping east, and carrying mineral
seams in places. Further cross-cutting may reveal quartz associated with
this bed.
For further working I would suggest prospecting largely by trenching
and loaming. The extension of the tunnel may be advisable, but surface
operations will probably be a quicker method of revealing spurs which
might be profitable. ,
A nice sample of gold was shown to me during my visit. This consisted
of specks up to a pennyweight each obtained from surface spurs. With
the exception of the spurs, no large bodies of stone have been found nor
any permanent lodes or tracks cut.
Samples of the fossils obtained from the eastern face have been for-
warded to the head office for determination. The presence of what appears
to be Phyllografius typus is interesting, as this fossil appears to be present
in the auriferous areas at Bendigo, Castlemaine Daylesford and other
gold-fields.
When the survey of the Daylesford field is well in hand another in-
spection of this interesting area will be worth making, as the line of the
Daylesford belt will pass in the immediate vicinity.
[7.77.//.]
THE LADY STAUGHTON MINE, SPARGO CREEK.
By H. S. Whitelaw.
The Lady Staughton mine is situated about 1 mile east of the Spargo
Creek post-office and 11 miles south of Daylesford, at an altitude of about
2,200 feet above sea-level.
In a length of 600 feet, over which gold has been traced along the
surface, three shafts have been sunk, viz. : —Hogan’s, Breathwaite’s and
McDonald’s. Hogan’s is an inclined shaft at the south end of the reef,
and follows the reef on a dip of 65° to 75 0 W. from the surface to a
depth of 27 feet. At the top of the shaft the reef is 8 inches wide; at
the bottom it is 2 feet wide; and,• according to Mr. Watt, who represented
the manager on the occasion of my visit, it is auriferous from top to
bottom. A dish of rubble said to have come from the bottom of the
shaft was washed in my presence, and showed a fair “ tail ” of gold.
Breathwaite’s shaft, about roo feet north of Hogan’s, is sunk on the west
side of the reef. From the bottom, about 50 feet below the surface, there
29


is a cross-cut to the hanging-wall of the reef which here is said to contain
line gold. McDonald’s shaft is about 500 feet north of Breathwaite’s;
spurs were cut in it, but no defined reef, and it is not certain that the reef
extends this far north. The rocks bounding the reef are chiefly thick-
bedded, siliceous sandstone and olive-green slates, which appear to dip to
the east in Hogan’s shaft; in some trenches to the northward, however, the
beds dip to the west, and what appears to be bedding in Hogan’s shaft
may be cleavage.
The average strike of the reef and beds is N. 7 0 W., and the pitch of
the beds is 5 0 S.
Little can be seen of the structure of the reef. McDonald’s and
Breathwaite’s shafts are timbered from top to bottom, and Hogan’s contains
several feet of water and no ladders. The reef runs along the western
side of a spur, heading from which is a gully running in a south-westerly
direction. The gully has in places been tried, by prospectors, and
apparently does not contain gold in payable quantities. This being so, I
take it that the portion of the reef that has been denuded from above the
present surface was very poor, and that the present outcrop of the reef is
the top of the richer portion. The shoot of gold (if it may so be termed),
z.e., that portion of the reef which is not so poor as the remainder, proved
by surface prospecting, is about 120 feet in length, and extends for about
90 feet north of Hogan’s shaft, which is in a good position to prove by
further sinking whether the gold occurs in payable quantity at a depth.
At present the indications suggest that the gold which can be washed from
the surface and from the rocks thrown out of the shafts and trenches is
contained in the slates and spurs on the foot-wall side of the reef, as loam
gold can be obtained from the surface between the reef and top of the
spur a couple of chains to the eastward. The formation, in fact, resembles
that of the slate reef at Marong, the Homeward Bound reef at Kamarooka,
and the auriferous slates at Percydale, where the gold now found in the
cleavage planes of the slates was, it is thought, originally contained in
spurs from which it has been leached and redeposited.
[24.7.13.1
THE SPARGO CREEK MINE, SPARGO CREEK.
By H. S. Whitelaw.
The Spargo Creek mine lies about midway between the Spargo Creek
post-office and the Lady Staughton mine, at an altitude of about 2,020 feet
above sea-level.
The Werribee River runs close by the mouth of a tunnel which has been
driven easterly to intersect two reefs that have been worked, with payable
results in places, along the surface over a length of about 600 feet. These
reefs, known as the Eastern and Western, are about 260 feet apart in the
tunnel. Midway between them is a decomposed dyke, which has broken
through the country about where the rocks appear to have been folded into
an anticline. From their positions with regard to this anticline, and on
account of their dips, the two reefs have been classed as legs of a saddle
reef, the cap of which has been denuded, and a few years ago some
Ballarat miners erected a hand-boring machine at the surface between the
reefs, and started to bore for saddle reefs. The work was not persevered
with, and no quartz was found.
The Eastern reef dips to the east on the eastern side of the ant’cline,
and the western dips to the west on the western side. Along the surface
they vary in width from 2 inches to 2 ft. 6 in., and appear to be bedded
with the countrv. In the tunnel neither reef is of encouraging appearance.


The Western is about 2 inches wide, and thins out to a thread in the face
of a north drive, which is 60 feet in length; the Eastern is a mere track,
and it is doubtful whether it is the matching leg of the Western reef, which
is probably a fault-reef as distinct from a back.
Fig. 15. —Sketch section of tunnel; scale about 160 ft. to 1 inch.
Apart from the tunnel, the old workings are inaccessible, but Mr. Watt,
who worked on the reefs, informed me that in three places along the
Eastern reef a payable shoot was worked to a depth of about 30 feet, and
on the Western reef payable crushings were broken from above and below
the tunnel over a length of about 120 feet, the most profitable results being
obtained from a flat make or spur on the hanging-wall side. This spur
averaged about 15 inches thick, and dipped to the south-west at an angle
of about 20 0 ; 1,000 tons crushed from it yielded 2\ oz. of gold per ton.
South of the tunnel it was worked to water-level, and when abandoned
showed gold in the face.
At present a shaft is being sunk r3© feet west of the Western reef. It
is 40 feet deep, and sinking will, the manager states, be continued to a
depth of 200 feet, in the hope that a second flat-make will be found.
From the structure of the country is seems probable that flat-makes will be
found below the one already worked with such good results, and it is just
as likely that where they intersect the beds in which the top-make was
rich, they will prove as profitable; but it is difficult to understand what
influenced those who selected the site for the shaft in their determination
to sink at the extreme north end of the surface gold, opposite where the
reef at the surface contained only 2% dwt. of gold to the ton. The out-
crop of the rich flat-make was 100 feet to the south; moreover, the flat-
make pitches to the south, i.e., away from the shaft. Each succeeding
flat-make (if any exist below the one worked) may be expected to pitch to
the south; for, generally speaking, spurs similar in mode of occurrence to
the one worked here pitch more or less perpendicularly to the pitch of the
country, which is here steeply to the north, and might be missed by the
present shaft. A better site would be about a couple of hundred feet to
the southward. From here the downward continuation of the flat-make
previously worked could be reached with so much less driving, and there is
a better chance of intersecting, in favorable beds, any other makes that
may exist at lower levels.
The tunnel above referred to is about 550 feet in length, and the face
appears to be just entering a syncline pitching 35 0 N. About 30 feet back
from the face, and 50 feet east of the Eastern reef, there are two beds of
black slate carrying seams of pyrites and some graptolites. Fossils were
also noticed in slates thrown out of shafts on the Western reef, but time
did not permit of a collection being made.
[24.7.13.1
Bv Authority : Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne.




1914.
DEPARTMENT OF MINES.
GEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF VICTORIA.
Plans and Sections to accompany
BULLETIN No. 29.
SOME DAYLESFORD MINES,
BY
H. S. WHITELAW and W. BARAGWANATH.
Plate I.—Plan of North Cornish Mine. *
ll—'Transverse Section of North Cornish Mine.
111. —Plan of Rising Star Mine. '
IV. —Transverse Section of Rising Star Mine.
V.—Plan and Sections of Christensen’s Ajax Mine.
' VI.— Transverse Section of Christensen’s Ajax Mine.
Vll.—Plan of New Cornish Mine.
Vlll.—Longitudinal Section of New Cornish Mine.
IX.— Transverse Section of New Cornish Mine. ,
X.—Plan, Longitudinal and Transverse Sections of Old Jubilee Mine.
XL—Plan and Transverse Section of Steele’s Pioneer Mine.
Xll.—Longitudinal Section of Steele’s Pioneer Mine.
By Authority: Albert J. Mullett, Government Printer, Melbourne,
4596
























