

[Reprinted from Journal and Proceedings of the Royal Society of
N. S. Wales, Vol. XLV.)
SOME CURIOUS STONES USED BY THE ABORIGINES.
By R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
[With Plate XV.]
[Read before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, December 6, 1911.]




SOME CURIOUS STONES USED BY THE ABORIGINES.
By R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.
[With Plate XV.]
[Read before the Royal Society of N. S. Wales, December 6, 1911-2
In the report of the Australasian Association for the
Advancement of Science, Vol. xn, pp. 495-498,1 described
some remarkable stones, chipped and ground into shape by
the aborigines, discovered over a large area of the north-
western part of New South Wales, but which have not
been reported from any other part of Australia. The
scattered remnants of the tribes in the region indicated
are all more or less civilized at the present time, and have
ceased to use these stones in their ceremonies. For this
reason it is especially important that all available inform-
ation should be collected and published as widely as possible,
in order to bring these relics under the notice of every
person who may have opportunities of obtaining further
particulars regarding this interesting subject.
These prepared stones vary in length from less than half
a foot to more than two feet, in exceptional cases, but the
more common lengths range from 9to 15 inches. They
are of different material, including sandstone, clayslate,
kaolin, quartzite and such other kinds of stone as might be
available. In the majority of specimens the longitudinal
axis is practically straight, as in Nos. 1,2, 8, of Fig. 1.
There are others which have a crescent or horn shaped
shaft, of which No. 3is an.example. The shaft is generally
round in section, but examples are not infrequent where
the breadth of the stone is two or three times greater than
the thickness. Some are long and slender, as Nos. 2 and 8,
whilst others are short and squat like Nos. 4 and 9.
359
SOME CUKIOUS STONES USED BY THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES,


They are thickest at the base and taper gradually upwards
to an obtusely pointed apex. Some of them have a large
Fig. I —Seven Magical Stones.
360
R. H. MATHEWS.


number of marks cut into the surface, apparently with a
sharp stone, shell, or piece of bone, as Nos. 8 and 9;
others have but a few incisions, whilst some are quite plain.
A characteristic of this type of native implement consists
of a depression worked into the base ; in nearly all the
specimens, instead of the large end being flat, the central
part has been picked out and afterwards ground fairly
smooth, forming a concavity resembling a shallow saucer
or trough —the shape of the concavity depending upon
whether the base is round, or is longer in one direction
than in the other. In some specimens, instead of a single
hollow, there are two trough-shaped depressions, as in
No. 6, and specimens with three troughs in the base are
occasionally found. In a few examples, the base is flat
or nearly so, with a number of grooved lines reaching right
across the diameter; or else starting at the centre and
radiating in every direction to the margin. There may be
only a few of these lines or there may be a score or more
on thehbase.
It has been supposed that some of the softer specimens
of these articles, kaolin for example, are not natural stones
but have been artificially manufactured from burnt gypsum
by the natives. Mr. R. Hall, curator of the Tasmanian
Museum, speaking of a specimen in the museum, says in a
letter to me: —“According to Dr. Noething here, it (the
specimen) is sulphate of lime, roasted and then wetted to
form the required shape. That is also my opinion.” lam
quite certain that none of the numerous specimens which
I have met with have been made in that way, but that all
of them, whether kaolin or not, are natural products cut
into their present shape by human labour.
No. 1. A decomposed sandstone, 24£ inches long, with a
circumference of 11 inches round the thickest part of the
shaft. There are no marks on the surface, nor has it the
361
SOME CURIOUS STONES USED BY THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.


usual depression in the base. It was found on Murtie Run,
Darling River, and weighs a little over 10 lbs.
No. 2. A slender, cylindrical clay slate, 2l£ inches long,
with a maximum circumference of 6f inches. At a distance
of 2i inches from the apex, a well defined groove extends
completely round the shaft. There is a slight depression
in the base, and a number of marks all along the shaft, but
not shown in the drawing. It was found near Wilcannia.
No. 3, a compact grained kaolin, is interesting on account
of its very pronounced crescent shape, on the convex side
especially. The native workman had perhaps to accom-
modate the design of the implement to the form of the
block from which he obtained it, or the shape may have
been intentional. The total length is 12 and of an
inch. A section through the shaft about midway would
have an elliptical shape, the longer diameter of which
would be inches and the shorter 2iV inches. There are
several marks cut into the surface, one of which, near the
base, reaches quite round the stone, and there is a well
defined hollow an eighth of an inch deep in the base or
large end. The specimen was found on the Darling River
above Wilcannia, and weighs 3 lbs. 13 ozs.
Nos. 4,5, 6. A quartzite pebble, 9 inches long and 3£
broad. No. sis a side view showing the thickness of the
stone to be 2 A inches. The specimen is evidently just in
the condition it was in when picked up by the native artist,
with the exception that the basal end was first beaten flat,
and then a couple of trough shaped hollows worked into it.
No. 6 exhibits the outline of these.hollows which lie in the
direction of the longer diameter of the base. One of the
hollows has been ground into a depth of a thirtieth of an
inch, and the other is slightly shallower. This specimen
is interesting from the fact that the only labour bestowed
upon it consists of the formation of the cavities in the
362
K. H. MATHEWS.


base. Moreover, two concavities in the base are of unusual
occurrence, a single depression being the normal condition.
The stone was found on Wilcannia Common, and weighs
4 fbs. 3 ozs., which is a great weight for its bulk.
No. 7, a whitish argillaceous sandstone, inches long
and 4 inches in circumference at the larger end. It is
uninscribed and is without the characteristic hollow in the
base. Found on Murtie Run, Darling River, and weighs
8 ounces.
No. 8 represents a conical shaft of hard clay-slate, 11
inches long by a maximum diameter of 2~h inches. A
section through the shaft at right angles to the longitudinal
axis would be almost circular. An oval shaped concavity
has been ground into the base to a depth of iV of an inch
in the deepest part. The weight of the implement is 2 tbs.
7 ozs. On the side represented in the illustration there
are 99 incised marks, many of which are horizontal or
nearly so, and are in pairs. About an inch from the pointed
end, one of the lines is cut completely round the stone.
Attention is also invited to 14 pairs of short, almost vertical
incisions, a form of marking which is somewhat uncommon.
The regular and symmetrical outline of this specimen, as
well as the extensive marking, show that considerable
labour has been expended upon it. Found on Tankarooka
Run.
No. 9. This profusely incised specimen is a reddish
coloured rock, probably derived from basalt, rich in iron,
and may be described as a sandy laterite. A small portion
has been broken off the base and also off the apex, the
supposed extent of the missing parts being indicated by
dotted lines. The present length of the stone is 9j inches,
but was probably about lOf inches originally. The circum-
ference round the thickest part is 11 inches, and a section
through the stone at that place would give an elliptical


figure, with a longer diameter of 4 inches and a shorter of
2-f inches. There are numerous horizontal lines of excep-
tional length, as well as some vertical and oblique ones,
cut conspicuously into the surface; the total number being
111. All the markings are straight or nearly so, with the
exception of two near the middle of the specimen, which
have a graceful curve. Found near the southern end of
Poopelloe Lake, and about 20 miles south from the Darling
River, and weighs 4 lbs. 2 ozs.
The uses of the stones above described are not fully
known, but sufficient evidence has been gathered by me to
show that they were employed in magical incantations
connected with causing the food supply to increase, making
rain, injuring an enemy, and other occult functions. The
object of the present article is to promote and encourage
inquiry by station owners, managers, and others residing
in the north-western districts of New South Wales, where
there are still a few old aborigines who could perhaps
increase our knowledge respecting these curious native
productions.
For the purpose of enabling the reader to obtain a more
realistic conception of what the stones look like, I have
added a photograph of six specimens (Plate XV, Fig. 2). The
crescent or horn shaped stone, No. 5 in the photograph
identical with No. 3 in the diagrammatic drawing. Another
stone, No. 1, also has a crescent form outline, especially
on one side. In all of the specimens the shaft is practically
round and would give an almost circular section. The
material in these specimens is kaolin, sandstone and clay-
slate, and each of them has a shallow hollow in the base.
The six specimens in the photograph are different from
those shown in the diagrammatic drawing, with the excep-
tion of No. sas stated above. On the floor of the photo-
graph are six stone hatchets of different sizes, three of
364
R. H. MATHEWS.


which have a very distinct deep groove around them, for the
purpose of attaching the handle. They are not numbered.
Another photograph (Plate XV, Fig. 3), shows six magical
stones, all of which are different from those described,
excepting No. 3, which is the same stone depicted as No. 9
in Fig. 1. Nos. 1,2, 3, and 4, are of the same material as
No. 9in Fig. 1. Nos. 8 and 10 are clay-slate, while the rest
are grey sandstone. The three small articles on the floor
of the picture are stone hatchets used by the aborigines,
and are without numbers.
365
SOME CURIOUS STONES USED BY THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.




Journal Royal Society of N.S. W., Vol. XL V., 1911.
Plate XV.
Fig. 2— Six Magical Stones and Six Hatchets.






