

\ | SOME OF THE
MINOR HINDRANCES
TO THE
PROGRESS OF CHRISTIANITY;
BEING
AN ADDRESS
DELIVERED BY
fKCpriwim of t\t iootl] gWrste Jiswata,
» EEY. J. LANGDON PAESONS,
TO THE
MINISTERS AND DELEGATES.
1869.
ORENEELL-STREET,




MINOR HINDRANCES TO CHRISTIANITY.
■ * ft
ASiSS/p'S* 57
Fathers and Brethren—
I occupy this chair to-day because I have been invited to do so
by the Executive of the Association. Ido not think the best
possible choice hrv? been made : but I have accepted the position,
and shall not therefore indulge in self-laudation under the mask of
professions of unfitness. So, with the brief preface that I trust
our meetings this year may be devout in tone, practical in character,
and stimulating in their effects, I shall at once proceed with my
address, the subject of which is—
“ Some op the Minor Hindrances to the Progress op
Christianity.”
I have chosen the minor rather than the major hindrances, from
the conviction that, being more numerous, frequently overlooked,
and generally regarded as insignificant, they are really the more
important. Idolatry, Atheism, Popery, Superstition, nationalism,
Unbelief, Plypocrisy, are not easily missed as obstacles to the
progress of the Gospel, and they are often made themes for earnest
counsel and warning. But the lesser hindrances, though a great
army, are disregarded and unmentioned.
I quietly assume that the Gospel can be hindered. I shall
not even skirmish in the old theologic battle ground, where
the champions of Divine Sovereignty and of Human Free-
Will have waged their bitter warfare. The Apostle Paul’s
authority justifies the assumption. He gave up privileges
and endured the loss of all things “lest he should hinder
the Gospel of Christ.” If he could hinder the Gospel, it can be
hindered by us. If he denied himself lawful rights, and made
sacrifices to avoid hindering the Gospel, we should do the same.
We are exposed to the same danger and are bound by the same
obligation. As a matter of fact the Gospel is hindered by us all.
We look upon the effects of our consistency, prayers, and efforts,
and say—“ We have helped the Gospel.” If we could estimate the
effects of our inconsistencies, unbelief, and indolence, we should
say, “We have hindered the Gospel”—the difference between what
we might be and might have done, and what we are and have
accomplished, being the extent to which we have impeded the work


of sanctification in our own souls and the kingdom of Christ in the
world.
Some of these hindrances are placed in the way of the Gospel
by its ministers. For the sake of disarming criticism, as well as
for convenience of arrangement, I shall begin with them.
The Separateness, the Distinction of Order, which ministers often
assume and maintain belongs to this class. Let no one for a
moment suppose that lam a Plymouthist. I recognise, and at
fitting times magnify mine office, as of divine appointment and an
integral part of the Christian system. The separateness to which
I refer is a whisper of priestliness—a faint echo of apostolic
successionism, an attempt to keep up, as vital, the distinction
between the clergy and the laity. Of course the nature of the
minister’s duties invests him with reverence, and should secure him
respect. He is to be esteemed very highly in love for his work’s
sake. But there can be no doubt he loses influence just in the
proportion that he removes himself from the sphere of common life.
If he hedge himself about with reserve, his experiences are
supposed to be exceptional. If he claim or affect to be distinct
from or superior to other Christians on account of his office, he is
thought to revolve in an orbit of his own. He becomes, in fact,
an official. He is a functionary who prays, preaches, administers
ordinances, buries, and marries; but he is not felt to be a brother
exposed to the same temptations and sorrows as the humblest of
his hearers. A certain degree of isolation is forced upon ministers.
There are many Protestants who regard their minister very much
as the Papist regards his priest—and pastor as well as presbyter
may be but old priest writ large. There are over-reverential
people who will persist in losing sight of the man in the office.
But often ministers cultivate a distinctive superiority as a safeguard,
and a source of authority. A good brother belonging to another
denomination, for whom I was once going to preach, urged me to
wear his gown, giving as his reason, “ You know we can’t afford to
despise these things ; this is a levelling age, and they keep up our
position.” I told him at the time I thought it was a mistake. I
think it a mistake now. Our office is spiritual, our work is
spiritual, our authority is spiritual. We are not priests in any
other sense than that in which all believers are priests. We claim
no sacramental authority. We have not even the figment of
ordination at the hands of a man who thinks he has by direct
transmission from the Apostles some occult authority for saying,
“ Receive ye the Holy Ghost for the office and work of a priest of
God now committed unto thee by the imposition of our hands.”
That is an imposition in quite another sense. Overseers, bishops,
( Etouxotoh), are not made by man, but by the Holy Ghost (Acts
xx. 28). They are not nominated by another bishop, but are
elected by the Church, which recognises the presence and working
of the Holy Ghost in them. Even the Apostles did not ordain (in
the sense of appoint by virtue of authority) the elders. Xeipoxovlw,
the word used in Acts xiv. 23, literally means to “hold out the
hand,” and proves that the election was by suffrage. The electing


The result of this unmanly detraction is most disastrous. The
great army of the Cross, instead of marching on in resistless unity,
led by officers animated by one common spirit, is split up into little
companies of Ishmaelites, whose hands are against every man’s, and
every man’s hand is against them. Our order is charged—and I
think with justice—with most of the divisions that have rent the
body of Christ. Nearly all the great schisms have originated in
petty personal piques between party leaders. Charitable, large-
hearted judgment of the brethren, has never been a common
ministerial virtue. And it is vain to hope for a united Church
till we have a united ministry—till ministers practice towards each
other that “ love which envieth not .... which thinketh
no evil . . . and which doth not behave itself unseemly.”
body is clearly the Church, and the Churches are to determine who
are to be their elders or bishops. And the more believers are
convinced that we are not above them but of them, the more will
they trust our teaching and reverence us. And if we cannot win
their confidence and maintain our position without clothing and
millinery, without gowns and bands, long-tailed coats and
white neckties, aprons and cassocks, and other ecclesiastical
fripperies and fopperies, the sooner we are consigned to the
lumber-room of worn-out things the better. Our true foun-
dation is not the superstition, but the intelligent affection of
the people. Our usefulness depends upon our being trusted, upon
our having the sympathies of those to whom we minister. And
every badge we wear, every mannerism we adopt, every exception
we make or take, separates us from our fellow-men, lessens our
influence, and so hinders the Gospel of Christ.
Jealousy of each other is another hindrance placed in the way
of the Gospel by its ministers. Pitiable but most deplorable
instances of this abound even among those who belong to the same
denomination, hold the same opinions, and preach the same
doctrines. The success of Christianity is lost sight of in the
interests of a particular Church. The salvation of souls is made a
secondary matter to insisting upon some real or fancied right or
complaining of some miserable personal slight. More successful
labourers are systematically depreciated, and their modes of action,
however efficient, are condemned. Indeed it is rather wonderful to
hear some of the ingenious ways in which the success of the
successful is accounted for by some of the unsuccessful. There is
nothing in their preaching, that is mere clap-trap or milk and
water. Their zeal is fanaticism run mad. Their promptitude and
determination are rashness and self-sufficiency. And their use-
fulness is ascribed to anything but to love of souls and fitness
for and consecration to their work.
The Want of the Accent of Conviction in Preaching is another
hindrance. This may proceed from either of two causes.
Ministers sometimes do not believe what they preach—sometimes
formality makes them perfunctory. Now if there be not faith there
should not be preaching. The Scripture rule is, “We believe, and
therefore speak.” But the accent of conviction is often wanting


where faith exists. Through incessant talking, divorced from
careful cultivation of the spiritual life, ministers become mere
sermon-machines and praying-wheels. The same subject is
discussed so often, that the utterance and the words are both
stereotyped. The tones are unconvincing, the emphasis is artificial,
the emotion is forged. The result is that “Oh dear, dear,” look
of utter want of interest of which Dean Alford speaks as dis-
tressingly obvious in so many congregations. For hearers know
Avhen the preacher is insincere and unearnest. His words then are
only words. The tympanum receives certain sounds, but the soul
neither thrills nor stirs. There may be thunder, but there is no
lightning; there may be light, but there is no heat; there may be
thought, but there is no emotion.
When this accent of conviction is lost, great alterations should
be made in modes of preparation and delivery to recover it. For
it is better to make the soul feel the truth than to delight the
fancy with word-pictures, delicately-turned tropes, and dainty
poetry, or to gratify the intellect with freshness of style and
cogency of argument. These need not be unreal, but if they are,
rough sentences —fresh from the heart, and eloquent with con-
viction—are far more effective. Few indeed of the preachers who
have Avon souls have been either masters of composition or
brilliant orators. Whitfield had a magnificent voice, but his
sermons were most commonplace—at any rate, those published are.
Yet, when with passionate earnestness he described the sinner as a
blind traveller on the edge of a precipice, with but a step between
him and destruction, even the icy Chesterfield forgot his adamantine
maxims, and cried out, “ For God’s sake, save him, Whitfield.”
Jonathan Edwards, though a profound logician, was utterly desti-
tute of oratorical accomplishments. He read his sermons, holding
the manuscript close to his eyes, and used scarcely any action.
Yet, when he delivered that sermon on the text “ Their feet shall
slide in due time,” so vehement was his realization of the peril of
the wicked that, as he preached, the people crowded into the aisles,
and in an agony of fear clung to the pillars of the chapel, lest they
should slip into perdition.
It is this accent of conviction which produces conversion. It
is God-inspired, and is God-honoured. Rhetoric, brilliant de-
clamation, imagery, may dazzle, may win applause ; but the
difference between reality and acting is soon discovered, A
preacher rings himself on the hearts of his hearers as a coin is
rung upon a counter. If he be genuine, the more he is rung the
more is his genuineness made apparent ; but if he be counterfeit,
the higher his flights the sooner and surer is he detected. My
brethren, if our spiritual life be depressed, let us cry for the re-
vivifying influences of the Holy Spirit. If we have lost the keen
realization of the truth, let us by prayer get it as a gift from God,
and speak it out with ringing clearness in the ears of men. It is
the want of this that explains empty pews, yawning congregations,
lukewarm Churches, and— so far as that which is human can—the
absence of conversions.


I turn now to the Church. Here hindrances abound, and the
difficulty is to select the most obstructive. There can be no doubt,
however, that Gossip is one. The love of a little private in-
formation, even of dear friends, is a human infirmity. It is un-
happily a common Church characteristic. The eagerness with
which personal tittle-tattle is pounced upon, treasured up, and re-
peated, is as remarkable as it is mischievous. For gossip feeds
only on garbage, and circulates only what is damaging. Its cus-
tomary prefaces are —“ Can you tell me if it is true ?” or, “By
the way, have you heard V’ and then follows the painful domestic
secret, the distressing social scandal, or the sad Church incon-
sistency, which in half an hour is repeated, and that night is
the property and talk of a dozen households. Gossip is a serious
hindrance to the progress of the Gospel. Ministers’ reputations
are tattled away. Elders and deacons are whispered out of their
usefulness. Churches are torn in pieces by the wagging of that
little member which nothing but the grace of God can tame.
Very often no evil is intended ; there is no desire to do mischief,
nor to be unkind—it is mere love of listening to other people’s
matters and retelling them.
It is said that whenever Hannah More was told anything dero-
gatory of another, her invariable reply was, “ Come, we will go
and ask if that be true ?” The effect was sometimes ludicrously
painful. The tale-bearer was taken aback, stammered out a quali-
fication, or begged that no notice might be taken of the statement.
But the good lady was inexorable—off she took the scandal-
monger to the scandalized, to make enquiry and compare accounts.
How much mischief similar conduct would prevent here, where we
know just too much and too little of one another ! How many a
busybody’s occupation would be lost! How many a wound the
Christian conscience would be spared! How many a schism the
Church would escape !
Closely allied with Gossip, only worse in nature, though not
worse in its effects, is Censoriousness. The love of finding fault
is universal. Not a few pride themselves upon being able to
pick plans, systems, and reputations to pieces. The fault-finder
has obtained access to every Church. The pastor is the victim
most frequently assailed. “His last Sunday morning’s sermon was
not up to the mark. He shook hands with some one else and not
with me. He has been twice to see a neighbour, but not once near
our doors. He shows a great deal too much attention to the rich.
He is not high enough in doctrine, or he is too strait-laced. He
does not give food enough; or, he preaches too free a Gospel.”
But the pastor’s wife comes in for her share ; the deacons are not
forgotten, and all the members in their turn come under the lash
of the fault-finder’s tongue. He disturbs the meetings; he sows
discontent; he is ever ready with an objection. But, as all
human propositions and work are imperfect, it is very easy to dis-
cover faults in them. And to have a needle-eye for detecting mis-
takes and failings is neither a grace nor a gift of the Spirit. The
office of charity is not to strip the poor fault of every figleaf of


excuse and make it run naked ; it is to cover it up and wrap it
warm in the mantle of love. Nor is it a sign of conscientiousness
to nibble at and take exception to every project that is proposed,
and to censure everything that has been done. There are some
who, because they cannot have perfection, are pleased with nothing.
They make the best the enemy of the good. They would even try
to pick a hole in perfection itself. They are the plagues of our
Churches. One of them will mar the peace of a wdiole de-
nomination. It is a habit to be guarded against; it is a hindrance
to be removed.
In this enumeration we must not overlook Parsimoniousness. As
Christianity is constituted, money is indispensable. The divine law
is that the material resources needful for its propagation are to be
the free-will offerings of believers. Yet it is to be feared that no
side of the Christian character is so defective, no duty is so
systematically neglected, as that of giving. Nothing, indeed,
makes one so ashamed of the current profession of Christianity
as its financial aspect. Our overdrafts, our debts, our collections,
our offerings, our donations, our artifices to get money, are a dis-
grace to the Gospel. The principles and practices of the great
majority of Christians with regard to money contributions are de-
plorable. Every week reveals it. A Church member is heard
praying with w T onderful fervour for the conversion of the heathen.
Ask him for a £5 note to send out a missionary, and he shuffles,
makes paltry excuses, and refuses—not because he cannot afford it,
but because he loves his money a great deal more than he loves
the souls of idolaters. Another expresses in the abstract his
unshaken confidence in the promises of God. Ask him for a
sovereign towards some philanthropic object, and remind him
“ that he who hath pity on the poor lendeth unto the Lord, and
that which he hath given will He repay him again.” How quickly
he pulls out his watch ! How suddenly he remembers he has a
pressing engagement! He will see you about it again. Ah, but
he does not invest the pound, and put the promise to the test. A
third sorrowfully laments the neglect and ungodliness everywhere
manifest. Bring out a subscription-book and say —“ We are
building a church or a schoolroom to check it. What may I put
down your name for T In a moment he tells you there are too
many churches and schools already ; or else he overwhelms you
with the story of his past losses, or the gloomy prospects of the
future.
I am not pleading for extravagance in building, nor for exces-
sive salaries for ministers. I ask for efficient organizations. I ask
that instead of one-half of the Church’s time being spent in paying
off debts which ought not to exist, we may have our energies
free for spiritual labour. I ask that Christians, instead of giving
beggarly contributions, and screwing down their weekly offerings
to the last possible limit, will give to God liberally, bountifully,
royally ; and curtail their expenditure on dress, on style, on amuse-
ments to do so. I ask for the wealth of the rich and the mites
of the poor for the treasury of the Lord, and in quite another


proportion to that commonly accepted. I ask [that gifts may be
according to the prosperity granted ; and when that is done, we
shall not have to din and dun and expostulate ; for overdrafts ,and
debts of churches will be as great curiosities as mastodons and
dodos, and all will belong to a past age.
I had noted down several other hindrances upon which, if time
had permitted, I would have spoken. Prejudice, which is a bitter
spring, poisoning the sweet stream of spiritual life; Fashion and
Love of Display, which are the fatal decoys to wordliness of heart
and life ; Indolence, that turns away with folded hands from the
white harvest fields; Self-indulgence, which considers ease, personal
comfort before duty; Timidity, which loses golden opportunities
through fear of lions in the way ; fiGstheticism, which exalts taste,
above both devotion and truth; Silence where there should be
speech, and speech where there should be silence.
I pass these by with bare mention, and come in conclusion to the
Inordinate Worship of Wealth and Position, and the craving for
Eespectability, which is despiritualizing and emasculating the
Church. Respectability is the great Diana of modern Christianity.
If a new beatitude were discovered, there could not be a more gene-
ral conviction nor a louder cry than—“ Blessed are the respectable !”
Respectability has come to be the test of success ; and fidelity to
Christ, consistency, and belief are subordinated to it. In the days
of our Lord the sign of the divinity of the Gospel was that the poor
had it preached to them, and that the common people heard it
gladly. Eighteen centuries have wrought a strange change. Now
the evidence relied upon to convince doubters of its onward pro-
gress is that the rich and the great listen to its message. The
minister who can boast of influential people who come in their
carriages, and who numbers among his hearers an Honourable
or two, a few Members of Parliament, and a Mayor, is called
a most successful man, with a very prosperous “cause,” even
though conversions are rarer than showers in summer. But
the minister whose congregation is drawn from the lower stratum
of the middle class and the poor, though hundreds are con-
verted under his preaching, is half-contemptuously spoken of,
even by Christians, as “a very useful man no doubt, doing a
great deal of good —very earnest, very rousing; our servants go
there, and you know they require that sort of thing.” Why, this
is exactly what the “upper classes” thought about the Christ Him-
self. Respectability would have nothing to do with Him, because
none of the rulers had believed in Him. And respectability now
will only acknowledge that form and kind of Christianity which
fashion and rank sanction. Respectability does not believe much
in conversions, or in any decisive and aggressive efforts ; neither can
it enjoy prayer meetings where a godly but unlettered man tries to
make known our wants to God. Respectability can overlook a gla-
ring inconsistency, but it is terribly shocked at a mispronunciation.
It can tolerate a breach in the moral law, but not one of etiquette.
It can find great delight in the society of a Christian who has sur-
rendered all his spirituality, but none in that of one who drops his


"li’s.” Respectability likes to go to a fashionable rout on Monday,
to the races on Thursday, to the theatre on Saturday night, and
whispers to the world, “ I love you ; I am your friend.” Then, on
Sunday it comes to the house of God, and says, “I am a friend of
God ; I love the Father,” as though it had never been written—“ If
any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him,” and
“ Whosoever will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God.
Rospectability does not select its place of worship from considera-
tions of truth or spiritual profit. The question it asks is not “What
is believed and preached T but “ Who attend T And respectability
goes where the fine people go. It leaves the church where the poor
predominate, even though its first religious impressions were re-
ceived under the ministry there, and is quite proud to sit down in a
back seat behind the leaders of fashion—
“ The influential sinners
Who rent the highest pews.”
People who will be respectable surrender principle, convictions,
and conscience for respectability. They do despite to the Spirit,
they are disloyal to Christ, they wrong their own souls to belong to
a respectable Church, where they cannot speak of what they do be-
lieve, and where they are compelled to sanction by their presence
and silence what they do not believe.
In this age respectability is a temptation that besets us all. It
is a danger that threatens every Church. The world is determined
to be religious. It has Set its heart upon getting the sanction of
religion. But it can only get what it wants by making Christianity
worldly. It wants to patch up a peace. It says to Christianity
—“You come with me in the week to my balls, and races, and
theatres, and lend me your countenance, and I’ll come to your
Churches ou Sunday, and patronize your bazaars and ragged schools.”
And if Christianity do not reply —“ Between me and thee there is a
great gulf fixed, I may not come over lest I become like thee and
lose the likeness of my Lord,” the line between the Church and the
world will be completely obliterated. We must indeed “take heed
that we do not grow respectable,” For any denomination that gets
that title is not far off its “ funeral sermon.” Already we have gone
further than fidelity or safety warrants. A determined stand must
be made. The alternative before us is the approval of Christ or the
approval of the world. And in order to show that we love the
Lord Jesus, we must forego much that is lawful, because it is
neither expedient nor safe, Puritanism of the sourest and dismallest
type is better than a liberalism that makes “ light have communion
with darkness, and Christ concord with Belial.”
I hope I shall not be misunderstood. I am not making an in-
discriminate assault upon wealth and position. Wealth is
undoubtedly a great talent; riches are an immense power • and
the influence of those who stand in the front ranks, regulating the
movements which affect society, is to be desired for the Gospel. A
wealthy Christian can do what a poor one cannot r do. But
Christianity must not be hawked about to get the leaders of


\ i 11
% 1
society to patronize it. Christianity cannot accept, and must not
receive, their patronage if their lives are at variance with its
precepts. Dives must not be put upon our religious Committees
because he is Dives, and can give a large donation. Rank must
not be asked to take the chair at our meetings because he has a
title. Respect must be had to consistency and fitness. Wealth
and nobility, with piety, are in their proper places presiding over our
Christian Societies. But no amount of money, and no historic
splendour of name, and no degree of prestige or success, justifies
the invitation of a man of un-Christian life to patronise Christi-
anity. And when it is done, they who do it deserve what the
Committee of the Norwich Bible Society got when it asked the
sporting Earl of Orford to take the chair at its annual meeting.
In reply to the Secretary, the Earl wrote the following note :
“ Sir —l am surprised and annoyed at the contents of your letter—
surprised because my well-known character should have exempted me from
such an application ; annoyed because it obliges me to have this communica-
tion with you. I have long been addicted to the gaming table. I have
lately taken to the turf. 1 fear I frequently blaspheme. I have never
distributed religious tracts. All this was well known to you and your
Society, notwithstanding which you think me a proper person for your
President. May God forgive your hypocrisy. I would rather live in the
land of sinners than with such saints.
“ I am, &c.,
“May, 1857. * “Orford.”
The candour of that nobleman is to be admired, however much his
moral condition is to be deplored. He had a truer sense of con-
sistency than that lackey-spirited Committee, who thought rank a
sufficient set-off to blasphemy, and titled ungodliness a compliment
to the Word of God. How ashamed of themselves they must have
been when these incisive sentences were read out for their common
edification!
And now I close. I have enlarged upon this last, for it is the
most serious. The intelligence from England shows that this
determination to be respectable is threatening to destroy the
spiritual life of the city churches. They are becoming so worldly
in tone and act that vital godliness is imperilled. The same peril
is here. Let us watch and pray that we enter not into temptation.
The last thing to be said is the necessity of unflinching Christian
faithfulness to Christ, to the Word, to conscience. It is not
isolated acts, but the habit of fidelity that is required— fidelity in
the little as well as the great—for he who is faithless in that which
is least, will when the temptation is strong enough be faithless in
that which is greatest; and it is only he who removes the minor
hindrances from the way of the Gospel who has the guarantee that
he will never obstruct its progress with the major ones.
Who keeps no guard upon himself is slack,
And rots to nothing at the next great thaw.
The circumstances and the times demand a thorough and personal
consecration on the part of Christians, There must be sincere and
decisive piety. Consistency must be worn and protected as a
jewel of costliest worth. We must be altogether for Christ. A


12 11
half-hearted homage, a partial surrender, a fitful service* a luke-
warm love, will not suffice. Body, soul, intellect, life, influence,
time, talent, affection, must all be laid upon the altar, awaiting the
descent of the fire from heaven. Then the rest will follow. The
Holy Ghost shall endue us with power from on high ; and the
Gospel, having all hindrances removed from its way, winged by
faith, wafted by prayer, and accredited by consistency, shall go
singing through the lands till stranger ears have heard and alien
hearts understood its wondrous message of love. Then praise and
shall rise from full hearts daily, prayer shall be as incense, the lifting
up -of the hands as the evening sacrifice, till
God’s millenial morn shall rise
On happy hearts and blessed eyes.
Meantime each believing and obedient heart may take up the
supplication of faith—
"Few years, no wisdom, no renown,
Only my life can I lay down ;
Only my heart, Lord to thy throne,
I bring, and pray
A child of thine I may go forth,
And spread glad tidings through the earth,
And teach sad hearts to know Thy worth !
Lord, here am I.
Make Thou me strong ; that staff and stay,
And guide and guardian of the way,
To Theeward I may bear each day
Some fainting soul.
Speak, for I hear ; make pure in heart,
Thy face to see ; Thy truth impart
In hut and hall, in church and mart!
Lord, here am I.
I ask no heaven till earth be Thine,
No glory-crown while work of mine
Eemaineth here ; when earth shall shine
Among the stars ;
Her sins wiped out, her captive free,
Her voice a music unto Thee,
For crown, new work give Thou to me !
Lord, here am I.
Andrews, Thomas, & Clark, Printers, Grenfell-street, Adelaide.
