

SOME THOUGHTS
PREACHER’S OBLIGATIONS.
AN ORDINATION SERMON
PREACHED IN
JJt. ®a%xrntl,
On SUNDAY, DECEMBER 21, 1873,
The Rev. W.J. GUNTHER, M.A.,
Incumbent of St. John's, Parramatta,
Examining Chaplain to The Lord Bishop of Sydney, and
Rural Lean.
■SgtHug:
JOSEPH COOK & CO., PRINTERS, CHURCHMAN OFFICE, ,
370, GEORGE STREET.




SERMON.
f'loiq.x
“We preach not ourselves, hut Christ Jesus the Lord,” —2 Corinthians iv. 5.
The necessity for a Divine revelation is evident to every
reflecting man. We see this when we realize our intellectual
powers are very limited. The results of our pursuit after truth
by unaided reason are vague, contradictory, and unsatisfactory.
We accomplish little. We seek truth, and obtain but the
shadow. We make but guesses at truth. We see traces above,
beneath, around, of a superior Being, and learn something of
His power and goodness, but a solution of the many difficulties
which surround us in reference to ourselves and Don can only
be found in the Holy Scriptures. Further, our judgment and
inward perception are constantly perverted by our depraved
inclinations, the effects of which were strikingly illustrated in
the experience of St Paul —“ The good that I would, Ido not;
but the evil I would not, that I do.” This revelation is also
seen to be necessary when we regard man as a religious animal,
known to possess some religious instincts, wherever he is found,
however low in the scale of civilization. Since no instincts are
given without a use, we argue these have been wisely given, and
will be gratified by the Author of our being. Yet again, the
religious systems of unenlightened men show us a Divine revela-
tion is needed. Shall I point to the religious systems of Greece
and Rome ? Shall I point to the teaching of the sacred books
of the Hindoos and Chinese ? Abundant evidence we can gather
that the ceremonies of heathenism, imposing though they might
be, were absurd, disgusting, superstitious, and demoralizing—
that the morals of their philosophers and teachers, and those
prevailing in general society were shamefully depraved. Bacchus,
Yenus, Mercury, some readily worshipped. As were the gods,
such were the people. All that was good, and true, and pure,
in the teaching of the wisest came from a Divine original.
What was necessary for man God has lovingly given—a book
which not merely contains, but is His Word, the revelation of
His will. This Word is that by which we get understanding in
all conditions of life. It is to us what the pilot is to the
mariner nearing the cruel breakers, the treacherous rocks, the
unknown and inhospitable coast. It is to us what the torch is
to the traveller, whose way is darkened—what the lamp is to the
miner toiling in the bowels of the earth. In vain we attempt


to know and worship God and become wise unto . salvation
without this ! In vain we seek to know His character and dis-
position towards us—our origin, our duty, the source of true
happiness, our true destiny. Without it all streams of earthly
comfort are unsatisfying if not bitter, all human resources but
broken cisterns. We are in the position of men ever learning
and never able to come to the knowledge of the truth.
I am here to-day, brethren, in the Providence of God, on a
thrice solemn occasion. May God grant that no words of mine
may mar the effect of our holy service. May He pardon what
is imperfect, and bless all that is spoken to the advancement of
the Kingdom of His dear Son.
The ordinance of preaching—by which we understand the
exposition, illustration, and application of God’s truth, under
the Gospel dispensation is an all important one. It is of
Divine, not human institution. God knowing our nature, has
provided a means of impressing us with His truth even more
powerful than that of the written Word. The commission of
the Great Teacher is, “Go teach make
disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.” Those who are taught receive
the Word. They become lowly scholars in Christ’s school, and
need regular instruction. They become disciples, and we are to
go on teaching (StSacrxovrej) “teaching them to observe all
things whatsoever Christ has commanded.” The usefulness of
this institution has been admitted in all ages of the Church.
The Gospel owes its spread from its introduction into our world
to the present times to the labours of the noble company of the
preachers. What victories under God were won by this weapon
in Apostolic ages by men who hazarded their lives in ceasing not
to teach and preach Jesus Christ! What victories were won in
the Roman Empire, and in the regions where the Roman armies
had never penetrated ! “We are but of yesterday,” says one,
addressing himself to the magistrates of the Empire, “ and we
have filled every place, your cities, islands, garrisons, free towns,
camp, senate, and forum : we have left nothing empty, but your
temples.” Tertullian, the writer of these words, declares no
congregation in the Primitive Church separated without being
fed with holy sermons. This was the main engine by which the
strongholds of Paganism have been and are broken down, and
and its lords many and gods many destroyed. Through it* the
thick covering of superstition and error has been removed in
many lands. Now it pleases God by the foolishness of preach-
ing to save them that believe. The preaching Church is the
standing Church. As in the yesterdays of life, as in the to-days,
so in the to-morrows. We do not contrast this with other means
of grace, so necessary for the health and growth of the spiritual


life, but we believe it to be an instrument generally blest to tbe
first development of that life. To use the language of the
learned Hooker, “ We esteem sermons as keys to the Kingdom
of Heaven, as wings to the soul, as spurs to the good affections
of man, unto the sound and healthy as food, as physic unto
diseased minds.”
Bub what is the subject of this preaching? We preach not
ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord. Who may be said to
preach themselves ? Those who are self constituted, self
appointed Ministers ; men who have not been chosen and called
by those who have public authority given unto them in the
congregation to call and send ministers into the Lord’s Vineyard.
God calls us all to labour for Him, and sometimes loudly and
clearly, as ho called Abraham the father of the faithful, as he
called Daniel to be faithful among the faithless, the sons of
Zebedee to be fishers of men. Ofttimes He finds men in strange
spheres of duty, and calls them as he did David tending the
flocks of sheep, Moses engaged in a like occupation, and Amos
the herdraan of Tekoa. The call was manifest. They had the
credentials of their commission. These were extraordinary, and
to the fulfilment of grand missions, but all whom God calls He
attunes and prepares. There are diversities of gifts. There are
differences of administration. There are ordinary and extra-
ordinary gifts. There are diversities of operation, but it is the
same God who worketh all in all, and divideth to every man
severally as he will. If God give the inward call to preach, we
may be assured that he will qualify for the work, and in due
time give the outward —put it into the hearts of those in authority
to do so. Ours it is in patience to possess our souls. How
shall we preach with any success except we be sent ? How
shall our ministration be blest unless called by the voice and
power of the Holy Ghost, unless called by God and the Church ?
Again, those may be regarded as preaching themselves who
undertake the work from any other desire but the promotion of
God’s glory, and the edification of His Church. If to promote
worldly interests and reputation the work is engaged in, if to
acquire the advantages and dignities which fall to the lot of the
few, if for the dissemination of particular systems of truth, if
from a love of filthy lucre or influenced by motives of ambition,
pride, self-seeking, and self-pleasing, if to create schools of thought,
or to display our own talents, attainments, and powers, if from
a thirst for human applause, if from any of these motives (and
oh how should we guard and pray against being thus influenced!)
our work will be unblest, will be without pleasure and comfort.
The work of the ministry will be stript of its charipk,
of its rewards. Twinges and upbraidings of conscience will be our N
constant tormentors, the people committed to our care will be
the first to rise up in judgment against us, accusing V


guiltiness, of tampering with the immortal interests of souls for
whom Christ died, instead of being our joy, our glory, and
crown of rejoicing.
We preach not ourselves but Christ Jesus the Lord. To preach
Christ is a very significant and suggestive expression. In the
words, Christ Jesus the Lord, the various offices of the third
person of the ever blessed Trinity are referred to. He is our
prophet, priest and king—the prophet whose wisdom removes
our ignorance—the priest whose blood alone takes away our
sin—the king who reigns within us. The apostle and the
preachers of his day appear to us witnesses of the life, death
and resurrection of Christ. Facts in His history were brought
forward, and not the speculations of man. These facts are the
basis on which the truth of Christ’s doctrine rests. St. Paul
is at Athens. His audience consists of illustrious philosophers.
Though thwarted his aim was to lead them to Christ by bearing
witness to the chief events in his history. He may tell of a
God of nature—of a God of Providence, but it is his chief aim
to lead their thoughts to the God and Father of Christ, Christ
being the central figure. As in historical paintings, the hero
occupies the foreground, this Christ ever occupies in our thoughts
of God. How important the facts of his history ! Would St.
Paul tell of a general resurrection ? The resurrection of Christ
is proclaimed? Would he lead the Corinthians to the per-
formance of certain duties ? He exhorts them by the meekness
and gentleness of Christ. Would he have them distribute
to the necessity of saints ? He draws his motives telling of the
eternal Son who became poor that they through His poverty
might be rich. The facts may be well-known, but their
tendency and practical influence are little felt. Our theme still
is Christ —the sun of our system, and, more than this—the life
of Christ, and the work and doctrines of Christ —the great
verities of Christianism. Christ, the only Saviour of lost man
is our master theme. Christ’s willingness and power to save are
oft-repeated truths, but they alone meet the necessities of man’s
nature, and satisfy his inmost blessings. Oh, what a mission of
love was His ! Oh the preciousness of this Christ to you who
believe! Oh Emmanuel we love to think of thy goodness ? Christ
is the object of the Bible from Genesis to Revelation, and w r e
preach him Jacob’s Shiloh, Isaiah’s Immanuel, Daniel’s Son of
Man, Haggai’s desire of all nations—the rose of Sharon the
lily of the valley. We preach Christ—his infinitely grand and
perfect work—his majestic Spirit—Christ the source of spiritual
liife—Christ the Lord, who has made a full, perfect and sufficient
sacrifice arid for the sins of the whole world—who by
death has overcome death, (and His death is the great central
X fact in HisMstory,) Christ the great exemplar of Holy religion—
-Christ whosfe (Rath shows his love, the greatness of His character


—God’s unspeakable gift — given not to save a definite
number of souls or to prove the truth of His doctrine by His
death, but to atone for sin—not to destroy, but to bless—to
ennoble, to sanctify humanity. We preach-Christ the God-man
when we proclaim His works done for man —the condition of
our world when He came—the character and essence of sin—
when we show that His death was necessary to purchase relief—
when we proclaim Him as the prophet, priest and king of the
Church —when we speak of the blessings purchased by His
death—the gifts and graces of the Holy Spirit, the forgiveness
of all sin. Do we tell of pardon ? Christ purchased it. Do we
tell of faith ? Christ is the author and finisher of our faith ?
Do we tell of personal holiness and good works ? Christ
hath wrought all our works in us. Do we speak of the
Church ? Christ is its head-God over all blessed for ever. We
preach Christ the offerer of grace and glory—the sinners friend
—the saint’s joy—the tender friend who wept over doomed
Jerusalem where He had taught so many of His doctrines —the
compassionate teacher who in his school taught so patiently
line upon line, and precept upon precept —who welcomed His
disciples after His resurrection, and upbraided them not with
their neglect of His warnings and their desertion. We preach
Christ when we make His glory the end of our preaching —bid
you rely on Him alone for salvation, (and out of Him is no
salvation) —regard him as your Mediator, Intercessor, and here-
after your Judge —when we draw aside the veil that hides the
Spirit world from our view, and bid you behold the redeemed
from north, south, east and west —all basking in the sunshine of
God’s presence—all jubilant with song in the paradise of God.
Our text book is inexhaustible, and well it is for us the Bible
is not a larger book. How much has to be studied, expounded,
and taught about the Saviour! All other themes are sub-
ordinate to this. We may illustrate our preaching from God’s
Book of Nature and Providence, our Antiquarian, Geographical,
Botanical, Astronomical, Historical, and Scientific researches. We
may gather flowers and fruits, seek confirmatory evidence from
science, and the discoveries of philosophers to increase our useful-
ness. Philology and Biblical Archaeology are always helpful. It is
necessary we should keep abreast of the times know some-
thing of the various questions agitating the Church. We must
walk in the fields of religious inquiry, examine representations
of truth in all their varied aspects, be acquainted with the
different phases of scepticism and infidelity abroad, the teaching
of Eitualists and Rationalists. The social, civil, political, and
scientific movements of this and past ages of the world must be
observed calmly and honestly. We must be men of progress,
though men of one book —truth seekers that we may be truth
finders. The Physician of bodies needs much knowledge, and


varied gifts, how much more the Physician of souls! We
require it not that we may have dominion over your faith, be
small popes among our people, but that we may be your helpers,
that we may commend ourselves to your consciences in the sight
of God —that we may be good ministers of Jesus Christ,
defenders of the faith, ambassadors for Christ, apt to teach,
examples to the flock, able under God to feed the flock, to build
up the Church, to convince gainsayers, to warn, rebuke, exhort,
comfort, that we may approve ourselves as the Ministers of God
and His truth.
And now mindful of the thrice solemn ordinances of this holy
day may I not seek to stir up your minds and my own to a
fuller realization of the character of our work. Oh, how sub-
lime is it in its varied phases; and how awe-inspiring are our
responsibilities! What faithfulness should we manifest in
the prosecution of our grand enterprise—yea, what love
and pity for souls, souls for whom Christ died —yea, what
patience, forbearance, self-denial, chivalry, devotion and zeal
for the glory of our God! God’s treasure house is
full of gifts. His treasury is inexhaustible. His gifts
of grace are as innumerable as the stars which beautify the
firmament of heaven, the grains of sand on the sea shore.
Though we may not dictate in answer to believing prayer, we
may expect to realize the presence of Christ in all our ministra-
tions at home and abroad—expect to be enabled to take heed to
ourselves and the doctrine, to save ourselves and them that hear,
rightly to divide the Word of Truth —expect to be taught how
to reprove, rebuke, to warn the unruly, to exhort the feeble-
minded and wavering, to comfort the sick, the sad, the sorrowful,
the fatherless and widow in their affliction. The Gospel will
come in power and the Holy Ghost; as we hear, so will we
preach; as we are taught, so will we teach. We shall bo
Christ’s heralds. It will not be we who speak, but the Spirit of
our Father which speaketh in us. What has been done first
upon our knees will be truly and nobly done. “ Ora et labors.”
Men of prayer are not those who offend often with their tongues,
who bring discredit upon their high and holy calling.
Brethren in Christ, members of our congregations, we seek
your earnest, hearty, and oft-repeated prayers that we may
indeed preach Christ. The treasure is in earthen vessels. We
are weak and powerless. The arrows of temptation fly thick
and fast around us. We have our special difficulties, and trials,
and perplexities —oft a crown of thorns to wear, a path strewed
with thorns to tread. The bait is hidden by a thousand
beauteous hues. There are temptations of town life and country
life, temptations to worldliness, to lukewarmness and frivolity,
to the neglect of self-discipline, prayer, and study—temptations
to subserviency and tyranny, to trim and compromise when we


should boldly speak the truth in love —temptations from fear of
man and carnal policy to be silent when we should be ready
with all faithful diligence to banish and drive away all erroneous
and strange doctrines contrary to don’s Word —temptations to
act merely as officials, literary men, and relieving officers, mere
apes of Epictetus, when we should be ministering as the
messengers of the Churches and the glory of Christ—tempta-
tions to neglect the pastoral visitation of the whole as well as
the sick, to neglect the promotion of schemes of moral, intellec-
tual and social improvement—temptations to be overmuch
fascinated with new speculations in prophecy, new theories in
philosophy. To yield to any one of these is injuriously to affect
our preaching. Oh, what a work we have to do ! Who would
dare rush forward uncalled ? Thinking of the work of the
ministry, and the iniquity of their holy things, the most faithful
are bowed down in self-abasement, and ready to exclaim, “ Who
am I that I should go ? ” “Ah Lord God ! Behold I cannot
speak, for lam a child.” Who is sufficient for these things ?
Need you wonder that we ask not for your sympathy alone, but
for your prayers? Did not St. Paul exhort the Thessalonians,
“ Brethren, pray for us ” P Does he not require the Corinthians
to help him with their prayers ? Does ha not ask the Romans
to strive together in their prayers for him ? If he needed them,
much more do we! If he earnestly sought them, much more
should we! Oh, what strength would it give to the minister to
feel that his people were praying for him, and that his work was
theirs also. How the almost magical influence of sympathy
would make itself seen and felt in its effects ! Blessed beyond
power of description are they who thus act! In watering others
they will be watered. They will intelligently value the ministry
of God’s Word —be true lay-helpers. They will not speak
lightly of the ministers of Christ, but value and esteem them
highly in love for their work and their Master’s sake. Their
prayers bring them nearer to God, to man —nearer to the white-
robed army above. The Church is asleep, or but half awake.
Men realize not how much our success depends on their prayers.
“ God forbid that we should sin against the Lord in ceasing to
pray £or you.” Miserable indeed is the lot of the prayerless.
Men who never pray for themselves cannot pray for their
minister! How many neglect secret prayer, public prayer,
family prayer! How many delighting in the form know nothing
of the spirit. On how many of your homes might the words be
written, “They have not called upon God.” Yet the voice of
the Eternal Christ calls you —For you I died ; for you I live.
I call you by my gentleness and patience, ray love and compas-
sion ; I call you by My agony and bloody sweat, by My cross
and passion, by My precious death and burial, by My glorious
resurrection and ascension. These are witnesses of Christ’s love.


Will not He who has done so much enable you to pray for
yourselves and your ministers ?
Oh, may grace be given to us the ministers of Christ, to
preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord! Men and
brethren, Christ is to be preached by you faithfully, devoutly,
lovingly. If he be glorified, what though the complaints are
loudly uttered, “ Your sermons are too doctrinal, or too practical
or too full of morality Christian though it be.” What though
your sermon creates uneasiness, because full of wholesome truths
displeasing to the carnally minded, I pray you ever preach Christ,
tell of his blood which cleanseth from all sin. Preach Christ in
your lives. Be His epistles read and known of all. Your life,
the acts done, the temper manifested, the walk and conversation
must accord with the teaching. There must be no confession of
Christ in the pulpit, and denial of him in the life. Preach Christ
faithfully, and God will own your labours, you generally will
have favour with the people, and always the Master’s “ Well done
good and faithful servant.” May grace be given to you Brethren to
receive our instruction, and to listen with a teachable spirit. May
the old truths faithfully preached be received with meekness, and
brought home to your hearts and consciences. Then souls will
be won for Christ. Then our parishes will be erangelized —this
goodly land of ours Christianized with the Christianity of the
Holy Scriptures. Then will our Church —honoured by God,
the mother of so many of the excellent of earth, noblest of men,
purest of saints and dearest of martyrs—be loved by man. Her
principles will be reverenced and obeyed. She will strengthen
her stakes, and lengthen her cords—send out her boughs to the
sea, and her branches to the river—be the joy of the whole laud,
the nursing mother of many daughters. Then will the arm of
the Lord awake as in the ancient days, and God’s work be
revived ; Zion will awake, and put on her strength. Then will
the tears and blood of martyred brothers and sisters be well
repaid. Then will Christ see of the travaii of His soul and be
satisfied. Then will the preacher’s work be nobly done, and
God, even our own God, shall bless us, and at last give us our
portion with those who, having turned many to righteousness,
shine as the brightness of the firmament and the stars for ever
and ever.




• *K : :
!
•■vj..
■ |T
' i
♦
•
