

SUPPOSED FURTHER TRACES
LEICHHARDT.
James Panton.




[From “ Proceedings of Australasian Association for the Advance-
ment of Science ,” Sydney , 1888, p. 407.]
SOME SUPPOSED FURTHER TRACES
OF LEICHHARDT.
By James Panton.
The fate of Leichhardt still remains a mystery, and although in
this paper I will endeavour to show you that there is reason to
believe a few further links of evidence have recently been obtained,
I fear that there is little probability at this remote period of ever
unravelling the whole truth of the disaster which must have
befallen his band of explorers.
Some years ago, on reading Gregory’s description of the remains
of a camp and burnt hut discovered by him on the Elsey Creek,
on his overland exploration from the Victoria River to the
Eastern Colonies in 1856, I was impressed with these unaccount-
able traces of Europeans at a spot so far remote from any tracks
of known explorers, and nearly four hundred miles from the sea-
board.
He says, in his Journal under date 13th July : —“Several trees
cut with iron axes were noticed near the camp. There was also
the remains of a hut and the ashes of a large fire, indicating that
there had been a party encamped there for several weeks. Several
trees from six to eight inches in diameter had been cut down with
iron axes in fair condition, and the hut built by cutting notches
in standing trees, and resting a large pole therein for a ridge;
this hut had been burnt apparently by the subsequent bush fires,
and also some pieces of the thickest timber remained unconsumed.
Search was made for marked trees, but none were found nor where
there any fragments of iron, leather, or other material of the
equipment of an exploring party, or of any bones of animals other
than those common to Australia. Had an exploring party been
destroyed here, there would most likely have been some indications;
and it may therefore he inferred that the party had proceeded on
its journey. It could not have been a camp of Leichhardt in
1845, as it is one hundred miles south-west of his route to Port
Essingfcon, and it was only six or seven years old, judging by the


growth of the trees. Having subsequently seen some of Leich-
hardt’s camps on the Burdekin, Mackenzie, and Barcoo Rivers a
great similarity was observed in the mode of building the hut,
and its relative position in regard to wood and water supply, and
the position in regard to the general features of the country was
exactly where a party going westward would first receive a check
from the waterless table-land between the Roper and Victoria
Rivers, and would camp and reconnoitre ahead before attempting
to cross to the north-west coast. This creek is named ‘ Elsey ’on
the map.”
Again, on 31st July he remarks—“ Near this spring were several
huts constructed in the rudest manner by heaping branches
together.” And on 6th August—“ These water vessels were
formed by hollowing out a block of wood in the shape of a canoe
and had a capacity of three gallons, and it was evident that they
possess tools of iron as also of stone.” Further on 13th August—
“ Some fishing spears showed marks of iron tools.”
The Elsey Creek is one of the southern tributaries of the
Roper River, forming what is known as the Warlock Ponds on
the Overland Telegraph Line. The position of the old camp,
from what I can determine from a conversation with Mr. Gregory,
is about fifteen miles south from the present cattle station, and on
the east bank of the creek. About two and half years ago a
letter appeared in the Australasian, from an overlander from
Queensland to Port Darwin by the gulf stock track, slating that
the writer had met with an old native woman on the McArthur
River, who told him that she had seen two very old white men
with the tribes far up the river to the south-vest, that one of
these men had used crutches, the use of which she imitated and
that only one of these men was then alive.
After this, when proceeding on his journey near Limmen River,
he was joined by two stockmen who had come from the newly
formed stations on the head waters of the McArthur and Limmen,
and who informed him that on their route they had seen an old
grey-headed man, who looked like a white man, who was coming
towards them calling out, “ white fellow, white fellow ;” when he
was joined by a large party of natives who hustled him away,
and they saw no more of him.
I had already heard from overland drovers that there was a
rumour of whites being with the natives of the McArthur ; and
when I read this traveller’s letter I felt that this statement of the
native woman was most valuable evidence of Europeans having
been with the natives. Her demonstration of the use of the
crutches must have been acquired from actual observation, the
few overland drovers that had passed by the Gulf Route would
not have required them as they never leave the saddle, and natives


never use them. The locality where these white men were
reported to have been seen, is only some two hundred and fifty
miles distant from the hut found on the Elsey, and is near to
where Gregory found evidences of iron tools and huts constructed
of branches. I therefore concluded that these men might be
some of poor Leichhardt’s party ; and at a meeting of ou*’ Geogra-
phical Society, I urged the advisability of at once sending out a
search party to rescue the survivors ; but I regret to say, that
upon discussion, it was not thought advisable to do so ; our worthy
President, Baron von Mueller being of opinion that the rumour
had probably originated through some man in the employment of
the Overland Telegraph Company having gone off to live with the
natives, and that, as Mr. Lindsay was then supposed to be engaged
in a zig-zag exploration of that portion of the Northern Territory,
would be likely to bear something of this white man, should he be
with the natives. Unfortunately, as I now learn, from a perusal
of Mr. Lindsay’s manuscript of that trip, he never extended his
exploration to that locality, but from letters I have received from
him recently, he appears to be upon the eve of obtaining still
further information of a portion of Leichhardt’s party, which I
shall refer to further on. My theory was that Leichhardt from
his last camp on the Barcoo, keeping on his course due west, would
have passed through easy travelling country until he encountered
the arid sand ridges explored by Winnecke to the west of Mulli-
gan River, that finding that tract of country impenetrable with
his equipment, he had fallen back on the Mulligan and followed
the watercourses up north until he came to the Pitcherry Creek
system, which would encourage him to continue on his former
west course ; that having reached as near the head waters of that
creek as he could do with safety, he had halted and sent on a small
reconnoitering party of horsemen to examine the country ahead,
that this party had not succeeded, and that Leichhardt had then
found it necessary to work up further north so as to avail himself
of the inland waters from the coast ranges within the tropics. In
this way he would reach Buchanan’s Creek, follow it up, to be
baulked again in making westward, would push still further north,
reaching Creswel I Creek with the same result, and then being driven
further north and north west, he would for the first time meet
with powerful savage tribes, and would probably encounter a
check ending in disaster. That finding his calculations upset as
to reaching the west coast within the time he expected, and having
sustained loss in horses and live stock, he had despatched a small
party for Port Essington in hopes of a chance vessel calling, or of
leaving a cache with an account of the Expedition and his future
plans. That this party had for its own safety and easy travelling
kept to the open country, and passing the head of the Strang-
ways River bad come upon the Elsey when in high flood, and
that they then had built the hut found by Gregory, to shelter


themselves from the tropical rains and await until the country
should become passable ; and that it was most probable these un-
fortunates were murdered on their way from that point to Port
Essington, as they would have to pass through country occupied
by warlike and bloodthirsty tribes. Gregory found the hut in
1856, and judged that the trees had been cut six or seven years,
so that we may fix the probable date of the Elsey camp as
the rainy season, January 1849—which would be nearly thirteen
months from the date of Leichhardt’s start. No relief coming to the
main party, and their stores exhausted, they would be at the mercy
of the blacks and may have secured their friendship and protection.
The use of iron tools as described by Gregory would thus be ac-
counted for, and I may here remark that it is now well known that
the natives in that northern portion of Australia do not construct
huts. The small stone erections described by Gregory as huts,
met with on the Victoria River, are used by the natives as
traps, in which the hunter concealing himself, flutters a pigeon
overhead, which lures the hawks to descend, and get knocked over
when pouncing on the prey.
Next, I come to what I consider traces of the reconnoitring
partv sent on westward from the Pitcherry Creek waters.
The interesting paper contributed by Mr. Worsnop to the South
Australian Branch of the Australian Royal Geographical Society,
in 1887, entitled “ Pre-historic Native Art,” contained a number
of illustrations of native drawings. - I had studied this subject
for many years and am familiar with native art from Cambridge
Gulf to Cape Howe; but amongst Mr. Worsnop’s illustrations I
found what I recognised as a singular departure from any native
drawings I had ever met with, and which I attributed to un-
educated Europeans—one was a “ rock hieroglyphic ” found by
Arthur John Giles, in 1873, near the junction of Sullivan’s Creek
and Finke River, consisting of seven vertical straight lines, some
distance apart, and having an orb at the bottom of each line, but
not touching. A wave-like double line crossed the vertical lines
about midway, in the spaces between these vertical lines on both
sides of the wave lines were two treble half-circle lines, and above
and below these half-circles, were arrows formed with two barbs
as used by surveyors ; for the first three spaces these half-circles
and arrows were represented, the arrows pointing in different
directions and the half-circles changed in position ; in the fourth
the half-circles were only on one side of the wave line, but the
arrows were on both, in the remaining spaces the arrows only
were shown. To me this appeared to be the work of a European
unable to write, endeavouring to make a record of so many
months spent with natives on a creek. The orb denotes the moon,
the spaces the months, the wave line a creek, the double half-
circles camps, and the arrows indicate the direction of the bunting
parties in search of food. As the season advances the fixed


camps are discontinued, but the direction of the arrows still show
the hunting parties going to and from the creek.
This theory, in the absence of further evidence, would appear
rather too conjectural; but the next drawing which attracted my
attention was one representing four red hearts, pie?-ced by arrows
or harpoons, found in caves by Winnecke in his explorations in
1869.
He describes them as follows :
“ The group of native drawings which I have roughly shown
herewith are found in several large caves near Mount Skinner
and Ledan’s Hills in Latitude 20° 30' south and Longitude 134° 30'
east.”
Figure No. 1 apparently represents a heart pierced in the centre
by a spear. The outline of the object representing the heart has
been delineated with red ochre, whilst the spear has been drawn
with a burnt stick or piece of coal. I have only seen this
particular sketch in one instance, where four distinct drawings
of the same object, exactly below and equidistant from each othe v ,
have been made in anything but a crude manner, the outline
having been carefully and very distinctly traced on the rocks,
showing a degree of perfection scarcely to be anticipated from
these wild inhabitants. The breadth of the heart is about tive
inches and its length about six inches. The length of the spear
portion is about three feet.
Here, in all four representations, we have the typical and not
the true form of heart, The first, third and fourth have each the
red heart pierced with a single barb harpoon, and the second has
the heart pierced with an arrow or double-barbed harpoon.
Can anyone doubt this being the work of a European 1 Is it
not true nautical art all the world over 1 A device to be found
tatooed on the arm of nearly every sailor afloat.
As a further specimen of native art Mr. Worsnop says: “J.
McDouall Stuart, in his Journal, under date February 23, 1861,
at Marchant Springs, on the Finke River, says: “The natives
had made a drawing on the bai’k of two trees—two figures in the
shape of hearts, intended I suppose to represent shields, as there
was a bar down the centre, on either side of which were marks
like broad arrows. On the outside were also a number of arrows
and other small marks, I had a copy of them taken. This was
the first attempt at representation by the natives of Australia
which I had ever seen.”
Under date March 15th on the Hugh River, James’Range,
he observed one of the gum-trees having marks similar to those
he saw on the Finke—broad arrows and a wavy line round the
tree.
On May 15th, at Hawke Creek, Ashburton Range, Stuart
found stuck up in a tree what appeared to be a piece of wood
about two and a-half feet long, sharp at both ends, broad at the


MLlo
mil i
h)
bottom, and shaped like a canoe, of this he says : “It is the
finest piece of workmanship I have ever seen executed by the
natives. It was about twelve inches deep and ten inches wide,
tapering off at the ends. Small lines were cut along both sides
of it. It had been cut out of a solid piece of wood, with some
sharp instrument. It is exactly the form of a canoe.”
Here we have a perfect model of a dug out canoe in the
interior of Australia, where such canoes are unknown. Does not
this look like the work of a sailor ?
Mr, Worsnop also mentions that Gosse in 1873, found amongst
some cave drawings at Ayer’s Rock, devices of two hearts joined
together, but of this no illustration is given.
Stuart also mentions that he was astonished to find the natives
near Newcastle Waters give Masonic signs. Is it not probable
that they were given instruction by some poor European captive,
the kindest return he could give for their attention, and trusting
that some day it might be of service to his benefactors.
Mr. Lindsey in writing some months ago from the Ruby Mines,
which are situated about one hundred miles to the east of where
these traces were found and about Latitude 23°, mentioned that
he had met with an old native who recollected, when a little boy,
having seen a party of white fellows passing from east to west,
at a point south from where he was then camped, and in reply to
a letter which I addressed to him asking for futher information
on this subject, he replied under date 16th July last:—
“ I was very sorry at not being able to follow up that story of
the blackfellow about the party of long ago, but without saying
anything to us he went away and I did not see him again. The
line of route was just south of Glen Annie, on the Ruby map,
say in Latitude 23° 30', and Longitude 135°. If I drop across the
native when lam there next I will take a run down. Of course
I ciannot afford to devote much time to searching for tracks of
poor Leichhardt. If 1 were single and had no one depending on
me, I certainly would devote two years of my life in the
endeavour to wrest from the silent bush the long kept secret. Do
you not think that it is a disgrace to the colonies that such a
man’s fate should be left undetermined ?”
Now that I have had the pleasure of reading Mr. Lindsey’s
report of his exploration and journey from the Finke River to
Lake Nash, and thence north to the lower McArthur River, I
think it is probable that the reconnoitring party may have
crossed further to the south than the Pitcherry Creek, but I still
think that they may have met with disaster about the McDonald
Range, and that the survivors were the artists who executed the
several devices which I have noted.




