





[?]


SOME MEMORIES
Erasmus departed this life in July of
the year 1536. His sense of humour
never deserted him. He died in the
house of his publisher.
Dr Hendrik Willem Van Loon


LOVE LYRICS FROM
FIVE CENTURIES
Selected by George G.
Harrap. With an Intro-
duction by John Drink-
water.
Crown 4 to. 12 s. 6d. net


THE AUTHOR
Fr.


SOME MEMORIES
1901-1935
A Publisher's Contribution to
the History of Publishing
by
GEORGE G. HARRAP
GEORGE G. HARRAP & CO. LTD.
LONDON BOMBAY SYDNEY


First published 1935
by George G. Harrap & Co. Ltd.
182 High Holborn, London, W.C. 1.
Copyright. All rights reserved.
Made in Great Britain. Printed by A. P. Tayler & Co. Lid., London


FOREWORD
In a history of publishing 1 which appeared in
1930 the House of Harrap is given ‘honourable
mention’ of four lines, wherefore my associates have
prevailed upon me to set down some of the inci-
dents in our career that will more fully satisfy the
curiosity of those who may be interested in the
story of our House.
I have in the following pages placed on record
events which I hope will not be without interest to
the general reader, and I have sought to acknow-
lege my debt to the men and women whose associa-
tion with me, either as partners or co-workers, have
made our common efforts fruitful.
As I have surveyed the years that lie behind I
have lingered over memories of the many friends
of the business who are with us no longer. Such
losses are inseparable from passing time, but the
years have taken a sad toll.
The memories I have endeavoured to recapture
concern the present century and the business which
began in 1901. My litde book is planned as a
record of this business and it extends beyond only
1 Publishing and Bookselling, F. A. Mumby.


in a few instances when it has been necessary to
probe somewhat more deeply into the earlier years
in which my publishing career had its roots.
Sometimes I have been tempted to discuss issues
not strictly confined to our domestic affairs, but the
views of one who has served publishing for fifty-
two years will be received indulgendy.
I have merely mentioned my apprenticeship and
the historic House of Isbister in which I learned my
trade. I retain many memories of the nineteen
years which ended in 1901, but these belong to the
fuller story of my life which would deal, also, with
other fields of activity and other men and women
whose friendship I deeply value.
Finally, to those not mentioned in these pages
who have given the House of Harrap service or
friendship through the thirty-four years of its his-
tory I tender thanks and the assurance that they are
not forgotten.
G. G. H.
182 High Holbom.
February 14, 1935.


CONTENTS
Page
I. Of York Street ix
11. Of Portsmouth Street 30
111. Of Parker Street 63
IV. Of Australia and Africa 79
V. Of My Jubilee 91
VI. Of My Second Visit to Australia 97
VII. Of Growing Pains 103
VIII. Of Our Staff 106
IX. Of the Mystery of Publishing no
X. Of Other Friends 132
XI. Of 182 High Holborn 154
Index 169




ILLUSTRATIONS
The Author Frontispiece
Number ij York Street Facing Page n
My Own Room at York Street 12
Daniel Collamore Heath 16
George Oliver Anderson 20
One of Willy PogAny’s First Drawings for A Treasury
of Verse for Little Children 24
Lincoln Chambers, Portsmouth Street 30
J. E. Mansion 36
The Dictionary 38
Walter G. Harrap 42
One of Harry Clarke’s First Drawings for Hans
Andersen 58
39-41 Parker Street 66
One of Arthur Rackham’s Pen Drawings from
Andersens Fairy Tales 70
At the Lunch to Celebrate the Publication of
Marlborough 76
Willy PogAny’s Idea of Our Board Meeting 80
Two Corners in the Showroom at Sydney 98
Number 182 High Holborn ijB
9


NUMBER 15 YORK STREET


I
OF YORK STREET
When, in October 1901, I entered for the first
time the future home of an infant publishing
House whose advent was to cause not the slightest
stir in literary or other circles, I had no higher
expectation than the rest. The door I unlocked
led to a suite of three small rooms on the second
floor of Number 15 York Street, Covent Garden,
and I confess that I felt a certain trepidation as to
the outcome of this plunge into business on my
own account. Can there be anything more uncer-
tain than the fate of new books? I had only to
misjudge a few manuscripts at this stage; I had only
to be the sport of ill-luck a very few times and my
modest venture would be scattered to the winds. 1
True the rent was as small as the rooms, but as I
entered into possession I felt keenly that I had
given a hostage to Fortune.
The front room was to be the sanctuary in which
the new publisher was to receive distinguished
Authors who would forthwith begin to josde each
• It is gratifying to recall that three of the very first of my publi-
cations are still alive. These are: Hyde’s Lessons in the Use of English,
Kupfer’s Legends of Greece and Rome, and Heath’s Practical French
Grammar. The second was the germ from which sprang the “ Told
Through the Ages ” series.
11


other on the narrow stairs and in which he would
make the august decisions that would bring joy or
the reverse to humble aspirants for his patronage.
How the kindly gods must have laughed!
The inner room was to contain some of my
stock-in-trade, the invoice-books, and the ledgers;
there was a desk for my one and only clerk, and a
small counter over which I hoped many book-
sellers’ collectors were, as time went on, to be
supplied with my future publications.
The other room was presided over by my third
employee, and here the main stock was to be
housed and the outgoing parcels packed. It was not
long before this little room became horribly con-
gested—a presage of the future, for from the end
of my first year’s trading, despite further premises
acquired at intervals, we were rarely to have elbow-
room in the warehouse during the following
twenty-five years.
At the beginning the inscription upon the outer
door of my offices was “D. C. Heath & Company,”
for I had decided to trade under the name of this
important firm of American publishers.
For nineteen years previously I had been em-
ployed by Isbister & Company, Limited, who were
English agents for the Heath publications. Mr
Heath, as will be seen, eventually gave me legal
control of the agency, and when I decided to launch


MY OWN ROOM AT YORK STREET


my own business I knew that I could take the
Heath publications with me as a foundation for my
list. D. C. Heath & Company were well-known
by this time to English teachers, and it would, I
thought, be more advantageous to build upon their
established name than to use my own. Mr Heath
was entirely favourable to my proposal; it pleased
him to think that the name of his House would
receive widened publicity, and he had entire con-
fidence in me. But after two years certain of his
colleagues expressed uneasiness. Should disaster
unhappily overtake me their name might be in-
volved. Mr Heath delicately explained the situ-
ation and I immediately wrote that I appreciated
the reasonableness of the objection and would in
future trade under my own name.
This happened more than thirty years ago, but
the consequences of using Messrs Heath’s name at
the outset still cling to us. We are frequendy
termed ‘American’; not long ago a reviewer in
The Times referred to us as “that enterprising firm
of American publishers.” Were I an American I
should, lam sure, be proud of my nationality, but
the truth is I was bom within sound of Bow bells.
The ground floor of Number 15 was occupied
by Mr Simsohn, a wholesale florist and a kindly
landlord. Most of his business was transacted in
the early morning, but there were usually a few


flower-sellers standing about the entrance to the
shop. This brings to mind my most distinguished
visitor of those early years. The Earl of Aberdeen
had become interested in the Nature books by Miss
Lilian Cask which were among my earliest suc-
cesses; some correspondence passed, and one day
he did me the honour of calling to make my
personal acquaintance.
By this time I had a typist; I was getting on and
was working under considerable pressure. My
typist saw visitors in the first place and was expected
to shield me from callers whose business did not
demand my personal attention. I did not think that
she lacked common sense, but, alas! when his
lordship presented his card he was asked if he had
an appointment. He had not, and on no account
would he disturb Mr Harrap if he were busy! I
have not ceased to regret that I missed the oppor-
tunity, which never recurred, of meeting this
noble-hearted, gracious man. The following day
I received a short letter from him; he wrote that
he was sorry that he had not seen me, and went
on to relate how, before leaving, he had enjoyed
an interesting conversation with a flower-seller at
my door!


My intimacy with publishers in the United
States began long before 1901 and two connexions
in New York were to be of vital help when the
moment came to lay the foundations of the House
of Harrap.
I have referred to D. C. Heath. He is ‘Mr Great-
heart’ in my story, and in my early twenties it
meant much to me that a publisher of his eminence
was my friend. He, too, had been the architect of
his fortunes, and he was unspoiled by success. One
day I apologized to him for the modest accommo-
dation of my home, where he was at the moment
a guest. “My dear boy,” he answered, “my father
was a blacksmith.” Years after, when our friend-
ship had grown very close, I understood why he
was drawn to me. His beautiful home and the
family upon whom he lavished without stint pro-
vided a cultured setting which satisfied one side
only of his nature; he hungered for an affection
which did not flourish in that soil. My youthful
admiration and affection helped to fill a void in
his big, simple heart; I believe that it was one of the
lures that drew him so often to our shores. He
came many times to London and always during
the greater part of his stay we were together.
At the outset I was employed at Isbisters, his
English agents, and I owed my contact with him
to the interest I was more and more taking in the


educational publications of D. C. Heath & Com-
pany. He appreciated my efforts and eventually
was convinced that our interests were identical.
He must have noted my aspirations and that my
conditions did not satisfy them; but it was no hint
from me that moved him, upon one of his annual
visits, to mention the possibility of my setting up
in business. I was, indeed, surprised when, at the
end of a conversation, he took from his pocket a
power of attorney which, in an emergency, gave
me authority to deal with his agency as I might
determine.
My employers had not valued this agency, and
on an occasion one of the powers that be remarked
of my activity: “If he chooses to flog a dead horse
it is his own affair.” The ‘authorities’ failed to
appreciate the possibilities in that carcass, but my
instincts were leading me wisely, for ere long it
was to appear that there was enough life in the
animal to transport me in safety over the first
several miles of our uncharted road. The agency,
in other words, enabled me to start in business on
my own account, and Mr Heath’s sympathetic
interest in my fortunes continued unabated until
his death in 1908. His friendship for me was
bequeathed to his successors and for forty years
this link has continued to connect the Houses of
Heath and Harrap. Mr Heath’s immediate succes-


DANIEL COLLAMORE HEATH
16


sor, W. E. Pulsifer, was as a brother to me, and
his successor, Winfield S. Smyth, the present
president of the company, maintains these tradi-
tions of friendship.
0 0 0
In my later years at Isbisters I usually arranged
for the publication of their books in America, and
when American publishers looked in at Tavistock
Street they were referred to me. One day, how-
ever, a publisher with whom we had not previously
communicated called to inquire concerning a forth-
coming book by Dean Farrar which, however, was
already promised to another New York firm. As I
was at lunch the publisher, T. Irving Crowell,
saw one of my seniors, and when I returned to the
office a colleague told me that the interview had
taken place at the trade counter and very little
consideration had been shown to the visitor. As
my colleague was aware, I felt strongly as to the
claims upon our courtesy of visitors from overseas,
and his report made me feel uneasy. Fortunately
he had heard Mr Crowell say that he was staying
at the Savoy Hotel, and I immediately walked over
to the hotel. I was lucky; Mr Crowell was in his
room and I was able to meet him. We sat together
for half an hour and our conversation was the
b
17


beginning of an association that still links us
together after the lapse of more than forty-five
years. When I walked over to the Savoy Hotel I
had no other desire than to remove a possible bad
impression of my firm. Nothing was farther from
my thoughts than even the remotest expectation
of personal gain, nevertheless that short journey
was to prove of great importance to my future
career.
Mr Crowell was of about my own age; after
serving his apprenticeship in the business that his
father had established in 1876 he was now taking
a considerable share in its management, and one of
the purposes of his visit to London was the enlarge-
ment of the firm’s English connexions. Our inter-
view and some subsequent correspondence sug-
gested to Mr Crowell that I might be of service to
him in London, and not long after his return to
New York I was placed upon the firm’s pay roll,
where I remained until a number of years after the
launching of my own business.
Thus began the second of the two American
associations that helped me to make my great
decision, and my reliance upon this stone in my
foundations was not misplaced. Not only was the
regular subsidy from New York of great help at
that period of my fortunes; the constant interest of
Thomas Y. Crowell Company in our activities


provided a substantial outlet for a part of our
output.
To borrow a phrase from cricket, in 1932
T. Irving Crowell and I were ‘fifty, not out,’ for
we both celebrated the jubilee of our connexion
with publishing in that year.
0 0 0
Although York Street was within the purlieus
of Covent Garden Market and most frequented by
dealers in fruit, vegetables, and flowers, it had long
been associated with publishing, for the firm of
George Bell & Sons had been established there
since 1864, Their premises were almost opposite
Number 15 and from my window I could usually
see Edward Bell busily occupied at his desk. I
pause upon the memory. Proximity brought occa-
sional contacts with the Bells, and we transacted
some business together which, I believe, proved
satisfactory to them. I was on friendly terms with
that extraordinary American author, Ralph Waldo
Trine, who visited my home soon after the publi-
cation in New York of his In Tune with the Infinite,
a book destined to be a ‘best seller’ on both sides
of the Atlantic, and I had something to do with
the arrangements whereby Messrs Bell acquired
the valuable English rights. Edward and Ernest


Bell embodied much that seemed precious in the
traditions of publishing, and I could not but
appreciate the friendly notice of neighbours who
had richly attained to that to which, in those early
years, I hardly dared aspire.
The Bells left York Street after a while, having
erected a large and stately building close by.
Evidently it was a prosperous time for publishers,
for my litde business was also expanding. I look
back very gratefully over those first years and
marvel that not once did I experience financial
difficulty. At fairly close intervals I took over other
rooms in Number 15 until I occupied the entire
building, save only the flower shop and a room
behind it on the ground floor.
But our needs expanded faster than their
accommodation and rarely during the York Street
period did we have room in which to swing the
proverbial cat. Number 14 became vacant after a
while and we were prepared to rent it if we might
break through the party wall. However, the
Authorities attached impossible conditions to their
permission and the project fell through. But
shortly after this, our needs again becoming press-
ing, as we might not go through a hole in the
wall, we crossed the road and rented additional
office space in Number 2 opposite. I fear that this
inflicted great inconvenience in particular upon my


GEORGE OLIVER ANDERSON


partner, Mr George Oliver Anderson, who thence-
forth had to be constantly dodging the traffic in
our busy street.
This reminds me that the business ceased to be a
‘one-hoss shay’ in August 1905. In Mr Anderson
I found a partner whose broad shoulders. have
borne an equal share of our common load. He had
begun his career as a schoolmaster, first at the
Kendrick School, Reading, and later at Kirkham
Grammar School. After seven years his love of
books bred dissatisfaction with teaching and he
accepted a post in Paris with Neal’s Library, whose
bookshop in the Rue de Rivoli was well known to
English and American visitors. The business was
eventually taken over by Messrs W. H. Smith &
Son, and Mr Anderson returned to London to enter
the publishing house of Dean & Son, Limited,
where he remained until he threw in his lot with
mine. We have planned and builded together,
and he, a loyal comrade, shares the credit of the
successes which steadily favoured our enterprises.
0 0 0
At the end of the first nine years of the firm’s
existence we could survey our foundations with
satisfaction. Perhaps there had been a certain
timidity in laying the several stones. Each had


been added only after the pressure of needs that
would not be denied. We ought, perhaps, to have
had greater faith in our future and secured more
ample accommodation each time we added so
modesdy to the House we were erecting. But, as
I have observed, we undertook nothing beyond
our immediate financial means and were content
with the progress we continued to make.
At York Street we launched no famous authors,
nor were we able to advertise theatrically, but
during those nine years we were mainly concerned
in consolidating our educational connexion, which
could be little helped by press campaigns, and some
of our publications had a substantial influence upon
the development of educational ideas and methods.
We were glad to know that teachers near and far
were scanning our lists and examining our new
books in expectation of finding originality. Then,
we had learned that my intention at the outset to
produce educational books that looked as little
like text-books as possible was a very happy idea.
To-day the importance of this departure is not
universally appreciated because many school books
are nicely printed and bound, but at the beginning
of the century few publishers paid attention to the
appearance of such books and I believe that we
may claim to have been among the pioneers of an
important reform.


During this period we published a number of
excellent juvenile books. They were the beginning
of a list that has given us a secure place in the
confidence of teachers, librarians, and parents who
realize the beneficent influence which worth-while
books may exercise upon the minds of children.
It has been our policy to build up a collection of
books for boys and girls that while being as inter-
esting as romances contain nothing that must later
be unlearned. These books have been prepared
with care; each takes its place in a scheme that is
designed to inspire young readers with an interest
in every field of knowledge. We have had our
reward in the perennial demand for series such as
“Told Through the Ages” and “The Romance of
Knowledge,” and the continued popularity of
many individual books long after they were first
published.
If we had launched no authors whose names
were destined to become familiar to the man in the
street, nevertheless we found writers whose books
are still in demand to-day. Of some of these books
we have printed more editions than can be claimed
by many of the ‘big sellers’ which are famous for
a year and a day and whose authors’ names are
on every tongue while they are hot from the press.
During the closing years at York Street we com-
menced to produce the ornate gift-books which,


somewhat later, we were to list under the heading:
‘Books Beautiful’. The phrase became our House
slogan and now every bookseller recognizes that it
connotes a Harrap book. Recently we received
an interesting communication from a bookseller
in the Midlands, who wrote that he possessed a
book which he thought might interest us. It was
published in 1809 by one John Harrop, of Alston,
Cumberland, and evidently Mr Harrop considered
that it was a ‘book beautiful’ for the title-page is
headed; “Harrop’s Elegant Edition.” It was
indeed interesting to discover that there was a
‘Harrop’ in the trade a century before I had run
up my flag.
The foundation of our ‘Books Beautiful’ was
undoubtedly Willy Pogany’s first Omar Khayyam,
and our association with this gifted artist was
always warm and intimate. I recall his first visit
to York Street widi his portfolio in 1906. I turned
over his drawings without tremendous interest
until I came to a sketch of a whimsical Christmas
scene. “Is this your work?” I said. “Why, yes,”
he said, somewhat surprised. I thought it was the
most promising thing I had seen in our office, and
when Pogany went away down our narrow stairs
he took with him a commission to illustrate our
Treasury of Verse for Little Children. He made an
amazing success of this job; the book with its


ONE OF WILLY POGANY’S FIRST DRAWINGS FOR 'A TREASURY
OF VERSE FOR LITTLE CHILDREN ’
It is an example of his whimsical humour; the elf
might have flown with him out of Hungary!


abundance of beautiful pictures is still selling regu-
larly after more than twenty-seven years. We
recognized that we had found a genius and we
promptly asked Pogany whether he would like to
tackle Omar. “Would he!” His enthusiasm was
delightful, and we could not have made a happier
choice; his book has been a joy to hundreds of
thousands of book lovers all over the world.
Willy Pogany must have a place in this record
if only because for several subsequent years he was
a member of our staff. True he had done some
insignificant work for another publisher before we
became acquainted, but he was our ‘discovery’.
He had left his native Hungary as a youth to
pursue his art in Paris. He found little there but
good fellowship, so after a time of high striving
and very poor living he crossed the Channel, where
conditions were equally trying until die morning
when he called at York Street. Henceforth, until
August 1914, he contributed a major book to our
list each autumn. The Ancient Mariner, Tannhauser,
Lohengrin, Parsifal, all were remarkable achieve-
ments, embellished by a wealth of artistic detail
which differentiates them from all other English
art books of the period and which keep them alive
in our list. Happy are the possessors of the original
limited editions. The book for 1914 was to have
been Wagner’s Ring, but war came, and Willy


was not a naturalized British citizen. He had to
make a hurried dash, together with his English
wife and little boy, to New York, and the book
was never completed. England lost one who had
grown to love her, and America gained an artist
whose designs for scenery and costumes for the
New York Metropolitan Opera House and various
theatres, and mural decorations for public buildings
have gained him many laurels. He is now at
Hollywood making films and painting portraits of
film stars who are often to be met in his pleasant
studio under the shadow of tall trees. He has
illustrated many books since 1914, but his best
work in this department of his art was probably
finished when he left England, for I do not think
that he finds in America the atmosphere which in-
spired his splendid work for the House of Harrap.
0 0 0
Our nine years in York Street were not only
happy because the sap was rising and the grain
promised to swell; it is often said with truth that
there are no friends like the friends of one’s youth,
and we had substantial reason for feeling grateful
to many who came into our circle when we were
very young. I have not space to develop the theme
here but I should be indeed ungrateful if I did not


acknowledge my debt to the memory of the late
William Robertson, headmaster of Castle Douglas
Academy, who placed his intimate knowledge of
English, French, and German books and authors
unreservedly at my disposal. His mind was pecu-
liarly well-balanced and he was not easily to be
induced to abandon any position; thus he was an
invaluable counsellor to a young publisher who
had much to leam.
Our friendship began long before the start of
the business, and by 1901 Robertson had retired
to Edinburgh, where his latter years were spent in
leisured retirement among his beloved books.
Every September I spent a week in Edinburgh
and we discussed my publishing plans together.
He was as eagerly interested as myself, and his
wife would often make valuable contributions to
our discussions. I cannot overestimate the value
of my long association, not once clouded with a
misunderstanding, with these rare and generous
souls. Not the least of Robertsons services was
his introduction to me in 1905 of Mr J. E. Mansion,
whose connexion with the firm was to become
very close, as will be seen. The names of both
men should be inscribed upon foundation-stones
of the Harrap building.
29


II
OF PORTSMOUTH STREET
The halo of romance with which Time, for us,
has crowned our years in York Street had not
descended upon the premises when at last we
decided that we must add another storey to the
structure that was rising. To tell the truth, we left
York Street with little thought but of the incon-
veniences that had attended our endeavour to get
a bushel of grain into a quart pot. No glamour at
that date attached to the tiny rooms, the rat-infested
basement, the narrow entrance Uttered with the
debris of a flower and vegetable market.
In August 1910 we crossed the threshold for the
last time and took possession of a part of the second
floor and the whole of the large basement of Lin-
coln Chambers, Portsmouth Street. The building,
double-fronted and of imposing appearance, as
befitted its surroundings on the edge of Lincolns
Inn, and its original professional occupants would
add, we thought, dignity to the House of Harrap.
There were, again, literary associations, for on the
opposite side of the street was a picturesque little
shop to which came a steady stream of pilgrims
from the world over; they venerated it as ‘the


LINCOLN CHAMBERS, PORTSMOUTH STREET


Old Curiosity Shop’, “Immortalised by Charles
Dickens,” as we are informed by the inscription
upon it.
One morning I walked through our portals into
the pages of that sentimental story. In the street
fronting our building and grouped around the
little shop were the characters familiar to lovers of
the book. Quilp had just come out through the
narrow door and was bullying the old grandfather,
while Little Nell laid a timidly protective hand
upon the old man’s arm. It was a ‘moving’ pic-
ture; when I had recovered from my surprise I
recognized that I was present at the filming of the
story for the cinema.
0 0 0
I was asked recently: “Have you successfully
republished any book which had been a failure?”
and the question brought to my mind a memory
of Professor D’Arcy Thompson and his book
Day Dreams of a Schoolmaster. D’Arcy Thompson
was an old man when his book came first into my
hand. The original edition had been published in
Edinburgh and was forgotten by all but a faithful
few. It had never been reprinted until Messrs D. C.
Heath & Company brought out an edition in New
York in the eighteen-nineties. They had included
31


it in a series of pedagogical treatises and their
edition was so uninspiring in appearance that I felt
no thrill when I received an advance copy. When
I began to turn the pages, however, I quickly
realized that I must take off my shoes. D’Arcy
Thompson’s theme was teaching and he had writ-
ten for teachers; at the end of the century his
pedagogical views could have little value, but what
he wrote was the stuff of which classics are made.
Chapter after chapter deeply absorbed me, and one
in particular which ended with a most exquisite
reference to his first wife—a veritable gem of
literature—inspired the desire to do something to
resuscitate the book.
At that time D’Arcy Thompson was living in
Galway, where he was Professor of Greek at the
University. His book was concerned, largely, with
his experiences as a teacher in the Edinburgh
Academy, where among his pupils were Andrew
Lang and Robert Louis Stevenson.
We could not sell the American edition of Day
Dreams of a Schoolmaster in England without the
author’s permission, and I wrote asking for this.
Thompson appeared to be little interested and, on
the whole, thought that it would be desirable that
the dead past should bury its dead. I was dis-
appointed and wrote again urging that readers of
another generation should not be denied the


opportunity to enjoy what I had got from the
book, I suppose that I must have written with
feeling for Thompson replied: “Very well; there
may be another who will feel about my book as
apparently you have felt, so go ahead. But I do
not suppose that I shall get the price of a box of
cigars out of it.”
Thompson was right, to my great disappoint-
ment; the book did not sell despite my efforts to
set it going. I eventually came to the conclusion
that people were put off by certain chapters in the
middle of the book, which looked forbidding to
those ignorant of the Classics, because of extensive
quotations from Greek authors. I believed that
these were most detrimental in a book for die
general reader and, moreover, they were digres-
sions. I had to accept defeat, for I was not my own
master at that date.
Some years later, when D’Arcy Thompson died,
his second wife gave me a photograph of her
husband “in memory of a correspondence that had
given him pleasure.” I had by no means lost
interest in Day Dreams of a Schoolmaster and when
I was established at York Street I asked Thompson’s
son whether he would consent to my bringing
out still another edition of his father’s book,
omitting the ‘Greek’ chapters. I contemplated a
book printed in fine type and made attractive in
c
33


every detail of format. He was uncompromising,
however; his father had first published the book as
it stood and he did not feel justified in permitting
any alteration. I suggested that I had a more filial
regard for his father’s memory—l would remove a
disability which prevented potential readers from
appreciating the fine spirit revealed so eloquently
in the larger part of the book.
Seven years after Thompson’s death his book
was no longer copyright and I felt justified in
producing a new edition which embodied my
ideas. It appeared in “The Harrap Library” which
was printed from types specially cast for the series.
Chapters XII to XV were omitted and as frontis-
piece I used a drawing specially made from the
photograph that Mrs Thompson had presented
to me.
In its new, delectable form Day Dreams had a
fresh lease of life and it was one of the successes of
the series. Its republication connected me with
many pleasing incidents, one of which was the
discovery that T. P. O’Connor had been a student
under Thompson at Galway. He reviewed the
book in two long articles in T.P.’s Weekly and
wrote delightfully of his memories of his old
Professor. Here is one of the passages:
Over the long gulf of years the little study hall
. . . remains vivid and living in my memory to


day; and though my ears by now have many strange
and melodious memories of human speech and
human voice, there is no memory so keen as that of
this Englishman’s voice rolling out the divine words
of the great poet Homer.
Another passage which vitally intrigued me
described how many times he had paused on the
threshold of Thompson’s study drinking in the
angelic loveliness of a woman’s portrait on an
opposite wall. It was the face of D’Arcy Thomp-
son’s first wife, of whom he had written, in the
chapter I have referred to: “Time shall throw his
dart at Death, ere Death has slain such another.”
I envied T. P., for I had been deeply attracted to
the subject of that portrait. I did not suppose that
I should ever see it, but the opportunity was in
store. Years later I was talking of D’Arcy Thomp-
son to several friends at an exhibition of books in
Edinburgh. Suddenly a young lady came up.
“Mr Harrap,” she said, “I have been much inter-
ested in what you have been saying. My aunt with
whom lam living is the sister of D’Arcy Thomp-
son’s first wife, and she has a portrait of her sister
which was given to her by D’Arcy Thompson’s
widow, who felt that it should come back into
our family. My aunt will be pleased if you will
pay us a visit.” “My dear young lady,” I said,
“nothing in this world could give me greater


pleasure than to be shown that portrait.” That
evening I looked upon the face of her who had
died long ago so “young, and fair, and learned,”
and with ‘T. P.’ I could well believe that her death
must have made “a great difference” to her school-
master husband.
0 0 0
In Lincoln Chambers we were to repeat the
experiences of York Street. We soon outgrew
the new premises and in 1913 reached down to the
ground floor, acquiring first the northern portion
and later the southern half. The fateful year 1914
was drawing near and the War was to suspend
development temporarily, nevertheless, before it
had ended —in March 1917 to be precise—we had
taken two other offices on the second floor.
Portsmouth Street must always be associated in
our memory with the War. The dreadful month
of August 1914, among its problems, brought us a
responsibility that was staggering. Our friend,
J. E. Mansion, had for some years occupied the
post of Chief Modem Language master in George
Watson’s College, Edinburgh, and we had grown
to lean more and more upon his advice in develop-
ing our French and German list. It was a field in
which Mr Mansion walked as master, and in


J. E. MANSION
36


January 1914 we invited him to come south to
take charge of our modem language department.
Thus it was that Mr Mansion presented himself in
London, together with his family and the family
gods, almost at the moment when the fateful
British ultimatum was presented to Germany, He
reported for duty on August 1, having six months
before resigned his Edinburgh post and the sub-
stantial pension to which in due course he would
be entitled!
At that juncture the future of all publishing
businesses seemed dark indeed and few had the
prescience to anticipate the surprising develop-
ments that were to come when the nations had
settled down to war in earnest. Mr Mansion appre-
ciated our position and made light of his own
anxieties, good sportsman as he is; he immediately
accepted my suggestion that he should take a
temporary post at Merchant Taylors School, and
here he remained, greatly appreciated, until Easter
1917, when business had become more or less
normal again.
If both Mr Mansion and ourselves feared in
August 1914 that a disastrous decision had come
home to roost we now recognize that Fate had
been kind. In the first place, Mr Mansion was to
render invaluable assistance in the general conduct
of our affairs as a member of the Board. More


important still, he was to realize a life ambition by
bringing to fruition a task upon which we all set
our hearts from the moment when he impressed
us with the conviction that no other living French
scholar was better equipped to undertake it. The
first volume of his French Dictionary has now
appeared, and when completed—we hope in 1936
—this great work must take a place among the
most valuable aids to scholarship which our gener-
ation has produced. It has been a huge under-
taking; we did not anticipate at the outset that it
would require fifteen years of gruelling labour
from its compiler and his loyal assistants, but they
have the satisfaction of knowing that the achieve-
ment is a substantial buttress to the edifice upon
which we all are labouring.
0 0 0
I am somewhat anticipating, however, for at
Portsmouth Street the walls of the House of
Harrap were not so high that they needed but-
tresses; the structure still lacked design and it was
to ramble further when soon after the close of the
War expansion was again the order of the day.
Unfortunately, we could not obtain further
accommodation in Lincoln Chambers, so once
more we were forced to the unsatisfactory alter-


THE DICTIONARY
38


native of taking additional premises outside the
parent walls. First we rented a basement under
15 and 17 Chichester Rents, Chancery Lane, and
in October 1920 we took two offices in Great
Turnstile, Holbom.
Under our several roofs we nourished ambitions
that were far from parochial, and symptoms were
soon to manifest themselves. In 1917 the business
had been converted into a Limited Company and
the happy association of my partner and myself
was reinforced with younger blood when, in due
time, my two sons joined the Board. George, the
elder, had come into the business eight years before.
He was tremendously enthusiastic and as the staff
was few in number he delighted in taking a hand in
everything. He loves to tell how at times he
helped to wheel our parcels for the country on a
truck to the carriers. He could not stay ‘put’ long,
however, and soon began to press my partner and
myself to be allowed to try his hand as a traveller
in the country. After some hesitation we gave in
and George promptly surprised us with the fruits
of his first campaign. After this, there was no
holding him back and ere long he had gone
a-roving to develop our Foreign and Dominions
trade. He has certain of the characteristics of
Columbus and Napoleon—he is ever eager to dis-
cover fresh fields and tireless until he has conquered
39


them. After travelling through many lands of
the five continents he made Sydney his head-
quarters in 1915 and established there the Australa-
sian Publishing Company, Limited, 1 the manage-
ment of which he resigned to Mr Stanley L. Bart-
lett when, in 1922, he returned to London to seek,
at the hub, larger opportunities, opportunities
which he is so qualified to develop and through
which he has succeeded in bringing much grist to
our mill.
Among the authors whom he has persuaded into
our fold are several who have expressed warm
appreciation of his helpful encouragement. Pro-
minent among these is the late J. J. Bell, whom he
first met at a moment when Bell was deeply
depressed. It appeared that he was convinced that
his work was done and that he was incapable of
further literary effort; my son argued the point
with him and at length suggested that he should
write a book for us about Scotland, “And,” said
he, “I will guarantee its success.” Eventually he
won Bell over and The Glory of Scotland was the
splendid result. The story of my son’s measures
which ensured the welcome that the book received
is a romance. Three large editions were called for
during the first month after publication and Bell
was encouraged to go on. Before his death, at the
‘Sec page 145.


end of 1934, we had published two further books
by him and he had started to write two others for
our list.
My second son, Walter, came to us in 1912, after
serving two years as a pupil in the famous Ballan-
tyne Press, of which more anon; like his brother he
was eager to get into the collar, and he was showing
great promise when the fatal month of August 1914
made a mess of all our schemes. Two days after
War was declared he came to me and remarked
quietly: “I suppose you would like me to give a
lead?” Of course I told him that he must himself
decide what he ought to do. He at once left me and
a couple of hours later came back with the King’s
shilling. (His brother also volunteered, but was
rejected on medical grounds; he was, however, per-
mitted to travel and was to have his share of adven-
ture on the high seas during the next two years.)
Walter’s first active service was in Flanders; in
1917 he was transferred to Mesopotamia and owing
to military exigencies in that theatre he did not
return until March 1920.
Before the War he was attracted by the financial
side of the business and in the long interval before
demobilization he studied accountancy from books
which he asked me to send out, so that upon his
return he was excellently equipped to control our
finance. His efficient organization of his secretarial
41


department shortly left him free to supervise
others, and he then undertook charge of our
publicity. He loves responsibility, and his tactful
personality is felt in every sphere of the business.
At the Board his thoughtful contributions to the
discussions have a great influence upon our even-
tual decisions. His influence is felt, also, outside
our walls, for he is a strenuous advocate of joint
co-operative methods. He was the originator and
first Chairman of the Publishers’ Advertising Circle,
and the first of the booksellers’ posters, now well
established as the N.B.C. posters, was produced at
his instigation by contributions from a group of
publishers. In 1929-30 he was Treasurer of the
National Book Council and was one of a deputa-
tion of two who interviewed Lord Camrose and
enlisted his powerful support for a scheme of non-
commercial advertising, the fruits of which have
appeared in two annual exhibitions of hooks in
London held under the auspices of the Sunday
Times. It is hoped that these are the first of a
permanent series.
It is difficult for a father to give public expression
to his pride in his sons; I am happy to know that
my colleagues share my pride and confidence in
these two pillars of our House.


WALTER G. HARRAP
42


Mention of Walter’s connexion with the Ballan-
tyne Press revives memories of my earliest years
in publishing. The Press did the larger part of
Isbisters’ printing and, as a youth, I had to carry
messages to the London managing partner, Mr
Charles McCall, whose wife, nee Jane Home, was a
distant relative of Sir Walter Scott. At my first
interview he made a deep impression upon me; I
was never to meet a more gracious man or one
more beautiful of countenance. His instant kind-
ness to one who was a mere junior immensely
flattered my callow pride, but I afterwards learned
that it was characteristic in him to extend this
courteous consideration to all—old or young,
important or otherwise. My contact with him
ripened into a happy association which endured
until his death, and for a considerable time after I
started my own business most of my printing
orders were placed with him. Like James Ballan-
tyne, the founder of his firm, “he had a fine taste
for the effect of types,” and his personal interest in
my desire to reach a high standard of typographical
excellence in my early publications was of great
value to me.
The Press, as all know, had distinguished tradi-
tions; it may be said to have been founded by Sir
Walter Scott, for James Ballantyne, his school-
fellow, printer of a weekly newspaper in the small


Scottish town of Kelso, became also a book printer
in 1799 at Scott’s suggestion and active encourage-
ment. Six years later, indeed, Scott became a part-
ner in the enterprise, which meantime had migrated
to Paul’s Work, Edinburgh. The partnership
lasted for twenty years, and was to end unhappily.
Lockhart most unjustly terms Ballantyne “the
most negligent and inefficient of master printers,”
for the reproach was deserved only so far as it
related to the affairs of his counting-house. Al-
though of sterling integrity he did not understand
the mysteries of finance, and Scott was tempera-
mentally over-sanguine. It is not to be wondered
at that Scott’s extravagance and Ballantyne’s sub-
mission to the stronger personality should have
involved the partnership in catastrophe. The crash
is one of the dramas of literature; it was not a
tragedy for, happily, it did not conquer Scott’s
indomitable spirit, and his successful struggle to
repay the firm’s creditors, although it shortened his
life, revealed the nobility of his great character as
nothing else could have done.
On the whole, Ballantyne also comes well out
of the sad affair. Scott, apparently with justice,
shouldered the blame, and his friend’s credit as one
of the greatest and most able printers of his time
was not shaken by Lockhart’s criticism.
After the crash James managed the Ballantyne


Press for the creditors. He died in 1833 and his son
John Alexander carried it on until his death, thirty
years later. This ended the family connexion, and
the business passed to three partners, one of whom,
Edward Hanson, obtained complete control in
1879. A year previously Hanson had established a
branch in London; the first manager was Horace
Hart, later Printer to the University Press, Oxford,
and he was succeeded by Charles McCall, who,
some time later, was taken into partnership. In
1905 the branch was converted into a separate
company under the name of Ballantyne & Com-
pany, Limited. It was to retain the imprint: “The
Ballantyne Press, London,” but otherwise was
entirely disconnected from the Edinburgh House.
McCall became life Managing Director; his finan-
cial interest was henceforth entirely confined to the
London Company while the Hansons were part-
ners in both.
Long before 1905 the Ballantyne Press, London,
had become familiar to publishers and others who
appreciated fine printing and just as James Ballan-
tyne’s genius had first made the imprint famous so
the artist-craftsman Charles McCall, in London,
carried the traditions to greater heights.
I first met McCall in the early ’eighties and for a
number of years subsequently Isbisters and the
Ballantyne Press shared the same building in


Tavistock Street, Covent Garden. This brought
intimacy and soon I moved about the Press with a
freedom which was enjoyed only by those whom
McCall trusted and liked. And what a distinguished
band this was! Austin Dobson, Andrew Lang,
Ricketts and Shannon, Henley and his “young
men,” Whistler, Charles Holmes, later to become
director of the National Gallery. These and many
more were attracted to the Press by this quiet
gentle craftsman, who fondled the evidences of his
craft with the tenderness and affection of a mother
her child.
The visitor to Tavistock Street might rub shoul-
ders with Bernard Shaw, Oscar Wilde, Aubrey
Beardsley, Conrad, Galsworthy, and a host of
other celebrities of the ’eighties and ’nineties, and the
memory of one of these, the lovely Lady Randolph
Churchill, remains with those who chanced to see
her on some of the numerous occasions when she
called, maybe a bunch a proofs in her hand, to
discuss with McCall or his son the format of the
Anglo-Saxon Review ; but those who were intimate
with McCall would sometimes see him in his
happiest moments, turning over the pages of some
new book with his friends Arthur Jacobi of the
Chiswick Press and Blaikie of Constable’s, the
Edinburgh printers who were associated with
Scott and Ballantyne sixty or seventy years before.


These craftsmen friends were sparing of their
words; it was sufficient to turn the pages with just
a comment here and there.
From 1893 until 1908, when Charles McCall
died, I was the frequent witness of the delightful
friendship between him and his son. Charles Home
McCall joined his father in that year of the salient
’nineties as a pupil for a publishing career. Together
they plotted and planned, designed and built—the
father ever endeavouring by resetting of type, re-
building of‘furniture’, remaking of papers, experi-
mentation with inks, to achieve a yet more perfect
craftsmanship; the son blending his mind with his
father’s in this and yet revealing an increasing sense
of the financial limitation which commercial con-
siderations imposed upon the craftsmanship of
bookmaking. Somehow with the co-operation of
that perhaps unique band of craftsmen who
assisted them the balance was sufficiently main-
tained to achieve a stream of lovely books which
yet were remunerative to the Press: The Gentle
Art, Scholar Gypsies, The Yellow Book, the Anglo-
Saxon Review, the Vale Press, the Studio, and so
many others. The Ballantyne Press, London, was
a throbbing hive of industry during day and night,
week in, week out. Many of the several hundred
employees were of humble service, but a number
of them were craftsmen and ‘characters.’ In par


ticular Jack Tanner will not be forgotten by the
clients of the Press. He would come to them from
the caseroom, apron and all, eager to discuss this
or that detail of the art of which he was master.
We all held his typographical taste and knowledge
in the greatest respect and felt for him a warm
liking and regard.
Under the two McCalls the employees and the
Press were a happy family. Two and even three
generations of some of the employees might be
found working together at Tavistock Street.
After Charles McCall’s death his son became
Managing Director, and in 1913 he was made
Chairman of the Company. During these five
years the Press maintained its finest traditions and
none would have doubted that the establishment
was destined to carry on these traditions for long to
come.
However, this was not to be. In 1914 Charles
Home McCall disposed of his interest to his co-
directors, the Hansons, who were almost imme-
diately faced with consequences of the Great War
which, for various reasons, pressed disastrously
upon them. Nevertheless, it came as a great sur-
prise to me when I learned, in 1916, that the Press
was to be merged with the firm of Spottiswoode
and Company. Friends have this only to comfort
them: the historic name—one that had been


honoured for 139 years—is preserved in the present
name of Spottiswoode, Ballantyne & Company,
Limited.
During the interregnum after Home McCall
retired the Ballantyne Press, London, was super-
vised by Walter Lewis, who had been works
manager under him. Lewis was a strict overseer;
he knew his business thoroughly and had little
patience with inefficients. But those who strove to
satisfy his ideals found him helpful and kindly; my
son, who worked under him as his personal assis-
tant while a pupil of the firm, owes a great deal to
his example and instruction.
Lewis did not accompany the Ballantyne Press
to Spottiswoode’s. For a time he took charge of
the Complete Press at Norwood, but a wider
sphere opened for him when, in 1923, the Univer-
sity of Cambridge selected him to fill the proud
post of Printer to the University. The Cambridge
University Press is one of the oldest in the kingdom
and the Syndics could not have made a wiser choice.
Lewis is in his element, and in the dignified and
chaste typography of many of his more important
books I detect an influence from his early years
under the elder McCall that I think he would wil-
lingly acknowledge.
It is interesting to note that the Ballantyne
Press, London, provided both Oxford and Cam-
D
49


bridge Universities with accomplished Master
Printers.
I was deeply obliged to Lewis when, in 1927, he
consented to take my youngest son as a pupil.
Heath served for two years under him at Cam-
bridge and he, too, was well grounded in the craft
which he had elected to enter. His only regret is
that he was not privileged to enjoy a longer period
of tuition under Lewis’s admirable guidance. We
were delighted when, in 1925, the University
honoured our friend by conferring upon him the
honorary degree of Master of Arts.
0 0 0
During the greater part of the War period I
was, of course, deprived of the help of most of
our capable lieutenants. Mr Anderson was im-
pressed into the Air Force, and the younger men
were early withdrawn to the various Fronts. I
should have found it well-nigh impossible to carry
on but for the aid of the women on our staff who
took over a number of the key positions and func-
tioned in them admirably. In particular I shall
always remember most gratefully the ability with
which Miss Ivy Wallace (now Mrs Walter Harrap)
relieved me of all cares regarding the counting-
house. From the beginning to the close of the


War she saw to it that our financial operations did
not bother me.
As I look backward over those trying years
memory lingers also upon the services of Miss Alice
Price. Before coming to us, in 1916, she had had
no business experience whatsoever; she was one of
those young ladies who chafed at inaction while
the world was burning, and she quickly justified
her promise that she would make herself useful.
She had not been long with us when the temporary
head of our export department and the warehouse
—a sphere in which considerable ability and much
hard work was called for—asked to be relieved of
the main responsibility. I asked Miss Price to fill
the gap; the position did not daunt her and until
the permanent manager returned she devoted her-
self whole-heartedly to our interests. She is still
with us, I am happy to say, and she continues to
serve us with the same sincere and efficient dili-
gence.
In due course our young men, save three, came
back from the War. One of the unfortunate,
Mr Melville, who was on our editorial staff, was
blown to atoms by a shell within a fortnight of
reaching the Front; another, Mr Smith, went from
the counting-house, and the third, Hebden, was a
mere lad in our warehouse. He was of poor
physique, narrow-chested and painfully thin; few
51


could have supposed that he could bear the rigours
which had to be endured during the dreadful first
winter by the thousands of raw, untrained recruits
who, like him, were rushed into Flanders to stem
the onrush of the early tides of war. Before the
winter ended he was sent home on a short furlough
and he told me that his battalion was holding
flooded trenches and the men had to stand in deep
water chilled to the bone. I marvelled that this
frail youth could stand up to such conditions, and
in some distress I said: “You must dread the
thought of going back!” He added to my pain
when he answered manfully; “There’s nothing
else to be done.” A few weeks later he was blown
up in the explosion of a mine. Was he an insigni-
ficant unit? We honour his memory and are
grateful for what he gave to his country.
All but one of our temporary absentees got off
lightly. Mr E. Guy Bartlett, who had charge of
our educational department, was the unfortunate
exception. I am happy to observe that he pursues
his daily round at our office as cheerfully as ever
despite the loss of an eye.
0 0 0
Our family again united, we took up the threads
that had been tangled four years before. We could


reflect gratefully that our structure was intact; the
building stood four-square. One of the plans that
circumstances had wrecked was the laying down
of the French Dictionary and work was begun
seriously upon this in 1919. It was to accommodate
Mr Mansion’s helpers in this immense undertaking
that we rented the additional offices at Great
Turnstile.
During our twelve years at Portsmouth Street
we cemented many friendships but none of our
relations were more constant than those with the
late Professor W. H. Hudson and T. W. Rolleston.
Both gave us invaluable advice whenever we asked
for it and both contributed permanent books to
our list.
I had come first into contact with Hudson in the
eighteen-nineties, when he was a member of the
faculty of Leland Stanford University, California.
He had edited several English classics for an
American publisher and these were sold in England
by Isbisters, the House in which I served my
apprenticeship. I remember that one day Hudson’s
father came to the shop to purchase one of his son’s
books; happily I met the old gentleman and I was
touched by his naive expression of pride in his son.
Some years later Hudson accepted a London
University Extension lectureship. Thenceforth his
home was in London, and he was a frequent visitor


to Portsmouth Street. He was highly esteemed as
a lecturer; his knowledge of English literature was
profound, and he expounded his subject so elo-
quently that students sat fascinated as he unfolded
his conception of the right spirit in which the
study of literature should be pursued in words
that flowed from his lips with the ease that silk
may be unwound from a spool. He died in
1918 a comparatively young man. He is re-
membered by several of his books; perhaps the
most valuable is his Introduction to the Study of
Literature.
We came first into association with Rolleston a
few months before we left York Street, when he
submitted a manuscript for the “Told Through the
Ages” series. It was clearly not the work of a
novice, and we realized that a star had swum into
our firmament. To say that we highly esteemed
his fine scholarship and certain judgment of men,
particularly writers, is to express lamely our
appreciation of his valued co-operation. He had a
great faculty for friendship and knew many worth-
while people. He contributed frequently to The
Times, but as his articles were not usually signed
they did not bring him into the prominence he
deserved. But he cared little for publicity and
preferred the study and the hearts of his friends.
Once I asked him to advise us as to whom we


might invite to write the Hindu volume in our
series of ‘Myths’ to which he had himself contri-
buted the Myths of the Celtic Race. He suggested
Sister Nivedita, an accomplished Irishwoman who
had devoted her life to Indian ideals and woman-
hood. I knew nothing of her history—it was
unpardonable, and Rolleston was justified in
assuming that I was better informed; he spoke
only of her unsurpassed knowledge of Hindu life
and literature. Acting upon his advice I wrote to
her in India, but for long received no reply. Then
one day she came quiedy into my room at Ports-
mouth Street and agreed to accept the commission.
She died before completing the task and I then
learned from the obituaries that I had entertained
an angel wholly unawares. I grieved that I had
not known as we sat and talked how honoured I
had been by her visit.
Rolleston was a poet of considerable parts, and
some of his poems are to be found in anthologies;
he collaborated with Stopford Brooke in the
Treasury of Irish Poetry. The two men must have
had a good deal in common, and Rolleston would
have been very much at home in Brooke’s famous
literary salon in Manchester Square. The con-
nexion was drawn closer when in 1897 he married
Brooke’s daughter, Maude. His sudden death in
1920 was a deep grief to many like my partner and


myself who felt that he had left a gap not easily
to be filled.
Rolleston introduced us to his friend, H. B.
Cotterill, in 1910, and each year thereafter, until
his death in 1923, our list of new books contained
one by Cotterill. Every one of these shed lustre
upon the House, but the melancholy truth is that
only one, his Ancient Greece, can be said to have
‘paid’. Alas that this should so often be the reward
of the scholar, whose inestimable labours are repaid
with a poor lodging in Grub Street.
We first heard of Cotterill when Rolleston told
us of a superb translation of the Odyssey which his
friend had completed after many years of prepara-
tion. It was a romantic story. Cotterill had begun
his career as a master at Harrow School where,
learning of the unhindered activities of slave raiders
in Central Africa he was fired with a desire to
help his ‘beloved blacks’, as he afterwards termed
them. He began to appeal publicly for aid in
equipping an expedition and this activity drew a
characteristic letter from John Ruskin, who
advised him to direct his zeal to calamities nearer
at home. However, Cotterill persevered, and the
expedition, under his direction, succeeded in
stamping out the raids. As their farewell gift the
Harrow boys gave their master a steel boat in
sections, and in this boat he was the first white man


to circumnavigate the stormy waters of Lake
Nyasa. Their task achieved, the other members of
the expedition returned to England, but Cotterill
remained for two or three years. “At that time,”
he wrote, “Dante, Homer, and Shakespeare were
often my only companions.” It was then that he
conceived the wish to translate the Odyssey in the
metre of the original, and the Odyssean labour
being accomplished, the translator’s publishers
could see no money in it. Rolleston was an ardent
advocate and we could not refuse him. Though
financially the book was not successful it was richly
worth while and we number it among the services
for which we, as publishers, hope to have credit.
During the last years of his life Cotterill resided
abroad and I was enriched by a correspondence
which revealed the noble qualities of the writer.
He is of a choice few over whose graves with deep
feeling we have said: “Hail and farewell!”
0 0 0
At York Street we had discovered Willy Pogany,
and at Portsmouth Street, in 1915, Harry Clarke
discovered us. He had come from Dublin, a young
man of twenty-six, for only a brief stay, bringing
the addresses of a dozen publishers who might give
him work. He called upon them all in turn, but


not one appreciated that here was an artist indeed.
When he had reached the limit of his stay and was
making the last call on his list the publisher sug-
gested that he should “see Harraps.” Clarke had
never before heard of us, but he promptly set out
on this final voyage of discovery. He came into
my room late in the afternoon, slim, pale, and
youthful, with the air of one who has had rebuffs.
He opened his portfolio very shyly and with deli-
cate fingers drew out his lovely drawings. Why
did not the very first publisher take this Irish genius
to his heart? Fate, again, had been kind to the
House of Harrap.
Some years later when we were lunching to-
gether he told me the story. His experiences, as
publisher after publisher politely bowed him out,
had at length made him all but despair, and he had
entered my room with little expectation of finding
encouragement. It was the final throw of the dice,
and but for me, so he said, he would probably have
abandoned the idea of illustrating books. It is a
happy reflection that I owe my later friendship
with Clarke to my decision, that afternoon, to
commit my firm to a major book of the character
that is usually entrusted only to artists who have
‘arrived’. True, my partner was somewhat
shocked by my impulsiveness when I broke the
news to him next day, but he, too, became


ONE of HARRY CLARKE’S FIRST DRAWINGS FOR HANS ANDERSEN
The younger figure is a self-portrait of the Artist
58


enthusiastic when the drawings began to
arrive.
The book was Hans Andersen, and Harry Clarke
interpreted the immortal tales with an imagination
which penetrated into the heart of his subjects and
transmuted them into still more shining gold. His
mastery of line and colour amazed us when we
considered his youthful age, and this evidence of
early power convinced us that we had again found
an artist of whom we should be proud. I am glad
to remember that we took our courage in our
hands and produced, in addition to the twenty-
shillings edition, a limited edition at three guineas.
It is not often that a first book by an unknown and
untried author or artist is given the distinction.
We have successfully essayed it twice.
Willy Pogany was self-taught, but Clarke had
been trained for his life vocation. His father was
a master-craftsman in stained glass, and at sixteen
Harry was apprenticed to him. It was an ideal
vocation for his gifts and he made such progress in
the craft that three years in succession— l9ll, 1912,
1913 —he was awarded the only gold medal given
by the Board of Education in the national com-
petition for work in stained glass. In 1914 he was
awarded a travelling scholarship and spent some
months in France studying cathedral windows.
He was now twenty-five and in the intervals of


designing for glass he experimented in another
field. Two series of drawings from the period are
preserved in private collections; they illustrate
“The Rape of the Lock” and “The Ancient
Mariner.” The latter series, nine drawings in all,
were to have been published in a book, but the
blocks were burned in a fire during the Irish
Rebellion of 1916 and the project was abandoned.
This was the year in which we produced Hans
Andersen and it will be seen diat although unknown
in England he was no novice. Indeed, his drawings
for our book exhibited a maturity remarkable, as
I have observed, in so young an artist.
Harry Clarke now expressed a desire to illustrate
Poe’s Tales, and as there could be little doubt but
that Poe’s bizarre and gruesome fancies would
offer ideal inspiration to an artist of Clarke’s par-
ticular bent we were glad to encourage him. It
was a fortunate decision for he gave us a truly
wonderful series of drawings which established
him in the front rank of contemporary book-
illustrators. Notwithstanding its substantial pub-
lished price, four editions of the book have been
printed, and both in England and America it is
accepted by connoisseurs as the best representation
in pictorial form of the spirit of the Tales. This is
Clarke’s greatest book and the one by which he
will be longest remembered. He contributed


others to our list in the intervals of his work in
stained glass, but this work utilized more andmore of
his energies as time went on. His last book for us,
Goethe’s Faust, was published in 1925. A number
of the drawings were etched by a German artist
who sold them as his own designs. The etchings
bore no publisher’s name and, fortunately for
him, we were unable to trace the pirate.
Clarke was an indefatigable worker; between
1915 and 1919 he produced over two hundred
finished works. This is the more remarkable
when we consider the rich luxuriance of detail
with which he loved to embellish his draw-
ings.
As an artist and craftsman in stained glass he
was gaining ever wider appreciation. He executed
a splendid series of nine lustrous windows for the
chapel of University College at Cork, and impor-
tant commissions came to him from England and
abroad. One of these was for a window in Brisbane
Cathedral and I was privileged to see this in
position when I visited the city in 1924. I entered
the Cathedral to find it deserted but for a solitary
priest who, when he understood that I knew the
artist personally, all but embraced me. It appeared
that Clarke’s window was considered to be one of
the Cathedral’s choicest possessions. It was the
East window, and I stood before the High Altar


with the priest admiring its grace and the glory
of its colours.
At thirty Harry Clarke had attracted favourable
notice—Mr Thomas Bodkin, in the Studio, had
written that his works represented “the first fruits
of a veritable renaissance in the technique of stained
and painted glass”—and it may well be believed
that if the gods had bestowed upon him also the
gift of good health he would ultimately have
secured a niche in the temple of Fame. As it was,
he will be remembered among the artists of his
time for his imaginative power and originality,
and it will be written that his early death, in 1930,
at the age of forty-one, extinguished a genius that
gave promise of rich development in the service
of Art.


III
OF PARKER STREET
We laboured for twelve years upon our building
at Portsmouth Street, and during the latter half of
the period we were more and more circumscribed
within its narrow limits. The annexes were too
far from the main structure, and time and energy
were dissipated in going to and fro. A new storey
was needed and the ground plan would have to be
enlarged. We had begun to admit the need for
action when we received one day an important
communication. Messrs Sir Isaac Pitman & Sons,
Limited, who had been established for many years
near Paternoster Row, had purchased a large
building on the corner of Parker and Newton
Streets, by Kingsway. It had been erected in 1903
by Viscount Astor for the Pall Mall Gazette and
the Observer, and Messrs Pitman did not require
all of the commodious space that had accommo-
dated the printing machinery and warehouse. They
wished to lease the superfluous area to some eligible
tenant and having noted our progress it occurred
to them to invite us to share the building.
The friendly manner of the approach appealed
to us and we conned the invitation with interest.


When, however, we looked over the premises we
had our doubts. It required considerable imagina-
tion to visualize the transformation of the machine
rooms and factory corridors into a publisher’s
offices. It was clear that much expenditure must
necessarily be incurred, and we felt that we might
expect to find elsewhere a building that would be
more suitable for our occupation. We wrote to
Messrs Pitman accordingly, but they would not
take our letter as the last word. In reply we
received a most friendly communication from
Mr Alfred Pitman in which he wrote that his
brother and himself desired particularly that we
should come under their roof, and if we would
indicate the ‘expensive’ alterations that in our
judgment would be necessary to suit the premises
to our needs they would endeavour to remove our
objections. We could not but appreciate the
friendliness of a House which, in common with
all who have had relations with them, we held in
the highest respect. To have rejected this renewed
overture would have been churlish, and although
we had litde expectation of a satisfactory issue we
sat down and drew up a formidable list of the
structural and other alterations that we deemed
essential. When the list was finished we hesitated
to submit it, but moving was a big responsibility,
and our next home must satisfy the require


ments of the business for a good many years to
come.
The Pitmans immediately put us at our ease;
they would not haggle over details, even though
they might have been justified in questioning cer-
tain of our requirements. Almost at once they
came back with a most handsome proposal. Pro-
vided that we would make a modest contribution
they would do the rest. There was still one
reservation in our minds; we were not entirely
satisfied that the space available was sufficient to
provide for further expansion which might reason-
ably be anticipated. We raised the point, but
Messrs Pitman had offered us all that their own
needs permitted; we yielded to their kindly pres-
sure, and in August 1922 we entered upon posses-
sion of a large part of 39 and 41 Parker Street,
Kingsway; the business was again united under
one roof.
0 0 0
lx seemed that we could labour in greater com-
fort for a considerable time to come and we
settled down with renewed vigour to further
enlarge the bounds of the business. Twenty years
earlier I had thought that we were to confine our
operations to the educational field. When at
E
65


length I began to produce non-educational books
it was not the result of a settled policy, but because
certain of my supplementary reading books were
so attractively got up that they came into general
demand in the bookshops. It was the old story of
the acom, but the process was more rapid; before
we realized that we had made an important depar-
ture we had become, also, general publishers.
In the early stages of the business we had con-
centrated on modem language text-books and our
interest in this department has never slackened, as
is witnessed by the space in our catalogue occupied
by text-books in many foreign languages and,
above all, by our new French Dictionary. At
Portsmouth Street we tackled various other edu-
cational subjects in the same spirit, concentrating
in turns upon one or another. We devoted atten-
tion specially to History and built up a valuable
series of text-books for all of the stages in elemen-
tary and secondary education. More recently my
co-director, Mr Anderson, has developed an im-
portant list of Geographical text-books for which
he enlisted the services of Professor Rudmose
Brown as general editor, and meantime we have
not neglected the various other needs of the pupil
and the teacher. Mention of the latter reminds me
of the Intelligence Tests which we introduced
from America and France in 1919, since when we


39-4 1 PARKER STREET


have furnished English teachers and examiners
with much varied material for experiment and
investigation in this important field of mental
inquiry.
Our particular interest in books for the study of
the English language and literature, which has long
been apparent to teachers everywhere, has been
nurtured by our relations with authors who have
given us invaluable books from time to time.
Chief of these is Mr F. H. Pritchard, who, when we
first became acquainted, was teaching at the Devon-
port High School. Mr Pritchard had submitted
the manuscript of his first text-book to one of the
most famous of the older London educational pub-
lishers, who returned it with the familiar expression
of polite regret. Mr Pritchard had used many of
our books and had been struck by their freshness
and originality; his own book was not written on
any traditional lines and he rightly concluded that
a firm such as Harraps might view it with less
prejudice. Thus we were given the opportunity
of securing a book which almost as soon as it
came out hot from our press received the most
flattering recognition. Its very ordinary title was
English Extracts and Exercises, and many editions
have been printed to satisfy the demand for it from
all parts of the Empire. The annals of most pub-
lishing houses tell of similar opportunities missed,


and our friends must not be too severely blamed.
Some time later their representative visited Mr
Pritchard’s school and asked him if he contem-
plated a further book. Mr Pritchard inquired the
reason of this interest in him and was told that
the House was always interested in freshness and
originality. “I suppose,” remarked Mr Pritchard,
with a smile, “the difficulty is to recognize this
when it appears.” Of course the visitor was sur-
prised; he was told the facts and there was no
more to be said.
English Extracts was the first of many successful
Pritchard books for our list, and the connexion
brought the author into relations with us that
quickly ripened. In 1925 he came to London to
supervise our text-books in English, and it has
been a most happy association. Our ‘family’ con-
tains no member who is more universally loved.
His modest air and his cheerful readiness to collabo-
rate with all who solicit his valuable advice or
criticism has given him a firm place in the affec-
tions of all.
Another author whose contributions to our list
eventually brought her into our editorial fold is
Miss D. M. Stuart—“ Dorothy Margaret of Ours.”
She gives us invaluable help in the domain of
history, a province in which she walks with un-
canny ease for one so young. I have suggested


that she proves the theory that there are several
incarnations; almost certainly she has been a pro-
fessor of history in a former life! She has also read
very widely and to much purpose in English
literature and she wields with great ease a very
lively pen.
She is not only distinguished for what she has
already achieved. She is the remarkable only
child of a remarkable mother, who educated her
at home. That is, Miss Stuart did not go to school
or college, nor did she have any other tutor.
Nevertheless, she was soundly grounded in classics,
modem languages, and all English subjects until
the two became fellow students; until her mother’s
death in 1933 they continued to be inseparably
absorbed in their mutual pursuits. Some years ago
Miss Stuart began to contribute poems to Punch
as “D.M.S.” These initials, after a while, became
very familiar to readers of Punch. She was invited
to contribute a life of Horace Walpole to the
“English Men of Letters” series; it was very flat-
tering, for no woman, save Mrs Oliphant, has
received a similar compliment. The publishers,
moreover, were so pleased with the book that
they induced her to write another, Christina
Rossetti, and only once previously has any author
contributed two volumes to this famous series.
In 1924 Miss Stuart submitted some poems for


the International literary contest in connexion
with the Olympic Games in Paris. The award of
the silver medal to Great Britain in her person was
the first made to a woman competitor since the
fifth century b.c. She has been equally successful
with books for mature readers and for the young.
Her Boy Through the Ages, published in 1926, and
its successor, The Girl Through the Ages, rank with
the best juvenile books published since the War.
Mss Stuart bridges the two sections of our
business, for she contributes to both the educational
and general side. This latter province received
more and more of our attention as the years at
Parker Street went by, and it soon grew to sub-
stantial proportions. Clemenceau, 1 Herriot, Croce,
and Mussolini came to us from abroad; Jan and
Cora Gordon, ‘Sinbad’, Sisley Huddleston,
Thomas Burke, Professor Allardyce Nicoll, Clen-
nell Wilkinson, reinforced our list of belles-
lettres; J. J. Bell, Stephen Gwynn, W. B. Seabrook,
Stefansson, all gave outstanding books of travel;
Hilaire Belloc, Dr Van Loon, Winston Churchill,
are among our outstanding writers of history;
1 “It may be surprising to the British public to know that for years
Clemenceau has been living almost in poverty. He contracted last
May to sell a book of memoirs, and the sum of £4,000 which Messrs
Harrap paid him was a godsend. Clemenceau remarked to his friend,
Mr Henry Bacon, an American lawyer in Paris: ‘Now I shall be able
to afford to eat chicken.’
“A few weeks previously he sold three sporting rifles in order to
raise a little money.” Daily Express, November 25, 1929.


ONE OF ARTHUR RACKHAM’S PEN DRAWINGS FROM Andersen's
Fairy Tales
70


P. F. Warner, Jack Hobbs, M. A. Noble, contri-
buted first-class cricket books; the novels of Mrs
E. Barrington, Victor MacClure, Laurence Mey-
nell, J. S. Fletcher, Leonard Gribble, and the
authors of A House is Built provided us with many
‘best sellers’. Marion St John Webb, Lilian Cask,
Rose Fyleman, Joyce Brisley, Eleanor Farjeon,
enabled us to hold our own in the nursery.
We have added to our credit as publishers of
finely illustrated books during recent years by the
contributions of two great artists. Before the War
Arthur Rackham was acknowledged to be the
greatest of the distinguished band of draughtsmen
and colourists, worthy successors of Hugh Thom-
son and Tenniel, whose illustrations gave added
life to the books they interpreted, but I think that
he has added to his reputation by the books he has
illustrated for us year by year since he hitched our
wagon to his star, in 1928, particularly by his Hans
Andersen, which he himself considers to be equal to
the best of those early achievements which made
him so jusdy famous. The faithful support of the
many collectors in England, the United States, and
on the Continent who regularly purchase his
delightful limited editions must be most gratifying
to him, as it is profitable to us. Rackham has
studied the mechanical side of his art and he has
litde to leam of the processes involved in the
71


preparation of a fine book. His criticisms and sug-
gestions concerning the reproduction of his draw-
ings and the paper upon which they are to be
printed are most valuable. His thoroughness is
after my own heart, and I recognize that if he is not
easily satisfied it is because his genius reaches out in
entreaty to the ideal.
Just as Arthur Rackham is supreme for the grace
and beauty of his colour and for the delicate firm-
ness of his grotesque and elfish line drawings, so
Stephen Gooden has no rival in the realm of
engraving upon copper. He is a newer recruit to
our list and so far we have published only one of
his books. Since 1930, however, he has been
engraving book illustrations exclusively for us, and
the fruits are to appear in due course.
The engraver necessarily works slowly; a single
plate may occupy him for the best part of three
months, as Gooden suggests in an exquisite design
of 1932 in which Cupid is seen guiding a graver
which is harnessed to a snail!
Gooden attracted the attention of the elite with
Anacreon, published in 1923, the first book to be
illustrated by him. It contained eight engravings
and was sold for one guinea. To-day a purchaser
would be lucky who secured a copy for three times
the original price.
The Nonesuch Press also published a superb
72


series of his engravings in their Bible. This was
completed in five volumes; the first appeared in
1924 and the last in 1927.
Two years later, in 1929, Gooden illustrated The
Brook Keriih. These engravings delighted the
Author, who was eager for Gooden to illustrate
others of his books. Both Gooden and we were
agreeable, and one of Moore’s early tales was
chosen, a romance entitled Peronnik the Fool. By
this time Moore was failing and his last months
were cheered by proofs of his engravings shown to
him by the Artist from time to time.
When I discussed the publication of this fine edi-
tion of the book with Moore I realized that since
it could not be finished in less than a year there was
a probability that he would not live to see it com-
pleted. The work was to be first published in a
limited edition only and its value would be less if
Moore did not sign the copies. The agreement was
drawn up by Moore’s lawyer, and before returning
it I added a clause which provided that the Author
should sign the endpapers immediately. To tell the
truth, I anticipated some demur, for George Moore
was not easily handled in his later life; but to my
surprise the revised agreement was executed with-
out comment, and a fortnight later we had all
the signed endpapers in our possession. I do not
know of any other such arrangement having been


proposed or made and I felt that we had substantial
grounds for congratulation when some months
before the book was published I read of Moore’s
death in the wireless bulletin of a ship in which I
was a passenger to Sydney.
Among the proofs which Gooden showed to
Moore was one of a plate on which the artist had
engraved a superb cock. This drew from Moore
an enthusiastic eulogy which perhaps I may be
allowed to print here for two deeply interesting
reasons. In the first place it expresses an estimate
of Gooden’s genius which I believe is accepted
by other competent critics. Secondly, they are
Moore’s last words, for they end the unfinished
book which he was writing when he died in
1933- 1
A great artist truly—the greatest among living
artists, no one to compare him with except Diirer
himself. And looking at a proof of a drawing he
had done for Peromtik the Fool, a fierce, blustering
cock, screaming, perched on a key drawn in per-
spective, no doubt the key of the secret castle where
the sorceress kept the knights she had lured into her
service, how he screams! a raucous scream as if
nobody knew except himself that day was near. . . .
Will my luck give me a publisher when I am among
the gone who will ask Gooden to do four, five, or
six pictures for my Daphnis and Chloel Should such
1 A Communication to My Friends , The Nonesuch Press.
74


a thing happen, I doubt not that God will open my
ears to hear the crowing of the cock.
0 0 0
I have merely mentioned most of our authors
but I must pause here upon the most distinguished
name. My eldest son made the first contact with
Mr Churchill in 1929, and he was fortunate in
securing a most important contract. Many dis-
tinguished men—Lord Balfour and Lord Rosebery
of the number—had long urged Mr Churchill to
write the biography of the ‘tremendous’ Duke, and
he now determined to undertake it. He had been
held back from the obviously appropriate task by
a letter, known as the Cameret Bay Letter, which
Macaulay had fastened, wrongfully but apparendy
permanently, upon Marlborough. When the first
volume of the book was published we gave its
author a complimentary lunch, and I shall never
forget how, when he was speaking, his eyes flashed
and his stature increased as he declared “Had Marl-
borough written that letter it would have been an
oflence mortal and immortall”
It is now a matter of history that Mr Churchill
has disproved the authenticity of that damning
letter, and we are proud to be associated with him
in the greatest of his literary achievements.


Our relations with Mr Churchill have brought
us nothing but satisfaction. Having become party
to a financial transaction that might lay heavily
upon more wealthy firms than ours, he neglected
nothing that could ensure that eventually we
should not regret the bargain. I have always felt
that Mr Churchill would be more grieved than
ourselves if we were involved in a loss. He has
done everything humanly possible to command a
publishing success and has fulfilled—not only in
the letter—every undertaking. Few authors are so
conscientious in the correction of their proofs.
Each of the two volumes so far completed have
been so reshaped and polished after the original
manuscript had been set up that the identity of the
first proofs with the printed books is difficult to
establish.
Mr Churchill is the most ‘human’ of men, and
contact with him is delightful. One is not allowed
to be overwhelmed by his personality. His great-
ness is never paraded; in his correspondence are
touches of ‘Victorian’ courtliness that increase
one’s happiness in being of the number of his
correspondents. I must always count my associ-
ation with him among the greatest privileges of
my publishing career.


AT THE LUNCH TO CELEBRATE THE PUBLICATION OF “MARLBOROUGH”
(Mr Churchill is seated between my son, George S. Harrap, on the left, and myself, on the right)
76


I must not omit reference to a department of our
general publishing that has for long been dear to
the heart of Mr G. O. Anderson. Many years ago
we began to give thought to the bindings of our
‘Books Beautiful’ and we evolved, I believe, some
original efforts that were appreciated. Thirty years
ago Mr Anderson introduced to our list “The
King’s Treasury” series, the first volumes of which
came to us from America. These exquisitely
printed little books were bound in Persian calf with
a velvet finish and ‘yapp’ edges. The style had
already become popular in the United States, but
“The King’s Treasury” volumes were the first to
be marketed in England. Before long there were
many competitors, and the binding enjoyed a
great vogue until towards the end of the War
when it was swamped by the flood of poorly
printed books inappropriately bound in this dainty
style.
Subsequent to the War Mr Anderson continued
his experiments with leather bindings and we re-
sumed the production of nicely bound editions of
our prize and gift books. Each year our Christmas
catalogue offered a wide assortment of these ‘Books
Beautiful’; they secured such appreciation that Mr
Anderson was encouraged to select appropriate
books of other publishers and, tastefully bound in
morocco or calf, these were incorporated in our
77


list and the sales contributed substantially to our
turnover. Publishers from whom we purchase
sheets welcome this activity, for they know that
the connexion we have built up and the wide
range of our operations enable us to effect many
sales that would not come to their own nets.


IV
OF AUSTRALIA AND AFRICA
In 1924, at a Board Meeting, it was decided that
one of the Directors should visit Australia to con-
sider on the spot various difficulties that had
developed in our organization there. I felt that I
could best be spared, and ten days later I was on
the way via the Rockies and the Pacific.
Australia gave me a right royal welcome. I
went to all of the centres to which visitors usually
go, and everywhere my hand was cordially grasped
by the men and women interested in books whose
personal acquaintance I sought. Booksellers, edi-
tors of newspapers, librarians, teachers, education
officials—from all I received most flattering atten-
tions and many met me with a cordiality that was
the beginning of enduring friendship.
Our manager, Stanley L. Bartlett, and his wife
had been close friends of my son during his resi-
dence in Sydney, and George had prepared them to
find in me a somewhat unconventional ‘chief.’
Their welcome was warm-hearted, and I could not
resist their hospitable plea that I must make myself
at home in their family. This intimacy brought
understanding, and the foundations of an enduring
79


friendship were laid. By the end of my visit I was
convinced that if there were a dozen wives,
mothers, and friends the like of Elsie Bardett in
Australia none need despair of the future of that
great Dominion.
I had long known that Stanley Bartlett was
devoted to Harraps but it was gratifying to be
assured, as I was, that we were justified in our con-
fidence. His lieutenant, William Goodchild, is
equally loyal to our interests, and between them
they had built up a tradition for our House of
which I continually received evidence as I met
booksellers and education officials on my travels.
There must, however, always be peculiar diffi-
culties in running a branch separated from the
parent tree by thirteen thousand miles of ocean. I
could more easily appreciate the problems that had
puzzled us in correspondence, and the happy result
of our conferences in Sydney was that a more
workable arrangement was effected, and I was able
to leave at the end of three months believing that
with larger responsibility Bartlett’s work would
be carried on with greater smoothness and effi-
ciency.
Mr H. A. Kellow, one of the early friends of the
House, had many years before migrated to Rock-
hampton in Queensland and I had barely settled
down in Sydney when by a curious coincidence—
80


WILLY POGANY’S IDEA OF OUR BOARD MEETING
(N.B. He was not always so expeditious!)


it would provide material for an interesting story
—he learned of my arrival. To my surprise, I re-
ceived a telegram one morning inviting me to pay
him a visit; I replied that of course I intended to do
so, and at the first opportunity I took ship to Bris-
bane and travelled the further five hundred miles
by train.
When I first met Kellow he was on the staff of
the Allen Glen’s School at Glasgow. Energetic and
able, there is little doubt .that in due course he
would have succeeded Dr Kerr, the rector at that
period. When, however, he received an invitation
to become principal of the Rockhampton Gram-
mar School the lure of adventure fired his youthful
ardour. He accepted the opportunity at once and
with equal alacrity contracted the very happy mar-
riage that enabled him to administer his new pro-
vince in double harness.
I stayed nearly a fortnight at the Grammar
School and was delighted to find that Kellow was
as eager of spirit as twenty years earlier, when we
first discussed his literary schemes. He had com-
piled one of our early text-books in English, an
excellent manual, characterized by an originality
which made some of our later text-books famous.
Before leaving Glasgow he contributed two other
good books to our list, and I think that we missed
a number of others by his removal to a tropical
F
81


home where the opportunities for study and com-
munion with other cultivated minds are naturally
few.
In 1930, however, he completed an admirable
survey of the poetry of Queensland. 1 In most
hands the study would have produced very barren
results, but Kellow’s book, which we were glad to
publish, is written with a grace of style and with a
discernment of the comparative values of the
material he analyses that makes it a worth-while
contribution to literary history and criticism.
I contemplated returning home by way of China
and the East, but one day I received a cable from
my old friend Maskew Miller, the well-known
publisher and bookseller of Cape Town. He had
been stricken with a mortal ilhiess and desired to
meet me again. I could not be deaf to his appeal,
and so, on my return journey, I called at the Cape.
As we neared South Africa I learned from the
captain of the ship that he was a close friend of
Miller, and a few hours after we had berthed at
Cape Town we met again at Miller’s dinner-table.
Maskew Miller was one of those bookseller-
publishers who from small beginnings have built
splendid businesses in the Dominions. His story is
similar to that of the late George Robertson, whose
publishing career in Australia is a romance. I
1 Queensland Poets, by H. A. Kellow.


found that Miller was facing his malady heroically.
There was no cure, but his spirit was not quenched
until the inevitable end came, some time after I
had bade him ‘good-bye’.
0 0 0
Three years later I carried our flag into Africa,
and during a most interesting eight months saw a
good deal of many parts of the continent. I went
first to Cairo, where I met various of the education
officials and visited some of the schools. I then
spent a month in Kenya and Uganda, and motored
with friends to the Mountains of the Moon on the
border of the Belgian Congo. In Kenya I did not
find much educational activity, except in certain
schools for Indians, and the few bookshops were
not very well stocked. Uganda is a black man’s
country, and the education of the natives is largely
conducted by the missionaries. I was very im-
pressed with the mission bookshop at Kampala—
a fine building moderately stocked with good
books.
It happened that a book of considerable interest
to the community at Nairobi had been published
in London just before my arrival there, Kenya from
Within ; everyone burned to read it, but a very few
copies had been imported by the booksellers and


the fortunate few who had obtained these were
plagued by friends who wished to borrow them.
I reflected upon the misfortune to author and pub-
lisher that a few copies only were sold eventually,
whereas a considerable number would have been
purchased had they been available. I myself tried
in many places to procure a copy without success
until some weeks later, at Dar-es-Salaam in
Tanganyika, I called upon the editor of the local
newspaper, who was also the bookseller of the
town. It appeared that he had one copy of the
book, which had been sent him for review in his
newspaper. He would not sell this, but offered to
lend it if I would give him my word that I would
return it before my departure.
Recalling this incident, I am reminded of an-
other. Just at that moment, the good folks of
Dar-es-Salaam were greatly agitated over some
political question and my friend the editor made
this the subject of his leading article one morning.
The next day when I opened my paper I found
the same leader; the editor explained that he had
decided to reprint it in view of its special import-
ance. I was greatly tickled; the incident would
have made good copy for Charles Dickens!
When I reached Rhodesia I found very different
conditions. Coming into Salisbury from the
North is to be again in civilization. There is a


remarkable hotel, and bookshops and schools need
no apology. I spent some pleasant weeks making
the personal acquaintance of all interested in books,
and, as usual, I was most hospitably entertained.
In South Rhodesia I visited the extraordinary
remains at Zimbabwe and, of course, went on
pilgrimage to the grave of Rhodes in the Matop-
pos. In Rhodesia it is easy to imagine that the
spirit of Rhodes still lives. I stood by the simple
grave together with a royal princess of England.
We had each motored from Bulawayo over a
road, twenty miles long, which had been laid
down for visitors to the grave. It appeared to serve
no other purpose, and as I looked at the winding
road from the top of the hill, I could not but
realize that this was the memorial. For how many
of the illustrious dead has such a causeway been
constructed? I also saw the falls of Victoria
Nyanza, and was awed by their thunder as they roar
into a gorge, 400 feet deep, which winds through
the silences of distant primeval forests.
From Rhodesia to the Cape I visited many
splendid schools and universities. It cannot be
denied that the Europeans in Africa value education
for their children, for they have expended vast
sums upon school and college buildings. In certain
States, however, I observed that education author-
ities sometimes prescribe obligatory class-books,


especially for the elementary schools, which are
not up to English standards.
I recall an animated discussion with a Director
of Education one day. He had said that English
publishers must anticipate that as time went on
more and more locally produced books would be
used in the State schools. This drew me, and I
ventured to criticize certain State readers which
did not appear to me to represent adequately the
qualities in English literature which the pupil
should be taught to appreciate. One series in par-
ticular had impressed me as mere scissors and paste.
I had been told by teachers in several States that
their pupils, educationally, are two years behind
English children, and the Director did not dispute
this. I said that the magnificent school buildings
indicated that parents were prepared to make
sacrifices for their children’s education; they did
not choose the text-books and no doubt assumed
that the authorities could be relied upon to safe-
guard the pupils’ interests in this important par-
ticular. My friend interpolated the remark that
the authorities could not do just as they pleased.
There were political influences; for instance, as
when the State demanded encouragement of local
enterprise. Officials, he admitted, were sometimes
dissatisfied when compelled to bend to State exi-
gencies. As regards the series of readers to which


I objected, it had been compiled by a retired
official whose pension was small and, not un-
naturally, old colleagues were sympathetic. I said
that if Africa is to be always self-contained perhaps
it is not all-important if her sons and daughters
are not trained to compete on equal terms with
young people elsewhere. He saw the point, and
we parted in friendly agreement.
After some weeks in Africa I became very inter-
ested in Negro problems, and I met many workers
in the educational field. The visitor must be on his
guard against the prejudices for or against the
Negro of those who live side by side with him,
but those who will not admit that the main differ-
ences between white and black is background are
fighting a losing battle. That astonishing man,
Dr Aggrey, who from the bush and unmixed
black forbears rose to be the honoured vice-
principal of Achimota College, disposes of their
arguments. He is evidence that the Negro possesses
the same brains as his white brother.
Aggrey held most sensible views concerning the
education of his people. Education for the Negro,
he maintained, should aim at making him not a
second-class white man but an efficient Negro.
I saw the working out of this theory at different
centres, but particularly at the great Trappist
monastery at Marionnhill, near Port Elizabeth,
87


where I was the guest of the Missionaries for two
days. The Mission occupies a considerable tract of
land and upon this schools, workshops, library,
hospital, and churches have been erected by the
Negroes under the direction of the Fathers. The
Negro is being trained to use his hands to good
purpose in metal- and wood-work, tailoring, shoe-
making, and many other crafts, including the
making of stained-glass windows for mission
churches elsewhere. Some of the missionaries are
highly educated men and they are producing books
for native education which are printed and bound
by the Negroes at Marionnhill. There is a training-
college for native teachers and some of the students
sang for me. I shall not forget the mellow har-
monies produced by this smiling choir; I spoke
sincerely when I said that I should hear their songs
in my heart as I journeyed on through distant
lands and years. I left Marionnhill admiring pro-
foundly the great humanizing work of these
devoted German missionaries.
In many other centres throughout the vast con-
tinent the Negro mind is developing. The process
was inevitable with the coming of the white man
and nothing can stay it. Fortunately it is being
wisely directed and we may hope that a path will
be pursued by both races that will avoid a tragic
ending of their intercourse.


In London we frequently receive amusing evi-
dence that the Negro is being taught English,
The following letter came from Kumasi. Its
writer had previously sent a remittance for certain
books and as these had not reached him as soon as
he expected he jumped to conclusions and wrote
to reproach us with not keeping faith. He envis-
aged the loss of his money, which, no doubt, had
not been easily acquired. The subsequent letter
expresses his contrition upon finding that we are
not thieves. It is the only testimonial I shall inflict
upon my readers.
Dear Sir,
I am really lost in thoughts, to find adequate
words in English language just to express the high
feelings I had towards the immediate arrival of my
lost books. I am cut to the quick for not answering
you in time now even that I have received them
safely. It was caused by a sickness which befell me
and was about to finish with me but by the careful
protection of the Omnipotent the gates of death
were shot before me. I have already fore seen that
you are a man well equiped for trade, and that if it
were any order man he would not have done such
a difficult task to find out these books. A trader
who is easily broken up is no trader and he soon
loses customers. I am very ashamed for writing you
at first such an unpleasant letter but even this you
were not in the least offended and replied me
pleasingly. Well I crave of your pardon to have


my first letter burnt; and that I will always recom-
mend you to my friends and hope also to do me
immediate services at my request. Here Ends my
words
I am, your faithful
Servant,
(Signed) I. K. Ampah.
90


V
OF MY JUBILEE
During our occupation of Parker Street we
passed two milestones. The first was a Company-
affair, the second was personal to myself.
When our doors opened in 1901 the twentieth
century was in its cradle, and before the end of 1926
we had served twenty-five years of our history.
We celebrated this event by inviting a number of
the friends of the House to dinner.
Six years later I had completed fifty years of a
publishing career and my colleagues honoured the
occasion by inviting many men distinguished in
the world of hooks to dine with me. I sat with
authors, artists, members of the Press, booksellers,
publishers—friends from near and far who had
known me many years, and friends who had more
recently come into our circle. Their manifestations
of goodwill deeply moved me and my heart was
full as I tried to thank them. At die request of the
Editor of John O’ Londons Weekly I incorporated
the gist of my speech in an article, 1 and this
brought me a large number of letters from men
and women in many lands. Many of these corres-
1 John O' London's Weekly, October 29, 1932.


pendents are personally unknown to me and it is
unlikely that I shall meet them in the flesh. Evi-
dently they were attracted by my story because I
had lived and worked with books and authors.
I suppose that this interest opens a way of escape
from the ‘common round’.
One letter, with its enclosure, intrigued me
deeply. I was told that the enclosure, addressed to
Anatole France ten years before, was not acknow-
ledged. It is common knowledge that towards the
end of France’s life he read very few letters from
strangers. Had he read this ‘cry from the heart’
it must have touched him.
Dear Sir, Is, >
I hardly know why I am sending the enclosed
copy of a letter to Anatole France to you —it was
written at a time of deep feeling when life had been
pressing and cares overwhelming. But some weeks
ago I read your article in John O’ London s and a
sentence at the end of it called it to mind and
tempted me; so thinking that perhaps you might
feel interested in so much having been roused in
one by the mere reading of a book, I have ventured
to send it you. It’s just a very true story of the life
of an unknown woman whom Fate has tracked
down remorselessly. ... I find as I have always done
a great joy in reading and a satisfying pleasure in all
the beauty of Nature and the liveliness of life lived
with a purpose.
I am, Yours truly,


To Anatole France.
I am an old woman “long past the midway of
this our mortal life” who has found one of her
greatest joys in opening for the first time My
Friend’s Book with its exquisite beauty and tender
humanity—to have lived for three score years and
never to have known of your writings must indeed
prove myself unknown—for I am not of your
world. My life was cast in a different mould, but
what I have missed I trust Time, that owes me
much, will be generous, and so I may overtake some
of what has passed me on ‘Life’s road’—for I too
have been a seeker after Beauty, and there is some-
thing so responsive in me that things that have been
lying dead seemed to spring into life again; and I
read and re-read and, afraid of losing much of its
beauty, “for memory fails,” wrote down many of
its sublime thoughts and tender reflections. No
words can express just what that book meant to me.
Alas! I had no happy childhood’s home. I was not
the centre and joy of fond parents: I can never even
remember an expression of love or tenderness
bestowed upon me, but was always a looker-on of
others, a dweller on the outside edge of happiness—
and yet, I was not an unwanted child; inasmuch as
I was not bom without “benefit of clergy”. My
parents were lawfully wedded, but what union
could exist between age and youth, different
nationalities and religions? God knows if there
was even love—l knew them so little.
At an early age when religious differences arose I
was placed in a school where, with fantastic irony,


Fate took a hand and decreed that the child of a
devout Jew and no less devout Roman Catholic
should be made a good Protestant, though I was a
little pagan and shudder when I remember the
ugliness with which I was surrounded.
“Oh childhood—thou innocent inheritor of the
sins and woes of others—what pitying Fate shall
deliver thee? ”
I was indeed heavily burdened; since then I have
known some joy all too quickly overlaid with
sorrow. Now hke little Pierre I look back with
great tenderness on that little waif, for I know she
had much in common with him. “That sensitive
appreciation of form and colour, and the sweet
unrest with which Beauty assails the souls of those
who love her.” She too was intensely alive with a
vivid imagination; those positive assertions often
brought down punishment. I was often shut up
alone in an attic where, through the narrow window
panes, nothing but sky and the tall masts of ships
could be seen, but what visions I saw! Indeed I
have ever maintained that when the “Grey sisters
wove the drab threads of my Fate a pitying fairy
shot it through with gleams of gold and rainbow
hue.” And so I came into my inheritance. An un-
speakable joy in Beauty and the unquenchable gift
of laughter. And these I have ever striven to keep.
The joy I have found in reading compensates for
much I have lost and I cannot say more than this.
At the time of reading your book I was lying ill
and worn, but nothing existed outside it, the faded
walls and blistered ceiling were not; the pressing


cares and anxieties vanished—it revived good and
tender feelings: it recaptured lost visions; it turned
my soul to prayer. Since then I have read others.
Little Pierre, whom may I be allowed to say I love;
The Revolt of the Angels, with the Gardener’s story
of haunting beauty; Life and Letters, etc. There is a
peculiarly satisfying quality in them that feeds some-
thing starved in me. They express so much. I feel
their bitter sweet irony attracts, for I have found life
ironic. Much of their great learning is beyond me
for I have no classical culture, no gift of tongues.
How little could be bought for the meagre sum
paid to feed and clothe the small body with the
plainest fare; and the mind was not considered more
important, but I have striven by reading to under-
stand what can only be gained by learning. And
so in a measure I have found in my ignorance what
many miss in their great knowledge. So I would
ask the writer of Little Pierre to forgive this reveal-
ing, this self expression, for to him I owe the power
I have found in doing so. May I conclude in his
own most beautiful words:
“But I know that above the fairies
Above the wavering chances of the world
There soars the everlasting Mind
That has inspired our Hearts with
Faith and Hope and Love.”
July 1923
Many times in my travels I have been struck by
the deep interest in books of people whose lives
are spent in narrow surroundings. Twice while I


was in Africa I received invitations to visit strangers
who lived hundreds of miles from my route.
They had read in their newspapers that I was in
the country, and they were eager to entertain me
for an unlimited time if I would come to them and
talk—so I presume—about books.


VI
OF MY SECOND VISIT TO
AUSTRALIA
I again visited Australia in 1933. The great
depression was nearing its close but indications of
its fell effects were apparent everywhere. Of course
my interests centred upon the book trade and
books, and I found much to give me concern.
During the height of the depression duties had
been imposed upon the importation of books from
England, but the powerful opposition of the
intelligentsia to a measure which restricted mental
intercourse with the great centres of culture else-
where had secured their repeal.
There remained, however, the effect of the
exchange, which very considerably increased the
cost of books, already much higher than the pub-
lished prices in England, and reduced the volume
of sales. Australian business men do not appear to
be convinced of the wisdom of the English adage:
“Small profits and quick returns,” and I felt that
the book trade was not doing all it might to assist
the purchasing power of the Australian people.
The prices of English books in the Australian shops
staggered me and I risked offending my bookseller
G
97


friends by expressing unpopular views on public
occasions. The text for my criticisms was: “If
prices are doubled when sales are halved the
doubling process must soon be repeated, and what
will be the eventual result?”
One of the consequences of increased prices was
that schools and education authorities could not
purchase needed books. In Queensland, for
instance, grants for school libraries had been dis-
continued. One of the chief officials told me that
he greatly deplored this; his department had urged
the importance of school libraries upon the
ministers, but they had replied that there were not
funds for public needs of a much more urgent
character. It is not too much to say that throughout
the States public grants were insufficient to provide
many of the school books which are needed.
When books are beyond the reach of the
majority the effect upon the development of cul-
ture must be unfortunate, but a community like
the Australian that is segregated from main cur-
rents suffers disastrously.
I felt that I might be of service in impressing
upon those who cared to listen the imperative
need for encouraging the cultivation of reading
habits, and during the several months of my stay
in Australia and New Zealand I laboured con-
scientiously as an ambassador of books. I spoke on


TWO CORNERS IN THE SHOWROOM AT SYDNEY
98


the platform and before the microphone, and many
newspapers gave me headlines.
It was a great pleasure to renew my personal
contact with the friends I had made in Australia
and New Zealand ten years before. I was happy
to find them little changed, but I was not to meet
the doyen of the Australian booksellers, George
Robertson, of Sydney, whose health was failing.
I learned that he now took little part in the pub-
lishing business he had founded and made famous;
he died shortly after I left Australia.
Another outstanding bookseller, Mr Preece, of
Adelaide, who had entertained me on my previous
visit, had been dead several years. He had built
up a business which remains, under the care of his
two sons, an intellectual centre of South Australia.
As formerly, I found that the fine shop was stocked
with books of quality; I might have been at home,
in Oxford Street.
Australia has long been well served by its book-
sellers; in each large centre there are several who
would have made their mark in any community.
One of the most active is ‘J Forsyth of
Dymock’s, in Sydney; another is Captain C. H.
Peters, who presides most efficiently over the great
Melbourne House of Robertson & Mullan.
A. H. Spencer, of the same city, is a bookman of
the rarest type. I imagine that his influence must


extend far beyond the State of Victoria. I recall
one memorable Saturday with him in the bush.
We talked of books, of the beauties of Nature, of
deep problems of life, until we halted by a great
tree. “This,” said Mr Spencer, “is my tree and I
come to it for inspiration; there are few I would
bring to it and I wish you to remember it always.”
Indeed, I shall not forget my friend’s revelation of
himself; those hours with him made a deep im-
pression upon me.
In 1924 1 had spent a month in New Zealand and
had met most of the important booksellers,
librarians, and education officials. In 1933 I was
not able to repeat this tour of the Islands, but the
ship in which I was travelling to San Francisco
docked at Wellington for two days, and this
enabled me to renew my personal contact with a
number of the booksellers and others. Chief
among these was our friend George H. Bennett, of
Palmerston North, who came to Wellington to
receive me. We had last met in England, where
we had been privileged to entertain him and his
family. Mr Bennett carried me from the ship to
a hotel where I found a friendly party waiting to
greet me. The following day at his pressing request
I addressed a larger gathering which assembled to
wish me God-speed.
I met again at Wellington another friend,


Colonel Alex. Charters, D.S.O. I had corres-
ponded with him long before we met at the
conclusion of the Boer War, when he visited
London preparatory to returning home to resume
his professional career. In 1918 he visited me again,
a gallant figure in his military uniform with many
ribbons. He was one of the first of his country-
men to volunteer in the Great War and had left for
Europe in the first transport from New Zealand.
When we first exchanged letters he was a young
teacher in the small township of Masterton. He
was keen to establish touch with those who could
help him to keep abreast of newer currents in
education and was eager to obtain books which
embodied methods of teaching approved by the
more advanced members of his profession in
England and America. Later he became principal
of an important school in a larger town and the
books which he introduced were noted by others.
After the Great War he served as an Inspector of
Schools and this afforded larger opportunities for
communicating his views and recommending text-
books which he believed to be better than those
already in use in his circuit. He became very
familiar with our catalogue and lost no opportunity
for recommending what he believed to be valuable
in it. Thus we gained a great deal from his friendly
interest.


I now had the happiness of spending a night
with him and his family in their home and we
reviewed our long association; as I have said, it
stretches back to the laying of our foundation-
stone —to the launching of my earliest text-books.


VII
OF GROWING PAINS
The many journeys of my eldest son and my
own considerable travel left little of the civilized
world unexplored and we became personally
familiar in an unique circle of readers, users, and
distributors of books. Few are the lands into which
the activities of a publishing house do not penetrate,
but it requires personal contact to fuse the glowing
metal, and I am convinced that our policy of
meeting face to face those to whom otherwise we
should have remained merely a name helped
materially to solidify our rising structure.
And that the structure continued to rise was
apparent when we had been only three years at
Parker Street. Our doubts as to warehouse accom-
modation were well founded; we were as badly
off as ever!
Once again we were forced to split up the
establishment and in May 1926 we leased a large
building at Pancras Road by King’s Cross railway
station. It was an ideal warehouse of three enor-
mous floors; more than large enough to house our
stock and to provide our entire needs in the ware-
house department for years to come.


This time the inconvenience threatened to be
more serious than ever. In the first place the whole
of an important department was tom away, to the
sorrow of the staff affected, who naturally disliked
being lopped off. In the second place, the book-
sellers’ collectors had to extend their rounds; we
sympathized with their discontent in having to
come for our books far off their beaten tracks.
Lastly, although the telephone makes instant com-
munication easy, the going and coming of one
and another between Parker Street and King’s
Cross entailed considerable waste of energy.
Before the decision to move had been finally
made we had debated these considerations anx-
iously, but needs must when the devil drives!
And we did not experience all the inconvenience
that we had feared, for the department we had
divorced was most ably supervised by Richard
Waters, who had seen it grow from almost its
beginning. He came to me as a lad in the third
year of the business and if it is too early to say
that he has grown old along with me it is true that
he and I are the veterans of the House of Harrap.
During latter years he has put on weight; but
for this, Time has laid its finger very lightly upon
him. I find it easy to think of him as “Young
Richard”—l suppose lam “the Old Man” to
him! Through all the years of our association his


loyalty has burned with a steady flame, and I am
convinced that none feels a greater pride in the
business which he has helped to build.
But the bridge between Parker Street and
King’s Cross was too long and narrow to serve
indefinitely and when almost one half of our
employees went from ‘home’ they justly hoped
that it would not be a permanent separation.
Only three years before we had believed that we
had found the site upon which our House would
stand for long to come, but when we were com-
pelled once again to build an annexe we knew that
we must begin to contemplate our next habitation.
Nevertheless, for another nine years our divided
establishment functioned very smoothly on the
whole, although towards the end of the period we
found it difficult to house all of our editorial staff.
By 1930 we knew that in two or three years a
further enlargement would become essential.


VIII
OF OUR STAFF
A business house is not only a ‘tenement of
clay’; its construction requires much more than
bricks and mortar, and surveying the progress of
our building operations during many years we
cannot forget the many devoted employees who
helped us to place the bricks. I have mentioned
several; many others there are whose loyal services
throughout many years are deeply appreciated,
and if the names of these valued helpers are merely
recorded they, one and all, will, I hope, appreciate
that considerations of space prevent me from doing
fuller justice to their claims upon our gratitude.
The business in this year of grace 1935 is only
thirty-four years old, but no less than six of our
employees have been with us twenty-five years or
more; three others have given us more than
twenty years’ service; fourteen have been with us
from fifteen to nineteen years.
I print upon the roll hereunder the names of
those who have been in our employ for upward
of fifteen years and the year when each joined our
staff. There are others who have completed ten
years or more; these, too, are giving us faithful
service and I tender them our thanks.


&oII of honour
Richard H. Waters .. .. 1903
Robert A. Minton .. .. 1907
Eva Sims .. .. .. 1907
Wm. S. Sleet .. .. 1908
E. Guy Bartlett .. .. 1908
James Wilkins .. .. 1909
Mary Lavars Harry •• .. 1911
Sydney H. Lamb .. .. 1911
Charles C. Wood .. .. 1912
Elsie G. Finch .. .. 1915
Joseph Whitton .. .. 1915
Ethel A. Smithers .. .. 1916
Charles B. Knock .. .. 1916
Bertha York .. .. 1916
Alice A. Price .. .. 1916
John J. McCarthy .. .. 1916
Dorothy J. Hart .. .. 1917
Edward Mickelburgh .. 1918
Sadie Milgrom .. .. 1918
George S. McLaughlin .. 1919
Frank C. D’Albertanson .. 1919


We have often been termed a happy family, and
nothing has given my co-directors and myself
greater pleasure than to believe that our staff are
loyally devoted to our interests; we for our part
have earnestly considered theirs. Very early in our
partnership Mr G. O. Anderson expressed the
hope that we should find it possible to institute
a profit-sharing scheme. Some years passed before
we felt that we had attained the stability that
would justify us in believing that we could rely
upon a steady flow of dividends—and a profit-
sharing scheme without profits to divide is not
likely to be satisfactory to employees or agreeable
to their employers. In 1920 we announced that
thenceforward the staff would receive a bonus
upon their wages or salaries equal to the dividend
declared upon the shares in the Company. In
other words, if the dividend should be ten per cent,
the staff would receive an additional ten per cent,
of their salaries.
As the years passed we began to realize that a
time would come when some of our employees
would reach the age when they should retire from
active service, and we began to feel concerned as
to our responsibility for helping them to make the
necessary provision for their old age. In 1927
old-age pensions was in the air in publishing
circles and the Publishers’ Association appointed a


committee, of which I was chairman, to consider
suitable schemes and make recommendations. The
committee met a number of times and opinion was
divided. Should the employees contribute to the
fund or should the employers bear the entire cost >
I favoured the latter principle but failed to carry
my point; the majority recommendation was fol-
lowed by most publishers, but we decided to
institute our different plan and we contribute
annually to a trust fund sufficient to assure our
employees a pension at the age of sixty-five for
men and sixty for women.
So far two only of our employees have qualified
for a pension; the second to retire died, alas! in the
very first week of his retirement.


IX
OF THE MYSTERY OF
PUBLISHING
What, precisely, goes on under the roof of a
publishing House; My friend Stanley Unwin
has told us in his excellent book The Truth about
Publishing —but not entirely all about it. lam sure
that he will forgive me if I say that he has omitted
consideration of an aspect of publishing which I
consider all important. In his indispensable book
the publisher is presented, maybe, as one who
receives manuscripts, judges their merits, pays for
their transformation into books, bears the cost of
advertisement, and provides the machinery of
distribution. The reader may overlook the fact
that the publisher worthy of the name does more—
he initiates and creates. Before the manuscript is
begun the book is often bom in the brain of its
publisher, as Mr Chesterton declared. 1 Looking
over the activities of our House I recall very many
successful ventures which were first thought of at
York Street, Portsmouth Street, and Parker Street,
and the process continues. Apart from the books
1 “Tie Pickwick Papers originated in the suggestion of a publisher;
as many more good books have done than the arrogance of the man
of letters is commonly inclined to admit.” —G. K. Chesterton.
110


themselves there are the well-known series, each
of which has a peculiar individuality. Speaking
from my personal experience I may say that these
are usually conceived by their publishers, although
a lucky hit with a new book may provide the
inspiration. The first series to appear in our list
was “Told through the Ages” series, now quite
a library of volumes, each fitting into a common
mosaic. Some of these books were submitted to
us uninvited, but most of them were commissioned
by us. Even the others were probably suggested
to the authors by the idea embodied in our design.
We also initiated our ‘Myths’ series at York Street.
In this case the idea was suggested to us by the
success of Guerber’s Myths of Greece and Rome and
we decided to build up with other volumes which
in due course would cover the entire field of
mythology.
In the quest for appropriate authors I travelled
over much ground. I found the author of the
Polynesians volume in New Zealand, the author
of the Australian volume in Adelaide—after some
months of searching, during the course of which I
consulted Sir Baldwin Spencer and others. The
author of the Bantu volume was chosen after I had
discussed the book with anthropologists and others
in many parts of Africa. The library now provides
the general reader with all that he requires to know
111


of the mythological beliefs of most of the primitive
peoples.
Another of our collections which broke fresh
ground was the ‘Story-teller’ series. This, again,
owed its inception to the first volume, which
came to us under interesting circumstances in 1910.
Another publisher had undertaken to produce it;
the copy lay in his safe for a while; he lost interest
in it, and we were asked if we would care to take
it over. It was a lucky offer for we have sold
half a million copies of various volumes of the
series.
Of more recent series I may mention the One-
Act Plays of To-day if only because the story of its
inception will point my moral. The first volume
presented the first collection of one-act plays pub-
lished in England. The idea came to me one
evening and quietly reflecting upon it I felt assured
that Mr J. W. Marriott was the man to select the
appropriate plays. I decided to approach him but
the next morning I had barely gone through my
correspondence when he called to see me. We
exchanged greetings, and then I said: “I was think-
ing of you last night.” “I hope not unkindly,” he
answered. When I had explained, he said: “That
is funny.” “Why?” said I. “Well,” he retorted,
“I have called to ask you to let me do this very
thing.” “Thrice blest is he,” I remarked, “who


gets his blow in first.” A fruitful idea had occurred
to us simultaneously; how fruitful it was may be
judged from the fact that the anthology has been
succeeded by so many others that they constitute
quite a catalogue and their combined sales have
exceeded half a million. Other publishers, also,
have taken the hint.
It is not only series that are initiated by the pub-
lisher. The subjects of many successful books occur
first to him and he seeks and finds the appropriate
author. Because of these considerations I regret
that Mr Unwin barely mentions this aspect of
publishing. When copyright laws are being made
and revised legislators will get their notions of the
functions of the publisher from this authoritative
source, and it may be unfortunate if they should
not be aware that there is justification for the
publisher’s claim that he is very often the father of
the book.
0 0 0
The publisher, because of his opportunities for
obtaining publicity, may give a lead to public
opinion. I recall an episode in our history that
takes me back to the beginning of the War. It
will be remembered that the clash between Austria
and Serbia commenced hostilities. Austrian armies
h
113


twice crossed the Serbian frontier and were twice
flung back in confusion. England watched, breath-
less; we all admired the courage of our gallant ally,
and when Mr Woislav M. Petrovitch, an attache
at the Serbian Legation, offered us a book on
Serbia, we believed—and so it proved—that the
subject would appeal to English readers.
In due course the manuscript was delivered, and
its author, in delivering it, commented upon his
countrymen’s objection to the solecism ‘Servia,’
etc. then current in England. He said that this form
of his country’s name had originated in a false
derivation from the Latin root and was offensive
to his countrymen because it implied ‘servitude.’
His Chief at the Legation, however, had asked
Sir Edward Grey whether he could take steps to
remove the reproach but had been told that it was
too late in the day to attempt anything. “And so,”
said Petrovitch, “I have entitled my book: Hero
Myths and Legends of the Servians, and have used
this form throughout.”
I realized that it would be difficult to disturb a
national habit, but if ever a Serbian aspiration was
to be gratified surely this was the psychological
moment. I therefore instructed the printer to
substitute the preferred form throughout the book
and I appended a note in which I declared that the
corrupted form, ‘Servia’, was extremely offen


sive to the Serbian people and should be aban-
doned.
The effect was instantaneous. The Times warmly
advocated the change and was supported by the
Press generally; before a year had passed the correct
form was in use everywhere. Six months later
Americans followed suit, and soon the disagreeable
solecism was banished from the United States also.
I recall a visit from Petrovitch one morning.
He entered my room flourishing in his hand an
envelope bearing a printed address. It had come
to his Chief from the Foreign Office and the word
‘Servian’ had been struck through and ‘Serbian’
written above. “It is Sir Edward Grey’s own hand-
writing!” exclaimed Petrovitch excitedly.
I was told that I should be offered a decoration,
but this was forgotten, and, of course, I did not
remind Petrovitch. I believe that the affair brought
him considerable credit; somewhat later he became
an Under-Secretary of Education at Belgrade.
Poor fellow, his end was sad. He died in London
by his own hand in November 1934 after suffering
intense mental torture from the fear of impending
assassination.
Some publishers maintain an editorial staff cap


able of rendering valuable service to their authors.
Few, I believe, are so thoroughly equipped as are
we in this respect, and many of our books have
owed much to the meticulous care with which
the manuscripts have been prepared for the printer.
Quite a number of them have enjoyed a longer life
in consequence of this process of taking away
weights and adding wings, and the service has
been warmly appreciated by most of the authors
who have undoubtedly benefited from it. There
has been occasional resentment, but die authors
concerned have usually been convinced in the end
that they have been wrong. It is a narrow mind
that prefers a lesser excellence rather than perfec-
tion arrived at with the help of others, and in our
experience the masters of the craft are not usually
super-sensitive. One of Robert Louis Stevenson’s
publishers wrote of him:
Like all writers of the first rank, he was perfectly
amiable about changes and condensations, and was
not handicapped by the superstition that his copy
was divine revelation and that his words were
sacrosanct. 1
The same writer added:
All of the really first-rate writers I have known
have been similarly open-minded. . . . Somehow,
1 Memories of R. L. Stevenson, S. S. McClure.


young writers often have the idea that they are
lowering their flag if they consent to any changes in
their manuscript. My experience has been—and I
think all other editors have had the same experience
—that only writers of inferior talent and meagre
equipment feel in that way.
The production of a book involves collaboration
between author and publisher, both of whom are
affected for better or worse by every book which
bears their names, and the attitude of authors like
Stevenson makes collaboration easy and delightful.
In The Four Georges Thackeray pays this tribute
to a publisher’s reader:
Some bookseller’s clerk . . . did the work, saw to
the spelling, cleaned up the slovenly sentences, and
gave the lax maudlin slipslop a sort of consistency.
and Lockhart, in his Life of Sir Walter Scott, tells us
that in numberless instances Scott was glad to
acquiesce in the propriety of Ballantyne’s suggested
textual changes, both in his verse and his prose,
while his books were going through the press.
The publisher’s reader is not to be envied. He
must devote the closest attention to his manuscript,
and if he relaxes for a moment something may
escape him for which he will be blamed when the
book has been printed and the error or, it may even
be, libel, comes to light. He must have a feeling
for the right turn of a phrase and possess a general


knowledge that helps him to ‘smell out’ state-
ments which ought to be verified. The efficient
reader is bom and not made. We owe much to
our reading staff and particularly to its chief,
Charles C. Wood, who for more than twenty years
has supervised his department with most admirable
efficiency. I believe that he has few peers in the
province to which he has devoted his life. After
many years of gruelling effort he pursues his ideals
with the ardour which characterized him at the
beginning. For these ideals he deserves to be
honoured; they represent a conviction that he must
bestow on every book the fruits of his trained
knowledge of typography and literary form. He
refuses to compound with his conscience—to bow
to expediency. “What is worth doing is worth
doing well,” he answers. John Ruskin chose as
his father’s epitaph: “He was an entirely honest
merchant.” I can say of Wood with equal sin-
cerity, “He is an entirely loyal guardian of every
interest of the House of Harrap.”
The editorial equipment of the publisher is not
complete without artists who are capable, on
occasions, of adding to the work of others touches
which adjust the drawings more closely to the
purpose for which they have been commissioned.
Some small detail may not be in exact correspond-
ence with the author’s text and it is possible to


rectify this without incurring delays involved if
the drawings concerned are sent back to the artists.
I recall one instance when the artist had omitted to
supply an arm to one of the figures in a group!
Perhaps an illustration is considered suitable,
also, for the jacket of the book; if so, the pro-
portions of its background may need readjusting,
without disturbance of the original design, and
so on.
Our House artists are capable of doing excellent
original work, and they frequently provide illus-
trations for our books. Most of their time, how-
ever, is devoted to routine and this includes inter-
viewing the many other artists who come to offer
us their work, and criticizing and approving the
making of the blocks. Their duties are very varied
and Miss M. Lavars Harry, who has supervised
this department for more than twenty years, is a
rare combination of artist and woman of affairs. She
handles all those with whom she has contact with
the sure confidence of one who knows what she
wants and how to get it. She is greatly respected
by those who do business with her and is most
popular with her colleagues. I cannot imagine
‘Harraps’ without her; her pleasant room with
flowers from the garden that she loves always
allures me, but I know my pleasure in that room
springs, above all, from our long association and
119


the mutual confidence that Time has strengthened
with each passing year.
The last ten years have seen a great development
in the attention paid to lay-out of publishers’ Press
advertisements, to jackets, to showcards, and other
display material, and to indirect publicity for books
and authors. The old view that these matters were
rather beneath the dignity of a publisher resulted in
the task being largely neglected or left to junior
assistants. In Press advertisements there was little
or no attempt to achieve a uniformity of style
which would tend to make the reader associate
them with a particular firm. Jackets never gave any
personal details about the author. Display material
was dull. Paragraphs for editorial use by the Press,
and photographs of authors, were rarely if ever
sent out. Harraps were among the first publishers
to establish a separate department to deal with these
matters. This department is controlled by my son
Walter with the assistance of the publicity manager,
G. E. Kamm.
0 0 0
Looking back over the half century that has
passed since I first entered a publisher’s office, I
note that many conditions have altered. Old
leisurely processes have given way to a fevered


activity in keeping with the spirit of the age. The
character of the popular books has changed.
While there is still a considerable demand for
worth-while books of religious appeal, no longer
are books of sermons by prominent divines to be
found among the best sellers of every season, and
no longer do novels make a dignified first appear-
ance in three volumes.
Fifty years ago we were reading fiction that
could be classified, often, as literature. The im-
mense output of the present day was not dreamed
of, and the publishers chose their new novels with
discrimination. We have only to note the stream
of fiction which now pours daily from the presses
of the much larger number of publishers to appre-
ciate that it would be a miracle if most of these
books were weighed and chosen with care.
Publishing was something of a close corpora-
tion; a few firms largely monopolised the trade.
They discharged their obligations to the reading
public of their day with dignity, and they main-
tained the gentlemanly traditions which had made
of publishing an honourable profession. Their
dealings with the authors were, on the whole,
fair and honest; the annals of the prominent pub-
lishers of my youth would, I am assured, witness
not only to their common honesty, but often to
generosity and humanity. In these days the literary


agent often stands between the publisher and the
author, but it is interesting to note that he, too, is
frequently criticized in die organ of the Authors’
Society. I am sure that many authors who deal
direct with publishers gain much from the direct
contact. But in fairness I would add that our rela-
tions with certain of the literary agents have been
entirely agreeable. They have discharged their
obligations to their clients in a manner that has
made dealings through them pleasurable.
Fifty years ago authors did not expect that their
books would be advertised regardless of expense,
and much of the large-scale advertising of to-day
is indulged in by newer publishers who may thus
purchase an earlier ‘place in the sun.’ Large-scale
advertising of a particular book only in rare cases
produces increased sales commensurate with the cost.
But modem advertisements are usually in good
taste and it is not often that a publisher offends
against the canons of his craft. An author friend
characterized the following, which appeared in the
Evening Standard, as “red in tooth and claw.”
Authors and agents who think that their books
should be selling better and who wish for greater
advances, good production and splendid individual
advertisements, are invited to write in private to
Walter Hutchinson, Chairman, Hutchinson &
Company, Limited.


Does this mean that the old gentlemanly traditions
of publishing have now gone by the board, that the
superior ethics of
The good old rule, the simple plan.
That they should take who have die power,
And they should keep who can
are now the order of the day : I think not, although
I must admit that we occasionally hear of authors
being solicited to transfer their allegiance. But
publishers on the whole respect the code which
their predecessors honoured. This inflicted no
hardship upon authors, for I believe that their in-
terests are not served by a flitting from House to
House.
Authors who have found a friendly publisher
should not lightly detach themselves. Continuity
in the same list counts for a good deal, and the
publisher who has produced a number of books
for a particular author is often inspired, later on, to
bring out collected or illustrated editions which
ensure to these books a fresh lease of life.
The subject recalls a conversation with George
Moore several years before his death, which re-
minds me that authors maintain that they have a
right to change their publishers at will—as, indeed,
they have. He described to me the plot of a new
novel he was writing and suddenly asked whether
my House would like to make an offer for its


publication. I reminded him of his long associa-
tion with another House—one with which we
enjoyed very friendly relations—and suggested
that this made it somewhat difficult for both
of us. He grew angry and declared with his
characteristic heat that he would please himself
as to who pubHshed his books. As the novel
was never finished there was no occasion for
further argument.
As an old-fashioned publisher I look with
suspicion upon the various societies which are
telling people what they should read. Human
nature being what it always was, power is not
often wielded irrespective of self-interest. The
judgment of critics who are also authors may
sometimes be influenced by personal friendships
and a desire to help those who in their turn may
have it in their power to help them. Then,
author-judges may quite honestly prefer particular
types of books and their preferences are imposed
upon readers who find it easier to submit to the
opinions of others than to cultivate an inde-
pendence of judgment, that greatest of literary
delights. The Book Societies are supplemented
by a growing number of newspaper dictators,
and those who—like myself—are uneasy can only
hope that the fate of books will continue to be
determined, in the words of Lord Macaulay, not


by what is written about them, but by what is
written in them.
These conditions have arisen from the rapid
growth of readers, due, in its turn, to the im-
mensely increased facilities for education. Thou-
sands in the community have acquired a taste for
reading who have no confidence in their ability to
choose what they shall read. Perhaps this is not to
prevail indefinitely; if so, we may hope that many
good books which otherwise would blush unseen
will come into their own.
Another of the many activities of recent years
which would have amazed my leisurely predeces-
sors is the selection of books for what has been
termed ‘newspaper stunts.’ The public undoubt-
edly get ‘bargains,’ but I suspect that newspapers
which resort to this form of advertising would not
dip so deeply into their coffers merely because of
their conviction that
“Kind hearts are more dian coronets.”
0 0 0
“Books, like umbrellas, should be borrowed”
appears to be an almost universal article of popular
belief, but its universality is a phenomenon of the
twentieth century. True there were lending
libraries when I entered publishing over fifty years


ago. I recall Mitchell’s, Day’s, the Grosvenor
among the select libraries which were patronized
by the intelligentsia, and, of course, there was the
London Library for the scholar; above all, there
was Mudie’s, which occupied, apparently, an im-
pregnable position as the institution for circulating
books of every kind to borrowers. W. H. Smith
and Son’s circulating library had been founded in the
early ’sixties, but fifty years ago the number of
books purchased by all of the lending libraries was
small indeed compared with the volume dis-
tributed to-day through Boots’ Booklovers Lib-
rary alone. Since its beginning in 1900 ‘Boots’
have purchased thirty millions of new books, and
their book exchanges in a single year amount to
the colossal total of thirty-five millions. If to this
figure we add those of the circulating libraries of
W. H. Smith & Son, Mudie’s, Harrods, and the
Times Book Club, not to mention others, it will
be apparent that to-day it is easy to satisfy a thirst
for reading at little expense.
But in addition to these organizations there is
provided for the citizen of to-day, in every com-
munity of any size, the free use of practically every
book he may desire to read. And that he is taking
advantage of the privilege is shown by official
returns which reveal that in 1932 the stock of books
in the urban and county libraries of England and


Wales totalled upward of 19,500,000 volumes, and
each, on the average, had been lent out eight times, 1
that is, over one hundred and sixty-four millions of
books had been issued to the public free of charge.
John Citizen is a lucky fellow; not only is he pro-
vided with this well of literature (perhaps not in
every detail undefiled) but he is dragged to it by
every lure and device that occurs to the trained and
efficient librarian of to-day. No longer can he find
excuse for ignorance.
The latest development, the ‘tuppeny’ library,
is not new, for Boots began by lending books at
twopence. It has recently, however, attained
surprising proportions, and a multitude of these
libraries is dispensing vast quantities of books to
borrowers whose reading had hitherto been con-
fined to magazines and other cheap literature.
In one seaside town a leading bookseller told me
recently that 182 lending libraries have sprung up —
nine of them in the same road as his bookshop—and
his trade is down to an eighth what it was two years
ago! 2
The multiplicity of these libraries is leading to
further developments. The borrower in large
centres bestows his patronage upon various com-
1 My figures are taken from “A Library of To-day,” an account of
‘Boots’ in The Cornhill Magazine, by James Milne.
• Frederick Bason, “The Antiquarian Bookseller To-day and To-
morrow!” in The Publishers’ Circular , February 9, 1935.
127


petitors for his ‘tuppence,’ and this is exercising the
minds of the larger libraries, which are intent upon
discovering devices whereby they may prevent
such promiscuous dealings. One such library now
issues a five-shilling voucher, good for a certain
number of exchanges, and this is punched each
time a book is taken out. Undoubtedly this is a
move towards the regular subscription arrange-
ment of the established libraries, and perhaps these
newer institutions are training further subscribers
for Boots and Smiths.
This, however, is not the only development of
the ‘tuppenny’ library. Most of them began by
stocking cheap fiction only. After a while they
were compelled to buy the newer and more expen-
sive novels; now the more successful are lending
books of biography and travel, besides others, for
they have found that many of their patrons demand
this superior fare.
This is comforting to publishers and authors who
have observed the progress of the borrowing habit
with mixed feelings. They have been told that the
efficient lending library calculates upon circulating
a single book some fifty times, and they have re-
flected upon their small remuneration from the
individual reader. From a novel published at seven
shillings and sixpence authors receive from nine-
pence to eighteenpence, according to their stand


ing and the sales achieved. By far the larger num-
ber of first novels by new authors earn no profit
whatever to the publishers, and the net profit on
all but a very few select ‘successes’ amounts only
to a few pence per copy. Many books of which less
than two thousand copies are sold, and which yield
no profit to their publishers and only a pittance to
the authors, are read through the libraries by many
thousands of subscribers. This is profitable to the
libraries and it should convince those who think
that the novel is dear at seven shillings and sixpence
that their ideas are wide of the mark. To-day most
new novels are borrowed, few are bought, and in
my view the novel should in the first instance be
published for the libraries at a higher price; the
successful books should be issued, say, at three
shillings and sixpence, some months later. I do not
of course, advocate a return to the ‘three-decker,’
but it now appears that our forbears were wise in
their belief that books which are to have a com-
munity of readers should be priced accordingly.
The objection to the three-volume novel published
at 3 is. 6d. did not come from Mudie’s; they were
not dissatisfied, for the ‘three-decker’ was an in-
ducement to many of their patrons to take out a
triple subscription.
I think it cannot be denied that large numbers
of the less literate have been brought into contact
I
129


with books by the activities of the ‘tuppenny’ and
public libraries, and pubHshers and authors will
benefit from the enlargement of the book-buying
class that will ensue.
There have been many colourful moments in the
story of ‘Boots’ but none more romantic than that
in which Lady Trent, a bookseller’s daughter,
decided to include books among the stock-in-trade
of her husband’s drug stores. She was a book-lover,
as I had noted, for Boots frequently reordered
stocks of our leather gift books, particularly those
in the yapp binding, and when I commented upon
this I was told: “Mrs Boot is very fond of these
dainty volumes.”
Florence Boot, as she was then known, could not
have foreseen whence this was to lead, much less
could she have anticipated the amazing conse-
quences of her further inspiration, soon after, to
start a lending library. Mr Mercer Stretch of
Mudie’s, however, did see that Boots’ chain of
shops offered unique opportunities for developing
a library which should reach millions of new sub-
scribers, and he was brought in to initiate and
supervise the organization which he had suggested.
Ten years later Mr Fred R. Richardson was ap-
pointed Chief Librarian, and the twenty-five years
of his control have witnessed a progress which is
paralleled by few of the enterprises in ‘big business ’


of our time. The founders saw in the library an
adjunct which would bring additional customers to
the drug stores, but figures speak eloquently, and
those I have cited indicate that in itself it is a profit-
able undertaking, one that is the envy of distribu-
tors of books in every land.
Richardson has every justification for feeling
satisfied with the fruits of his long labours, but he
is too modest to accept all the admiration that is his
due, and while he remains at the helm he is not the
man to be satisfied that he has accomplished all that
may yet be done.


X
OF OTHER FRIENDS
“By their friends ye shall know them.” A happy
criterion! We shall be content to stand before
Peter with the friends of our House! It will not
be a small company, and certainly Richard P. Jago
will be there. We first made Jago’s acquaintance
at York Street when our interest in modem lan-
guages frequently lured him up our narrow stairs.
He contributed some French texts to our list, and
we grew to respect his sound qualities. His is a
mind that challenges and stimulates; his caustic
wit is a brake and a corrective; he is an indefatig-
able worker. But above all, he has endeared him-
self to us because we long ago found him out!
Admirable cynic—his every action gives the he to
his material estimates of men and things.
Another friend who for many years exhibited a
warm interest in our development was George
Tyler, head of W. H. Smith & Son’s Shops Depart-
ment, whom I have already mentioned. He always
welcomed me affectionately when I dropped in
upon him at 186 Strand; he loved to talk of his
experiences—he had left school before he was
twelve years of age—and of the men under him


who were loyally endeavouring to carry out the
new, energetic policy dictated to the House when
they lost the contracts for the station bookstalls
throughout two of the great railway lines. I was
deeply impressed by Tyler’s enthusiasm and by his
earnest concern for the well-being of his staff. He
frequently requested the new managers of the
country bookshops to call at Portsmouth Street and
discuss with me ideals and methods concerned with
bookselling. George Tyler died in 1921, but his
memory remains green and I am happy in knowing
that Pavid Roy, now manager of the Book De-
partment, has inherited Tyler’s feelings of friendly
regard for me, as well as others of the traits that
made his beloved ‘chief’ so universally esteemed.
As I mentioned David Roy there sprang to my
mind a picture of an earnest young man speaking
with eloquent emotion of his early life in the Low-
lands of Scotland and of his remarkable father. The
place was a London restaurant and the occasion was
a complimentary dinner to Arthur Rackham.
Rackham had referred to the painful stages by
which he had climbed to eminence and Roy was
lured to his feet an hour later. His speech was not
on the programme but it is remembered by many
as the oratorical event of the evening. Speaking
with his rich Scots accent in a voice charged with
feeling he declared that at the beginning of Rack


ham’s address his mind had flown away to the village
where his own boyhood was spent, and straight-
way he had heard no more. He then proceeded
to unfold a moving story that I shall never forget.
His father was of that sturdy, independent breed
which far from the limelight has played a great
part in our island story, waging a heroic fight
against odds and bringing up families from which
have sprung the J. M. Barries and the Camegies
whose achievements have become world famous.
Early in his life the father had lost his right arm,
“but,” said David proudly, “he could do more
with his one arm than many men I know can do
with two.” He never earned enough to provide
his family with luxuries, but there was always
enough to satisfy the simple needs of the house-
hold; indeed, there was always something left over.
“Each morning,” continued David, “at breakfast
I found my plate of porridge, and for the rest of the
day the fare provided satisfied my boy’s appetite.”
Mr Roy’s simple interests centred upon his books,
of which the small home contained a number—
mosdy of a religious character, for the elder Roy
was an earnest Christian and leader of a Bible class.
This latter interest was so dear to him that he once
declined an offer of higher wages in another dis-
trict because to have accepted it would have
entailed giving up his class. Father and son would


often set out walking together, and, said David,
“I remember occasions when my father would halt
and, pointing to my shoe, would say: ‘Do up that
lace; I have only one hand but you never see me
with a lace undone.’” ... “Ah!” said David, wist-
fully, as he concluded his filial tribute, “would that
I could believe that I have given my father cause to
think half as well of his son as I so proudly think of
my father.”
For more than twenty years after W. H. Smith
& Son opened the first news-stall at Euston Station,
the railway ‘bookstall’ had confined its activities
to selling newspapers, books, and magazines to rail-
way passengers, and it was due to John Treadwell,
manager for many years of Smiths’ bookshop
at Birmingham, that the news-stalls began to
cater for the needs of local residents. This was
at the end of the ’seventies and Smiths’ by this time
had a monopoly on most of the English railway
lines. They had used this nobly. Vendors of books
on railway platforms had hitherto sold only rub-
bish, and often most pernicious rubbish. It was
quite a lucrative trade, but W. H. Smith would
have none of it. He stocked only worth-while
books and gradually his policy was justified. To-
day the stalls at Waterloo, King’s Cross, St Pan-
eras, and other great stations of London and the
provinces distribute an amazing number of books,


and their sales are by no means confined to merely
topical and fictional literature. Much of the credit
for this is due to the remarkable men who have, in
most cases, served W. H. Smith from boyhood.
They were recruited from the ranks and their
knowledge of books has been mainly acquired
through keen observation of the reading tastes of
their customers. They have built upon the firm
foundation of sterling character.
Men such as Thomas Wallis at Waterloo, and the
veterans Henry Irons at Liverpool Street, Thomas
Harmston at St Pancras, and Arthur Gee (who
has lately retired from King’s Cross) are deserving
of honour for what they have accomplished in
thus raising the status of the bookstall from a mere
convenience to the passing traveller to alluring
centres for cultivated readers who because they
may browse among books are content to wait
for their trains.
It would be interesting to know the combined
years of service of the managers of Smiths’ shops
and bookstalls. The total, I imagine, would be
prodigious! Mr Gee’s successor at King’s Cross,
Theodore Charles, had already served the firm for
forty-six years when he was transferred from
Southampton to London. It has been observed that
a nation gets the government it deserves; similarly
both employers and servants contribute to the con


ditions that explain the loyalty manifested by the
employees of this great firm.
I have mentioned only W. H. Smith & Son, for
they were the great pioneers on the railways and
although they no longer have a monopoly they
still dominate the picture. There were many who
deeply regretted their disappearance, at the close
of 1905, from the platforms of two great railway
companies. But, with their usual energy, by open-
ing numberless bookshops in the towns served by
these lines, they preserved for themselves the
valuable connexions built up by their devoted
servants. The late George Tyler, who was respon-
sible for carrying it out, said of their aggressive
enterprise on his retirement in 1919, with pardon-
able pride: “Shrewd business men have said, ‘We
know of nothing to equal it, and certainly nothing
to surpass it, in the whole history of British com-
-9 99
merce.
The honoured House of John Menzies & Com-
pany performs Smiths’ function on the Scottish
railways, and Charles Eason & Sons’ bookstalls are
similarly familiar to the traveller on the railways
of the Irish Free State.
Every autumn during the early years of the


business I used personally to show my new books
to the booksellers in Scotland, and many of them
received me so kindly that I looked forward to
these annual encounters. I recall my first meeting
with William Pollock, of Ayr. I entered his shop
one morning without any expectation and was
surprised by the warmth of his greeting. I can still
see his friendly smile as he looked up from my
card. Some correspondence between us had im-
planted a germ and he appeared to be genuinely
pleased to meet me. When he learned that I was
travelling with my wife, he insisted that we must
both go to his home for lunch and to meet his
family. We did not leave the hospitable roof
until the evening was well spent, and thereafter,
whenever I visited Ayr, a full day was always
devoted to Mr and Mrs Pollock. Together we
would motor over the county, and on these expedi-
tions my hosts introduced me to other delightful
people.
William Pollock is a fine example of the pro-
vincial ‘county’ bookseller, and his shop is the
intellectual centre of a circle that extends far
beyond his city’s bounds. That kindly twinkle in
his eye explains something; but he possesses not
only a wealth of good nature; other sterling
qualities, essentially Scottish, have played their part
in the building up of a business as bookseller and


publisher of which he and his sons may well be
proud.
My first visit to Glasgow is memorable for the
friendship with D. J. Knox, which began when I
entered the imposing shop of John Smith & Son.
Knox had a way with him that sweetened inter-
course; the warm pressure of his hand and the
friendly glint of his eye made all who came into
contact with him feel immediately at home. The
regard bom at our first contact endured for many
years, and Glasgow has not been quite the same to
me since he died.
That shop has produced several men who have
made a mark upon their craft. Chief of these is
John G. Wilson, whom I met on the threshold of
his distinguished career. He was young and eager;
everything relating to books absorbed him. He
attracted to the shop many kindred spirits, but
large though it was, the shop was far too narrow
for his enthusiasms, and these found further expres-
sion in a regular literary column which he con-
ducted in a Glasgow weekly. Upon one of my
annual visits to the city he induced me to contribute
an article to this journal.
After some years his star drew him to London,
and he went into partnership with Frederick H.
Evans, of Queen Street, Cheapside, the book-
loving bookseller who suggested to his friend,


J, M. Dent, the idea which took shape in the
famous Temple Shakespeare. This, however,
proved to be merely an interlude; destiny had
larger opportunities in store for Wilson.
I was personally concerned in bringing to him
an invitation to take charge of a large bookstore
in the West End,but he declined this—most wisely,
as it turned out, for soon after he was offered
the control of the splendid business of J. & E.
Bumpus, Limited in Oxford Street. His subse-
quent career has amply confirmed the expectation
of his friends, who were convinced that he was the
ideal man for the opportunity. He has developed
the business by the application of methods which,
while being ‘up to date’, have maintained the
dignified traditions of the House. To-day none
would question his place among a very choice few
living booksellers. Alas! the familiar bookshop
with its proud associations has receded into history.
Many will regret its transference a little further
west, but happily John G. Wilson remains and a
host of friends will watch with deep interest the
fortunes of his business in its new home. Wilson
has many gifts and these are always at the service
of others.
Wilson was succeeded at Smiths’ by John Fisher.
He is a shy Scotsman who gets more than his
living out of books, as those who arc in sympathy


with his literary ideals quickly discover. After
several years he removed to Edinburgh and in
1919 took up a partnership in Robert Grant &
Son, Princes Street, an old-established firm of
booksellers and stationers, founded in 1804, which
stood in need of new blood. For some years he
devoted his energies to consolidating the book-
selling connexion; ultimately his appreciation and
knowledge of the books he sells led him on to
publishing and, with his associates, he founded the
Moray Press, which has made an excellent start.
An infant organization of necessity lacks the
machinery of distribution which is all-important,
and when Fisher invited us to take over the distri-
bution of the Moray Press publications outside of
Scotland, our long friendship made it easy to
negotiate a suitable arrangement.
Edinburgh has proud publishing traditions;
many great reputations have been made there and
I feel confident that the Moray Press will make
good.
During those early visits to Scotland I met again
and again many others of the leading booksellers.
It was an impressionable period of my career, and
the kindly courtesy of most of them will ever
remain among my happy memories.
As I did not make similar visits to English book-
sellers I had little close personal connexion with


them. I have, of course, met many of them
during my long publishing experience, but we
have been as ships that exchange courtesies with
each other as they pass.
There is, however, one distinguished provincial
bookseller whom I am proud to number among
my closest friends. I think with sorrow of the
many years during which J. D. Hughes and our-
selves merely transacted business together. They
are years that the locusts have eaten! From his
lair in the basement of 34 Cross Street, Manchester,
he controls the great bookselling organization of
Sherratt & Hughes. His customers know him to
be a man of the strictest integrity, and his unique
knowledge of books—old and new—is always at
the service of those who approach him. None
has greater reason to value these qualities than have
we, for during recent years we have considerably
imposed upon his willingness to divulge the secrets
of his craft. His generosity is unbounded; it is the
natural expression of a personality that attracts
people of every type and kind. He is a great book-
seller, but much as he is admired for his business
qualities ‘David’ is much more loved for himself
by all who have the happiness of being intimate
with him.


I have referred to two Americans whose friend-
ship was so helpful to me many years before we
were established at Parker Street. There is one
other, Caspar W. Hodgson, whose cordial rela-
tions with us date back to the very early days in
York Street. Hodgson founded the World Book
Company when I began at York Street. He had
been with D. C. Heath & Company as one of the
firm’s representatives, and our mutual affection
for Mr Heath drew us together. Mr Heath fre-
quently referred to the two of us as “his boys.”
The World Book Company flourished for many
years under Mr Hodgson’s brilliant guidance; we
successfully marketed in England a number of
their excellent books, while they reciprocated by
publishing in America a number of ours. They
were early in the field in recognizing the value of
Intelligence Tests and our energetic participation
in this important branch of educational method
was largely due to our habit of co-operating with
them. The river flows smoothly in its accustomed
channels.
When the United States took over the Philip-
pines a new field of enterprise was opened to the
American educational publishers and Hodgson saw
his opportunity and concentrated upon the pro-
duction of text-books for the natives. He made a
study of the conditions upon the spot, spending


altogether a considerable time in the Islands, and
he was richly rewarded. Many of the Government
contracts that he obtained would make an English
publisher’s mouth water!
Mr Hodgson built his business premises at
Yonkers-on-Hudson, some fifteen miles out of
New York, thus following the example of Double-
day, Doran & Company, whose estate at Garden
City is a model for all large employers. Each
time I visited Yonkers I envied our friends their
attractive offices in beautiful surroundings.
Mr Hodgson’s residence was within the bound-
aries of his small estate; its main architectural
features are uncommon and these are made even
more attractive by the lay-out of the grounds,
which are reminiscent of the tropics—an influence
from Mr Hodgson’s Philippine journeys. It is an
artistic setting for home, office, and studios; the
worker would indeed be dull who did not gather
inspiration from it.
Another of our tried American friends is the
Houghton Mifflin Company of Boston. When we
first thought of opening a branch in Australia we
were attracted to the idea of a partnership with
one or two other publishers, and we eventually
concluded an arrangement with Constable & Com-
pany, Limited, of London, and Houghton Mifflin
Company. Together we formed a limited com


pany called the Australasian Publishing Company,
Limited, and my eldest son went out to Sydney to
take charge of the combined operations.
It is not easy to command success for ventures
of the sort in another country where much has to
be learned of local customs and conditions, and
during the first few years my son had an uphill
task. Before this period of experimentation had
ended the bonds which joined the diree parties to
the venture had become loosened, the Company
was wound up, and its manager at that date,
Stanley L. Bartlett, took over our stock and under-
took to represent us as our Agent.
During the whole of this Australian association
Houghton Mifflin Company played their part with
a generosity of spirit that we remember gratefully.
Their treasurer, James Duncan Phillips, was
throughout a sportsman, and our long friendship
was never threatened.
The Houghton Mifflin Company have in their
distinguished career been associated with many
celebrated authors, and they rank with the great
English publishing houses. Our contact with them
began early in our career and we have obtained
from them many successful books. Like our own,
their catalogue is very catholic; it ranges over a
wide field of interests, educational and general.
Just as in England various recruits to publishing
K
145


have since the War attained to an equality with
Houses that had been household words for two
generations, so in the United States more than one
of the post-War publishers have established them-
selves among the aristocrats such as Houghton
Mifflin, Litde Brown, and Lippincott. The most
distinguished of these ‘new-comers’ is Harcourt
Brace & Company, Inc., whose story reveals an
unbroken sequence of successes from its founda-
tion in 1919. Only those who are intimate with
Alfred Harcourt and Donald Brace know the
secret of the firm’s rapid rise to eminence. Certain
of Harcourt’s qualities would rarely fail to com-
mand success in any sphere, but the full extent of
his attainment is only to be explained by those who
have been in frequent contact with his generous
personality. Certain of the firm’s famous authors
tell their friends of incidents in their relations with
him which prove that he is in the true succession of
the great publishers.
Many other well-known American publishers
come into my story, for there is a constant inter-
change between publishers on both sides of the
Atlantic. The attempts of English publishers to
market their books in America and of American
publishers to market theirs in England have not
often proved satisfactory. Messrs Macmillan opened
a New York branch of their great English business


many years ago and after surmounting the initial
difficulties this obtained a considerable degree of
success, but eventually the enterprise was taken
over by an American company. Similarly the
great American pubHshers, Doubleday, Page &
Company —the House which nurtured the greatest
of all American ambassadors to Britain, Walter
Hines Page —purchased the Heinemann business
on the death of its distinguished founder and so
became established in London. After several years,
however, the business was reacquired by English
investors, and it is once more a British concern.
Several other publishers are functioning on both
sides of the Atlantic, but the respective branches
are branches merely, and most Houses consider
that the interests of their authors are best met by
arrangements which leave the American publishers
to market English books in the United States
and English pubHshers to market American books
throughout the British Dominions. In their re-
spective territories the selling organizations of
the established publishers give them advantages
that are not easily acquired by branches of foreign
concerns.
And so there is a constant interchange between
British and American pubHshers, and representa-
tives of the important Houses visit each other at
regular intervals. At these meetings forthcoming


books are considered; nay, more, many fruitful
ventures have been initiated in the discussions.
Naturally this process brings publishers on both
sides of the Atlantic closely together, and many
alliances are cemented by this friendly co-operation.
We greatly value the many friendships with
United States publishing houses that have brought
and sent grist to the respective mills, and the annual
meeting with many visiting publishers is looked
forward to with pleasurable interest. Among
those whose cordial greeting was for many years
one of my annual pleasures was Maynard A.
Dominick, treasurer of Frederick A. Stokes Com-
pany of New York. He was in every sense my
contemporary, for the year in which I celebrated
my jubilee was identical with that in which he
completed fifty years of service in the House of
Stokes. Among the most valued of the congratu-
lations I received was a letter from Dominick in
which he wrote, among other kind and generous
things;
My first thought on arriving in London was to
make a visit to your office, as I have always valued
your friendship above the buying and selling of
books.
I recall with deep pleasure memories of the years
in which I gave personal attention, with my co


director, Anderson, to our American connexions.
In later years my eldest son has most ably managed
this department and he, in his turn, has many
friends on ‘the other side.’
0 0 0
English publishers cultivate friendly relations
with many foreign publishers and booksellers and
our dealings have cemented bonds in various
countries which have been pleasant as well as pro-
fitable. The Dutch are particularly attracted to
English books and English people and we deeply
value certain associations which had their begin-
nings in the earliest days of our business. Messrs
W. J. Thieme & Company, at Zutphen, have
brought out Dutch translations of many of our
books and they have shown a constant interest in
our list. The two brothers Schillemans, the present
heads of the firm, have consistently manifested a
friendliness which we are happy in reciprocating
and which extends beyond the relations of buyers
and sellers.
I visited Holland for the first time some thirty
years ago, and among those who greeted me wdth
particular warmth was Mr Andries Sybrant, head
of the wholesale bookselling firm of Kirberger and
Kesper at Amsterdam. A friendship developed


from this encounter which I grew to value, for
none could fail to be attracted by the kindliness and
nobility of his gentle character. Some years after
our first meeting one of his assistants decided to
come to London, where he afterwards successfully
established himself as a dealer in foreign books. Mr
Sybrant foresaw that the young man might come
up against difficulties that would bring dangerous
temptation and I received a letter from him in
which he authorized me, should I consider it neces-
sary in some emergency, to give him financial
assistance.
Mr Sybrant’s chief assistant was Mr Hendrik J.
Oosten, who, when his chief retired, in 1920, took
charge of the business for the new owners, Messrs
Simplon, Marshall Limited, London. It so often
happens that foreign control sets up many diffi-
culties. Mr Oosten had been trained in a good
school and he solved problems which might have
discouraged less courageous men by the exercise of
admirable patience and courtesy. These brought
their reward in 1930, when die shares were trans-
ferred to him and he acquired the ownership of a
business that had been in existence eighty-five
years. Like ourselves, he values the cordial rela-
tions which bind our two Houses; it is a traditional
friendship which has stood the test of many years.
That first visit to Holland was a busman’s holi


day. My wife accompanied me and she was not
too well pleased that I brought some of our newer
books in our luggage. When we reached The
Hague we took a room in the Hotel Bellevue,
facing the forest, and I sallied out to make my
business appointments. A year previously Mr
Anderson had opened a connexion with Mr Meyer
Elte, a dealer in old books and manuscripts, and I
called at his shop in the Korte Poten. He greeted
me most kindly and a little later called at the hotel,
where in preparation for his visit I had spread my
samples upon the bed. Since he did not deal in new
books I had not expected that he would be very
interested, but he placed a substantial order.
Knowing him as I now do, I feel sure that this was
a generous gesture. Perhaps a desire to please my
wife had something to do with it, for he is a
gallant gentleman.
Fate had cast a noose that bound our two fami-
lies so firmly that after thirty years the bond has
not slackened. We are proud of this intimate con-
nexion, for Meyer Elte is a prince among those
distinguished men whose knowledge and love of
antiquarian books is esteemed and respected in
every capital in Europe. His story has many
parallels with my own. Just two years before I
opened the offices at York Street he opened his
shop in the Korte Poten, and as I had prepared the


ground for my essay into business on my own
account by previous years of spade-work, so he had
laid his foundation by selling books from a barrow
which he regularly wheeled from The Hague to
Delft and back, a distance of five miles each way.
He was only thirteen when he started, so he had
had little schooling. Evidently, however, he pos-
sessed something more valuable than a secondary
education, for to-day he converses in their own
language with intellectuals of England, France,
Germany, and Holland, and his knowledge of
antiquarian books is profound. He is proud to
commemorate the first seven years of his business
life by printing upon his letter-heading a picture of
the barrow.
When he rebuilt his premises in the Korte Poten
Elte beat me by five years. Like ourselves he was
ambitious to possess a business home that would be
worthy of his loved vocation, and the reconstructed
shop is a joy to all visitors. When it was opened in
1929 the occasion brought visitors from many parts
of Europe.
I was represented by my eldest son who saw,
with amazement, the narrow Korte Poten blocked
with the numerous cars bringing tributes which
made the interior of the building beautiful with
flowers. These, however, painted the lily, for the
three floors need no exotic decoration. One is


decorated and furnished in the period and style of
Louis XVI, another in the Dutch style of the seven-
teenth century; all three bear eloquent witness to
the taste of this self-educated man whose acquired
knowledge of books and whose services to culture
entide him indeed to display the decoration be-
stowed upon him in 1934 by France—the coveted
insignia of Officier d’Academic.
Visitors to the well-known shop to-day often
meet Elte’s two sons or his daughter, who take
charge of it in their father’s frequent absences to
attend international sales; where in important
European centres the great dealers in antiquarian
books, manuscripts, and engravings foregather
there also Elte will be found.


XI
OF 182 HIGH HOLBORN
The consistent growth of the business had en-
couraged me to believe that eventually we should
be justified in building for my successors and I had
conceived an ambidon which I found appealed to
my co-directors. My plan was to start a building
fund which we could augment from time to time,
according to circumstances, so that eventually we
should be able to float a property company and
acquire a suitable freehold site or building. The
first instalment was set aside in 1930 and the
opportunity knocked at our door in 1934. When
it came things moved very rapidly, as will be seen.
We had noticed that a great building in High
Holbom, called Cannon House, was standing
empty. It had been built forty years ago for the
publishers and printers of Kelly’s Directories, and
Messrs Kelly had sold it in 1922 to Messrs Morgan,
a well-known firm of paper-makers’ agents. The
building, after standing empty for many months,
did not look inviting, and it was much larger than
we needed. Together with the new building of
the Educational Supply Association it occupies an
island site, the boundaries being High Holbom on


the north, Drury Lane on the west, Smart’s
Place on the east, and Goldsmith Street on the
south. Cannon House has the three frontages of
High Holbom, Smart’s Place, and Goldsmith
Street, and there are about two acres of floor space
on its four floors and magnificent basement.
Although we were not sanguine that it would
prove to be a suitable building, we had decided
to inspect its interior, but before we could do so
we were approached by an agent, who desired to
know whether we wanted further warehouse
accommodation. We were told that a certain
client, who was not at the moment to be named,
had secured an option to purchase the freehold,
and before exercising this he wished to feel reason-
ably assured that it would be possible to find
tenants for the half of the building not required
for his business. We said that we were not inter-
ested in a lease, but might consider joint purchase
if the client in question felt disposed to join us in
forming a property company. The agent reported
our suggestion to his client who invited Walter
and myself to discuss the proposal with him at his
offices.
It now appeared that the client was Mr Cyril
Hogg, managing director of Messrs Samuel French
Limited, the publishers of plays. We knew each
other very well and had been engaged together in


a number of transactions that had profited both
parties and engendered a mutual liking. He felt
quite disposed to join us in a larger venture and
this feeling of confidence in us was to expedite a
settlement greatly. It is interesting to reflect that
our decision to publish one-act plays which had
brought us into contact with Mr Hogg was respon-
sible for the friendly spirit that had now moved
him to approach us. The threads of life are
strangely intertwined!
Upon calling at Southampton Street at the hour
appointed, Walter and I received a shock; we were
told politely that Mr Hogg would be very busily
engaged for an hour. But we had not been back
at Parker Street more than a few minutes when
Mr Hogg telephoned a reminder of our engage-
ment. He was distressed to learn of our rebuff; it
appeared that he had instructed that he was not to
be disturbed during our interview, and there had
been a misunderstanding.
However, we were soon in conference, and
within an hour Mr Hogg had cordially accepted
our plan. This, in short, was that we should form
a limited company to acquire the freehold; we
should each hold an equal number of shares, and
we should become our own landlords.
My son and I returned to Parker Street where
our co-directors warmly welcomed our report. I


imagine that only rarely are important transactions
of this nature settled in so short a time. On Sunday
our name occurred to Mr Hogg; on Monday his
agent called upon us; on Tuesday we conferred
together; on Thursday I signed the contract; on
Saturday I was on my way to Constantinople!
0 0 0
For twelve years our walls had continued to
rise under the roof of others. We were now to
place our own roof upon the framework we had
built, and it was natural that we should rejoice.
Nevertheless, we contemplated the termination of
our close intimacy with the House of Pitman with
more than mere regret. The test of friendship is
to live with friends, and our experiment had
brought us nothing but satisfaction from the
beginning when, with a considerate courtesy
which, I believe, is traditional in their family, the
brothers Alfred and Ernest entertained us at lunch
to celebrate our union.
Until recently the headquarters of the famous
House were at Bath, where the printing and bind-
ing works are among the best equipped in the
country. The Parker Street offices are presided
over by Mr James Hynes and Mr Frank Heywood,
and our intimacy developed relations with these
157


two friends which will always be among our most
pleasant memories of Parker Street. Towards the
end of 1934 Messrs Alfred and Ernest Pitman re-
tired from the business, and the Company was
reconstituted under the Chairmanship of Mr I. J.
Pitman, the eldest son of Ernest, who had taken
an active part in its management since 1923, when
he brought from Oxford trophies which witness
to his prowess in most of the University sports. He
will long be remembered as one of the most dis-
tinguished athletes of his undergraduate genera-
tion. His brother Christian also took a seat on the
Board.
We are glad to believe that although we shall no
longer share the same building our intimate con-
nexion with this distinguished House has cemented
bonds that will endure.
0 0 0
Our new home provides the acre of space which
we now need for our offices and warehouse, but it
was necessary to entirely rearrange and reconstruct
the four floors to suit our requirements. High
Holbom is destined to be an important thorough-
fare and the south side on which our building
stands was in process of widening. Cannon House,
indeed, was the only building not set back and our


NUMBER 182 HIGH HOLBORN
158


first move was to arrange for the rebuilding of the
front in line with the neighbouring properties.
The compensation we received enabled us to erect
a facade of stone and red brick which is in harmony
with its surroundings. To-day the south side of
the street is all but completed, and its range of
imposing buildings is appropriate to an important
artery to the West End. On the north side the
houses are old and insignificant, but they are the
property of the Crown and before long no doubt
will be replaced with structures similar in charac-
ter to those they will face.
Our Property Company undertook responsi-
bility for the exterior structural alterations, and
these were supervised by the architect, Mr W. E.
Hazell, who also designed and carried through the
rearrangement of that portion of the interior to be
occupied by Messrs Fox. For our part of the
premises, however, we preferred to act as our own
architect, and my son Walter mapped out, in con-
sultation with me, the many rooms, passages, etc.,
which our needs demand. We then invited esti-
mates from various builders, and I was most grati-
fied when these were opened to find that my friend
of thirty years standing, Mr A. J. Arnold, of
Wcstcliff-on-Sea, had submitted the lowest tender.
The next three months were filled with interest for
Walter and myself; together we considered and


decided upon the multifarious details of construc-
tion and decoration, for our colleagues had gener-
ously given us a free hand, and throughout we had
their entire confidence. It is most pleasing to us
both, and to Mr Arnold, that the result entirely
satisfied them. Visitors to the new building, also,
compliment us upon the general design and
arrangement of the four floors and express admira-
tion of the partitions, beams, and pillars of oak,
mahogany, and walnut which beautify their sur-
roundings.
With the approach of February 1935, prepara-
tions for removal were begun, and from beginning
to end the staff cheerfully shouldered the labour and
inconvenience, which,indeed, all were eagerto share.
Shortly before leaving Parker Street for the last
time I found the following lines, which had been
placed upon my desk by Mrs M. E. German. I was
greatly pleased to be thus eloquently assured that
the staff share the satisfaction of the directors in the
opening of a new chapter in the history of the
House of Harrap.
Once again the scene is changing,
Once again, behold upheaval!
In the famous House of Harrap.
Now we leave the site of Pitman,
Leave the narrow street off Kingsway,
Where great authors oft assembled—


Some whose works are world-wide famous
Both within our busy city
And beyond the distant oceans
To the outposts of the Empire.
Many are the budding authors
Who have gained by friendly comment,
Even though, their script returning
Brought a firm, though kind, refusal!
Many are the works of beauty
Published in their wondrous bindings;
Bindings of the choicest leather
Covering rarest illustrations.
One such book our Chief has sponsored;
In a lordly format, printed
Songs from out the hearts of lovers,
Beating hearts for those who listen,
Beating from the dust of ages.
Then the mighty work of Churchill.
Surely this a proud achievement!
Fixing on the brow of Marlborough
Laurels grudged by Lord Macaulay.
Years have seen the preparation
Of much rich and varied matter;
Seen fulfilled a great ambition
In the Standard Dictionary,
Link between two sister nations.
Then the works on Education
Grow in strength beyond comparing.
Books of brightness, making easy
Once laborious tasks of learning;
Books that teachers haste to ponder
When they see the name of Harrap.
L
161


Years have seen the great depression
When dark clouds around did hover
And the staff were apprehensive
Lest it meant reduced finances.
But the storm was duly weathered
And our chiefs remained undaunted.
Once again the House will shelter
All its staff in one great building.
After years of separation
Thus they will be reunited.
Oh what joy will be apparent
When no longer from the book-stores,
Far outside their usual limits,
Come the weary book collectors
To the distant bounds of Pancras!
Many of the staff have married:
Some beyond the seas have settled;
Others, though their names be altered
Still continue in the office,
Loth to leave the House of Harrap.
Let us not forget our colleagues
Serving in the far Dominions,
Thus achieving further prestige
For the House within the Homeland.
There are many happy memories
Centred round that street off Kingsway;
Years of loyal work together
In the cause of Education.
May the years bring greater progress
In the new and stately building;


May success with happy service
Dwell within the House of Harrap
In the precincts of High Holborn.
With our removal to High Holbom we have
left the realm of memories. But the romance of
adventure will go on. Our organization extends to
distant fields and, nearer home, few potentialities
are uncared for. To-day the problems of a pub-
lisher are complicated, to-morrow they may be
even more difficult—how simple, by comparison,
those of the York Street period appear, though
some of these, maybe, were not easy at the time.
I do not fear the future—now to be unfolded—if
the House continues to deserve the respect of those
who read its publications, the esteem and confi-
dence of those who transact business with it, the
friendship of the men and women whose co-
operation will make them intimate with its
methods and its personnel, the loyalty of its
staff.
The past, in which these things have been added
unto us, is closed. The curtain rises upon the
Fourth Act in our Drama. It is the evening of
February 14, 1935, and once again Mr Winston
Churchill is addressing our assembled guests, some


four hundred friends who have come to the house-
warming from near and far. He is saying:
“I am sure I shall be expressing the feelings of
everyone who has gathered here when I say how
gready we rejoice that we are allowed to partici-
pate in this memorable occasion.
“Mr Harrap’s recollections go back over the
whole span of most of our lives, and he has
described in simple terms, terms which were none
the less moving and compulsive, the long, steady,
sure, unarrested progress by which the firm and
House of Harrap have risen from such small begin-
nings to the very high and honoured place which
they occupy in the publishing world of Great
Britain. Very exceptional qualities of character
must have been necessary, even if we did not know
that our host possesses them. The mere account
which he has given will show how exceptional
those qualities have been to enable him, and later
on his partner, Mr Anderson, to bring forward this
business amid all the competition of the modem
world and many of the changes and shocks in
which our country has been involved—great
events of war and peace, shaking and disturbing
the currents and course of business and affairs—
and of the innumerable vicissitudes of life. None,
apparently, to these two mariners have been more
than wavelets, or at most an occasional billow


which could not obstruct the passage of the ship to
which he referred. The seas are no longer un-
charted, they are now thoroughly sounded and
known. This new harbour has been reached after
so long, adventurous, and prosperous a voyage.
Here we are in the new harbour, and from her
shelter larger vessels will set out year after year to
carry their cargo of information and culture and
learning and amusement to all parts of the English-
speaking world. It is, indeed, a happy occasion.
It is, indeed, an occasion which those who are here
will long remember.
“It is also pleasing to feel how our country, over
that long period, has been able to maintain the
conditions where industry, ability, foresight, thrift,
high character, and that litde snap of genius which
must He at the back of every great and successful
undertaking, enable such business to reach its full
fruition.
“Now here we are in the new building. I have
a key with which I might have opened it—a golden
key symbolic of this occasion, it is a symbol that
we are to-day opening even a larger and more
prosperous and more extensive scale of affairs to the
House of Harrap than they have hitherto achieved.
From this new building they will, I am assured,
play their worthy part in the literary and publishing
life of our country on an even larger scale.


“It has been a great pleasure to me to know Mr
Harrap. The relations of author and publisher have,
I think, never been more pleasant and agreeable
than they have been between us. To work for him,
to have one’s writings published by a firm which
takes such tremendous pains in all the details of the
preparation of a book, and which commands, to my
great advantage and satisfaction, a profound store
of scholarly knowledge, must benefit and greatly
assist the author. I will say this, and I think he will
bear me out, I have tried to rival him in taking
pains, especially as to the details, as far as I am
capable of doing so.
“At any rate, these five years have been a very
great pleasure to me, and I know that Mr Harrap
has considered that the publication of Marlborough
by his House should be looked upon not on any
mere commercial basis. There was a time when I
thought that he was very bold and adventurous in
the munificent proposals which he made to me and
carried out. I rejoice to say, as we are comfortably
gathered in the harbour this evening, that I do not
think this venture has left him any occasion for
regret.
“Now, ladies and gentlemen, my pleasant task
is over, and it only remains for me, in your name,
to wish the House of Harrap all good fortune and
prosperity in the future, and that this building,


now inaugurated, may long prove a centre of
learning and culture and a fountain spring of wise
information to be spread abroad by the medium of
books through all the quarters of our land.”


INDEX
Aberdeen, Earl of, 14
Aggrey, Dr, 87
Ampah, I. K., 90
Anacreon, 72
Ancient Greece, 56
Anderson, George Oliver, 21,
50, 66, 77, 108, 149, 151
Anglo-Saxon Review, The, 46,47
Arnold, A. J., 159
Australasian Publishing Co.
Ltd., The, 40, 145
Ballantyne & Co. Ltd., 45
Ballantyne, James, 43, 45
Ballantyne, John Alexander, 45
Ballantyne Press, The, 41, 43,
45. 49
Barrington, E., 71
Bartlett, E. Guy, 52, 107
Bartlett, Stanley L., 40, 79,
145
Beardsley, Aubrey, 46
Bell, Edward and Ernest, 19
Bell, George, and Sons, 19
Bell,J. J., 40, 70
Belloc, Hilaire, 70
Bennett, George H., 100
Blaikie, 46
Bodkin, Thomas, 62
Books Beautiful, 24, 77
Boot, Florence, 130
Boots’ Booklovers Library,
126, 130
Boy Through the Ages, The, 70
Brace, Donald, 146
Brisley, Joyce, 71
Brooke, Stopford, 55
Brook Kerith, The, 73
Brown, Professor Rudmose, 66
Bumpus, J. and E., Limited, 140
Burke, Thomas, 70
Cambridge University Press, 49
Camrose, Lord, 42
Charles, Theodore, 136
Charters, Colonel Alex., 101
Chesterton, G. K., no
Chiswick Press, The, 46
Churchill, Lady Randolph, 46
Churchill, Winston S., 70, 75,
163
Clarke, Harry, 57
Clemenceau, Georges, 70
Complete Press, The, 49
Conrad, Joseph, 46
Constable & Co. Ltd., 144
Constable, T. & T., 46
Cotterill, H. 8., 56
Croce, Benedetto, 70
Crowell, T. Irving, 17
Crowell, Thomas Y., and Com-
pany, 18


D’Albertanson, Frank C., 107
Day Dreams of a Schoolmaster, 3 x
Day’s Library, 125
Dent, J. M., 140
Dobson, Austin, 46
Dominick, Maynard A., 148
Doubleday, Doran & Com-
pany, 144
Doubleday, Page & Company,
147
Eason, Charles, & Sons, 137
Educational Supply Associa-
tion, The, 154
Elte, Meyer, iji
English Extracts and Essays, 67
Evans, Frederick H., 139
Evening Standard, The, 122
Farjeon, Eleanor, 71
Farrar, Dean, 17
Finch, Elsie G., 107
Fisher, John, 140
Fletcher, J. S., 71
Forsyth, John, 99
Four Georges, The, 117
Fox, Charles, Limited, 159
France, Anatole, 92
French, Samuel, Limited, 155
Fyleman, Rose, 71
Galsworthy, John, 46
Cask, Lilian, 14, 71
Gee, Arthur, 136
Gentle Art of Making Enemies,
The, 47
German, M. E., 160
Girl Through the Ages, The, 70
Glory of Scotland, The, 40
Goethe’s Faust, 61
Goodchild, William, 80
Gooden, Stephen, 72
Gordon, Jan and Cora, 70
Grant, Robert, & Son, 141
Grey, Sir Edward, 114
Gribble, Leonard, 71
Grosvenor Library, The, 125
Gwynn, Stephen, 70
Elans Andersen, 59, 71
Hanson, Edward, 45, 48
Harcourt, Alfred, 146
Harcourt, Brace & Co. Inc., 146
Harmston, Thomas, 136
Harrap, George Steward, 39
Harrap, Heath Stanley, 50
Harrap’s Standard French Dic-
tionary, 38, 53, 66
Harrap, Walter Godfrey, 41
Harrop, John, 24
Harry, Mary Lavars, 107, 119
Hart, Dorothy J., 107
Hart, Horace, 45
Hazell, W. E., 159
Heath, Daniel Collamore, 12,
15. 143
Heath, D. C., and Company,
12, 16, 31, 143
Hebden, 51
Henley, W. E., 46
Hero Myths and Legends of the
Serbians, 114
Herriot, Edouard, 70
Heywood, Frank, 157
Hobbs, Jack, 71
Hodgson, Caspar, 143
Hogg, Cyril, 155
Holmes, Charles, 46


Home, Jane, 43
Houghton, Mifflin Company,
144
House is Built, A, 71
Huddleston, Sisley, 70
Hudson, Professor W. H., 53
Hughes, J. D., 142
Hutchinson & Co. Ltd., 122
Hynes, James, 157
Intelligence Tests, 66, 143
Introduction to the Study of Litera-
ture, An, 54
In Tune with the Infinite, 19
Isbister and Co. Ltd., 12, 15
Jacobi, Arthur, 46
Jago, Richard P., 132
John O’London s Weekly, 91
Kamm, G. E., 120
Kellow, H. A., 80
Kelly’s Directories, X 54
Kenya front Within, 83
King’s Treasury Series, The, 77
Kirberger & Kesper, 149
Knock, Charles 8., 107
Knox, D. J., 139
Lamb, Sydney H., 107
Lang, Andrew, 32, 46
Lewis, Walter, 49
Lockhart, J. G., 44, 117
London Library, The, 126
McCall, Charles, 43, 45, 48
McCall, Charles Home, 47, 48
McCarthy, John J., 107
MacClure, Victor, 71
McLaughlin, George S., 107
Mansion, J. E., 29, 36
Marionnlnl], Trappist monas-
tery at, 87
Marlborough, 75
Marriott, J. W., 112
Melville, S. J. C., 51
Menzies, John, and Company,
137
Meynell, Laurence, 71
Mickelborough, Edward, 107
Milgrom, Sadie, 107
Miller, J. Maskew, 82
Minton, Robert A., 107
Mitchell’s Library, 125
Moore, George, 73, 123
Moray Press, The, 141
Morgan, Charles, and Com-
pany, 154
Mudie’s Library, 126, 129
Mussolini, Benito, 70
My Friend’s Book, 93
Myths of Greece and Rome, The,
111
Myths and Legends of the Celtic
Race, 55
National Book Council, The,
42
Nicoll, Professor Allardyce, 70
Nivedita, Sister, 55
Noble, M. A., 71
Nonesuch Press, The, 72
O’Connor, T. P., 34
Odyssey, 56
Omar Khayyam, 24
One-Act Plays of To-day, 112
Oosten, Hendrik J., 150
171


Page, Walter Hines, 147
Peromik the Fool, 73
Peters, Captain C. H., 99
Petrovitch, Wbislav M., 114
Phillips, James Duncan, 145
Pitman, Alfred, 64, 157
Pitman, Christian, 158
Pitman, Ernest, 157
Pitman, I. J., 158
Pitman, Sir Isaac, & Sons, Ltd.,
63. 157
Poe’s Tales, 60
Pogany, Willy, 24, 57, 59
Pollock, William, 138
Preece, F. W., 99
Price, Alice, 51, 107
Pritchard, F. H., 67
Publishers’ Advertising Circle,
The, 42
Pulsifer, W. E., 17
Rackham, Arthur, 71, 133
Richardson, Fred R., 130
Ricketts, Charles, 46
Robertson & Mullan, 99
Robertson, George, 82, 99
Robertson, William, 29
Rolleston, T. W., 53, 54
Romance of Knowledge Series, 23
Roy, David, 133
Schillemans, the Brothers, 149
Scholar Gypsies, 47
Scott, Sir Walter, 43, 117
Seabrook, W. 8., 70
Shannon, Sir James, 46
Shaw, Bernard, 46
Sherratt & Hughes, 142
Simpkin, Marshall Ltd., 150
Sims, Eva, 107
Simsohn, M., 13
‘Sinbad,’ 70
Sleet, William S., 107
Smith, 8., 51
Smith, John, and Son, 139
Smith, W. H., and Son, 126,
132, 135. 137
Smithers, Ethel A., 107
Smyth, Winfield S., 17
Spencer, A. H., 99
Spencer, Sir Baldwin, in
Spottiswoode & Company, 48
Stefansson, V., 70
Stevenson, Robert Louis, 32,
116
Stokes, Frederick A., Company,
148
Story-teller Series, 112
Stretch, Mercer, 130
Stuart, Dorothy Margaret, 68
Studio, The, 47
Sunday Times, The, 42
Sybrant, Andries, 149
Tanner, Jack, 48
Tenniel, Sir John, 71
Thackeray, W. M., 117
Theime, W. J., & Company,
149
Thompson, Professor D’Arcy,
31
Thomson, Hugh, 71
Times Book Club, The, 126
Told Through the
54. in
Treadwell, John, 135
Treasury of Irish Poetry, A, 55
Treasury of Verse f or Little
Children, 24
172


Trent, Lady, 130
Trine, Ralph Waldo, 19
Truth about Publishing, The, no
Tyler, George, 132, 137
Unwin, Stanley, no, 113
Vale Press, The, 47
Van Loon, Hendrik Willem,
70
Wallace, Ivy, 50
Wallis, Thomas, 136
Warner, P. F., 71
Waters, Richard, 104, 107
Webb, Marion St John, 71
Whistler, James McNeill, 46
Whitton, Joseph,. 107
Wilde, Oscar, 46
Wilkins, James, 107
Wilkinson, Clennell, 70
Wilson, John G., 139
Wood, Charles C., 107, 118
World Book Company, The,
143
Yellow Book, The, 47
York, Bertha, 107


LOVE LYRICS
FROM FIVE CENTURIES
Selected by George G. Harrap. With Introduction by John Drinkwater
and Pictures by Baron Arild Rosenkrantz.
In each of the five centuries lovely, little-known lyrics are ranged
beside the immortal classics of their kind. The twentieth-century
section, the result of wide and patient gleaning in the field of contem-
porary verse, proves—if, indeed, proof be needed —that, though
modern poets may be evolving a technique and an idiom of their
own, they stand in direct and not unworthy succession to those great
forerunners of theirs who chose, like them, to sing of
Love, that is first and last of all things made.
“To collect love songs is to skim the cream, and Mr Harrap has
skimmed most lovingly, with an evident joy that is proper to the
task. The felicitations he will receive arc well deserved . . . An
anthology to be coveted and kept."— Sundry Times.
“At once a beautiful, and a beautifully produced book." —Sir J. C.
Squire in The Daily Telegraph.
“This finely printed book is not a mere replica of previous anthologies,
and the reader may be sure of finding in it many delights."
—News Chronicle.
“Mr Harrap’s selection of well over a hundred lyrics has been made
with much taste.” — Daily Mail.
“Mr Harrap’s choice shows a wide reading and a catholicity of taste
which every lover of poetry will appreciate. Future anthologists
will undoubtedly benefit from the comprehensive survey and wide-
spread research which have resulted in this worthwhile volume.”
—Public Opinion.
“This exquisite b00k... a production of which the expert bookmaker
must be proud."— Poetry Review.
“Mr Harrap’s collection of love lyrics shows, for an editor who has
had enough experience of publishing to lose his first appetite for
books, a remarkable catholicity. The lyrics are admirably chosen."
—London Mercury.
“Love poems are worthy of a beautiful setting, and they have certainly
got it here. The anthology is a delight." — Liverpool Post.
“There is an individuality about the selection as a whole ... the range
of authorship is wide ... an eminently successful attempt to represent
the love poetry which these islands have produced."— Scotsman.


