

Some
Reflections on the War
AN ADDRESS
TO THE SYDNEY UNIVERSITY UNION
ON MAY 14TH, 1915
Professor M. W. MacCALLUM
M.A., L.L.D., CHALLIS PROFESSOR OF
MODERN LITERATURE
Published at general request , and sold in aid of
the “Australia Pay ” Fund Collection on July 30th, igiq ;
price Sixpence
SYDNEY :
W. A. PEPPERDAY & CO.


Some
Reflections on the War
AN ADDRESS
TO THE SYDNEY UNIVERSITY UNION
ON MAY 14TH, 1915
Professor M. W. MacCALLUM
M.A., L.L.D., CHALLIS PROFESSOR OF
MODERN LITERATURE
Published at general request, and sold in aid of
the “Australia Day ” Fund Collection on July 30th, cgi $ ;
price Sixpence
SYDNEY ;
W. A. PEPPERDAY & CO.


THIS ADDRESS WAS INTENDED FOR DELIVERY, NOT
FOR PUBLICATION. IT HAS BEEN PRINTED, EXCEPT
FOR ONE OR TWO VERBAL CORRECTIONS, AS IT
WAS SPOKEN.


Some Reflections on the War.
I am venturing to address you to-night on a subject
about which we are all talking and thinking, and about
which there is not much new to be said. Nor have I the
expert knowledge of matters military, economical, or
political, to express an opinion that would be worth lis-
tening to, on the situation we have to face. But perhaps
there are some general lessons that the war already con-
veys, some general considerations that it already sug-
gests, which are more or less in the air, but which it may
not be unprofitable to gather together for an hour’s
survey.
Now, I suppose that all those who belong to the so-
called Allied Powers, are thoroughly convinced of the jus-
tice of their case.
The outbreak of hostilities, due to the wilful rejec-
tion of means that might have preserved peace even at the
last moment, must be attributed to the high-handed
aggressiveness in the first place of Austria, but especially
of Germany,
The participation of Britain (or at least the prompt-
ness of that participation, and the unanimity with which
practically all parties rallied to the support of the Govern-
ment), has its cause in Germany’s almost unexampled
breach of a treaty, to which she herself was signatory.


Even irrespective of this outrage on good faith, the
coercion of Luxembourg and the invasion of Belgium
showed an utter disregard of the rights and liberties of
smaller States.
The entanglement of Turkey resulted from an extra-
ordinary campaign of mendacity and bullying, assisted
apparently by corruption as well.
The troubles in various parts of the British Empire,
from the really serious revolt in South Africa, to the
short-lived mutiny at Singapore, were engineered by
German misrepresentations and German bribery of the
most unscrupulous kind.
Moreover, the complete lack of honour and justice in
brewing the disturbances in their whole range, is paral-
leled by the singular inhumanity in the conduct of the
war. lam not talking of the unverified atrocities, some
of which may be dismissed as impossible, and all of which
should be reserved for authentification, such as Lord
Bryce’s commission is giving. I refer to matters that are
admitted by both sides, and are of universal knowledge.
Such are the tyrannical treatment of civilians in con-
quered districts, and the savage reprisals, which, even if
merited by some, were taken on innocent persons; the use
of floating mines; the ruthless attacks on non-combatants,
for example, at Scarborough and Yarmouth; the attempt
to torpedo a hospital ship, and the successful torpedoing
of a refugee ship, followed latterly by the wholesale tor-
pedoing of merchant, passenger, and even fishing craft, in
a good many cases when they actually belonged to
neutrals. One cannot go through the entire list, and we
do not know how much it may be added to in future, but
as yet it has reached its period in the massacres with poi-
sonous gases, nay, poisonous gases that cause wanton
tortures to the victims, and the almost incredible atrocity
wreaked on the Lusitania.


Many of these crimes are also breaches of the Hague
Convention, many of them are merely offences against the
traditional feeling of humanity and the unwritten law of
nations that have been growing up with the gradual pro-
gress of civilisation. One cannot say in which case they
are the more heinous.
And none of them is or can be denied. The Germans
themselves can only seek to excuse them on various
grounds, that range from the candid plea of necessity to
impudent allegations that the enemy has done the same,
or flimsy sophistries such as that the old ruined castle of
Scarborough is a fort. But it is obvious that they are all
merely parts of the general policy of terrorism and the
general determination to stick at nothing. In view of
them, and the official instructions to the general staff,
with their humanitarian platitudes corrected by specific
directions to violence, it was to be expected that many of
the tales of particular outrage would turn out to be true.
For in all armies there is a percentage of blackguards who
use the opportunities for ravage, and can, if at all, be
restrained only by the influence of their officers; but in an
army in which the authorities make a profession of fright-
fulness, we can imagine they will have it all their own
way.
This war then was conceived in sin, and brought forth
in iniquity, and is nourished on horrors that a year ago we
should have thought inconceivable in the civilised world.
We feel that to wage it against its originators and per-
petrators is our inalienable right and our imperative duty.
To us belligerents and to the great majority of neutrals
we are champions of a holy cause, and are resisting one of
the most flagitious attacks that has been ever made on
the higher interests of mankind.
But the strange thing is, that what strikes us as so
convincing, and indeed self-evident, seems never to have


entered the head of any German. Germany, from what
one can gather, is virtually unanimous in thinking that it
is in the right. Not only the militarists and the Prussian
junkers, but the population at large, and even the social
democrats; not only the people, but the intellectuals,
hailed the outbreak of the war with enthusiasm; and
though now I do not know whether all would still justify
the methods, at least, save for an isolated caveat from
some stray socialist, they do not repudiate them. Even
the Socialists as a party do not protest; and when a
poetaster composes his Hymn of Hate, it is taught and
sung in the schools, and the author is decorated by the
Kaiser amid popular satisfaction.
This is an extraordinary and interesting phenomenon.
Among the signatures to the University manifesto, are
those not merely of men distinguished in science and
scholarship and thought, but some like Eucken, to whom
the interests not only of truth but of spiritual truth are
supreme, some like Harnack, not only eminent in the-
ology, but enforcers of Christianity in its practical appli-
cations ; and yet they are all at one with the Government
and the nation, or at least acquiesce in their measures
without a whisper of dissent.
Now, ordinarily, this would produce in us hesitation
and self-distrust. In most matters of right and wrong, the
disagreement of men like Eucken and Harnack would
justly enjoin us to re-examine our position. In most
matters of human concern the practically unanimous
verdict of a great nation would make us wonder whether
there were not some weakness in our case.
But any doubt, any suspension of belief, is in the pre-
sent instance a sheer impossibility. It would, I hope, be
a great deal easier for most of us to die than for a moment
to call in question the righteousness of our quarrel. The
principles of Truth, Liberty, Justice, Humanity are at


stake; and if they are to be challenged, life is not worth
living.
All the greater then is the riddle, why Germany is
of one mind and conviction in what we are certain is a
bad cause badly maintained. And let me entreat you to
remember Burke’s great saying that you cannot draw an
indictment against a whole nation—you cannot condemn
it as vile, because of the wickedness of the Government,
or of individuals, or even of large sections of the popula-
tion. More especially is that impossible, in the present
instance, for people like University teachers, many of
whom have probably spent some time in Germany and
learned to prize much in the German national character,
almost all of whom are indebted to German thought for
some of their most valuable intellectual possessions.
But precisely to those who have such feelings and
such knowledge the riddle is most perplexing. Take an
analogous and contrasted example that will show how
paradoxical it is—the attitude of British parties and citi-
zens to the South African war. Most of you can recollect
the outspoken condemnation that it called forth in large
numbers of our politicians, of our intellectual leaders, of
the wider public, in reference both to the grounds on
which it was declared, and to the way in which it was
waged. lam one of those who thought and think that it
was amply warranted, and that it was conducted with
unprecedented clemency. But even those who most bit-
terly condemn it, would agree, I suppose, that it was far
less unjustifiable than the violation of Belgium, and far
less ruthless than the Belgian occupation. But while in
Britain, this righteous and merciful war, as its apologists
consider it; this comparatively excusable war, als its
severest denouncers admit, evoked a storm of disapproval;
in Germany, the present war, which we all view as beyond
defence alike in its origin and its procedure, is accepted
not only without blame but with eagerness and elation.


Of course one cause of this may be the smaller free-
dom of utterance within the Kaiser’s dominions. Possibly
there are misgivings and heartsearchings of which we
know nothing. But even if this be so, it fails to cover
the ground. For even if dissentients must be silent, they
are not compelled to say the opposite of what they be-
lieve; and, in so far as one can judge, the men of light
and leading in Germany have all given their benediction
to the war.
Again, the comparative absence of self-government
and individual initiation in matters political among Ger-
mans may have something to do with it. With them, far
more than with us, there is a disposition to take the cue
in public affairs from the powers that be. Yet this fails
to meet the whole case; for it is not always so; and a
hundred years ago in the so-called War of Liberation, the
anti-Napoleonic movement in most of the States came
from, and was supported by, the people, rather than by
the commonly reluctant Governments.
Or it may be said that the true facts and issues are
not so clear to the Germans as to us; and this, too, is
undoubtedly true. I was in Germany till after England
declared war, and before the declaration no one in unoffi-
cial circles expected it. At that time Russia was the con-
spicuous foe, with France as her probable or actual con-
federate; and all the papers proclaimed that it was the
inevitable struggle between the Slav and the Teuton; for
which struggle a just occasion was offered in the murder
at Serajevo, and from which struggle the old Gallic enemy
hoped to get her “revanche.” Afterwards, when England
took a hand, this pretext was relegated to a second rank,
and it was alleged that the great object was to frustrate
English jealousy and procure Germany her place in the
sun. Now, both these pleas, though neither is forgotten,
are moved back a step, and it is asserted that Germany,


ringed by a circle of foes, is fighting for her national
existence.
None of these apologies will bear examination. The
many-coloured Government books show clearly that
Russia and France did not wish the war, that even Aus-
tria in the end would have made terms, that Germany
forced the pace; while it is shrewdly suspected that the
Serajevo assassination was engineered at Berlin and
Budapesth. Nor can the struggle be described as between
Slav and Teuton, when there are on the Russian side,
besides the English, the Flemish and the French, while
on the other, in addition to the Germans, there are Poles,
Southern Slavs, non-Aryan Hungarians, not to speak of
the Turks. Moreover, it is no Slavonic territory but Bel-
gium and Northern France that are most threatened with
a permanent occupation, as the method of administering
Belgium clearly shows. Nor is it true that Britain, with
long cherished malice, was watching for the opportunity
to cripple her formidable rival, as our lack of military and
financial preparation sufficiently proves. Least true of all
is it that the Triple Entente had been formed with the
idea of enveloping Germany on every side to crush her
out of existence; for its purpose, as has been demon-
strated beyond reply, was purely defensive.
But all these arguments have some foundation and
a fair amount of plausibility. It is a fact, that a collision
between Slav and Teuton was one of the contingencies
that had to be faced. It is a fact, that England had several
things which the Germans wished to have, and that she
could not willingly allow the opposite coasts of Belgium
and Northern France to be in the hands of a strong aggres-
sive power. It is a fact, that if the Allies win, they will be
wise to reduce Germany to a position in which she will be
unable to renew her ambitious plans. So all these pre-
texts have an air of likelihood about them that must make


them very persuasive with the German public, when pre-
sented according to Government instructions.
Yet none of them, while perhaps justifying a war in
the abstract, could justify the conditions of this war, the
breach of faith with which it was begun or the ruthless-
ness with which it has been pursued. To account for
these, and for their acceptance by a whole nation, and by
intellectual, moral, and religious leaders whose names
we are in other matters bound to respect, we have to look
for a principle that may seem to vindicate them. This I
believe to be the doctrine of the State, theoretically main-
tained and practically obeyed by the great majority of
Germans. According to this, it is in the life of the State,
as a member of that social and political organism, that
the individual finds his true and sole; realisation. Each
citizen has value and dignity only in so far as by loyalty
and self-dedication he surrenders and transcends his
immediate self to be absorbed in the common political
whole. Hegel was the first great propounder of this
idea; and though he advances it with many qualifications
and is far less of an extremist than some of his successors,
even he describes the State as “an absolutely complete
ethical organisation, the be-all and end-all of everyone’s
education.”
Now this in itself is no unworthy ideal. It approxi-
mates what was the fact as well as the theory of the old
Greek Republics; so that Aristotle treated morality as
possible only to the citizen of a free Greek city. At lowest,
it represents a healthy reaction against the individualism
of the eighteenth century, and the conception of the
state that used to prevail in English communities, which
has been described as “anarchy plus the policeman,”—a
riot of unchecked personal liberty, except where offences
of violence or fraud were committed. And, when restored
to honour, there was every reason why it should be
exaggerated in Germany, where since the peace of


Westphalia, there had been no one authoritative State, till
under the leadership of Prussia it was united and magni-
fied in 1871 and, taking the ply from that scientific
despotism, bartered its idiosyncracies for the benefits of
Prussian control. And the benefits have not been small.
Everyone who knows Germany must admire the orderly,
efficient, careful management that is on all sides dis-
played. In almost every sphere where the greatest good
of the greatest number is concerned, from national insur-
ance to the enactments on nuisances, from the planning
of towns to the breeding of poultry, in education through
all its ramifications from the time-honoured classical to
the innovating technical, in the hiring of servants and the
regulation of markets, we see evidence of a complete,
consequent, well-thought-out, harmonious system, that
precludes all waste and over-lapping, and produces the
fullest results with the utmost economy of means. That
comes from taking the organisation of the State in
earnest, and assigning every thing and person and interest
an allotted place, and turning all of them to the greatest
account. I wish we had a little more of it ourselves.
But though the apotheosis of the body politic
by the Germans is natural, that does not mean
that it is right; and though right up to a
certain point, that does not mean that it is right
absolutely. Such a doctrine of the be all and end all
for our existence has, of course, much to commend it. The
duty to the State is no doubt of enormous authority; it
ranks very high in the scale of ethical obligations, and
provides a relatively adequate sphere in which a man may
lose his life to find it. But it is not everything. Its juris-
diction is not supreme, and it does not furnish an outlet
and sanction for all human effort. It must not be
allowed to over-ride either the claims of the individual or
the claims of humanity.


In the first place, State-worship, carried to its logical
conclusion, leaves the members who make up the State
no independence even in their deepest and most personal
concerns. It is characteristic of the docile nature
of the Germans, that the Reformation settlement
went on the maxim, “Cujus regio, ejus religio;”
that is to say, even religion, the matter of indi-
vidual responsibility above all others, in the very
nation that first proclaimed the right of private
judgment, was handed over to the control of the sovereign
power. That is equally opposed to the claims of ecclesi-
astical self-government, and to the claims of personal
conviction; and though sometimes Church authority has
been tyrannical, and though sometimes the dissidence of
the sectarian has been grotesque, there is no question
that each in its own way has upheld the rights of the
spirit against secular usurpation. If State-absolutism
tolerates no immunity in so intimate and spontaneous a
relation as this, much less will it do so in regard to any-
thing else. The citizen must a fortiori exercise no criticism
cf his own on public affairs, but accept his place as screw
or bolt in the political machine; his final end is to serve
a purpose in its processes. Of course it is the business of
some —deputies, or more especially ministers and their
officials—to deliberate for the improvement of the
machinery and see that the improvements are carried out.
That is their function among the parts of the mechan-
ism ; it is not the function of the other parts, which must
keep to their own task. That it is the right and duty of
everyone to form an opinion, and try to enforce it, is not
conceded on the mere state theory; for it does not admit
that, as Christianity teaches, the individual has an infinite
value of his own.
But this being so, the deification of the State falls
into the opposite error too, and neglects the claims of
humanity as such. And very naturally. For the highest


rights and duties of the individual are the highest
rights and duties of the race. Generosity, mercy, honesty,
truth, justice, are, in a sense, private virtues; but they are
virtues that should be exercised to all mankind, indepen-
dently of nationality, colour, or clime. And men, as men,
may easily be excluded from their operation, if we make
the service of our own community our single or supreme
aim. No doubt the exclusion will be mischievous to the
community itself, for in the long run it also will suffer by
it. But so long as the State furnishes the ultimate
criterion, circumstances will often arise when it may seem
to profit by their violation.
Now the effect we see in Germany. The Government
has proposed for its one object, not guided by any wider
or loftier consideration, the advantage of the German
State, quite apart from the claims of humanity at large;
and the units that make up the public have had no locus
standi, from which they might criticise or thwart this
policy. Things might not have been so bad had the para-
mount authority been one of any higher or finer aspira-
tions ; but, unfortunately, it was the military despotism
of Prussia, an aggressive absolutism, whose trade has
always been war, which holds with the most bigoted
superstition to the Divine Right of Kings, which takes its
tone from the arrogant junkers who support the throne,
which has made itself great by a career of lawless and
iniquitous conquest. State-worship would always have
been one-sided and defective. State-worship under the
guidance of Berlin has become perhaps the most pernici-
ous sorcery that has ever debased and perverted the heart
of nation or man. Looking at the deeds for which collec-
tive Germany has now made itself responsible, and recall-
ing the Germany of 50 or even 30 years ago, before the
influence of the Hohenzollerns had time to tell beyond
their own dominions, it is almost impossible to realise
that it is the same people. And yet they congratulate


themselves on their culture, as though it were still the
culture of Lessing, and Kant, and Goethe, and Grimm, or
rather that culture in a new and improved edition. One
feels inclined to apply to them and their transformation
Milton's words about the magic draught of his wicked
wizard:—
Soon as the potion works, their human countenance,
The express resemblance of the gods, is changed
Into some brutish form of wolf or bear,
Or ounce, or tiger, hog, or bearded goat,
All other parts remaining as they were:
And they, so perfect is their misery,
Not once perceive their foul disfigurement,
But boast themselves more comely than before.
Even now, however, the votaries have not lost all the
original brightness of the great though inadequate idea
that inspired them. Prussian State-worship still brings
forth its characteristic fruits of loyalty, unanimity, effici-
ency, thoroughness, valour, endurance. All honour to
these qualities, which we are bound to appreciate. And we
are also bound to recognise that there may be multitudes,
if we only could know, who have kept their souls alive,
but are systematically duped by the authorities, so that it
is hard to discover their real temper. Their censorship
excludes the truth, their journalism is a corrupt depart-
ment of their immoral government; and when we read of
the popular rejoicing over the raid on Southend and the
sinking of the Lusitania, we should not overlook the
accompanying statements, quoted from their papers, that
Southend, a suburban watering place like Manly, is a for-
tified town, or that the Lusitania, one of the ordinary pas-
senger fleet, was a converted cruiser. I have no doubt
that the majority believe these lies; as, how can they fail
to do? Do not forget how in the early periods of the war
the people brought food and fruit and flowers to the
prisoners till the reptile press denounced and officialdom
forbade it. But the instinctive kindliness thus displayed


is good augury for the future, if once the pollution of Prus-
sianism is expelled. Even, however, when it is revoltingly
obtruded, among the murderous brigands of land and sea,
and the more loathsome civilians who know the facts yet
defend the crimes—even then, I say, we are bound to
remember, in the third place, that some of the worst
offences are the inevitable aberrations, or rather direct
consequences of fanaticism —fanaticism, which is none the
less tyrannous that it is now political, and not, as in its
chief previous examples, religious. As I have tried to
show, the delinquents have been indoctrinated with ideas
that make them think they are doing right; and in so far
many of their actions can find some faint parallel in the
conduct of earnest men who were fighting of old for
church or sect. If they have disregarded the most solemn
pledges of immunity, the Puritans in the Great Rebellion
are proved to have slain adversaries provided with a safe
conduct. If they have slaughtered prisoners and non-
combatants, so did the Covenanters, on the precedent of
hewing Agag in pieces before the Lord, and dashing the
little ones of Babylon against the stones. But the closest
analogy is—l don’t say with real Jesuitism, but with
Jesuitism as its opponents pictured it, till a few years ago.
Save for the fact that the one is secular, and the other
ecclesiastical, the actual Prussianism of the present is the
exact counterpart of the supposed Jesuitism of the past.
None would deny that both start from a noble principle, in
the one case absolute self-surrender to the Catholic
Church, in the other absolute self-surrender to the Ger-
man State. Both display the same perfection of system
and the most efficient exploitation of resources down to
the smallest details. Both from the first realised the
importance of education and the: formation of the mind,
and have brought the process of moulding the intellects,
the convictions, the character of their adherents to an
exact science. And both are justified in the issue by pro-


ducing many leaders in literature, in science, in practical
affairs, as well as a consummately trained and unreserved-
ly loyal society. But for the good of a society much is
deemed permissible, and Prussia has put in practice the
extremest principles that Pascal attributes to the Jesuits.
“Keep no faith with heretics,” now reads, “Keep no faith
with non-Germans;” destroy dissentients without com-
punction ; shrink not from stirring up strife and blood-
shed ; refuse no weapons of espionage, fraud or assassina-
tion ;do any evil that good may come of it. Bells were
rung for the massacre of St. Bartholomew’s; iron crosses
are distributed to the Scarborough baby-killers
Now in the case of Germany, I wish you to observe
that these results follow from a creditable, though one-
sided fealty, to a valuable, though inadequate principle.
And such results are always apt to follow, when we
view matters out of perspective, and attach to a cause
more importance than it has. The consequence will be that
we lose more than we gain. In Shakespeare’s words we
“make the service greater than the God,” i.e., we sacrifice
for our object more precious possessions than the object
itself. The Germans have made their service greater than
their God. Their marvellously administered empire is
their God; and for its aggrandisement (or, if they like, for
its existence) they have sacrificed concerns that are of far
greater worth than the Empire itself—truth and good
faith, justice and humanity, respect for the inalienable
rights and liberties of others, all of these to be reckoned
among the dearest treasures of life both for the particular
man and mankind as a whole. They have made the means
the end, and the end the means. Nothing can justify that.
No deity in heaven or on earth, no community fashioned
by human effort into the mortal god of the State, no con-
ception of the Supreme Being who works in the Universe
he has made, deserves that we should offer up in unholy
rites (that are in very truth mere devil worship), the irre-


versible moral laws. One of the chief functions of every
political union is to provide a sphere in which these can
be realised. It cannot dismiss, far less can it abrogate
them.
It is the spirit that would do so from its sanctuary in
Berlin that we are up against, and must oppose to the
death. It is from no mere patriotism that we have
engaged in the struggle; that motive animates our oppo-
nents as well. Though with us the patriotism should be
far more intense, (for while the Allies would never destroy
or enslave the Germans, slavery and destruction is their
avowed programme for the British Empire), still there is
something higher and nobler to urge us on. Our cause
is the cause of right, of freedom, of the future ethical
advance of the world. Nay, we are fighting for Germany
almost as much as for ourselves. It would be the worst
thing for her, if she were to win, and if her Moloch-cult
were to obtain a new and larger lease of life. Her victory
might, no doubt, be the next step to a dominion wide as
the globe. What then ? Does it profit a nation any more
than a man to gain the whole world and lose its own soul?
In the last half century Germany has come near losing her
own characteristic soul. Defeat might still save her, and
make her once more the old Germany that in my young
days we used to love and revere; and give her back the
piety, idealism, and uprightness which she has been
bartering away for the unrighteous mammon of the
Hohenzollerns. The Hohenzollerns! “Those of the High
Tolls,” as the word originally means, from the frontier
customs of which centuries ago their ancestors had
charge in the hills of Southern Swabia. And truly they
deserve the name. High tolls they have exacted, high
tolls from other lands, in territory and blood, which will
now perhaps be required back of them. But the
highest tolls have been levied on the Germans them-
selves ; for the coin in which these were paid has been vir-


tue and honour and independence, and their fair fame in
the world.
Thus we are at war not only for patriotism, and pat-
riotism at the white-heat, since nothing less than national
existence is at stake; but for eternal and inviolable ideals,
the triumph of which will be for the salvation of our very
foes. To my mind, Providence has highly honoured us
by permitting us to appear among her champions in the
lists; nor do I envy the great—or, at least, large—neutral
republic that sits snugly at peace, mindless of its
own adherence to the Hague Conventions, uttering
no protest when their humanitarian provisions are set at
naught, making its voice heard only when its crafts are in
danger, with the profits that accrue, and apparently con-
senting to telegraph through its President polite birthday
greetings to Kaiser Wilhelm, but not to the heads of the
Allied States.
But observe that this honour bestowed on us by Pro-
vidence is not only a grace, but a responsibility. We must
walk worthy of it. It lays on us many and arduous
obligations.
For one thing, let us remember that a blameless
cause demands blameless methods, and never fall into the
contradiction of sacrificing humanity for the sake of
humanity, or sink to the level of those who not quite
illogically think they can perpetrate anything in service of
the State.
He who the sword of Heaven will bear,
Must be holy as severe.
I suppose in our righteous indignation at the outrages of
the enemy, we have all often felt a craving to adopt repri-
sals in kind. That is a very natural feeling, but lam sure
it is wrong. It is quite permissible to take measures that
may prevent the enemy from repeating his offences, or
when he has repudiated covenants, no longer to observe
them; but reprisals as such, reprisals in the sense of ven-


geance, would not do any good. In the practice of
savagery he is certain to beat us; we should soon sicken
of it, and leave him with a balance to his credit—or dis-
credit—and many more victims the worse for the experi-
ment. But besides—and this is a far more cogent con-
sideration—we are fighting for the honour and dignity of
human nature, and must use even the unworthy after our
own honour and dignity. This does not mean that pun-
ishment should not be meted out to the guilty, but let it
be to the really guilty. There must be no hitting beneath
the belt. There should be no ill-treatment of non-com-
batants, no rioting and civic violence (the recent outbreaks
of which every right-minded man must deeply deplore) ;
there should not, it seems to me, save in the case of aggra-
vated offences, be chastisement for subordinates who
merely have had to carry out the orders of their superiors.
The penalty should be reserved for those who are caught
red-handed in crime, as the Canadians exterminated with-
out quarter the murderers of their wounded comrades; or,
after the war (if it goes as we wish), for the authorities
who commanded the infamous acts, like von Tirpitz, who
arranges a campaign of piracy, and the Kaiser himself,
father and sponsor of every enormity; nor should the Ger-
man nation as a whole, since in its corporate capacity it is
accomplice with its rulers, and responsible for their pro-
ceedings, escape such reparation and expiation as it can
make. But revenge, retaliation, the return of frightful-
ness for frightfulness in any and every form we ought
to eschew; and especially against unoffending civilians.
And for another thing, we must avoid all arrogance
and boastfulness, whether in the way of disparaging our
opponents or of exalting ourselves. We have ample
ground for the conviction that we are in the right, and
that we are fighting in God’s quarrel. But that is not to
say that apart from the present all-important issue, we are
at every point superior to those on the other side. In


some respects we certainly are not. When one reads of
the unanimity and strenuous co-operation, save for a few
insignificant hunger riots, among all classes of the Ger-
man Empire, one feels a burning shame. There they are
working at high pressure, in a state of siege, living on
potato bread. With us there are strikes, there is slack-
ing, there is lukewarmness. I do not for a moment ven-
ture to apportion the blame, or say that the whole fault
lies either with employer or employee. But I am sure
that a grievous fault lies somewhere, and that in a health-
ily regulated State such a thing could not occur. And I am
quite sure that we might with advantage borrow from
Germany a greater orderliness, efficiency, and thrift, than
have ever been seen in any British community. All these
we can copy, and yet avoid the German error of State-
worship. We may improve our arrangements indefinitely,
and yet safeguard the independence of the individual, and
the interests of humanity as the final criterion. I often
think that in contrast to Germany—though, of course, the
German Government has seen to the matter merely for
motives of selfish prudence and ambition —Britain does
not provide the masses of the people with material con-
ditions required for a satisfactory fullness of life; and that
Australia, while providing the conditions, uses them more
for pleasure and comfort than to any more dignified aim.
Yet it is when a man is enabled in some degree to realise
his human ideals, and thus has at once a material and
spiritual stake in the country, that he has a personal
motive tq suffer and fight and die for it, and may confi-
dently be required and expected to do so. It is infinitely
touching and cheering to see the millions of Englishmen
and the thousands of Australians so eager to risk all for
their heritage, when many of us thought that it should
have been richer, and many of us feared that it would not
be prized even at its true worth.


But this leads me to the other aspect of that modesty
and fairness after which we ought to strive. For
Heaven’s sake, let us renounce all self-righteousness.
Ours is the high calling, to stand forth as defenders of
the right. Of that calling are we worthy? Can we claim
that our merits entitle us to the glorious mandate? Surely
we must be diffident about answering Yes. We have
allowed many social abuses to grow up, we have left
many unchecked; we have paid our vows at the shrines of
luxury and wealth and material well-being; we have
lapsed into frivolity and flippancy; whole classes have
played with the ideas of right and wrong, and have tried
to show their wit in quibble and paradox instead of seek-
ing immovable convictions of the truth ; our piety has been
formal and perfunctory, our charity has cost us nothing;
we have been content with the second rate, or rather with
the tenth or hundredth rate, and have looked askance on
essential worth. Is it for such as we, to bear “the sword
of heaven?” Are we not like the luckless knights of
romance; who undertook a quest that was too high for
them ?
Let our answer be humble, but resolute. As a
nation we are certainly very far from being what we
ought to be, but as a nation, by the grace of God, we are
what we are. Our heart of manhood is still sound, as the
numberless examples of heroism that we read about (and
that, in the most obscure) sufficiently show. And we can
make ourselves more worthy. I think the war itself is
making us more worthy. It has been a rough reminder,
a rude awakening from the lethargy into which many of
us were sinking. I mean, that it has roused us to the
reality of an ideal which we were in danger of forgetting.
In the generation to which I belong the tendency has
been to regard the good things of this world—wealth,
comfort, refinement, a career, intellectual activity, know-
ledge—even the highest of these falling short of the


crowning height—as the ultimate blessings of life. I
should say that you who are young will henceforth be less
liable to this blunder. We have been made to understand,
as never before in my experience, the presence of evil and
misery on the earth, and the divine command to resist and
in some sort overcome them, and promote the triumph of
right. We see thousands of thousands recognising that
the grand duty and grand privilege—that man’s “chief
end”—is service and sacrifice, even if their self-con-
secration be perfected in a painful death. I do not think
the world can ever be quite the same to us after this.
Surely the coming race will face it with a seriousness and
unselfish vision that their fathers could but imperfectly
attain. And they will need all their insight and deter-
mination. I shall not attempt to forecast the issue of the
war, but anyone can see that it will mean a new heaven
and a new earth; that problems, in magnitude and num-
ber unlike any before, will clamour to be solved. After
the participation of the Dominions, the question will arise
of their relations to the island home. After the partici-
pation of India, there will be strange developments in its
national aspirations. After the wastage of capital, the old
traditions in regard to the production and distribution of
wealth will have to be considered afresh. After the State
(not only here, where we were in part accustomed to it,
but in Britain, where private enterprise was wont to rule
supreme), has interfered with railways, manufactures,
banking, commerce, far-reaching experiments in the
industrial world cannot fail to be made. And so on; the
list could be expanded ad infinitum. All these riddles
and many more, the youths of his Majesty’s Dominions
(in one or other of them, or in all of them together), will
have some time to answer, if they are to be worthy of
their opportunity and their mission. It is a momentous
charge and a lofty privilege. We who belong to the
vanishing order, wish you God-speed in your task.


I have abstained from venturing- any prophecy about
the event of the war. However it goes, in some form or
other such like great social and political issues are bound
to present themselves. But now before closing I may
indulge in some forecasts that need no specialist know-
ledge or inspired information, but follow necessarily from
facts or principles that are within reach of us all
The first is, that whoever wins, Germany must in the
long run fail. The mills of God grind exceeding
small, even if they grind too slowly for our personal
hopes ; and it would be blasphemy to suppose that such a
power could permanently obtain the control of the world.
For the typical Prussian or Prussianised German, though
among his own people he is doubtless a man as other men
are, has, in his dealings with non-Germans, quite lost his
moral sense, and of human nature retains only the most
brutal passions which it has inherited, with the most
unscrupulous intelligence which it has evolved. And
we cannot believe that in God’s universe the nation
that shows itself a Caliban-lago to all save its own
members, will in the end be allowed to wield the sceptre
or to escape its reward. A Thug Empire under a Thug
Emperor is not the final goal for the aspirations of
mankind.
In the second place, the struggle is bound to be grim
and agonising. Efforts and sacrifices will be required of
the Allies, compared with which those already made,
enormous though they are, will be child’s play. To
extrude, or even to restrain, this evil thing, will need all
our resources in will and means. There is talk of con-
scription in Britain, even when it is on the way to contri-
bute three million men. The population at home is,
roughly speaking, ten times as great as in Australia, so in
the same ratio we should be contributing 300,000, and
already casting about for more. Much as has been done,


our expeditionary forces do not reach anything like that
figure. Of course we must not denude the country of
troops; but even so, it seems to me that far more might
be going to the front than have hitherto offered. And after
the recent doings of Australians that have thrilled us all
with such admiration and pride, with such thankfulness
and sympathy, with such joy and sorrow, we see of what
value they would be. When I was at Oxford in October
several of the tutors told me that the colleges had only
30 per cent, of their usual numbers, and would soon be
emptier, as most of the undergraduates were training in
the O.T.C. A few weeks ago I had a note from a Manches-
ter professor, in which he told me that his male students
were fewer by a very large percentage: “I wish they were
fewer still,” he added, “but in view of the pacific temper of
Lancashire before the war, that is not bad.” Has our own
University furnished its due quota? I will not shrink
from saying that I think it the bounden duty of every man
between, say, 19 and 35, to examine himself and his posi-
tion seriously, and consider whether the call is not
addressed to him. Of course, for many it is not yet
urgent, and often there is a necessity or higher duty tc
remain at home. There is the question of physical fitness
for anyone who cannot stand the conditions is a hind-
rance, not a help. There is the question of responsibility
for others; and this may mean not only the obvious
responsibilities as for wife and child, but some that are
none the less real because they are less conspicuous.
There is the question of the country’s work, for there
must be citizens enough to carry it on efficiently, and as
much as may be on the ordinary lines. Those who can-
not as yet see their way to follow the flag, may be acting
on the most valid grounds and may be entitled to as full
recognition as those who do. But, at any rate, it is a
matter in which all ought to go into audit with them-
selves.


And some of you may say that it is easy for an old
man to give such advice, while he stays behind, comfort-
ably revolving in his accustomed round. Truly it is a
part of the tragic irony, that such as have lived their lives
and have not much henceforth to do or to expect, must
stand aside; while those who have before them years of
work to perform and promise to fulfil, are falling in
thousands, their day hardly begun. Perhaps it is the old
men who feel this most. And I would ask you, who think
we are declaiming at our ease, to remember that in send-
ing forth the lads on whom we had set our hearts and our
hopes, we are giving of our best, which is indeed much
more precious to us than our own lives. But it had to be,
it is right, and we would not have it otherwise.
For, in the third place, whatever the issue, I do not
think it makes any difference in our duty. I have yet to
learn that we should take up arms for conscience sake
only when we are sure to win. If we are men, it is for us
to play the man, and make no terms with the powers of
darkness. For victory we hope, for victory we must strive
and travail; but even were defeat foreseen as the end of
the struggle, we are not absolved from our charge to up-
hold the truth as we know it, according to our strength.
Perhaps the great indictment of history against the Brit-
ish Empire will be, that despite the warnings of men like
Lord Roberts and others of smaller note, we were unpre-
pared, and could give less effectual help than was due
from us. But that is for the examination of the future;
and if true, we are expiating our negligence now. And at
present the point is to put every ounce of weight into the
scale, quite regardless of the final balancing. As Mr.
Asquith said, better that the British Empire be destroyed
than that it acquiesce in such a crime. We must do our
best, though it be only at the eleventh hour, and fight to
the last in scorn of consequence. The immediate success
depends on many factors, and who will venture to com-


bine and compute them, and reckon out the result? We,
I think, have nothing to do with that, if we have used
our means to the uttermost. We must leave that in
higher hands. But of this we may be sure; that in no case
shall our efforts and sacrifices be wasted. If we bear
witness with all our might to the worth of the individual
and the dignity of mankind, then should the worst befall,
we shall still be witnesses, like those witnesses who gave
the word a new meaning, the martyrs, whose blood was
found to be the seed of the Church.


W. A. PEPPERDAY AND CO.,
GENERAL PRINTERS,
119 a PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
