

Some Guiding Principles
IN THE
REVISION Of the NEW TESTAMENT;
PRICE FOURPENCE.
SYDNEY YOUNG MEN'S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION
OR,
The Authorised Version —
How it was “Compared with the most Ancient Authorities.”
BY
REV. A. LUKYN WILLIAMS, M.A.,
Principal of Moorc Collcgc, Liverpool.
THIRD LECTURE OF WINTER COURSE, AUGUST, 1881 .
COLONIAL PUBLISHING SOCIETY, LIMITED, 315 PITT STREET.




Some Guiding Principles
IN THE
REVISION of the NEW TESTAMENT,
BY
REV. A. LUKYN WILLIAMS, M.A.,
ymrijmf uf 59 o cut JimaiijmcrL
PRICE FOURPENCE.
SYDNEY:
THE COLONIAL PUBLISHING SOCIETY (LIMITED),
315 PITT STREET, NEAR PARK STREET,
OFFICE OF “THE ILLUSTRATED CHRISTIAN WEEKLY” AND “WORDS OF GRACE,’
JBBl.




SOME GUIDING PRINCIPLES
IN THE
REVISION OF THE NEW TESTAMENT.
MY object to-night is not to deal with the Revised
Version as a whole, comparing it in details with the
Authorised Version. That has been already done, and very
ably done, at more than one public meeting in this city. I
wish rather to point out and explain some of the principles
adopted in forming it. Rut only some of these. I shall
not, for instance, speak of principles affecting merely the
English, such as the removal of words which have altered
their meanings, (*) or the uniform spelling of proper names,
and so on. Nor of other principles more properly affecting
the translation, such.as the attempt to render, in all cases
where it is possible' to do so, the same Greek word by the
same English word. I wish rather to speak of those prin-
ciples which affect questions of still deeper interest—the
omission or addition of whole sentences, verses, or even
paragraphs : principles which answer the question, Why is
this added or that left out? My object, in a word, is to
place before you the principles by which alteration has been
made in the Greek words from which the Revised version
has been formed. I feel that I perhaps owe an apology for
bringing a subject at first sight somewhat abstruse before
you. Yet it is not really abstruse. Though it has to do
with Greek, no knowledge of Greek is required to under-
stand the principles. The subject is in itself neither dry
nor difficult If any part of what I shall say seems to be
either one or the other, put it down to the fault of the lec-
turer, and study the subject for yourselves.
It may be asked, What reasons are there for altering the
Greek words at all? But do not mistake me in this. No
one has ever thought of altering the Greek words which the
Apostles wrote. But to alter the Greek words from which
the Authorised Version was made is a very different thing.
For the Authorised Version was made from a very imperfect
(*) A convenient list may be found in Xewth on Bible Revision, p. 58.


form of the Apostles’ language; and the object of all altera-
tions made now is to give us the exact words as they were
first written.
Remember that the original writings of the Apostles have
long since perished. I know that a secular paper in this*
city has stated—and I grieve to say that a religious paper
has copied the statement —that the original documents of
St. Paul’s Epistles “ written, that is, by the hand of the
Apostle of the Gentiles himself,” are in the Vatican Library
at Rome. But the statement has not a shadow of truth in
it. Written probably on papyrus, and worn by constant
use, copied to spread their contents the better, with their
importance for future ages unnoticed, the originals have
doubtless long since perished. The actual words, therefore,
that the Apostles wrote must be gathered from later sources..
These are the words which we all wish to have. For who
cares to read a day longer than is necessary words which
purport to be those of Apostles, and are only the expres-
sions of, perhaps, some well-intentioned monk of the fourth
century ?
But you perhaps ask, Why did not the translators of
the Authorised Version do this 1 Why did not they take
the right words to translate from 1 Because they did not
know what they were. AVe have more materials now for
testing the expressions come down to us. The materials
used for the Greek Testaments from which the Authorised
Version was translated were in all some half-dozen manu-
scripts, most of which were very late and very inferior, and
the Latin translation called the Vulgate. We have now
more than 1750 manuscripts (*) and several translations.
It is obvious, that if any doubts exist as to the words which
the Apostles wrote, we have a greater chance of recognizing
the right words, and of rejecting additions to them, than
our forefathers had 270 years ago
I intend this evening—
I. To mention the different kinds of materials, or, as
they are usually called, Authorities, for the words of
Scripture.
11. To show you how we can use the Authorities.
111. To make a few general observations.
(*) Hammond, Outlines of Textual Criticism, 1876, p. 26. Cf. Scrivener, Intro-
duction, 1874> PP- 269.


I. The Authorities :
In testing the genuineness of the language of any early
hook, whether religious or secular, there are three sources
of information, and three sources only : —Copies that have
come down from copies of the original writings, usually
called Manuscripts; translations into other languages,
usually called Yersions; and lastly, Quotations by early
writers. All these three exist in the case of the New Testa-
ment, as may be seen from the first diagram.
But before calling your attention to this diagram, I
must ask you to notice the position of other books than the
New Testament. Take, for instance, the case of the
Latin and Greek classics, and see the position we are in to
test their text. There are very few quotations. There are
no early translations. We are practically dependent on
manuscripts alone. This would not, indeed, so much matter
if the number and date of the manuscripts were all that
could be wished for. But how stands it 1 Take a few of
the best classical authors. There is Thucydides, the historian.
The best manuscripts that we have of his works were written
in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, a.d. Now
Thucydides lived in the fifth century 8.C., so that the manu-
scripts were written some 1600 years after his time. Pro-
bably, therefore, they are very inaccurate; as, in fact, they
are seen to be from a comparison with the few early
quotations that remain. Then there is Plato, the philosopher.
We have two manuscripts of the ninth and tenth centuries
(though most are of the fourteenth), nearly 130 years after
Plato lived; and, again, the poets, iEschylus, Sophocles,
Euripides, are all dependent on a revision of their text
made in the eighth or ninth century —that is to say, some
1100 or 1200 years after the latest of them lived.
If we turn to Latin writers, we are not much better off.
Of the 45 books of history written by Livy, 10 are altogether
lost, 15 more are contained only in one MS., 10 more are
found in only two MSS.; and though there are several MSS.
of the remaining 10 books, it is probable that no part of
Livy’s History depends on anything made earlier than the
eighth century—that is, some 800 years after it was first
written. In the case of Horace there are plenty of manu-
scripts, but there are none older than the ninth century, at
least 800 years again after Horace’s time. Yirgil alone, of


the classical authors, at all rivals the Canonical Books. We
have seven manuscripts of the third and fourth centuries,
written, say, 300 years after he lived, but even then none
are complete, and the greater part of his poems depends
upon the evidence of two manuscripts only. There are a
good many quotations, but no versions.
You will see then that in the case of the classics, save
perhaps in that of Yirgil, the authorities are so late and for
the most part so few that we may, nay must, largely fall
back on conjecture in determining what each author wrote.
But in the case of the New Testament it is not so; for, to
quote Tregelles (*), “there is no one thing as to which
critical editors are more fully unanimous than in the rejec-
tion of all conjecture in the formation of a text.”
The reason is this—that our authorities for the New
Testament are much more complete. The manuscripts alone
exceed 1750, and though the majority of these are later
than the tenth century, yet some 150 go back from the ninth
century to the fourth (f). I shall not trouble you with
many particulars; I have put the names and approximate
dates of five of the earliest in the first diagram. The two
earliest are the Sinaitic and the Vatican, both of the first
half of the fourth century —the former found in a convent
on Mount Sinai in 1859, the latter kept—perhaps I should
say most jealously guarded—for several hundred years in
the great Vatican Library at Rome. The Sinaitic is, perhaps,
slightly the earlier of the two, and contains all the New Tes-
tament. The Vatican contains nearly all. The Alexandrine
of the fifth century also contains all the Testament, though
there are a few missing pages. It is one of the glories of
the British Museum. Ephraem, of about the same age, is
now in Paris, and from having been written over with some
later writing has been very difficult to read. (|) Lastly, our
Cambridge MS. is of the sixth century. The fact that it
has both the Greek words and also an early Latin transla-
tion in parallel columns shows that it was written in the
West, a point which I shall remind you of presently.
(*) Horne and Tregelles’ Introduction, iv., p. 150.
(t) The latter are written in capital letters, and are called “ uncials.” Th
former are, with a few early exceptions, written in a running hand, and are called
“ cursives.”
(t) Good vellum was so expensive that old manuscripts were often treated thu&]
They are then technically called “Palimpsests.”


Kindly look, now, at the next column in the diagram.'
First, there is the Old Latin. That was a translation
made by at least the middle of the second century. Curi-
ously, it was not originally made in Italy, as y wouW
have expected, but in North Africa, somewhere near Car-
thage. The fact is that the old Church of Home was com
posed of so many Jews from Palestine, and other Orientals
that they spoke and read not Latin but Cree ’ ; us ey
did not need any translation of the Greek Testament. But
there were not so many foreigners in _ Carthage and its
neighbourhood, and when the Christian Church there
wished to read the records of the Faith, they got the more
learned of their body to make a translation for them. Lat
on, indeed, this Old Latin translation was revised in Italy
and elsewhere, but it underwent no material change till th
end of the fourth century, when Jerome re-translated some
parts and re-modelled others (*), and it became what is
usually known as the Latin V ulgate. This is still, thoug
unfortunately in a considerably less accurate form than
Jerome left it, the authorised version of the Roman branch
of the Catholic Church—still the edition which, to quote
their own words, “ no one is to dare or presume to reject
under any pretext whatever.” (t) , . _ , , ~
Then there is the Syriac version, made m the second halt
of the second century, and used throughout Syria. Apart
from its antiquity, it is interesting also m this, that it is
written in very nearly the same language as that which our
Lord spoke, and that probably as we read this version we
are often repeating the very syllables that fell 10m His lips.
It also was revised, apparently at the end of the third ce
turv d) The Harcelan Syriac, mentioned as made in the
seventh century, is really a new version, though based on
its predecessor. The Memphitic and Thebaic are two trans-
lations made in the end of the second century for different
* The nexKcolumn gives the names of the most important
C) He altered the GospSsmuch more thanthe rest of the New Testament.
(f) Decree of the Council of Trent, 1546. ’
(t) The name Peshito (“ the gmple verton having
both unrevised and reused. oV'i’riiton V.gnce it frequently called the Cure-
assrsr'K.SS.s s. -a.. .»** «*
lecture the Revised Syriac.


Fathers. They are valuable for our purpose in proportion as
they quote passages from the New Testament. What this
means in the case of some may be estimated from this : that
in Tertullian there are several thousand such quotations (*),
and that Origen’s quotations are said to be so many that if
the whole New Testament were to perish, it could all be re-
stored word for word from his works alone. I will not,
however, detain you with this column.
I will only call your attention to two things with regard
to both the Fathers and the Versions. First I will remind
you that the dates of both are determined by ordinary his-
tory, from facts for the most part completely independent
of textual criticism ; and secondly, I will ask you to notice
the variety of places to which these Versions and Fathers
belong : Justin Martyr to Palestine ; Irenseus to France;
the Old Latin version, Tertullian, Cyprian, and Augustine
to North Africa; the Memphitic, the Thebaic, and Origen
to Egypt; Chrysostom to Antioch and Constantinople;
Jerome to Palestine and Rome; the Syriac to Syria ; that is
to say, from farthest east to farthest west—from old Rome
on the Tiber to new Rome on the Bosphorus—from gramma-
tical Antioch to speculative Alexandria—they each, in their
several methods, and in varying proportion, bring their tes-
timony to the Word of God.
11. Having thus very briefly mentioned the different kinds
of authorities for the words of Scripture, I turn to the
second and far more important division of my subject—How
to use the Authorities.
It might be supposed by some that we had nothing else
to do but just see what the Manuscripts, Versions, and
Fathers have, and then copy it out. But there is a difficulty.
The authorities differ, so that we have to compare them,
and see which are the most trustworthy—which are the
most free from mistakes.
Now, if you come to think of it, it is no wonder that mis-
takes should occur in the authorities. Consider for a few
minutes the mistakes to which they are liable. It is easy to
see the mistakes that the Fathers might make when they
quoted. They often wrote their books in a hurry (many of
their sermons, for instance, were I doubt not, written as
hastily as the productions of a much later age), and what
(*) Roensch. Das Neue Testament Tertullian , p. 35.


were they to do when they wanted to quote a text 1 You
and I can turn to our neatly-bound “ Bagster,”—or if we
don’t mind spoiling our eyes, to a tiny volume advertised to
o-o into our waistcoat-pocket—but theij had not even any-
thino- as handy as the Great Bible that used to be chained m
our English churches ; they were obliged to refer only to
written rolls. I use, by-the-bye, the plural, rolls advisedly,
for, up to the end of the third century at least, the books ot
the New Testament were never written all upon one roll.
They were divided into at least four volumes —first, the
four Gospels ; next, the Acts and Catholic Epistles ; thirdly,
St. Paul’s Epistles; and lastly, the Revelation. Thus, even
if the Father who was quoting happened to be able to refer
to one book, it is very probable that he had not with him,
nay, had not belonging to him at all, the other books ot the
New Testament. So that he was obliged to trust to Ins
memory; and if his memory was not much better than
yours or mine, it is easy to see that his quotations would
often be inaccurate (*). _ ,
Then there are the mistakes in translating. The early
translators of both the Old and New Testaments did not
care so very much for the exact words. They translated,
for the most part, not for scholars, but for the populace, and
they cared for the spirit rather than the letter (t)- Besides,
even when they did aim at being rigidly literal, they were
often unable to render the exact sense of the Greek, either
through their own ignorance, or through the structure of the
language into which they were translating.
Lastly, we come to Manuscripts the mistakes made m
copying ’ We all know the mistakes we are liable to make
in copying. Why, even in printing mistakes do occur ; and
indeed mistakes in printing show us very well how mistakes
may occur in MSS. “ When,” says Tregelles (\\ “a piece
of MS. is placed in the hands of a compositor, it is prob-
able in a very high degree that he will make some mistakes
in setting it up in type. Here and there he might read
( \ Resides (i 1 he might purposely paraphrase the quotation ; (ii.) later copyist
have terribly altered the quotations in the Fathers to make them agree with the
usual text of later times. „ •,
m Witness in the case of the Old Testament, the Greek Targum usually called
the Septuagin’t. In passage after passage it is content with a paraphrase, keeping
the spirit but smoothing over difficulties.
(t) Horne and Tregelles’ Introduction iv., pp. 48,49.


the copy wrongly, or he might omit a word or words ; or he
might transpose words or sentences, or rep eat something;
or if there were references to foot-notes, and the copy was
not very clear, it might be thought that the intention was,
that they should be inserted in the text, or if there were a
mark indicating that something should be inserted, it is not
impossible that the piece so to be introduced might be
brought in, not in the place intended : and besides all these
mistakes, there might be not a few errors in punctuation
and orthography. If it left the compositor’s hands in this
state, it would require a good deal of revision before it accu-
rately represented the copy of the author. But if, instead
of being corrected, the page or sheet were at once printed
off as it stood, errors and all, and if the copies so printed
were put into the hands of other compositors, then of course
new variations would arise. Some of the compositors might
notice unquestionable mistakes, and they might endeavour
to correct them ; in doing this, they would be very likely
to depart still further than before from the copy, and each
perhaps in a different way;—they might also in some in-
stances correct what did not need correction; and their ten
dency to do this would be all the greater from their find-
ing undoubted errata in what had been put into their
hands.
And besides this, they would be also subject to the same
causes of error, as was the first compositor, and this too in a
still greater degree, from their having something still more
defective to work upon. Let the same operation go on a
few times more, and then we should have copies of the same
page or sheet, the general texture of which would remain
the same, but with variations, and some of them consider-
able in particular parts.”
Just the same kind of mistakes were made in copying a
manuscript. There would be first the quite unintentional
mistakes. Sometimes the copyist’s eye would lead him
wrong. This was especially easy in the oldest times, when
the manuscripts were written in capital letters, without any
division between the words. The second diagram is a re-
presentation of such an early MS. as it would appear if
written in English. You can see how easily the copyist might
divide the words wrongly, or mistake the letters, especially as
some of the Greek capital letters are very much alike. *Or


he might add a word from the line below, as the printer of
our Authorised Version did in Heb. x. 23, where the author s
words, “ Let us hold fast the profession of our hope without
wavering,” were altered to “ Let us hold fast the profession
of our faith without wavering,” because the compositor’s, eye
caught the word faithful in the following line. Or he might
perhaps do worse than this; he might leave out a word,
thus altering the sense, perhaps, as much as that unlucky
printer altered it who in an edition of the Authorised Ver-
sion printed the seventh commandment without the word
“ not.” * .
Sometimes again the ear of the copyist would deceive him.
Though he was copying words in front of him f, yet he
would be very likely to mechanically put a word of the same
sound—like the printer of a modern edition of the Author-
ised Version, who put “ who maketh his son to rise on the
evil and on the good ”%. In fact this is a very common
source of mistake.
Sometimes too, he would make the more venial error of
substituting one word for another of the same sense, as we
might write “then” for “therefore,” “said” for “spake” and
o
so on.
Besides these mistakes, which may fairly be called unin-
tentional, there are others which may be rather termed
conscious alterations. The copyist would, for instance,
come across a difficult phrase, difficult in point of grammar
or history. Surely, he would say, there is something wrong.
And the good man would think for half a minute, and then
put in what he thought must be the correct reading. Such
grammatical corrections are on every page of the New Tes-
tament, but as it requires a knowledge of Greek to appre-
ciate these, and as I promised that no knowledge of Greek
would be required for this lecture, I will not refer to them
here. For an instance of a historical difficulty corrected,
think of St. Mark, i. 2. St. Mark says, “ Even as it is
written in Isaiah , the Prophet,’ and instantly quotes
Malachi first and Isaiah afterwards. Surely some good
copyist said, the man before me made a mistake. St. Mark,
* Tregelles’ Historic Evidence, p. 100. The edition was published in 1631. For
errors of a similar kind cf. Newth On Bible Revision, p. 54.
t It is probable that it was very seldom that they wrote from dictation.
1 Eadie, Ecclesiastical Cyclopaedia, sixth edition, p. 83.


of course, wrote, “ Even as it is written in the Prophets,”
and my careless predecesser thought it had all come from
Isaiah, and made St. Mark say so. But our friend’s prede-
cessor was right, and he himself was wrong, misled by a
mere surface difficulty.
Or, again,—and those of you who are acquainted with the
subject will perceive that I am naming only a few of the
causes of what are technically called Various Readings;
there might be a note at the side, originally put in
just to explain or to illustrate. Our copyist, however,
takes it for a correction, and puts it in without saying any-
thing of what he is doing. Sometimes, especially in late
manuscripts, whose writers were but imperfectly acquainted
with the writings they were copying, there are strange mis-
takes of this kind. Such is 2 Cor., viii. 4.* which in one
late manuscript runs as follows : “Praying us with much
entreaty that we would receive the gift. So it is found in
many of the copies , and take upon us the fellowship,” and
so on. The man saw some Greek words in the margin, and
put them in without understanding them, and not knowing
that they were only the scribbling remark of some previous
owner of the manuscript that the words before were found
in many of the copies.
Such are some of the mistakes to which, in using our
authorities, we must remember they are subject.
I wish now to call your attention to a very important
fact—the presence of mistakes of the same kind in the same
authorities and groups of authorities, or, more accurately,
the fact that certain authorities and groups of authorities
seem to be especially liable to the same kind of mistakes.
That is to say, when you take up any chapter at random in
a particular MS. or version, you can say to yourself. Now
probably in this MS. or in this version I shall find such and
such mistakes, and probably these same mistakes will occur in
such and such other MSS., Versions, and Fathers. So that
he who compares authorities with the view of gathering
from them the right reading must not only remember that
all the authorities are liable to mistakes, but must also allow
for a tendency to mistakes of a particular kind in each
authority.
Only he must remember that no one authority is uniform
* Horne and Tregelles. Introduction iv., p. 57.


in this. You remember that I said, when speaking of mis-
takes in quotations, that the New Testament was not of old
bound up in one volume, but that it was collected into foui
volumes ; one containing the Gospels, another the Acts and
Catholic Epistles, another St. Paul’s Epistles, and the last
the Revelation only. Bearing this in mind, you will see
that each of our present authorities may represent tenden-
cies of different kinds ; that, for instance, a particular MS.
may have one tendency in the Gospels and another in St.
Paul’s Epistles. It is easy, then, to see that a single MS.
might lead us to a wrong conclusion. It is only as we
examine groups of authorities that we can distinguish the
tendency. *
There are seen upon examination to be three tendencies
by which authorities are divided. There is the Popular
tendency, the Scholar’s tendency, and lastly, shall I call it,
the Fashionable tendency. I intend to call your attention
to these tendencies only as they affect the authorities for
the Gospels.
First, the Popular. This was the tendency of early times,
when other details were known about the Lord’s life than
those which the Evangelists thought fit to chronicle the
tendency to insert fresh particulars about events, places,
words, &c. Such a detail, and doubtless a true detail,. is the
mention in one MS. of seven steps leading from the prison to
the street, in the narrative of St. Peter’s deliverance (Acts
xii. 10). This tendency is found in the two oldest ver-
sions, flit; Old Latin and the Old Syriac ; for, as I observed
before, the earliest versions were for the most part popular,
and did not aim at exactness. It is found in a still stronger
degree in the Cambridge MS., and sometimes in the Sinaitic,
for this, the Sinaitic MS., was in many places copied from
a MS. largely of this tendency. This group of authorities
is usually called the Western group, because the Old Latin
version and the Cambridge MS., until lately the only repre-
sentatives known, are from the West; but seeing that it
really includes the Old Syriac version and partly the Si-
* I have only mentioned above the intermixture of tendencies in the New Tes-
tament as a volume. It is evident that even in one part, say the Gospels, the MS.
might have been made from a comparison of earlier MSS. representing different
tendencies. This will make the last remark about the need of examining whole
groups of authorities to see tendencies still more emphatic. The whole subject is
discussed briefly in Westcott and Hort’s Greek Testament, pp. 542) &c., and will
be investigated fully in their promised Introduction.


naitic MS., and deals largely with details which could only
come from those who knew Palestine, a more accurate title
would perhaps be the Palestinian group.
The second tendency I called the Scholars’—it is a ten-
dency to neat grammatical corrections. This is only found
in a small group representing, probably, the corrections of
scholars at Alexandria. The chief representatives are the
MS. Ephraem and another MS., called Regius, also at Paris.*
Occasionally the Sinaitic shows traces of this tendency.
The corrections are, as I said, grammatical, but they are neat,
—so neat that if you take one alone you might perhaps think
it right. It is only when several are looked at which are up-
held by these authorities alone that all are suspected, f
The third tendency I have called the Fashionable, for
reasons apparent in a minute or two. This is the tendency
prevailing in the great mass of MSS. and versions. It
contains something of the two previous tendencies, for it is
willing to add or paraphrase, and willing to correct, but it
is different in this, that its additions give no new informa-
tion, and its corrections are not particularly neat. In fact,
it is the tendency to clear away all difficulties by adding
just such words as will explain them, or by altering strange
forms to those well known. It delights to give a smooth
and easy text. It seems A to have begun, to any large extent/
at least, in the end of the third century. The chief repre-j
sentatives of it are the Alexandrine MS. J (you will
remember that I am speaking of the Gospels only, for else-
where the Alexandrine MS. was taken from a purer source)
and also to a large extent the Revised Syriac and Latin
V ulgate.
Perhaps some one may ask, How was it that this tendency
to a particular kind of mistakes spread eventually over
nearly all the later authorities 1 In this way. It began at
Antioch. How Antioch was always the mother Church of
Constantinople, for Constantinople generally obtained her
bishops and teachers from Antioch, and thus it spread to
Constantinople. There it probably increased, for owing to
the sudden change of attitude on the part of the Emperor
' MS. Regius (4) is of the eighth or ninth century.
t This lecture being only for English readers it is impossible to give examples.
Many such will doubtless be given in chap. ii. of Westcott and Hort’s Introduction.
I Cf. Westcott on St. John, in the “ Speaker’s Commentary,” p. xc, Westcott
and Hort’s Greek Testament, pp , 547-552.


to Christianity—Diocletian had persecuted the Christians,
but Constantine professed himself a Christian—a sudden
demand for the books of the new religion was created, and
copies multiplied rapidly, as every one wished to be in with
the times in learning about Christianity. Now, rapidity in
copying means carelessness in copying, and the chai acteristic
difficulties of purer texts were slurred over or explained
away. But, still, surely this would hardly account for such
a preponderating number of MSS. of this kind. True,
but remember that in a short time Constantinople became
the only place where Greek MSS. were used. At Rome
and in the West, the knowledge of Greek died out. Alex-
andria and the East were overrun by the Mahammadans.
Thus for 800 years Constantinople was the sole source of
Greek MSS., and, naturally enough, they were used in the
later times to correct old versions, or, as in the case of the
Authorised Version, to make new ones.*
But the real difficulties in Textual Criticism begin when
these few MSS. differ among themselves. What are
we to do then ? Shall we now go back again to
the old plan of numbers ? Shall we, that is to say, prefer
whichever word has the greater number of these old
authorities for it ? If one word has three MSS. in its
favour and another word has only two, shall we therefore
conclude that the former is right and the latter wrong?
Surely not. Perhaps these old MSS. were in that part
taken from the same source. Having rejected the principle
of numbers on this ground only a minute or two ago, we
shall hardly be consistent in going back to it now. . No —
and I particularly wish you to mark this—we must in each
case consider the tendency of each authority. I have
already mentioned the tendency of certain groups of
authorities. I said that the Cambridge MS., the Old Latin
and Old Syriac versions, and the Sinaitic MS. when with
them, had a strong tendency to add and to paraphrase. I
said that the Ephraem and the Regius MSS., and occa-
sionally the Sinaitic with them, had a tendency to make
neat grammatical corrections. I did not speak of the Vatican,
for this seems for the most part to have no particular
tendency. It usually indeed prefers the shorter reading,
(*) Cf. Horne and Tregelles’ Introduction, iv. p. 96. Westcott and Hort’s Greek
Testament, p. 55. Hammond, Outlines of Textual Criticism, chap. vn.


but that is because the shorter reading is generally right.
A large part also of the Sinaitic is thus colourless, and con-
firms the Vatican.
We must, then, allow in each case for the tendency of
each authority, and let it weigh according to its peculiar
characteristic.
The diagrams numbered 111 and IV are an attempt to set
before you visibly the effect of this principle, that of allowing
for the tendency of each authority and letting each authority
weigh accordingly. I have taken two cases for illustration.
The authorities for the insertion and for the omission of
certain words are named. The arrows opposite each name
represent by their thickness and their length the true
weight, as it seems to me, of each authority or group of
authorities. Of course you must pardon the roughness of
the idea—one cannot really measure arguments by inches—
but though it can lay no claim to exactness it may at least
serve to illustrate my meaning.
I will first take St. John vii. 53—viii. 11, the section of
the Woman taken in Adultery. You notice that it is in-
serted by the Cambridge MS. But what is the usual
tendency of this MS ? To add. Very well then, the addi-
tion of it in this MS. can only weigh very little. I have
thus given it a very small arrow. Similarly with the Old
Latin version, it loves to add; so the fact that some MSS.
of this version insert the passage has also but little weight.
Again, the two together show what was the Western ten-
dency, and thus when they are bracketed they cannot have
a larger arrow, to say the least. If anything, perhaps, it
should be smaller than that of the Cambridge MS. alone.
We will, if you like, allow the Latin Vulgate a little more
weight, for though it was later, yet sometimes good authori-
ties were used in its construction. To Augustine we can
give very little weight, for he is uncritical.
How turn to those that leave the passage out. First of
all comes the Sinaitic, then the Vatican. Now notice that
each alone weighs much more for the omission than the
Cambridge weighs for the insertion; the Vatican because it
has no particular tendency, the Sinaitic for the same reason,
when it stands apart from the Western group in cases of
this kind. But the evidence of both together is always
strong, so strong that if you go through any five or six


chapters you will hardly find them when united.wrong
once. Therefore they have a very large arrow, considerably
more than double as large as either taken separately.
Again, the Alexandrine has a strong tendency to insert
everything—it is the oldest representative of the fashionable
tendency—therefore its omission of it weighs much.
Ephraem also omits. So much for the MSS. omitting it.
Then for the versions. What was the tendency of the Old
Latin version ? To add. Then the omission here in the
best copies weighs much. So with the Old Syriac. But
when you put them together, and remember that they are
both of the second century, and that one is from the
farthest West and the other from the farthest East, their
united testimony, on such a point as this, may be said to
be of the same weight as the combination of the Sinaitic
and Vatican. Hence the size of the arrow. Similarly
the passage was not received in the Egyptian Church,
nor in the Syriac Church at the time of the Revision
of its “ Authorised Version.” In the same way the
Fathers, Tertullian, Origen, and Chrysostom, alike show
clearly that they knew nothing of these verses. Alone,
each would have some weight, but together , representing as
they do the acumen of a trained lawyer from the north of
Africa, the research of the most deeply read scholar of the
highly cultivated city of Alexandria in Egypt, the fervour
and polish of the golden-mouthed orator of Antioch and
Constantinople, they must have immense weight against the
genuineness of the passage. Taking this altogether, we at
once reject the claims of these verses to have been written
by St. John, and we see that we are justified in giving so
very little weight to the authorities representing the Popular
text, when they are in favour of insertions.
But the second case that I have chosen illustrates just
the reverse. The doubt is about some words in St. John
iv. 9: “ For Jews have no dealings with Samaritans.’
Here the omission is favoured by the Western authorities.
But what is their tendency? To add. Quite so; so that we
cannot say that they are at all likely to have left it out if
they had seen it. On the contrary, the fact that they leave
it out shows that they could not possibly have had it before
them. I quite grant that the insertion of the words in the
Vatican weighs strongly in their favour, but I also call your


attention to the fact that the weight of that MS. is not
increased to any appreciable extent by the presence of the
correction of the Sinaitic, and by the Alexandrine, and the
Ephraem. Because, by seeing that the tendency of these
other MSS. was to insert it, we are led to doubt if the
Vatican itself had not already fallen a victim to this
tendency. As for the versions, we should have expected to
find it in the Old Syriac. That is always adding, so it
weighs very little. The Egyptian, I grant, weighs more.
The Latin Yulgate and the Revised Syriac being the pro-
ductions of a later age, inclined to receive as genuine every-
thing that existed at all, weigh comparatively little. Origen,
from his research, weighs much. Chrysostom only a trifle.
I allow that the result is doubtful, though I am myself in-
clined to think the clause is false, but the point which I wish
you to observe is this, that the very few authorities against
i the words weigh so much, because their evidence is contrary
to their peculiar tendency.
Having thus judged a particular case by the tendencies of
the various authorities, we can, if there is any doubt still
left, then fall back on other considerations. For instance,
if we wish to kill the slain, we can remember that there are
very many small vacations among even those authorities
which do insert the first few verses of St. John viii., we can
remember that it interrupts the sense; we can remember
the probability that some early disciple, finding in viii. 15
that Christ said, “I judge no man,” illustrated this
remark by adding in the margin of his copy the account
of this perfectly true incident in our Lord’s life, told first of
all, perhaps, by one of the twelve. (*)
But, again, some one may ask—“ Are you really so sure
that these readings are alterations ? May not these readings
which you call alterations—and you confess that they are
found in the great mass of MSS. and versions—really be
right, and the words given by the few authorities really be
the alterations 1” I think that a little reflection will satisfy
such an inquirer. Which do you think it most likely that
(*) We know that Papias (c : 150 a.d.) wrote a whole book of such illustrations. It
is important to remember that Papias lived in the same part of Asia Minor as
the Apostles, Andrew and Philip, We know, too, that Papias talked with two of
Philip’s daughters, and with at least two personal disciples of the Lord, Aristeas and
John the Presbyter. (Cf. Lightfoot, Colossians, pp. 45-47. and reff., and on a fresh
Revision p. 28.)


a copyist should have clone? Leave an easy word out or
put an easy word in ? For instance, take St. John iv. 50.
Some authorities read, “ Jesus said unto him, Go thy way,
thy son liveth. And the man believed.” Others read,
“ Jesus said unto him, Go thy way, thy son liveth. The
man believed.” Which to you seems most probable—that
a copvist having the “ and ” before him should leave it out,
or not having it should casually put it in ? You say at once .
The latter alteration seems most probable, “ and ”is
doubtless false. Quite true ; but it is in the great mass of
authorities. So with the next verse ; some authorities reacl,
“ His servants met him, and told him , saying.” Others read
only, “ His servants met him, saying.” Which to you seems
most probable —that a copyist, having the words, “ and told
him ” before him, should leave them out, or that not having
them, but knowing the sense was so, he should casually put
them in? You say at once : The latter alteration seems
most probable—those words are doubtless false. I quite
with you ; but they are in the authorities of this
tendency we are speaking of—that is, they are in the great
mass of the MSS. and versions. These are samples of
alterations that may be found on every page of the New
Testament. Similarly, which seems to you most likely
that a copyist should leave out a sentence which was before
him, or put it in from another Gospel ? Take for instance
the case of the Lord’s prayer in St. Luke xi. 2.—which is
the most probable, that St. Luke wrote “ Our Father which
art in heaven, hallowed be thy name,” and that a copyist
left out several words, making it read only, ‘ Father,
hallowed be thy name,” or that St. Luke wrote only,
“ Father, hallowed be thy name,” and some copyist —dear,
good man that he was —accustomed to his daily prayer as
related in St. Matthew, and as recited in the public service
thought there was some mistake and put in the missing
words ? I know you say, The latter ; the words “ our and
“which art in heaven” were never written by St. Luke.
True, and yet they are in the great mass of the MSS. and
versions.
But besides this we can often actually trace the growth
of a reading. Take, for instance, those verses which poor
Henry Martyn, the missionary on whose work we Cam-
bridge men love to dwell —may God grant us more of a


spirit like his—the verses which he was obliged to discuss
with his Persian inquirer : I mean St. John v. 3,4, about
the angel going down into the water. Part is found in one
authority, part in another ; and at last in the mass of
authorities both are combined. Or, take, again, the dox-
ology at the end of the Lord’s Prayer. One authority reads,
■‘For thine is the 'power for ever and ever. Amen.” An-
other, “ Por thine is the kingdom and the glory for ever and
ever. Amen.” and at last they are combined into “ For
thine is the kingdom, the power, and the glory for ever and
ever. Amen.” The fact is, that those who were among the
earliest to repeat the prayer were Jewish Christians long
accustomed to close their Hebrew devotions with ascriptions
of blessing and glory to God; and naturally enough they
would add such, an ascription whenever they used the Lord’s
own prayer.
But we are not left to conjecture merely; we are often
able to test these later MSS. —and I include the Alexandrine
under this title because it agrees so much with those of un-
doubtedly later origin—by quotations from early Fathers.
What do we find 1 That wherever the mass of later MSS.
are on one side and the few oldest MSS.—say the Sinaitic,
the Vatican, Ephraem, and the Cambridge—are on the
other side, that then the early quotations uphold the few
and oppose the many; that is, that the early Fathers had
the same words before them in their MSS. which we have
in only the few oldest MSS. now. And I suppose that few
persons will be found rash enough to assert that all the early
Fathers—l say “ all,” for the point of the argument is that
they are unanimous—had worse MSS. before them than
their descendants had in the following centuries. If any
could be found willing to assert this, he says in effect that
later copies of a writing are more likely to be correct than
earlier copies, and he may as well add that it is his opinion
that the farther a man goes from the source of the spring
the purer he will find the waters (*).
This being so, we shall not think it strange if, in cases
where we have no early quotations from the Fathers to guide
us, we prefer to trust to the four or five oldest authorities —
especially if backed up by one or two old versions—to trust-
ing to the authority of the remaining hundreds.
(*) Cf. Alford, vol. i. Chap. vi. sec. 144.


We have then learned this about MSS. that represent this,
third tendency, that though they surpass in number they are
really inferior in quality to the few oldest, and that when
they are opposed to the few oldest, the evidence of a few
must be accepted : that if, for instance and such cases could
easily be found—there were 500 MSS. of this fashionable
tendency on the one side and only the five MSS. Sinaitic,
Vatican, Ephraem, Cambridge and Regius,—on the other
side, the evidence of these five would instantly be preferred.
Besides, after looking at a few cases, we may soon get a
few “ rules of thumb ” to guide us, viz., that the shorter
reading is more likely to be right, and that the hordei reading
is also*more likely to be right. And we shall, after a little
time spent in examining passages, see this rule; also, that
that reading is preferable which most fully accounts for the
growth of the others.
But though these considerations are often useful, they
are much more uncertain than the evidence of MBS. ver-
sions and Fathers, because people differ so much about what
is probable and what is not probable. *
So far I have tried to lay before you the principles to be
adopted in choosing the right Greek words to be translated
into English. We have seen that, in any passage where
authorities differ, the mere number of the. authorities is
quite unimportant; and that when the of the
great mass of later authorities is opposed to the united tes-
timony of the few old authorities, the few oldest are at once
to be preferred. saw, further, that where these few old
authorities differ among themselves, that we must consider
in each case the tendency of each authority, that those
authorities which have not the tendency to favour a par-
ticular reading, and yet do favour it, weigh much more than
those which either distinctly have the tendency and favour
it, or which favour it without having any particular ten-
dency in any direction. Lastly, we saw that there are a
few other considerations, which may come in as make-
weights, but that it is far safer for us to trust almost
entirely to the evidence clearly before us in written docu-
ments.
* “The uses of internal evidence are subordinate and accessory ; if taken as the
primary guide it cannot but lead to extensive error.”—Westcott and Hort, Greek
Testament, p. 542.


111. I have now only to make one or two general obser-
vations.
You may very fairly ask this question: May not fresh
authorities be discovered which will upset these conclusions,
and materially alter the science of textual criticism ?
Certainly, fresh authorities may be discovered. It is not
twenty-three years since the Sinaitic MS. was discovered,*
and others as old may yet perhaps be discovered. Two
sources suggest themselves : first, the monasteries in Syria
and Armenia, in which fresh copies of the earliest versions
may still exist; and, secondly, the tombs and buildings in
Egypt, from which may perhaps be obtained not only early
papyrus leaves containing secular history, but also some
belonging to the first three centuries of the Christian era,
containing parts of the Hew Testament Scriptures.!
But we may at once say that no future discovery will
make any appreciable difference. It is true that the Sinaitic
was a great discovery, yet it has only confirmed previous
investigation. Both before and since it was found, the
science of textual criticism has been steadily advancing.
Of course there are Conservatives and Liberals in this as in
all sciences, and of course, occasionally, a man will be led
by affection for some special MS. that he has discovered, or
to which he has specially devoted his study, to return to
readings which his calmer judgment once rejected; but
these are the exceptions to the rule.
But, again, I fear that some one may say : If you make
so many changes, how are we to be sure that much of what
you have left unaltered is not false 1
My friends, I think that if you have followed the argu-
ment of my lecture pretty closely you will see the futility
of this question. It is true, quite true, that there are 150,000
various readings in the New Testament, but of these “We
may,” to quote one of the American Revisers,! “dismiss nine-
teen-twentieths from consideration at once, as being obviously
of such a character, or supported by so little authority, that
no critic would regard them as having any claim to recep-
tion. This leaves, we will say, 7500. But of these, again,
* Tischendorf discovered it February 7, 1859. He had found some leaves of it in
1844 ; cf: Tischendorf: “ When were our Gospels written?” p. 29.
t For the last cf : R. S. Poole, “ Contemporary Review,” February, 1881.
1 Professor Ezra Abbot, “ Biblical Revision,” by members of the American Com-
mittee, p. 82.


it will appear, on examination, that nineteen out of twenty
are of no sort of consequence as affecting the sense ; they
relate to questions of orthography or grammatical construc-
tion, or the order of words. . . . They concern only the
form of expression, not the essential meaning. This re-
duces the number to perhaps 400, which involve a difference
of meaning, often very slight, or the omission or addition
of a few words, sufficient to render them objects of some
curiosity and interest, while a few exceptional cases among
them may relatively be called important. But our critical
helps are now so important, that in a very large majority of
these more important questions of reading we are able to
determine the true text with a good degree of confidence.
What remains doubtful we can afford to leave doubtful. In
all ancient writings there are passages in which the true
text cannot be settled with certainty ; and the same is true
of the interpretation.” *
We speak, you know, of various readings, and ponder
over the way in which they arose, and we are in danger of
forgetting that about the substance of nearly every page in
the New Testament there neither is nor ever has been the
shadow of a doubt. The reason why we think so much of
these various readings is that we long to have every single
word in the New Testament exactly as the inspired authors
left it. We do not fear now-a-days any criticism of the
genuineness of the words of Scripture, knowing that
although every now and then some pet thought of ours
which we have long upheld to be truth may be torn roughly
away by the hand of criticism—l had almost said by the
hand of God —yet the truth as a whole cannot be injured,
but shall shine out with the greater brilliancy as each
earth-born cloud is dispelled from before it.
But so far from allowing that our faith can be endan-
gered by the boldest scientific criticism of the text of Scrip-
ture, I claim it a most important witness for the genuineness
of the New Testament. For in the middle of the second
century, say 150 a.d. — only, that is, some 50 or 60 years
after the latest New Testament books were written —we
have already direct evidence of their existence in the
* “If comparative trivialities, such as changes of order, the insertion or omission
of the article with proper names, and the like, are set aside, the words in our
opinion still subject to doubt can hardly amount to more than a thousandth part of
the whole New Testament. ’—Westcott and Hort, New Testament, p. 561.


translations of the Old Latin and the Old Syriac trans-
lations made, not for neighbouring districts, but for coun-
tries widely distant from each other. And more than
this. If their agreement in the substance of the books
testifies to the fact that each received the books from
a common source, their disagreement in a few words or
sentences (such as St. John iv. 9 referred to above)
shows that the book had had a history before they trans-
lated from it. Some time had even then elapsed since
the books were written, if various readings had already
begun to corrupt the text. I do not think we can be far
wrong if we say that this evidence for the date of the
fourth Gospel takes us back as early as 130 a.d. that is
only forty years after St. John wrote it.
Sir, my task is done. I have attempted, only indeed
too feebly, to lay before you and this audience some of the
guiding principles in the revision of the New Testament.
I showed, first, how far better we are off in materials for
discerning the true words of Scripture than we are for dis-
cerning the words written by the classical authors. I then
tried to show how we must use these materials, remember-
ing on the one hand their liability to various mistakes, and
on the other hand, the tendency of groups of authorities
to mistakes of the same kind. I reminded you, lastly, of
the certainty of these methods of criticism, and very briefly
of the positive evidence obtained by the study of this sub-
ject to the truth of our faith. I have now only to thank you
all for the close attention that you have given to me and
asking your pardon for many shortcomings, pray you and
myself henceforward to be more bold, more true, more hope-
ful, more faithful in our study of the words of Scripture,
remembering that through them alone can we grasp the
many sides of truth, and advance to the perfect knowledge
of Him who is our Life.


ST. JOHN, XXI. 25.
(ENGLISH OF SINAITIC M.S.)
AN DTH E R EA R EA LSOOTHER
MANYTHINGSWHICHDH)
JSTH EWHICII IFTH EYSHOU
LDBEWRITTENEVERYONENOT


CENTURY.
M.S.S.
VERSIONS.
FATHERS.
II
OLD LATIN
OLD SYRIAC
MEMPHITIC )
> EGYPTIAN.
THEBAIC j
JUSTIN MARTYR
IRENiEUS
TERTULLIAN
III
ORIGEN
CYPRIAN
REVISED SYRIAC
‘
IY
SINAITIC
VATICAN (b)
LATIN VULGATE
CHRYSOSTOM
JEROME
Y
ALEXANDRINE (a)
EPHRAEM (c)
AUGUSTINE
YI
r
CAMBRIDGE (d)
~
VII
1
1
J. . ...
HARCLEAN SYRIAC
j


B. JOHN VII. 53—VIII. 11.
LNSERT
OMIT
, •
SIN AIT 10
> )
* (
BaMMM
VATICAN
— >j
1 < CAMBRIDGE
«
£
< — <
ALEX AN DR IN K
EPHRAEM
OLD LATIN (best)
j < OLD LATIN (best)
n
1
LATIN V U LG AT K
KSS
OLD SYRIAC
EGYPTIAN
REVISED SYRIAC
TERTULLIAN
>■*
(™" IB
>
>
1
< — AUGUSTINE
ORIGEN
CHRYSOSTOM
-»r
l
BhESB
— —— — *— ~


S. JOHN IV. 9.
INSERT
OMIT.
<
SINAITIC (corrected)
SINAITIC
■■■■ — > j
<— ‘
in
V
VATICAN
BBS) \
CAMBRIDGE
■■By j
' WBBm
ALEXANDRINE
I - /
EPHRAEM
OLD LATIN
1
<
OLD SYRIAC
EGYPTIAN
LATIN VULGATE
<
REVISED SYRIAC
ORIGEN
<
CHRYSOSTOM
_______




A FAMILY PAPER.
(H
16s. per year, 4s. per quarter, in advance.
ILLUSTRATED BY SPLENDID ENGRAVINGS OF
COLONIAL &. CONTINENTAL SCENERY.
9 ..... . ...
EOETRAITS OF 1 EUVE USEE NTT 3YLF2SI.
CONTAINS—
A SERIAL TALE. OUTLOOK.
SOCIAL NOTES. RELIGIOUS INTELLIGENCE.
MISSIONARY NEWS. MAIL NOTES.
Colonial Publishing Society,
.LIMITED.)
315 PITT STREET,
SYDNEY.
YOUNG MEN’S CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATION
CORNER PITT & PARK STREETS.
OBES FROM 9 A.M. TO 10 P.M.
MEETINGS.
Evangelistic Service for Young Men, every Saturday Evening at 7i o’clock.
Young Men’s Midday Prayer Meeting, Wednesday, from 1.15 to 1.50 p.m.
The General Secretary is constantly in attendance at the Rooms to meet
with Young Men.
Terms of Meniberthiv ; £1 per annum, payable in advance.
