

Aus der
Zeitschrift fur Ethnologie.
Heft 2. 1908
Some Mythology of the Gundungurra Tribe,
New South Wales. x )
R. H. Mathews, L. S.
* The territory of the Gundungurra tribe includes Burragorang, Kat-
somba, Picton, Berrima, Taralga and Goulburn, with the intervening-
country. The Bunan ceremony of initiation 2 ) described by me in 189(1
applies to the Gundungurra, in common with the Thurrawal and Thoorga
tribes. In 1901 I published an elementary grammar of the Gundungurra
language. 3 ) In the present article 1 am submitting a legendary tale which
I obtained personally from the remnants of the Gundungurra tribe now
residing at Burragorang on the Wollondiliy river.
The natives of this tribe believe that in the far past times, which
they call the gun’-yung-ga’-lung, all the present animals were men, or at
any rate had human attributes. These legendary personages are spoken
of as the Burringilling, in contradistinction to the present race of people.
It would appear, however, that the Burringilling folk were much cleverer
than the people of the present time. They could make rivers and other
geographical features, cleave rocks and perform many similar Herculean
labours.
Gu-rang’-atch was one of the Burringilling, his form being partly
fish and partly reptile. One of his camping places was in a large, deep
waterhole or lagoon at what is now the junction of the Wollondiliy and
Wingeecaribbee rivers; the waterhole and the country around it being-
called Mur-rau’-ral in the Gundungurra tongue. Gurangatch used to lie
in the shallow water near the bank in the middle of the day to sun
himself. One day Mir-ra’-gan the tiger cat, a renowned fisherman, who
searched only for the largest kinds of fish, happened to catch a glimpse
of Gurangatch’s eye which shone like a star through the water. Mirragan
tried to spear him but he escaped into the centre of the waterhole, which
was of great depth. Mirragan then went into the bush a little way off.
and cut a lot of hickory bark, millewa in the native language, and
stacked it in heaps under the water at different places around the
lagoon 4 ), in the hope of making Gurangatch sick, so that he would come
to the surface. The poisoned water made Gurangatch very uncomfortable,
but the solution was not strong enough to overcome such a large fish as lie.
1) Yorgelegt in der Sitzung vom 19. Oktober 1907.
2) American Anthropologist, IX, pp. 327 —344, with plate.
3) Proc. Amer. Philos. Soc., Philadelphia, XL, pp. 140 —148.
4) There are some long, thin slabs of stone still lying in layers on the banks of
Murraural waterhole which are said by the natives to be the sheets of hickory bark put
there by Mirragafi to poison the water.


Seething with disappointment, Mirragan went into the bush again to
cut more hickory bark to increase the nauseating power of the water, but
as soon as Gurangatch saw him going away he suspected what he was
after and commenced tearing up the ground along the present valley of
the Wollondiliy, causing the water in the lagoon to flow after him and
bear him along. He went on forming several miles of the river channel,
and then he burrowed or tunneled under the ground for some distance at
right angles, coming out again on a high rocky ridge on one side of the
valley, where there is now a spring or water catchment, known to the
white people as the „Rocky Waterhole", but is called by the natives
Bir’-rim-bun’-nung-a-lai’, because it contains birrimbunnungs or sprats. 1 )
Gurangatch raised his head above this waterhole and shoved out his
tongue which flashed like lightning. From this elevated point of obser-
vation he saw Mirragan starting from Murraural along his trail.
Gurangatch then returned along his burrow or tunnel to the Wollon-
diliy where he had previously left off, and continued making a canal for
himself. When he reached what is now the junction of Guineacor river
he turned to the left and made a few miles of the channel of that stream.
Coming to a very rocky place which was hard to excavate, he changed
his mind and turned back to the junction and resumed his former course.
He had some difficulty in getting away from this spot and made a long,
deep bend or loop in the Wollondiliy which almost doubles back upon
itself at that place. When Gurangatch got down to where Jock’s Creek
now embouchures with the Wollondiliy, he turned up Jock’s Creek
excavating a watercourse for himself. Being a great magician he could
make water flow up hill as easily as downhill. On reaching the source
of Jock's Creek, he burrowed under the range, coming up in the inside
of Wam’-bee-ang caves, which are called Whambeyan by the white people,
being a corruption of the aboriginal name.
We must now return to Mirragan. When he came back to Murraural
waterhole and saw how Gurangatch had escaped, he followed on down
the river after him, going on and on till he overtook him at Wambeeang.
Mirragan did not care to go into any of the subterranean passages, there-
fore he went up on top of the rocks and dug a hole as deep as he could
go and then prodded a long pole down as far as it would reach, for the
purpose of frightening Gurangatch out of his retreat, much in the way
we poke a kangaroo rat or other creature out of a hollow log. Not
succeeding in his purpose with the first hole, he dug another and still
another and shoved the long pole down each one as before. There are
several weather worn „pot holes" on top of the Whambeyan caves still,
which are said to be those made by Mirragan on that occasion.
When Gurangatch perceived that his enemy was continuing his re-
lentless pursuit, he started off one morning at daylight through his tunnel
or burrow and returned down Jock’s Creek till he came out into the
1) The natives maintain that there must be a subterraneous passage from liockv
Waterholc to the Wollondiliy because sprats are found there as well as in the river.


Wollondilly again. Some miles farther down was where Mirragan’s family
resided. When they heard Gurangatch coming and the water roaring after
him like a flood, they ran away up the side of the hill in great terror.
By that time Mirragan himself appeared upon the scene and his wife
began scolding him for having meddled with Gurangatch and besought
him to give up the pursuit, but he would not be dissuaded. He went
on after Gurangatch and overtook him at what the white people call the
„Slippery Rock“, but the native name is Woong’-ga-ree. There they
fought for a long time, which made the rock smooth and slippery ever
since.
Gurangatch at last got away and went on downwards, making the
water flow after him. Every time that Mirragan overtook him, he hit
him with his big club or boondee, and Gurangatch struck Mirragan
heavily with his tail. This continued down to what is now the junction
of Cox’s river, where Gurangatch turned off to the left, digging out the
present channel. He went on till he came to Billa’-goo-la Creek,
corrupted to „Black Hollow“ on our maps, up which he travelled some
distance, but turned back, and resumed his course up the Cox to the
junction of Ked-oom’-bar Creek, now called Katoomba by the Europeans.
He excavated Kedooinbar Creek as far up as where Reedy Creek comes
into it and turned up the latter a little way, where he formed a deep
waterhole in which he rested for a while.
Gurangatch then journeyed back to the Cox, up which he worked his
way for some distance and formed the waterhole Karrangatta. In order
to dodge his enemy he burrowed under ground, coming out on Mee’-oo-
wun mountain, now written Mou-in, where he made a deep hole or spring,
which is even now a menace to the white man’s cattle on account of its
narrowness and great depth. Returning to Karrangatta waterhole, he
made his way up to the junction of Koo-nang’-goor-wa, corrupted to
Konangaroo, where he and Mirragan had another fierce encounter. Gu-
rangatch journeyed on up the Cox to the present junction therewith of
Harry’s Creek. He then excavated the valley of Harry’s Creek till he
came to Bin-noo’-mur, the present Jenolan caves, where he had the good
fortune to meet with some of his relations.
Gurangatch was weary from his hard work and sore from all the
blows he had received during his journey. He suspected that his enemy
would still be in pursuit of him and therefore besought his friends to
escort him out of his reach. They accordingly took him out of the caves
and conducted him over the main range into a deep waterhole, called by
the natives Joo-lun-doo.
While this was going on, Mirragan had arrived close to Binnoomur,
but was very tired and lay down on a little hill to rest himself. When
he revived he searched about the caves and found tracks of where
Gurangatch had been staying, and also the tracks of how he had been
taken away to Joolundoo by his friends. Mirragan was quite worn out
by his prolongued encounter, and when lie saw that his quarry had got
among his relations, he thought that he also would go and obtain assi-


Mathews: Gundungurra Tribe.
stance. He then considered that it would be prudent, before he left the
spot, to adopt some means of preventing Gurangatch from escaping back
to his old haunts during his absence. He consequently set to work and
built a precipitous wall of rock, Wan’-dak-ma-lai’, corrupted by Europeans
to Duckmulloy, along the side of the range between the caves and
Joolundoo. *)
Mirragan then hurried away to his friends somewhere out westward.
On reaching their camp they were eating roasted eels and offered him
one. Although he was weary and hungry he answered. „No, no, that is
too small a thing for me to eat. I am chasing a great big fish and want
you to come and help me.‘" He stated that this great fish was in an
extremely deep waterhole and requested them to send the very best divers
in the camp. They selected Billagoola the shag, Gool’-a-gwan-gwan the
diver, Gundhareen the black duck and Goonarring the wood duck.
When Mirragan returned to Joolundoo with this contingent, Gun-
dhareen dived into the pool but returned after a while saying he was
unable to get down to the bottom. Goonarring then made the attempt
but without success. Goolagwangwan was the next to go down and after
a considerable time brought a young or small Gurangatch to the surface,
saving to Mirragan, „Is this what you have been after?“ He replied
contemptuously, „No! that is too small; try again.“ Goolagwangwan dived
down the second time and brought up a larger fish, but Mirragan would
not look at it. Billagoola then took his turn at diving and when he got
down a long way he observed several fish like those brought up by
Goolagwangwan. They were trying to hide a very large fish by covering
it with mud on the bottom of the pool Billagoola tried to get hold of
this monster, but its head was jammed into a crevice of the rock and
its tail was fast in another crevice on the opposite side, so that he could
not shift it. Being a very expert diver and a strong fellow withal, he
pulled a huge piece of flesh oft' the back of Gurangatch and started up
again. On reaching the surface, Mirragan exclaimed with delight, „That
is a'piece of the fish I was chasing.“ When the meat was cooked
Mirragan and his friends had a great feast and returned to their respective
homes.
Along the course of the Woliondilly, as well as along the Cox river,
there are big waterholes here and there, which are said by the natives
to be Gurangatch’s resting places. The following are some of the holes
in the Woliondilly: Doogalool, Gungga’-look, Woonggaree, Goo-rit,
Mullindee, Boonbaal, and Gurrabulla. In the Cox river there are:
Gaung-gaung, Junba, Billa’goola, Karrangatta, and several others. Many
of the waterholes referred to are believed by the old natives to be in-
habited to the present day by descendants of Gurangatch.
1) A precipitous sand stone escarpment, consisting 1 of huge blocks of rock, layer
upon layer, is still pointed out as the wall built by Mirragan.
