

]llead at the Adelaide Meeting of the Australasian Association for the
Advancement nj Science, held January, 1007,]
2. -SOME NOTES ON SCIENTIFIC TRAVEL AMONGST THE
BLACK POPULATION OF TROPICAL AUSTRALIA IN
1901, 1905, 1906.
By Professor HERMANN KLAATSGH, M.D.
[With Seventeen Plates and Map.]
In coming to Australia it was my intention to attack the difficult
problem of tho origin of tho Australian blacks, and of their importance
in relation to the whole development of mankind. Many years pre-
viously I had begun my studios by examining skeletons” and skulls,
and had noted tho close .similarity existing between tho skulls of Aus-
tralian aboriginals and of those of primitive man in Europe that was
first pointed out by .I’rofessor Huxley,
Having arrived in Australia at the end of March, 1904,1 proceeded
direct to Brisbane, when; ready assistance was offered by Dr. W. B.
Both, then Chief Northern Protector of the Queensland Aboriginals.
I accepted his invitation to investigate carefully his excellent collec-
tion of Queensland crania now preserved in the Australian Museum,
Sydney, where I finished the descriptive paper in 1905.
My paper, entitled “ Morphological Studies of the Skulls of North
Queensland Aboriginals,” is now in course of being printed and pub-
lished by tho New South, Wales Government. In this some of the
general ideas will bo communicated regarding my theories of tho im-
portance of the Australian race in comparison with Anthropoids, the
fossil man of the European Stone Age, and the now existing races of
mankind. (1)
I agree with Dr. Hewitt’s opinion that only a land connection could
explain the presence of tho aboriginals in Australia, and I am inclined
to accept the view of a submerged continent, from which, in one direc-
tion, have been distributed tbe Asiatic people, and in another tho Aus-
tralian blacks.
In tho month of July, 1904, I began my investigations on the
anthropology of the living body of the aboriginals of North Australia,
in which direction very little had been previously done. My first
experiences with the natives in a primitive stage was in tho Gulf of
Carpentaria. The Queensland Government placed the sailing-ship
Mdbidir at my disposal for a period of six weeks, which gave, me the
opportunity of visiting some of the rivers of the gulf coast of the Cape
(1) My publications on this question before I came to Australia are very little
known to English authors, from their not having been translated into that
language. In the paper indicated my other publications are mentioned, which are
to he found in the “ Zoitachrift fiir Ethnologic, Berlin,” and in tho Reports of the
German Anthropological Society, A more general review is given in my paper
on tho Origin and Development of Mankind, in tho popular work, “ Woltall und
M'onschheit,” IX., 1002, Berlin,
65


York Peninsula and the Wellesley Islands, a number of which had,
since the time of Flinders, only recently been visited by Dr. W. E.
Roth in the Melbidir.
On Bay-ley Island I spent some days in friendly contact with a
tribe of natives. At the Archer River 1 assisted in the foundation of
a mission station, in company with Mr. Arthur Richter, of the Mapoon
Mission Station, Batavia River. The mouth of the. Archer River is
wrongly depicted on every map of Australia, for it enters the sea by
two distinct and navigable channels separated by an island. They
both extend into bush country never before touched by white men.
The confidence of the blacks, who had -proved very treacherous anti
dangerous before our arrival, was won as the result of a successful
operation performed by me on the breast of a woman. Having visited
the Normauton and Rurkotowu districts on the Leichhardt River, where
I collected relics of the giant fossil marsupial Nototherium , I returned
to the coast of North Queensland and remained from November, 1904,
until February, 1905, in the districts of Cooktown and Cairns.
A most important field for investigation proved to be the Bellenden
Kerr Mountains inland from Cairns, whore a great number of half-
civilised and free-living tribes are located. Some of those were found
to be in a good condition, hut others were in a state of decay, largely
owing to the introduction of opium by the Chinese. One of the beat
specimens collected hero was the mummy of an old chief, “ Naioha,”
of “ Boonje ” (Upper Russel River), which had been perfectly smoked
eight months after death. The negotiations with the relatives for the
possession were difficult, but successful. From Cairns I proceeded to
Sydney, where I arrived at the end of March. During mv studies in
the Australian Museum I was very kindly assisted bv the curator
Mr. Etheridge.
I left Sydney at the beginning of September, 1905, for a 14 months’
trip around Australia.
On the south coast I visited Warnambool, Victoria. I found
the sandstone formation near Warnambool more interesting than I
expected the unfavorable opinions expressed by some scientific
authorities. Various footprints of animals in the sandstone, rocks
have been known for many years, but very little attention has been
given to the fact. I discovered the footprint of a giant bird, which I
suggest may belong to Gcnyjrnis wiotoni (Stirling), remains of which,
found in Callabonna Lake, are preserved in the Adelaide Museum.
I published the results of my investigation in one of my reports to
the Anthropological Society of Berlin. (2) I came to the conclusion
that the human-like footprints, saved by Mr. Archibald, the late
director of the Museum, very likely indeed belong to a juvenile human
individual of the Tertiary period. (3) I next proceeded to Perth, and
(2) Zoitachrift fur Ethnologic, 1000.
(3) After a consultation I had with Prof. E, David, of Sydney, I have every
reason to hope that the locality of Warnambool may now he studied more pro-
foundly by the Australian scientists.


alter a short stay there and on the Island of Rottnest I followed the
north-western coast, which proved to be a most prolific place for study,
having been previously practically untouched from an ethnological and
anthropological point of view. Intimate connection was established
with the Niol Niol tribe in particular, among which the Roman Catholic
priests have a mission station at Beagle Bay. Generous help was
rendered by these missionaries. The Niol Niol proved to be a kind
and intelligent people, who have preserved the old customs and tradi-
tions, having been only in contact with white people for some 12 years.
Their language has been studied by the Trappist monks, who founded
the mission station. The tribe possesses a great variety of weapons
and ceremonial decorations, many of them reminding one much of
the specimen described by Spencer and Gillen in their excellent works
on the Arunta and the North Central Australian tribes. I secured a
fine collection of sacred wooden slabs or churingas, which name (follow-
ing Spencer and Gillen) I accept as a term for the whole of Australia.
In the north-west the churingas have different names according to
their size. Amongst the Niol Niol every man has two churingas, a
large one and a small one, called respectively “ Minher ” and “ Man-
daka.” They consist of wooden material and are carefully ornamented
with quadrangular figures. Every real, churinga in the Broome district
is perforated at one end that it may be used as a hullroarer. They are
absolutely restricted to the male individuals. The women have smaller
sticks of similar shape, called “ Lara,” which have not any sacred or
secret importance, but are carried round by the lubras as charms.
There are doubtless some local differences between the north-
western and central districts of Australia, by which the different results
of investigations are easily accounted for. So far as I have studied
the question in the north-west, my attempts to establish a complicated
system of totems similar to that described by Spencer and Gillen for
Central Australia has been completely unsuccessful.
The dances I saw performed (but only by night) reminded
me very much of the pictures published by Spencer and Gillen;
but at Beagle Bay they are nob connected with “ totems.” Eor in-
stance, an old man, who beautifully imitated a dugong, had nothing
to do with anything like a dugong totem. There was no for
the aboriginals to conceal a totemistic system, because both the mission-
aries and’l were, very intimate with them, and, showing and explaining
to them the pictures of “ sacred ceremonies ” in the papers of Spencer
and Gillen, we were able to question them very closely regarding the
totemistic laws and performances, but they denied absolutely the
existence of such a system. (4)
I hope to be well understood that, by stating the facta as regards
the Broome district, I do not contradict in any way the correctness
of the statements made by Spencer and Gillen for Central Australia.
(4) One of the old intelligent fellows of that tribe is always inventing new
dances —“ oatohing them from a hollow tree ” —and such now dances are com-
municated to other tribes.


The only thing I am missing is a clear definition of the word “ totem ”
as applied to Australian conditions. The scope of the use of this
system is very wide in the papers of Spencer, and it includes some
W UCI 1 n ® vcr W01,1 . d acee I )t as totemistic. Regarding the
\\ elliingua totem ’• ceremonies of the Warramunga tribe* Spencer and
Gillen (•>) admit that “there is no idea associated with them of secur-
ing the increase of the Wellungua, nor apparently have they any desire
to do so. Hie idea of the giant snake inhabitating “ sacred ” water-
holes is a general one, extending from the west to east of Australia but
without being connected with a totem. In the Broome district the
snake is called - allanga, reminding us of Wellungua, the same name
occurring m the. Molonga corroboree described by W. E, Roth. (6)
The same idea is found in North Queensland. The volcanic lake
Lacham m the Bcllenden Kerr Range is believed to be inhabitated
by a dangerous giant snake; the rainbow was the reflection of its brilliant
skin. _ Ihe latter suggestion is also found near Broome. In one of mv
excursions in the Wyndliara district I came across a “ sacred ” lagoon
supposed to bo inhabitated by the dangerous snake “ Noujuwarra.” (7)
. ■ he common belief of a powerful snake over the whole of Australia
is; important regarding the origin of a similar belief in ancient religions
of Asiatic nations. (8) B
„ Jr* Tw-T 7 dl v CUIt f°. g 0? abso ? utel y accurate information from
the Niol Niol regarding their belief in the reincarnation of the soul.
But, clearly enough, they accept the existence of the soul before birth
idle, name given to soul in this stage is “ Rai.” The “ Rai ” are
supposed to be sitting in trees, like birds, and to enter the body of a
woman independently of sexual intercourse. They also accept the
existence of the soul after death, as spirits called “Njer” which may
be useful to the living relations, but may also sometimes tease them.
I never could find out if the “ Njer ” are transformed into “ Rai.’
Ihe belief in the three entities of the soul is very remarkable in connec-
tion with its similarity to the ideas of African religion, and of savage
and of cultivated nations. (9) *
No sign is to be found of the present or past existence of message-
sticks in the, Broome district, *
, n n J s } |P“ 0< ® and aiUon -r-“ Northern Tribes of Central Australia ” London
1,104, p. 227. I was very pleased to loam from Mr. Gillen that he is inclined to
LSSSsZ m?** **■*• “°" s ‘ l ““ am*
(7) Cf. Herbert Basedow, Trans. II.S. of S A vol nms tv, n,r
Range.—" The watorhole Wiirmikattidinji is inhabited by a huge snake "which 0
however, no native remembers having ever seen.” ’ ’
(8) W. G. Stroeton—Roy. Soe, South Auutr., 1893 “ Customs Rites and
fi 'T 01 Al ?original S of the Gulf of Carpentaria.” Cerib^fTm
cmitll ® 0 ™ 100 l Niat the eclipse of sun and moon is believed to be
not -Sd by i bl f fe U°w «»ake- Jo»e oxoollent paper of Mr. Stratton seems to be
not valued enough ; it is not mentioned by Sponoor and Gillen.
(9) See S. Laing.—“ Human Origins,” London, 1897, p. 119.


In one expedition to Pender Bay, near Cape I observed
natives in preparation for a corrobboree rising a green color for the
decoration of their bodies. This is a vegetable matter derived from
the young leaves of eucalyptus, which are masticated, the resulting
liquid giving a brilliant green color. That is the only real vegetable
color ever observed amongst the Australians.
The customs of circumcision and subincision are practised over the
whole north-west. The subincision is properly an Australian custom, the
reason for which until now has never been explained. The suggestion
that this peculiar mutilation is intended to restrict procreation has been
successfully contradicted by Dr. W. E. Roth. (10)
In the countries where the practice is in vogue every male is in-
trooised, and the women must have undergone a corresponding ordeal,
which has been elsewhere described. As Roth clearly explains, this
mutilation of the male does not necessarily prevent fertilisation. (11)
In these remarks the idea is given, for the first time, of the
introoiaed man as an. artificially made woman.
During mv stay in the Broome district (Novcmber-Deccmber,
1905, May-June, 1900) I received information of the real significance
of subiucision, which at first I refused to accept as correct.
Constat in agro qui Broome uocatrir iuuones eosquo pueros qui
uel iam facti sint puberes uel mox futuri, uidelicet decern nati aiiuos
usque ad quattuordocim, mutuo inter sese raasturbari solere. Sacer-
dotes autem Christian! qui apud Beagle Bay hahitarc aolent, ita in
rem omnium turpissimam ac foedissimani et inuecti sunt et inuehuiitur
ut uix sani sit negare rem ita fieri. Quippe in tribu Niel-Niel nomi-
nata uiri puerique inter sese quiddam paciscrintur eique paoto etiam
lingua sua possunt nomen dare. Nam et uiri, siue initiati slue pene
incisi, nomine Wamba, et pueri, priusquam initiandi ritas facti aunt,
nomine Walebel uocantur ; quod nomon Walebel nogatiuam habere
signifloationem syllaba ‘ 1c ’ interposita satis demonstrat.
Ille uero qui nomine Wamba utitur suum quisque Walebel aut
habet aut liabuit ea condiciono ut amicus amico nictum paret cotti-
dianura; quae duorum marium condicio non dissimilis uidetur ease
matrimonlo cuidam quod post ceitum tompus possit dissolui, quippe
quae usque eo maneat donee puer, pene incisus, nomeu et ipse habeat
Wamba.
Me quidem percontantem quaeimm ratio sit inter Wamba et
Walebel masturbandi, quidam ex iudigenis, homo non insulsus, qui
apud East Kimberley erat natus, oeitiorem fecit, rem imitatus ;
pueri profeoto ponem cum. primum erigi coeptus sit in uinlis penis
foramen, quod ad id auctum usque ad intimam scroti partem patent,
inseri solere; pucrum hurai supinum iacentem uiri pene mambus
comprehenso (quasi extrema digitalis tegument! parte frices digitum),
suum circumfricare ponem. usque oo dum utrique effuudatur semen.
(10) Roth.—Ethnol. Studies N.W. 0. Queensland, 1897.
(II) Of. W. E. Roth, 1.0, , p. 179.


Quae equidem bene scio esse uera ex eo quod, dum uiri cuiusdam,
pene incisi, cadauer inseco atque aperio, intellexi illud urethrae fora-
men, inter initiandi ritus factum, ita posse augeri ut pucri cuiusuis
penis facillime posset inseri.
The explanation of this custom is the difficulty experienced by the
younger members of some tribes in getting young women, who are
possessed by the old men. The mayor of Broome, Mr. Warden, who
has lived there for 17 years, informed me that great jealousy is shown
by the Wambas regarding their boys, and that more of the fights which
are very common amongst the black people of Broome- have their
origins in the boys than in the women.
I only intend to state the facts, which may bo easily proved by
every other scientist visiting the country of Broome and Beagle Bay.
I suggest as possible that the primitive significance of the horrible
custom of subincision may be explained by conditions formerly exist-
ing in which the difficulties regarding the possession of women by
the young men were extremely great. This condition being variable
and easily changed, I believe that in many tribes the subincision has
become a custom which is only performed because the ancestors did
the same, and without any practical importance. Therefore the con-
tradictions which I anticipate against the statements I have made
will bo without any value.
I)]'. Roth at first, of course, was not inclined to accept my idea ;
but later, by a letter, he called my attention to his observation in the
Boulia district. (12)
From Broome I made a trip to Java, where I contracted a serious
infection of malaria fever.
During my visit to Java I had an opportunity of inspecting the
locality where Dr. Dubois (1891-1893) discovered the remains of
Pithecanthropus. Digging at that place, on the border of the Bcnge-
wang River, 1 secured some fossil relics of elephas, rhinoceros, bos, and
oervus. The fragment of the skull of Pithecanthropus shows some
peculiar features by which it is near connected with the Australian type
of cranium. I am inclined to consider Pithecanthropus as a very
primitive form of: real Tertiary man, connected in one direction with
the ancestor of the Australian and Tasmanian aboriginals, and in the
other direction with the fossil man of the European Stone Ago (the
typo of Neanderthal, Spy, and Krapina).
(12) In connection with what you told me as to ;your new views about intro-
oision, please look at sec. 321, p. 180, of my ethnological studios. It is certainly
interesting that the Boulia name for a “ whistler ” is the vulva possessor.
December 18th, 1006, R.M.S. Omrah. Dr. Roth.
Mr. Herbert Basedow, in his “ Anthropological Notes made on the South
Australian Government North-West Prospecting Expedition, 1903,” made the
following interesting observation: In the Tomldnson Ranges members of the
Ullparidga tribe were observed to dance about a man who had killed a kangaroo,
and all the while to hold their subinoised urethras to view, . . . " .
and widening the slit to its utmost extent. Transactions of the Royal Society,
Adelaide, vol. xxvni., 1904, p. 3.


Another interesting connection between Java and Australia ns
proved by the great similarity of the Australian dingo with the wild
dog of the Tcngger Mountains of East Java. I visited this locality,
in which the real Cams Icnggaranim, described by Kolilbragge, is only
represented to-day by some specimens which are not completely
pure bred, but show clearly the characters of the appearance of the
dingo. (13)
These facta concerning man and clog corroborate the, idea that a
common centre, lias existed, a now submerged continent which was
connected with Java and with Australia.
There is not any connection of Pithecanthropus with the recent
Malay population of" Java. I investigated the Malay race for com-
parative studies with the Australians.
There is no trace of a paleolithic population of Java. The only
stone, implements found are of neolithic typo and recent. I was digging
in some caves of the southern mountains of Java, the only part which
is not volcanic. My inquiries regarding relics of an old population
were, unsuccessful. The rumors of an extinct aboriginal people of
Java, for which even a name has been invented {“ Kalangs ’) arc
baseless and, purely mythological.
I returned to Broome (May, 1906) in a very bad state of health,
and bad to stay for some weeks in the, hospital. Alter recovering I
made, a second trip to Beagle Bay, In the beginning of July I pro-
ceeded to Wyndham, on the Cambridge Gulf, a place which had been
prominently before the public in relation to Dr. Roth’s report regarding
the ill-treatment of the natives there.
I am sorry to have to sustain the correctness of Dr. Roth’s allega-
tions, for, during my stay there, of two months, I found the relations
between the whites and the, blacks so unfavorable that it was impossible
for me, to get into friendly touch with the, numerous wild tribes around
Wyndham, every white person being regarded with the dread that the
natives attached to police officers, who, in their mind, were likened to
dangerous animals. Excellent material for investigation, however,
was found in the prison, where 70 to 80 aborigines were confined. I
measured over 70 of thorn very exhaustively, taking a much greater
number of measurements of the body and of the head, combined obser-
vation of the complexion and structure, than have been made before.
I also secured a very fine material for pictures of the living bodies.
Nine miles inland from Wyndham I discovered a native quarry,
which is not known to the blackfellows of to-day. A field of 100yds.
diameter in the bush was covered with the relics of the old manufac-
tures. The intention had been to get material of a dark-colored mota-
morphio sandstone rock with which to make the spear-heads. On digging
I found the traces of human handiwork for a depth of nearly a foot.
A half-civilised aboriginal near Wyndham completed some of the samples
of the quarry to the form of the leaf-shaped stone heads, which are now
imitated in el ass.
(X 3) I collected a good deal of anatomical material of the Australian Dingo,
which X have sent to Prof. Studor, at Borne, Switzerland) for further investigation.


At Wyndham I got sick again, by complications following the
attack of malaria, but recovered before proceeding to Port Darwin,
where I arrived at the middle of September. In the Northern Terri-
toiy the most friendly relations exist generally between the whites
and blacks ; and, strange to say, in this State exists the least compre-
hensive legislation dealing with the aboriginals, which are physically
and mentally of a superior type. Close association was secured with
the Kunandja or Kunandra tribe (Alligator River tribe). Before my
arrival Mr. Herbert Basedow, that gifted young scientist, made a pro-
found study of the customs and weapons of the tribes of Palmerston
and of the Daly River. His paper will shortly be published. I need
only mention here an observation I made at Port Darwin, viz., a native
from Port Keats (14), Victoria River, who had a very interestin' 1 ’ foot-
formation reminding one of a hand. The extreme "shortness of this
man s big toe in relation to the second toe proved the atavistic
repetition of the ancestral stage of mankind in which the foot was
handhke. On my arrival in Adelaide I hoard that Dr, Ramsay Smith
noted the same phenomenon before me, but he took no stereoscopic
photograph nor a cast in plaster of Paris, as I did.
Prom Port Darwin I made a trip to Melville Island for a. fortnight
m a 2-ton vessel, accompanied by Mr. Joe Cooper, a buffalo hunter. ' ’ .
The natives on this island are absolutely preserved in the primitive
stage, and are stated to be dangerous and treacherous. (15) Unlike
a “ a 1 otber P arte the Australian coast, these black people
of Melville Island have never been disturbed by white immigration
since the only white settlement, .Port Dundas, founded in 1827 bv
Captain Bremer, was abandoned in the year 1829. Left to themselves
lor so long, them number did not decrease, being now approximately
more than a thousand. Joe Cooper and his brother are the only white
men who can venture to go inland, where, in the very centre of the
island, they have a camp, from, which the hunting operations for the
buffaloes are undertaken. Mr. Cooper, who was speared in the neck
1U years ago, has introduced for defence purposes a small company of
mainland natives. 1 J
The buffaloes (16) represent an enormous increase of the herd in-
troduced from Timor by the old settlers. It may be mentioned that
the natives never attempted to spear the buffaloes, and that they had
to be taught to appreciate their meat.
p• J Palmer ston September 18th, Tuesday night, the small cutter
of l ly r?°^ ded r' by s £ V6l \, abon g mals i two of them were natives
mMemlle Island. Gape Gambler, on the south-east corner of Melville
ab n °F 1 i n gl ? al waa one of the murderers of the party of Mr. Fred Brad-
pW“ « le l “ oar °»'P 6 Scott, in his launch, together with theßrfashm
engineer Eggoroff and two other white men, Nov., 1003.
moot &ofogistMr. fc H n Y°L.“ rotin Expediti ° n ° f tho y etlr 190S ’ % Govern-
-IL®I Journal of the Geographical Society, London, vol. xv 1829
ton o^CoZrg'jwuT^ 00 ' °' ““ Mand


Island, was not readied till Thursday, September 20th, owing to con-
trary winds and rough sea. Anchor was dropped off Cape Gambler,
and lour ol the natives in the boat wore landed to make their way across
the island to Cooper Bros.’ camp, and arrange that horses should be at
the landing-place to meet the party. Whilst the boat lay at anchor
17 full-grown native men and two boys came off. They proved to be
ol the best type yet seen by me in Australia. The description given
by Captain Bremer in the year 1824- is correct even to-day ; “ These
natives were of about medium height and well formed, possessing
wonderful elasticity, and not stoutly built, the stoutest having but little
muscle. Their activity was astonishing, their color nearly black,
their hair coarse but not woolly, and tied occasionally hi a knot behind,
while some had daubed their heads and bodies with red or yellow
pigment. They were almost all marked with a kind of tattoo, generally
in three lines, the centre one going directly down the body from the
neck to the navel, the others down from the outside of the breast
approaching the perpendicular line at the bottom.” (IT) The manner
in which, they came to my boat reminded mo absolutely of the picture
published by Captain King, vol. 1., p, 112 : _ They “ sprang into the
water and made towards the boat with surprising celerity, jumping at
each step entirely out of the sea, although it was so deep as to reach
their thighs ” (p. 113). “ The, men were bettor formed than any wo had
seen before ; they were daubed over with a yellow pigment . . . .”
(p. 114). Even the features of their face seem to have, been well
preserved for three generations. Major Campbell noticed “the eyes
small, sunk, and very bright and keen.” The supraoiliary ridges are
well developed in many individuals. This character is also mentioned
by Campbell (“ the eyebrows are extremely prominent ”).
The humorous propensities (18) of this happy black people have
not diminished during 80 years, and it was on account of this good
humor that I always had the best relations with the Melville Island
natives, who seem to be a well-disposed people if they arc treated
kindly.
Surrounding the boat the 17 male individuals examined everything
with the greatest curiosity. They were very pleased with the gifts
we presented to them, and I received some of the beautiful spears,
which are almost the most artistically barbed specimen in the whole
ol Australia. In spite of being very 'heavy, they are thrown without
the wommora (throwing stick), and are only used for fighting. The
only implements they use in making them are sharp pieces of shell,
because there is no material on the island for making stone implements,
which never have been introduced from the mainland.
(17) Bromor’s report on Ms expedition to Melville Island with H.M. ship Tamar
is reprinted in “ The Genesis of Queensland,” H. S. Bussell, Sydney, 1.888, p. 30 it
tteq. Some particulars have been communicated to Capt. King by a letter from
LieutenantTi S. 800. “King’s Narrative of Survey,” etc., vol. xi., London, 1827, p.
233 ff.
(18) King.—Yol. i„ p. 112 ; “ The whole tribe began to shout and laugh in
the most extravagant way.”


The presents they appreciate most are the iron tomahawks, just
as in the time of Captain King (19) and Bremer (20).
The scars by which they decorate the body are totally different
from the ornamentations on the mainland. They seem to imitate
loaves arranged on a branch ; but I make the suggestion that they
are connected with the arrangement of the barbs on the spears.
Our conversation was mostly restricted to signs, but some interpre-
tation of words was managed by the two Island boys we had on board.
On several points of the coast I had the opportunity of meeting
natives of the island. After crying out for them “ Pongi, Pongi,”
which means “ good friend,” they nearly all came to the ship, and I
never had any bad experiences (21).
After leaving our black friends we made another landing on
Buchanan Island, near the southern entrance to Apsley Strait, where
our natives secured a good supply of turtle eggs. Next day (September
21st) the narrow Apsley Strait was entered, and in the afternoon anchor
was dropped off the old settlement of Fort Dundas, the relics of which
arc well described in the Government report, 1905 (22). Some hundred
yards south from this place I came across an excellent specimen of a
grave decorated by monuments, as discovered and briefly mentioned
by Captain Bremer, but never scientifically described.
The grave was surrounded by nine wooden pillars arranged in an.
elongated oval, each post differing in size and shape from its fellow.
The longest was about 6ft., and each was variously painted in yellows and
reds. Some of the pillars were capped with water vessels made of bark
and perforated by two openings, the borders of which were carefully
fixed with string-work. The meaning of this arrangement was explained
to me by one of our Island boys. The water vessels indicate that there
a woman was buried, and the perforations of the vessels show that she
has been speared.
There must bo something in the arrangement of the painted
symbols on the pillars indicative of the position in which the corpse
lies. One of our Island natives, on being requested to do so, without
the slightest hesitation dug down at the west end of the enclosure and
discovered, at a deptli of about 2ft., the skull, which proved to be that
of a very young lubra
After cutting off the upper part of one of the pillars we returned
to the boat, very likely observed, but not attacked, by the natives.
But at night, as we were lying at anchor near Luxmore Head, firestioks-
carried by natives were seen moving about among the timber; there-
fore it was decided to run no risk, and the intention to obtain water
was postponed till the following morning.
(19) King.—Vol. x., p. 11l ; “ TUtor a short parley with them, in which they
repeatedly asked for axes by imitating the action of chopping . . . . ”
(20) Bremer and Campbell made often the experience that axes have boon
stolen by the natives,
(21) Cf. Government report, 1905, lx., p. 28.
(22) Lx., p. 27.—A view of Fort Dundas, taken from Garden Point, 1824, is
published in King, vol. n,, p.. 237.


The relics of a monumental grave destroyed by fire were described
by the Government expedition, 1905, near Luxmore Head“ In a
little sandy flat there was a grave enclosed by wooden slabs, a portion
of which has been burnt. Aboriginal markings were faintly discern-
ible in places on the wood, and some of the posts had the wood cut
away at the top, leaving two spikes like horns at the sides ; others
had the wood cut away from the outside towards the centre, leaving a
short spike standing up in the middle of the post.” In some examples
the slab was so carved out that the upper part was only connected
with the lower by two thin pillars, or on others the top was mush-
room-shaped.
It is easy to see that the natives used the fire for this work of
sculpture, scratching away the burnt parts with pieces of shells.
Captain Bremer (23), 1824, found the grave of a native on Bathurst
Island ; “ The situation was one of such perfect retirement and repose
that it displayed considerable feeling in the survivors who placed it
there, and the simple order which pervaded the spot would not have
disgraced a civilised people. It was an oblong square open at the foot,
the remaining end and sides being railed round with trees of 7ft. or Bft.
high, some of which were carved with a stone or shell, and further orna-
mented by rings of wood also carved. On the tops of these, posts wore
placed the waddics of the deceased At the head was placed
a piece of a canoe and a spear, and round the grave were several little
baskets made of the fan palm leaf, which, from their small size, we
thought had been placed there by the children of the departed. Nothing
could exceed the neatness of the whole : the sand and the earth were
cleaned away from the sides, and not a shrub or weed was suffered to
grow within the area.” These little baskets of fan palm leaf arc to-day
generally used by the Island people (though they also occur on the
mainland). During my stay at the central camp I obtained a large
collection of the baskets made by the young Melville Island girls, with
a pointed bone of kangaroo. The description of the grave by Captain
Bremer proves that in this case a male, and very likely a good warrior,
was buried, as indicated by the. waddics and the spear (24). The same
(23) Russell, 1.c., p. 34.
(24) There are not many cases mentioned in which the Australian aboriginals
wore accustomed to decorate the graves with the implements or weapons of the
deceased. Grey made a remark regarding south-west Australia. Mr. Alex.
Morton (Hobart), “ Notes on a Visit to West Australia,” Royal See. of Tasmania,
1898, says from the Murchison River—’ 1 If it is a man it is usual to place at the
head of the grave a womorah, the property of the deceased.” Of. Herbert Base-
dow, 1.c., p. 24, regarding a grave of a woman in the Musgrave Ranges—“ The
grave in which the corpse, had been buried a few foot below the surface had boon
filled up with earth and a circular mound erected over it to indicate the spot. On
the summit of the mound the implements of the gilt—a yamstiok (‘ wanna ’) and
a ooolcman (‘mika’) —had boon stuck in the sand in an upright position,
almost as a tombstone might bo erected.” (Pi. VI., fig. 1).
Regarding the question as to how far the pillar grave monument are distri-
buted over Australia I got very little information. The only comparable thing
is a simple small painted slab from a grave of Mao Arthur River, preserved in the
Adelaide Museum. Some gentlemen at Port Darwin assarted that they had seen
similar things in the Northern Territory, but without definite statements.


idea is confirmed by Major Campbell’s report (1892); “It appears
to be the custom of the. natives to bury their dead in retired spots,
near their most frequent camping grounds. The burial place is circular,
about 10ft. to 12ft. in diameter; it is surrounded by upright poles,
many of which are formed at tire top like lances or halberds, 14ft. to
15ft. high, and between these spears and waddles of the deceased arc
stuck upright in the ground.
On Saturday, the 22nd September, the long sandy point of Capo
Van Dioman was doubled. Near Cook’s Reef two natives wore sighted.
They followed the ship, making the most funny jumping movements
as a reply to our invitation, by “ Pongi, Pongi,” to come near tho boat.
As we intended to go ashore they cleared out rapidly. Cooper suggested
that they belong to the tribe which speared a Japanese sailor (25) from
one of the. pearling luggers some months ago, and that they feared
punishment.
After sailing all night the cutter arrived about midday on Sunday
at Lethbridge Bay (26), at tho mouth of an uncharted river, which lias
been named by the Coopers tho Jessie River (27).
More than a dozen mainland natives were waiting hero, who all
crowded on board—men, women, children, and three, dogs. Tho
river was narrow, with mangroves growing so closely and thickly on
either hand that at several points a passage had to bo cut for tho boat.
Every branch falling down emptied a nest of green ants over our
heads.
After continuing up tho river for about five miles a halt was called
for the night, and fires wore lighted on shore. I camped there, but I
did not sleep, because I never felt at one time such countless hordes
of ferocious mosquitoes as wore, met with on this river. An early start
was made the following morning, and after travelling two mites the
thick belt of mangroves gave place to a wide expanse of swampy country
swarming with many varieties of game, buffaloes, and birds, especially
wild geese which, with long swan-like neck, strong bony prominences
on the head, and the webbed feet only partially developed, seem to
be identical with the species from southern New Guinea that 1 saw in
Java.
Approximately 10 miles from tho coast the water voyage ended,
and we had to travel on horseback over a tableland from 100 ft. to 200 ft,
(20) Government report, 1905, p. 28.
(20) Captain King says (vol. i., p. 108): “ Tho country appeared verdant,
and the hills are thickly wooded ; at the bottom of tho bay a shoal opening trends
m between two hills, over which, in the evening, seven natives wore observed to
cross in a canoe. This was called Lethbridge Bay.”
(27) Government report, 1905, p. 22,—“ . . . Although there appears
to bo an abundance of fresh water on both islands, no rivers wore observed to open
out on either of the north, south, or west coasts.” But on the map a “ Johnston
River ”is marked opening in Bronton Bay. We did not proceed so far eastwards,
and the Johnston River is not identical witli tho Jessie River, the origin of which
is in the very centre of the island. This river, geographically undescribed, ought
to lie termed by a definite name, for which I would suggest that of Cooper River]


high for another 10 miles to the central camp. At the landing-place
a great number of Melville Island natives were awaiting, including
many women and children. They all helped to carry the luggage
and provisions. We left the boat without any protection in the
river.
The soil on the tableland shows the laterite formation, the surface
being covered with small pebbles of ironstone—-the usual ferruginous
concretionary claystone. A similar formation is found on the top of
Luxmore Head (28). The high land was not well timbered, but as we
descended to the valley, in which the central camp is situated, I
was surprised by the luxuriant vegetation and the big timber which
renders the little valley cool and shady on the hottest day, the whole
forming a striking contrast to the parched appearance of the surround-
ing country. This fertile condition was due to the presence of several
springs which practically form the source of the river up which our
party had ascended. One of the springs forms a large watcrhole contain-
ing water of great freshness and purity, and forming the most invigorating
and glorious natural bath conceivable. This picturesque valley is
the present headquarters of the buffalo shooters. There are two camps,
one tenanted by the mainland blacks—the bodyguard of the Coopers—
the other by the Island natives, who distinguished themselves funnily
enough as the “Myalls,” or wild blaokfellows. Both camps have the.
most friendly relations with each other. I remained two days, making
some interesting observations, and exchanging tobacco, axes,'calico, &c.,
for many ethnographical specimens. There wore a good number of
very comely young girls and pretty children. They spend much time
in decorating their faces by a peculiar method of painting, which I did
not observes on the mainland. Some parts of the face round the mouth
or below the eyes are surrounded by a colored lino, generally red ; the
interior of this marked field is dotted with spots of another color, for
instance, yellow. I have seen similar decorations on pictures of women
from Hula, British New Guinea. The forehead is painted almost
yellow, the region of the eyes red.
The most interesting spectacle was offered every night bv the
corrob borees, especially by the dances of the Island people, these'being
totally different from those of the mainland natives, who performed a
“ devil devil ” dance, using dancing sticks made of paper-bark. The
Myalls walked first in Indian file; then surrounding in a half-
circle two men, who were the only performers—the others providing
the spectators and the orchestra—in a most singular way, never observed
in the mainland, by beating both hands on the bare buttocks. So
far as I know such realistic music has never been described, but Major
Campbell (1829) makes a remark connected with this matter regarding
the Melville Island natives : “ When they express joy they jump
about and clap their hands violently on their buttocks, and in showing
contempt they turn their hack, look over their shoulder, and give a
smack upon the same part with their hand.” Very rightly the same
,(28) Government report, 190 S, p. 23.


author remarks that “ they arc good mimics, have a facility for catching
up words, and arc gifted with considerable observation.” In the
corrobborees I witnessed they not only imitated animals such as alliga-
tors, turtle, sharks (29), as was done elsewhere, but they had adopted
the antics of the old Fort Dundas sailors in rolling and pulling on ropes,
and oven the actions of the man in command of sailors so engaged.
The performers are painted most beautifully with white clay, and
very likely this decoration is an imitation of white men’s apparel.
The hands and feet being devoid of coloration, the impression of a white
dress is conveyed. The dances ended regularly with jumping of a
most violent description.
Some of the women and children took part in the dance, stamping
in the circle with the characteristic high, step movements, holding a
piece of paper-bark in the hands to cover the genital parts, and pro-
ducing a most ridiculous effect.
I was sorry to leave this peaceful place, in which the air is filled
by day and night with the happy laugh, and song of a yet undisturbed
black people. The moonlight in the dense scrub mingled with the
glare of many camp fires made the most poetic impression I ever met
with in “ Black Australia.”
Returning to the mouth of the .Jennie River (September 27th), after
a second painful mosquito night in the mangrove swamps, I discovered
another grave on Radford Point —at least I supposed that place to
be a grave, although I was unable to obtain any proof. Our digging
between, the monuments was unsuccessful; perhaps the skeleton had
decomposed, perhaps displaced. There wore only two monuments,
■sft. to 6ft. high, which are figured in Plato 17. On the inner side of
every pillar a waddy was implanted, allowing the male sex of the,
■deceased. The paintings in red and yellow were beautifully done.
I cut away the upper part of one pillar, taking it in the boat. Near
the place I found two small sticks, which arc used for boating time
in the corrobborees.
On the same day I was fortunate enough to discover another grave,
in which the skeleton was preserved. We tried to call at Karslake
Island, but the water was so shallow that our boat became fixed on the
■coral reef. I travelled 600yds. over the shallow stony ground to the
island, in which our blackfellows opened a grave. It was surrounded
by nine pillars, the most of them being damaged by fire ; but the same
variation of shape was noticed as I have described. The skeleton
was partly decomposed, but the skull fairly well preserved. It was
that of a strong male individual of perhaps 60 years of age. The teeth
(29) In imitating the shark the two performers kept stinks in their arras, one
in the right placed with one end against the shoulder, the other in the loft. The
right arm represented the snout, the loft the tail of the flak Moving forwards,
with the right arm in front, they turned and jumped about most furiously, as if
they were trying to oatch game.


are completely preserved (30). The supraoiliary ridges were very
prominent. The wholes feature of the skull reminded me very much
of a beautiful specimen from Victoria belonging to my collection, thus
proving the unity of the race from south to north, only the width of
the, face is a little larger in the Melville Island specimen than in that
from the south coast.
On the return journey through the Apsley Strait we experienced
some turbulent weather, and I tried to protect myself against the
icy cold rain by jumping into the tepid seawater.
In St. Asaph’s Bay I had the last meeting with the aboriginals.
An excellent old fellow and two young men came on board, and we
had a great laugh and entertainment without words together.
From Port Darwin I returned directly to Sydney at the end of
November, 1906. The last scientific work of my trip was done in
Tasmania, where I was most kindly assisted by Mr. Morton, curator
of the Tasmanian Museum. I investigated the skulls of the extinct
Tasmanians, which reminded me of the studies on the same matter
I made some years ago in Paris and London. I was pleased to find
Dr. Noetling in Tasmania, and to learn that wo may expect from him
an exhaustive publication on the primitive stone implements of the
Tasmanians. I collected myself a good number from a native quarry
near Melton-Mowbray, northwards from, Hobart. The soil is filled
with relics of human manufacture for a depth of 18in., which proves
a long continuance of work, especially if we consider that the locality
is the summit of a hill, in which soil is increasing slowly. lam obliged
to Mr. Morton for the donation of many fine specimens of stone imple-
ments, which I hope will be useful in the acute discussions taking
place in the old country regarding the Eolithic problem. I discovered
primitive stone implements of Tasmanoid type in many old camping
grounds in North Australia. There is no cardinal distinction between
those from Australia and from Tasmania. It is wrong to call the Aus-
tralian Neolithic on account of the half-polishod stone axes, which are
scarce compared with the primitive stone implements. These imple-
ments show great variations which offer some similarities with those of
the Palaeolithic and Eolithic stages of stone technique of Europe. Many
Australian tribes have preserved a stage which is lower even than
some Eolithic types of the old country ; many used only shells.
Deeply regretting the extinction of the Tasmanians, I think every-
body will agree with me if I suggest that a more enlightened treat-
ment of the Australian aboriginals is justifiable on scientific grounds
alone, apart altogether from humanitarian questions. My object as
a scientist is not to blame any person or any institution, but to enlist
the services of the white Australians in suggesting more improved
methods of treatment of their black brothers—methods which I feel
will be forthcoming when the existing conditions and the problems
which have to be faced are better known.
(30) According to Major Campbell tho custom of knocking out one front
tooth was practised among the Island people ; but I observed nothing of that
oustom, nor of circumcision or subinoision.


EXPLANATION OF THE PLATES.
Plate I. Bark Canoe and Native of Bayley Island, Wellesley Giot
Gulf of Carpentaria,
Plate 2, Wellesley Island Natives on Bayley Island ; the four
figure from the left is the principal old man, “ Aliget.”
Plate 3. Native Camp, Archer River, North Queensland.
Plate 4-. Native Men of the Bellenden-Ker District, North Queer
land,
Plate 5. Mummy of Native Chief, Bellenden-Ker Mountaii
North Queensland.
Plate 6. Natives of Cairns District, North Queensland, prepaid:
for a fight.
Plate 7. Natives of the Niol-Niol Tribe, Broome District, Nor
Queensland, decorated for a Corrobboree.
Plate.B. Natives of North-West Australia decorated for a Cc
robboree.
Plate 9. Native Prisoners, Wyndham Gaol, NorthrWeat Austral!
Plate 10. Three Native Prisoners in chains, Wyndham Gaol, Nort
West Australia.
Plato 11. To the left, Victoria River Native ; to the right, feet
same, showing abnormality of toes (see test).
Plate 12. Group of Natives of Melville Island at the Landing-plac
Jessie River. On the extreme left, a typical Melville Islander; in tl
background Joe Cooper, the buffalo-hunter.
Plate 13. Natives of Melville Island dancing.
Plate 14. Women of Melville Island at Central Camp.
Plate 15. To the left, Natives of Wellesley Island collecting Nardot
to the right, Dance of Melville Island Natives.
Plate 16. Central Camp, Melville Island—Mainland and Islai
Natives.
Plate 17. On the left, the upper part of a carved Grave Monnme;
(“ Wondorolla ”), from Radford Point, Melville Island, on which a Natr
rests his arm ; on the right, four Natives and two Grave Monuments.
18. Map of Melville Island, showing author’s route.
Plates and Ma:


PLATE 1. BARK CANOE AND NATIVE OF BAYLEY ISLAND, WELLESLEY GROUP, GULF OF CARPENTARIA.


PLATE 2. NATIVES. WELLESLEY ISLAND.


PLATE 3. NATIVE CAMP, ARCHER RIVER.


plate 4. NATIVE MEN OF THE BELLENDEN-KER OISTIOT, NORTH OUEENSLAND.


PLATE 5. MUMMY OF NATIVE CHIEF, EELLENDENKER MOUNTAINS, NORTH QUEENSLAND.
FRONT AND SIDE VIEWS.)


PLATE 5. NATIVES, CAIRNS DISTRICT, QUEENSLAND.


PLATE 7. NATIVES, N, W. AUSTRALIA.


J. TAYLOR. COLLO.
PLATE 8. PREPARING FOR A GORROBOREE N. W. AUSTRALIA


J. TAYLOR. COLLO.
PLATE 9. NATIVE PRISONERS, WYNDHAM, W AUSTRALIA,


PLATE 10. NATIVE PRISONERS IN CHAINS, WYNOHAH GAOL, NORTH-WEST AUSTRALIA.


J. TAYLOR. COLLO.
PLATE 11. NATIVE OF VICTORIA RIVER. FEET OF SAME NATIVE SHOWING ABNORMAL TOES


J. TAYLOR. COLLO.
PLATE 12. NATIVES OF JESSIE RIVER, MELVILLE ISLAND.


J. TAYLOP. COLLO.
PLATE 13 NATIVES DANCING, MELVILLE ISLAND.


J. TAYLOR. COLLO
PLATE 14 NATIVE WOMEN, MELVILLE ISLAND.


J TAYLOR. COLLO
NATIVES DANCING. MELVILLE ISLAND.
PLATE 15. NATIVES GATHERING NARDOO, WELLESLEY ISLAND


FOUR NATIVES AND TWO GRAVE MONUMENTS,
MELVILLE ISLAND.
PLATE 17. UPPER PART OF A CARVED GRAVE MONUMENT,
FROM RADFORD POINT, MELVILLE ISLAND, ON
WHICH A NATIVE RESTS HIS ARM.


PLATE 18. CENTRAL CAMP, MELVILLE ISLAND. MAINLAND AND ISLAND NATIVES.


SURVEYOR CENERAL'S OFFICE.ADELAIDE. A.[?]


