

BEAUTY SPOTS
OF MAFFRA
& Districts.


ISBN 0 9590454 2 2
This facsimile of the original booklet that was published circa 1914 has been printed through
the kind permission of Miss Hilda Hammond, a daughter of the photographer,
H. B. Hammond.
Published 1988, by F. A. Pearce, ‘Penpol’, Boisdale, 3860
Printed by E-GEE PRINTERS PTY. LTD.,
45 Macleod Street, Bairnsdale, Vic. 3875


Maffra from McLean’s Hill
H. B. Hammond, Photo


Some Beauty Spots
of
Maffra and Districts
PHOTOGRAPHS by H. B. HAMMOND, MAFFRA


Maffra from the River.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


The Shire Hall.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


Sweetnam’s Maffra Hotel - Mr. E. Lonergan, Proprietor.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


MAFFRA
■ AFFRA, in North Gippsland, 130 miles from Melbourne, is
one of the prettiest little towns in Victoria. With its main
street three chains wide, containing four rows of well-grown
——J ornamental Fees, planted like St. Kilda-road; its good,
gravel roads, level in almost every direction to the very foot
of the ranges, and the beauty of its scenery within easy distance, is
rapidly becoming known to tourists as the ideal district for motorists
and cyclists, and now that the Government roads, one leading to Moroka


Metropolitan Hotel.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


Macalister Hotel Mr. J. Shankley, Proprietor.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


Bell Bird Corner Newry Road.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


Valley, the other to Licola, are open for traffic, with easy grades and
beautiful mountain scenery, shooting, fishing and motoring parties are
taking advantage of the facilities offered, and the object of this booklet
is to give some idea of what the Maffra district shows.
No. I.—A view of Maffra from McLean’s Hill. The State sugar
factory is shown in the distance, the trees in the background indicate the
main street, and the course of the Macalister River.
No. 2. —Is taken from the west side of the town on the banks of
the river; the buildings shown are in the main street.
No. 3.—Maffra Shire Hall, in Johnson-street.
No. 3a.—Sweetman’s Maffra Hotel, kept by Mr. E. Lonergan.


Macalister River at McLachlan’s.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


“The Rocks,” Upper Maffra.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


A Fairy Grotto “The Rocks.”
H. B. Hammond, Photo


No. 4. —Metropolitan Hotel, Mr. Maddox.
No. 4a. —The extreme west end of the town, showing abutment of
bridge and Macalister Hotel, kept by Mr. J. Shankley.
No. 5. —Bell Bird Corner, a pretty spot on Newry-road, three miles
from Maffra, where the tinkling note of the bell bi*rd is heard all the
year round.
No. 6. —A view from the high river bank at Mr. McLachlan’s. The
Macalister River leaves its rocky bed here and enters the rich flats of
Upper Maffra.
Nos. 7 and 8. —These views are taken at what are known as the
Upper Maffra Rocks. This is an ideal picnic spot ten miles from


Low Level Bridge - Valencia Creek.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


Mac’s Water Hole - Valencia Creek.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


Blackwoods in Blossom - Valencia Creek.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


Maffra, and is reached by a picturesque bush road, well made to within
two miles, and then a good bush track leads to the Rocks, which are the
property of Air. Horstmann, a veteran councillor of the Maffra Shire,
Justice of the Peace, etc.
No. Ba.—The low level bridge over the Avon River, 12 miles from
Maffra, just below its junction with Valencia Creek* When heavy local
rains fall the river becomes a foaming torrent, the side chains are re-
moved, and logs and other debris are carried over the top of the bridge.
No. 9.—A lagoon in Bulgar Park, Councillor AlacDonald’s property
at Little Plain.
No. 10. —Blackwood in blossom on Cameron Bros.’ farm, Valencia
Creek.


Moroka Valley Road Leaving O’Connor’s.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


Luckman’s Caves - Moroka Valley Road.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


The Hairpin Bend - Moroka Valley Road.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


Nos. 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 are taken on the Government road to the
Moroka Valley. This country, which, before the road was made, was
practically impassable, is now easy of access by horse, buggy or motor
car, and to leave Maffra in the morning and camp or picnic in one of the
hundred and one beauty spots along the road, is one way of spending
a perfect holiday. Rabbits are plentiful in the lplls and along the
Valencia Creek, which is scarcely ever lost sight of. Perch and black-
hsh abound in the rocky pools of the creek, which Hows in a succession
of rapids over freestone rocks, and deep pools, clear as crystal, from
the uninhabited ranges beyond. The new road is cut for ten miles, and
its present limit is about 25 miles from Maffra. It is being rapidly
pushed on, and in the near future it is a certainty that a splendidly
graded buggy or motor road will be carried right on to Mount Welling-


George Robertson’s Farm, Valencia Creek. On the Moroka Valley Road.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


End of Track Completed on Moroka Valley Road. H. B. Hammond, Photo


Heights above Glenmaggie - Licola Road.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


ton, opening up some of the grandest scenery in Victoria, and finally
joining the road which passes the Buffalo. Thefe are several tracks to
Mount Wellington, but it is an established fact, that when finished, the
Valencia Creek and Moroka Valley route will be easily the more prac-
tical and beautiful.
No. 11. —The start of the Government road at O’Connor’s.
i
No. 12.—Luckman’s Caves.
No. 13. —The Hairpin Bend; a typical bit of Gippsland engineering.
No. 14. —George Robertson and his farm; a typical pioneer and a
braw mon.
No. 15.—01 d Con’s Downfall, the present terminus of the road;
only a bridle path follows.


Licola Road - Medowra Flats.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


Medowra Flats - Licola Road.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


Bell Bird Pinch - Licola Road.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


We now leave the Moroka Valley road and turn to the road which
follows the Maealister Valley, from Maffra to Licola. The road leads
through Tinamba, the pretty township of Glenmaggie (named by Angus
McMillan as a compliment to his sweetheart in Scotland, Maggie
Nicholson), and past many lovely and prosperous looking farms, and
pretty hills and valleys, with the grand mountains in view all the time,
and from the hill tops glimpses of the open country *five or six hundred
feet lower down.
No. 16.—The first view, taken a few miles out from Glenmaggie.
Nos. 17 and 18. —Views of the Medowra flats from the track high up
on the hillside. Medowra is the property of Mr. Langland, who, a few
years back, purchased it from Mr. Tom Riggall.


Bell Bird Pinch - Licola Road.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


The First Bridge - Licola Road.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


Beyond Glenfalloch - Licola Road.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


Nos. 19 and 20. —Show Bell Bird Pinch, where, on turning a sharp
angle in the cutting, a milk cart is met, and the car has to be backed a
short distance to allow a pass to take place. Before the road was cut
the cart track passed over the top of the hill, and the “Pinch” was one
of the terrors of the road.
No. 21. —The first bridge on the new road. The scenery here is very
fine, the hill side at back of picture must be 1000 feet 4iigh, and too steep
to walk up, but wooded from bottom to top.
In the run on to the terminus of the road the scenery is very fine, a
succession of amazing turns and ever changing views, now of the river
below, now of the hills above, and mostly both at the same time, till
Glenfalloch Station is reached. Glenfalloch (the hidden glen) was for
many years the home of the late Mr. Edward Riggall and his family,
and has lately been purchased by Mr. R. Gilder, of Bushy Park.


A Homestead - Licola Road.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


The Last Bridge - Licola Road.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


Sunset on Mount Rockwalloby.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


No. 22.—1 s taken a mile beyond Glenfalloch, and gives an idea of a
typical turn in the ever-turning and wonderful Licola road, and also a
glimpse of the rich Glenfalloch flats.
No. 23.—Mr, Alf. Burgoyne’s farm beyond Glenfalloch; a lovely
spot.
No. 24.—The far bridge, and the furthest bit o/ work so far done
on the track. After crossing this bridge no vehicle traffic of any des-
cription is possible, but like the Moroka Valley road, the intention is to
push right on, thus making a grand alternative route to Mount Wel-
lington.
No. 25. —Shows the Rocky Range known as ‘’Rock Wallaby,”
under the setting sun, the car and track are in deep shadows, but the


The Children’s Bathing Corner at Maffra.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


The Ford, Avon River - Beesley Park.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


Noonday Rest - Dargo Road.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


rocky hillside across the valley,- with its remarkable rib of stone running
from base to summit, looking like the “Old Wall of China,” is in bright
sunlight.
The hillside along which the cutting is made, is so steep here that
a stone dropped over the edge from the road, only touches ground a
few times as it bounds to the bottom of the gully, hundreds of feet
below.
Pretty scenery abounds even in the town of Maffra itself, as the
next photo, showing the children’s bathing bend, proves. The river
winding immediately behind the buildings of the main street, contains
many picturesque turns and deeply wooded bends, in one of which the
ladies’ bathing house is situated. Some distance along, round many a
bushy bend, is the men’s corner, and half way between, a lovely sandy


Carting Stores to Dargo.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


Stockdale Hotel - Dargo Road.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


Hop Picking - Briagolong.
H. B. Hammond, Photo


shallow, where large gums and wide spreading wattles spread their
shade across the water, is an ideal place for children.
Two bullock teams on their way to the sawmill are next shown,
crossing the ford of the Avon at Bushy Park.
A noonday rest on the Dargo-road, shows the manner in which the
stores are taken to the mountain township. The Stockdale Hotel, being
a half-way house on the road between Maffira and Dargo.
Many hops are still grown at Briagolong, and our photo shows one
of the pickers, together with the interior of an old vine-grower s home
a few miles beyond Briagolong. A scene on the river shows one of
many ideal places for picnicing, where both shooting and fishing can
be had, and beautiful scenery revelled in ad lib.
Id. B. HAMMOND, Photo, Maffra.


“The Old Folks at Home.” Interior Old Vine Grower’s Home, Briagolong. H. B. Hammond, Photo


On the River.
H. B. Hammond, Photo




