

Communicated December 23. 1834.
A KANGAROO, recently brought from New South Wales by Capt. Sir Edward W.
Parry, R.N., and presented by him to the Society, offers the type of a new species so
well defined in its characters, and so distinct from all that have been recorded, as to
merit a full description. Its distinctive characters may be expressed in the following
terms:
Macropus Parryi.
Macr. rhinario lato; auriculis elongatis, nudiusculis; caudd pilis rigidis hrevibus incum-
bentibus vestitd, corpore sublongiore: notao griseo ; gastrao pallido ; fascid gemrum,
cauddque pro maximd parte, albis, hdc ad apicem nigrd.
The general form of the animal is that of the common Kangaroo, Macropus major,
Shaw ; it seems, however, as far as may be judged from a single specimen not seen by
me until after its death, to be somewhat more slender in its proportions. Its size is
about one third smaller; but the tail and ears are of greater proportional length, as
will be seen by the comparative measurements hereafter given. The colour above is
grey, differing little, except by its comparative lightness, from that of the common
species; the long scattered hairs being entirely of a brownish grey, and the under fur
dusky at the base and pale at the tips of the soft woolly hairs which compose it. The
general hue is somewhat darker along the middle line of the upper part of the back,
and at the base of the tail; but becomes paler on the shoulders, and still more so on
the sides of the body : the under parts lose nearly all the tinge of grey, and are covered
with a much thicker, longer, closer, and more woolly fur. The base of the tail above,
for about 9 inches, is dark grey, and beyond this are several faint indications of a ten-
dency to form half rings of that colour on the somewhat dirty white which occupies the
remainder of that organ, with the exception of about 3 inches at the tip. The hairs on
the tail are short, bristly, closely adpressed, and but thinly cover the surface of the
skin. On the middle line of the under surface, however, they are closer and much
longer. Like those of the upper surface these are of a dirty white ; but about 7 inches
from the tip they begin to change into a deep black, and mingling towards the extremity
with the shorter hairs of the sides and upper surface, they give to the tail a black tip,
intermixed with only a few scattered white hairs, which are scarcely seen except on a
close examination. At the base of the tail its under surface is covered by white fur,
XXXI. Some Account of Macropus Parryi, a hitherto undescribed Species of Kangaroo
from New South Wales. By E. T. Bennett, Esq., F.L.S., Sec. Z.S.
295


continuous with that of the belly and pouch ; and on the hinder part of the haunches
on either side (or rather on a space bounded by the base of the tail, the prymna, and
the marsupium,) is a broad patch of light yellowish brown. In the common species the
hair of the tail is far less bristly, longer, softer, and by no means adpressed.
The head above is of a greyish mouse colour, more intense from the eyes forwards,
where it becomes almost wholly of a dusky black. Bordering this darker colour below,
on a level with the lower eyelid, a broad well-defined white band extends along the
cheek from the posterior angle of the eye to the angle of the mouth. Below this is a
similar but less strongly marked band of the common grey colour, which passes from
the back and sides of the neck over the sides of the head, and is continued along the
last-mentioned band to the angle of the mouth. The lips are grey, with an admixture
of long black and white bristly hairs, and the latter are especially remarkable on the
lower lip and chin. A broad whitish patch, with little of the grey mixture, occupies
a space bounded by the edges of the lower jaw and extending to the upper part of the
throat. The ears are mouse-coloured at the base, with a light grey patch on the vertex
between them, grey in the middle, and dusky at their tips. Externally they are very
thinly clothed with short scattered hairs, and internally they are almost naked, excepting
a slight tuft of white hairs at the base of their anterior margin, and a narrow edging all
round of short whitish hairs. This extreme thinness of the clothing of the ears renders
visible on their inner surface, and also by transmitted light, a number of small glan-
dular transparent pores. In the common species these organs are thickly clothed with
hair on their outer surface, and are much less bare internally than in the animal brought
home by Sir Edward Parry, and there are consequently no transparent pores visible in
them: the hairs of the margin of the ears are also, in the common species, of a dark
hrown approaching to black.
On the limbs the hairs become gradually shorter and more rigid. The whole of the
fore paw is black, with a slight admixture of grey on the metacarpal and carpal regions;
and the claws also are black. On the hinder feet the two large outer toes are deep
black, and covered with long rigid hairs as far as the base of the strong black hoof-like
claws. The two small united toes are light grey, like the metatarsus and tarsus.
The comparative extent of the naked muzzle appears in this group, as in various
tribes of Ruminants, to afford an excellent guide in the discrimination of species, and
perhaps also of sections, without attaining, as in some other cases, a value of generic
importance. In the species under consideration it occupies the whole space between
the nostrils, and downwards to the fissure of the upper lip, spreading over the flattened
extremity of the nose, and giving off on either side a rather broad margin to the upper
edge of each nostril. It is covered with rather large and conspicuous papilla:. In this
respect the animal is allied to the Bush Kangaroo, Macr. Ualabatus, Less.; and differs
altogether from the common Kangaroo, in which the naked muzzle is limited to a narrow
margin surrounding each of the nostrils, with a very slight band of connexion in front.
296
MR. E. T. BENNETT’S ACCOUNT OF MACROPUS PARRYI.


Macr. Parryi.
Macr. major
Ft. In.
Total length from the muzzle to the tip of the tail .
5 4
6
8
Girth round the middle of the body
1 8
Length of the head ....
6
body
2 4
3
2
— tail
2 6
2
9
ear
4
Breadth of the ear . .
2
24-
Length of the hinder foot from the calcaneum to the tip of
the longest claw . .
10;
2
Length of the tibia
1 1
fore arm and foot from the olecranon to the
tip of the longest claw .
9
The measurements of Parry's Kangaroo, as compared with a specimen of the common
or greater Kangaroo in the Society’s Museum, are as follows:
The two latter measurements are not given in the common species, the specimen com-
pared being without bones in those parts, and consequently liable to contraction or
distension under the hands of the stuffer. A second specimen of Macr. major in the
Collection measures 3 feet in the length of the body, and 2 feet 8 inches in that of the
tail.
Sir Edward Parry states the animal “ to have been obtained at Stroud, near Port
Stephens, in the latitude of about 30° South. It was caught by the natives, by whom
it is called Wallaroo; having been thrown out of its mother’s pouch when the latter was
hunted. At that time it was somewhat less than a rabbit; but having continued in
the possession of Sir Edward Parry for more than two years in New South Wales, be-
sides six months on the passage to England, it may be considered as fully grown. It
was never kept in confinement until it was embarked for England, but lived in the
kitchen, and ran about the house and grounds like a dog, going out every night after
dusk into “ the bush” (or forest) to feed, and usually returning to its friend the man-
cook, in whose bed it slept, about two o’clock in the morning. Besides what it might
obtain in these excursions, it ate meat, bread, vegetables, in short, anything given to it
by the cook, with whom it was extremely tame, but would allow nobody else to take
liberties with it. It expressed its anger when very closely approached by others, by a
sort of half-grunting, half-hissing, very discordant sound, which appeared to come from
the throat, without altering the expression of the countenance. In the daytime it would
occasionally, but not often, venture out to a considerable distance from home; in which
case it would sometimes be chased back by strange dogs, especially those belonging to
the natives. From these, however, it had no difficulty in escaping, through its extreme
297
MR. E. T. BENNETT’S ACCOUNT OF MACROPUS PARRYI.


swiftness ; and it was curious to see it bounding up a hill and over the garden fence,
until it had placed itself under the protection of the dogs belonging to the house, espe-
cially of two of the Newfoundland breed, to which it was attached, and which never
failed to afford it their assistance by sallying forth in pursuit of its adversaries.”
Captain Parry further observes, that, “ like all other Kangaroos, this animal, when in
active motion, never touches the ground with its tail, merely using it to form a tripod
when standing erect. It seems to inhabit no part of the colony in the latitude of Sidney.”
On his return to England Sir Edward Parry brought the animal with him ; but soon
after his landing it met with an accident by which its leg was broken, and which it
survived for only a short time. Its body was presented to the Society while yet recent;
and the following account of the particulars observed in its dissection is by my friend
Mr. Owen.
“ Having examined, at the request of my friend Mr. Bennett, the principal viscera of
this new species of Macropus, I find that they present with few variations the same
characters which belong to the anatomy of the greater Kangaroo, and which have been
for the most part described and figured in the works of Home and Cuvier.
‘ ‘ The large sacculated stomach occupied the epigastric, left hypochondriac, and left
lumbar regions ; from this it passsed obliquely upwards and across the abdomen, and
then turned, as in the greater Kangaroo ', to terminate in the duodenum. The cardiac
end was produced into two small sacculi, which were not so much separated from each
other as in Macr. major, but were folded back upon the stomach. The cardiac extre-
mity was situated sternad of the (esophagus, which was about 3 inches long after passing
the diaphragm. The interior of the stomach presented the same disposition of cuticle,
and series of glandular patches, and the pylorus was surrounded by the same thickened
zone of glands, as in Macr. major. The sacculi were puckered up by two longitudinal
bands extending from the (esophagus along either side of the smaller curvature, while
in Macr. major a third longitudinal band extends along the line from which the great
epiploon is continued to the spleen and transverse colon.
“ There were two hair-balls in the stomach, of an oval shape, not rounded as they
generally are in the Ruminants, which are most obnoxious to these formations. One of
these hair-balls measured 3 inches in the long diameter; the other, 2 inches. They
were entirely composed of the hairs of the animal, matted together and agglutinated
by the mucus of the stomach. This occurrence of an inconvenience which is the oc-
casional result of a necessary complication of the principal digestive organ, is interesting
on account of the near approach to the Ruminating tribe which the Kangaroos make
in the complexity of the stomach, and which is united with a corresponding simplicity
of the ccecum and colon.
‘ ‘ I have more than once observed the act of rumination in the Kangaroos preserved
in the Vivarium of the Society. It does not take place while they are recumbent, but
1 Proceedings of the Committee of Science, Zool. Soc., Part 1., p. 161.
298
MR. E. T. BENNETT’S ACCOUNT OF MACROPUS PARRYI.


when erect upon the tripod of the hinder legs and tail. The abdominal muscles are
seen in violent action for a few seconds; the head is a little depressed; and then the
cud is chewed by a quick rotatory motion of the jaws. This act was more common!v
noticed after physic had been given to the animals, which we may suppose to have
interrupted the healthy digestive processes ; it by no means takes place with the same
frequency and regularity as in the true Ruminants.
The disposition and structure of the intestinal canal corresponded to that of the
greater Kangaroo, in an adult specimen of which I measured carefully the intestines,
and found the length of the small intestines 22 feet; of the large intestines, 9 feet; of
the crecum, 1 foot 10 inches: in Macr. Parryi the small intestines measured 9 feet; the
large intestines 4 feet; and the crecum 9 inches. The different segments of the canal
have consequently nearly the same relative proportions ; but the whole are shorter in
proportion to the body than in the greater Kangaroo.
“ There were several glandular patches in the ileum; the villi of this gut, viewed
under the microscope, were thickly set, moderately long, and compressed, as in the greater
Kangaroo. In the large intestines the mucous surface was devoid of villi, but presented,
when magnified, a very fine reticulation. In the greater Kangaroo two longitudinal
bands commence about one third of the distance from the end of the crecum, and con-
tinue for about 2 feet along the colon, when they gradually spread over the gut and dis-
appear ; very faint traces of a similar structure were perceptible in Macr. Parryi: but
in neither species do these bands draw up the intestine into pouches; nor is the crecum
or colon dilated to serve as a reservoir, the stomach here serving for the necessary ac-
cumulation and retention of the vegetable substances. In Semnopithecus, however, the
colon is sacculated as in other Quadrumana, notwithstanding the complicated structure
of its capacious stomach. I have observed in the greater Kangaroo that the contents of
the crecum are very soft, and so continue along the colon to the ends of the two longi-
tudinal bands, beyond which they begin to be formed into cubical lumps about an inch
square, with the margins rounded off.
“ The liver in Macr. Parryi was situated wholly to the right of the mesial plane, as
in the Ruminants, and from a similar cause, viz. the preponderating size of the stomach,
which, with the spleen, fills the left hypochondrium. It presented the same form as in
Macr. major, being more or less deeply cleft into five lobes exclusive of the Spigelian
appendix or lobulus. The latter is not continued in the Kangaroo from the right lobe of
the liver, as in most other Mammalia, but is a process of the left lobe, on account of
the position of that part of the lesser curvature of the stomach to which it is adapted.
“The gall-bladder does not perforate the liver, as in the Opossum, but occupies a
deep fissure, its fundus in both genera, however, projecting from the convex surface of
the gland.
“ The terminal portion of the ductus choledochus was surrounded and thickened by
the same glandular structure in Macr. Parryi as in Macr. major; and was similarly
VOL. I. 2 R
299
MR. E. T. BENNETT’S ACCOUNT OF MACROPUS PARRYI.


joined by the duct of the pancreas immediately before penetrating the duodenum, which
it enters in Macr. Parryi at 3 inches from the pylorus ; and in Macr. major at 5 inches’
distance from the same place. A similar glandular structure of the biliary duct is ob-
servable in some of the Dibranchiate Cephalopods; but in these the accessory folliculi
are more developed, and were regarded by Hunter as analogous to a pancreas: the
true analogue of this gland, however, exists in all the Cephalopods in the simple rudi-
mental condition which it presents in the lowest Vertebrata. The pancreas in the Ma-
cropi extends from the spleen across the root of the mesentery to the duodenum - it
sends off many branched processes into the posterior part of the epiploon.
“The spleen presents a singular figure, which might, at first sight, be supposed to
relate to the extent and complexity of the stomach. It is a narrow, flattened, T-shaped
body; one long strip extends down the left side of the great end of the stomach, and
a shorter strip goes off at right angles to the smaller end of the stomach, and accom-
panies a large process of the pancreas. In Dasyurus and Phalangista, however, in which
the stomach is of a simple form, the spleen is also characterized by a process extended
at right angles from the longer portion or body of the gland which lies longitudinally
in the abdomen. Now in these Marsupial genera the superadded process accompanies
and is in close contact with a corresponding process of the pancreas, as in the Kangaroo,
but both processes are comparatively shorter. The smaller or transverse portion of the
spleen was much notched at its anterior trenchant margin in Macr. Parryi ; I have al-
ways observed it entire in Macr. major.
“ The kidney in Macr. Parryi presented one elongated mamilla, without the smaller
accessory ones observable at its sides in the greater species. The situation of these
glands, and of the suprarenal glands, is the same in both. In Macr. Parryi the kid-
neys were on the same transverse line, 6 inches above the brim of the pelvis.
“ The ™cera of the chest were as in Macr. major. The blood of the head and ante-
rior extremities is returned to the right auricle by two superior vena cava, as in the
other Marsupiata.
“ The “ferine organs presented the same remarkable structure as in the greater Kan-
garoo, except that the septum of the mesial cul-de-sac of the vagina was not extended so
low down. Traces of peritoneal canals were carefully searched for, but with the same
negative result as on former occasions.”
PLATE XXXVII.
MACROPUS PARRYI.
A side view of its teeth is subjoined, chiefly for the purpose of showing the form of
the third incisor, which differs from that of Macr. major by its smaller extent and by
the anterior of the two nearly equal portions into which it is divided being destitute of
groove.
300
MR. E. T. BENNETT’S ACCOUNT OF MACROPUS PARRYI.


SZU-.jL-.
Macropus Parryi.
Lear, del.
Zeitter, sc.
