

I Pu tr^
* )
\
y. fl 11
«■'*'» *T, , A #-A-
i ji ’ Qnr/t* *
< % J^ v 3Hu‘ *. r ‘ 4 ,5
"kwj'cK^
\
U -






SOME ACCOUNT OF THE NATIVES OF MURRAY’S ISLAND IN
Torres’ straits.
FROM THE JOURNAL. OF A NAVAL OFFICER.
The sailed from Port Jackson for Torres’ Straits on the 4th
of June, 1833. The wind was light for some days ; and we did not
meet a steady south-east monsoon till we passed below the 14th degree
of south latitude on the 15th of the month.
In approaching Torres’ Straits, most masters of merchant-ships pre-
fer the more southern route, entering the Straits by a passage between
the reefs called the Barrier*, near the coast of New Holland ; and whe-
ther this be more accurately surveyed than the more northern route,
which passes nearer the New Guinea Coast, I know not, but in adopt-
ing the former, two dangerous reefs, called the Eastern Fields and the
Boot Reef, which %ire well known to lie directly in the line of the latter
route, are entirely shunned. As, however, the situation of Murray’s
Island places it completely out of the line of the entrance into the
Straits, on the New Holland Side, it is seldom visited by ships in pass-
ing ; and as it lies immediately in the line of ships entering towards the
New Guinea coast, the captain or master of this ship, wishing to trade
with the natives of the island, and having furnished himself at Sydney
with various articles fit for that purpose, adopted, of course, the more
northern route in order to accomplish this favourite object.
On the 18th of the month, we saw the Eastern Fields, and passed
along the northern border of the reef, about three miles distant.
Towards the western extremity of this reef we observed a very remark-
able rock, distinguished from all the others, and exhibiting the appearance
of a round tower. At four, p.m., we lost sight of the Eastern Fields,
and, after three hours’ run, at about eight knots the hour, the ship was
hove to for the night. At daylight next morning, the 19th, she re-
sumed her course (west), and at ten, a.m., the Boot Reef was seen from
the mast-head. We ran along the northern border of this reef, also dis-
tant about three miles. Between the eastern and western extremities
of the reef, we counted seven distinct and detached rocks, one of which
the sailors looked upon as a wreck; but there is no reason to suppose
any one of these objects a wreck more than another, since there is no
difference in their appearance, except in point of size : they are all black.
Soon after passing this reef, Murray’s Island, situated inlat. 9° 54' S.
and long. 143° 58' E., and about six or seven miles within the Barrier,
was made from the mast-head, and soon afterwards, a little to the south-
ward of it, a smaller island, having a peaked appearance, was seen. At
one, p.m., the Barrier itself was announced from the mast-head, and
shortly after was distinguished from the deck. This object, to a person
on board a ship approaching it, and impelled by a strong breeze, when
the sea is breaking over it in all directions, certainly exhibits a most
* At the eastern of Torres’ Straits, extending from New Guinea to New
Holland, there are an immense number of coral reefs, running close to each other,
from east to west; of which reefs the eastern ends or extremities, terminating abreast
of each other, and forming a long line north and south, nearly on a level with the
surface of the water, present to a ship approaching them the appearance of a low
wall, which is called the Barrier. But some of the channels between these reefs are
found passable for ships of any burthen.


sublime and somewhat terrific appearance. On nearing it, however,
several small channels are discovered between the reefs; and through
the widest of these, called, I believe, the Pandora’s Passage, about half
a mile broad, we entered Torres’ Straits.
We now steered for Murray’s Island, and soon anchored about a
mile and a half to the northward, that is, in the month of June, to the
leeward of it, and off a long line of sandy beach, where various canoes,
manned with naked black people, were lying. Immediately after
coming to anchor, six canoes, containing from twelve to sixteen men
each, shoved off from the shore, and approached the ship, a naked black
man standing in the centre of each canoe, and holding up to our view
a piece of tortoise-shell, intimating their wish to traffic with us. For
this they seem to have prepared on first seeing the ship, since, pre-
viously to our bringing up, the natives kept constantly waving a sort of
flag composed of long grass tied to bamboo poles, signalizing their wish
to communicate with us.
The canoes, formed as usual of trunks of trees hollowed out, are
very long and narrow, swimming lightly, which renders the aid of out-
riggers necessary to prevent their upsetting. These out-riggers consist
of two long bamboo spars laid and fastened with grass ropes across the
centre of the canoe, distant from each other about six feet; and on the
outer ends of these two spars, on either side, another spar is tied parallel
with the canoe itself, about seven feet from it, that is beyond its gun-
wale or edge, and resting on the surface of the water, which, of course,
must considerably impede the velocity of the vehicle, but which effec-
tually prevents the risk of its upsetting. The space between the cross
spars on the canoe, and to the distance of about tw r o feet beyond its
gunwale or edge on each side, is fitted or filled up with a bamboo
hurdle, covered with a grass mat, on which the principal personage of
the party and those who are not employed in paddling repose. The
paddlers stand up in the canoe, and do not seem to attend to any parti-
cular arrangement in the performance of their work, but each paddles
on one side or the other, according to his convenience, so that some-
times most of them, or perhaps all, are seen paddling on the same side.
The out-riggers are awkward things approaching a ship, as they render
it impossible for the canoes to lie alongside; consequently it has here
become necessary to lower a quarter-boat near the surface of the water,
and over the stern of this boat the communication with the islanders 4 is
effected.
Besides tortoise-shell, they offer for barter the shells of various tes-
tacei, bows and arrows, long wooden spears, rude ornaments, cocoa-
nuts, yams, plantains, bananas, and sweet potatoes; but the tortoise-
shell is the only valuable article they have. Iron in every shape they
esteem very much, and, next to that, their fondness is for tobacco.
They willingly give a piece or two pieces of tortoise-shell for a piece of
hoop iron eight or ten inches long; and a pound or even two pounds
of the shell may be had for a small axe worth about eight pence. The
other shells they give for tobacco ; and an inch of twist will purchase
a dozen or two dozen of leopard shells, while all their remaining articles
are bartered for and procured on proportionally easy terms.
The clatter and confusion of tongues, however, on the starboard
quarter and astern of the ship, may be more easily conceived than
described, since all the men in the six canoes and almost all hands on


board were bellowing and talking at once, while not one word spoken
by either party was understood by the other, and the whole of the traffic
was carried on by signs after all, so that they might just as well have
been silent on both sides. A little before sunset, the savages having, by
signs, intimated their intention of returning to-morrow, paddled off from
the ship and went on shore. Various fires were seen burning along
the beach during the whole of the night.
June 20th. —The natives came off this morning according to pro-
mise ; and the same sort of traffic has taken place as yesterday. They
have brought off with them in the canoes some naked black children,
for whom they beg, by signs, (which they seem very expert both in
making and understanding,) small looking-glasses and coloured glass
beads ; but in barter they do not seem willing to give anything for these
baubles, which they appear to think are only fit for children. They
seem mild, inoffensive people, as far as we can observe ; but, in con-
sequence of their nakedness, the captain’s wife being on board, none of
them have been allowed to enter the ship, except one man, who appears
a comparatively superior sort of individual, and to whom the captain
has given a suit of sailor’s Sunday clothes, with which, probably on
account of the privilege they have entitled him to of coming on board,
he is highly delighted. This man and others have, by signs, intimated
to us a wish that some of us should go on shore, and they offer them-
selves as hostages for our safety; they also offer or promise, by signs,
as a further inducement, the use of their women to the sailors. But all
the natives of the islands in these straits are said to be treacherous ; and
we do not think it safe to trust them.
I made the man whom the captain clothed —whose own name is
Secure, but who is called by his comrades Madeau, which means chief
or head man, and whom, although he does not appear to be more than
the chief person of a canoe, I shall in future designate by the term
Madeau—understand, by signs, that we dreaded having our throats cut,
and being eaten by the natives, should we risk ourselves among them.
Madeau expressed, by his gestures, some horror and surprise when he
understood my meaning; and, pointing to Murray’s Island, which the
natives call Mera, he repeated frequently the words, “ Powta, powta,
Mera powta then, pointing towards Darnley Island and New Guinea,
he made signs that the natives in that direction eat human flesh; but,
again pointing to Murray, he again repeated the words “ Powta, powta,
Mera powta.”
That he uses the word “ powta” to signify his denial of cannibalism,
is very clear; but what it particularly means I cannot understand:
perhaps it is some animal the flesh of which they eat; but we have not
been able to discover any animal on the island except a dog, and I have
ascertained that lC chess ’’ is their term for dog; perhaps “ powta” means
shell-fish ; this seems very abundant, and must form a principal part of
their animal food *, At sunset, the savages again went on shore,
having failed to persuade any of us to accompany them.
* It will be seen from this and various other passages, that the writer has copied
literally the words of his journal, which detailed the circumstances as they occurred,
together with the impressions they made on his mind at the time ; and the passage
here referred to in particular shows how difficult it is for persons totally ignorant of
each other’s language to convey to each other the true meanings of words expressing
abstract ideas, which cannot be manifested and explained by reference to material or
tangible and visible objects.


June 21st.--The savages came off early this morning, to barter as
yesterday, and Madeau brought off with him a young woman, whom
he intimated, by indubitable signs, that be intended for the use of the
chief mate. The lady was accompanied in the canoe by her husband,
who, however, out of delicacy towards the captains wife, could not be
permitted to come on board farther than to look over the quarterdeck
bulwark. As soon as it was intimated to the woman that she might
come on board, she plunged from the canoe into the water, and swam
alongside the ship. She was covered or partially covered from the loins
nearly to the knees by small parcels of long grass, fastened to a grass
string tied round the waist. She was conducted into the cabin, where
she was dressed by the captain’s wife in a chemise, handkerchief, gown,
and petticoat, with which, although exhibiting at first a degree of the
timidity which is natural to her sex, she seemed much gratified. She
certainly was not an ill-looking person; and she soon acquired con-
fidence, giving us to understand that her name was Garri, (which, how-
ever > i W6 a^tervvar^s learned, is their common term for woman,) and
that she was a person of some consequence.
Expecting, probably, more candour from Garri than from the men
regarding the safety of landing on the island, I succeeded, by the same
signs which I used yesterday to Madeau, in making her understand the
cause of our declining to go on shore. Garri laughed heartily, and
pointing with one hand to the island, which was in view from where we
stood, with the other she laid hold of my arm, and made motions as if
eating and tearing it with her teeth. At this moment the husband and
Madeau, who were watching her, called out to her in an enraged tone
of voice, which greatly alarmed her; and, on my repeating the signs,
she shook her head, and waved her hand from her, expressing displea-
sure. She soon became anxious and restless, showing a desire to
return to the canoe, and it was necessary to allow her to do so. Madeau
himself frequently repeated the words “ Powta, powta, Mera powta
but he seemed in bad spirits, while he remained on board afterwards, and
he and his companions went on shore earlier than they did yesterday
It is very possible that Garri, then greatly elated by the attention
shown her, on learning the apprehensions we entertained regarding the
safety of going on shore, may have laughed and used the motions of
eating and tearing my arm as a humorous frolic; yet, although the
Murray islanders certainly do look upon cannibalism among them-
selves as a most detestable crime, I think it is more than probable that,
like many other savages who are not habitual cannibals, they would not
consider themselves defiled by tasting the flesh of a white person or of
an enemy taken in battle.
In the evening the chief mate and myself went in the cutter, armed,
and were rowed along the shore near" the beach, where the natives'
huts are built; but, by the captain’s particular request, we did not land,
and he himself, out of respect for his wife’s fears, declined going in the
boat Probably, by far the greater part, if not the whole, of the male
population of the island assembled on the beach when they saw our
boat approaching the shore. I counted about 230 men, besides many
women, and some younger persons, the women being distinguished by
their dress, such as Garri is described to have worn on coming on board;
and many persons, the younger men especially, rushed into the water
to meet us, but we laid on our oars and kept off. Our friend Madeau


was, of course, among the assembled crowd, and he kept waving the
red cap given to him with his clothes, as an invitation to us to land.
One large canoe came off to us, with only five hands, merely sufficient
to paddle her, as if to show that they-did not wish to alarm us by num-
bers ; and neither the people in this canoe nor on shore appeared to be
armed. We allowed the canoe to come alongside our boat, and the
savages did all they could by gestures to persuade us to go on shore.
Madeau, seeing from the shore that we would not be persuaded by
this canoe’s crew, came off to us in a small one paddled only by two
persons. On getting alongside our boat he came into it, and repeatedly
offered to go with the crew on board the ship, and remain as a hostage
for the safety of the chief mate and myself, whom he wished to go on
shore. We made him understand that we were under a promise to the
lady on board the ship not to go on shore, and he did not insist further;
but, having learned by this time that shaking hands was a token ot
friendship among us, he more than once shook hands with every person
in the boat, and then returned to his canoe. ,
June 22d.—It has blown fresh the greater part of this day, and only
one canoe came off to barter ; even this one soon went on shore again,
and all the canoes were hauled far up on the beach. In the evening,
however, the weather, as well as the captain’s wife’s fears, having mode-
rated, he and I went in the gig close to the shore, where he shot some
white gulls, principally with the view of showing the natives the ettec s
of fire-arms. They seemed amused, but not alarmed, and swam oft to
pick up the dead bodies. Many of the men swam off close to the boat
with tortoise-shell and other shells, offering to barter them tor iron and
tobacco, which the captain, who has, of course, an eye to business and
does not allow the traffic for tortoise-shell to any person on board but
himself, caused the boat to be furnished with previously to our quitting
the ship. The black men did not seem at all inclined to be trouble-
some, but finding that we would not suffer them to approach the boat
in numbers, they returned, and stood on the coral rocks at some little
distance, holding up to our view what they wished to exchange, and
each person, when beckoned to for the purpose, swam off thence to the
boat, carrying with him his article of traffic. Many pounds of tortoise-
shell and various other shells were obtained for mere trifles at this
strange sort of mart, held in five fathoms water. When directed by
signs, the good-natured savages instantly dived down and brought up
from the bottom pieces of ornamental coralline, receiving about a chew
of tobacco for their trouble. Our friend Madeau came off to us on this
occasion also. As soon as he entered the boat, he took up
and pointing it towards the shore, he repeated the words, rowta,
powta, Mera powta.” With these words,* which Ido not understand,
unless they mean some wild animal that we have not seen, and with
various gestures, he endeavoured to persuade us to land ; and when v\e
declined doing so, he readily consented to come on board with us m
our boat, and he remains on board to-night. At table, he watches how
others do, and is careful to do the same, which, though truly character-
istic and natural, has led him into some ludicrous mistakes. He seems
desirous to be as communicative as possible, and we have collected
from him a vocabulary of several words of his language; ave
not been able to understand the real meaning oi the word powta.
The captain is powta, his wife is powta, the chief mate is powta, I am


powta, the ship is powta, the island is powta, the natives are all powta,
the boats are powta, the canoes are powta—everything in fact is powta*
—yet we cannot make out what powta is.
June 23d.—1 went in a boat this forenoon with the chief and third
mates, Madeau, and the crew; we rowed towards the shore, and an
immense crowd of the natives, as usual, came into the water to meet us,
offering shells, &c. to barter. When we thought they were approach-
ing too close, and two of the savages had got hold of the gunwale of
the boat, we backed her off until they let go their hold and returned to
their companions. Then we made signs for two small canoes to ad-
vance with such articles as they wished to barter. In the meantime,
the third mate and 1 volunteered to go on shore, leaving Madeau and
the chief of one of the small canoes in our boat as hostages. The third
mate stepped into one of the canoes, which immediately shoved off with
him, leaving the other for me. They paddled the third mate’s canoe
towards one end of the beach, and mine towards the other, making a
space of about 500 yards between the two points of landing. As°we
landed, we were each received by a crowd, and each party wished to
lead his man in the opposite direction from the other; but the third
mate and myself were of one mind, and were determined to join each
other, which we did without much interruption. When the two parties
met and formed one crowd, it consisted of about the same number of
persons that I counted on the beach on a former occasion—men and
women, the women being dressed in their grass petticoats as already
described, and the men now all armed, some with bows and arrows, and
some with long wooden spears. One.man from each of the two canoes
respectively in which the third mate and myself came on shore, re-
mained by us, holding us by the hand, and repeating from time to time
the well-known, but little understood word, c< powta,” “ powta,” some-
times touching their own breasts with the off-hands, intimating that
they were resolved to protect us; from which I conclude, that the word
“ powta,” after all, means “ safe.” As we proceeded along the beach,
and were passing a long bamboo palisade, within which there were
various huts, in order to detain a part of the crowd, and to guard against
our being both together out of the view of our own people in the boat,
which might afford the savages the opportunity of ill-treating us, or
perhaps of carrying us off into the thicket behind, I requested the third
mate to remain outside the palisade, while I, still accompanied by my
canoe companion, went in to see the interior.
Each habitation, of which there were three or four within this palisade,
seemed to consist of an oblong shed, entirely open at one end, and a
well-secured round-about structure coming to a tine point at top, and
neatly thatched down from that point to the very ground. Into any or
either of these structures I could see no entrance; but I pushed "my
hand through the thatch of one of them, and found that it was formed of
a number of long bamboo poles, stuck into the ground in a circular
form, enclosing an area of about nine feet in diameter at bottom, and
all joined at top, the whole edifice being about the size of a ton of hay
or straw. I suppose the entrances into these well-protected round houses
must be by raising the thatch in some part at the bottom, and in them,
in all probability, the stores of provisions are protected from the parch-
ing and perishing effects of the sunshine ancl rain; while the simpler


and less secure oblong sheds serve for the ordinary residences, to sleep
in, &c. In these sheds there was literally nothing except some dry grass
or litter strewed about, which, no doubt, answers the purpose of bedding.
A sturdy savage, armed with a bow and arrows, observing that I
examined the round structures with care, beckoned to me to follow him,
which I did, expecting that he would show me the entrance into one ot
them ; but, when we came to the back of it, when we were covered from
the view of the rest of the crowd, he made a sudden and violent grasp at
the right-hand pocket of my jacket, and succeeded in laying hold of a
silk handkerchief which it contained. The young savage who held my
hand made a strenuous effort to prevent the robber from taking it, but
he sprang off with it to a little distance, and hastened to fix an arrow to
his bow. Immediately I drew my friend off to the other side of the
structure, intimating to him, as well as I could, that the thing taken
was of no consequence, and that I would give him another like it as
soon as we reached the boat. Of course I lost no time to join the crowd
outside the palisade, which must now be considered the safer place, and,
having hastily informed the third mate of the circumstance that occurred
within, he readily agreed with me that the sooner we got off to our boat
the better. But, to our great surprise and disappointment, on looking
along the beach, there was no canoe to be seen, the two in which we
landed having paddled off again to our boat. We now hailed the boat,
requesting the chief mate to cause Madeau to send a canoe for us; but
the boat being a considerable distance off, the chief mate did not hear
us till we hailed several times ; and we, no doubt, manifested, by our
manner, visible indications of apprehension and uneasiness, more espe-
cially, as many of the savages now became extremely clamorous, de-
manding “ walli, walk” (clothes), pointing to and otten laying their
hands on the handkerchiefs about our necks, our waistcoats, jackets, &c„
&c. ; while we endeavoured to pacify them by intimating to them that,
as soon as we got off to the boat, they should have “walli” (clothes),
“tun” (iron), “suga” (tobacco), and everything they wished. In
the mean time, the two faithful savages, who still held us by the hands,
and considered themselves our more immediate protectors, kept con-
stantly repeating the words, “ Powta, powta, Mera powtaand the
third mate’s man gave him to understand, that should the canoes not
come, they would carry us off to our boat on their shoulders; but this
I did not approve of, because the attempt to adopt such a measure
would at once manifest still more clearly our fears, and place us more
entirely at the mercy of the crowd, should they be hostilely disposed,
and, if they were not so disposed, that measure was not necessary. At
length, however, by the united force of our voices hailing together, we
succeeded in making the chief mate understand that we considered it
necessary to get off immediately. He therefore caused our boat to pull in as
close to the shore as the surf on the beach would permit it to approach,
and a canoe advanced to take us off*; but the third mate’s man would
carry him off to the boat on his shoulders, and did so accordingly. The
canoe into which I entered having shoved off, three wild-looking savages
rushed into the water after us, and, having unceremoniously boarded her,
rudely placed themselves by my side, intimating to me that they came
for the things I promised them. The third mate and myself certainly
did fulfil our promises to the faithful young savages who seemed so will-


ing to protect us; and we learned that the hostage who remained in our
boat with Madeau was father to one of them ; but the other claimants
were treated as the sailor served the saint.
Madeau, having learned from my protector the breach of hospitality
committed on me, seemed disconcerted and unhappy, and hastily left
our boat and went on shore. Immediately on our return to the ship she
weighed anchor, and we quitted Murray’s island.
The Murray islanders are generally athletic and well made; their
heads indeed are invariably well formed, the organs of the intellectual
faculties, according to the Spurzheim system, and especially those of
causality and benevolence being developed, giving to the forehead a
high and expanded appearance. The nose is broad, but not as flat as
that of the African negro, nor are the lips as large; the teeth are white
and sound. Some have woolly and some have straight hair, which many
of them besmear with a reddish mineral substance, resembling the Sibilo
of the southern Africans, and mixed, in like manner, with oil or grease.
The skin is as black as that of the negro, and is generally sleek, exhibit-
ing the appearance of good health and good feeding. Some few of the
more elderly people, however, are affected with a species of leprosy,
manifested by a whitish scurf in spots on the surface of the body : I ob-
served one man affected with elephantiasis, having the right leg and
thigh greatly enlarged by a tubercular swelling ; and one individual
had lost both lips and the alifi nasi, by ulceration, which bad healed,
leaving the poor man, however, greatly disfigured.
Besides these deformities, and perhaps others unnoticed by us, pro-
ceeding from natural causes, they have some of their own making; both
ears of all adults, male and female, being mutilated by cutting the lobes
in a particular manner, forming pendants or drops an inch and a half or
tw r o inches long, hanging down from the outer and lower part of the
helix, on each side ; and every adult person has a hole pierced through
the lower part of the septum narium ; the larger the hole the more
fashionable the individual possessing it seems to be considered: and
Garri, the woman that came on board, took some pains to manifest her
claims for distinction, by repeatedly wetting her fore-finger with spittle
and shoving it through this hole. The hole in the nose is also, I have
no doubt, made use of on certain occasions, for suspending from that
feature grotesque ornaments, some of which we saw, though not in actual
use, and I conclude that they are preserved for occasions of merriment,
because various masks made of tortoiseshell, the more hideous in
appearance the better, were offered for barter. Some of them wear
ornaments consisting of crescent-shaped pieces of pearl-oyster-shell,
suspended by grass strings, gorget fashion; and some wear necklaces
formed of red or white berries strung on grass strings. But it does not
appear that these or any other ornaments are worn as marks of rank or
influence; on the contrary, we could not perceive that they recognize
any chief; and we have reason to believe that, on the deference irre-
sistibly paid in all situations, but perhaps more in savage than in what is
called civilized life, to personal courage, to superior natural intellect, and
more especially to natural good disposition and benevolence, are grounded
the sole claims for respect and influence acknowledged among them.
Their food seems to consist of cocoa-nuts, yams, plantains, bananas,
and sweet potatoes; with turtle, abundance of shell-fish, and, probably,


other fish, their expertness making ample amends for the simplicity of
their fishing-tackle; the hooks being made of tortoise-shell, and with-
out barbs. The cocoa-nut tree abounds on every part of the island ;
and we observed, here and there on the side of a hill, small patches of
cultivated ground where, probably, the yams and sweet potatoes are
planted; but it does not appear that they have grain of any kind, nei-
ther could we perceive any animal, except dogs.
Of religious worship we could not make out that they have any idea
at all; and certain it is that they do not carry about their persons any
amulets or other superstitious appendages, with a view of conciliating
the favour or protection of any supernatural agency.
The following is a vocabulary of some of the words of the language
of the Murray islanders.
Madeau, a head man or respected person. Camear, father. Coskera,
mother. Garri, a woman. Neoura, a child. Neoura garri, a little girl.
Peka, a fish. Eboura, a bird. Eboura mera, a singing bird. Chess, a
dog,—and Madeau could not find any other name for any four-footed
animal, the likenesses of many of which were shown to him. Ilmere,
thunder. Oura, lightning, light, a red colour. Lema, the sun. Meba,
the moon. Vera, a star. May, the sky. Waga, the wind. Mat, the
forehead. Peeta, nose. Erecap, the eye. Kerim, the head. Teree,
the teeth. Eruse, the mouth. Eruta, the tongue. Pella, the ear.
Crimo, the hair. Emoura, the chin. Gam, the body. Toga, the arm.
Tal, the hand. Tetera, the foot or leg. Apper per Kerim, a hat or cap.
Top, the upper part of any thing. Isera, a shell. Macaise, a turtle.
Kaiso, tortoise-shell. Idago, the nautilus. Suga, tobacco. Klimsick,
a fork (wooden). Turi, iron,—every sort of metal, and everything made
of metal is called Turi, as they know no metal but iron. Demorupick
or Turi, an axe. Owmis, a mat. Lagar, a rope. Gulli gulli lagar, a
thread. Epe, a plate,—in reference, probably, to a piece of slate, stone,
or shell, used as such. Opoita, a pistol, all sorts of fire-arms ; but they
have none. Gi'ode, salt. Cawka, a yam. Dawdaw, grease or fat.
Lara, flesh. Oragavv, a potato (sweet). Ney, water. Wobba, drink.
Isimere, bread ; probably they make yams or plantains into a sort of
bread. Wara, a ship. Perapere, a looking-glass; probably everything
having a shining or polished surface. Tarpole, a bottle ; in reference,
probably, to a calabash of that shape. Walli, clothes; all sorts of
clothing are called walli. Mam mam walli, red cloth. Gulli gulli walli,
blue cloth. Caka caka walli, white cloth. Oukus, more. Ippeouka,
plenty. Assai, come here, or, I say. Powta, safe, free from danger.
Coco, a bow. Sarick, an arrow or arrows. Mera, the native name of
the island.
Madeau could find no name for a book, because he had never seen
one before, and they have nothing corresponding with it in appearance;
but he was easily made to understand the meaning of a chart of the
straits, and was highly gratified when Murray’s island, laid down in it,
was pointed out to him.


1508 00333740 4


Ti
-<
4
w
r
/
