

ROYAL
GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY
OF AUSTRALASIA,
QUEENSLAND.
Some Articles used in Burial and other
Rites by the Australian Aborigines.
By R. H. MATHEWS. L.S.
Outridge Print, Brisbane.


The Royal Geograhical Society of Australasia,
QUEENSLAND
Founded 1885.
fHIS Society has been established in Brisbane for the last twenty-four years. It
was instituted with the view of promoting the interests of Geographical science
in its widest sense, of encouraging exploration and pioneering enterprise in
Australasia, and of furthering the study of Physical and Commercial Geography.
While these objects cannot fail to commend themselves to the scientific, com-
mercial, agricultural, and other industrial classes of the community, and to many
persons engaged in extending pastoral and mining enterprise into distant parts of the
Continent, the great educational advantages to be derived from the establishment of
this Society will be no less apparent to all intelligent citizens of the Commonwealth,
Any lady or gentleman may become an Ordinary Member, subject to election.
Subscription, £1 is. per annum, due on the Ist July in each year.
Life Membership, £lO 10s.
The usual Entrance Fee is not charged at present.
Members’ Privileges.
To receive the Society’s Diploma.
The right to be present at, and to introduce two friends to, all meetings of the
Society.
The privileges of admission (without additional fee) to the meetings of the Koyal
Geographical Society, London, and of the use, for the purpose of reference, of the Map
Room and Library.
To be allowed to purchase copies of all the publications of the Royal Geographical
Society, London, on special terms.
Membership of the Royal Scottish Geographical Society when in North Britain
without payment of additional fee, and the privilege of purchasing The Scottish Geo-
graphical Magazine on special terms.
To have access to the Library and other public rooms of the Society.
To receive a copy of the Society’s official publications.
Diplomas of Fellowship.
Section IV, Clause 3, Constitution and Rules :
The Council may confer the Diploma of Fellowship upon such eminent persons
as have rendered valuable services to geographical science ; on persons of distinguished
scientific attainments ; on those who have promoted the objects of the Society ; and
on Honorary and Honorary Corresponding Members of the Society, without the pay-
ment of diploma fees. On Ordinary Members, on payment of a nominal diploma fee,
subject to the following conditions, namely Upon written application: Those
who have compounded for life membership and are deemed worthy of the distinction
by the Council, (b) Upon written application : Those who are not in arrears with
their annual subscriptions, and are, upon the recommendation of the Council, approved
by the Society at an ordinary monthly meeting. Of " the honorary class the number
of Fellows shall not exceed ten. Each Diploma, after being approved by the Council,
shall be signed by the President and by the Hon. Secretary of the Society. Members
who receive the diplomas shall have the privilege of designating themselves “ Fellows
of the Society and may use the initials F.R.G.S.A.Q. after their names as long as
they continue to be members of the Society.
Ladies or gentlemen who wish to become Members of this Society may do so by
handing in or posting their names to the Hon. Secretary, at the Rooms, Public
Library Building, Brisbane, or to any Member of the Society, who will arrange for
their nomination.


SOME ARTICLES USED IN BURIAL AND OTHER
RITES BY THE AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.
(With Four Illustrations.)
By R. H. MATHEWS, L S.
Oval-shaped objects used in connection with native burials
in the valley of the Darling River, New South Wales, were manufac-
tured from burnt gypsum 1 , reduced to a powder, and fine sand or
ashes, well compounded with water, just as we would mould anything
of the kind out of cement or plaster of Paris. The necessary shape
could be given to the mass while plastic, and then allowing it to dry
in the sun. These objects are in the shape of a large egg, varying
in length from about three to nine inches, by a width, say two and
a quarter inches for the smaller ones, up to double that width for
the larger. (See block A and descriptive letterpress).
They are often approximately circular in a section through the
middle part, but in other cases such a section would be ovate. Some
of them are flattish on one or both sides, and are not unlike a cake
baked in an elongated form. In a few of the flattened productions,
one side is slightly concave, but whether this was intended by the
maker it is difficult to say. Probably the wet mass assumed this
shape while drying in the sun, because the heat would naturally
cause the outer margin, which would dry first, to turn upward, similarly
to the way a board warps toward the sun, when exposed in a free
state. Nearly all the specimens I have seen were evidently manu-
factured in the way above described, but an occasional one consists
of a piece of sand-stone, or shale, of a light colour, found in the
bush, which required bid little fashioning to bring it to the re-
quired shape.
An old aboriginal of the Ngunnhalgu tribe, known as Harry
Perry by the white people, told me that these kopai objects, which
he called murndu, were made out of powdered kopai and a little sand
nr wood ashes, much in the way we mix up flour when making dough
for baking into bread. He said that when a native of either sex died
and was buried, the relatives came to the grave and placed these
kopai balls on top of the mound of earth. For example, if the body
were that of an adult man, his widow would place a murndu on the
ground above his head. The deceased's brothers would each place
I. Called kopai by the natives; often erroneously written copi and kopi.
by the European residents of that region.


one or more along one side of the grave ; his mother and sisters might
also lay a murndu or two on the other side ; and so on.
An old man of the Murawarri tribe informed me that in his
language the kopai ball or tablet is called yurda. When a man,
woman, or young person beyond the age of childhood, died, leaves
were strewn over the earth covering the grave, and on top of the
leaves were laid the yurda. There might be only one or two yurda
deposited, or there might be more, depending upon whether the
deceased had few or many friends. Mr. E. J. Suttor writes me that
he has seen a dozen or more of the kopai balls lying on a native’s
grave. They were put on as soon as the corpse was buried,
A Ngeumba blackfellow told me that in his tribe the name of the
kopai balls is dhaura. The gypsum was collected, burnt and pounded
fine by the women, and the men shaped the dhaura.
A resident informs me that gypsum is very plentiful on Yantara
Station, near Lake Cobham, about 120 miles north-westerly from
the Darling River, where tons of it could easily be obtained. Another
correspondent, at Kallara Station, on the Darling, states that gypsum
is quite plentiful there. In fact, gypsum and pipe-clay are both
easily obtainable along the valley of the Darling, as well as in the
hinterland, all the way from its junction with the Murray river up
to Brewarrina. There is also a kind of slacked or rotted gypsum,
which occurs in patches, resembling slacked lime.
Old Perry and others above quoted, said that the object of
deaerating the grave in the way described, was to induce the bori
or spirit of the dead person, to remain in its place of sepulture, and
thus prevent its roaming through the camp at night to do injury
to anyone with whom the deceased might in his or her lifetime have
had a feud. When the spirit saw that its owner’s death had been
properly mourned for in accordance with the tribal custom, it felt
more friendly towards everybody. The spirit comes up during the
night and sits on top of the grave, and commences licking or sucking
one or more of the kopai balls.
Sir Thomas L. Mitchell is the first author to mention these kopai
balls. He says, “It was on the summit of a sandhill where I fixed
my depot on the Darling (Fort Bourke) that we saw the numerous
white balls, and so many graves. The balls are shaped as in the
accompanying woodcut, and were made of lime. ... A native
explained one day to Mr. Farmer (a member of Sir Thomas’s staff) in
a very simple manner, the meaning of the white balls, by taking
a small piece of wood, laying it on the ground, and covering it
with earth. Then laying his head on one side and closing his
2
BURIAL RITES, ETC., OF AUSTRALIAN ABORIGINES.


eyes, he showed that a dead body was laid in that position in the
earth, where these balls were placed above 1 .”
In 1901 Mr. G. Officer, of Kallara Station, described some kopai
balls or cakes found at a grave on Curronyalpa run on the Darling
River, about 15 miles above Tilpa. There were 39 specimens at
the grave, some of which were lying on the surface, others were
BLOCK A.—KOPAI BALLS
partially revealed, and the remainder were found by digging a little
way into the sandy soil underneath.
Owing to the unusually large number of pieces on this grave,
I am inclined to believe that the greater portion of them had been
carried from other graves in the neighbourhood to this spot and
hidden for the purpose of protecting them from the vandalism of
the white men, who were in the habit of carrying them away as curios.
Mr. Higgins, a long resident of the Darling region, writes me, that
two old blackfellows had stated to him that when the
natives observed that the white people desecrated their
burying places in this way, they themselves buried the kopai
balls in the ground to keep them out of sight. Possibly nearly all
the specimens recovered by Mr. Officer had originally been concealed
with earth, but the violent winds of that district had blown the
1. Three Expeditions into Eastern Australia (London, 1838), Vol 1., pp.
253-254. Seven kopai balls are illustrated in the woodcut referred to.


sandy soil away and left them visible. The grave was on a sandhill
about three miles back from the river, and was therefore out of the
way of the white men, whose nrincipal traffic lav alone- the course
of the stream.
Explanation of Block A
This picture exhibits three medium-sized balls, and one small
one, all of which are made from gypsum (kopai), as above described.
I shall call them murndit, their native name in the Ngunnhalgu tribe,
which occupied the country from about Wilcannia up to near Louth,
being the tract from various parts of which my specimens were
obtained.
Fig. 1. The murndu numbered 1 in the picture is 6| inches
in length, by a maximum width of 4| inches. The thickest part,
at right angles to the width, is 3| inches. The weight of the article
is 21bs. 9 ozs.
Fig. 2 measures 2f inches in length, by a mean thickness of
2* inches. Weight, 4| ozs.
Fig. 3 has a length of a trifle over 7| inches, and its greatest
breadth is 4| inches. It is oval in section, with a thickness of 3J
inches. Weight, 21bs. 14ozs.
Fig. 4is 6t 9 6 inches long, with a maximum breadth of 3ft
inches. It has a practically circular section through the middle.
Weight, 21bs. Bozs.
Scattered here and there through the composition of the
murndus are pieces of gypsum as large as gravel, showing that the
mineral was not very well pulverised, a fact which does not surprise
us when we remember that the natives had to burn the gypsum
in a camp fire. For the same reason the powder became mixed
with small quantities of wood ashes.
Mourning Caps.
Helmet-shaped objects called knrno , known to have been worn
on the heads of widows as a sign of mourning, were made from
gypsum, burnt and pounded fine, and mixed with water. A fibre
or rush net was first placed on the woman’s head to protect the hair,
and the soft mixture applied outside until it resembled a cap, hence
called “widow’s caps” by the Europeans. (See blocks B and C).
The mixture was not all put on at the same time, but by a sense
of additions extending over a few weeks. The marks of the meshes
of the net are distinctly visible in the interior of some of the caps
of this kind, which have been preserved by white men. When the
mourning cap had been worn the customary time, it was taken off
and placed by the widow upon the grave of her late husband. When


the deceased left a plurality of widows, each wore an emblem of mourn-
ing, and disposed of it in the same way. If the net was firmly
embedded in the dry gypsum, it was left in it, but if the net could be
readily detached it was taken out of the cap for future use. In some
cases, portions of the women’s hair had to be cut to get the cap off.
When the net was left in the cap, it rotted away, but its imprint
remained. I have seen “ widows’ caps ” weighing from about half
a dozen pounds up to twice as much.
A station owner who has resided on the Darling river for more
than thirty years informs me that he has occasionally seen black-
fellows, as well as black women, wearing mourning caps of this
description.
Sir Thomas L. Mitchell reports that on the Darling River he
found “ casts in lime or gypsum, which had evidently been taken
from a head, the hair of which had been confined by a net, as the
BLOCK B.—MOURNING CAP, OUTSIDE VIEW.
impression of it, and some hairs remained inside.” The same author
states that, on the Murray, some distance above its confluence with
the Darling, he saw some native graves with mounds of earth raised
over them, on which were laid the “ singular casts of the head in white
plaster,” which he had before seen at Fort Bourke. In some cases the
■casts of the head were found lying beside the gypsum balls. He
5
BY R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.


gave illustrations of two of these casts, showing also the marks of
the net inside 1 .
In 1838 Mr. Joseph Hawdon observed some skull-shaped caps,
made of white plaster, which he thought was obtained by burning
shells and grinding them into powder. They were laid on the grave
of a native near Lake Bonnie on the Murray River. He says that
inside the cap was a network of twine. Mr. Hawdon states that
he also noticed a great quantity of crystallised lime or gypsum in
the locality; it was in masses some tons weight 2 .
BLOCK C.—MOURNING CAP, OUTSIDE VIEW.
Mr. E. J. Eyre gives an example of the “ Korno, or widow’s
mourning cap, made of carbonate of lime, moulded to the head.” The
specimen illustrated by him weighed 8J lbs. 3
1. Op. cit., Vol. I., pp. 253-254, and Vol. II., p. 113.
2. Diary of an Overland Journey from Port Phillip to Adelaide in 1838.
(MSS).
3. Journs., Expeds., Discov. Cent. Australia (London, 1845), Vol. II.. p. 509,
Plate I., fig. 17.


Block B is an exterior view of a kurno or widow’s cap ; 1 being
the front or part fitting over the forehead, whilst 2 represents the
back of the head.
Block C shows the interior of the cap, with the marks or
impression of the net and the size of its meshes plainly discernible.
This cap weighs 71bs. loz., and has been formed of kopai or gypsum
in the way already described. The specimen was found on a native
grave on the Lower Budda run, Darling river. For the two photo-
graphs, taken at my request, I am indebted to Mr. F. W. Beattie.
Ceremonial Stones.
The following is a short description of some remarkable stones
which were used in the secret ceremonies and incantations of the
aborigines in the northern portion of New South Wales. This region
may be approximately defined as lying north of latitude 34 degrees,
and west of longtitude 148 deg. The objects referred to have been
observed by squatters and other residents of the bush in different
places for many years past, but like most other matters connected
with the aborigines, very little attention has been paid to them.
They are now found lying on the surface of the ground, or only partially
exposed, on the flanks of sandridges which have been old camps of
the natives or perhaps places of ceremonial gatherings. They had
probably been hidden away when not in use, or at the death of the
owner, and had since been exposed by the removal of the loose sandy
soil during the violent gales which sweep over that district in dry
seasons. Specimens have also been found below the surface when
digging for other purposes.
These stones vary in length from about half a foot to two feet,
and the more common lengths are from 9to 15 inches. ihey are
widest at the base and taper upwards to the other end, which
terminates in a blunt point. Some of them have a large number of
marks cut into the surface with a sharp stone, shell, or piece of bone;
some have but a few such incisions, whilst others are quite plain.
A characteristic of this type of native implement consists in the
presence of a depression worked into the base in the following manner.
In nearly all the specimens, instead of the proximal or large end of
the stone being flat, the central part has been picked out with a sharp-
pointed stone, and afterwards ground fairly smooth. These hollows
are deepest at the centre, gradually decreasing outwards all round
to the margin, forming a concavity resembling a shallow saucer
•or trough, the shape of the concavity depending upon whether the
base is round, or is longer in one direction than in the other.


In the majority of specimens which have been recovered, the
longitudinal axis is practically straight 1 , and a transverse section
through any part of the shaft would have an almost circular outline.
There are other specimens, however, in which a section at right
angles to the length would have the form of a considerably
elongated oval; in some cases the longer diameter of such section is
more than three times the length of the shorter one. In the present
monograph I have prepared an original plate illustrating four speci-
mens of the oval or flat variety of stone, because they are more
uncommon than the round or cylindrical ones. Examples of the
latter will be described by me in another paper.
The diagrammatic drawings in the accompanying plate represent
the exterior or bounding lines of each stone with strict accurracy.
For example, No. 1 is a front view, and No. 2 is the edge of the same
stone. The outline only of the stone is given in each case, without
any shading, because it is thought that this will give the reader
a sufficiently clear idea of what the article is like. I have not thought
it necessary to supply drawings of the bases of the stones, showing
the concavity, but in Nos. 1,5, and 7, I have stated the depth of
the hollow in each case. 1 have selected specimens consisting of
different kinds of stone ; for example, soft sandstone, hard sandstone,
clay slate, and quartzite, for the purpose of showing that the natives
made use of whatever material was available. I have included a
stone, No. 5, which is profusely inscribed, and another. No. 3, which is
without the usual hollow in the base, the latter being rather uncommon.
Explanation of Block D.
No. 1 is a fine-grained sandstone, 12x# inches in length,
and a maximum width of 3| inches. No. 2is a profile view of the
stone, standing edgeways in front of the spectator, the thickness
of which is 2| inches, or less than two-thirds of the width. The base,
or large end, has the characteristic concavity or trough ground into
it to a depth of au of an inch. Three well defined incisions
appear on the opposite or invisible surface of the stone, but on the
face shown in No. 1 there are only a few obscure scratches which
I have not re-produced. The specimen, which was found on the
-eastern side of the Warrego river, weighs 31bs. Bozs.
No. 3, a coarse-grained, hard sandstone, is 12| inches long,
.and 3i 3 gf inches wide.
No. 4 shows the profile, the transverse measurement of which
is 1J inch, being only a little more than a third of the breadth. The
I. Some specimens, instead of being straight, are bent over to one side,
giving the shaft a very pronounced crescentiform outline.


BLOCK D.—CEREMONIAL STONES.
9
BV R. H. MATHEWS, L.S.


base of the stone has been ground smooth, but there is no concavity,,
There are no marks cut into any part of the surface of this specimen,,
which weighs 31bs. 0 ozs. It was picked up on Tankarooka run.
Darling river.
No. 5 consists of dark-coloured clay slate, a trifle under a foot
in length ; and the greatest breadth, which is near the base, being
21 inches.
No. 6 is a side view showing a thickness of 1 f inch
or slightly more than half the breadth. The stone was found on
Tankarooka run and weighs 21bs. 6ozs.
The face of the stone shown in the illustration is slightly convex,
whilst the reverse is practically flat, but rounded off towards the
edges. Both faces contain a large number of marks cut into the
surface with some sharp instrument, such as a mussel shell, a sharp
flake of stone, or a marsupial’s tooth. Some of the best defined
of these marks are cut to a depth of about a sixteenth of an inch.
No. 5 exhibits 72 of these incisions, and No. 6 shows 22, in
addition to an irregular spiral cut which extends round and round
the implement in three folds or laps. The terminal ends of the spiral
incision are on the reverse face, and consequently do not appear
in the drawings. There are also a large number of incisions on the
reverse face, similar to those illustrated.
The base or larger end of the stone is in the form of an elongated
oval, and has three of the usual trough-like concavities chipped and
ground into it in the direction of its longer diameter. The larger
of these depressions is -j%ths of an inch deep, but the other two are
very shallow, although easily discernible. The present is the only
case in which I have seen three of these concavities in one stone —
a single depression being the general rule.
No. 7. This peculiarly-shaped specimen consists of a hard pebble
of quartzite — having a length of lOf inches, by a breadth at the
widest, part of 3| inches.
No. 8 is a profile view, the greatest thickness of which is 2 f
inches. The face given in No. 7is almost flat, and so is the reverse
face, both being in their natural state as originally found by the
native workman. The sides were then chipped in places to bring
the implement into its present pointed form. A transverse sec-
tion through the middle of the stone would give an irregular four-
sided figure, with the four corners rounded off —a shape not -often
observed.
The specimen was discovered on Tankarooka run, and weighs-
41bs. 7ozs. A saucer shaped concavity is chipped into the base
to a depth of Toths of an inch.




THE THOMSON FOUNDATION GOLD MEDAL
OF
The Royal Geographical Society of Australasia,
QUEENSLAND.
Founded 1885.
Established in honour of J. P. Thomson, LL.D., Hon.F.R.S.G.S., etc.,
Founder. See pages 132-135 of Journal, Vol. XVI.)
CONDITIONS.
This Medal shall be awarded annually, or at such other times as the
Council may approve, to the author of the best original contribution to
Geographical Literature, provided it be of sufficient merit, approved and
accepted by the Council. Special awards of the Medal may also be made
from time to time to such persons as have gratuitously rendered eminent
services to the Society.
The Council may award a silver or a bronze impression of the Medal
to the Author of a contribution deemed to further the interests of the
Society and add to the value of Geographical Literature.
The Council may name from time to time the subject of such con-
tribution for which the Medal is to be awarded, preferential consideration
being given to the Geography of Australasia.
All contributions must be written in the English language, and every
contribution for which the Medal, or a silver or bronze impression of it,
may be awarded will become the property of the Society absolutely.
It shall not be competent for any Officer of the Society or Member
of the Council for the time being to compete for the Medal.
The administration of the Medal shall be entirely in the hands of
the Council of the Society, who will make such additional rules and
regulations for awarding the Medal as from time to time may seem
necessary.


The Royal Geographical Society of Australasia,
QUEENSLAND.
Founded 1885.
Conditions of Competition for The Thomson Foundation
Gold Medal.
The Thomson Foundation Gold Medal of this Society will be
awarded to the Author of the Best Original Paper (provided it be of
sufficient merit) on the following subject; —
Tu-be sent in not later than Ist July, 1910.
1, The Economic Utility and Distribution of the Sub-Marine Fauna of
Queensland.
The competition is open to Members and Non-members of the
Society alike, whether residing in Australasia or elsewhere, but not to
any Officer of the Society or Member of the Council for the time
being. No award of the Medal will be made for a mere compilation,
no matter how meritorious.
All competitive communications for the Medal should be written on
one side of the paper only, with marginal space on the left hand side
thereof, and limited to, say, about 32 pages of the Queensland Geo-
graphical Journal,” Royal Bvo. Instead of the writer’s name each paper
must be identified by a motto. A sealed envelope with such motto
written outside, and the writer’s name and address inside, should ac-
company each paper.
The successful papers will be printed and published in the Journal
of the Society, fifty reprint copies of each being supplied to the author,
free.
All communications, with illustrations, must be written in the English
language, and every communication for which the Medal, or a silver or
bronze impression of it may be awarded, will become the property of the
Society absolutely.
Papers may be illustrated by such maps, diagrams and pictures as
are considered by the authors thereof to be necessary and useful.
Additional subjects for future papers will be announced from time
to time.
All communications should be addressed to the Hon. Secretary of
the Society, Brisbane
J. P. THOMSON, Hon. Secretary.
