

c/WTTI# <P &
SOME INCIDENTS
CONNECTED WITH THE
VISIT OF H.M. SHIP “CURACOA”
NORFOLK ISLAND, SOUTH PACIFIC,
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
[I'OK PRIVATE CIRCULATION ONLY.]
u Sains populi suprema est lex."




SOME INCIDENTS
CONNECTED WITH THE
VISIT OF H.M. SHIP “CURACOA”
NORFOLK ISLAND, SOUTH PACIFIC,
IN JUNE, 18G5.
ONE OF HER EXECUTIVE OFFICERS.
u Salus populi suprema est lex."
PRICE ONE SHILLING.
[FOR PRIVATE CIRCULATION ONLY.]
nWS P** 7 *




PREFACE.
A letter having appeared in the Times not so very long
ago, pointing out the apparently destitute state of the
inhabitants on Pitcairn Island, it is well to know that the
survivors of the Mutiny of the Bounty and their descendants
lived upon the above Island from 1790, until 1855, the
surface of which was about 800 acres, and at their own
request they were all transferred in the following year to
Norfolk Island, after they had been informed that it was
no longer to be used as a convict establishment.
Their party consisted of 193 persons, viz
40 Men,
47 Women,
54 Boys,
52 Girls.
but sometime afterwards, 40 of them, who appeared dis-
contented with their improved quarters, preferred returning
to their desolate rock ; these, therefore, are the people for
whom the appeal was made, and it is reasonable to suppose
that they are badly off; but what a contrast to the com-
fortable life their relatives live on Norfolk Island, who
knew when they were well off.
Having had printed for private circulation only the following incidents,
I have thought it wise to let them be narrated as they appeared amongst
my papers witten nearly a score of years ago, when I gave vent to some
of my ideas by usiug nautical language, which enabled me in so few words
to thoroughly express my sentiments.
1883.




VISIT OF H.M. SHIP “CURACOA”
NORFOLK ISLAND, SOUTH PACIFIC.
We left Sydney with a fine N.W. breeze on the 4th June, 1865,
destined for the South Sea Islands. The ship seems none the
worse for her couple of days in dry dock, for now with a clean
bottom, and properly trimmed, she scuds along at a fine rate.
It is rather strange, that generally on leaving this harbour
the ship lias a fair wind, but on leaving Auckland or any similar
unpleasant spots for the same place, we have to “ beat ” most of
the way. Two days found us running betweeen Lord Howe’s
Island and Ball’s Pyramid ; the former Island reaches an eleva-
tion of about 2,300 feet; it is inhabited, a few farms being worked
on the low part of it ; but Ball’s Pyramid only reaches an eleva-
tion of about 1,800 feet, and from the N.E. and S.W., presents
an almost conical appearance, while from other points, and seen
from a distance, it looks like the dark walls of some gigantic
tower planted in the ocean. I marked particularly this time
the deceptive idea one forms of very high land ; it invariably
appears much nearer to the spectator than it really is, and it is
not until having sailed towards it for some miles, and finding it
still the same dark mass it at first appeared, that he appreciates
the long distance at which he must have originally seen it.
We anchored on the following Friday morning, in Sydney Bay,
half-way between Norfolk and Philip Islands, and about 2 miles
from the shore in very deep water (22 fms.), so that on the arrival
about noon of a whale boat with some of the inhabitants in it,
we had to get underway, for they informed us that our present
anchorage was dangerous, the wind being from the S.E. made it
a lee shore ; we therefore steamed round to Cascade Bay. on the


North Side of the Island, taking their boat in tow, and found it
tolerably calm, with a better landing place, to our great relief.
The Commodore with his Scientific Staff, and a large propor-
tion of the Officers landed at once, but having to keep watch, and
superintend the work connected with the upper deck and hull,
besides the general tidying up of the ship, &c., I did not accompany
them, intending to make a whole day of it by starting early the
next morning ; however, I was doomed to be disappointed, having
expected something for about 8.30 a.m., with a falling barometer
and increasing N.E. wind, we had to “up anchor ” again and
steam away, and only just in time, for the first quarter-of-an-
hour or so the ship hardly moved, it was blowing so hard ; about
10.30, seeing no chance of the gale moderating, we knocked off
steaming and made sail to close reefed fore and main topsails,
fore staysail, main and mizen trysails, shaping our course to the
eastward under the impression, that should the weather improve,
we should be to windward of the Island, and be able to run down
to our starting point in a short time ; but in the evening the wind
suddenly shifted to W.N.W., so we hauled up, and were beating
about all that night and the next day (Sunday), until about five
o’clock in the evening, when it had veered round to the southward:
we were then about 33 miles off the Island, ran the ship to within
15 miles of it, blowing hard, weather very thick and squally,
then lay her to, head to the eastward and waited for daylight,
when we stood on and, as the two Islands appeared one on each
bow at six o’clock, we ran in and picked up onr old anchorage in
Cascade Bay, which we found just sheltered from the strength of
the S.E.-ly breeze.
Those of us who were on board had anticipated the
Commodore’s immediate departure on our return to the anchor-
age ; but we were very agreeably surprised to find, that he had
considerately resolved to let us have an opportunity of enjoying
a day with our interesting friends.
On the return on board of some of the fellows who had been
on shore all the time, they spoke in ecstacies of the delightful
three days they had spent, and much regretted having to leave


their generous entertainers, for my readers must bear in mind
that during the time we were at sea, the skip was in charge of
the Commander, assisted by one of the Navigating Officers, whilst
noisy Bob H with several juniors, and last, but not least,
our celebrated gunner, noted equally for his ability and veracity,
all worked with a will at their respective duties, as there was not
time to have informed the Commodore and the remainder of the
Officers, so suddenly were we obliged to depart.
I was not the last to ask leave, but made up a party and
landed about two o’clock, our band also accompanied us as there
was to be a ball that evening. The Chaplain, who was taking a
passage in the same boat, and was one of the number who were
left behind (having returned for a fresh supply of baccy),
informed us that he had a horse waiting for him, so I felt satisfied
that if another one was available, I would not be behind hand in
nailing it ; having the good luck to be first out of the boat, my
wish was gratified, and No. 2 horse was ridden into Kingston
(the village) by myself, not however, until the bridle had carried
away twice, for it was only made of flax, as on passing a lot of
our fellows along the road, they good naturedly whipped my
animal, making the navigation intricate and my yoke line smash,
so overhauling a small mid on a big horse and well bridled, I
politely informed him that “ exchange was no robbery,” and as
he did not like the idea of proving his horses paces, we conse-
quently shifted bridles only.
On any of the inhabitants first coming on board, each one was
anxious to know of the individual Officers if they were going on
shore, and on one of us answering in the affirmative, our
questioner at once begged to secure him as his guest ; they asked
us also in the kindest and most unaffected terms to manage to
put up with their simple fare. Young John Adams, (a man of
about forty), insisted upon my doing so as long as my visit on
shore should last; it was, therefore, to his house I directed my
steed’s head after refitting at the mid's expense, and right glad I
was on alighting and tying him up, to sniff the savoury smell of
dinner. Dick, a pal, was with me, and it made “ his eyeballs


gingle,”—of course there being no bell or powdered lacquey to
receive us, we ushered ourselves in, and found the family as well as
a lot of our fellows, tucking in to any number of good things, and
we could not, without doing injustice to the Service, stand by and
keep our mouths closed, so sat down and joined them. They had
no liquor, but gave us plenty of milk, which did very well for
the time, but had not the desired effect after the long ride, so
having il an eye to windhird, Dick and I had brought some
Jamaica with us, for most of the time we were at sea it poured
with rain, and those fellows left behind had found it mighty miser-
able, plenty of baccy but no tipple, and now was the time it came
in handy. It having fallen to my lot to carry the bottle all the
way, which did not grieve me much for it had a cork, and I was
skilled in the art of drawing such implements, I took jolly good
care to see its contents “ served out,” and have “summat for the
trouble.”
We had anticipated great pleasure at seeing this interesting
and isolated community, the descendants of the mutineers of the
Bounty, and now our hopes had begun to be realised.
The Commodore, before commencing the cruise, had evidently
made up his mind to see and learn everything that he well could,
and he did not trust alone to his own ability to describe the various
interesting matters we were sure to meet with, but took with him
an Artistic and Scientific Staff, that I suppose, no other Man-o’-
War visiting these Islands ever had the advantage of. Mr. B ,
an independent gentleman, who had travelled nearly all over the
world, and I believe is the author of some very interesting works :
y . ? the great botanist, and Mr. K , a photo-
grapher ; also a conchologist and ornithologist, all equally enter-
prising and enthusiastic in their different branches, and I have no
doubt” but that the world will reap the benefit of their researches
at some future period.
Well! to return to my yarn, for I intend classifying the
subjects I wish to mention, first, with my own adventures,
secondly, an account of the different families and their oiigin,


and lastly, my opinion of the inhabitants, and also ol their Island
Home.
After dinner I went out, and received a very cordial welcome
from all I met ; in one house my attention was attracted to
several women seated on the verandah, most of whom shook my
hand with such hearty good will and warmth, that I was afraid
it might suffer if I did not make a forcible attempt to
disengage it. Many were engaged in needlework, whilst others
occupied themselves in nursing their young and tender branches,
all, however, joined in conversation with me without the slightest
reserve or embarrassment. Our band were assembled in the
school-yard giving an afternoon’s entertainment, which attracted
not only the aristocrats of the place, but also the poor and sick. I
soon got to make acquaintances and form engagements for the
forthcoming amusements in the evening, as the young females
were by no means bashful. After having passed an hour or so
listening to the most melodious strains from the different sorts of
instruments, we males dispersed to our several homes, for the
female portion of the community required time to deck them-
selves out in their u fancy rigs.” I adjourned to the kitchen which
was detached from the house, where the girls were hard at work
preparing tea, the missus being in the parlour “ squaring
yards,” &c., where we chatted away until a song was proposed, so
between us all we managed to gratify them with a display of our
vocal powers until the meal was ready.
During this interval a rather ludicrous circumstance occurred
to my friend Dick, which caused much merriment to the rest of
the party, the girls laughing so immoderately as to cause the
unfortunate victim to join in the general endeavours to split our
sides. On being asked to sing a song, I induced him to come
and sit by me upon a stool which stood opposite the spectators,
and after having done so for some little time in the most
unconscious manner, thoroughly appreciating his soft and com-
fortable position, he rose to get his handkerchief out of his
pocket, when he discovered he had been sitting in a newly mixed
and liquid corn cake, which had been deposited on the stool


previously by one of the girls, and who now laughingly declared
that he should have no tea for appropriating the whole cake to
himself, though perhaps he thought it rather a novel way of
making a meal of it.
They could not understand my not taking sugar in my tea,
remarking that I evidently had a sweet tooth, or else I should
not have flirted so with Bella : grace was said hy John Adams
in a deliberate and clear manner, and thanks offered at the end
of the meal.
Now all our thoughts turned to the hall, so away went the
girls to put on the finishing touch, whilst we males enjoyed a
delightful half-hour’s smoke. On their reappearance, fully rigged
out, we proceeded to the school-house, one of the largest of the
old buildings, en masse , the spacious ground apartments of which
were turned, for the occasion, into the ball and ante-rooms. Here
we found everybody assembled in their gayest costume, the old
men mostly dressed in black, the others in the ordinary garb of
respectable Englishmen. The girls wore their crinolines (they
do so only when in holiday costume), and with neat boots, white
stockings and white or light coloured dresses of a quiet material,
some wearing a pink or blue sash round their waist, looked more
like English country girls, and having clear complexions were
fair enough to compare with them ; in many is a shade of the
Tahitian olive, but in others the rose on the cheek is clearly
perceptible against the pale face. No long dresses are worn, and
all are fastened close round the neck ; their waists are not the
bewitchingly small tight ones of our English belles, but attain
their natural circumference, as they never wear stays ; their
luxuriant black hair is neatly “ triced up ” at the back of the
head with the common net of the period They seemed to enter
heartily into the “ Spirit of the Ball,” chatted away most amiably,
and to tire them was almost impossible.
About half-past eleven dancing ceased for a while, to give our
indefatigable band a chance for a spell. A song was proposed,
and Dick, who is a capital comic singer and actor, gave them an
insight into Bob iiidley’s peculiarities, but in the absence of male


nigger costume he adopted that of a woman, and gave them
Sarah Ridley in character ; the comic song was a novelty to
them and appeared to amuse. I confined my dances chiefly to
one girl, Emmeline ; a thundering nice dancer too, she was, and
I had a few besides with Adeline.
It was about half-past one when “ God save the Queen,”
silently listened to by the entire company, proclaimed it time to
“pipe down.” We adjourned to our different homes, and to bed
as well, very tired and considerably bruised from the bumping
we had received. The champagne and varieties of eatables which
in general adorn the supper table of more fashionable life were
here dispensed with ; plenty of good milk was supplied wherewith
to “wet our whistles,” and I am sure our spirits were quite jovial
enough to allow us for that night to wish for nothing stronger,
and all the better, too, we felt next morning for it, as no feverish
cries of brandy and soda were heard to escape our innocent lips
on being called.
During the forenoon the Commodore got a number of the
people together to be photographed, principally in family groups.
Our Chaplain, Y , and I rode up early to Mount Pitt;
it reaches an elevation of about 1,040 feet. It is nice going to
the foot of the mountain, though both in ascending and descending
it you have literally to clear your own way. We had a splendid
gallop through an avenue of Norfolk Island pines about a quarter
of a mile long, on nice soft springy turf; it certainly struck one
as one of those inexpressibly lovely views so seldom met with.
Getting back to Kingstown about noon, we found the girls
collected in the school-yard, the band giving them their last
melodies, for we had to take our departure after replenishing the
inner man.
The whole island accompanied us, the road from the
settlement to Cascade Bay, a distance of about three miles,
presenting an unusually lively scene. I, of course, never walking
when I could ride, secured one of the few horses able to carry
two outside, for Miss Adeline rode alongside me on the pommel


of my saddle ; in fact, each mounted officer got a girl to
accompany him. She being in front took the reins, whilst we
behind gently held them in their seats by encircling their waists
with our arms, whispering sweet things in their ears by way of a
little flirtation, each assuring the other that the happiness
of meeting again would be looked forward to with hope,
pleasure, &c., &c. Of course we made the most of the ride, as
speed was no object; in fact the pedestrians were some way
ahead of the mounted corps. We took a very touching farewell
of them all on the beach and stept reluctantly into our boats,
for some of them had given way to their feelings, and more than
one eye was seen to “ pipe.” The Commodore has promised to
return before many months, so that we have the prospect of a
very pleasant visit in store for us, particularly as we shall go
as old friends. At half-past four we were again underway for
more uncivilized regions, with a fresh S.E. wind; so Norfolk
Island was soon lost to view.
John Adams, who put me up, is the great grandson of the
Adams one reads about in the “ Munity of the Bounty he has
several children, Polly, the eldest daughter who is married, a son,
Fish, about 20 years old, who was my guide to Mount Pitt,
besides various small fry.- About the first question old Mr. Adams
asked when he came on board, accompanied by his boats crew,
was relative to the Queen’s health, and I am sure the whole lot
of them felt what they looked, when they said they were exceed-
ingly glad to hear “ she was very well,” the rest of the Royal
Family of course got their share of attention. We saw a good
deal of a man called McCoy, who coming on board the first day
we arrived, preferred stopping on until the evening to hear the
band, so we gave him a “ shake down,” but were unable to land
him the next morning on account of our having had so hurriedly
to put to sea. He is a descendant of one of the survivors of
the Bounty.
All the first day he was very sick, for although accustomed to
knock about in their own whale boats in any weather, the motion
o! the fiigate he found to be quite another thing. I administered


a favourate antidote of naval men for sea sickness, viz., brandy
and water, the draught, though not wholly, was partially success-
ful in relieving the patient, the temporary effect was to cause him
to eat a little, then to enjoy a sound sleep for the night, and
to come on deck next morning with his sea legs properly shipped.
This drug is best applicable to a strong constitution, when it may
be administered more freely, but such confidence have I in its
efficacy, that when ladies even have been about to commence a sea
voyage, I have ventured to recommend it on top of a substantial
meal ; but when treating with these more frail constitutions,
I have been fearful of fixing the exact proportion or quantity
of the component parts of the mixture, on account of a certain
tendency in the alcoholic ingredient to rise to the head, and
I think, as a general rule, it is best to make it as agreeable as
possible to the palate, and suit the quantity to the inclination.
McCoy is a fine man, about six feet in height, with an open
countenance, intelligent black eyes, and a luxuriant black beard
and moustache to add to his manly appearance, he is like them
all in fact, an unaffected civil fellow ; he is married, and has six
or seven children, his wife being a fine blooming woman, and
there is no doubt that if his hopes are realised, there will be seven
more little McCoys, thereby making fourteen in all, which he
informed us was nothing extraordinary, for when giving us the
number of some of the families in the Island., such figures as 16,
17, and even 19 appeared on the list.
A family called the Quintals were old inhabitants, but I saw
very little of them.
r ’ The scenery generally is strikingly beautiful ; a succession of
prettily rounded hills and dales covered with rich pasture, inter-
spersed with majestic pines, wild lemons, guava bushes, ferns, &c.,
also Mount Pitt in the distance, clothed to its summit in luxu-
riant foliage, with its towering pines standing out at intervals up
its sides and along the topmost ridge, all tend to make it so. A
variety of birds flit about, among which are pigeons, blue and red
parrots, &c., these with the fine cattle, cows, sheep, goats, &c.,


give life to the landscape, whilst inland, pretty glimpses of the
sea are caught between the hills and trees.
On reaching the south side of the Island, you look down from
the hills above and discover a flat shore nearly a mile long in
direction of the beach, and a quarter-of-a-mile broad, and in the
distance Philip Island, with its red rocky hills 930 feet high, a
grove of trees growing round the summit. This plain is the spot
on which the settlement is situated, this part of the Island
in appearance strongly contrasts with all the rest of it, the
picturesqueness and romance of the scenery around is for a
moment lost, whilst gazing on the cold massive walls of the large
regular buildings which once kept some hundreds of convicts
within their bounds ; but now form the happy and peaceful home
of a pious and innocent community.
Now, many conflicting accounts have been given of these
people ; what little I have stated concerning them, I saw ; whether
they are an industrious, hard working lot or not, I cannot say,
for whenever a Man-o’-War visits them her stay is the occasion of
a general holiday, and then attention is paid to entertaining their
particular favourites, Naval Officers.
Bishop Patterson paid them a visit in his yacht (the Southern
Cross) whilst we were there, he preached an excellent sermon,
which I trust did his hearers good ; it was on the Sunday, I was
at sea in the ship, so of course did not hear it.
He sailed the day before we left, on a cruise to some of the
other islands, taking with him ten of the young men. On Mr.
Adams, senior, telling me of this, he seemed to deplore their loss
on account of their not having sufficient left to do the required
work in the island.
Their stock of sheep amounts to about a couple of thousand,
which are regularly sheared and the wool sent to Sydney Market
for sale. Occasionally a whale is captured, and last year I believe
£l5O was the sum received from the oil extracted from these
animals, the money being invested in a general fund for the
whole community.


It is well known that the intermarriages that must necessarily
occur with so small a number, confined as they are by a limited
space, have caused, and will always he the cause of many
deformities in their offspring. I observed two cases, one in a
little hoy who was walking on his ankles, the soles of the feet
being upwards, and the other in a boy who was in a state of
idiotcy, but perfectly harmless.
Their religious observances are conducted in the strictest and
most pions manner, under their good pastor, the Eev. Nobbs.
A schoolmaster was sent by the Governor of Sydney; until then
Mr. Nobbs gave them all the instruction. This new man, I fancy,
is looked upon by them as an interloper ; he has a salary of
£3OO per annum, whilst Mr. Nobbs is allowed but £lOO per
annum, most galling I should think, to the Reverend Gentleman
who has a very large family, and so many years has fulfilled the
office of
Pastor, Master and Doctor.
Most probably he was getting “ washed out,” and it was deemed
necessary to introduce younger blood and more enlightened
teaching.


t
k v^kJ
- V
,13
l' K iC
