

Reprinted from The Medical Journal of Australia, July 5, 1958.
IUICU 1-XXXXXi J- iv\y -7 -
J): oL rnt fa?
C6c ardrifialD SOatson Memorial
Novels are mainly read for entertainment, of course, and
if a novel fails to entertain it can hardly be considered
a good one. However, from another point of view, a
novel is a highly interesting social document, particularly
so if the author describes characters and scenes with
which he is familiar. A good novel represents social
history come to life. It is proposed to examine certain
famous novels and one play from this point of view, and
JLecturc. 1
SOME DOCTORS IN FAMOUS NOVELS
AND A FAMOUS PLAY.
_ -r,? ~, ~ . to describe the doctors who appear in them.
By C. Craig, C.M.G., M.D., M.S., D.D.R. (Melbourne), _ . ... ... ~ , ~ .
FRACSMFR So tar as 18 P osslb t e . the authors and their characters
_ will be allowed to speak for themselves.
Launceston, Tasmania.
Jane Austen, 1775 to 1817.
1 wish to thank the President and Committee of The Mr. Perry.
Royal Australasian College of Physicians for having done jane Austen was the daughter of a country clergyman,
me the honour of inviting me to deliver the Archibald Her novels describe upper middle class life in Hampshire
Watson Memorial lecture for 1957. I had no personal and the neighbouring counties. She was a realist, and
knowledge of Professor Watson, but of course I was she had an extraordinary power of turning the events
well aware, as was every other medical student in Aus- of everyday life into narratives of absorbing interest,
tralia, of the legends that surrounded his name. Mr. Perry, who appears in ?Emma?, was the first
This lecture has to do with doctors as they appeared well-drawn doctor to appear in an English novel. Jane
to some famous novelists. Austen suffered from and died of phthisis. She must
A friend of mine is in the habit of saying that, on therefore have known doctors well. The word ?gentle?
retiring at night, he frequently thanks heaven for the I s sometimes applied to her, but when the occasion called
* , , for it she was the very reverse of gentle. Nobody could
f StS \ Many m of - n S ; recall i ng happy hours be more scathing . If she bought that people were
spent with novels, would wish to join him in his thanks. foolish> pompous or consequential, she described their
1 Delivered at a meeting of The Royal Australasian College failings without reserve. It is a great relief, therefore,
of Physicians in Hot: on October 4, 1957. to find that the first doctor to be described by an English


novelist is dealt with sympathetically. The novel is
of great interest also inasmuch as it fixes the status of
the apothecary. At that time most of the English villages
were served by apothecaries or by Licentiates of the
Society of Apothecaries. Mr. Perry was an apothecary.
Apothecaries were looked upon by the medical profession
as being somewhat inferior in status. However, in
?Emma?, Mr. Perry is regarded as an ordinary doctor.
He is only one of the minor characters, but he forms an
Important part of the background of Highbury life, which
is vividly described. He is referred to again and again
throughout the book, and always with affection and
respect. Indeed, it is obvious that the village is proud
of its doctor.
Altogether, Mr. Perry Is a very satisfactory ?first
appearance?.
Charles Dickens, 1812 to 1870.
Dickens was born in Portsmouth. At the time of his
birth, his father, the original of Mr. Micawber, a man
constantly in debt and difficulty, for whom nothing ever
?turned up?, was a dockyard clerk. The family removed
to London when Dickens was a small boy. Their fortunes
varied from comparative prosperity to direst poverty. As
a young man, Dickens learned shorthand and became
a Parliamentary reporter. His first book, ?Sketches by
Boz?, was published in 1836. In the same year he began
to write ?Pickwick?. This book is of great importance
to the present study, as it contains the brilliant description
of the two medical students from Guy?s Hospital, Mr.
Benjamin Allen and Mr. Bob Sawyer. Bob Sawyer has
become the patron saint of gay and irresponsible medical
students.
Mr. Benjamin Allen and Mr. Bol) Sawyer.
At the time of their appearance, Mr. Pickwick was
staying in the country with Mr. Wardle. Sam Weller
awoke him with the news that there were a ?couple of
sawbones? downstairs. When Mr. Pickwick had been made
to understand that these were two medical students, he
said: ?I am glad of it. They are fine fellows; very fine
fellows; with judgments matured by observation and
reflection; tastes refined by reading and study.?
Sam points out that they were both smoking cigars
and that one had his legs on the table and was drinking
brandy whilst the other had a barrel of oysters between
his knees. Mr. Pickwick considered these to be the
?eccentricities of genius?. However, when he descended
to breakfast he did not find the appearance of the students
very reassuring. The following is the description of Bob
Sawyer.
Mr. Bob Sawyer, who was habited in a coarse blue
coat, which, without being either a great-coat or a
surtout, partook of the nature and qualities of both,
had about him that sort of slovenly smartness, and
swaggering gait, which is peculiar to young gentlemen
who smoke in the streets by day, shout and scream
in the same by night, call waiters by their Christian
names, and do other various acts and deeds of an
equally facetious description. He wore a pair of plaid
trousers, and a large rough double-breasted waistcoat;
out of doors, he carried a thick stick with a big top.
He eschewed gloves, and looked upon the whole, some-
thing like a dissipated Robinson Crusoe.
Mr. Pickwick is shown as gradualy warming up to the
students and particularly to Bob Sawyer. Before thd
party broke up, Bob Sawyer invited Mr. Pickwick and
his friends to his lodgings in Lant Street, The Borough,
near Guy?s Hospital. This party was a failure. Bob had
not been able to pay his rent. His landlady, Mrs. Raddle,
revenges herself by first of all refusing to produce hot
water for the brandy and then later, when conviviality was
just about to appear, by loudly calling on the company
to make less noise. Mr. Pickwick and his friends had
to sneak quietly away.
A little later in the story, Bob Sawyer succeeds in
passing his examinations and sets up in practice in Bristol,
where he is discovered by Mr. Winkle. The following is
the famous description of his method of building up a
practice. Bob is addressing his messenger boy:
?Did you leave all the medicine??
?Yes, sir.?
?The powders for the child, at the large house with
the new family, and the pills to be taken four times
a day at the ill-tempered old gentleman?s with the
gouty leg??
?Yes, sir."
?Then shut the door, and mind the shop.
?Come,? said Mr. Winkle, as the boy retired, ?things
are not quite so bad as you would have me believe,
either. There is some medicine to be sent out.?
Mr. Bob Sawyer peeped into the shop to see that no
stranger was within hearing, and leaning forward to
Mr. Winkle, said in a low tone.
?He leaves it all at the wrong houses.?
Mr. Winkle looked perplexed, and Bob Sawyer and
his friend laughed.
?Don?t you see?? said Bob. ?He goes up to a house,
rings the area bell, pokes a packet of medicine without
a direction into the servant?s hand, and walks off.
Servant takes it into the dining-parlour; master opens
it, and reads the label: ?Draught to be taken at bed-
time ?pills as before?lotion as usual?the powders.
Prom Sawyer?s, late Nockemorf?s. Physicians?
prescriptions carefully prepared?, and all the rest of
it. Shows it to his wife ?she reads the label; it goes
down to the servants; they read the label. Next day,
boy calls: ?very sorry?his mistake?immense business
?great many parcels to deliver ?Mr. Sawyer?s compli-
ments ?late Nockemorf.? The name gets known, ana
that?s the thing, my boy, in the medical way. Bless
your heart, old fellow, its better than all the advertising
in the world. We have got one four-ounce bottle
that?s been to half the houses in Bristol, and hasn?t
done yet.?
?Dear me, I see,? observed Mr. Winkle; ?what an
excellent plan.?
?Oh, Ben and I have hit upon a dozen such,? replied
Bob Sawyer, with great glee. ?The lamplighter has
eighteenpence a week to pull the night-bell for ten
minutes every time he comes round; and my boy
always rushes into church, just before the psalms, when
the people have got nothing to do but look about ?em,
and calls me out, with horror and dismay depicted
on his countenance. ?Bless my soul,? everybody says,
?somebody taken suddenly ill. Sawyer, late Nockemorf,
sent for. What a business that young man has!? ?
It is well known that medical students are very liable
to outbursts of gaiety and irresponsibility. These out-
bursts usually end within a year or two of graduation.
However, when the story ends Mr. Bob Sawyer is still
as gay and Irresponsible as ever.
Mr. Jailing.
Mr. Jobling appears In ?Martin Chuz/lev i ? lists).
He was a general practitioner, wh; lived .Lad practised
in the ?City? of London. He was a man who possessed
little knowledge of medicine, but who had an immense
power of making it appear that he did. He thoroughly
understood the art of being impressive. In many ways
there is a great similarity between Doctor Jobling and
Sir Blomfleld Bonington in Shaw?s ?The Doctor?s
Dilemma?, which will be examined later. There is one
great difference, however. One feels that Sir Blomfleld
would be the soul of honour, whereas Dr. Jobling was
thoroughly unscrupulous. The following extract deals
with his relationship to the bogus Anglo-Bengalee Insur-
ance Company.
In certain quarters of the City and its neighbourhood
Mr. Jobling was, as we have already seen in some
measure, a very popular character. He had a porten-
tously sagacious chin, and a pompous voice, with a
rich huskiness in some of its tones that went directly
to the heart, like a ray of light shining through tb�
ruddy medium of choice old burgundy. His neckerchief
and shirt-frill were ever of the whitest, his e?etnes
of the blackest and sleekest, his gold watch chain of
the heaviest, and his seals of the largest. His boots,
which were always of the brightest, creaked as he
walked. Perhaps he could shake his head, rub his
hands, or warm himself before a fire, better than any
man alive; and he had a peculiar way of smacking his


Ups and saying, ?Ah!? at intervals while patients
detailed their symptoms, which inspired great
confidence.
Jobling was for many reasons, one of which was
because his connexion lay principally among tradesmen
and their families, exactly the sort of person whom the
Anglo-Bengalee Company wanted for a medical officer.
But Jobling was far too knowing to connect himself with
the company with any closer ties than as a paid (and
well paid) functionary, or to allow his connexion to be
misunderstood abroad, if he could help it. Hence he
always stated the case to an inquiring patient, after the
following manner.
?Why, my dear sir, with regard to the Anglo-Bengalee,
my information, you see, is limited: very limited. I
am the medical officer, in consideration of a certain
monthly payment. The labourer is worthy of his hire;
Bis dat qui cito dat??(?Classical scholar, Jobling!?
thinks the patient, ?well-read man!?) ??and I receive
it regularly. Therefore I am bound, so far as my own
knowledge goes, to speak well of the establishment.?
?If you put any questions to me, my dear friend?,
says the doctor, ?touching the responsibility or capital
of the company, there I am at fault; for I have no
head for figures, and not being a shareholder, am
delicate of showing any curiosity whatever on the
subject. Delicacy?your amiable lady will agree with
me I am sure?should be one of the first characteristics
of a medical man.? ?Very good, my dear sir, so the
matter stands. You don?t know Mr. Montague? I?m
sorry for it. A remarkably handsome man, and quite
the gentleman in every respect. Property, I am told,
in India. House, and everything belonging to him,
beautiful. Costly furniture on the most elegant and
lavish scale. The pictures, which, even in an anatomical
point of view, are per-fectlon. In case you should
ever think of doing anything with the company, I?ll
pass you, you may depend upon it. I can conscientiously
report you a healthy subject. If I understand any
man?s constitution, it is yours; and this little indis-
position has done him more good, ma?am? says the
doctor, turning to the patient?s wife, ?than if he had
swallowed the contents of half the nonsensical bottles
in my surgery. For they are nonsense?to tell the
honest truth, one half of them are nonsense?compared
with such a constitution as his!?
The following conversation takes place in the board
room the next day.
?Commission to you, doctor, on four new policies,
and a loan this morning, eh?? said Crimple, looking,
when they had finished lunch, over some papers brought
in by the porter. ?Well done!?
?Jobling, my dear friend,? said Tlgg, ?long life to
you.?
?No, no. Nonsense. Upon my word I?ve no right
to draw the commission?, said the doctor, ?I haven?t
really. It?s picking your pocket. I don?t recommend
anybody here.. I only say what I know. My patients
ask me what I know, and I tell ?em what I know.
Nothing else. Caution is my weak side, that?s the
truth; and always was from a boy. That is?, said
the doctor, filling his glass, ?caution on behalf of
other people. Whether I would repose confidence in
this company myself, if I had not been paying money
elsewhere for many years?that?s quite another
question.?
Other Dickens's Doctors.
Dickens described two other doctors. Doctor Slammer,
a pompous army doctor, in ?Pickwick Papers?, and Dr.
Chillip, an obstetrlcion who brought David Copperfield
into the world.
Thackeray, 1811 to 1863.
Dr. Brand, Firmin.
Dr. Firmin appears in ?The Adventures of Philip?. He
was a fashionable doctor practising in London, and he was
a bigamist, a forger and a thief. This novel is a bitter
disappointment. When he wrote it, Thackeray was nearing
the end of his life. He had just started the ?Cornhill
Magazine,? and ?Philip? appeared in it as a serial. In
?Vanity Fair? one feels that Thackeray was living with
his characters, day by day and week by week. In ?Philip?
he is obviously Improvising. Incidents and scenes are
rehashed from previous novels, There is no real Dr,
Firmin; his character alters from chapter to chapter,
and there is not the slightest interest in his villainy.
He is mentioned simply to place on record Thackeray?s
failure in the only full-length picture of a doctor he
attempted.
Mrs. Gaskell, 1810 to 1865.
Mr. Gibson.
Mrs. Gaskell was the friend and biographer of Charlotte
Bronte. Her range was much the same as that of Jane
Austen. She was once regarded as a minor novelist, but
?Cranford?, ?Mary Barton? and particularly ?Wives and
Daughters? are now regarded as outstanding novels.
The last novel, ?Wives and Daughters?, is a key one
as far as the present study is concerned, as the plot
is centred on the household of a country doctor, Mr.
Gibson, and his day-to-day life is described in detail. Not
only is Mr. Gibson perhaps the best drawn doctor, but
he is also one of the best drawn male characters in
English literature. As far as his attitude to his work and
his patients is concerned, Gibson could be held up as
a model. As is the case with most men of strong character,
he had certain strongly marked faults. He was too
intolerant and too little inclined to suffer fools, but his
patients saw only devotion, kindness and skill.
The novel is noteworthy inasmuch as it throws con-
siderable light on the old system of apprenticeship.
Mr, Gibson kept three servants; Betty, a cook, and
a girl who was supposed to be housemaid, but who was
under both the elder two, and had a pretty life of it in
consequence. Three servants would not have been
required if it had not been Mr. Gibson?s habit, as it
had been Mr. Hall?s before him, to take two ?pupils?
as they were called in the genteel language of Holllng-
ford, ?apprentices? as they were in fact?being bound
by indentures, and paying a handsome premium to
learn their business. They lived in the house, and
occupied an uncomfortable, ambiguous, or, as Miss
Browning called it with some tru�h, ?amphibious?
position. They had their meals with' Mr. Gibson and
Molly, and were felt to be terribly in the way; Mr.
Gibson not being a man who could make conversation,
and hating the duty of talking under restraint. Yet
something within him made him wince, as if his
duties were not rightly performed, when, as the cloth
was drawn, the two awkward lads rose up with joyful
alacrity, gave him a nod, which was to be interpreted
as a bow, knocked against each other in their
endeavours to get out of the dining room quickly; and
then might be heard dashing along a passage which
led to the surgery, choking with half-suppressed
laughter. Yet the annoyance he felt at this dull sense
of imperfectly fulfilled duties only made his sarcasm
on their Inefficiency, or stupidity, or ill manners, more
bitter than before.
Beyond direct professional instruction, he did not
know what to do with the succession of pairs of young
men, whose mission seemed to be, to be plagued by their
master consciously, and to plague him unconsciously.
Once or twice Mr. Gibson had declined taking a fresh
pupil, in the hopes of shaking himself free from the
incubus, but his reputation as a clever surgeon had
spread so rapidly that his fees which he had thought
prohibitory, were willingly paid, in order that the young
man might make a start in life, with the prestige of
having been a pupil of Gibson of Holllngford.
It is part of the plot that one of the apprentices should
fail in love with Mr. Gibson?s daughter, Molly. Mr. Gibson
would not allow him to declare himself, as he thought
both parties were too young.- The incident made him take
thought about the future possibilities of his daughter?s
marriage. Although he attended the nobility and gentry
in the neighbourhood and was received as an equal by
them, he knew well that they would not regard a doctor?s
daughter as a suitable match for their sons. Molly was
very friendly with Squire Hamley?s family, but the squire
made it very plain that he wanted no love-making between
Molly and his two sons. In the end, after many troubles,
poor Squire Hamley saw very clearly that character
counted for more than birth, and he begged his remaining
son Roger to marry Molly. However, his son had already
fallen in love with Molly, and so Mr. Gibson?s main
concern in life was settled.


Anthony Trollope, 1815 to 1882.
Anthony Trollope is now fairly widely read in both
England and Australia. However, there was a long period
during which he was completely forgotten. In the early
years of this century his name was never mentioned,
extracts from his works were not included in school
anthologies, and to all Intents and purposes his work was
dead. His return to popularity was, to a great extent,
due to an American, A. Edward Newton, who in ?Amenities
of Book Collecting?, 1918, called attention to his excellence.
The following story will appeal to any book collectors
who may be present. The Launceston Public Library is
an old established library, and it contains many original
editions. Many years ago the library advertised that it
would, on a certain date, sell a number of out-of-date books
at threepence a volume. I was early on the spot. Many
tables were searched, but nothing of interest was found.
I was about to turn away, disappointed, when, on the last
table, I found a long row of Trollope?s novels. The
volumes were old, worn and repaired, but many of them
were first editions, with Millais?s illustrations. I
guessed that they had been put out by a junior member
of the staff, but did not think it my duty to Inquire. Just
as I was about to remove them, who should come in but
the late Dr. G. H. Hogg, a member of the library board.
He sized the situation up quickly, and in a few minutes
the ?Trollopes? were being returned to their shelves.
Since then I have had the greatest possible pleasure from
those old volumes (taken out singly and with the library
stamp on them).
Doctor Thorne.
Although Doctor Thorne, in the novel of the same
name, dominates the book to some extent, the tale is
essentially a love story and a satire on certain money-
loving aristocrats. Old Doctor Thorne has been living in
Greshambury for some years. He has long been intimate
with Squire Gresham, who is the first commoner in the
country, and he has been the family doctor. His beautiful
niece, Mary Thorne, has been more or less brought up
with the Gresham children. Frank, the heir, who is
nearly of age, has fallen in love with Mary. The squire?s
wife, Lady Arabella, is the sister of Earl de Courcy. The
de Courcy taste for magnificence has led the Squire into
extravagance, and the estate is heavily mortgaged. It
is an article of the de Courcy creed that Prank should
marry ?money?. However, all efforts fall to shake his
determination to marry Mary. The de Courcys thereupon
?wash their hands? of the affair. Mary and her uncle
are excommunicated by Lady Arabella. However, there is
a mystery about Mary?s birth. It turns out that she is
the Illegitimate daughter of Dr. Thorne?s dead brother,
and that by virtue of her birth, she is the heiress of an
enormous fortune. Everything is changed in an instant.
Lady Arabella welcomes Mary back with open arms. The
de Courcy family announce their intention of attending the
wedding in force ?even the Earl and Countess will come ?
and they are profuse in their praise of Frank?s conduct.
The medical interest of the novel lies in the relationship
of Dr. Thorne to his colleagues in the neighbouring towns
of Barchester and Silverbridge. He was at loggerheads
with them. Twenty years previously he had ?squatteij?
at the village of Greshambury. This in itself was a
cause of offence. More than that, he had added the business
of dispensing apothecary to that of physician.
Then also. Dr. Thorne, though a graduated physician,
though entitled beyond all dispute to call himself doctor,
according to all the laws of all the colleges, made it
known to the Bast Barsetshire world, very soon after
he had seated himself at Greshambury, that his rate of
pay was to be seven-and-sixpence a visit within a
circuit of five miles, with a proportionally Increased
charge at proportionally Increased distances. Now
there was something low, mean, unprofessional, and
democratic in this; so, at least, said the children of
gathered together in conclave at Barchester.
In the first place, it showed that this Thorne was
always thinking of his money, like an apothecary,
as he was; whereas, it would have behoved him, as a
physician, had he had the feelings of a physician
under his hat, to have regarded his own pursuits in
a purely philosophical spirit, and to have taken any
gain which might have accrued as an accidental
adjunct to his station In life. A physician should take
his fee without letting his left hand know what his
right hand is doing; it should be taken without a
thought, without a look, without a move of the facial
muscles; the true physician should hardly be aware
that the last friendly grasp of the hand had been made
more precious by the touch of gold. Whereas, that
fellow Thorne would lug out half a crown from his
breeches pocket and give it in change for a ten shilling
piece. And then it was clear that this man had no
appreciation of the dignity of a learned profession.
He might constantly be seen compounding medicines
in the shop, at the left hand of his front door; not
making experiments philosophically in materia medica
for the benefit of coming ages?which, if he did, he
should have done in the seclusion of his study far
from profane eyes?but the positively putting together
common powders for rural bowels, or spreading vulgar
ointments for agricultural ailments.
A man of this sort was not fit society for Dr.
Fillgrave of Barchester. That must be admitted. And
yet he had been found to be fit society for the old
squire of Greshamsbury, whose shoe-ribbons Dr. Pill-
grave would not have objected to tie; so high did the
old squire stand in the county just previous to his
death.
Dr. Fillgrave, who had certainly the most respectable
connexion in the country, who had a reputation to main-
tain and who was accustomed to meet, on almost equal
terms, the great medical baronets from the metropolis
at the houses of the nobility, declined to meet Dr. Thorne
in consultation. He must have bitterly regretted the day
when he made this announcement. Dr. Thorne was not
a pugnacious man; he had no disposition to provoke a
fight; but there was that in him which would allow him
to yield to no attack. He vigorously counter-attacked
Dr. Fillgrave in a letter to the Barsetshire Conservative
Standard.
Dr. Fillgrave never knew another happy hour. Had
he dreamed of what materials was made the young
compounder of doses at Greshambury, he would have
met him in consultation morning, noon and night with-
out objection; but having begun the war, he was
constrained to go on with it: his brethren would allow
him no alternative. Thus he was continually being
brought up to the fight, as a prize-fighter may be seen
to be, who is carried up round after round, without any
hope on his part, and who in each round, drops to
the ground before the very wind of his opponent?s
blows. But Dr. Fillgrave, though thus weak himself,
was backed in practice and in countenance by nearly
all his brethren in the country. The guinea fee, the
principle of giving advice and selling no medicine, the
great resolve to keep a distinct barrier between the
physician and the apothecary, and, above all, the hatred
of the contamination of a bill were strong in the
medical mind of Barsetshire.
Trollope?s account of the great Barsetshire medical war
is most amusing, but it is too near the truth to make
comfortable reading. One aspect of the war is worthy
of further comment. It is the question of how a doctor
should behave when he is attending a family, and he is
told that his services are no longer required. How should
he behave, and how should the other doctor concerned
behave? There are all sorts of ethical rules dealing with
this situation, but it is well known that there are only
two that are of any value. The first, of course, is the
golden rule, ?Do unto your colleague, etc.?; the other rule
is that the retiring doctor should make a supreme effort
to behave gracefully. Dr. Fillgrave made the great mistake
of behaving ungracefully.
Sir Omicron Pie.
Trollope loved to describe power and prestige. It is
not surprising, therefore, that he should introduce into
several of his novels the imposing figure of Sir Omicron
Pie, the great London consultant. The period of waiting
for his arrival, the arrival, the consultation and the giving
of the opinion are always described with great unction.


George Eliot, 1819 to 1888.
In these days ?medical research? has come to mean
research conducted in a laboratory. Certainly many of
the epoch-making discoveries have come from the
laboratory. However, it is forgotten that much important
work, even epoch-making work, has been done by men
actively engaged in medical practice. Such names come
to mind as those of Withering, Jenner, James Mackenzie
and Wilfred Pickles.
Literature contains full-length portraits of two men
who had a passionate desire to devote their lives to
medical research. One was an Englishman, Dr. Lydgate,
in George Eliot?s ?Middlemarch?; he was a country doctor.
The other was an American, Martin Arrowsmith, in
Sinclair Lewis?s ?Martin Arrowsmith?; he was a
bacteriologist.
George Eliot (Marv Ann Evans) was an intellectual.
She was, in the fullest sense of the word, a ?natural
philosopher?. Not only did she develop and expound a
particular philosophy of life, but she developed it in the
light of scientific principles which she thoroughly grasped.
Such qualities as these may well mean literary death to
a novelist as in the end they meant death to H. G. Wells.
However, George Eliot was a born story-teller. It was only
in her later years that her desire to expound overcame
her desire to entertain. It was her scientific knowledge
that enabled her to draw such a character as Dr. Lydgate.
Lydgate came from a good family. His father had
been a military man, and his uncle was a baronet. The
following is the account of his intellectual awakening.
One vacation, a wet day sent him to the small home
library to hunt once more for a book which might
have some freshness for him: in vain! unless, indeed,
he took down a dusty row of volumes with grey paper
backs and dingy labels ?the volumes of an old Cyclo-
paedia which he had never disturbed. It would at least
be a novelty to disturb them. They were on the highest
shelf, and he stood on a chair to get them down. But
he opened the volume which he first took from the
shelf; somehow one is apt to read in a makeshift
attitude, just where it might seem inconvenient to do
so. The page he opened on was under the head of
Anatomy, and the first passage that drew his eyes
was on the valves of the heart. He was not much
acquainted with valves of any sort, and he knew that
vulvas were folding doors, and through this crevice came
a sudden light startling him with his first vivid notion
of the finely-adjusted mechanism of the human frame.
But the moment of vocation had come, and before he
got down from his chair, the world was made new to
him by a presentiment of endless processes filling the
vast spaces planked out of his sight by that wordy
ignorance which he had supposed to be knowledge.
Prom that hour Lydgate felt the growth of an intellec-
tual passion.
Lydgate was apprenticed to a country practitioner. After
a short period in Paris he set up as a general practitioner
in the provincial town of Middlemarch.
Lydgate was ambitious above all to contribute to-
wards enlarging the scientific, rational basis of his
profession. The more he became interested in special
questions of disease, such as the nature of fever or
fevers, the more keenly he felt the need for that
fundamental knowledge of structure which just at the
beginning of the century had been illuminated by the
brief and glorious career of Bichat, who died when he
was only one and thirty, but like another Alexander,
left a realm large enough for many heirs.
It may be said at once that Lydgate failed. He failed
temporarily as a practitioner, but, more seriously, he
completely failed to satisfy his passion for research. His
temporary failure as a practitioner was due to the fact
that at first he had not learned that medicine is an art
as much as a science, the art being that of managing
human beings. He knew that most illnesses were naturally
self-limiting?that the cure was due to Vis Medicatrix
Naturae. He therefore decided to treat them without
the use of drugs. In one case of pneumonia he was very
successful. However, most of his patients simply could
not understand him; their minds were quite unprepared
for so violent a departure from ordinary practice. How-
ever, such a failure as this was certain to be temporary.
So able a man as Lydgate was bound to have sized up
the situation and to have altered his practice accordingly.
The cause of his real failure was very different. He
fell in love with and married Rosamond Vincy, the
daughter of one of the town?s leading merchants. Rosamond
was apparently a mild creature, but she was possessed
of a passion equally as strong if not stronger than was his
for research. It was the passion for social advancement.
She had no idea of staying in Middlemarch. She wished
to live either in London or close to Lydgate?s grand
relatives in the north.
Lydgate secretly wondered over the terrible tenacity
of this mild creature. There was gathering within him
an amazed sense of his powerlessness over Rosamond.
His superior knowledge and mental force, instead of
being, as he had imagined, a shrine to consult on all
occasions, was simply set aside on every practical
question. He had regarded Rosamond?s cleverness as
precisely of the receptive kind which became a woman.
He was now beginning to find out what that cleverness
was ?what was the shape into which it had run as
into a close network aloof and Independent. No one
quicker than Rosamond to see causes and effects which
lay within the track of her own tastes and interests:
she had seen clearly Lydgate?s pre-eminence in Middle-
march society, and could go on imaginatively tracing
still more agreeable social effects when his talent should
have advanced him; but for her, his professional and
scientific ambition had no other relation to these desir-
able effects than if they had been the fortunate dis-
covery of an ill-smelling oil. And that oil apart, with
which she had nothing to do, of course she believed
in her own opinion more than she did in his. Lydgate
was astonished to find in numberless trifling matters,
as well as in this last serious case of the riding, that
affection did not make her compliant.
She was in fact a master of the art of evasion. She
had that victorious obstinacy which never wastes its
energy in impetuous resistance. What she liked to do
was to her the right thing, and all her cleverness was
directed to getting the means of doing it. When Lydgate
fell seriously into debt, she secretly thwarted all his plans
for economy. She devised her own plan of escaping from
their difficulties, and without consulting Lydgate she
wrote what was meant to be a ?winning? letter to his
rich uncle, Sir Godwin, asking for a thousand pounds. Sir
Godwin replied not to her but to Lydgate himself, telling
him when he had something to request, not to set his
wife to do it, and he refused the money. When Lydgate
reproached her:
She said nothing, but under that quietude was
hidden an Intense effect. She was in such entire
disgust with her husband that she wished she had
never seen him. Sir Godwin?s rudeness towards her
and utter want of feeling ranged him With Dover and
all the other creditors ?disagreeable people who only
thought of themselves, and did not mind how annoying
they were to her. Even her father was unkind and
might have done more for them. In fact there was
but one person in Rosamond?s world whom she did not
regard as blameworthy, and that was the graceful
creature with blonde plaits and with little hands crossed
before her, who had never expressed herself unbecom-
ingly, and had always acted for the best ?the best
naturally being what she liked best.
Lydgate was in an unexpected way relieved of his money
troubles, but, of course, he had to give up all idea of a
country practice combined. with research.
He died when he was only fifty, leaving his wife and
children provided for by a heavy Insurance on his life.
He had gained an excellent practice, alternating,
according to the season, between London and the Con-
tinental bath places; having written a treatise on Gout,
a disease which has a good deal of wealth on its side.
His skill was relied on by many paying patients, but
he always regarded himself as a failure: he had not
done what he once meant to do.
Robert Louis Stevenson, 1850 to 1894.
If during one of those quiz sessions, which are so often
heard over the air, the questions were asked: ?Who was
Dr. Perry, or Dr. Jobling, or Dr. Lydgate?? it is doubtful


if many of those questioned could answer. However, there
are two doctors whose names are known in every house-
hold. They are Dr. Jekyll and Dr. Watson.
Dr. Jekyll (and Mr. Hyde).
There is no need to comment on the famous allegory.
What is of intense interest from the medical point of
view is that in the 80?s of the last century when Stevenson
wrote ?Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde? he should have hit on
the idea of making Dr. Jekyll synthesize a mind-trans-
forming drug. During recent years, outstanding pharma-
cological advances have made the use of such drugs
commonplace.
The following is Dr. Jekyll?s description of his sensations
immediately after taking the drug.
Late one accursed night, I compounded the elements,
watched them boil and smoke together in the glass,
and when the ebullition had subsided, with' a strong
glow of courage, drank off the potion.
The most racking pangs succeeded: a grinding in the
bones, deadly nausea, and a horror of the spirit that
cannot be exceeded at the hour of birth or death. Then
these agonies began swiftly to subside, and I came to
myself as if out of a great sickness. There was some-
thing strange in my sensations, something indescribably
new, and, from its very novelty, incredibly sweet. I
felt younger, lighter, happier in body; within I was
conscious of a heady recklessness, a current of dis-
ordered sensual images running like a mill race in my
fancy, a solution of the bonds of obligation, an unknown,
but not an innocent freedom of the soul, I knew myself,
at the first breath of this new life, to be more wicked,
tenfold more wicked, sold a slave to my original evil;
and the thought, in that moment, braced and delighted
me like wine. I stretched out my hands, exulting in
the freshness of these sensations.
Dr. Livesey.
Stevenson also created Dr. Livesey in Treasure Island
It is an excellent picture of a country doctor.
Conan Doyle, 1859 to 1930.
Conan Doyle was trained as a doctor, and for a while
he practised as one. In ?Round the Red Lamp? there
are many excellent medical stories. ?The Stark Munro
Letters? is little read these days, but it is full of interest.
The picture of Dr. Cullingworth is that of a medical man
who had many admirable qualities, but who was too flam-
boyant to be acceptable to his colleagues.
The doctor by whom Conan Doyle is known to the public
is Dr. Watson.
Dr. Watson.
Dr. Watson was the colleague of the great Sherlock
Holmes. He is generally accepted as being a man of
excellent character, who was singularly lacking in the
qualities of imagination and penetration. The modern
use of the word ?dumb? would seem to have been specially
devised to describe him. Nothing could be further from
the truth. There was nothing ?dumb? about Watson. It
is usually forgotten that it was Watson who worked up
and presented to the public the reports of Holmes?s cases;
and It is generally accepted that this presentation was
masterly. So far from being ?dumb?, Watson was a highly
intelligent and very gifted man. However, his gifts were
of a lower order than those of Holmes. If Watson was
given all the facts of a finished case, he could sort them
out, analyse them and present the essentials in a clear,
orderly and dramatic fashion. If he was capable of
analysis, however, he was not capable of synthesis. Holmes
was a master at both. Holmes was at his best when he
was building up a case from small scraps of evidence,
all apparently unrelated. It is this particular faculty that
has led teachers of clinical medicine to hold him up as
an example to their students. The original of Holmes was,
of course, one of Conan Doyle?s medical teachers, and
Holmes?s methods (?You know my methods, Watson?)
were those of a first class clinician. Certainly students
could be taught to Imitate his concentration, his highly
developed powers of observation and his systematic use
of a vast previous experience. What could not be imitated
would be the brilliant flash of intuition that led him to
make his final and usually successful leap in the dark.
Watson?s mind has suffered by comparison with Holmes,
but it was an excellent one nevertheless.
Bernard Shaw, 1856 to 1950.
?The Doctor?s Dilemma ? (1906).
I am indebted to Hespeth Pearson?s ?Bernard Shaw? for
the following details concerning the way in which ?The
Doctor?s Dilemma? came to be written.
Mrs. Shaw reminded him how, while chatting with
Sir Almroth Wright, at St. Mary?s Hospital, they had
been interrupted by an assistant who wanted to know
whether the eminent physician could add another tuber-
culous patient to those he was already treating by his
new opsonic method, the number he could so treat
being necessarily limited. ?Is he worth it?? asked Sir
Almroth. Shaw instantly saw that there was a play
in the situation, and said so to Mrs. Shaw, but thought
no more of it until her reminder at Mevagissey. The
subject also enabled him to take up a challenge issued
by William Archer, who had stated in print that Shaw
could not claim the highest rank as a dramatist until
he had depicted death on the stage. He, therefore,
determined to write a tragedy, all about doctors and
death, and to make it the most amusing play.
In ?The Doctor?s Dilemma? Shaw dramatized aspects
of the leading physicians and surgeons of the day. Pearson
describes Shaw?s method of studying the profession.
Apparently, once a month until the age of 70 years, he
suffered from devastating headaches. He used his disease
to learn all about doctors.
Like Palstaff, Shaw turned his disease to commodity,
using his headaches to learn all about doctors: ?I
used to be a collector of uncanonical therapeutics.
Whenever I heard of a new method of treating illness
I presented myself for treatment when next I had a
spare hour. Though my celebrity made me an interest-
ing patient, I was medically a very disappointing one,
as there was nothing more serious the matter with
me than the occasional headaches which, like common
colds, reduce Harley Street to impotence. The cure
of a man who is obviously not ill cannot be claimed
as a triumph by any physician, orthodox or unorthodox.
Still, if I could not credit the practitioner with success,
at least I could not reproach him with failure. And
I gathered a good deal of first hand information which
I could not have obtained by any other means.
The doctor?s dilemma arose in the following manner.
Sir Colenso Ridgeon has just been knighted, in acknow-
ledgement of his supposed discovery of a cure for
tuberculosis. The cure is by inoculation. The adminis-
tration of the inoculation has to be carefully controlled
by means of what is known as the ?Opsonic Index?.
Unless the index indicates a favourable moment, the
inoculation may hasten the disease and kill the patient,
The amount of material ready for inoculation is very
limited, and Sir Colenso has room for only one more
patient on his list. A beautiful woman, Mrs. Dubedat,
comes to see him, and begs him to save her husband,
who is an artist. He falls in love with her, and invites
her and her husband to a dinner he has arranged at a
hotel to celebrate his knighthood, and where they will
meet some of his old friends. After the dinner, all are
agreed that Dubedat is a brilliant artist and a charming
man. Ridgeon says to Mrs. Dubedat: ?You shall go away
quite happy. He is worth saving. He must and shall
be saved.? The Dubedats retire. It then turns out that
not only has Dubedat borrowed money from all of them,
but he has also stolen a gold cigarette case. Later it is
discovered that he has entered into a bigamous marriage
with one of the hotel?s housemaids. He is, in fact, a
young blackguard. Ridgeon now has to decide whether
he will save Dubedat, or whether he will instead save
Dr. Blenkinsop, a hardworking general practitioner and
an old friend, who has revealed that he is suffering from
tuberculosis. This is the ?Doctor?s Dilemma?.
The play is a satire on doctors and particularly on
the specialists of Harley Street. The three friends of
Ridgeon, Sir Patrick Cullen, Sir Ralph Blomfleld Bonington
and Mr. Cutler Walpole, are typical representatives of the


consultant type. One after the other they call to con-
gratulate him. Sir Patrick Cullen is an old man, and
his theme is ?I?ve seen it all before?.
Sir Patrick: Lord! yes. Modern science is a wonderful
thing. Look at your great discovery! Look at all
the great discoveries! Where are they leading to?
Why, right back to my poor dear father?s ideas and
discoveries. He?s been dead now for forty years. Oh,
it?s very interesting.
Ridgeon; Well, there?s nothing like progress, is
there?
Sir Patrick: Don?t misunderstand me, my boy, I?m
not belittling your discovery. Most discoveries are
made regularly every fifteen years; and it?s fully a
hundred and fifty since yours was made last. That?s
something to be proud of. But your discovery?s not
new. It?s only inoculation. My father practised
inoculation until it was made criminal in eighteen -
forty. That broke the poor old man?s heart, Colly, he
died of it. And now it turns out that my father was
right after all. You?ve brought us back to inoculation.
Sir Patrick says of Cutler Walpole:
He worked hard at anatomy to find something fresh
to operate on; and at last he got hold of something he
calls the nuciform sac, which he?s made quite the
fashion. People pay him five hundred guineas to cut
it out.
When Walpole enters the following conversation takes
place.
Walpole: By the way, I hope I?m not disturbing
you two in anything private.
Ridgeon: No, no. Sit down. I was only consulting
him. I'm rather out of sorts. Overwork, I suppose.
Walpole (swiftly) : I know what?s the matter with
you. I can see it in your complexion. I can feel it in
the grip of your hand.
Ridgeon: What is is?
Walpole: Blood-poisoning.
Ridgeon; Blood-poisoning! Impossible.
Walpole: I tell you, blood-poisoning. Ninety-five
of the human race suffer from chronic blood-
poisoning, and die of it. It?s as simple as A.B.C. Your
nuciform sac is full of decaying matter ?undigested
food and waste products?rank ptomaines. Now take
my advice, Ridgeon. Let me cut it out for you. You?ll
be another man afterwards.
Sir Ralph Bonington is the last to come in.
Sir Ralph Bloomfield Bonington wafts himself into
the room. He is a tall man, with a head like a tall
slender egg. He has been in his time a slender man:
but now, in his sixth decade, his waistcoat has filled
out somewhat. His fair eyebrows arch goodnaturedly
and uncritically. He has a most musical voice; his
speech is a perpetual anthem; and he never tires of
the sound of it. .Pie radiates an enormous self
satisfaction, cheering, reassuring, healing by the mere
incompatibility of disease or anxiety with his welcome
presence. Even broken bones, it is said, have been
known to unite at the sound of his voice; he is a
born healer, as independent of mere treatment and skill
as any Christian Scientist. When he expands into
oratory or scientific exposition, he is as energetic as
Walpole; but it is with a bland, voluminous, atmospheric
energy, which envelopes its subject and its audience,
and makes interruption or Inattention impossible, and
imposes veneration and credulity on all but the strongest
minds. He is known in the medical world as B.B.;
and the envy roused by his success in practice is
softened by the conviction that he is, scientifically con-
sidered, a colossal humbug: the fact being that, though
he knows just as much (and just as little) as his
contemporaries, the qualifications that pass muster in
common men reveal their weakness when hung on his
egregious personality.
It is part of the plot that Sir Ralph should have no
idea at all as to how to administer the dangerous vaccine
Ridgeon has discovered. He refers to it as an ?antitoxin?,
and cares nothing for the Opsonic Index. ?There are
only two rules for antitoxins?, he says. ?First, don?t
be afraid of them. Second, inject them a quarter of an
hour before meals, three times a day.?
The most interesting medical character in the play is
Ridgeon. Shaw undoubtedly uses Ridgeon to satirize
what he considered to be a god-like attitude on the part
of certain scientists. They were god-like inasmuch as
they considered themselves to be above the ordinary
ethical rules that guided other people. Ridgeon is in
love with Mrs. Dubedat. Dubedat turns out to be a
blackguard. Ridgeon has no hesitation, therefore, in
breaking his promise to save Dubedat. He hands him over
to the care of Sir Ralph Bonington. Sir Ralph, of course,
gives him the antitoxin ?three times a day, before meals?,
and Dubedat dies, as Ridgeon knew he would.
The last scene is an exhibition of the late Dubedat?s
paintings. Ridgeon attends and Mrs. Dubedat reproaches
him with his perfidy. Ridgeon tells her of his love for
her. She repulses him, but Ridgeon is not very put
out, as he feels certain of success in the end. To change
the conversation, he says, ?I have marked five pictures
as sold to me?. Mrs. Dubedat replies: ?They will not be
sold to you. Louis?s creditors insisted on selling them, but
this is my birthday; and they were all bought in for me
this morning by my husband.? Ridgeon is flabbergasted
by this revelation that she has already remarried and
the play ends with his saying, ?Then I have committed
a purely disinterested murder?.
Sinclair Lewis, 1885 to 1951.
Dr. Martin Arrowsmith.
Martin Arrowsmith was the son of J. J. Arrowsmith,
who conducted the New York Clothing Bazaar in Elk
Mills, a village in the State of Winnemac. In 1897, when
the story opens, he was a boy, and he had established
himself as the unofficial and unpaid assistant to Doc
Vlckerson. He is determined to follow in ?Doc?s? foot-
steps and become a doctor. His parents died, but they
left him enough money for his arts and medical courses.
He attended the University of Winnemac. As is the
case with most of Sinclair Lewis?s books, ?Martin Arrow-
smith? is a scathing satire on the American scene. The
following is the description of the University of Winnemac.
There are twelve thousand students, besides this
prodigy Oxford is a tiny theological school and Harvard
a select college for young gentlemen. The University
has a baseball field under glass; its buildings are
measured by the mile; it hires hundreds of young
Doctors of Philosophy to give rapid Instruction in
Sanskrit, navigation, accountancy, spectacle fitting,
sanitary engineering, provincial poetry, tariff schedules,
Rutabaga-growing, motor car designing, the history of
Veronezh, the style of Matthew Arnold, the diagnosis
of myonypertrophia kymoparalytica, and department
store advertising. Its president is the best money raiser
and the best after-dinner speaker in the United States
and Winnemac was the first school in the world to
conduct its extension course by radio.
Nevertheless, it was at Winnemac that Arrowsmith
received his great inspiration. The Professor of
Bacteriology was Max Gottleib. Gottleib became and
remained his hero. In the main the novel is the story
of his struggle, first to become a good bacteriologist, and
secondly to carry out first class research work. Unlike
Lydgate, Arrowsmith succeeded. If Lydgate failed because
of his wife, Arrowsmith succeeded because of his. Arrow-
smith possessed what is usually called ?the artistic
temperament?. Leora thoroughly understood him, and
saved him from the worst consequences of his tempera-
mental defects. After Arrowsmith had become a very
well-known bacteriologist, Leora died. He later remarried.
His second wife was a wealthy woman, and she was in
the New York ?social swim?. She had no insight into
the mind of a scientist, and she constantly interrupted
his work with social demands. Arrowsmith therefore
found himself in much the same position as Lydgate.
However, he was made of sterner stuff than Lydgate,
arid rather than give up his science he left his wife.
Henry Handel Richardson (Ethel Henrietta Richardson),
1870 to 1946.
Two outstanding tragedies have been written about
Australia. The first was ?For the Term of His Natural
Life? by Marcus Clarke, with the scenes of which we
Tasmanians are very familiar. The second was ?The


Fortunes of Richard Mahony? by Henry Handel Richard-
son. Miss Richardson was born in Melbourne. Her father,
Walter Lindesay Richardson, was a doctor who came to
Victoria in the sixties, and who practised at Ballarat,
Bast Melbourne, Queenscliff and other centres.
There can be no doubt that the tragedy of Richard
Mahony is the tragedy of Walter Lindesay Richardson.
The experiences of those early years, before her father
died, must have burned into Ethel Richardson?s very soul.
Dr. Richard Mahony.
Mahony was a man of noble but warped character. It
is difficult to define the exact nature of the flaw in his
character. It is perhaps best described as a ?partial
wrongheadedness?. Although he had a wide knowledge
of medicine and was a successful doctor in his younger
years, he was never temperamentally at ease in the
practice of his profession. His marriage was fortunate
to a degree. Mary Mahony is the outstanding doctor?s
wife in literature. She was a woman of marked personal
charm, and she possessed great strength of character. It
is the essence of the tragedy that her loyalty should
involve her In Mahony?s slow decline.
Mahony made a fortune from investments in gold mining,
gave up medicine and returned to Europe. When he
was nearly fifty years old, his wrongheadedness Induced
him to alter his investments, and he lost his fortune.
He had to return to Australia and commence practice
again. From this point on, the story is one of a doctor
whose mental equipment was slowly decaying, forcing
himself to grapple with the most difficult form of life
known ?that of a general practitioner.
The spectacle of doctors whose health has become
impaired and who have not saved enough money on which
to retire is a common one in medicine, and it Is not
usually seen as a tragedy. For the most part such doctors
have learned by long experience how to practise medicine
as an art, that is, how to manage people and situations,
and they swim along fairly well in troubled waters.
Mahony had never learned this art. The story of his
attempts and his failures is told with great dramatic
force, but it is one of the grimmest stories it is possible
to Imagine.
Conclusion.
Robert Louis Stevenson was also a sufferer from tuber-
culosis, and he also knew doctors well. In the dedication
to ?Underwoods? he paid the following great tribute to
the medical profession.
There are men and classes of men that stand above
the common herd: the soldier, the sailor and the shep-
herd not unfrequently; the artist rarely, rarelier still,
the clergyman; the physician almost as a rule. He is
the flower (such as it is) of our civilisation; and when
that stage of man is done with, and only remembered
to ?be marvelled at in history, he will be thought to
have shared as little as any in the defects of the period,
and most notably exhibited the virtues of the race.
Generosity he has, such as is possible to those who
practise an art, never to those who drive a trade;
discretion, tested by a hundred secrets; tact, tried in
a thousand embarrassments; and what are more
important, Herculean cheerfulness and courage. So it
is that he brings air and cheer into the sickroom, and
often enough, though not so often as he wishes, brings
healing.
The question must now be asked: ?Does the evidence
derived from a study of the great novelists wholly support
this tribute?? The answer is that it does not wholly
support it. According to the novelists, doctors are neither
better nor worse than their neighbours. They rise to the
same heights, and fall to the same depths. They yield
to the same temptations, and are subject to the same
inconsistencies and defects of character that afflict other
people.
However, it can be said that doctors are almost
invariably represented as being men of strong personality,
whose character and bearing have an immense influence
on those around them. In the majority of cases this
influence is for good and only very occasionally is it for
evil. If they do not deserve the whole of the tribute paid
to them by Robert Louis Stevenson, at least, according
to the novelists, they deserve much of it.
Acknowledgement.
I am greatly indebted to Professor Walter Murdoch for
much helpful advice.
8 . THE MEDICAL JOURNAL OF AUSTRALIA July 5, 1358
Australasian Medical Publishing Company Limited
Seamer and Arundel Streets, Glebe, Sydney, N.S.W.
Glebe, Sydney, N.S.W.
