

" Some of the Lessons
of the Great War "
A Summary of Addresses delivered at Rosedale,
Dargo and Buchan, in January, 1920
LIEUT.-COLONEL SIR JAMES BARRETT
K.8.G., C.8., C.M.G., M.D., M.S., F.R.C.S., ENG.


M 'JJSYONEY GAZETTEJ>RESS^


El Arish was occupied early in 1917, and
after the Battles of Maghaba and Rafa the
invasion of Palestine was undertaken. The
advance was continued to Gaza, where a
check was experienced in March and April.
1917, and a prolonged halt took place.
Towards the end of 1917, Gaza was taken,
and soon afterwards came the occupation of
Jerusalem.
1V..1n the latter half of 1918, the Turkish army
was destroyed, and the whole of Palestine and
Syria were occupied.
The "East versus West" controversy, which raged
throughout the war, was, I fancy, mainly journalistic.
1 do not think serious soldiers or statesmen ever made
the mistake of regarding this campaign as "a side show,"
since they knew that the " Eastern Corridor " was vital
to Germany, and that she would use all the force she
could to preserve her control of the East.
The matter has not been understood in Australia, be-
cause the number of Australians in this theatre subse-
quent to 1915 was comparatively small, and conse-
quently the facts were not reported in Australia.
At the end of the war, Field Marshal Viscount Allenby
had under his command something under half-a-million
men (including the Egyptian Labour Corps), of whom
a large number were Mahommedans, whereas the
total number of Australians was about 18,000. It
was the efficiency of the front line mounted Australians,
abo'ut 12,0c0 in number, that led to the expansion of this
arm of the service to about 32,000, of whom about a third
were Australians, the remainder being New Zealanders,
British Yeomanry, and Indian (Cavalry. This compo-
site mounted force was, I believe, the largest ever
assembled under one commander.


The magnitude of the Palestine campaign can best be
pictured in Australia, if it be remembered that the total
number of soldiers who left Australia was 3301000* about
three-fifths the number of the total British force in
Palestine and Egypt. .
One further reminder is necessary. In an efficient
and well-managed army, it takes two men at the Base,
and on the lines of communication, to keep one man
fighting, that is to say, out of 500.000 men, about 160,000
might be actually fighting.
It is in a national war an inexcusable waste of human
material to post perfectly fit men to act as the support-
ing two-thirds. Partially fit men, and in some places
women can do this work perfectly well, and I person-
ally would staff Base Hospitals largely with women,
where their work would be quite efficient. Of course
it would be much easier to conduct a war with nothing
but fit A class men, but such an army would in a
national war certainly suffer defeat at the hands of an
enemy such as Germany, who from the first adopted
the other policy of putting the round man in the round
hole, and thus industrializing the army, for, as H. G.
Wells put it: An army is efficient in so far as it is in-
dustrialised.
In 1917 and 1918, owing to the exhaustion of Great
Britain's man power, further supplies of A class men
could not be obtained, and consequently the men on the
lines of communication and at the Base were examined
medically to ascertain what they were best fitted to do.
The classification adopted was as follows: —
Category "A"—Able to march, able to shoot, hear
well, and stand active service conditions.
Category "B"—-Free from serious organic disease,
and, in addition, if clasified "B.i. Front Line"
and "B.i L. of C.," able to march at least five
miles, see to shoot with glasses, and hear well.


Category "B.ii. L. of C"—Able to walk to and from
work a distance not exceeding five miles, see
and hear sufficiently for ordinary purposes.
Lategory "B.iii. L. of C." —Only suitable for seden-
tary work or on such duties as storemen,
batmen, cooks, orderlies, sanitary duties, etc.
Also, if skilled tradesmen, fit to work at their
trades.
After this classification had been effected a recom-
mendation was made by the Medical Board respecting
the occupation for which these B Class men were best
suited. The results were card-indexed by the Records
Department, and the men were then examined by trade
testers, and their competency thus ascertained.
A brief allusion to medical details may interest those
not familiar with the subject.
In no circumstances was any defect or absence of
teeth regarded as a disability, but dentists were pro-
vided in the forward area. The visual standard was
profoundly lowered, and with satisfactory results.
Chronic discharge from the ear was regarded as a minor
ailment, and dealt with accordingly.
It is unnecessary to multiply details, but by this sys-
tem two results were obtained
I. Many thousands of men were kept in the front
line.
11. Many thousands were retained in Egypt and in-
dustrialised, and allotted to suitable occupa-
tions.
Does not this experience instruct the civilian. This
policy was undertaken for the most powerful of motives,
viz., national preservation.
But why should a similar policy not be developed in
civil life? Why should not occupation be determined
in somewhat similar fashion ? It has fallen to my lot,


as President of the Medical Board, to find the Board in
doubt respecting the fitness of a soldier. The Board
would refer him for expert (written) opinion to a con-
sulting Physician, Surgeon, Oculist, or X-Ray Spe-
cialist, who were amongst the very best Great Britain
could furnish.
They personally examined the man and reported.
At times you could see what went on in the soldier's
mind: He was,being personally examined by men he
could never hope to get near in civil life, for what? To
determine whether a man receiving 16 pence a day was
fit to take his place in the front line.
He naturally reasoned as follows:—If all this is done
now, why should not some similar arrangement be made
in civil life? A position difficult indeed to answer.
His attitude was sometimes punctuated by the know-
ledge that relatives of his were in safety, and drawing
large wages as munition workers, etc.
In military life, a daily return is furnished to Head
Quarters of the number sick and inefficient, and if it
rises, immediate enquiry is made and action taken. Who
is there in civil life who knows or cares what the effi-
ciency of the nation is? The Health authorities do pos-
sess a rudimentary organisation, but the Public Health
Service can never be really effective until two changes
are made:—
i. The posts in these departments must be made the
prizes of the profession, with the necessary salary and
status, otherwise the best brains will for the most part
not enter them.
2. The necessary authority entrusted to them must be
fortified by an educated public opinion on matters of
health.
During the Egyptian campaign, cholera was stamped
out with trifling loss; typhoid fever rendered harmless;
and ophthalmia the former scourge of Egypt, kept well


in hand. But two diseases have not yet been brought
to heel, viz., dysentery and malaria. Venereal diseases
caused much trouble, "and the following letter indicates
how falsely the public judges the position. We know
enough to extirpate V.D. altogether, if those who claim
to be moralists would permit us.
The following letter, addressed by me to the Press, at
the request of the Returned Soldiers' and Sailors Im-
perial League, indicates the position: —
"The Victorian State Council of the R.S.S.L.L.A. has
asked me to correct a misapprehension which has arisen
in the public mind respecting the prevalence of venereal
disease amongst soldiers. An exaggerated view has
been taken of the existence of venereal disease amongst
soldiers by reason of the publication of statements by
Dr. Cumston, Director of Quarantine in the Common-
wealth service—Publication Xo. 17. In this bulletin
Dr. Cumston points out that the number of men who
have suffered from venereal disease, after enlisting and
during service, between August, 1914.' and September,
1918, has been, in Australia, 13,058, and abroad 40,950;
with some corrections the total is estimated at 55. 00 °-
As the number of soldiers mobilised during the war was
416,000, the percentage is, approximately, 13 per cent.,
distributed over four years, or an average of 3 per cent,
per annum.
"To those who have not examined the venereal disease
problem closely the figures may appear excessive, but I
have no hesitation in expressing my opinion that they
are far below the corresponding figure in normal civi-
lian life. A number of factors must be considered.
During the war a soldier is removed from home influ-
ence; he is exposed to temptation hitherto unknown to
him, particularly in Eastern cities. 011 the other 1' nd,
never before in his life has his health been care 1 for
with the same degree qf thoroughness. The Com-


mander-in-'Chief must have soldiers; a daily return
must be furnished showing the number of men who are
ill, and if it is found that the rate of infection from
venereal disease is high, immediate steps are taken to
ascertain the cause. The army is aware of the extent
of the infection, and is able to express it in fairly pre-
cise terms. In addition, a Commander-in-Chief em-
ploys every moral agency possible by which the spirits
of his men can be maintained, and their good sense en-
couraged and developed. Every good General appreci-
ates the value in his army of men who are not only
valiant but contented. All these forces make for
good.
"In civil life the extent of the damage cannot be so
definitely ascertained. We are certain, however, that
it is enormous, as the following estimates will show.
The committee of the London Hospital estimated that
12 per cent, of the population of London were syphilitic;
similar estimates for Paris and Berlin gave an estimate
of 12 to is per cent. Taking venereal diseases alto-
gether, we definitely know that of 12,000,000 people in-
sured in Germany, 750,000 were infected annually. If
this be multiplied by four, to represent a period of
four years, we get a percentage of 25 per cent., as
against 13 per cent, of the men mobilised in Australia,
amidst all the temptations of war conditions. We have
an estimate of the Committee on Prophylaxis of V.D.,
Washington State Medical Association, that 80 per cent,
of all men in large cities have had gonorrhea once, or
several times. We have the estimate of Bierhof that
there were in New York 1,000,000 persons infected, and
the estimate of Morrow that 1,500,000 are infected with
gonorrhea annually in the United States.
"So far as Australia is concerned, there is no doubt
whatever, in my mind, that the infection in civil life far
exceeds that amongst the Australian Imperial Force.


What has happened, however, is that the public has re
ceived a shock. They have hitherto played the part of
the ostrich, and refused to believe these estimates, and
now they are face to face with statistics compiled with
military precision, and from which there is no escape.
"The evil must be faced and met. be-
cause the extent of the evil is now being recognised,
there is no justification for losing the sense of perspec-
tive, and in the comparison between civilians and the
military population, so far as V.D. is concerned, the sol-
dier appears in a very favourable light. May I ask the
public to weigh the facts carefully, and at all events to
be just in their judgment of the returned soldier."
For the control of malaria and dysentery there is no
short cut, and some idea of their gravity may be gath-
ered from the fact that when the war ended, about
53,000 sick men were in hospital in Egypt and Palestine.
If you will remember that the capacity of the Mel-
bourne Hospital is about 400 beds, you will realise what
these figures mean.
Many of the details on which these conclusions are
based, will be found in a book entitled "The Australian
Army Medical Corps in Egypt," published by Lieut.
Deane and myself, and a book published by me, entitled
"A Vision of the Possible."
The net result of the campaign has been to provide us
with knowledge, which, if applied, would profoundly
modify our civil life. We know enough to effect great
changes if we were allowed to act.
The campaign was also remarkable from the indivi-
dual clinical point of view, and the most valuable know-
ledge was gained by many medical officers of tropical
diseases, the ravages of ophthalmia, and by thorough
investigation into the nature of that terrible scourge,
known as pellagra.


Owing to the self-contained nature of the theatre of
war, the strength and weakness of the army medical ser-
vice, became obvious to every medical officer, and the
war office has since the Armistice radically recast the
whole Imperial Army Medical Service. As a result
there is now open to young medical men a career in
the R.A.M.C., full of scientific interest and utility.
The army medical service of Great Britain has learnt
its lesson, and in order to attract the best young brain
into the service, the following arrangements have been
made since the war:—
Before the war there was only one road to promotion
beyond the rank of Major, namely, by administrative
work.
In other words, when a man became a Lieut.-Colonel
he practically abandoned clinical work. It is now, how-
ever, possible for an officer of the R.A.MjC. to become
a full Colonel, while still engrossed in clinical work,
and he may receive a salary of £1395 per annum if un-
married, and a little more if married. He may, how-
ever, if be wishes, become a pathologist, and rise to the
rank of Brig.-General, with a corresponding salary. He
may also, if he so elect, attach himself to the Depart-
ment of Preventive Medicine, which is now completely
separated from the other branches, and again he may
possibly become a Brigadier-General. There are, there-
fore, four avenues of promotion, viz., administrative,
clinical, pathological, and preventive medicine. A
Major-General receives £2OOO per annum.
The maximum rates of pension are £450 for a Major,
£6OO for a Lieut.-iColonel, £BOO for a Colonel, and £lOOO
for a Major-General.
I venture to say there is 110 civilian or military ser-
vice in the world now comparable with the R.A.M.C.
for proper treatment of the officer, and for scientific op-
portunity. The service should therefore lead the
world in medicine and surgery.


I do not say that these changes are the sole outcome ui
the experience gained in the Palestine campaign, but
they have been largely influenced by it, because in such
a self-contained command, and in so unhealthy a coun-
try. the specific faults of the service became evident,
and the necessity for attracting the best young brain of
the country into the service, became obvious.
A comparison of these salaries and conditions, with
those available in Australia in the Departments of
Public Health, will bring the position home to all those
who think. r
May I, in conclsuion, make brief reference to some ot
the teachings of the war in general
(T) AS comparisons have been made respecting the ,
parts played by the several Dominions, and by Great
Britain, it is well to set out the facts. -
The Empire employed in Egypt about 500,000 men,
of whom tB,OOO were Australians.
In addition there were:—-
Tn Mesopatamia 45°,000
S'alonica 285,000
Italy
And other theatres 293,000
The Dominions sent overseas
Percentage ot
Male Population.
Canada 458,000 13.48 p.c.
Australia 332,000 13-43 P- c -
New Zealand 112,000 19-35 P-C-
New Zealand 112,000 19-35 P-C-
South Africa 71,000 11.12 p.c.
Great Britain Si/Od- 000 2 5-35 P- 1 --
Great Britain (excluding
Ireland) 5,540,214 27 Vr° p /'
In addition, over 1,000,000 Indians were enlisted.
Whenever, therefore, we are inclined, and justly
inclined, to praise the work of our own men, we


should bear in mind and give respectful praise
to the tremendous effort made by Great Britain,
and we should remember that those qualities we rightly
admire m Australians, are British qualities, developed
still further under our free conditions, and favoured by
the protection she has given us in the past by her Fleet
and her spirit.
(2) We read utterances in journals referring to inde-
pendent Dominions, Sovereign States, Consultations and
Alliances.
Is it really necessary to remind people that in March,
1918, the Allies found it necessary to place their armies
under one General (Foch) to avoid defeat; they had
learnt the lesson that war cannot be successfully con-
ducted by consultations and alliances.
Sooner or later we shall have to entrust the vital
Imperial functions—Defence and Foreign Affairs—to a
body composed of representatives of all the Dominions
and Great Britain, who will sit continuously.
(3) We are told that the war shows that a citizen
army can be trained after war breaks out, and that
professional soldiers are practically unnecessary. It is
true that in the course of over four years, citizens be-
came well trained soldiers.
It is also true that it was the professional soldiers
who stemmed the German rush, who died in their places,
and gave the citizen time to discharge the duty he had
hitherto ignored.
Next time, it" unhappily there be a next, a more astute
enemy may not be good enough to give us time to be-
come soldiers. Let us all hope that the League _of
Nations may develop, and strengthen into a body which,
inspiring confidence, gradually permits of national trust
and consequent relative disarmament. Until that day,
however, it seems to me little short of pernicious folly
to cast away our capacity for self-protection. War


like Medicine or Law is a profession. Trained soldiers
are essential, and in my experience are the last people
who want war, since they know too much about it.
The worst service publicists can render is to belittle
the characters and the occupations of the soldier, now
they think his immediate utility has passed away.
(4) Is it not obvious that Australia, a country one-
third larger than India, is, with a population of 5,000,000,
practically defenceless. She can only hope to defend
herself by making sensible arrangements respecting
foreign policy and defence, with the remainder of the
Empire.
The term Independent Nation, as applied to Australia,
is simply misleading, as independence is only possible
to those who are strong enough to stand alone, and
there are few countries in that position to-day.
(5) Does any sane man think that the League of
Nations has the slightest chance of practical success
unless the various parts of the British Empire show
that they can take broad and long views, and combine
for great purposes and lofty ideals. If similar peoples
cannot combine in a sensible way, what chance is there
of wholly dissimilar peoples succeeding where those of
marked similarity fail?
(6) We require a Cabinet Minister more or less con-
stantly in London. A High Commissioner has other
duties, and is not directly responsible to the people. The
man we send should be our very best, as the functions
entrusted to him are the most important and vital any
Australian can undertake.
The eyes of Australia tend again to turn inwards.
Australia must set aside men of the first order, free
them from all internal distractions, and let them keep
their eyes on the international horizon. The experi-
ence of the great war has been terrible, and sensible
men should forever abandon "the policy of the ostrich."


;
.
.
'
• '
.
.
t
. '
.
L '
t - : - ■- . . , r


/r iCsrtPtiEris PDUP\
/ PRriTCRS \
\ nciBOURrtf, 1
1300-2/20—2637
