

1
1
j
j
£
j
!
J I \A
sgs
lJ
j&.
I
fil
II
1
ffi
M
illi
jlLJ
m
E
Ip
1
■ipVy^V
7 V 1 j
',////;
iTv
< • HI
' I
IjPrVvV y
V--. Vjx
3pr^i
0
A
' 1 ■
i : J
!Wm
&p&
p|
ggpte
Si
yf I
gi:
£3sS
(p^ 1 ™
■
|l?
%
p
|
li
3 J
s
g
|
1
1
|
2
3
?
j
VO
cr
\A
on
it-
er-
s'-
i .
I


SOME NOTES
ON THE
TOWN AND DISTRICT OF MACKAY
Compiled for the information of the Members of the
Federal Parliamentary Party and for
General Circulation.
MAY, 1905.


KJ ftfylU-Slti-l
The following notes have been prepared and the statistics collected, by a Committee composed of repre-
sentatives of the sugar manufacturing and cane growing interests of the district and the local governing bodies
of the town. Their object is to lay before those interested, more especially the Federal Parliamentary party
about to visit the North, the salient facts of the town and district of Mackay. It has been the endeavou r
of the Committee to avoid treading upon controversial ground, and so far as it is possible all matters purely
of opinion have been elimated, and facts only have been put forward. It cannot, however, be pretended that
the notes have been prepared at considerable trouble and expense merely for the amusement of the compilers
or the gratuitous information of the general public. The main industry of Mackay is the sugar industry, and
it would be ignoring the fact if it were asserted that the people of Mackay and district believe that legislation
on the part of the Commonwealth has been guided by a full knowledge of all the facts. In no direction is •
the opposite shown to a greater extent than by the delay in declaring a permanent Federal policy towards
the industry, more especially in the matter of payment of bonus upon cane produced entirely by white labor.
It has been felt by the Committee, which issues these notes, that it is desirable to remedy, at least so far
as Mackay is concerned, what many believe to be a lack of appreciation of the importance of the whole subject.
Not a single industry, or a small district is involved; not a few sugar planters, nor a few thousands of capital.
Mackay forms but a comparatively small portion of the sugar industry of Australia, yet the facts and figures
set forth within will enable those interested to conceive, however inadequately, the extent to which the wel-
fare of thousands of white settlers and white laborers must rest in the maintenance of the sugar industry,
and the almost unlimited benefits which may be derived by Australia as a whole from its expansion. The
settlement and development of the Mackay district is typical of what is possible for the whole of tropical
Australia.
For the Committee,
T. D. CHATAWAY,
Chairman.
Chapter I The Geographical and Climatic Conditions.
Chapter II The Medical Point of View.
Chapter 111 General Nature of Settlement.
Chapter IV Legislation and the Sugar Industry.
Chapter ; V Social Development and Conditions.
Chapter VI Industries other than Sugar.
Chapter VII Cost of Production of Cane.
Chapter VIII Cost of Manufacture of Sugar.
Chapter IX General Statistics and Conclusion,


Some Notes
ON THE
'RICT OF MACKAY
ERRara.
Page 3—Last line, for “Eton,” read “Hat- of the Members of the
_ ton „ ntary Party and for
Page 16.—First line, for “25.00,” read
“25,000.” • Circulation.
Page 23 In cross-heads to centre table,
for “50 acres,” read “60 acres.”
'905-
Some Description of the Geographical and Climatic Features of the Town and District of Mackay.
the visitor goes on to a hill on the north side of the river, close to the town of Mackay, and looks
N™ [iS- anywhere but to the east, he will be able to see the whole of the Mackay district. To the east
i 1 fell be will see the ocean, with the islands rising abruptly from the water, and giving some hint of the
;’lpr|l : (prb ] mountain range which the Pacific holds concealed, but which is doubtless partly responsible
for the partial artesian water supply to be obtained in the district. Looking southwards, some
twenty-five miles, to the west an equal distance, the eye can at once take in the whole district. The Pioneer
River taking its winding course from the mountain range, through miles and miles of flats with hardly a rise
anvwhere above the dead level, flows in a broad shallow stream at his feet. Inquiry will show that almost at
the base of the range the height above sea level is only 340 feet, and this gradually reduces as one nears
the coast, until the town of Mackay is found to be only 25 feet above sea level. Looking to the south the
ranges seem to join the actual coastline about 25 miles to the south, and the whole appearance is that of a vast
timbered flat, in the form of a semi-circle, having the coast for the diameter and the range for the circum-
ference. This simile is spoilt only when one looks to the northern side of the Pioneer River, Ihere may e
seen many, rough broken hills, some still covered with tropical scrubs, others more or less cleared, and growing
crops of cane. Between these hills are many small valleys of rich soil, where cane-growmg may be maintained,
even after the hills, which are not looked upon as permanently profitable, have been, temporarily per aps,
abandoned. ‘With the exception of these hills and lands on the north side of the river and the rich alluvia
flats lying close along the southern bank of the Pioneer, the whole district when first settled was a typical
tropical coastal area. Thousands of acres were closely covered by rank vegetation, either coarse a y grass,
or scrubs, while immediately away from the river banks immense tracts were practically no better than swamps
drained by the several creeks through outlets fringed with mangrove growths into the Pacific. This distr ct
lies in latitude 21.52 south, and is 520 miles north of Brisbane, 193 miles from Rockhampton, and 220
from Townsville by sea. So far as railway communication is concerned it is completely isolated, the nearest
rail-head being at Clermont, roughly 160 miles away, on the inland side of the coastal range_ racticay
all communication is therefore by sea, and this is rendered the more difficult by reasonof fact that,
many tropical rivers, the Pioneer is broad, shallow, and continually offering fresh difficulties m the way of
navigation. It may be said that this, in itself, has no little bearing upon the necessity of maintaining an
industry which does not depend upon very prompt and rapid marketing of its products, while
from the rest of the State also affects the movements of laborers, who are required m large numbers at certain
portions of the year for the work o f the canefields. The total area of the district may be sariltc.be about 1764
square miles the district proper is under the control of the Shire of Pioneer which maintains some 2200 m les
of roads. The Town Council maintains 49 miles of streets. The two bodies conjointly are re o:asible for
the two principal bridges over the river. A local railway (42 miles), mos yun ere Ftnn which
Government, runs up the river along its southern bank, as far as Miram, then across e ,


n
Some Notes
ON THE
TOWN AND DISTRICT OF MACKAY
Compiled for the information of the Members of the
Federal Parliamentary Party and for
General Circulation.
MAY, 1905.
CHAPTER I.
Some Description of the Geographical and Climatic Features of the Town and District of Mackay.
f the visitor goes on to a hill on the north side of the river, close to the town of Mackay, and looks
M anywhere but to the east, he will be able to see the whole of the Mackay district. To the east
\M ■ fei'l he will see the ocean, with the islands rising abruptly from the water, and giving some hint °f the
Mrlai Rrajl mountain range which the Pacific holds concealed, but which is doubtless partly responsible
i f or partial artesian water supply to be obtained in the district. Looking southwards, some
twenty-five miles, to the west an equal distance, the eye can at once take in the whole district. The Pioneer
River taking its winding course from the mountain range, through miles and miles of flats with hardh a rise
anywhere above the dead level, flows in a broad shallow stream at his feet. Inquiry will show that almost at
the base of the range the height above sea level is only 340 feet, and this gradually reduces as one nears
the coast, until the town of Mackay is found to be only 25 feet above sea level. Looking to the south tie
ranges seem to join the actual coastline about 25 miles to the south, and the whole appearance is that of a vast
timbered flat, in the form of a semi-circle, having the coast for the diameter and the range for the circum-
ference. This simile is spoilt only when one looks to the northern side of the Pioneer River. There ma y be
seen many, rough broken hills, some still covered with tropical scrubs, others more or less cleared, and growing
crops of cane. Between these hills are many small valleys of rich soil, where cane-growmg may be maintained,
even after the hills, which are not looked upon as permanently profitable, have been, temporarily perhaps
abandoned. ‘With the exception of these hills and lands on the north side of the river and the rich alluvia
flats lying close along the southern bank of the Pioneer, the whole district when first settled was a typical
tropical coastal area. Thousands of acres were closely covered by rank vegetation, either coarse, blady grass,
or scrubs, while immediately away from the river banks immense tracts were practically no better than swamp
drained by the several creeks through outlets fringed with mangrove growths into the Pacific. This distr ct
lies in latitude 21.52 south, and is 520 miles north of Brisbane, 193 miles from Rockhampton, and 2_
from Townsville by sea. So far as railway communication is concerned it is completely isolated, the nearest
rail-head being at Clermont, roughly 160 miles away, on the inland side of the coastal range c y
all communication is therefore by sea, and this is rendered the more difficult by reason_of the fact tat
many tropical rivers, the Pioneer is broad, shallow, and continually offering fresh difficulties m the way of
navigation. It may be said that this, in itself, has no little bearing upon the necessity of maintaining an
industry which does not depend upon very prompt and rapid marketing of its products, while the iso at on
from the rest of the State also affects the movements of laborers, who are required in large numbers at certain
portions of the year for the work o c the canefields. The total area of the district may be said to be about 1764
square miles The district proper is under the control of the Shire of Pioneer, which
of roads. The Town Council maintains 49 miles of streets. The two bodies conjointly are responsible for
the two principal bridges over the river. A local railway (42 miles), mostly under the control of the Sta
Government, runs up the river along its southern bank, as far as Miram, then across the river to Eton, which


lies not far from the foot of the ranges. There is another branch runs from Newbury (15 miles) to Eton
in a southerly direction, this also almost touching the ranges. In addition some 106 miles of privately-owned
tramways traverse the district in all directions, mainly carrying sugar cane to the mills, but often being used
by the farmers for the transport of goods. The foregoing may afford some indication of the position of the
district of Mackay and of its general features, and it remains only to recall the fact that it is practically cut off
from the inland portion of the State, from an agricultural point of view, by the mighty horse-shoe range, to
which reference has been made. That range rises abruptly from the great level areas of the district, with an
average height of about 2000 feet, though in some places the height above sea level is only 800 feet. Mount
Omega, 35 miles west of Mackay, reaches an altitude of 2500 feet, and Mount Dalrymple, 40 miles to the west,
is 4 2 55 feet above sea level, being the highest point of the main range.
Such being the position of the district, it is perhaps needless to say that the climate and soils of the range
differ widely from those in the district proper. Frosts are common along the mountains, and even on the
spurs dropping down into the valley of the Pioneer. Sugar cane could not live under such conditions, and
consequently its cultivation stops short the moment the foot of the range of mountains is reached. That those
mountains and the valleys between them will eventually pass under cultivation for products of the temperate
zone seems certain, but further railway communication and improved shipping facilities will be necessary.
Ihe traveller, coming from the west, finds as he descends the range a complete change. The comparatively
dry, sharp atmosphere gives place to one charged heavily with moisture, the timber changes from stately trees
to small scrub woods, and the rich wholesome grasses of the ranges are replaced by the common coarse grasses
of the coast. Ihe scenery has changed with the atmosphere. Possibly the thermometer will show lower
readings on the east side of the range, but both the coast dweller and the western resident know which climate
is the more enervating and which the more healthy. Further, the westerner finds that the rainfall is far greater
on the coast, and though he may envy his fellows below the mountains, he has learnt from bitter experience
that given rainfall, with coastal conditions, he can never hope to make stock-raising or sheep-farming a success.
But it must not be supposed that Mackay people have much to say against their climate. They admit its
defects, but know that tropical cultivation cannot be carried on without tropical inconveniences. They claim
for their climate that it combines the best average climate from the point of view of the comfort and welfare
of both cane crop and white men. It is noteworthy also that in this district the settlement of small white
farmers first took a leading place. The gradual development of white growers and labourers is, however, dealt
with in another chapter. It has frequently been a matter of argument that the climate of this district is little
worse than that of other places. At the end of this chapter we give some comparative figures which may prove
of interest. It is sufficient, however, to remark that when other places are quoted as practically having
the same climatic conditions as Mackay it is always to be found that the places selected for comparison do not
grow any tropical crops, or, if they do, as in Northern New South Wales, they can only get a crop once in every
two years, whereas in Mackay a cane crop reaches maturity in from twelve to sixteen months. This in
itself is a complete answer to all such one-sided comparisons. If a second answer were required it is to be
found by the fact that it is only by paying the bonus on cane that the industry in Mackay and the North
can employ white labour, whereas in the places often used for comparison white labour can be secured in
any quantities, and frequently at a lower wage than the Northern sugar industry could and would pay. The
average rainfall of the district is inches, of which 40 inches fall during the first three months of the year.
During June and July, which are considered the winter months, slight hoar frosts are not uncommon, and
occasionally on the low-lying lands two or three degrees of frost have been known. In 1883 a severe frost
visited the district, and did considerable damage, mainly owing to the fact that the methods of taking off the
cane and delivering it to the mills were at that time slow and liable to interruption by rain. Nowadays a frost
simply means that a number of helpers turn their attention to the few fields affected, and the cane is rushed
into the mills before any serious loss can result. It is probable, moreover, that with the improved drainage
of the district by the operations of the Shire Council, the place has practically become free of frost. Crushing
as a rule starts at the beginning of July, and for the next three months the harvesters have not unpleasant
weather. Summer then comes, and the harvesting goes on, if the quantity of cane is available, until the wet
season sets in, or about the first fortnight in January.
It is difficult to arrive at any adequate illustration of the temperature of Mackay and of the general
climatic conditions. It can be seen from the tables which we publish below that, on the whole, Mackay has
a far heavier rainfall than such typical coastal stations as Sydney, Lismore, and Brisbane, but that the rain falls
on fewer days. In other words, when it rains in Mackay, it does rain. It may further be seen that, during
the four winter months, when the populace should be recuperating after the long summer, the winter is, to a
large degree, spoilt by the high humidity of the atmosphere, following naturally upon the wet season. The
temperatures show that, comparatively speaking, Lismore and Mackay are about equal as regards the mean
maximum, though both are ten degrees higher than Sydney; but when we come to the mean minimum we find
that Mackay is about six degrees hotter than Lismore and eight degrees hotter than Sydney. In other words,
the people of Mackay when they should be cool are moist, and, in any case, are never nearly as cool as their
more fortunate neighbours in the two hottest places south of the border of the State. Reduced to a simple expres-
sion Mackay is more or less of a Turkish bath all the year round, and if this is true of Mackay it may be imagined
what is true of the sugar districts further north.


L1SM0RE, BR1SBJ
LIISMOHE.
W ET
Inches.
Days.
i
67
150
44
125
53
136
40
120
64
132
73
142
37
105
40
116
24
04
47
128
501
124
s under review show a
fall
i wet days only two below
WINTER
MONTHS,
10 YEARS.
SYDNEY. LTSMORE. MACK AY.
YEAR. |
Max. Mix. Max. ! Mix. Max. Mix.
1895 70 | 56 82 58 80 6 , 03 -
1896 70 ; 57 81 1 580 78 5 62'7
1897 71 | 57 82 5 57 6 81 4 64 6
1898 70 57 79 5 59*4 80 035
1899 70 57 79 8 58 9 80 3 04 2
1900 70 56 829 58’6 80 7 05
1901 70 56 81 1 58-7 80 1 [ 05 6
1902 70 57 84 4 59 3 80 0 ! 04 2
1903 69 57 82 8 58 6 807 03 4
AVERAGES... 70 j 56 6 81 8 58 5 81 r 2 04 3
TABLE OF RAINFALL, SYDNEY, LISMORE, BRISBANE and MACKAY for 10 YEARS.
be noted that the ten
N.B. —It should
average,
RELATIVE HUMIDITY—FOUR
YEAR.
ANE and MACKAY for 10 YEARS.
BRISBANE MACKAY.
, W ET . W ET
INCHES. j INCHES UiVO
Days Dais.
44 143 110 74 130
59 105 64-96 86
44 97 121 5 4 86 72
42 53 115 46-62 Q 122
6006 131 99-5 99
37 35 137 67-91 99
34 4 110 15 60 96
38 48 110 6475 A 122
16 16 87 36-51 80
49-27 136 61 63 104
42 6 119 65 3 101 ’
1 at Mackay of six inches below the general
the average
MAY-AUGUST—MACKAY FOR
PER CENT 1 . HUMIDITY.
SYDNEY.
YEAE.
r , Wet
Inohe8 | Ways
1891
88-22
31 85
42 40
18DG
1897
12 52
42 97
1899
55 90
1900
G6-54
M) 10
4307
38 62
AVERAGE
years
, with
DRY BULB
WET BULB
189(5
1898
1899
1900
1904
AVERAGES...
humidity
is 76-9%..
Omitting 1897 and 1901 (years of
drought)
the average
MACKAY, for 9 YEARS.
MAX. and MIN. TEMPERATURES, SYDNEY, LISMORE and
163
169
17G
151
170
172
44 2
U9
137
152
171
188
1903
1902
1901
1898
1895


CHAPTER 11.
A Brief Summary of the Opinions of a Medical Man after Fifteen Years’ Residence and Practice
in Mackay.
G. T. Lloyd, M.B.
the first instance Mackay appears to have been otherwise than a paradise from the sanitary
r ijW| point of view. The early pioneers tell of high rate of mortality, due to the prevalence of fever
I and an apparently superfluous consumption of “battle axe.” Concerning the latter there is
% a good deal to be said, of which anon.
® Round Mackay is an alluvial flat, evidently very young in the world’s history, in proof of
which the similarity between the salt water lagoons and the rapidly-closing old entrance to the river may be
cited. All over the land close to the town other nearly dry watercourses show how rapid and how recent has
been the formation of the soil. There are practically only two winds, the north and the south-east; both come
off the sea. The atmosphere is always humid, and a temperature of 85 degrees Fahrenheit is often unbearable.
Both winds reach the town over mangrove scrubs, and bring mosquitoes with them, though so far as the town
itself is concerned the north is the greater culprit.
The Mercury said in 1870 —“ The good name for salubrity of climate which Mackay has so long deservedly
borne, we regret has been well nigh lost. This is hardly a matter of surprise if we consider the trying ordeal
through which it has passed. The country has been saturated with rain which on the flats has been unable
to find an outlet, and so has stagnated and rotted under the rays of the sun when fine weather returned.
The heavy rank growth of the scrubs, and the decay of the rotting vegetation, have been stimulated by the
same cause. The consequence is that all round us, and in our midst, there are rank miasmas rising which cannot
but affect injuriously the health of the district. It is to this alone that the low fever so prevalent at present
in Mackay is to be attributed. Some of the parts of Sydney Street, Wood Street, and North Street, are
thoroughly impracticable in wet weather. There are almost impassable bogs opposite Robb’s Hotel, in the
direction of the new Church of England, the road is a perfect quagmire after two or three days’ rain.”
The drainage is naturally bad, but easy of improvement. This is owing to the youngest channel of the
river always being formed by a breaking of the stream through older alluvial soil, leading to the natural trend
of the drainage being away from the river-bed for the time being. A notable instance of this occurs at the
Marian Mill on the south side of the river. All the water falling a few hundred yards away reaches the
sea not by the river itself, but through the Savannah Swamp and Sandy Creek, following a much more
devious course ending ten miles to the south of the river mouth. Owing to this condition of things there
is much land which is always moist, and, therefore, a breeding ground for mosquitoes. In continuously
wet or continuously dry seasons fever is uncommon. When the seasons are very good, as in 1894, 1904,
and 1905, mosquitoes become commoner, and so does fever.
In 1890, soon after the writer arrived here, the weather was wet for the first five months of the year,
and when the rain ended fever was very common. The writer himself had the misfortune to live in a house
not two feet from the ground, and during that time never experienced two months without a rise of his bodily
temperature. During his experience there have been few deaths from malaria, but all the severe cases of real
ague he has seen have arisen during the breaking up of land both in town and country.
■ Since the first epidemic in 1890, to which the name of dengue was not then applied, slight cases of fever
have always been classified as dengue or influenza, but many of them do not differ from the low fever of earlier
years. During the wet season women coming from the country to the town to be confined nearly always ex-
perience a rise of temperature about the fifth day, which is often accompanied by no inconvenience nor
symptoms of other disturbance. As puerperal fever is practically unknown in the North, and has not, so far
as the writer is aware, ever occurred in the Mackay district, this may fairly be set down to malarial influence
a condition which has frequently been reported from other tropical countries.
With drainage the health of the town itself has steadily improved, notably in the south ward, where
fever and dysentery were formerly prevalent, but now have almost disappeared. In the central part of the
town children’s diarrhoea was formerly always to be found, but since the advent of the waterworks is almost
unknown.
One feature of epidemics on the wind-swept flat occupied by the town is their extreme mildness. Dengue
has never taken hold of Mackay as of other Queensland towns, measles and scarlet fever caused few deaths
nor did they spread as elsewhere. This the writer attributes to the constant presence of one or the other of the
abovementioned sea breezes.
Leaving the town in the direction of the west or south, and, at the same time, adding the same distance
from the sea, the temperature increases in the day roughly to the extent of one degree Fahrenheit per mile,


and the heat becomes less oppressive in a still greater ratio. A temperature of 85 degrees in town means 92
degrees at Alexandra and 100 degrees at Homebush, but either of these places is preferable to the town on
a hot summer’s day with either a north or south-east wind. That is, out of doors. At Homebush the diurnal
variation of temperature is often 20 degrees greater than in town. With hotter days there are much cooler
nights. This is obviously due to that plantation being shut in on two sides, and getting its heat by direct
radiation —the south-east winds are there entirely cut off.
Persons who have lived out west at any places, such as Thargomindah, state that 120 degrees in the shade
there is more bearable than 90 degrees here, on acount of the difference in humidity.
The tendency of the white race here is to degenerate. Children, whose parents have the means to house,
feed, and clothe them adequately, suffer little by comparison with those of the poorer class; but ordinary rough
fare is inadequate to the proper physical and mental development of any white child. Experience has taught
much, and the physique of the children in the town itself has, on the whole, improved of late years, but in the
flat country there is much to be desired.
The housing has a great deal to do with the health of the community. The houses are generally built
of wood, often of iron. Few of those belonging to the poorer farmers or labouring men are ceiled, and in the
greater part of the day they are little less than ovens. The father is away at work, often not returning for
his meals, consequently he does not fully realise what his wife has to endure. The elder children are at school,
but the mother and infants have to withstand the burden and heat of the day with a vengeance. Under these
conditions it is impossible that, except in extraordinary cases, they should retain the requisite amount of fat
which Nature provides to white people in the climates to which they are indigenous, and the results are very sad.
The young wife, more prolific in a young country, is always pregnant or preyed upon by an infant, and
her physique from the first fails to bear up against the incessant strain. Few of the native-born women are free
from uterine disorder after they have borne two or three children, and relief comes only in three ways —(1) from
widowhood ; (2) from their internal troubles being exaggerated to an extent producing sterility ; (3) from the
breadwinner being able to save enough to go to a more temperate climate. The writer believes it impossible
for the average white woman to lead a natural married life in the tropics without being broken down
in body and in mind before the end of child-bearing, unless in circumstances which enable her to leave occasionally
for a more temperate climate.
Turning to the children, it naturally follows that the auspices are not favourable at the beginning of
their life. A woman who has to cook in a kitchen where the temperature under the iron is often 120 degrees
is not the best of nurses. (I may here remind readers that the former temperatures alluded to are shade
temperatures. Corrugated iron under the sun often reaches 140 degrees, and reflects heat excellently well,
both above and below.) The baby crawls about on the floor or on the verandah, if there is one, the two-year-old
does the same or toddles about in the sun and the dust or mud, sometimes with, sometimes without a hat.
Here he has abundant opportunity to pickup the germs of the dread earth-eating disease, which in some localities
annihilates whole families, and on account of which the Mackay Orphanage had to be dismantled not so many
years ago. It is still common in many badly-drained localities, and what drainage system have we in this
country outside of the municipalities ?
Malarial cachexia is common in out-lying districts, and the best cure, change of air, is beyond the
means of the child’s parents.
As the child grows, the boy, though abnormally intelligent, is often lazy and backward in physical growth.
The girl, less backward in point of size, reaches a maturity which is only a drain upon her long before she has
attained her ultimate form. The results are disastrous, but cannot suitably be dilated upon here. Suffice it
to say, that half-castes with a white mother are rare, except the father be a Chinaman, in which case the
woman seldoms remains unmarried, and after marriage is looked after with a solicitude which the wives of
some men often lack.
So much for the mothers and children, now for the man. If he is a labouring man he has to rise early.
He has a breakfast of bread, beef, and tea, often without milk. Then to the field, where more tea may or may not
be brought to him through the morning. Dinner at high noon, with a sweating skin, no leisure before or after,
circumstances under which digestion is well nigh impossible, unless his teeth be of the best and his digestion of the
most robust. Then again to the field, more sweating in the sun, and home at sundown, tired, wet, and hungry.
The healthy hot bath introduced by the Japanese is unknown to the white man, and how many have the chance
of a cold one ? A tired wife and the tea waiting, the hungry children home from school hours ago—remember
they have only had their meagre sandwich for lunch—what human father could keep them waiting longer while
he attends to his own personal wants ? And the last thing the father that is inhuman wants is a wash.
Neither feels inclined to plant cabbages after tea.
Cq j Under these circumstances the toiler may struggle on for a few years, experience ha c not yet shewn
how many; but to the knowledge of the writer there are many sober and hard-working men of forty apparently
far nearer their end than most of sixty in the old country. They cannot get a change. Their teeth are gone,
and they cannot afford more ; their digestions follow ; they suffer from the unspeakable sprue or from asthma.
What is to become of them ? Are all to become a charge to the State ?
With regard to the abuse of stimulants there is a great deal to be said. A man comes from a bracing
climate with lots of energy, and is plunged into a gulf of relaxation of nervous and musculaY energy; or perhaps


he is a native of the place, and suffers from the fact in a natural tiredness. In either case after he has
worked in the heat all day and has sweated freely, his skin over-active and his digestive functions corres-
pondingly the reverse, can it be wondered at that, if unused to self-restraint and ignorant of the consequences,
he tries alcohol as a stimulant ? And having tried it once he may resort to it again and again. Alcohol is easy
of access; to the wage-earner without encumbrances it does not appear to be expensive, and in the tropics many
youths acquire the alcohol habit before they are full grown. Ihe State teaches them no religion, and if their
school-teachers did attempt to inculcate temperance there is the ready answer that if a teacher drinks he ge + s
the “ sack,” while a man (?), who is his own master, can do as he likes.
The tropical problem is a great one. The writer believes that until some arrangement is made whereby
all white residents in the tropics can earn enough to make themselves comfortable almost to the point ot
luxury or to leave for a better clime after a term of years, we shall have steady deterioration.
The corollary is obvious.
CHAPTER 111.
Being a Short Account of now the District Came to be Settled, and Its Development, to the Present-
district of Mackay was not discovered from the sea, nor did its early settlement owe'very much
i to arrivals by water. The gentleman, after whom the town is named, came down over the ranges and
(IpS&sVi |i spied out what then appeared to the uninitiated an excellent pastoral land, with a river of beautiful
(\ water running from one end of it to the other, and with numerous creeks also carrying fresh water.
Little wonder, then, that his discovery should at once lead to the pastoral occupation of the district,
where everything promised success to the breeders of cattle and sheep. These early squatters, in getting their goods
up from Rockhampton, utilised the Pioneer River, and trade quickly sprang up both with Rockhampton and
Bowen, the merchants at the latter place doing a considerable business in supplying goods to retailers in Mackay,
The other side of the ranges was closely stocked with sheep, and the first industries in Mackay district were the
shearing of these sheep, or their boiling down. This led to the wool coming through Mackay, to the export
of considerable quantities of hides and tallow, and also to the shipment of copper, found over the ranges and at
Clermont, through this port. The great activity in the pastoral industry, coupled with an influx of disappointed
miners into the place, drew attention to the district and it was not long before there appeared upon the scene
experienced agriculturists who fr and in the new district what promised to be a suitable place for tropical agri-
culture. Up to 1872 agriculture was practically non-existent, and just about this time the prospects of sheep
rearing in the neighbourhood began to fall off. Cotton growing appears to have been tried on a fairly large scale,
and we also find other crops at this time being tried more or less experimentally. In 1868, however, sugar cane
was found to grow well, and sugar being then nearly £4O a ton in price, this industry attracted attention to the
rapid exclusion of all others. A large amount of land was rapidly taken up during the next few years, under
what were known as the sugar and coffee regulations, and many sugar mills, all small and some of the most
primitive type, were erected in the district. Even in the very earliest days of sugar growing there were
some small farmers, for we find efforts frequently made to form co-operative companies for the erection of what
were then called oublic mills, with a view to making the grower of very small areas of cane independent of
the relatively big plantation owner. In the beginning of the eighties the Habana Mill was established on the
north side ot the river, and the first indication of the subdivision of lands was given by the proprietor leasing
portions of his holding to small farmers to grow cane for his mill. At the same time there was a privately-
owned mill at Victoria and another at Marian, both of which crushed cane for small farmers, but as the latter
had no voice in the management of the factories the results were not conducive to that feeling of mutual inter-
dependence upon which the successful working of the system of small growers and large factories rests. Owing
to the rapid development of the European beet sugar the bottom fell out of the sugar market in 1883, and
shortly after the first steps were taken by the Queensland Government to bring to an end the employment of
Polynesians. After some agitation the Government advanced the money to groups of farmers at North Eton
and Racecourse to erect central mills on conditions not differing widely from those of the present Sugar
Works Guarantee Act. These mills were expected only to crush cane grown by white labor, but this part of
the experiment fell to pieces in a very short time. They did good work, however, and soon had supplies of
cane in excess of their requirements. Meanwhile the fact that the farmers continued to grow cane for 13s. a
ton, while the private cultivators on a large scale were in some cases finding their cane cost up to £1 a ton by the
time it reached the mill, attracted the attention of the Colonial Sugar Refining Company, who had ten years
before established a fine mill and opened up a large plantation at Homebush, previously a cattle station. This
Company at once cut up the Homebush Estate into moderate-sized farms, and the land was snapped up by men
desiring to grow cane. The small farmer system then came rapidly to the front, and it was not long before


the Sugar Works’ Guarantee Act put it fairly on its feet. Plane Creek Central Mill, 25 miles south of Mackay,
was opened up, and farmers were settled on the freehold lands of the very first of the squatters who came into
the district. Pleystowe Central Mill did the like service for another of the oldest cattle stations, while further
along the railway the Marian Central provided a market for growers further afield yet. The extension of the
railway across the river added to the agricultural area available for cane growing by thousands of acres, and
the greatest success has so far attended the development of this part of the district by small farmers, working
either with their own labour only or with the assistance of an occasional white man. There is no question that
the bonus given for white-grown cane has largely assisted in the development of this new country. According
to the official statistics for the year 1903, the total area under cultivation in the district was 25,869 acres, of
which 23,473 acres were under sugar cane. These figures are probably about ten per cent, too low for the
present time. The pastoral industry was then represented by 20,000 head of cattle, 7700 horses, and 5000 sheep
on this side of the range. There are about 800 farmers in the district, and of last year’s crop of 28,500 tons
of sugar it may be calculated that not more than one-fifth was made from sugar grown on the old plantation
system. The rest was grown by small farmers, employing white or colored labor, but the largest of them
probably not growing more than 2500 tons of cane or sufficient to make 275 tons of sugar. In cases where white
farmers have hesitated to go on to the land or have been afraid to continue in the industry, there has been
found no difficulty in getting colored men —principally Chinese, Japanese, and Hindus —to take the farms on lease.
There are still some large areas of lands to be cut up to complete the close settlement of the district, but this
is merely a question of time, and the sugar industry remaining profitable. It should be stated that on the
north side of the Pioneer, along the coast, a number of sugar mills were erected, and large quantities of cane grown,
to a great extent on the mountains. All this area has now practically been abandoned, it having been found
that after several years’ working the mountains become for a time at least depleted of their plant foods,
and thus unprofitable to work. The country, however, is used to some extent for dairying and general
farming though the products have not yet reached sufficient quantities to create an export trade of any
magnitude. Much of these old sugar lands is regarded as particularly suitable for dairying. The failme of
this industry so far to make notable headway is dealt with elsewhere. With the more recent developments
of the central mill system has come a rapid accretion of small farmers, and the table appearing elsewheie shows
that the large estates have of recent years been largely reduced in numbers. What may be called villages have
gathered round each of the large mills, and there are several small townships along the railway. The total
population of Mackay and district according to the last census,, was 11,182, of whom 4650 live in the town.
Of the whole 1869 or 16.7 per cent, were Polynesians in 1901. A census taken in 1871 showed at that time
g5 0 per cent of the population to be Polynesians. The decrease in the proportion of the Polynesian popu-
lation is noteworthy, and a fact of which the people of this district, more especially the older pioneers, claim
to be justly proud.' Of the total population, 2295 males and 80 females are engaged in farming and 30 males
and 75 females in dairying. There are estimated to be 950 dwellings in the town and 1600 m the Shire. In thus
briefly summarising the general settlement of this district, it must be borne m mind that we have taken the
town and district, as defined by the areas of the two local governing bodies. There is still a considerable trade
with the more western country over the ranges, and Mackay affords a market to several stations, not only for
their beef but also for their horses, the farmers always requiring light, serviceable draughts for the fields.
The sugar’from the Proserpine district to the North also passes through the hands of Mackay shipping at Flat
Top, and a large trade is done with that centre by steamers and sailing craft. . . . , ..
A summary of the principal figures for the town, district, and port will be found in the statistical details
contained in the last chapter of this pamphlet.
CHAPTER IV.
Showing the Legislation Affecting the Industry and the Policy of the Past.
■ N dealing with this subject it will at times be extremely difficult to determine the dividing line
between matters of fact and opinion respectively, but in pursuance of the general policy of the
work, the utmost effort will be made to entirely exclude anything in the nature of opinions.
J The Queensland sugar industry has, perhaps, received more attention from politicians and
from the Legislature than any other industry in the Commonwealth. From its infancy it has
plaved a prominent part in the politics of Queensland, and'from the very establishment of the Commonwealth
it has been the subject of much political warfare, and has been quickly subjected to the ordeal of Commonwealth
While it would be futile to deny that politicians and parties have at various times, to the detriment of
the industry been swayed by popular prejudice and insufficient knowledge concerning the % same, it must fairly
be acknowledged that underlying the bulk of the legislation there has been on the whole a general desire to


avoid the destruction of the industry, while at the same time aiming at the welfare of the State and the Common-
wealth.
It would be quite hopeless to attempt to determine the exact extent to which' the various influences
referred to have left their mark upon the legislation in question. It is sufficient to refer to the existence of such
influences as it is of great importance that they should be given such weight as they are fairly entitled to in
arriving at a sound judgment upon the wisdom of past and prospective legislation.
The following is a list of the principal existing Imperial, State, and Federal Acts directly affecting the
industry, namely ;
IMPERIAL ACTS.
TITLE OF ACT.
Date cf Royal Assent
The Pacific Islanders’ Protection Act, 1872
27th June, 1872
2nd August, 1875
„ „ „ „ 1^75
STATE ACTS.
No. TITLE OF ACT. Date of Royal Assent.
1 The Pacific Island Labourers’ Act of 1880 18th November, 1880
2 The Pacific Island Labourers’ Act Amendment Act, 1881 10th March, 1881
3 The Pacific Island Labourers’ Act of 1880 Amendment Act of 1885 10th November, 1885
4 The Pacific Island Labourers’ Act of 1880 Amendment Act of 188G 4th September, 1886
5 The Pacific Island Labourers’ (Extension) Act of 1892 14th April, 1892
0 The Sugar Works’ Guarantee Act of 1893 18th October, 1893
7 The Sugar Works’ Guarantee Act Amendment Act of 1895 30th October, 1895
FEDERAL ACTS.
Date op Royal Assent.
TITLE OF ACT.
The Pacific Island Labourers’ Act, 1901
Excise Tariff Act, 1902
Sugar Rebate Abolition Act, 1903
Sugar Bounty Act, 1903
17th December, 1901
26th July, 1902
30th July, 1903
99 99 99
At the time the Imperial Acts were passed, a Queensland Act called “ The
of 1868 ” was in force. That Act was repealed by and with amendments its pn
Pacific
Island Labourers Act
were incorporated in
provisions
the Queensland Act of 1880. The Imperial Acts and the Queensland Acts down to and inclusive of the Act of
1884 aimed at the regulation of the Pacific Island labour traffic, and at securing the protection and welfare of
the labourers while in the State and until their return to the Islands. They recognised the desirableness, subject
to proper restrictions, of the introduction and employment of the Pacific Islanders in the State. Prior to the
Act of 1880, there was no restriction as to the nature of work that the Islanders might perform, and considerable
feeling was aroused in the State by reason of the fact that the Islanders in many cases were taken inland to
station work, and were also employed in domestic and similar work unconnected with tropical and semi-
tropical agriculture.
Under the Act of 1880 licenses were only issued to applicants for the introduction of Islanders upon proof,
to the satisfaction of the Minister, that such applicants were engaged or had made provision for engaging in
tropical or semi-tropical [agriculture, and that the Islanders whom it was desired to introduce were intended
to be employed in such agriculture only. Tropical and semi-tropical agriculture were defined to be “ The
business of cultivating sugar cane, cotton, tea, coffee, rice, spices, or other tropical or semi-tropical productions
or fruits and of rendering the products thereof marketable.”


The Act, however, made no provision restricting the employment of the Islanders when introduced to
tropical or semi-tropical agriculture.
The Act of 1884 (section 2) amended the definition of tropical and semi-tropical agriculture so as to
mean “ field work in connection with the cultivation of sugar cane, cotton, tea, coffee, rice, spices, or other
tropical or semi-tropical productions or fruits,” but so as not to include —
( a) The business of engineers, engine drivers, engine fitters, blacksmiths, wheelwrights, farriers,
sugar boilers, carpenters, sawyers, splitters, fencers, bullock drivers, or mechanics.
{b) The business of growers or coachmen.
(c) The business of horse-driving or carting, except in field work, or
(d) Domestic or household service.
And provided (section 10) that from and after the first day of September, 1884, it should not be lawful to employ
any Islander, except under an agreement for service attested as by the Act provided, nor except in tropical
or semi-tropical agriculture as above defined.
It was further provided (section 11) that the restrictions as to the nature of employment should not apply
1 o Islanders employed as part of the crew of a vessel engaged in the trade or as attendants at a depot or hospital for
Islanders, nor to any Islander with respect to whom it should before the first day of September, 1884, be proved
to the satisfaction of the Minister, that he had been continuously in the colony for a period of not less than
five years. Upon such proof, a certificate of exemption was to be issued to the boys.
The number of such certificates issued in Queensland was 800. There are still in the Mackay district
about 50 exempted, or as they are called “ ticket ” boys or Islanders.
Those who had invested money in the industry naturally expected that after the 1884 Act, the conditions
>f labour would be regarded as settled for at least a reasonable time, but in 1885 a further Amending Act was
passed, under which the capitation fee provided for by section 8 of the Principal Act —being a fee to cover the
expenses of the supervision and return of the Islanders —was increased from 30s. to £3, and the hospital capitation
fee was also increased from 10s. to £1 per annum, and by section 11 it was enacted that after the 31st day of
December, iBgo, no licenses to introduce Islanders should be granted. By a further amending Act, passed
in 1886, additional burdens in the way of additional medical attendance and other expenses were placed on the
employer.
By a further amending Act, passed in 1892, the definition of tropical and semi-tropical agriculture was
further amended so as to include the work of handling sugar cane and megass (the latter being the refuse of
cane after it has been crushed), and to exclude any work in connection with the cultivation of maize and the
work of ploughing, or except as aforesaid (i.e., the handling of cane and megass), any work done within a sugar
factory or sugar refinery. And the additional burden was placed on the employer of maintaining the Islanders
after the expiration of their agreement until they had an opportunity of returning to their native islands or
entered into a fresh agreement with the same or some other employer to serve in tropical or semi-tropical
agriculture. But section 11 of the Act of 1885, which imposed a limitation of the period for the introduction
of Islanders was repealed. Experience at the time, supported by a report of a Royal Commission, had satisfied
Parliament, and the prime movers in favour of the section in question, that under its operation the industry
was doomed to extinction.
(t > Such was the state of the law relating to the introduction and employment of Islanders at the date of
the commencement of the Commonwealth.
On the 17th December, 1901, “ The Pacific Island Labourers Act, 1901 ” (an Act of the Federal Parliament)
received the Royal Assent. That Act provided (section 3) that no Pacific Islander should enter Australia on
or after the 31st day of March, 1904, and that none should enter before that date, except under a license as
provided in the Act, and that no agreement should be made or remain in force after the 31st day of 'December,
1906. The illegality of employing Islanders without agreement is continued, and the permission to temporarily
import Islanders is framed with a view to largely decrease their number in the Commonwealth before 31st
December, 1906. The Act professes to confer a power to deport Islanders.
With a view to encouraging the cultivation of sugar cane by white labour, the “ Excise Tariff Act of
1902 ” provided for a rebate of excise until the Ist January, 1907 ,to growers of cane. Such rebate in the Mackay
district amounts to 4s. Bd. per ton of white-grown cane. The rebate was abolished by the “ Sugar Rebate
Abolition Act, 1903,” but at the same time a bounty of a corresponding amount and for the like period was
granted by the “ Sugar Bounty Act, 1903.”
Farmers in the Mackay district have availed themselves of these Acts in a greater degree than those of
any other district. The figures bearing on the question are set out in another part of this work.
Conflicting opinions (frequently varying with the particular shade of political opinion of the individual)
will, no doubt, be heard concerning the ultimate effect of the bonus, but the unanimous opinion will be found
to be that the removal of the support which the Industry receives from the bonus at or unduly near the time
when the support of the Kanaka is withdrawn would inevitably lead to disastrous results,
j* At the date of the Queensland Act of 1880, the following mills had been erected in the Mackay district,
namely :—Alexandra, Pioneer, Pleystowe (Ist), Dumbleton, Richmond, Cassada, Nebia, Palms, Peri, Te Kowai,
Meadowlands, Barrie, Balmoral, Lome, River Estate, Foulden, Cedars, Inverness, and Miclete, of which only two,
namely, Palms and Meadowlands, are still working.


Between the Acts of 1880 and 1885, the following mills were erected, namely : —Homebush, Nindaroo,
Victoria, Marian (Ist), Habana, Farleigh, Palmyra, Ashburton, Beaconsfield, and Coningsby, of which only
three are still working, namely : —Homebush, Farleigh, and Palmyra.
The Government which passed the Act of 1885, whereby the granting of licenses for the introduction of
Islanders, after the 31st December, 1890, was prohibited, soon recognised the resulting damage that was ahead, and
accordingly decided toexperiment in the interval between the passing of the Act and the date appointed for the
operation of its restrictive provisions, with a view to demonstrating the possibility of carrying on the industry with
white labour. In the year 1886, therefore, two suitable sites in the Mackay district (both adjoining the railway) were
selected for the erection of two central sugar factories to be managed by small farmers, and the Government ad-
vanced the moneys necessary for the erection of the factories. The Government, however, took the precaution to
run a minimum of risk so far as the repayment of the moneys was concerned. They therefore advanced the moneys
to two companies formed for the purpose by groups of farmers living in the neighbourhood of the mills, viz.,
The Racecourse Central Sugar Company, Ltd. and The North Eton Central Sugar Company Ltd. The share-
holders in the companies were placed under an obligation to grow sufficient cane to keep the mills profitably
employed, and through the respective companies their lands were mortgaged for the repayment of the loans.
In pursuance of the policy of the Government, the moneys were advanced upon condition that no coloured
labour should be employed in the production of the cane or the manufacture of the sugar therefrom. But it
was speedily recognised that the factories were doomed to failure if the condition regarding coloured labour was
carried out, and such condition was therefore not insisted on. A special feature of these mills was that the
Government retained a controlling influence through their own nominees on the directorates. Except the two
mills in question no mills were erected in the district after the 1885 Act until the “ Sugar Works Guarantee Act
of 1893 ” was passed.
In 1893, the policy of the State with regard to the employment of coloured labour having in the light
of experience been regarded as settled, the introduction of Islanders having been again authorised by the Act of
1892, the Government of the day had sufficient confidence in the industry to introduce an Act known as “ The
Sugar Works Guarantee Act of 1893.” The object of this Act was to authorise the Treasurer, after obtaining
sufficient security over sugar lands and proposed mills, to guarantee debentures of companies to be formed for
the purpose of erecting central mills for the manufacture of sugar. Under this Act about £500,000 of money
provided by the State was invested in the industry, and the following mills were erected in the Mackay district,
namely :
Amount
Advanced.
Capacity
in Tons.
NAME OF MILL.
Marian Central Mill
Pleystowe Central Mill .
Plane Creek Central Mill
Prosperine Central Mill .
# Double Peak Sugar Co. .
£89,000
85.000
5000
SCOO
65.000
51.000
18,200
5000
5000
*This Company is merely a subsidiary supply company for the North Eton
Central Sugar Company
The whole of these mills are still in operation. As security for the advances made by the State for the
erection of the mills a large number of small holdings were and are mortgaged to the State Treasurer. No
restriction was imposed by the Act with reference to the labour to be employed in the production of cane for
the mills. It may be safely asserted that this Act has been the salvation of the Mackay district, and, indirectly,
has resulted in considerable revenue being derived by the State. It has also resulted in the settlement of a large
number of small growers in the district.
In the year 1895 an amending Act was passed, but the amendment merely related to the purchase by the
Treasurer of the debentures of the companies in lieu of guaranteeing the same.
In 1900, largely in consequence of a heavy fall in the price of sugar, a Bill was introduced and passed
for the purpose of granting the existing mills more favourable conditions for repayment of advances, and also
for the purpose of providing funds for additional mills. In Committee, an amendment was inserted prohibiting
the employment of coloured alien labour in works connected with the projected mills.
The Bill as amended was passed by both Houses, but owing to the amendment referred to, the Bill
failed to receive Royal Assent. The refusal and ground of refusal of Royal Assent to this Bill is worthy of more
than passing notice by Australian statesmen.
In conclusion, the hope may be expressed that the above glance at the history of past legislation will be
of some small assistance to those who are charged with the serious business of passing future legislation relating
to a most important industry. Such legislation will not only affect the welfare of many thousands of white
citizens of the Commonwealth and millions of public and private capital, but, as pointed out in another chapter,


will affect the future settlement by a white population of the tropical parts of the continent. As a native of
the State, the writer’s hopes naturally centre round the settlement of tropical Queensland with a white popu-
lation, but his experience teaches him that there is no royal road to such settlement, and that the questions
involved in bringing about the desired end are of such a complex nature that they will require the most careful
handling and consideration. “ The longest way round will probably be found to be the shortest way home.”
CHAPTER V.
Contains a Glance at the Social Development of the people of the District, from the Pioneer to
the Permanent Farmer.
PfHE intention of this article is to trace to some extent what may be called the social development
ViW * own an d district, showing the changes which have taken place, not so much from the
VC IK r industrial point of view as from that of a purely pioneering community, the majority of whom were
either capitalists or their employees, to a community in which the labouring classes have
#4 - developed into small employers, and a condition of social environment has been created, which
is believed to be closely approximate to the ideals of modern social reformers. We have shown how the district
came to be settled by pioneer pastoralists, and how in time they gave place to the closer settlement of large
plantations, each plantation being supplied with its own machinery for treating the raw material. We have
further traced the abandonment or breaking up of the plantations and older squattages, and the establishment
upon the land of numerous small farmers, in the main supplying cane to central factories in which they have more
or less of a controlling voice. When sugar became the vogue, say, in the early eighties, there could not have been
more than a couple of score of plantations. The labour employed was for the main part that of Polynesians,
and the conditions strongly resembled those of many portions of the old world, where the feudal system has
established communities, whose very schools, churches, and places of abode are practically under the supreme
control of one person. During the building of the numerous factories, artisans found ample employment, Mhi’e
ploughmen and oversers, storekeepers and clerks practically completed the white staff of a plantation. The
system had its advantages at the time. The capitalist alone was able to cope with the difficulties of pioneering
work, and the time for the small employer was in the future. Nothing illustrates the condition then more
emphatically than the fact that with far fewer employers such matters as horseracing and public amusement
generally, were conducted on a far more lavish scale than at present. With the change in the condition of the
conduct of the industry came also a very decided change in the personnel of the people engaged in it. The
labourers of one decade became the employers, on a small scale, of the next. Instead of fifty or so planters
something like eight hundred small farmers took their place. The overseer of a gang of sixty Kanakas was
replaced by half a dozen farmers employing, say, four islanders each. The labouring classes were thus raised
in the social scale, if one may use a term subject to much mis-use. Men, finding themselves employers, improved
themselves intellectually, and rose to the necessities of their new positions. With the introduction of the
central mill system the farmers became, to some extent, manufacturers, and men who a few years ago might have
been classed as unskilled labourers are to-day fairly well acquainted with the more or less important features
of the sugar factory, in some cases have taken active control, and in all cases have for themselves supervised
the conduct of important business, involving an annual turnover of anything from £20,000 to £40,000 a year.
That the community must socially be the gainer by such a metamorphosis cannot be gainsaid. As has been said,
around the central mills villages have gathered. These small communities are still in their embryo stage, but
most of them have their churches, their schools, and, possibly, a friendly society and a school of arts or lending
library. In other words, the whole tendency and effect of the progress of the sugar industry during the last
twenty years has been to elimate the fear of landlordism, improve the status of the white labourer, and create
a class of self-made and self-radiant men, who cannot fail to prove a strength to the Commonwealth. Nor
need we add that the political strength of the community as a whole has been largely increased by this process
of evolution. Men who twenty years ago practically owed their livelihood to one employer are now not only
independent in the matter of earning their bread, but are also thoroughly independent in the matter of the
expression of political beliefs. Consequently they pay more attention to current politics, and express their
opinions at the ballot box with absolute freedom, and with some knowledge of the issues submitted to them.
Again, this is a matter of benefit to the whole community. We find, then, that the community of sugar producers,
both as cane-growers and manufacturers, have become strengthened not only in numbers, but in material and
intellectual status, and this progress has been brought about during the years that coloured labour is said to
have contaminated the North. There may be disadvantages from the industrial point of view, upon which
stress might be laid, but these do not come within the scope of this article. Whatever those disadvantages


Number.
Population.
Aborigines
1482
OS 074
Chinese
035
29.108
Polynesians.
41
1.887
All Others
19
.871
2177
100. 00
may be, it is certain that few will agree to put back the hands of the clock of national progress, but will rest
content with the belief that in the course of a few years those who have raised themselves from the positions
of labourers to that of employers will rise higher on the intellectual ladder, which the earlier pioneers, owing
to special advantages possessed by them, had climbed in their younger days. It may be contended that the
conditions of living described in Chapter 11. hardly bear out the contention of this paper. It may be said at
once that we do not contend that the average farmer lives now in the same luxury as that enjoyed by the earlier
planters, once they had fairly established themselves ; but it is certain that he is as independent, and that
the difficulty of obtaining holidays for himself and his family are by no means increased by the fact that he is an
employer instead of being an employee. Another feature of this development, to which attention may be fairly
drawn, is to its usefulness as a means of national defence. No country is so weak as that which has large areas
of lands unoccupied, and coveted by other nations. Only recently in Western Australia the fact that Asiatics
land without authority along the unoccupied coast lands was fully established and admitted. The people on
the Queensland coast lands have ample experience of the dangers of an unprotected seaboard, and while few can
land unseen along the Mackay coastline at the present time, it is not so many years ago since an undesirable
class of people frequently reached Australia and got away inland before they were discovered. The settlers,
however, now soon give warning of anything like the landing of undesirables. Thus the small settlement
makes for defence. Again it has led to the establishment of rifle clubs, and men, who as employees, could not
have left their work to go under training, now, as employers, are able to regulate their own movements, and so
assist largely, by themselves and by their sons, to build up a bulwark of defence, which may one day be required
in the hour of trouble. To argue, at any great length, that it is a benefit to the community to have a closely
settled population in any agricultural district, would, perhaps, be unnecessary, and the introduction of such
matters here are more for the purpose or removing what is believed to be a general belief in many parts of the
Commonwealth that the sugar industry of this State is carried on mainly on the lines of the Sandwich Islands,
Java, Louisiana, Cuba, and the West Indies. The conditions, as we have shown, are in no sense similar.
Even the Polynesian laborers ride their horses and their bycicles, hold their cricket matches and football con-
tests, attend their schools, and generally enjoy life under conditions which would be envied by the white
labourer in many parts of the world. One is loth to touch upon the question of women and children working
in the canefields, but it is a matter which cannot be ignored. That not an inconsiderable number of cases occur
cannot be denied ; that the practice is common is certainly incorrect. The writer has seen women hoeing as well
as helping to harvest in the canefields, and at least one school teacher has admitted to him that during harvest
the attendance at the school falls off. It is not surprising that a certain number of the poorer farmers at least
should secure the help of their families. To them the bonus on white-grown cane is a godsend, but as they
cannot say whether it will continue beyond a certain time they naturally seek, by the aid of their wives and
their children, to “ make hay while the sun shines.” It is probable, however, that this matter will remedy itself,
if the continuance of the bonus on white-grown cane is fixed for a considerable number of years. The continu-
ance of the bonus for a settled term of years will also probably have the effect of checking the tendency of
coloured aliens to go on to the land as farmers. In the absence of white farmers, with some capital, to take
up the lands going out of cultivation on account of the labour difficulty, or of new lands which the owners desire
to lease, the number of Chinese, Japanese, and Hindu settlers has largely increased of late. White farmers
require every encouragement to enable them to step in and, by taking the lands themselves, check this undesirable
form of settlement. There is one other point to which allusion must be made in dealing with the social con-
dition of the people engaged in sugar production in the Mackay district. It has frequently been contended that
the danger to a pure Australian race of white people rests in the possibility of contamination of blood by
reason of the presence of Polynesians in the country. The exact figures of the half-caste population in the
Mackay district is not known, but one is almost safe in saying that it is impossible to find a half-caste with
either father or mother a Kanaka. Half-caste Chinese and aboriginals are not uncommon, but it is safe to say
that* whatever pollution of the “ white ” blood there may be, the Polynesian is not responsible. The following
figures, taken from the last census returns, illustrate the half-caste proposition as it affects the whole of Queens-
land, and the Mackay district need not fear comparison with any other part, not only of this State, but also
with sections of the large cities of the Commonwealth
Half-Caste Population (White and Coloured), Census 1901, for Queensland.
Per cent. Half-Caste


CHAPTER VI.
Showing what has been done to Establish Other Industries, and Why Sugar is the Mainstay of the
District.
;*r T is important to note that the question of the establishment of industries, other than that of sugar
sis' ; production, in the Mackay district has been by no means overlooked. Apart from the products
f the pastoral industry, which, as has been said, originated the settlement in the district, there
L— has never ceased to be a more or less regular effort to develope the mineral resources in the
mountain ranges, and local capital to this day is largely engaged in endeavouring to establish
mining in the neighbourhood. The lack of railway communication and the absence of any startling discovery
has, however, so far made such efforts practically fruitless. A company to evaporate sea water and make salt
has been started, and a good deal of timber is secured from the ranges ; but it is with agricultural industries
that we have more especially to deal. The first crops grown in this district appear to have been arrowroot
maize, cotton, potatoes, etc. In 1867 we find a record of the export of a small quantity of maize, about seventy-
five bags, while a ton and a-quarter of cotton is sent away from the Alexandra plantation, and the arrowroot
crop on the same place is reported to be doing well. The following year there is mention of the despatch of
forty-two bales of cotton from Pleystowe, while in 1869 we again find over a ton of cotton going away.
There are also records of the despatch o\er the lange of locally grown maize, sweet potatoes and pumpkins,
and rum, maize, and potatoes are mentioned among the exports of the first half of that year. Sugarcane’
however, was rapidly becoming the popular crop, partly due, doubtless, to the high price prevailing, and since
that time, despite all vicissitudes, it has remained the staple, if not the only industry of the district. Indigo
planting was commenced but abandoned, for financial reasons. Tobacco growing had some success, but was
killed out by blue mould, and gave place to sugar. In later years the State Government established an
experiment station or nursery, and grew various crops, none of which “ caught on ” amongst the farmers.
Briefly, there are climatic and geographical conditions which make most of these crops, except under special cir-
cumstances, less profitable than cane-growing, and with these conditions it may be well to deal at some little length.
The failure of rum was due, partly to the heavy excise duty imposed, but mainly to the improvements in the
methods of sugar manufacture, the sugar in the molasses being exhausted to a degree which made them unprofitable
from a distiller’s point of view. With a view to discussing subordinate agricultural industries, it may be
convenient to place before readers the latest official figures of this district, merely using them as a text,'and
prefacing their publication with the remark that they apply to a somewhat exceptional year, and cannot be
taken as finally conclusive According to the official statistics of Queensland for the year 1903 (those for 1904
will not be available until next August), the principal agricultural productions, other than sugar and sugarcane,
were as follows :
Acres. Production.
M aize ... ... ... ... 1281 17,864 bushels
ftice ... ... ... ... 3 320
Potatoes, English ... ... ... 69 141 tons
„ Sweet ... ... ... 255 977 „
Pumpkins ... ... ... 24 86
Coffee ... ... ... ... 61 2,780 lbs’.’
Hay ... ... ... ... 76 86 tons
Green Fodder ... ... ... 159
Grapes ... ... ... ... 6 11,156 lbs.
Bananas ... ... ... ... , 9 592 bunches
Pineapples ... ... ... 7 1,083 dozens
Oranges ... ... ... ... 25 40,279 dozens
Taking maize first, we may say that the output mentioned above is probably a record, at least in recent
years. Maize has to be harvested about March, and as this is usually a wet month it frequently spoils. Briefly
the weather that is good for maize is not good for sugar cane. During 1904 the maize production of the Mackay
district did not probably exceed 12,000 bushels, and during this year the output is not likely to exceed 4000
bushels. The small quantity of rice grown in 1903 is probably the last of that crop which will be produced
in this locality, the increased facilities for import, coupled with the naturally unsuitable soil conditions,
having killed the industry, which was never very robust. English potatoes were practically not produced in
1904. This crop is not a reliable one at any time, the seed is most expensive, and generally it has only been
grown where farmers have had no railway communication. With the extension of railway and tramway facilities
the farmers abandon potato growing and turn to cane. Much the same argument applies to sweet potatoes,
with the further remark that the decrease in the number of Polynesians has reduced the demand for this tuber.
Pumpkins again are only grown away from the railways, in default of the more profitable cane and in any
case could not possibly hope to compete against the Darling Downs and other districts more suited to their
growth. Some years ago a small coffee plantation was successfully worked on the North, side, and the owner
was able to sell all he produced. Of recent years three other plantations have been started in this district and


while the output for 1903 is only 2780 lbs., the output last year is calculated at 25,0(7 lbs. The labour
question, principally as regards picking is likely, sooner or later, to crop up in respect to coffee. For the
present it has been done either by coloured labour or by white children, but to what extent the industry can
continue on these lines, and what margin of profit there is at present prices, remains largely a matter of experience.
Hay and fodder have been neglected as a result of the improved weather conditions for the growth of cane.
Grapes do not do well in the district, and only one grower makes a small quantity of wine. The banana
production was considerable some years ago, but went out in the face of cane culture, and importations became
very common. Recently Chinamen have again gone into the industry, which is believed to be on the increase.
Last year there was a heavy falling off in the production of pineapples, but oranges, in certain places where
there is no clay subsoil, do well, and last year a considerable quantity was exported. However, it should be
added that the greater part of the district'is entirely unsuited to the growth of this crop. Some experiments
have been made in the cultivation of fibres, but nothing has yet been done to place that industry on a
permanent footing. On one plantation several thousand plants of the Agave Sisilana are growing, and there
is a possibility that if cane becomes unprofitable or almost so fibre production may be tried as a substitute.
It remains only now to refer to dairying. Two dairy factories have been erected in the district, each of which
has made every effort to secure suppliers of cream, but neither of which has, so far, obtained a full supply. One
is at work at present, and the bulk of its supplies come from the North side, referred to in Chapter 111. Cane-
growing is more profitable than dairying to the average farmer, and above all he understands the one business
and does not understand the other. ' He is loth, therefore, to take up what is practically a new calling, unless
driven to it. It will be seen, then, that many industries have been attempted, but their failure or partial failure,
or, possibly to put it more correctly, their absence of progress, may be traced to simple basic facts. Most
agricultural industries suited to the tropics make about the same demand for labour, while the climatic con-
ditions render the cultivation of products of the temperate zone either unreliable or far less profitable than the
cultivation of tropical products in their natural habitat. A local condition, which also has much influence, is
the difficulty of securing cheap and rapid shipping facilities. There is no special haste to get the manufactured
sugar to the refineries, while fruits and vegetables must get quick despatch. Dairying products to be exported
satisfactorily must go away in cool storage, and of this there is none. It does not follow that cane-growing
must always be the only important industry in Mackay district, but it is certain that so long as it remains profitable
to the growers so long will they prefer it to other industries, of which, possibly, they do not even know the
rudiments. Sugar-growing and manufacture constitute a science and a business which requiies much technical
knowledge, and that special knowledge is only gathered from the experiences of succeeding generations. When
cane-growing ceases, if it ever does, it means that some other industry far less profitable to the community as
a whole, will take its place. A State Royal Commission inquired into the sugar industry in 1889, and the minority
report, that of the Chairman of the Commission (the late W. H. Groom), advised the substitution of fruit-
growing for cane-growing, seeing, that in his opinion, the latter was doomed to extinction as the result of certain
legislation, and urged that the Government should specially subsidise steamers to run the fruit to the south.
Mangoes have been shipped with success from Mackay to the Southern States and to New Zealand, but the
trade makes no real headway. Some efforts have been made to ascertain, experimentally, the chances of
establishing a trade with the south in early vegetables, but in this, again, it is impossible to persuade many
farmers to desert the industry which they understand, and commence afresh. Possibly in discussing the
foregoing subject of other industries the writer of these notes may have gone more into detail than he at first
intended. It is important, however, that the facts should be clear. There may be other industries which can
take the place of cane, but if there are, to give the same satisfactory results, they must produce as much per
acre, employ as much skilled and unskilled white labour, be suited to the tropics, and, unless the horse is to
starve while the grass is growing, be capable of being learnt and put upon a production of £300,000 a year within
a year or two.
CHAPTER VII.
Gives Some Particulars of the Cost of Growing Cane by the Farmer Under White and Polynesian
Labour Conditions.
ew? W T may first of all be said that probably no one to-day seriously believes that the farmer spends
r || half his time gossiping over the fence, or that he lives in riotous luxury, and does very little work.
W Both he and his labourers have to work, and work hard. The ploughman, when he has done
11 a complete day’s work and looked after his horses, has put in ten good hours, while during the
harvesting the cane-cutters may frequently be seen in the fields at daybreak, and, with some
short intervals for rest, will keep going until the darkness suspends operations. The farmer himself, at least
throughout the crushing season, is about long before the sun, and his hours might almost be said to be limited


£ s. ■
d.
£ s.
d.
Brushing and Falling
0
1 0
0
Burning and Clearing
2 5
0
1 2
(5
Holeing
8 10
0
1 1 5
0
Cutting Plants, Carting, and Planting Same ...
1 5
0
0 Ml
0
Hoeing, three times
3 7
()
1 10
0
£12 7
0
£5 17
0
only by his physical endurance. Taking the whole year round, and the different classes of farms, it is probable
the farrier puts in a daily average of not less than eleven hours. In arriving at the cost ot growing cane
no trouble has been spared to arrive as nearly as may be at figures which are broadly correct. The local
organization has, through the secretaries of its different branches, collected as much information as
possible, and, of course, amongst its members are many who are staunch believeiS in the superioiitv of the
white over the coloured man for agriculture in the tropics. The writer of these notes has also himself been a
practical working farmer for fifteen years, growing cane on both forest and scrub lands, and has now two
farms, one registered for bonus and the other being worked with Polynesian laboui. With so much assistance,
therefore, he confidently puts forward his figures, under the qualifications to be mentioned, as being the facts
of the case. In estimating the results on forest land the first crop on virgin soil has not been taken into con-
sideration, as the work done in putting in such a crop is no criterion as to that necessary as the ground gets
older ; nor has the cost of manuring very old land been included ; in the case of scrub, as the greater
portion of cane has come from new scrub, we have taken new scrub lands only. We have also dealt
with plant crops only, as the varying results from ratoon crops (all the way from lour tons to foity) render
them difficult to determine. Labour has been charged at the rate of ss. a day {£l a week and food) for white
men, and 2s. 6d. a day for Polynesians. There is no means of determining, however, what will be the cost of
white labour after the end of 1906, when the 1250 coloured labourers will have gone, and an additional labour
force of that number will be required. The cost of cane production with white labour may, theielore, be safely
taken as the minimum cost. Further, it has, of course, been impossible to estimate the money vcdue of the
advantage which a farmer enjoys when he has labour under agreement, and is thus able at a moment’s notice
to cope with the sudden weed growths, the result of tropical heat and moisture. With day labour it is by no
means an uncommon experience for the farmer to find himself at a critical, moment without the help that
he had counted upon. The estimates supplied the writer of the cost of clearing land with white labour were
most varying. One had his land cleared for £9 an acre, and another only paid £6. The disparities may be
accounted for by the difference in the timber, the state of the ground, and similar factors. Taking all into
consideration an average of £y 10s. per acre was worked out, and one-fourth of this has been cht«igcd againn
the crop dealt with, as after the first few crops the cost of manures, instead of that of clearing, will have to
be met. The following table will represent the respective costs of crops of cane grown on forest land with white
and with Polynesian labour :
White Labor. Polynesian Labor.
£ s. d. £ s. d.
Clearing, quarter cost . ... ••• •• ...117 0 ... 100
Ploughing, four times, average seven-eighths acre per day ... 1 14 0 1 12 8
1 12 8
Harrowing and rolling ... 010 2 ... 0 b 8
Planting (cutting, carting, laying, drilling, and covering) ... 1 2 S ... 014 2
0 10 2 ... 0 0 8
1 10 0 ... 0 15 0
Hoeing, three times ... ...1100 ... Olot)
Supplying ... ••• ••• ••• ... 010 0 ... 0 5 0
Cultivation with horse implements ... ... 0 13 4 .. 0 9 8
£1 18 2 ... £5 111
Seventeen tons to the acre is taken as a fairly representative average crop for this distiict, and the cost
per ton, the added cost of cutting, and the total cost per ton, works out thus :
Cost as above. Cutting. Total ( ost.
s. d. s. d. s. d.
With White Labour ... ••• ••• 9 3 3 6 12 9
With Polynesian Labour ... ... ... , b 1 7
Concerning the cost of cutting cane with Polynesians, a Kanaka at 2s. 6d. a day often cuts and loads into
dray or wa ff on three tons, at a cost of rod. per ton, while with portable line on small crops the cost will sometimes
run as high as 2s. The above, is. 3d., is a fair average. It may also be noticed that a plough team on
a “ white ” farm has been charged at 7s. 6d. per day, while on a Kanaka farm it is only charged 7s. 2d.
White ploughmen at similar wages are employed in each case, but the cost of picking up and chaffing cane
tops for feed will be less where the Polynesians are employed, thus reducing the daily cost of the plough teams.
Turning now to the cost of cane production, with the two classes of labour on mountain scrub lands,
and following generally the same rules in ascertaining the figures, we find the following :
White Labour. Polynesian Labour


With
AVhite Labour
Cost as above
s. d.
gg
Cutting,
s. d.
3 6
1 3
Total
s.
11
5
Cost.
d.
With
Polynesian Labour
a 10|
9
If
Ab stated above, the foregoing calculations refer to a plant crop only, and a fair estimate of the output
is 30 tons to the acre. The cost of the cane harvested in the field will then be as follows P
In the above only the cost of labour in connection with field operations has been included, such items
as supervision, cartage from the field to the mill or tramline, interest on cost of or rent for land fencing
purchase of manures, value of plants (from 20s. to 30s. per acre), and depreciation, having no bearing upon the
relative costs of cane grown under the different conditions. In all these items add another five or six shillings
to th„ cost Nor do the figures apply to cane grown on the large plantation system, being merely those of
the small farmer. The physical features of the district also vary greatly, and these mud be taken into con-
nuonath°pnfl.fln S A° me P^ CeS the fidds t0 be rid g ed in order to secure drainage, in others farmers plant
?P° n n n the f flat h , Ag ™ n > a : e g rown °\ the stone y hills, but the holeing and planting is much more expensive
than on forest land, while in harvesting the cane has to be sent down from some of the steeper hills slung on
m °°! S s P eciall y constructed. Both the condition of the land planted and the climatic con-
ditions of the moment may require a change m procedure, and these also must be reckoned with in working
out the average cost of growing cane. The mam factor, however, as will be seen by the statement givef
above is the cost of labour. It may be interesting to conclude this chapter with a brief summary of the rates
groWmg countries ’ with which bef ore many years Australia must endeavour
to compete in the world s markets
Rate per Day.
Demerara (Coolies) ... ... ... lod. to la. 4d.
Fiji (Polynesians) ... ... ... Is. 3d.
•lava ... ... ... ... 6d. | g
Straits Settlements ... ... ... «d
Mauritius ... ... ...
Natal (Coolies) ... ... ... ... 10d to 1§ ;
••• .. 7*d.
Hawaii (Japanese) ... ... ... 2s lid
Louisiana (Whites) ... ... ... 4 S 2d
„ (Negroes) ... ... ... 3s. l|d.
CHAPTER VIII.
Giving the More Important Features in Connection with the Cost of Manufacture.
is thought to be prevalent in many quarters the idea that the sugar industry is not conducted
Cim ® u P on the mos t economical and advanced lines, and that in many directions it could be greatly
ftl improved, thus making it more profitable, and either enabling it to pay higher wages to white
employees or to permit of the duty on imported sugar being reduced, with a view to cheapening
* c . tbat artlc * e of public consumption. It is further apparently not realised how very little hope
there is ot the sugar industry becoming a large exporting industry of the Commonwealth, if anything occurs
to mciease the cost of production. In the department of manufacture, with which this chapter deals great
pi ogress has been made since the days when every planter had his own factory, and in this district alone some
thirty or so sugar mills were working, each turning oat what nowadays would be considered an absurdly small
tonnage ol sugar. From the moment of the establishment of large mills, alluded to elsewhere, the matter of
manufacture received even more attention than that of cultivation. Indeed, the time was when the factories
ol this State, including those in this district, were able to boast of the perfection of their work. The losses in
the mills were largely reduced, and technical and scientific supervision were in no way neglected. Comparisons
cannot well be drawn with the work of, say, fifteen years ago, for at that time each mill was making sugar
tor the open market, and the cost largely depended upon the processes used, while the return for the
manufactured product was largely regulated by the conditions of the markets at the moment, and the ability
ol the sellers to meet those conditions and make the best of them. With the general practice of making raw
sugars lor sale to the refiners, the value of the manufactured product has become, from year to year, a fixed
quantity, and the manufacturer now knows, within reasonable limits, what he is likely to get for his product
it should be said, however, that the abnormal conditions of the beet output last year, where there was a heavy


shortage, diverted Java sugars from our shores, and generally raised prices to a figure which by many is
attributed to the operations of the Customs and Excise Acts only. It may fairly be stated that the cost of
Jawa sugars off the coast to a large extent regulates the prices paid by refiners to the Commonwealth sugar
industry for raw sugars. Below we give an exhaustive and carefully prepared table, showing the main features
of the work at the five central mills in the Mackay district proper. It should be stated that North Eton and
Racecourse were established about 1886, not under the Sugar Works Guarantee Act, and consequently their
repayments on account of interest are very much lower than those of the other mills. In glancing at the
figures the interested reader will note the large quantities of cane handled at each mill. With the exception
of 1904 season all the crops shown were regarded as short ones, and in nearly every case the disadvantage of
a short crop is to be found aptly illustrated in the increased cost of manufacture in the factory. The fact is
worth noting, as it emphasises the point that a mill cannot be worked profitably the moment the supply of
cane falls below a given quantity. Thus we find mills handling 15,000 tons in a poor season, and nearly 40,000
in a good one, the cost of manufacture varying from £2 a ton to £1 os. 6d. The large number of growers
supplying each of these mills may be noted, while it may be remembered that the balance of the growers in
the district are supplying cane to privately-owned mills. Last year these five mills handled 156,978 tons of
cane, and produced therefrom 17,964 tons of sugar, or over sixty per cent, of the total sugar made in the
Mackay district proper. The average production of cane per grower was 326 tons, or equal to the product of;
say, 22 acres. The cost of the cane to the mills is given, all of it having to be hauled from the fields either by
railway, tramway, or in carts and wagons. While the cost of manufacture varies, as noted before, it will be
seen that on the whole it is a fairly well-known quantity. The figures given are all subject to Government
audit, and in our table they have been reduced to one common factor —namely, per ton of sugar analysing 88
per cent, net titre. They may, therefore, be taken as unimpeachable, and a glance at them will show that a
reasonably careful grasp is kept by the farmers over the business they have undertaken to carry on. In
calculating the total cost of each ton of sugar made interest on the capital, which has in each case been borrowed
from the Government, is charged, while the heavy payments on account of maintenance of the plant, which
have to be made each year, are charged against the current crop. When, therefore, the true cost of producing
a ton of sugar is seen it will be observed that the margin is a small one, and further that, if there is to be any
material reduction in the cost of placing a ton of sugar on board the ships, either the wages in the mills must
come down, or the farmer must take less for his cane. There is no desire for the former, and the farmer
as has already been shown, cannot stand any addition to the cost of production of cane, or, which is the same
thing, any reduction in the value he receives for his crop. It must be added that absolutely no coloured labour
is employed in connection with the mills appearing in the table we publish. Mechanical devices for certain
work in the mills are being from time to time introduced with a view to reducing the labour bill, but the
adoption of these is at first only a matter of experiment, and secondly depends upon the mills being able to
make sufficient profits to enable them to go to the heavy initial expense.


MACKAY CENTRAL J SUGAR MILLS.
- I |
MARIAN MILL. NORTH ETON MILL. PLANE CREEK MILL. PLEYSTOWE MILL. RACECOURSE MILL.
REMARKS.
SEASON. SEASON. SEA SON. SEASON SEASON
1900 1901 MM-J WHY.', I!)U1 MKM» l!MH 1902 '.Mi.l I'.Mi 1900 1901 1902 1908 1904" 1900 1901 1902 1903 1904* 1900 1901 1902 1903 1904* 1904.
. . | ■ _ i :
£43,389 £42,461 40,555 39,845 39,221 24,165 23,510 23,090 22,600 22,880 ->..,84/ °4,lo0 54,434 53,668 57,135 36,399 36,698 37,001 37,905 36,128 18,921 19,245 19,390 19,795 21,120 £176,484
21,377 27,415 15,183 17,763 32,230 15,09, lo,131 10,8o8 14,,0.) 26,391 21,61, -6,*.81 18,131 19,646 38,830 18,192 21,424 18,484 24,430 22,850 17,442 25,147 15,350 21,621 36,677 Tons 156,978
106 100 98 98 96 68 68 53 63 80 ,3 ,6 ! g - gi 115 52 6 , 6g ?? g() 91 gg 1Q6 112 11Q Growers 481
2,536 3,317 1,856 2,040 3,828 1,848 1,597 1,278 1,736 3,047 2,530 2,9,2 2,380 2,350 4,592 1,967 2,285 2,091 2,545 2,554 2,067 2,764 1,727 2,394 3,943 Tons 17,964
8-43 8-26 818 8 70 | 8 42 8 17 9 4, 8 o0 8 4, 8 66 8 o4 8 84 f 7-92 8‘36 8‘45 9 25 9‘37 8‘84 9 60 8'95 8‘44 910 8 88 9 02 9‘30 ,, 8'68
£ s. d.l £ s. d £ s. d £ s d £ s d £ s d £ s. d £ s. d £ s* d £ s d £ s d £ cL £ g d £ r £ g d £ * g d £ g d £ s d £ s (i £ s d £ s d £ s d £ s d £ s d £ s d £ s d
0 13 4| 0 13 9, 0 lu 4 0 15 40 13 11 0 13 20 13 7 0 lo 0 0 Id ,0 13 11 0 15 10 0 15 11 0 15 2 0 13 80 14 II 0 15 11 0 16 0 0 14 4 0 14 5 0 15 2 0 16 8 0 16 9 0 16 3 0 14 6
2 0 10 111 6 111 6 1 12 9 1 6 0 1 11 10 2 3 2 1 18 1 1 12 9 1 12 3 1 - 2 1 .,9 1 0 11 1 1 4 1 0 6 1 6 6 1 2 3 1 0 6 1 1 9 1 3 2 1 13 1 1 13 3 1 14 8 1 12 9 1 9 1 1 6 2
8 6 4 7 17 7; 8 11 9: 9 0 6 7 13 0 7 II 99969 3 3 90 087 9 , 8 2 8 o 2 7 17 588080288 2 8 II 293 7i 9 11 285 18409039869 13 19 1 1 8 5 5
£743 £1,214 £1,445 j £1,832 £1,292 £600 £552 £o‘24 £642 £460 £84o £l,02o £1,173 £1,467 £1,892 £759 £730 £763 £1,880 £1,494 £570 £658 £646 £1,329 £1,676 £6,814
£1,739 £1,560 £1,460 I £1,407 £1,352 £528 £570 £o.v2 £460 £802 £2,90, £2,600 £2,476 £2,390 £2,300 £1,596 £1,419 £1,374 £1,304 £1,846 £331 £292 £252 £210 .£227 £6,527
£ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ l l- £ s - c g g g jq 9 () 7 I £ d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d. £ s. d.
9 5 10 8 14 310 3 110 12 3 8 6 J 8 4 0 10 3 610 0 2 9 8 - i 9 8 1 10 0 6 8 18 5 9 12 1 9 10 010 4 2 10 16 2 9 11 3 8 12 8 9 7 1 9 19 0 10 6 0 9 10 6 9 0 5
10 2 Oil 2 710 12 110 11 Oil 7 610 0 811 OHIO 9 8 10 10 all 10 0!M!) ,11 I 10 11 1010 10 611 7 6 9 19 11 II 0 1110 10 010 10 1011 7 6 10 2 7 11 3 0 10 11 410 10 1111 9 0 11 8 2
*
Government Returns not yet available),
ON BASIS OF 88% NET TITRE SUGAR.
PARTICULARS AND
COST OF
MANUFACTURE.
TOTALS & AVERAGES
Capital Cost, After allowing for
Yearly Ex penditure on Additions,
and Deducting Depreciation
Tons of Cane Crushed
Number of Growers
Tons of Sugar Manufactured
Average Tons Cane to tons of
Sugar
Average Cost of Cane at Weigh-
bridge
Average Cost of Manufacture in
Mill per Ton of Sugar
Average Cost of Manufacture and
all Expenses to f.o.b.
Yearly Expenditure on Main-
tenance
Yearly Expenditure on Interest...
Total Cost per Ton of Sugar,
including Maintenance and
Interest ...
Output Realised per Ton
yet available),
Season partly estimated
(as Government
1904
and the item “ Sugar realised per ton ” includes estimated bonus at 2/5/- per ton.


CHAPTER IX.
General Statistics of the Town and District, with Some Brief Comments Thereon, and Final Remarks.
fgfafN t* l6 concluding chapter of this pamphlet the Committee desire to place before those interested
IH ||k|.| in as concise a form as possible a few of the principal figures, which may give some fair impression
Ijipl |P|j of the magnitude of even the Mackay section only of the Australian sugar industry. In Chapter
1., will be found sufficient to give a fair impression of the climatic conditions, while, in Chapter 111.,
has been stated the population of town and district, with proportion of coloured aliens, and
number of dwellings in each. In Chapters VII. and VIII., we have given particulars of the cost
of producing cane and sugar, with a table tracing the cost of manufacture at the local central mills for the
past five years. There are, however, some important figures, without which this pamphlet would not be
complete. We refer to those showing not only the private capital invested in this portion of the sugar industry,
but also the public moneys involved. The State has something more than a patriotic interest in the future
of Mackay. It has a purely business one. It has invested in one form or another an enormous sum of money,
aggregating something like £505,000. Further than this, from the national point of view, it is clearly
undesirable that an industry producing something like £l6 from every acre cultivated should give place, if
that were possible, to some other industry yielding not more than half that amount. Taking the State invest-
ments, we find them to be practically as follows :
State Investments in Mackay.
Loans to Town Council ... . . ... 29,103
Loans to Shire Council ... ... ... 84,529
Loans to Harbour Board ... ... ... 11,724
Loans to Central Mills (balance due)... ... 135,869
Loans Meat and Dairy Works ... ... 7,358
Cost Mackay Railway ... ... ... 239,666
Cost Public Buildings ... ... ... 13,000
Cost Experiment Station ... ... ... 1,000
Grants Act, Bridges ... ... ... 6,000
Grant to Harbour Board ... ... .. 13,617
Schools ... ... ... ... ... 13,400
Of course, the grants are not intended to be recoverable, except in the indirect method of assisting to
create and maintain a community, which will in its turn contribute both to the State’s general production and
wealth, and also to the revenue. For the purposes of the following statement it is unnecessary to consider the
fact that certain public revenues pass through the hands of the Commonwealth Government before they reach
the State Treasury, nor is it possible to give in detail the earnings of other parts of Australia by reason of the
shipment of nearly 30,000 tons of sugar valued at over £300,000. The figures below will, however, give some
general idea of the trade of the district and the contributions towards the public funds, resulting from this
portion of the sugar industry :
Trade and Public Revenue.
Imports, 1904 ... ... ... ... 80,600
Exports, 1904 ... ... ... ... 300,597
Customs Collections, 1904... ... ... 15,287
Railway Earnings, 190!, from carriage cane ... 4,990
Railway Earnings. 1904, from carriage sugar . 2,694
Total Railway Earnings ... ... ... 17,867
Value of ten years’ Exports ... ••• 2.178.654
Value of ten years’ Imports ... ... 887,355
Customs Collections, ten years ... ... 278,732
Railway Earnings, nine years ... ... 87,441
It should be noted that the past ten years have not been exceptionally prosperous ones, consequent on
the low price of sugar and a series of disastrous droughts. In the foregoing we have not thought it necessary
to burden the reader with minor figures, such as those of the Post and Telegraph Departments, the stamp
duties, gold warden’s and other offices, which contribute to the public revenue, while the payments of income
tax on account of this town and district only last year are not available. These probably amounted to about
£3OOO. Turning now to the private capital invested in this district, we may first of all take the Town and
Shire valuations as fairly indicating the taxable values of all the lands. These we find to be as follows :
Town of Mackay. Shire of Pioneer.
Unimproved land valuations, 1904 £191,461 ... ... £647,611


25 Acres.
50 Acres,
£
£
Clearing spread over 8 or 4 years
120
270
Fencing, field and horse paddocks ...
56
88
Stables and yards
20
35
Horses ..
53
98
Harness
12
30
Ploughs, harrows, and cultivator
17
48
Dray (and wagon for 60 acres)
12
57
Chaff cutter, gear, and sundries
12
35
£10 per acre
£302
£11 per acre £661
1893
£
299,361
£
19,692
1894
308,229
13,603
1895
265,525
15,474
1896
156,904
12,925
1897
210,645
16,673
1898
345,445
89,857
1899
163,494
40,398
1900
206,482
43,713
1901
232,907
21,729
1902
200,372
27,965
Under the central mill system the farmers have to mortgage their lands to a value equal to that of the
Government loan, and consequently the value of the lands, now mortgaged, but held in the vicinity of the various
central mills, can be seen from the State investment shown above. At one time there were over a score of mills
in the district, costing from £5OOO to £35> 000 each, but these have been reduced in number, concentrated, or
replaced until to-day the actual mills in operation number ten, with a capital value of probably £350,000, including
the tramway systems. The amount of private capital invested in buildings cannot be well estimated, but we know
that there are 2550 dwellings in the town and district, and, while many of these probably cost about £lOO
each, there are hundreds which have not been built for less than double that amount, and there is no inconsiderable
number, especially in the town, the cost of which has run into four figures. The full amount invested by
farmers in plant, fencing, and other necessary adjuncts to carrying on agriculture is also difficult to calculate,
but the official figures show that the value of machinery and implements, other than sugar mills and tramlines,
is as follows ;
Farming.
Dairying
Irrigation.
Total.
£88,596
£lOOB
<£2918
<£87,522
Another calculation which may assist in arriving at the amount of outlay incurred by a farmer, before
he starts his business, may be made in the form of an estimate at per acre. Two tables, prepared by independent
and experienced cultivators, have been placed at our disposal. Of course, much depends upon the farmer
himself, who may, for a year or two, prefer to live in a humpy, and forego both the comforts and conveniences
of a properly equipped farm. We give both estimates, one for a farmer harvesting twenty-five acres, and one
for a farmer harvesting sixty acres each year, merely prefacing the table by saying that dwellings are not
included :
Cost of Starting a Farm.
Either estimate will make the private capital invested in farms in this district over a quarter of a million
sterling. We know that the mills and tramways represent about £350,000 of capital, so that it is not difficult
to see that a sum of at least £600,000 is involved in the local sugar industry alone. The amount of private
capital invested in other industries and businesses, which are dependent upon the maintenance of the sugar
industry, cannot even be hazarded.
The value of the sugar industry, as compared with all other sources of production in this district, may
be gathered from a short statement, supplied officially to the local Chamber of Commerce, but which cannot
be brought right up to date, owing to the figures not being now available.
Value of Sugar Compared with Other Products, Mackay.
Tear. Sugar Products Shipped Dtwrr P-riytiti
Sugar Products Shipped. Other Products Shipped.


0
£
s.
d.
£
s.
d.
1895
15,556
22,839
9
9
8
13
9
8
189(3
15,811
16,312
9
16
11
10
3
5
1897
17,290
22,428
8
18
5
11
17
11
1898
21,863
31,993
8
11
0
12
16
6
1899
18.313
17,521
9
4
10
8
16
10
1900
17,126
20,194
9
19
9i
11
19
6
1901
17,769
24,093
10
19
8f
13
19
8
1902
16,639
16,676
10
8
7
10
10
8
1903
13,245
18,329
10
11
4
15
11
4
1904
18,000
28;500
10
12
11
16
8
5
The following table is taken from the returns of the year 1903, but it should be added that those for
1904, not yet available, are expected to show notable increases in the number of small holders of land :
Size of Cultivated Holdings, Mackay District.
Owners. Acres.
Five Acres and under ... ... ... 98 282
Over five and not exceeding twenty ... ... 262 3188
Over twenty and not exceeding fifty ... ... 256 8567
Over fifty Acres ... ... ... ... 126 13,832
Totals ... ... ... ... 742 25,869
The following figures show the operations under the Federal Law to encourage the growth of cane with
white labour only :
Bonus on White Grown Cane.
Tons of Cane
Teak. w of White. Black. Bounty Paid.
White Suppliers.
No. Tons Tons £
1902 428 55,395 86.351 12,925
1903 408 76,113 79.607 17.855
1904 495 126,304 95,916 29,468
Proportion of White and Coloured Cane-Growers, Mackay District.
Growers. Mill Hands.
Tear. White. Colored. White. Colored.
1900 474 64 476 47
1901 485 57 475 47
1902 517 48 476 50
1903 526 54 479 48
1904 669 76 636 44
1905 671 103 678 44
From the foregoing it will be seen that while, in the period under review, the number of white cane-
growers has increased by 41J per cent., the number of coloured growers has increased by no less than 61 per
cent. If we take the last three years only the number of coloured growers has increased by only a fraction
under 100 per cent. On the other hand, the number of coloured men, employed in connection with the mills,
has remained an infinitesimal quantity. The Chinese have increased their number of growers from 13 in 1900
to 33 in the present year, while other nationalities, mainly Indians, have risen from 30 to 69 in the same period.
In contrast with this it may be interesting to note the proportion of Polynesians to the whole population of
Mackay and district during the past. The following table gives the figures at the census periods :
Percentage of Polynesians to Total Population, Mackay
Population. Polynesians. Percentage.
1871 2140 770 65.9
1881 5787 2500 43.2
1891 10538 2450 23.2
1901 11182 1869 16.7
The following table is of value as showing the production of sugar in this district for the past ten years,
and also the value of the output, calculated at per acre of the cane harvested :
Value of Sugar, at 88 per cent. Net Titre, Per Acre, for Ten Years
Tear. Acres Crushed. Tons Sugar. A r alue f.o.b. Mackay. Value per Act
A r alue f.o.b. Mackay. Value per Acre.


Lastly we give the proportion of the Mackay to the whole of the Queensland industry, It will be seen
that it is equal to about one-fourth, and so large a part of the whole is certainly entitled to be heard :
Proportion of Mackay to the Whole of the State Sugar Industry for Four Decades and Last Year.
Mackay The State % Mackay of
* ear> Area under Cane. Area under Cane. the whole.
1871 2211 9581 23
1881 7895 28,026 24 6
1891 14,307 50,948 28.1
1901 22,379 112,031 199
1905 26,000 120,000 23 3
In Conclusion.
In the foregoing pages the Committee, who have prepared this pamphlet, have endeavoured to condense
as far as possible the information put forward into a statement of recognised facts. Theyg certainly^believe
those facts will establish the opinion that upon the sugar industry, and the sugar industry alone, Mackay must
depend for its very existence for many years to come. They also think that sufficient chas |been said to
indicate that not Mackay only, but the State and even the Commonwealth is interested in seeing the whole of
the sugar industry prosper and expand, thus settling the agricultural tropics of Australia, promoting the close
settlement of the lands with a sturdy white population, which will not only find employment for thousands,
and contribute largely to the wealth and the revenue of the State, but will also form a safeguard for the
Commonwealth against the unauthorised influx of undesirables. It has been said that no interest is taken
in the sugar industry outside Queensland, and that the problems of settling the tropics are not likely to receive
more than passing notice from the statesmen of this great country. The Committee are loth to believe this,
and hope that the facts set forth herein will not only dissipate apathy, if there is any, but will arouse a keen
desire|on the part of all who read them to thoroughly grasp the broad essentials of the whole question, and
assist in forwarding the great national work at present carried out under the sun line by a population equal to
not more than one-tenth of that of either of the two great cities of the Commonwealth.


3
