

THIRD (BEING NEW, ENLARUtU, & impKUVED)
EDITION.
FOURTH THOUSAND.
Some of Messrs. MOODY d SANKEY'S
NEW REVIVAL HYMNS
SPIRITUAL SUNGS,
WITH NEW PREFACE,
REV. PETER CAMPBELL
TWO ORIGINAL (COLONIAL), HYMNS,
&c., &c., &c.
SYDNEY:
EDWARD TURNER, 16 & 18, HUNTER STREET.
WHOLESALE AND RETAIL,
Also may be obtained from all Bookseller-.
PRICE. SIXPENCE- PER POST. SEVENPEHCE-
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.


THE REVIVAL HYMNS.
“ Speaking to yourselves in Psalms and Hymns, and
Spiritual Songs, singing, and making melody in your
heart to the Lord.”—Ephesians v. 19.
“ Sing forth the honor of His name : make His praise
glorious.”—Psalm Ixvi. 2.
“Wilt thou not re\ ive us again, ” —Psalm Ixxxv. 6.
“ I will sing with the Spirit, and I will sing with the
understanding also.”—l Corinthians xiv. 15.
“ Sing unto the Lord with the Plarp ; with the Harp
and the voice of a Psalm.”
“ With trumpets and sound of cornet make a joyful
noise before the Lord the King.”—Psalm xcviii. 5, 6.


IRA D. SANKEY, Esq
(Of America),
This Third Edition of some of the Spiritual
Songs which he sings with so much Christian
feeling, pathos, sweetness, and good taste,
(AT MR. MOODY’S MEETINGS),
is respectfully dedicated by his fellow Christian,
and humble admirer,
PETER CAMPBELL,
(Of Edinburgh).
Australian Voluntary Missionary
Private Box, 138,
General Post Office,
Sydney, New South Wales
14th June, 1875.




INDEX.
a-eoo*
Page
I. Editorial Note (2nd Edition) I
2. Ditto (3rd Edition) 5
HYMNS.
3. Sweet hour of prayer ... ... ... ... 11
4. Work for the night is coming ... ... ... 12
5. The Life Boat ... ... ... ... ... 13
6. Beautiful Land on High 13
7. Hold the Fort ... ... ... ... ... 15
8. Jesus loves me ... ... ... ... ... 15
9. Come to the Saviour ... ... .. ... 16
10 Jesus of Nazareth ... ... ... ... 17
11. The Lord will provide 18
12. Jewels ... ... ... ... ... ... 19
j 3. Give me the wings of Faith ... ... ... 20
14. Ihearthe Saviour say ... ... ... ... 21
15. Safe in the arms of Jesus
16. Lord I hear of Showers of Blessing ... ... 23
17. I love to tell the story... ... ... ... 24
18. We shall sleep but not for ever ... ... 25
19. Dare to stand alone ... ... .. ... 26
20. Keep praying at the door ... ... ... 27


APPENDIX.
Page
I. Original Non-Sectarian Hymn, by Editor ... 28
2. Original Hymn, by a Lady of New South Wales 30
3, 23rd Psalm 32
4. 1 ooth Psalm 32
5. Old Hymn ; Shall we gather at the River ... 33,
6. Ditto There is a fountain filled with blood 34
7. Doxology 35
8. Ditto 35
9. Mr. Moody’s Hints ... ... 36
10, Religious Announcement : Editor’s Voluntary
Mission ... ... ... ... ... 41


EDITORIAL NOTE
(TO SECOND EDITION).
In June 1873, two American Evangelists,
named Messrs. D. L. Moody and Ira D. Sankey,
paid a visit to England. They held various
Evangelistic Services, at which the Gospel was
preached in a very simple, earnest, and forcible
manner hy the former gentleman; and many
new American Hymns were sung by the latter
one, who accompanied himself on a musical
instrument, known as “The American Organ,”
These services, as well as a series of noon-day
daily prayer-meetings, conducted by them (and
at all of which they were voluntarily assisted
both by many Ministers and Laymen of nearly
all Protestant Denominations in Great Britain)
were remarkable, not only for the very fervent,
novel, and varied manner in which these were
conducted ; but also by the strong hold which
they instantaneously took of public feeling and
attention, and above all, by the marked and
acknowledged good results which (with the
Divine aid and blessing) flowed from the
conducting of these numerous religious services.
York, Sunderland, Newcastle, and Gateshead
both on Tyne, Darlington, Stockton on Tees
I
"Wo


and Carlisle, all in England ; and Edinburgh,
Dundee, Glasgow, &c., &c., were all in turn
visited by Messrs. Moody and Sankey. Some
time ago, these gentlemen were busily
engaged in their good work in Scotland. They
originally were business men, who are now (in
simple faith) giving themselves up to Prayer
and work in and for God’s cause.
The Rev. Peter Campbell, New South Wales
Voluntary Bush Missionary (during his recent
sojourn in Britain) assisted an outsider) at
very many of the Revival Services in Edin-
burgh, Dundee, Inverkeithing, Newcastle on
Tyne, Liverpool, &c., and watched closely the
progress of the British Revivals. He has much
pleasure in bearing humble testimony to the
genuine nature of these Revivals there.
He further testifies, that the Revival move-
ment caused a much more friendly feeling on
the part of Ministers of Religion to be evinced
towards their Brethren of all Christian denomi-
nations ; that humility was practised as well as
preached by them, and that sectarian differences
were quietly kept out of view.*'
* Union amongst all Christian workers is that which
is our great need ; and very much will not be done till
we get it. * * * Christians must subordinate their own
private idiosyncrasies and sacrifice something for the
sake of united effort.” Letter from an earnest Minister
in Melbourne to the Editor, —dated 10th September, 1874.


More active measures to advance the spiritual
instruction of children were taken, and
improved methods of rendering that instruction
attractive, were successfully used. Special
agencies for arousing amongst young men a
greater interest in Religion, were also used,
and much blessed.
The hearts of large numbers of the rich, as
well as of the poor were touched. A very great
increase of Christian liberality in support of
God’ s work, was also a pleasing and noticeable
feature of the religious awakening. Finally,
it may very safely be said that great and lasting
benefits have already (through the enjoyment
of the present Revival Blessings) accrued to
many thousands of the British people.
To the Lord alone let us ascribe all the honor
and all the glory !.
The Spirit of God is evidently at the present
moment manifesting itself unmistakeably in
Sydney and Melbourne * Let every true
Christian in these cities pray earnestly (pub-
* About eleven months ago I attended the Melbourne
Second Pevival Prayer Meeting, in the Congregational
Church, South Yarra, and was kindly invited to take
part in the proceedings. The meeting was quite a
success. A great number of other meetings have sub-
sequently been held; and the Church of England some-
time ago held “ Mission Week” Services in Melbourne.
Much good has been done, and great interest evinced.


licly and privately) for a great Revival Blessing
to descend there, and throughout the whole of
Australia; and God will assuredly answer these
prayers by opening the windows of Heaven,
and pouring out such an abundant blessing
“that there shall not be room enough to re-
ceive it.” There will indeed be “showers of
blessing!”
The following are only a few of the many
simple and touching Hymns used during the
British Revivals. These were also used at his
services by the Rev. Peter Campbell, on board
of the “Great Britain,” steamer, on the recent
passage out from Liverpool to Melbourne. That
God’s blessing may rest upon their publication
and use in Sydney and elsewhere, and that
thereby the honor and glory of Christ may be
advanced, is the Editor’s fervent prayer.
PETER CAMPBELL.
Private Box , 138
General Post Office ,
Sydney, N.S.W.


PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION.
Messrs. Moody and Sankey after finishing-
up their good work in Scotland, subsequently
went to Ireland; were much blessed by God
in their earnest and praiseworthy efforts to
do good there ; —and finally reached London.
All Newspaper Headers are familiar with the
graphic accounts of their labors there, which
have from time to time, appeared in the
British and Colonial Newspapers. These
Evangelists are now aided and countenanced
by the leading Ministers of different denomi-
nations ; and men of rank, taste, culture, and
note, as well as representatives of all classes,
have made it their business to attend their
Meetings. We used to think that the fact of
2,000 people assembling every day at noon, in
the Edinburgh “ Free Assembly Hall ” to
pray, was something very remarkable; but it
appears that nine times that number of persons
have during every day in the week, for some
time past, assembled (at Mr. Moody’s Revival
Meetings in London) for prayer and mutual
edification.
We are in a position to state and prove that


the following Statements which have appeared
in some of the Newspapers, are utterly false ,
viz:
' 1. That Mr. Sankey is Agent for, or in some
way connected with some persons who manufac-
ture or sell “American Organs,” —or improved
cheap portable Harmoniums.
2. That the British Revival movement is
carried on to make money out of it.
3. That Messrs. Moody and Sankey make
money by the sale (at the doors) of their own
Photographs, Hymn Books, &c.
The facts are simply as follows: —A Com-
mittee of Ministers, &c., arrange all financial
matters and details; Hymn Books are sold under
the auspices of this Committee to enable Christ-
ians to possess the words and music of the
Hymns sung at these Meetings. The profits
(if any) help to defray the enormous expenses
attendant upon conducting Meetings held on
such a large scale. Mr. Moody has no interest
in the sale of these Hymn Books.
If Mr. Moody’s Photographs are offered for
sale, it is not with his consent, for I know
that he discountenanced the practice in Scot-
land ; nay more, that in Glasgow, he requested
his friends not to buy a certain Religious penny
periodical, simply because it contained his
portrait, and was by boys hawked about the
Streets for Sale.


We are glad to learn that Messrs. Moody and
Sankey will bye and bye (if God will) come
out to Australia. They will probably land in
Melbourne. The Editor has recently written
letters to Mr. Moody giving full details about
the present state of, and every necessary infor-
mation about Religion in New South Wales;
assuring him at same time not only that his
services are much needed here; but that a
hearty welcome and kind co-operation (on the
part of our local Christians) may be faithfully
depended upon.
Cheering accounts of the progress of the
Revival movement in Melbourne, also in South
Australia, have also reached us.
The Revival in Sydney has not died out. It
ought to have more vitality however. We
would like to see a far greater amount of
prayerful interest, zeal, energy, and self-
consecration infused into the work. Why not
also try daily Prayer Meetings ? If places like
Dundee in Scotland cannot afford to do without
daily prayer Meetings, then neither can
Sydney !
I would suggest that less formality and ex-
clusiveness in our local prayer meetings would
be steps in the right direction. After the first
half hour, why not invite any Christian present
to pray ?. To read from a written list or call
out (without one) the names of a few persons—


and requesting these to pray, appears to me to
savor somewhat of a narrow minded, selfish,
and would be—if it could —kind of exclusive-
ness. We want in God’s work all the Christian
Clerical and lay experience, character, talent
and variety that we can conveniently lay our
hands upon. We require a greater number of
prayers ; but not such very long ones !
We offer these hints in a Christian friendly
spirit and trust they will be so received.
The Editor soon after his recent return from
Europe to Sydney,—held fifteen daily prayer
meetings; many other Revival Services in
Sydney—and an “Eight days Mission” in
the City of Newcastle. He subsequently made
two long and prolonged Missionary Toars in
the Monaro, and Kiandra Districts, and held
Services or delivered Lectures thereafter in
Goulbourn, Yass, Young, Grenfell, Cowra,
(Lachlan River), Bathurst, Orange, Hill End,
Mudgee, &c.. &c ; the time occupied in these
Tours being about Eight months With the
Divine aid, much good was accomplished.
The Missionary returned to Sydney on 10th
June, 1875. At the majority of these Services
and Lectures Mr. Sankey’s Hymns were sung.
About 1,600 copies (of Ist and 2nd Edition) of
this Hymn Book, have been distributed
gratuitously;—principally in the up-country
districts. It is superfluous to say therefore


that the former Editions have both been pub-
lished at a considerable pecuniary loss; the
Editor’s object being to endeavor to do good
by, (but not to make any profit through)
their circulation.
We are more impressed than ever with the
conviction that Churches, Missionaries and
Schools are most urgently needed in the thinly
populated pastoral and mining districts of New
South Wales.—The cry is still —COME UP
‘‘and HELP US.” —We mean to try (and in
our feeble way) with God’s aid and blessing to
erect (as soon as we obtain from the public of
New South Wales the necessary funds)
Three Christian (Protestant) Non-Sectarian
Voluntary Bush Mission Churches in Monaro.
The details will be found in another column.
May we reckon upon your sympathies, prayers,
and pecuniary aid ?
The Editor would reverently thank The Great
Master for graciously Blessing and using the
former Editions of this little Hymn Book in
His work. May He be pleased (for his Son’s
sake) to Bless this Edition also.
PETER CAMPBELL.
Private Box 138, General Post Office,
Sydney, 21st June, 1875.


Note. —In the Appendix will be found a new Christian
non-sectarian Hymn by the Editor; a new Hymn by a Lady
of New South Wales ; two good old Scotch Psalms
two old, well-known, and favorite Hymns, and two
Doxologies ; also Hints “how to make Prayer Meetings
attractive,’* &c.


SWEET HOUR OF PRAYER.
“Peter and John went up together into the Temple at the hour
-of Prayer.”—Acts iii. i.
SWEET hour of prayer! sweet hour of prayer!
That calls me from a world of care,
And bids me at my Father’s Throne
Make all my wants and wishes known.
In seasons of distress and grief,
My soul has often found relief,
And oft escaped the tempter’s snare,
By thy return, sweet hour of prayer.
Sweet hour of prayer ! sweet hour of prayer!
Thy wings shall my petition bear
To Him, whose truth and faithfulness
Engage the waiting soul to bless :
And since He bids me seek His face,
Believe His word, and trust His grace,
I’ll cast on Him my every care,
And wait for thee, sweet hour of prayer!
Sweet hour of prayer! sweet hour of prayer !
May I thy consolation share,
Till from Mount Pisgah’s lofty height
I view my home, and take my flight:
This robe of flesh I’ll drop, and rise
To seize the everlasting prize;
And shout, while passing thro’ the air,
Farewell, farewell, sweet hour of prayer!


WORK FOR THE NIGHT IS COMING.
(To the Christian.t “ Let him that heareth. say come.”—Rev.
xxii. 17.
WOEK, for the night is coming;
Work through the morning hours;
Work, while the dew is sparkling ;
Work mid springing flowers :
Work, when the day grows brighter,
Work, in the glowing sun :
W ork, for the night is coming,
When man’s work is done.
Work, for the night is coming;
Work through the sunny noon - T
Fill brightest hours with labour ■„
Best comes sure and soon.
Give every flying minute
Something to keep in store
Work, for the night is coming,
When man works no more.
Work for the night is coming,
Under the sunset skies;
While their bright tints are glowing,.
Work, for daylight flies.
Work, till the last beam fadeth,
Fadeth to shine no more :
Work, while the night is darkening,
When man’s work is o’er.


3 THE LIFE-BOAT.
“Wherefore my Beloved, work out your own Salvation with fear
and trembling.’’— 2 Phil. ii. 12.
lIGHT in the darkness, sailor, day is at hand I
J See o’er the foaming billows fair Heaven’s
land.
Drear was the voyage, sailor, now almost o’er ;
Safe within the life-boat, sailor, pull for the
shore.
Pull for the shore, sailor, pull for the shore ;
Heed not the rolling waves, but bend to the oar ;
Safe in the life-boat, sailor, cling to self no more !
Leave the poor old stranded wreck, and pull for the shore.
Trust in the life-boat, sailor ; all else will fail.
Stronger the surges dash and fiercer the gale.
Heed not the stormy winds though loudly they
roar;
Watch the “bright and morning star,” and
pull for the shore.
Bright gleams the morning, sailor, uplift the eye;
Clouds and darkness disappearing, glory is nigh!
Safe in the life-boat, sailor, sing evermore,
“ Glory, glory, hallelujah!” Pull for the shore.
4 BEAUTIFUL LAND ON HIGH. ’
“ God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shal
be no more death, neither sorrow nor crying, neither shall there be
any more pain; for the former things are passed away.”—Rev. xxi. 4.
THERE’S a beautiful land on high,
To its glories I fain would fly;


When by sorrows pressed down, I long for my
crown,
In that beautiful land on high.
In that beautiful land I’ll be,
From earth and its cares set free ;
My Jesus is there, He’s gone to prepare
A place in that land for me.
2 There’s a beautiful land on high,
I shall enter it by-and-by;
There, with friends hand in hand, I shall walk
on the strand,
In that beautiful land on high.
3 There’s a beautiful land on high;
Then why should I fear to die,
When death is the way to the realms of day,
In that beautiful land on high.
4 There’s a beautiful land on high ;
And my kindred its bliss enjoy;
Methinks I now see how they’re waiting for me
In that beautiful land on high.
5 There’s a beautiful land on high,
And though here I oft weep and sigh,
My Jesus has said that no tears shall be shed
In that beautiful land on high.
6 There’s a beautiful land on high,
Where we never shall say “ Good-bye !’*
When over the river we’re happy for ever,
In that beautiful land on high.
14


HOLD THE FORT.
“ That which ye have hold fast till I come.’’ —Rev. ii. 25.
HO, my comrades! see the signal
Waving in the sky!
Reinforcements now appearing,
Yictory is nigh!
“ Hold the fort, for I am coming,” Jesus signals still;
Wave the answer back to heaven, “ By Thy grace we will
2 See the mighty host advancing,
Satan leading on :
Mighty men around us falling
Courage almost gone!
3 See the glorious banner waving,
Hear the trumpet blow!
In our Leader’s name we’ll triumph
Over every foe!
4 Fierce and long the battle rages,
But our help is near :
Onward comes our great Commander,
Cheer, my comrades, cheer!
JESUS LOVES ME.
"God is love.”—l John iv. 8.
I AM so glad that our Father in heaven
Tells of His love in the Book He has given
Wonderful things in the Bible I see;
This is the dearest, that Jesus loves me.
I am so glad that Jesus loves me,
Jesus loves me, Jesus loves me, even me.


2 Though I forget him, and wander away,
Still He doth love me whenever I stray;
Back to His dear loving arms would I flee,
When I remember that Jesus loves me.
3 Oh, if there’s only one song I can sing
When in His beauty I see the great King,
This shall my song in eternity be,
“ Oh, what a wonder that Jesus loves me V y
4 Jesus loves me, and I know I love Him;
Love brought Him down my poor soul to
redeem;
Yes, it was love made Him die on the tree;
Oh ! I am certain that Jesus loves me ;
6 If one should ask of me, how could I tell;
Glory to Jesus, I know very well!
The dear Holy Spirit with mine doth agree,
Constantly whispering, Jesus loves me.
6 In this assurance I find sweetest rest,
Trusting in J esus, I know I am blest;
Satan, dismayed, from my soul now doth flee
When I just tell him that Jesus loves me.
7 COME TO THE SAVIOUR.
“ And the Spirit and the Bride say come.’’ —Rev. xxii. 17.
COME to the Saviour, make no delay ;
Here in His word He’s shown us the way;
Here in our midst He’s standing to-day,
Tenderly saying, “ Come!”


Joyful, joyful will the meeting be,
When from sin our hearts are pure and free.
And we shall gather, Saviour with thee
In our eternal home.
4( Suffer the children !” Oh! hear His voice
Let every heart leap forth and rejoice ;
And let us freely make him our choice ;
Do not delay, but come.
Think once again, He’s with us to-day;
Heed now His blest commands, and obey ;
Hear now His accents tenderly say,
“ Will you, my children, come ?”
JESUS OF NAZARETH-
“ He heard that it was Jesus of Nazareth.” —Mark x. 47.
TXT HAT means this eager, anxious throng,
W Which moves with busy haste along—
These wondrous gatherings, day by day ?
What means this strange commotion, pray ?
In accents hushed the throng reply
“ Jesus of Nazareth passeth by.”
2 Who is this Jesus ? Why should He
The city move so mightily ?
A passing stranger has He skill
To move the multitude at will.
Again the stirring tones reply,
“Jesus of Nazareth passeth by.”
3 Jesus! ’tis He who once below
Man’s pathway trod, ’mid pain and woe;


And burdened ones, where’er He came,
Brought out their sick, and deaf, and lame.
The blind rejoiced to hear the cry,
“ Jesus of Nazareth passeth by.”
4 Again he comes! From place to place
His holy footprints we can trace.
He pauseth at our threshold—nay,
He enters —condescends to stay.
Shall we not gladly raise the cry ?
“Jesus of Nazareth passeth by.”
5 Ho ! all ye heavy laden, come !
Here’s pardon, comfort, rest, and home
Ye wanderers from a Father’s face,
Return, accept His proffered grace.
Ye tempted ones, there’s refuge nigh;
“Jesus of Nazareth passeth by.”
6 But if you still this call refu?e,
And all His wondrous love abuse,.
Soon will He sadly from you turn ;
Your bitter prayer for pardon spurn.
“Too late! too late !” will be the cry —
“ Jesus of Nazareth has passed by.”
9 THE LORD WILL PROVIDE
“ Casting all your care upon Him, for He careth for you.”—-
Peter v. 7.
IN some way or other the Lord will provide :
It may not be my way, it may not be thy way;
And yet, in His own way, “The Lord will
provide.”


Then we’ll trust in the Lord, and He will provide ;
Yes, we’ll trust in the Lord, and He will provide.
At some time or other the Lord will provide ;
It may not be my time, It may not he thy time;
And yet in His own time, “ The Lord will
provide.”
Despond then no longer, the Lord will provide ;
And this be the token—No word He hath spoken
Was ever yet broken : “ The Lord will provide.”
March on then right boldly, the sea shall divide;
The pathway made glorious with shoutings
victorious,
WeTl join in the chorus, “The Lord will
provide.”
10 JEWELS
“And they shall be mine saith the Lord of Hosts, in that day
when I make up my Jewels.” —Malachi iii. 17.
WHEN He cometh, when He cometh,
To make up His jewels :
All His jewels, precious jewels,
His loved and His own.
Like the stars of the morning. His bright eyes adorning,
They shall shine in their beauty, bright gems for His crown
2 He will gather, He will gather
The gems for his kingdom ;
All the pure ones, all the bright ones,
His loved and His own.


3 Little children, little children,
Who love their Redeemer,
Are the jewels, precious jewels,
His loved and His own.
11 GIVE ME THE WINGS OF FAITH
* *Without; faith it is impossible to pleas® Him/’—Heb. xi. 6.
Wherefore seeing we also are compassed about with so great a
cloud of witnesses, let us lay aside every weight and the sin which
doth so easily beset us, and let us run with patience the race that
is set before us”—Heb. 12-1.
GIVE me the wings of faith to rise
Within the vail, and see
The saints above, how great their joys,
How bright their glories be.
Many are the friends who are waiting to-day.
Happy on the golden strand ;
Many are the voices calling us away
To join their glorious band—
Calling us away, calling us away,
Calling to the better land.
Once they were mourners here below,
And poured out cries and tears ;
They wrestled hard, as we do now,
With sius and doubts and fears.
I ask them whence their victory came;
They, with united breath,
Ascribe their conquest to the Lamb,
Their triumph to His death.


12 I HEAR THE SAVIOUR SAY
“ Watch and pray that ye enter not into temptation; the Spirit
indeed is willing, but the flesh is weak.”—Matthew xxvi 41.
HEAR the Saviour say,
A. Thy strength indeed is small;
Child of weakness, watch and pray,
Find in Mo thine all in all.
Jesus paid it all—All to Him I owe ;
Sin had left a crimson stain ; He washed it white as snow.
Lord, now indeed I find
Thy faith, and Thine alone,
Can change the leper’s spots,
And melt the heart of stone.
For nothing good have I
Whereby Thy grace to claim —
I’ll wash my garment white
In the blood of Calvary’s Lamb,
When from my dying bed
My ransomed soul shall rise
Then “ Jesus paid it all ”
Shall rend the vaulted skies.
And when before the throne
I stand, in Him complete,
I’ll lay my trophies down,
All down, at Jesus’ feet.


13 SAFE IN THE ARMS OF JESUS
“ Underneath are the everlasting arms.”—Dent. xxx. 27.
SAFE in the arms of Jesus
Safe on his gentle breast,
There by his love o’ershaded,
Sweetly my soul shall rest.
Hark! ’tis the voice of Angels,
Borne in a song to me,
Over the fields of glory,
Over the jasper sea.
Safe in the arms of Jesus, safe on His gentle breast,
There by His love o’ershaded, sweetly my soul shall rest
2 Safe in the arms of Jesus,
Safe from corroding care,
Safe from the world’s temptations,
Sin cannot harm me there,
Free from the blight of sorrow,
Free from my doubts and fears ;
Only a few more trials,
Only a few more tears !
3 Jesus, my heart’s dear refuge.
Jesus has died for mo ;
Firm on the Eock of Ages
Ever my trust shall be.
Here let me wait with patience,
Wait till the night is o’er;
Wait till I see the morning
Break on the golden shore.


14 LORD I HEAR OF SHOWERS OF BLESSING.
“ Hast thou but one blessing, my Father? bless me, even me also
O my Father.”—Gen- 27-38.
LOED, I hear of showers of blessing,
Thou art scattering full and free ;
Showers the thirsty land refreshing,
Let some droppings fall on me—Even me.
2 Pass me not, 0 gracious Father,
Sinful though my heart may be,
Thou might’st leave me, but the rather
Let Thy mercy fall on me —Even me.
3 Pass me not, 0 tender Saviour.
Let me live and cling to Thee :
Fain I’m longing for Thy favour ;
Whilst Thou’rt calling, call for me—
Even me.
4 Pass me not, 0 mighty Spirit,
Thou canst make the blind to see,
Witnesses of Jesus’ merit,
Speak the word of power to me —Even me.
5 Love of God, so pure and changeless ;
Blood of Christ, so rich and free ;
Grace of God, so rich and boundless,
Magnify it all in me —Even me.
6 Pass me not; Thy lost one bringing.
Bind my heart, 0 Lord, to Thee;
Whilst the streams of life are springing,
Blessing others, oh, bless me —Even me.


I LOVE TO TELL THE STORY
“I will * * * talk of thy doings.”—Psalm 77-12
ILOYE to tell the story
Of unseen things above,
Of Jesus and His glory,
Of Jesus and His love.
I love to tell the story,
Because I know it’s true ;
It satisfies my longings,
As nothing else would do.
I love to tell the story,
’Twill be my theme in glory,
To tell the old, old story,
Of Jesus and His love.
I love to tell the story :
More wonderful it seems
Than all the golden fancies
Of all our golden dreams.
I love to tell the story :
It did so much for me :
And that is just the reason
I tell it now to thee.
I love to toll the story :
’Tis pleasant to repeat
What seems each time I tell it,
More wonderfully sweet.
I love to tell the story :
For some have never heard
The message of salvation
From God’s own Holy word,


4 I love to tell the story :
For those who know it best
Seem hungering and thirsting
To hear it like the rest,
And when, in scenes of glory,
I sing the new, new song,
’Twill he the old, old story,
That I have loved so long.
16 WE SHALL SLEEP BUT NOT FOR EVER-
“ * * We shall all be changed :—ln a moment, in the twink-
ling of an eye, at the last trump; tor the trumpet shall sound and the
dead shall be raised incorruptible and we shall be changed.—i Cor.
xv. 51-52.
WE shall sleep, hut not for ever ;
There will he a glorious dawn !
We shall meet to part, no, never!
On the resurrection morn !
From the deepest caves of ocean,
From the desert and the plain,
From the valley and the mountain,
Countless throngs shall rise again.
We shall sleep, but not for ever ;
There will be a glorious dawn ;
We shall meet to part, no, never !
On the resurrection mom !
2 When we see, a precious blossom,
That we tended with such care,
Eudely taken from our hosom
How our aching hearts despair!
25


Eound its little grave we linger,
Till the setting sun is low,
Feeling all our hopes have perished
With the flower we cherished so.
3 We shall sleep, but not for ever,
In the lone and silent grave :
Blessed be the Lord that taheth,
Blessed be the Lord that gave.
In the bright, eternal city,
Death can never, never come !
In His own good time He’ll call us
From our rest to home, sweet home.
17 DARE TO STAND ALONE!
“ Now, when Daniel knew that the writing was signed, he went
into his house ; and his windows being open in his chamber toward
Jerusalem, he kneeled upon his knees, three times a day, and
prayed, and gave thanks before his God, as he did aforetime.’’ —
Daniel vi. 10.
STANDING by a purpose true,
Heeding God’s command,
Honour them, the faithful few !
All hail to Daniel’s Band !
Dare to be a Daniel! dare to stand alone !
Dare to have a purpose firm ! dare to make it known !
2 Many mighty men are lost,
Daring not to stand,
Who for God had been a host
By joining Daniel’s Band.


3 Hold the gospel banner high!
On to victory grand!
Satan and his host defy,
And shout for Daniel’s Band!
4 Many giants, great and tall,
Stalking through the land,
Headlong to the earth would fall,
If met by Daniel’s Band.
b KEEP PRAYING AT THE DOOR
“ Pray without ceasing.” —l Thessal, v, 17.
KEEP praying at the door,
And knocking while you pray,
Nor tremble, though the tempter’s voice
Would fright your soul away.
Keep praying at the door, Still praying at the door ;
Though long the answer is delayed, Keep praying at
the door.
2 The Lord will surely come ;
His promise cannot fail:
Oh, knock, and pray, and plead and call.
Thy prayer will yet prevail!
3 The door will open wide,
And thou shalt enter in,
And from the Holy One receive
A pardon for thy sin.


APPENDIX.
ORIGINAL NON SECTARIAN SPIRITUAL
SONG.
By The Rev. PETER CAMPBELL.
(Tune, Evan.)
Come, give the hand of brotherhood.
Why do you grudge it so ?
Unto all those to whom it would
Be welcome here below!
What tho’ thy fellow-man and thee
May have a different creed
Can ye not still united be
In heart and Sp’rit indeed ?
Can ye not jointly aid some cause
Meant for a goodly end.
Oft times make the thoughtless pause
And libertines amend ?.
28


Heed not the bigot’s cold contempt
If e’er repulsed you be
When you have ventur’d an attempt
To create harmony.
Amongst all men within your sphere
Whatever views they hold
To make each one to each draw near
And Christ like love unlold.
Then give the hand of brotherhood
Why do you grudge it so ?
Unto all those to whom it would
Be welcome here below !


2. ORIGINAL HYMN
A hkM m MW SOTTH W&&SB.*
THE LORD FOR THE CHRISTIAN PROVIDES
Whate’er may betide,
The Lord will provide.
Then “ take ye no thought for the
morrow;
For the sparrow He cares —
He numbers your hairs —
And does he not grieve for your
sorrow?”
With faith on your side.
The Lord will provide —
(But seek ye his righteousness first) ;
* This Hymn (now published for the first time) was
expressly written for and kindly presented by the author-
ess, to the Rev. Peter Campbell’s Mission,


He knows what you need—
And He will give heed—
And “ provide ” for your hunger and
thirst!
On Him cast you care
Too heavy to bear —
The Lord will provide you with
strength .
Your troubles will cease—
He’ll give you His peace
Meanwhile, —and sweet Heaven at
length !
With Him as your guide,
With Him to “ provide,”
His yoke and His burden are light ;
The Lord whom ye seek,
So lowly and meek,
Is Lord of all power and might.


23 rd PSALM- O.M.
(tune, eyan.)
THE Lord’s mj Shepherd, I’ll not want;
He makes me down to lie.
In pastures green he leadeth me—
The quiet waters by.
My soul He doth restore again,
And me to walk doth make,
Within the paths of righteousness,
Ey’n for His own name’s sake.
Yea, tho’ I walk in death’s dark vale,
Yet will I fear none ill;
Eor Thou art with me, and Thy rod
And staff my comfort still.
My table Thou hast furnished,
In presence of my foes;
My head Thou dost with oil anoint,
And my cup overflows.
'Goodness and mercy all my life,
Shall surely follow me;
And in God’s house, for evermore,
My dwelling-place shall be.
100™ PSALM- L-M
ALL people that on earth do dwell
Sing to the Lord with cheerful voice :
Him serve with mirth—His praise forth tell
Come ye before Him and rejoice!
32


Know that the Lord is God indeed;
Without our aid He did us make ;
We are His flock—He doth us feed,
And for His sheep, He doth us take.
Oh, enter then His gates with praise ;
Approach with joy His courts unto ;
Praise, laud, and bless His name always,
For it is seemly so to do.
For why—the Lord our God is good :
His mercy is for ever sure;
His truth, at all times, firmly stood,
And shall from age to age endure.
SHALL WE GATHER AT THE RIVER?
SHALL we gather at the river,
Where bright angel-feet have trod ;
With its crystal tide for ever
Flowing by the throue of God?
Yes, we’ll gather at the river,
The beautiful, the beautiful river,
Gather with the saints at the river,
That flows by the throne of God.
On the margin of the river,
Washing up its silver spray,
We will walk and worship ever,
All the happy golden day,—■ Yes , Sfc.


E’re we reach the shining river,
Lay we ev’ry burden down ;
Grace our spirits will deliver
And provide a robe and crown. — Yes , Sfc.
Soon we’ll reach the silver river,
Soon our pilgrimage will cease ;
Soon our happy hearts will quiver
With the melody of peace, — Yes, Sfc.
THERE IS A FOUNTAIN FILLED WITH BLOOD
THERE is a fountain filled with blood,
Drawn from Immanuel’s veins,
And sinners plunged beneath that flood
Lose all their guilty' stains.
I do believe, &c.
The dying thief rejoiced to see
That fountain in his day ;
And there may I, though vile as he,
Wash all my sins away,
E’er since by faith I saw the stream
Thy flowing wounds supply,
Redeeming love has been my theme,
And shall be till I die.
Then in a nobler, sweeter song,
I’ll sing Thy power to save,
When this poor, lisping, stammering tongue
Lies silent in the grave.


DOXOLOGIES
Praise God from whom all blessings flow :
Praise Him all creatures here below ;
Praise Him above ye heavenly host;
Praise Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost :
The God whom we adore;
Be glory as it was and is,
And shall be evermore.


11 Exhort one another daily.”—Hebrews iii., 13.
HINTS TO RENDER
fIAYEI METISES
ATTRACTIVE.
BY ME. D. L. MOODY.
(Condensed and slightly altered by the Editor.)
1. Get the people close together. —Do not let
them be scattered over a large place, as if they
were afraid of coming near the leader, or of
touching one another. If we want to make a
fire burn, we lay the sticks close together;
they warm and kindle up one another.
2. Let the meeting-place he well ventilated. —
People often fall asleep, not under what is said
to them, but from want of fresh air. Let the
place be also well lighted.
3. Have some good singing. —By all means
sir g the Psalms, and the favourite hymns we
all so love, such as “ Eock of Ages,” etc.; but
do not let us have these always. Freshness and


variety are attractive. Plenty of good singing
enlivens the services, and makes young people
like to come again.
4,. When we hav.e special meetings, let us have
special prayer. —We meet for an object—Let
us keep to that object. If men meet to pray
for the revival of God’s work in Australia or
elsewhere, let them stick to the point, and not
scatter over all manner-of subjects,
5. Let requests he received for special cases. —A
mother’s for her family, a brother’s for his
sister, and so on ; and thanksgivings too
6. Let the Minister, Missionary, or Layman
presiding, do little more than give the key-note
to the service. —Do not let him kill it with a long
address. Let him say what he has to say, in
about five or ten minutes, and get out of the way,
that there may be room for others to follow.
7. Lt is well at the close to give out, at each
meeting, the subject for the next. —It gives
Christians time to think and read about it—
to talk about it in their families or elsewhere.
But all must be short. If one brother prays
for fifteen minutes, and another brother for
fifteen more, there will be time for little
besides.* Let the briefest word be encouraged,
and said at once, without fear of it being counted
an interruption.
* Prayers at Prayer Meetings should occupy from
three to five minutes only .—Ed.


9. Do not scold the people who haae come became
others have not come —Make it interesting , and
those who do come will come again. If there
is stiffness and formality they will soon cease
coming. It must he taken out of the meeting
or it will smother it.
9. If you are discouraged, do not let any one ,
know it. —lf we are not in heart to pray, let us
leave it to others. If we are gloomy, our gloom
will be contagious. Let us keep it to ourselves.
10 Do not have more than two prayers consecu-
tively.—lf there be more, we get wearied; let us
vary with a hymn, then an incident, or a word
upon a text. 8o we shall keep moving right
along all the time. Many have musical talent;
let them train and use it for Christ.^
11. Do not let us have'a formal address. —A
brother begins, “ Now lam going to address
you,” and then perhaps gives a long preamble.
We get frightened at the beginning, and tired
before the end. Led men condense, say what
they have to say, and make way for others.
12. Have the meeting short. —If men are tired
they will not come back again. Better send
them away hungry. If the interest continues
for an hour, keep it up for an hour; if only for
* Let the world sing its own songs, and the Christian
sing only Psalms, Hymns and spiritual songs.”—
I. U. Sankey.


half an hour, it is then time to stop. Keep
your hand upon, its pulse, and make good use
of every minute ; and do not let us think it less
interesting because we do not take part in it.
13, Avoid discussion. —If a man brings in a
controverted question, do not allow it. Do not
reprove him on the spot, but take him privately
and advise him.*
14. If you cannot get members to take part, go
and speak to them about it in private. —“ Can’t we
make the meeting more interesting ?. Couldn’t
you say a word?”; “No, no, I have never
been accustomed to it.” —“ Well, you’ll never
begin any sooner. Mightn’t you try ? ”
15. Be sure and throw the meeting open half the
time. —After the first half hourt let any one
speak and pray, who has a word or a petition.
If I go with a burden laid upon my heart,
which I wish to be removed, if one or two take
all the time, I have no opportunity. The
Spirit has been working, and is not the Spirit
grieved ?. His working is hindered.
16. Be punctual. —If I advertise a meeting
for twelve o’clock, let me keep to the hour. If
I do not begin till ten minutes past, I break
* Let him ventilate his crotchets and hobbies also
somewhere else. —Er>.
t One hour is long enough for any Prayer Meeting.—
Ed.


my promise. Is it honest for Christian men to
do so?. And close punctually. Business men
count upon it.
18. Lastly. Seek to make sure that in going to
the meeting , you are going to it in the Spin it. —
There are timds when one cannot feel this, hut
since I began so to work, I can say that I never
went to such a meeting in the Spirit, and came
away disappointed.
REV. DR. W. P. MACKAY
(OF HULL).
This gentleman wrote to the Editor (while
in Dundee) in substance, as follows: —“I
have had much experience in similar meetings
before Mr. Moody heard of them, and con-r
sider the fact of any one person speaking or
praying regularly at daily or other Prayer
Meetings fatal to their success. Without
variety and change of speakers, &c., these
meetings would soon run to seed.”
[I quite agree with Dr. Mackay, and consider
further (as stated publicly by me in Edinburgh)
that the greatest misfortune that can happen to
similar meetings, will be that of their being al-
lowed to fall into the hands of Ministers and Mis-
sionaries alone . What we want is a goodly
sprinkling of the Christian lay (in addition to
the Clerical) element engaging actively in the
conducting of Eevival Prayer Meetings.— Ed.]


RELIGIOUS ANNOUNCEMENT.
IKY. PETER CAMPBELL’S
N. S. W. TOWN AND COUNTRY
(non-sectarian)
CHRISTIAN, RELIGIOUS, TEMPERANCE,
Jfeioit.
(INSTITUTED, 27th DECEMBER 1870.)
OBJECTS :
Preaching the Gospel, Lecturing on “Intemperance,”
and other subjects, Distributing Tracts and Hymn Books,
&c., and doing good generally; not only in settled
Districts but also in the Bush and Gold Fields (includ-
ing Jails and Hospitals).
'flgT Medicines and advice also given gratuitously.
PROPOSED CHRISTIAN VOLUNTARY MISSION
CHURCHES IN MONARO.
Mr. Campbell purposes (D.V.) to erect Three “ Christian
Voluntary United Mission Churches” in Monaro District
of New South Wales, where these, also Missionaries and
Schools are much needed. The proposed localities are—
Duke’s Springs, Jindabyne and Kiandra, These Churches
will be 50 miles apart from each other. The Missionary
will reside near one of them. No Christian (Protestant)
Church has yet been built at any of the places above
named. At only one of them (viz : Kiandra) is there any
School.


Trustees will be duly appointed.
One Gentleman is endeavouring to collect about
in Monaro. The Missionary has given 0 > being the
whole of the Mission Funds. About have been
subscribed within the last Three Months by the general
public.
Total amount required
Your spmpathies, prayers, and liberal pecuniary
aid are respectfully solicited,
Donations (however small) thankfully received and
acknowledged, and may either be handed to Rev. Peter
Campbell, personally, or sent to him (enclosed in
Registered Letters) to his own private box, “No. I 38,”
General Post Office, Sydney, New South Wales.
Rev. P. CAMPBELL’S Mission.
OPINIONS OF VARIOUS GENTLEMEN & OF THE PRESS
NEW SOUTH WALES.
“ Mr. P. Campbell * * * preached for me * * with
much satisfaction to myself and my Congregation. His
services are evidently calculated to be of much benefit to
Bush Congregations ”
(Signed) JOHN DUNMORE LANG, D.D.
Gulgong. —His appeal for his Mission is one which
should evoke a suitable response from all believers in
energy, earnestness and perseverance.— Guardian.
West Maitland and Murrurundi. —The local
newspapers “Mercury” and “Times,” designated Mr.
Campbell the “ Apostle of Temperance.”
Hill End. —Mr. Campbell has deservedly earned for
himself the name of a “ doer of good.” — Times.
42


From The Honorable William Grahams, M.L.C.
I have much pleasure in stating that the Rev. Peter
Campbell has occasionally Preached the Gospel and also
Lectured at my Station. He has my best wishes for the
success of his praiseworthy and useful Mission.
(Signed) W. GRAHAME.
January 24th, 1875.
He zealously strives to do good.
(Signed) JOHN M. LETT, J.P.
o Kiandra.
Notice in Sydney Morning Herald , of 23rd April,
The Rev. Peter Campbell.—The friends in Young of
the total abstinence cause respectfully and gratefully thank
this gifted and self-denying missionary for his voluntary,
faithful, and successful labors during his five days’ sojourn
in their town. May the Lord bless and reward him.
JOHN M’GRAIN, D.G.W.P.
JOHN BALFOUR, P.W.P.
Sons of Temperance.
GEORGE SMITH, L.D.
W. H. CARBIS, W.C.T.
Young, 20th April, 1875. Good Templars.
MEMORANDUM.
The Missionary has preached in Presbyterian,
Baptist, Wesleyan, Congregationalist, and Unconsecrated
Episcopalian Churches, &c., in New South Wales.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA, 1871.
Bugle Ranges.—The Lecturer, by his earnest and
impressive manner, seemed bent on doing good.”—
o Adelaide Chronicle.
ENGLAND.
Rev. Mr. Campbell holds certificates (of his having
preached for them) from Rev. J. H. Rutherford (Con-
gregationalist) Newcastle on Tyne; and Rev. J. R.
Welsh (Presbyterian) Liverpool.


/Cl a*7q
SCOTLAND.
The Missionary also received testimonials from Revds.
Dr. W. L. Alexander (Congregationalist); J. S. Alex-
ander (Free Church); W. Barber (Wesleyan) ; Professor
John Kirk (Evangelical Union) ; and John Gunson
(Free Methodist); all of Edinburgh ; also from Revds.
G. Laing and Andrew Inglis (Free) ; John Masson and
John Tait (Congregationalists) and John Brand (United
Presbyterian) all of Dundee; in the whole of whose
Pulpits he has preached.
From Professor John S. Blackie, of the
Edinburgh College.
“ I presided at a public meeting held in Edinburgh
this winter, at which Mr. Campbell gave an account
of his Australian Mission in a manner that excited a
lively interest and made a lasting impression on my
mind.”
JOHN S. BLACKIE.
27 th March, 1874.
From Rev. John Stuart, D,D. (one of the Queen’s
Chaplains in Ordinary for Scotland).
“ I know Mr. Campbell well, and believe that he is
doing a good work in Australia amongst a class of men
that need it much. ” JOHN STUART, D.D.
Minister of St. Andrew’s Church, Edinburgh.
27 March, 1874.
AT SEA.
no Passengers per the S.S. Great Britain signed a
letter (dated 25th July, 1874) thanking Rev. Peter
Campbell for “ his valuable Missionary Services ” on
board (both for adults and children) during passage out.
Caxton Printing Office, 156 Pitt-street, Sydney.
44




46
