

SOME.
FRAGMENTS
OF
OLD SYDNEY.
Giathered by
“ OLD CHUM.”
Price ... One Shilling.
Sydney:
MCCARRON, STEWART & CO., PRINTERS AND STATIONERS,
44 AND 86 PITT STREET.
1898.




INTRODUCTORY.
rapid disappearance of the few remaining
bits of Old Sydney the Sydney of 60
years ago—serves to remind us of what the
city used to be, and recalls the figures of well-known
citizens who have long since joined the great majority in
the land of shadows. In the Sydney Morning Herald of
March 21, 1898, was published a highly interesting and
instructive article upon one block of buildings in Castlereagh
Street, recently demolished to make way for the Citizens’
Life Assurance Company’s modern structure. This block
of buildings, known in the early days as Black’s Terrace,
has a halo of romance woven round it from the fact that
some of Sydney’s most estimable citizens have from time
to time been in residence there. The terrace calls up
memories of a past almost forgotten—a period full of interest
to old colonists, many of whom still remain, claiming a
share in making history in New South Wales.
To rescue this portion of Old Sydney from oblivion
is the purpose of this little work, and if it serves to keep
green the memories of many who have gone over, to remind
old colonists of scenes that have passed, and to enable the
present generation to compare old with new Sydney, its
purpose will have been fulfilled.
In compiling the work I have had to tax the patience
and kindness of many friends, old and new, who have
generously assisted me in making as perfect as possible
the brochure now submitted.
Amongst others I would particularly tender my thanks
to the Hon. Dr. Norton, M.L.C., Mr. Reginald Black',
J* J* Welsh, Mr. John Bennett, Mr. Gordon, Acting
City Surveyor, and other officials of the Municipal Council.
June, 1898. Xy\W




[Per favour of Dr. Houison.]
After the Great Fire, 1890.




SOME FRAGMENTS
OF
OLD SYDNEY.
IT is seldom that a great calamity can be turned into a
blessing, but the disastrous fire which started at Gibbs,
Shallard and Company’s printing office, Pitt Street, on
the morning of October 2, 1890, and extended back to Castle-
reagh Street, destroying some hundreds of thousands of
pounds’ worth of property, may be looked upon as a blessing
in disguise, inasmuch as it has changed for the better the
topography of that part of the city of Sydney. Prior to this
fire there was no thoroughfare for horses and vehicles
between King and Hunter Streets. There were three open-
ings for pedestrians—Hosking Place, Foxlow Place and
Brougham Place; the first still retains its name, but all the
houses have disappeared. They were comfortable two


storied red brick houses, occupying both sides of the road-
way, and tenanted by persons chiefly engaged in the neigh-
bouring theatre. Those on the north side were demolished
to make way for an extensive pile (Pomeroy Chambers, built
by the late Hon. J. B. Bundle, M.L.C.), which building went
down in the 1890 fire, and the allotment gtill stands vacant.
In the forties, on this allotment, was a sunken cottage,
approached by a long flight of steps, in which resided a medical
doctor. The houses on the southern side disappeared
to make way for stores and warehouses, which were closely
packed here at the time of the great conflagration. On the
south-western corner of Hosking Place stands the Athenaeum
Club, but on ancient maps the site is vacant. Foxlow Place,
re-named Moore Street, after the alderman of that name, had
one row of four or five houses on the north side, the southern
being the blank wall of Mr. Starkey’s ginger-beer factory,
which still stands. The cottages in Foxlow Place, like those
in Hosking Place, were occupied mostly by members of the
theatrical profession, for in those days the Thespians were a
permanent body in this city ; not, as to-day, migratory; and
in the days when Foxlow Place flourished there was no
“ Poverty Point.” The Foxlow cottages were demolished
to make way for the extensive warehouses of Messrs. Lark
and Son, which were mopped up in the big fire. Brougham
Place—now named Rowe Street after the Colonel and ex-
alderman architect Thomas Rowe—is a historic spot,
and had a double row of quaint-looking houses on the
model introduced to New South Wales by that amateur
architect, Governor Lachlan Macquarie. These houses
in the golden, roaring, fifties were occupied by respect-
able mechanics, chiefly employed in the foundry of
P. N. Russell and Company, and, being central, brought
rentals that would now be the envy of any landlord. A
number of those houses went under in the fire of 1872, but
two still remain—about the last fragments of old Sydney in


this neighbourhood. The houses on the north side were
demolished to make way for the Hotel Australia, At the
southern corner of Brougham Place and Pitt Street stood
an old-fashioned public-house, not always reputable, but
having the credit of being the first restaurant to bring down
the “ shilling ordinary ”to sixpence. In Brougham Place,
it is said, George Robert Nichols, the solicitor, had his
offices, but I have been unable to find any record of it. In
the forties he had offices, when in partnership with the late
John Williams, Crown Solicitor, in Fisher’s Buildings, Pitt
Street—a row standing between Brougham Place and King
Street. Mr. Fisher was a bootmaker, and carried on busi-
ness in the last house of the row, that nearest King Street,
now occupied as a fish shop. Upstairs in that house, the last
of the lot retaining its old front, were the offices of Messrs.
Nichols and Williams, and in that building the late Chief
Justice, Sir James Martin, dusted musty law books, carved
his initials deep into the office tables, and read up all the law
he knew. Young Martin left the ranks of the attorneys in
1856 for political reasons, joined the higher branch of the
profession, and reached the topmost rung of the ladder.
In July, 1839, the Governor, Sir George Gipps, in
presenting to the Legislative Council the estimates for the
year 1840, said that the department of the Town Surveyor of
Sydney had been reduced to about one-third of what the
whole expense was shown to have been in 1838. Sir George
Gipps then announced that that would be the last item of the
sort introduced into any estimate, as he thought the time
had arrived when the inhabitants of Sydney might well be
called upon to bear the expense of paving, lighting and
cleaning their own town. The hint was taken, and in 1842
Sydney was incorporated, there being six wards—Gipps,
Bourke, Brisbane, Cook, Macquarie, and Phillip, each


returning one alderman and four councillors, Mr. John
Hosking, of Hughes and Hosking, being elected first Mayor.
The 1842 map of the City of Sydney, kindly shown me by
Mr. Gordon, Acting City Surveyor, shows imperfectly the
block—Hunter, King, Castlereagh and Pitt Streets. There
is but one opening shown, that now known as Rowe Street.
History, it is said, sometimes repeats itself. After the
disastrous fire of 1890 public attention was called to the
necessity of a wide street being formed in place of the narrow
thoroughfare known now as Moore Street, but in the olden
time, as pointed out, named Foxlow Place. But in 1870 the
late Sir Alexander Stuart, who is understood to have occupied
the position of land valuer to the Government of the day,
su gg este d some such improvement. the old Post
Office fronting George Street was pulled down, the necessity
of a passage from George Street to Pitt Street was apparent.
Negotiations were opened up with the owners of adjacent
properties, Mrs. Esther Hughes having 63 feet frontage to
George Street, with 55 feet g inches to Pitt Street. Twenty
feet to each street were purchased from Mrs. Hughes, and Sir
Alexander Stuart, in addressing the Colonial Secretary, Mr.
Charles Cowper, enclosed a sketch of the proposed street and
resumptions. Looking at the question after a lapse of 28
years, Alexander Stuart’s letter is interesting, especially when
we compare land values then and now.
In connection with land values, it may be interesting to
note that the site of the Sydney Infirmary was a grant from
the Crown to Mrs. John Blaxland, of Newington, on her arrival
in New South Wales in 1807. The deed comprised an acre
of land, free of all restrictions. In 1813, when Mr. Blaxland


was in England as a witness in the Bligh-Johnston trials, Mrs.
Macquarie, wife of the Governor—a practical, common-sense
woman—seeing the need of a general hospital, cast longing
eyes on this beautiful acre, a site unsurpassed for the purpose
of healing the sick. By industrious argument Mrs. Macquarie
induced Mrs. Blaxland to part with the land, offering her in
return, with the Governor’s consent, “ the whole of Miller’s
Point,” or any land she might select, if at the disposal of the
Government, the choice being left to Mr. Blaxland on his
return from England. When this gentleman did return and
made his demand, numerous obstacles were placed in the way,
and all be got was for then and now one of the most
beautiful sites in Sydney. Mrs. Blaxland had intended the
spot as the site of a noble residence for her family. We
can only speculate what that acre would be worth to-day if
vacant.
Previous to the arrival of Governor Macquarie in 1810
the public thoroughfares of Sydney were known as “ rows,”
not streets. The Governor changed their names. Pitt Row
became Pitt Street; Soldiers’ Row, Park Street; Back Soldiers’
Row, Kent Street; and Chapel Row, Castlereagh Street—that
portion of the city we are now interested in. Sydney, like
most cities of the old world, was built up by chance,
many of the streets following the old bullock tracks. Castle-
reagh Street is one of few exceptions, as it runs in a direct
line from Hunter Street to Belmore Markets.
The text of Sir Alexander Stuart’s letter to the Colonial
Secretary is here given :
My dear Cowper,—While arbitrating on Mrs. Hughes’ land, next the
Post Office Lane, an investigation of the whole subject forced on me the
conviction that a noble street, wider than George Street, could be made


Perkins" land, occupied by Thompson and Giles’ land occupied
Thompson and Giles’ shop.
by themselves.
43 feet frontage to George Street and 35
feet 0 inches to Pitt Street,
taken from Mrs. Hughes by arbitration.
20 feet originally purchased from Mrs. Hughes.
Colonnade.
■
Probable extension
of Post Office.
from George to Pitt Streets, and the Government, by a judicious purchase,
enabled to recoup to itself the whole cost of Mrs. Hughes’ land, not only
that now arbitrated on, but probably also the piece originally purchased
for the 20-ft. lane.
George Street.
Pitt Street
This sketch (not accurately drawn) will give you a tolerably correct
idea. The course to be pursued would be to purchase Perkins’ and
Giles’ land, give from it a few feet (about three at George Street end
and eleven at Pitt Street) to make a 66-ft. street right through, and
then sell off the entire frontages. I forget the frontage of Perkins’ and
have not the plans to refer to ; but suppose it is 56 feet, my estimate
would be as follows Purchase by valuation : Having no frontage right
to road or lane, value would probably be—s 6 feet to George Street to
Tank Stream at £IBO, £IO,OBO ; 56 feet to Pitt Street to Tank Stream
at £IOO, £5,600 —£15,680 I do not know on what terms Thompson and
Giles have a lease, but no doubt they would prefer some claim for
compensation, say about £3,000, making total cost from £IB,OOO to
£20,000. When the road is completed you would have, say, 52 feet to
George Street, which, with a depth of about 65 feet, would realise £2OO
per foot, being then at corner of the finest street in the city, £10,400.
The frontage of the new street would be worth from £l2O to £l5O, say,
however, £IOO. It is about 345 feet long, or deducting about 65 feet,
say, 280 feet, at £IOO, is £28,000. This, added to £10,400, making a
total of £38,400, or, say, £38,000, which would not only pay the new
purchases, but Mrs. Hughes’ arbitration and, as 1 dare say, more than


Black’s Terrace after the Fire, 1890.




£IOO would be got for the new frontage, probably the original purchase
also. Observe, I have not counted Pitt Street frontage, as I count the
new street all through, the new frontage being just as valuable as Pitt
Street; probably at a corner an extra price could be got for the last 40
feet. Although the arbitrators may have put but a small value on the
land frontage, it becomes of a very different value when it is frontage to
a street, and that one of the finest streets in the city. I believe if there
had been 70 feet to 80 feet depth that the whole frontage would have
been worth as much as George Street. It might be made a condition of
sale that buildings of a certain style or design were to be erected. I
would deprecate, however, any attempt on the part of the Government
to build with a view of profitably selling afterwards, and I believe that
the Government would even by the former conditions lose considerably
in price. No one likes to be unnecessarily restricted, and the situations
would be such that no purchaser, I think, would put up a mean-looking
building. The main question appears to be how to obtain purchase of
the land. As Mr. Hughes’ grant (a printed one) contained specific right
for the Crown to resume for public improvements on valuations, very
probably Perkins’ does also. That could be readily ascertained, and
if so the difficulty vanishes as regards George Street frontage. Pitt
Street frontage, I think, does not contain the same clause. Thompson
and Giles, however, would sell ; but, of course, unless they could be
compelled to go to arbitration, would open their mouths wide. I think,
however, they could be dealt with privately before too much attention
was drawn to the subject.
Yours, &c.,
Sydney, March 29, 1870.
Hon. Charles Cowper.
ALEX. STUART.
Surprise may well be expressed at the enormous increase
in the value of land in this locality when we look at the
figures obtained for the frontages to Stuart’s “ new street,”
February 15, 1892. It will be seen above that Mr. Stuart’s
valuation for the “ inner blocks ” was to or at the
“ lowest £ 100 per foot.” At the historic sale in February,
1892, the block corner of George Street and Martin Place
went up to £i,joo per foot and was withdrawn, as the reserve


placed upon it by the Hon. W. J. Lyne, Minister for Public
Works, was per foot. The next lot offered was that
on the corner of Pitt Street, and this was knocked down at
per foot, the next fronting Martin Place at per
foot, and the next at £l,OOO, the three lots being purchased
by one institution for a total of or an average of
per foot. Prior to the opening up of Martin Place the
only means of communication between Pitt Street and George
Street was by Mort’s Passage, on sufferance, which was close
to where Gordon and Gotch now have their business premises.
But Sir Alexander Stuart’s dream has been realised ; the
new street has been formed, not merely from Pitt Street to
George Street, but from George Street to Castlereagh Street
—a noble thoroughfare, which, in the course of time, may be
extended, as it should be, to Macquarie Street, when it will
rival in beauty the “ finest street in Europe,” Sackville
Street, Dublin. On the north-west corner of Castlereagh
Street and Moore Street, until a few weeks ago, stood a terrace
of three houses, but which at the time of the 1890 fire were
five in number. They were built by Mr. J. H. Black,
manager of the Bank of New South Wales, about the year
1841, the contractor for the erection of the buildings being
the late Hon. Edward Flood, M.L.C. —the first big
contract accepted or undertaken by that gentleman. Out
of that contract unquestionably grew Mr. Flood’s great
wealth. Later on the buildings came into the possession of
the sons of the original owners, and were by them sold to
the late Mr. John Hughes, father of the Hon. John Hughes,
M.L.C., by whom they were transferred to the late Mr. J. P.
Garvan, who in turn sold the terrace to the Citizens’ Life
Assurance Company, Ltd. At the time of the big fire,
the German Club occupied the most southerly house, next


were the consulting rooms of Dr. Morris, Mr. F. B. Freehill,
solicitor, now Consul for Spain, occupied another, and the
“ Citizens staff filled the remainder. When Moore Street
was widened there remained but three of the old land marks.
At the corner, as shown in the illustration, Mr. E. P. Field, an
evangelical barrister, daily in the dinner hour preached the
gospel to large crowds. Mr. Field was induced to take up this
work as a thanksgiving for recovery from a serious illness. In
undertaking this duty Mr. Field practically gave up his busi-
ness at the Bar, which was bringing him in some £2,000 a
year. He has since returned to England with the intention
of following his profession in Westminster Hall. While engaged
in missionary work Mr. Field’s purse was always open to the
needy, but on occasions he was “ had.” The writer saw him
once go down King Street at a run, rush into a public-house
at the corner and come out triumphantly. It appeared
that a man had approached him with a tale of what he
could do in the way of trade with a few shillings. Mr.
Field had his suspicions, but he gave him half-a-crown.
He watched the man go into the public bar, rushed after him,
saw his coin on the counter, and while the attendant was
drawing the beer, put it in his pocket and emerged in
triumph. In March last the terrace was demolished, and on
the site—the finest perhaps in commercial Sydney, worthy of
a royal building—the Citizens’ Life Assurance Company
are erecting premises in every way fitted to the site.
Standing on this princely corner and looking either way
for a few hundred yards, memory conjures up many stirring
scenes and many old-time incidents. It will scarcely be
believed that within the memory of many now living, the
vacant ground at the rear and side of the Citizens’ new
buildings was a garden with fruit trees and flowers, where
many then lads, now aged men, used to “ box the fox,”


in other words, rob the orchard—a venial offence in boys
who consider that stolen fruits, like kisses, are always
sweetest.
Of the earlier tenants of Black’s Terrace little can be
ascertained; their names seem to have faded in the mists of
time, but that the houses required men of means to occupy
them goes without saying. This portion of Castlereagh
Street, between the years 1840 and 1880, was looked upon as
the most eligible residential site in the city of Sydney. The
Hon. James Norton, M.L.C., to whom I am indebted for much
valuable information, looks back with regret to the time when
he and his schoolmates used to play cricket on the site of
Black’s Terrace, and humorously describes how indignant
he and his mates were when they were ejected from the site
through Mr. Black’s building operations.
From Hunter Street to Brougham Place were some old
houses, old as viewed from a Sydney stand-point. On the
north-west corner of Hunter Street was, in 1840, a long, low,
weatherboard building. It was demolished many years ago,
when the land remained vacant until the pile known as
Tattersall’s Chambers was built. At the corner in 1833 was
on exhibition a tiger in a cage, the genesis, perhaps, of the
circus and menagerie in Australia. There is also a legend that
at this corner, or very close to it, the first chaplain, Rev.
Robert Johnston, erected his first church, a building of the
wattle and daub order. This, in 1798, was burned down by
prisoners of the Crown, who did not appreciate in a proper
spirit the sermons of the parson or the irksome duty of going
to church. But the incendiaries gained nothing by their icono-
clastic act, as Mr. Johnston secured a newly-erected store in


the neighbourhood, in which he continued to preach the
gospel to his “bonded” congregation; the officials and free
people were not, apparently, church-goers. The building
which stood on the corner in 1840 was, in all probability, the
store in which Mr. Johnston held service at the commence-
ment of the century, and which gave the original name,
“ Chapel Row,” to that part of the city of Sydney. Round
the corner, in Hunter Street, are two very ancient buildings.
In 1840 the fine house (stone) which still stands, was the
residence of Mr. Young, head of the firm of Young and
Company, merchants, who had their stores at the rear and
side. Next were the stores of Flower, Salting and Company,
a very old Australian firm, intimately connected with the
settlement of Port Phillip (Victoria) in its infancy. The
stores of Messrs. Young, and Flower, Salting and Company
still stand.
In 1855 the first house in Castlereagh Street was occupied
by Mr. John McLean, Principal Superintendent of Convicts,
an office now merged into the Comptrollership of Prisons.
Just here are two choice bits of old Sydney—two houses which
must have been in existence before Black’s Buildings. Messrs.
Henfrey, cordial makers, have been on this site for 50 years.
The two old-fashioned houses in front of their factory were,
in the forties, occupied, the one by Mr. Porter, who
subsequently went to Melbourne, where his son became
Prothonotary of the Supreme Court; the other was the
private residence of Mrs. Maher, who kept a large drapery
establishment in Pitt Street. This lady died in the house of
scarlet fever. Subsequently Mr. G. K. Holden, a well-known
solicitor, and one of the earliest presidents of the Law
Institute, occupied the house, and that gentleman’s wife,
though many years had elapsed, died of the same disorder.
These premises, now occupied as offices, are perhaps among


the best samples of the builder’s art of 6o years ago. Black’s
Terrace, in the same year (1855), had as tenants, in the house
near Hunter Street, Mr. Joseph Wyatt, proprietor of the
Prince of Wales Theatre and the builder of the old Victoria
Theatre in Pitt Street in 1838 ; the next was occupied by
Henry Grattan Douglass, M.D. and surgeon, and a member
of the old Legislative Council; the third was in the occupation
of the Government as the office of the Commissioner of Crown
Lands ; the fourth was tenanted by another old and well-
known medical man, Arthur Martin a’Beckett, who had been
at one time Staff-Surgeon of the British Legion in Spain.
He arrived in Sydney in 1838, but left for England in 1858,
returned to Sydney in 1865, and died in 1871. The last
house, that nearest King Street, was the private residence of
Mr. William Nash, bullion broker, whose offices were in
King Street. On an extensive block between Black’s Terrace
and Foxlow Place was a small house, occupied by a carpenter,
William Ryan ; then on the other corner came Mr. Starkey’s
ginger-beer establishment—the old building now occupied as a
livery and bait stables, with a modern terrace built in front.
Next to Starkey’s, where now stands the Hotel Australia,
were three old-fashioned houses, occupied in 1855 by Moses
Moses, merchant; Bartholomew O’Brien, M.D. and surgeon,
and Dunsmure and Stafford, solicitors, the latter being on
the corner of Brougham Place, and said to be the identical
house in which Vincent Wallace composed the greater part
of the opera of “ Maritana.” Other authorities say that
Wallace lived in one of the houses in Brougham Place, but
from other circumstances I am inclined to believe that he
resided in the house on the corner. Vincent Wallace was
born in Waterford, Ireland, in 1815, his father being band-
master of the 29th Regiment. At the age of 14 he was
placed in the orchestra of the Theatre Royal, Hawkins Street,
Dublin, and at the age of 26 was conductor there. 111-health
induced him to come to Sydney, where he arrived in 1833,


accompanied by his sister Eliza, an accomplished vocalist,
who subsequently married another musician, John Bushelle,
well known amongst Sydneyites as the “ Knave of Diamonds,”
from his resemblance to that figure in old card packs.
Wallace and his sister gave many concerts, one in aid of the
Roman Catholic Cathedral, which realised ,<I,OOO. Wallace
returned alone to London in 1845, where he completed and
produced “ Maritana.” He died in Paris, October 12, 1865.
His gifted sister, Madame Wallace-Bushelle died at her
residence, William Street, August 16, 1878. On the other
corner of Brougham Place was Hardie’s old bakery, and it
still stands. Between here and King Street were sundry
small shops and a public-house known as the “ Settlers’ Arms,”
next was Wyatt’s Theatre, and at the corner of King Street
was the Registry Office of Mr. James Pawsey.
The year 1857 saw some few changes. The northern
house in Black’s Terrace was occupied by Dr. —now Sir—
Alfred Roberts, the next by Mrs. Hanson, the third had the
Registrar-General’s Office and—after a lapse of 40 years—
a branch of the same office has been opened on the opposite
side of the road. Dr. a’Beckett still occupied his old spot,
but Mr. Nash had given way to Dr. O’Brien, while Nash
occupied the house lower down, formerly tenanted by the
doctor. In 1857 the Wheatsheaf Hotel was being built on
the corner of Foxlow Place. For many years it was kept by
Mr. John Renno, the well-known stage mechanist, and Mr.
Renno kept it at the time of the 1890 fire. On this site it is
understood that the “ Old Leather Bottle Inn ” of the forties
stood. In 1857, between Brougham Place and King Street,
stood no less than three public-houses, fed presumably by
the theatre, of which Mr. Wyatt was the proprietor, the
north-west corner not being then a public-house. Across
the road at the south-west corner of King and Castlereagh


Streets was an old-fashioned little place, the early type of
public-house, and known as the “ Carriers’ Arms.” This little
hostelry was then kept by one Patrick Fox, whose name
appears on old title deeds as the owner of a big slice of the
south side of King Street. Mrs. Fox is not long dead; she
lived in an old-fashioned house next the Daily Telegraph office,
the old house still standing but newly fronted and converted
into shops and offices. The site of the Daily Telegraph office
belonged to the Fox family. On it in 1840, and for some
years previously, stood a weatherboard building, with a willow
tree alongside. The willow tree and the weatherboard house
made way a few years ago for the present Daily Telegraph
office. In 1840, about midway between Pitt and Castlereagh
Streets, in King Street, Mrs. Hordern kept a shop where
could be purchased ladies’ finery, boots, shoes, &c. This
lady was the grandmother of all the Horderns of to-day. Mr.
and Mrs. Hordern went to Port Phillip in its early days and
prospered. Mr. Hordern had purchased at the early Mel-
bourne land sales numerous choice allotments, which he held
until his death, in the late sixties. All his landed property he
devised by will should be sold and the proceeds divided
equally amongst his children. To conduct the sale an old
friend, Peter Davis, at one time Mayor of Melbourne, but for
many years retired from business as an auctioneer, look out a
new license, and once more wielded the hammer in the
interests of the Horderns. The sale was conducted in the old
Temperance Hall, in Russell Street, the lots bringing top
prices. Out of that sale Sydney has benefited, as the
Horderns have entirely confined their operations to this city.
Another generous colonist, who usefully expends his wealth,
owes his position to early Melbourne land values—the Hon.
R. H. D. White, M.L.C.—the history of this gentleman’s
fortune reading more like fiction than fact.


Mr. William Nash who, in 1854, occupied one of the
houses in Black’s Terrace, was a well-known character in
Sydney for many years. He is understood to have arrived in
the colony in the late twenties. His wife preceded him and
opened a small shop in the drapery line in Pitt Street, where
Way and Company are now. In 1831 she was there,
but in 1832 Mr. Nash’s name was over the door. While
residing in Black’s Terrace he had an office for the pur-
chase of bullion in King Street, where Otis Chambers
now stand. Here his son-in-law, Robert Forbes, who also
had a residence in Black’s Terrace, was in partner-
ship with him. The gold purchased during the day was
taken to the bank each evening in a wheelbarrow, Mr.
Nash superintending the removal with a loaded pistol.
Nash had the reputation of being an inveterate gambler, but
he also had the reputation of being a charitable man, whose
left hand did not know what the right did. He was a bit of a
humorist, too. Getting into his gig on the Parramatta race-
course, he happened to drop a roll of bank notes. A new chum
standing by picked the parcel up and ran after the owner,
who had not missed the money. When he had put them in
his pocket, he coolly surveyed the man, and inquired how
long he had been in the country. “Just three weeks, sir,” was
the reply. “ Well,” said Nash, “get back again as soon as
you can before you get contaminated, as you are too
honest for this country.” Nash got into some
trouble over gold buying and took a trip to England. There he
very nearly got into another scrape in driving a coach and
eight horses and mules through the streets of London, once in
close proximity to the carriage of Her Majesty, Queen
Victoria. Mr. Nash was strongly advised to leave England
as soon as possible, and he did. He returned to Sydney and
resided until his death in September, 1864, in the centre of
three houses which until a few years ago stood on the site of
the Hotel Australia.


It has passed into a proverb that playhouses are, as a
rule, destroyed by fire. That seems to have been the fate
of the buildings used as theatres in Castlereagh Street, near
King Street, which have no less than three separate times
succumbed to the “ devouring element.” The first theatre on
this site was erected in 1838, and built by Mr. Joseph Wyatt,
who is understood to have built the houses in Brougham
Place. This gentleman also built the Victoria Theatre in
Pitt Street, which establishment he opened March 26, 1838}
with “ Othello,” Mr. Arabin, from Hobart-town, playing the
Moor, Mr. Spencer being the lago, Mr. Grove the Cassio,
Mr. Simes the Roderigo, Miss Winstanley and Mrs.
Arabin being the Desdemona and Emelia. That is just 60
years ago, but, in 1882, the Victoria Theatre met the usual
fate of playhouses, and was burned down. The warehouse
of Messrs. Harris and Company now stands on the spot, Mr.
Wyatt’s house, “ The Prince of Wales’,” in Castlereagh Street,
was burned down in October, iB6O, and in 1861 a new house
was built on the site and named the Prince of Wales’ Opera
House. This building was leased by Mr. William Dind, an
old identity, not long dead. In January, 1872, while the
pantomime, “ The House that Jack Built,” was running, the
theatre met the usual fate—fire. Its successor went the same
way in the nineties. The fire of 1872 extended beyond the
theatre, A row of shops on the north side of King Street was
destroyed by the falling walls of the theatre, while the shingle
roofs of the old houses in Brougham Place were ignited and
seven of them burned. Several lives were lost through
falling walls and debris. The theatre has been rebuilt, but
the buildings in the neighbourhood are the same that stood
there in the sixties. Brougham Place has a gruesome bit of
history attaching to it. At the back of Mr. Nash’s house one
morning was discovered a full sack tightly tied at the mouth.
On being opened, there was found the dead body of a woman,
killed by a sailor in a squabble at a public-house known to the


initiated as the Blood-house,” Kent Street. It proved to be
a case of manslaughter, for which the sailor underwent a long
term of imprisonment.
Mr. Samuel Terry was an old identity who arrived
in New South Wales very early in the century. He obtained
much notoriety through mention made of him in Mr. Com-
missioner Bigge’s Report on the state of the Colony in 1820.
Bigge arrived in Sydney in 1819 as a special commissioner
appointed by the Imperial authorities to inquire into com-
plaints made by the “ pure merino ” colonists as to Governor
Macquarie’s determination to let the “ dead past bury its
dead,” when he recognised the emancipists and placed them
on the same footing as their neighbours who happened to have
arrived free. Macquarie selected some of the emancipists for
seats on the Magisterial Bench, and even had the temerity
to invite them to his table at Government House. Many of
the emancipists were sent out for offences other than theft,
and numbers of them became wealthy and reputable citizens,
Macquarie’s policy did credit to his head and heart, though
Commissioner Bigge reported against it. Mr. Terry’s resi-
dence was on the west side of Pitt Street, where now is
Martin Place. Alongside his cottage Mr. Terry grew cabbages
and other vegetables for amusement. Nearly opposite his
residence was a terrace of houses known in early days as
Terry’s Buildings. They were built in the twenties, as on
October 1, 1827, in No. 1, that nearest Hunter Street, was
opened the Australian Subscription Library. In the same
building was the Sydney Dispensary, and the dispenser
combined the duties of compounding prescriptions and lending
out books. From that modest start has arisen the Free
Public Library in Bent Street. These buildings appear to
have been demolished in 1838, and a new row erected, as in
that year Messrs. Chambers and Thurlow, solicitors, advertise


that they have removed their offices to “ Terry’s New
Buildings, in Pitt Street.” This row of houses old Sydneyites
will remember had the steps abutting on the pathway, and in
the seventies were occupied chiefly as lawyers’ offices. Mr.
Terry died early in 1838, aged 62 years, and occupies a vault
in the Old Sand Hills Cemetery, near Belmore Park, in which
much-neglected spot lie many old colonists. When Mr.
Terry’s will was read he was found to be worth half a million
sterling in real and personal estate. In the Sydney Herald
of April 2, 1838, appears a quaint advertisement respecting
some of Mr. Terry’s assets :
“MOST IMPORTANT SALE OF SHARES
in the lucrative and prosperous Banking Institutions under-
mentioned,
By ISAAC SIMMONS AND COMPANY,
on Wednesday next, the 4th day of April, at One precisely,
in lots to suit Capitalists, by order of the executors of the
late Mr. Terry, viz.—” Then are enumerated the shares for
sale:—Forty shares in the Bank of New South Wales, £yo
paid up, in eight lots of five each; 20 shares in the Com-
mercial Bank, paid up, in four lots of five each ; 30
shares, paid up, same bank, in six lots of five each ; five
shares in the Bank of Australasia, £2l ss. paid up; 70 shares
in the Marine Assurance Company, £ls paid up, in seven
lots of 10 each. The auctioneers go on to say : —“Such an
opportunity for the secure and immediate investment of
capital may not occur again for years, as the whole are to be
disposed of to the highest bidder for the benefit of the estate
and legatees generally. Capitalists, military officers and
merchants, &c., having surplus funds at their bankers, can-
not ensure to themselves a more profitable income in any
part of the commercial world than the dividends arising on


the purchase of these shares. Terms, 15 per cent, cash
deposit on the fall of the hammer, and approved endorsed
bills at three months for the balance.” Mr. Terry’s daughter,
Esther, is understood to have inherited most of her father’s
wealth. She married John Terry Hughes, of the firm of
Hughes and Hosking, who had a close connection with the
historic spot of which I write. Mr. Hughes died in October,
1851, at the comparatively early age of 49 years. The site
of Mr. Terry’s house in Pitt Street is the same allotment
mentioned by Mr. Stuart in his letter to Mr. Cowper, and
was eventually resumed by the Government to open up
Martin Place. The firm of Hughes and Hosking was at one
time extremely wealthy, their investments in land being
enormous. On the old maps the name of the firm can be
traced as owners and grantees all over Australia. Mrs.
Esther Hughes died at her residence, Albion House, Eliza-
beth Street—a fine old mansion standing in some 40 acres of
land, now occupied by bricks and mortar—August 29, 1873,
aged 70 years. As will easily be understood, Mrs. Terry has
left many wealthy descendants.
On the eastern side of Castlereagh Street, between
Hunter and King Streets, are some very old houses. On the
north-eastern corner is a venerable house which, in the
fifties, was occupied as a boarding-house, but in the sixties
was a first-class residential hotel, at which the comedian, Mr.
Charles Mathews, put up during his Sydney engagements.
It has still in front the stately Norfolk pines of olden days,
though one is encased by some temporary shops on the
corner. It is, or was, the entailed property of the Kites of
Kelso. Under the will of the elder Kite, no lease could be
given for a longer period than seven years. In boom time an
eligible tenant offered to put up a substantial building if he


could get a2l years’ lease. The trustees procured an Act of
Parliament enabling them to so lease ; but bad times came,
the project was abandoned, and the property is still in its
ancient state. Next is perhaps the oldest building in
this street. It is now occupied by Sir William P. Manning
and the Messrs. Billyard as offices In 1834 T was built
by the late Mr. James Norton, one of the oldest estab-
lished and best known of the old-time Sydney lawyers, and
father of the Hon. Dr. Norton, M.L.C. The doctor was
born in the house at the corner of King and Elizabeth Streets
and known in later years as the “ Three Tuns Tavern,” kept
by Richard Driver, father of Richard Driver, M.L.A., a well-
known figure in Sydney life —social, sporting and political.
In the early thirties this was the private residence of Mr.
Norton. At the rear of the cottage now mentioned Mr.
Norton’s business was, for over half a century, conducted.
Some portions of this old office still remain. It very much
resembled a watch-house from its strength, and in its strong-
room were stored up many of the secrets of the old colonial
families, as the Norton firm has been the legal advisers of
most of the early colonists. In the vacant ground still attached
to the premises are two old wells, about which Dr. Norton
mentions a curious circumstance. The water could not be
used, because it was (and is) impregnated with alum, while Hen-
frey’s well across the road was a pure crystal spring, used in
the firm’s business as soda water and cordial manufacturers.
After the Norton family went to reside at Elswick, on the
Parramatta Road, the cottage experienced a variety of tenants.
In 1870 it was the Volunteer Club, and since then has been
used chiefly as offices. Next door is another old building,
which shares with the Norton residence the palm for age. It
looks modern in front, but if you pass through the vestibule
into a sort of courtyard, you will see as finely preserved a
relic of ancient Sydney as can be wished for by the most
enthusiastic antiquary. Away back in the thirties this house


was built by a Sydney merchant, Pittman, a name now for-
gotten, and to be found only in the books of Dr. Norton’s firm.
Through this firm Pittman conveyed to Captain Lamb, R.N.,
founder of the firm of Parbury, Lamb and Company, who made
it his town residence for many years. Captain Lamb sold to
Mr. Wm. Foster, barrister, who shared in the thirties and
forties the lead of the bar with such men as Wentworth,
Wardell and Broadhurst. There were giants at the bar in
those days. Mr. Foster conveyed the property to Mr.
Fisher, solicitor, son-in-law of Wentworth, who, in turn,
parted with his interest to Mr. Daniel Egan, who lived in a
stone cottage close by. This gentleman was a member of the
Legislative Assembly for Eden, and Postmaster-General in the
Robertson-Cowper Ministry, October, 1868, to October, 1870.
Mr. Egan’s life was saddened by a terrible domestic mis-
fortune. His wife and family, returning from a trip to the
Old Country, were on board the ill-fated ship “ Dunbar,”
wrecked at the Gap, South Head, in August, 1857. All but
one on board perished on that fateful night, the exception being
a seaman—Johnston —now assistant lighthouse-keeper at
Nobby’s, Newcastle. In the sixties this historic building
became the Victoria Club-house, which it continued to be
until about the year 1870, when the Auditor-General took
possession of it as offices for his staff. When these officials
vacated for the new offices in Bligh Street, a new front was
put to the building, making it flush with the pathway, and
the offices let to various firms of solicitors, agents, and others.
The Victoria Club in the early sixties was more or less
political. Amongst the members of the Legislative Assembly
who registered there were ; —Mr. W. M. Arnold (The Patter-
son), David Bell (Camden), Charles Cowper (East Sydney),
Charles Cowper, Jun. (Tumut), John Lackey (Parramatta),


George William Lord (The Bogan), John Morrice (Cam-
den), John Robertson (Shoalhaven), Henry Rotton (Hartley),
John Nagel Ryan (The Lachlan), and William Walker
(Windsor). Of the 29 members constituting the Legislative
Council in 1863 but one—Mr. Alexander Walker Scott —
registered at the Victoria. Of these 29 members but one
remains on the roll, the Hon. G. H. Cox, and but two in the
flesh, the other being a very old pensioner and many years
absentee— Mr. Francis Lewis Shaw Merewether —now and for
some 40 years resident in England, and drawing a handsome
pension. Of the Legislative Assembly of that day not one
now sits in the lower branch, only three of the number
occupy seats in the Legislative Council, and but very few
remain on earth. The three remaining in the Council are :
Sir John Lackey, Mr. John Lucas, and Mr. Wm. Walker.
Amongst those living, but not now in politics, are Sir
Saul Samuel, Bart., Mr. J. F. Burns, Mr. Charles Cowper,
Mr. J. T. Ryan and Mr. A. A. P. Tighe. Of those who
registered at the Victoria Club Mr. Arnold became a
Minister of the Crown and subsequently Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly. He was unfortunately drowned at his
residence at the Paterson, during a flood in the Hunter, in
1875, whilst endeavouring to save some pumpkins and melons.
Mr. Charles Cowper merged into Sir Charles Cowper, and died
in London as Agent-General for New South Wales. His son
Charles became Water Police Magistrate and subsequently
Sheriff, which office he vacated a couple of years ago. Mr.
Lackey is now Sir John Lackey, President of the Legislative
Council and an Acting-Lieutenant-Governor; that is, he
fills the place of Sir Frederick Darley as Acting-Governor
should the Chief Justice become incapacitated through
absence or illness. Mr. Lord became Colonial Treasurer under
Sir James Martin; John Robertson became Sir John Robertson,
Premier of New South Wales, and a sturdy politician he
was. Around Henry Rotton’s memory hover many interest-


Citizens’ Life Assurance Co.’s New Buildings.
(On site of Black’s Terrace.)




ing anecdotes. In an old-fashioned briar-bordered lane at Kelso
are the remains of an old white house, now said to be ghost-
haunted. In the roaring days of the Turon and Tambaroora
goldfields, this house was kept by Mr. Rotton as a hotel.
He subsequently removed to Bathurst, where he again kept
a hotel, and ran a line of coaches for mails and passengers
across the Blue Mountains. There is a story which passes
current that Mr. Rotton had boasted that he could run one of
his own teams, coach and all, through his mail contract, the
document was so loosely worded. It is said that there was
no mention of newspapers in the documents, and the bags con-
taining these the contractor used to bring to his hotel, where
those expecting newspapers had to call and get them, no doubt
much trade resulting. When Mr. Rotton retired from busi-
ness he went to live at Blackdown, on the Macquarie River,
a couple of miles out of Bathurst. Here a somewhat sensa-
tional incident occurred. Mr. Rotton’s daughter was the
wife of Mr. H. M, Keightley, police magistrate at Rockley,
some 25 miles distant from Bathurst. Keightley’s house at
Dunn’s Plains was stuck up by bushrangers, under Hall and
Gilbert, in October, 1863. Mr. Keightley, in defending him-
self and his household gods, shot one of the bushrangers,
Burke. In revenge, O’Meally proposed the shooting of Mr.
Keightley, and preparations were made for carrying out the
suggestion. Mrs. Keightley then threw herself in front of
Hall, and begged her husband’s life. It was then agreed
that Mr. Keightley should be ransomed for Mrs.
Keightley, accompanied by Dr. Peechey, who was a guest
of Mr. Keightley’s at the time, rode to Bathurst to Mr.
Rotton for the money, both pledging themselves not to give
notice to the police, the bushrangers also taking precautions
against surprise. Although it was Sunday morning, Mr.
Rotton procured the money, and with the doctor rode to
Rockley to ransom the magistrate. The numbers of the
notes were taken at the bank, and some months afterwards a


man endeavouring to pass some of them was arrested, tried,
convicted, and sentenced to a long term of imprisonment.
While driving his coaches over the mountains Mr. Rotton on
several occasions experienced the sensation of being “ stuck
up,” chiefly between Hartley and Glanmire.
Of John Nagel Ryan, of Galong and Ballyryan,
Burrowa, I have many pleasant memories. A warm-hearted
kindly Irishman, who kept open house and who never sent a
swagman away empty-handed. I had business with him at
Ballyryan once; the whisky decanter was duly produced, and,
as I declined the temptation, Mr. Ryan declared that I was
the first man that ever came to Ballyryan and refused
whisky. He used to tell droll stories about old times in
Burrowa. There was a race meeting on there once, and one
of Mr. Ryan’s hands, a new arrival, asked for the loan of a
horse and dray. Being asked the purpose, he explained that
there wasn’t a stone on the racecourse in case of a fight, and
he wanted to cart some “ metal ” there. The stones were
carted, and are there now. They were never used as,
although most of the Burrowa Ryans hail from Tipperary, on
that day there was no stone-throwing. By the way, in
Burrowa eight out of every ten bear the patronymic “ Ryan.”
Mr. Walker’s life has been uneventful. Of the 11 registering
at the Victoria Club, but Sir John Lackey, Charles Cowper,
Jun., and Wm. Walker remain. In the sixties another pro-
minent figure made the Victoria Club his home when in
Sydney, and ended his short career under its roof.
Sir Frederick Pottinger was the son of Sir Henry
Pottinger, created a baronet in 1839 for services in India,
where he held rank as Major-General in the East India
Company’s service. Sir Frederick held at one time a


commission in the Grenadier Guards. He appears to have
been somewhat wild, and found his way to New South Wales,
where he joined the police force. His identity was concealed
for a time, but one morning bluff old John McLerie, Inspector-
General, found among his pile of letters one important looking-
envelope, addressed,
“ Sir Frederick Pottinger, Bart.,
c/o Inspector-General of Police,
Sydney,
New South Wales.”
Calling a clerk he inquired if there was any man in the force
named Pottinger. Looking up the list it was found that there
was such a man, a mounted trooper “out back.” He was
recalled to the city, and in a short time exchanged the
private’s for the sub-inspector’s uniform, perhaps the quickest
police promotion on record. Sir Frederick Pottinger’s career
as a police sub-inspector is largely mixed up with the bush-
ranging era—the early sixties. If he did not capture many
—or any—bushrangers; he harassed them hugely. Some of
the more bloodthirsty wished to have a shot at him. On the
Wawingragong racecourse, near Forbes, in January, 1865,
Ben. Hall, Johnny Gilbert, and John Dunn were waiting to
get a pot shot at the inspector, who had his famous horse
“ Bushranger ” entered for a race. The trio had never seen
Pottinger, though they often felt his influence. They had
anticipated that he would ride in police uniform or in his own
racing colors, but, luckily for him, he rode in private costume,
and so escaped the intended shot. So difficult of capture
was Gardiner, the chief outlaw, that many persons went the
length of saying that Gardiner was a myth and that Pottinger
himself was the real desperado. The bushrangers seemed to
defy the police, and Pottinger came in for the worst of the
blame. The Colonial Secretary, Charles Cowper, told
Captain McLerie that if he could not clear the country of


bushrangers he, Mr. Cowper, would find someone who could.
An Act of Parliament was passed giving the police power to
shoot down on sight such of the outlaws as refused to surren-
der, In the columns of the Sydney Morning Herald appeared
a metrical jeu d’esprit which will bear reprinting.
THE FIELD OF WHEOGO.
The moon rides high in a starry sky,
And through the midnight gloom
A fairy scene of woodland green
Her silver rays illume.
Dark mountains show a ridge of snow
Against the deep blue sky,
And a winding stream, with sparkling gleam,
Flows merrily murmuring by.
Not a sound is heard save the bough when stirred
By the night wind’s moaning sigh,
Or, piercing and shrill, echoed back by the hill,
The curlew’s mournful cry.
And twinkling bright, in the shadowy night,
A distant taper shines,
And seated there is a wanton fair
That in amorous sadness pines.
For her lord is gone, and she sits alone—
Alone in a desolate home,
But it was not her lord that she then deplored.
For she loved to see him roam.
The joy of her heart is a ranger smart,
Who lion-like roams in the night,
And with supper all spread and a four-post bed,
She waits by the flickering light.


Equipped for fight, in trappings bright,
Came a band of warriors there,
By gallant Sir Fred, right gallantly led
The ranger to seize in a snare.
They spread o’er the ground and the house they surround,
Nine men with revolver and gun.
“ A reward’s on his head,” said the gallant Sir Fred.,
“ And we’re nine to the bushranger’s one.”
Still gleamed the light through the shades of night,
And still the pale moon shone,
But no ranger came to cheer the dame
As she sat by the light alone.
The warriors bold were freezing with cold
And thought it was time to start,
When the echoing beat of a horse’s feet
Sent the blood in a rush to the heart.
At gentle speed, on a snow-white steed,
And singing a joyous song
To the twinkling light in the shadowy night,
The ranger rides along.
A stalwart man was he to scan,
And filled with ruffian pride,
For in many a fray he had won the day
And the new police defied.
Up started, then, Sir Fred, and his men,
With cock’d carbine in hand,
And called aloud on the ranger proud
On pain of death to “ stand.”
But the ranger proud, he laughed aloud,
And bounding, rode away,
While Sir Frederick Pott, shut his eyes for a shot,
And missed in the usual way.
His warriors then, like valiant men,
With their carbines blazed away,
The whistling lead on its mission sped
But whither none could say ;


For the snow-white steed at gentle speed
Bore the ranger from their view,
And left Sir Fred, to return to bed—
There was nothing else to do.
But Sir Frederick Pott, with rage was hot
As he looked at his warriors eight ;
Eight to one, with revolver and gun,
And he cursed his luckless fate,
For he shuddered to think how his glory would sink
When the country heard of the mess,
And the tale was told of his warriors bold
In the columns of the press.
In fury then he marched his men
Where dwelt the wanton fair.
With war-like din they all entered in,
And searched and ransacked there ;
In slumber sound, a boy they found,
Whereon Sir Frederick said :
“ By a flash in the pan we have missed the man,
So we’ll take the boy instead.”
The “ wanton fair ” of the rhyme was a woman who left
her husband to share Gardiner’s fortunes when the outlaw
retired from the road. When the chase got too hot, Gardiner
retired to the Aphis Creek, on the Peak Downs Road,
Queensland, and opened a store. His capture was brought
about by peculiar means. A traveller happened to drop into
the store for some supplies, and recognised the ex-bushranger.
There was a reward of for the capture of Gardiner, and
the traveller resolved to earn it. He came to Sydney, ascer-
tained that the reward was still in existence, obtained the
promise of it if the capture were effected, and made his dis-
closure ; the police did the rest. Gardiner was tried at
Darlinghurst, and sentenced to 32 years’ imprisonment. After


serving 10 years he was released by Sir Henry Parkes, on
condition that he left the country. He accepted the terms ;
was taken to Newcastle by Detective Elliott, who saw him
safely past Nobby’s, on his way to China, in the “ Charlotte
Andrews.” He found his way to San Francisco, where, for a
time, he kept a low saloon, and died in abject poverty. The
woman’s fate was worse. After Gardiner’s conviction she went
to New Zealand, and went down irretrievably. Sir Frederick
Pottinger, who claimed that he could trace his descent from
King Alfred, succeeded his father in March, 1856, and died
April g, 1865, from the effects of a pistol wound, accidentally
inflicted while travelling in a coach on the way to Sydney.
His grave, in St. Jude’s churchyard, Randwick, is marked by
a modest headstone, and his successor to the title is a brother,
an English barrister.


m
McCARRON, STEWART & CO.,
Art Printers,
44 4 86 PITT STREET, SYDNEY.
tpgg


citizens;
jjL Life Assurance Company, Limited
(Incorporated Pursuant to Act of Parliament.'
>•<
Temporary Head Offices : 279 GEORGE ST., SYDNEY.
(With Branches and Agencies throughout the Colonies.)
,
glirretova :
JOHN SEE, Esq., M.P., Chairman.
W. J. LYNE, Esq., M.P.
J. J. POWER, Esq., M.B.
E. COFFEE, Esq.
I F. B. FREEHILL, Esq., M.A.
Sir VV. P. MANNING, Knt.
JOHN J. GARVAN, F.S.S., General Manager.
©Jjtef lilebtcal (Officer:
M. J. CLUNE, Esq , M.D, 18 College Street, Sydney.
gJatthera :
THE BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
Jlctuaru :
WM. R. DOVEY, F.F.A,
:
JAS. ROBERTSON, Esq., F.S.I.A.
(City Auditor).
DAVID FELL, Esq
(Public Accountant).
(OeuccuJ gu'crctuvu
W. N. DEWAR, F.S.S
CHIEF OFFICES:
NEW SOUTH WALES—(Temporary Offices) 279 George Street, Sydney.
VlCTORlA—Citizens’ Buildings, Queen Street, Melbourne.
TASMANIA—MiIIer’s Chambers, Murray Street, Hobart.
NEW ZEALAND—Citizens’ Chambers, Custom House Quay, Wellington.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA —King William Street, Adelaide.
QUEENSLAND Citizens’ Buildings, Queen Street, Brisbane.
WEST AUSTRALIA—Hay and Barrack Streets, Perth.
New Assurances, written during 1897, amounted to
14^),.Sterling.


