

PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
|loml (Geographical of
Ijiostralasia,
(SOUTH AUSTRALIAN BRANCH).
“SOME ABORIGINALS I HAVE KNOWN,”
SIMPSON NEWLAND, ESQ., J.P.
SESSION, 1894-6.
h-f 55
Adelaide;
W. K. Thomas & Co., Printers, Grenfell Street.




* - DECI992
The subject I have chosen is one that a
bolder writer might have shrunk from select-
ing, since in the lives of individual aborigines
it may be contended that there is little matter
to interest such an audience as that to
which I recently addressed them. My
apology is that in discharge of one of its most
important functions the Geographical Society
has long been anxious to collect all the in-
formation that can be obtained respecting a
race fast disappearing. I do not, however,
propose to merely deal with hard dry facts,
but to endeavour to give truthful character
sketches, carefully avoiding word-painting or
embellishment. Each individual will be
presented before you as distinctly and
accurately as I can describe him in so
necessarily limited a space. Every character,
with the exception of one, I have personally
known—most of them for many years with
ample opportunity of forming a correct judg-
ment of their qualities. In this paper I shall
not dilate upon the treatment of the aboriginal
by the European in the past or dwell upon the
course that, in my opinion, ought to be adopted
in future. That some amends should be made,
some attempt to wipe out the dark stain on
Australia’s fair escutcheon, is alike due to the
few of the unfortunate people remaining and
to the fame of our country and race.
A brief notice of some of the customs of the
coastal tribes may be interesting, but as my
paper is intended to simply treat with indi-
viduals time will not admit of more than a
limited digression. Their arms in many
respects were very different from those of the
aborigines of the interior, and in some noted
instances inferior. The large nearly round
bark shields formed to a sharp point or apex
at the top and bottom were much more pre-
SOME ABORIGINALS I HAVE KNOWN.
tentious, and apparently a safer defence than
the narrow six inches of wood, the equally
fearless and more skilful warrior of the centre
of the continent only asked to defend himself
from the showering weapons of his foes, but in
reality they were less effective. At close
quarters a heavy spear passed through them,
and the repeated blows of a waddy split them.
The narrow wooden shield on the contrary was
not intended or ordinarily used to stop a blow
or a weapon, but to ward it off. The bark
shields of the Ramingara, or Encounter Bay
tribe, were out and stripped green from gum-
trees, then shaped and hardened by fire.
Withes bent into handles were fixed into the
inner side so as to give a secure hold to the
hero using them. I believe none of the coastal
tribes of this part of the continent knew the
properties of the boomerang or used the
weapon. lam supported in this opinion by
Mr. H. A. E. Meyer, who lived for some
years at Encounter Bay, keeping a school for
the education of aboriginal boys, and with
some success. He is the author of a “Voca-
bulary of the Languages Spoken by the
Aborigines of the Southern and Eastern
Portions of South Australia,” and there-
fore a valuable authority. Mr. Meyer,
does not say the weapon was not
known by the Ramingara tribe, yet as
he makes no mention of it in his work
or vocabulary we may assume that they did
not possess it. He mentions a flat two-edged
weapon about 3 ft. long used for fighting, but
that was not the boomerang. I believe this
is the weapon often confused with it by those
having but a superficial knowledge of the
true properties of the perfect boomerang.
Many of the northern tribes of the continent,
for instance, make a flat elbow shaped instru-


ment, but with no idea that it will do more to allow the blacks to have their fight out.
than cleave the air rapidly. In my journey
to the Finke and Mac Donnell Ranges I cer-
tainly never saw a true boomerang.
I am indebted to Dr, Browne, who accom-
panied Sturt in his heroic expedition into the
interior of the continent, for further informa-
tion on this subject which confirms my own
opinion. He states that he feels confident
none of the tribes on the Lower Murray or on
the coast possessed the weapon. He also in-
forms me that Mr. George Williams (an ex-
cellent authority) even takes a wider range,
and says the natives below the junction of the
Murrumbidgee and for about a hundred miles
up the Darling in addition to the Lower
Murray did not use the boomerang. Occa-
sionally one might come into their possession
from a neighbouring tribe, but it was not of
their own manufacture. On the other hand,
some old residents of the south are under
the impression that the Encounter Bay
tribe did use the boomerang, notably
Mr. Giles Strangways and Mr. Watts
Newland. The former expresses himself very
confidently on the subject. The latter appears
uncertain as to the Ramingaras (Encounter Bay
tribe), but strongly asserts that the Tatiara
natives used the weapon. I am inclined to
think that both confuse the flat elbow-shaped
instrument with the true boomerang, and the
following incident seems to prove it. In the
early days an important battle between the
Ramingaras and their enemies of the Murray
waters was stopped by Inspector Tolmer as
narrated in his book. He states that he
destroyed the combatants, spears, shields, and
waddies, but never a word about boomerangs,
and I cannot conceive so important a weapon
in warfare escaping notice if it existed. The
Rev. R. M. Newland wrote a scathing letter,
condemning Tolmer’s action in destroying the
aborignals’ means of obtaining game for food
as a wanton exercise of authority. Of course
the Inspector acted under orders from head-
quarters, and therefore could not be blamed.
Personally I think it would have been far better
It is an interesting subject, and I trust having
called attention to it the question whether the
southern tribes, particularly the Encounter
Bay tribe, used the wonderful weapon will be
set at rest before it is too late. They had the
womera or tarralye for throwing the light,
short spear, usually made with a thin grass-
tree or cane stem fitted to a wooden point
some 2 ft. long. These could be thrown much
further than the long, heavy, all-wood spears
flung by hand, and were therefore more useful in
skirmishing and hunting. The waddies of all
bear a great resemblance, though some tribes
make different! varieties of these in a very
fanciful manner.
I never remember seeing any attempt
among the Southern tribe at making any tool
or weapon to act as a tomahawk —to use, for
example, to out out opossums from their holes
in hollow limbs or trunks, nor were there any
marks of this having been done, while on the
Darling and other rivers the marks made by
the stone tomahawk are very common
still, and easily distinguished from the
clean cut of our useful steel tool by
their bruised, hacked appearance. Opossums
and kangaroo-rats were much more numerous
on the coast, so that probably there was not
the necessity to resort to cutting them out.
They also used a barbed spear, or more
frequently a sharp hooked stick to draw them
out with, a method I never saw tried on the
rivers except for grubs, and for them a stem
of cane grass with a knob on the end was
employed. This is pushed along the hole
made by the large, fat, rich grub generally in
box or gumtree stems or roots, and the
unhappy owner dragged out to regale the
appreciative appetite of the aboriginal
epicure. Nor were the southern inhabitants
such expert hunters in other respects as their
brothers of the interior. They never appear
to have practised netting birds in the way the
Riverina blacks did. They speared fish from
the surface, though not apparently to a very
great extent. The aboriginal of the rivers


on the contrary transfixed his fish, frequently or trees over streams, pigeons and other birds
when the waters were low and clear, from
below, an extremely interesting and wonderful
operation, worthy of the most skilful oapturers
of earth’s creatures. No doubt the coast
tribes depended principally upon the sea for
their sustenance. Crayfish and other kinds of
shell fish abounded when the European
arrived, besides vast numbers of the finny tribe
they caught in nets skilfully made of tough
fibrous flags, rushes, and grass. Hence there
was not the incentive or necessity to
become accomplished hunters that so
often pressed upon the dweller in the
immense expanse of country where drought
obtains. The seasons being certain there
were also regular crops of grass seeds
and several kinds of fruits, such as native
peach and montries, covering the sandhills on
the seashore in great abundance. Birds were
numerous, and their eggs and young must
have been an important item in the aboriginal
laider, and bear in mind that he was not
troubled by our nice and inconvenient dis-
tinctions between good and bad eggs; indeed
chicken in its earliest and tenderest stage best
suited his decidedly delicate taste and appe-
tite. In very truth, the more I reflect upon
the condition of the aboriginal, particularly
the residents in the rich districts of the coast,
the more I am forced to the conclusion that he
enjoyed an easy life, feeling little of the
struggle for existence that not unfrequently
oppressed the inhabitants of the arid in-
terior.
The Ramingaras no doubt caught birds in
many ingenious ways, but neither they nor
the contiguous tribes appear to have under-
stood the practice of netting then adopted by
the Riverina natives. With them the netting
of birds attained such perfection as to be
almost scientific. The shy fleet emu they
noosed or decoyed near enough to kill with
their weapons. The native hen, or Kirkelle,
was adroitly netted in its thickest haunts,
ducks caught in great numbers in long nets
hung on a line stretched from upright poles
in a similar way in nets hung from trees across
the bottom of glades down which they flew to
water in the evenings. Smaller birds were
obtained in various ways, all evincing a won-
derful knowledge of the habits of animated
nature.
Of the members of the Ramingara or En-
counter Bay tribe in the early days of the
colonization of South Australia among the
most noted were Big Solomon, One-armed
Charley, and Big Tom, There were others
less well known we will glance at presently.
Big Solomon was an immensely powerful
fellow, considerably over 6 ft. in height, and
reputed to be the strongest man in the dis-
trict save one, a prominent headman of the
whale fishery. The rival feats of strength
performed by these two heroes was a frequent
theme among the gossips and lovers of the
marvellous. Solomon never took very kindly
to the whites. He was a hunter and a warrior
and clung to the customs of his forefathers.
I never remember seeing him do a day’s work
whatever the inducement offered. He lives
in my recollection in a much more picturesque,
even heroic form, arrayed in full abo-
riginal panoply for the battle or the
chase. A veritable son of Anak, proud
of his strength, confident of his skill,
he stands armed with the shield, spears,
and waddies of the warriors of his
race. Save for the bars of red ochre
and paint, which grotesquely yet terribly
adorn his fierce features and form, and the
feathers in his tossed up hair, he is stark naked.
Not one thread or stitch of clothing is there to
impede the free use of those massive yet supple
limbs in the strife with foes, in which activity
is life. There were numerous fights in those
early days between the hostile tribes, in which
great Solomon bore his part right manfully.
Are they not written in the Chronicles of
the South, “ Paving the Way,” and to repeat
them would be but to tell a twice-told tale.
Like all the untamable blacks Solomon
died early, but he lived long enough


to realize that his race was doomed breast as in life. His head was held erect, the
to quick extinction, as, indeed, ail
the more intelligent among them realized
almost from the first advent of the
Europeans. Outwardly, with the aborigines
desire to say what would please, they might
speak of our race as “good,” and express
their hope and belief that they would after
death “jump up whitefellow,” but those who
got beneath the thin veneer knew that deep
down there rankled a feeling of wrong and
bitter hatred. Certainly so far as lam aware
the subjeou of this sketch was quite satisfied
with his black skin, and sincerely hoped that
his white brother’s proclivity to grab all would
not extend to the next world. That under
any circumstances they would become white-
fellows is a form of sycophancy I never
heard any individual of any tribe, except the
Ramingara, give utterance to. Solomon’s
influence among his people was great, and
even now his fame as a fighter is not yet for-
gotten by some of the wretched blacks living
in the district, though they are not members of
his tribe, for the Ramingaras are extinct.
One-armed Charley was another irreconcil-
able. A morose fierce man, keenly sensitive
about his mutilated limb, he would never allow
it to be seen. The blacks said it had been
injured by a shark when he was a mere boy,
which would account for its being so shrunk
and small, not larger than the arm of a child.
With the curiosity of a boy I longed to see
it, though far too much in awe of the haughty
warrior to ask to do so or spy beneath the
short opossum cloak that hung over his
shoulder. While he lived the sight was with-
held, but when he died an opportunity came
to visit the encampment one night and
watch the last rites being performed
in honour of the one-armed hero. In the
midst suspended over the centre fire in an
sitting position on a few cross sticks was the
dead chief. Naturally a tall man, his long
unimpaired limbs fully stretched out occupied
Considerable space in marked contrast to the
diminutive shrunken arm hung on his broad
face wearing an even fiercer scowl than was
habitual to him. A slow fire smouldered
beneath the body, and frequently started into
a flame as the grease from the anointed corpse
dropped into it, to be immediately quenched
with a few ashes by one of the watchful
attendants, so that the broil might not burn.
There was a strong smell of “condolly” per-
vading the atmosphere, accompanied by a
subtler odour that appeared strongest near the
suspended figure, and not devoid of that
fragrance so frequently found where soap is
absent. After the grill, which lasted two or
three nights, was perfected, they placed the
remains on a rude platform some feet from
the ground in one of the sheaoak trees then
lining the seabeach. Where ultimately the
remnants of Charley or indeed any of
the Ramingara heroes reposed I never
knew, for it was one of their
peculiar customs to bury in secret and raise
no sign over the grave, in this respect being
quite distinct from the Riverina natives, who
bury openly, and mark and protect the graves
of their dead with long and assiduous atten-
tion. All avoided speaking of the departed
to strangers, but this reluctance appeared
more marked in the coast tribes. The subject
of this sketch was also a man of importance
among his tribe. Though unable to defend
himself effectually in consequence of his
useless left arm, he was a fearless opponent in
many a battle. I remember him figuring in
more than one well-known fight. Right well
he looked, too, in martial array, for his tall
figure was a model of sinewy strength. On
such forms there seemed nothing incongruous
in the paint and feathers ; on the contrary
they were an appropriate adjunct to the
savage accoutrements of the fierce warrior.
Big Tom was a tall, wiry man of a decidedly
pacific disposition, though he could fight like
a demon when the occasion arose. He used
to perambulate the district with his two
wives, invariably turning up at harvest time
o reap at least one field of my father’s wheati,


which he always took by contract. He thus higher estimation among his own than among
utilized the labours of the partners of his joys
and sorrows in a more effectual way than was
possible under the despised daily wage system.
Tom’s attachment to his old master was deep
and lasting, and he looked upon himself as
bound by honour to him in all emergencies.
He would shepherd to fill a gap, or do
anything else if desired ; but harvest
work was his specialty. No more faithful,
honest, reliable soul ever animated a black
form, or a white one either. Without the
smallest attempt at force or intimidation this
service continued for years, until poor old Tom
went to the happy hunting grounds. He,
however, survived both Big Solomon and One-
armed Charley, and indeed the greater num-
ber of his people. Let us hope that his life
was happy and his end peaceful; he certainly
deserved both, for his virtues were all his own,
though he was only an ignorant, generally
despised savage. When some valued friend
has died we laud his virtues in such words as
these, and scarcely feel that we can say more
—“ He was a good husband, a kind father, and
a true friend.” Well, Big Tom was all these.
From him I learned much of the customs and
opinions of his people, and I have often heard
him lament the decadence of his race. He
and all his family figure in “Paving the Way”
at considerable length.
Shaking Jack, so called from being affected
by the palsy, was another noted character.
His appearance was repulsively ferocious, and
struck terror into the women and young
people of the district. He generally stalked
about stark naked, except for a lavish,
gorgeous coating of grease and red ochre. No
doubt the unfortunate wretch was deranged at
times. It is a generally accepted fact that
savage tribes greatly respect the insane. This
is not characteristic of the aborigines of Aus-
tralia so far as I know them. They are
certainly kind to them, as to others of their
sick, but they rather laugh at their vagaries
than reverence them. To the best of my re'
collection Shaking Jack did not excite a much
our people.
We now come to the Darling aborigines, in
many respects a more interesting people. Of
the Parkingee tribe Barpoo, the recognised
chief when the whites stocked the Upper
Darling with sheep and cattle, was perhaps the
most remarkable. In person tall, spare,
stately, in manner quiet, reserved and digni-
fied so far as any whiteman could judge, for
he never unbent to them. Indeed, from first
to last he refused to hold any intercourse with
thehatedßoreemuchlesswork for him, wearhia
clothes, or even eat his food. He was rarely
seen by me, not more than half a dozen times
during the ten years that he lived after my
arrival in the district, and never at the head
station. On the few occasions we met the
proud savage took not the slightest) notice of
the stranger other than by the aboriginal’s
silent sign of aversion, spitting on the ground
as he passed him. More he dared not do—
scarcely that much as time went on, and the
whip might find even his sacred shoulders.
Less than that action of contempt, probably
never noticed by the casual observer, he
would not bring himself to show. Having
once recognised that further resistance was
utterly hopeless, he acquiesced in the submis-
sion of his tribe, and though never submitting
himself he openly, took no aggressive step
against the conquerors, but no doubt many
a poor nameless tramp met his fate at
the hands of the untamable black chief in
revenge for the wrongs of his people. About
such matters all the members of his tribe for
long kept an impenetrable silence, even the
loquacious Watulganya (of whom we shall see
something presently), butt as years passed on I
heard from that gradually more oonfidin g
youth of several suspected murders, though
particulars are withheld. One instance maybe
worth narrating. A drover brought his mob
of cattle from a long dry stage into the Dar-
ling to water. Parched himself, he ran down
the bank and bent over a log to drink. As his
lips almost touched the stream a dead face,


just beneath the surface, met his gaze. He
was very dry, but he sought another spot to
slake his thirst. Who the dead was I never
knew, or any one else. My drover friend and
informant peremptorily refused to show me
the body or describe the place, alleging that
there might be an enquiry delaying him on his
journey. Long afterwards I had reason to
believe that Barpoo’s waddy was not innocent
in the matter.
The squatters denounced the Parkingee
leader as an old scoundrel, and judged by our
code of ethics he probably was. With this
conclusion I once coincided, but with grey
hairs has come a modified judgment. It is
not to be expected that Australia’s pioneers,
when their dangers and difficulties were
around them, could form unprejudiced
opinions of their aboriginal foes. When
Barpoo was hungry he doubtless killed a
sheep or robbed a hut of rations. As already
intimated, I have little doubt he knocked
lonely travellers on the head as oppor-
tunity offered. But have not many of
the heroic patriots of history done
all these things against the enemies and
despoilers of their country. Cool reflection
shows something of what the fierce untamable
spirit must have felt when he saw the detested
interloper take possession of all his country
after slaughtering many of his people in their
vain attempts at resistance, and bend the
survivors to his service, making shepherds and
stockmen of the free hunters, then later to
see them wither and die. There was clearly
nothing left for him but to die too, and die
cursing the Boree.
Barpoo’s influence with the tribe was para-
mount. A noted medicine man and chief, they
implicitly believed in his power to put all
straight in a future world, while he consoled
himself with making death dealing bones and
much cursing of his white foes. Do we
not read in the best of all books that
when all else failed the same ex-
pedient was resorted to on at least one
occasion.
One night by the camp fire, out alone with
Watulgunya, I obtained an insight into the
feelings of the inscrutable black chief. I
asked my sable companion what Barpoo
taught them respecting their future state.
The circumstances were most favourable for a
confidential communication —Watulgunya was
in a mortal funk. We were camped on
haunted ground, in the very midst of the
rocks and oaves where the ghosts of the
dead Mullas held high carnival, and he clung
to me as a very protecting angel. Apostle
Barpoo’s gospel proved precisely what might
be expected—all the wrongs and sorrows of
this world set right in the next; sunny skies
to bask under, flowing streams and luxuriant
plains abounding in fish and game to disiiort
in and hunt over, with the trifling addition of
an unlimited number of perpetually young
and beautiful houris th wn in.
“ Yes, Barpoo had seen all this ; so it must
be true.”
‘ f What of the poor whitefellow ?” I asked.
But, though Wa tulguny abelieved every word
he had been told, yet he did not think it wise,
just then, to risk being sent to so much happi-
ness by telling the Boree his ultimate fate.
Subsequently I gathered that flame and fury
at the will of the saved aborigine would be the
white man’s portion.
Toby, a tall, well-made figure, bearing the
stamp of antiquity upon its every line, flits
across the stage. A face mildly benignant,
covered with grey hair, low-voiced, gentle,
and as innocent as any child. Essentially a
most mildly mannered man, had his colour
been white he would have been a really lov-
able character. A genuine Parkingee, he
also clung to the customs of his forefathers,
he might don the white man’s shirt, or a
petticoat worn as a shirt did just as well; but
he refused to confine his nether limbs in a pair
of trousers as beneath the dignity of an abori-
ginal. The European’s food he accepted as
the best available substitute for the superior
article it had supplanted, but intoxicating
liquor he pronounced “no good,” andexeip-


plified why by staggering and rolling his head down to the camp unobserved I saw the
about, asserting that it so made “Oobora
walk about.” Instinctively and by conviction
he was a teetotaller, though perhaps he
considered sugar a more necessary portion of
his beverage. I have always looked upon
Toby as a perfect gentleman, bearing a marked
resemblance to Don Quixote. His simplicity
was wonderful. He once, being in charge of a
flock of sheep, was annoyed by wild dogs and
came in for “ physio.” A number of baits
duly charged with strychnine were given him
with strict injunctions what to do with them,
for he was just as likely to take them himself
as give them to the dingoes. A piece of
tainted meat tied to a cord was hung over his
shoulder to so carry to a certain point from
which he was to drag it as a trail to attract
the dogs ; on this he was to drop the
baits. In due course he returned trium-
phantly, having conscientiously tramped
the full distance, but still bearing baits
and trail on his baok as when he started.
The young blacks could not speak of this
exploit of the old man without shouts Of
laughter, but he never appeared to compre-
hend that he had given cause for amusement.
Toby considered himself an infallible rain-
maker, for which purpose he chiefly valued
his venerable beard, and when required for
the important ceremonies necessary to
the reluctant element to fall, he out it off with
a liberal, unsparing hand. On such occasions
he would come tome, and after carefully ex-
amining mine would encouragingly say that
when it was a little more “flourbag”it also
could be utilized ; all this with much the air of
an indulgent parent telling achild that “ if it is
good it shall have a treat.” Poor old Toby,
he lived to see all his kindred die. His
son, Jollyboy, the bright, merry boy
that figures in “Paving the Way,” lingered
the last. His loss nearly killed the doating
sire, following as it did the death of his lubra,
though if ever there was a happy release hers
must have been. She had long been ill, but I
never knew the cause until one day on going
blanket thrown baok from her body, reveal-
ing a dreadful cancer full of loathsome insect
life. Picking the insects away with a stick
was kind, gentle old Toby. He looked up,
saw me and burst into a wail of grief, appeal-
ing for assistance where none could be given.
A few days later she died ; surely it would
have been a meroy to have ended her suffer-
ings with laudanum.
Jolly boy, so called from his merry intel-
ligent disposition and boundless good temper,
was a universal favourite. As he is sketched at
length in other pages it is unnecessary to
dwell upon him here. Though inferior to
many of his fellows in horsemanship, track-
ing, or athletic exercises, his qualities were
sterling, and in the difficulties and dangers of
the bush life of those days man could not wish
for a truer, stancher companion than the sub-
ject of this memoir. Jollyboy once had a
quarrel with a noted medicine man, of whom
all were in terror, named Jacob. Jollyboy
asserted that Jacob had made “a bone” to
kill him, which the doctor, or juggler, denied.
A council was held, and Jollyboy was con-
demned to receive a blow on the head from a
heavy club wielded by the accused. The
young fellow bent to the stroke, delivered
with right good will over the crown, and was
sent sprawling. That settled the matter. No
ill blood apparently followed. The owner of
the broken crown expressed himself as satis-
fied ; perhaps he was glad it was no worse.
Jacob grinned sardonically, but was not
supposed to discontinue his nefarious prac-
tices. Scarcely beyond boyhood Jollyboy
sickened and wasted away, of what complaint
I knew not, but it often affected his mind.
Long before the disease appeared fatal he told
me he was dying. Poor boy, in his case, as in
many others, I felt so sadly unable to be of any
use. Probably the medicines given were fro"
quently wrong, particularly chiorodyne, which,
having once taken, they always craved for.
On the death of Barpoo Warlo Jemmy
became the most influential man of the tribe,


and after some years (being instigated thereto
by some of the white jokers) he was duly
crowned King by having a brass plate bearing
his name and title hung round his neck, a
dignity I believe he still bears, though his
subjects are but a remnant indeed. When I
knew His Majesty he was in she prime of
life, a big, strong, heavily built fellow, quite a
marked contrast to his predecessor. He dip-
lomatically truckled to the opinions of the
strongest. Great, very great, at big palavers
and oorrobborees he loved to deck his huge
person in the trappings of war, but though
his courage was never questioned—indeed,
his broken knuckles fractured in hand to hand
combat attested his martial prowess—he then
seldom fought. A hunter to the core he under-
stood the habits of each animal, reptile, bird,
fish, and, I may almost add, insect of
his country. He also possessed a profound
knowledge and had a deep awe of the Mullas,
those malignant spirits that haunted and
destroyed the trembling Parkingees.
“ I hear’em,” the King would say, “ bale
white man only me, that one come up last
night plenty sing out. Mine think it black-
fellow by and by tumble down.”
King James was the husband of Polly, who,
sharing the vicissitudes of his life, was natu-
rally never satisfied until she likewise was
proclaimed his fellow sovereign and wore a brass
plate. At first he treated her pretensions
with complete and profound contempt, but
his better half had all the persistency of her
charming sex and eventually won her ends
and the royal title, which she wore with
becoming grace. Within liberal limits Hi
Majesty appreciated the fascinations of the
bottle, and hereagain HerMajestyclaimedfull
rights and suck for suck. He was fond of warm
apparel and good living, and was very lazy,
but he fully recognised the importance and
necessity of the lighter work of the station
being faithfully carried on—by his subjects.
The real hard laborious work he considered
ought to be done by “stupid walk about
whitefellow.” He would see that some “ boy”
was off at early dawn for the horses, and if in-
structions were imperative, and no one else
available, he himself would bring up the dairy
cows—when the sun had properly warmed the
atmosphere. Still he was a valued institu-
tion, and the Manager could have better
spared a better man.
Jemmy, like many better heads, was hazy on
the currency question. Of gold and silver
there was not much on the Upper Darling,
but he could not see why there should
be any difficulty to a man possessed of a
cheque-book. Are there not those in civilized
life who also look upon that article as a bound-
less source of wealth ? To him it was simply
sitting down and scribbling a few lines ; and
why any reasonable man should demur to that
small trouble was incomprehensible. To every
objection to meet his demands he invariably
replied, “What for ‘no?’ that one only
makum paper.” After a number of young
men had been down with stock to Adelaide
or Melbourne, Jemmy conceived it necessary
to his dignity that he should go. Opportunity
offering he went; but the mob of cattle was
sold at Swan Hill, and he returned with the
drover from that place. He was quite satis-
fied, and ever after he considered he had been
to the Queen of the South city. When any
doubt was expressed, he retorted, “'WanHill
close up Melbourne.”
The relation of a short incident that occurred
will give some insight into his character. Sil-
ting writing one day I heard Miola call
“Booka Boree,” “dead whitefellow.” And
through the open door could be seen floating
down the river the body of some unfortunate
wretch. Only Jemmy and a strange “ walk
about” were available. With them I followed
•n a boat and drew the corpse to land. It was
not a pleasant office. Almost naked, the
clothes were fastened by a belt round his
waist, in the trouser pocket were a few shil-
lings and a knife, on his feet a pair of tolerably
good boots. We dug a grave (a very shallow
one), and hid him away. Before doing so
the white man proposed taking possession


of his boots, while the black man turned
disdainfully away. He, at least, would
touch nothing that belonged to the dead
stranger.
According to the customs of the Parkingees
plurality of wives was allowed, and James,
like many another monarch, had an amiable
weakness for the adorable sex. There was a
tawny charmer, of whom he became ena-
moured and desired to make No. 2, which No.
las strenuously resisted. In the crisis I was
appealed to. The strict letter of the law was
undoubtedly with the monarch, to say nothing
of the suggestive waddy he bore. But what
wife in such circumstances regarded the one
or the other. Queen Polly defied both, and
the King submitted. I cannot dismiss such an
exalted character without a brief summing up
of his virtues. As a wise ruler should, he
understood the signs of the times and adapted
himself to them. He was a good husband and
an indulgent father, a fair catalogue for any
man ; but there is something more. The act
for which he most deserves to be remembered
was begetting Miola, the flower of aboriginal
maidens.
Warlo Jack, surnamed the Silent, was the
brother of King James, but unlike as brothers
can be. Little over the average height, and
slightly, even elegantly, built, he was the very
figure to make a good horseman, a promise
amply fulfilled, for Jack not only could ride
with consummate coolness and ease any horse
that was ever foaled, but he had excellent
hands as well. With horses he was invariably
gentle and kind, though bis temper was
naturally vile. As a tracker 1 never knew his
superior—patient, persevering, once on the
trail he stuck there if it rook a week to run the
quarry down. Day succeeding day I have
been with him, suffering hunger and thirst,
admiring, fuming, storming, occasionally may-
be mildly swearing—for some bushmen have
acquired that naughty habit—but the taciturn
John kept on, his eyes bent on the ground,
scarcely speaking a word from dawn to dark.
To his master he rendered a willing obedience,
but from no other would he take orders, nor
was compulsion easy, as he was ever ready to
fight.
Kitty (she and Jack were both Keelparas,
who cannot intermarry—according to the laws
of the race, a Muckwarra must marry a
Keelparra and vice versa ) was a widow, and in
accordance with the laws of the tribe on the
deathofherhusband she becamethe property of
his brother Billy, otherwise Manum. Neither
youthful nor elegant like Jack, but elderly,
thickset, and exceedingly muscular, what
woman with a particle of taste could hesitate
between the two ? Kitty set the whole com-
munity at defiance. To the commands of the
elders and chiefs, the expostulations and en-
treaties of her kindred and friends, she turned
a deaf ear, and to the waddy of Billy a thick
head. With the charming constancy and
admirable good taste of woman she would,
and ultimately did, have the showy youth in
preference to the adult, staid man.
An early swimming adventure with Jack
is not without interest. During a high flood
in the Darling when much of the country was
submerged it became necessary to cross a
number of cattle locked on a sandhill by the
waters, over a broad billabong to the back
country. There were no boats in those days
on the station, nor had we a bark canoe; our
horses we did not want, to cross so we sent
them home when the cattle were over. There
were three of us, Jack, my friend, and my-
self, and it was our business to get over that
wide belt of water and take our clothes with
us. These, boots and all, we each made up in
a bundle and tied on our heads. Then we
swam to a tree standing some distance out,
its branches above the stream. That haven
we reached merrily, and rested, or
roosted on the boughs for a while
surveying the prospect; and the
longer we looked the less at least two of the
party liked it. It was cold, and the bark of
that tree the roughest I ever felt, and we were
not the only unfortunates who had sought
refuge there ants, centipedes, scorpions,


ferocious maneaters of all kinds wanted to
make a meal of us. Jack soon had enough of
it, and we watched him stem the tide, and a
long way it seemed even for that accomplished
swimmer. Then rather than be eaten alive I
followed, my friend doubting his powers. For
a time it was easy enough, but in the mid-
current there was quite a sea on caused by the
wind meeting the stream, and, being weighted
by a considerable number of garments, which
soon became heavy with water, I was badly
buffeted about, and began to think the
other side further away than ever.
To throw the clothes off meant losing
them and prospective nakedness for an
indefinite period, so I struggled on in the
same spirit as actuated an old friend who was
once precipitated off a steamer into the
Darling without a moment’s warning. He first
went to the bottom, in his surprise not
making a kick; then he thought it was time
to do something, and though he could not
swim a stroke he struggled to the surface,
where he spluttered “I won’t be drowned;
I’ll be hanged if I will, ” and so managed to
keep up until fished out. There was no one to
fish me out, nor was it needed, for when
through the rough water the rest proved com-
paratively easy. While still in difficulties my
companion some distance behind called out
that he could not do it, and when I turned to
look he had thrown his bundle away and was
floating down the current on his back.
Meantime Jack was over, and the moment
he knew the position of affairs he sprang
from the bank, shot along like a copper-
coloured streak under the surface almost the
whole way, and came up under the drowning
man, who then coolly placed his hands on his
shoulders, and so together they came safely
through. Nor was this all. The grand
swimmer then ran down the stream a con-
siderable distance, plunged in, and returned
from a long dive triumphantly with the
saturated bundle of garments. The whole
thing was splendidly done, and probably
struck me the more because at that time I had
nob gone through the nutnero
perienoes familiar to later days.
Jack merely laughed in his quiet way at the
adventure, and, being young, I possibly snig-
gered a little, but my friend bore a serious
face for the rest of the day, nor do I think he
ever tried such a feat again. It is, perhaps,
notout of place here to say that though a fair
swimmer, there was not one sound man,
woman, girl, or boy beyond the age of an
infant in the tribe who could not swim rings
round me. They were simply magnificent in
the water.
Dick (Watulganya) was my first black boy
—that in the bush means personal attendant.
He early attached himself to me; why, it is
hard to say, for the position entailed much
hard work, which never agreed with him. He
was unquestionably in one respect the most
remarkable aboriginal I ever met. Absolutely
the only coward I have known of the race,
and his cowardice was of an utterly abject de-
scription, for he felt not the least ashamed oj
it. His temper was good, for the simple reason
that he had not the spirit to resent anything.
When he had learnt to ride he dare not get
on a horse if it looked back at him, and when
on he tumbled or jumped off if it gave a frisk.
No amount of chaff, abuse, or contempt would
induce him to leave the stockyard fence if the
cattle within were anything more than the
milking cows or the working bullocks. In
person he was well and strongly made with
the exception of his legs below the knees, the
bones of which bowed forward as much as his
calves projected behind. For this peculiarity
he acquired the title of 4< Boomerang shins,”
much to his disgust. Vain as a peacock he
was a great beau, ever decking himself out
in gaudy colours. Always to the front in
a corrobboree, he never took part in a
fight in his life; always a butt, though
somehow liked. Yet all his airs, graces,
blandishments, and repeated endeavours
did not help him to a lubra. Ever in love
and ever in vain, he once appeared on the
verge of gaining a blooming bride, the young


and really attractive, Sporting Barny, full of
fun and frolic. She was a native of the Upper
Paroo, and he had the halo of being a showy
stranger, a horseman, and consequently a
hero. The other swain, commonplace, quiet
Ben was only a shepherd, but withal worth
a score of Dicks. Barny was attracted,
tempted by the superficial visitor for a time,
but presently his blandishments fell flatly,
and with the good sense invariably displayed
by the young and beautiful she stuck to the
substance, as represented by plain Ben, and
allowed the alluring shadow to depart. Dick
pulled a long face, and talked big about fight-
ing, and that was the nearest approach to
bloodshed his ardour ever carried him. As
for Ben and Barny in a few years both were
dead. Both looked strong, yet they quickly
trod the short path to the grave the coloured
race of Australia seem destined to follow.
Ben with characteristic superstition thought
an enemy had made a bone and was killing
him; anyhow he said he was dying, and he
did die, and Barny quickly followed, too
quickly to give expectant Dick a chance to
console her.
Before replacing Dick by a more reliable
attendant I tookjsome long journeys with him,
when it became evident that he could not
track a wagon. On one of these excursions
(it was before the invention of canvas water-
bags) we only had a very little canteen, which
Richard carried. Riding in front I chanced
to look back and caught my faithful slave
drinking up the last drop of water. Being
caught in the act lying or evasion was in
vain, but he felt no shame, merely ob-
serving that he was very thirsoy. Yet
with all his mean and contemptible qualities I
liked the transparent humbug, and having to
drive a mob of fat cattle to Adelaide took
him with me. After that he absolutely
swelled nearly to bursting with pride, and
never ceased bo expatiate upon his exploits.
Years later he came again, and stayed at
Burnside some weeks. Week-days he “ did
the block” about the city, and on Sundays
regularly stalked off to the local chapel,
carrying a white umbrella to preserve his
complexion, “ an example to all,” as a regular
attendant observed.
Paddy was little more than a dwarf, but he
possessed the soul of a hero. My introduction
to him was in this way. In those days when
the unknown stretched before us one’s in-
stinctive desire was to explore it. To the
north-west, where the Mount McPherson
Range is lost in dry waterless tableland, a
large area of untraversed country lay. Of
this the blacks told many tales sufficiently
attractive to excite the ardour of a keen bush-
man to examine it. A friend, myself, and a
young blaokboy named Tarcoo, who had seen
part of the unknown region, started out fully
armed with revolvers and rifles, expecting
great results. Our discoveries, however, were
of no importance, simply because there was
nothing to discover. I forgot—we discovered
Paddy. We were riding over some open
country, when out of a grove of bushes sprung
a small slight figure not more than about 4 ft.
6 in. high, with limbs of the thickness
of pipestems or perhaps walking sticks,
armed to the teeth with spear, boomerang,
and shield. Gesticulating fiercely, he barred
the way. Our boy Tarcoo shouted something,
and the diminutive warrior lowered his
weapons, though he still stood on guard.
Then several women came forward and con-
ferred with Tarcoo, and after a considerable
yabber yabber a number of ambushed men
presented themselves. Before these the boy,
according to the custom of his people, sat
silent waiting to be questioned. Friendly
relations were ultimately established, and in
return fcr the gift of an emu we had shot and
left some miles back they gave us a couple of
native hens, which we greatly preferred bo emu
steak. Some years later Paddy came into the
station, bub he never submitted kindly to the
white man’s sway. His weapons scarcely ever
left his hands, and hesoon pined away and died,
bearing to hisgravean unquenohableantipathy,
which he never oared to conceal, to the Boree.


He left a brother, Ugly Billy, who figures
elsewhere, behind him. Some years after-
wards I was out in that country again and met
a squatter who had stocked some leaseholds we
had taken out. He told me that a blackfellow
then with him had described his first meeting
with white men, and the terror of himself
and companions on seeing them riding across
a plain towards them like “ great big emus.”
I looked up the aboriginal, who recognised me
at once. He told me how in their fright they
had hidden, and that when we left they ran
our tracks back and found the shot emu.
Tarooo, taking him altogether, was the
smartest aboriginal I ever knew. A mere
child when I first met him, he grew into a fine
strong man, not only a perfect master of all
the weapons, exercises, and accomplishments
of a native warrior and hunter, but a good
rider, tracker, swimmer, and the fleetest
runner, except Peter, of the whole tribe,
and yet the muscles of one leg seemed
shrunk. One was certainly less than the
other, said to be the result of a severe
burn when an infant. Tarooo could speak
English well, was very intelligent, and a
splendid worker at almost anything he could
be put to. His temper was not amiable, con-
sequently he was not a general favourite.
Nothing he loved so much as manly games
with his fellows except a downright fight.
Then he appeared in his glory. On one occa-
sion he had a quarrel with his uncle, a man
not much older than himself, and for a time I
did not interfere. King Jemmy urgently re-
quested me diplomatically to take no notice,
as he would take care that nothing serious
occurred. “ Better let blackfellow fight some-
times,” said His Majesty. When I did go up
to the camp the elder combatant had a spear
through his thigh, several severe cuts from a
boomerang, and numerous contusionsfrom wad-
dies. He still stood up, occasionally hurling a
weaponathisopponent, whoevidentlyoonsider-
ing the battle won scorned to return a blow.
There he stood covering himself with his few
inches of shield and a waddy, sometimes
erect, again crouching down to the small
dimensions, but always bold and defiant. Hit
him? Simply impossible, the showering
spears, waddies, and boomerangs glanced
harmlessly from shield and guarding weapon
behind which appeared his exulting face
fired with the fierce ardour of battle. In love
he was fortunate since the fascinating Miola
became his wife, and a good wife she made
him.
Miola stands out as the most striking
character I have ever known among the
aborigines. No other has approached her in
manners, appearance, or ability—indeed
among any people she would have excited
attention. The daughter of their majesties
James and Mary, she always remained
about the head station and grew up with the
white children there. With them she learned
to both read and write a little, sew, cook, and
perform household work as well as the average
white servant. Her appearance was re-
markable. Above the average height of her
countrywomen, her upright carriage made her
look taller; curly black hair, splendid
dazzling, white, regular teeth, great brown
eyes; a velvety, copper-coloured skin, and a
voice musical as a bird’s. Surely that enume-
ration is sufficient to excite interest. Yet
more may be fairly said of this interesting
girl. Brightly intelligent and capable,
while true and faithful to her people,
she had the ambition to lead the higher
life of the European, and was never content
when grown up until a hut was built for herself
and others. For a long time she kept this
clean and comfortable, but in the end the
habits of the rest were too much for her.
From her youth she was destined by the
custom of the tribe to be the wife of Tarooo,
and ultimately she married him, though that
meant going back to the blacks’ camp. He
was both fond and proud of her, and she
returned his affection. They had one child, a
bright merry little fellow. Some years later
poor Miola met the early death that seems the
fate of the best of her people. She died


amented by all, and I am sure that her
memory is yet green, and that all who ever
knew her would speak kindly of her. She
figures in “ Paving the Way,” and her charao_
ter is in no respect overdrawn.
Sketches of “Some Aboriginals I have
Known” would not be complete without some
mention of Baldy, the chief of the Upper
Paroo tribe. For years an outlaw by the
whites he, when his life would have been per-
fectly safe, determinedly refused to yield.
When I first went up with stock into country
on the Queensland boundary Baldy was
spoken of as the leader in every outrage, and
no white man’s life was considered safe if in
his power to take. A neighbouring squatter,
who had recently narrowly escaped with his
life from a hand-to-hand encounter with him,
vowed that he would hunt him to death.
Doubtless the black chief was quite as deter-
mined to kill the white man, particularly as on
the last occasion he had got the worst of it, if
a ball through his body reckoned for anything.
The indomitable outlaw, however, thought
little of such trifles as leaden pellets in
his person, and soon was on the war-
path again, and probably paid back on
some unfortunate the injuries he had
received.
We took black shepherds with our sheep
from the Darling, and, as the tribes were very
friendly, spoke the same language, frequently
intermarried, and, indeed, could scarcely be
considered distinct tribes, we soon established
amicable relations with many of Baldy’s
subjects, and put them on shepherding in
place of the river men, who returned to their
work at the home station. Our new employes
never gave us the least trouble, and as soon as
they understood that neither the Queensland
W, K. Thomas S Co., Printers, Grenfell Street, Adelaide.
police nor our squatting neighbour would
bother them while in our country we had the
whole lot at our service good, bad
and indifferent—all except the redoutable
Baldy. I had messages sent to him to
come in, that no one should molest him
but all in vain. 1 never saw him
in all my rides, drives, or walks, nor did the
overseer, who was constantly on the run for
many years. Much of the country was
densely covered with thick polygonum
swamps, and we were well aware Baldy lurked
there during the day, and late at night often
joined the shepherds’ camps. Sometimes he
went out into back country, away from the
hateful white man, and lived the old hunter a
life, obtaining water from the roots of the
kurrajong-trees growing on the dry tableland
to the west of the Upper Paroo. On an
excursion out there on one occasion 1 saw his
tracks and the thick roots drained of
their contents. Probably the untamable
savage was close by, maybe our black
boy even saw him, but Baldy would hold
no communication with the white race,
though in return for the protection given and
kindness shown to his people he kept the
tacitly understood truce. There were many
similar characteristics in the two unbending
chiefs Barpoo and Baldy. The former was
the more diplomatic (forgive the word so
applied) and abler chief; the latter the
fiercer, more unyielding warrior or robber, if
you will. He, too, has a place in “ Paving the
Way.”
Before concluding I feel that I ought to
apologize to many of my equally deserving
aboriginal friends and acquaintances for not
introducing them to you, but space would not
permit.


E> i&L o
R 2ZJI
M o^
