

pf 'TH- P'nri
\Zbb
?Aji Ititiubt&m.
i>v -2)' TaJsrick JColonti


4
'


/ 0->~
% UiJM?/ v , .... / . / / /' ?
. ? / - v ? / ? z' ? r
/ /
1
s
SONNETS-AD INNUPTAM.
[These sonnets originally appeared, with others, in the Australasian, under the nom de
plume of ? Australis. 19 With the Author's consent they are re-published in this form . ?
Editor,? Easter Omelette.?]
But Hope was left of all Pandora?s hoard,
And thou wouldst rob it, in thy heedless crime,
The only jewel in my casket stored
Against that punctual creditor, Old Time.
It is mine anchor in the boisterous seas
Love?s passion tempests with its windy sighs,
Mine only stay in the unruly breeze,
When rains of sorrow blind my weeping eyes.
When venturous mariners toward the arctic sail
Where flames the Pole-star in the front of night,
Their way is lost if envious clouds do veil
The heaven-hung beacon from their straining sight.
Then what a world of darkness it will be
If thou tak?st Hope, my guiding star, from me.
Here, borne to thee upon the northern wind
(?Neath alien skies with no familiar star),
I live in converse seasons, and my mind
Sees things that are not, sees not things that are.
I know that thou from me art far removed,
Though Fancy feigns ?tis not so high a height,
And whispers still, I am by thee beloved,
Though every sense declares the 1 opposite.
It is the moon (not clouds) that seems to flee
Through clouded skies ; such is, alas ! my lot,
While I do think thy soul doth haste to me,
?Tis mine that goes, not thine that cometh not,
Clouds blot the moon, but I with earnest will
Do strive to make thee more resplendent still.


/ ' <
Prometheus placed the lion in our breast,
And, though degenerate, we are kin with those
That scaled Olympus, and disturbed the rest
Of broad-browed gods, who found us equal foes.
Then do not wonder that I still maintain
Pursuit of thee, whose beauties godlike are ;
Love is a bird of such imperial strain
He flies at quarry be it e?er so far.
Ixion dared to woo the wife of Jove,
And I, unawed, make constant court to thee,
Hoping, as Jove sued Leda for his love,
Thou yet may?st look from thy far height on me.
Great Jove himself, more pitying than thou,
Has made with mortals marriageable vow.
When thou dost see the climbing Morn o?er-peer
The towers of Night, whose watch-lights gleam from far,
And through her realm cast his keen-pointed spear,
Like ancient herald when declaring war;
When thou dost see his fiery car up-strain,
The steepy heaven?s high over-arched cserule,
While from his wheels long beams of lustre train
Like shining threads spun off a golden spool;
Dost thou admire when the unsparing hours
Drown Phoebus? steeds beneath the western flood,
And kill the Day-god in their twilight bowers,
Leaving the skies o?er-reddened with his blood.
What mercy, then, can?st thou expect from those
That fight, and conquer, e?en celestial foes ?
i V r


But Morn revives, and visits earth again,
Bursting the confines of night?s gloom} T hold,
And, mounting up above the surging main,
Slides slow along the eastern slopes of gold.
But, ah! when once thy Beauty?s sun is set,
No second dawning shall its glories know,
But Age's night with tearful dew shall wet
Thine eyes, and crown thee with its chilling snow.
Spring dies, and comes, and on her clouds of flame,
Lifts up the golden morning of the year,
But life again dead Beauty cannot claim,
Nor seek renewal of her closed career.
Year follows year, and day succeeds to day,
But Beauty, dead, it perishes for aye.
From the white clouds that in thine eyes are seen,
Two deep-blue planets glimmer down on me,
Bright as the image of the moon when keen
Along the shiny levels of the sea.
Within those eyes (two suns !) my love would dwell;
But, ah ! the clime was too divine for me.
Like Icarus, who neared the sun, and fell
Sheer in the crystal beauty of the sea,
I too shall drown, for from mine eyes there spring
Tears whose abundance can make for me now
A watery tomb ; and since I?ve not the wing
To reach so high as such a height as thou,
I needs must fall, and I shall find below
A sea to drown : such is my wealth of woe.
- ? ifii < .


Grief ?neath each brow of mine hath scooped a cell,
And at the entrance is a flood-gate placed,
Whose double portal cannot stop the swell
Of tears whose channels down my cheeks are traced
My sighs are acolytes unto my woe,
My tears as holy water are, and these
Uninterruptedly do overflow
From out mine eyes, which are their chalices.
Thus, like the benediction of a priest,
Love sanctifies whate?er concerneth me,
And like the glory round a saint deceased
Makes the gold fleeces of the hair of thee.
Thou art my saint, and I do pray to thee
As ne?er before prayed ardent devotee.
For Acis, slain by the Cyclopean king,
The sea-nymph wept, in whose dissolving tear
His body melted, and became a spring
That ever seaward flowed to meet his dear;
Would so these tears that from my eyelids drip
In sweet solution made a stream of thee,
That I might sit upon thy brink, and sip
Thy waters imaged with the shape of me ;
So that, when dead, and in the deep earth hid,
The rains would melt me till I met thy sluice.
As long ago the amorous Alpheus slid
?Neath earth and seas to mix with Arethuse,
And when they met in sweet commune together.
Rolled on and on for ever and for ever.


The piercing flames within all maidens? eyes,
Are vestal lamps that do preserve the fire
Prometheus stole from the Olympian skies,
And thou art priestess of that virgin choir;
Since thine are as the captain-star that gleams
Without corrival in the front of night,
All lesser fires are swallowed in their beams,
And unrespected in their sovereign light.
As eastern rivers whose inviolate floods
Were tasted only by the lips of kings,
So only princes of the richest bloods
Are fit to see the splendour in those springs
That well forth light, like those twin stars that roll
Around the cross that marks the southern pole.
But Time, the vulture, round thine eyes shall place
The threatening footprints of besieging years,
And plough the level beauty of thy face
In channels filled by thy reluctant tears.
He will not spare thy taper finger-tips,
Nor those white hands whereof thou art so proud,
Nor teeth that shine between thy crimson lips
As does the moon through summer slips of cloud.
The wasting of thy form will but prelude
The narrow compass of thy future home,
Smooth skin o?er-wrinkled and straight back subdued
Are but the packing fits one for the tomb ;
Leagued with the seasons that have made them fair,
Time blots all beauty be it e?er so rare.


I make not my division of the hours
By dials, clocks, or waking birds? acclaim,
Nor measure seasons by the reigning flowers,
The spring?s green glories, or the autumn?s flame
To me thy absence winter is, and night,
Thy presence spring, and the meridian day.
From thee I draw my darkness and my light,
Now swart eclipse, now more than heavenly ray.
Thy coming warmeth all my soul like fire,
And through my heart-strings melodies do run,
As poets fabled the Memnonian lyre
Hymned acclamation to the rising sun.
My heart hums music in thy influence set,
So winds put harps iEolian on the fret.
The rude rebuffs of bay-besieging winds
But make the anchored ships towards them turn.
So thy unkindness unto me but finds
My love tow?rds thee with keener ardour burn ;
As myrrh incised bleeds odoriferous gum,
I am become a poet through my wrong,
For through the sad-mouthed heart-wounds in me come.
These earthly echoes of celestial song.
My thoughts as birds make flutter in my heart,
Poor muffled choristers ! whose sad refrain
Gives sorrow sleep, and bids that woe depart
Whose heavy burthen weighs upon my strain.
Imprisoned larks pipe sweeter than when free,
And I, enslaved, have learnt to sing for thee.


XIII.
Thy throne is ringed by amorous cavaliers
And all the air is heavy with the sound
Of tiptoe compliment, whilst anxious fears
Strike dumb the lesser satellites around.
One clasps thy hand, another squires thy chair,
Some bask in light shed from the eyes of thee,
Some taste the perfume shaken from thy hair,
Some watch afar their worshipped deity.
All have their orbits, and due distance keep,
As round the sun concentric planets move ;
Smiles light yon lord, whilst I, at distance, weep
In the sad twilight of uncertain love,
?Thwart thee, my sun, how many a mincer slips,
Whose constant transits make for me eclipse.
Know that the age of Pyrrha is long passed,
And though thy form is eternized in stone,
The sculptor?s doings cannot Time outlast,
Nor Beauty live save but in blood and bone ;
Though new Pygmalions should again arise
Idolatrous of images like thee,
Time the iconoclast e?en stone destroys,
As steadfast rocks are splintered by the sea.
Thou shouldst indeed a hamadryad be,
Inhabiting some knotted oak alone.
And so revive the worship of the Tree
Which, by succession, outlives barren stone.
Though thus transformed still worshippers would woo
As Daphne-laurels poets yet pursue.


Why dost thou like a Roman vestal make
The whole long year unmarriageable May,
And, like the phoenix, no companion take
To share the wasteful burthen of decay.
See this rich climate, where the airs that blow
Are heavenly suspirings, and the skies
Steep day from head to heel in summer glow,
And moons make mellow mornings as they rise;
As brides white-veiled that come to marry earth,
Now each mist-morning sweet July attires,
Now moon-night mists are not of earthly birth,
But silver smoke blown down from heavenly fires.
Skies kiss the earth, clouds join the land and sea,
All Nature marries, only thou art free.
O what an eve was that which ushered in
The night that crowned the wish I cherished long!
Heaven?s curtains oped to see the night begin,
And infant winds broke lightly into song;
Methought the hours in softly-swelling sound
Wailed funeral dirges for the dying light;
I seemed to stand upon a neutral ground,
Between the confines of the day and night;
For o?er the east Night stretched her sable rod,
And ranked her stars in glittering array,
While in the west, the golden twilight trod
With crimson sandals on the verge of day.
Bright bars of cloud formed in the glowing even,
A Jacob-ladder joining earth and heaven.


XYII.
O sweet Queen-city of the golden South,
Piercing the evening with thy starlit spires,
Thou wert a witness when I kissed the mouth
Of her whose eyes outhlazed the skiey fires.
I saw the parallels of thy long streets
With lamps like angels shining all a-row,
While overhead the empyrean seats
Of gods were steeped in paradisic glow
The Pleiades with rarer fires were tipt
Hesper sat throned upon his jewelled chair,
The belted giant?s triple stars were dipt
In all the splendour of Olympian air.
On high to bless, the Southern Cross did shine,
Like that which blazed o?er conquering Constantine.
P. Moloney.


BLANCHE HAZELWOOD.
F. E. C. HOPKINS.
? Woman?s, at best, a contradiction still.? ? Pope.
? My dear F. R. C.,? said Jack Quill, the Bohemian, sitting, last
Easter, in the clematis-covered verandah at the old home-station,
? you never tell us anything about women. What little you
write is singularly devoid of female interest. Is it that you
have had no experience, or that you are afraid to depict their
follies ? ?
? Neither, friend,? I replied. ? I can pardon your remarks,
for you are somewhat privileged here. I was going to say that
it is impossible to paint the lily, or adorn the rose.?
?That?s evasive. If you said exactly what you meant, it
would be, that you were afraid to skate on thin ice. I verily be-
lieve, you are of my own opinion?that to give ladies anything but
praise, is to make them anything but friends. What one did
you ever meet that forgave another anything ? At odd times,
to be sure, they relent in their antipathies towards the sterner
sex, but never to their own. Women are like olives ?an acquired
taste ; odd ones are very unpleasant. Many resemble leeches
closely : they stick to you till all is gone ?then they drop off;
you can?t coax them any more.?
?For shame!? said I. ? Men are always thinking of them,
at any rate. I feel that I must crush you with a quotation.
Listen :
? Yain is your pomp, and vain your power,
Unless kind woman share your raptured hour;
Unless, ?mid all the glow of pageant art,
She adds her smile, and triumphs in your heart.?
? Bravo ! ? cries my companion. ?We must have some claret
after that.?
And here, dear reader, permit me a short parenthesis.
Jack Quill is a particular friend, but he and I are as different as
black to white, as day to night; still we are, and always have been,


companions. Of late years, unfortunately, our avocations have
separated us a good deal; he spending half his time in an
editors room, and I the major portion of mine in a sheep-
yard. I wonder how it is that people of such different tastes
agree so well! Jack never indulges to excess in drink, yet
sips every liquor under the sun; I, on the other hand, seldom
drink anything but tea or water. He, is passionately fond of
horse-racing, billiards, and loo; while I?well, I, unfortunately,
am not. He has one great advantage, however ?he knows more
of the wicked ways of this world, while I can only boast that I
know a little about sheep and wool. At holiday times, he often
comes to see me, and spends a few days kangaroo-hunting, fishing,
and shooting. Of all good fellows, he?s the best, though riding
makes him very sore, and he says he can?t think whatever people
see in sheep.
His old pipe hangs over the mantelpiece from one visit to
another: it?s the first thing he looks for when he returns. On
jthe occasion I speak of, we were both somewhat tired, after
a long ride. The thermometer stood at 110� in the shade
during the daytime, and at sundown we were taking things
easy, in a negligent, undress style, after sporting about like
porpoises, splashing and spouting in the cool river for fully
half-an-hour.
I left off where we were discussing the merits of women in
general terms.
?Do you know,? said Jack, ? that I had a very remarkable
adventure ?quite a little romance in itself ?since we last met ? ?
?Ah! ? I replied; ? who was the lady ? ?
?F. R. C., you want' to know too much. Still, you shall
hear.?
I may take the opportunity of mentioning that Jack Quill
has the reputation of falling in love with every pretty woman
he meets ; consequently, he is seldom out of debt or danger:
and how he keeps up appearances is something ? passing strange,?
and only known to the children of Israel, who would mourn
sincerely if he shuffled off this mortal coil.


? Promise not to interrupt, and I will give you this strange,
eventful history. It happened last summer. I was somewhat
unwell, and Doctor Gregory, of Collins-street, ordered me out of
town for change of air. I will not tell you where I betook
myself to, but it was a snug little hamlet on the sea-coast, not a
hundred miles from Melbourne. A pretty beach, with shining
sands, a rocky point, and some few white houses nestling in a
cosey nook, where, at times, the trees had fair chances of escaping
the salt-sea winds. There was only one hotel in the place, but
it was a good one; and the proprietor, strange to say, a civil,
obliging, decent fellow. Proprietors of hotels, although servants
of the public, are not usually such. You know how fond lam
of good cookery. Well, this man?s wife was a treasure ?Oh !
don?t start; I only mean as far as the cooking was concerned.
She superintended that department herself, and while I was there
I put on flesh considerably.
? The day after my arrival, I did not get up till ten o?clock ?
a late hour for breakfast; but I was glad to find that it did
not matter when you required your meals ?you could always get
them, with civility, at any hour: the only house in which I
ever came across a good-natured, amiable cook. As the saying
goes, ? It?s the devil sends them ! ? There can be no mistake
about that.
? I began to think I should find time hang very heavily on
my hands. No excitement, no theatres, no society, no St. George?s
Hall. What a change to Melbourne!
? ? Landlord,? said I, ?do you often have many people stopping
here ? ?
? ? Well, at certain times,? he replied, ? the house is full, but
at present there?s no one but yourself, except a young lady ?
? ? A young lady ?? I inquired, my curiosity being aroused at
once.
? ? Yes, sir?a young lady from Riverina. She?s been staying
here nearly a week, for the good of her health, I think. Invalids
often come down this way for a change. You haven?t seen her
yet ? Perhaps I might get a chance to introduce you during the


day; but she?s not fond of company. She told my wife she?d
like to remain very quiet for a week or two.?
? ? Is she pretty ? ? I ventured.
? ? Lord bless you, sir, I?m no judge of that. When a man
gets to my years, he doesn?t think of looks.?
? ? All right, my friend, I won?t press you for an opinion. I
see you have a little quiet humour of your own. By the way,
you forgot to tell me her name.?
? ? Miss Hazelwood.?
? ? What! Blanche Hazelwood ? Her father is an old friend of
mine. I knew him years ago, when he had a station on the
Mitta-Mitta. Take up my card this afternoon.? Hereupon, I
handed him one of my elegant pieces of pasteboard, inscribed in
the usual manner ?
JACK QUILL,
Office of the Daily Bohemian ,
Bourke Street.
? ? Just like my impudence,? you will say; but what the
deuce is a fellow to do at the sea-side when he has nothing to
amuse him ? And then, you know, it would have been positive
rudeness not to have called on an old friend?s daughter, especially
when she had nothing to amuse herself with.
? Years aaro, when I first met Blanche Hazelwood, she was
o ;
quite a little girl, charming and arch in her manner, but, I used
* to think, a little spoiled. What a difference a few years makes!
I could scarce believe that the beautiful, graceful woman I now
met was the child I had known. Old fellow, I like youth most
of all?its days are the happiest, brightest, and best. As babes,
children, boys and girls, we are friends ; but when age comes, it
brings jealousies and rivalries. Heaven only knows what else
besides ! How shall I describe her ? My dear F. R.. C., words
really fail me to do her justice.?
? Pshaw ! ? I interrupted, ? you?re like every other fellow ?or
rather, much worse. The favourite of to-day, nothing can
approach; the favourite of to-morrow, nothing ever could; and
so on.?
v . . _ 'A \
&&. V>. a ;*v : ? . ? r ,? v*. .


? You?re rough?rough, dear hoy. Never mind, here?s her
photograph ; ? and he took from his pocket-book a carte-de-visite.
I must confess, reader, that it was an exquisite picture. The sun
often flatters; and if there was truth in this, the original must have
been one of the handsomest women Nature ever made. The
smile was simply bewitching, and the eyes sparkled with gladness.
? Ah! I thought she?d fetch you, my quiet Arcadian,?
proceeded Jack. ? Lord ! if you could only have seen the original.
What a figure, too ! and such taste in dress ! So graceful in her
manner, all-round perfection?one woman in a hundred thousand.
Before two days, I was over head and ears in love with her. She
wrote me a nice little note, too ; I have it here.?
? For goodness sake,? I interrupted again, ?goon with your
story, if it is one, and don?t show me any love letters. I posi-
tively hate them.?
?Perhaps you never got any. Never mind, I will go ahead
with my yarn. Well, she said she?d be so glad to see me; in
fact, any friend of her papa?s would be always welcome, and she?d
been so unhappy lately. All of a sudden, here was something fresh
?a new mystery. She had been unhappy. About what ? I deter-
mined to find out at once.
? That same evening we had tea together, and talked over old
times, and spoke of old friends. She looked charming ;in fact, I
never was so struck with a woman in all my life. When I went
to bed I determined to do something desperate before I left the
place. I?d run away with her, and marry her?we?d go to New
Zealand, and we?d
But I recollected old Solomon?s bills were
overdue, that my gold watch was in pawn, and my father had
refused point blank to give me any more money.
?As the days passed, Blanche and I grew more and more
intimate, and we were much together. I used to take her out
driving and boating, and did everything I could to make the
time pass pleasantly. She was very communicative, too, and told
me all her family affairs; how, when her papa died, her brother
Tom and self would come into a fortune of sixty thousand pounds,
to be divided equally between them. Think of that!


\ Mr
SmL. ?: L C
? Frequently she said she felt ?so unhappy.? Now, even with
a friend, it is difficult to ask particulars of a secret without being
considered rude or inquisitive. As luck, or bad luck, would have
it, one morning she received a batch of letters.
??What do you think, Mr. Quill? I have just heard from
papa and Tom, and I really think papa will forgive me. At any
rate, Tom says he will. You know, I offended him, some time ago,
and that has been the cause of all my trouble.?
? ? Can I do anything for you, Miss Hazelwood ? ? I suggested,
? I shall be only too happy.?
? ? Nothing thanks,? she replied. ?You have been very kind, and
I am sure I shall never forget the pleasure I have had in your
society. It?s now getting on for a fortnight since Tom went to
Melbourne to see papa, and he says he will be back in about two
days, for by that time he will have all his business settled. You
recollect Tom, of course, at our house, though, I suppose, you
would hardly know him now ? ?
? ? What an affectionate brother ! ? thought I, for she seemed
quite wrapped up in him, and was never done singing his praises.
But to return to the letter that the post brought. There was
one for myself, but I let it lie on the table. I was thinking, not
of myself, but of her . In two days her brother would be back. I
must try and make hay while the sun shone, and not lose this
golden opportunity. How could I serve her ? What could I
do to show her my devotion and affection ? Oh ! if I had only
money ?the Archimedean lever that moves the world ?what could
I not do ? But the financial thermometer was down to zero.
? All day she was in my thoughts ; all night I dreamed of her
?as no mortal ever dreamed before.? As I said before, I was
over head and ears in love. She gave me every encouragement,
too, and always had a bright, beautiful smile to welcome me
with. She was never cross or out of temper. ? What a woman
for a friend, what a friend for a wife ! ?
? And so I dreamed, and went on for several days, with the
unopened letter in my pocket. You may think that the thirty
thousand pounds had a good deal to do with my conduct, but it


hadn?t. At last I summoned sufficient pluck to open the note.
It was from our editor, brief and to the point: ?
? ? I)ear Jack, ?Return at once. WeVe a special mission for you
to Sydney. The proprietors require a voluminous report on the moral
condition of the aborigines of New South Wales. We expect you by
the first coach. I dare say you?re dull enough down at the sea-side.
Jones says he?d have despatched Blinkers, only Blinkers has got the
blight, and we must have these aborigines looked to at once, as letters
are daily appearing in the other papers on the subject, and we are
behindhand.?
? 'Devil take the aborigines of New South Wales, and Blinkers
too, and his ill-timed blight! ? Here was a pretty fix. I should
have started on the day the letter came. It was evident I must
not make any further delay.
? I determined that evening to screw up all my courage to the
? sticking place,? and tell Blanche my feelings; how I loved her,
and would continue to, for ever and ever. But, dear boy, I?m a
most unlucky fellow. Every time I made an attempt to tell her,
somebody either came into the room, or something gave the con-
versation an evasive turn. I then decided I would write to her.
Now that I was going away, it would be the best plan. I would
send her a letter by every post, and she would read for herself in
the Daily Bohemian my masterly articles on the aborigines of
New South Wales.
? She promised to write to me also, and vowed eternal friend-
ship. She would never forget the happy days we had spent
together, and she had been so lonely and so unhappy till I came.
Oh, women, women, how happy or miserable you make us ! As
some one says, you are changeful as the wind or sea. We never
know how long your moods will last.
? And so I parted from her. She gave me her photograph,
and told me not to forget. Forget! How could I, how can I ?
It would be impossible. Will you believe it, F. R C., I fairly
cried in the coach ? I never was so sad in all my life. Her last
words were, ?lf you see Tom in Melbourne, tell him I?m quite well,
and ask him not to forget to bring me the little birds he promised.
Good-bye?good-bye.? ?
wri
\ ?
- .


.


00074023
3 1508
