

. REVS. '.TAMES 15ALLAMYNE AND JOHN EGGLESTON
BIOGRAPHICAL, SKETCH -OF REV. 0. J. DRAPER
INTRODUCTION BY REV. DR. CAIRNS
lltclbournc:
SMITH, 30 SWANSTON STREET
RLL'NDF.LI. AND FORD, I’RINTF.RS, FLINDERS LANE WEST.




H S’ c 9v - -y^
6 SORROW ON THE SEA.
A NARRATIVE
OF THE
SHIPWRECK OF THE LONDON
IN THE
BAY OF BISCAY, ON THURSDAY, JANUARY 11, 1866,
WITH 270 SOULS ON BOARD,
A SERMON ON THE MELANCHOLY EVENT,,
PREACHED IN ERSKINE CHURCH, ON SABBATH. 18th MARCH,
THE REV. JAMES BALLANTYNE
% ferment in Ipmwff of tire gtb. ganni games § mm,
PREACHED IN WESLEY CHURCH, ON THE EVENING OF
WEDNESDAY, 21st MARCH,
THE REV. JOHN EGGLESTON;
% liiojrapljmrl Sketch of tin gtfa. |. Draper,
PREPARED BY THE REVS. JOHN HARCOURT, J. C, SYMONS,
AND J. DARE,
INTRODUCTION BY THE REV. DR. CAIRNS.
HUFcrumc :
A. J, SMITH, 3 0 SWANSTON STREET.


CONTENTS.
Introduction ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• 111
The Tidings ... ... ... ••• ••• ••• H
The Ship ... ... ... ••• ••• H
The Storm and Wreck ... ... ... ... 12
The Saved ... ... ••• ••• •••
Narrative of the Survivors ... ... ... 17
Efforts to Save the Passengers ... ... ... ••• 19
List of Passengers ... ... ... •••- ••• 21
Information Relative to those who Perished ... ... 22
Heroic Deportment of the Crew and Passengers ... ... 23
Other Incidents ... ... ... ••• ••• 26
Sermon in Erskine Church, by Rev. James Ballantyne ... ... 31
Sermon in Wesley Church, by Rev. John Eggleston ... 41
Biographical Notice of Rev. D. J. Draper, by Revs. John Habcoubt,
J, C. Symons, and J. Dare ... ... — —5 O


INTRODUCTION.
God’s people are a closely united family. The bond that knits
them together is the dearest, the tenderest, the strongest, of all
ties. Nature is weak compared with grace. The grace that binds
in one the many hearts of believers is mightier than death, and will
flourish in ripened excellence when death has been swallowed up in
victory, and heaven—a holy, happy heaven —is the eternal home of
the redeemed. We read, “Ye are the body of Christ ; there should
be no schism in the body, the members should have the same care
one of another; whether one member suffer, all the members should
suffer with it, or one member be honoured, all the members should
rejoice with it.” In the same spirit the Apostle exhorts the disciples
in Rome, “ That they rejoice with them that do rejoice, and weep
with them that weep.” It is, therefore, in the very spirit of Our
Lord and of our calling in Him that we invite our readers to make
the case of our mourning friends their own, and partake of the cup
of sorrow which they have been compelled to drink, and to express
a warm sympathy with our neighbours, whom the Lord in His
inscrutable wisdom has plunged into deepest grief. At the same


time we owe a great duty to ourselves at this solemn juncture. For
the blow that has bruised our neighbours’ heart is intended to soften
our own. The chastening rod that has descended with swift and
stunning violence upon them alights also upon us, rebuking our
apathy, and stimulating us to redeem the time, for the days are
few and evil. God is warning us, let us hear and accept the
warning! He is imparting a precious lesson, let us diligently
hearken and apply it!
The present visitation of death is too fearful a sign of God’s
sovereignty, and too disastrous in its apparent effects, not to demand
our earnest and prayerful consideration. Some of the features of
this awakening providence are well deserving of our notice.
Our departed friends had acted for the best in their arrangements
for a long voyage. They had selected one of the noblest vessels that
naval science had ever constructed, manned with a select crew, and
guided by officers of great experience and ability. Humanly speaking,
idiey had made a wise and prudent choice, and might reasonably
expect a prosperous voyage and a speedy arrival in this our adopted
country. Provided with all the comforts and conveniences with
which modern ingenuity has furnished the saloons of so magnificent
a ship, they could reckon securely that every satisfaction would be
theirs compatible with life at sea, that the time would not hang
heavy on their hands, and that in the brief compass of some sixty
-days they would reach our sunny shores. But God had other views
ifor them. He had made a very different arrangement. He had
given a commission to his servants, the obedient elements, to arrest
that ship at the outset of her career, and to set free for Him
the souls which were His by all the bonds of eternal love.


This commission might carry judgment to some. No doubt
it did to every one on board that doomed vessel who was the
obdurate enemy of God. But it is with Christian friends alone
that we are now concerned, and for them he came as he had pro-
mised ; not, indeed, at the time, and in the manner expected, but at
the seasonable time, at the set time, and in the way which his uner-
ring wisdom devised at the bidding of his love, as best —as the very
best—for them. His ways are not our ways; but they are “ mercy
and truth unto His people.” “ His way was in the sea, and His path
in the great waters.” But as of old He led Israel like a flock by the
hand of Moses and Aaron—led them through the cloven breast of the
Red Sea, while the voice of thunder was in the heaven, the lightnings
lightened, and the earth shook ; so here, He himself came, and
through that foaming deep as through a golden gate, he led their
emancipated souls up to the city of God —up to bliss ineffable—
up to an ever-blooming paradise —up to the saints in light—up to
thrones in glory—to be with Him where He is, partakers of His
holiness and joy, and to be for ever with the Lord.
The last enemy is Death. We must fight the closing battle
with him somewhere. Violent will it be whenever fought. It
came to them on the deck of that foundering ship, amid the roar-
ing of the tempest winds and the shock of the pitiless waves. All
was done that the skill of man could suggest or his energy en-
deavour, But vain were human efforts —vain the strength of iron
—vain the coolness and intrepidity of dauntless hearts. The storm,
as if exulting in its vehemence, and resolute to have its prey,
made breach upon breach; blow followed blow with shattering
force; the massive defences were shivered like brittle glass, the


cabins filled with the seething surge, and the awe-struck passengers
and crew (or those of them who remained alive, clinging to each
other on the flooded poop) betook themselves to prayer.
There is a thrilling interest in the simple story as we have read
it. “At ten o’clock on that fatal Thursday Captain Martin told them
how it fared with the ship—that there was no hope of rescue, and
that she was sinking. It is some consolation to read of the calm
and solemn resignation with which they heard this appalling an-
nouncement. There was no shrieking, no rushing on deck, no frantic
and agonised cries. There was dismay, but no disorder. Mothers
were weeping sadly over the little ones about to be engulfed
with them, and children, ignorant of their impending death, were
piteously inquiring the cause of so much woe. Friends were taking
leave of friends, as preparing for a long journey; others were
crouched down, with Bibles in their hands, endeavouring to snatch
consolation from passages long known or long neglected.” The Rev.
Mr. Draper’s attentions were unceasing, praying now with one,
and now with another, and again in the midst of a crowd implor-
ing mercy for all. * * * “ The cutter did not quit a
moment too soon, for it had not proceeded more than 80 yards from
the ship when the London went down stern foremost, with her
crowd of human beings, from ’whom one confused cry arose, and then
all teas silent for ever."
In that crisis, Christ had His ministers to speak words of hope,
and to embody the anxieties of all in supplications with strong
crying and tears. Surely, the Lord intended mercy, -when He had
there His ministers of mercy. Surely, there was salvation in that
solemn hour, when the Saviour had His own servants there to


declare it and to offer it in His name. Yes ! all was well for every
one who really called upon the Lord, and looked to Him as the day-
star of the heart. And if in that dismal time the very worst of His
enemies entreated His compassion, as did the thief upon the cross,
his faint and timid hope would not be disappointed. No ! those
broken prayers, those sobbed-out supplications for mercy to par-
don, and grace to help, would be answered by a glorious deliver-
ance from sin, and death, and hell.
“ Weep not for the dead, neither bemoan them.” They are
beyond the reach of our condolence ; nor do they need it.
They have entered into rest. They are rejoicing spirits now.
Christ hath wiped all tears from their eyes, and the days of
their mourning are ended. It is with the living we have to do.
Let us mingle our tears and sighs with the bereaved, for it will
relieve the intensity of their distress to know that we share it
with them. Let us bear them on our hearts at a throne of grace,
and ask for them the sympathy of Him whose divine office it is
“to bind up the broken-hearted, and to comfort all who mourn.”
Separation from Christian friends is only for a little while. In
Christ there is indissoluble union, and no death. He is our life ;
because He lives, all who are His shall live also. Life in this world
is at the longest but as a watch of the night, a brief interval that is
momentarily contracting. Soon the hour of our departure will
strike, and whether on sea or on land, whether by a sudden
summons or by a lingering decline, whether by a violent stroke or
by a gentle sleep-like change, we shall quit this scene of trial, and join
the Lord and our beloved friends in a kingdom that shall never
be moved. Let us cherish the blessed hope of a happy re-union.


They liave gone before, we follow. Without us, if we are in Christ,
they cannot be perfect. They not only remember us, but they look
for us ; they wait our appearing; they will welcome our arrival
on the blissful shores of the heavenly Canaan, and we shall live
with them for ever, for ever adoring God for the wonders of His
love in redeeming us to Himself.
Hark ! how th’ adoring hosts above
With songs surround the throne !
Ten thousand thousand are their tongues ;
But all their hearts are one.
Worthy the Lamb that died, they cry,
To be exalted thus ;
Worthy the Lamb, let us reply,
For he was slain for us.
ADAM CAIRNS.
Chalmers Manse, March 27, 1866.




FOUNDERING OF THE S.S. LONDON,
Bay of Biscay, Januaey 11, 1866.
See page 16.


NARRATIVE
THE LOSS OF THE LONDON.
THE TIDINGS.
A grief of no common magnitude has fallen on this city and
land. The steamer that brought the January mails to us brought
with them “ a freight of woe.” The burden of the brief and
terrible tale was that the steamship London had foundered in the
Bay of Biscay, with 270 souls on board. As the appalling tidings
spread with electric speed, business came almost to a dead stand,
men gathered in groups at the corners of the streets, the most
painful anxiety and suspense were exhibited, and the city became
shrouded in gloom. The ship was so well known ; the officers and
many of the crew had been so frequently in our port, and not a few
of them were so much respected • the loss of life was so large, and
the disproportion between those who were saved and that loss was
so great; the passenger list numbered so many well-known and
esteemed old colonists and intending visitors, whose advent would
have been greeted with affectionate welcome; and the chasm opened
in many a family circle is so wide and saddening, that it was scarcely
to be wondered at that the tidings should penetrate with a great and
sudden grief every relation of life and all the ramifications of society,
and that men should stand awe-stricken in the presence of the
fearful calamity.
THE SHIP.
The London was an iron ship, almost new, of 1700 tons
register, and was built in the private yard of Messrs. Money
Wigram and Sons, her proprietors, at Black wall. Captain Martin,
* The information contained in the narrative is compiled principally from the Home
News, and the daily papers.


her commander, formerly of the Suffolk, and who was well known
in connection with the Australian passenger traffic, was a navigator
of great experience and skill, and had, we understand, a large
stake in her. She was of the highest class at Lloyd’s, and, as
she had already made two successful voyages to our shores and
home again, a long career of prosperity was anticipated on her
behalf. Like the most of the Blackwall clippers, she was con-
structed more with a view to high speed in smooth water and under
light winds than for surpassing' runs in heavier weather. Whether
this peculiarity of build had to do with her loss, or that
dreadful misfortune was attributable to the character, quantity, or
position of her cargo, it would be premature to say. When the
mail left England, inquiry was being made into the causes of the
wreck by the Board of Trade, and in due time we shall come into
possession of the results.
THE STORM AND SHIPWRECK.
The London left the East India Docks on Thursday, the
28th December, and dropping down to Gravesend, sailed thence
on Saturday afternoon, the 30th, under charge of a river pilot. As
the night was wild and the wind dead ahead, the ship brought up at
the Nore, and lay there during the whole of the following day.
There were three clergymen on board—the Rev. Dr. Woolley, Prin-
cipal of Sydney University; and the Rev. Messrs. Draper and Kerr.
At daybreak on Monday, January Ist, the anchor was weighed, and
the ship steamed down Channel, still against a head wind, but
making fair way. While passing outside the Isle of Wight the wind
increased to half a gale, and Captain Martin deemed it prudent to
put back and lie-to for the night in St. Helen’s Roads. On the
morning of January 2nd, the London proceeded through the Needles
into the open Channel, the wind being still ahead, but light. As the
ship ran down the Channel the wind rose and the sea increased, and
a couple of hours after passing the Needles the wind blew a gale right
ahead, with a heavy sea rolling, which continued all the way to Ply-
mouth, where the ship arrived about noon on Thursday, the 4th
January. A sad casualty occurred here. A pilot cutter put off a
small boat, having on board the pilot and his assistant, to bring the
London inside the breakwater. When the boat was about 100
yards from the London a sea capsized her, and both the pilot and


liis assistant were thrown into the water. Captain Martin instantly-
ordered one of his lifeboats to be lowered, and with great difficulty
the assistant pilot was rescued, but the pilot was drowned. The
London came to an anchorage inside the breakwater at 1 p.m. on
the 4th, and during the afternoon took on board those of her first and
second-class passengers who had arranged to join the ship at Plymouth.
At midnight on Friday, the sth, she proceeded on her voyage, the
weather being at this time calm, with a light wind ahead. She
had full steam on during the whole of Saturday the 6th, and
the voyage proceeded very satisfactorily until Sunday morning,
the 7th, when the wind increased, and a head sea gradually
rose. During this day the London passed several ships, and
nothing occurred to create the smallest uneasiness in the minds
of any of the officers of the vessel. On Sunday night the wind
increased to a gale, and the sea rose considerably. Early on
Monday, the Bth, the ship w r as well clear of the land, and Captain
Martin, having ordered the engines to be stopped, set his topsails,
and so endeavoured to keep the ship moving slowly ahead. At
noon on this day, the wind having somewhat lulled, the engines
were again set in motion, and she kept steaming slowly ahead through
the night. At 8 a.nu on Tuesday, the 9th, while the captain was
still endeavouring to keep the ship in her course by means of the
screw, the violence of the gale carried away at one sweep the jib-
boom, the foretopmast, the topgallantmast, and the royals. These
large spars were not wholly detached from the ship, but, hanging
fast to the stays, swung to and fro with such violence that the crew
were wholly unable to secure them. About two hours later the
mainroyalmast was blown completely out of its socket and added to
the general wreck. Captain Martin, who had not been in bed since
the previous Sunday night, was not at all disheartened up to this
moment ■ but as the gale continued to increase during the morning,
with a sea already running mountains high, the position of the ship
was undoubtedly felt to be one of some peril. Still, as the wind
had somewhat veered round, the engines were kept steaming easy
ahead, and it is believed that at this moment no person on board
felt any anxiety for the ultimate safety of the ship. About 3 p.m.
on Tuesday, however, a tremendous sea struck the ship, and carried
the port lifeboat clean away from the davits. All that evening and
through the succeeding night the wind blew a very heavy gale, and
the sea ran very high, but the screw was still kept steaming easy
ahead. At 3 a.m. on Wednesday, the 10th, Captain Martin sent


for Mr. Greenhill, the chief engineer, and informed him of his
intention to put the ship about and run for Plymouth, and
he desired that full speed should be got up directly. This was
immediately done. In half an hour after the ship’s course had been
altered she was again struck by a tremendous sea, which carried
away the starboard lifeboat, and which stove in the starboard
cutter. At noon on this day the ship’s position was lat. 46.48 K,
long. 8.7 W. A very heavy cross sea was running, with the wind
now dead astern of the ship, which caused her to roll heavily. But
no danger was even now anticipated, and all through the evening of
Wednesday, and long after midnight, the ship continued to steam
slowly ahead, the captain and his officers remaining steadily at their
posts, and the passengers appearing to have full reliance upon the
skill of Captain Martin to bring them safely to port. At 10.30 p.m.
on Wednesday, the ship still rolling deeply in a heavy cross sea, and
the wind blowing a whole gale from the south-west, a mountain of
water fell heavily over the waist of the ship, and spent its destructive
force upon the main hatchway, over the engine-room, completely
demolishing this massive structure, measuring 12 feet by 8 feet, and
flooding with tons of water this portion of the ship. Instant
endeavours to repair the hatchway were made with a promptitude
and vigour commensurate with the imminent crisis. Every spare
sail that could be got at, and even blankets and mattresses from all
parts of the ship, were thrown over the aperture; but each suc-
ceeding sea shipped by the vessel tore away the frail resource of
the moment, and not more than ten minutes after the hatchway
had been destroyed the water had risen above the furnaces
and up to the waists of the engineers and firemen employed in this
part of the ship. The lower decks were also now flooded with
the rush of waters the ship was continually taking in. The chief
engineer remained at his post until the water had risen above his
waist, when he went on deck and reported that his fires were out,
and his engines rendered useless. Captain Martin, with calm con-
viction, remarked that he was not surprised ; on the contrary, he
had expected such a result. Finding his noble ship at length little
more than a log on the water, he ordered his maintopsail to be
set, in the hope of keeping her before the wind. This had scarcely
been accomplished when the force of the wind tore the sail into
ribands, with the exception of one corner, under which the ship lay-
to throughout the remainder of the night. The donkey engine was
supplied with steam by a boiler upon deck, and all the deck pumps


were kept going throughout the night, and the passengers of all classes,
now aroused to a sense of their imminent danger, shared with the crew
their arduous labours. Notwithstanding every effort, the water still
gained upon the pumps, and the gale continued at its height \ cross
seas with tremendous force were constantly breaking over the vessel.
The motion of the ship became slow and heavy, and she refused to
rise to the action of the waves. At a quarter after 4 o’clock on Thurs-
day morning, January 11, she was struck by a stern sea, which carried
away four of her stern ports, and admitted a flood of water through
the breach. From this time all efforts were useless, and at daybreak
Captain Martin, whose cool intrepidity had never for a moment for-
saken him, entered the cuddy, where all classes of the passengers had
now taken refuge, and responding to an universal appeal, calmly
announced the cessation of all human hope. It is a remarkable fact
that this solemn admission was as solemnly received—a resigned
silence prevailing throughout the assembly, broken only at brief
intervals by the well-timed and appropriate exhortations of the Rev,
Mr. Draper, whose spiritual services had been incessant during the
previous twenty-four hours. At 10 o’clock, the ship still rolling
deeply, an attempt was made to launch the starboard pinnace,
but a sea struck her just as she reached the water, and she sank,
leaving a crew of five men still struggling for their lives. As
the ship was lying-to three of them managed to scramble up the
sides of I*he ship, and the other two were rescued by ropes being
thrown to them. After this the exhausted crew appeared indifferent
to their fate, and no other effort at launching the remaining boats
was made until 1 o’clock, when, the water having reached the main
chains and the ship evidently settling down, the port pinnace was
got over the ship’s side. Even at this moment the sea was so heavy
that those of the passengers who were within reach of the boat
appeared to prefer the frail shelter of the sinking vessel to the
obvious dangers of a small boat in a raging sea. At this crisis Captain
Martin, always at hand, addressing Mr. Greenhill, his chief engineer,
under whose command this particular boat was rated, said —“ There
is not much chance for the boat; there is none for the ship. Your
duty is done; mine is to remain here. Get in and take command of
the few it will hold.” Thus prompted, Mr. Greenhill, with his fellow-
engineers and some few others, numbering only 19 souls, among
whom were only three second-class passengers, quitted the ship, with
only a few biscuits in the shape of provisions, and not a drop of
water. When the boat put off many of the passengers, who, although


expecting death, little knew how very soon it was to come upon
them, waved their handkerchiefs, and cheered when the boat got
about a dozen yards from the ship, being apparently anxious
that some should live to tell their hapless tale. The boatswain,
Stedding, of Blackwall, who has left a wife and five children; the
butcher, from Blackwall, who has left a wife and family ; Ham, the
cook, a married man, and a very old servant of the owners; the baker
(name unknown), and the purser’s mate, William Eiley, had made
up their minds to leave the steamer in the remaining small boat
over the cuddy, and had provisioned and launched her ; but no sooner
were they ready to put off than the foundered ship quickly slid below
the waves, and left for a moment an awful gulf, within whose walls
of dark whirling water they fell, with every human being and every
article around, and were soon swallowed up. The passengers were
seen with lifebelts, but probably none were alive when they came to
the surface. The spectacle was only to be seen, for in the din of the
tempest no cry from the sinking multitude could be heard, and soon
not a vestige was visible. As the ship sank it was seen that all on
deck were driven forward, not by Avater, but by a tremendous and
overpowering rush of air from beloAv, which, as it escaped through
the deck as well as the hatches, impelled all on deck forward with
violence, and their dreadful struggle must have been soon ended. It
was remarked that the third officer, who Avas named Angel, stood to
the last to his post at the donkey engine, which Avas employed in
Avorking the pumps, and that his hands were on the engine even
as the vessel disappeared.
THE SAVED.
A compass had been given to the creAv of the pinnace by the
captain, and under the directions of King, the men agreed that,
whatever might happen, they would ’ sit immovable except Avhen
pulling at the oars. Two worked at each oar, and they ran before
the sea. Every nerve was exerted to make the boat withstand the
fearful tossings and the strain as she mounted the waves and became
surrounded by the surge. Before daylight, and as the moon rose,
the men were overjoyed at descrying a vessel close alongside. They
hailed the ship, and were heard, but as they could present no light
they could not be seen, although they could see the ship tacking
about for an hour trying to find them. The search Avas fruitless,


and the ship was lost sight of. The boat had not been rowed during
the time the ship was sighted, but simply kept away before the wind
until daylight, when no vessel was visible. The men adhered to their
course, and at 9 o’clock sighted two vessels, but were prevented from
making for them by the cross seas. They rowed for one of them,
however, for five hours. When at last they came up to her, they
found her to be an Italian barque, the Marianople, Captain Cavassa.
Just as they were approaching the vessel, they were struck by
a heavy squall and shipped a sea, so that all in the boat gave
themselves up for lost, but only by one of the men moving in
the boat to bail her out, and no fresh seas striking her, they were
enabled to bail her clear, and bring her up alongside the barque, A
line was thrown to them, and they were drawn up to the deck, where
they found themselves completely benumbed by the exposure to
which they had been subjected. Captain Cavassa, who could speak
little English, to whom the men feel grateful to the most extreme
extent, used more means for their recovery and for their comfort than
simple humanity would dictate. He had the men stripped, rubbed,
and clad in fresh warm garments, and he killed for them a turkey,
besides providing tea and soup and setting apart for them warm beds.
At that time the ship was in 46.48 N. lat. and 7.13 W. long., and was
bound for Cork or Falmouth. They were landed at the latter port,
and proceeded by train to London.
NARRATIVE OF THE SURVIVORS.
The following narrative has been collected from the statements of
Messrs. Munro and Main, two of the survivors, who are now in London.
Messrs. Munro and Main were passengers on board the London, and
they say that on the Tuesday a kind of gloom prevailed amongst
the passengers. That was the day on which the masts were torn
away. Some said from this time that they would never see
Australia again. As matters became worse, they all grew more
resigned. Early on Thursday morning, husbands and wives and
children assembled in the saloon, listening to the Rev. Mr. Draper,
and praying devoutly. A complaint was made that the married men
were prevented by their wives and children clinging to them from
working at the pumps ; but the answer was, “ How can I leave
them 1 ” Mr, Munro says it would be impossible to describe that
harrowing scene. Money, watches, chains, and valuables of all


kinds were lying about. All was dust now. The catastrophe was
now near at hand, and at this point the narrative of the boat begins.
At a little before 2 o’clock, the hour at which the vessel went down,
the ladies in an insensible state were floating about on the poop of the
ship, and at this time both Mr. Munro and Mr. Main, looking out upon
the little boat that was being tossed like a cockle shell—now close to,
and anon 20 yards from the vessel’s side—remarked that if they had a
chance they would not get into her, believing it impossible for her
to live. But, suddenly they felt the big ship leave as it were their
feet, and then it was that they resolved to take chance in the small
craft. As soon as Mr. Munro got into the boat the doctor’s assistant
offered him .£SOO if they would take him in. To this offer one of
the sailors replied, “Keep your money, and look after yourself.” To
this the assistant answered, “ I am your doctor, and you are bound to
take me with you.” All this time they were pulling away from the
ship, Avhich five minutes afterwards sank beneath the waves, and
although at this awful moment the small craft was some considerable
distance off, still it is the opinion of the sailors that had they been
one minute later in leaving the ship’s side the boat would
have been sucked down into the vortex. It is a matter of
great surprise to those who fortunately took refuge in the boat that
she should have lived in such a sea, and that too with seven persons
more than she was built to carry. All that the now wearied crew had
with them were three bottles of brandy, one bottle of champagne, some
fresh water, and a bunch of raw carrots. They had not started long,
however, upon the dreary journey before their fresh water was de-
stroyed by the constant seas that broke over them. They consumed
the bottle of champagne and two bottles of the brandy during the
Thursday night, and the third they could not find, so that they were
left almost at the outset with but a few carrots for sustenance.
Leaving the scene of the wreck, they put the boat’s stern to the sea,
and drifted due south dead before the wind, in the very opposite
direction to that which they desired to make, but to have attempted
to steer the boat would have been instant destruction. They con-
tinued thus at the mercy of one of the most terrific seas that ever
rolled in the Bay of Biscay till about 12 o’clock at night, expecting
every moment to be swamped. At this hour the wind somewhat
abated, and veered to S.S.E., but so black was the night that they
could not even see each other. They all prayed for daylight, and as
soon as dawn was seen breaking in the east it seemed to impart to the
sufferers fresh life and a confidence that they would be saved, for,


to quote Mr. Munro’s words, “ I felt convinced that, as our little'
craft had lived through the dreadful night, she would live through
any sea we might encounter.”
As the morning advanced the wind decreased in violence, and the
black clouds that kept sending forth drenching showers descended
almost to the sea. They saw the first vessel about 4 o’clock, but
owing to the wind and tremendous sea over which they were being
carried, it was impossible for the vessel to find them.
About 7 o’clock on the Friday evening they saw a schooner on the
port side, and held a consultation as to whether they should pull
towards it, but Mr. King objected, and shortly after that one of the
men in the boat jumped up and exclaimed, “ There’s another ship,
boys.” King still objected to facing the weather, upon which one of
the crew swore that it was their only chance, and that if King
refused to make for it, he would “ stave the boat in.” King then
said, “ Well, Igo and they accordingly pulled to the vessel that
rescued them from their perilous position, and brought them safely
to port to relate the sad disaster that has thrown a gloom over the
United Kingdom.
Mr. Munro, from whom a portion of this narrative has been derived,,
is a native of Montrose, which he left some time ago to go to
Australia, where he had business connections with the gold diggings.
EFFORTS TO SAVE THE PASSENGERS.
Very considerable astonishment has been expressed that no effort
was made during the two days that the ship was in imminent danger
of going down to prepare rafts and use similar means to give an addi-
tional chance for the safety of the 23d* souls on board. The testi-
mony, however, of both the passengers and the rescued crew goes to
show that Captain J. B. Martin—of whose skill as manifested
during the storm they speak in terms of the highest commendation
—did not order the construction of rafts because the wind blew
with such severity, and the waves leaped over the steamer in such quick
succession and tremendous force, that no men could have worked on
the deck, and even if they had succeeded in building a raft there
could be no hope of any of the unfortunate people being enabled to
cling to it alive for many minutes in such a sea. So soon as it was
determined to launch the lifeboat, plenty of assistance was at hand
to effect the launching, but the passengers and crew, who had beheld
* More recent information states the number of passengers and crew to have been 289.


the starboard lifeboat washed away on the preceding day, were
horrified at observing their only remaining lifeboat slip through the
stern davit, break into two parts, and, of course, become utterly
useless. It was then resolved that the iron pinnace, capable of
carrying fifty persons, should be launched, and by the aid of the
donkey engine, the pinnace was raised and hung over the leeward
rail. When let go, however, she foundered, one man, a Dutchman,
being drowned, and three others, who were rescued, being cast into
the surf to leeward. Two of the men who were overboard were
John King, the able seaman, to whose marvellous skill as steersman
the survivors entirely and with gratitude attribute their preserva-
tion, and Mr. Munro, a passenger, who hung in the davit until brought
in by Edward Gardner, the steward. King had one of his sides
bruised and his thigh dislocated by being beaten against the steamer,
and Gardner received injuries in his back. Nothing then remained
on board the ship but an ordinary six-oared capfain’s gig and a still
smaller boat on the top of the cuddy or cookhouse. After con-
siderable hesitation, it was agreed that a boat should be launched for
the second time, and an opportunity was presented for passengers to
embark in her, but only three passengers and sixteen of the crew
availed themselves of it, and if they had delayed three minutes
longer than they did, they would have perished in the ship. The
precaution was taken that only three or four of the sixteen of the
crew who committed themselves to the boat should be allowed to
jump into her while she was being lowered, and by this means she
reached the water without mishap, and the rest were enabled to
follow. The crowd on board were afraid to leave the ship, having
naturally been frightened by the sinking of the iron boat, and those
who put off in the second boat were shouted at not to make the
attempt, as their chance was
made.
hopeless
Some heroic sacrifices were
LIST OF
THE
SAVED.
John Greenhill, engineer.
John Jones, second engineer.
John Armour, third engineer.
Thomas Brown, fireman.
W. M. Edwards, midshipman.
D. T. Smith, boatswain’s mate.
William Daniels, quartermaster.
John King, A.B.
Benjamin Shield, A.B.
Richard Lewis, A.B.
James Gough, A.B.
Edward Quin, A.B.
William Crimes, O.S.
A. G. White, boatswain’s boy.
William Hart, carpenter’s mate.
Edward Gardner, second - class
steward.
D. G. Main, passenger,
John Munro, passenger.
J. E. Wilson, passenger.


LIST OF THE PASSENGERS.
I'IRST CLASS.
Rev. Mr. and Mrs. Draper.
Mrs. Owen and child.
Mr. and Mrs. G. E. P. Urquhart.
Mr. J. Patrick.
Mr. G. V. Brooke and Miss Vaughan
Brooke.
Mr. J. Alderson.
Mr. P. Benson.
Mr. and Mrs. J. Fenton and two
children.
Mr. and Mrs. Chapman and two
children.
Mr. G. M. Smith.
Mr. and Mrs. Clarke and son.
Mr. F. Lewis.
Mr. and Mrs. J. Bevan.
Dr. J. Woolley.
Mr. and Mrs. Debenham.
Miss L. Maunder.
Mr. J. Robertson.
Mr. T. M. Tennant.
SECOND
Mr. Kaye Eastwood.
Mr. F. Stone.
Mr. and Mrs. White
Miss H. Price.
Mr. J. L. Williams.
Mr. and Mrs. Graham.
Mr. B. G. Rowe.
Mr. J. E. Wilson (saved).
Mrs. Morland.
Miss G. Graham,
Mr. J. Dotliie.
Mr. C. Gough.
Mr. A. Bruce.
Mr. J. Woodhouse,
Mr. G. Cross.
Mr. W. Day.
Mr. D. W. Lemmon.
Mr. and Mrs. Giffett.
Mr. G. Chennels.
Mr. and Mrs. Wood.
Master and Miss Clayson.
Mrs. Traill and child.
Mr. G. Palmer.
Mr, T. Brown.
Mr. and Mrs. Amos.
Mr. E. Brooks.
Mr. J. R. Richardson.
Rev. Mr. and Mrs. Kerr.
Mrs. and Miss King.
Mr, and Mrs. Thomas
children
Mr. A. Sandilands.
Mr. E. Youngman.
Mr. H. J. Dennis.
Mr. E. A. Marks.
Mr. D. F. de Pass,
Master W. D. Burrell.
Dr. J. Hunter.
Miss D’Ovoy.
Miss. C. M‘Lachlan
Miss Cutting.
Mr, M‘Millan,
CLASS.
Mr. Thomas Wood.
Mr. Godfrey Wood.
Miss E. Wood.
Mr. B. Bevan.
Miss S. Brooker.
Mr. Davies.
Mr, T. O’Hagen,
Mr. H. W. Harding.
Mr. F. Fryer.
Mr. J. Munro (saved).
Mr. D. C. Main (saved).
Mr. C. Johnstone.
Mr. P. Fenwick.
Mrs. and Miss Meggs.
Mr. G. H. Campbell
Miss E. Marks.
Mr. E. G. Trevencn,
Mr. and Mrs. Hickman,
and two daughters.
Mr. A. M‘Lean.
Mr, Davis.
and two
two sons,


THIRD CABIN.
Mr. W. Passmore.
Mr. H. Miller.
Mr. C. P. Chandler.
Mr. B. Hay.
Miss E. Jones.
Mr. and Miss Simpson.
Mr. and Mrs. Hansen.
Mr. and Mrs. Graham and three
children.
Mr. David Graham.
Mr. M‘Yittie.
Mr. and Mrs. Seacombe and three
children.
Mr. G. Ilolwegan.
Mr. and Mrs. G. Flick and four
children.
Mr. E. Trevurrow.
Mr. D. Block.
Mr. J. Gerkem.
The above list of names has
believe, accurate. We should.
Messrs. 1 Zulec Morris and Zulec
Barnett.
Mr. S. Boulton.
Mr. T. Skeggs.
Mr. and Mrs. D. Smith.
Mr. A. Umphray.
Master Spring.
Mr. A. Hoyeim.
Mr. J. Walls.
Mr. W. Barron.
Mrs. Lampes and two children.
Mr. Algernon L. Otter.
Mr. John Little.
Mr. H. M‘Covey.
Miss F. Batchelor.
Mr. J. Kirkwood.
Mr. W. Clifton.
Mr. E. Eeynolds.
as been carefully collated, and is, we
observe that the names of Mr. G. V.
Brooke and his sister were entered as Mr. and Miss Vaughan.
INFORMATION RELATIVE TO THOSE WHO PERISHED.
Mr. and Mrs. J. Fenton and two children are mentioned. Mr.
Fenton was long connected with squatting pursuits in this colony,
and had a station near Mount Korong. He was returning after a
lengthened visit to Europe. Mrs. Fenton was a daughter of Dr,
Martin, of Heidelberg, and sister of Mrs. Dr. Youl. Mr. G. M.
Smith was a brother of Mr. J. M. Smith, boot importer, of Little
Collins-street East. Mr. Clarke (saddler, Elizabeth-street) and Mrs.
Clarke and son, had visited England mainly for the purpose of
having a difficult surgical operation performed on the latter. It
was successfully accomplished, and they were returning to Melbourne
with their son in restored health. Mr. F. Lewis was, we believe,
connected with one of the banks. It was reported that this Mr.
Lewis was Mr. Robert Lewis, formerly member for Ballarat West,
who, however, was not on board the London. Mr. and Mrs. Bevan
were extensively known from Mr. Bevan’s long connexion with
coaching enterprise in Victoria. The name of Mr. B. Bevan is also
given in the list, but we have not been able to ascertain whether
he was a relative of Mr. and Mrs. Bevan. Dr. J. Woolley was the


principal of Sydney University. Mr. and Mrs. Debenham were
also connected with Sydney, Mr. Debenham being a member of a
firm of auctioneers there. Miss L. Maunder was a resident in the
colonies, who lately went home as a passenger per Suffolk. Mr. J.
Robertson was formerly bookkeeper to Messrs. M'Naughton, Love
and Co.; he was a member of the firm of Robertson, Dickson and
Co., warehousemen, Flinders-lane, and had lately gone to the mother
-country for the purpose of making business arrangements, in which
he was understood to have been very successful —exertions, the fruits
■of which he was returning to enjoy. He leaves a wife and family.
Mr. T. M. Tennant was a stranger to the colonies ; he is believed to
have been an engineer, connected with a ship or engine building
firm in Leith or Dundee, and to have been about to visit the colonies
for the sake of health. It is possible, however, that this may be a
mistake, as a young man of the same name, son of Mr. Tennant,
Shields, Ayrshire, was known to be on his way to this colony. He
had been for some years in Virginia, on a tobacco plantation, and
was about to join his brother here (who, however, died about Christ-
mas last, after a very short illness), with a view to the establishment
of a tobacco manufactory. Mrs. Traill, who with her child was lost,
was the wife of Mr. Traill, who lately arrived in Melbourne as
manager of the Oriental Bank. Mr. J. Palmer, we are informed,
was a relative of Mr. Palmer, of Messrs. Patterson, Ray, Palmer and
Co., warehousemen. Mr. and Mrs. Amos were old colonists. Mr.
Amos was a warden, formerly at Dunolly and latterly at Creswick.
Miss C. M‘Lachlan, whose name also appears in the list, was a sister
of Mrs. Amos; and their widowed mother, well known for her
charities, resides in Fitzroy. Mr. E. Brooke should be Mr .E. Brookes;
but little more is known of him. Mr. J. R. Richardson was a resi-
dent of Sydney, a stepson of Mr. Muirhead, of that city. The Rev.
Mr. and Mrs. Kerr were coming to Melbourne to labour in connexion
with the Presbyterian Church of Victoria. “ Mr.” King should be
Mrs. and Miss King. The former was the wife and the latter the
daughter of Mr. King, a musician of this city. Miss King was pos-
sessed of a voice of great power and beauty, and she had been home
that it might be cultivated in the best schools. In this she had suc-
ceeded, and having finished her musical education, she was returning,
in company with her mother, to follow a professional life. Mr.
Thomas, who perished along with his wife and children, was
the newly-appointed manager of the London and Australian Agency
Company (which had purchased the business of Messrs. Clough and


Co.). Mr. E. Youngman was a member of the firm of Youngman
and Co., wholesale druggists, Russell-street. Mr. H. J. Dennis, we
believe, was a brother of Messrs, Dennis, jewellers, Bourke-street.
Mr. E. A. Marks was a brother of Mr. Marks, of Messrs. S. H. Cohen
and Co., auctioneers, and a nephew of Mr. Edward Cohen. Mr.
D. F. de Pass was a nephew of Mr. John de Pass, of this
city, and was coming out to join the firm. Mr. M'Millan is reported
to have been a merchant in Launceston. Mr. White, who, with
his wife, was lost, was formerly clerk in the detective office in
Melbourne. Mr. A. M‘Lean was a plumber, late of Bourke-street. He
took home a son, whom he left with friends there, but he leaves a
widow (who keeps the City Baths in Bourke-street) and three chil-
dren. Mr. A. Bruce was a brother of Mr. Bruce, of Messrs. Bell, Bruce
and Co., 'wholesale storekeepers, Queen-street. He had a brother
who was drowned in the wreck of the Royal Charter. Mr. Dothie was
lately salesman for Mr. George Robertson, bookseller. He leaves
a wife and a large family. A family named Graham, and a number
of others who were passengers in the second cabin, but whose names
we have been unable to gather, were from Ballarat. Mr. D. W.
Lemmon was son of Mr. Lemmon, ironmonger, Bourke-street. Messrs.
Cross and Day were two young compositors who were coming out
from the Times office, with excellent recommendations, to join the
printing staff of the Argus. Mr. P. Benson (a saloon passenger)
was a brother of Mr. Benson, wholesale druggist, Russell-street.
Mr. D. S. Hunter was connected with the Fiji Islands ; he was a
lame man, and known to many persons here. Mr. C. Gough is stated
to have been a relative of Mr. J. Gough, maltster, Flinders-lane. Mr.
and Mrs. Hansen were connections of Mr. Hansen, of the Whitting-
ton Hotel, Bourke-street. Mrs. and Miss Chapman, Mr. Chapman,
Master Chapman, and a daughter, were the family of His Honour
Judge Chapman, of Otago. The names of Mr. Newton and Miss
Hybert also appear on the list furnished to the agents by last mail,
but it is possible they too may have been detained.
HEROIC DEPORTMENT OF THE CREW AND
PASSENGERS.
Such magnanimity as Captain Martin showed on the brink of
eternity is given to few, and short of this Mr. Greenhill and the
rest of the boat’s crew appear to have done nothing unworthy of
brave men. The fate of the starboard pinnace would naturally


deter many from venturing into the port pinnace, wildly dashing,
as it doubtless was, against the broadside of the London, and only
to be reached by a perilous leap from above. Bold and active men
would alone be likely to prefer such an alternative to that of taking
their chance with the ship, and, what is still more important, none
but experienced boatmen could, in all probability, have kept the
pinnace afloat in such a fearful sea. The salvation of the party is
mainly attributed by all to the marvellous skill and courage of
King, their coxswain. Had this man, on whose prowess nineteen
lives depended, chivalrously made way for a lady, or had the boat
returned to be engulfed in the same abyss with the doomed ship,
who would have been the gainer 1 That some of those left on
board, encouraged by the success of the pinnace, should have after-
wards rushed, but too late, to man the other two boats, proves
nothing at all against their more fortunate shipmates. There is no
proof, or presumption, of selfishness against them ; and if we pity
the cruel fate of the dead, let us at least forbear to make unfounded
imputations upon the living.
Mention has already been made of the Rev. Mr. Draper’s exhor-
tations to the unhappy people in the chief saloon. The women sat
round him reading Bibles, with the children, and occasionally some
man or woman would step up to Mr. Draper and say, “ Pray with
me, Mr. Draper” —a request that was always complied with. Up to
the time the ship w’ent down the reverend gentleman ministered to
those amongst whom he moved constantly. He was heard to say
repeatedly, “0, God, may those that are not converted be converted
how—hundreds of them.”
G. V. Brooke exerted himself incessantly. Attired only in a red
Crimean shirt and trousers, with no hat on, and barefooted, he
went backwards and forwards to the pumps until working at them
was found to be useless ■ and when last seen, about four hours
before the steamer went down, he was leaning with grave composure
upon one of the half-doors of the companion. His chin was resting
upon both hands, and his arms were on the top of the door, which he
gently swayed to and fro, while he calmly watched the scene. One
of the passengers who saw him has said, “ He had worked wonder-
fully, and, in fact, more bravely than any man on board of that ship.”
His last w r ords spoken to the steward were, “ If you succeed in
saving yourself, give my kind farewell to the people of Melbourne.”
Miss Marks, of Old Kent-road, London, was at first almost
frantic ; yet when the boat left she stood calmly on deck bareheaded,


and waved an adieu to Mr. Wilson. Mr. Grant, one of the officers,
was lively throughout, and encouraged many to toil at the pumps —
a work rendered by the wind highly dangerous and difficult. Miss
Brooker, from Pimlico, was heard to say as she wrung her hands,
“ Well, I have done all that I could, and can do no more.”
About an hour before the vessel sank, Mr. Wilson met Captain
Martin under the main deck aft, and asked him if it would be of
use to help in carrying out the water on the second deck. He
replied, “ I will see,” and walked to the engine-room, into which
he looked down, when he turned about, came back, and said,
“ You may do it, but I think it is of no use.” He then
walked on to the poop, and silently observed what was going on.
On Tuesday night, after the passengers had been alarmed by the
shipping of water, Mrs. Price, Mrs. Wood (who had with her her
husband and five children), Miss Brooker, and Miss Marks, read the
Bible by turns in the second cabin. It was on that night that, after
the sea had poured down the hatch, the captain said, “ Boys, you
may say your prayers.” At twelve o’clock on the following night
Mr. Draper held a general prayer-meeting in the saloon. The rescued
men remember with gratitude and respect the efforts put forth by
ministers on board. The Rev. Dr. Woolley encouraged the pas-
sengers to work at the pumps, in which he was seconded by the
stewardess, who had a son on board, and cheered the passengers by
her collected demeanour and constant attentions. Mr. John Wilson,
a native of Montrose, went down into the cabin, and endeavoured to
persuade a friend, Mr. John Hickman, from Ballarat, and brother to
Mr. Hickman, solicitor, of Southampton, to attempt to save his life
by going into the boat, but, after being entreated, he said, “No, I
promised my wife and children to stay by them, and I will do so.”
The water was then a considerable depth on the lee side of the
saloon, indeed over the top of the berths, and he asked Mr. Wilson
to help him in removing his four children to the windward side, out
of the water. This was done, and then he shook hands with Mr.
Wilson, with “Good by, Jack,” and parted with his friend for ever.
When last seen Mr. Hickman was standing in a row with his wife
and children.
OTHER INCIDENTS.
When it was first made known that the vessel must go down, a
passenger brought on deck a carpet bag, and on his doing so the
captain gave a short melancholy laugh, and then smiled, as one of


the passengers expressed it, “at the preposterous idea of the man’s
thinking at such a time of his property.” When the men were all
in the boat, one of the seamen cried, “There may still be room ;
fetch a lady.” Mr. Wilson then sprang over a portion of the deck
in search of a lady he knew, but not seeing her, and knowing that
every instant was precious, he said to a young girl, “ Will you go T
She did not refuse, therefore Mr. Wilson seized her, and took her to
the bulwarks, but when she looked over the rails and saw the
distance which she must spring, she said in despair, “ Oh, I cannot
do that!” There was no time for persuasion or parley, and Mr.
Wilson was obliged to drop the girl and jump from the steamer to
the boat, which he fell into safely. Before the boat could be got off,
it was in great danger of being sucked doAvn with the ship,
which was rapidly settling beneath the water. The swirl of
water round the stern that preceded the foundering had already
begun to be excessive, and the boat was therefore hastily
cut away. At that moment those in the boat were piteously
called upon by a lady about twenty-three years of age, who, with
a face which was, it was stated, livid with horror, shrieked out an
offer of “ A thousand guineas if you’ll take me in !” But in that
solemn hour millions of money would have been accounted valueless,
and to return must have resulted in destruction to all. One of the
seamen has stated that when the boat was pushed off, and the cap-
tain had wished those in her “ God speed,” the men resolved that no
danger must be allowed to accrue to them from further crowding,
and that some of them drew their knives, with a determination of
cutting off the hands of those who might leap from the ship and
endeavour to cling to the boat’s gunwales.
Mr. Munro states that a passenger named Eastwood, with whom
he had been acquainted prior to the voyage, said to him, “ Well,
Jack, I think we are going to go.” The answer was, “ I think we are,
Eastwood.” The reply was, “We cannot help it. There’s only one
thing I regret about it. Of a draft for £SOO on the Bank of Vic-
toria, Ballarat, I only received £2O, which I gave to the captain in
the office of Money Wigram and Co. I should have liked my poor
father to have got the balance.” The speaker was among those who
perished; but, fortunately and singularly enough, his communication
was made to one of the three surviving passengers, and as the
deceased Mr. Eastwood’s father is known to live near Liverpool, the
probability is that his son’s wish will be fulfilled—a wish that was
so fervent that Mr. Eastwood shed tears as he expressed it.


Mr. Alexander Burrell, of Glasgow, had taken his passage along
with Mr. Patrick, his partner, with the view of commencing busi-
ness in Melbourne. A pressing engagement arose almost at the last
moment, which induced Mr. Burrell to remain in Scotland, with
the intention of coming by the next overland mail. He accordingly
substituted in his place his youngest son, William D. Burrell, aged nine
years, who, along with Mr. Patrick, perished. A touching element in this
bereavement is that it had been arranged that the little boy should
go to Melbourne some months before, in the charge of a lady, by a
sailing ship, but in consequence of showing great distress at the
thought of going without his father, he had been kept till the
London sailed. The little boy thus perished in his father’s stead.
Mr. A. Sandilands, one of the lost passengers, was a gentleman
connected with a well-known firm at the West-end ; and it is not a
little remarkable that he had not long before sailed in the Duncan
Dunbar, which was destroyed at sea. The passengers on board
that vessel being afterwards transferred to a ship called the John
Duthie, Mr. Sandilands again started on the same voyage; but
finding that the weather promised to be extremely unfavourable he
left the vessel at Plymouth, and at length obtained the consent of
his family to embark on board the London, and has consequently
been lost. A poor old couple who had three children with them
had tried in vain three times to go upon their voyage. First in a
vessel unknown, which was wrecked; next in the Duncan
Dunbar, which also was recently wrecked; and lastly Gardner, the
steward, saw the poor wife washed overboard from the London,
to leeward, her husband following her presently beneath the
billows.
A family consisting of twelve persons, residing at Sancreed, near
Penzance, had engaged a passage in the London, but their sailing
orders did not, unfortunately as they esteemed it at the time, arrive
sufficiently early to allow of their joining the ship at Plymouth ;
they thus missed the boat, and to that have to attribute the
fact that they are among the living. Miss Batchelor, of Union-street,
Stonehouse, made an application for a passage in the London, but
was told that she was too late —all the berths were engaged. Un-
happily for her, however, one gentleman was persuaded not to
proceed, after he had arrived at Plymouth with the intention
of going; and Captain Martin, who knew of Miss Batchelor’s
anxiety to go out under his guidance, sent to her and offered to her
the relinquished cabin. She went, and her relatives now deeply mourn


what at the time was a cause of congratulation. A second-class male
passenger was so alarmed at the rough weather which the London
encountered on her way down to Plymouth, that immediately on
her arrival at that port he came ashore, resigned his passage, and
went back to his home, thus unwittingly saving his life,
A young man, as the result of some family quarrel, left his home
and took a passage by the London. He was advertised for in the
Times, and importuned to return, his friends being unaware of his
whereabouts. Messengers were sent down to Plymouth, and an
influential shipbroker in the town was employed to intercept him
should he attempt to sail thence. Fortunately, he was detected
among the passengers of the London, and his family communicated
with by the broker, the result of which was that a brother of the
young man came down to Plymouth, and persuaded the would-be
emigrant to forego his voyage.
Among the passengers were a Mr. Graham and his wife, who were
married on the 21st December. Mr. Graham belonged to Wahgunyah,
and along with his brother was engaged in farming and vine-growing.
Mr. Graham belonged originally to Carlisle, and being a very enter-
prising man had been selecting for his service persons conversant
with vine-culture and wine-making, as also improved instruments of
husbandry. His young wife was from Banff, where she was well
known, and the melancholy event has thrown a gloom over
that little town. Nine members belonging to Mr. Graham’s
family perished in the wreck. Among the passengers were two
stout old people, who had become favourites on board, and who had
been sent for by their only son. The poor creatures, on learning
that they must drown, took a small quantity of brandy, and went
below to die together in their cabin. The name of Mr. Palmer, the
editor of the Laio Review, is among the lost. Mr. Palmer was born
in the Principality, and originally studied for the Christian ministry.
Incipient pulmonary affection and other circumstances induced him
to abandon his original design and to study for the bar. He was
called to the bar by the Honourable Society of Gray’s Inn, on June
6th, 1861, and joined the Western Circuit. He became the Secretary
of the Law Amendment Society, and ultimately the editor of the
Law Review. Suffering during the recent autumn from pulmonary
weakness, his physicians advised him to take a long sea voyage.
The voyage to Melbourne was selected, as it was his intention to
return in about a year and resume his professional duties. Mr.
Arthur Ticehurst, the chief officer on board the ill-fated ship, was
a native of Hastings, and was much respected. As he had only


left the residence of his father, the mayor (Mr. Frederick Ticehurst), a
few days, the fact lent additional vividness to the melancholy tidings
which arrived there on January 17. The feeling of the town was
manifested at the town council meeting on January 18, when the
Hon. George Waldegrave Leslie, M.P., proposed that a subscription
should be raised in order to erect a memorial tablet in the church
of the parish in which the young man was born —St. Clement’s.
The idea was adopted unanimously, and the subscription list was a
tolerably long one before the termination of the meeting.
It appears that a distressing suicide has occurred owing to the loss
of the London, An inquest has been held by the city coroner, at
St. Mary Axe, on the body of Miss Sarah Marks, aged forty-eight,
who, it was alleged, committed suicide through grief, caused by the
loss of a sister, aged twenty-three, who was on board the ship
London when that vessel foundered. From the evidence it appeared
that the deceased had been in good health and spirits until she had
heard of the loss of the London, and thence became quite frantic.
She said that her young sister was lost on board that vessel, and it
was she who had persuaded her to go to Australia. She said, “I am
my sister’s murderer.” A few days subsequently she was found on
the floor of her room, quite dead. On the table was found a bottle,
labelled “Poison—Essential oil of almonds.” A paper was also
discovered, on which deceased had written that “ she had destroyed
her life, for she was the cause of her sister’s death, by persuading her
to go to Melbourne in the London.” It is believed that it was
Miss Marks who came to the side of the sinking ship, and offered to
give a thousand guineas to the crew of the boat to take her in.
In the London were £I2OO worth of drapery goods, for a Mr.
Eogers, a tradesman, of Melbourne, shipped by his mother, a draper,
of St. Austell. The goods fortunately were insured. One of the
passengers who have perished was the son of the organist of Exeter
Cathedral; and two others, Mr. E. Eeynolds and Mr. W. H. Clifton,
were residents in Launceston. Mr. E. G. Trevenan, Mr. E. Trevenan,
and Mr. J. Walls were among the Cornishmen on board.
Several revolvers were seen in the hands of passengers, who did
not conceal their intention of shooting themselves when the last
moment came, preferring to meet their death, when inevitable, by a
bullet rather than by drowning. The steAvard, indeed, overheard an
offer by the owner of a pistol to a friend, that he would shoot him
if he desired. The well-meant offer was at that time declined, and
whether these intentions were carried into execution is not known;
but no reports of firearms were heard as the steamer foundered.


SEEMON PEEACHED IN EBSKINE CHURCH,
On Sabbath, the 18th Inst.,
THE KEY. JAMES BALL AN TYNE.
“There is sorrow on the sea.”— Jeremiah xlix. 23.
My dear Friends —If you look at the margin of your Bibles you
will observe that a somewhat different rendering is given to the
original text of this passage. It is made to read thus, “ Or,
sorrow as on the sea.” Perhaps this rendering is the more expressive
of the two. The verse contains a prediction in reference to Syria—
Damascus, the capital, being put for the country—and the judgments
that were to come down upon it are compared to the sorrow that is
on the sea. The magnitude and intensity of the threatened grief is
thus indicated. The sorrow that is on the sea, when in mist and
tempest, and it may be, midnight gloom, a noble ship goes down,
freighted with some hundreds of immortal beings, is a sorrow made
up of loud wails, and frantic cries, and wild despair—the sorrow of
nameless agony. What an affecting illustration of the truth of my
text has just been furnished to our community. On Thursday last,
the 15th day of March, tidings came to our shores of “sorrow on
the sea,” which will long distinguish that day as one of mournful
memory. These tidings fell upon our city like a thunderclap of
woe. Brief and terrible was the burden they bore—that the steam-
ship London, bound for this port, had gone down in the Bay of Biscay,
with 220 souls on board. Among the lost are many who were well
known and highly respected in this colony. Wide chasms, never
again to be filled up in this world, have been opened in numerous
family circles in this city and land. Such “ sorrow on the sea”
brings lessons to us of the most solemn character. Not only does
it call for our tenderest sympathy with the wide-spread circles of
bereavement, but in startling thunder tones it says to us, “ Be ye
also ready, for ye know neither the day nor the hour when the Son
of Man cometh unto you.” May the good Lord* help us to set forth
some of the more prominent lessons which the melancholy event
is fitted to convey, and may He also impress these lessons deeply on
our hearts.


In contemplating this “ sorrow on the sea,” let us, first of all—
Bow Meekly , and Acknowledge the Hand of God.
There is need for this. Many will talk about this dire calamity
without making any such acknowledgment. They will go no further
back than mere secondary causes. In the present day there is a
tendency to speak of physical causes and of the “ immutable
course of nature” in such a way as that He who is above all such
causes is overlooked or forgotten. God is thus virtually shut out of his
own creation, and “ cold material laws” are substituted in His place.
When, therefore, men speak of secondary causes —of the peculiar
structure of the vessel, of its being overladen, of the disadvantages
of a steamer in the grasp of an angry sea, of the unwonted fury
of the tempest, and so on—and it is quite proper to discuss
them when it is done wisely and cautiously—let us at the
same time remember and acknowledge that the hand of
God was over all. Over every element of nature, every mutation
of time, every vicissitude of life, every accident, and every calamity,
He, the sovereign Lord of all, presides, and without His permission
or decree nothing happens, and by Him all things are controlled.
And if not even a sparrow can fall to the ground without our
Heavenly Father’s will, think ye could 220 immortal beings be sud-
denly and by an appalling death launched on the dark ocean of eter-
nity without His providence ? Oh no ! dark and inscrutable though it
be, the Divine purpose was there. God beheld the fearful strife.
The great ship straining and labouring, and growing feebler in the
conflict with wind and wave as every fresh sea swept her decks; the
consternation in every bosom, the blank despair on every brow;
strong men growing pale, and gentle women sinking in terror, and
little ones shrieking in nameless woe ; the piercing cry of fear and
the low wail of agony commingling with the roar of the tempest—all
was patent to God ; and He held in the hollow of His hand the
maddened waters when, like a wild beast springing on its prey,
they clutched the ship in their remorseless grasp, and He
had but to say to the raging wind and foaming wave, “Be
still,” and instantly there would have been a great calm. But He did
it not. Shall we then blame God ? Oh no. All-wise, He cannot
err. Boundlessly good, He can inflict no wrong. Almighty, He
cannot be baffled. Everywhere present, He presides alike over
the death of a worm and the crush of worlds. And what-
ever therefore falls out is under His direction, and must work


out the ultimate and highest good of His creatures. Under
this view of God’s sovereignty, we should rest in such thoughts as
the following :—lst. The present condition of the world is discipli-
nary, consequent on its fallen state j and hence, meanwhile, good and
evil commingle in the lot of man. 2nd. There are inscrutable mys-
teries in God’s providence which, with our present limited faculties,
we cannot understand.
He plants His footsteps in the sea,
And rides upon the storm.
As we gaze upon these mysteries, we can only exclaim —“ It is a great
deep!” “We walk by faith ! ” Now, it is “ trusting-time ” with us.
3rd. The assurance ought to be enough for us —“ The Lord reigneth.’’
We sometimes wish that such and such a thing had been otherwise,
so that some great calamity might have been avoided. We are blind,
and such wishes are vain. The very change in circumstances that
we suggest might, for aught we know, have involved in a greater
calamity still. It is enough, surely, to know that infinite wisdom
and goodness are regulating all, and that what is dark to us is bright
to God. Our Father is at the helm. The Lord reigneth. Be it
ours to bow, without one repining thought, beneath the darkest
dispensation, and say, “It is well.” “ I was dumb, I opened not my
mouth ; because Thou didst it.”
Through waves, through clouds and storm,
He gently clears thy way;
Wait Thou His time, so shall the night
Soon end in joyous day.
Thou comprehend’st Him not ;
Yet earth and heaven tell,
God sits as Sovereign on His throne,
He ruleth all things well.
Let us notice, secondly—
The Impotence of Man.
Man is a singular compound of strength and weakness. The
evidences of his might are all around us. We see him contending
successfully with wilderness and wild wood, with flood and fell,
transforming the desert waste into a garden of beauty, boring a way
for himself through the great mountains, making the winds his
servants, transforming the unstable ocean into a highway of the
nations, hemming in the sea by dykes so that golden harvests wave


where formerly huge ocean billows rolled; and making the wires his
silent message-bearer, transmitting his words from city to city with
a fleetness compared with which Arab steed or eagle’s pinion is
tardiness itself. His ingenuity, how great; his arm, how full of
prowess; his conquests, how marvellous ! And yet, after all, how
helpless ! He is but a creature of a day ! He is crushed before
the moth ! Things may go well with him for a time, his sky cloud-
less, and his path smooth, and yet all suddenly the clouds may
gather in black masses above his head, the winds may come forth
with hurricane fury, the thunders may roll terrifically, the water
may descend in deluging power, and the seething sea may
open its black depths, and in one brief hour man’s fair home-
stead may be transformed into a scene of desolation, or
the ocean may be strewed with the wrecks of his wisdom and
skill, the wrecks of his fortune, and the wrecks of lives more pre-
cious than all. What a melancholy and impressive illustration of
the truth of this is furnished to us in the shipwreck of the
London. If you had gazed on that ship under full steam and on a
tranquil sea, her deck crowded with happy countenances, as she sped
along at the rate of eleven knots an hour, you would have been apt to
exclaim, “ What a mighty being is man, and what marvels of skill
come from his handand yet again, gazing on that ship as she
laboured heavily in the trough of the angry sea, her engine fires
rapidly drowning out, her deck covered with the debris of broken
spars and dismantled rigging, her crew paralysed, her cool and skilful
captain at his wit’s end, and her passengers looking at each other in
blank despair or crying in words of anguish for mercy, you could only
exclaim, “ How impotent is man when the elements in their wrath
rise against him.” A tried captain was there, experienced, cool,
brave; engineers who kept to their post till they were up to
the waist in water; a crew that seem to have quitted them-
selves like men to the very last; passengers who combined ener-
getic action with fervid prayer, all that man can do; and yet,
despite of all, the great ship settled deeper and deeper in the waters
until mountain billows closed over her, entombing her living freight
in a briny grave. And among the passengers there might be a hurry-
ing to and fro in the cabins and on deck, some shouting orders that
w r ere utterly impracticable, some calling loudly but vainly for help,
others imploring Heaven with frantic cries; but all was impotent to
beat back the foaming billow or produce even a momentary lull in
the fury of the storm. Oh ! the affecting impotence of man; strong,


yet how weak ; able to do mighty marvels, yet in a thousand sup-
posable circumstances the victim of the most affecting helplessness.
“ Cease ye from man, whose breath is in his nostrils, for wherein is
he to be accounted of.”
Let us notice, thirdly —
The Frail and Unsubstantial Character of Human Hopes.
To a very large extent, men live in the future. Especially true is
this of the young. Hope penetrates the mystic veil that hides from
us what is to come, and paints a blue sky and a sunny day some-
where. There are few indeed who are not busy laying some plans
that refer to months and years yet to come, while Hope steps in and
represents them as already realised, and crowns them with the rich
warm glow of triumph. We are dreamers all. And how seldom do
we admit as an element in our phantom dreams the possibility of
their being blasted in a single hour. One cannot help thinking what
hopes must have gone down to everlasting extinction when the ill-
fated London sank amid the seething billows. There were some on
board in the morning of their days, who doubtless painted this land
in their mind as a kind of earthly Paradise. There were others who
were looking forward to joyous welcomes, happy greetings, hallowed
re-unions with those whom they loved, and from whom they had
been separated for a while—fond husband, or wife, or child well
beloved. There were those, too, who were looking to this young
land as the battle-field on which by dint of tact, and energy, and
brave hearts, they would win for themselves broad lands and much
gold, and a name among men. But with fell and fearful swiftness
w r ere these hopes laid in ruins for ever. Let us take a lesson, my
hearers. Let us not seek happiness in building up hopes of mere
worldly good. It is folly to do so. Hot more swiftly does the
burning liot wind wither up the tender grassy blade on our northern
plains that has sprung up in a night after the refreshing shower; not
more swiftly does the hailstorm strip the orchard of its bloom, or
the vineyard of its luscious fruit, than do the contingencies of this
mortal life sweep such hopes away in irremediable destruction.
I would not, if I could, extinguish the hope that rises in your breast;
but I would, if I could, direct that hope to a befitting object. My
friends, my young friends especially, hear me. Lift your hopes on high.
Eix them not on this world. Fix them above. “He builds too low
who builds beneath the skies.” The hopes that are fixed on earth


may perish in an hour, or even if their object should be gained it
will only be like Dead Sea apples—it will turn to ashes, wormwood,
and gall upon the lips. There is one hope and only one which will
never make ashamed; which instead of passing into darkness, like a
meteor of the night, will grow brighter as the lights of earth
go out and die, and which, when it has conducted you across the
dark flowing river, will merge into the effulgence of a cloudless day.
Get this hope, my hearers. Whatever you fail to get, do not fail to get
this. Do you ask how you can get it 1 The moment you rest your eye
in’faith upon the bleeding Saviour, that moment will this hope, with
its Divine light and joy, be enkindled within you. As dying sinners
turn then to Calvary, and with simple, child-like, believing gaze, be-
hold the Lamb—even the Lamb of God, one drop of whose blood
laid on the heart can stir within you the dawn of immortality.
Let us notice, fourthly—
The Fearful Character of Sin
I hope I will not be misunderstood here. The eighteen on
whom the tower of Siloam fell were not sinners above all men who
dwelt in Jerusalem. So said He in whom all wisdom dwells. Nor
am I to be understood as saying that the crew and passengers of
the London, either all of them or any part of them, were sinners
above all other men that sail in other ships or tread the solid shore,
that such a calamity should come to them. It would be presump-
tuous, nay, it would be wicked, in me or in any one, to suggest
that there was even one sinner on board whose sins were charac-
terised by such blackness and enormity, that in consequence
thereof this fell calamity came down upon the fated ship.
They might have been all good people, and yet that ship
might have been swallowed up in the hungry sea. Why,
then, do I say that one thing to be noticed in connection
with the catastrophe is the fearful character of sin ? I say
so, because but for the presence of sin in the world no such
heart-rending event could ever have occurred. It is sin that has
“ brought death into the world and all our woe.” It is because sin
is in the world that torturing pains are in the world, and loathsome
diseases, and crimes of crimson stain, and funeral trains, and grave-
yards, and wailings of woe, and calamities, the recital of which
make men’s ears tingle. And were not sin in the world none of
these things, so replete with sorrow, would be in the world either.


And men must be made to feel that sin is in the world, and they
must be made to feel als<j that of all dreadful things sin is the
most dreadful. God takes no pleasure in seeing the miseries of
men, in beholding the countenance grow black with sudden terror, or
in hearing the cry of agony; but He must ever and anon, if I may so
speak, compress a thousand notes of ordinary warning in one
startling hurricane-voice of terror, so that those who are sunk
in carelessness, lethargy, and sin may be roused from the stupor
of death, and taught in time to tremble and fear, and turn
and seek the Lord. Oh no ! my hearers; God is very pitiful,
and of tender mercy, and eternity itself will not suffice to
fathom His great heart of love ; but He is wise and holy, and full
of majesty as well, and by public calamities he arrests the thoughts
of thoughtless men when all other means fail; teaches communi-
ties to stand in awe and tremble at His power ; vindicates holiness
upon the earth, ftnd turns many from sin to righteousness. Who
knows but that through the shipwreck of these 220 precious lives,
some thousands of immortal souls may be saved from an infinitely
more frightful shipwreck still—shipwreck in the dark depths of hell,
whereby they would become castaways on the lake of fire for ever.
May God, then, help us to hate sin, as of all things the most hateful,
and may He in His great mercy deliver us from its terrible power
as well as its tremendous consequences.
Let us notice, fifthly—
The Possible Nearness of Death.
Most alfectingly is this taught us by this calamity. Not only are
we taught that death is ever near, but also that it may come when
least expected. Little did the passengers on board the London
think when they set sail that the angel of death hovered so near.
Probably, the idea of death so sudden was not present to a single
mind; it was perhaps the very last thing that they would think of at
such a time. Death ! Who was likely to lay it to heart at such a
season ? The ship was nearly new, the captain skilful, the crew
well selected, and brains were busy with the future, and hopes were
high, and visions of friendly meetings were bright, and hearts
were glad and joyous; and yet death was there, hovering with
unseen wing above the ill-fated vessel, and, lo ! in a moment he
struck his dart of agony into many a heart. And as it was with
them it has been with thousands; as it was with them it


may be with us. At the furthest death is never far away;
possibly it may be near, very near. It may be at the
door. It may have received its commission from Him in whose
hand our breath is. The dart may be uplifted. The bow may be
drawn. The arrow may be taking its flight. The crimson tide may
even now have commenced to ebb in its flow, the pulse may soon
tell out its last faint beatings, and this very night the winding-sheet
may enwrap some of us in its snow-white folds. May not each
heart ask the question, Lord, is it I ? And the very fact that we
know not who it will be speaks to us with solemn emphasis the
warning words, Be ye also ready. m
Let us notice, sixthly—That this “sorrow on the sea
Furnishes us with grounds on which to mingle gratitude and rejoicing
with our tears.
It is matter of gratification, in the midst of all our regrets and
sorrow, to see how strikingly the hour of great peril may bring out
the nobler traits of our poor, frail, selfish humanity. There were
instances on board the London of calm resignation, uncomplain-
ing endurance, unselfish devotion, and heroic bravery, which go far
to redeem the less noble traits of our common nature. Men deli-
cately nurtured working at the pumps so long as one gleam of hope
remained; one gentleman replying to entreaties to save himself by
getting into the boat, “No—l promised my wife and children to stay
by them, and I will do so ladies calmly reading their Bibles by
turns in the cabin for consolation; the Rev. Mr. Draper praying
almost incessantly with the passengers by night and day, and seek-
ing the salvation of their souls in such fervent utterances as these,
“ O God, may those that are not converted be converted now !” the
stewardess cheering those around her by her cool demeanour and
unremitting attentions; the third officer remaining at his post till the
last, his hands being seen on the donkey-engine even when disap-
pearing in the boiling waters; the noble captain standing on the
deck of the sinking ship, alive to the terrible fact that all hope of
saving her was gone, yet bravely refusing to quit her, and telling the
chief engineer to save his life with the lives of the few who would
venture with him in a frail boat on such a wild sea; these, and doubt-
less many other heroic deeds not recorded, exhibit human nature in
its grander aspects, showing that, underlying all man’s overweening


selfishness, there may live in his breast impulses of the most generous
and heroic character.
And may I be permitted to say, that when that heroism is ani-
mated by true piety it lifts a man in the hour of terror to a position
nothing short of sublime? The Rev, Messrs, Draper and Kerr, and
Dr. Woolley, are reported to have been unceasing in their prayers and
consolations, as well as their labours for the hapless people. The
position of Mr. Draper especially must call forth our highest admi-
ration. Oh, the transcendent grandeur of a living Christian in such
an hour! Learning, philosophy, science, are nothing to it. _ The
crew were patient and untiring while work availed, the captain was
calm and intrepid, the great actor while playing out his last tragedy
was self-possessed and brave; but while the noble captain could
only tell the passengers that all hope was gone, and the illustrious actor
could only wave an affectionate farewell to his admirers in Mel-
bourne, the minister of Christ, in utter obliviousness of self, stood amid
the trembling throng like an angel of mercy, telling them that, though
all hope of an earthly haven was gone, there was the hope of a
better haven on heaven’s tranquil and sunny shore, and with strong
crying and tears, striving in great soul-agony of effort to freight
the life-boat of salvation with upwards of 200 immortal souls, so
that out of great tribulation they might enter into an eternal repose.
Never did preacher occupy a position more awfully sublime than
that admirable man in that fearful hour, with a holy calm upon his
brow, the tear of soul-solicitude in his eye, and the words of eternal
life upon his lips. Never did the Gospel of Christ appear more
surpassingly glorious than when it came with its “great solace”
to these sinking hundreds, when every earthly hope had failed.
Never, probably, did congregation listen with more fervid earnest-
ness than did that multitude of men and women amid the panic and
horror of that terrible death-struggle. Befitting close to a life of un-
remitting toil for Christ. Of the strong man of old we read —“ The
dead which he slew at his death were more than they which he slew
in his life.” Of this good man, calmly strong in death, may we not
say “ The souls he gathered to Christ with his dying breath may
perhaps have been more than ever he gathered by any sermon
preached during his former life.”
Servant of God, well done !
Rest from thy loved employ;
The battle fought, the victory won.
Enter thy Master’s joy.


Let us notice, lastly, that this great “ sorrow on the sea ” teaches
us —
Of ivhat unspeakable moment it is that We All find a safe abiding
in Him who is an Hiding-place from the storm of coming wrath.
It may be that there were some on board the London who,
when the tempest fell upon them, were unprepared to die. Perhaps
they had made “ gold their hope, and said unto the fine gold, Thou
art my confidence.” How worthless such a confidence now.
Watches, chains, rings, trinkets, gold, were scattered about the deck,
no one deigning even to look at them. “All was as dust now.”
Yet let us not think harshly of such. From a felon’s cross a
gate opened straight into Paradise, Let us hope that poor
trembling souls found the calm harbour of pardoning mercy and love
in that dreadful hour. The hearer of prayer was there, and the
grief of broken hearts might be heard by Him commingling with
the death-wail of the storm. But yet one cannot help thinking what
a fearful time in which to make one’s peace with God, and what an
appalling risk to run, to hazard the adjustment of a soul’s salvation to
such an hour ! Let us be wise. There is a storm gathering, black
and terrible, and it draws nearer every hour —a storm infinitely more
appalling than that which swept the Bay of Biscay—the storm of
Jehovah’s wrath. There will be shipwrecks in that storm, compared
with which the shipwreck of the London, terrible though it be,
may not be named. There will be shipwrecks of souls—ship-
wrecks on the burning ocean of eternity ! Be it ours to escape this
climax of all ruin! Christ is the life-boat sent out to take in perishing
souls on time’s troubled sea. My hearers, He is near you this day.
Stand not hesitatingly, like the young lady on board the London,
who, when asked to jump into the boat, looked at the distance she
had to spring, and exclaimed, “ Oh, I cannot do thatbut cast your-
self in, aye, into the loving arms of Christ, outstretched to receive
you; then once in that life-boat you are safe, and piloted by Infinite
Wisdom, and shielded by the Cherubm, and steering for the shores
of immortality, you will sweep calmlyyon through the darkest night
and the most tempestuous sea, riding out safely every gale, until,
reaching the golden strand of heaven, ou shall be greeted by angels,
and welcomed to the paradise of the lest.
Land a-head ! its fruits are waving
On the hills of fadeless green;
And the living waters laving
Shores where heavenly forms are seen.


THE LATE REV. D. J. DRAPER,
SERMON AT WESLEY CHURCH*
The esteem in which the late Rev. D. J. Draper was held by the
Wesleyan body, and the universal regret which is felt at his un-
timely death, was manifested by the numbers which attended at
Wesley Church, Lonsdale-street, on Wednesday evening, March 21, to
pay the last tribute of respect to departed worth. It had been
announced that the Rev. John Eggleston would preach a sermon in
memory of the deceased gentleman. Shortly after 7 o’clock, almost
half an hour before the service commenced, every seat in the church
was occupied, and soon afterwards the building was crowded to excess.
There are seats to accommodate 1646 persons, irrespective of the chil-
dren’s gallery and orchestra. At about eight o’clock, there could not
have been less than three thousand persons present within the church,
and between three and four hundred were then endeavouring to gain
admission. Indeed, so difficult was it to push through the crowd that
several members of the choir were unable to gain their position near
the organ. At length the heat became so oppressive that many
were obliged to seek relief in the open air, and several ladies were
conducted helplessly from their seats in a fainting state. It is very
questionable whether such a numerous congregation was ever seen
within the walls of Wesley Church before. The service was com-
menced by the Rev. J. S. Waugh, and the choir sung the chorale
from Mendelssohn’s St. Paul —“ To thee, O Lord, I yield my spirit.”
The Rev. Mr. Eggleston then read a lesson, and after another hymn
had been sung, he proceeded to deliver
THE SERMON.
The reverend gentleman took his text from Psalm xxxix, 9—“ I
was dumb, I opened not my mouth; because Thou didst it.” He then
proceeded to say—This verse expresses the feelings of many of our
hearts when the sad intelligence reached us which has filled us with
sadness, and has brought us to the sanctuary this evening. A
calamity so fearful, involving so large a sacrifice of life, an event
which came so near to us in the removal of those whose arrival had
♦ For the above particulars we are indebted to the Age. n r -,L


been looked for so confidently, paralysed us for the moment. We
could hardly realise its truth; we could not understand it ourselves;
we could not explain it to others. We could only look above, and
conclude it to be an inscrutable and startling dispensation of Him
who giveth not an account of His matters; who has His pathway in
the deep, and whose footsteps are not known. We could not open
our mouths in complaint—that would be to rebel, to deny the per-
fections of God. Our text describes our state, “ I was dumb, I
opened not my mouth ; because Thou didst it.” We have had time
to think. We have heard more of the transactions that took place.
We still say, “ Thou didst it.” We still feel that it would be wrong
to question the justice, the wisdom, the goodness of God in the
event. We are perhaps more reconciled when w r e consider that
moral and religious ends may be accomplished by the wide-spread
influence of the melancholy catastrophe. We have thought that a
consideration of God’s providence in this painful event would be
suitable for the present occasion. We shall show (1.) that it is right
to look upon it as a dispensation of Providence; to say to God,
with the Psalmist, “Thou didst it.” (2.) We shall suggest
considerations which shall forbid murmuring, and assist resig-
nation to the Divine will. (1.) We are to show that it
is a dispensation of Providence; that we are right in saying
to God, “Thou didst it.” Some charge us with weakness
and ignorance in looking upon such events as under the
arrangements of Divine Providence; they look upon them as
resulting from the regular and ordinary concurrence of events, as
happening in accordance with those fixed and immutable laws which
govern the natural world. We hear of the fierceness of the storm,
the defects in the construction of the vessel, the imprudence of the
commander and officers in stowing the cargo, or in venturing forth
when the storm signals provided to warn mariners portended a fear-
ful hurricane. We should hesitate, without the clearest evidence,
to admit anything that would reflect on the commander, who bravely
perished with the vessel; or on those who owned her, whose charac-
ters stand so high, and whose course has been so prosperous. But
if everything that has been written on these subjects could be esta-
blished, we should still maintain that “ the Lord reigneth.” There
is a mind superintending all human actions, a Being who has charge
of all human interests, and who can influence and control everything
that affects the destinies of individual men. The doctrine of Provi-
dence is clearly revealed in this sacred volume. Individual, family,


social, and national interests are all declared to be under His imme-
diate charge. In the world of matter and in the world of mind,
He has immediate, universal, and supreme influence, so that every-
thing which affects our interests can be directed or controlled by
Him. In fact, the Bible is the Book of Providence, as a moral
discipline exercised over redeemed creatures. Special and signal
interpositions of God are manifest in all ages. Take the history
of Noah, of Joseph, of Job, of Moses, of Daniel, and of the
Apostles, with the signal events recorded, and you have all classes of
Providential interposition—instances in which the elements, infernal
and angelic agency, human actions, are all under the guidance and
controul of a superintending Providence, It would be impossible to
conclude that the ordinary laws of nature inflicted and removed the
plagues of Egypt ; built the walls of the sea, and made a dry passage
for the Israelites to pass through ; brought manna from heaven, and
a river from the smitten rock, to feed the Israelites in the wilder-
ness ; closed the mouths of hungry lions while Daniel remained in
their den ; deprived the furnace of power to burn the three Hebrew
children; prevented a single individual from perishing at Paul’s
shipwreck; opened the prison doors and knocked off Peter’s fetters,
and conveyed him to the praying Church. The various facts in the
sacred history illustrate and bear out those doctrines which declare
that God is about our bed and our path, and spies out all our ways
that He is our guide, our defender ; that the very hairs on our head
are numbered ; and invite us to pray to Him in distress, and to
praise Him for mercies received.
And we ask—Can it be otherwise, if we admit the fact of the Divine
existence 1 We cannot conceive how any person who admits the
idea of a Creator can deny His providence. Surely the Being who
brought into existence the vast universe must possess infinite
properties. He must be Omniscient, Omnipotent, Omnipresent;
and these attributes must be immutable and eternal. With such a
Being ever existing, what can transpire without his appointment or
permission 1 Fix upon any event, great or small. If Omnipresent,
he must be there when it transpires. If Omniscient, he must be
acquainted with it, whether proceeding from natural or moral
agencies. If Omnipotent, he could prevent it, or change it, or
counteract it, as His infinite wisdom and choice might dictate.
What reason can be assigned why He should stand by and be a
passive spectator of what transpires in His own universe affecting His
own creatures ?


We must deny His moral qualities to suppose that He is an in-
different spectator of what occurs; that He has brought creatures into
existence and then abandoned them ; that He has created intelli-
gences capable of knowing, loving, serving, and enjoying Him, and
then shrouded Himself in darkness, yea, withheld Himself utterly from
them, and manifests no practical interest in their welfare. We pity
the soul that can pride itself on its independence of mind because
it denies the doctrine of God’s present providence, and can manage
to exclude Him from His own world. My brethren, we rejoice that
we have been taught to recognise Jehovah as clothing the lily of the
valley, marking the falling sparrow, holding the winds in His fist,
and the waves of the sea in the hollow of His hand ; creating light,
forming darkness; the author of blessings, the appointer of troubles.
And in this our trouble, we must see His providential hand.
We admit that there are mysteries in God’s providence. Many
events are mysterious to us from our culpable ignorance of the
principles of God’s moral government. They are clearly revealed in
this sacred volume ; and if we would study the records of Provi-
dence, we should have clearer views. His reign on earth is peculiar.
He is conducting a fallen race through a moral discipline, in order
to save them from sin, and prepare them for obedience and future
reward; and hence good and evil are distributed as they best pro-
mote their improvement. Then He has to administer the affairs of
the earth to meet the case of those who have moral responsibility,
and hence self-determination; and He has to adjust His dealings to
their faithfulness or unfaithfulness.
The dispensations are involved in mystery, because we know not
all the interests that are included. In dealing with some special
cases others are naturally and necessarily involved, but these painful
events are overruled to a higher good; they are a blessing, and tend
to the advancement of their spiritual and eternal interests. In visit-
ing nations with his chastenings—the pestilence, the drought, the
famine, the flood, the scourge of war, commercial confusion —multi-
tudes are involved whose characters and conduct would not have
invited the chastening; but while arranging for the general good,
their cases are under special consideration, and if evil is permitted
it is because it can be overruled to the promotion of higher
interests. We may be surprised to see the wicked flourish, but if
sin was invariably punished, men would be compelled to virtue and
be mere machines; there would be no moral choice. We may
wonder to see the righteous suffer, but moral ends are achieved


for themselves or others, and eternal reward will compensate the
sufferers. Job’s sufferings were severe, but they developed the
power of grace, to the encouragement of tens of thousands in all
future ages; and they afforded lessons on God’s providence as a
moral discipline, which would spread far and wide in the day in
which he lived, and influence the moral character of nations in the
future. The wickedness of Joseph’s brethren, and the trials through
which he passed, were intended to place him eventually in a posi-
tion of eminence and usefulness in a powerful nation, and were
part of an extensive plan of Divine discipline for the benefit of
mankind. He makes the wrath of man to praise Him, and the
remainder He restrains.
The painful event that has brought us together is mysterious, but
we must refer it to God. He could have prevented it. “He has
the winds in His fist, and the waves of the sea in the hollow of His
hand.” He could have given a turn to the fearful storm before
it came in the path of the steamer, and let them pass on safely. Or
He could have allowed the captain to have known the signals along
the coast, that are reported to have warned of its approach, and
induced him to postpone the starting, and thus they would have
escaped its violence. Or He could have laid affliction upon some of
our dear friends, and induced them to allow the London to go
without them ; and thus they would have escaped. He did not
interpose to prevent, and He must have had reasons for it. We may
be asked to gaze upon the mountain waves, heaving over the sides
of the London, and smashing the main hatchway over the engine-
room, and rendering the vessel helpless ; sweeping along the stern
and forcing in the dead lights and stern-ports, and flooding the
deck, and be asked —Are we to see the hand of God in those billows 1
We may be directed to the bodies of ladies and children washing
about helplessly on that swimming deck; to the poop deck swept
by the mighty wave ; to the carrying of that helpless throng forward
into the waste of waters, and be asked—ls God to be seen in this
storm ? We may be pointed to dear Mr. Draper, who was returning
to these colonies with important information from the parent Church,
more eminently qualified for the discharge of ministerial duties, cut
off in the zenith of his usefulness. We may be pointed to youths
who had completed their education, and were being brought back by
their parents with the proud hope that they would distinguish
themselves; to parents whose return was anticipated by families
that needed their supervision and care. We may be referred to the


noble efforts made to save the vessel, and the prayers offered for
their safety, and be asked whether God’s providence can be in this
matter; and if so, why He did not interpose to save ? We admit the
force of these ideas ; but if we had merely heard of the wreck of the
London —if she had been seen to go down by a passing vessel,
too late to save a soul from a watery grave, and we had known
nothing about the proceedings for the last few days she was afloat
—we must still have submitted to the dispensation, and we should
have a right to conclude that‘the Judge of the whole earth must do
right. He is too wise to err. He is too good to act unjustly.
Although clouds and darkness are round about him, although we can-
not interpret some of His dispensations, righteousness and judgment
are the habitation of His throne.
In kindness to us, much is known. Nineteen escaped before the
London sank. Their testimony is made public, and is spreading
throughout the world and engaging deep interest. They have been
privately conversed with, and facts have been narrated big with
interest, and calculated to shed light on some of God’s designs in
permitting this fearful event. Let us try to realise a few of these
facts. About 240 persons left port in the London; for nearly
no small tempest lay on them ; one calculated to excite
concern, and lead persons to seriously feel the importance of their
circumstances. For forty-eight hours death and eternity were
staring them in the face. There were a few pious souls on board
who knew the importance of religion, and who employed their
influence to induce their fellow-passengers to seek, salvation. Our
dear friend, Mr. Draper, is specially mentioned as exerting a powerful
influence in this emergency, but he -was not the only one who acted.
Mrs. Draper was with him to the last, for one of the survivors has
stated that she gai/e one of the sailors a large wrapper as he left the
ship, telling him to “ wrap it round him—it would keep him warm
and if this collected thoughtfulness existed, we know how actively
she would be engaged in promoting the spiritual interests of the
passengers throughout the trying season. We have heard of others
who were decidedly pious, and who would doubtless act in character.
We are informed that when the captain announced to the passengers
and crew that there was no hope, Mr. Draper exclaimed, “My
friends, the captain tells you there is no hope, but I tell you there is
hope for you ; Christ can save you; your bodies may never reach
land, but your souls can now be saved, and landed safely on the
shore of heaven.” We have read of the prayer-meeting he con-


ducted at midnight; of the females taking it by turns to read the
Bible in the cabin ; of one after another coming and saying, “ Mr.
Draper, pray for me,” and the request being complied with. A
survivor declared to one of Mr. Draper’s friends that the last thing
he heard on quitting the vessel for the boat, only a few minutes
before she sank into the ocean, was Mr. Draper and others singing
that hymn—
Kock of Ages, cleft for me,
Let me hide myself in Thee.
Another testifies to hearing his earnest exhortation to prepare
immediately for death.
With these and similar facts before us, may we not see some of
the gracious designs of this sad event, and cultivate resignation to
the Divine will. Did not God, by these sad circumstances, use
special means to save numbers of souls from eternal death?
Think of between two hundred and two hundred and fifty being
brought face to face with death and eternity for forty-eight hours, not
knowing how soon they might sink to rise no more. Witness the ear-
nestness of God’s servants in exhortation and prayer. Could they have
a more powerful incentive to approach the mercy-seat ? Some of
them may have exhausted all ordinary means—parents’ instructions
and prayers ; the ministry of the Word in the sanctuary : ordinary
providential dealings. Some may have been so trained and actuated
as to be out of the reach of ordinary religious influences, and had
they been spared to reach this land might still have been surrounded
with associations that would lead them from God. But now death
stares them in the face, and they see around them those whose con-
sciences are calm ; whose souls are feeding upon God’s word, and
who can exercise a joyous hope of heaven. Well might they come
to God’s servant and say, “ Mr. Draper, pray for me.” Who can tell
how many who went on board that vessel godless and careless were
awakened and converted, and meetened for heaven ? And surely the
storm that gave them an easy bodily death was worth expending if
they were rescued from the quenchless flames of everlasting perdition.
With reference to our departed friends, Mr. and Mrs. Draper—
setting aside our painful loss, and the sad idea of their having the
wide ocean for their resting-place —could we have wished that loving
heart, that clear persuasive voice away from the London, when 240
souls were imperilled, many of whom were entreatingly exclaiming,
“ What must Idoto be saved ?” Has not this event stamped an
honour on our beloved brother ? Has it not afforded him a scope of


usefulness that he could hardly have obtained had he not been on
board that vessel X We glory in men who go and toil for years
amongst savages, until they sink under the exhaustive influence of
anxieties and wasting climates ; and when we see their places filled
up by others who are ready to die in the service of souls, we glorify
God in them. And could we read the accounts of our dear brother’s
herculean efforts, see the last twenty-four hours spent in incessant
labours for Christ and souls, in the presence of storm and tempest,
in a sinking ship, and not feel that there is a dignity in sanctified
human nature, and a divine reality in the office of the Christian
ministry 1 We feel assured that the scene which his zeal and love
furnished on board that tempest-crushed vessel w r ill do more to com-
mend the Gospel and its ministry to the thoughtless and sceptical
than anything that could transpire. Some men who have looked
upon religion as a system of priestcraft, and conclude that ministers
would not attend to their duties unless they w T ere well paid for it,
will be constrained to see that it is a loving power that ministers
have, a self-sacrificing zeal. There was an exhibition of Christian
faith and love in the exhortations and prayers of those forty-eight
hours which exhibit the glory of the Christian character. It has
taken hold of the very soul of every community as the account has
spread.
I ask my ministerial brethren, much as they feel the loss, whether
that was an unsuitable close to the ministerial career of Daniel
James Draper ? We have seen the zeal of his noble soul at work
in these colonies in framing schemes for Church extension, and in
evangelistic efforts to save souls and build up the Church of God.
We have seen him ever ready to help any public institution that
could benefit the bodies and souls of the people; and can w 7 e see
him in that frightful storm—working at the pumps, addressing
words of spiritual comfort to the people when the captain proclaimed
the hoplessness of their condition ; holding a prayer-meeting in the
saloon at midnight; starting “ Rock of Ages, cleft for me,” when
the floating bodies of the dying indicated the fast approach of the
last moments, and sinking with exhortations to come to Christ still
upon his lips —and not feel that he had a glorious end. He was
enabled to —
His body with his charge lay down,
And cease at once to work and live.
Preach Christ to all, and cry in death.
Behold, behold the Lamb ! ]


We will not murmur so far as he is concerned. We must not con-
fine our remaks to those on board the London. God speaks to
us in this event.
Surely the members of the Church are warned to use the ministry
while they have it. Numbers present were favoured with Mr.
Draper’s ministrations. Would you not have listened more faith-
fully had you known you must so soon be deprived of the oppor-
tunity of hearing him again ? Value your privileges while you have
them. As ministers, there is a strong call to work while it is day.
If so eminent a standard-bearer can be removed, we need not expect
exemption from the shafts of death. There are plenty of avenues
through which death can strike besides a storm at sea, and while we
have the opportunity we ought to save souls from death. “ What-
soever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might, for there is
no ’ work, nor service, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave,
whither thou goest.”
Ministers and people may derive encouragement from the power
of sustaining grace. How blessedly was God’s servant supported in
thin trying hour. We sometimes tremble lest we should faint in the
day of adversity. Witness the calm confidence and hallowed zeal dis-
played amidst that war of elements, enduring the most imminent peril.
Have not religion and eternity been brought home to thousands
by this sad event in a way that they could not have been by ordinary
means ? Relatives of those who perished are numerous ; the event
itself has excited interest amongst masses. The “ordinary dispe nsa
tions of God’s providence are too apt to lose their effect. The
ministry of the Word is resisted until it becomes powerless. The
funeral processions become so common that they fail to impress the
general mind. Sometimes sudden death, from disease or accident,
snatching a neighbour or acquaintance into eternity, startle those
who view the event into a conviction of the uncertainty of life, but
too frequently all these influences fade away. But here is an event
coming suddenly and startlingly upon us, in which all the lessons of
God’s providence are concentrated with overwhelming force. We
see the power of religion, the vanity and uselessness of wealth and
position when the summons comes—“ This night thy soul shall be
required of thee the uncertainty of life, the importance of being
always prepared for our solemn change. The variety of persons in
that passenger list will give an interest to the narrative to vast mul-
titudes, and they will be prepared to feel the force of those moral
lessons that are intended to be conveyed.


Allow me to ask whether numbers in this congregation have not
felt the force of these circumstances. What are worldly pleasures ?
What are millions of gold and silver ? What are the most brilliant
earthly associations when death conies with a summons from
Heaven, which cannot be turned aside ? How blessed is the soul
that has secured an interest in Christ, and can look with calmness
on death, and “ Head its title clear to mansions in the skies.” We
may all live there, and it is the only really happy life to live. No
person can charge our departed friends, Mr. and Mrs. Draper, with a
gloomy religion. They had a joyous union with the God of love,
and cheerful and blithe they pursued their earthly course.
BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH.
The following biographical sketch of the late lamented Mr. Draper
has been prepared, at the request of their brethren, by the Rev. J.
Harcourt, J. C. Symons, and J. Dare :
The Rev. Daniel James Draper was a native of Hampshire, Eng-
land. He entered the Wesleyan Ministry in 1834, He was recom-
mended as a candidate for the ministry from a circuit in Wales, in
which some of his earlier years were spent; and at the district
meeting held in Swansea, in May, 1834, he, in company with the
late Rev. F. Lewis, was recommended to the conference, by whom
he was received as a probationer in the Wesleyan ministry. He
was appointed to Chateris (under the superintendency of the Rev.
Francis Derry), where he spent one year, when, having expressed his
willingness to proceed as a missionary, he was appointed to New
South Wales. In company with Messrs. M‘Kenny, Spinney, Lewis,
Brooks, and Matthew Wilson (the latter being the only surviving one
of the party), Mr. and Mrs. Draper embarked, in October 1835, in
the Bencoolen, for Hobart Town. At the embarkation of the
mission party in London, Mr. Draper tells that Dr. Bunting said to
him—“ Well, brother, you are going to New South Wales—a new
world, and a most interesting field of labour. You will find a moral
atmosphere unfavourable to the success of the Gospel ministry.
Years may pass before you witness any decided fruit of your
labours, and I think it probable that you will meet with many
discouragements. However, success is certain. It must come!
it must come !” These words from that venerable minister often
cheered Mr. Draper. “ When my heart (says he) well-nigh fainted,


the good Spirit has brought to my remembrance the words, ‘lt
must come, it must come.’ It came at length, and, thank God, we
no longer ‘ labour in vain, nor spend our strength for nought.’ ” Mr.
Draper laboured successively in Parramatta, Bathurst, and Sydney,
and in each of these places he endeared himself, as a minister and
a man, to all who came within the sphere of his influence. In
1846 Mr. Draper removed to Adelaide, where he remained until
1855. At the time of his appointment to Adelaide, Methodism
was in a very low state, and required all the wisdom of the serpent,
as well as the harmlessness of the dove, on the part of any minister,
in order to recover it from its depressed condition. The circum-
stances connected with Mr. Draper’s appointment should be men-
tioned. The Rev. W. Longbottom, whose early labours in South
Australia had been so useful, had a second time been stationed
in Adelaide. He found the Church scattered, and all but
destroyed. Earnestly did he labour, and with considerable success,
for its restoration. But his health failed, and he was laid
aside. It was, therefore, necessary to send some minister to
succeed him. The discovery of the Burra Burra mine, which hap-
pened about this period, with the great influx of population as the
result of that discovery, made the appointment a very important
one. Mr. Draper volunteered to proceed to Adelaide, upon the con-
dition that one other minister should be appointed with him. This
was readily agreed to. The Rev. John Harcourt was sent in June,
and Mr. Draper followed in October, 1846. At that time, and for
some years after, the entire colony formed one circuit. This ex-
tensive field was cultivated by Mr. Draper with signal success. He
spared no energy, but was in labours more abundant, frequently
riding on horseback fifty miles a day, in order to minister the word
of life to the congregations in distant and scattered localities. By
God’s blessing upon his labours, it soon became necessary to increase
the number of ministers ; and successively Messrs. Thrum,
Lowe, Symons, Flockart, Dare, and Hull, became his coadjutors.
Throughout his career in South Australia, Mr. Draper had to meet
difficulties of no common order, and he met and conquered them
with great ability and success. His wise plans and earnest labour,
cheerfully seconded by his brother ministers and the devoted laymen
of Adelaide, under God placed Methodism in the foremost position
of the churches of South Australia, a position well sustained to the
present time. In 1850 and 1851 Mr. Draper projected a scheme of
church extension, which embraced the erection of a number of


chapels, ministers’ residences, &c. The people entered most heartily
and liberally into this work. Of those erections the noble edifice in
Pirie-street was the chief as well as the last. It was a great under-
taking, but was conducted to a successful issue. Just, however, as
this scheme was completed, news of the gold discoveries of Victoria
reached Adelaide. The people flocked from South Australia by
thousands. In less than three months, more than 15,000 men left
out of a population of 60,000 persons, None could tell what the
issue would be, and universal ruin stared all in the face. Those
were dark days, and most trying to the faith of God’s people. The
chief burden of responsibility as to the newly-completed churches
rested upon Mr. Draper ; for congregations, members, officers,
trustees, had gone to the diggings, and none could say if they would
return, or would permanently remove. Deeply did Mr. Draper feel
this trial. Those who did not know him intimately were unaware
of the depth of his feelings and emotions. But the darkness was
not of long duration. The people began to return ; they entered
heartily into plans for the removal of the debts from their holy and
beautiful houses; soon, mourning was turned into joy, and Mr.
Draper was permitted to witness the fruit of his long, earnest, and
wise labours. In 1855, Mr. Draper was appointed to Victoria. He
has laboured in the principal churches of Melbourne up to the time
of his visit to England, which has ended so fatally. From 1855
until 1865 he occupied the position of “ Head of the Wesleyan
Denomination,” or “ Chairman of the District,” but his office was
really that of a bishop. In this important position he devoted him-
self most earnestly to the duties of his office. How he succeeded
may be known by the present position of the Wesleyan Church in
this colony, and which is greatly due to Mr. Draper’s efforts. At a
valedictory service, held in Wesley Church, on the 14th March,
1865, on the eve of Mr. Draper’s departure for England, an address
was presented to him, in which the following testimony is borne to
his character and ability :—“ We rejoice that, under God, and aided by
the zealous and able service of your brethren, you have been instru-
mental in building up our beloved Methodism, and extending her
influence and usefulness in no ordinary degree. Your eminent fitness
for office, and the skill, ability, and uniform courtesy with which
you have conducted the affairs of our Church during the ten years of
your residence amongst us, have elicited our highest approval and
admiration. Your ministrations as a pastor and preacher have been
in a high degree useful, while, as a Christian and s a gentleman, your


example has been influential for good.” Mr. Draper, in the course
of his reply to the address, said—“ During his thirty years of
service in Australia he had been preserved in health ; he did
not now, he was thankful to say, go to England in search of health.
He hoped, by relaxation for a year, to be better able to perform
his various duties. He expected, by his association with the good
and great in the old country, to be benefited and instructed. As
representing Australian Methodism, he should seek to do so faithfully
and well. Some persons had said to him that when he got to
England he would not return, but, if God spared him, he should
certainly come back. All his sympathies and interests were with
Australia.” An inscrutable Providence, as mysterious as it is
painful, has prevented the accomplishment of these intentions. The
high estimation in which Mr. Draper was held by his brethren in
the ministry is best shown by the language of an address, which,
together with a gold watch, they presented him on his departure for
Great Britain :—“ As a minister of our Church, occupying for many
years a prominent position, we desire to bear testimony to the
evangelism, the instruction, the energy, and success which have
characterized your ministry. As an ecclesiastical officer, whether in
the chair of the Conference, or presiding over the district meeting,
or transacting the multifarious and highly-important business of our
Church, you have always commanded our confidence and secured our
respect. The great ability which you have uniformly displayed in
conducting the affairs of our Church while you have been at its head
in Victoria, has been of lasting benefit, and has helped to lay, in this
young country, the foundations of Methodism broad and deep. The
kindness and courtesy which have marked your personal and
official intercourse with us have made impressions upon our hearts
which will be long cherished ; while your readiness to advise, your
sympathy in our varied difficulties, your counsel and assistance in
our times of perplexity and sorrow, will ever be gratefully remembered
by us. We rejoice that it has been our privilege to labour with you
in this interesting and important field of Christian enterprise. With
thankfulness to God for his great goodness to us, we look back and
trace the gradual and rapid progress which Methodism has made
during the last ten years. And as we have been fellow-labourers in
the past, so we hope we shall be in the future; and that upon your
return from England we shall be again favoured with your presence and
services.” It is not necessary to dwell upon Mr. Draper’s far-sightedness
in securing sites and erecting churches, and thus giving expansion
and stability to Methodism. But it is proper that distinct reference


should be made to his power of inspiring confidence in himself and
in his plans. His straightforward and honest policy, his clear and
practical conception, his careful calculation, his manly, genial carriage,
combined to fit him pre-eminently for the leader in any enterprise
who would be cheerfully and devotedly followed. Only those who
•have been associated with him in the work of the Church can form
any just estimate of these qualities. His presence and counsel
dispelled gloom, and gave heart <to those who were engaged with him
in he duties and responsibilities of the Church. There is one enter-
prise in which Mr. Draper took a most lively interest, but of which he
was not permitted to see the completion : we allude to Wesley College.
For many years he was most anxious for the erection of the college.
It will be remembered by his friends how he rejoiced at the com-
mencement of the building. He, in conjunction with Mr. Powell,
spared themselves no trouble to procure a suitable head master. His
communications to the committee, as well as to his private friends,
showed how near to his heart was the success of the institution.
He expected great benefit to Methodism and to the colony from the
college ; and he wrote with more than ordinary expectations of the
pleasure which he hoped to experience in its completion and
prosperity. But he was not permitted to realise these hopes. It is
an affecting thought that, just when so many were joyously-
inaugurating the college, our beloved brother was proclaiming mercy
through Christ to his fellow-sufferers on board the London,
and that within about two hours after our meeting dispersed, he,
with his beloved wife —and we may well believe many w-ho were
brought through him to the Saviour —sank beneath the raging
waves, while their spirits rose to heaven. All Mr. Draper’s
letters during his visit to England were full of the buoyancy which
so eminently characterised him ; indeed, his visit had been one of
unmixed pleasure ; and upon his return to Australia he looked forward
to many years of increased usefulness —an expectation which was
entertained by all his friends. These hopes are now quenched in
death. Mr. Draper was widely known and highly esteemed beyond
the bounds of his own Church as a man of catholic spirit, a good
citizen, and a kind and firm friend. Australia can ill afford to spare
such men as he was. In New South Wales, South Australia,
Victoria, and indeed throughout the entire Australasian Wesleyan
Church, the distressing—and, to human vision, untimely—death of
Mr. Draper will be mourned deeply and long. While the Church
will deplore its loss, multitudes will feel that they have lost a
personal friend. His memory will be gratefully| cherished in many


a family circle as well as in many a Christian congregation. And yet
there will be joy mingled with sorrow; joy and gratitude that God
enabled him to be an angel of mercy to the perishing ones in the
ill-fated ship. If his life was that of an earnest and useful worker
in the Lord’s vineyard, his death was that of a moral hero. He has
left behind him, as a precious legacy to his sorrowing friends, a
name more enduring than monumental brass or sculptured iron.
Mr. Draper, we believe, was about fifty-five years of age. Mrs.
Draper, whose loss is deplored only less than that of her noble
husband, was a Christian gentlewoman of rare gifts and virtues, to
whose piety, intelligence, and firmness he was in no small degree
indebted. As she had shared with and aided him in his toils on
land, so she sank with him into the mighty deep. Her name is as
ointment poured forth, and her memory is embalmed in the grateful
hearts of the poor and destitute, who were the constant objects of
her solicitude and benevolence. Mrs. Draper was a person of
more than ordinary interest to the colonial churches. She was the
daughter of one of the very first missionaries to the South Seas,
her father, Mr. Shelley, having come out to Tahiti, in the ship Duff,
in 1797. She was born in Parramatta, New South Wales ; was con-
verted to God in early life, became a scholar in the first Wesleyan
Sunday School, and afterwards a teacher in the same school. She
was Mr. Draper’s second wife, and was married to him in 1839. Her
venerable mother, now verging upon ninety years of age, and nearly
blind, survives her. It was Mrs. Draper’s cherished hope to be per-
mitted to smooth the dying pillow of her revered mother, and it
was on this account that Mr. Draper was appointed to Sydney by
the last conference ; but an all-wise Providence has willed it other-
wise. Of our dear departed friends we may say, “ They were lovely
and pleasant in their lives, and in their death they were not divided.”
Mr. and Mrs. Draper leave behind them an only son, who is at
present in the Bank of New Zealand, Dunedin, with whom the
deepest sympathy will be felt; and for whom, in this terrible
affliction, we solicit the prayers of all God’s people.
Both the rev. gentleman’s discourse and the paper which he read
were listened to with profound attention ; and, on the congregation
retiring from the church, the organ played “ The Dead March in
Saul.”
BLUNDELL AND FORD, PRINTERS, FLINDERS LANE WEST.


P i*H '
