

Hi 'ft
K— 1 e
c L < r
_Jk5 P m




SOUTH AUSTRALIA AS IT IS :
By the Rev. Augustus Kavel, Evangelical Lutheran
Pastor at Klemzig and Hahndorf, near Adelaide,
South Australia, September, 1844.
[Translated from the German hy C. Flaxman, Esq.]
REPRINTED FROM THE ‘SOUTH AUSTRALIAN NEWS,’ MAY, 1845.
The following statement is penned in compliance
with the request of Captain N. Probst, commanding
the German emigrant vessel £ George Washington,’
who was desirous to convey a brief but authentic
account of the state of this young British Colony to
those persons in Germany who take an interest in it.
The author is himself a German, who, although he
had very important reasons for leaving his native
land, and has no idea whatever of ever returning to
it, is by no means estranged from it, and would deem
it sinful to mislead any of his fellow-creatures, and
especially any of those whose attention may be drawn
to his present communication. It is, therefore, his
determination in the following statement to exagge-
rate nothing, but to report faithfully according to
truth. And the more so, in order that, should there
but one single individual, in consequence of this
document, become induced to make South Australia
his adopted home, the author may be able, without a
blush, to face him both on his arrival, and also after
he has remained here for some length of time. He
is also conscious of not being actuated by any self-
interested motive whatsoever, least of all by any
commercial object to entice any one to come hither ;
although he would indeed rejoice, should the Sove-
reign of all the countries of the wmrld lead hither
many more of his countrymen, in order to provide
for them here a happy home. The writer having
now lived for five years and ten months in this colony,
which is only nine years old, it may be relied upon
that his report is founded upon repeated observation,
and actual experience, and is not that of a mere j
stranger travelling through it. Let us, then, now |
proceed to the subject itself.
The British Colony of South Australia is that part
of the Continent of New Holland extending from
the 38th to the 9th degree of south latitude, from
south to north, and from the 112th to the 153rd de-
gree of longitude east of Greenwich, from west to |
east. The access to it from the south consists of two
passages between the mainland and Kangaroo Island,
which lead to the Port of Adelaide, on the east side |
of St Vincent’s Gulf. On looking towards the east,
from the harbour, you perceive before you a plain,
stretching for about fourteen English miles, or three I
German miles, to the foot of a range of hills, which
extend as far as the eye can reach in the direction
from north to south, and shut out the view into the
interior of the country. This range attains an eleva-
tion, at its highest points, of about 2500 feet above
the level of the sea ; and on approaching near to it
from the plains, presents to the view a connected
chain of hills, richly overgrown with wood in many
places, while in the winter and spring time, which
lasts from June to November, it is covered with a
beautiful carpet of grass and flowers, and intersected
in many places by gullies, which are adorned in the
same way, and terminate, not in naked, craggy, pre-
cipitous peaks, but by a rounded line of summit. At
the same time, but more particularly from June to
the middle of October, the whole of the plain lying
between the Gulf and the mountains is adorned with
grass and flowers, and here and there with smaller
and larger woods, and in many places with only
clumps of trees, so that a journey over it at this
season of the year resembles a walk through a large
and beautiful park. The same must also be said of
travelling in the mountain ranges, which are formed,
with the exception of a few limited spots, of an
uninterrupted succession, extending many miles in
length and breadth, of dome-shaped hills, driven
together, as it were, and which are connected by
vafleys and table-land, sometimes wider, and some-
times narrower. Of this kind are all the various
mountain ranges of the country, e. g., the Victoria,
or Alexandrina Range, the Barossa Range, the Her-
cinian Range, aifd the others.
These, afford, as well as the plains, throughout the
entire year, an abundance of rich pasturage for the
flocks and herds of cattle, sheep, and goats, which
are continually increasing in importance; so that,
particularly in the above-mentioned time of year, up
to Christmas, even the working bullocks look as fat,
and indeed are so, as the fattened cattle in many
parts of Germany. Our beef and mutton, therefore,
are on all hands admitted to be not inferior to the
best which may be had in London or Hamburgh,
South Australia has no want of rivers or water, as,
on account of its southern position and its warm
climate, might be supposed ; for, besides the Murray,
which is as broad as the Elbe at Hamburgh, and at
many places forty feet deep, and is an honour to the
country, there are the Torrens, the Onkaparinga, the
Gawler, the Para, the Rhine, and other rivers, which
flow during the rainy season, and for some months
afterwards, and during the remaining portion of the
year contain a sufficiency of good water in their long
and deep pools (which are connected with each other
from their sources to their discharge into the sea),
some of these pools extending from 590 to 1000 feet
in length. The country has also everywhere a great
number of watercourses, or creeks, taking their rise
in the ranges, and joining either the rivers or the sea,
most of which flow during the rainy season, and for
a short time afterwards. But spring water is also
found everywhere by digging, and indeed in many
instances pretty near the surface, at a depth of from
five to ten feet, but generally at from twenty or
thirty to fifty feet, even on the top of the highest
hills, and it has seldom been necessary to dig a hun-
dred feet or deeper. As the colonists, partly for
purposes of Cultivation, but especially with a view to
establishing cattle and sheep stations, have been
obliged to spread themselves over a great portion of
the Colony, both in the hills and on the plains, such
facts with respect to the abundant supply of spring
water have been satisfactorily and practically ascer-
tained, and it is deemed superfluous to think of boring
Artesian Wells. We also do not need the gigantic
task of an Osiris, to lay out a lake of Mceris, or to
intersect our plains with a net-work of canals, to
j fertilize them ! Every year we have, thank God, a
■ sufficiency of rain water, whether the rainy season
sets in in April, or not before the beginning of June,
to yield a superabundance of such w'heat as carries
away the prize in Mark lane, London, and sells there
as seed wheat at from eight to ten shillings (which is
equivalent to about three Prussian dollars,) and up-
wards per bushel, (12 Berlin Metzen); and to pro-
duce barley, from which an ale is brewed, but little
inferior to that which is brewed in England.
As to the average annual quantity of rain which
falls here from the middle of May to the beginning
of October, (besides which it is seldom the case that
any of the other months pass altogether without rain),
the calculations and observations made through
several years show that it comes up to that of wet
and foggy London, only that the South Australian
showers, which are not so regular as those of England
or Germany, but are more liberally bestowed during
the aforesaid rainy season, fall much more heavily,
and on that account are styled, by way of honorary
distinction, “ Australian showers.”
These make the country, and particularly the hilly
portions, but likewise the plains, very fertile. If,
however, they were assisted by the construction of
artificial lakes, ponds, and so forth, in which the


enormous mass of rain water which runs down into deaths have occurred among them, that diseases
the sea every year were collected and preserved, so
that the fields and gardens might be artificially irri-
gated even in the height of summer (although that is
not necessary for the ordinary degree of fertility),
the fertility of the land would be raised to an almost
unparalleled degree, as the result of an extraordinary
thunder-shower in February, 1840, exemplified, when
in some parts of the colony there was an extraordi-
nary crop of potatoes and maize, and everywhere
garden produce attained to an uncommon size and
perfection. Such artificial irrigation is however not
necessary, and appears to be so much the less needed,
as, during the nine years which this colony has been
established, it has not experienced a single arid or
unproductive year, but rather only fertile years. It
is only to be wondered at how some people like the
Baron Speck Sternburph , who have never set foot in
this country, can tell the public in Germany that this
country is altogether scantily supplied with water.
The soil, both of the arable and garden land, is,
moreover, of such a quality, that it does not appear
capable of being so easily penetrated by the heat, as
the land in Germany, and consequently the roots of
tbe plants do not so easily perish. If even it should
chance, as in the year 1840, not to rain for eight or
ten weeks, this does not prevent either .wheat or
barley from blossoming, going to ear, and becoming
full-grained. Such a continued drought before and
until harvest, has however only occurred once in the
course of nine years, and, as experience showed, it
proved harmless. There was not a single tree dried
up, or an acre of grain lost; and although potatoes
and other vegetables ceased growing, they were not
dead ; but on the rains setting in, they again began
to grow. This life-preserving power during a pro-
longed absence of rain, is, however, probably attri-
butable, not only to the quality of the loamy or
clayey soil, but also to the temperature of the air.
The climate of this country is indeed a warm one,
but the warmth is on the average moderate. In the
plains, where it is warmest, the temperature during
the winter, ranges from 10° to 12° Reaumur, at noon,
in the hilly parts still lower; in summer it keeps
between 18° and 24°, and but seldom rises to 30° or
32°. Slight night frosts occur only in the more
elevated districts of the country, several times in the
year, on the plains, and near the sea-coast, scarcely
ever. The vestiges of them disappear within an
hour, at the latest, after sunrise. The air, when the
sky is clear, is exceedingly pure, thin, and free from
vapour; hence the sun, the moon, and the stars,
shine with much greater brightness here than in
Germany and England. It is scarcely ever sultry
and oppressive, even during thunder-storms, (which
however, occur but rarely), except when the wind
blows from the north, (that, however, is never the
case long together) ; it is tempered even in the height
of summer, with an agreeable coolness, in conse-
quence of the prevailing sea-breezes from the south,
so that frequently a cool night succeeds a compara-
tively hot day ; it is therefore advisable, as in Italy,
at evening time, in order to avoid catching cold, to
put on warmer clothing, at any rate in the hills. The
writer has not indeed been either in Sicily or Greece,
but he presumes that those countries, and also
especially Palestine, have the same climate as South
Australia. And although he cannot say that he
knows “ Das Land t co die Gitronen bluhn ,” (“ the
country where the citron blooms,”) yet he must con-
fess that he is acquainted with another such a
country, and it is this. In order to give some idea
of the excellence of the climate of this colony, he
begs only to mention, that the 500 of his fellow-
countrymen who came here in the year 1838 and
1839, (as also himself) have enjoyed very good health
ever since they have been here, that exceedingly few
among the children are almost unknown, and that
the churchyards are not full. The pure atmosphere
of this country facilitates their breathing to persons
afflicted with pulmonary and other diseases, uncom-
monly : so that those who in Germany panted for
breath to go up stairs, or up any little ascent, are here
enabled to climb the mountains with ease. Coughing
is very rarely heard, fevers also are in like manner
only spoken of as quite extraordinary occurrences.
That, however, persons who do not in the least degree
guard against cold, or who lead an intemperate life,
should be liable to serious bowel complaints, by
drinking intemperately in the hot season, is no
wonder. But independently of that, the healthiness
of the climate may be vouched for by the single fact,
that in one German community of about 130 souls,
only one death occurred, being that of a child, in
thirty-two months; and that in another community
of 150 souls, during the same period, the only deaths
were two elderly men, and three or four children.
Should this state of health continue, which there is
not any reason at present to doubt, the 930 or 940
Germans who are living here now, and among whom
very nearly 100 children have been born since Feb-
ruary, 1839, will soon become a pretty numerous
population.
The excellency of the climate would allow one to
expect a high degree of fertility in this country,
provided the soil be of a good description, and that
it is. Sand, in the strict meaning of the word, is
only found on the sea-coast, and in some comparative-
ly small spots of the colony—that is, in the occupied
districts. Most of the soil in the plains and the hill-
country, is either a reddish earth, or of a whitish
grey description, mixed with loam, or it is black
alluvial deposit, (which latter especially is found at
the foot of the hills, and near the rivers and creeks,)
to the depth of twelve inches or more. All three
kinds, but especially the first and the last, have
proved to be very fertile, producing all kinds of
vegetables, most excellent wheat and barley, (rye
and oats make too much straw upon the rich soil,)
maize, tobacco; besides which, all kinds of European
fruits, and likewise vines, almonds, dates, citrons,
oranges, figs, mulberries, and such like. Wheat,
during the last few years, has been cultivated, and
has succeeded so abundantly, that, especially in 1843
and 1844, considerable quantities of it, and also of
flour, have been shipped to New Zealand, New' South
Wales, the Mauritius, the Cape of Good Hope, and
to England. An acre of land (equal to 1| of a
Prussian Morgen) which is sown with from one bushel
and a-quarter to one bushel and a-half, (75 to GO lbs.)
of wheat, yields, according to the quality of the soil,
from twelve, or in the average fifteen, to twenty,
twenty five, and thirty bushels. Barley yields still
more abundantly. As in reaping, a quantity (of the
wheat especially) falls out under the sickle, on ac-
count of the great heat, and which the inconsiderable
quantity of rain that falls between harvest and the
next seed-time does not cause to germinate, it can be
harrowed in at the setting in of the rains, and thus a
generally middling, often a good crop can be had
without trouble, which has the additional advantage
that it is free of smut. Whole fields of this descrip-
tion, and promising an abundant crop, are now to be
seen, on which nothing but the mere harrowing has
been employed. The tobacco plant, after the leaves
have been taken off in autumn, may also be allowed
to remain, and only requires to be cut off close to
the ground, when it yields another crop in the second
and even in the third year.
Generally speaking, the fertility and productive-
ness of this country are extraordinary, especially
where there are late rains, and that is generally the
case. The author of this report has seen hundreds


of plants of wheat, barley, and oats, which had epoch in history. The considerable mountain ranges
sprung up from the grains that had fallen out at the
harvest, each single plant carrying from ten, twenty,
and thirty to forty, and even more, stalks and ears,
yielding an excellent spontaneous crop. Other proofs
of the productiveness of the South Australian soil
are afforded by the almond, the kernel of which,
within four years, grows to a tree, bearing not a few
eatable fruits. Transplanted fruit trees, for example
the almond, the apricot, the fig, and such like, bear
fruit in the same year, and even in pretty good
quantities. Especially, however, does this colony
promise to become a wine-growing country, so that
raisins, and wines, and also olives, will form a staple
article of export, besides wheat, barley, and tobacco.
In addition, there will come by-and-by currants, with
all the other products of Greece and Sicily, and also
silk, as soon as the mulberry tree has been sufficiently
extensively cultivated. Although, indeed, as yet,
neither flax nor hops are thought of, as articles of
export, yet they also thrive very well here, especially
the former; hemp only has not succeeded so well.
The object of this paper and want of time do not
permit the writer to enter any further into details, to
prove the fertility of this country, or to lead the
reader through our gardens, among the apricot and
the almond trees, which are now in full blossom, and
the lovely acacias, to the useful castor-oil trees,
(Palma Christi, Ricinus) and to the vines, or to show
him the stocks, from three to four feet high, with the
wall-Howers spreading to the size of a shrub, the
pinks and rose trees, vieing in odoriferous perfumes
with the sweet scent of the native flowers. But
should he (the reader) come here, and see all this,
and refresh himself in the heat of January aud Feb-
ruary with the fruits I have mentioned, or with the
taste of the sweet melon, or the juicy water melon,
he would soon feel quite at home here, and be as
little desirous to return to his native country, as his
countrymen who are already here. “The earth is
the Lord’s, and all that is therein.” To Him belongs
South Australia. It is truly a blessed country. It
has corn, and in a very few years, we shall also be
able to say, wine too, in abundance.
The stock of cattle, which consisted eight years
and a-half ago, of one cow, one goat, and six rams,
now amounts, partly through importations, and
partly by overland supplies from the other colonies,
but chiefly through the natural increase, to half-a-
million of sheep, 20,000 head of cattle, (reckoning only
those above six months old,) great numbers of horses,
large herds of goats, multitudes of pigs, and an
extraordinary number of turkeys, geese, ducks, and
other poultry, and pigeons. The seas yield also
whales, for the export of oil and whalebone, of which
two articles there was taken last year £lO,OOO worth,
in addition to which are several other eatable kinds
of fish, smaller and larger, in abundance, and also
oysters, lobsters, and other shell-fish ; while the lover
of game may obtain and thankfully enjoy kangaroo,
wild turkeys, wild ducks, aud so forth, and without
in truth being obliged to pay at all dear for it. On
the other hand, whoever desires to live more econo-
mically, may have butcher’s meat, milk, cheese,
butter, and excellent wheaten bread, in the greatest
abundance.
South Australia, in superficial contents larger than
Great Britain, with her twenty-five millions of in-
habitants, but which as yet has only about 18,000
European inhabitants, offers, on account of her
fertility and her large resources, which have as yet
been turned to very little account, an immense field
for emigration and enterprise. Besides sheep and
cattle farming, agriculture, and garden cultivation,
for all of which there is still an exceedingly ample
field; the working of mines promises to become of
great importance, and some day to constitute an
of Australia, which have hitherto been examined but
very superficially, in a geological point of view,
exhibit many indications of metals, and of useful and
precious stones. Two copper mines have been in
operation this year past, yielding a rich supply of
copper ore, which is alleged to be of the best quality.
A third one has been opened, and Mr. Menge, the
geologist, in the course of his explorations during
the last few months, has discovered about fifteen
more copper mines. Three lead mines, which, how-
ever, also contain a good proportion of silver, are
likewise being worked, and of several others, namely,
of tin and of zinc, indications have been found. In
order to form an idea of the richness of these mines,
it will suffice to remark, that during the present
month alone, sixty tons of lead ore, of the above
quality, and thirty-two tons of copper ore, have been
shipped for England whilst the writer saw a few
days ago, upwards of a hundred tons (meaning of
course ship tons) of copper ore, in the warehouses at
the port, ready for shipment. Whether the hills
contain gold also, is a question which yet remains to
be solved. Mr. Menge, however, who has seen, and
repeatedly examined the gold mines in the Ural
Mountains, is decidedly of opinion, that the s riking
resemblance between those mountains and our own,
warrants the expectation of gold being likewise found.
On the other hand, our ranges contain iron in abun-
dance, and, according to assurances of practical and
theoretical miners, of the best quality. The iron ores
contain here and there, 90 per cent, of iron, and may
be picked up from the surface without the ler U
trouble, and thrown into the smelting furnace. The
establishment of iron works, iron foundries, and steel
manufactories, would form a profitable business, and
they would be able to supply all the British colonies
in the Southern Ocean, together with the East Indies
and China, with that article. No iron works have as
yet been established here; the iron foundries in
Adelaide are small private undertakings, and do not
smelt any ore; and the smelting-house, which has
quite recently been opened near the town, will, as
far as I know, only smelt copper and lead ore.
From what has been said, it may safely be con-
cluded, that a few able and theoretical miners from
Germany, would find a large field for investigation,
to the extension of science, and promotion of indus-
try, and able working smelters and miners a con-
siderable field of labour, where they could support
themselves and their families comfortably. But
whoever sends out such persons, must take good care
not to send any unskilful or ignorant people ; for as
raining operations have fairly commenced, real good
miners will doubtless be brought here, and the un-
skilful will stand a good chance of remaining unem-
ployed. Coals have not yet been discovered, but we
Germans understand how to smelt with charcoal,
which ?the English here will not altogether believe.
There is, moreover, abundance of wood. With regard
to themeSallic treasures of this colony, I should add
that quicksilver also was discovered a few weeks ago.
The discovery of so many metals, and indeed of some
quite new ones, as I am assured, is, however, not to
be wondered at, when it is considered that these are
the first discoveries of the kind in one entire division
of the world, (New Holland,) which, however, both
on account of its extent, and of its geographical
position, would lead one to expect many and good
metals.
No less interesting is the mineral kingdom, in its
more peculiar and restricted sense (lithology), which
presents inexhaustible materials for the naturalist, as
well as for the architect and the artist. To say
nothing of the primitive limestone (marble), pyrites
and quartz, clay, slate, talc, clay, gypsum, slate, and
suchlike, which are here found in entire hills and


masses, it is particularly worth mentioning, that com- The colony is likewise satisfactory to educated
plete hills of opal and of chalcedony are found, some persons, on account of its possessing a number of
of which the. writer has lately seen in different parts scientific men, among whom the members of the
of the colony, and which doubtless contain very legal and of the medical professions are conspicuous,
valuable specimens below the surface. The author and also many men of business who have travelled a
has not yet had time and opportunity to visit the good deal, and are possessed of a knowledge of the
emerald hill, which was discovered by Mr. Menge. world and of mankind, are settled here, with a view
He has seen, however, a hillock of asbestos, of a of providing for themselves and their families, and
coarse kind, and has had in his hands a specimen of for their fellow-citizens too, —pleasant homes. In
silver-coloured soap-stone, of which there is also a addition to this, the private libraries contain many
large hill, and which is admirably adapted for mantle- valuable classical works, of ail times, and in almost
pieces, and such kind of articles. There is no want every branch of science ; while close connexion with
also of asbestos of the finer kinds, according to Mr. the other Australian colonies, the Mauritius, the
Menge’s information. What other excellent and Cape, the East Indies, China, and the islands of the
useful things besides may exist, have net yet been Pacific, but especially with England and Scotland,
able to be discovered for want of the necessary ex- bring us newspapers from all those countries; the
animations, and to prosecute which duly qualified most important intelligence they contain, with refe-
persons are needed. We are justified, however, by rence to politics, commerce, and science, being com-
what has been found already, to infer that more is rnunicated to the public by our three local news-
still in store. There can be no doubt the mineral, papers, so that we are periodically kept informed of
the vegetable, and the animal kingdoms, will each the leading events all over the world. This will,
open new and profitable fields of investigation to the however, be managed for the future with even greater
mineralogist, in its metals, its stones, its ekrths, and regularity; a regular line of packet ships between
its fossils ;to the botanist, the chemist, the physician, London and Sydney having been established since
and the apothecary, in its numerous kinds of trees the Ist of January, 1844, by which means a ship will
and plants; to the naturalist, in its animals, its be dispatched once every month from the former to
insects, its birds, and its fishes ; and that siience and the latter place.
the comforts of life may be thereby very (materially That we are also well provided with European
advanced. But what can be done in these respects ! goods, as for example, clothing, furniture, wines, etc.
by 18,000, or rather, deducting the women jand chil- etc., I may also add for the information of'those
dren, by 7 000 men, who are engaged for jthe most | who might perchance imagine that we were living
part in rearing cattle, in cultivation, or in commerce, here like the natives in the bush. No such thinji;
almost too much, or how can they find time for it, jwe live here, in truth, just the same as Europeans,
unless others come to their assistance, tojdevelope I Finally, in order that no one may be apprehensive
the incalculable resources of this portion of (lie globe, ; on account of the blacks, I would observe, that they
and to open up the way for future races oil men, we i are much fewer in number than the European set-
may say nations ? t tiers, living in small tribes of from 2D!) to 300, at a
A desire to contribute something to the promotion pretty good distance from each other, and doing no
of the arts and sciences, exists indeed aqiong us; injury to any one, beyond nowand then thieving,
neither is there a total absence of talented men. j when they are unobserved, and that rarely at night.
Thus, for example, pretty full descriptions of the \We therefore wake and sleep here in perfect safety ;
beautiful beetles of South Australia have been pub- ' many persons in the country do not fasten up their
lished, and even a lecture upon comets was delivered houses at all when they go out, not even at nights,
upon the occasion of the appearance of the splendid The author’s house is also usually not locked. Other
large comet here in March, 1843. Many inventions robbers and thieves, namely, Europeans, are also
have also been made here already : as, for example, scarce; unless sometimes some convicts creep in
a corn-cutting, or reaping machine, and a pump mill, from Sydney, which is 300 German miles distant, or
which, while it pumps up the water, can at the same from Port Philip, which is 150 German miies distant,
time, grind corn, or saw wood. The mechanical arts, No convicts are transported to this place,-for South
for instance, stone-masonry and also architecture, j Australia is not a penal colony. Travelling also is
arc practised here in the same perfection as in | perfectly safe; and if one happens sometimes when
Europe. Of able masons, carpenters, millwrights, on a journey to sleep by night in the bush, there are
smiths, joiners, turners, and tanners, there i.Cho lack, neither thieves, nor snakes and scorpions, nor abom-
in proportion to the present population of 18,000 inable ants, or any other creeping thing to be afraid
Europeans. The flour for our own consumption and of. The author has many a time experienced this,
for exportation, is produced by five steam, five wind. There is besides an excellent police force watching
and two water mills, both the two latter built and over the peace of the Europeans, and a rigid justice
possessed by Germans. Of leather, enough is tanned punishes its disturbers. In case of need, there is
here for our own consumption, and even ome for also a company of soldiers here for the preservation
exportation. Soap, candles, starch, blue, pnd salt, lof peace, but they have hitherto only served on
are manufectured here. And -if; wifie" only "parade drtty.
for which markets are sought and found by our com
mercial community in connexion with the South QriTTT’nr ATT
Australian Company, who, although they may be AU
limited in numbers, are not deficient in experience. Price 2d.,_ or 34. by post.
, • ~ , 1 ’ and contains the latest
activity, and enterprise. the Colony<
AUSTRALIAN NEWS,
)y post, is Published on the Ist of each month,
latest and most interesting intelligence from
more hands to work, and a little more capital, to The above interesting article is taken from the
enlarge our present, and to open up the new re- ‘ Adelaide Observer.’ An Appendix is added to the
sources, our present articles of export might be original document, which refers to the expeditions
considerably increased, both in number and amount, undertaken to explore the interior of Australia, to
and this colony, which has already, during the nine the price and rent of land, the wages of labourers, the
years of its existence, become pretty nearly indepen- prices of provisions, etc. The most recent infor-
dent of external supplies to meet its requirements, mation on these points will be found in the ‘ South
would soon become perfectly so, and have a super- Australian News,’ or may be had by application to
abundance to dispose of to other countries. The the Committee for Diffusing Information respecting
greatest part of the South Australian natural or South Australia, No. 4, New Broad-street, or to the
manufactured products, constitute articles of export, South Australian Society, No. 27, Leadenhall-street.




