

n^A'OSlfiF
®he (5 mu* Man.
No. 452.] WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 2, 1854. [Price 7 d.
THE WEEK.
In three weeks, at latest, the session will close. The sooner
the better. Everybody is tired of witnessing the feeble
struggles of a Government, the displacement of which would
neither be possible nor desirable, to guide an assembly which
refuses work and disdains control. Legislate the present
Cabinet cannot, that is abundantly clear —perhaps under pre-
sent circumstances no Cabinet could ; but we have as yet no
rational ground for distrusting their capacity to conduct the
war, nor their essential unanimity with respect to it. Ill-
informed (and conscious that it is so) of what is going on, and
justly afraid of embarrassing operations which it is incompe-
tent to direct, Parliament can exercise no supervision and ap-
ply no salutary stimulus. At once idle and restless, and almost
useless for purposes of legislation, it serves in reality only as a
medium for asking questions which are generally parried, and
which (as Admiral Berkeley’s slip reminds us) it is not always
advisable to answer.
Within the last three days the miscellaneous Opposition
counts three victories (two in one night), on points of
different degrees of importance. Mr. Henley on Friday struck
out the declaration from the Bribery Bill; ibi omnis effusus
labor; and the wreck of the measure, having on the motion
for the third reading narrowly escaped destruction, is met
at the door of the House of Lords by the stern announce-
ment that it comes too late. The same untiring objector,
in concert with Lord Seymour, has checkmated the Home
Secretary’s plan for reorganising the Board of Health. And
Mr. Robert Palmer has succeeded in charging half the
expense of the militia store-houses on the Consolidated Fund—
a thing not obviously unreasonable, but stiffly resisted by Mr.
Sidney Herbert.
It will be difficult to say whether the rejection of the
Russian Securities Bill, which is not yet disposed of, should
count as a Ministerial triumph or defeat. Introduced, as Mr.
Henley observes, by a Radical and a Tory, it is supported by
one member of the Administration and opposed by another;
and the law officers of the Crown think it unobjectionable, but
disapprove every word it contains. It is called “ moonshine”
by Mr. Henley, “ humbug” by Mr. Bright, a discreditable de-
lusion by Mr. Wilson, whose arguments are in their turn de-
scribed as u sheer nonsense” by Lord Palmerston. That incor-
rigible personage appears to have taken it up without consult-
ing his colleagues ; but to be snubbed by Mr. Wilson is more
than flesh and blood can bear, and on the next opportunity the
Home Secretary takes his revenge by pummelling the Secre-
tary to the Treasury amid the uproarious delight of the House.
The Bill itself is probably not worth the disputes it occasions. Its
object is to prohibit all trafficking in Russian stock created since
the commencement of the war. The facilities for evasion are
such (due protection being afforded to innocent holders) that
any such enactment is pretty sure to be w r aste-paper. As to
the objections of the loan-jobbing interest, of which Mr.
Baring is the respectable exponent, they are of course entitled
to no attention at all.
The emendations introduced in the Upper House into the
Oxford University Bill, have been sustained in the Lower, in
spite of a tolerably strenuous resistance from Mr. Walpole
and Mr. Roundell Palmer. The effect of them is to make
every member of the governing council eligible by the whole
mass of residents, and to limit the protection which Mr.
Palmer’s clauses throw over emoluments connected with
schools, to scholarships and exhibitions. On these points the
opinion of the Commons, though expressed with sufficient clear-
ness, was not rooted enough to be proof against weariness of the
subject, the authority of the Lords, and the risk of irreparable
injury to the Bill. The objections urged against reconsider-
ing them are of no value : the House of Lords is entitled to
more than a simple veto; its business is to legislate jointly
with the Commons; and Ministers have a perfect right to
push their own views in both Houses successively, and to
turn their success in either to the best account they can in
dealing with the other. The measure is now complete, and
awaits nothing but the Royal assent to become law. With
some imperfections, and with the material exception of Mr.
Heywood’s clauses, it is, as it stands, a good measure, and
calculated to produce a large and useful reform. But the
positive mischief involved in the adoption of these clauses
counterbalances all its merits : acknowledging the excellent
intentions of its framers, their care, courtesy, and labour,
we accept it as a whole without satisfaction, and we look back
on the penultimate stage of its progress to maturity with
deep and unmixed regret.
Sir William Young, at present Lieutenant-Governor of South
Australia, is transferred to New Zealand, and replaced by the
Hon. F. Lawley, one of the private secretaries of the Chan-
cellor of the Exchequer. Mr. Lawley is a clever, capable man,
likely to be spoiled at home and to distinguish himself in a
difficult and responsible situation abroad ; but we do not feel j
able, all things considered, to extol his nomination, with the
Ministerial prints, as a model appointment on the part of the
Government, or as a great act of self-sacrifice on. his own.
The Premier’s youngest son, the Hon. Arthur Gordon, steps
into his seat for the family borough of Beverley.
It transpires that a short scarlet frock and a light helmet-
shaped schako are to be the future dress of the English army.
This change will not take effect till the garments now in use
and in store are worn out. Another is in operation already :
the sentry at his box exhibits a bristly upper lip, for an order
permitting the moustache to all who choose to adopt that or-
nament has issued this week from the Horse-guards, guarded
by regulations of a stringent and Procrustean sort, which will
compel a man to make a trigonometrical survey of his face
before he begins to shave. The irreverent public diverts itself
at this struggle for uniformity of chin and whisker, but, being
for the most part of the Misopogon persuasion, does not quarrel
with it. The French soldiery wear beards of all shapes and
sizes, and they are never clean.
There is hardly any perceptible movement among the
hostile armies on the Danube, and the only reliable news we
have from that quarter is sad news, relating to the deaths of
three English officers, sacrificed, at the first crossing of the
river, partly by their own adventurous gallantry, and partly
by an error in judgment on the part of the general in com-
mand. The Turks have not pushed forward ; they have con-
tented themselves with getting a sure footing on the left bank,
and appear to be very cautiously feeling their way on. Nor
have the Russians attempted the offensive on any considerable
scale; they watch their enemies from a little distance, and
block, or seem to block, the road to Bucharest. An assault on
the trenches is reported, in which the Ottoman troops had,
as usual, the advantage ; but the rumour seems apocryphal,
and the prospect of a pitched battle has disappeared as fast as
it arose. Threatened in the rear by the great army which
Austria is not yet quite prepared to use, Gortschakoff will
hardly risk a decisive defeat; and it is probable that Omer
Pacha will not challenge a general action without something
more than the moral support of his Christian allies. Russians,
Turks, French, and English—we are all waiting for Austria.
When she moves, the former cannot choose but go, and the
latter will have nothing to do but to pursue a retiring enemy.
Her active assistance, when we get it, will repay us for long
suspense and many false starts. We are earning a right to it
by caution and delay.-
The latest reports are that an expedition against the Crimea
is actually preparing, and (from the other quarter) that
Admiral Chads has taken or destroyed the forts at Bomarsund,
not without considerable loss, to provide a lodgment for the
French army.
Since the triumph of the revolution in Spain, public ex-
pectation has waited on the movements of the dictator Espar-
tero. He has postponed long his march upon the capital,
possibly through indecision—perhaps staying to collect his
strength and secure his position in the north—perhaps con-
scious that his importance in the public eye and his power over
the Court grew with every hour of suspense. The city has
been full of barricades, the people ready to proceed to any ex-
tremity, and the old scheme of a union with Portugal again in
circulation and enjoying considerable favour. But the immi-
nent danger to the throne appears to have now passed away.
The Queen has submitted, as submit she must, to his terms,
verbally conveyed to her by an officer of his suite; she “ ad-
“ heres,” as her proclamation expresses it, “to all his ideas
and he is at last at Madrid, complete master for the moment
of it and her. So long as O’Donnell remains in arms he can
hardly be said to be master of the country.
dFomflu ano Colonial.
FRANCE.—( From our Correspondent.)—Tar is, July 31, 1854.
In the total absence of news of interest from either fleets or
the affairs of Spain are occupying a large share in our speculations;
speculations indeed they may w r ell be termed, for, from the West as
from the East, the tryrapet at this moment emits but a very doubtful
sound, and leaves ample latitude of interpretation and conjecture.
Beyond the fact that every political party in Spain, from Carlist to
Socialist, appears to be on the qui vive, and that for four days, from
the 18th, that is, to the 21st inclusively, there has been more or less
fighting and pillaging in the streets of Madrid, we have up to this
day made very little progress in our information as to the probable
results of this new revolution. In fact, Spain, in her social and
political feelings and emotions, in the springs that act within her
divided provinces and numerous and almost independent agmta-
mientos or municipalities, is even yet so completely a terra incognita
to the rest of Europe that our best informed political men are the
first to avow their inability to draw any definite conclusions from
such uncertain data. There are men, indeed, who, because they|have
spent a season at Madrid, or scampered through Andalusia, have the
confidence to suppose that they know Spain and Spanish parties, and
can read the causes of such events as are now in progress there,
and predict their probable solution. ' But such opinions are just as
various as the subject matter of which they treat, and you are assured
in the same breath that Spain is Carlist at bottom, and does not care
a rush about constitutions; or that a republic is what the country is
really in arms for; or that socialism and infidelity have quitted the
territories of the Most Christian, to find a refuge in those cf the Most
Catholic monarch. In one opinion only do all men seem to agree
with regard to Spain and Spaniards, and that is, that they arc best
let alone; and that the most ill-advised policy on the part of any
other nation in Europe which desired to see its own views prevail in.
the Peninsula, would be to attempt any open demonstration for their
advancement.
As far as our present information goes, facts would seem to indi-
cate that constitutionalism is for the moment at least in the ascendant.
The Queen’s announcement “ that she had sent for Espartero,” is
alleged to have sufficed to put a stop to actual hostilities and attacks
upon the royal palace at Madrid. For the moment, too, all parties
appear disposed to lie on their oars and abide the coming of the
great constitutional chief; but whether he will be accompanied by the
four or five other generals and leaders of the revolution as persons
who have rallied to his policy, or whether the acts "which they shall
jointly accomplish at Madrid will be peaceably accepted by the rest
of the country—whether, in short, diversity of opinion and civil war
will, or will not be avoided, nothing but the posts of the next ten
davs can assure us with any certainty.
It is now asserted here that the measure adopted by the Queen is
one by no means so unpalatable to her Majesty as has been sup-
posed ; that she was tired of her ministers, of the so-called Moderate
party, and of their constant failure to. govern the country; and was
by no means personally indisposed to call in the Progressionists to
her aid. That she is not sorry, in short, to emancipate herself from
the control of those who were rather the ministers of her mother
•than of herself. On the other hand, it is confidently affirmed that
there will be no difficulty in rallying men of all shades of constitu-
tional opinion, all having been equally opposed to the acts of the late
Ministry, and to the indefinite adjournment of the Chambers; and
all men of consideration of the Liberal parties having been of late
closely drawn together by their mutual apprehensions that their per-
sonal liberties were about to be violated and absolute power re-estab-
lished by a coup d'etat. In support of their views, it is now the gene-
rally received opinion that the revolution has been brought about by
a vast preconcerted plan, existing not only amongst those who have
actually taken part in it, but extending also to all those parties
exiled from Madrid by the decrees of the month of February last,;
the design of the whole going no further, at all events, in its origin,
than to bring back the Crown to a sense at once of morality and con-
stitutional policy.
Field -Marshal Don Manuel de la Concha, Marquis del Duero, one
of the members of the Senate, illegally banished for his opposition to
the late Ministry, has already returned to Barcelona, where his pre-
sence is said to have produced the best possible effect. He is a
friend and ally of General O’Donnell. It was at Paris that he re-
ceived the tidings, not unexpected, of the revolution and its success.
Before leaving this city, he expressed his firm attachment to the
Queen and constitutional monarchy; which sentiments he affirmed,
to prevail in the minds of all the other leaders of the movement, who
were hostile only to the Ministry and its policy, but neither to the
person or legitimate sovereignty of the Queen.
Although the people still remain in arms behind their barricades,
the Moniteur tells us that their leaders have sent a deputation to
Queen Isabella, inviting her to leave her palace and show herself to
the people; promising themselves to form her escort in the midst of
the barricades, and convince her of the respect of the Spanish people
for her person and the monarchy. This demonstration is considered
as of good omen for the result of the arrival in person of Espartero.
On the other hand, it appears most essential that that event should
not be long delayed, for already a dangerous propaganda is being
exercised among the labouring classes, and a journal has made its
appearance from a Socialist press, in which the “ crimes of capital,’*
the “abuses of property,” the “slavery of the people,” and similar
subjects are treated of.
On the summit of all the barricades, we are told, appear portraits
of Espartero, o‘Donnell, Generals Dulce, Ros de Olano, &c., sur-
rounded by wreaths of flowers, and otherwise ornamented with
draperies, &c., so as to give to the barricades the air of decorations
for a fete. About 17,000 citizens have already received arras, and
act as a national militia. General Blaser appears, after all, to be
neither killed, wounded, nor made prisoner; but remains at the head
of his troops, now once more within three days’ march of Madrid.
A member of the Junta of the capital has been despatched to him to
order him to lay down his arms.
The arrival at Madrid of General Salazor, formerly Aide-de-Camp
of Espartero, is announced, charged with a special message from the
latter to the Queen. He arrived accompanied by Colonel Pampillon,
her Majesty’s envoy to Espartero, to offer him the conduct of the
Government. An interview of a strictly private nature took place
between General Salazor and Queen Isabella; but although the
General afterwards waited upon the Junta of the city, nothing tran-
spired as to the nature of the communication delivered by him from
Espartero.
The Moniteur of this morning announces in a single line, via


[Aug. 2,
604
Bayonne, the arrival of Espartero in the capital. Nothing is said
either of his being accompanied by the other generals, or the con-
trary.
The whole of the works of the several encampments in the vicinity
of Boulogne will be fully completed in the course of the ensuing
month; and in September, it is understood, a grand review will take
place in the presence of the Emperor, the Kings of Portugal and
Belgium, and also of Prince Albert, who, it is said, has been invited
for the occasion. By the care of Mngr. Parisis, Bishop of Arros, and
in accordance with the wishes of the Emperor, religious services are
being organised in all the camps, at Equihen, Wimereux, Wimille,
Ambletense, and Helfaut, which lie within the diocese of Arros.
Further embarkations of trodps for the East are taking place at
Toulon, instead of at Marseilles, where the cholera is inflicting great
ravages, as well as in many of the villages and coasting districts of
France. This is especially the case in the Department of the ITaute-
Marne. At Jorquenay, a village in that Department, thirty deaths
had occurred up to the 21st inst.,out of a population of two hundred
and fifty souls. Prayers and solemn religious processions are taking
place throughout the whole diocese of Langres. The Due d’Elchin-
gen, second son of the late Marshal Ney, has also fallen a victim to
the same disease at Gallipoli.
The Minister of Justice has published the number of suicides offi-
cially registered between the years 1826 and 1852. The voluntary
deaths thus inflicted in the space of twenty-seven years amount to
71,418. Those of 1852, the last year to which these returns extend,
are stated at 3,674.
According to a report recently presented to the Director-General
of Savings Banks, it appears that the whole amount held by the 360
savings banks of the Departments, on the 31st of December last, was
238,000,000 of francs, or about nine and a half millions sterling. The
most satisfactory character of the report is the fact established by it
of the considerable increase of deposits made by the rural districts.
The same document mentions, by anticipation of the report to be laid
before Parliament, that the receipts of English savings banks
amounted in November last to the sum of thirty-five millions sterling.
The weather in Paris has again assumed an unsettled character,
varying between intense heat and violent storms of rain, wind, and
thunder. On Thursday last perhaps a greater quantity of rain fell
within a couple of hours than any one living can remember. In
many parts of the town the streets assumed the appearance of a
canal, the pavement entirely disappeared under the torrent, which
reached up to the axle-trees of the carriages, and the whole popula-
tion crowded every window to witness the unusual sight. The inun-
dation appears not to have extended far; and though it gave rise to
new fears for the harvest, corn still continues to fall in price at Havre
and other places. The Echo Agricole , however, an excellent agricul-
tural journal, put forward some rather gloomy remarks on the sub-
ject, for which it was promptly called to order, and received a second
“ warning” from the Minister of the Interior.
Railway trains are now advertised direct from Paris to Munich in
twenty-six hours for 92 and 67 francs, first and second class places.
SPAIN.—The letter of our Paris correspondent gives the general
aspect of Spanish affairs, so that we need only fill up his outline with
little more than documentary details. On the morning of the 26th
ult., previous to the arrival of Espartero, the Madrid Gazette contained
the following important address from the Queen to her subjects:—
“ Spaniards—A series of deplorable mistakes may have detached me
from you, introducing absurd distrust between the people and the throne.
My heart has been calumniated by whomsoever has attributed to it senti-
ments contrary to the welfare and liberty of those who are my children ;
but since the truth has at last reached the ears of your Queen, I hope that
love and confidence will revive and be strengthened in your hearts.
“ The sacrifices of the Spanish nation to sustain its liberties and my
rights make it my duty never to forget the principles I have represented—
the only principles I ever can represent—the principles of liberty, without
which there are no nations worthy of the name.
“ A new era, based on the union of the people with the monarch, will
dispel, even to the last shadow, the sad events which I, first of all, desire
to obliterate from your annals.
“ I deplore, from my innermost soul, the misfortunes that have occurred;
and, with an unwearying solicitude, I will strive to make them forgotten.
“ I entrust myself confidently and unreservedly to the national loyalty.
The sentiments of brave men are always sublime.
“ May nothing in future trouble the harmony I desire to maintain with
my people. lam disposed to make every kind of sacrifice for the general
good of the country. I desire that it shall manifest its will by the organ
of its legitimate representatives, and from this moment I accept and offer
every guarantee that may firmly fix its rights and those of my throne.
“ The honour of that throne is your honour, Spaniards! My dignity as
Queen, as woman, and as mother is identical with the dignity of the nation
that once made my name the symbol of its liberties. I fear not, therefore,
to entrust myself to you; I fear not to place my person and that of my
daughter in your hands; I fear not to place my fate under the shield of
your loyalty, because 1 firmly believe that I make you abitrators of your
own honour and of the safety of the country.
“ The appointment of the Duke de la Victoria as President of Council of
Ministers, and my complete adherence to his ideas, having for their object the
general happiness, will be the best pledge of the fulfilment of your noble
aspirations.
“ Spaniards! you may make the happiness and the glory of your Queen
by accepting those which she desires for you, and prepares for you in the
innermost recesses of her maternal heart. The pure and perfect loyalty of
him who is to direct my councils, the ardent patriotism he on so many
occasions has manifested, will put his sentiments in accordance with mine.
“ Given at the Palace on the 26th of July, 1854.
“Yo La Reina.”
This address is followed by another from San Miguel, stating that
he did not consider it desirable to do more than prepare the way for
Espartero by obtaining the following decrees, which are accordingly
published:—
“ Article 1. The decrees depriving Generals Don Leopoldo O’Donnell,
Conde de Lucena, Don Francisco Serrano, Don Antonio Eos de Olano. Don
Josd de la Concha, Don Felix Maria de Messina, and Don Domingo Dulce,
of their employments, ranks, titles, and decorations, are hereby revoked.
“ Art. 2. Are also revoked the decrees and royal orders by which were
confined in any point of the Spanish dominions, or were sent into foreign
countries, all and any military men or civilians, on account of political
causes, during the administration of Count San Luis. The persons in
question may freely proceed whithersoever they please.
“ Art. 3. It is my will that a thick veil be thrown over the dissensions
and political acts of the present struggle, as well as over all relating to its
origin and preparation.
“ Art. 4. In the preceding article are not to be comprehended the faults
or crimes of the Ministers and authorities, over whom may impend accusa-
tion and judgment of the Cortes, or of the competent tribunals. In these
cases the action of justice remains open, that it may be enforced by legal
means.
“ Art. 5. The same is the case with respect to all acts not of a political
character, and which correspond to the class of ordinary crimes.”
Espartero, it would appear, sent a messenger before him, Major-
General Don Allande Salazar, who, in an interview with the Queen,
obtained the only terms the Duke of Victoria asked, viz., it is said,
1, the convocation of constituent Cortes, elected by universal suffrage;
and, 2, the departure of Queen Christina from Spain. There was a
violent scene at the palace in consequence of Queen Isabel accepting
Espartero’s conditions, to which lier mother was opposed, and be-
came greatly exasperated—even going so far, it is said, as to box her
daughter’s ears; while the King-consort was in a great passion at
seeing this, and was for having Queen Christina delivered over to the
people.
The 24th ultimo was the Festival of Santa Christina, and, in order
to show the popular hatred which exists towards Queen Christina,
orders were sent by the authorities of the barricades to all house-
keepers not to illuminate, as had been done every night for the last
week. In the Calle del Principe a death’s head was displayed over
one of the barricades, with crape around it, and an inscription above,
“ Santa Christina.”
On the 22nd Generals Serrano, O’Donnell, Dulce, and Eos de
Olano, with their troops, were at Seville. General Blaser, who had
not been defeated and driven into Portugal, as reported, was at
Baileu, but expected to give up the command of his troops to General
Eendon.
The Chronicle correspondent gives a list of the Junta of Madrid
who have been directing affairs in the capital. The list is headed
with General San Miguel, the chief Minister, pro tem ., as president,
and consists of three marquises, three generals, one colonel, a former
Governor of Madrid, a former President of Council, an ex-Civil Go-
vernor, the President of the Academy of Arts, one University pro-
fessor, two advocates, one banker, two proprietors, four journalists,
one civil engineer, three shopkeepers, one innkeeper, and one jour-
neyman printer!
ITALY.-—Parma has been declared in a state of siege in conse-
quence of a disturbance that broke out on Sunday week, which ori-
ginated in two medical students taking a deliberate shot with a
pistol at an officer in the street in broad daylight; whereupon, the
alarm being given, pickets were turned out to patrol the town, and a
force sent against a certain cafe (the Cafe Ravazzoni), which was
known to he a resort of persons holding very advanced political opi-
nions. The doors and windows of the cafe designated having been
barricaded, the military brought artillery to bear against it, and the
inmates defended themselves by throwing all available articles of fur-
niture on the heads of the assailants from the upper stories. The
result of such a siege is easily imagined. The cannon balls soon
broke the doors open, and the soldiers, once in, soon broke the necks
of Paolo Ravazzoni’s liquor bottles, so that when, after destroying
everything in the house liable to destruction, they were ordered to
retire, they were quite in a state to shoot any one they might meet in
the street with or without orders, and numbers of innocent persons fell
victims to their pot valour. The excesses of the soldiery do not ap-
pear to have been checked by their officers, and the work of pillage
and destruction seems only to have been arrested by satiety on the
part of the rioters. Some hundred bourgeois have been arrested, and
order restored.
GERMANY.—The King of Prussia arrived on the 17th at the
Palace of Nymphenburg, and the King of Wurtemberg returned the
same day to Munich; the King of Saxony and the Regent of Baden
followed subsequently. The Empress Elizabeth of Austria arrived
at Ischl, followed by the Emperor; atad it is said the sovereigns of
Austria and Prussia will have an interview at Ischl.
TURKEY.—There is a report of a battle having been fought at
Frateschti, or Slobodzie, a town 70 miles to the north-east, on the
23rd of July, in which the Russians were completely beaten, losing
2,000 killed, and, according to one account, 3,000 prisoners (another
states, with greater probability, 300); but the whole affair is denied
on the authority of private information by the Austrian Corresponded.
The latter paper, under date of Bucharest, 26th inst., says that
General Bud berg had held a council of war at Frateschti, to consult
upon a retreat, and states that orders have been sent to Prince
Gortschakoff to evacuate the Principalities. According to the
Chronicle, advices from Turnu-Severin of the 27th inst. state that the
Anglo-French troops crossed the Danube on the 24th at Turtukai,
and that the position of the armies is as follows:
“ The vanguard of the allied troops is at Oresti.
“ The Ottomans have advanced from Giurgevo to Podima.
“ The Russian rearguard is retreating, fighting, upon Kalogereni.
“ The Russians have concentrated 300,000 men on the Dniester, in
Volhynia and Podolia. The headquarters are at Mohilew.”
An earlier despatch, dated Rustchuk, July 19, informs us that—
“ Thirty English sailors, under Lieutenant Glynn and Prince Leiningen,
have taken direction of the Turkish flotilla at Giurgevo.
“ Thirty English pioneers, under Captain Page, of the Royal Engineers,
are assisting in completing the fortifications of Giurgevo.”
An important engagement at Rustchuk of the 7th of July, is re-
ported in detail by the Times correspondent, almost before we have
intelligence of its having taken place, by any telegraphic despatch.
Its importance, we regret to say, arises from the disastrous conse-
quences to the English officers, who led on the Turks to the attack.
The town of Rustchuk, it is explained, extends for a mile along the
bank of the Danube, at an elevation of ninety feet; the banks are so
steep as to render any fortifications unnecessary beyond bastions with
earthen parapets to cover the guns, of which there are a tolerable
number:-
“ On the land sicte it is surrounded by a rampart and ditch, with
masonry revetments. The ground here rises to a small eminence, crowned
with redoubts. A small bay near the centre of the river front forms the
harbour, where a steamer and plenty of boats were lying.
“ The opposite side of the river is flat for half a mile inland, when it
gets slightly but abruptly elevated towards the village of Slobodshi. The
town of Giurgevo is a mile and a half below Rustchuk, on the left bank,
and still further down is the island of Mokan, which the Turks gained
possession of on the sth, killing twenty of the Russians. Opposite to the
harbour and boats was the principal Russian battery; 100 yards in the
rear of it a creek runs nearly, parallel to the river. It is generally
furdable, and loses itself at both extremities without joining the Danube.”
Omer Pacha, it appears, was expected with 25,000 men on the 9th*
but during the night of the 6th, however, the Russians withdrew all
their guns, and so few men were to be seen on the left bank that
Hussein Pacha, the commander of the forces in Rustchuk, determined
at once to effect a lodgment;—
“ At half-past 9 a.m. four companies of infantry, under the command of
Bekir Pacha, accompanied by Behram Pacha (General Cannon) and Cap-
tain Bent, Royal Engineers, landed a little below the Russian battery,
without opposition beyond a musketry fire. General Cannon advanced with
some skirmishers along with Captain Bent, who was the first Englishman
to land; and they drove the enemy across the creek with considerable loss;
but the Russians, who in reality were 800 strong, here made a stand, and
the Turks had to retire on the river bank. They established their left in
the battery; their rieffit was in less danger, for the creek gets deeper in
that direction. The Russians came forward very bravely, but the Turks
defended the battery with determination, and, after a few minutes’ firing
at very close quarters, the former retired among the reeds and brushwood,
whence they continued their musketry fire with considerable effect.
“ General Cannon now returned to consult with Hussein Pacha, who
overlooked the whole field of action from the Rustchuk bastions, and he
sent two battalions over, and ordered the gunboats to keep up a vigorous fire.
“ A quarter of an hour after the party under Bekir Pacha started another
body of 500 men, commanded by Colonel Balfour Ogilvie, aide-de-camp to
General Cannon, accompanied by Colonel C. Hindu, aide-de- camp, Captain
Arnold, 3rd Madras Native Infantry, and Lieutenant Meynell, her Majesty’s
75th Regiment, proceeded in a steamer for a mile and a half up the river,
and landed on the left bank. Seeing during the passage that Bekir Pacha
was likely to be hard pressed, Colonel Ogilvie determined to effect a junc-
tion with him. He threw out fifty skirmishers in front, under Captain
Arnold, Colonel Hinde commanding the advanced and Lieutenant Meynell
the rear guard. The enemy opened a severe fire of grape from two guns
they brought up, and their infantry annoyed his left flank by an incessant
musketry fire. After descending the river for a mile, the Turks took a Rus-
sian battery close to the bank, and Colonel Ogilvie, finding that Captain
Arnold had got so much over to the left front that he could not see him, as
the ground was covered with high reeds, ordered them to wait till Captain
Arnold should fall back, for he had given him directions to rejoin the main
body at this point. After half-an-hour, however, Colonel Ogilvie, who
could not see anything that was going on down the river, and being anxious
to join Bekir Pacha, pushed on down the river, leaving Lieutenant Meynell
with fifty men to keep the position till Captain Arnold returned. By this
time the steamer had made another trip, and 200 more men came down the
bank and joined Lieutenant Meynell. After a march of a mile and a half,
over ground occupied by the enemy, and commanded by their guns, at
grape and canister range, the gallant party under Colonel Ogilvie effected
a junction with Bekir Pacha, and this timely reinforcement raised the
spirits of the Turks. Captain Arnold’s detention was afterwards explained
by the accounts of those who were in the Rustchuk bastions, and could see
the whole engagement. He had actually advanced with his fifty men on a
Russian battery more than three hundred yards inland, in which there were
two guns, driven them out of it (the enemy retiring their pieces), and held
possession till overwhelming numbers forced him back on Lieutenant
Meynell. Here they retained their ground for about two hours, without
any reinforcement being sent from the town, until three fresh Russian bat-
talions came down the heights, one of which joined in the attack. At this
point the Turks, now far outnumbered, were driven out of the battery to the
river bank. Captain Arnold and Lieutenant Meynell were both killed;
their bodies were found in the battery, which renders it evident that the
gallant fellows had fought where they stood till the last.
“ The remainder commenced retiring down the river, under shelter of
the bank, which is here about seven feet high, but the enemy, keeping
above them, continued loading and firing, while our men, from their posi-
tion, could offer no resistance. It seemed as if the whole party must have
been destroyed, when 300 men, under Lieutenant Burke, Royal Engineers,
who had been landed from the steamer, commenced marching down the
river, and the enemy drew up to attack them. Here a repetition of what I
have just described took place; the Turks found a tempting but fallacious
shelter behind the bank, and the Russians from above stabbed them with
the bayonet, or discharged their muskets, the muzzles almost touching the
heads of our men. Most fortunately, the bank soon ended, and the ground
became level with the river’s edge. The Turks could now form line, and
face their opponents on equal terms. They slowly retired for 100 yards,
and then, though much outnumbered, showed such a resolute front that the
Russians durst not charge.
“ The attention of the generals on both sides was now directed to this
action, for while Hussein Pacha despatched the steamer to bring off our
men, 500 Russian cavalry and two guns descended from the village of Slo-
bodshi, and galloped in the same direction. The Russians had the start,
and the result was watched with intense anxiety, when, to the surprise of
the Turkish general, the Russian cavalry halted a quarter of a mile in the
rear. It was now expected that the steamer, which had two guns on
board, would bring off our men without difficulty, but she became enve-
loped in smoke and steam; one of the enemy’s shot had rendered her totally
useless, and she drifted back across the river.
“ The position of the Turks was now to all appearance hopeless; one
charge, and they would all be driven into the river by superior numbers,
when the enemy’s infantry slowly retired behind the cavalry, and the whole
of them proceeded to Slobodshi. Towards sundown the parly were brought
back without molestation. They lost about 70 men, among whom was
Lieut. Burke, who commanded the expedition.
“ All this time the firing was kept up at the battery where the first
landing was made; a quarter of a mile below it the Russians had brought
up two battalions and two guns, and made desperate but unsuccessful
efforts to reach our boats and take the battery we were defending in the
rear. By 5 p.m. the Turks had retrenched themselves, which would have
been effected long before had proper arrangements been made, and a sufficient
supply of tools been sent over.
“1 had returned to the right bank at about 3 p.m., and, as Hussein
Pacha, accompanied by General Cannon and bis staff, was going over to
the other side at about 8 p.m., I took the opportunity of re-crossing. The
Turks were busy completing and extending their retrenchments, all firing
had ceased, and we passed the night there without any further attack. In
the morning the Russian infantry had disappeared; their cavalry, who wexe
drawn up on the rising ground, drew off slowly an hour after daybreak, and
the Turks commenced the melancholy task of burying the dead of both
sides which were strewn over the battle-field.”
Of the killed and wounded, the writer gives the following esti-
mate: —
“ I reckon that there were 200 Turks killed of those who landed highest
up the river; that in the battery opposite the town there were 30 killed;
and on the extreme right 70. The wounded, I am informed, amount to
to about 600; total, 900.
u Of the Russians, about 30 were killed up the river, 70 near the
battery opposite the town, 50 on the extreme right, and 40 in the battery
taken by poor Arnold and by shell from the Rustchuk bastions; total
killed, 190; taking the wounded in the proportion of four to one, this
gives 760 —total 950. The difference of the proportion between the killed
and wounded on the two sides is thus explained : —The Turks who were
killed when under the river bank were nearly all shot dead ; the wounded
had no means of retiring, and the Russians returned to massacre those who
were still living. It is but justice to add, that this shameful inhumanity
might be partly owing to the exasperation occasioned by the Turks having
not yet entirely discarded the disgraceful practice of decapitating the dead.
“ In this hard-fought action, which lasted for nine hours, the soldiers on
both sides displayed great courage. The Turks, who made good their
lodgment and slept on the field, may with justice claim the victory; but it
was an action for which no necessity existed.”
According to the Paris correspondent of the Times the expedition
to the Crimea is at last resolved upon
“ It will be commanded by Marshal St. Arnaud, who is to bring with
him 25,000 men. Flat-bottomed boats, for the disembarkation of the
troops, were being constructed in the arsenal of Constantinople, under the
direction of French naval officers. The Charlemagne was to convey a
certain number of those boats to Baltshik, where the combined fleet is still
at anchor. The Mogador was also waiting to take on board several of
these boats. It was believed at Constantinople that the Austrians would
shortly enter the Principalities. Dervish Pacha had accordingly been
appointed Imperial Commissioner at the head-quarters of the Austrian
army. The Polish Count, Branicki, who accompanied Prince Napoleon to
the East, had returned from Yarna to Constantinople, and embarked for
France.
The Times correspondent at Devna finds some difficulty in making
an interesting letter, owing to the English troops remaining stationary
at that camp, and without any appearance of removal, as appeared
to be the case at the date of his last letter, on the 19th of July r . His
recital consists of little more than repetition of races among the men
and battues of game got up by the officers, resulting in the bagging
of a deer or two perhaps, and a couple of doves; one day a boar
turned up, and was speedily bayoneted; another, two hares afforded
sport for 300. However, occasionally an incident will occur worth
notice, and here are two: —
“ Yesterday, an old woman, said to be Fatima Hanoum, the Karakizla
(Black Virgin), Kurdish chieftainess, passed through Devna on her way
from Varna, attended by a rabble-rout of thirty or forty Bashi-Bazouks.
She stopped at the rude khan or cafe', and enjoyed her pipe for a time, so
that one had an opportunity of seeing this Turkish Semirarais. She is a
lean, withered, angular old woman, of some seventy years of age, with a
face seamed and marked in every part of its dark mahogany-coloured sur-
face with rigid wrinkles. Her nose is hooked and skinny—her mouth
toothless and puckered—her eyes piercing black, restless, and sinister, with
bleary lids, and overhung by tufty grey brows. Her neck, far too liberally
exhibited, resembles nothing so much as the stem of an ill-conditioned,
gnarly, young olive tree. With most wanton and unjustifiable disregard of
THE GUARDIAN.


the teachings of Mahomet, and of the prejudices of Mussulmans, she shows
all her face, and wears no yashmak. Her attire consisted of a green turban,
dirty and wrinkled as her face; an antiquated red jacket, with remnants
of embroidery, open in front, and showing, as far as mortal sight could
gaze upon it, the lady’s bosom; a handsome shawl waist scarf, filled with
weapons, such as knives, pistols, and yataghans; and wide blue breeches.
Hanoum is a spinster, and her followers believe she is a prophetess. The
followers were Bashi-Bazouks pur sang , very wild and very ragged, and
stuck all over with weapons like porcupines with spines. Their horses
wore lean and scraggy, and altogether it was a comfort to see this interest-
ing Virgin Queen of the Kurds on her way to Schumla, if, indeed, it was
the Fatima Hanoum or some humble imitator. The lady refused to visit
our camp, and seemed to hold the Giaour in profound contempt.
“ To-day there was a much more interesting arrival. Some five-and-
twenty horsemen rode into the village, attired in the most picturesque ex-
cesses of the Osmanli; fine, handsome, well-kempt men, with robes and tur-
bans a blaze of gay colours, and with arms neat and shining, from the care
bestowed on them. They said they came from Peshawur and other remote
portions of the north-western provinces of the Indian Peninsula, and, while
the officer who was conversing with them was wondering if their tale could
be true, the officer in charge of the party came forward and announced him-
self as an Englishman. It turned out to be Mr. Walpole, formerly an
officer in our navy, whose charming book on the East is so well known, and
it appeared that the men under his command were Indian Mahomedans,
who had come up on their pilgrimage to Mecca, and who, hearing of the
Turkish crusade against the Infidels, had rushed to join the standard of
the Sultan. They are to be attached to Colonel Beatson’s corps of Bashi-
Bazouks, and to form a kind of body-guard to the Colonel, whose name is
so well known in India. Mr. Walpole seems quite delighted with his com-
mand, and, as he has the power of life and death, he seems to think there
will be no difficulty in repressing the irregularities of his men.
“ He mentions also a rumour just afloat that the transports and steamers
have received orders to be in readiness in Varna Bay on the 29th of this
month.”
The Times very unjustifiably attributes the unfortunate death of
Captain Parker, on the Bth ult., at Sulina, to his carelessly going on
an excursion of recreation. The gallant seaman was in fact engaged
on duty, as the following narrative in the Herald , corroborated by the
other accounts, fully proves:
“It was determined by Captain Parker thoroughly to examine the
gabion battery, about half a mile distant from the mouth, and then to in-
vestigate the capabilities of the river farther up. No attack from the enemy
was expected, but still the boats, as usual, pulled in manned and armed;
he, as ever, led the way, and, followed by the Firebrand's pinnace and gig
and Commander Powell, of the Vesuvius's gig, entered the river first, fol-
lowed at some little distance by a paddle-box boat from each ship, a cutter
from the Firebrand , and a gig from the Vesuvius. No resistance was
offered until Captain Parker’s gallery was opposite the gabion battery, when
a heavy fire was opened on her from the enemy under cover of tbe embra-
sures, piercing the boat in several places, penetrating the clothes of the
captain and surgeon, and severely wounding one man. He immediately
threw the yoke-lines to Dr. O’Hagan, desiring him to turn the Boat, while
he himself stood up and shot down with his rifle one of the enemy who
appeared from behind the embrasure. It was apparently his indention to
delay the attack until the arrival of the reserve force; but when he observed
that the pinnace under the command of Lieut. Lyons, who prov ed himself
worthy of the name he bears, had touched the ground, and that
her marines were landing, he cried out cheerfully, ‘ There is nothing for
it now but to storm them; follow me, my men,’ and immediately sprang
from his boat, closely followed by all the seamen and marines who had ar-
rived at the spot. All this time our boats were exposed to a galling fire
from the embrasures. The Greeks, too, doubtless irritated by the strict
blockade which we had maintained, materially assisted the enemy, for we
saw their red caps mingling with the Cossack helmets, and a dropping fire
was kept up from the town of Sulina. The captain landed about sixty
yards from the battery, and advanced along the tall canes running parallel
with the river; he had fired his rifle once, and after re-loading was in the
act of again lifting it, when a volley of balls fell round, one of which
pierced that noble heart. Every assistance was immediately rendered by
his old and tried friend, Dr. O’Hagan, but that glorious spirit had passed
away, he had only the sad comfort of being with him to the last, and the
galley retired to the Firebrand with the body of that gallant leader, who
had quitted her a few hours before full of health and vigour. On her ar-
rival Lieut. Jones despatched Mr. M'Sorley, assistant-surgeon, tto the as-
sistance of the wounded, to whom, in the meantime, every assistance and
consolation had been rendered by Dr. King and the Rev. Percy R<ogers. On
Commander Powell’s succeeding to the command, he ordered a retreat until
the arrival of the reserve enabled him to throw in a heavy fire of shell and
rockets into the enemy’s position. Under cover of this the seamen and ma-
rines, headed by Commander Powell and Lieuts. Sull, R.M.A., and Hawkey
R.M., stormed the battery which had proved so final. The enemy evacuated
it as our men entered, bearing away on their horses, in accordance with
their invariable custom, their killed and wounded. The battery was im-
mediately destroyed, and the Government building, on both sides of the
mole, set on fire; but this complete success cannot be said to atone for the
loss his country, his friends, and the public service have sustained in the
loss of the last of the glorious name of Hyde Parker.”
The Gazette of Friday published a despatch from Admiral Dundas,
enclosing official information of the taking of the batteries. The
Admiral adds: —
“ The satisfaction I feel at the perfect success of this gallant exploit is
much diminished by the death of Captain Hyde Parker, who fell when
leading his men. The service has lost in him a most promising young
officer, who was always zealous to do his duty, and never made a (difficulty.”
The particulars of the action are related by Commander Powell, of
the Vesuvius, who writes; —
“ Captain Hyde Parker directed a strong party of boats from the Fire-
brand and Vesuvius to accompany him up the Danube for the purpose of
destroying some works which were occupied by the Russians. At two,
p.m., the boats entered the Danube, Captain Parker’s gig in advance; at a
bend of the river, opposite a number of houses on the right bank and a
large stockade on the left, a sharp fire was opened upon him, and his boat
was nearly riddled; some of his men were wounded.
“ The heavy boats were coming up, and Captain Parker at once pulled
back to them, hailing me to land the marines, and be ready to stoirm. This
order was executed by the marines and a detachment of seamen im the same
gallant spirit with which it was given. Captain Parker then 'dashed on
shore, in his gig, and at once advanced with a few men; he wms in front,
and greatly exposed. A tremendous fire was soon opened by the enemy
upon them, and, a few minutes after landing, a bullet passed thnough their
leader’s heart, and in a moment this gallant sailor ceased to live. Thus
died an officer whose merits, sir, are well known to yourself. His conduct
on this occasion leaves an example of valour that never can be erased from
the memory of those who were present.”
The command of the force then devolved upon Co»mmander
Powell; who, after bringing the heavy guns to bear upon the place,
carried it at a run by a detachment of seamen and marines. The
works, enclosing stables, Government houses, and magazines, were
demolished, and the town of Sulina destroyed, except the principal
street. Our loss was Captain Parker killed and six wounded.
Acting-Lieutenant Lyons of the Firebrand , Lieutenant Jull, of the
Marines, and James Shade, A. 8., are highly commended in the
despatches. Acting-Lieutenant Lyons is appointed Lieutenant by
commission.
The Chronicle reports under date of Copenhagen, July 31, that
Bomarsund has been taken, with great loss on both sides. Previous re-
ports stated that Rear-Admiral Chads, C. 8., had been detached for once,
and was at Bomarsund, with the view of trying a real bombardment
on the forts as soon as the Vulture , 6, paddle, Captain Glasse, arrives
with the big gun. He had with him: —
Edinburgh, screw 60 Captain Hewlett (flag).
Ajax, screw 60 Captain Warden.
Hogue, screw 60 Captain Ramsay.
Blenheim, screw 60 Captain Pelham.
Amphion, screw 34 Captain A. C. Key.
Another account says that—
“ On Friday last the Ajax, Hogue , Blenheim , and the Edinburgh , with
the Amphion , went up to Bomarsund, and were fired at by the guns of the
fort. The ships did not receive any injury, and did not return the fire.
On Saturday the Desperate and the Phlegethon (French) went up, but
were not fired at. Admirals Plumridge and Chads, with the vessels
named, and all the paddles, and 2,000 French troops, are to attack
Bomarsund. The fortifications have not been injured at all by the fire
(said to have been so destructive) of the Hecla; they present a very
formidable appearance, mounting 150 guns in three forts, and there is
promise of a very severe and sanguinary affair.”
GREECE.—Mavrocordato is at length telegraphed as having ar-
rived on the 20th ult. Three of the chief officers engaged in the late
insurrection, Theodore Grivas, Ivaratassos, and Papacosta, have sent
in a petition to the Council of Ministers, which forms a sort of in-
dictment against the late Greek Government. They declare that
their only aim in crossing the frontier was to deliver their brethren
from the Ottoman yoke; and that they had been induced to take that
step by the following motives:—
“ The former Minister of War, Charles Soutzo, assured us positively, in
the name and after the express orders of his Majesty the King, that the
Government was firmly resolved to aid the revolution with all the means in
its power; that the Western Powers would look at it favourably; that
principally the States of Germany, on account of the connection of kindred
(relations de parentes) which exists between their Sovereigns and our own,
would furnish us with all manner of material aid, and that they would pro-
tect us in case the Western Powers should change their opinion about this
new strife; and that, finally, the intention to aggrandise Greece, and to
liberate our brothers, was evidently proved by the fact that several millions
of money were in the hands of the Government.”
The petitioners condemn the Government for having misled them,
for not having consulted France and England, and for having relied
on one Power alone. They beg that the distribution of the money
received from abroad may be investigated, and that some relief may
be afforded from what remains to the suffering people, who, in
obeying, as they thought, the voice of the country, were deceived by
the Greek Government.
Four insurgent chiefs have been put to death near Frikona, in
Thessaly, by the Bashi-Bazouks.
PERSIA.—A secret treaty with the Czar is once again reported ;
the Prime Minister having left Teheran for Georgia to communicate
with the Russian general as to the following conditions put forth by
the former:—
“ 1. Russia pledges herself to restore to Persia the province of Erivan,
as far as Gocha; the territory of Karabagli, and a portion of that of
Taulish. 2. Russia agrees not to claim the debt of Persia, which is to be
annulled. 3. Russia promises and undertakes to assist Persia in recovering
the districts of Kuttur-Dambat, and all the territory conquered by the
Turks in the province of Azerbijan. 4. A pot-de-vin (gratuity) of
2,000,000 of ducats is to be paid by Russia to the Persian negotiator. On
those terms Persia places herself entirely at the disposal of the Emperor of
Russia, and pledges herself to employ ,her army, not only against Turkey,
but also against all his enemies.”
EGYPT.—On the death of Abbas Pacha some opposition was
made to the succession of his brother, Said Pasha, as the rightful
heir to the Yiceroyship, as the eldest living male descendant of Me-
hemet Ali; but this was speedily overruled by Mr. Bruce, theßritish
Consul. Said Pasha is said to be favourable to Europeans, to trade,
and irrigation, presenting a striking contrast to his predecessor,
who—
“ Preferred the desert to his palaces at Cairo, always shunned Euro-
peans, and did not care to avoid showing his dislike to the Consuls, whose
visits he affected to consider an intrusion. His death is not regretted, for
he had made several attempts at monopolies and restrictions on trade. He
prevented the growers of produce from selling to any one but himself; he
was always making new exactions from the natives; and, during the last
two years, he caused a great deal of misery in the country by constant
forced levies of men for the army. Abbas Pacha, who was naturally
clever, but indolent, spent a great deal of his time with Ulemas and readers
of the Koran, who confirmed him in his fanaticism and dislike of Euro-
peans. He was very fond of horses, pigeons, and particularly of dogs, of
which latter he had, at enormous prices* collected a large number, of all
descriptions and from all parts of the world; and he liked to spend his
time with them and his readers of the Koran in some out-of-the-way place
in the desert or on the Nile.”
MISCELLANEOUS.—The young*King of Portugal, accompanied by his
brother, the Duke of Oporto, arrived at Berlin on Saturday se’nnight, having
come up the Rhine, and landed at Dusseldorf. The royal party from Portugal
were amused with a parade every day ; and, after seeing all the military and
other sights, left on Friday for Coburg. The King of Prussia conferred
on his youthful guest the Order of the Black Eagle.
Omer Pacha has expressed his deep sorrow at the loss of Captain Butler,
who died on the very day of the retreat of the Russians. The Turkish
general has decided that a pyramid shall be erected in the middle of the
fort in honour of the soldiers who have died in its defence, and that the
mortal remains of Captain Butler shall be carried to the same place. A
special monument is to be erected to immortalise the devotion of that
valiant officer.
The King of Greece, according to the Press , receives regular remittances
from Russia, quite in the pensioner style. A Greek house in Paris
manages the business. With this money wholesale corruption is carried on.
Another French General has fallen a victim to the cholera at Gallipoli.
General Carbuccia, Commander of the Foreign Legion in the service of
France, died of cholera on the 19th.
The Copenhagen journals - state that a Danish vessel, returning from
Greenland, picked up three English seamen on an iceberg, where they had
taken refuge when their own vessel was caught in the ice, and crushed to
pieces.
The contractors for an enormous steamer at New York recently enter-
tained a dinner-party of twenty-two persons in its cylinder.
A singular invention, though not altogether new, has just been tried at
Rouen and met with much success. It is a system of sails, which are so
arranged that from whatever direction the wind may blow a motive power
is obtained; which is applied to machinery, and a screw or paddle is, by
this means, set in motion. The little clipper, upon which the experiment
was tried, succeeded in making nine knots an hour, with a light wind. The
inventors intend submitting their invention to Government, to be used as
an auxiliary to steam vessels.
A year or two back the shares of the New York Crystal Palace were
valued at 160 dollars; recently they had fallen to five; and now th« build-
ing itself is to be sold to pay the debts connected with it.
3 r elanfc.
The grand jury for the South Tipperary Assizes found a true bill
on Thursday, against Mr. John Carden, for abduction, and another
against Mr. John Carden and all his men except two, for felonious
assault. Abduction is a felony, punishable by transportation for life,
or for not less than ten years, or by imprisonment for not more than
four years. On Friday, accordingly, the trial came on. “ An
immense crowd of fashionable and distinguished persons crowded
every part of the spacious building.” Lord Viscount Gough and
the Hon. George Gough were among those present. The following
is the account given in evidence of the occurrence by the lady who
was the object of attack, Miss Eleanor Louisa Arhuthnot: —
“ We had got about half way from the church when my sister, Laura
Arbuthnot, said, ‘ Mr. Carden is coming.’ I then saw Mr. Carden. He
turned his horse and followed us quite close to the car. He did not say
anything. When close to the lodge-gate the car stopped suddenly. I did
not see Mr. Carden at the moment the car stopped. The next time I saw
him was at the door of the car, which he opened, and put in his hand
across Miss Lyndon, and caught hold of my arm. He pulled me very
violently. My sister, Miss Arbuthnot, held me and prevented Mr. Carden
from pulling me out. Miss Lyndon struck him on the face with her closed
hand. I saw him bleeding. Mr. Carden then let me go, and pulled Miss
Lyndon out of the car. I and my sister, Miss Arbuthnot, were left in the
car. I was in the place behind the coachman, my sister opposite. Mr. Carden
caught my sister and pulled her out. After her removal I was alone in
the car. Mr. Carden came to the car again. He caught hold of both my
wrists. He endeavoured to pull me out of the car. I resisted him by
holding on by a strap which was attached to the window. The strap was
broken by the force with which Mr. Carden pulled me, and I was pulled
down from where I was sitting to the door of the car. I recovered my posi-
tion just as I was losing my balance. I did not get back to where 1 had
been sitting, but succeeded in getting a seat at the bottom of the car. I
made every resistance I could. I kicked Mr. Carden in the chest with one
of my feet. As soon as I recovered my position I saw Miss Arbuthnot
strike him on the back of the head with her closed hand. She was behind
Mr. Carden on the road at the time. While I was in the car, after the
other ladies had left it, Mr. Carden said, ‘ Eleanor, it is you I want.’ He
repeated ray name frequently. I heard him say to my sister, Mrs. Gough,
that he should be hanged. I was never altogether removed from the car.
I never encouraged Mr. Carden’s addresses.”
The evidence of other witnesses gave similar accounts. Some sensa-
tion was caused by the evidence of the police-inspector, that he had
found two bottles of chloroform in Mr. Carden’s carriage, also sal
volatile and ammonia. Mr. Carden’s physician deposed to having
sold him two bottles of chloroform “ to administer to a lady who was
subject to hysterics.” The evidence being clear and undenied, the
point contended by the counsel was, whether or not the assault
amounted to abduction, or an attempt at that offence only. The
jury returned a verdict, “ Not guilty of the abduction, but guilty of
the attempt.” The demeanour of Miss Arbuthnot produced a gene-
ral feeling of deep sympathy for her, in the painful position in which
she had been placed by the wild doings of the principal prisoner.
Mr. Carden’s inanher in the dock was cool and collected. The
back part of his head bore the dressing of a wound. He paid
great attention to the proceedings. Towards the close of the
day he presented a haggard appearance, and was much depressed.
Next day an issue was raised, by the prisoner’s plea, whether
this verdict, by acquitting him of the abduction, acquitted him
of the charge in the second indictment of a felonious assault on
one of the persons who came to the rescue of Miss Arbuthnot. The
jury found, after considerable consultations—it appearing probable at
one time that they would have to be locked up from Saturday till
Monday without anything to eat —that it did not; and accordingly
the second indictment was proceeded with on Monday morning.
The same day sentence was passed on the prisoner for the attempted
abduction —two years’ imprisonment, with hard labour.
Unfortunately, the confident hopes expressed at the beginning of
the summer that the potato disease would not appear this year, are
no longer tenable. The Anglo-Celt says:—
“ We most say it, because it is good to be forewarned, the potato is
going—the reports that have come in to us from the most reliable sources,
leave the matter beyond doubt. Up to this day we were sanguine in the
contrary opinion, but it would be scepticism to doubt longer—idle, if not
worse, to dissemble on the subject. From this side and from that we have
heard that whole fields are affected, and rapidly becoming worse.”
The Rev. Dr. Beresford, Archdeacon of Ardagh, is spoken of as
successor to the late Bishop of Kilmore.
The Dublin papers are in raptures on finding Irish talent appre-
ciated at the Antipodes. In addition to the appointment of Pro-
fessor Heames, mentioned last week, Professor M‘Coy, of Queen’s
College, Belfast, has been appointed Professor of Natural Sciences in
Melbourne University. The salary is 1,000?. a year and a house.
The Cambridge Chronicle says that Professor M‘Coy is well known in
Cambridge, where he spent a long period engaged in the assortment
and arrangement of the Geological Museum, under the direction of
Professor Sedgwick.
At a meeting of the magistrates of Armagh, on Thursday se’nnight, it
was resolved that the police force of the county should be reduced from
ninety-seven to twenty-six; the peace of the county justifying that step.
James Russell, au Orangeman of Belfast, has been killed in a scuffle
arising out of the Orange celebration of the twelfth. A coroner’s jury
has returned a verdict of “ Wilful murder” against Michael Stanford, by
whom the deceased was stabbed.
P?ome Hetog.
THE COURT.
Th 3 doings at Osborne afford scant news for the Court Circular.
The Premier and the Duchess of Sutherland have been the visitors of
the past week. On Sunday the Rev. G. Protheroe preached in the
private chapel of the palace.
The Right Hon. Sidney and the Hon. Mrs. Herbert left town on Saturday
for Broadstairs.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer and Mrs. Gladstone left town on Satur-
day to visit the Duchess of Sutherland at Clifden, near Maidenhead, return-
ing on Monday.
The Cathedral Commission met on Wednesday at No. 1, Parliament-
street. The Commissioners present were the Archbishop of Canterbury,
Sir John Dodson, Sir John Patteson, the Rev. Dr. Wordsworth, and the
Rev. Canon Selwyn.
Lord Medwyn died in Edinburgh on Tuesday last, at the advanced ageof
seventy-seven. He was called to the bar in 1799, raised to the bench in
1825, and only resigned his judgeship in the end of 1852.
The will of the late Marquis of Anglesey has just been proved by the
present marquis, the Duke of Richmond, and Viscount Sydney, the exe-
cutors appointed under it. The personalty is sworn under 140,000?. A
liberal provision is made for all his younger sons. An annuity of 500?. is
bequeathed to his secretary, an annuity of 100?. is continued to Lieutenant
E. Martin, R.N., and 1,000?. is left to Hugh Cameron, Esq., as an acknow-
ledgment of his professional services. The remainder of the property goes
to the present marquis, to whom also are devised the estates, &c. The
truncated pillar, ornamented with devices, which was presented to the gal-
lant marquis by George IV., when Prince Regent, and the officers of the
marquis’s Hussar regiment, he also bequeathed to his eldest son, to descend
as a family heirloom with the earldom of Uxbridge.
The will and codicil of the late Duke of Portland, in which his grace
expresses his desire to be buried at Bolsover, if he should die at Welbeck,
and that the cost of his funeral should not exceed 100?., has just been
proved in the Prerogative Court of Canterbury. He bequeaths 5,000?. to
be divided amongst his servants as he may direct in writing. No such di-
rections have been found, so that this sum will be divided as the executors
think fit. The deceased’s personal property has been sworn under 900,000?.,
the stamp duty payable on which is 12,000?.
The Queen has granted to Mrs. Moore, the widow of Colonel Moore, of
the 6th Dragoons, who perished at the post of duty in the burning Europa,
a pension of 200?. a-year, and apartments in Hampton Court Palace. But
605
THE GUARDIAN.
1854.]


600 . , THE GUARDIAN. [AW. 2,
her Majesty is not alone in her noble recognition of the brave old soldier, in the presence of any one?—l really don’t think I ever did. It is a long time ! f
Colonel Moore was about to sell out of the service; but when he heard that , 1 cann °t charge my memory with ever having made that observation necbed the present system; but power was given by the clause to
his regiment was ordered abroad, he resolved to forego that ease to which thlt I dI?not S ’ ,P ° SltiVely aS a man ’ S recollection can S°- My firm conviction is re medy them. One mode was that of requiring the claimants to take
his age and long services so well entitled him. The officer next in seni- Several other Questions inml vino- - j , University honours, and that was a sufficient answer to the objection that
ority, Major White, had been in treaty for the purchase of the Lieutenant- in the negative by Colonel Parrel Tl 1 gatlons WB 7 put f nd answered they could not, under the present clause, apply any stimulants; but they
Colonelcy of the regiment; but the unexpected and melancholy fate of his g 7 C ° lonel GarretL The C ° Urt was ad J ouraed * might, in addition, renew the competitfei after a certain time, throwing
gallant commanding officer gave him the promotion as a death-vacancy, . - lfc °P en > necessary, to the members of other colleges, who had been at
and the value of Colonel Moore’s commission was consequently lost to his !ltl¥ the same school. No reason, however, could be shown for taking away
family. Major White, with a generosity beyond all praise, has, we are in- if JJiD ItttCfti* the right of preference altogether. The case of the Merchant Tailors’
formed, placed 2,000/. at the disposal of the widow and family of his late School was a very strong one. The present head master, a competent and
friend, an act of which the officers of the British army may be justly royal assent. liberal-minded man, had expressed, in the most forcible manner, his con-
Post. _ On Monday the Royal Assent was given by commission to a lame that the school was so dependent upon the particular endowment
Mr. Mechi s annual gathering of agriculturists, professional and ama- number of private and the following public bills:-- h in Joh ns College, and upon the special value which that endowment
teur, at Tiptree Hall, took place on Wednesday. As usual, it afforded a Turnpike Trusts Arrangement; General Board of Health- Rwmfrnfmn den . ved froai tbe circumstance, that any meritorious young man elected by
pleasant and instructive holiday to about 300 men of all ranks—Peers, of Bills of Sale (Ireland); Jamaica Loan; Sheriff and Sheriff-clerk of T™? St *, dohn ’ s ’ and continuing meritorious and satisfying any
Commoners, men of science, municipal authorities, farmers, and gentlemen, Chancery (Scotland); Joint-Stock Banks (Scotland)* Cruelty to Anim.k. standard established there, would keep his fellowship for life—that he
from other countries, intent on studying the wonders of this. After Returning Officers; Turnpike Acts Continuance- Jurv Trial rirplamh* believed the difference in value between a scholarship tenable for three
luncheon Mr. Mechi led forth his guests over his farm, explaining the Friendly Societies; Royal Military Asylum; Poor-law Commission Conti £ ears ’ and a fellowship tenable, subject to proper tests of merit,
various processes by which he grows finer corn, mangold, and oats, nuance (Ireland); Poor Rates; Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction • Stock in TruV .° r ™ e ' . was . such ’ that the very existence of the school was
than his neighbours; and pointing out the fertilising effects of liquid Exemption; Common, &c., Rights (Ordnance)- Land Revenues of Hip inv ?\ ved m it- Winchester School might possibly be in the same
rnnr.m-n n.. vt n -rr. , ,ui me nnsilinn onH V.n mnn aL- • j. . r> -.-r A,
Mr. Mechi’s annual gathering of agriculturists, professional and ama-
teur, at Tiptree Hall, took place on Wednesday, As usual, it afforded a
luncheon Mr. Mechi led forth his guests over his farm, explaining the Friendly Societies;’Royal Military Asylum • Poor-law Go
processes by which he grows finer corn, mangold, and oats, nuance (Ireland); Poor Rates; Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
♦ non hie j. I.M? • nrv . o t« .. 17' j • y. r. _ 11
“ anure - Crown (Ireland); Highways (Public Health) Act; and Public Libraries Pf' 100 ’ an f k hc c ? rtain the interests of New College would not at
An immense gun has been forwarded from Woolwich to the Baltic, for T . . the oxford university mix. less vakiaWe toTnTofherm tL B UWrX F i™i. n! ° r fe . l !°' Vsllit,S ’
Rear-Admiral Chads. _ This gun will command a range of no less than n col | sl derntion of the Lords’ amendments on this bill took place would always give a particular value in the eves of Winchester Tm 'T
7.600 yards, or something over four miles and a quarter— rather calcu- .-I hursday, when Mr. If alpole moved that the house dissent from hoped the house would not forget that this nnestion <W a t • ’ ®
lated to disturb the “fancied security” of the Russians. the amendment providing for the election of the Hebdomadal Council ance from g
The transport-ship Lord Auckland, from London to Madras, with Com- b 7 e ,'y, hol “ b ? d y °/ congregation, instead of the sectional mode were affected. It so happened that in New Col L t l‘
pany’s troops on board, put iu at Plymouth on Monday, with cholera on earned by the right liongentleman in the Commons. The amend- Church,pSfaSSSin oT LT M 7
board. Ihree deaths have already occurred, and upwards of twenty cases I ' Vas «»PPOrted by Lord J. Russell and Sir Wm. Heathcote, the lat- Tailors’ School and Westminster School existed there wefe m ’ , M . ercban4
are reported still to exist. A bulk has been sent into the Sound to receive 4er ob J<f> "S to sectional election as a most mischievous ar- at all-theyw no S o h o larsll
•'-/si a. ._ _
A circular memorandum, from the Horse Guards, authorises the Mr. Wa!lpole, explained that he considered the bill so much improved
moustache; under regulations, however, a contemporary observes, “ which ords ’ and by the admission of Dissenters, that
will render it necessary for every man to carry a foot-rule with him in ad- a corres P ont Jing alteration in the government of the University was
dition to a razor:— necessary. The amendment was opposed by Mr. Henley , Mr. Win-
“A- flear space of two inches must be left between the corner of the mouth and ra ™' ancl Jfr. Newdegate. The latter declaring that it was amorm the
the whisker, when whiskers are grown; the chin, the under lip, and at least residents at Oxford that Tractarianism had snnimr nn «nrl f
two inches of the upper part of the throat must be clean shaven, so that no hair this same body they weromtwnW g ?’ , '? S t 0
can be seen above the stock in that place.” n ® e ine 7 "ere now about to hand it over, bound hand and
Ihe Snake and Viper , two more of the steam gun-vessels, are nearly VT* +
ready for launching at Blackwall. The entry of seamen and stokers for *7 trusted that the representatives of Protestant Dissenters would not
the Beagle , the Lynx , and the Despatch , which have been put in comrais- cO / I . sent fophme the government of the University in the bands of a faction
sion, is making satisfactory progress. The crew of the Myrmidon have 10 '.* lfc k* d . n e P OWe G would annul their marriages, and refuse them
been transferred to the Arrow. The advanced squadron of this steam gun- !f e ngilt , burial of their dead. He most earnestly trusted that the
vessel flotilla will appear in the Baltic next week. f!° US - e w ? ul u not, by agreeing to the amendment, hand over the Church to
Two new vessels-of-war, each of 20 guns, are being built at Chatham; dommatl on of a faction which had done more to lower its character
they are to be named the Cadmus and Charybdis . Two vessels, each nV*”/ 0t ie f b ° d ? lnch had taken P art in its management.”
pierced for 16 guns, to be called the Camelia and Mutine, and two of 8 Ihe house then divided, when the numbers were—For the amendment, 62;
guns, to be named the Lyra and Icarus , are to be built at Deptford. A J;’ 115; m ajority, 53. The Lords’ amendment was then agreed to.’
vessel to be called the Scout , to carry 20 guns, is being built at Woolwich, Chancellor of the Exchequer made objections to the amendment in
and another of 20 guns, the Scylla, at Sheerness. Three troop-ships for clau f ’ empowering the colleges to make ordination “ for the con-
service in the Baltic, to be named the Urgent , Perseverance , and Transit, S< V a , 10 . n 0 fellowships, and for the conversion of fellowships attached to
are now ready for launching in the port of London. schools into scholarships or exhibitions so attached,” as being too exclusive.
, Owing to the unparalleled smallness of Dublin garrison by reason of the bIS P 1 ’?? therefore, it was agreed to insert the following:—“ For
withdrawal of so many regiments for service in the East, the military J! 18 consolldatl °u, or conversion of emoluments, including therein
guards have been reduced in number to the minimum point. At the Castle, f . f 8 conversion of fellowships attached to schools into scholarships or exhi-
Bank of Ireland, and other stations, not half the former complement of men bltl ?£ s . so attached, and of fellowships otherwise limited into scholarships oi-
l's called upon to do duty, but even with this marked reduction the life of a exblbltl^ s ’ and either subject or not to any similar or modified limitations.”
protection given by the clause. It was true there was a proviso added to
the clause, to the effect that the colleges or commissioners, if they thought
ht, might divide the fellowships into two classes, senior and junior, and
that the senior only should be held to be fellowships within the meaning of
the clause; but that was no protection whatever, because it made the whole
matter depend upon an act to be dqne under the exercise of the uncon-
trolleid power of the commissioners, who might refer a large portion of the
fellowships to the senior division. The Lords’ amendment, iu short, was a
simplle alienation and abstraction from the schools of the largest and most
important portion of their emoluments, and he trusted the house would
supprort him in rejecting it.
Mn\ Price was understood to say that the Master of Pembroke College
was strongly in favour of the amendment.
Mrr. Henley said no man could doubt that the Master of Pembroke was
mtawour ol an amendment which would sweep away the whole substance
°t Albingdon School, body and bones, and enable him to pick his scholars
and fellows from the whole kingdom. (A laugh.) He was glad his hon.
and beamed friend had taken the course he had in giving those who
agreed with him an opportunity of recording their opinions and sentiments
on thus clause. It was a very strange alteration to be made by the House
of f' 01 ™ 8, _ -That assembly had now consecrated the opinion that it was
right to disregard the possession of a privilege for three hundred rears, and
that the rule was henceforth to be delur digniori. That was a dangerous
principle for the House of Lords to establish, and one on which he doubted
Bank ot Ireland, and other stations, not half the former complement of men V.“® so attacbe( » a nd of fellowships otherwise limited into scholarships or whether they would like to hold their neerao-P. If7nrlll i •hi!* a
is called upon to do duty, but even with this marked reduction the life of a exbl , b,t “ n3 ’ f and subject or not to any similar or modified limitations.” been enjoyed by c rtafn „fc XThnndred vet w‘r f 1
soldter in the Irish metropolis is not an idle one. , , The chief amendment was that made on the 34 th clause, excepting fellow- aside simply becau eit though hat ht Z,L S f
The Ordnance anthorites have advertised for tenders for constructing a aad from the right of preference retained to schools. possess m tthat that ™ "t' T’ S vV°
Jhe Volcano, floating steam-factory, is nearly ready to start to the waTnot jf «f
fleet.* 0 * S take 3 ° Ut lettm and DeWSpaper5 ’ and 10 ’° 001 Specie the in thet U e?cTse a of 1“ wlXundto’coi 7 should propose to apply the principle to the privitgeof
On Saturday afternoon the patterns for the regiments of cavalry (not P laces of education alone, and if the) dissented schSmrag whom th^fshokrehip^^^^^
Hussars or Lancers) were sealed at theclothing board, Whitehall. Thenew 'bl f t . he .. c ?™ m,ssl onors, they could only do so on the appeared to him to be perfectly groundless Just ln mcrt oo as th/ir^
attire is m every respect similar to that worn by the Hungarian troops in tbatwou,d P re judicial, not to the interests of the schools con- was small-just in that proportion was the otifc vaE ltort I
the Austrian service. The full-dress equipment consists of a tunic or " ected Wltb them > but » h o colleges as places of education. For that enjoyed it. If theyXHo rob these school ’, .n -"t?
frock, somewhat rounded. On the breast is a profnsion of gold lace, termi- as ?"’ aad to P revent emoluments being taken away from the schools for word) of this property given to them hnndreds of V m lnd nght
natiog in “ frogs.” The back also is Highly ornamented. The rank of the COns,de “ unconnected with the interests of the schools, the house, at his it to others. simT on fheGround^that^TT! § ’ff T
officer is indicated by varying forms of the lace. Henceforward no sash or jooommendation agreed to the 34th clause in the bill, which referred to enjoy it, it was of course in their power te do so hnt HTu
shoulder-belt will be worn. The shacko, as at present existing, will be th< i g° vornin S b °dy of each school, not only the questions relating to the less be a <rross act of robberv and that was i b I p neverthe-
abohshed, and in its stead will he substituted a helmet, composed of felt endo ' vme iits m which !t was interested in the University, but tlnfgeneral of the bill ‘‘ 4 e rea i principle of this clause
with gilt mountings and white plume. The trousers will remain as at pre- dubious of the abolition of any particular right of preference to^Nvhicl, The „m , ~, •
sent. For the heavy cavalry regiments, the Lancers and Hussars! no ff™ 1 b e entitled. Now, there could be no reason why they at the condLTf^
efiange has jet been finally determined. should except fellowships from the operation of that clause The onlv ened them that if tW vntL *, a f addressing, threat-
plausible arguments which had been adduced in favour of th„r 7 !w .• . lf . ! 7 T oted ln a P artlc ular sense they would be called in a
The Dulwich College inquiry was continued on Saturday, when delegates y re founded upon an entire misunderstanding, if not misrepreseutatoTf limit 1 the threlt tf tha/mffinte —fi hon f ourab ! e g e u« e niun did not
from the various parishes interested appeared to suggest improvements b «> effect a„ d object of the clause in question. It had by Ihe Z disfi’ncfly^ House of g r„rrV° r t 0n f
whereby them rights to the advantages of the foundation should be better bo " o .ura b le member for Kidderminster that the clause in effeft said that (Opposition done^ h^he 3 chose . to ™ b a ” d plunder-
carned out. The people of Camberwell wished “ that the principle of re- noth,n g should be done with the fellowships attached to schools without the prepare to vield their nlaces 7 n 1 f,® m thl “ bdl > the . v mu st
presentation at the board should be by vote of the inhabitants, and that consentof lh « governing bodies of the schools. There could not be a more guislied Conservative orator h ou * ab,e g en t'eman himself a distm-
there should be periodical statements of the proceedings of the board, and cai yP lete misrepresentation of the effect of the clause; and an explanation smaller institutions of count rn s “ p P osed hold witb tenacity
that the accounts should be audited by two independent auditors.” There was 0f ,1 48 4raa , ob j ect and^effect would serve as a full answer to another anrnment ritv to sav toHie TTouso TSflTf hesitate, with hyper-Papal autho-
3 man named Allen (namesake of the founder of the college, and said to he
his lineal descendant) who had a right of admission to the college, hut
who had applied in vain for admission for the last 45 years, though a resi-
dent of Dulwich for that period. This was one of the facts which proved
that a total reform in the administration of the resources of the college was
necessary.
_ A fbi rd court-martial has been opened at Windsor, being a second one on
Lieut. Perry. This has been ordered by the Commander-in-Chief, in con-
sequence of certain statements made by Lieut. Perry at the former court-
martials, reflecting on Colonel Garrett, his commanding officer, and Cap-
tain Nicholas, of the same regiment. Lieut. Perry had stated, on his pre-
vious trial, that on appealing against the bullying of his fellow-officers,
Colonel Garrett “reproached him, and called him a fool for his pains ;’’
secondly, that he had threatened to appeal, in this matter of being bullied,
to the general of the district, and had sent a letter to that effect to Colonel
GUrrett; thirdly, at the court-martial on Lieut. Greer he had stated—“ Cap-
tain Nicholas never, to my knowledge, censured anvbodv, he having himself
ill-treated others on joining;” and-fourthly, he had said on the same occa-
sion—“ I could put questions to prove that Captain Nicholas has ill-treated
young officers, and that he aids and abets nearly everything of the kind
that takes place. These were the statements for which he was now to be
On being asked if he was ready with his defence, having only been
supplied with a copy of the charge that morning, Lieut. Perry handed
in a list of twenty-one witnesses, of whom some were officers in
Turkey. He wished for a long adjournment to enable him to get
the greater part of them together; he also applied to be allowed
to be at large, meanwhile, on parole, as his health is suffering from
confinement. The court did not, however, consider itself empowered
i. w me enect or tne clause; and an explanation
of its true object and effect would serve as a full answer to another argument
which had been used, namely, that it was of the greatest importance to the col-
leges to have these fellowships, offices of Government and teaching, filled with
persons of high qualifications. The clause did not in the least degree in-
terfere with that nor did it refer to that veto of the governing bodies of the
schools any regulation which might be proposed for that purpose. It would
be m the power of the colleges or the commissioners in any case to estab-
lish as an indispensable condition of election to a fellowship, upon the
ground of preference, any qualification soever which might be thought
Zr 27 VTS the eh f™ n °l a P erson of competent attainments and
learning lake the case of Pembroke College, which had been unred as
showmg the necessity of the Lords’ amendment upon the clause.
broke College was connected with a school never large, and now, he be-
lieved, incapable of supplying candidates of sufficient merit to fill the
vacancies in the fellowships and scholarships which attached it to the
say 6 wh J AKr. ! n ° rd ,T t 0 that evi, » that should
say y hen Abingdon school could send a fit person to be elected to a
scholarship upon that foundation, and when that person exerted himself
?iowpn n - lVei ?f t7 7f nd 7^ fc 7 a mentonous career as an undergraduate
showed himself well qualified for a fellowship, that he should not be elected
to the fellowship, but should be exposed to a general competition, and per-
haps rejocted as unworthy of the office only because some one mfght
possibly come forward more able and more distinguished than himself? It,
was quite clear that could not be necessary for any legitimate purpose of
the college What was really necessary was, that the college should have
the power of establishing an adequate standard of merit, and excluding any
ud °l the /T nd °. f , Sch ° ol Terence, but who did not come
p to that standard, and then, if necessary, throwing open the office to
general competition. Now, under the 34th clause in the bill, it would be
Ihe Chancellor of the Exchequer said a noble lord being once indignant
at the conduct of a small portion of the assembly he was addressing, threat-
ened them that if they voted in a particular sense they would he called in a
s lort time to vacate their seats. The right honourable gentleman did not
limit the threat to that minute and insignificant portion of the assembly
but said quite distinctly, if the House of Lords chose to rob and plunder—
(Opposition cheers)—as they had done by the clause in this bill, they must
prepare to yield their places. The honourable gentleman, himself a distin-
Conservative orator, who was rather supposed to hold with tenacity
smaller institutions of the country, did not hesitate, with hvper-Papal autho-
rity, to say to the House of Lords, “If you vote otherwise than I think
right, you must be prepared to have your powers and privileges taken awav
fiom you. (Ministerial cheers.) He ventured to state that the House of
Lords, by the vote it had given on this occasion, had done nothing to weaken
but everything to strengthen, itself in public opinion. And, moreover, after
giving at least as much attention to the subject as the honourable gentleman
ie would venture to state that the amendment sent down by the House of
Lords was not an amendment in favour of robberv and plunder, but was an
amendment in favour alike of moral and intellectual excellence as against
% i nd fu 8 !’ v( Cheers ‘) The honourable and learned gentleman
N n “■] Palrner ) had discussed the question with great temper and modera-
te on and he confessed he felt great regret that the honourable and learned
gentleman was not satisfied with the victories he had already obtained, for
he had already succeeded in inducing this and the other house of Parlia-
ment to invest bodies for the most part utterly incompetent with an absolute
powei of stepping in between Parliament, between the commissioners, be-
tween the Privy Council, and the work of legislation, and of saying, “ We do
the dlffnrinn P 1 for the interests of lea ™ing, for promoting
the diffusion of the streams of learning over the land ; we look at this locality
and as in our opinion this locality is to suffer by the change you meditate we
sav no and fo.-b.fi you to proceed ” The HoaseCf Lords to Z
Md v toa " d fryyd friend, so far as regarded all scholarships
and all exhibitions connected with the University of Oxford. All that the
.I M \ claimed, not to throw open
Of In a fe . llowsh, l’ s . but t 0 impartial and dispassionate parties a power
“™ g ’ ’I? krge , r and Tv ge “ ral grounds thaa 41,0 cctpotation
cLtinnfd Tb P COn bf’ W a et , her 4hese C,OSe end °>™™ts should be
continued. The honourable and learned gentleman proceeded on the as-
confinement. The court did not, however, consider itself empowered competent for the college, without part of the 3^°”’ thou^ be did not use the phrase, that both the Privy Council
to grant either request, and the _ case was ordered to proceed on of the school, to say that no one from boZl K T ff?° rS f? e .were a set of men totally incapable of discerning and
Monday. Accordingly, on that morning Major-General Wetberall, Deputy- fellowship unless he took a second class or even afW v ected a ? stlmatm g the fair claims of these schools, and of allowing to those fair
Adjutant-General of the forces, opened the prosecution. It had were thought to be the proper standard - -ind , fi ' s4 ‘ c, ? ss ,f that c| a™s everything that was just and reasonable. It was the duty of the
been ordered by Lord Hardmge, he said, as the best way of allowing idlest thing in the world tf say that ’the rl, 6 PI to consider and weigh fairly all claims, not over-riding local
Colonel Garrett and Captain Nicholas to clear themselves, or Lieut. Perry passed it, took from the college 7 or ‘if 4 h ° USe ’f ere f ? and hcai rights, but estimating together the bearing one on another
to substantiate his statements. Colonel Garrett was called and examined of establishing such tits ml „ the power of certain local with larger and more general rights. Those were tLTut es
by the prosecutor He stated that while the regiment was in Dublin, of the favoured class as would be recesLre for onv ° f ? ll T. shlpS to ba to the hand of the commissioners; but the honourable
Lieut. Perry complaints to him on more than one occasion that his purpose of the college. The only thing that could ° r le ” ltlmate ,ind Earned geat einan said he was not satisfied with that, and that the
brother officers had annoyed him. On one of these occasions he told clause was to abol4 absolutely ttfrigbt of Drawee T. " tb ® ?"P 0 ” 41011 °f Ab ‘»gd<> n , b ™g the best judges, should have the power to
Major Maxwell to see about it, who sent the acting adjutant, and he after- sen t of the school. It had Mso been vnlrl ei3ce ’ wltbout th ® con - mteipose with an absolute veto. Long before the bill assumed its present
wards reported that the matter had been settled. He had no recollection hibitions were favourable to the is whil st f 1 ® T* “* r™ 14 C ° ntained 4he Principle of compensation to these scho!ls P 'A e
"““ ~~ “ I——•»” ■» ■" ssz“ S“; r I css? surras


1854.]
THE GUARDIAN.
gentleman (Mr. Henley) had directed his powers of ridicule, of giving to
the best man these advantages of the University. The Government ■ did
not intend to give scope even to that principle, but to provide the best nna-
chinery to satisfy every local claim. Was it true that these endownuents
now existed in such a form as would be most beneficial to these parities
themselves? He said, on the contrary, and to a very great extent, tihey
existed in such a form that immense resources were wasted in producing
an amount of local encouragement hardly perceptible. He would take a
particular case, which would exhibit the matter simply. Let the house
suppose that a school had a right of preference to three fellowships of 2(00/.
a year each. They represented a property of 600/. a year; but if the
average tenure of those fellowships was fifteen years—which was some-
where about the usual tenure —it followed there would be only one opening
once in every five years. That opening afforded a perfectly ineffective
stimulus to the school; but supposing the commissioners converted one of
those fellowships into five exhibitions of 40/. a year, each tenable for five
years, then there would be an exhibition available every year in the school,
instead of a fellowship once in five years. He put it to the house whether
that would not give very much greater encouragement, at an expense of
200/,, than the three fellowships at the expense of 600/. a year? And
therefore he said that in numbers ,of these schools arrangements might be
made which, augmenting the amount of local interests, would leave a large
overplus for the benefit of general education. He asked the house to do—
what? Not by a sweeping clause to declare that these privileges should
be taken away, but to submit these matters to impartial persons in high
stations, being worthy of the confidence of the house, to make the best
arrangement they could after full examination of the case. If the com-
mission failed, they allowed them to go before the Privy Council, where
there would be a hearing from parties acting judicially; and, if the Privy
Council failed, they might come down to this house, where his learned
friend, with all his Winchester associates at his back, would be ready
enough to ask sympathy, and find ability enough to command it, to induce
the house to prevent the recommendations of the commissioners
being carried into effect. These matters having been so much dis-
cussed, he would not go at any length into them, but he wished
to point out to the honourable and learned gentleman that he was
not entitled to the honour and pride of declaring himself in that
house the preserver of the wills and intentions of the founders. The wills
of the founders declared certain local preferences, and if it was mere saered-
ness of situation that they were talking about, why not preserve the rights
of the Channel Islands, of Wales, of the diocese of Lincoln, of the diocese of
Exeter, and all the rest? They did nothing of the sort, and was it unjust
to apply to schools the same principle they applied to counties? The inten-
tions of the founders were exactly parallel. The only difference was, that
in the one case there were persons ready to raise a great disturbance, and
in the other there was no organisation—no means of raising clamour. So
with regard to founders’ intentions altogether. He should like to know
in what case (where the founder had enacted anything inconvenient to any-
body) his intentions had been allowed to stand in the way of putting that
obstacle aside? And he should like also to know in what case it was pos-
sible to urge the founders’ intentions against useful reform, intended for the
interests of the public? The fact was, the Government w*ere those who
were giving effect to the intention of the founders. Many of those founders
were men of enlightened minds. The intention of William of Wykeham was
to establish the best college at Oxford, to make it distinguished among
others by its intellectual and moral excellence, and he trusted to a most
elaborate system of control, examination, and mutual supervision. The
force of those statutes died out, and what was the case in these close col-
leges generally? Did they fulfil the intentions of the founders? Could it
be said that any of these close colleges were superior to the other colleges
ih Oxford? He thought not. He said it was the intention of William of
Wykeham to have a superior college, and by circumstances his college had
become entirely inferior. And when it was endeavoured to infuse the
breath of new life, they came and talked of founders’ intentions. These
were the founders’ intentions—to have the best college which legis-
lation and human wisdom could obtain; and he hoped by this
bill, and the amendment of the House of Lords, to give effect
to the founders’ intentions in that respect. Though he attached
great importance to the specialties of the two Universities, with
respect to this particular question, the general principle would apply
also to Cambridge. There was no question about that, and it was admitted
also that the object of the interference of Parliament in this matter of
University education was to open and enlarge the Universities, not to nairrow
and restrain them. In Cambridge he did not know how, but, in fact,, this
very thing was done which the Lords’ amendments gave power to do, with
respect to one of the greatest and most distinguished colleges in that Uni-
versity. Trinity College had taken away from the Westminster sclholars
the absolute right to succeed to fellowships. That had been done wiithout
the intervention of Parliament; and now that Parliament was appealed to
to facilitate the work of reform, that work would not be assisted, if, to use
a term which had become fashionable, they allowed themselves to be deluded
by his hon. and learned friend. If the house adopted the clause of his
hon. and learned friend, it would be impossible to effect for King’s College
at Cambridge, which was connected with Eton, the very thing w/hich,
without the aid of Parliament, Trinity College had effected with regarrd to
Westminster. No doubt the rights in question varied in every possible
way. No doubt there were special cases where the object of the foiunder
was almost exclusively his interest in the school, whilst there w*ere armulti-
tude of other cases where his interest was in the college. With regaird to
Winchester, he thought his hon. and learned friend fundamentally nnisre-
presented when he said New College was made for Winchester, and ttiiat if
he read the statutes he would see Winchester was made for New Colhege.
Mr. R. Palmer —Both were made for each other.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer thought the welfare of New College
was the main object in the mind of William of Wykeham, and thaat he
treated Winchester as a mere appendage. It was because of these ;many
shades and varieties of interest that Parliament should refer the cashes for
review to an intelligent competent tribunal, in order to deal fairly by these
parties. He was quite satisfied his honourable and learned friend ''would
not succeed in inducing the house to adopt his amendment. It was. quite
true the house had twice voted in its favour, but by very different imajori-
ties, and the more light that was thrown on this question the more iimpos-
sible would it be to induce the representatives of the people in this comntry
to set themselves against the House of Lords in a case where the House of
Lords had been voting on large views of public and general interestss, and
where the interests arrayed against them were, to describe them iin the
kindest manner, interests of personal and local feeling.
Sir W. Heathcote charged the Chancellor of the Exchequer with Ihaving
shown the eagerness of a partisan, and considerable unfairness in his state-
ment of the argument. They ought to be contented with a reference? to an
impartial tribunal. He assumed the whole question—that it was jmst to
refer it; but whilst they had no objection to the parties who constituted the
tribunal, what they said was, it ought not to be referred at all. The
right honourable gentleman described the advantages which would arise
from certain regulations of these fellowships, but every one of those regula-
tions might take place under the clause of his honourable and beamed
friend, and without the amendment of the House of Lords. It was emacted
in another part of the bill that fellowships might be converted into e?xhibi-
tions and scholarships, and all the advantages intended were to be obtained
without this amendment. Schools were established with certain liimited
views, either as to particular localities or particular persons, and it was not
right to turn round and apply them to a purpose as different as possible
from that for which they were originally designed. He should enter his
protest against this attempt to overthrow the sufficient and very decided
opinion of this house.
Mr. 11, Vernon said that, as he was one of those who voted witth the
majority on the first occasion, and with the minority on the secomd, he
trusted the house would allow him to say a few w T ords in justification! of the
course he had thought proper to pursue. He regarded with great
confidence the commissioners selected by her Majesty’s Governmient to
manage the University. He likewise approved the various checks innposed
on the exercise of their authority. He was perfectly certain nothing would
be ordered by those commissioners, in a sense either unfair or severe, with
reference to these schools; and he thought it the duty of the house to
reflect before placing a power of veto either in the Corporation of Abingdon,
or even the school to which he was more particularly attached, that of
Westminster. With regard to the allusion of the Chancellor of the Ex-
chequer to Trinity College, Cambridge, and Westminster School, the right
honourable gentleman was completely in error, as the Westminster scholars
never had the power of taking fellowships—it was a pure question of ex-
amination.
Sir J. PaTdngion bad listened with interest to the honourable gentleman
who had just spoken, because, having voted both ways, he w r as anxious to
know how he would vote on a third occasion, and with every respect for
that honourable member, he must say a more hollow, more inconsistent,
and more unsatisfactory speech he never heard in his life. (A laugh.)
The honourable member said he voted in the first instance for'the clause,
because he approved the principle, and he voted in the second instance
against the clause, because he was not prepared to carry the principle to its
extreme extent. He should like to know how the honourable member
drew the distinction, and how the principle that was good for a fellowship
was not equally good for a scholarship? He should like to know how the
honourable member could explain to any sensible man that he did not
give his first vote for that which he negatived with his second; and when
he talked of extremes and extravagance, they were on the part of an
honourable member who took so inconsistent a course. The Chancellor of
the Exchequer, in speaking of the conduct of the House of Lords, and in
answering a comment on their conduct, declared that he thought the amend-
ment “ in favour alike of moral and intellectual excellence, as against igno-
rance and abuse.” (Ministerial cheers.) He dissented altogether from such
a description of the amendment, and he was surprised to hear it given by the
right honourable gentleman, who only four years ago expressed himself in
very different terms. It was upon a question, not of expediency, whicH
might be good to-day and bad to-morrow, but of high principle, which
must be the same in 1854 as it was in 1850. There was no escape from
such inconsistency.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer (seeing Sir John Pakington with
Hansard in his hand) said he did not admit the accuracy of the report,
and upon that occasion he published his sentiments in the form of a cor-
rected speech.
Sir John Pakington was about to refer to the usual authority. He would
read the extract and compare it with this description of the conduct of the
House of Lords, and the right honourable gentleman could take exception
at any part of the report he pleased. He quite agreed with his honourable
friend (Mr. Henley) that this was a question of unjustifiable spoliation.
(Cheers.) He would not retreat from those words, and he believed the
country would view it in that light, as a hollow, unjustifiable setting up of
what was thought expedient and politic, as opposed to that which was
honest and just. That was the view he took of this question, and he was
fortified in it by the opinion of the right honourable gentleman himself. In
the year 1850 the right honourable gentleman was reported to have spoken
these words—“ Into the question of the restraint on the election to fellow-
ships, I will not enter. It is plain, however, neither the House of Com-
mons nor the Crown can assume jurisdiction to remove those restraints; but
in point of fact those restraints are of a much more limited character than
is generally supposed.” Did the right honourable gentleman deny those
words? [The Chancellor of the Exchequer signified, his assent to the
quotation.] Then the right hon. gentleman did say that neither Parlia-
ment nor the Crown could remove these restraints on the election to pro-
fessorships.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer —Not Parliament—the House of Com-
mons and the Crown is the expression.
Sir John Pakington—He must say he thought the right honourable
gentleman was thankful for small mercies. (Cheers.) He must be hard
pressed, indeed, when he drew such a nice distinction. The right
honourable gentleman then went on to say that it was plain there must be
some limitation to the principle of examination, that he would not like to
see the Prime Minister or a member of the Cabinet appointed by an
examination, that he would as soon appoint them from counties or from dio-
ceses, and that the same argument applied to fellowships. The right hon.
gentleman protested then against the principle that examination was to
be taken as the sole test of fitness. Now, he said that the House of
Lords, by making examination the sole test of fitness, had passed a
measure in favour of moral and intellectual excellence against ignorance
and abuse. He did not deny the right of the right honourable gentleman
to change his mind, but he thought his opinion would not tell for much
with the house after having expressed an opinion much the reverse within
a period so recent as the last four years. Then the right honourable
gentleman asked whether the colleges themselves carried on the intentions
of the founders. He thought they had no right to enter into that ques-
tion after the repeated proofs they had had that such was the desire of
the colleges. He only hoped the House of Commons would equally respect
the intentions of the founders. That very morning the house had refused
to do what he believed to be an act of justice, solely out of respect to the
supposed intentions of the testator (alluding to the decision on Sir Thomas
Wilson’s bill); and he hoped that honourable gentleman who had so much
regard to the intentions of testators in that case, would be equally careful
to respect those intentions in the present instance.
Lord John Russell said it would be recollected that the last time this
question was debated there was a majority of ten only in favour of the
proposition of the hon. and learned gentleman; so that if the house should
come to-night to a different decision, it would not, at all events, be the re-
versal of a decision which had been arrived at on the former occasion by a
large majority. But the right hon. gentleman opposite had charged it
against his right hon. friend that, in 1850, he said that these endowments
ought not to be set aside at the will of the Crown or of the House of
Commons. No doubt his right hon. friend said so then, and he would be
ready to repeat the same statement now; but what they proposed to do
by this bill was, that not the Crown or the House of Commons should de-
cide the question, but that the whole body of the Legislature, Queen, Lords,
and Commons, should assent to an act by which the alteration should be
made.
Mr. Wigram had no wish to use such harsh words as plunder and spo-
liation, but he must say, that if the clause were passed in its present form
it would enable parties to violate the rules under which property had
hitherto been governed.
The house then divided—For the Lords’amendment, 110; against it,
68; majority, 42.
Several other amendments were agreed to without discussion.
In clause 42, which provided for subjecting all statutes made by the
commissioners to alteration and repeal by University or college, with ap-
proval of her Majesty in council, the Chancellor of the Exchequer moved
that the words “ respecting private halls,” which had been added by the
Lords, be omitted, on the ground that it would give a right to the Univer-
sity to abolish private halls altogether. The amendment was defended by
Messrs. Walpole , Newdegate , and Henley , but rejected on a division by
130 to 70.
There was an incidental discussion of the admission of Dissenters; on the
46th clause, which provides that no oath should be necessary on taking a
degree, the House of Lords had inserted the following proviso:—“ But
such degree shall not as such constitute any qualification for the holding of
any office which has been heretofore always held by a member of the United
Church of England and Ireland, and for which such degree in the said
University has heretofore constituted one of the qualifications, unless the
person obtaining such degree shall have taken such oaths, and subscribed
such declarations as are not by law required to be made and taken on ob-
taining such degree, either at the time of taking such degree or subse-
quently.”
■s {Mr. Newdegate wished to ask whether the term “ office” was to be held
applicable to the fellowships in colleges such as in Merton, which entitled
the possessors to make regulations for the management of such colleges?
The Solicitor-General said, according to his apprehension, the word
“ office” did not include “ fellowship,” although, in certain cases, a fellow-
ship might have attached to it some particular office. “ Office” and “ emo-
lument” were quite distinct, and in his opinion, the word “ office” could
not include either fellowship or emolument.
Mr. Haywood believed that the words were intended to apply to the
masters of grammar-schools. He did not, for his own part, agree with the
proviso at all, and he could not consider the matter settled so long as it re-
mained upon the statute-book, but he believed that it expressed the present
opinion of the other house of Parliament upon the subject, and he had no
wish at this period of the session to raise a difficulty about it. Sir Robert
Peel, in the year 1834, in speaking upon this subject, had said—“ The
Dissenters at the Universities never would remain contented with the mere
empty degree of Master of Arts, but would continue to strive after—nay,
peremptorily to demand—a perfect equality in all things not necessarily
connected with ecclesiastical affairs. He would put the case of two stu-
dents intending to enter upon the profession of the law, the one a Dissenter,
the other a member of the Church of England; either might have, he
would suppose, a lay fellowship, if the religious scruples of one of them
had not happened to stand in the way. The Dissenter might stand more
in need of such fellowship. He would then put it to the right hon. gen-
tleman to say how he could, upon his own principles, refuse the claim of
the Dissenter to a collegiate advantage, not necessarily connected with eccle-
siastical affairs? by what right could he establish such an invidious distinction
on a matter merely of civil benefit and advantage? To his mind, it did appear
infinitely more rational and consistent to proceed according to the recom-
mendation of the hon. member for Leeds, and grant to the Dissenters a full
and equal participation in all the advantages of the Universities not neces-
sarily of an ecclesiastical or spiritual character*.” He must say that he
(Mr, Heywood) should very much have preferred that Parliament should
have arrived at this, which w'as called by Sir Robert Peel “ an infinitely
more sound and rational conclusion,” than that this proviso should have
beep introduced for the purpose of pushing out or keeping out Dissenters
from the masterships of grammar-schools. He was not at all satisfied
with the matter as it stood; but he repeated that he would not at present
make any opposition to the amendment.
Mr. Goulburn thought that, when the hon. gentleman cited the opinion
of Sir Robert Peel upon this subject, it was as well the house should know
that upon the very occasion on which he-had made that speech—in which
he was arguing against the views of his opponents, and showing to what
consequences they would lead—his vote, as they would see if they referred
to it, had been given against the proposition to admit Dissenters to the
Universities.
Mr. Henley understood that the language of Sir Robert Peel, which had
been referred to by the hon. member for North Lancashire, had not been
cited by him for the purpose of informing the house of the opinions held
by Sir Robert Peel on the subject of admitting Dissenters to the Universi-
ties, but had been read for the advantage of*the right hon. gentleman
opposite (the Chancellor of the Exchequer), and of other gentlemen who
sat near him, and in order to show them that what they had now done had
established an irresistible claim upon the part of the Dissenters to have
everything else they desired. He understood that that quotation ex-
pressed Sir Robert Peel’s opinion, then speaking upon this very subject—
that if what was then asked should be conceded, which was something
very like what the right hon. gentleman the member for the University
had been instrumental in carrying now, the Dissenters would have in that
concession an irresistible argument for demanding everything else. Now,
with respect to this proviso, it appeared to him that the only effect of it
would be to strike at the schoolmasters; and that while it would shut out the
Protestant Dissenters to a man, Roman Catholics would be let in by it. It
applied to “ any office which has been heretofore always held by a member
of the United Church of England and Ireland.” Now many of these
schools had, no doubt, been formerly held by Roman Catholics; and there-
fore the effect of this concoction by the Dissenting body on the one hand
and the right hon. gentleman on the other would be, that no Protestant
Dissenter could benefit —that it was possible that Church of England school-
masters might be shut out~and that Roman Catholics alone would derive
any advantage.
Mr. R. Palmer did not think that the right honourable gentleman’s ap-
prehension with respect to Roman Catholics was very well founded; but he
admitted that the clause was very oddly worded. (A laugh.) He believed
that “the United Church of England and Ireland” had only existed since
the Act of Union, and it would be obvious that, if that were so, hardly any
office could be said to have been “ heretofore always held ” by a member of
that Church ; but, of course, a court of law would give a rational interpre-
tation to the clause. (Laughter.)
The motion to agree with the amendment w*as then put and carried.
Mr. Craufurd moved to restore the 47th clause, which provided that no
member on account of his rank should be permitted to take his degree sooner
than any other undergraduate. The Chancellor of the Exchequer objected.
He thought that the safer course would be to leave this, as they had left a
great many other matters of detail, to be dealt with by the University it-
self. The amendment made by the Lords was agreed to without a division.
On the 50th clause, —“ saving the powers and privileges of the Univer-
sity and its officers, except in so far as they are expressly altered or taken
away by the provisions of this act,” Mr. Blackett called attention to the
subject of the Vice-Chancellor’s veto. He wished to ask whether the sub-
stitution of the words “expressly altered or taken away” for the word “af-
fected ” in this 50th clause would have the effect, in his opinion, of restor-
ing the veto? The Solicitor-General answered the question in the nega-
tive. It was provided by the 19th clause that every statute framed by the
Hebdomadal Council should first be submitted to Congregation, and after-
wards to Convocation; and, in his opinion, the exercise of the veto was,
by that provision, effectually restrained. The amendment was then agreed to.
The definition in the interpretation clause of the word “residents” was
altered by striking out the words “ two terms, or.” It now stands—“ AH
members of Convocation who shall have resided twenty weeks within one
mile and a half of Carfax during the year that shall expire on the Ist day
of September next preceding the making and promulgation of the register.”
Lord John Russell, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Mr. Henley, Mr.
Walpole, and other right honourable gentlemen were appointed to confer
with the Lords on the subject of those amendments made in the Upper
House with which the House of Commons had disagreed.
THE BISHOP OF NEW ZEALAND.
On the motion for going into committee of supply on Thursday,
Sir J. Pakington , in calling the attention of the house to the case of
the Bishop of New Zealand: —
He would say nothing of the position of the Bishop of New Zealand, of
his exemplary character, and great and admitted capacity. He would
assume for a moment that, instead of being a Bishop of the Church of
England, he was the lowest official of the smallest colony, and he (Sir J.
Pakington) would ask the house whether, in the case of any public servant,
be he who he may, it was consistent with good faith and fair dealing, that
an allowance once granted by Parliament, and on the faith of which that
public servant had gone out to the colony, should be so withdrawn?
Putting the case in that way to the house, he begged to say distinctly that
he did not intend to make any accusation against the Duke of Newcastle,
the Secretary of State who arranged the matter. He was quite sure that
the Duke of Newcastle was as little inclined as any one could be to do
anything unfair towards any public servant connected with his department,
and more especially one holding the high position of the Bishop of New
Zealand. He might add, that he knew too much of the Colonial-office
to feel surprised that occasional mistakes of that Ifind* should Qriso,
and he could only suppose that this was a mistake, 'aha * that in
withdrawing this grant from the estimates of 1853, without the slightest
warning to the Bishop, the Duke of Newcastle ffiad acted inadv’et(eajJy
(Sir J. Pakington) would not advert to the attempt made by the.Duke:bf
castle in another place to throw the blame of this upbp-
only say that he felt extremely innocent on the subject. It wa§
in the year 1852 he expressed a hope that, after twq |ears!j New
would cease to be a charge upon this country. mbf been
so cautious in making a distinct exception with regard to, ||f


608 the guardian. tAuo %
patty to sucl. a stoppage of the < Sao'lty“ulJil " 8 f! b f 1 "■ ■' l ;"' 1 momfor shoolP bofong to if, and 1,0 hoaod
would remind any honourable gentleman who attempted to throw blame on menf nf thf« hiAmn o»a hm- ° f r ” ment assenting Jo the appoint- no charge against that gentleman.
him of the fact that it was stopped in 1853 without any warning or notice, be voted by Pari lament bound so v f e V wo . od was authorised to state, on behalf of Mr. Chadwick, that
ia?rr.-“ «“>■— —— ■
blame, he was willing to bear his share of it, but he would not be a it would be' th^‘ w / shed ,‘° " h f !f this bill were read a second time,
Sn hrTIL I gr f nt T ie —stances. A letter part of this country, out “™„-wCrTBtS of Ihe wickt W Under ‘ ake 33 S °° D 88 possible toremove Mr ' Chad -
Sir George Grey, to theß?shop w°i, of It'set'Vorded U sitn f ion f to a it had been already stated that all the three mem
but the real substance of it wa's, “ I am sorry l„ say that I STS bers had placed their resignations in the hLds of the bo
inform you that your salary is stopped.” The Bishop sent an answer colony on a now footing, that the SfM h"” » h e Government might think fit, and his honourable
it was only tbe sewity tiiat wB iniiepaißble from the natore «f these un- wonld not pay him thenX must* go'litliolT hif sGpenl eonfd'net m-.* f,when the numbers were—For the second tewd-
saasilisSS - -
-s s=.=s s=3Kz,td“i sbrcis fair jss*gv, -FF* =&. ..«. l«. »
Z\l'T m ° D , e ° ft '™ thln fr first ’. tba ‘,T n°t answer for Parlia- denomination subscribe for not Pariiament Z ilfpTfn P . rotect ’on Society, it>as considered desirable to extend
ment being always disposed to continue this grant, and that at some future money? The missionary efforts o/the Church of Fnelmd could 3J° from i t I/, 8 Whlcb P» bllc - |]ouses were to be open on Sunday
day the income of the bishopric might bo transferred from the pavliamen- a moment's comparison with hose o? the Dkscnttal Iml -md ° « Iff* I *° half -P as 2 J ** middle of the day, and from stoll h,
tary grant to some other source. He (Sir J. Pakington) did not believe the latter did not ask Parliament for a single L hoped the nmnnfT B’T"TT 8 ’T"TT , from *° 2 ’ and 6to 10 °’ c,ock - as originally
noble ord had intended to convey to the Bishop thepossibility that he, the very member for Lambeth would divide the house aminst the conHmmnee n f tr ’ F T d< onl y consented to the bill from the strong
minister who made the arrangement, would turn round on the Bishop and say his salary. against the continuance of this teelmg expressed in its favour. Why should club-houses for the rich
m-ideif ,T*f *l° be b aken away without any warning, or any provision being Lord William Graham, in answer to the honourable member nil, ?" other daps? The corn-
made foi it elsewhere. It was well known that the Bishop of New Zealand Hadfieldj said that the Bishon of New 7.°,“. bonomable membei (Mr. plan ed tnat some definition of what was meant by “ a traveller” was
d.d not desire income for income sake. He bestowed his income in a man- minatton to“ IX"* . for * P*™ going to the Crystal Palaclor
PhprnHtV^V 701^7 ° t f a k° P °!x t i e Cl l urch - He bes towed it with and there to maintain himself, by digging or begem* the bit wav thaUie wm & traveller . ? S ° me held that he was, and some that he
Lbeiahty and generosity; and from the fact ot his devoting his income to the could. 7gg ° tog th b Sfc Way tbat he Was not * Jt f as a question that ought to be settled one way or the
benefit of Ins fellow-Ohnstlans, and never making it a source of profit to Sir J. Pakington said that after the statemonf- fW k \ otlie * m Th e Marquis oj Clanricarde disliked the bill as having the
himself, he might have been exposed on receiving this intimation to the the right hon. gentleman the Colonial Secretary he shonll nnf- a PP earf wce of an infringement on the liberty of the industrious
want of pecuniary means. He (Sir J. Pakington) did not affirm that the his motion. g6ntleman Colomal Secretar ?> he &hould not P in classes, and interfering with their recreation. The Duhe of Argyll
f a [ y ° f f .f 6 Blsb . op °f Nevv Zealand was to be a permanent charge on the The right hon. baronet’s motion was then withdrawn aerordimrlv bore testimony from inquiry he had made upon the subject, that a
funds of the country. He thought it might be desirable to do in that case aaroneis motion was then withdrawn accordingly. much more stringent measure was acting beneficially in Scotland-
as had been done in others, and transfer it to some other source; but until ivr r , ™ PUBLIC health act. spending hours in a beer-house could hardly be called recreation’
they had done so, they were bound in good faith, and by a regard for the comhrne^c’’pnhlto Hr ITT t T T* thC S “° nd !' eading ° f a bill to n ffTfr tbr ° Ugh committ “- On the third reading on Friday
dignity and welfare of the Chnrch, to continue that salary until they had S', !l Health Act for two years, urging the necessity of 10 E [‘ rl «J Ilarrowby proposed his amendments-the extension in
otherw.se provided for it In conclusion he begged to move that the house, on se 3 hut nf ,ho n° f T° T ' Wh ° c ? nld take care of them - th . e . . a . fter " oon tbl b «H-past 2 p.m. was not opposed, but the evening
the fo owing day should resolve itself into committee of supply to consider f,‘T of m«Les TT ° h ° m be h WaS ex . lstence - Th e nggrega- f dd ‘t>on from sto 11 was strongly objected to by the Earl ofShaftet
the following resolution:—That an hnmhle address be presented to her Ma- 3 masses tendered sanitary precautions more than ever an, l the who thought four hours Quito lone-
jesty, praying that she may be graciously pleased to give directions that the the3JJ,l T,i ho r therefb T Proposed to continue, for a limited time, enou g b f or public-houses on the Sabbath evening. On a division the
salary of 600/. hitherto voted annually to the Bishopof New Zealand should p , , ' General Board of Health, established by the Earl of extension was rejected by 24 to 15, and the bill passed
be paid for the years 1853 and 1554, assuring her Majesty that the house << tT m . ~ the bbibeev rmr
would make good the same. The groat outlines of that arrangement were that there should be On Friday on tho orrW J a n • ~ .
Mr. W. Williams considered that the salary had been stopped in pursu- “ L^ don ’ th ° Government » a board which bill, Lord ultham made a spJch'lgalLt o^
ance of a bargain made with the House of Commons. He had distinctly w W f - k tlle hea] t b of the country at large, should collect one-sided legislation directed against tLnonrwhil^M 5 k \
stated, the year before the withdrawal of the grant, that he would divide reqTedassi2nee Tnd d^ 7 assistance to those districts which Parliament are allowed to be remunerated by thousLds^^ar'lnd
CWh7nTh° th T g T l |!fK Peaki , ng ’ be P rovl ’sion for the prelates of the TT ge fi T al f °“ d . s >, wh!cb the his vote in n ciosl division B & 61 W 1 ■"*** " "' aDt
Church in the colony should be made by the colony or by this countrv A« P ! • . m L omenfc * as one peculiarly unfitted for its being dropped. “He did The bill having been read a Hnrd firm. ctm. a *.
, Si^r , ss d r sti Tt that had thousanas these meaas 12 M to tiS 8 fi„ Tf c, t c] r e 38 we,e ’ st ™ ck ' ou '- ’ y
Zealand asked from Parliament and as soon as ii , ! 7T f ° r ? ew which «omplaint might be made. That anneared to f th!t -, r a 66 , T eve “ mg - the °f gave notice
paid of it"' COl “ ny ’ T 6 Btohop's Mlhorto was hot per Cpl respectrf thM ’ that the resoluti ® be in
Sjte M r t h ' s , dn , ty ; aftCT PnDC,PICS ° f °“ r Parl CoDStita - T n n , SEC ™
been given that nothing would be again askedTomVarl^ 68 S v? d Lord Set J mour moved, as an amendment that the bill should ho i suned on ° n A Lord I)u( } le V part's Russian Securities Bill was re-
hension and the payment was illegal, no dofbt tZ Cnse’‘iZZfc H e 6 c'etnrVtlT ad -- d « d va„tageons san"aryTe" K'attend"]‘to^•^tfc b ompo S S■i 0f CVCo ' thi “ g tHat Sh ° U ‘ d baV6
(“ststhsssrts£;;:•] 5 Tl ” l “ i " , “" d ' ■“ « £«f
“Ll-rr"“il;; sr
consented and which
■** ' v 11 ji \] ' * ' '


(509
THE GUARDIAN.
1854.]
THE “ TIMES” AND THE LATE CAPTAIN PARKER.
Cohnel Blair , on Friday, called attention to the statement in the
Times that “ Captain Parker literally threw his life away, without
glory to him or result to the public service.” “Nothing,” comtinues j
the writer, “ nothing would serve but the organisation of ai little i
excursion for the sake of pleasure or curiosity.” Now, the whole
statement was entirely void of foundation. Sir James Graham tluanked <
the gallant officer for the opportunity of contradicting a statement f
that had given great pain to the widowed mother whose husband,
Sir Hyde Parker, had died only a few weeks since. The rightt hon.
baronet, having then read the Gazette account, which will be found
elsewhere, added: —
“It must be admitted that our officers were placed, by the sort of criti-
cism in question, in a very hard and embarrassing position. If gallant en-
terprises were not attempted by them, then there was the suggestion made
that they were under the influence of orders given them not to act with
energy, and thus they laboured under suspicions most painfulto a man df
honour. If, on the o'ther hand, they essayed deeds of the high courage
befitting our countrymen, then they were stigmatised as men of mere fool-
hardiness ; and, if they died in the execution of their noble daring, were
denied the just meed of their valour and devotion. He deeply legietted
that such comments as these adverted to should have been made upon
Captain Parker, the sou of one of our most gallant sailors, and himself
one of our most promising naval officers.
MILITIA BARRACKS.
The Militia (No. 2) Bill enacts that counties shall provide certain
buildings for the use of the militia at the expense of the counties.
On going into committee on Thursday Mr. T.Egerton calledlbe atten-
tion of the county members to the fact that counties would be put to
an expense of 12,000/. or 13,000/. to build barracks, upon which Mr.
Henley , Mr. Deedes , Sir John Paldngton, and Mr. Christopher raised an
outcry against the bill, as saddling the counties with an intolerable
expense. Colonel Gilpin suggested that it should be equally divided
between the counties and the Government. Mr. T. Sotheron moved
the omission of a proviso in Clause 1, for the purpose of raising the
question as to whether the counties or the nation should bear the ex-
pense of these new barracks. He thought the nation ought to., It
was suggested by the Government that the question would arise more
properly on the 4th clause. A division was, however, taken, and the
clause affirmed by 94 to 65. Before the house could proceed to
Clause 2, the clock cut short the morning sitting.
The committee resumed the next day, and on Clause 4, providing
that the expense of the new buildings should he borne by the county
rates, Mr. Robert Palmer proposed an amendment, the object of which
w a s to place “ one-half” of the expense on the Consolidated Fund.
In spite of the earnest opposition of Jjord Palmerston and Mr. Sidney
Herbert, Mr. Palmer carried his amendment by 85 to 60. Mr. Glad-
stone remarked, in reply to a question from Mr. Henley , that the prin-
ciple affirmed by the committee would make it necessary for the Go-
vernment to consider what course they would take. The remaining
clauses of the hill were then agreed to, with some amendments.
In opposing Mr. Palmer the Home Secretary made a slip. Lord
Palmerston said he —
“ Believed in many cases the addition to the county rates would not ex-
ceed a halfpenny in the pound for the period during which the charge would
apply. Now, he thought, such an addition to the rate would be hardly per-
ceptible. [Mr. Henley observed that it would form one-sixth part of the
whole county rate. (Laughter, and cheers from the Opposition.)] Well,
if that were so, he (Lord Palmerston) did not think there was much cause
to complain of the weight of the tax.” (A laugh.)
PUBLIC BUILDINGS —BURLINGTON AND MONTAGUE HOUSES.
In Committee of Supply, on Thursday, a vote of 140,000/. to pur-
chase Burlington House and grounds for the public service was
proposed. Mr. Spooner , Mr. Williams, and Captain Scobell opposed
the vote. The site would be inconvenient for public offices; and the
country ought not to be put to such an expense at the present time: —
Mr. Milnes was surprised at the hon. member for North Warwickshire
being so tender on this'grant, when it was very generally reported that, if
Government did not purchase Burlington-house, it would be made use of
for the purpose of erecting a Roman Catholic institution upon a large
scale. (Laughter.) , . ,
Mr. Gladstone Remarked, that it might be a generation before such an
opportunity would again occur of acquiring three acres and a half off land
in the very heart of London. For commissioners’ offices, Burlington-house
would be exceedingly convenient; and such space as was not usoed by
learned societies could be turned to account by the Government. Mr.
Disraeli supported the vote. It was carried by 143 to 23.
The latter right hon. gentleman asked for information on one point.
“ He was himself so impressed with the feeling when in office, _ of how few
such opportunities the Government had, that when a distinguished noble-
man who held a Crown lease which was about to cease, wished to have
that’lease renewed, the Board of Treasury, of which he was a member,
refused the renewal. Application was made to have the lease of Monfcague-
house renewed by the Duke of Buccleuch, a nobleman who was respited
by every member of that house; but it appeared to the Treasury thrat the
claims of the public service were so paramount that they were mot at
liberty to renew the lease. On that occasion he felt it his duty, remeimber-
ing that Montague-house stood next to the Treasury, to retain the sitte for
the use of the public; but no sooner was he out of office than that decision
of the Board of Treasurv was rescinded, and the lease of Montague-ffiouse
was renewed to the same distinguished nobleman he had alreadly re-
replied—“ The subject had not been before him for some
time and therefore he was not prepared to go into any of the details ; but
he frankly owned that he thought the right hon. gentleman quite right m
callino-their attention to the transaction, because he (the Chancelllor ot
the Exchequer) was distinctly of opinion that an error was committted in
the renewal of that lease. - As to when the error was committed, amd the
person by whom it was committed, he was not prepared to say anything at
present, as he thought it would be more satisfactory to have alll the
documentary evidence before them before entering into the question.
This should be produced. _ ~. . , , , ,
On Friday Mr. Disraeli came down and acknowledged that he had made
a mistake. He had censured the present Government for that error, as he
still regarded it to be, but he had since ascertained that the censures was
applicable to the Government of which he himself had been a meimber.
The fact was that he had, while in office, declared his decided opmiom that
the leases of houses contiguous to the public offices should not be remewed,
so far as depended on Government, and he had, in the pressure of business
towards the close of his tenure of office, taken it for granted that tbs view
of his had been acted upon in the particular instance. It was under this
impression that he had spoken on the preceding evening, and he had only
to apologise to her Majesty’s present Government for having passed cen-
sure upon them which he ought properly to have taken to himself. ( Hear,
hear,” and laughter.) „ n r
In committee of supply on Monday, a sum of 2,005?. was voted for
reinstating the Chapel of the Embassy at Constantinople, burnt down ;about
six or seven years ago, and not rebuilt at the time owing to the extrava-
gant expenditure lavished on the Embassy-house itself.. Strong representa-
tions of the inconvenience felt by the British residents had been made to
the ambassador, and even offers to contribute 1,000/., though their num-
bers were small. An architect would be sent from the Board of Works in
this country to superintend the building, under the control and direction of
the ambassador. , ~
A vote of 1,400/. was next taken to defray the expense of erecting an
enclosure wall and entrance gateway, and the necessary buildings to a
British Protestant cemetery at Madrid. In reply to Mr. Apsley Pellatt,
Mr. Wilson said the cemetery would be consecrated by a Protestant bishop,
and arrangements had been made by which it would be open to all British
vote of 2,500/. for the repair of the Koval monuments in Westminster
Abbey, led to an interesting discussion. Mr. Ewart and Mr. MoncJcton
Milnes expressed their cordial approval of the vote—at the same time com-
plaining of the fee of admission to the Abbey, and the charge by the dean
and chapter of 200/. for a few square feet on which to place the public mo-
nument to the poet Campbell. In regard to the latter Sir Win. Molesworth
promised inquiry, and as to the former he said he had been told that its
object was to provide for the payment of the persons who were employed in
showing the monuments. “It was important that no person should be
permitted to go round without being attended by people by whom they
might be carefully watched, the fact being that the monuments had suffered
much more from the petty pilferings of the last century than during the
whole of the centuries preceding. Mr. Scott, in his able report, referred to
the subject in the following terms: —‘ As the monuments have suffered
fully as much from spoliation as from decay, it is of the utmost importance
that the vigilant watch kept over them should not in any degree be relaxed ;
had the present system been adopted a century earlier, the atrocious pilfer-
ing and robbery, from which those invaluable works of. art have so griev-
ously suffered, would have been in great measure prevented ; for it is
truly mortifying to reflect that, though the church was exposed during the
Great Rebellion to the insults of the soldiery, who were atone time quartered
within its walls, and though there was actually an order of Parliament
(happily never obeyed) for melting down the bronze, these monuments ac-
tually suffered infinitely less during that turbulent time, than in the en-
lightened period intervening between the middle of the last century and our
own day, and that their greatest spoliation has been suffered at the hands
of that intelligent public, who, one would have imagined, would have been
the guardians, rather than the pilferers, of our national monuments.’ If,
therefore, no fee were to be levied on the public seeing these monuments,
it would be necessary that Parliament should vote a sum of money for the
payment of persons to show them. If Parliament were prepared to do that,
he would ask the consent of the Lords of the Treasury to such a vote being
proposed ; and he had no doubt that if a general feeling in its favour were
expressed, the Lords of the Treasury would acquiesce in it.”
Mr. John Ball said the Archeological Society did not approve of all the
restorations proposed by Mr. Scott, but thought the historical monuments
ought to be left in their present state. Mr. Eivart thought the monu-
ments of Edward the Confessor, of Edward 1., of Philippe and Eleanor of
Castille would be particularly well restored. Sir William Molesworth said
Mr. Scott’s object was to preserve and not renew the monuments. Mr.
Brady bore testimony to the success which had attended Mr. Scott’s
attempts at restoration in Ely Cathedral. He did think Westminster
Abbey was a fit receptacle for the monuments of warriors—they ought to
erect a building for their reception, and not desecrate an edifice dedicated to
God. He would support any vote that would allow the public to have free
admission to the church. The vote was then agreed to.
On the proposal to grant 1,000/. for the restoration of the statue of
King Charles I. at Charing-cross,
Sir W. Molesworth explained that from what he saw on a' personal in-
spection of the statue, he Mr. Richard Westmacott to examine
the statue and make a report. That gentleman reported that it was in a
very bad state. Lie stated that the horse was fractured in the knees—
(laughter)—that the bridle, sword, and bit were no more—( u hear,” and
laughter)—that the tail was also defective, the weather having penetrated
it. " (Roars of laughter.) In short, he (Sir W. Molesworth) found that
the statue could not be completely restored for less than the sum now
asked for; it was evidently in a very dilapidated state, and unless the com-
mittee were willing to see one of the finest statues in the metropolis fall to
pieces, they should agree to the vote.
Mr. Wise thought the repairs might wait. (Laughter.) Their asso-
ciations in connection with Charles the First were not of a character which
should make them especially anxious to restore his statute. He was more
celebrated for his encroachments on public rights and the violation of na-
tional liberties than for anything else. He admitted that as a work of art
the statue was valuable; it was one of Le Sceui s best.
Mr. Disraeli was surprised that the hon. gentleman, shallow as might
be his constitutional prejudices, did not support the vote as a lover of the
fine arts. When the statue was lost, it was universally regretted that so
fine a model of equestrian statuary should have disappeared, and he really
thought that after this chef-d'oeuvre of Le Soeur had been regained it would
ill-become the House of Commons to refuse a vote which was in fact neces-
sary to keep it in existence.
The vote was then agreed to, as were also the following:—
13,000/., Agricultural Statistics.
6,000/., Spurn Point.
13,370/., Kingstown Harbour.
16,889/., Duchy of Cornwall Office.
2,273/., Registration of Joint Stock Companies.
50,000/., Universal Exhibition of Paris in 1855.
[Upon this vote Mr. Bright complained that Mr. Cole allotted to the
subdividing of space upwards of 3,000/.; expense of office in Paris, about
3,000/.; cleaning, &c., 5,000/.; painting, decorating, &c., 3,000/.;
travelling and other expenses of jurors, &c., 11,000/. (Loud cries of
“ Hear, hear.”) He objected that a large staff of jurors, officials, and
clerks, should live for weeks luxuriously in Paris, at the public expense,
while so small a sum as 9,700/. was allotted to the actual transmission of
goods. Mr. Cardwell promised attention to the subject, and the vote
passed.]
100,000/., for Civil Contingencies.^
812,826/., Post-office Packet Service.
998,000/., Militia.
10,000/., Retired Full Pay.
REAL ESTATE CHARGES BILL.
On the motion for going into committee on this bill, Lord St.
Leonard's strongly objected to the measure, as a hasty and ill-advised
interference with the existing law of real property and the law of
primogeniture. He moved that it be committed this day three
months. Earl Fortescue replied that the sole effect of the bill was to
cure hardships upon younger children, from personal property being
made available in certain cases for discharging encumbrances upon
real estate. The Lord Chancellor said that though the bill was not a
Government measure, he yet approved of its introduction. The first
clause would be productive of unmixed good, inasmuch as it would
make the dispositions of property, in cases where testators had not
actually described how it should go, conformably to their real inten-
tions. It had nothing whatever to do with the law of primogeniture.
Their lordships divided, when the motion for going into committee
was carried by 26 against 23. The bill then passed through com-
mittee with amendments. The date for its coming into operation
was fixed for the 31st of December. The second clause was struck
out.
HAMPSTEAD-HEATH.
The Finchley-Road Estate Bill was rejected on its second reading
on Thursday by 97 to 43. The amendment was moved hj Lord
R. Grosvenor , supported by Mr. Osborne , who insisted that it was a
preparatory bill for enclosing Hampstead-heath, in direct contradiction
to the spirit and intention of the will of the late Sir Thomas Wilson.
Five similar attempts had been previously reported against by the
judges. Mr. R. PhilUmore gave it as his opinion that in passing the
bill the house would be violating the intentions of the late baronet.
Mr. R. Lowe thought if the public wished to preserve Hampstead-
heath, they should purchase it. It was not on that ground that he
opposed the bill, but because he thought “ they ought not to sanction
anything that would do violence to the will of a dead man.” Sir J. Shelley
said the bill had to do with Hampstead-heath, for he had had the ground
measured, and the enclosure came within half-a-mile of it. Mr. Hen-
ley, Sir B. Hall , and Mr. E. Ball , also opposed the bill. Sir. F. Thesiger
supported the measure. The decision of the Lords showed they did
not attach much weight to the opinion of the judges against the bill,
which he did not consider to he well founded. It would be an in-
justice to throw out the present hill simply because its promoter
formerly attempted to enclose Hampstead-heath; as to the intentions
of Sir T. Wilson, the Finchley-road and a railway had since beep,
driven, through the estate, making the state of things entirely
different. Mr. W. M. Smith pointed out that if the judges had de-
clared against the bill, Lord St. Leonards was in its favour. Messrs .
Bouverie , Frewen , and Forster , and Lord Galway likewise supported the
bill; as did Mr. Geach , who came to the house with the full intention
of voting against the hill, but he confessed that the arguments he
had heard had totally changed his opinion; he therefore supported
the bill.
MISCELLANEOUS.
Earl Granville states it to be the intention of the Government to re-in-
troduce into the House of Commons the Public Revenue and Expenditure
Bill, with the principal amendments made in it by their lordships’ select
committee, in which shape Lord Campbell says it will not meet with any
further opposition from him.
The following is the committee appointed to draw up reasons to be as-
signed to the Lords for'disagreeing to the amendments to which this house
hath disagreed:—Lord John Russell, Viscount Palmerston, Mr. Chancellor
of the Exchequer, Mr. Walpole, Sir John Pakington, Mr. Henley, Sir James
Graham, Mr. Solicitor-General, Sir William Heathcote, Mr. Goulburn, Mr.
Wigram, Mr. Hamilton, Mr. Roundell Palmer, Mr. Heywood, and Mr. Bro-
therton. Three to be the quorum.
The Duke of Cleveland inquired why the Earl of Durham had not
taken the oaths as Lord-Lieutenant of Durham, an appointment made in
April last; and whether his acts were not invalid till he had taken the oaths.
The Earl of Aberdeen replied to the first question that he had no doubt
the earl himself would give a satisfactory explanation; and he himself
would endeavour to prevent further delay. To the other, the Lord Chan-
cellor replied—“No doubt a functionary may subject himself to great dif-
ficulty and embarrassment by acting before he has taken the oaths of office;
but his acts are valid. No man can inquire whether he has taken the oaths
or not.”
The Drainage of Lands Bill was opposed in the Lords on Monday, on
going into committee, by Lords Porimon and Redesdale , as conferring
extraordinary powers and exemptions. This was denied by the Earl of
Granville , but on a division the bill was rejected by 23 to 13.
Sir John Paldngton has given notice of his intention to oppose the Canada
Government Bill, which stands for a second reading on Wednesday.
Lord Palmerston informed the house on Monday that the law officers of
the Crown had advised that legal proceedings should be taken against
Lieut. Austin, governor, and Mr. Blount, surgeon, of the Birmingham pri-
son, which would be instituted without a moment’s delay.
The House of Commons has daily morning sittings, and yet seldom con-
cludes the evening one till 3 a.m. next morning, being occupied 15 hours
out of the 24.
The Globe says the prorogation is fixed for the 15th, and the annual
Ministerial whitebait dinner for the 12th of August, at Greenwich. The
Observe »• trusts that the two events may take place a few days earlier, but
they are not yet fixed; whilst the Herald doubts if Parliament will break
up before the 22nd,
The moving of the new writ for Beverley last week has been explained
by the announced appointment of the late member (the Hon F. C. Lawley )
to the Lieutenant-Governorship of South Australia, as successor to Sir
Henry Young. “ A Colonial Reformer” complains to the Times of the ap-
pointment to so important a post of one so little known: —
“ I am told, however, that for some few months he has been acting as private
secretary to Mr. Gladstone, with whom, I believe, he is closely connected by mar-
riage ; and it is indeed possible that Mr. Gladstone may have discovered in Mr,
Lawley qualities unknown as yet to the public which tit him admirably for the
high and responsible position thus suddenly and strangely conferred upon him.
But, if such be the case—and I sincerely hope it be the case—Mr. Lawley
ought surely to have exhibited a sample of those high qualities in public before he
aspired to the important and difficult duties upon which he is about to enter.”
On Tuesday Mr. Lawley visited bis constituents, took a farewell leave of
them, and introduced as a candidate for the vacant seat the Hon. Arthur
Gordon, third and youngest son of the Premier. He was favourably re-
ceived ; but, on the nomination on Saturday, Mr. George Woodyatt
Hastings, an advanced Liberal, was proposed in opposition. Mr. Gordon
declared that, if returned, he should strenuously advocate free and unfet-
tered commerce in its fullest extent and extension, reforms political and
social, including an extension of the suffrage, the ballot, the total abolition
of church-rates, and the vigorous prosecution of the war in which we were
engaged;—
“ That war he was desirous of seeing carried on with the utmost vigour of
which human nature is capable. It was very easy to say the Government had not
done enough in the matter of the war, but he should like those who said so to have
the management of such a war. It was all very easy to talk about taking this
place and taking that place, about knocking to pieces Cronstadt, and taking pos-
session of Sebastopol, as if they were knocking over a set of ninepins. (Laughter
and cheers.) But he would tell them that that was not the way they would be
able to do it. We should have to attack strong fortresses and meet great armies;
and it must be*, done effectually if it were done at all, and to do it effectually great
preparations mud great combinations were necessary. But he would tell them
what these atttacks upon the Government meant. Many persons thought they
were meant im good faith ; but the fact was, the motive which actuated many men
both in Parliament and out of it was, the desire to injure the head of the present
Government, {because they knew that if he were to fall under their attacks, if he
were removed from the proud position which he now occupied, the Government of
which he was the head must fall to pieces directly—(cheers)—that he was the
keystone of the arch, and that if he were removed, the whole fabric would crumble
into dust. They knew that, they wished to accomplish that, and that was the
secret of it, bmt he hoped the electors of Beverley would not lend themselves to
such an opposiition. It was his firm opinion that the Government were determined
that the war slhould be •carried on with the utmost vigour until the objects for
which it had been undertaken were effectually, firmly, thoroughly, and for
ever secured —(loud cheers,)—till the independence of Turkey was secured,
till there wa« no danger from the aggressions of Russia, and that these
should be secured by no useless wordy guarantees, and no nonsensical
pledges between the parties themselves, but by some effectual guarantee,
such as should ensure Europe from such a disturbance again; and that we should
not close this war until the disturber of the peace of Europe had been punished
as his conduct so richly deserved. (Cheers.) All he could say, however, was,
that if the Government did not pursue that policy, although that man whom he
most revered on earth was at its head, he for one would not support that Govern-
ment. Alluding to the opposition to his election, he spoke of it not as an opposi-
tion to himself, but to the man whom he was proud to call his father. (Cheers.)
‘ And,’ said the hon. candidate, ‘ it is my highest boast to be the son of your pre-
sent Prime Minister. (Cheers.) It is my greatest ambition to prove myself his
not unworthy son. (Cheers.) And therefore I tell that gentleman, when he
comes here and attacks my father, that I am not going to sit down before I tell
him that those charges are utterly baseless and unfounded. I tell him that there
is no man in England who has more the honour of his country at heart than the
present Prime Minister. And I tell you that his very efforts to keep peace, in my
opinion, prove that he will be the last to close the war till it is brought to a suc-
cessful issue.’ ”
Mr. Hastings spoke of himself as a thorough-going Liberal, and one who
thought that the war was entirely owing to the vacillations of Lord Aber-
deen. He declared his intention of thoroughly opposing the Government
of Lord Aberdeen, and called upon the Conservatives to support him in his
contest, an appeal at one time thought likely to be answered so as to en-
danger Mr. Gordon’s return. At the close of the poll, however, on Monday,
the numbers were—Gordon, 493 ; Hastings, 192.
The Spectator notices a new rule in the Commons, which requires that
the two-minute sand-glass must run down before the door is shut,
rendering a “count-out” almost hopeless. Mr. John Phillimore’s motion on
the “Free-bottom, free-goods ” question was brought to a close by the
dexterous movement of a learned gentleman, who shut the door before the
two minutes had expired. This kept gentlemen outside who were ready to
allow themselves to be counted, and that done they would have retired.
This sand-glass may be the means of allowing important discussions to go
on with fewer than forty members present, and votes to be taken, inconve-
nient and, expensive in their results, simply by keeping the door open for
the entrance of members who are ready to reserve themselves for two ob-
jects—to be counted, or to vote, as the case may be.
In the division in the Commons on Thursday the following voted to
agree to the Hebdomadal Council Election Clause, as restored to its
original form by the Lords, who had, last May, voted for Mr. Walpole’s
amendment: —Sir W. Clay, Captain Scobell, and Messrs. J. Ball, T. Barnes,
James Bell, Bonham Carter, Cobden, Crook, J. Ferguson, R. Gardner,
Heywood, Kershaw, Massey, Murrough, Apsley Pellatt, W. P. Price, and
W. Williams. One member, Mr. James Macgregor (Sandwich), voted with
Ministers in May and against them on Thursday.


®orresnonuence.
CAROLINE SOUTHEY.
To the Editor of the Guardian.
Sir—As a relative of the late highly-gifted and excellent Caroline
Southey, I shall be obliged by your correcting an error made in your last
week’s paper with respect to her parentage.
She was not “ a daughter of the Rev. Dr. Bowles, a Canon of Salisbury
Cathedral,” (intended for the poet, the late Rev. W. Lisle Bowles, M.A.,
Canon of Salisbury,) but of a layman, Charles Bowles, Esq., of Buckland,
Lymington, Hants, at which house, as you state, she died; and in no way
related to Mr. Lisle Bowles, though, as he has more than once told me, he
delighted to imagine that he was of the same family as well as name.
May I be also allowed to express my regret that a little more extended
notice of the talents and writings of one graced with no ordinary gifts; of
one, too, who was to Robert Southey in his latter years of decay of mind
and body the dearest friend, the most tender nurse, as well as loving wife,
had not been given in the pages of the Guardian , a newspaper so able and
so candid in its literary capacity.
Would that in this rough world of ours there were more such gentle spi-
rits as her whose death, though patiently waited for after many years of
bodily weakness and suffering, and full of Christian hope, is greatly
mourned by her godson and cousin, C. S. F.
CONVOCATION.
To the Editor of the Guardian.
Sir— *\\ hen an increase in the number of working clergy appears proba-
ble (now that the matter is taken up by Convocation), it is well to call
attention to everything which (when duly considered) may tend to hasten
this, improvement.
The lists of deaths, then, in your columns and others, show how very
many of these working clergy now pass away at an early age (between
thirty and fifty ), most probably, in almost all cases, from very hard work
in populous parishes. This should be considered, and have its effect.—
X am, Sir, your obedient servant, A C.
July 28, 1854.
rp .7 p /» 7 f w ”fr ixkj x uuiuuio no a|/puavu
lo the Editor of the Guardian, preceded its actual arrival; but all doubts on the subject were removed by
Sir In reading the very admirable report of the Upper House of Con- appearance towards the end of May, and its gradual increase in virulence
vocation, und their suggestions with regard to the Church service, there is fhe middle of last month. Wednesday, the 14th of June, was ap-
one poin t which seems strange. pointed by the Governor to be observed as a Fast-Day, and the churches
In No. 3we have this suggestion—“ A service, with sermon or lecture, on that day were crowded; the chapel on the Codrington estate was
preparatory to the administration of the holy communion.” Have we not thronged within and without. The number of deaths in Bridgetown gra-
suph a service already? One is sorry to seem to cavil at a document not ua hy increased till it reached a maximum of 340 in one day; after which
Unfairly styled “one of the most able and important papers ever put it as gradually declined till the present time, when the reported cases of death
forth ;” but alterations in our service, for the sake of alteration , had surely ? re nofc more than two or three in a day on an average.* But its decrease
better be avoided.—l am, yours, &c., A Country Curate. * n own has been accompanied by a fearful increase in the country. It has
To the Editor of the Guardian.
Sir The remarks of your correspondent “E. S.” on the intended Idte-
ration of the services demand a hearty greeting from Churchmen. He
rightly remarks, “ Either alter the present order for daily morning and
evening prayer, or use it as it is.” But why need it be altered at all? We
may adhere closely to the very letter of the Rubrics, and yet not jumble
three separate services into one on Sundays, and two separate ones on Wed-
nesdays and Fridays, a custom which Archdeacon Thorpe justly likens to
the boy who recited all his prayers on Saturday night that they might not
ba neglected during the week.
Surely it was intended that matins on Sundays should end with the
anthem, and also on all other Litany days, and that the Litany should be
sung or said after Morning Prayer (not at Morning Prayer as is now
generally the custom) upon Sundays, Wednesdays, and Fridays,” &c., as
the Rubric commands.
We are not aware that any individual indulged in that strange conglo-
meration of services now so prevalent, till the Puritan times; those gentry,
considering, like the heathens of old, “that they should be heard for their
much speaking,” and, accordingly, supposed that, the longer the prayers were,
the more effective they were likely to be; aye, and great were their endea-
vours to get each separate petition of the Litany merged into one long, cold,
spiritless prayer. 6 ’
Why, then, should we hesitate to rid our Church of this innovation?
An alteration like this would hardly be sufficient to offend even that pe-
culiar class of individuals the weaker brethren. Nay, would they not be
glad of it? Why are invalids, and those who cannot keep up their atten-
tion long, to be deprived of absolution and public worship on Sunday
monimg from the length of the three services in one, sermon besides?
Perhaps it may be partly owing to this system that the most important
pan of the service on Sundays is so often left out—l mean the Holy
Eucharist; instead of its being administered every Sunday and holyday, as
our Reformers intended it should. Should the anti-rubrical wishes of the
Bishop of London become generally adopted, our Prayer-book may as well
share the fate of Cranrner, and our loved Church merge into Dissent and
extempore prayers.—Your obedient servant, R R K
July 31, 1854.
P S. I need hardly add that the separation of the services., has been
tried in many of our metropolitan and country churches with the greatest
success.
DISSENTERS’ MARRIAGES BILL.
To the Editor of the Guardian.
Sir I perceive that the Dissenters have obtained leave to introduce a
bu. into Parliament to free themselves from the necessity of Laving their
banns of marriage published before the guardians of the poor.
I do not grudge them this freedom, if they wish to connect themselves
closer with their natural friend and ally, the Registrar-General and his
deputies.
But I do hope that some Churchman will be found in the House of
Commons, or at any rate some Bishop in the Lords, who will insist that
this publication of banns of marriage before the guardians be abrogated
entirely, and that the clergy shall be no longer compelled to receive as
legal evidence that a marriage may lawfully be solemnized, a document
mch Dissenters are to be allowed to repudiate. Ever since the trial at
Liverpool, the clergy have felt they had a grievance. Now is the time to
procure its remedy. Let Dissenters, if they please, solemnize after their
own way their marriages by permission of the registrar; but let no banns,
save those published in the Church, be compulsory upon the clergv. No-
thing short of this ought to satisfy us.—Your obedient servant, *J. B.
COLONIAL EPISCOPAL SALARIES.
To the Editor of the Guardian.
Sir— There is something mortifying to a Churchman’s feelings in the
handling of a Church question in Parliament, and this is particularly the
case with respect to the debate on the Bishop of New Zealand’s salary.
There seems to be an invincible apathy about parliamentary and political
Churchmen on these occasions, which cuts from under us any hope we may
have harboured of “ better times” for the Church in that “ mixed” multi-
tude of faith. The whole question was turned into a “ pounds, shillings,
and pence” matter, and even Mr. Roundell Palmer did not lift the subject
from the sole consideration that a Bishop who had done good service in the
co.onies had been deprived of his salary, without a footman’s warning, for
r.o ostensible reason except that the mother country could not afford to pay it
any longer; its payment never having been specifically challenged by Mr.
J. Hume or the member for Lambeth! But the personal injustice to the
Bishop of New Zealand is not the whole question, or half the ques-
tion, and this it is that I complain of, that no Churchman within
m walls of Parliament can be fifund to state the grievance in its
integrity; that is—that the British Government, having assumed v *
the sovereignty of the islands of New Zealand for its own political CtLal jj£ JO t,
national ends, employed, under the Queen’s sign manual, a Bishop of the *
National Church to evangelise the people of those settlements; that this ■ _.r. -. 1 -
able and devoted man faithfully fulfilled his mission, and, after twelve years WEDNESDA Y A UGUST 2 1854.
of devoted service in the Church of God, through perils of war and sea, J ’
e leaving a contented, happy, and Christian people behind him, returns to TITT? PUPHPTC a r™vw
it his native country, for a short respite from his labours, to meet ingratitude Anil* xuhruxi.lo J.U UUiM V UUAIiUJN.
and injustice at the hands of that Office which was the means of bringing We trust that, after the beginning which has been made, we
y him out of a sphere of life which would doubtless have placed him in the may now, without being thought dreamers, hope to live to see
~ highest position in the Church. So that what he has done for religion, for the day when the Church of England will be allowed by her
j Clvll * sa /: 10n ’ f ° r his country’s extension, in bringing the Gospel to a savage jealous protectors to have an assembly which shall really feel
! hr JL.
the cheek of every Churchman who was absent in this debate ought to i? U y i there is no prejudice under heaven bke^ a
1 tingle with shame, as did many a Churchman in reading it.—l am, Sir, ®.° oci . English one ; and of such a kind is the prejudice in
f your obedient servant, Not an M.P. * e minds of many powerful men and parties against the meet-
i July 31, 1854. in g °f a revived and reformed Convocation. But practical
, sense and practical proof that people know what they are about
I THE SYDNEY CATHEDRAL, have often before now had a wonderful effect even on English
To the Editor of the Guardian. prejudices; and we cannot but hope, for the honour of our na-
‘ Sir—When I left Sydney in May, there was an attempt making to raise tional intelligence, that it is not absolutely closed against such
J 10,000/. for the cathedral, a sum nearly large enough to complete it. A appeals in favour of the claim of the Church to have a voice in
gentleman offered to give 500/., if only nineteen others would follow his her own concerns. But even if this is still delayed, and more
example. An active Churchman, who immediately set to work to find the time must yet be given before the nervousness of the public
requisite number to support the proposal, had already secured seven or mind can be reconciled to the great innovation of a thin* being
rn ’r, , e T C K ted get T eral T 5 bUt l iU “ was donein one 'vay, the right and solemn way, which thing isalready
feared that the number could not be quite made up. Now, as there was rlnno In fiffw nmi a J , & . J
no limitation with regard to time or place, it has occurred tome that half- ““ ,r TV . “7? ° r fn
: a-dozen subscribers to that amount may be found in England to make up WayS ’. .; the proceedings of the last meeting of Convocation,
the deficiency, and so the plan may yet succeed. May I beg leave to make even 111 present unsatisfactory state, and with its crippled
known the above fact through your columns, and to request that you will powers, were enough to justify all the earnestness with which
r at the same time lend the aid of your own pen in the good cause. tae subject has been pressed on the public attention.
L Presbyter Australiensis. Ehe reports of the Committees, which, though they have yet
to be discussed and sanctioned, were received and commented
! THE CHOLERA AT BARBADOES. may be said to be almost the first formal and official docu-
To the Editor of the Guardian. ment ema nating from any who had authority to speak for the
Sir—Your readers may, perhaps, be interested in reading an account of Church, respecting her wants, and the means of supplying
the cholera, as it has appeared in Barbadoes. The rumours of its approach them. These reports have called attention to a number of
preceded its actual arrival; but all doubts on the subject were removed by important points, with a force and weight which could never
its appearance towards the end of May, and its gradual increase in virulence belongr to the instances, however strong, of individuals. Every-
till the middle of last month. Wednesday, the 14th of June, was ap- body lias felt that much wanted doing to fit the Church for
pomted by the Governor to be observed as a Fast-Day, and the churches the position she ought to fill in our modern society ; Bishops
Th' P 'V“ Wi f ate was and Archdeacons approved or expressed their wishes in
tmonged witlnnand without. The number of deaths in Bridgetown gra- ri i nr „ at , . i ur .• . ,
dually increased till it reached a maximum of 340 ia one day; after which Char ? e ’ s P eake f rs , were ur S ent a ‘ P« b hc meetings private
it as gradually declined till the present time, when the reported cases of death members suggested or recommended, or even brought in bills in
are not more than two or three in a day on an average.* But its decrease * ar .???. * ever 7 one dl d it on his own authority and re-
in town has been accompanied by a fearful increase in the country. It has s P on sibility; no one had a charge and commission from the
not yet reached the north of the island, and its ravages are most fearful in Church, or any one representing the Church, to turn his
the southern parish of Christ Church, which is most densely populated, thoughts to any of these pressing questions, or give his delibe-
and which, when last I heard any report, was losing one hundred rate advice on any of these imperious needs. Now, such dele-
a day. I am somewhat underrating the case in saying that gates have been set to work. They have had a trust committed
Bridgetown has been decimated by it, and, should it continue to them and a duty imposed on them, and what they report of
with unabated violence for a few days longer the number of deaths will be the wants of the Church is stamped, though not yet with the
fully one-tenth of the whole population of the island. This estate, the hiahpqf mithoritv wifh * rWroo nf rmhlm
proceeds of which form the munificent endowment of Codrington College, Xmnifv authentic
has suffered for about a fortnight, and the deaths already amount to 40 in solemnlt y such as n 0 documents on the subject have yet
a population of 600. The disease attacks people in various ways; as far P°^ sse ; .
as I can learn diarrhoea is the only invariable symptom; some linger for a „ ~u , s as distinctly placed on record before the
day or two, but most are carried off in a few hours. Every morning we English Church, that she is at this moment greatly deficient
awake in the expectation of hearing of the death of some one whom we have * n the ministerial agency that she employs. The truth is ac-
seen in perfect health the day and almost every day our worst fears knovvl edged, that, in point of fact, a great part of the
are realised. The horrors which we daily witness, or hear of, are beyond population “is such as, in some degree, requires to be
description, and almost beyond belief. Christian burial is, in most cases, “ dealt with in the same manner as that which is adopted
quite out of the question. Different plots of ground are chosen, two or “by our missionaries in foreign lands:” and hence it
three for each parish, and there the corpse is interred within a few hours follows, that there must also be a body of clerey who
of the person s death, without any religious ceremony, without even being cbnll "hp lIPp micclnnorme
inclosed in a coffin of any kind, but wrapped up in a tarred sheet. As y , ; ‘‘r, ? tbclr . '! ork and organisation,
there are three clergymen connected with this estate, things are better here J hat ’f to ‘he character of this missionary body, the Lower
than in any other part of the island; but it is not always possible, even leaves lor deliberation; but it marks as a want to be
under these favourable circumstances, to ensure anything like a decent ? u PP lied > the absence of all preaching, specially directed to the
ceremonial. Some few have been burled at night, when it was impossible ignorant and unreclaimed masses ; and recommends as one
to say the grave service over the body; and I have once been obliged to wa 7 of supplying the want, the appointment of preaching
stand by the grave with my Prayer Book in the hand which held my stations in large places or districts, and of special preachers,
horse’s bridle, and an umbrella in the other hand to screen me from the sent by the Bishop, to visit at certain seasons the great towns
scorching heat of the sun, and not a person in the ground beside myself to of the diocese, and hold services for the purpose of “ awakening”
assist at the interment. The first time I performed the service whilst the religious interest and zeal; and as another, the turning
body wrapped up m this manner was lying by the side of the grave, I felt, to account the naves of our Cathedral and other lar^e
femiliar may SUPP ° Se ’ ” 81g n<>W Churches, for the purpose of preaching. It need not be said
I came out to preside for a time over the institution which some of yonr , that ! JOth tbeS ! ex P edie "‘ s liave been found necessary and are
readers will have heard of as the nursery of the West Indian Church; but ar B e v llse . ( ~ ak)road * report of the Upper House ven-
I have been obliged to dismiss the students, and the vice-principal and my- on still more definite recommendations as to the different
self, instead of teaching the living, are occupied in burying the dead. I s ol^B agency to be created in order to meet the case. It
fear there is too much reason to think that there may have been cases of recommends, first, an attempt to secure, in a more general and
persons being buried alive. Two instances have come to my knowledge in systematic way than hitherto, the co-operation of the
which this was all but done; and in one of these cases matters had gone so laity of the Church, in the works of Christian charity,
far that the lid of the coffin was prevented from being fastened by the lift- in the school, in visiting the sick, and generally in
mg up of the hand of the supposed dead person The utmost precautions preparing the way for the pastor’s work; secondly, the
are taken to secure a proper depth for the graves, but, in spite of all cases creation of a special order of deacons, from whom less should
have occurred where dogs had scented and got access to the dead bodies, hn ovnooiml tU of ,
Many instances have occurred in which the dying have been left alone and iT“ Ibterary attainment than at present,
even been shut up in a house, because all the neighbours were afraid to go !• ho should be distinctly bound, at least for a specified
near them; and one instance, in an adjoining parish, took place, in which tline .» f' o subordinate duties and functions of the diaconate,
a man thus left had died in his own house, and no one being found to bury serving under a priest thirdly, the placing, in the midst of the
him, the magistrate gave orders that the house should be set fire to, and cr ovvded populations of the large towns, a number of clergy-
it, and all that it contained, body and all, were burned. ,n en, who might, with a view to “ economy, Christian fellowship,
For the moral effects of this plague I may refer your readers to “ and united prayers and action, live together, minister in one
Thucydides. All, and more than all, that he describes applies to the pre- “ central Church, and with due regard to ecclesiastical rule and
sent case. Add to the horrors of his description the fact, that neither will “ authority, labour round it.” The report also that
parents administer proper food and medicine to their children, nor hus- “ good would result, if those who were gained by These means
bands to their wives. The negroes, in many cases will not take care of « as converts were associated together in closer religious fellow-
themselves or their nearest relatives. I have myself witnessed the case of u ori /| n r.fmn &
a man, upon being asked how his father was, answering, with a langh on , P andact on than h f been common among us”-* source
his face, that he was at the point of death; and another case where, upon ~ mutua * strength to each other, and n leaven to
my asking a woman who had just attended her sitter’s funeral, who she J. l}ose a ™una Finally, the committee of the
was, I was informed by her that she had lost her the day before; Epper House coincide with that of the Lower, in
upon which she laughed as if the subject was only fit for merriment. recommending, for the missionary work of the Church among
Poor creatures! The little natural affection which they have, at the best ie home population, “ the organisation of a body of clergy,
of times, seems all to have forsaken them now. Indeed, it is wonderful that u for the special work of preaching and exhorting, under the
there is so much humanity remaining in them after the horrid treatment they “Bishop’s sanction, throughout his diocese.” Whatever be
have experienced from their masters in the days of slavery. And yet there is the immediate fruit of these reports, it is a new, and we may
another siae of the picture which it is pleasant to look at ] mean the in- S ay, scarcely hoped for advantage, to those who have advocated
creased attendance at church. The society s chapel, which was always well on pxfpnslnn nnrl nnnllpntmn nf i r
attended, has now no room for the crowds that flock to it every Snndav; 7 F 7
and yesterday, of the GOO people who were there, there were 150 commu- Church, to have henceforth the authority of such recom-
mcants. The number of applications, too, for baptisms of children, and for IJIe r " ( - latl0 , ns ,0 tJPP eal to - .
marriage licences from those who are living together unmarried, is greatly laer e is another point ot great practical importance, on which
increased. This, at least, shows that there exist among the people some some k°ld outlines of change are offered for the first time in
fears which tend in a right direction, and which encourage the hope that we something like an authoritative shape—the fuller adaptation of
may yet see the beneficial effects of this awful scourge of the Almighty, in the Prayer-book and its various services to congregational
increasing habits of piety and virtue amongst the inhabitants of this wants. The Prayer-book is too deeply rooted in the devo-
island. tional habits of the English Church to give way to any other
I feel that such statements as I have made require some voucher for basis for a form of worship; but the most is not made, and
“ y " ame ’ M tb fuU P e, p missio “ t 0 cannot be at present, of the Prayer-book and what it contains.
P cli^t„ n y CoSjuTIO. 1854. NICnOLAS 1 ° COCK - recommendation, and the liberty to use separately, ser-
» Since writing, the mmiGers have again increased to an average o, 60, owing to timf" “T l °
a heavy fall of rain, and consequent damp, which seems to he very trying to the Lini£ . ec * together at one fixed time, are m themselves such
constitution of the negroes. as, if realised, would be gladly hailed by many a parish
610
[Aug. 2,
THE GUARDIAN.


clergyman and rural congregation. And, further, the
Prayer-book, though it contains the materials, does nott
contain the forms of an adequate number of services, for th®
vast variety of occasions and great differences of conditiom
which a Christian life and a Christian population must present..
Indeed, there is one portion of Christian worship, and that ai
very important one, of which the Prayer-book can hardly b®
said to contain even the materials; we mean, metrical psal-
mody : for the Prayer-book, if one of the two versions of the
Psalms are usually bound up with it, contains but one me-
trical hymn. The reports of the two committees lay consider-
able stress on filling up these wants, and throw out sugges-
tions towards doing so. On the value of these suggestions it
is hardly the time to speak ; it must depend at last
on the wisdom and spirit with which the proposed new
forms are constructed; and the experience we have had
in modern times in this matter may certainly make
us feel anxious. But the task, we hope, if it ever has to be
done, of carrying out these recommendations, will not be in
exactly the same hands as have drawn up our late occasional
services ; and we still trust that we have seen the first step
taken, though it is but a step, towards removing the reproach
which, to a certain degree, justly lies on us, of not providing,
as freely as other Churches do, for the devotional wants and
tastes and aspirations of a manifold population.
Besides, however, the reports of the committees, there is
another portion of the proceedings, which is an omen and prece-
dent of the best augury. We mean the request to found and
the offer to endow a new see in Cornwall. Hitherto, the few
English sees which have been added to those of former
times have originated not with the Church, but with the
Minister of the day, who has only consulted with Parliament—
or, if with the authorities of the Church at all, with them only
as individuals —about the location of the new bishopric,
and the source of its endowment. A Cornish clergyman
has the honour of having revived the more primitive way of
raising and providing for a Bishop’s throne, and has come
straight to the Church for its sanction and approval. It is
satisfactory to see that his offer has been frankly and gratefully
accepted. It remains to be seen, what other authorities have
to say on the subject; but we trust that it is not too much to
hope that no obstacles will be thrown in the way of the design.
But, at any rate, the last meeting of Convocation, if it were
memorable for nothing else, would deserve to be remembered
for the readiness with which it received the proposal to found
a new sort of English Bishopric—one more after the type of
the see of Bishop Wilson than of the princely thrones of
Durham and Winchester, but one which the interests of the
Church imperiously require, and one which we hope will be
the first of a long array, erected in times that are coming,
after its model.
THE CATHEDRAL REPORT.
The long-expected report of the Cathedral Commission —
or, rather, an instalment of it—is now before us, and demands
our careful attention. So much mischief has already been
done by irrational legislation on the important subject of which
it treats, that we cannot too urgently impress upon all persons
who understand it, and are interested in the proper settlement
of it, the duty of letting their opinions be known.
The first portion of the Commissioners’ Report contains no
recommendations of future measures ; these it is thought may
be more advantageously proposed when the facts of the case
shall have been deliberately reviewed. Accordingly the Com-
missioners have devoted their first folio to a statement of the
exact constitution of the Cathedral with a comparii-
son in each case between their present organization and theiir
original form. To our own readers much of the informatiom
contained in it will not be new, if they remember the detailed
examination of the subject comprised in a series of articles,
which appeared in this journal two years ago. But we have
reason to believe that the ignorance of the political world, not
excluding that part of it which nominally belongs to the
Church, is profound. Few persons are to be met with in
general society who are aware even of the fundamental distinction!
in the origin of our cathedrals between the Old and the
New Foundations; or if they have heard the names, sup>-
pose the difference to have more than an antiquarian
interest. They will see from this Report that a knowledge
of the constitution of the several Chapters is essential to
a fair estimate of the manner in which their duties are
now fulfilled. What is of much more consequence at present,
they will learn that the documentary annals of the cathedrals
present to us two ideas of such institutions, so widely different,
that any confusion between them in the minds of ecclesiastical
reformers will infallibly destroy the consistency of their work.
We do not mean to say that it is impossible to gain hints from
both classes, or to deny that our age may possibly require yet
another modification of the cathedral system; but we contend
that no success can be expected from the attempt to mend a
machine, the principle of whose construction is unknown to
the restorer. The well-meant schemes of Cathedral Reform,
which have been broached in Parliament during the last few
sessions, have seemed to us inadmissible, chiefly on account of
this radical defect. It might be urged, perhaps, in behalf of
their authors, that the information required for a due discharge
of their duty was not accessible to an ordinary inquirer; he
could not be expected to make a tour of England to get a
sight of inedited statutes, or to study the folios of Dugdale
and Wilkins, in preparation for a debate, where no one would
appreciate his labours. This excuse will be no longer produci-
ble ; for the elementary knowledge, in which our legislators
have hitherto been deficient, maybe obtained from this Report;
it will serve for a “ Child’s first Manual,” we hope, to more
than one Parliamentary student of the history of ecclesiastical
institutions.
Some of its statements we may take occasion hereafter to
examine in detail, and to point out some few omissions, which
may be noticed in its plan. It will be better, for the present,
to confine ourselves to the broad question suggested by the
historical portion of the Report, viz., whether the future
character of our Cathedrals should be mainly of a diocesan, or
of an independent type.
The older Chapters—to use the words of the Report—“ had
“ their origin in the early missionary colleges, each consisting
“ of a Bishop with his associated clergy (living together and
“ maintained by common funds), by means of which the in-
“ habitants of this country were converted to the Christian
“ faith.” In this view of a Cathedral the Bishop is the central
figure. The members of the Chapter are in some sense his
officers; his Archdeacons have their place of right among the
Canons ; he takes part in the celebration of holy offices in the
Church; he acts in all diocesan matters with the advice of his
capitular council; for the promotion of learning and the over-
sight of schools, he has recourse to the Chancellor of the
Cathedral; its Dean and Canons are missionary preachers, whose
services he can command for the general good. It follows, of
course, that he must have the appointment of all the principal
officers of this his own church. He cannot rule his diocese with a
senate elected in opposition to his will, or conduct his govern-
ment with incapable ministers. If he be a true Christian pastor, it
will be his care to fill the stalls of his church with all the best
and most eminent ecclesiastics of his diocese, while the great
officers (as it were) of his state will be chosen with special
regard to the duties which they are severally to discharge.
Here is a grand outline of a system of Episcopal Government,
totally different from that now prevailing among us, which
leaves the Bishop in isolated dignity, at one time powerless, at
another despotic—everywhere responsible, nowhere efficient
for his work.
The other aspect of the Cathedral system is to be found in
those called Conventual , and more definitely in the churches of
the New Foundation , which grew out of monasteries previously
suppressed. Here the collegiate element predominates over
the diocesan. In some of them the Bishop is not recognised,
except in name. He cannot even hold an ordination in what
is called his own cathedral without leave from the Dean : he
takes no part in its services; in practice he is often thwarted
by its dignitaries. The truth is, that the society to which he
is attached was founded for a different purpose, and for one
which induced its founders oftentimes rather to claim exemption
from Episcopal control. The objects of an independent reli-
gious community,—the promotion of learning,—the celebra-
tion of perpetual worship,—the maintenance of an ascetic
discipline and a holy rule, had no bearing on Diocesan organi-
sation. And when the Prior and his monks were turned into
a Bishop’s Chapter, they retained in their various traditions,
and in the express words of their statutes, many hindrances to
the successful working out of the idea which they professed to
realise. Yet their own designs were not less legitimate than
those of the older bodies. Each presents to us a noble idea—
the one of an efficient Diocesan Council and Administration—•
the other of a religious society devoted to the promotion of
learning and devotion in a Christian land.
Recent legislation, we need hardly say, has ignored both
ideas alike, or has recognised them only to involve them in
hopeless confusion. Well may the Commissioners observe that
their difficulties are increased by the peculiar circumstances in
which the Cathedrals are now placed on account of recent
enactments. Honorary Canons without a single prerogative
except the privilege of paying a tax on their appointment,—
Canons reduced in number, and at the same time permitted,
in defiance of common sense, to reside on distant benefices—
Archdeacons nominally added to their Chapters, but without
place or vote in their councils—uniform regulations for
societies still retaining statutes of totally diverse complexion,—
these and a hundred other anomalies result from the ridiculous
legislation of the last twelve years, of which the only real pur-
pose was to filch some revenue for parishes too needy or too
selfish to provide for their own pastoral cure.
The time has now come to ask whether cathedral reform is
any longer to be understood as signifying everything else but
what its name implies. Then will follow the question as to the
nature of the reform to be attempted—in fact, as to the choice
between the two kinds of institutions we have described, or
possibly a combination of the two, with such modifications of
the statutes as the circumstances of each case may suggest. If
the commissioners will only keep this inquiry distinct from the
other and not less important question as to the provision for
parochial destitution, we shall have some hope of improving
the deplorable enactments of recent years. So far as this
Report goes, we watch their proceedings with interest and
with hope.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
There is a story somewhere or other of a beneficent fairy
who offered a certain king the choice of three advantages for
his country ; that it should produce gold for fifty years, silver
for a hundred, or iron for ever. The monarch was wise, and
chose the last, prefering to sudden and temporary riches the
gradual development of permanent wealth. A choice, some-
what similar in character, is now being extended to Australia;
and we should not be at all surprised if it were followed by a
similar result. Already the throng of independent gold-
seekers is diminishing, deterred from pursuing their toil
by the difficulties and dangers attendant on it. Com-
panies are being formed, capital employed, machinery brought
into use, and aqueducts constructed. All these will tend to
make labour subservient to capital; the isolated gold-seeker
will probably become as rare as the prairie-hunter of North
America; and the mines will in time be worked on the same
principles as the copper-lodes of Burra Burra, or the coaLseams
of Durham. On the other hand, an alternative is offered, of
which the colony will ultimately, if not immediately, avail
herself.
Young as South Australia is, it has had its full share in the
ups and downs incidental to the early days of a colony.
Under the Gawler Administration it was nearly starved to
death in its cradle —under that of Grey it was fostered into a
condition of healthful promise, which remained unchecked
under the rule of Governor Young, until the discovery of gold
in the adjoining provinces of New South Wales and Victoria
robbed it for a time both of its population and prosperity. A
new Governor has just been nominated in the person of Mr.
Lawley, on whom will devolve the responsibility of establishing
on a sure basis of prosperity its reviving fortunes, and of con-
ducting them to a higher pitch than they have yet attained. If
ever South Australia becomes a great and prosperous country,
she will date the commencement of her rise from the present
time.
Owing to the energy and enterprise of a private individual
a discovery has been made which promises all the blessings,
without the miseries, of gold. At his own personal risk, and
nearly at the loss of his life, Mr. Cadell has solved the problem
that he started, and proved the existence of a broad highway
leading into the richest portions of the interior for a distance
of at least 2,000 miles. The river Murray has been ascer-
tained by him to be navigable by steamers, having a shallow
draught of water for 1,200 miles from its mouth ; and but a
small outlay would be required to open up the water communi-
cation with the interior for an additional 700 miles. Nor is this
all, for amongst the numerous tributaries of the Murray
are two very considerable rivers, the Darling and the
Morumbidgee, the banks of which are already teem-
ing with sheep and cattle. All the wool has hitherto been
annually carted down to Sydney and other ports at vast
labour and expense; whilst wheat has only been grown to
supply the wants of the different farms. Now that new
facilities are offered for finding and reaching a market, pro-
duction of all kinds will be increased; and so alive are the
Governments of New South Wales and ,Victoria to this/that
they have already reserved on their respective sides of the
Murray tracts of land, 500 miles in length by two in width,
which are to be tabooed against squatters, and thrown open to
competition. The same course will doubtlessly be followed by
the Government of South Australia, which will derive even
greater advantages than her neighbours from Mr. Cadell’s dis-
covery. Within her limits is the outlet of the waters of the
Murray, and there, ere long, will be founded the Liverpool of
the Antipodes. As we expect that the banks of the Murray
will soon become more popular than the diggings, so do we hope
that the man who has opened up this source of honest wealth
will not remain forgotten or unrewarded.
ilojstgcrtpt.
Wednesday Morning.
Both houses were engaged last night with a variety of business. In the
Upper House the Earl of Clarendon stated that the Government had taken
steps to provide for the safety of merchant vessels passing through the Gut
of Gibraltar, in case of attack from the Riff pirates.
The Medical Graduates Bill passed through committee with some amend-
ments; whether these included the insertion of the Scotch Universities
moved by the Duke of Argyll, reporters say not. But the bill itself had
a narrow escape. Lord Wyndford and the Earl of Derby objecting to
partial legislation on the subject. A motion of the former to defer the bill
three months was only lost by 17 to 15.
The Burials Beyond the Metropolis Bill was read a thiid time and
passed, after a statement by the Bishop of London as to the disgraceful
way in which interments were often conducted in unconsecrated cemeteries.
The rev. prelate said: —
“ A very respectable clergyman in the north of London informs me that at pre-
sent there are sometimes as many as forty or fifty cabs and covered carriages con-
taining the corpses of deceased persons, waiting at the gates of unconsecrated
cemeteries for burial, and the corpses themselves are interred in a most hurried and
indecent manner. Frequently one of the undertakers or labourers employed at
the burial-ground puts on a surplice and reads such portion of the service
as he thinks necessary. I must say, too, that the scenes which occur at
one or two of the cemeteries are of the most disgusting character, and I
think, too, it is not unimportant as a question of public health, that it
should be known that cabs are very commonly used for conveying dead
bodies to these cemeteries, no matter what contagious disorder may have
been the cause of death. The cost of the commonest funeral conveyances, cheap
as they are, have been found too dear for these poor people. I cannot but express
my deep regret that no measure has been adopted this session to put an end to
this state of things, which has already produced great moral evils, and which, if
it be allowed to continue, will produce very great social evils. I know only of one
effectual remedy, which I have already suggested to her Majesty’s Government,
and that is, to introduce a measure giving the Secretary of State power to compel
all parishes in which the burial-grounds have been closed by his order to provide
new cemeteries for the poor of their parishes.”
The Earl of Aberdeen said the Government were fully alive to the im-
portance of the subject, and every endeavour would be made to remove a
state of things disgraceful to a civilised country.
The Earl of Shaftesbury made a formal motion for returns, in order to
reply to the attack made upon him by Lord Seymour the previous evening
in the Commons, when, among other things, the latter noble lord declared
that a statement the noble earl had made upon his honour, as to what took
place at a meeting of the Board of Health in 1851, was false, for he was
not present. Lord Shaftesbury now adduced the evidence of the other
commissioners, the Secretary and the Ministers, to support his word, which
he now made upon his honour in the most solemn way a gentleman could
do, and under the obligation of his oath, that he was present. There was
hardly an assertion in the speech of the noble lord that might not be met
by as flat a contradiction :
“They show the spirit of the man, the character of his charges, and the whole
system of the attacks on the board. He was pleased to reflect very contemptu-
ously on myself, and all my public actions and opinions. Partly through indif-
ference, and partly through inability, I shall not endeavour to make any reply. It
may be an infirmity, or even a vice, but so the fact is, that I do not much care for
the opinion of ray contemporaries, and nothing at all for the opinion of posterity.
What I do care for is the conviction that I have, by God’s blessing, ‘ done my duty
in that state of life to which it has pleased God to call me,’ and that conviction
cannot be taken away either by Lord Seymour or the House of Commons.”
The House of Commons, at the morning sitting, was occupied, in com-
mittee, in considering the remaining clauses of the Common Law Procedure
Bill, which passed without observation, and the Bills of Exchange (No. 2)
Bill. Mr. Geach divided the house on a motion to postpone the latter bill,
but was defeated by 56 to 30.
In the evening, Lord D. Stuart moved a series of resolutions setting
forth the conduct of Russia in neglecting the obligation contracted by her,
under the treaty of Vienna, to maintain the necessary works in the channel
of the Danube in order that no obstacle might be experienced in the navi-
gation of that river, and that, by the convention of 1831, it was agreed
by Great Britain to secure to Russia the payment of a portion of her
old Dutch debt, in consideration of the general arrangements of the
Congress of Vienna, to which Russia had given her adhesion; and, in
conclusion, declaring the opinion of the house that, Russia having with-
drawn that adhesion, and those arrangements being through her acts no
longer in force, the payments from this country on account of that debt
should be henceforth suspended. Sir Wm.. Molesworth opposed this repu-
diation of debt on behalf of the Government, and after a brisk debate the
motion was negatived by 57 to 5.
Sir William Molesicorth moved for leave to bring in a bill to make bet-
ter provision for the administration of the laws relating to the public
health:—
“ It was, he said, framed in conformity with the opinions expressed by the house
on the preceding day. These he understood to be, that there ought to be a depart-
ment charged with the administration of the Public Health Act, of the Nuisances
Removal Act, and which should also have the general charge of the health of the
country. The opinion of the house he further gathered to be that the Board of
Health was not a good one for carrying out these objects, and that there ought to
be some one in that house responsible for the administration of the law, and capa-
ble of explaining it, but that such administration should not become a portion of
the duties of the Home-office. He proposed to constitute the new board precisely
as the Poor-law Board was constituted. Its president should have a seat in the
house, and should have a secretary and an under-secretary. The superintending
inspectors should be salaried officers of the board, and therefore incapable of
taking private work. He proposed to give Mr. Chadwick compensation to the
almount of 1,000/. a year, and paid a tribute to the valuable services which had been
rendered by that gentleman.”
The proposal received the approbation of Lord Seymour and Mr. Henley
and the bill was brought in and read a first time. Lord John Russel
promising full inquiry into the subject next session.
At the commencement of the evening L,ord Palmerston , in answer to Mr.
Frewen, explained that the release of Mr. Jeremiah Smith, late mayor of
Rye, from prison, to which he had been sent on conviction of perjury, had
been granted on account of the precarious state o&that person’s health, and
not on the memorial of the jury.
Sir John Raldngion gave notice of his intention to call the attention of
the house to the circumstances under which Mr. Lawley had been appointed
Governor of South Australia, and he asked the Government for an early
day for the purpose. Lord John Russell named Monday, but expressed a
hope that more precise information would be given as to the object in view.
Mr, Worthy regretted that an earlier day had not been named, as he was
611
THE GUARDIAN,
1854.1


JP THE GUARDIAN. (- AITG 2 ,
prepared to meet and confute the gross calumnies circulated against his
friend and relative.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer , in reply to Mr. Danhy Seymour, said
that it was the intention of Government to propose to Parliament to build a
new gallery for the national collection of pictures, but the consideration of
the subject was not sufficiently advanced to enable him to say whether
the designs would be open to public competition. He added that there
was no intention to give the Royal Academy notice to leave the apartments
hitherto lent them.
The Crime and Outrage (Ireland) Bill, the Militia (No. 2) Bill, and
several others, were advanced a stage.
At the morning sitting to-day, the Hon. Arthur Gordon, son of the Earl
of Aberdeen, took his seat for Beverley; He was introduced by the Chan-
O Donnell was at Cordova, on h,s way to Madrid, at the invitation of sister and two daughters of the late Mr. James Simpson, in consideration
uspaitero and the Junta. ol his eminent services in the cause of education: to the widow of th®'
A second edition of'the Morning Chromde : reports the new Spanish late Sir Harris Nicolas, in consideration of his many valuable contributions
Mimstry to be composed as follows-.-Duke of Victoria President of the to the historical and antiquarian literature of this country; to Mr. Alario
Council; o Donnell, War; Alonso, Justice; Lujan, Public Works: Santa Alexander Watts, in consideration of his services to literature and to art,
Crus, Interior; 5101h.r0 Finances; Salazar Manne; Pacheco, Foreign to Dr. Hincks, in consideration of the eminent services he has rendered ta
Affairs. 0 Donnell and San Miguel are made Marshals. history and literature b his antiquarian researches , and es ial , in cnn .
A Consultative Junta has been formed at Seville. General Serrano has nection with the Assyrian and other Eastern languages ; and to the
been appointed Capta.n-General of Andalusia. daughters of the late Mr. Joseph Tucker, in consideration of their father’s
A second edition of the Times gives the following despatch : services as Surveyor of the Navv for eighteen years. 80?. a year to the
Vienna, luesday Evening. Rev. Villiam Hickey, in consideration of the service which his writings,
“ The evacuation of the Principalities by the Russians must be for published under the signature of “ Martin Doyle ” have rendered to the
lue inuuuug siLLiug uj-aay, me xioiwvrniur uoraon, son or toe Earl « The evacuation of the Principalities by the Russians must be for published under the signature of “ Martin Doyle ” have rendered to the
0 u el f e +T’ F°° 1 lb Se "* T “ vei ! !y ' He " i ! s ‘“H'riuced by the Chan- strategic reasons, as no official communication of the fact has been made call ‘e of agricultural and social improvement among the people of Ireland-
cellor of the Exchequer and Mr Haytert Sir Joshua Wahnesley pre- b the Czar to the Austrian Government. and to the daughters of the late Dr. M’Gillivray in clSation of the!
sented a petition from the fehendan Cub against intemperance, and .. Tlle Dipiomati.t Gortschakoffhas been informed that after the late father’s contributions to the service of natm-al Mstory ' 507° a yea!
paying t rat, as a reme y, tic ”tis l Museum and similar institutions Emperor of Austria has joined the army no farther negotiations relative to to the following ■ —To Mrs. Hogg, the widow of the Ettrick to
Eussian Gwernment .Whies Bil'and wiL iTsiC °°'" °“ “ io " rf the »»carried on. the widow of thfL Mr. Joseph If
Hussmn Government becuiities Bill, and "as lett sitting. Montenegro is m a very disturbed state. his personal services to literature, and the valuable aid derived by the late
The rumoured appointment of Archdeacon Beresford to the vacant “ Generals Hess and Kellner arrived from the army to-day. Sir Walter Scott from Mr. Tra n’s
Bishopric of Kilmore is confirmed by the Ttmes tins morning. “ The Oesl. Correspondent has the following authentic intelligenceprosecuted under Sir Walter’s to Mrs. W wMow Tsir.’
Two of the dange'ous cases on board the (loop ship Lot d Auckland “‘On the 27th July the Russians quitted, and the Turks occupied. Bowditch, the celebrated African traveller, in consideration of her con-
taminated fatally on Monday Frateschti. P ! tributes to literature; and to Mrs. Gen. (wdow of the late Dr
entered Plymouth Sound. Major-General Sir Harry Smith boarded her « . The Russians were retreating in forced marches to Schelava, and Glen, m.sslonary to the East for nearly thirty years) in ewridn^
**,*!? rooming, and expressed his disapprobation of the conduct of the thence to Poposoti and Obilescbti, with all their artillery and waggon tains, turn of Dr. Glen’s services to biblical literature'his ti-ansla on of
soldiers, who are neither clean nor well-d.sc.pl,ned; a court of inquiry .. . The Bucharest hospitals were to be evacuated by the evening of the the Old Testament into Persian; and 401. a year to tlm of the
subsequently sentenced two of them to impnsonmen . All the water is to 29th. ° lute Mr. James Kenny, in consideration of his iterarv talent
be started and while the troops and crew are on board the Andromeda .. * Qltenitza was evacuated by the Russians during the night of the On Friday the celebrated palm tree was removed from Mr Lodge’s
hulk the Lord Auckland is to be cleaned and purified. 27th. after the lele du pent and the bridge of boats had been destroyed. Hackney, to the Crystal Palace The root was enclosedT a sHong box
Queen Mane Amel.e the Duke and Duchess de Nemours, with other .. > The Turks imme dia t ely occupied the island opposite Kalarasch. "bout twelve feet square. There were twenty horses Tut to the Trackto
atA D^lus e e tZ, " ’ ™ “" P th " "* ldence “,‘ 0n the 28th ’ ***** «my quitted Kalugereni, and in the »ove it; and at Z foot of Sydenham Hill tK» a relay TtLty
portant ra^right^^esTion^iscd^twLu^lessrZ
zis ~»* “- «• »■- jtrr vf FH • ***
assXTSSiX £"T.i ■ •' *•
tionwas one, Lord St Leonard’s said, of a right of property in this Consols opened on Wednesday at 92* to f and, after slight fluctuations Wll | P ™ b T * v ? ]T e . Thursday,
country; and it was, without doubt, contrary to the intention of the Legis- ° f A per f C 0 e o n h dU ™/ he W<?6k ’ C l°Z\ at the sli § dl8< ? 0n Wednesday, at his house near London,
lature that a foreigner should import his work into this country, and then pn ? S ° f to % money, and 92j to | for the account. At one o’clock Jn \!ht f . His pecu J iar taste M wa s for conchology,
claim a couvridit Ricordi had therefore no leual oower to aUvn to-day we have the following quotations, on . he published some works, besides contributing largely to a
ll S 1 P f 4 ' g Bank Stock. 210 Three per Cent. Reduced Annuities, 92HHi; Three scientific journal, of which he was one of the proprietors,
copyught as regarded this country, and, the assignment not being valid, per Cent, Consols Annuities, 92f | Three-and-a-Quarter per Cent Annuities On Friday nieht between rinp ind fpn if hiinrr a i ir -
the right of action was not maintainable, and therefore the judgment of 2| 3; Long Annuities, expire sth January, 1860, 4g; Ditto 30 years, expire took place on the river • the c/ and ten ’ Jt bel "S ' ei J daik ; a c #) on
the Court of Exchequer Chamber ought to be reversed. sth 1860 ’ 4 « ’ India stock ’ 223 ? Consols Account, 92* #i; Exche- wZ? -? ? “ver ; > the Star, a Gravesend steamer, and the Sybil, a
The cross-examination of Colonel Garrett was continued by Lieutenant S Bonds Sip’ vlt 3 Pm ‘ par;1 DiU ° s °°'’ 3 Pm< Par; Ditt ° Small ’ 4 1 ‘ t? th T’ ° f th ?
Perry at the court-martial yesterday. The Colonel, in answer to a num- Th t r . Q . . . . ’ n , ® vesse^s bad passengers, and
her of questions denied an r recollection of comnlaints made to bl™T J h ° tra nsactions in Foreign Securities remain unimportant;— a ensued to get off the Sybil on to the Star, during which a woman
ner ot questions, denied any lecollection ot complaints made to him by Mexican 3 per Cent,, 24J; Spanish Bonds, New Deferred; 3 per Cent., IBJ fex an d ber child fell overboard and were drowned.
Lieut. 1 eiry, besides the one he mentioned previously. One other occa- div.; Spunish Committee Cert, of Coup not funded, 4f ; Dutch Exchange uer An old mon Tn«pnh Vimr ... c , .
sion of a complaint being made, however, he at length recollected; and on Cent ' 12 GuiI -’ 61 60 £ ex div - 5 ditto 4 P er Cent. Certificates, 92. * 2 nf T r- , '’ j G , ln »’ a " in e-cooper, waiting for the tram
hearing it, he assembled the junior officers, and desired that the annoy- Gold is o*3B per cent, dearer in Paris than in London, and o'B2 per with his lees'Tver °\ feunday e . venin g» sat do ' vn
ances should cease, reprimanding in particular one officer. Major Maxwell c<mL in London than in Hamburgh. The returns of Friday show a further and his foot was torn from hk W 1 n + S T? me f carr,a S es drove
was then called, who said Lieut. Perry had only made three complaints, decrease of 190,195?. of bullion in the Bank. 7 uT l g ‘ taken^ to a . hosp M and the
nrt* reported Colonel- “ “ e, “ !oned * “ d °“ eWaS “ * ° f “ the Corn-ma.ket on The cholera has appLtd to ’wZ have
wee th and a
not, at the Royal Barracks. Dublin, order Lieutenant Dunscombe. in my presence - p ° et m pnCeS mamtaiD ed. Ihe following are this morning’s the disease.
to be brought downstairs from his bedroom, between one and two o’clock in the q aota t lons :— Some twentv nersons hppn „, n ‘ nnß i v ;n of TT„n u *• .
morning, before the colonel of the regiment, yourself, and guests, in his shirt ? Amberg. Hotting. Bost. and E. June., 5 London, Brighton, and S. Coast, 107 a - 3 - ™t- 1 um S ° nS h .? n sendUS V l]l at by eating
“ The court was then cleared. On the re-admission of the public, it was an- Caledonian, 64 London and North Western, 106 5# Polcea meat. 1 hey were all violently sick and purged, with cramps, while
nounced that the question should be put. Eastern Counties, 13f Ditto, Eighths, If 8 2 some appeared to he going fast into collapse. The mayor held an inquiry
. T Witness-The reprimand was so strong that the only instance of a practical Edinburgh Perth, and Dundee, 26 London and South Western, 85| f into the matter, and the conclusion come to was that it was damsons tn
joke thatl know of was the instance alluded to. But I never ordered Lieutenant Great Northern, 88 | Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolns 23J-4 eat united in hot ™+i .. , , 1 IL 1 ® da "B ei f us to
Dunscombe to be brought out of his bed. So much the reverse, that I went out- Ditto, A, Stock, 72 Midland, 671 2 ea t potted meat in hot m eather, as it is extremely difficult to tell whether
side of the anteroom to prevent the young gentlemen bringing him in. The ante- Ditt0 ’ B » Stock, 127 North Staffordshire, I3f lfc be sound or not. The maker was advised not to make any more for the
room is close to the bottom of the stairs. The door was burst open by the party Great Western, 79* 8f Oxford, Wore, and Wolverhampton 33 present, and promised to comply
carrying Mr. Dunscombe, and I was carried into the room along with them. Lancashire and Yorkshire, 67| West End of Lond. and Crystal Palace 5* Some Inerfbr j • u -i
There Avere several civilians in the room. Colonel Garrett was sitting with his Ditto * Fifths, 12f York, New., and Berwick 76 5 ’ 2 luc ™ er ’ ma f c nes Avere ignited by the sun in a shop window at Bury
back to the door in an arm-chair. He must have heard the laughter, but to the London and Blackwall, 8f York and North Midland, 56 A 6 one day lately. Ihe flames were at once extinguished,
savimr fiml’ j!T mbe a PP ealed to me, Lines Leased at Fixed Rentals.-East Lincolnshire G. 6 per Cent. 135* 6 • Lon LaSt W6ek thunderstorms we fe general over the southern and western
d ' d b ur y’ aad Southend, li; Wear Valley Guarantee (Fper Cent., 3o|. G ’ k ° n counties The spire of Withington church, near Hereford, was much
stairs, and Mr. Dunscombe appeared in his uniform in the anteroom about five E ref^ ence Shares.—Great Northern, 5 per cent., redeemable at 10 per cent in J uied b 7 lightning. At Bristol a man painting Avas struck by the
minutes aftenvards. tlrV hSSa Western, convertiblesandredeemable at 4f percent. ; Manches- electric fluid, the shock producing temporary paralysis. In Llandowror
‘‘lt being now four o’clock, the court adjourned until to-morrow (this day).” Consolidated Pistol Carmarthenshire, there were floods, and afarmer was'drowned ; at Mydrim
“It being noAv four o’clock, the court adjourned until to-morrow (this day*) ” t6r i V,- 6 • d ? and Lincolnshire, Lew 107, 10 ¥ |f ; Midland Consolidated Bristol
, r „ , ~ , , r , v and Birmingham, 6 per cent., 1341-.
Mr. Garden was tried on Monday for the assault on John Smethwick T v
one of Miss Arbuthnot’s defenders, it was not charged that he struck the 100* ; Grand Trank SJalwesJerTJf 1 cSoid?
blow which disabled the man, but that he was privy to the assault, and 18 ; D i tto Bonds * Payable 735., Avithout option, 99|; Namur and Liege (Avith Intel
furnished the means of doing it. The jury acquitted him ; and the ver- * ; West Flanders, 3|.
diet was received with cheers by the spectators in the court, and waving s
of handkerchiefs by the ladies. Before sentence being passed Mr. Carden W ¥ d
addressed the court, not in defence of his conduct, but in explanation of J t
some points. The chloroform he purchased, he said, in case such extraor- p
dinary excitement might produce hysterical affection in the lady, and with , ere 5s at Portsmouth an Egyptian yacht, the Fez Djehad , in which s'
this vieAV it Avas that he ascertained from Dr. Forsyth the way to adminis- a . fevv da^s a S° arrived P 1 Kami Pacha, eldest son of the late Pacha of "1
ter it. In passing the sentence of two years’ imprisonment Avith hard on a visst to En S Jand and France to collect presents for his bride, t
labour for the abduction, the judge commented severely on one point, that . dau S kter of tlle Sultan of Turkey. The young prince had scarcely got
Mr. Carden called on his accomplices to fire upon their opponents, an order nt ° Jiaid)our w hen he heard the first news of the death of his father; he
which happily they did not obey. 18 consequently remaining in strict seclusion, and will return as soon as p
Near Liverpool, last night, there was an accident on the Lancashire and P 0s r sibl ® to < aa
Yorkshire and East Lancashire Railway. An excursion train was com- -p Tl 6 subscr iptions raised to do honour to the memory of Lieutenant
polled to stop while a luggage train was being shunted from the main line, Bellot to 2,000?., of which 500?. will be applied to the erection of
and while it was thus at a stand the Parliamentary train, from Liverpool a S rai ) lt( : obelisk j on the wharf of the Royal Hospital at Greenwich • the sj
to Preston, came up at a brisk pace, and ran violently into it, knocking the £ om . missdon ers of that establishment, and the Lords of the Admiralty, ni
passengers from their seats, and severely bruising the heads, faces, and bavmg S l y en tbeir unqualified sanction for the monument to be so placed.’ tl
limbs of several. The driver, fortunately, had time to put on the break, J ie ren j ainder op the money will be equally divided among his five sisters. dl
otherwise the consequences might have been tremendous. The two trains • P osition of tke obelisk, on the right bank of the Thames, Avill be a con-
left the Liverpool station within five minutes of each other. spicuous one to all passing up and down the river. Mr. P. Hardwick, R.A.
Cholera has been making progress during Jthe last week, and has carried bas kindly undertaken to superintend its erection. * ’’ 0 i
off its 133 victims. These were rather more than half on the south side Tbe annual conference of Wesleyan ministers (the old connexion) R
of the Thames, the rest occurred in various parts of the metropolis. The kaS bBen sittin S at Birmingham. The attendance numbered about 400. of
majority of the cases denominated Asiatic occurred in filthy places. There Tk ? Kev *. Jokn Farrar » Classical Tutor at the Richmond Theological Insti- ol
is one peculiarly painful case mentioned. The son of a blacksmith died on tution ’ Richmond, Surrey, was elected president for the ensuing year by a qi
Monday at Stepney, the father died at Rotherhithe of the disease next day, large ™ a J orit . v over two other “ preachers,” named for the office. Mixed hi
the mother on Thursday morning; and her .sister, who attended upon her] com . mittees of daymen and ministers, engaged in arranging the financial hi
went to her own home, in St. George’s East, and there died on Friday. The* afiairs of the bod F> re P orted that all the connectional funds, notwithstand- gc
general mortality last week was high, 1,219 deaths; this is forty above the lllg ie late Peuds and stations which have characterised Methodism co
average. manifest an upward tendency. The Wesleyan extension fund had reached gi
85,000?., half of which will be devoted to the formation of a chapel exten- te,
The following are the only telegraphic messages published by the Times slon fund ’ with a view to the erection of plain, useful structures, free from re:
this morning. They are dated Paris, yesterday evening:— d ebt. < The Reform Methodists announce a rival conference, to be held in to
“ The Moniteur contains intelligence from Bucharest dated the 28th B ™ in S kam a week hence. th
ultimo, according to which the Russian army had evacuated its position at ra- ev,kHands , of Salisbury, formerly a missionary in the West wl
Kalugereni. Its vanguard was at Schelava, two hours distant from Bu- lndies ’ su £gests the application of the fibre of the plantain and banana to fui
charest. The artillery, baggage, and hospitals, in three long columns were I • of P a P er - He has seen good paper made from the plan- kn
inarching towards the Sereth.” * tam Bbre - coi
[The Paris and Vienna correspondents of the Chronicle also concur in ranlgtm tooToTlf! 11"“ a " d 208 W ° men **" ° f “1
asserting that the Russians are retreating, and that the Ottomans have On UU :kt 1U ~, . , dl£
advanced to Frateschti.l ' . , onda J a public meeting was held m the Egyptian Hall of the Man- abi
“ Madrid, July 28.—The National Guard is already composed of nine I°J establl f me .f of an as / lum for L the permanent care of a e
battalions and two batteries of artillery. A decree of the Junta suppresses the l’ efo .™ lty > or accident . are hopelessly disqualified for ilh
the Royal Council, and another calls into force the Press Lew oM 837 *? t ' 1 • SubsCn P tlon 1 s were a ™»unced to the amount of 2,0007. of
The decree wind, exiled the Infante Don Enrique to WleL as pj “ aa n— d to sail this month;_ the
revoked. The Junta has also abrogated the pmhibTtion Z on the West India Docks, 7th; TL
the circulation of certain foreign journals Another decree orders r H.S.W., the Ha.erfoo, fiom Plymouth, 24th; the hel
the arrest and trial of some of tC ex-Minis eA and a -so?f i f TJ Docks, sth; the (Poofon Woo, from the of!
General Quinto, the es-£overnor of Madrid." It is said that the For Portland Bay, the Clara, from Plymouth, Bth; the
Ministers are concealed in the hotels of the diplomatic body. Queen bart Ijondon :D ' ,cks ' 9th i for Ho- Un
Christina has not as yet left Madrid. M. Salamanca has been arrested. Zealand the ’ 5 Un
and imprisoned at Albacetc. Generals Lara Mat.i-v-Alos oo.t *. runbson, irom diito, 10th. wls
who commanded the tooops in the late straggle, have ttieir choice either to to eaeli *nf T? 0 year . lave *>een thus awarded: 1007. a year wei
retire to a fixed place of residence or to leavf the country It Ts said wido L M FMMb Bond Head 5 to Mrs - Moir, tior
General Blaser’s force lias ‘pronounced’ at Baylen. On the 23th General Lang, fifty K the
two other people were drowned. As a woman at Ilfracombe was frying
some meat, the lightning descended the chimney and killed her. Two
men took shelter under an elm at Heavitree, near Exeter; one was killed
on the spot by the lightning, his companion was hurled several feet, and
severely burnt. At Rewe, near Crediton, several persons were knocked
down, but soon recovered the shock. At Shobrook, near the same place,
tweke sheep were killed simultaneously; while at Honiton, the provincial
papers say, at flock of thirty-one, which had gathered round a large oak for
shelter, were struck dead together, and the tree shivered to atoms. At
Tiverton chimnies were knocked down, and slates driven from the tops of
the houses.
A man named Kennett, who had been an inmate of Buckland workhouse,
was recently discharged, and took the road to Folkestone. He had with
him a razor, and, after proceeding some way, he inflicted on.himself several
\younds in the face, breast, and neck, from which the blood floAved copiously,
till he fell down exhausted in the road. Here he was found next day by a
labourer, but he refused to answer any questions, and, after being repeatedly
spoken to, got up, walked away, and was hot seen again until Saturday
night, Avhen he was observed sitting on some fagots near the road. He was
then taken to the Elham Union, where he soon became insensible, and gra-
dually sank till he expired.
A series of lectures are being delivered at St. MartinVhall, Long-acre,
on educational subjects, in connection with the Educational Exhibition of the
Royal Society of Arts, at the same place. On Monday the Rev. C. Marriott ,
of Oriel College, Oxford, delivered one on “ Digestion of Knowledge.” The’
object of the lecture AA r as to show that it was not only necessary to teach a
quantity of rules, but also to turn these over in the mind in their different
bearings, if we would make them of any real use. Rules might be taught,
but would soon be forgotten if they were not explained, turned over, di-
gested ; and when this was done the actual rule might be forgotten] but
could always be remembered on reflection. The rev. lecturer proceeded to
give an instance of what he meant, in that rule of evolution which
teaches that the first figure of the divisor should be doubled; the
leason being that, in the opposite process of involution the number
to be squared was multiplied twice by the first figure. These
things, he said, were explained more now-a-days than they were
when he was a child, but there was abundant room for carrying it still
further. Many people know many things, but do not realise them; they
know distances on a map, but do not realise them till they travel over the
country Avith their maps. He Avould always recommend the use of maps
in travelling, and if you do not travel, to get a map of the immediate
district of your home. Realities should be used to assist the digestion of
abstract knowledge, and a night on the top of a coach, or on the deck of
a steamer, was very good for the digestion of Astronomy. Practical
illustrations ot rules would be especially useful in answering the questions
of the young, Avho should not be discouraged in asking questions,
though they should be taught to wait with patience for the answer.
The different branches of study might be used with great advantage to
help digest each other. The young learner might be aided in his digestion
of history by a little geography, and even a little fiction. In conclusion
the rev. lecturer made some observations on the present position of the
University of Oxford. He had, he said, had a long acquaintance with that
University, and he AA r as sure there was no body of men in Oxford who
wished to see the Dissenters, as such, kept down ‘in intelligence; but there
Ayere men there who thought it was necessary that the great public educa-
tional body should be able to teach something as truth, and not to have to
say of everything, however sacred, merely “ This is what some men have
thought/


1854.]
THE GUARDIAN.
618
Hatu aim police*
Vice-Chancellor Sir W. P. Wood gave judgment on Friday that tlhe elec-
tion of the Rev. Mr. Morse to the living of St. Mary’s, Shrewsbury,, by the
trustees of the grammar-school, was void. The act under which the elec-
tion is regulated requires the trustees to choose a candidate who, ceteris
paribus , is the son of a burgess of Shrewsbury, and was educated in the
grammar-school of the town. Mr. Morse was not such, and another candi-
date was; Mr. Morse has therefore been restrained by perpetual injunction
from doing anything in respect of his election, and another election is or-
dered to be proceeded to forthwith.
The Victor, the Catharine Charlotte , the Froyjo , the JEgir , and the
Dido, Russian prizes, were condemned in the Admiralty Court on Monday.
One of the directors of the St. James’s Club, Mr. T. B. Stevens , passed
the Court of Bankruptcy on Friday, with 6,000/. liabilities, incurred princi-
pally on account of the club.
Sarah Ann Thakrah , the wife of a fireman, recovered 400/. from the
Great Northern Railway, at the Derby assizes on Friday, for herself and
child, on account of the death of her husband, who, from the absence of
any signal, drove his train into a coaUtrain in the Clarborough tunnel,
causing his own death.
The Wormhill poachers concerned in the affray by which Mr. L. G. Bag-
shawe met his death, viz., John Turner , James Walton, Wm. Dawson,
Wm. Taylor , Benjamin Milner, Thomas Wilson, and Thomas Dodds , have
been committed on charge of murder by the local magistrates. On Satur-
day the whole number, seven in all, were indicted for murder at the Derby
assizes. The evidence given detailed the affray. It appeared that Mr.
Bagshawe’s party commenced the attack, Mr. Bagshawe himself rushing
first into the water, when he was knocked down, and lay insensible for
some time in the water, his head resting on some weeds at the side. The
surgeon stated that the unfortunate man’s skull was fractured from side to
side, probably by one very violent blow. Mr. Justice Maule directed the
jury, before they convicted the prisoners, to satisfy themselves that the
blow by which Mr. Bagshawe died was inflicted with the view of resisting
their lawful apprehension. The jury, it appears, were not satisfied on that
point, and returned a verdict of acquittal. The prisoners were then ar-
raigned upon a second indictment for attempting to murder one of Mr. Bag-
shawe’s party, but the solicitor for the prosecution declined to go on with
the case, and a verdict of “ Not guilty” was therefore taken on this charge
also.
In valuing between ingoing and outgoing incumbents, the custom in
Lincolnshire is to allow only for such repairs as are necessary to make the
parsonage-house habitable. When the present vicar of Killingham, in that
county, the Rev. Mr. Jenkins, succeeded the prior incumbent, the Rev.
Mr. Hodge, the valuers agreed upon a small sum of 18/. as dilapidations,
which was paid. Afterwards the new incumbent called in an eminent
ecclesiastical valuer of London, who estimated the dilapidations at 109/.
In consequence of this he has now brought, at the Lincoln Assizes, an
action against the first valuers to recover from them damages for negligence.
The judge, Mr. Baron Parke, directed the jury that they had to consider
whether the valuers undertook to do anything more than value according
to the custom of the neighbourhood (which, however, was undoubtedly a
wrong principle of valuation); the jury thought they did not, and so had
not broken their contract. The verdict was therefore for the defendants.
A young woman of twenty-five, described as having great personal
attractions, has brought an action against one of her neighbours at the
Lincoln Assizes, to recover compensation for injuries caused by an act of
his by which she has become a cripple. The lady, Miss Lydia. Bill, kept
house for a farmer, and was riding to market on a quiet pony when the de-
fendant, another farmer, standing in his garden by the road side, threw a
rhubarb leaf at her in fun, which startled the pony so that he threw the
lady, causing injuries to her spine, by reason of which she can only move
now with crutches, trailing her limbs after her. The defence set up was
that the spinal disease, which did not immediately follow, was induced by
improper medical treatment; also, which was uncontradicted, that the lady
was riding in a very negligent manner, in a man’s saddle, with one foot in a
stirrup. The verdict was for the plaintiff, 600/. damages.
John Alder son, sexton, and Hewison Marshall, bell-ringer of the church
of All-Saints, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, with Ann A Iderson, mother of the
sexton, were indicted at the Newcastle assizes, on Friday, for stealing lead
from the coffins of the dead in the vaults of the churchyard. TAie two
male prisoners had been seen by the neighbours in the churchyard several
times when it was nearly dark, apparently “ cutting down gravess,” and
they carried something heavy away. Large quantities of lead weree subse-
quently found in the house of a u marine store-keeper,” which at the tonal was
sworn by a coffin-maker to have belonged to the coffin of one of the persons
who had been buried two years ago in the vault of the churchyard!. The
lead had been offered for sale by the sexton and the female prisoner, his
mother. The jury found all three guilty, and the judge sentenced the
sexton and his mother to 18 months, and the bell-ringer to 12 months
imprisonment.
By means of the electric telegraph, Franz de Haas, a Dutchman, nvas ap-
prehended in London last week, suspected of having murdered a fmmily of
five persons on the morning of Thursday se’nnight, at the Ringdijlh, near
Amsterdam. The master of the house was a vegetable dealer, aand had
gone early to market, whilst the rest of the family were yet in bed. It ap-
pears from the statement of one of the servant girls, that on hearing a knock
at the door she went to open it, and was immediately felled to the ground
by a blow from a hatchet ; then, going into the house, the miscreant beat
the woman of the house and the three children about the head with the
same instrument, and from a cabinet stole a sum of ab >ut 500 guilders.
From information subsequently obtained by the burgomaster, the London
police were communicated with, and de Haas was apprehended in a street
in Whitechapel. He was brought up at the Mansion-house, and has been
sent back to Holland.
At midnight of Thursday a cabman named Gathercole drove through the
middle of Co vent-garden market, with three persons on thereof, two inside,
one on the box, and two on the springs behind. The exploit, which was
thought to be the subject of a wager by some parties at Evans’s, was per-
formed before the police could overtake him. Next morning he was fined
2/. for the freak.
Two men, one of them a lawyer named George Campbell, the other an
old man of 60, named John Challis, were found by the police on Wednesday
night in an unlicensed dancing-room, disguised as females. They were
brought up at the Guildhall, and have been remanded on bail.
Joseph Ralph, a prisoner in Lincoln Castle gaol, has escaped. On
Thursday evening the prisoner, who is a Catholic, was vi -ited by th e priest,
and when that gentleman left the prisoner the warder neglected to lock the
cell. The prisoner appears to have noticed the circumstance and taken ad-
vantage of it. He made up his bed so as to look as if some one was in it,
and passed out. The turnkey, on looking in upon his last rounds, was
deceived by the appearance of the bed ; meanwhile the prisoner had made
off, and no trace has since been found of him.
The villain Harvey, the Torrington murderer, has confessed his guilt.
He states that he left his home with the hammer in his pocket with the
determination of murdering some person, and that upon meeting a girl
named Mary Allen, he resolved in his mind to kill her, but that he missed
the opportunity. Subsequently Mary Richards came in his way, and then
he determined she should be his victim. He is to be executed on Friday.
The Spaniard, Miguel Yzsguierdo, condemned to death for murder, has
gained his probable object in refusing to speak; his sentence has been com-
muted to transportation for life.
Near Coventry the down line of rails on the London and North-Western
Railway was being repaired, and all trains went for some distance on the
up line. From some neglect as to the points, the 7.30 train from Bir-
mingham on Thursday morning ran into the line under repair, and came
into collision with a train of ballast -waggons standing on that
line. The driver was killed instantaneously, and the stoker had his leg
cut off, and has since died; one of the railway police also received
severe injuries. Some of the passengers were hurt, but not seriously.
From an inquiry since held by the coroner, it appears clear that the acci-
dent was caused by “ the points” being out of order. A witness, an officer
of the railway, found them after the accident dirty and unoiled; they would
not, as they ought, close themselves after being opened. There was a
pointsman, named Walker , on duty at this part of the line, whose work it
was to see to the points, keep them clean, oil them, and examine them
after the passing of each train. Ho had, it appears, grossly neglected his
duty, and the jury, after a lengthened investigation, returned a verdict of
manslaughter against him. He has since been committed to take his trial
at the Warwick assizes.
The young Liverpool merchant, George Foster , accused of stealing a
1000/. bill of exchange, which was found in his possession, has been ac-
quitted. There was no evidence to prove when or how the note had been
stolen or how it came into his possession, beyond his own statement that he
had it from a man he only knew by sight.
Glasgow is at present infested by a. gang of housebreakers. They com-
menced operations at the beginning of the fair, and have become so daring
as to pursue their avocations during the day-time. Several have been ap-
prehended, and have turned out to be ticket-of-leave convicts.
Mr. Jeremiah Smith, ex-mayor of Rye, lately in prison on conviction of
perjury, has been liberated by order of the Home Secretary, the jurymen
who tried him having expressed their unanimous conviction, from circum-
stances which have transpired since the trial, that he was innocent of any
corrupt motive.
The Commissioners who last year conducted the long and painful inquiry
into the Birmingham Borough Prison (reported at considerable length incur
columns at the time), Mr. Welsby, Captain Williams, and Dr. Baly,
have made their report. They observe that at common law a gaoler has no
authority to punish a prisoner at all; but by statute he may punish by
close confinement, upon bread and -water, for a term not exceeding three
days. In the Birmingham prison, Captain Maconochie, who was governor
until 1851, introduced other and illegal punishments, depriving the pri-
soners of their bed and of their gas, keeping them from exercise and from
chapel, and from seeing their friends, and compelling them to stand with
their faces to the wall for all the worldng hours of the day, in some in- *
stances for several successive days. After 1851, Lieutenant Austin re- |
tained nearly all these, and introduced also the “ punishment jacket,”
w r hich the commissioners describe as “an engine of positive torture.” In
one case the commissioners distinctly state that a prisoner was driven to
commit suicide from the punishments he underwent. Edward Andrews, a
lad of 15, was put to the crank-machine, at which he would have to exert
a force equal to one-fourth of the ordinary work of a draught-horse, the
average estimate for a boy out of prison being about one-tenth of that. He
was deficient in his task the first two days, and, therefore, fed on bread
and water only, not receiving it till night. A fortnight afterwards, for
being lazy and breaking the index of his crank, he was put into the “ pu-
nishment jacket” for four or five hours, with bread and water. The same
punishment was repeated two days afterwards for the same offences, and,
when seen by the chaplain, he was “ wailing most piteously,” protesting
that he could not do the work, and complaining bitterly of being deprived
of his food. Three days afterwards he was again on bread and water, and
again in two days more with the “ jacket” also, for shouting and using
obscene language in his cell ; and he became so exhausted then in the pu-
nishment jacket that a bucket of water was thrown over him to restore him.
The schoolmaster says he had the jacket again next day, and reeled with
weakness when liberated. On his next offence the governor told him he
should report him to the justices, who have power by law to order personal
correction. On that night he hung himself in his cell—
“ The language and conduct of some of the warders was brutal. One prisoner
on his last arrival (for he also died in the gaol), was hailed by a warder with
‘What! you here again! I will grind the soul out of you this time.’ The
governor himself told one of the prisoners ‘he would grind him to the dust.’ A
prisoner, partially insane, shouted when the jacket was put upon him, and to stop
his cries the surgeon, in the governor’s presence, thrust a quantity of salt into the
man’s mouth as often as he opened it. While Lieutenant Austin was governor,
three prisoners committed suicide, phut the number of attempts at self-destruction
could not be ascertained ; the surgeon made the number of such attempts, and the
frequent sudden demand for his services in consequence, the reason for declining
to undertake a- friend’s practice during his absence. The infirmary was very
little used; two mep known to be ill with mortal diseases were left to die, and
did die, in their separate cells, with no human being present.”
The conduct of Lieutenant Austin in bis office the commissioners pronounce
deserving of the most severe ; and of Mr. Blount, the surgeon, they
say—
“Not only did he witness, apparently without remonstrance or objection, the
almost daily infliction of illegal and excessive punishments, but he himself, in
more than one instance, suggested, and even assisted in, the commission of illegal
assaults upon prisoners. They feel compelled to speak of his conduct generally in
terms of strong condemnation,”
It will be seen by our parliamentary report that the Government have de-
termined on taking legal proceedings against the governor and the
surgeon.
Synonyms of the New Testament: being the Substance of a
Course of Lectures addressed to the Theological Students,
King’s College, London. By Richard Ciieneyix Trench,
8.D., &c. Cambridge: Macmillan and Co.
This is another of the pleasant and useful little books to which
Mr. Trench ever and anon treats us, diversified in the present case
by its subject being found in the Greek language ipstead of the Eng-
lish. Mr. Trench has a peculiar forte for tracing the delicate shades
of difference in the meanings of cognate or synonymous words, as
well as the changes which their meaning has often undergone owing
to change of circumstances and feeling. It is, we must allow, the
natural tendency of a pursuit of this kind to lead to over-refinement,
and something like hair-splitting: and we think Mr. Trench occa-
sionally goes a little too far in establishing minute differences, and
sometimes in attaching too much importance, and even something
like a mysterious meaning, to mere caprices of language. Still,
where he lays himself most open to this almost unavoidable tendency
to exaggeration, he never ceases to be ingenious and suggestive, and
his over-minuteness is far preferable to the opposite error of carelessly
passing by distinctions and thinking of nothing but the modern
everyday use of words, without regard to their original meaning and
history. His present more immediate subject of New Testament Sy-
nonyms is a very important one, and one which he has treated with
his usual felicitous delicacy. In this case it is of the more conse-
quence to have distinctions of this sort pointed out, because it is im-
possible but that the sacred writings will always be really most fami-
liarly known, even to professed scholars, through the medium of a
version which constantly fails, as, indeed, every version must often
fail, to convey the various delicate shades of meaning in the original.
Thus, in our Lord’s threefold question and threefold exhortation to
St. Peter, our translation loses, perhaps unavoidably, the distinction
between <piX&7v and dyavrav, fidaxuv and <roipoolvuv, rendering them in-
discriminately by “ love” and “ feed” respectively. With regard to
the first pair of synonyms, Mr. Trench writes in his best manner;
with regard to the latter his remarks under a subsequent head (p. 95)
are perhaps hardly so happy: —
“ In almost all these passages of the New Testament the Vulgate, by the
help of ‘ diligo’ and ‘ amo,’ has preserved and marked the distinction, which
in each case we have been compelled to let go. It is especially to be re-
gretted that at John xxi., 15-17, we have not been able to retain it, for the
alternations there are singularly instructive; and if we would draw the whole
meaning of the passage forth, must not escape us unnoticed. On occasion
of that threefold ‘ Lovest thou me?’ which the risen Lord addressed to
Peter, He asks him first pt ; At this moment, when all the pulses
in the heart of the now penitent Apostle are beating with an earnest affec-
tion towards his Lord, this word on that Lord’s lips sounds too cold, not
sufficiently expressing the warmth of his personal affection toward Him.
Besides the question itself, which grieves and hurts Peter (verse 17), there
is an additional pang in the form which the question takes, sounding as
though it were intended to put him at a comparative distance from his Lord*
and to keep him there; or, at least, as not permitting him to approach so
near to Him as he fain would. He, therefore, in his answer, substitutes for
it the word of a more personal love, <piXu a (verse 15). When Christ re-
peats the question in the same words as at the first, Peter in his reply
again substitutes his <piXu for the Ayasrf* of his Lord (verse 16). And
now at length he has conquered ; for when the third time his Master puts
the question to him, He does it with the word which Peter feels will alone
express all that is in his heart, and instead of the twice repeated ayu.7ras,
his word is q>iXi7s now (verse 17). The question, grievous in itself to
Peter, as seeming to imply a doubt in his love, is not any longer made
more grievous still by the peculiar shape which it assumes. All this subtle
and delicate play of feeling disappears perforce, when the variation in the
words used is incapable of being reproduced.”
Yet even on this very head, where he has just been so clearly estab-
lishing a real and important distinction, we find Mr. Trench led
away by his love of over-minuteness. Thus he tells us:—
“ When the <piXt7v is attributed to a person of one sex in regard to one
of another, it generally implies the passion of love, and is seldom employed,
but rather dydcrdv, where such is not intended. Take, as an example of
this, the use of the two words in John xi. The sisters of Bethany send
to Jesus to announce that his friend Lazarus is sick (verse 3); no misun-
derstanding is here possible, and the words, therefore, run thus, dv (piXGs
ourhvtt : cf. ver. 36. But where the Saviour’s affection to the sisters them-
selves is recorded, St. John at once changes the word, which, to unchaste
ears at least, might not have sounded so well, and instead of <pnX%7v, expresses
himself thus:
vyurtet M o I nffovg rnv Mdgtfoiv, x.rr.X' (ver. 5.)
We have an instructive example of the like variation between the two
words, and out of the *same motives, at Wisd. viii. 2, 3. At the same
time the qnXuv is not unusual to express the affection between persons of
different sexes, and this where no passion, no honourable or dishonour-
able, is intended, if the case be one where nearness of blood at once and of
itself precludes the supposition of such, as that of a brother to a sister.
* See, for instance, Xenophon, Mem . ii., 7,9, 11, a very useful passage in
| respect of the relation in which the two words stand to one another, and
which shows us how the notions of respect and reverence are continually
implied in the dycovdv, which, though of course not excluded by, are still
not involved in the q>iXs7v .”
Now surely, if all this be true, it is somew hat strange that in the
LXX. we constantly find dyarrciv used to denote “ the passion of
love,” and that, in one case at least, where the merest sene is intended.
Thus W 6 find, Gen. xxix. 17 :—*P dyfoX xooXri tw ihu xa) <r>?
xa.) nydrtnffi M iXyfx h 6vyd,ryu> iSdovX rov A avid. But most remarkable
of all is the case in 2 Kings, xiii. 1: —lytvrJv pird ruvra. xa.)
’AjS iffffa.Xd.ip, vloo Aav)s ddtX<ph xaXn <r<w
Onjudf, xa.) Y\ydrt'/\<nv avrnv ’ Apvcuv vie ; A a,v'i%' So presently after, verse
15:— xa.) ipiffnmv e&vrhv ’ Apvdv p7ffo; piyet fftpodga, on piya, <r« [Tiff os, »
iplffnffiv dur'/]v, vertg tvv dydvrnv, *iv vydvrr.ff sv uvrnv. Here we have
d.ya.ffrci'i and dydien, the latter, according to Mr. Trench, “ purely a
Christian word, ho example of its use occurring in any heathen
writer whatever,” employed in nearly the lowest' use of the proscribed
terms and igus. That the two latter, as Mr. Trench observes,
never occur in the New Testament, and rarely in the-Old, is are-
markable fact, for which he may have given (p. 48) the true reason;
still the passages last quoted are surely fatal to his idea of the ex-
treme purity and sanctity of d.ya.va,v and dyd^n.
The treatment of these synonyms is a good illustration both of the
excellencies and the defects of Mr. Trench’s mode of treatment.
Many of his other distinctions are extremely acute and apposite.
Those on ffritpavos and 'hiding,*, (p. 86), are remarkably good, simple
as the distinction is between the two; so, again, on and
(p. 11). In these, and many others, he performs the useful, though
comparatively humble, task of pointing out important differences,
which would not occur to a mere reader of the English version. But
he often rises above his function; his remarks and illustrations on
ZjnXos and (pdovo; (p. 96) are very good, though one wonders that he
makes no allusion to Butler’s immortal explanation of “ resentment”
and “ revenge,” “ emulation,” and “ envy.” We will refer to only-
one case more, which again exhibits all Mr. Trench’s acuteness,
modified, as before, by a little over-refinement; we wish to send our
readers to the book itself.
“ In conformity with this same law of moral fitness in the selection of
words, we meet with vgopririvuv as the constant word in the New Testa-
ment to express the prophesying by the Spirit of God, while, directly a sacred
writer has need to make mention of the lying art of heathen divination, he
employs this word no longer, but pa.vnviff6a,i in preference (c. f. 1 Sam.
xxviii., 8 ; Deut. xviii., 10). What essential difference between the
two things, prophesying and soothsaying, the ‘ weisagen’ and the ‘ wahr-
sagen’ is, and why it was necessary to keep them distinct and apart by
different terms used to designate the one and the other, we shall best per-
ceive and understand, when we have considered the etymology of one, at
least, of the words. M a.vnvopa.l being from pdvns, is through it con-
nected, as Plato has told us, with pa.'nia. and pa.Uopa.i. It will follow from
this, that the word has reference to the tumult of the mind—the fury, the
temporary madness, under which those were, who were supposed to be pos-
sessed by the god, during the time that they delivered their oracles; this
mantic fury of theirs displaying itself in the eyes rolling, the lips foaming,
the hair flying, with all other tokens of a more than natural agitation. It
is quite possible that these symptoms were sometimes produced, as no doubt
they were often heightened in the seers, Pythonesses, Sibyls, and the like,
by the use of drugs, or by other artificial means. Yet no one who be-
lieves that real spiritual forces underlie all forms of idolatry, but will also
believe that there was often much more in these manifestations than mere
trickery of this kind; no one with any insight into the awful mystery of
the false worships of the world, but will believe that these symptoms were
the evidence and expression of an actual connection in which these persons
stood to a spiritual world—a spiritual world, indeed, which was not above
them, but beneath.
“ Revelation, on the other hand,'knows p nothing of this mantic fury, ex-
cept to condemn it. ‘ The spirits of the prophets are subject to the pro-
phets ’ (1 Cor. xiv. 32). The true prophet is, indeed, rapt out of him-
self; he is ‘ in the spirit ’ (Rev. i. 10); he is ‘ in an ecstacy ’ (Acts xi. 15);
he is iivo ll vivpooros 'A ylov (pigopivos (2 Pet. i. 21), which is very
much more than ‘ moved,’ as we have rendered it, rather ‘ getrieben,’
as De Wette; and we must not go so far in our opposition to
heathen and Montanist error as to deny this, which some, especially
of those engaged in controversy with the Montanists, have done. But
there he is not beside himself; he is lifted above , not thus set beside
his every-day self. It is not discord and disorder, but a higher harmony,
a diviner order, that is introduced into his soul; so that he is not as one
overborne in the region of his lower life by forces stronger than his own by
an insurrection from beneath; but his spirit is lifted out of that region into
a clearer atmosphere, a diviner day, than any in which at other times it
is permitted him to breathe. All that he before had still remains his, only
purged, exalted, quickened, by a power higher than his own, but yet not
alien to his own; for man is most truly man when he is most filled with
the fulness of God. Even within the sphere of heathenism itself, the supe-
rior dignity of the to the pdvns was recognised, and recognised on
these very grounds. Thus there is a well-known and often-cited passage
in the Timceus of Plato (71 e., 72 a. b.), where exactly for this reason
that the pdvrts is one in whom the powers of the understanding are sus-
pended, who, according to the derivation of the word, more or less rages ,
the line is drawn broadly and distinctly between him and the ;
the former is subordinated to the latter, and his utterances only allowed to
pass after they have received the seal and approbation of the other. The
truth, which the best heathen philosophy had a glimpse of here, was per-
manently embodied by the Christian Church in the fact, that while it as-
sumed the to itself, it ascribed the pavrsviffPai to that hea-
thenism which it was about to displace and overthrow.”


[Aug. 2,
disastrous- effects of past conviction on the tone of its society. He was
not without personal experience of its working, as the following
anecdote from Hobarton will show:—
“ At one evening party we were at, after a pic-nic, we noticed a rather
tall, gentlemanlike man, leaning against the mantel-piece of one of the
rooms alone, and not joining in any of the amusements, but in an evening
dress, quietly looking on, arid apparently in thought. A number of the
officers of the 99 th and of the Fantome were present, and we could not
find out who he was, till, to our astonishment, just as we were going away,
we found out that it was Pate, the man who was coward and villain enough
to strike the Queen.
“ This man was an officer in the Regiment, and was transported
for his crime, and came to be assigned as a prisoner—servant to the host of
the evening, who, I believe, knew something of his family at home, and re-
ceived annuities from them for him; so his situation as a servant was but
nominal. The host of the evening would not tell us who he was, knowing
that we, as officers of her Majesty, would not remain in the room with such
a man. Mr. regretted he had not given him a hint to vanish, but
that was too late, and we called no more on the' gentleman who gave the
party. It is an odd coincidence that I should have been near Piccadilly
at the time this attack on the Queen took place, and have afterwards mot
in the antipodes, at an evening party, the cowardly fellow who made it.”
The exemption of New Zealand from this original taint must
always furnish one ground of superiority to, that colony over its
Australian rivals. The general predominance of educated settlers
will still farther distinguish it from other British possessions, in which
colonial life has been influenced largely by the characteristics of
American society. It is, perhaps, too sanguine to hope that the
vigorous action of the Church may be another proud distinction of
New Zealand, although its history up to the present time might seem
to justify the expectation. If on this latter head there be any dis-
appointment, it exists chiefly in respect to Canterbury, whose
founders were certainly pledged to the establishment of more com-
plete ecclesiastical institutions than the colony has yet attained.
Mr. Cholmondeley is of opinion that their promises were founded on
a blunder, and that the high price at which they sold their land for
the purpose of fulfilling them, was injurious to the interests of the
colony. The land, he thinks, ought only to bear the burden of those
expenses, such as road-making and surveying, which are of direct
service to the land itself. Charges for institutions, whether of reli-
gion, education, or police, are more properly defrayed by an annual
vote. In fact, however, the Canterbury colonists, even onthis theory,
have no great wrong to complain of, inasmuch as their payments for
land have not been more than sufficient for the material operations
which it required; indeed, it may be doubted whether the unfortunate
travellers between Lyttelton and Christchurch would not have pre-
ferred even to give a higher price for their farms on condi-
tion of enjoying a practicable road. That the attempt to se-
cure religious unity by a scheme of colonization should fail,
will surprise no one who has studied the history of the
North American States—some of them amongst the most
intolerant colonizers of which history makes mention. It only
remains for those loyal members of the Church of England who
joined the Canterbury Settlement with a hope ofreviving home asso-
ciations in a distant land, to provide as best they can for the present
needs of the Church, and with increasing prosperity to contribute
for her more permanent support. This, however, they are not likely
to do, if Mr. Cholmondeley’s account of them is true:—
“ The truth at present is, that there is no religious character in the
British colonies; and those are especially indifferent who, in the old
country, belonged to the Church of England. I remember, when the New
Zealand census-paper was sent round, asking a servant of mine how 1 was
to fill up for him the space left under ‘ religious denominationhe hesi-
tated and smiled. ‘ Church of England?’ said I, suggesting what he had
been. 4 Whatever you like, sir,’ was the reply; ‘we always used to go to
church in the old country, but here we be kind o’ weaned of it.’ I cer-
tainly felt myself reproached for having brought a man and his wife, with
a large family, into a wild and lonely place, where there was neither church
nor clergyman, any more than doctor or shopkeeper. I afterwards en-
deavoured to anoint my conscience by reading a part of the Church
service on Sunday mornings. The man and his brother, and one or two of
his children, Ccame twice; they made no secret, however, of their opinion,
that pig-hunting was a better way of spending a New Zealand Sunday.
As for praying in a private house, only their respect for me prevented them
from openly telling me that it was 4 no good.' I may say that the family
were very good Church people in England; that they'' were in the habit of
reading the Bible to themselves iu the solitude of Banks’ Peninsula, I
Icnoio.
44 Often when at church in Lyttelton or Christchurch, I have been struck
with the English character of the attendance at divine worship; I mean
the pretence and hypocrisy of the whole thing. They go to church ’ and
take their dependants, because it is an 4 item’ in the bill of respectability.
There may be other inducements, but this is the main reason. How often
lias it occurred in England, to one who finds himself in a church crowded
full of coats and bonnets, that God is not to be found in that way at all;
that we are only cheating ourselves when we try to suppose so. Why, it is
worse than heathen idolatry. I have seen God worshipped in a Buddhist
temple in China by striking a bell with a hammer, and by offerings of in-
cense, oranges, and scraps of food saved from a scanty beggar’s meal. I
did not feel inclined to groan or laugh in spirit, but I have done so, to my
sorrow, in many a Christian church.”
A very clever story, full of character and interest, though founded on the
somewhat improbable fact of a change of infants, is published anonymously
as Transmutation , or, the Lord and the Lout (Chapman and Hall).
It is a tale to justify a more elaborate notice than we have space to devote
to it, much beyond the ordinary standard iu character and incident.
Three Years' Cruise in the Australasian Colonies. By R. Ed- _An Exposition of the Fourteenth Chapter of Ilosea (Longmans), in
mond Malone. Bentley. nine sermons by Mr, Margoliouth, is a collection of not very remarkable
Ultima Thule; or , Thoughts Suggested by a Residence in New discourses on the duty of repentance.
Zeala7id. By Thomas Cholmondeley. Chapman. A collection of simple and rather pleasing religious poems on flowers
It has seldom occurred to us to meet with two books on the same « ave , n T J V p tte £ *7 the Rev * G. H. Smittan, under the title of Florum
subject so essentially different as these. The one is composed of trTrui »nj sn ~, n . n N .
facts, the other mainly of reflections. If Mr. Malone occasion- Mr - J - D - Chambers s Order of Household Devotion (Lnmhy), is a collec-
ally ventures on a speculation, it is almost always some train fclon of prayers compiled from ancient offices of the Sarura use.” Nothing
of thought not his own, which he is reporting as it has come across P an be ess . sa factory than the common run of family prayers, and
him in his travels. If Mr. Cholmondeley now and then condescends s f m s, /n prmciple at least unobjectionable to go to the old
to state a fact (and he does give us some useful ones), it is lltua s . both for general form and for particular details. In the
only that he may raise a loftier edifice of argument or theory there- P r t esent volume there is, no> doubt, nothing which at all goes beyond the
upon. Nor is the difference less marked in style and expression. °JjS ,naJs i t r< ? rr : w “ich it is drawn; but there are some small portions of the
The sailor, whose book we have named first, makes no pretension to ces which imply a belief in doctrines (such as prayers for the dead and
literary training, or to the graces of composition ; occasionally he is of saints and angels), which do not form part of the
chargeable with baldness ofstyle, and with unskilfuiness in the arrange- au prised teaching of the English Church.
ment of his multifarious notes. The Canterbury colonist, on the It is never, we think,wise to notice attacks upon religious truths, or truths
other hand, has all the resources of a well-read scholar at his com- coan ected with religion, unless you have the means to refute them fully and
mand, and considerable acquaintance with philosophical systems; ® a isfactonly. The whole of this paper would not suffice for a proper and
but his terse language is apt to degenerate into quaintness, and his exami l latlon °* Dr. Giles s Christian Records, (Whittaker and Co.)
contempt for popular platitudes into a disagreeable mannerism. Both , We W 1 1 -therefore, content ourselves with saying that Dr. Giles proposes
the books, however, are worth reading. Mr. Malone gives us a great f° Py ove ™ at nei “ l#r Gospels nor the Acts of the Apostles were written
many statements about Australia and New Zealand, which we could y the persons whose names they bear, nor at tlm time which it has been
hardly find, corrected up to so recent a date, elsewhere; while Mr. u f u /{ to ascribe to them. He thinks they were written towards the middle
Cholmondeley pours forth his thoughts on every subject to which a 1 16 aecon( l century, certainly not earlier. Ihe Epistles and the Reve-
speculative settler in a new country could possibly address himself. at . lon lie P ro P® ses t 0 discuss m another volume, believing the ordinary
To the future emigrant we should recommend the Three Years ’ Cruise °P im P n as t° them to he equally unfounded. The early testimonies to the
for its statistics and its general information. If he requires, more- §® nuineness °f Gospels he gets rid of by assuming the spuriousness of
over, law and politics, ethnology and finance, with civil and eccle- 1 e P assa S es m ™J e lathers which quote them. As we do not state his
siastical history besides, Ultima Thule will not fafl to serve his turn. arguments we will not characterise them, but we will say that they are
Mr. Malone’s general survey of our colonies in the southern not ne w, and that what he would call prejudice, but what we call faith and
hemisphere results in a decided preference for Tasmania, both as re- rev ? r ?P ce 1 ’ W 1 assuredly disregard them.
spccts climate and inhabitants, although he is compelled to admit the v'T lve amusmg little book, called a Icachi Voyage to Iceland (Hall,
disastrous effects of past conviction on the tone of its society. He was • 11 . an l, ) , , * oun( * a pleasant companion for a short railway
not without personal experience of its working, as the followino l ourne y* Ihe author has seen what he writes about, and writes well.
iErdrstastical Intelligence.
PREFERMENTS AND APPOINTMENTS.
The Rev. C. Dowding, to the Curacy of Maperton, near Wincanton.
The Rev. T. F. Dymock, M.A., Rector of Hatch Beauchamp, Somersetshire, to
the Vicarage of Willesborough, near Ashford.
The Rev. Canon Hey, of York, Principal of St. Peter’s School, to the Vicarage
of St. Helen’s, Stonegate, in that city.
The Rev. T. H. Marsh, to the Curacy of Bathford, near Bath.
The Rev. J. Peat, M.A., to the Incumbency of Weald Chapel, Sevenoaks.
Ihe Rev. G. A. Seymour, M.A., to the Incumbency of the new church of the
Holy Trinity, Winchester—on his own nomination.
ORDINATION.
By the Bishop of Bath and Wells, in Wells Cathedral, on Sunday, July 23:
Deacon— A. Du Cane, 8.A., St, John’s College, Oxford. Priest—Rev. T. W. Hatha-
way, St. John’s College, Cambridge.
Errata.—ln the list of Deacons ordained by the Bishop of Winchester, inserted
m the last Guardian, for W. Mayow, St. Bee’s Divinity College, read W. Maycock.
We are informed that the noble church now building at Notting-hill, •
and proposed to be dedicated to All Saints, is at the sole charge of the 1
same Dr. Walker, Rector of St. Columb, Cornwall, who made that g
munificent offer to Convocation the other day to found a Cornish bishopric. 1
This same church of All Saints is to be entirely free, will be endowed by
the founder, will be continually open, and is a monument to the memory of S
the parents of Dr. Walker. a
The Dean and Chapter of Durham have contributed the sum of 250 1. ?
towards the restoration of the parish church at Berwick-upon-Tweed. 1
A rumour has reached us that the recently appointed Bishop of Bath u
and Wells has so far indicated his suspected leaning towards the party
tainted with the Tractarian heresy, as to refuse, in most positive terras, to i
sign letters of request, that the case of Archdeacon Denison might be u
brought to a judicial trial.— Hull Packet. % f:
The Archdeacon of Taunton has given notice of his intention to move T
the following resolutions in the Lower House of Convocation of the clergy 1
of the province of Canterbury;— n<
“1. Whereas two reports of joint committees of both Houses of the Convoca- n
non of the clergy of the province of Canterbury were laid upon the table of both
houses on Thursday, the 20th instant; . w
“ And whereas the first of the said reports recommends the adoption of certain l
provisions for the reconstitution of the Lower House of the Convocation of the
clergy of the province of Canterbury, in order •to enable it to treat, with the a!
fuller confidence of the Church, of such matters as her Majesty may he pleased to ol
submit to its deliberations;’
“ It is the opinion of this house,
“ lhat, until such time as the said provisions shall have been agreed upon, T
shall have become law, and shall have been carried into effect, it is inconsistent
with the resolution of February 2 of the present year above quoted, and is other-
wise unfitting and unadvisable, that the Lower House proceed to any consideration
of the second of the said reports, or to the transaction of any other business of im-
portance to the Church.
“ If this resolution be affirmed, it will he unnecessary to proceed further. But
if it be negatived, in that case I propose to move the resolution following :
“2. That so much of the recommendations of report 2as deals with 4 the third E-
exhortation following the prayer for the church militant in the order of the admin-
istration of the Holy Communion’ be not adopted.” L
On Sunday afternoon last, the Bishop of Oxford consecrated some ground F
recently added to the churchyard of Winkfield Church, near Windsor 12
Forest; and his lordship afterwards preached in the church on behalf of th
the industrial school which exists in the parish. G-
The Bridgwater Times announces the opening, on Saturday next, of the yf
44 Bridgwater Exhibition,” with a collection of ancient masters and modern gr
paintings from the mansions of the Somerset county families. There is ot
also to be 44 a trade department.” The ceremony of opening is to be ? n
honoured by the presence of the Lord Bishop of the diocese (Lord Auck- At
land); — th
Ihe presence of his lordship on this occasion will he a graceful compliment to th
those who have so diligently and spiritedly promoted this undertaking; and the bo
object of this exhibition, namely, to aid the Parish Church Restoration Fund, serves Pl
as an appropriate and happy introduction of his lordship to a very important part Ee
of his diocese. Lord Auckland’s ready acquiescence in the wishes of the pro- ni!
motors is an assurance that the present Bishop of Bath and Wells will prove an
active, energetic, and valued diocesan, anxious and willing to promote every good E>
work among us.” Pr
A poll was last week demanded against a church-rate of 2d. in the |1 H
pound, granted by the vestry to the churchwardens of Hingham, Norfolk. Dc
What made the case somewhat remarkable was the mixture of individuals
who formed the leaders of the opposition. It was justly called 44 an un-
holy alliance.” Ihe amendment against the rate was moved by the Rev.
William Harnard, a clergyman of the Established Church, and possessed c.°
of property in the parish. He avowed that he acted on party motives, and Mt
that he opposed a rate for most necessary repairs, because he did not think
the party, which 44 he was proud to represent,” and which he called 44 the
Low Church party,” had any voice among the present officers of the
Church. He was supported by Lieut.-Colonel Gilman, Mr. D. Alexander,
solicitor and late parish churchwarden, till ejected last Easter, and a few i
Dissenters, though others voted for the rate. At the close of the poll, pu
which lasted two days, the Hon. and Rev. W. Wodehouse, rector, declared
the numbers to be—for the rate, 99; against, 70. Every exertion w r as
made by the opponents, and many tradesmen were prevented, by personal Gr
influence, from recording their votes for the rate, though they would not cb:
vote against it. En
There has been a severe contest for a church-rate at Great Marlow. The me
proposal ot the rate was met by a proposition to adjourn its consideration M*
for a twelvemonth, which, on a show of hands, was declared by the vicar
to have been carried. The churchwardens demanded a poll, which lasted \y;
two days, and terminated in a majority of 19 for the rate. Almost every he
name on the rate-book w r as polled, including ladies, and men sick in their
The utmost good feeling, nevertheless, prevailed, and at the close
the vicar s opponents proposed a vote of thanks to him for his impartial to
conduct in the chair of the vestry. Br
On Tuesday last, the 25th ult. (St. James’s Day), the annual festival
of the Boys, Girls, and Infants’ Schools connected with the parish of St. fre
James, Devonport, was held, divine service being celebrated in the church
in the morning at half-past ten o’clock, and in the afternoon at three o’clock
(instead of the usual daily service at seven o’clock), when a sermon was
preached by the Rev. iEneas B. Hutchison, and a collection made in aid of
the expenses of the school treat. At the close of the afternoon service the
scholars, to the number of upwards of 800, proceeded to a field at Keyham
Barton, lent by Mr. Bradford, and there partook of an abundant supply of tea
and cake. Many of the patrons, friends, and Sunday-School teachers were
present, and encouraged the children in, their various sports and pastimes.
July the 21st, the Vigil of the Old Feast of St. Mary Magdalene, is
annually a day of joy to the Churchmen of Shadwell, Leeds, being the day
on which they commemorate the consecration of their beautiful little
church, and on which the school-feast is held. This year, owing to the
fineness of the weather and other circumstances, the event was a source of
especial happiness to all. The morning service consisted of Litany and
Holy Communion, a sermon being preached by the Rev. W. Richardson.
After the second lesson at evening service an earnest and affectionate address
to the children was given by the Rev. J. W. Knott, of St. Saviour’s, Leeds.
Before both services some Psalms were chanted in procession from the par-
sonage to the church by the clergy present, assisted by choristers from St.
Saviour’s, followed by the school-children with banners. The Rev. R. New-
love, Vicar of Thorner, and the Rev. Cass were also present, and took
part in the services. The children of the school were entertained as usual,
with their mothers and the visitors present, and both the tea and games in
which all participated were duly appreciated and enjoyed. It is a matter
of congratulation to the Incumbent, the Rev. C. F. Milner, that the Church
has undoubtedly made much progress in Shadwell, in winning back her
stray children, who, in great numbers, had joined the ranks of Protestant
dissent previous to the erection of the church. Still greater blessings may
be anticipated, and more entire success, when the Church system is fully
carried out by the restoration of daily morning and evening prayer, which
is about to take place.
On Wednesday last, July 26, the chapel of St. John the Evangelist, at-
tached to the asylum for aged and infirm journeymen-tailors, Haverstock-
hill, was re-opened by the Lord Bishop of London. This chapel, originally
built and endowed by the late Mr. Stulz, has been considerably enlarged
and greatly improved, at"the sole expense of one individual, through whose
liberality much additional accommodation has been obtained for the inmates
of the asylum (for whom the best part of the chapel has been reserved) and
the inhabitants of the neighbourhood. Those improvements which have
taken platce will be best appreciated by those who remember the original
structure., By an arrangement unparalleled in the annals of church archi-
tecture, tlhe communion-rails enclosed not merely the holy table, but two
pulpits, fivom one of which the prayers were read, from the other the ser-
mon preawhed—these two extraordinary structures being entered from the
vestry by ttwo doors in the reredos. The additions to the chapel have been
made frorm the designs and under the superintendence of Mr. Hayward,
architect, rnnd consist of a new bay added to the nave, and an entire new
chancel, westry, &c., with the interior remodelling of the roof, which,
though previously constructed with the beams carrying an almost flat
wooden ceiling, has been fitted with richly carved hammer-beam
trusses amd side-pieces of novel character, giving thereby much increased
lightness, Iheight, and beauty in the interior, without involving the removal
of a single slate on the outside. The chancel-roof is also of a correspond-
ingly rich idiaracter, having side-pieces hearing the emblems of the Evan-
gelists, carried on corbels carved with their heads. The east window is
rich in carving, and has a lily canopy over the central light. It has more of a
geometrical character than is usually seen in the Perpendicular period, at the
same time ithat its rectilinear character is preserved. The chancel has an
arch on the north side, with carved spandrils, and filled in with a screen,
combining iraetal and wood in its construction; and the floor is laid with
Minton tikes of a peculiarly choice character. The light of the west
window bass been made available by the removal of the organ (which has
been enlarged and improved by Messrs. Grey and Davidson) to the side of
the west gaillery. The staine’d glass of the east window (erected by the
offerings of the congregation and friends of the institution) is by Mr. G.
Hcdgeland, of London, as well as of a memorial window, to be placed on
the south slide, to the late Mr. Stulz, the original founder of the chapel.
The subjeetts of the east window are, in the centre, the Crucifixion; in the
north light, St. John on our Lord’s bosom; in the south, St. John in Pat-
mos. The memorial window will represent the good Samaritan. Afl the
others, save the west, which, it is hoped, will soon be filled in the same
way, are of ornamental quarry glass. It may not be so generally known as it
deserves to be,'that the master-tailors of London have, to their credit, founded
and support an asylum which not only shelters between eighty and ninety
of their aged journeymen, but in which, by the provision of a chapel and a
resident chaplain, the inmates have the advantages of daily prayers, fre-
quent communions, and constant pastoral superintendence.
an& (Collegiate.
OXFORD.
The Rev. A. A. Barker, M.A., Rev. G. H. Fell, M.A., Rev. A. Pott, M.A., Rev. J.
E. Millard, M.A., R. F. Hessey, M.A., and Rev. M. E. Welby, M.A., probationary
fellows, have been admitted actual fellows ; and the Rev. J. Sedgwick, M.A., and
L. Meyrick, 8.A., probationary fellows ; and Messrs. A. J. Coleridge, commoner of
University, Whinfield, from Rugby, and Anderson, from King’s College School,
have been elected demies of Magdalen College.
On Monday, July 24, the usual distribution of exhibitions and prizes, previous to
the breaking up of the school, took place in the school-room of Magdalen College,
Oxford. The attendance of visitors was unusually large, and included the junior
proctor, the Rev. Dr. Jelf, the Rev. Sir F. G. Ouseley, Bart, the Rev. W. Sewell,
Warden of St. Peter’s College, Radley, the Rev. Dr. Whorwood, Dr. Corfe, with a
great number of clergy and members of the University, as well as of ladies and
other visitors. The proceedings opened with the singing of a Latin rhyming poem,
on the subject of the school motto, “ Sicut lilium ” (in allusion to the founder’s
favourite device), composed by the Rev. G. Booth, one of the contributors to the
Anthologia Oxoniensis , and set to music for the occasion by B. Blyth, Esq., M.A.,
the college organist. The Head Master then read his report for the terra, with
those of the college examiners ; at the close of which the exhibitioners and prize-
boys were called up to a table, at which sate the examiners, namely, the Rer. H.
Pritchard, M.A., Fellow of Christ Church College, and the Rev. H. Harris, 8.D.,
Fellow and Vice-President of Magdalen College. The following awards were then
made: —The Shepherd Exhibition of 10f., Hester; the Shepherd Exhibition of 51.,
Hall, ma.; the Shepherd Exhibition (Lower School) of bl., Hannam ; the Ellerton
Exhibition of bl.. Hall, ma.; tiie First College Prize, Hall, mi.; the Second College
Prize, Langley; the Schoolmaster’s Prize, Galton, mi.; the Usher’s Prize, Wil-
liams; English Essay, Dicks, ma.; Latin Elegiacs, Hall, mi.; Sir F. Ouseley’s
Prize for Music, Mallara ; Prize Pen for Writing, Jones. After singing “ Dulce
Domum,” the school broke up till the 9th of September.
The following gentlemen were admitted members of the Royal College of Sur-
geons, on the 28th inst.:— Messrs. J. M. Hyde, Oxford; R, Pearce, Llangarren
Court, Herefordshire ; T. Mines, Belfast; C. A. Howard, York ; R. Lucas, Army;
C. E. Johnston, H.E.1.C.5.; S. Wright, Cottenham, Cambridgeshire; and J. A.
Marston, Newcastle-on-Tyne.
fUmi) anb Jialqn
WAR-OFFICE, July 28.
Bth Regiment of Light Dragoons—R. C. Sawbridgc, Gent., to he Cornet, by
purchase, vice Viscount Stormont, promoted in the Ist or Grenadier Regiment
of Foot Guards. 1 Ith Light Dragoons—C. L. King, Gent., to be Cornet, by pur-
chase, vice Gandell, who retires. 17th Light Dragoons—D. C. Lowe, Gent., to he
Cornet, by purchase, vice Jerningham, who retires. Coldstream Regiment of Foot
Guards—Ensign and Lieut. F. H. Ramsden to be Lieut, and Captain, without pur-
chase, vice Brevet Major Butler, died of his wounds. 4th Regiment of Foot-
Ensign W. Winniett to be Lieutenant, without purchase. sth Foot—Second Lieut.
G. H. J. M. Chapman to be Lieut., without purchase, vice Templeman, whose pro-
motion, without purchase, on the Gtli June, 1854, has been cancelled; Ensign J.
Margitson, from half-pay of the 27th Foot, to be Ensign, vice Templeman, de-
ceased ; E. F. Haig, Gent., to he Ensign, by purchase, vice Margitson, who retires.
11th Foot—Lieut. H. Curling, from half-pay of the 52nd Foot, to he Lieut., vice
Wilton, promoted, without purchase, to an Unattached Company. 20th Foot—To
he Assistant Surgeons—R. W. Carter, Gent.; R. Wolseley, Gent. 21st Foot—
Lieut. W. P. Collingwood to he Captain, by purchase, vice Spring, who retires;
Second Lieut. J. G. Image to be Lieut., by purchase, vice Collingwood ; S. G. B.
St. Clair, Gent., to.be Ensign, by purchase, vice Image; Sergeant-Major H. Fowler
to be Ensign, without purchase, and Adjutant, vice Tinley, promoted. 22nd Foot
Brevet Major J. Ramsey to be Major, without purchase, vice Airy, promoted in
the Coldstrqam Regiment of Foot Guards ; Captain C. K. K. Tynte, from half-pay
sth Foot, to be Captain, vice Ramsey, promoted. 35 th Foot—Lieut. R. J. G. Grant,
from the 2nd West India Regiment, to be Lieut., without purchase. 37th Foot—
614
THE GUARDIAN.


Brevet Colonel W. L. Dames, from half-pay Rifle Brigade, to be Major, vice Lush-
ington, promoted in the Scots Fusilier Guards. 42nd Foot—Lieut. C. C. Graham
to be Captain, by purchase, vice Whitehead, who retires. 46th Foot—To be
Assistant Surgeons—R, R. Scott, Gent.; J. Duffin, Gent.; 52nd Foot —Lieut. W. J.
Stopford to be Adjutant, vice Peel, who resigns the Adjutancy only. 58th Foot—
Lieut. G. J. R. Wynyard, to be Adjutant, vice Balneavis, promoted. 61st Foot—
Lieut. D. Reid to be Adjutant, vice Burnside, who resigns the Adjutancy only,
63rd Foot—F. Odell, Gent., to be Assistant Surgeon, vice Gibson, appointed to the
Statf. 68th Foot—F. de L. Saunderson, Gent., to be Ensign, without pur-
chase, vice Gator, promoted. 7lst Foot—Captain T. C. Ormsby, from half-pay
Unattached, to be Paymaster, vice Campbell, appointed paymaster of a Cavalry
Depot. 76th Foot—Lieut. J. C. Clarke to be Adjutant, vice Lacy, promoted.
80th Foot—Captain A. Ormsby to be Major, without purchase, vice Montgomery,
promoted in the Scots Fusilier Guards; Captain F. de Visme, from half-pay of the
60th Foot, to be Captain, repaying the difference, vice Ormsby, promoted. 83rd
Foot—Brevet-Major J. Kelsall to be Major, without purchase, vice Lloyd, deceased;
Lieut. H. De R. Pigott to be Captain, without purchase, vice Kelsall; Ensign E.
Meurant, to be Lieut., without purchase, vice Pigott. §Bth Foot—Captain G. V.
Maxwell to be Major, by purchase, vice Balfour, who retires ;: Lieut. B. B. Maule-
verer, to be Captain, by purchase, vice Maxwell; Lieut. H. Ernst to be Captain,
by purchase, vice W. H. T. Pattenson, who retires. 93rd Foot—Captain J. H. Gar-
ner, from half-pay of the 40th Foot, to be Captain, without purchase. 97th Foot—
Lieut. T. Smith, from the 82nd Foot, to be Paymaster, vice Griffin, appointed Adju-
tant of a recruiting district.
Brevet—To be Aides-de-Camp to the Queen, with the rank of Colonel in the
Army—Lieut-Colonel J. Bloomfield, of the Royal Horse Artillery, vice Dyneley,
promoted to be Major-General; Lieut.-Colonel T. Foster, of the Royal Engineers,
vice Oldfield, promoted to be Major General. To be Majors in the Army—Captain
J. H. Garner, of the 93rd Foot; Captain F. de Visme, of the 80th Foot. To be
Lieut.-Colonels in the Army—Brevet Major J. 11. Garner, of the 93rd Foot;
Brevet Major F, de Visme, of the 80th Foot.
Staff—Brevet Colonel J. F. S. Clarke, upon half-pay Unattached, to be Assistant-
Quartermaster-General to the Army,vice Brevet-ColonelTorrens, promoted to the
local rank of Brigadier-General with the Army serving in Turkey.
Brevet —Brevet Colonel A. W. Torrens, upon half-pay Unattached, and Brevet
Colonel T. L. Goldie, of the 57th Foot, to be Brigadier-Generals with the Army
serving in Turkey, while so employed.
Office of Ordnance, July 28.—Corps of Royal Engineers—Second Captain H.
C. C. Owen to be Captain, vice Tylee, retired; First Lieut. C. C. Chesney to be
Second Captain, vice Owen.
NAVAL PROMOTIONS AND APPOINTMENTS.
Admiralty, July 28.—Clerk-in-Charge C. Fisher, to the Arrow.
July 31.—Commander W. E. A. Gordon, to the Sans Pareil. Lieuts. H. T.
Burgoyne, to the Waterloo; and J. P. Smallpage, to the Boscawen. Second
Masters T. Pounds, to the Colossus; and T. D. Nicholson, to the Spy.
©ajette#, Jflarißtg, &c.
FROM THE LONDON GAZETTE, Friday. July 28. — Banlcrupts —J. Hum-
phrey, Dorking, Surrey, butcher—S. Edwards, Long Buckby, Northamptonshire,
(scrivener—W. Dundas, Celbridge-place, Paddington, house decorator—J. A. Bell,
Great Baddow, Essex, hop merchant—G. H. Cripps-, Shrewsbury, wine-merchant—
A. Deale, Leadenhall-street, City, patent ocean float manufacturer—H. Clegett,
Leadenhail-street, City, patent ocean float manufacturer—J. Maynard, Queen’s-
road, West Chelsea, butcher—E. Watson, Polstcad,Suffolk, shoemaker—ll. Ander-
son. Leicester, manufacturer of carved frames—J. Pratt, Manchester, bookseller—R.
Kirkpatrick, Manchester, joiner—M. Neville, Liverpool, coppersmith—F, Kay,
Sheffield, cut-nail manufacturer.
Tuesday, August l.—Bankrupts—W. Makin, jun., Manchester, provision dealer
—J. Sellick, Chapps*Mills, Wiltshire, paper maker— H. Swire and J. Lockwood,
Shipley, manufacturers—J. Smithson, West-mills, Yorkshire, corn miller— P,
Taylor, Manchester, millwright, engineer, and tool maker—H. Hart, Hulme,
Lancashire, timber merchant—S. S. Hitchcock, Blackmore, Essex, maltster—G.
Howes, Kingsland, licensed victualler—T. Robinson, Hexham, currier—H.
Brownentt, Liverpool, merchant—W. Atherton, Liverpool, merchant—F. Smith,
Standon, Herts, railler-C. Gibbs, Tliorndon, Suffolk, tailor—W. Matthews,
Paddington, builder—S. Zagury, Cullum-street, City, merchant.
THE MARKETS.
(From the County Chronicle.')
CORN-EXCHANGE, Monday, July 31.
We have had fair arrivals of foreign wheat, oats, and flour last week, but small
of all other articles. The finest parcels of English wheat realised nearly last week’s
rates, hut the secondary qualities hung on hand, and must be quoted Is. to 2s. per
quarter lower. Foreign was held firmly, but the attendance at market being
small, sales were confined to the merest retail quantities, at about the prices of
this day se’nnighr, best sorts of Red Baltic being most in demand. The top price
of town-made flour has been reduced ss. per sack, other English and foreign sacks
and barrels were held for late rates. Barley, beans, peas, and oats are each Is. to 2s.
per quarter cheaper. Malt is almost entirely neglected, prices, however, nominally
unaltered.
WHEAT, Essex and Suffolk red, 54s 56s 595; fine, 62s 64s 665; white, old
56s 60s 625; fine, 64s 68s 70s; foreign free, 58s 60s 635; fine, 65s 70s 74s per
quarter.
BARLEY, grinding, 31s 345; fine, 33s 355; malting, 34s 36s fine new. 36s 375.
MALT, 66s 70s; fine, 70s 725.
PEAS, hog new, 38s 455; maple, 42s 475; white, 48s 625; fine boilers new.
60s 545.
BEANS, pigeon, 40s 465; old, 50s 565; ticks for splitting, 42s 45s 475; old,
46s 48s 62s ; harrow, 45s 47s 48s ; old, 48s 52s 545.
OATS, feed, English, 26s 28s; fine, 28s 295; Poland or brew, 28s 295; fine,
29s 30s; Scotch potato, 30s 335; fine, 33s 345; Irish potato, new, 29s 30s; fine,
30s 31s; Irish feed, white, 26s 28s ; black, 24s 265; Foreign feed, free,, 22s 265;
fine, 26s 295; Poland or brew, 27s 295; fine, 29s 31s.
FLOUR, town made (per sack), 58s 60s 635; seconds, 45s 50s; Essex and Suffolk,
on board ship, 44s 48s; Norfolk and Stockton, 44s 455.
Average of six weeks—wheat, 76s Id; barley, 37s Od; oats, 30s 2d; rye, 49s 4d ;
beans, 49s 4d; peas, 16s lOd per quarter. Duties on all foreign corn, Is. per
quarter.
BREAD.—The price of bread in the City and at the West-end is still main'
tained at 9d. to lOd. the 41b. loaf, but in other places the bakers are selling the
best bread at B§d. the 41b. loaf, while in the cheap neighbourhoods they profess to
sell at 7|d.
TTEIt. —Best fresh, 12s. 6d. to 135.; seconds, 12s. per doz.
HOPS.—Borough Market, Monday, July 31.—There is some improvement re-
ported in various districts of the plantations, but opinions are very conflicting as
to the extent thereof. The last few nights have been cold and unkindly for the
bine, and anything like an average crop appears to be out of the question. The
duty during the past week has fluctuated from 50,000?. to 85,000?. The market
continues Arm, without, however, much business doing.
COALS.—London, July 31.—Buddie’s West Hartlev, 18s Gel; Carr’s Hartley,
18s 6d ; Davison’s West Hartley, 18s 6d ; Holywell, 19s Gd; Howard’s West Hartley,
Netherton. 18s6d; Longridge’s West Hartley, 18s 6d ; Tanfleld Moor, 16s 3d;
Tanfleld Moor Butes, 16s 3d; Walker Primrose, 15s 6d ; West Hartley, 18s 6d ;
Willington Hartley, 18s; Wylam, 19s 6d; Wallsend New Whitworth, 15s; Bell’s
Primrose, 15s; Eden Main, 20s 6d; Lambton’s Primrose, 20s 6d; Wallsend Bel-
mont, 19s" 6d; Wallsend Braddyll, 20s 9d; Wallsend Framwelgate, 19s 6d;
Wallsend Haswell, 2ls6d; Wallsend Lumley, 19s 6d; Wallsend Plummer, 20s-
Wallsend Russel’s Hetton, 20s 9d; Wallsend South Hetlon, 21s; Wallsend
Stewart’s, 2ls 6d; Wallsend Cassop, 20s ; Wallsend South Hartlepool, 21s; Walls-
end South Kelloe, 10s 9d; Cowpen, 18s. 6d; Denventwater Hartley, 18s. 6d.
HAY AND STRAW.
Smithfikld. —Fine Upland, Meadow, and Rye-grass Hay, 4? 10s to 4? 15s;
inferior, 3? 0s to 3? 10s; superior Clover, 5? 10s to 6? 12s ; inferior, 4? 5s to 4? 10s ;
Straw, 1? 10s to 2? 0s per load,
Whitechapel.—Hay, 4? 10s to 5? 5s ; new, 2? 10s to 4? 8s; Clover, 5? 10s to
6? 6s ; new, 3? 3s to 5? 0s ; Straw, 1? 13s to 2? os.
Cumberland.— Prime Meadow and Rye-grass Hay, 4? 18s to 5 1 15s; inferior,
2? 15s to 4? 10s; new, 3? 10s to 4? 10s; superior Clover, 5? 15s to 6? 6s; inferior,
3? 15s to 5? ss; new, 3? 10s to 5? 0s; Straw, 2? 0s to 2? ss.
SMITHFIELD, Monday, July 31.
The supply of beasts this morning was rather moderate than otherwise, but as
it consisted of nearly half foreigners, it was, on the whole, of poor quality. The
dead markets were barer of meat to-day than we scarcely ever have known'them
so that the trade here was considerably better, and nearly a total clearance was
made, yet without prices being much higher. We quote the Short Horns from
4s. 6d. to 4s. Bd,, and the Scots 65., an odd one here and there making ss. 2d.
Although sheep were more plentiful than last week, yet from their being so little
at Newgate and Leadenhall, the salesmen succeeded in establishing an advance
and the best Downs made ss. 2d., and half-bred sheep of good quality, 4s. lOd. and
ss. Lambs were in good request and prices rather stiffer, the best making ss. Bd.
and something over. There were a considerable less number of calves here than
last Monday, and business was improved by it quite 2d. per stone. The best made
a crown without difficulty, and an advance in all kinds was the consequence.
There were plenty of pigs here, and but few customers for them—prices the same.’
Head of Cattle. —Beasts, 4,085 ; sheep and lambs, 31,780 ; calves, 343 ; pigs, 420
Foreign—From Germany and Holland, 1,463 beasts, 3,350 sheep, 253 calves.
Spain—Sheep, 940. Scotland—Beasts, 100; Eastern Counties, 200 ; Midland
Counties, 2,200. To sink the offal, per Blb.—Beef, 3s 2d 4s lOd 5s 0d; mutton
4s Od 4s lOd 5s 2d; veal, 3s 6d 4s 8d 5s Od; pork, 4s Od 4s 6d 4s 8d; lamb’
4s 8d 5s Od to 5s Bd.
BIRTHS.
July 20, at Cardiff, the wife of the Hon. J. F. Edger, of Hong-Hong, of a son.
July 20, at Argyll House, the wife of Lieut.-Colonel, the Hon. A. Gordon, of'a
daughter.
July 22, the Hon. Mrs. Whaites, of a son,
July 22, at R. Brereton, Esq.’s, Blckeney, Norfolk, the wife of the Rev. E.
Dowell, of Besthorpe, of a daughter.
July 22, the wife of the Rev. J. B. Dykes, Precentor of Durham, of a daughter.
July 23, the wife of the Rev. E. J. Hill, of Pan field Rectory, Essex, of a son.
July 23, at Alton, Hants, the wife of the Rev. J. Garrett, of a daughter.
July 23, at Fahan-house, Londonderry, the wife of Lieut.-Colonel Heyland, of
a daughter.
July 23, at Crowcombe, Somerset, the wife of Captain H. Hopper, of a daughter.
July 24, at 7, Great Cumberland-street, Hyde-park, the wife of T. Chambers,
Esq., M.P., of a son.
July 24, at Clapham, the wife of the Rev. W. Bowyer, of a daughter.
July 24, at Charlton Musgrove, the wife of the Rev. C. M. Leir, of a son.
July 24, at Brussels, the wife of H. L. Styleman-le-Strange, Esq., of a son.
July 25, at the Rectory, Claycoton, the wife of the Rev. J. C. Poole, of a daughter.
July 25, at Thorpe-place, Surrey, the wife of the Rev, H. L. Bennett, of a son.
July 25, at Oulton, Lowestoft, the -wife of the Rev. J. Grainger, of Eton Col-
lege, of a son.
July 25, at Aspeden, the wife of the Rev. Alfred P. Sanderson, of a son.
July 25, at Maison Valin, Champs Elysdes, Paris, the wife of Lieut.-Colonel
Coke, Ist Derby Militia, and of Debdale, Notts, of a daughter.
July 26, at Boulogne-sur-Mer, the wife of Captain C. R. Chichester, 97th Regi-
ment, of a daughter.
July 26, at the Manor House, Sandford, near Enstone, Oxon, the wife of the Rev.
J. Marshall, of a daughter.
July 26, at Cambridge, the wife of the Rev. J. Pullen, of a son.
July 27, at Gyllyngdune, Falmouth, the residence of her father, the wife of the
Rev. J. Baly, Warden of St. Thomas’s College, Colombo, of a daughter.
July 27, at No. 26, Queen-square, Bath, the wife of the Rev. Robert Hughes, of
a son.
July 27, at Whitnash Rectory, Leamington, the wife of the Rev. J. Reynolds
Young, of a son.
July 28, at Brighton, the wife of the Rev. H. D. Heatlcy, of a son.
July 30, at the Parsonage, Dumfries, the wife of the Rev. A. McEwen, of a
daughter.
July 30, at 10, Gloucester-road, Old Brompton, the wife of E. Mansell, Esq., of a
daughter.
July 30, at Henley-on-Thames, the wife of the Rev, C. H. Godby, of a daughter.
July 31, at Chngford, Devon, the wife of the Rev. H. G. Hames, of a daughter.
July 31, at 7, Grosvenor-square, the Lady Elizabeth F. de Ros, of a daughter.
August 1, at Sydenham, the wife of S. Laing, Esq., M.P., of a son.
MARRIAGES.
May 16, at Cheribon, Java, by the Rev. A. C. Van Maarseveen, H, J. L. Van
Hecking Colenbvander, Esq., to Antonia Theodora, third daughter of William
Dennison, Esq., K.N.L., of Sindang Lant, Java.
June 3, at Oporto, R. W. Woodhouse, Esq., to Izabel Emelia, Viscountess de
Balsemao, daughter of the late General Viscount de S. Juan da Pasquelra.
June 20, at Christ Church, Bombay, Lieut.-Colonel Willoughby, C. 8., Artillery,
Principal Commissary of Ordnance, to Eliza, eldest daughter of the late Colonel
Egan, Bombay Army, and widow of Major Clarkson,
July 18, at St. James’s Church, R, E. King, Esq., only son of the Hon. R. King,
and grandson of General Viscount Lorton, to the Hon. Augusta Chichester,
daughter of the late and sister of the present Lord Tcmplemore, and grand-
daughter of the late Marquis of Anglesey.
July 25, at St. Anne’s Church, Dublin, S. S. Bateson, second son of Sir R. Bate-
son, Bart., of Belvoir-park, county Down, to Florinda, eldest daughter of Lord
Castlemaine, of Moydrum Castle, county Westmeath.
July 25, at Hatchford, by special licence, the Hon. G. Byng, M.P., eldest son of
Viscount Enfield, and grandson of the Earl of Strafford, to the Lady Alice Egerton,
eldest daughter of the Earl and Countess of Ellesmere.
July 25, at Abergavenny, the Rev. W. Louis Buckley, 8.A., to Anne Henrietta,
eldest daughter of the late Capt. George Stirling, and niece of Sir Samuel Stirling,
of Renton and Glorat, Bart.
July 25. at St. Mary’s Chapel, Inverary, Aberdeenshire, by the Right Rev. Bishop
Skinner, Robert Grant, Esq., of Druminnor, to Elizabeth, eldest daughter of the
late Sir John Forbes, of Craigievar, Bart.
July 25, at Shenley, Captain G. F. Whittingstall, 12th Royal Lancers, to Anne
Mary, only daughter of W. J. Myers, Esq., of Porters, Herts.
July 26, at Halesworth, Suffolk, F. Hoare, Esq., to Eugenia, daughter of the Rev.
R. G. Hankinson, Rector of Halesworth.
July 26, at St. Mary Abbotts, Kensington, G. French, Esq., Captain West Kent
Light Infantry, of Risden, Hawkhurst, Kent, to Anna, youngest daughter of the
Rev, J. H. Hewlett, M.A., Chaplain of the Chapel Royal, Whitehall.
July 26, at Dawlish, the Rev. W. Maycock, of Pentrich, Derbyshire, to Ellen,
fourth daughter of the late Rev. T. Walsh, of Grimblethorpe-hall, Lincolnshire.
July 27, at St. Lawrence, near Maldon, Essex, G. E. Francis, Esq., of the office
of her Majesty’s Works, &c., to Ann, eldest daughter of the Rev. J. B. Carwar-
dine, Rector of St. Lawrence.
July 27, at St. George’s, Hanover-squaro, Lieut.-Colonel Carleton, Coldstream
Guards, to the Hon. Charlotte Hobhouse, eldest daughter of Lord Broughton.
July 27, at St. John’s, Notting-hill, J. Loxdale, Esq., of Shrewsbury, to Anna
Rice, youngest daughter of the late Rev. J. Watson, D.D., Vicar of Ringstead-cum-
Denford, and of Great Dodington, Northamptonshire.
July 27, at Hove Church, near Brighton, W. P. Murray, of Lincoln’s-inn, Esq,,
M.A., Barrister-at-Law. to Georgina Charlotte Daysh, only daughter of the lato
Hon. A. R. Tumour, Commander R.N.
July 27, at Petworth, the Rev. J. New, Curate of Duncton, to Henrietta Jane,
elder daughter of J. Marr. Brydone, Esq., R.N.
July 31, at St. James’s, Westbourne-terrace, A. A. Pollock, Esq., youngest son
of the late Sir D. Pollock, to Caroline Dorothea Hay, eldest daughter of L.
Currie, Esq., of 7, Clarendon-place, Hyde-park.
August 1, at St. George’s, Hanover-square, by the Rev. R. T. Blagden, brother
of the bride, the Rev. R. F. Tompkins, of Bignor, Sussex, to Elizabeth, second
daughter of Richard Blagden, Esq., of Alberaarle-street.
DEATHS.
March 24, at Strughyn, Burmah, of jungle fever, Major H. M. Dobble, 30th
Regiment Madras Native Infantry.
April 11, at Heidelberg, near Melbourne, Victoria, Mary Anne, wife of Captain
D. M‘Lachlan, late of her Majesty’s 75th Regiment.
May 26, at Binsur, near Almorah, Captain the Hon. R. V. Powys, Bengal Army.
May 29, in the Island of Mauritius, aged 42, A. E. Shelly, Assistant Auditor-
General of the island, third son of the late Sir J. Shelly, Bart.
May 31, at Simla, Bengal, Major J. 11. Goddard, of the 14th Light Dragoons,
aged 32.
June 8, at Hyderabad, Anna Maria, the wife of Major C. Davidson, assistant to
the Resident.
June 11, at Macara, Madras Pres., of inflammation of the bowels, Lavinia, wife
of the Rev. A. Fennel, Chaplain E.I.C.S.
July 20, in York-place, Perth, Mrs. Anna Maria Hawkshaw, widow of the late
Major General T. Hawkshaw.
July 25, in Ainslie-place, Edinburgh, J. H. Forbes, Esq., of Medwyn, formerly
one of the Senators of the College of Justice, aged 77.
July 25, at Henstridge Villas, St. John’s-wood, Mary, widow of the late B. R.
Haydon, aged 61.
July 26, at Fareham, Hants, drowned whilst bathing, H. Althorn and N. B.
Stuart, aged 9 and 8 years, children of Lieutenant-Colonel Cumherlege, 7th Madras
Light Cavalry, serving at Saugor, Central India.
July 26, at Ewell, suddenly, aged 38, Emily Jane, the wife of the Rev. Sir G. L
Glyn, Bart.
July 26, aged 64, in Hornsey-road, G. B. Sowerby, F.L.S., of Great Russell-
street, Bloomsbury, author of several works on Natural History.
July 26, at East Lavant, near Chichester, the Rev. R. Thompson, 8.A., Chaplain
R.N., and Incumbent of Mid-Lavant, Sussex, aged 47.
July 26, at Farthingstone, near Daventry, in his father’s house, Owen Jones,
aged 19, Student of St. Augustine’s College, Canterbury.
July 28, at 47, Hemmingford-terrace, Islington, W. Darton, Esq., late publisher,
58, Holborn-hill, in his 74th year.
July 29, at an advanced age, the Hon. Charlotte Georgina Lady Bedingfeld,
relict of Sir R. Bedingfeld, Bart., of Oxburgh-hail, Norfolk, and sister of the late
Lord Stafford. Her ladyship was many years one of the ladies-in-waiting upon her
Majesty Queen Adelaide.
July 30, at Greenwich Hospital, Captain T. Dickinson, R.N., aged 68.
July 30, at Dieppe, Marie Harriette, the only child of the Hon. Spencer and
Lady Harriette Cowper.
July 3<3, at Buxton, the Hon. and Rev. F. J. Noel, Rector of Teston and Nettle-
stead, Kent, aged 61.
Temporary duty. Board
and Lodging are offered for the assistance of a Clergy,
man of sound Church principles, wishing to rusticate for two
or three months, by the Rev. A. Lendrum, Crieff, N.B. Crieff
is in the midst of some of the finest scenery in Scotland, and
from it easy access may be had to all parts of the Highlands.
WANTED, a MARRIED CLERGY-
MAN, of sound doctrine, to take charge of an agri-
cultural parish in Hertfordshire, for two months, beginning
from thei middle of August. The Advertiser, who is Curate
of the pairish, offers the use of the parsonage-house (a small
Cottage) and garden, and the services of a cook and house-
maid. Aiddress Rev. A. 8., Post-office, Bishop’s Stortford. No
family preferred.
AP RIE S T, five years in Orders,
unmarried, with a knowledge of Church music, wishes
to meet with a CURACY or SOLE CHARGE, where the
daily services are, or might in time be established. Oxford
diocese preferred. Direct Rev. A. M., Post-office, Southampton.
An unmarried clergyman,
M.A. Oxford, in full orders, of some experience, and
of moderate views, desires a CURACY in an Agricultural
Parish. He would be ready to undertake it any Lime after
the end of August. Address A. Z., “ Guardian’* <Dfflce, 16,
Beaufort-buildings, Strand, London.
PRIVATE TUTOR.—A Graduate of
Oxford, First Class, wishes to meet with One or Two
Pupils, whom he might accompany as a Travelling Tutor for
a year or two. He would prefer one who has a general
taste for art and scenery. Address E. W., 39, Great Marl-
borough-street, London.
PRIVATE TUITION.—The Rev. George
Woods, M.A., Rector of Sully, near Cardiff, Glamor-
ganshire, receives a limited number of Pupils, whose age
does not exceed fourteen. He has now a few Vacancies.
Terms, 80?. per annum.
Temporary duty.—Aßeneficed
Clergyman, having occasion to leave his parish imme-
diately for a year, is desirous of meeting with a brother
Clergyman, of sound Church principles, who would under-
take his Duties for that period. Remuneration, a small but
comfortably-furnished house, with a garden and stables, and
50?. Address Rev. A. B. C., Post-office, Great Driffield, York-
shire.
WANTED, a CLERGYMAN of some
experience, to take charge of an important parish
near Capetown, Cape of Good Hope. Clergymen offering
themselves are requested to address the Bishop of Cape-
town’s Commissary, the Rev. Dr. Williamson, Pershore,
Worcestershire. The emolument, unfortunately, bears but
a small proportion to the gain it would be to the Bishop, and
to the whole diocese, to have the post occupied by a wise and
devoted man.
A CURATE is required for a Parish in
thq county of Derby, to assist a Resident Incumbent
and take the sole charge of the people during his occasional
absence. He should be a good plain preacher to a village
congregation. Stipend, 100?. per annum. Address Rev.
M. 8., Post-office, Chesterfield.
THE RECTORof COLTON,near
Rugeley, Staffordshire, wishes to obtain the assistance
of a CLERGYMAN, who will undertake his duties for three
weeks, commencing on Saturday, August 12. Remuneration
one guinea a week, with the use of the rectory and servants.
No one who has children need apply.
DUTY.—A Priest is
JL wanted to take charge of a small and very pretty parish
during the months of August and September, in return for
the use of the Rectory-house and garden, dairy, and two or
three servants. Address Rev. J. J. W., care of Mr. Masters,
Bookseller, Aldersgate-street, London.
A TITLE for HOLY ORDERS can be
GIVEN at the ensuing Ordination of the Bishop of
Exeter. A Literate would be accepted. Address Rev. R. S.,
Mr. Holden, Bookseller, Exeter.
Diocese of moeay and ross.—
The Incumbency of the Episcopal Chapel at Forres
will shortly be vacant. Income, 150?. a year. Apply to the
Right-Rev. the Bishop of Moray and Ross, Hedgetield, Inver-
ness.—July 29th.
Edinburgh academy.—The office
of RECTOR of the EDINBURGH ACADEMY is now
VACANT, in consequence of the Resignation of the Rev.
Dr. Hannah. Candidates are requested to lodge their ap-
plications and testimonials (of which twenty printed copies
are required) with G. G. Pattison, Clerk to the Directors,
21, St. Andrew-squave, Edinburgh, on or before Ist Septem-
ber. The Rector to be appointed will be required to enter on
his duties on the 2nd October.
Edinburgh, July 25, 1854.
EXCHANGE, —The Incumbent of a
Laving in one of the midland counties, within two
hours by 7 rail of London, of the value of 250?. per annum,
with new house and well-arranged garden, and population
under 10)00, is desirous of exchanging for one with larger
income,;and with greater scope for active usefulness ; more
employment as well as increase of income being the objects
sought. London or the neighbourhood preferred. Address
“ Clericms,” Messrs. Mann, Nephews, 39, Cornhill, London.
qMUE Rev. F. POYNDER will be glad to
JL EXCHANGE duty and house for five or six weeks,
with the Clergyman of a country parish. His duty is light.
He offerss a good house (in Bridge-street, Blackfriars, Lon-
don), antd the services of a cook and housemaid. He has one
child thrree years old. Direct Bridewell Hospital, London.
TI IT L E WANTED for September
Orrdination, by an M.A. of Cambridge, who has parsed
the Vohuntary Theological Examination. A fair stipend
required.. Address A. K., Post-office, Wakefield, Yorkshire.
npEMPORARY DUTY.—Wanted by a
JL Cltergyman in full orders, for about twelve months,
employiment without very heavy parochial duties. Salary
not less than 100?. per annum, with a house, or an equiva-
lent. Tlhe neighbourhood of London preferred. Address
Rev. S. BL W., Malvern, Wells.
WANTED, in December next, by a
Graduate of Cambridge in full Orders, a CURACY
in an agricultural district. The use of a nicely furnished
house imust form part of the stipend. Address, pre-paid,
Rev. A. 18., Post-office, Cradley, Great Malvern.
WANTED, about the Ist of September
next, a CURACY, with a House. The Advertiser
is still im Deacon’s Orders, and has been obliged to leave his
first Curmcy in London, for which satisfactory reasons will be
given. .Address the Rev. A. 8., Post-office, Thrapstone,
Northamptonshire.
A GRADUATE of Oxford, an Anglo-
Caitholic in principle, desires a CURACY, with TITLE,
for thedhristraas Ordination. Address 8.A., Mr. J. R. Daldy,
10, Pateirnoster-row.
A MARRIED PRIEST WANTS a
CURACY, where there is Daily Service. He is able
to direct a choir, and is not afraid of work. Address P. Q. R.,
Mr. Masters, 33, Aldersgate-street.
Temporary duty wanted.—
A Married Clergyman, without family, would be glad
to take TEMPORARY DUTY on the sea-coast for a Month
or Six W/eeks, commencing the .second week in August. A
small Burnished house, with attendance, would he considered
as part of the stipend. Views moderate. Address M.A./
care of Bowley Brothers, High-street, Bridgnorth,
A MARRIED PRIEST, M.A. Oxon,
who has been nearly eight years in Holy Orders, is
desirous of meeting with a PERMANENT CURAC Y, where
there is daily service, on or near the south or west coast. He
holds High Church views, and is both able and willing to
work. His residence must be on a very dry soil. He is dis-
engaged in October. Address the Rev. T. A. Walker, Pits-
ford, Northampton.
ACLERGYMAN, of some years’
experience, holding sound but moderate viewns, having
recently vacated a Sole Charge, is now seeking a, similar
position or CURACY, which would allow of his attending to
the education of Two or Three Pupils. The Advertiser would
be willing to become associated as Curate with a g entleman
who might also wish for an efficient Tutor for his son. Re-
ferences to satisfy every inquiry can be given. A temporary
engagement for a period not less than one year not objected
to* Address “ Clericus,” 48, York-road, Brighton.
CANDIDATES PREPARED for HOLY
ORDERS or the Cambridge Voluntary Theological
Examinations by the Rev. John Baines, M.A., St. JoJfm’s Col-
lege, Oxford. For terms, &c,, address S. John’s Parsonage,
Haverstock-hiil.
npRAYELLING TUTOR.—A Cambridge
JL Graduate, who is well acquainted with the French
language, would like to make an engagement as Travelling
Tutor to a Pupil not under twelve years of age. Address
B. A., Post-office, Alresford, Hants.
A GRADUATE of CAMBRIDGE, (1854,)
with the highest testimonials for character and at-
tainments in Classics and Mathematics, is desirous of
accepting a TUTORSHIP or MASTERSHIP. Address, Alpha,
Post-office, Dewsbury, Yorkshire.
ONE or TWO PUPILS, not under six-
teen years of age, can be received by the Curate of
S. Columb, Cornwall.
ACLERGYMAN, formerly Private Tutor
. at Eton, receiving Five Pupils to prepare for Eton, or
Harrow, or Rugby, has TWO VACANCIES. Terms, 120
guineas. Address Rev. A. M., Rectory, Little Wittenham,
near Abingdon.
PRIVATE TUITION.—South Coast of
L Devon.—The Rev, G. E. Deacon, M.A., late Fellow
and Tutor of Corpus Christi College, Oxford, wishes to meet
with a few Pupils. His object being to find companions in
education for his own sons, ho prefers such as are not above
fourteen years of age. A coach runs daily between Sidmouth
and Exeter. House large and airy, and close by the sea-side.
Terms, 100 guineas. Portland House, Sidmouth.
A X OXFORD GRADUATE, in Classical
Jri L Honours, of some experience in tuition, would be
glad to meet with an engagement as TUTOR in a family, cr
ASSISTANT-MASTER in an Endowed School. Address
E. C. R., Mardon’s Library, Clifton.
TUIIION. —An Oxford S.C.L. wishes to
meet with Three or Four young Boys in a private
family or school, whom he may instruct in the Classics, and
to receive board and lodging as an equivalent for his services.
References to character and ability if required. Address
Omega, Post-office, Weston-super-Mare.
npUITION. —A Young Man, respectably
JL connected, who has had some experience in teaching,
desires to he engaged as Tutor to young gentlemen, either
in a School or Family. He can instruct in Arithmetic. Algebra,
Latin, Greek, and in the general subjects of English educa-
tion . He can refer to two Clergymen for references. Address
A. 8.C., care of Mr. Langford, Chemist, Hingham, Norfolk.
T EEDS GRAMMAR SCHOOL.—The
A.J Rev. A. Barry, M.A., Head Master, (late Fellow of
Trinity College, Cambridge, and Sub-Warden of Trinity Col-
lege, Glenalmond), will receive four or five BOYS, attending
the Grammar School, under his special charge as boarders, at
his house, Spencer-place, about half-a-mile from Leeds.
Charge for instruction, board, washing, &c., Fifty Guineas
per annum, exclusive of school fees, which, for boys not in
the foundation, vary from 12?. to 16?. per annum. Apply (by
letter) to Rev. A. Barry, Spencer-place, near Leeds.
DUCATIONTt Dover,
JH at a Preparatory School for little Boys, sons of Gentle-
men, conducted by Mrs. Hammond, assisted by her Daughters.
References kindly permitted to the Rev. Edward Coleridge*
Eton College; the Rev. Wm. Oxenham, Harrow ; the Rev. J
Moultrie, Rugby; and to the Clergy and Medical Men’of
Dover. Further particulars may be obtained by applying to
Mrs. Hammond, Dover.
1 THOME SELWOOD, SOMERSET
J_ COLLEGE and GRAMMAR SCHOOL of ST. JOHN
BAPTIST.—This Institution was opened on the Feast of St.
John Baptist, last past, under the Rev. W. J. E. Bennett,*
Vicar of the Parish, and the Rev. J. E. Gibson, Head Master!
Assistant Master, (to be tilled up.) French Master, Mr!
Nicholas, of the University of Paris. The teaching is iii
Greek, Latin, French, and the usual branches of a Com
mercial Education. Terms, for Boys of the College, (in-
cluding School Fees, but not Washing), 357. per annum. If
boys are Choristers half the School Fees (namely 4?. 45.) will
be remitted. For further information apply to the Head
Master. The next term commences on Monday, August 7th,
at Nine o’clock, a.m. Boys in the College to be present at
Evening Prayer, Seven, p.m., on Saturday, August sth.
615
THE GUARDIAN.
1854.]


- 616 THE GUARDIAN, [Aoo 2j
H This2hXlwm?e^^fi^^nday?he^u2 AtwusT I HALLS.— BRITISH WAX CANDLES 1 /ShURCH DECORATIONS f
Pupils are expected to be present at the evening iendce d\iU. Br^™T ge an „ d . c « mmodious HOUSE near Mag- U ls.sd. per lb.; British Sperm. Is. 6d • Genuine I /,V7- r JJ PXOKAI lONS, of every
For particulars apply to the Rev. Charles Miller,Vicarage* sittingVooms’ long ’ three o Perm ’ ls ‘ 6cL; Transparent Wax, Is. Bd. ; Best Wax I at ™wx FRANK SMITH’S
or the Rev. Charles J. Goulden, Grammar School Harlow’ w l ! W ? ’ kitchens, scullery, larder, 2s. 3d; Fine Wax, Is. 5d.; German Wax, Is. 3d - Botanic Wax I i a t7 C^L^«REI^!? MS ’ 36, Southampton-street,
Essex. ’ mar fcchool, Hallow. wine and coal cellars, with two acres of kitchen and flower Is. Id.; Patent Sperm, Is. Id.; Composite 9d* 1M a S An ,Hlftrate d Priced Catalogue, containing upwards
The new buildings now in course of erection win *Wfw I * bling> &c - A PP ] Y to Mr. A. Bridgwater, Iffley. Hid.; Moulds, 9d.; Store Candles! Bd.: Palmer’s’ mV’fin? I ,f m y woodcuts, sent on receipt of four postage-stamps,
be completed, and will afford much additional accomraoda- X> OARD and LODGING for a Gentleman °ak! 7 tW ° Jl cks ’ 9d<; Ma S ßUras » l° d -; Yellow Soap. 385.! HUHE GOLD REVIVER Is 6d ner
— a :r: ! sa ?:? ebedroomforeach ** cSts?: i *Lzz
XT OME EDUCATION.—Brighton J^ r ? th f s . occupying the same sleeping-apartment), may White Windsor, Is 4d - Rose 2s • AlVond 2s2d ’ 1 highly patronised preparations make old gilt frames and
iSSSSISSSS
rSS“= b^Srf“
asi'BE- •• TSfeSfAfeJ 1 ; ox .f°®p
SSpSSisSiS SHSSS
Head Master-The Rev, JAMES BANKS, M.A., late Scholar kpo LET, for Two or Three Months, a r “ k I ,red ’ s - Patterns of the’'materials and Directions for Measuit
of Lincoln College, Oxford. L FURNISHED COTTAGE at Grasmere- contain,'no- innJiWw b 7 g lthym, have never yet been I nent sent free, per post.
A sound preparation for University or professional life is two sitting-rooms, five bed-rooms, with dressing-room kif publicVotL kindhlß ierto brought before the I TSTXpD VTV/fPTvf YT V . 7
af Sh de fr to A n T arderS and - day b °ys at vei T moderate terms. chens, and offices, a small garden, coach-house and’two- of the Pn ces, together with a Copy I J CLERGYMEN Will find the following
a 7i(f gniifpaVVpv 16061768 Board ® rs un derl 5 years of age staHed stable. Near to the church and post-office. Apply, CARSON and SON ’No 9 WINCHFSTFR Ith Arti . cles * from their intrinsic merits, deserve more
at 40 guineas pei annum (washing, modern languages, Rev. G. Hutchinson, Moss Head, Grasmere, 7 OLD BPOad ’ KE i V I ? CHES^ ER ' STREET ’ I th s n a P assm S thought :
drawing, fortification, and navigation, being extras); or at mxxrn v "LD i BRO.AD-S. TRE ET, Royal Exchange. London. No I The TERRYAN POPLIN, for Vests, and PaletOts and
48 guineas inclusive of everything, except books and medical HPW O ELDERLY LADIES, (Sisters or Ag * A]l oideisareparticularlyrequestedtobesentdirect. I Overcoats, price 13s. and 30s. This light and indelible black
attendance. Above 15 years, 50 guineas, or 58 inclusive. X. Friends), may find a comfortable home in a family f'T'HE BEST SHOW nf IRON RUDQ'n?ADc • r nate J al is a nec essity for Summer Garments.
Very valuable Exhibitions are attached to the school, and consisting of a beneficed Clergyman, his mother and sSr S the KTNCDOvr wtri T ora 10 I P e CLERICAE FROCK COAT £ 3 5
day boys, whose parents reside in or within ten miles of fhe situation of the village and parsonage is dry and healthy twoverl kS S ’ B ™ T ON S.~He has I The CLERICAL PALETOT 2 2
Ludlow, may (by paying 3 1, per annum) secure the annual within thirty miles of London, and four from a rati way sho w 07l SVVTVa ! de J Ot nK-i t i° tl , ie ® xclusive I Phe CLERICAL WAISTCOAT 013
chance of an Exhibition of 50/. per annum for three years, station. Terms, 250/. per annum. Address A B p m t-offip/ ai J dßiass bedsteads and Children’s Cots, with I The DOESKIN TROUSERS in
tenable at Oxford, Cambridge, or Durham. 7 Ingatestone. Essex. Address A. 8., Fost-officc, Bedding and Mattresses. Common Iron Bed- Gentlemen who are dissatisfied wiih ihe quality price or
There are good houses at a Moderate rent, suitable for a — T ATW f n p®f d A \ P i >rt^i e /°! d ' n f Beds , teads from 12s - 6d. I make of their clothes, will find their remedy at PR NEVV-
parents coming to reside m Ludlow for the benefits of the A LADY, of middle age, accustomed to LV-Vn- 1 f ll Bedsteads » fit . ted Wltb dovetail joints and patent I M A N’S, Clerical and Practical Tailor, 102 Recent-street
school. The school re-opens August 14. Application may -fX the management of a Family, would be glad to take nrn2„f!iT ft 2 S 'l D Hd Cots from 21s. each; handsome I Opinions of the Press, vide Courier and Church Reform
be made to the Head Master, Grammar-school, Ludlow. * | CHARGE of a Widower’s or Single Gentleman’s HOUSe! S r *??,?,?. and Brass Bedsteads m S rea t variety, from J Gazette, 2nd of May. 1854 We were present last w-eek at
ST AT AT?P A PPT’Q pat tpcp n DT ppr S?pr?n’.r r as A S? MPANI g N to a LADY - Unexceptionable . I V n Regent ’ s Q uadran t, at the testing of black
1. MARGARLI b COLLEGE, CRIEFF, references. Address C„ Post-offiee, Woodhonse. near Leeds. T>APIER MACHE and IRON TEA-TRAYS.— I 2^ th i* to ® how the s . u Periority of the dying of those used by
rTIT PERTHSHIRE. J A Q A fYi u ~ JL An assortment of Tea-Trays and Waiters whollv im- I thlS u l *™’ iß c e m P ari s°n with those in general use, and were
FOR THE EDUCATION OF YOUNG LADIES. J A ap t .. . ... v s *, Lady, who IS precedented, whether as to extent, variety, or novelty. I niVi 1 U atdied at the result, for, on the testing of several
Visitor—-The LORD BISHOP of St. ANDREW’S RamMv in Vmnni° Ultlon ’ de sires a Re-engagement in a New oval shape Papier Machd Trays, ’ I , }l ® ces of home and fo jeign make, either piece or wool dyed.
Principal—The Rev. A. LENDRUM, M.A. teaol 7’” I *l s o o . und Ln B l . lBh education, she per set of three from 20s. Od. to 10 guineas I coloßr was easdy discharged by the acids used; but those
Lady Superintendent—Mrs. LENDRUM. amount of faWv^n I '% w d w in s T^ ddres s, stating the Ditto, Iron ditto from i3s. Od. to 4 guineas Ilw that W6F if made , for this hoß se, scarcely changed
Head Governess—Miss WAITE. nprnnlrf salal Y’ to F. 11., Heydon s Library, Fore-street, Convex shape, ditto from 7s. 6d. I even when under the influence of vitriolic acid,
Assistant O’CONNOR. —' Round and gothic waiters, cake and bread baskets ennallv low I of Cou , rs ®’. th ® fabric was burnt. We understand a
BE “- I 0.0 VERNE SS.-A Dignitary oHS 15 ATHS and TOILETTE WARE.—WIDLIAM S. | SSSiK X ** by ° f the
Physician—MATTH. B. GAIRDNER Esq MD * elements of Italian, and has the usual branches of English WA RE. lhe stock of each is at once the largest, newest, and I fni Y ' CLFRGIMFN, and GENTLE-
This College has been establishedforThe education, and a good method in the schoolroom. Her late most varied ever submitted to the public, and marked al \° GRA P UATE ‘W C * FOSTER and Co -> lat ® Rar-
viding for youngTadies a solid and nohtp^iwfnn f f Fh ?n; P 1 S A W6 , re from eight t 0 years of age. Her salary pnces P r °P° rt ionate with those that have tended to make his I F?. s and Foster, Tailors and Robe-makers, beg respectfully to
with the hhdies? advantairps\nmnra? nrfn e i^r Caßon ’/ oge - Rer i° L to D - D -» care of Mr. Skeffington, Bookseller establishment the most distinguished in this country. For- L p nt ™ atethat every description of Academic and Ecclesiastical
There are 10 ! 8 t l ra i n J lng ’ Piccadilly, London. ° ton ’ iiooKi ’ elle U table Showers, 7s. 6d ; Pillar Showers. 3/. to 5/.; Nursery f R obes are made by them, in the most correct forms and
moderate fixed charge. 7 gb g com P rehended m a SUPERIOR PESiniATT l' 13s.*6d. to 32s ; Sponging, 15s. to 325; Hip, 14s. to 31s. 6d. f ™ , best and IRO s fc Arabic materials, at the under-
The next Terra commences on the 17th nf *„„„ f u S U fr j . RESIDENT GOVERNESS. A large assortment of Gas, Furnace. Hot and Cold Plunge, I iaiß cd strictly moderate prices:—
special areangcmeift°Tlie e ?rave?Hn£? b pxnen^p^f^ UgU T E i 7 A La ? y ’ of . sound Church Principles, who has had Vapour, and Camp Shower Baths.-Toilette Ware, in grea j Commoners’Gowns 105.6d.t0 16s. 6d.
are made rdv elhng expenses from London I nrnch experience in Tuition, desires a RE-ENGAGEMENT variety, from 15s. 6d. to 455. the Set of Three. I Scholars’ do. .. 21 0., 30 0
For Prospectuses, containing term,, references, and other I ‘SraKrawWh’ 0 (^ ntre ? in WILLIAM S. BURTON has TEN LARGE SHOW-ROOMS B.A,'andT “oSwrif d ° *f S ” ‘ 4 °s ®
details, and for any further information required, annlv to Enellsh ediioaHo’n wfthfha S asa bran ches ot an (all communicating), exclusive of the shop, devoted solely to | SC I Silk Gm™° Vn 2”il 2
i -i
L> A GOVERNESS can be very lllVhiv I Silk Stoles ??' 8n ” n
„ 6C Cam S hri , d^^ < ’ Fe ** ow | to t * le ev * Brown, PILL of HEALTH- j LaWn ’ and
Secretaries—Rev. J. Griffith, M.A.; M Turner Esn —. T ; —— X “ For upwards of nine years (writes Mr. T. Province I Vo ** T n ~ {,3 0
This College provides a sound liberal and religious educa- A J " A HY in London requires a good ,°* Winchmore-haH, Middlesex), I have experienced the effi- I A large quantity of *Hoods slivnlti.2
tion, so modified as to meet the demands for practical know- A COOK, where no Kitchen-maid is kept, with an un- Ca ° 7 of Hus excellent medicine, and I have the happiness of I ilways on hand, for sale or hire Altar Cloth? otJ' ™
ledge °* tb ? pre T ? ent a^e - I exceptional character of twelve months. Sober clean actfve !f y,ng th , at lilneveLhad I il neve L had a better state of health. I beg fur- Linen, &c. tar Cl ° ths ’ CommuniOß
The 1 ration I ees vary from 15/. to 30/., according to age. obliging, and honest. The recommendation from anv ladv Hier to add, that this medicine is in general use by my family, I FOSTER and CO 123 and 124 TTin-b
Boarders are received in different houses connected with the greatly oblige. Address Mrs. Clarke. 3?StratfoS-place & "r W 2 °J * oth S g t 0 e + qU ; ll iL ”
College at 45/., 52/. 10s., and 60/. Oxford-street. P ce ’ For females these pills are truly excellent, removing all ob- I(aA R P E L S.—J 011 N MAPL E ’ S
Three Scholarships of 30/. per annum are open for compe- ttt a attttGS —T r —] : ; structions, the distressing headaclie so very prevalent with I\J FURNISHING ESTABLISHMENT is the largest
HHp :ll to students proceeding to Oxford or Cambridge. I \/%/ by a Eady in the Country. Hie sex, depression ot spirits, dulness of sight,nervous affec- J cheapest, and best in the world. Good Rrnwi« Pamofs*
~,?' Rl ® e Scholarships of 30/. per annum are open for compe-
tlt'° l n E students proceeding to Oxford or Cambridge.
The Principal holds a limited number of nominations,
abilities ll6 ' VOU d be willln S to g iy e to boys of promising
WANTED, by a Lady in the Country,
a thoroughly respectable middle-aged Person as
CUUK in a large I arnily where a Kitchenmaid is kept. Wages
2m i 1 Z e^ r> and washing f °und. Apply to X. Y. Z„ Post-
office, Stoke-by-lSayland, Suffolk.
structions, the distressing headaclie so very prevalent with \J FURNISHING ESTABLISHMENT is the
the sex, depression ot spirits, dulness of sight, nervous affec- I cheapest, and best in the world. Good Brussels Carnets’
tions blotches, pimples, andl sallowness of the skin, and gives 2* 9|d. per yard; rich Velvet Pile Carpets. 4s3d • latent
a healthy juvenile bloom to the complexion. Sold by all I Victoria Felt Carpeting, 2s. Bd. The Vienna Easy Chair 35s
Medicine-vendors, price Is. Ud. per box. Observe “ Thomas This Chair, stuffed in the much approvedTuSn X* i
front” is on the Government stamp. | ?reat luxury, and suitable for any kind of rooi! Ttefarap-on
I 1 Giinli yy irnlmif J rx . W 1
A Prospectus, with further information, mav be obtained
on application to the Principal, or to M. Turner, Esq., Secre-
tary, Brighton College. 1
*** The nex t half year will commence on August 10th.
O MARY’S COLLEGE, WINDERMERE.
k> WANTED, a MATHEMATICAL MASTER. A Cler-
*° tte KeV ' the Warden ’ S - M “^’ s
WANTED, by a MISTRESS, middle-
aged, not trained, who has just left a Village School,
Ln e ' ei ! ga T> ge^ent r T n the same - Cannot Each singing. Ad-
dress A. 8., Mrs. Hollys, High-street. Salisbury, Wilts.
AN TED, by the Trustees of a National
\rAeTT^o and^ P UT°^2i a Jl 7 inday and Daily Mixed School, a
MA.SIER and MISTRESS. Salary, 60/. per annum, with a
comfortable house and large garden. Applications and testi-
momais to be forwarded before the 19th day of August next
to Mr. Thomas Warden, Solicitor, Bardon, near Taunton.
1854 6tary t 0 th ° SUid Trustees * —Dated Bardon, 27th July,
WAN TED, at Michaelmas, a trained
MABTER and MISTRESS for a National School,
iney must be able to teach Singing. Salary, 80/. per annum,
with a house, in addition to their own receipts from Govern-
ment. Apply to the Rector of St. Mary’s, Chester.
T EDBURY POOR LAW UNION. dri
JU/ SCHOOLMASTER and SCHOOLMISTRESS WANTED. sta
f F“ e Guardians of the Poor of this Union will, at a meeting mu
of the Board on Tuesday, the Bth day of August next, pro- ger
ceed to the election of a Schoolmaster and Schoolmistress. rea
having certificates of merit. The Schoolmaster must be R re
qualified not only to instruct the boys in the ordinary wb
branches of education, but also to take charge of, and si nj
superintend their industrial training chiefly in spade hus- Mr '
bandry. The amount of salaries to be paid, exclusive of a £'
hoard, lodging, and washing, will depend upon the’qualifica- Vl-
- of the persons elected, to be determined on examina- ff
tion hy her Majesty’s Inspector of Workhouse Schools The V.
salray per annum will be, for the Schoolmaster, not less than ull
35/., and for the Schoolmistress not less than 25/. Written per
applications, with testimonials as to fitness, &c., must be upc
sent to the Clerk’s-office, Ledbury, on or before Monday, the arti
7th day of August next, and candidates must attend at the
Board-room, Union Workhouse, Ledbury, on the day of soU
election, at the hour of eleven in the forenoon.
By order of the Board, thei
T j« t i r\ J - HUGHES, Clerk. of s
Ledbury, July 20, 1854. pre
A SMALL RURAL PARISH.-If any thei
■AT. Lady will undertake to superintend the domestic. Tc
establishment of an unmarried Clergyman, in a pleasant feits
spot in Rutlandshire, she will find all the comforts of a home. Mar]
■ , ““ mG v,umiui is ui aJIOIIIC.
No salary will be given. The society around is very respec- Six P e
table, and the pos tion will suit a lady anxious to devote Ii
herself to the duties of a quiet country parish. The highest
reference will be given and required. Address F R S I I
Loughborough. * * i /
A LADY wishes to obtain EMPLOYMENT d^ pr !! sed state of the Tea market, U they a are 'enable^to
Ifee BR b EAKFAST CONGOU at 2 S . Bd.. 35., 3 S . 6d„ and
care°fMrs-
rr HaEE LADIES earnestly desire the aid
be made m vain, and that all who can will assist them in parcels of ?valLnl apphcat . 1 1 0n ’ P° st free, and
completing the work. Further particulars given if required, the kingdom d upwaids ’ lail P aid > aß F station in
eare ° f M, ' S ' l2I > ( SPARROW and Co.. Wholesale Dealers In
1 iea > 3p 2, Oxford-street, London.
TXTANTED, in a Clergyman's Family in a
o Laf C 7r7ZX i il a f T e A where two servants are kept,
a COOK and HOUSEMAID. The former must be a strong
and active person, who understands plain cooking, and to as-
sist m the housework; the latter be able to wait at table and
work at her needle, &c. Both must be members of the
Church, and Communicants preferred. Wages to the Cook,
9/. ; to the Housemaid, 8/. The advertiser would be much
obliged to any Clergyman who could recommend anv one to
fiH either of the above situations.—Address A. 8., Weedon
Post-office, Northamptonshire.
WAETED, in a Clergyman’s Family in
a very retired country place, a steady, healthy, active
Young Woman as PARLOUR and HOUSEMAID. She must
be a thoroughly good servant, and know how to wait well at
table, to clean plate, and to work well at her needle She
must be a member of the Church of England, and a commu-
nicant. Any Clergyman who could recommend such a one
would much oblige the advertiser. The family is small, and
good wages are given. Apply to E. H. W., Post-office,
Seaford, Sussex.
TXT ANTED, in a Clergyman’s family in the
Y T country, if a brother clergyman can well recom-
-S?S™ l ax? a . p ® r , son ’, a ste ady respectable GROOM and
lOOTMAN, strictly sober and good-tempered, between the
age of 20 and 30 years, who thoroughly understands the
dnving of a pair ot horses, the management of them in the
stable, and the taking care of harness and carriage He
must be a single man, active, and willing to make himself
generally useful, and one who can wait well at table, and be
ready to assist the Gardener when not otherwise employed.
Preference will be given to one who is a communicant arid
who has a knowledge of singing, in order to assist in the
singing at church. Address, pre-paid, the Rev. Dr. S at
Mr. West s, Bookseller, Bridgwater. The place will be found
a good and comfortable one. Wages moderate.
/YAUTION.-To TRADESMEN, MER-
•V ,7 H , ANTS> SHIPPERS ’ OUTFITTERS, &c.-Whereas
it has lately come to my knowledge that some unprincipled
person or persons have for some time past been imposing
upon the public by selling to the Trade and others a spurious
?M t 7T e xT U T? de 7 he - 11 f me . 0f BOND ’ S PERMANENT MARK-
ING-INK, This is to give Notice that I am the original and
sole Proprietor and Manufacturer of the said Article, and do
not employ any traveller, or authorise any person to represent
themselves as coming from myestablishment, for the purpose
of selling the said Ink. This Caution is published by me to
prevent further imposition upon the public, and serious
injury to myself.-E R. BOND, Sole Executrix and Widow of
the late John Bond, 28,Long-lane, WestSmithfield,London
To avoid disappointment from the substitution of counter-*
feits, be caretnl to ask for the genuine Bond’s Permanent
Marking Ink, and further to distinguish it, observe that no
Sixpenny Size is, or has at any time been, prepared by him
the Inventor and Proprietor. cu uy nun,
Dome sTfTc Fc~olTomTT^
H. SPARROW and Co. beg to announce that in con-
sequence Oi the late reduction of duty, and the present
depressed state of the Tea market, they are enabled to
• , v. »ii, u m iwui. AJicjrmaguu
Couch, in walnut or rosewood, 3 Guineas. Drawing-room
Chairs, 10s. each. Note the address—l4s, 146, and 147 Tot-
tenhara-court-road, and l to 7. Tottenham-place; also the
name, Maple, as the next house, although in the same trade,
has no connexion.
CLERGI MEN about to FURNISH should
immediately apply for our Pamphlet, of which the
I Mew Edition, for 1854, containing One Hundred and Forty-
seven Beautifully-executed Drawings, is just published, and
I will be sent gratis and post-free. Intending purchasers will
t at once observe the manifest advantage of selecting all their
I ,e S I ! n ’ ementsfrom °ur immense Stock of Home-manufactured
I solid CABINET FURNITURE, CARPETS, FLOOR-CLOTHS
I p? d P ra ri f 6 2 be DDING. This novel and most valuable’
j lamphlet shows the cost of every item, also the cost of
I separate rooms, as well as the entire cost of furnishing every
I description of house, such as— ® *
j V four-roomed cottage, with every necessary, for.. £27 14 6
I V six-roomed ditto, with every comfort, for 82 15 6
I 7 e *^ R “ roomed house, in a superior manner, for .. 150 12 6
I elve ' roomedditto ’ com P letei yand elegantly, for 387 14 0
J VVith every article admirably illustrated.
Special estimates and designs will be furnished in any part
lof the kingdom, free of charge, whenever required 3 V
Every article warranted to be of the soundest material and
and A n T ' AEE DELIVERED
LAKiiIAGE FREE, regardless of distance.
17 COBBETP and CO., Manufacturers and General House
Furnishers. Deptford-bridge. London. Established 1802
THE UNIVERSAL PURVEYOR.—The
i immediate object of this institution is, to commence
an Organised System of Supply for a great variety of Articles
of Consumption, with a public guarantee for their quality
S PriCe ’ asure ’ &c - His hoped thus, within
he limits of the agency, to make the operation of supply a
kind of public service, not speculative, but regularly and
sufficiently remunerated, and at the same time to relieve the
consumer of the uncertainty arising from the impostures and
unfair dealing practised by unscrupulous merchants and
tradesmen This can only be secured by making it the main
object of a trust, governed by persons of acknowledged cha-
racter, and administered in detail only by such as are found
honest upon trial. The profits applied to the benefit of the
officers of the institution, and of those who supply its capital
are to oe limited, so as to allow only a fair remuneration, and
all surplus proceeds to be applied to such public objects as
have a fair claim on the profits of distribution.
I Amongst these would be provident associations of persons
I connected with commerce or any branch of industry, also
I any associations of a pacific character for securing the due
balance of interests in trade, manufactures, or agriculture
and regulating the relations of profits, labour, capital, skill’
&c., with equal regard to all classes, or for equalising the
supply of labour in various departments.
In the present state of the plan the chief benefit offered to
the public is not any extreme cheapness, but a guarantee for
the honest endeavour to supply the best article that can be
fairly obtained for the price, together with the convenience
in some cases, of access to articles which are easily procurable
by parties well acquainted with the best houses of wholesale
supply in the city of London, but which may be difficult to
find genuine, or in some cases to find at all, in retail shops.
It is Intended also to give the ready-money customer the
advantage of his prompt payment. The system of keeping
an account with the establishment, and ordering by cheques
as from a bank, will be the most complete method of doing
business, and the most advantageous to the consumer.
T"|R. DE JONGH’S LIGHT BROWN
LI J ER 0IL ’ prepared for medicinal use in the
Loffoden Isles, Norway, and put to the test of chemical ana-
Ufis. ihe most effectual remedy for CONSUMPTION
BR HNCHI t IS, ASTHMA’ GOUT,'chronic RHEUMA-
TISM, and all SCROFULOUS DISEASES.
of anfl recommended by * Berzelius, Liebig,
Woehler, Jonathan Pereira, Fouquier. and numerous other
eminent medical men and scientific chemists in Eurone S acqua l nted Wltb the , b . esc hous es of wholesale
Specially rewarded with medals bv the Governments of 16 Clt7 ° f London » but which may be difficult to
Belgium and the Netherlands. ‘ Governments of find genuine, or in some cases to find at all, in retail shops.
Has almost entirely superseded all other kinds on fhp !a! S lßtended 7° t 0 glve tb e ready-money customer the
tinent, in consequence of its proved superior (rf -??JE rorn P t vß l ? ment - The s y stem of keeping
cacy, effecting a cure much more rapidly. as from Than estaffiishment, and ordering by cheques.
Contains iodine, phosphate of chalk volatile aoid and the 2 116I 16 P° St com P le te method of doing
elements of the bile—in short, all its most aefive an’/ bu f ness ’ and th e most advantageous to the consumer,
tial principles—in larger quantities than the Dale oils made - Vl ° f re desirous of entering further into de-
in England and Newfoundland, deprived mainly if these by letter with MonsVl . m . a Y.'communicate, by
their mode of preparation. y ° 7 |oHe r , w ith Mons. J. L. St. originator of the concern.
Sold, wholesale and retail, in bottles labelled with r>r dA r ’at ba . n y* s He e t, Regent’s-park, London, or with the Rev.
Jongh’s stamp ami signatnre ' b n v ° oUles ’ labelled " lth Dr- C. Marriott, Oriel College, Oxford, one ot the Trustees.
ANSAR, HARFORD, and CO 77 STRAND IPe Umversal Purveyor is already in operation as a bu i-
Sole Consignees and Agents for the United Kingd’om and ordeJimrasted to fts^are^ I"™* 1 "™* Undertakes t 0 execute
V»d« re KSto. d o^ r M a S^S^ b J| Jr cS'oM *PPlytoMr.Wm.
priceslmperial measure, Half-Pints, 2s. 6d.; Pints, 4s. M. Jhur’ctstreet.-Agents wautol lul ve} or - 159 > Fe “-
THE HOUSEWIFE’S FRIEND.—
CREWS’S RINSING LIQUID, used in all Laundries
effectually restores and fixes colours which are now destroyed
in washing. Twenty drops of the liquid are sufficient for one
gallon of rinsing water. Sold in bottles at 6d. and 9d. each
by all Chemists and Oilmen in the United Kingdom. Agents’
Messrs. Hayward and Barron, Bush-lane, Cannon-street’
Manufactory, Commercial Wharf, Mile-end, London.
The following are selected from numerous testimonials:—
I have tried Crews’s Rinsing Liquid at my Laundry, and
find it acts on Coloured Fabrics as set forth by the Proprie-
tor, and, therefore, shall continue its use, and fleet much
pleasure in recommending it to the notice of the jnubiic.
A. CARPENTER.
Blandford Laundry, 14, Byrom-street, Blandford-square.
Grove-street, Camden-town, 24th March, 1854.
I have great pleasure in testifying to the great value*of
Crews’s Rinsing Liquid for fixifig colours. I have used it
several times w ith the most delicate Coloured Fabrics, and
found that the Liquid not only fixed the colours, but when
the articles were dry the colours came out as though only
just printed. I feel bound to express my admiration of the
discovery, and shall recommend it to all ray female friends
S. CROSSENHAM.
DINNEFORD’S pure fluid
MAGNESIA has been for many years sanctioned by
the most eminent of the medical profession, as an excellent
remedy for Acidities, Heartburn, Headache, Gout and Indi-
gestion. As a mild aperient, it is admirably adapted for
delicate females: and it prevents the food of infants from
turning sour during digestion. Combined with the ACIDU-
LATED LEMON S\ RUP, it forms an effervescing aperient
draught, which is highly agreeable and efficacious. Pre-
pared by Dinneford and Co., Dispensing Chemists (and
General Agents for the improved Horsehair Gloves aud Belts)
172, New Bond-street, London; and sold by all respectable
Chemists throughout the Empire.
THE CHOLERA PREVENTED by the
Destruction of all noxious Effluvia.—CßEWS’S DTS.
INFECTING FLUID. Recommended by the College of
Physicians. The Cheapest and Strongest Chloride of Zinc
Quarts, 2s; Pints. Is.; Half-pints, 6d. Sold by all Chemists
Druggists, and Shipping-agents, and at Commercial-wharf
Mile-end, London. ’
N.B. “Crews’s Disinfecting Fluid is a cheap, powerful
and pure preparation.”— Medical Circular. ’
Cannon-street J SS City? reW ’ HeyWa ‘' d ’ a ‘ >d Bam>n ’ Bush - la " e >


Now ready, Part 1., of
This eerns of great Britain.
Illlustrated by JOHN E. SOWERBY ; Descriptions by
C. JOHNISON, Esq. To contain about Forty-six Plates, and
to be connpleted in Eight Monthly Parts, full-coloured, at 3s;
partly coloured, at Is. 6d. per Part.
To be lhad through all Booksellers; and of the Proprietor,
John E. tSowerby, 3, Mead-place, Lambeth.
Just ready, fcap. Bvo., price 55.,
Leamington college sermons.
SCHOOL LIFE. Sermons preached in the Chapel of
Leamington College.
By THOMAS BURBIDGE, LL.D., Master of the College.
“ First the blade, then the ear, after that the full corn in
the ear/’— St. Mark iv., 28.
Oxford and London: John Henry Parker.
Fleet-street and Hanover-street, August, 1854.
Messrs, seeleys are now
PUBLISHING:—
i.
EVENINGS with the ROMANISTS. By the Rev.
M. HOBART SEYMOUR, M.A. In post Bvo., price Bs. 6d.
cloth.
HOME for GENTLEWOMEN during
ILLNESS, 1, Upper Harley-street, Cavendish-square,
London.
This Institution was founded in 1849, for the purpose of
affording a home during illness to ladies of moderate means,
whose cases may require first-rate medical and surgical
treatment.
Ladies seeking for admission must apply to the Superin-
tendent, a Lady resident in the house, who has devoted her-
self to the work for love’s sake. Terms (including board,
lodging, and every expense), for a separate room, one guinea
per week. If sharing a room with one or two more, ten
shillings per week.
London nurses’ institution.
Established for providing MONTHLY and WET
NURSES, and in Old Age an ASYLUM for those Nurses.
PATRONS.
The Duchess of CAMBRIDGE.
Mrs. SAMUEL GURNEY.
President—Sir James Clarke, Bart., F.R.S., Physician to the
Queen.
Bankers—Sir Charles Price, Bart., and Co.
Subscribers can obtain well-qualified women as Monthly or
Wet Nurses, upon application at the Office of the Institution.
Monthly or Wet Nurses desirous of engagements, and
whose characters will bear the most searching inquiry, can
obtain futher particulars upon application to the Medical
Superintendent, between 11 and 3 o’clock daily.
Monthly or Wet Nurses can be sent at an hour’s notice to
any part of the kingdom.
Annual Subscription, One Guinea; Life Ditto, Ten
Guineas.
Applications for Nurses to be made to THOS. RAYNER,
Esq., M.D., the Medical Secretary. Letters to he prepaid,
and enclose a stamp.
70, KING WILLIAM-STREET, CITY. Office entrance in
Clement’s-lane.
Bank of deposit, national
ASSURANCE and INVESTMENT ASSOCIATION,
No. 3, Pall-mall East, London. Established a.d. 1844. Em-
powered by Special Act of Parliament.
Parties desirous of Investing Money are requested to
examine the Plan of this Institution, by which a high rate
of interest may be obtained with perfect security.
The Interest is payable in January and July at the Head
Office in London ; and may also be received at the various
Branches, or through Country Bankers, without delay or ex-
pense.
PETER MORRISON, Managing Director.
Prospectuses and Forms for Opening Accounts sent free on
application.
THE LONDON and WESTMINSTER
BANK issues CIRCULAR NOTES of 10/. each for
Travellers on the Continent. They are payable at every im-
portant place in Europe, and thus enable the traveller to
vary his route without inconvenience. No expense is in-
curred, and when cashed, no charge is made for commission.
They may be obtained at the Bank, Lothbury, or its Branches,
1, St, James’s-sqnare ; 214, High Holborn; 3, Wellington-
street, Borough; 87, High-street, Whitechapel; and 4, Strat-
ford-place, Oxford-street.
J. W. GILBART, General Manager.
CRYSTAL PALACE. FREQUENT
TRAVELLERS can INSURE AGAINST RAILWAY
ACCIDENTS, by the year, term of years, or for the whole of
life, on application to the booking clerks at the principal
railway stations ; and at the offices of the Railway Passen-
gers’ Assurance Company, 3, Old Broad-street.
WILLIAM J. VIAN, Secretary.
Keliance mutual life
ASSURANCE SOCIETY.
THE ENTIRE PROFITS DIVIDED AMONG THE ASSURED.
TRUSTEES.
Vernon Abbott, Esq. I A. Leslie Melville, Esq.
John Ledger, Esq. | James Traill, Esq.
George Whitmore, Esq.
ADVANTAGES PRESENTED BY THIS SOCIETY.
LIFE ASSURANCES may be effected upon Equal, Half-
Premium, Increasing, or Decreasing Scales ; also by Single
Payments, or Payments for Limited Periods. Tables have
been specially constructed for the Army, Navy, East India
Company, and Merchant Services; also for persons voyaging
to, or residing in, any part of the world.
N.B. —No charge for Policy Stamps.
E. OSBORNE SMITH, Autuary and Secretary.
75, King William-street, Mansion-house.
Q ACRAMENTAL WINE, BEST ROTA
Cj TENT, 40s. per dozen, bottles and hampers included,
and carriage paid.—O’NEILL and SMYTHE, in addition to
the Sacramental Wine now so extensively supplied by them,
send all their other wines, also carriage paid, to all parts of
the country, so far as there is direct conveyance, if not less
than one dozen be required, Cash or a respectable reference
is required.
N.B.—Bottles and hampers, when charged, are allowed for
at the same price if returned.—4, Crown-court, Old Broad-
street, Loudon,
npHE ROYAL CAMBRIDGE SHERRY,
JL This noble, celebrated Wine, is purveyed to H.R.H.
the Duke of Cambridge, her Majesty’s Household, many of
the highest Dignitaries of the Church, some of the principal
Clubs and Messes, while its qualities are recommended by
eminent medical men. It can only be had in England of the
Shippers, Messrs. BELLINGHAM and Co., 4, Beaufort-
buildings, Strand, in cases, 365. per dozen, or at Cadiz, 14?.
per quarter cask. Those prejudiced against “ Advertised
Wines,” are invited to try this by sample only.
ECHERCHE, WINES!— First Growth
Wines only ! At the following very reduced prices on
cash terms:
Sherry—“ Amontillado and Montilla character.” In Dock
at 521. per Butt, 26?. per Hhd., 13?. per Quarter Cask. Duty
paid—2l?. per Quarter Cask, 42?. per Hhd., 84?. per Butt,
425. per dozen.
Port—Very rare old Wines, 48s. and 545. per dozen.
Connoisseurs, who cannot suit their taste, except on rare
occasions, are invited to try these wines. Vintage Ports for
laying down.
The qualities of Wines most prized being different: some
preferring pale, others brown; some dry, some fruitiness
and smoothness, all of which are consistent with purity,
Gentlemen are solicited to call and taste the Wines at Mr.
Haramick’s offices, No. 11, Pall-mall, London.
First class! Champagne, Moselle, Hocks, Clarets, Sauterne,
&c., at the most moderate prices.
These Wines are patronised and recommended by several
eminent Physicians, and are especially recommended to
Connoisseurs. Samples, with List of Prices, forwarded on
application.
There being no credit on freights, neither on duties, and
to buy in the best market, cash terms command every advan-
tage. and are essentially requisite to obtain the best and
purest wines at the lowest possible prices.
H. H. HAMMICK, Importer,
11, Pall-mall, London, opposite the “ Traveller’s Club.”
0“ HURCH of ENGLAND QUARTERLY
RIE VIEW; a Quarterly Journal of Theology, Art,
Science, sand Literature, for the United Church of England
and Irelamd. The Number for July, now ready, price 65.,
contains
1. Church Preferment.
2. The Eastern Churches.
3. Spiritual Manifestations.
4. Public Schools.
5. Works by the Author of “ Mary Powell.”
6. Irish Education.
7. Church Music.
8. Restitutionist Theology.
9. The Turkish Empire.
10. Quarterly Report of Facts and Progress.
11. Literature of the Quarter Reviewed and Classified.
*** The prompt and regular delivery of the Review, post-
paid, on the day of publication, may be secured by the pre-
payment of 235. per annum through the local bookseller.
London : Sampson Low and Son, 47, Ludgate-hill; and all
Booksellers.
This day is published,
The rambler for august,
(Second Number of Vol. 11., New Series), price Is. 6d.,
by post 2s.
contents:—
1. Protestant Authors and Publishers and Catholic Readers.
2. College of Douay during the French Revolution.
3. Effects of Religious Persecution—Revocation of Edict of
Nantes.
4. Modern Philosophy—Plurality of Worlds.
6. Talbot Gwynne’s Novels.
6. Ruskin’s Lectures on Architecture and Painting.
7. Mrs. Austin’s Sketches of German Life.
8. Notices—Buckley’s Canon’s, &c., of Council of Trent—
Auden’s Luther—Songs of the Present—Yvan’s Ro-
mance of Travel —Neale’s Old Minor Canon—La-
martine’s Celebrated Characters—Collins’ “ Hide and
Seek,” &c.
London : Burns and Lambert, 17, Portman-street, and 63,
Paternoster-row.
IVTOVELLO’S EDITION. CHERU-
-1.1 BINTS TREATISE on COUNTERPOINT and
FUGUE. Price 6s. 6d., bound; post free, 75.; being the-first
of the series of “ Novello’s Library for the Diffusion of
Musical Knowledge.”
J. A. Novello, London and New York.
NOVELLO’S SCHOOL ROUND BOOK.
Fifty Rounds. Price Is.
NOVELLO’S ANALYSIS of VOCAL RUDIMENTS.
Price 6d.
HAWKINS’S HISTORY of MUSIC. Two Vols.,
355.; Portraits, 16s.
NOVELLO’S CHEAP Bvo. ORATORIOS. (Twenty-
two ready.)
Catalogues gratis on application at 69, Dean-street, Soho,
or 24, Pouiltry.
r\ LOBES.—STANFORD’S SCHOOL
VJT GLOBES, price 4?. the Pair, contain all the late
Geographical Discoveries. They are 16 inches in diameter,
mounted in strong black frames, with iron meridian.
STANFORD’S FAMILY GLOBES. Price 10?. 10s.
the Pair, in high mahogany frames, handsomely finished.
The CAPTAIN’S (TERRESTRIAL) GLOBE. 12
inches in diameter, in mahogany frame, with compass
and brass meridian. Price 21. 2s. each.
London: Edward Stanford, Map and Globe-Seller, 6,
Charing-cross, and Stationers’-court, Crystal-palace, Syden-
ham, where may be obtained Gratis, Stanford’s Geographical
Catalogues, containing the best Atlases and Globes, Maps of
the Seat of War, Admiralty Charts and Ordnance Maps.
OASSPORTS and HANDBOOKS for
JL TRAVELLERS.—EDWARD STANFORD obtains
Foreign-office Passports, mounts them in neat morocco or
roan cases, and produces the necessary Visas. Obtaining
Passport, and each Visa, Is.; mounting Passport in morocco
case, with pencil and pocket, 4s. 6d; in roan, 3s. fid. Hand-
books Maps, and Guides for all Parts of the World.
Londom: Edward Stanford, Map and Bookseller, 6,
Charing-civoss.
rpo CCLERGYMEN, AUTHORS, &c.—
JL PAIRKINS and GOTTO’S NEW WRITING PAPER,
made frorai straw, is invaluable to rapid writers. It has a
hard and ssmooth surface, can be written upon on both sides,
with eitheir metal or quill pen, is much pleasanter to write
upon than any other paper, and nearly half the price, being
only 3s. per ream.
ATO CHARGE for STAMPING.—A Single
J_ i packet of Note Paper, or 100 Envelopes, stamped with
Arms, Cresst, or Initials, free of charge, and every description
of Stationery full 30 per cent, cheaper than any other house,
at PARKIINS and GOTTO’S, Paper and Envelope Makers, 25,
Oxford-stneet. Useful Cream-laid Note-Paper, full size, 5
quires for (fid.; superior thick ditto, 5 quires for Is.; India
Note, 5 quiires for Is.; Letter Paper, 4s. per ream; Sermon
Paper, 4s. ifid.; Foolscap, 6s. fid.; and Draft, 7s. fid. per ream;
good Creaxm-laid Cemented Envelopes, 4d. per 100; the
iQueen’s-hcead Envelopes, Is. per dozen; office Envelopes, ss.
per 1,000;; black-bordered Cream-laid Note Paper, full size,
5 quires fo>r Is.; Bordered Envelopes, 9d. per 100; best wax,
3s. fid. per'lb.; 100 super visiting Cards printed for Is. fid.;
useful sanqple packets of Paper and Envelopes, by post, Is.each.
List of pricces sent post free. On orders over 20s. carriage
paid to amy part of the country. Copy the Address,
PARKINS ' and GOTTO, Paper and Envelope Manufacturers,
25, Oxford-street.
ALL the LONDON NEWSPAPERS
J~\ punctually despatched by the Morning, Evening, and
Foreign Msails, to all parts of the United,Kingdom and abroad.
ADVERTISEMENTS inserted in all the London and
Country Newspapers. A List with Politics, days of publica-
tion, &c., ssent gratis on application, by W. DAWSON and
SONS, Aboihurch-yard, and 74, Cannon-street, City. (Estab-
lished 1809).)
RALPH’S SERMON PAPER. —This paper
is eexpressly manufactured for sermons : from its
particular tform and size (viz., 5f by 9 inches) it admits of
more mattcer than the size hitherto used, and being rather
narrower, iit is far more easily read; the surface of the paper
is adapted ffor expeditious writing with either quill or metalic
pens. Pricce ss. per ream ; or ruled, as required, at 6s. per
ream. Saimple forwarded on application. Sermon Cases—
black roan,, 25.; finest Spanish morocco, with pockets, 3s. fid
each.
F. W. Ralph, Manufacturer, 36, Throgmorton-street, Bank
SACRED PRINTS for PAROCHIAL
USE. Printed in tint, with ornamental border, price
Id. each; mounted on cardboard, with a tape, 3d. each;
glazed, 6d. each.
The Undermentioned are now ready:—
1. The Nativity. 7. The Tribute-money.
2. St. John Preaching. 8. Preparation for the Cross.
3. The Baptism of Christ. 9. Leading to the Crucifixion.
4. Jacob’s Dream. 10. The Crucifixion.
5. Transfiguration of our Lord. 11. Healing the Sick.
6. The Good Shepherd. 12. The Return of the Prodigal.
Oxford and London : John Henry Parker.
Now re&dy, in Bvo., price Is.,
The case of archdeacon wil-
BERFORCE, COMPARED with that of the Rev. G. C.
GORHAM ; in Reply to some Remarks in the Recent Charge
of Archdeacon Wilbcrforce.
By W. GOODE, M.A., F.S.A., &c.
London : T. Hatchard, 187, Piccadilly.
Just published, fcap. Bvo., 4s. 6d.,
SERMONS, chiefly expository, preached
in Wells Cathedral.
By the Rev. E. HUXTABLE, M.A., Subdean, &c.
“ Far above the average in depth of thought, closeness of
reasoning, and learning.”— Guardian.
J. W. Parker, London; Macmillan, Cambridge; Green,
Wells.
This day, Bvo,, Is. 6d.,
Thoughts on Christian moral
INSTRUCTION ; the Necessity and the Mode of Im-
parting it. A Charge, delivered to the Clergy of the Dioceses
of Dublin, Glandalagh, and Kildare, at the Visitation, in
June and July, 1854.
By RICHARD WHATELY, D.D., Archbishop of Dublin.
London; John W. Parker and Son. Dublin : Hodges and
Smith.
ANNOTATED EDITION OF THE ENGLISH POETS.
BY ROBERT BELL.
This day, 2s. fid., cloth,
Songs from the dramatists.
Already published,
COWPER. With Illustrative Selections from the
Works of Lloyd, Cotton, Brooke, Darwin, and Hayley.
Complete in Three Vols. 7s. 6d.
DRYDEN. Complete in Three Volumes. 7s, 6d.
SURREY, MINOR CONTEMPORANEOUS POETS,
and SACKVILLE, LORD BUCKHURST. 2s. 6d.
On the First of September,
POETICAL WORKS of SIR THOMAS WYATT.
London : John W. Parker and Son, West Strand.
Just published, in fcap. Bvo., 4s. 6d., Two Illustrations,
Mercantile morals; a Book for
Young Men on entering upon the active duties of
Life: with an Appendix, containing Explanations of all
Terms used in Law and Commerce, also Foreign Coins,
Weights, and Measures, and their English Equivalents,
The CRUISE of the STEAM YACHT “ NORTH
STAR ” to RUSSIA, TURKEY, DENMARK, &c. &c.
Numerous Illustrations, price 3s. 6d.
London : James Blackwood, Paternoster-row.
Just published, Second and much improved Edition, 12m0.,
cloth, reduced from 3s. 6d. to 2s. 6d.,
ANEW LATIN DELECTUS, adapted to
the arrangement of the Eton and Edward the Sixth
Latin Grammars, with a Lexicon and Notes.
By the Rev. H. E. Adams, M.A., late Fellow of Magdalen
College.
Also, by the same Author,
A NEW GREEK DELECTUS, adapted to the
arrangement of the Rev. C. Wordsworth’s Grammar,
with a Lexicon and Appendix. Second Edition. 12m0.,
cloth, 3s fid.
A NEW EDITION of the GREEK TEXT of the
GOSPELS, with Prolegomena Notes and References for
the use of Schools and Students for Orders. Part I. St.
Matthew, 12m0., sewed, (136 pp.), 2s. 6d.
London : David Nutt, 270, Strand.
American theology. Messrs.
TKUBNER and CO., American and Literary Agency
12, Paternoster-row, have just completed a CATALOGUE o
their very extensive stock of AMERICAN THEOLOGY,
which they will be happy to forward by post to any parties
applying for the same. A liberal discount allowed to Cler-
gymen.
Trubner and Co., 12, Paternoster-row.
NEW PUBLICATIONS of Messrs.
TRUBNER and Uo.
BIBLIOTHECA SACRA and AMERICAN BIBLICAL
REPOSITORY. Conducted by Professor E. A. PARK and T.
H. TAYLOR, M. A., of Andover, with the special co-opera-
tion of Dr. Robinson and Professors 11. B. Smith, G. E. Day,
D. H. Allen, Dr. W. Lindsay Alexander, of Edinburgh ; arid
Dr. Samuel Davidson, of Manchester. In Quarterly Parts at
3s. fid. Annual Subscription, 14s. July now ready.
*** British Copyright secured by priority of publication.
A complete Index to the above mav be found in
POOLE’S INDEX to PERIODICAL LITERATURE. Bvo,
cloth, price 30s.
DWIGHT.—CHRISTIANITY REVIVED in the EAST;
or, a Narrative of the Work of God among the Armenians of
Turkey. By H. G. O. DWIGHT, missionary of the Ameri-
can Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions. 12m0.,
cloth, price 7s.
Triibner and Co., 12, Paternoster-row,
The STATE of the CHURCH in BRITAIN at the
TIME of AUGUSTINE’S MISSION; an Essay, to which
Dr. Ellerton’s prize was adjudged, 1854. By FRED.
MEADOWS WHITE, 8.A., Demy of Magdalen College.
In crown Bvo., price Is.
AMY and ROSALIE : a Mother’s Memorials of two
Beloved Children. With Engravings. In fcap. Bvo.,
price 2s. fid., cloth.
IV.
The KNOT of TO-DAY and a HAND to UNDO IT;
a Letter to the Archbishop of Canterbury on Church
Revival. Price Is. 6d., sewed.
SISTER AGNES; or, Sketches of Convent Life. By
A CLERGYMAN’S WIDOW. In fcap. Bvo., with Six
Engravings, price 55., cloth.
VERBAL INSPIRATION. By the Rev. JOSEPH
BAYLEE, D.D., Principal of St. Aidan’s College. In
fcap. Bvo., price 25., cloth.
The BOOK of COMMON PRAISE : a Selection of
Psalms and Hymns for Public Worship on the Principle
denoted by that title. 18mo., Bd., limp cloth; or with a
Preface and Appendix, Is.
VIII.
A CHART of the SEALS, TRUMPETS, and VIALS
of the APOCALYPSE ; with their Fulfilment as recorded
in History. By the Author of “ Essays on the Church.”
Price 2s. 6d. on a sheet of calico, bound in cloth.
The LECTURES DELIVERED at FREEMASONS’
HALL, May, 1854, before the Church of England Young
Men’s Society. In fcap. Bvo., price 2s. fid, cloth.
The Eighth Edition of
The Rev. C. BRIDGES’ WORK on the CHRISTIAN
MINISTRY. In Bvo., price 10s. fid., cloth.
OUTLINES of SACRED PROPHECY; being an
Inquiry into the Scripture Testimony respecting Good
Things to Come. By the Rev, T. R. BIRKS, M.A., Rec-
tor of Kelshall, Herts. Fcap. Bvo., 55., cloth.
ARNOLD’S LATIN VERSE COMPOSITION.
In Bvo., price ss. 6d., the Third Edition of
A PRACTICAL INTRODUCTION to
LATIN VERSE COMPOSITION. Contents:—!.
“ Ideas” for Hexameter and Elegiac Verses. 2. Alcaics. 3.
Sapphics. 4. The other Horatian Metres. 5. Appendix of
Poetical Phraseology, and Hints on Versification.
By the Rev. THOMAS KERCHEVER ARNOLD, M.A.,
late Rector of Lyndon, and Fellow of Trinity College, Cam-
bridge.
Rivingtons, Waterloo-place.
Of whom may be bad, by the same Author,
1. A FIRST LATIN VERSE BOOK. Fifth Edition. In
12m0., 2s.
2. A SECOND PART (containing Additional Exercises). Is.
3. GRADES NOVUS ANTICLEPTICUS. 12s.
GRESWELL ON THE BURIAL SERVICE.
In Two Vols., Bvo., price 165.,
A COMMENTARY on the ORDER for
the BURIAL of the DEAD, considered as a Manual of
Doctrine and Consolation for Christians.
By the Rev. W. GRESWELL, M.A., Fellow of Balliol Col-
lege, Oxford.
Rivingtons, Waterloo-place.
HOMER I ILIAS, WITH ENGLISH NOTES.—FOURTH
EDITION.
In Bvo., price 155., the Fourth Edition of
HOMERI ILIAS; the ILIAD of HOMER,
from a carefully corrected Text; with copious
ENGLISH NOTES, illustrating the Grammatical Construc-
tion, the Manners and Customs, the Mythology and Antiqui-
ties of the Heroic Ages.
By the Rev. WILLIAM TROLLOPE, M.A., of Pembroke
College, Cambridge; and formerly one of the Masters of
Christ’s Hospital.
Rivingtons ; Longman and Co,; Hamilton and Co.; Whit-
taker and Co.; Simpkin, Marshall, and Co.; B. Fellowes;
and E. Williams.
MR. ALFORD’S NEW VOLUME OF SERMONS.
In small Bvo., price 7s. fid.,
QUEBEC CHAPEL SERMONS, preached
in the former half of 1854.
By HENRY ALFORD, 8.D., Minister of the Chapel;
Editor of a New Edition of the Greek Testament, with Eng-
lish Notes.
Rivingtons, Waterloo-place.
BP. MANT ON A FUTURE STATE.—SEVENTH EDITION.
In 12m<f., price 45., the Seventh Edition of
THE HAPPINESS of the BLESSED,
Considered as to the Particulars of their State ; their
Recognition of each other in that State ; and its Difference of
Degrees. By RICHARD MANT, D.D., late Lord Bishop of
Down and Connor.
Rivingtons, Waterloo-place.
“ TITHE REDEMPTION TRUST.”
Published by request,
A SERMON, preached at Christ Church,
jT3L St. Giles’s, by the Right Rev. the BISHOP of NEW
ZEALAND, on the occasion of the Annual Meeting of the
Society, held at St. Martin’s Hall on 27th June last.
1 Corinthians, vi. 19—“ Ye are not your own ; for ye are
bought with a price.”
Rivingtons, Waterloo-place; and John Leslie, 58, Great
Queen-street.
ARNOLD’S SEQUEL TO THE FIRST GERMAN BOOK.
In 12rn0., price 6s. fid,,
nPHE SECOND GERMAN BOOK: a
JL Syntax, and Etymological Vocabulary, with copious
Reading-Lessons and Exercises.
By the late Rev. T. K. ARNOLD, M.A., Rector of Lyndon,
and formerly Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge ; and J.
W. FRADERSDORFF, Phil. Dr. of the Taylor-Institute,
Oxford.
Rivingtons, Waterloo-place.
Of whom may be had, by the same Authors,
1. The FIRST GERMAN BOOK. Third Edition. ss. fid.
2. READING COMPANION to the FIRST GERMAN
Royal table sauce.—crossb and
BLACKWELL, Purveyors in Ordinary by Appoint-
ment to her Majesty, beg respectfully to inform the Nobility
and Gentry that they continue to manufacture this delicious
and justly celebrated Sauce, in handsome China vases for the
table, and in pint and half-pint bottles ; also, their improved
Essence of real Gorgona Anchovies; Dinraore’s Essence of
Shrimps, for boiled and fried fish; the celebrated Soho
Sauce, for Game; Sir Robert Peel’s Sauce, for general pur-
poses ; Anchovy Paste, Strasburg Potted Meats, &c. The
whole of the above, together with their superior Pickles, may
be obtained of all the principal Sauce Vendors throughout
the kingdom.—Manufactory, 21, Soho-square, London.—
Established 170 G.
npO INVALIDS . —COOLER’S
JL ILLUSTRATED CATALOGUE of MEDICAL APPA-
RATUS, DRUGS, &c., forwarded free by post. Superior
Brass Enema Apparatus, 10s.; Pocket Medicine Cases for
Travelling, 10s.; Stoppered Bottles in Boxwood cases, from
Is.; Medicated Lozenges, 3s. fid. per lb.; Seidlitz Powders,
Is. per box; Bermuda Arrow Root, 2s. per lb.; with every
Medicine of the purest quality only, at a considerable reduc-
tion on the usual charges, at WILLIAM T. COOPER’S Dis-
pensing Establishment, 216, Oxford-street, London.
OPLEINDID CHINTZ FURNITURES.—
lO CLAIRKSON and CO., Her Majesty’s Furniture Printers,
inform the Nobility, Gentry, and the Public they
have now -.received the whole of the new Spring Stock of
their unriivalled Chintzes, greatly reduced in price.—17,
Coventry-sttreet, opposite the Haymarket. N.B.—The re-
mainder off last year’s Patterns are being sold from fid. per
yard.
C HARRIETS, Curtains, Cabinet and Upholstery
/ Furniture, Purified Bedding, &c. HOWITT and Co.,
General Homse Furnishers, respectfully invite the attention
of the Nobiility, Gentry, Clergy, and Public generally, to one
of the largest STOCKS (in combination) in the world of
modern amd elegant Rosewood, Walnut, and Mahogany
FURNITUEtE, for any class of house, also a distinguished
variety of ILooking-glasses, Foreign and English Damasks,
Tapestry amd Brussels Carpets, Chintz, and Floor Cloths,
Bedsteads tooth in Wood and Iron, of all sizes, for which a
distinct show-room is set apart. All goods marked in plain
figures throughout the entire range of their extensive gal-
leries. Any article selected exchanged if not approved of.
Books of estimates sent free upon application, and all goods
delivered im their own vans.—Albion-house, 226, 227, 228,
229, and 25(0, High Holborn,
CHEAP UNIVERSAL HISTORY FOR SCHOOLS.
Recently published, 264 pages, price 2s. bound,
OUTLINES of UNIVERSAL HISTORY.
In Three Parts. Part I. Ancient History; Part 11.
Middle Ages. Part 111. Modern History.
Edited by H. WHITE, 8.A., Trinity College, Cambridge,
M.A. and Ph. Dr. Heidelberg.
“ Distinct in its arrangement, skilful in its selection of
leading features, close and clear in its' narrative.” — Spectator.
“ There is a fulness in the outline which is admirably
brought out by the condensing powers of the author, and
renders the book exceedingly attractive.” —Christian News.
Dr. White’s other School Histories.
GREAT BRITAIN and IRELAND. 463 pages, 3s. Gd.
FRANCE. 389 pages, 3s. fid.
UNIVERSAL HISTORY. 689 pages, 75.; or in Three
separate Parts, 2s. fid. each.
SACRED HISTORY. 187 pages. Is. fid.
ENGLAND, for Junior Classes. 189 pages, Is. fid.
SCOTLAND, for Junior Classes. 160 pages, Is. Gd.
Edinburgh ; Oliver and Boyd. London: Simpkin, Mar-
shall, and Co.
BROWN’S IMMENSE BOOK STORE
(established in 1819), 130, 131, and 132, Old-street
St. Luke’s, London. 150,000 volumes always on sale.
Win. Brown begs respectfully to direct the attention of the
Clergy, and book-buyers generally, to his unequalled stock,
consisting of English and Foreign Books, both new and
second-hand, in all branches of literature, more especially in
theology.
CATALOGUES, with prices affixed, may be had gratis, and
forwarded post free on application.
NEW BOOKS supplied at a discount (for cash only) of
twopence in the shilling from their published prices.
COLONIAL and FOREIGN ORDERS, containing a re-
mittance, faithfully executed.
BOOKS PURCHASED. —Wm. Brown respectfully informs
Gentlemen, Executors, and others, having libraries or smaller
collections of Books to dispose of, that, from the constant
demand he has for all kinds of Literary Property, he is
enabled to offer higher prices than are usually given, accom-
panied with ready money payment.—London, 130, 131, and
132, Old-street, St. Luke’s.
BOOK. 4s.
3. HANDBOOK of GERMAN VOCABULARY. 4s.
This day is published, price Is.,
EAPTISM from the BIBLE.
A SERMON Preached at Newmarket, at the Visitation
Of the Lord Bishop of Ely, July 7,1854.
By the Rev. EDMUND MORTLOCK, 8.D., Rector of
Moulton. Published by Request.
Rivingtons, London ;J. Deighton, Cambridge; Rogers and
Clarke, Newmarket.
PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.
Price Is., pp. 60.
THE SURE JUDGMENT of GOD ; a
Sermon on a Mill Accident, preached at St. Saviour’s,
Leeds, with a Letter to the Mill Owner on his Duty to his
Workpeople, By the Rev. CHARLES GUTCH.
“ An impressive discourse.” —Christian Remembrancer.
“ Peculiarly adapted for the present tim e.”—English
Churchman.
“ We cordially recommend them to the general attention
of employers and employed, and that all reading-rooms in
the manufacturing districts should be furnished with a copy
of them.” —Church of the People.
Harrison, Leeds. Rivingtons, London.
617
THE GUARDIAN.
1854.]


[Aug. 2, 1854.
SIR DAVID BREWSTER’S NEW WORK.
In a few days, Third Thousand, thoroughly revised,with
Additional Chapters, fcap. Bvo.,
MORE WORLDS than ONE; the Creed
of the Philosopher and the Hope of the Christian.
By Sir DAVID BREWSTER.
John Murray, Albemarle-street.
MURRAY’S BRITISH CLASSICS.
The fourth volume of
GIBBON’S ROMAN EMPIRE, Edited by Dr. WM.
SMITH, is published THIS DAY.
John Murray, Albemarle-street.
“ A work of great value, whether it be considered as a
scientific military memoir of the transactions it treats of, or
on account of its strict impartiality. It is impossible to trace
a feeling of superior favour for either Russian or Turk ; and
after perusing the book, we rise with the satisfaction of hav-
ing travelled professionally with a professional man, who has
been influenced by little except the study of his profession.
An excellent translation of this work, which has recently
been published, renders it accessible to the English public.”
—Edinburgh Review, July , 1854.
“ The first successes of the Turks startled those who have
not studied the Campaign of 1828 (as it is told in the Nar-
rative of Baron Von Moltke, with a spirit and precision un-
surpassed by Polybius).” —Quarterly Review.
John Murray, Albemarle-street.
MRS. MARKHAM’S SCPI O 0 L
HISTORIES.
NEW AND CHEAPER EDITIONS.
In consequence of the enlarged and increasing circulation
of these Popular School Histories, the Publisher is enabled
to issue the New Editions at the following reduced rate.
Now ready, Sixty-eighth Edition, with Woodcuts, 12m0,, 65.,
MARKHAM’S HISTORY of ENGLAND. From the
First Invasion by the Romans, to the Fourteenth Year of
Queen Victoria’s Reign.
MARKHAM’S HISTORY”of FRANCE. Frcm the
Conquest by the Gauls, to the Death of Louis P hillppe.
Thirty-sixth Edition. With Woodcuts. 12m0., 63.
111.
MARKHAM’S HISTORY of GERMANY, Brom the
Invasion by Marius, to the present time. Sixth Edition.
With Woodcuts. 12m0., Gs.
IV.
HISTORY of GREECE. From the Earliest I eriod
to the Roman Conquest. With Chapters on the History
of Literature and Art. By Dr. WM. SMITH. Sixth
Edition. With Woodcuts. 12m0.„ 7s. Gd.
John Murray, Albemarle-street.
London: John Murray, Albemarle-street; and Walton and
Maberley, Upper Gower-street.
MURRAY’S HANDBOOKS for
TRAVELLERS.
JJANDBOOK of MODERN LONDON. ss.
JJANDBOOK of TRAVEL-TALK. 3s. 6d.
Handbook for Malta, turkey, Con-
stantinople, and the DANUBE. 10s.
Handbook for Russia, the Baltic
and FINLAND. 12s.
Handbook for Norway, Sweden, and
DENMARK. 12s.
Handbook for Greece, and lonian
ISLANDS. 15s.
JJANDBOOK for EGYPT and the EAST. 15s.
Handbook for south Germany and the
TYROL. 9s.
HANDBOOK for BELGIUM and the RHINE.
Handbook for north Germany
HOLLAND, and PRUSSIA. 9s.
Handbook for Switzerland and the
ALPS. [Just ready.
J JANDBOOK for FRANCE and the PYRENEES.
Handbook for north italy and
FLORENCE. [Just ready.
Handbook for central italy and
TUSCANY. 7s.
JJANDBOOK for ROME and its ENVIRONS.
Handbook for south italy and Naples
15s.
John Murray, Albemarle-street.
The quarterly review
No. CLXXXIX,, is published this day.
Contents:—
1. The House of Commons.
2. Milman’s History of Latin Christianity.
3. The Drama.
4. Classical Dictionaries.
5. The Electric Telegraph.
G, Melanesian and New Zealand Missions.
/. Queen Elizabeth and her Favourites
8. Lord Lyndhurst and the War.
John Murray, Albemarle-street,
RUSSIAN CAMPAIGNS IN TURKEY. Arthur itn v* V F EK ’ F i?- G>s *
Now ready, with Map and Twelve Plans of Schumla, Varna, _ rtlmr Ball, Virtue and Co., 25, Paternoster-row.
Silistria, &c., Bvo., 145., This day, in post Bvo., cloth, price 10s. 6d.,
THE RUSSIANS in BULGARIA and TT'INAL DISCOURSES at ARGYLE
RUMELIA, 1828-9. During the Campaign of the JL’ CHAPEL, BATH.
Danube, the Sieges of Brailow, Varna, Silistria, Schumla, By the late Rev. WILLIAM JAY.
and the Passage of the Balkan. Recently oublished
By BARON VON MOLTKE, Major on the Prussian Ge- A PORTRAITURE of Mr. JAY ’ Price 3s. 6d. fcp.
m’oaf . -_ thur Hall, Virtue and Co., 25, Paternoster-row.’
This day, in fcap,, cloth, price Bs.
MOUB RAY’S TREATISE on
DOMESTIC and ORNAMENTAL POULTRY. New
Edition, Revised and greatly Enlarged by L. A. MEALL,
with the Diseases of Poultry, by Dr. HORNER. With
Coloured Illustrations.
Arthur Hall, Virtue and Co., 25, Paternoster-row.
_ Complete Edition, in fcap., cloth, price 3s. Gd.,
QIGNS of the TIMES; or, Present, Past,
kj/ and Future.
By the Rev. JOHN GUMMING, D.D., F.R.S.E. New and
Enlarged Edition.
In preparation,
The DAILY LIFE; or, Divine Precepts and Pre-
scriptions for Christian Living. By Rev. JOHN GUM-
MING, D.D.
Arthur Hall, Virtue and Co., 25, Paternoster-row.
ready,-Third Thousand, with Engravings, cloth, 3s. Gd.
'THE KAFFIR, the HOTTENTOT, and
-A- tbe FRONTIER FARMER : Passages of Missionary
»frru 0m th . e Journal sof the Ven. Archdeacon MERRIMAN.
I he rapid sale, which has already, we believe, cleared off
the first edition of the little work of which a copy is now
before ns, will have rendered our recommendation almost
superfluous. In the hope, however, of accelerating the dis-
appearance of a second issue, we are glad to give our opinion
that a more simple, and yet effective, record of missionary
work in an English colony can hardly be found.”— Guardian.
George Bell, 186, Fleet-street.
ARCHER GURNEY’S NEW POEMS.
Now ready, in One Vol. Bvo., the People’s Edition, with
„ Fancy Boards, price Is. Gd., of
ON G S of the PRES E N T.
London : Clarke and Beeton, Fleet-street.
spoken.” (2 Cor. iv. 13.)
London : H. Wooldridge, 82, Strand.
MESSRS. BLACKWOOD’S PUBLICATIONS.
/CLASSICAL SCHOOL DICTIONA- NEW WORKS.
4“’ Examiner in the Uni- PA “ STINE 185 *- IS52 ’ Two BVO.
scholars, of the varied learning and critical research embodied SIR ARCHIBALD ALISON'S HISTORY" of EUROPE, from the Fall of Nauoleon to the
in his more voluminous publications. They have thus the Accession of Louis Napoleon. Vols. I. to HI Price 15s each F
advantage, not very common in elementary books, of com- Volume HI contains: -Asia Minor, Greece, Turkey, in 1821-The Greek Revolution, Battle of Navarino. and Establish-
prising the results of investigations more extended than of Greek Independence—The War between Russia and Turkey, 1827-1829—France to the Revolution of 1830—
could ever have been undertaken for such a subsidiary pur- -Domestic History of England to the Monetary Crisis of 1825, &c. &c. 01
pose, and of furnishing every tyro, in the clear and masculine PROPEsqnT? k/ttscc. TiT«3m«v> w -
language of the editor, with the latest conclusions off ho fmm f ®/®TORY of the FRENCH PROTESTANT REFUGEES,
scholars at home and abroad.”— Quarterly Review, July, I .< W Jf voCatlon of the Edict of Nantes to the Present Time. Translated by F. HARDMAN, Esq. Bvo.. 14s.
Now ready, New and Cheaper Edition, One Vol., Bvo., u ail tbe a .PP earance of M* Weiss s hook with pleasure.” —Edinburgh Review.
SMITH’S CLASSICAL DICTIONARY of MYTHO- £ESSS""-
rngtev F B om™^ P S H ch7lf n CompS 1 'from OmTarge? pieced “ as tho most acceptallle
ir. DR tir' S HISTORY of the PROPAGATION of CHRISTIANITY among: the
SMITH’S SMALLER CLASSICAL DICTIONARY, HEATHEN since»the REFORMATION. A New Edition, being the Third. Three Vols., Bvo, 365.
Woodcut Crown nottlln * to be desire( L bmughTtoMs tasTevery gift and
SMITH’S SMALLER DICTIONARY of GREEK =®°a“ we ““-m
Hundred Woodcuts. New Edition. Crown Bvo. 7s. 6d. , ffi 8 !,f. n . d to the succinct, intelligible, and intructive form In which the
lv * , p ]aced subjects which, to the novice, were hitherto surrounded by a mass of technicalities freouentlv
SMITH’S SCHOOL HISTORY of GREECE, from man ff Sdence ‘Z ! b courage and perseverance. It is a book which shonld And a place int“e
the Earliest Times to the Roman Conquest. With Chap- Herald G> ° n tabi6 evei y stutlent, and m the schoolroom of every educational establishment.”— Sunderland
ters on the History of Literature and Art. New Edition. ‘
With One Hundred Woodcuts. IGmo. 7s. Gd. FINLAY'S HISTORY of the BYZANTINE and RUT.P.tr d
HISTORY of the BYZANTINE and GREEK EPdPIRES. From 1057 to
U T, e s i ege an ? Ca P ture of Constantinople by the Turks in 1453. Bvo., price 15s.
E»tenB?ve°kLw 0 llS?p S «r!? , whic f h l Mr ' Fin J has n ?' v completed his survey, form a very valuable and successful series,
colj ' J i efu \ resea I rdl - . UT^ er the guidance of a sound judgment and a discriminating perception,
y6t mdepenae "* Ca 3,e ’ haVe flUed UP a ™ uum iu En S>->‘ Uteraturl tvhich” was
MR wimM lPH f^h T RU ? SIAN SHORES of the BLACK SEA. Fourth Edition. Bvo., 14s.
With Map and other Illustrations. ’
aIITiKOMItar 1t are P n 1 n t J f^ r f;r 1 0 v 1 -A h 1 nt ? those districts of Russia and the Principalities on which the eyes of
production of o smin/tn a i° Ui y *J Xod ' i T IIS b -°° k W 1 be found to fulfil tlle expectation raised by its subject. It is the
eminently practical in'Ms conoiadom’ iU WS statements - moderate in his OP I - 10 ” 8 - «»' d
LA %Z t V ID t 2 WHOOD - By Ca P tain E - B. HAMLEY, E.A. Two Vols., post 8vo„
.. U- Twelve Illustrations, engraved on steel from designs by the Author.
w ls , Wltbal a bl ?Kht healthy book, with a dash of hearty humour in it.” -Athenceum.
mi the most promisii,s debuttas been in
Cantai^HamW I ‘>n th a volume. and not be at once caught with its sparkling ease and racvlivelinoss
comte S-SS-™i!L a rSl rab * Ti° an<l gl '“- 1 ! 1 ' c vivacity - Hls h«™our is manly and refined s his fancy is fertile in
comic tiaceiy, and the meie rhetoric of Ins composition is spirited and graceful.”— The Press.
PR pr^f^ 3Cß ELEMENTS of PHYSICAL and CLASSICAL GEOGRAPHY.
“ , 0n ? °! the best school-books on the subject.”— John Bull.
nrnKihW poss ® sses some leatures altogether new, which, with its general merits of plan and execution, will
piohably secuie fox it a preference over every work of the kind hitherto published.”— The Scotsman.
HEW EDITION'S.
f HISTORY of eur O rr , from the Commencement of the
inJ ,2 R t TOlut ; or V T t( ? the bAt[ l Q Of Waterloo. Fourteen Vols,, Bvo., Library Edition (the Eighth), with Portraits p h
10/. 10s. Iwenty \ols., crown Bvo., price 61. A PEOPLE’S EDITION, now publishing in Monthly Parts, at Is each X 2
A " YEAR - SAMUEL WARREN, D.C.L. A New Edition, complete in ™
The DIARY of a LATE PHYSICIAN. By SAMUEL WARREN, D.C.L. Complete in One
v 01., price ss. Gd. r 0^
CAVALIERS > and OTIIER By Professor AYTOUX.
Th pric C e° URSE ° f TIME ’ a POSM - By ROBERT POLLOK, A.M. Twenty first Edition,
The OAXTONS. By Sir E. B. LYTTON, Bart. One Vol., 7s. 6d.
MY NOVEL. By Sir E. B. LYTTON, Bart. Two Yols., 21s.
KATIE STEWART. A True Story. Price 7s. 6d.
LIFE in the FAR WEST. By G. F. BUXTON. 4s.
The POEMS of FELICIA HEMANS- Complete in One Volume, 21s,
The POETICAL WORKS of D. M. MOIR (a). Two Yols., 14s.
PARIS after WATERLOO; including a Visit to Flanders and the Field of Waterloo. By
JAMES SIMPSON, Advocate. ss. J
IN THE PRESS.
FIRMILIAN; or, The Student of Badajoz. A Spasmodic Tragedy. By T. PERCY JONES.
[ln a few days.
METAPHYSIC; the Theory of Knowing and Being. By JAMES F.
FERRIER, A. 8., Oxon, Professor of Moral Philosophy at St. Andrews. h *
MISS AGNES STICKLAND'S LIVES of the QUEENS of SCOTLAND. The Fifth
Volume, containing the Continuation of the Life of Mary Stuart.
WILLIAM BLACKWOOD AND SONS, EDINBURGH AND LONDON.
This day, Bvo., 155.,
T ORD MAHON’S HISTORY of
JUi ENGLAND. The Seventh and Concluding Volume.
W ith an Index to the whole Work.
John Murray, Albemarle-street.
" WHEELER’S JUNIOR BIBLE-CLASS BOOKS.
This day, with Sixteen Maps, in Two Vols., 18mo., cloth,
price 2s. 6d. each,
A POPULAR ABRIDGMENT of OLD
and NEW TESTAMENT HISTORY, for Schools,
Families, and General Reading. Explained by Historical and
Geographical Illustrations, and numerous Map Diagrams.
By J. T. WHEELER, F.R.G.S.
Arthur Hall, Virtue and Co., 25, Paternoster-row.
ARCHDEACON WILBERFORCE’S CHARGE.
Noav read}', fcap. Bvo., cloth, price 35.,
Sermons and charge on the holy
COMMUNION.
By Archdeacon WILBERFORCE.
Lately published, by the same Author, Second and Cheaper
Edition, fcap. Bvo., cloth, 35.,
SERMONS on the NEW BIRTH of MAN’S NATURE.
Third Edition, complete, fcap. Bvo., cloth, 35.,
The DOCTRINE of the HOLY EUCHARIST.
“ A work greatly needed in the Church of England,
Guardian.
London : J. and C. Mozley, G, Paternoster-row. Oxford
J. H. Parker.
Now ready, price Gd., This i
THE MONTHLY PACKET of f^eedi
EVENING READINGS for YOUNGER MEMBERS , ttt
of the ENGLISH CHURCH, for AUGUST. Prosneo
Contents : Conversation on the Catechism, Conversation o on
XXVIII.—The Daisy Chain, by the Author of “ The Heir of
Redclyffe,” Chap. XII. —Marie’s Home, Chap. Xll.—The
Lances of Lynwood, Chap. Xl.—Heraldry, Chap. IX.—Our o ’ i J
Feathered Neighbours, Chap. XXIX. —A Visit to Lima,
Chap. L—A Visit to Kew—Minor Cares—Name-fancying,
Chap.VlH.
Also, price 2d.,
The MAGAZINE for the YOUNG, for AUGUST.
Contents:—Little Drake—Chapters on Insects; Chap.
VIII., Beetles—Thoughts on Pictures—Lessons on the Psalms,
No. HI.—A Letter from Rome—August.
London : J. and C. Mozley, 6, Paternoster-row.
M BID’S WORK OTvF APT “ uuu ucuus no euiog). —spectator.
This dar, post Bv(x. with FronHsplece, price 95.. “Dnque.to.mbly the best history of the French Revolu-
npHE POETRY of CHRISTIAN ART. Richard Bento*. Publisher in Ordinary to her Majesty.
I Translated from the French of A. F. RIO. ft , . ———rr— —
“ One of the most profound and beautiful disquisitions on I—JTTQTnU1 —JTTQTnU I' ’ W " S 'J? x rvrTxo
the subject. Those who wish to make themselves masters of |_J or ID6 o 01 LUUib
one of the most important phases of art can do no better dLJL , XVIII. and CHARLES X.
than consult M. Rio’s Book.” —Daily News. By EYRE EVANS CROWE, Author of “ The History of
London: Thomas Bosworth, 215, Regent-street. -n ... , . _
* ——— 5 —— Richard Bentley, Publisher in Ordinary to her Majesty.
Just published, price Is. 9d., sewed, 2s. Gd., cloth, ,77.., P n,.nAM •
PLE A with MY" MOT HTTP tU IHE GORDON GUMMING OF THE NORWEGIAN WILDS.
PHTTRm, -V* cw * , Now ready. Second Edition, in Two Vols., royal Bvo., with
CHURCH in SCOTLAND , being the Substance of upwards of 100 Illustrations, 425.,
iouri^re Sß Mw^di^^burgh A Q CANDINAYI AN ADVENTURES,
London • Thomas Bosworth’ TVo-ont dar l ng a Residence of upwards of Twenty-one Years.
Ronoon . ihomas Bosworth, Regent-street. By L. LLOYD, Author of “ Field Sports of the North.”
IMPORTANT ON THE SABBATH CONTROVERSY. Richard Bentley, Publisher in Ordinary to her Majesty.
Tun? T V- my 8v ?” lu DDTTicT7 Now ready, In Two Vols., Bvo., 255„
S-DAY and the BRITISH qpHE HISTORY of the EARLY CHRIS-
PEOPLE. An argument for both. | ttaxtq
By A BELIEVER. Bv SAMTTFT FT TOT
in almost snbiitne expressions.’’
ennhon ■’ /*) rv... Dr ni mummy Jieiaia.
SCHOOL HISTORIES FOR CHILDREN BY THE AUTHOR
OF “AMY HERBERT.”
THE CHILD’S FIRST HISTORY of
ROME. By the Author of “Amy Herbert.” Fcap.
Bvo., 2s. 6d.
A FIRST HISTORY of GREECE. 3s. 6d.
London : Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans.
BUNSEN’S lIIPPOLYTUS—NEW EDITION.
Just, published, in Seven Vols., Bvo., price 5/. 55.,
CHRISTIANITY and MANKIND ; their
BEGINNINGS and PROSPECTS.
By C. C. J. BUNSEN, D.D., D.C.L., D.Ph.
Being a New Edition, Corrected, Remodelled, and Ex-
tended, of “ Hippolytus and his Age.”
This Second Edition of the “ Hippolytus” is composed of
three distinct works, which may he had separately, as fol-
lows:
L HIPPOLYTUS and HIS AGE; or, the Beginnings and
Prospects of Christianity. Two Vols., Bvo., price 30s.
2. OUTLINES of the PHILOSOPHY of UNIVERSAL
HISTORY, applied to Language and Religion. Two Vols.,
Bvo., price U. 13s,
3. ANALECTA ANTE-NICAENA. Three Vols., Bvp., 425.
London: Longman, Brown, Green, and Longmans.
NEW, CHEAPER, AND ILLUSTRATED EDITION.
Now ready, in Five Vols., 305., with upwards of Forty
Illustrations,
'T'HIERS’ HISTORY of the FRENCH
JL REVOLUTION. With Annotations by the most cele-
brated Authorities who have written on this subject.
“M. Thiers’ ‘History of the French Revolution’has become
a standard work, and needs no eulogy.”— Spectator.
“ Unquestionably the best history of the French Revolu-
tion.”— Sun.
“The work of a profound and original thinker.”— Morning
Post.
“ The ‘ liberty wherewith Christ lias made us free’ is the
master-key applied by Mr. Eliot to Church history in its
earliest ages. His sketches of the great characters in Church
history are clearly drawn, and his narrative never loses its
characteristic moderation.”— Guardian.
Richard Bentley, Publisher in Ordinary to her Majesty.
Now ready, Cheaper Edition, in Two Vols., Bvo., price IGs,,
The secret history «f
the COURT and GOVERNMENT of RUSSIA, under
the EMPEROR ALEXANDER, and the PRESENT CZAR
NICHOLAS.
By J. H. SCHNITZLER.
“ We give more credit to what this author relates respecting
the Russian empire and its rulers than to any recent publi-
cation.”— Literary Gazette.
Richard Bentley, Publisher in Ordinary to her Majesty.
Now ready, Second and Cheaper Edition, in thick post
Bvo., 10s. Gd.
Roughing it in the bush
By Mrs. MOODIE.
“ A took containing such sketches of character and
scenery—so full of experience and reflection —exhibiting so
much dramatic power and poetic pathos, deserves more
consideration than a mere ordinary book of travels. It
merits at least a permanent place in the library.”— Morning
Chronicle.
Richard Bentley, New Burlington-street.
Now ready,
READINGS for the AGED, chiefly on
the Lesser Festivals of the Church.
By the Rev. J. M. NEALE, M.A.
Second Series ; with an Engraving of tho Interior of Sack-
ville College Chapel. Price 6s.
Also, First Series, Second Edition, price 55.,
The PRESENCE of CHRIST with his MINISTRY,
and in HOLY PLACES. Two Sermons, preached at the
Visitation of the Right Rev. the Lord Bishop of Exeter,
and the Ven, Archdeacon of Totness, in the present year.
By the Rev. the Hon. C. L. COURTENAY, M.A., Vicar
of Bovey Tracey, Devon, and Chaplain in Ordinary to
the Queen. By request. Demy Bvo, Price Is.
QUESTIONS and ANSWERS ILLUSTRATIVE of
the CHURCH CATECHISM, for the use of Young Per-
sons. New Edition. Royal 32m0., price Bd., cloth,
London; J. Masters, Aldersgate-street, and New Bond-street.
M AGAZINES for AUGUST.
On the Ist of August, price 15.,N0. XX., N. S.
(O. S. No. CIV.),
The ECCLESIASTIC., Contents:—Milman’s
Latin Christianity. The S. P. C. K?s Edition of Bishop Wil-
son on the Holy Communion.—Angelina and Perdita.—
Swainson on Preparation for Holy Orders. —Anadol—Re-
views and Notices.
Also, price 2s„ No, CIII. (LXVII. New Series),
The ECCLESIOLOGIST. Published under the
Superintendence of the Ecclesiological, late Cambridge Cam-
den, Society. Contents: Batalha. Sequentiae Ineditas.
IX.—Opening of the Theological College, Cuddesden. —Tho
Archaeological Institute at Cambridge.—Moveable Benches
or Chairs.—The Architectural Museum.—Bishop Broughton’s
Monuments.—Memorial to Dr. Mill.—S. John’s, Limehouse.—
Reports of Societies.—New Churches.—Church Restorations.
—Notices and Answers to Correspondents.
Also, price Gd., Part XCII. of
The CHURCHMAN’S COMPANION. Theodora
Phranza ; or, The Fall of Constantinople. Chapters
XXIX,, XXX., XXXI.—The Parables of the Mustard Seed
and the Leaven.—The Challenge of Lucius.—What do we
go to Church for?—The Dangers of the Dead Sea. —The
Ruined Church.—The Butterfly.—The Bishop of New Zea-
land’s Melanesian Mission. Prayer never Dies. The
Children’s Corner—The Editor’s Trip.
London: J. Masters, Aldersgate-street and New Bond-street.
Lately published, pp. 68, price is.,
A LETTER to a CONVOCATION-
MAN, concerning the RIGHTS, POWERS, and PRI-
VILEGES of that BODY, 1697.
Edited, with an Introduction and Notes, by the Rev. WM.
FRASER, B.C.L.
“ Enriched and illustrated with Notes by Mr. Fraser, whose
learning on the difficult subject singularly qualifies him for
the task.” —Scottish Ecclesiastical Journal.
London: J. Masters, Aldersgate-street and New Bond-street.
PRAYERS and LITANIES for
CHURCH SCHOOLS.
Price 4d.
“ Well adapted to supply a want which has long been felt. ’
— Guardian.
“ Better than anything of the kind which has preceded it.
They are short and appropriate, and worthy, we think, of
general adoption. We are particularly pleased to see an
office for noon, as ■well as hymns for the third and ninth
hours. ’ ’ —Ecclesia Stic.
Crossley, Leicester. Masters, London.
Printed and Published by W illiam Odhams, at his Print-
ing-office, 15, Beaufort-bu ildlngs, Strand, in the Parish of
St. Clement Danes, and City of Westminster.—Wednes-
day, August 2, 1804.
618
THE GUARDIAN.
