

. . ■
*' . r,£f
jiiOOTfl ApNDi\LE EpTE
PETERSHAM.
Parish oi, Petersham, County of Cumberland,
near Sydney, N.S.W.
DESCRIPTION OF THE ESTATE,
SHEWING POSITION
LOCAL IMPORTANCE,
ITS PROSPECTIVE VALUE,
And ADAPTABILITY AS A SUBURBAN
SUBDIVISION,
C. A. OWEN, Civil Engineer,
Licensed Surveyor, N.S.W., Victoria, Western Australia
90 Pitt Street, Sydney, K.S. W.
Gibbs, Shaljard, and Co., Printers, 84a Pitt Street, Sydney.




FWS
£OUTH ApHDip Vp
PETERSHAM.
Parish of Petersham, County of Cumberland,
near Sydney, N.S.W.
DESCRIPTION OF THE ESTATE,
SHEWING POSITION
LOCAL IMPORTANCE,
ITS PROSPECTIVE VALUE,
And ADAPTABILITY AS A SUBURBAN
SUBDIVISION,
C. A. OWEN, Civil Engineer,
Licensed Surveyor, N.S.W.. Victoria, Western Australia,
go Pitt Street, Sydney, N.S W.




A DESCRIPTION of the SOUTH ANNANDALE ESTATE, in
the Parish of Petersham, County of Cumberland, Municipality of
Petersham, near City of Sydney, N.S.W.
The Estate comprises part of the land granted in 1793 by the
Crown to Captain (afterwards Major) Johnston, as a reward for Civil
and Military services rendered at the foundation of the Colony in 1788,
under Governor Phillip, to whom he acted as Aide-de-camp. Major
Johnston was then Senior-Lieutenant, and was one of the first officers
to receive promotion after the foundation of the Colony. Officers in
those days were permitted to make their own selections of land, and
Major Johnston, favoured by circumstances (being one of the first to
occupy land in the new Colony), and entitled by right (as a reward for
the different public offices that he discharged), was thus enabled to
secure one of the best and most advantageously situated grants that
the Crown has made in the Colony. Added to this, the Major did not
dispose of his valuable acquisition as soon as the prosperity and
increasing population gave monetary value to it, as most of his brother
officers did ; but he kept it intact, built a residence, and otherwise
permanently improved it. At his death the Estate was left to his son.
Lieutenant R. Johnston, R.N. (afterwards Captain), who kept it as his
father had done, and to this day it remains the home of the Johnston
family. I have mentioned these facts to explain how so large a parcel
of land has remained undivided and unbuilt upon to times when the
land all round has changed from unoccupied bush into extensive and
important Suburban Municipalities, comprising an ever-spreading net-
work of streets, railways and tramways, covered with mansions, houses,
villas, cottages, factories, shops, and occupied by ever-increasing
multitudes of busy people. To such an extent has this transformation
taken place, that it wants only a few years more to complete the almost
unbroken lines of business places and shops that line the main avenues
from the City to the Estate, and the previous occupation of all the
surrounding available land gives a most distinctive value to the land
that Major Johnston so judiciously selected, and that he and his son,
Captain Johnston, so carefully preserved for the benefit of their
family.
To be more particular, the land is even and park-like in appearance,
slightly undulating, having a gentle and general slope from the
Parramatta Road and Western boundary into Johnston’s Creek (which
eventually becomes an arm of Port Jackson) ; thus drainage of every
part is most easily accomplished, in fact almost provided for by nature.
/M33SS i F
-"0


The soil, for building upon and continuing the roads that already
surround it, is firm and of the very best class; no natural features or
obstructions occur that in any way impede these works, and it can at
once be converted into a suburb with a minimum outlay. _ The position
is generally higher than any of the surrounding district, thus good
views are obtainable, and healthiness from pure air is secured. A
»reat desire on the part of the public has always been shewn Awards
Setting this Estate thrown open for building upon, and as all other
available spots are fast being occupied by houses, the demand is ever
increasing. In fact so eagerly has it been sought after, that the
Government, in 1885 (moved by a general demand from the people),
made an offer to purchase 10 acres of it for use as a Public Park, and
but that the family arrangements with regard to the Estate were
incomplete at the time, the Park for the Municipality of
would have been placed upon the Estate. All around is lg e y
gas, streets and houses, the same supply that is used in _ Sydney and
perhaps a more essential thing than this is the practically inexhaustible
supply of pure water provided by the Nepean River and Prospect
Reservoir, the mains-of which are laid along the Parramatta Road
(which forms a large portion of the principal frontage to the Estate),
supplying all houses with water, and running on into the City.
The distance from the heart of the City is two miles Parramatta
Road, which is really the Western continuation of George (the
principal street in Sydney). So true is this that a portion of the Parra-
matta Road, long since absorbed into the rapidly-extending City, is now
called George Street West. This road brings one direct to the Estate,
and passes along the whole of its Northern boundary ; it is the prmcipai
avenue by which all the traffic to and from the Western suburbs finds
its way into the City. Along this road and past the Estate a steam
tram service brings one into the City in fifteen minutes. n ie
Western side are some of the main streets of Petersham already con-
nected with and continued into the proposed subdivision shewn yp an
“ A.” Nearly at the Westernmost corner of the Estate is Petersham
Railway Station, the largest and most important station on the suburban
railway. The Southern boundary is the suburban railway line just
mentioned, and along it Easterly is Stanmore Station, which is on e
Estate, and accessible from every part of it. The growing importance
of the traffic here increased so rapidly that in 1885 a handsome bnc
and stone station and offices, costing £I2OOO, wa,s found necessary o
substitute the inadequate accommodation provided by the former
building. The Eastern boundary is formed by Johnston’s Creek, which,
as before mentioned, provides for carrying away the drainage ot the
whole Estate. The plan A shows the design that has been already
followed in opening some of the streets, and was laid down so as to suit
the land and its drainage; providing good access, allotments in accord-
ance with an economical sale of the land and following popular demand,
and at the same time to return the greatest number of feet frontage


out of the subdivision that could be made, thus securing to the pro-
prietor the greatest monetary return that can be made out of the
Estate. The areas and frontages are more particularly given upon the
plan “ A ” and in the document marked “ C.”
The Estate forms a centre round which lie the Municipalities of
Leichhardt, Camperdown, Newtown (which is practically an extension
of the City) and Petersham, which suburbs have long maintained their
favour with the people for suburban residences. At the present time
they are occupied almost to their fullest extent, and therefore the
opening up for sale and for building upon of the South Annandale
Estate & is anxiously looked for as being almost a necessity to provide
for the rapidly increasing population. It would be eagerly bought up
and soon covered with houses.
By an estimate based upon the municipal returns tor 18»», I nna
that within a radius of one mile of South Annandale is settled a popu-
lation of 40,000 people, paying the sum of about £90,000 yearly, which
is expended in municipal improvements within the same radius ; this is
exclusive of any money the Government may think fit to spend for
special work, such as waterworks, sewerage, bridges, or public buildings.
The means of communication and accommodation for passenger
traffic is of the most complete description —effective, quick and cheap.
The suburban train service to Stanmore with 90 trains per day ;
the steam tram service (already mentioned) with 100 trams per day ;
and an almost ceaseless traffic of omnibusses and cabs, all running to and
from the City, and connecting the traffic with that of every part of the
colony, would accommodate an unlimited demand, commencing at 5.5
o’clock in the morning, and running throughout the day until 12.10 at
mgh As illustrating this I may mention that the train service carried
last year to Stanmore station 90,000 passengers, paying in fares about
£3,190 ; while the Leichhardt trains during the same period carried an
additional 3,204,000 passengers, paying £26,700. .
A reference to the plan “ B,” which is a correct locality plan,
showing all places within a radius of five miles of the City, will give
some idea of the different points I have mentioned. It shows the South
Annandale Estate tinted red, the suburban Railway lines m black, and
the system of Steam Tramways in and out of the City by blue lines,
drawn along the street where they pass. I may, however, mention
that the plan is not complete as to all detail. It was compiled,, I
believe, in its present form in 1876 (thirteen years ago); it has not been
charted up since that date, therefore as to detail street information it is
deficient; for in that lapse of time an astonishing increase in the
Western suburbs has taken place, they having nearly doubled their
population and importance; this has caused almost every available plot
of ground to be occupied by the introduction of new streets and
buildings, all of which the map just mentioned does not shew. South
Annandale is so well known that I think it almost unnecessary for me


90 Pitt Street, Sydney,
August, 1889.
to say that I know of no Estate or land suitable for a subdivision
within five miles of Sydney that has the natural and other advantages
of this property, nor that comprises such valuable building land, and so
much of it. The day when the whole Parramatta road frontage will
be an unbroken line of houses, shops and business places, as well as
houses on every allotment is in my opinion very close at hand.
In order to illustrate the growing demand for this land for build-
ing purposes, and also as bearing upon the question of its prospective
value, I may state that the population of New South Wales in 1879
was estimated to be 740,000, in the present year (1889), the population
is set down at a about 1,100,000, and calculating from carefully kept
records it is expected to reach about 2,000,000 in ten years’time (1899).
A glance at these figures must show that there is an almost
unlimited demand for building land to provide houses for this rapidly
increasing population, and it also follows that public attention will first
be directed to such areas as are most convenient to the great centres of
life, of which Sydney and its suburbs is the greatest in this colony.
i§9ib ltd;
yah vaq 0G rich
jcensed Surveyor
*
Acting tinder the authority of E. Twynam, Esq., Surveyor-General of
N.S.W.; of Alex. Black, Esq., Surveyor-General of Victoria;
and of Sir F. Napier Broome, Governor of Western Australia.
aisl-l vctxlisoo! vtoanoi
9yl§- Hiv/ t yjiO sdi k
it. ••irn. .'I: --i ••■.- 7: r .-.1


“C."
Gladstone Chambers,
90 Pitt Street,
Sydney, 2oth July, 1889.
Estimate of frontages and areas to accompany copy of South Annandale
Estate plan of this date.
The unsold portion (as shewn by red edging on plan,
comprising the whole of the balance of the Estate as designed for
subdivision, inclusive of roads, some of which have been opened
and others that have only been designed for future subdivision)
embraces an area of about 116 acres 2 roods 17 perches, and,
according to the design laid down, gives about 29,000 feet of
selling frontage, with an average depth of 120 feet.
The unsold balance of the Ist subdivision, colored violet
on plan, embraces an area of about 3 acres 1 rood 13
perches, and gives about 1000 feet of selling frontage, with
an average depth of 120 feet.
(Signed) C. ALFRED OWEN.
(L.S.)
This is a copy of the document marked “ C,” referred to in the
accompanying report.


•'7AF r p
Eifeuo
C o£jUsj
Sydney :
84a Pitt Street.
3 1508 00812600 0
Gibbs, Shallard and Co., Printers, Bookbinders, etc.,




