

AUSTRALASIAN COLONIES.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
HANDBOOK,
WITH MAP.
ISSUED BY THE
EMIGRANTS’ INFORMATION OFFICE,
31, Broadway, Westminster, S.W.
Note I.— This Office has been established under the supervision of
the Colonial Office for the purpose of supplying intending, emigrants
with useful and trustworthy information respecting emigration to
the British Colonies. The information issued to the public is mainly
obtained from the various Colonial Governments and their represen-
tatives in this country. No pains are spared to make the informa-
tion as correct as possible, but the Committee of Management cannot
undertake to hold itself responsible for the absolute correctness of
every detail.
Note 2. —The figures and details given in this Handbook do not
always correspond with those given in the Australasian colonies
circular, which should be read with this. The circular is revised
quarterly.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE,
EYRE AND SPOTTISWOODE,
PRINTERS TO THE QUEEN’S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
And to be purchased from the Emigrants’ Information Office ; or
EYRE and SPOTTISWOODE, East Harding Street, Fleet Street, E.C.; or
ADAM and CHARLES BLACK, 6, North Bridge, Edinburgh; or
HODGES, FIGGIS, & Co., 104, Grafton Street, Dublin.
April 1888.
Price One Penny.






<*ST7' e n s V I? N 5 Vs / TT 35 V %// ~ - - «
&GT / \° x <£ Slhl • \fA I
•) '<fMii i f]s 4 I
•'> . * lUtl [/ill Wl II
1 ] > O . ;*Vf| *? IfcJ I «
7 7 #) 3 .§ u C|Xrt *Cv *% ‘*” § h
i mM h * 1i jfii g § I
i to *» * ■: r j,.i n ratll M"J I
1 I& 141I 4 1 1 1 ,*l*3* 31 § .•. !
.^ p (\ / 'J 5 A-?r* £ 5 i lijrfc i S 3 ocUc- | |OM 7j 2 0
f* '«#f-S3 J > /_ _-a—N-jV 3 T t : •' o o
-7 \ ./la 's I * i I ° . i s
iff /;'■:•/ 7 ( ? I * i I I "V S4l£Mfdllil*'ioA §
i> [ •' ! '&' % <r 'lk V«y%i I g « %rj "‘ jl •§
te. I Vv. 0 ) jsl 3 » 1 , H I ss-jsssasaagS > M *3
,V* I I
■■> Jr*/ \ • vt&.-v g** $ | '-5 £ v | 111 |‘ 2
s// . I |»I ili IHI l I w
W d /7 ' | g
1 m y/ -# to " ”"' Jg
m| w| w| "I


Handbook No. 4.
AUSTRALASIAN COLONIES.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
HANDBOOK,
WITH MAP.
ISSUED BY THE
EMIGRANTS’ INFORMATION OFFICE,
31, Broadway, Westminster, B.W.
Note I. —This Office has been established under the supervision of
the Colonial Office for the purpose of supplying intending emigrants
with useful and trustworthy information respecting emigration to
the British Colonies. The information issued to the public is mainly
obtained from the various Colonial Governments and their represon-
tatives in this country. No pains are spared to make the informa-
tion as correct as possible, but the Committee of Management cannot
undertake to hold itself responsible for the absolute correctness of
every detail.
Note 2.— The figures and details given in this Handbook do not
always correspond with those given in the Australasian colonies
circular, which should be read with this. The circular is revised
quarterly.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR HER MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE,
BY EYRE AND SPOTTISWOODE,
PRINTERS TO THE QUEEN’S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY.
And to be purchased from the Emigrants’ Information Office ; or
EYRE and SPOTTISWOODE, East Harding Street, Pleet Street, E.C.; or
ADAM and CHARLES BLACK, 6, North Bridge, Edinburgh; or
HODGES, FIGGIS, & Co., 104, Grafton Street, Dublin.
April 1888.
Price One Penny.




SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
South Australia was first settled in 1836. It is, with the single
exception of Western Australia, the largest of the Australian
Colonies, and stretches across the whole continent from south to
north. It is more than seven times as large as the United
Kingdom. Its southern shores are washed by the Southern
Ocean, and its northern coasts by the Indian Ocean. It touches
all the mainland colonies of Australia, bordering on New South
Wales, Victoria, and Queensland on the east, and being bounded
on the west by Western Australia, Twice since the establish-
ment of the Colony, its limits have been extended. In 1861, a
strip of land between the boundaries of South and Western
Australia, south of lat. 26°, was detached from New South
Wales and annexed to South Australia by the Imperial Legis-
lature ; and in 1863 the northern boundary of the Colony, which
was originally the 26th parallel of latitude, was shifted to the
northern coast line, thus bringing within her borders the large
area now known as “ The Northern Territory. ’
The area of South Australia (including the Northern Ter-
ritory) is 578,361,600 acres, of which only 10,010,191 acres were
alienated at the end of 1886, much of the remainder being available
for agricultural, pastoral, and mineral settlement. The area of
mineral land, or land held under mineral lease, is comparatively
small, so that, roughly speaking, the whole may be divided into
country of two classes, agricultural and pastoral land.
The southern coast line of South Australia (including Kangaroo
Island) is 2,300 miles in length, and is indented by two large
gulfs, called Gulf St. V incent and Spencer’s Gulf. Glenelg,
at which the P. & O. steamers call on their way to and from
England, and the Semaphore (near Port Adelaide), at which the
Orient steamers touch, are on the eastern shores of Gulf
St. Vincent. Between these indentations is a peninsula known as
Yorke’s Peninsula, which a few years ago was all held by
squatters, for raising sheep, but has now almost entirely passed
into the hands of agriculturists. The Mount Lofty Range, as it
goes northwards from Cape Jervis, merges into the Minders
Range (in which Mount Remarkable is over 3,600 ft. high) which
gives place in turn to other ranges, altogether extending hundreds
of miles up the centre of the Colony. This mountain range
forms an extensive watershed, and numerous watercourses mote
i 53840. Wt. 2440t>. A
Situation.
General
description


or less permanent flow from the hills, and fertilise the lower
lands.
The absence of rivers is very noticeable in Central Australia.
In that part of South Australia, the Murray is the only navigable
river. This river takes its rise near the boundary of Victoria and
New South Wales, and empties itself into the Southern Ocean at
Encounter Bay. The Murray and its tributaries are navigable for
many hundreds of miles, but the navigation of the mouth is rendered
hazardous by a sandy bar. Adelaide stands upon the River
Torrens, which, although not navigable, is the source of the
supply of water to the city and suburbs. There are a few other
permanent streams, but none of them call for special notice. In
the Northern Territory, there are several fine rivers.
South Australia may be classed into three Divisions
I. The settled Districts lying along the southern coast round
Encounter Bay the Gulf of St. Vincent and Spencer’s
Gulf, stretching eastwards as far as the Victorian and
New South Wales Borders, and northwards as far as the
south-eastern shores of Lake Torrens.
11. The coast country west of this as far as the Western
Australian border, and the vast interior plains of the
colony.
111. The Northern Territory.
I. It is in this part of the Colony that the population is mainly
located. It is divided into 37 cotinties, which, proceeding north-
wards round the coast from the south-eastern corner of the Colony,
near Cape Northumberland, are named as follows : —Grey ; Robe ;
Macdonnell; Cardwell, to the east of which is Buckingham;
Russell; Sturt; Hindmarsh; Adelaide; Gawler, to the cast of
which are Light, Eyre, Albert, and Alfred; Stanley, to the east of
which are Burra, Young, and Hamley; Daly, at the head of
Gulf St. Vincent; Fergusson, in Yorke’s Peninsula; Victoria,
north of Daly, with Kimberley on its eastern border; Frome,
having Dalhousie and Herbert on the east; Newcastle, at the
head of Spencer’s Gulf, to the east of which are Granville and
Leytton ; Blachford, on the south-eastern corner of Lake Torrens,
having on the east Hanson and Derby; Taunton, the northern-
most county, bounding Blachford and Hanson on the north ;
Jervois, on the west coast of Spencer’s Gulf, to the west of which
is Musgrave, and below Jervois and Musgrave is Flinders,
situated at the south of Eyre’s Peninsula. There is also
Robinson county, and Carnarvon or Kangaroo Island. Of all
these counties Jervois is the largest, being about twice as large as
Somersetshire, and Light the smallest, being a little larger than
Herefordshire.
The total area of these counties is nearly 40,000,000 acres, of
which fit millions have been alienated from the Crown. In Adelaide
county as much as 600,515 acres out of 730,240 are alienated;
in Gawler, 500,010 out of 593,920; in Light, 519,128 out of
536,960; in Victoria, 710,394 out of 915,840; but in Young, only
690 out of 1,328,040 ; in Hamley, only 80 out of 1,404,160 ;in
Jervois, only 52,845 out of 2,224,000 ; in Cardwell, only 1,234 out


of 1,116,800. Wheat is grown throughout the greater part of the
settled region in very large quantities; fruits, including grapes for
wine, and vegetables do well, while much of the land is used for
grazing purposes.
Of these districts the county and town of Adelaide are the most Adelaide,
important. Adelaide, the capital (founded in 1836), is situated on
the River Torrens in the middle of a large plain, about eight miles
from Mount Lofty (2,334 feet in height). It has a population of
about 45,000, or including the suburbs, nearly 110,000. It possesses
handsome buildings, churches of many denominations, clubs,
libraries, and all the conveniences of a modern city. It is well
situated, market gardens, full of all manner of fruits and vege-
tables abound in the neighbourhood, and a little further off
good farm houses and extensive farms. Twenty-five miles by rail
to the north of Adelaide is Gawler (population 1,800), a very Gawler.
thriving town, situated in the centre of a large agricultural district,
and famous for its flour mills. The country round Balaklava Balaklava.
in Gawler county is also agricultural and pastoral, and contains
a quantity of scrub land which is now being taken up.
In Light county are Angaston (population 800), and Kapunda Angaston.
(population 2,300), both in the centre of fine wheat and fruit-
growing farms. The country between Angaston and Mount
Remarkable is the most valuable and best wool-growing district
in the Colony, consisting of a series of hills, well grassed,
watered, and wooded. Kapunda used to derive a great deal Kapunda.
of its prosperity from the large copper mines in the neigh-
bourhood, but these have been more or less closed since 1879.
Fifty miles north of Kapunda is Kooringa (Burra), in Burra Kooringa.
county (population 2,700). It was once a very bustling place,
when nearly 1,200 hands were employed in copper mines in the
neighbourhood, but since the mines have been closed, it has
become very quiet. Large quantities of wheat are grown round
Kooringa, round Apoinga in the south, and generally throughout Apoinga.
the county and in the adjoining Stanley county. Petersburg!! Petersburg!!.
(Dalhousie county), is an important railway junction, 154 miles
north of Adelaide (railway fare,
is mainly agricultural. Port Augusta (population 767), is in the Port Augusta
county of Frome, 200 miles north-west of Adelaide, at the head
of Spencer’s Gulf. It is connected by rail or coasting steamer
Avith Adelaide ; fare by rail, 275., by boat, 21. It has a good
harbour, with a large wool trade, and in fair seasons a consider-
able wheat export. The aA T erago rainfall is only 3 inches in the
summer, and 6 in the Avinter and spring. There are many
indications of great but undeveloped mineral wealth to the
northward.
Port Pirie (population 1,800), in Victoria county, 50 miles to Port Pine,
the south of Port Augusta, has substantial Avharves, and a con-
siderable wheat export trade. Laura, in the same county, is a Laura,
pretty little town, situated in a wooded and undulating country ;
and Georgetown (population 741), situated on a rich alluvial Georgetown,
plain, between two low ranges of hills, is surrounded by some good
Avheat farms. In Daly county there are the mining townships of
A 2


Wallaroo, Kadina, and Moonta. Wallaroo (91 miles north of
Adelaide, fare 12s. 11 d.), is a pleasant seaport town with a safe
harbour. The Wallaroo and other copper mines are in the
neighbourhood, and the largest smelting works in the Colon}',
including 36 furnaces, are carried on at Wallaroo Bay. At
Kadina several of the mines have now been closed, but at Moonta,
12 miles from Wallaroo, they are still working, though with a
reduced number of hands.
On the opposite side of Spencer’s Gulf the land is rather sandy,
but suitable for sheep. The rainfall at Port Lincoln is 4 inches in
the summer, and 16 in the winter and spring.
To the east and south-east of the Adelaide plains, through the
hills at from 20 to 35 miles from the city, are a number of
picturesque and healthy towns and townships. The country to
the immediate south is hilly and generally well grassed, while that
to the north-east, running right down to the Victorian border,
consists of wide grassy plains and swamps, more suited for
pastoral purposes than for grain. Among those towns are the
following: Mount Barker (population 752), in county Hind-
marsh, is the centre of a large vine, fruit, and wheat industry.
Around Nairne (county Sturt), are several farms and stations,
and a good deal of the land is now used for grazing purposes.
The district round Echunga (on the borders of counties Adelaide
and Hindmarsh) is partly agricultural, and partly mining. Wheat,
peas, and potatoes, are principally raised, and gold has been worked
in the neighbourhood. Hahndorf (county Adelaide), is a little
place mainly inhabited by Germans. Wheat, potatoes, and grapes
are extensively grown, and gold has been worked in the district.
Lobethal (county Adelaide) is another German settlement. The
district is an agricultural one, wheat, barley, rye, oats, hops, and
potatoes, being extensively cultivated. Considerable quantities
of grapes also are grown, and a good deal of green and dry fruit
is sent out from the district. A tweed and woollen factory has
been started here. Around Blumberg an extensive trade is
carried on in wheat and dairy produce, and Gumeracha, in the
north east, is the centre of some very good and pretty country,
and alluvial gold fields are being worked in the neighbourhood.
Strathalbyn (county Hindmarsh), is a very picturesque town,
situated in an agricultural district. More to the southward on the
coast are Ports Elliot and Victor, favourite places of resort in
summer, and surrounded by wheat farms.
Port Victor has a harbour in connexion with the River Murray
trade, for which it competes with Port Adelaide. There is a fine
breakwater here extending from Granite Island, and steamships
of considerable size can load at the port.
The principal town in the south east is Gambierton, a corporate
town at the foot of Mount Gambier in Grey county. The soil
here is very rich, and English fruits, potatoes, grapes, hops, and
wheat thrive. This is one of the best districts of the Colony,
the climate not being so hot as in other parts. The average
rainfall is 8 inches in the summer, and 24 in the winter and
spring. The Blue Lake and some lesser lakes and numberless


caves are in the neighbourhood. Seventeen miles distant is the
open roadstead, known as Port Mac Donnell, and to the westward
from this, and nearer to Adelaide, are the harbours of liivoli,
Guichen, and Lacepede Bays, with their respective townships of
Beachport, Robe, and Kingston, Beachport is connected with
Mount Gambier, and Kingston with Naracoorte, by rail. Ihe
district round Naracoorte, 50 miles from Kingston, is mainly used
for pasture. Large quantities of guano are procured from some
of the caves here and used for manure.
Fifteen or twenty miles to the north-east of Naracoorte is
Bordertown, where the railway systems of South Australia and
Victoria meet; very good wheat is grown here. Naracoorte
and Mount Gambier are about 60 miles apart by rail, and
half-way between them, on a fine plain, is the neat-looking
township of Penola.
11. This includes the western coast north and west of Eyres
Peninsula between Streaky Bay and Western Australia, and the
vast inland regions north of Lake Torrens and Lake Eyre, till
it merges into the northern territory in lat. 26“. A large part
of this division consists, so far as it is known, ot desert and salt
lakes; other portions are well adapted for sheep ; but the annua,
rainfall is far too light for grain-growing, being only from 7 to
10 inches. The district which comprises the largest portion ol
the wool-producing country in the Colony is that which may
be said to commence at Terowie, 200 miles north of Adelaide,
in Kimberley county. It is bounded on the upper west by
Lake Torrens, and on the east by the New South Wales border,
and includes the far outlying runs on the borders of Queensland,
and such tracts in the far north as have been found suitable for
pastoral settlement. The lower portion of this district, as far as
the Barrier Ranges, consists of good open hilly country, with
saltbush and grassy tracts; beyond these ranges some poorer
country is met with, till the watershed of the Cooper’s Creek
and Diamantina is reached, north of parallel 28°, where a great
improvement takes place, and very good pastoral country is found
lying between Lake Eyre and the Queensland border.
For the purpose of utilising this far outlying country, camels
have been introduced, by the aid of which valuable tracts of
land have been opened up.
The wool of the north and north-east is of a good and line
merino quality, but the loose nature of some portions of the
country causes the staple to contain a large quantity ol dust,
hence the comparatively lower prices it commands. The country
also running up the Queensland frontier around Cordillo Downs
promises, with good seasons, to produce a high-class wool, but
the upper portion of the north to the north-west of Lake Eyre,
and stretching into the northern territory, has not, on account ol
the extreme heat and general character of the climate, proved
itself so suitable for wool-growing.
111. The Northern Territory of South Australia contains an
area of about 523,620 square miles, of which only 754 have
been taken up, and includes country adapted to the cultivation


of tropical products—indigo, cotton, tapioca, rice, coffee, and, in
parts, sugar canc. The interior and less valuable country is also
suited to pastoral settlement, and several squatters have already
taken up land there and stocked it, with satisfactory results. On
December 31st, 1885,* the stock in the Territory was stated to
be—Horned cattle, 136,000; horses, 6,000; sheep, 40,000.
The Northern Territory is also rich in mineral wealth —specially
in gold, copper, and tin—the development of which will be much
assisted by the railway which has been authorised from Palmer-
ston, the capital of the settlement, to Pine Creek in the gold dis-
trict, 800 tons of copper were exported in 1886, 9,465/. worth
of Beche de Mer, and 17,490 oz. of gold, valued at 63,139/. There
is direct telegraph communication between Port Darwin and
Adelaide through the interior of the Colony.
The country is better watered than most parts of Australia, the
Roper, Liverpool, South Alligators, Adelaide, and Victoria being
considerable streams. The climate is tropical, except on the
table lands, where the temperature is lower. There are two
seasons, the dry and the wet. The wet season lasts from October
to March, with an average rainfall of 59 inches at Palmerston,
but the rainfall further south is far less. During the wet season
the heat is very oppressive, but at other times of the year the
days are bright and clear, and the heat quite bearable. The
swamps cause a kind of intermittent fever to attack settlers.
As an agricultural country, for tropical products especially,
the country is well suited. Maize grows luxuriantly ; cotton is
indigenous, but not of a sort required for commerce ; and tropical
fruits and vegetables, such as bananas, cocoanut trees, pineapples,
yams, mangoes, &c., grow well. The chief cultivators of the soil
are Chinese. The grasses of the country are very rich and
nourishing, especially for cattle. Eucalyptus, mangroves, and
bamboos cover many parts of the country.
There is a weekly mail between Palmerston and the Gold
Fields near Pine Creek, 160 miles off.
At Port Darwin, the principal port, the imports in 1886 were
valued at 293,854/. (or just double those of 1885), and the
exports, two-thirds of which were gold, 94,627/., nearly half of
the latter being to New South Wales ; the shipping in 1886 was
much larger than in 1885. The population is about 4,320, of
whom 3,725 are male Chinese ; and Europeans 600, of whom
500 are males. Anyone who settles in the Northern Territory
must be prepared to put up with great, heat, high prices, and
difficulties of communication.
The climate is much hotter and dryer than that of England; it
is more like that of southern Italy. The seasons are nearly the
opposite to what they are in England. The four hottest and
dryest months are December to March inclusive, when the heat
sometimes increased by hot winds, is very intense, but the dryness
of the atmosphere renders it bearable. Those who can afford it,
spend the summer on the hills, or at watering places along the
* These are the last returns.


south-east coast. The remaining months of the year are very
pleasant, the weather being brighter, dryer, and warmer than in
England. The winter is wet; there is no cold weather as in
England. The rainfall at Adelaide is generally about 21 inches
in the year, as against 25 at Greenwich, the wettest months being
from June to September ; but in 1886 it was only 14|.
In the hill districts the fall is much heavier. At Mount Lofty,
it is fully twice that of Adelaide. In the far north, especially in
the plain country, the rainfall is lighter and more uncertain. In
much of the squatting country, the annual rainfall seldom exceeds,
and sometimes does not reach 8 inches.
The climate is healthy ; the death-rate for the years 1877-86,
averaged 14’26 per thousand as against 19'27 in England.
The best time for arriving in the Colony is from May to
October ; speaking generally, the emigrant would always do well
to arrive in good time to settle down before the hot weather
comes on, and the shearing and harvest begin.
The population on 31st December, 1886, was estimated at
312,758, 665 less than in 1885 ; there were 13,202 more males
than females. At the census of 1881 the last taken, the natives
numbered 6,346. They are of a very low order of intelligence,
but their skill in following the trails of stray beasts makes them
valuable in the bush. They make good shepherds, while the
boys learn to ride easily and become good stock-keepers. There
are many mission stations established among them.
The number of ships which entered and left the South Australian
ports in 1886 was less than the number in 1885. Of the total
number, Port Adelaide claimed two-thirds; the only other ports
of any moment are Ports Morgan and Glenelg.
Thei’e is regular communication by sea between Adelaide and
the other Autralasian Colonies, as well as with the principal ports
of the Colony itself.
The following are the principal shipping lines between England
and Adelaide, with their London addresses. Vessels of one or
other of these lines leave almost every week ; particulars as to
sailings will always be found advertised in the newspapers, or may
be obtained from the shipping companies :
Peninsular and Oriental Steam Shipping, Co., 122, Leadenhall
Street, E.C. N.B. —No steerage passengers are taken by this
line.
Orient Steam Shipping Co., 13, Fenchurch Avenue, E.C.
Aberdeen Line, 24, Leadenhall Street, E.C., and Aberdeen.
Anderson, Anderson, and Co., 5, Fenchurch Avenue, E.C,
Anglo-Australasian Steam Navigation Co., 2, Billiter Avenue,
E.C.
C. Bethell and Co., 110, Fenchurch Street, E.C.
Colonial Line, 112, Fenchurch Street, London, E.C.
Colonial Union Line, 3, Crosby Square, E.C.
Messrs. Green and Co., 13, Fenchurch Avenue, E.C.
Messrs. Houlder Bros, and Co., 146, Leadenhall Street, E.C.,
and 30, Hope Street, Glasgow.


North German Lloyd (via Antwerp), 5, Fenchurch Street, F.C.
Messrs. Trinder, Anderson and Co., 4, St. Mary Axe, E.C.
Messrs. Money Wigram and Sons, 7, Leadenhall Street, E.C.
Passenger The Passenger Act, 1855, and other Acts require passenger
cts * ships carrying emigrants to be seaworthy, have proper accommo-
dation, furnish good and sufficient food, provide medicines, and
on large ships a surgeon, and in other ways protect the interests
of emigrants. Short summaries of these r egulations are posted
up in every ship; emigrants who find that they arc not being
treatly fairly, should immediately complain. Passengers by the
North German Lloyd and other companies whose vessels do not
clear from English ports, are not protected by these regulations.
Passages aud (a.) Free passages, none. No Land Warrants are now given.
f ares * (6.) Assisted passages, none.
(c.) Nominated passages, none.
(d ) Unassisted passages to Adelaide ( fares liable to change :
consult advertisements
in daily
newspapers ) :
By Sailing Vessel
(about 90 days).
By Steamer
(from 40 to 46 days).
3rd class - from 14/. !4s.
3rd class - from 14/. 14s. to 21/.
2nd class - from 21/.
2nd class - from 30/.
Ist class - from 50/.
Ist class - from 42/. to 70/.
As a rule, children under 12 years of age, half price ; under
one year, and sometimes one child under 3 years, free.
Ship-kit. Food (three or four good meals a day) and sleeping accommoda-
tion are in all cases included in the fares given above, but third-class
passengers must find their own bedding, knives, forks, &c. These
will be supplied, if wanted, at the cost of 1/. Each third-class
passenger is generally allowed 15 cubic feet of luggage free;
Luggage. children half this quantity. Two boxes, each 2 feet 6 inches
long, 2 feet broad, and 1 foot 6 inches deep, make up 15 cubic
feet; but any sized boxes will do so long as 15 cubic feet are not
exceeded. Luggage required for use on the voyage should be
labelled “Wanted.” By sailing ships the amount of free luggage
varies.
Arrangements There is no Government depot for emigrants. There is a
for reception servants home under private management for the reception of
labour reeis- f ema fr servants, in Flinders Street, Adelaide. Emigrants who
tries, &c. lave friends in the Colony should communicate with them
beforehand.
Outfit: No large outfit is necessary, nor need it be new. Emigrants
havingjknives, forks, spoons, bed and table linen, kitchen utensils,
sewing-machine, light tools, and other small articles or ornaments,
ahoukMake them, but not heavy furniture nor rough common


tools, as tree luggage is limited. Emigrants should take all the
clothes they have, but not less, if possible, than the following for
the voyage and subsequent use. (1.) For men, two pair boots,
one strong suit, two pairs of white or light tweed trousers, and one
jacket of similar cool material, one cloth cap, and one broad
brimmed straw hat, one pair slippers or canvas shoes, and one
overcoat, and six articles of each kind of underclothing. (2.) For
women, two pairs strong shoes, one warm and two cotton gowns,
one broad-brimmed straw hat, and one close-fitting hat, one pair
slippers, one cloak or shawl, six articles of each kind of under-
clothing, and sewing materials. (3.) For children, one warm cloak
or greatcoat, two pairs strong shoes, two warm suits, and six or
nine articles of each kind of underclothing. Two or three
coloured serge suits for men, and an extra supply of flannel for
women and children will be very useful. If the emigrant is
going by sailing ship, extra warm clothing will be required.
N.B.—There are not many opportunities for washing clothes on
board.
For labouring men and others without capital there is very
little opening at present in the Colony, and clerks, shopmen, and
warehousemen are specially warned against emigrating. There
is, however, great scarcity of useful female domestic servants.
The late bountiful harvest, and the better mining prospects have
materially improved, at all events for a time, the condition of the
country. The numbers of those who left the Colony in 1886
and 1887 on account of the depression have become reduced
(though the returns for January 1888 still show a considerable
excess of emigrants over arrivals), and, if the good seasons con-
tinue, the Colony may even require additional labour. But the
reeent sale of Crown Lands to prop up the falling revenue shows
that trade is still very bad, and the time for emigrants from this
country is not yet. If any do go, they should remember that
trades are not so sharply defined as in England. A carpenter,
for instance, will often act as a joiner, wheelwright or cooper;
a bricklayer, as a mason or stonecutter ; a general labourer, as farm
hand or ploughman. They should also take the first fair offer of
work, though it be outside their own particular trade, and should
avoid lingering in the large towns.
For farmers with capital, the prospects are no doubt better, but
the uncertainty of the rainfall makes a positive statement im-
possible. Fruit growing and wine making offer, perhaps, lo men
of capital and experience, steadier prospects than ordinary
farming, but they should not invest money in land until they have
gained experience of the Colony, otherwise they may not impro-
bably lose it. It is better for them to work at wages, or to help
a friend, than to plunge at once into farming in a country where
soil, climate, seasons, and the mode of farming are very different
from what they have been accustomed to. The delay incurred by
learning these differenees will be more than compensated for by
the experience gained.
In 1886 there were no emigrants introduced into the Colony
at the public expense ; the total amount expended by the Colony


iu connexion with immigration was 39,281/. 14s. During that
year 17,623 immigrants altogether came into the Colony, of whom
only 4,138 were females. The bulk of them came from British
possessions, such as the other Australasian Colonies. Only 624
males and 372 females came from the United Kingdom.
As against the 17,623 immigrants, no less than 25,231 persons
left the Colony in 1886 on account of the depression there. In
1887 there were 12,290 immigrants, and 15,423 emigrants, showing
a loss to the Colony, owing to the bad times of 1886 and 1887, of
about 10,000 persons.
Pauper Pauper immigrants may be sent back to the country from
immigration. which they came.
Pkofkssional There is very little opening for professional persons, and
Pjsksons. persons outside the Colony have little or no chance of getting
appointments in the Colony.
1, Medical Any person may receive from the medical board in South
Practitioners Australia a certificate of his being a legally-qualified medical
Act of 1880, practitioner, on proving that he is either, (1) a F,, M., L., or
Extra L.R.C.P., London, or (2) F., M., or L.R.C.P., Edinburgh,
or (3) F., or L.K. and Q.C.P., Ireland, or (4) F, or M.R.C.S.,
England, or (5) F., or L.R.C.S., Edinburgh, or of the F.P. and S.,
Glasgow, or the R.C.S., Ireland, or (6) L.S.A., London, or
L.A.H., Dublin, or (7) M.B. or M.D., or M.S. of any Chartered
University in Her Majesty’s dominions, or (8) qualified to be
registered under the Imperial Medical Acts, or (9) qualified to
practise in any foreign State.
Surveyors. Any person who is legally licensed as a surveyor in any part of
the world may receive from the “Board of Examiners for Sur-
veyors ” in South Australia, without examination, but on payment
of 51. ss. in fees, a certificate entitling him to practice in South
Australia (Act of 1886),
Cost of living. The rent of a wooden house of four rooms and offices suitable
House rent. for an artizan and his family in Adelaide, Kadina, Port Augusta,
&c., varies from 6s. to 13s. per week, but in the country towns
the rate is less (for farm labourers, note 1 below). Large
numbers of artizans, however, reside in their own freehold
cottages.
Board and At private houses in towns for single young men, shopmen, &c.,
lodging.
board and lodging costs 12s. to 255,
10s. to 155.; less in the country.
f. per week ; for single females,
i s. tu £tos, pci wccjs.; iur sixigit) itjmaxes,
mntry.
in Adelaide, Kadina, Port Pirie, Port
as follows :
; Milk, per
quart - sd. to 6d.
Mutton - 3d. to id.
Potatoes, per
6d. cwt. - ss. to 7s.
'. id. I Sugar - 2 \d. to id.
1 Tea - Is. 6d. to 2s. 6d.
1 Tobacco - 3s, 6d. to ss,
. 105. )
Provisions.
Retail prices per lb. in
Augusta, &c., are roughly as
Bacon - B d. to Is. \d.
Beef - 4c?. to 7 d.
Bread, 2 lb.
loaf - 3d.
Butter - from Is. to Is. 6c/,
Cheese - from Is. to Is. id.
Coffee - Is. 6 d. to Is. 10c/.
Flour, per
ton -9/, 10s. to 10s. 10s.


Clothing is about 10 per cent. (2s. in the £) dearer than in
England, but less is required owing to the warm climate.
Bootmakers. —Piecework is the rule. Men on daywork earn
from 405., and female machinists 20s. to 275. Gd. per week.
Bookbinders. —From 455. per week. Blacksmiths. —7s. to 9s. a
day. General Labourers, 4s. to ss. a day.
Builders. —Stonemasons, wallers, Bs. to 95.; stonecutters, 10s.;
plasterers, 7s. to Bs.; bricklayers and slaters, Bs.; carpenters,
7s. to 95.; labourers, 6s. to 7s. per day.
Bakers. —From 505., without board and lodging, per week.
Butchers. —From 30s. to 50s. per week.
Cabinetmakers. —From 6s. Gd. to 9s. per day.
Coachbuilders. —Various, from vicemen at 1/. 10s. to smiths at
61. 10s. per week. Farriers. —Good firemen, Bs. Gd. to 9s. per
day of 10 hours.
Coopers, Gasfitters, Locksmiths, and Bellhangers, Bs. to 10s.
per day. Coopers’ work is generally done by piece.
I? ■on Trade. —Per day, general smiths, 9s. to 12s. ; strikers,
ss. Gd. to 75.; fitters, Bs. to 11s.; engine drivers, 6s. to 9s. per
day.
Painters and Paperhangers. —7s. to Bs.; grainers and writers,
9s. to 12s. per day.
Plumbers. —Very good hands, 7s. to 9s. per day.
Printers. —Jobbing hands, 21. 15s. Tailors. —From 21. 2s. to
3/. 10s. all per week.
Saddlers. —Gs. to Bs. per day of nine hours.
Tanners and Curriers. —Beamsmen, 21. to 21. 10s. per week ;
strikers and finishers, 30s. to 405.; tanners, 30s. to 365. per week.
The day is 10 hours. Curriers work is all done by piece.
Wheelwrights. — Is. to Is. 3 d. per hour.
Station hands. —Per week, drovers, 1 1, to 1/. 10s.; shepherds,
10s. to 205.; bush carpenters and blacksmiths, 305.; cooks, 20s. to
305,, 40s. to 50s. during shearing. Per year, married couples,
40/. to 70 1.; new arrivals, 40/.; new arrivals, married couples,
40/. to 601. All the above arc with rations and expenses paid up
to the station.
Farm hands. —Hay harvesters, &c., 20s. to 255. per week, with
board and lodging, day of 12 hours. Shearers, 15s. to 20s. with
board, per 100 sheep shorn, or about 12s. to 15s, a day. Plough-
men, 10s. to 17s. per week with board.
Gardeners, 6s. Gd. to 7s. per day.
Female Servants, per week, with board and lodging:—
General servants. —Bs.
Cooks. —10s. to 20s.
Housemaids. —Bs. to 10s.
Kitchenraaids.—Bs. to 10s.
Housekeepers.—l2s, to 20s.
Laundresses.—los. to 16s.
Nursemaids, Bs. to 10s.
Charwomen, 3s. a day.
Note I.—Farm labourers are usually boarded and lodged, and
single men are, as a rule, preferred to married
men with families.


Note 2.—A high rate of wages does uot necessarily imply a
demand for labour.
„ 3.—The ordinary working day for artizans is eight
hours.
The value of the exports in 1886, was 4,489,008/. (of Avhich
over H millions were to the Australian Colonies, and 2\ millions
to the United Kingdom,) or 928,137/. less than in 1885, and
2,134,696/. less than in 1884. The principal articles of export
(the produce of the Colony), were wheat, 82,134/., as against
1,576,873/. in 1885, wool, 1,447,971/., flour, 544,476/., and
minerals chiefly copper, 275,280/. The total imports in 1886
were 4,852,750/., (of which 2,394,693/. were from Australasia,
and 1,973,647/. from the United Kingdom), as against 5,289,014/,
in 1885.
The actual revenue for 1887, was 2,014,102/., as against
1,975,269/. in 1886; in addition, 1,100,000/. was authorised to
be raised by sale of Crown Lands to meet an again recurring
deficit. For the quarter ending March 1888, the revenue was
600,000/., or 88,000/. more than for the corresponding quarter in
1887. The expenditure in 1887 was 2,145,135/., as against
2,234,395/. in 1886. The Public Debt at the end of 1887 was
19,168,500/., raised at various times for productive public works.
The Sovereign is represented by a Governor who is appointed
by the Imperial Government, usually for a term of six years. The
Executive Council consists of the Governor, the Chief Justice,
and the members of the Ministry for the time being. There are
two Houses of Legislature—one called the Legislative Council,
and the other the House of Assembly. The Legislative Council
is composed of 24 members, who are returned by four Electoral
Districts. Members of the Council must be natural-born or
naturalised subjects of Her Majesty the Queen, of thirty years of
age, who have resided for not less than thrjee years in the Colony.
The qualification of electors for the Legislative Council is the
possession of a freehold of the value of 50/., or a leasehold of 20/.
annual value, or the occupation of a dwelling-house of 25/. annual
value. The elector must also be twenty-one years of age, a
natural-born or naturalised English subject, who has been a
registered voter for not less than six months. The House of
Assembly, or “ Lower House,” is composed of fifty-two members,
who represent twenty-six districts. Elections are triennial, but
the House is sxxbject to dissolution by the Governor when circum-
stances arise to warrant such a course. The only qualification of
a member of, or an elector for, the Assembly, is tlxat he must be a
subject of Great Britain, 21 years of age, who has been on
the electoral roll for six mouths. The elections are by ballot, tie
voting being takexx between eight o’clock a.m. axxd six o’clock p.m.
Municipal institutions flourish ixx the Colony. In the city and
many of the provincial towns there are coi'porations, aud in the
country districts there are “District Councils,” which possess
rating powers, and arc charged principally with the execution of
works of local improvement and development. The money


expended by these councils on public works is supplemented from
the general revenue.
All religious bodies are represented. There is no established
church. At the last census in 1881, out of a population of
279,8(55, there were 76,000 belonging to the Church of England,
43,000 Roman Catholics, 42,000 Wesleyans, 20,000 Lutherans,
and 18,000 Presbyterians. These and other smaller denominations
have places of worship in all the settled parts of the Colony.
The administration of justice is based upon the English model.
There is a Chief Justice and two Puisne Judges vrho hold several
criminal and civil sittings in Adelaide during the year, and at
longer intervals circuit courts in the south-east and northern
districts. In the northern territory the Government Resident
can deal with all except capital cases.
The Insolvency jurisdiction is administered by a Commissioner,
whose powers are very large. He can imprison an insolvent for
a stated period, not exceeding three years, for certain offences,
and for seven years should the insolvent not surrender himself, or
not fully disclose or deliver up his estate, or should he embezzle
any part of it to the value of 10/. (The Insolvent Acts, 1886-7).
Local Courts are established all over the Colony in convenient
places. The Limited J urisdiction of a Local Court reaches 30/.;
the Full Jurisdiction, 400/. These Courts answer the purpose of
County and Small Debts Courts in the old country, and the
processes are even more simple.
Magistrates have ordinary jurisdiction apart from civil cases.
One Justice may commit for trial for serious offences, and has the
power of fine or imprisonment for short periods for petty mis-
demeanors. A special magistrate or two justices may deal
summarily with certain specified classes of felonies and grave
misdemeanors.
There are also in different parts of the Colony, Licensing
Rehches, which deal with wine and spirit, publican’s, slaughtering,
pawnbroker’s, and auctioneer’s licenses.
The fees are 4 d. per week for children under eight years, and
6c/. for pupils above that age.
The education is compulsory and secular ; but the teacher may,
if he likes, and must if requested by 10 parents of pupils, read
out a portion of the Scriptures, for half an hour before school
begins. There are also many Sunday schools.
There are many scholarships and exhibitions open to all.
About a quarter of the total amount spent by the State on educa-
tion is recouped by payment of fees, &c. There are several
colleges, such as St. Peter’s and Prince Alfred Colleges, where
higher education and religious instruction are given ; and a School
of Painting and of Design. There is also an Agricultural college
situated on the Government Experimental Farm at Roseworthy,
about 30 miles from Adelaide. The students are divided into
(1) practical, and (2) science students. The former are required
to work regularly upon the farm, and thus acquire a thorough
knowledge of the various operations, and of the different machines
and implements employed, and they are paid for the work per-
formed by them. The fee for practical students is 50/, a year,


including everything except books and washing. The highest
educational establishment in the Colony is the Adelaide Univer-
sity, having several valuable scholarships and the power of
conferring degrees on both men and women.
The principal Banks in the Colony with their London addresses
are—
Bank of Australasia, 4, Threadneedle Street, E.C.
Bank of South Australia, 31, Lombard Street, E.C.
English, Scottish, and Australian Chartered Bank, 73, Cornhill,
E.C.
Bank of New South Wales, 64, Old Broad Street, E.C.
National Bank of Australasia, 149, Leadenhall Street, E.C.
Union Bank of Australia, 1, Bank Buildings, E.C.
Bank of New Zealand, 1, Queen Victoria Street, E.C.
Commercial Bank of Australia, 1, Bishopsgate Within, E.C.
These banks allow 5 per cent, interest on fixed deposits for
12 months. English money is used throughout the Colony.
Persons are recommended not to take their money in cash, but by
means of one or more money orders payable to themselves at any
post office in the Colony. Large sums should be transmitted
through one of the above banks.
The head bank is at Adelaide, and there are branches at the
principal telegraph stations. On the 30th June 1887, the number
of depositors was 56,685, with an average deposit of 27/. 17s. lOri.
The rate of interest allowed to depositors was 5 per cent.
At the end of 1886, there were 1,211 miles of railway open.
The principal lines are as follows : (1), Semaphore, and Port
Adelaide to Adelaide; (2), Adelaide through Roseworthy to
Kapunda (50 miles), and North West Bend on the Murray River
(106 miles) ; (3), Adelaide through Roseworthy and Port Wake-
field, at the head of Gulf St. Vincent, to Wallaroo on Spencer’s
Gulf, and Snowtown; (4), Adelaide through Burra to Port Augusta
at the head of Spencer’s Gulf, whence a line goes due north for
220 miles, through Beltana and the Gums to Hergot Springs;
(5), Branch lines from No. (4) at Petersburgh, (a) to Port Pirie on
Spencer’s Gulf, (/>) to Cockburn, to be extended to Silvertown
and the New South Wales border ; (6), Adelaide, going south to
Mount Barker, Strathalbyn, Goolwa, and Port Victor, about 100
miles ; (7), from Kingston (on Lacepede Bay), in the south, east-
wards to Naracoorte, 52 miles, whence one line goes south to
Mount Gambier (65 miles), and another due north for 60 miles,
near the Victorian border, to Border Town ; (8), Rivoli Bay (in
the south), south-eastwards to Mount Gambier (51 miles); (9),
Adelaide, through Mount Barker, Nairne, Murray Bridge, Wirrega
to Border Town, and thence through the Colony of Victoria to
Melbourne (508 miles), 2nd class fare 21.55. Other lines are being
constructed, such as (1), extension of No. 4 above, northwards
round Lake Eyre; (2), Palmerston, on the northern coast,
southwards to Pine Creek.
There is telegraphic communication between South Australia
and all parts of the world. The entire length of the line from
Adelaide to Port Darwin, on the north coast is 1,973 miles. The
charge fora telegram, (l),in South Australia itself is Is, for every


10 words; between a few places it is 6d. ; (2), from Great Britain
to South Australia it is 9s. 4 d. or 9s. 2d. a word.
The rates of postage are to or from the United Kingdom, are Post.
(I), books, magazines, &c., If?, for 1 oz., 2d. for 2 ozs., 4c?. for
4 ozs., and 4c?. for every additional 4 ozs.or part; (2),newspapers,
Ic?. every 4 ozs.; (3), letters, 6d. every oz.; (4), parcels post,
2s. for first 2 lbs., Is. per lb. afterwards up to 11 lbs.
There are mails between England and South Australia at least
once a week.
The rates for money orders from Great Britain are— 2l. and Money Orders,
under, 6c?.; between 21. and 51., Is,; between 51. and 71., Is. Gd,;
between 71. and 10?., 2s. #
There is a public library at Adelaide, and suburban or country Libraries and
institutes with libraries, in every place of any size, institutes.
The principal friendly societies, most of which are regulated by Priendh’ and
the Friendly Societies Act, 1886, are the Oddfellows, Foresters, s ”ci e tief
Druids, Rechabites, Good Templars, Sons of Temperance, and
Hibernian Australasian Catholic Benefit Society. There is also a
Young Men’s Christian Association, and a Masonic Grand Lodge.
All these have branches in the important towns. Members of
friendly societies in England should apply to their own society for
letters of introduction to the corresponding society in the Colony,
There are several building societies, which are regulated by an
Act, which is based upon and almost a reprint of the English Act
of 1874.
There are hospitals and charitable institutions at all places of
any size. In-door relief was given by Government in 519, and lst i tu tions
out-door relief in 4,205, cases in 1886, mostly on account of
sickness.
Many Clubs have been started in Adelaide for the promotion of Amusement*,
sport, such as Hunt, Archery, Lawn Tennis, Yacht, Rowing,
Swimming, Cricketing, Football, Athletic, and Bicycle Clubs.
These have been repeatedly referred to in the foregoing pages; Products.
they are here grouped together.
Agriculture is carried on only in the settled portion of the Agriculture.
Colony. Wheat is the chief product, and of this there are about
1,950,000 acres, or some 20,000 less than in 1886-7; about
19,012,500 bushels were produced in 1887-8, which was a consider-
able increase. The average produce per acre is eight bushels; in
1887, it was nearly 10; the weight per bushel is 66 lbs.; the
average market price per bushel in Adelaide varied in 1886 from
4 s. Id. in January, to ss. 2d. in August and September; the
prices throughout were quite Is. higher per bushel than in 1885.
The mode of farming in South Australia is very different from
that pursued in Europe. Hand labour is too tedious and costly,
and harvesting operations are done by machinery. The agricul-
tural year begins immediately after the autumn months. In
March or April the early rains fall, and ploughing is very general
during the three months of April, May, and June. The intense
heat of summer hardens the ground, so that ploughing is difficult
and costly prior to the advent of the rains. Immediately, however,
the first showers have fallen, the farmer commences ploughing,


and is busy with his teams from morning till night, breaking up
the ground which he intends to put under crop. Sowing is begun
in April, May, or June, according to the locality and, as a rule, is
completed by July. In recent years, sowing has been done by
mechanical seed sowers, which are largely manufactured in the
Colony. With this machine, 100 acres per day can be easily
sown at a cost of about 3d. per acre. Drills, such as are used
in English farming, are only adopted to a very limited extent.
The operations of rolling and harrowing are very much the same
as on English farms, only that the ground being drier and more
friable requires less working. The principal rains fall in June
and July; in August, as the days lengthen, the crops shoot up,
and in the next two months they gi’ow rapidly. As the month of
November approaches, the crop begins to show for ear. In certain
unfavourable seasons, red rust then develops and injures whole
fields of wheat. Hay harvest is generally in full swing by the
middle of November, the corn harvest following immediately after-
wards, the forwardness of the crops depending upon varying
circumstances, such as early or late varieties of wheat, early or
late sowing, or favourable, or unfavourable climatic conditions.
Hay is made in South Australia of the wheat plant, mowed just as
the wheat is forming in the ear, and dried for a few days in the
sun. By the beginning of December, when the summer has set
in, reaping operations have fairly commenced ; and by Christmas,
harvesting is general throughout the Colony. The average daily
work is from eight to ten hours, and the area reaped per day may
also be set down on an average of from eight to ten acres,
according to circumstances. It is difficult to accurately state the
cost of reaping, but it runs from Bs. to s s. per acre.
The capital required to work a farm, over and above the
purchase money, is about 20s. to 255. an acre; improved land costs
from 80s. to 90s. an acre. The chief difficulties which the farmer
has to contend with are scarcity of farm hands, the rabbit plague,
and droughts. Some of the crops have been almost entirely spoilt
by drought during the last two or three years. The harvest of
1887-8 was unusually good.
The sheep and cattle runs range from a few square miles up to
several hundred in extent, and there are cases of a squatter or a
squatting firm leasing one or more thousand miles of pastoral
country.
In 1886, nearly 45,000,000 pounds of South Australian wool
valued at 1,447,971/. were exported.
The principal breed is the merino; the weight of a good
merino being about 60 lbs.
Thei’e were in 1884 nearly 7,000,000 sheep, 169,000 horses, and
390,000 horned cattle in the Colony; no statistics have been
taken since then. Drought has destroyed large numbers of
sheep during the last two or three years, especially in the
western, central, and northern districts, but in 1887 the rains
were plentiful. It is hoped that by the sinking of artesian wells,
the storing of water, and irrigation, the danger of drought
may be to some extent obviated. The rabbit plague also causes


great loss, especially along the Murray flats. The price in the
Adelaide markets in 1886 for first-class Merino fat wethers
ranged from 85. in December, to 17 s. in September; for first-class
bullocks from 81. 10s. in December, to 21 1, in July ; for first-class
cows from 61. in January and February, to 15/. in May. Prices
were generally higher for cattle, and lower for sheep than in
1885. The average pi’ice of Adelaide wool in London in 1886
was 7 \d. per lb., as against 80?. in 1885, and 9 d. in 1884.
Every kind of fruit that can be grown in England is found, as Fruits and
well as olives, figs, oranges, peaches, guavas, grapes, &c., vc S cta blcs.
growing in the open air, and thriving most luxuriantly.
There are about 600 market gardeners within a few miles
of Adelaide, who gain their living by growing fruit and
vegetables; many of the working hands are Chinese.
Potatoes are grown mainly in the neighbourhood of Mount
(f am bier, in the south-eastern district of the Colony, about
200 miles from Adelaide, where also there are a few hop planta-
tions. In the Mount Lofty Ranges also potatoes are grown
regularly along with the other crops of common garden vege-
tables, but no large cultivation is conducted. Upon the plains,
the crops are uncertain owing to want of rain, though sometimes
a few acres will turn out well. The average weights are about
the same as in England.
The country and climate are suitable for the production of all Wine,
sorts of wine. The Adelaide plains produce wines similar to
those of the south of Spain, whereas the hilly districts are
adapted to the growth of clarets and the lighter descriptions of
wine. The aggregate annual vintage is under 500,000 gallons.
At Tintara, 30 miles south of Adelaide, where there are many
good vineyards, land costs from 31. to 10/. an acre. There are
also good vineyards round Greenock and Angaston, 40 to 55 miles
north-west of Adelaide.
The low rate of copper, and the heavy output in other countries, Minerals:
especially in South America, where the cost of production is low, (l.) Copper,
have led to the practical suspension of copper mining in the
Colony. The recent rise, however, in the price of copper has
favourably affected the mining industry.
At the end of 1886, the only copper mines which were being
worked at all, were at Kapunda in Light County, Hamley, Moonta,
Wallaroo, and Matta Matta, 85 miles N.W. by W. of Adelaide;
and Yorke’s Peninsula Mining Company. The value of the
copper and copper ore exported in 1886 was 230,868/., as against
322,983/. in 1885, and 563,010/. in 1877. The price of South
Australian copper in London throughout 1877, ranged from 74/.
to 83/., but in 1886, from 44/. to 47/. only; in November 1887,
it was about 50/.
8,825 ozs. of gold, valued at 32,585/., were exported in 1886, (2.) Gold,
or nearly twice as much as in 1885. Alluvial gold fields were
being worked at the end of that year on Crown lands near
Echunga, Hahndorf, Gumeracha, Barossa (34 miles N.E. of
Adelaide), Ulooloo, Manna Hill, and Teetulpa (80 miles N.E.
of Petersburg), and quartz reefs in the hundreds of Myponga
i 53840. B


(38 miles south of Adelaide), Kuilpo, Para Wirra, Barossa,
Waukaringa (225 miles N. of Adelaide), Teetulpa, King’s Bluff,
Hurd’s Hill, and on private property near Woodside, 25 miles E.
of Adelaide, but the results were not very large. Gold is said to
have been recently discovered at Wonna near Terowie.
(3.) Silver. Silver is now mined on the border land near Silvertown in New
South Wales.
Manufactories. The manufactories are not very large. The principal are those
for railway and other carriages, agricultural implements, bricks,
chaff-cutting, clothing, and foundries.
The total number of hands employed on 31st March 1885
were 7,952 males, and 1,350 females. There were also at that
time, 85 mills for grinding and dressing grain, employing 644
hands. No statistics were taken for 1886.
Irrigation Irrigation settlements are being established by Messrs. Chaffey,
settlements. but at present only part of the land has been surveyed. The
settlements arc on the Murray, 160 miles above Morgan. They
have an area of 250,000 acres, and a river frontage of 60 miles,
the frontage blocks being heavily timbered with red gum. The
prices are to be 15/. per acre for agricultural, and 20/. for fruit-
cultivating lands, cleared and ready for the plough. Messrs.
Chaffey are to spend 300,000/. on the land within 20 years (Act
of 1887).
Crown Land The disposal of Crown Lands, other than those in the Northern
Laws. Territory, is administered by the Commissioner of Crown Lands,
to whom application must be made, and is regulated by the Crown
Lands Consolidation Act, 1886, as amended by the Act of 1887.
The chief regulations are as follows :
1. Town and 1. Town and suburban lands maybe sold by auction, at not
suburban lands, less than 1/. per acre, 20 per cent, to be paid in cash, and the
balance within a month. In 1886 the average price of town lands
was 20/., and of suburban lands, 21. 2s. 11 d. per acre.
2. Agricultural 2. Agricultural lands—
lands, (1.) May be bought at public auction at not less than 1/. per
acre, exclusive of any improvements. The purchaser must
pay 20 per cent, down, and the balance within a month, the
average price in 1886 was 1/. Os. o \d. per acre ; or
Selector’s (2.) They may be bought on credit under a selector’s agree-
agreement. merit, in which case the selector or purchaser must pay
10 per cent, of the purchase money at the time of sale, and
the full value of the improvements (if any), 10 per cent, three
years afterwai’ds, and then 5 per cent, by 16 equal yearly
instalments till the whole is paid, all these improvements
being considered purchase money, no interest being charged.
Should he fall into arrears with these payments, 5 per
cent, is charged upon the arrears. The purchase may be
completed at the end of 10 years. The maximum area that
may be held under a selector’s agreement, is 1,000 acres.
Personal or substituted residence is required for three
months in the first year, and nine months in subsequent
years. Before the end of the second year the credit selector
must expend ss. per acre in improvements, 7s. 6d. in all
before the end of the third, and 10s. in all before the end of


the fourth year. The improvements are “to consist of all
“ or any of the following :—Erecting a dwelling-house or
“ farm buildings, sinking wells, constructing water tanks or
“ reservoirs, fencing, draining, clearing, and grubbing the
“ land.” During the first year a tenth of the land and
during every subsequent year, a fifth must be under cultiva-
tion ; the average price in 1886 was 1/. 2s. 4\d. per acre ;or
(3.) (a.) This selector’s agreement may be exchanged for a Selectors
selector’s lease of the same land up to 3,000 or 5,000 eahe *-<
acres, at a rent not less than 2d. an acre to be fixed by the
Commissioner of Crown Lands, exclusive or improvements,
good for 21 years, with right of renewal, ih.) Other
selectors’ leases, of lands reserved for leasing, in the South-
Eastern District up to i( one block,” or in the case of drainage
lands 1,000 acres, are granted for 14 years, with right of
renewal. These leases are no longer (since the Act of 1887)
to be put up to auction as directed by the Act of 1886, but
the rent is to be fixed by the Commissioner according to the
quality of the land, and the value of improvements, if any,
thereon. For drainage or first-class lands, the rent is never
to be less, even by way of a reduction, than Gd. an acre.
Selectors’ leases of both kinds, that is, both (a) and (5),
, require the land to be fenced within two years, a personal
residence for three months in the first year, and nine months
in subsequent years. The leases (5) may be held by Act of
1887 with leases (a), and in that case residence on either is
considered as residence on the other also.
(4.) Inferior lauds—most commonly scrub lands, which cost Leases of
from 1/. to 51. per acre to clear—may be leased, or sold at not m eilor an
less than 1/. per acre, payable by instalments as rent, on
condition of personal residence, or without such condition
may be leased for 21 years at a minimum annual rent of 10s.
per square mile, with right of purchase in either case at any
time during the last 11 years of the term at 1/. per acre.
The maximum area to be held of these lands is 3,200 acres,
the holder being required to clear one-fortieth of the land
yearly of timber, till one-half is in a fit state for agriculture.
(5.) Leases of grazing and cultivation lands are granted in Grazing and
blocks not exceeding 20,000 acres, except (by an amendment 1011
of the Act of 1887) whenever by reason of the proportionate
value of the improvements on such blocks, the Commissioner
may deem .it expedient to offer more. The term is 21 years,
and the yearly rent not less than \d. an acre, and 5 per-
cent. on the value of all improvements, if any, at the end of
the lease. Personal residence or residence by an agent is
required. These lands may (Act of 1887) be held in addition
to other lands.
Persons who take up land under (2), (3), (4), or (5), must not
be under 18 years of age, nor married women unless they are
judicially separated or are under a protection order,
3. Certain lands now held under lease may on the expiration of 3. Pastoral
that lease be re-let for 21 years at a rent to be fixed by valuation, eases -


but not to be less than ss. a square mile, together with payment
for improvements to the existing lessee.
Pastoral leases of other lands are granted for 35 years at
a yearly rent of not less than 2s. 6d. a square mile, and “ the
“ annual rent at which such lease shall be purchased shall be
“ payable for the first 14 years of the term ; ” subsequent rent
is fixed by valuation at not less than 2s. 6d. a square mile. The
lessee must before the end of the third year improve the land to
the amount of 30s. per mile, or stock it with at least five
head of sheep or one of cattle per mile; the improvements
to be increased before the end of the seventh year to the
amount of 3/. per mile, or the stock to 20 head of sheep or four
of cattle. The lessee receives at the end of the lease compen-
sation for all improvements then on the land (see No. 422 of Acts,
1887).
4. Leases of 4. Blocks of any Crown lands up to 20 acres'may be surveyed,
small blocks for an d leases thereof sold to any bond fide working man over 18
working men. y earg 0 f a g e> f or 21 years at not less than Qd. a year, with a right
of purchase at, and not before expiration of the lease or
renewal. By the amending Act of 1887, the price at which the
land may be purchased is to be fixed when the lease is offered for
sale. Personal residence for nine months in each year by himself
or his family is required. A number of blocks were put up to
auction in March 1888 at an upset price of 9 d. to 2s. an acre
annual rental, and 21. an acre purchase money.
5. Special leases 5. By the amending Act of 1887, special leases of lands in cer-
to encourage tain parts may be sold at auction for 21 years at not less than 2d.
tree or fruit ( or> jf no t sold, at 1 \d. or Id.) an acre a year, with a right of pur-
growmg. chase, exercisable at any time after the expiration of 10 years of the
term, at not less than 10s. an acre. The principal conditions are—
(l) fencing the land with a vermin-proof fence; (2) destroying,
within three years, all rabbits and other vermin on the land ; (3)
planting at least one-twentieth part of the land during each year,
until three-fourths of the land are planted with wattles, olives,
vines, fruit trees, vegetables, roots, corn, grasses, or other trees or
plants.
6. Mineral 6. Mineral leases of not more than 80 acres are granted
leases and for not more than 99 years, at a yearly rent of Is. an acre, and
2± per cent, on profits of mines. The lessee must spend at least
' rals°other 6 " 6/. per acre in working the mines in every two years, or employ for
than gold. nine months in each year three men per 80 acres. Licenses
giving a 12 months’ right to search for minerals (except gold) on
mineral lands, may be obtained by any person for a 20s. fee.
(2.) Gold. Leases up to 20 acres are granted for gold mining purposes at
a yearly rent of 10s. per acre for a term not exceeding 21 years.
A miner’s right for 12 months costs ss. (Gold Mining Acts, 1885
and 1886).
Crown Land These lands are regulated by the Northern Territory Crown
Laws m the Lands Consolidation Act, 1882, and gold mining leases by Acts of
SSS Z 1885 and 1886.


1. Country lands up to 1,280 acres may be bought on credit
at 12s. 6d. an acre, payable over 10 years, with a rent of 6d.
a year.
2. Town, suburban, and country lands may be bought for cash
at not less than 12s. 6d. an acre, 20 per cent, to be paid at once,
and the balance within a month.
3. Pastoral leases may be granted of not more than 400 square
miles for 25 years at a rent of 6c?. per square mile for the first
seven, and 2s. Gd. for subsequent years.
4. Country lands may be rented as plantations for the cultiva-
tion of rice, sugar, coffee, tea, tobacco, &c., in blocks from 320 to
1,280 acres, at 6d. a year. If at the end of five years half the
land is under cultivation and enclosed and the rent paid, the land
becomes the property of the lessee.
5. Lands may be leased for mineral purposes (except gold) for
14 years at a yearly rent of 2s. 6d. an acre, with right of renewal
on payment of 100/. per acre.
6. Gold mining leases up to 20 acres are granted for 21 years
at a yearly rent of 10s. an acre. A gold miner’s right, entitling
him to search for gold on Crown lands for 12 months costs 10s.
Complaints by servants against masters, or masters against
servants, may be summarily decided and compensation awarded
by two justices.
By the Game Act, 1886, (1.) certain birds and animals are
protected, in the counties and islands only, during certain seasons
of the year; (2.) trespassers in pursuit of game on enclosed land,
except land held on lease from the Crown for pastoral purposes,
may be fined 51.
By this Act, (1.) no scrub may be burnt during November,
December, and January; (2.) no stubble may be burnt from
November to the end of April, except during stated hours; (3.) no
smoking is allowed in the open air within 20 yards of hay, corn,
or stack, from November to the end of April, except with a pipe
properly covered.
Masters and
Servants Act,
1878.
The Game Act.
Bush Fires
Act, 1885.
In consequence of the great damage caused by rabbits, Acts
were passed in 1879 and 1884, with the object of suppressing
them. Over 4,300,000 were destroyed from January to October
1886.
Rabbit A cts.
Vaccination is by the Act of 1882 compulsory, under penalties
not exceeding 51.
Marriage is allowed with a deceased wife’s sister (Act of 1871).
At the end of 1886 the total military defence force was 2,290;
the naval defence force, 166 ; and there was one vessel, the
“ Protector,” armed with 11 guns and 154 small arms.
Land is transferred very cheaply and rapidly on the lines of the
Torrens’ system. Registration is compulsory. (R. P. Acts,
1886-87.)
A complete copy of the new Customs’ Tariff, 1887, maybe seen
at this office. On some articles there are specific duties, on others,
duties ranging from 10 to 25 per cent, on the value, and there
is an extensive free list. The customs tariff for the Northern
Territory is as regards some articles slightly different.
Vaccination.
Marriage.
Defences.
Land Transfer,
Customs.


Further statistics will be found in (1) the “ Statistical
“ Abstract for the several colonial and other possessions of the
“ United Kingdom in each year from 1872 to 1886,” (price 11c?.) :
London, Eyre and Spottiswoode; (2) The Statistical Register of
South Australia for 1886, published in Adelaide.
Useful information may be obtained respecting the Colony
from the South Australian Statutes, and Newspapers ; Hazell
and Hodgkin’s “ Australasian Colonies,” 1887, (Stanford, Charing
Cross, London, and at this Office) price 6c?., post free 7|c?.;
Stow’s South Australia, prepared for the Calcutta Exhibition,
1883, and Congreve’s South Australia, prepared for the Colonial
and Indian Exhibition, London, in ] 886 ; the “ Handbook for
“ Australia and New Zealand,” (Silver and Co., 67, Cornhill,
London), the “ Australian Handbook,” (Gordon and Crotch,
St. Bride Street, London), the “ Indian and Colonial Directory,”
(Street and Co., 30, Cornhill, London), the “Year Book for
Australia,” (Messrs. Triibner and Co., Ludgate Hill, London),
and the “Colonial Office List,” (Messrs. Harrison and Sons,
59, Pall Mall, London). The “Handy Guide to Emigration,”
(S.P.C.K., Northumberland Avenue, London), price 3c?., post
free 4c?., contains a list of the names and addresses of the various
emigration societies. A long list of books on South Australia has
been prepared by T. Gill, and may be seen at this office. For
further particulars on the Colony, apply to the Agent-General for
South Australia, at 8, Victoria Chambers, London, S.W., or to
the Chief Clerk at this office.
Note I.—The Committee of Management will be glad to receive
suggestions and information, more especially from
Colonists. Any such communication will, if desired,
be treated as confidential.
n 2. —The Committee of Management cannot return excess of
stamps sent for Handbooks, or accept damaged stamps.
„ 3. —Revised editions of this Handbook are issued in the
spring of each year. The Committee cannot under-
take to insert in the Handbook changes which occur
in the course of the year.


INDEX.
Adelaide - - - 3
Agriculture - - 15, 18
Agricultural College - - 13
Amusements - - - 15
Augaston - 3
Apoinga - - - 3
Area - - - - 1
Arrival, best time for - - 7
„ arrangements on - 8
Ealaklava - - - 3
Banks - - - 14
Blumberg - 4
Board and lodging - - 10
Books - - - - 22
Border Town - -5, 14
Building Societies - - 15
Bush Fires Act - - - 21
Charitable Institutions - - 15
Climate - - 6
Clothing - - -11
Copper - - - 17
Cost of living - - - 10
Counties - - 2
Crown Lands - - 18-21
Customs - - - 21
Defences --- 21
Demand for labour -- 9
Divisions :
(1.) Settled Districts - 2
(2.) Western and Central - 5
(3.) Northern Territory - 5
Echunga - - - 4
Education - - - 13
Emigration - - - 9
Exports - " 6, 12
Franchise - - - 12
Fares - - - 8
Food, price of - - 10
Friendly Societies - - 15
Fruits - - -3, 4 > 17
Gambierton - - - 4
Game Act - - - 21
Gawler - • -2,3
Georgetown - - - 3
Glenelg - - - 1,7
Gold - - -4, 17
Government - - 12
Gumeracha - - - 4
Halmdorf - - 4
Hospitals - - - 15
Imports - - - 12
Institutes - - - 15
Irrigation Settlements - - 18
Justice - - - - 13
Kadina - - - - 4
Kangaroo Island * - 1
Kapunda - - - 3
Kingston - - 5
Kooringa - - - 3
Lakes Eyre and Torrens - 5
Land Laws - - 18-21
„ Transfer - - - 21
Laura - - - - 3
Libraries - - - 15
Lobethal - - - 4
Luggage - - - 8
Manufactories - - 18
Marriage - - 21
Masters and Servants Acts - 21
Medical practitioners - - 10
Mineral leases - - 20, 21
Minerals - - - 17
Money - - - - 14
Money Orders - - 15
Moonta - - - - 4
Mountains :
Barker - -4, 14
Flinders - - - 1
Gambier - -4, 14
Lofty - - 1,3,7
Remarkable - - 1
Municipal Government - 12
Nairne - • -4, 14
Naracoorte - 5
Northern Territory -5, 20
Outfit - - - 8
Palmerston - 6
Passenger Act - - 8
Pastoral Settlement - 16, 19
Pauper Immigration - - 10
Petersburgh - -3, 14
Population - - 7
Port Adelaide - - - 7
„ Augusta - - 3
„ Darwin - - - 6
„ Elliot - - 4
„ Lincoln - - 4
„ Morgan - - 7
„ Pirie - - 3
„ Victor - 4


llivoli - - 5,14
Post - - - - 15
Products - - - 15
Professional persons - - 10
Provisions—price of - - 10
Savings Banks - - 14
Shipping - - 7
Strathalbyn - - - 4
Railways - * - 14
Surveyors - - - 10
Rabbit Acts - - - 21
Rainfall - - 7
Religion - - - 13
Teetulpa - - 17, 18
Rent - - - - 10
Telegraphs - - - 14
Revenue - - - - 12
Terowie - - 5
Rivers:
Adelaide - - - 6
Liverpool - - - 6
Vegetables - - 3,4, 17
Murray - - - 2
Roper - - 6
Wages - - - 11
South Alligators - - 6
Wallaroo - - - 4
Torrens - - 3
Wine - - ”17
Victoria - - - 6
LONDON; Printed by Etrb and Sfotiiswoodk,
Printers to the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty.
For Her Majesty’s Stationery Office.
[24406.— 2500.—4/88.]




The following Publications are drawn up for the use of
Emigrants by the Emigrants’ Information Office :
Price.
1. A Poster—exhibited in all Post Offices
Free.
2. Quarterly Circulars on Canada, and the Australasian
and South African Colonies
Free.
Id.
3, Canada. Handbook, with Map
4. New South Wales. Handbook, with Map -
Id.
Id.
Id.
Id.
Id.
5. Victoria. ~
C. South Australia. „
7. Queensland. „
8. Western Australia. „
9. Tasmania. „
Id.
Id,
10. New Zealand. ~
11. Cape Colony. „
Id.
Id.
12. Natal. „
13. The above 10 Handbooks,
cover, with the 10 Maps
bound together in stiff
Is.
All the above may be obtained post free from the Chief Clerk,
Emigrants’ Information Office, 31, Broadway, Westminster, S.W.;
the Handbooks may also be obtained, either directly or through
any Bookseller, from Eyre and Spottiswoode, East Harding
Street, Fleet Street, E.C. ; or Adam and Charles Black, 6, North
Bridge, Edinburgh; or Hodges, Figgis, & Co., 104, Grafton
Street, Dublin,
