



SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
WATER CONSERVATION AND DEVELOPMENT.
[No. 52.
[Estimated cost of printing, £7 la. 7d.]
Warrakilla, May 10th, 1883.
Sir —The experience of the past forty years has demonstrated the fact that the want of sufficient and
reliable rainfall has seriously retarded the progress and success of South Australia.
This conclusion is of the greatest importance to the province, more especially to those engaged in pastoral
pursuits and in the cultivation of the soil; and it will be more fully realised as settlement advances and the
population increases and extends from the capital towards the interior, unless means he adopted to conserve
waters that in times of flood are now permitted to run to waste, and to develop the immense stores which
doubtless exist at no great depth in the earth, and which can only be utilised by being raised to the surface
and distributed as required for agricultural, pastoral, and other purposes.
As regards deficient and irregular rainfall, South Australia is by no means exceptional. History tells us
that cultivation and pasture were practised thousands of years ago by means of irrigation from rivers and
tanks, by canals and ditches, in lands similarly situated in Egypt, China, Persia, India, and elsewhere, and,
during our own time, in Europe and America; and that prosperity results according to the state of repair and
excellence in which these works are maintained—their neglect entailing failure of crops and pasturage, and,
at times, even famine upon the communities depending upon them, and, on their being allowed to go to ruin,
a return of the country to sterility and barrenness.
In Europe, where the climate is generally moist, and the rainfall tolerably reliable and regular, there are
over 5,000,000 acres irrigated and drained; in China an immense area is similarly dealt with ; in India
over 10,000,000 acres ; in Sind, where the average rainfall is but nine inches in the year, over 1,250,000
acres are irrigated; and in England, Scotland, and America, this system is being largely and increasingly
resorted to, the latter country being subject to hot dry winds similar to our own, and the evaporation, there-
fore, proportionately large, cannot successfully compete with lands in moister climates, but they can, and are,
doing their best to mitigate the evils arising from a small and irregular rainfall in certain localities, and with
the best results. Without irrigation the state of Utah would still be a desert, and a similar remark applies
to Colorada and Nevada.
Stewart, in his work on irrigation in America, says, when speaking of the small rainfall in particular
places during 1868 to 1871 ; —“ The distress amongst the farmers south of Monteroy was extreme : neither
“ grass nor grain grew, hundreds of farms were abandoned, and stockmen drove the horses, cattle, and sheep
“ up into the mountains for food and water.
“ In the spring of 1870, the great Santa Clara Valley was entirely destitute of grass, and the plains of
*• Los Angelos, comprising over a million acres of land, were barren to the borders of the streams. Else-
“ where the same effects were visible, and over the entire State thousands of horses, cattle, and sheep were
“ starved to death.
“ The estimate of farmers in the Southern Valley of California is, that but two crops in five years can
“be secured without irrigation, and in 1850 only Tin. of rain fell in San Francisco.” It will be seen there-
fore that South Australia is not exceptionally situated as to rainfall, small and precarious as that sometimes
is. The knowledge of this fact does not limit our liability, or lessen our loss, however; the fact stares us in
the face. The all but yearly losses by failure of crops and pastures is brought promptly and painfully before
us, and the voice of the people through the public press reiterates the fact, and demands of the Government
that stops be taken to mitigate, if not altogether remove, the cause of their frequent losses from want of water,
whilst millions of tons absolutely run to waste during the floods that almost invariably follow large and
copious rains. This fact the Government has recognised, and has borrowed money for water conservation
and development. Already a considerable expenditure has been incurred and a large amount of good done,
though in a desultory way, by the construction of wells, dams, masonry tanks, and scooped reservoirs, upon
leading lines of road from ports and inland towns, as well as in other suitable localities. The expenditure
up to this date within hundreds amounts to a total of £49,031 11s. 4d., and outside hundreds to £55,268
4s. od., making a grand total of £104,299 15s. 4d. spent in cost of construction, supervision, and appliances :
the result being the conservation to the country of fifty-six millions of gallons of water that would other-
wise have run to waste during each general rain, besides the yield from a large number of wells, many
of which have been successful, and give an important and permanent supply fit for stock, and, in most cases,
for domestic and other purposes. Add to this the wells, dams, tanks, and reservoirs sunk and constructed by
the pastoral lessees, resumed and paid for by the Government in the progress of survey and settlement of the
country, and reserved to the use of the public, the aggregate result is an important one, though for other than
irrigation purposes, being only intended to meet local requirements, apart from the culture of the soil, and
those of teams and stock travelling from the capital, ports, and inland towns, to adjacent lands, or towards
the interior.
Many of the works above referred to have been constructed under the supervision of officers belonging
to the Survey Department, but this method has not proved satisfactory. Complaints


Complaints are loud and numerous from all parts of the country. Wants that have been supplied are
speedily forgotten, and secure but little commendation ; but those that arc felt are grievous to be borne, and
are daily and weekly heralded by the newspapers. However able, anxious, zealous, and painstaking the
officers of the Government may be, their numbers are too few to keep pace with the enormous demand made
upon their services, that extends over so wide an area of country ; and where failure—as it sometimes must —
attends their best endeavors, they arc censured by the public, who do not at all times extend sufficient
consideration to the difficulties under which they labor. Failure on the part of private attempts to develop
and conserve water are sympathised with by most, if not by all; but failure by a Government officer is a
very different affair. Doubtless public criticism does good; but many able, painstaking men are sensitive,
and retire from a position which renders them liable to censure so publicly administered, and those who can
bear unmerited blame arc few. At all events, the system does not work well, and requires altering.
Moreover, to carry on extensive works over a wide scope of country, from the capital alone as a centre, is
objectionable, as the cost of supervision and transport is enormously enhanced, and much valuable time is
frequently lost by references upon points which should be settled nearer at hand, so as to avoid delay.
Letting works of this nature by Government tender is also objectionable, as considerable capital is often
required, and capitalists are not likely to rest content, where risk has to be run, with reasonable profits.
They go in for a big thing; and, unless the supervision is perfect, the loss to the country, both as to cost and
quality of work, may be serious. Nor does it do to employ men on large salaries to undertake works of this
nature, as too often men worthy of all praise whilst in the employ of private firms, or on their own account,
become apathetic when vested with responsibility as to works, but without responsibility as to the means or
cost. It would, therefore, appear undesirable to continue the present plan.
When works of this nature are to be undertaken upon an extensive scale, and over a vast tract of country,
at one and the same time, or as nearly so as possible, they should be commenced from centres, and carried on
by persons who not only know the localities thoroughly, but also where labor can best and most readily and
cheaply be secured to carry on the works in such localities, and without inconvenience to other local wants ;
also where suitable materials can most readily be obtained; and this can probably best be done by forming the
whole province into districts for the development and conservation of water for all purposes within such
districts, to ensure a flow' of w r ater w'hen required, to germinate and promote the growth of cereals, fodder
plants, and grasses, and to irrigate the flat lands when piacticable.
An Act of Parliament would, of course, be required to enable this to be legally done, and the districts
should embrace lands not permanently supplied with water sufficient for the purposes of the inhabitants, and
for cultivation, agriculture, and pastoral purposes. A council or board should be elected by each district to
carry out the required objects, each board having power to appoint its own officers, and to be held responsible
to the district electing it. An assessment would have to be made upon the property in each district for the
works required, the cost being supplemented by an equal amount voted by the Legislature and paid by the
Government on the certificates of its inspectors, whose duty it would be to see the works properly carried
out, and to advise with the respective boards and their executive officers.
In the subdivision of the country, district councils might readily be adopted, as far as such obtain; beyond
these, hundreds and counties, and in the purely pastoral or outside districts, they might be defined according
to settlement and the natural features of the country.
It may be supposed that conservation and development of water within the hill districts of the province
are not required; this supposition, if it exists, is incorrect. The want, at times, is seriously felt, and a suffi-
cient supply of water in the hills all the year round would be of inestimable advantage —the cultivation of
fruit and vegetables would be largely increased, fodder plants grown and stored for winter use, and by the
judicious application of water and drainage to the flats the vegetation might be promoted to a considerable
extent beyond what is now the case.
The want in the agricultural districts and grazing land adjacent is too w'ell known to require more than
mention. It is self evident. Even the South-East can largely be benefitted, as will be shown below, and the
districts including pastoral lands to the limits of the province can be as much advantaged as those lands in
the more immediate proximity to the agricultural settlements.
In 1867 the country from Mount Hopeless to the north boundary of the province, as well as the plains
on either side, were mostly inundated. The waters referred to were, for the first time, seen by me whilst
initiating a trigonometrical survey in the locality. Owing to inexperience, at the time they were supposed
by me to be permanent; by others the}' were attributed to mirage ; but subsequent experience and accurate
geographical information has shown the region to abound in large lakes and lagoons of fresh water ; and it
is all but certain that the whole of the country referred to can be made of permanent value, and to give a
large percentage upon any necessary expenditure by the construction of proper dams and ditches to retain
and distribute the immense quantities of flood waters which it is now known periodically inundate that
country by the flooding of the Diamentina, Mulligan, and other rivers leading and discharging their waters
into that area, and which are at present lost by evaporation or useless absorption in the shallow beds of
Lakes Eyre, Gregory, Blanche, Frome, &c.
No doubt the works required will be upon an extensive scale, and costly, but the results will be propor-
tionately advantageous, and the means may be found, or induced by liberal enactment and regulations; but
without a large expenditure we need never hope for results beneficial to the occupants and the country ;
which results are, however, essential, if the continued prosperity and progress of the province are to be
secured and maintained.
With reference to a very similar tract of country, Colonel R. Baird Smith, in bis report on the irrigation
works in the presidency of Madras, says:—“ The extent to which it has been carried throughout all the
“ irrigated region of the Madras presidency is truly extraordinary. An imperfect record of the number of
“ tanks in fourteen districts, shows them to amount to 43,000 in repair, and 10,000 out of repair, or 53,000
“in all. It would be a moderate estimate of the length of embankment for each, to fix it at half a mile ; and
“ the number of masonry works in sluices of irrigation, waste weirs, &c., would probably be not over-rated at
“ six. These data, only assumed to give some definite idea of the extent of the system, would give close
“ upon 30,000 miles of embankment, sufficient to put a girdle round the globe not less than Oft. thick, and
“ 300,000 separate masonry works. The whole of this gigantic machinery of irrigation is of purely native
“ origin, and it is a fact that not one new tank has ever been made by us ; and the concurrent testimony of
“ those best informed upon the subject show that a great many fine works of the kind have been allowed to
“ fall into utter disrepair and uselessness. The revenue dependent on existing works is roughly estimated at
“ 150


“ 150 lakhs, or one and a half millions sterling, and the capital sunk in them is materially underrated at ten
“ times this amount, or £15,000,000.
“ The methods of forming these works are as varied as the accidents of the grounds they occupy.
“ Valleys are taken possession of, and the natural drainage lines flowing through them are checked by
“ embankments sufficiently long to close the gorges, and sufficiently high to retain a volume of water propor-
“ tioned to the areas of irrigation situated below them. Descending steppes of land are occupied by a
“ succession of reservoirs, the higher feeding the lower from its surplus supply, and the whole forming one
“ connected scheme of irrigation.
“ I cannot close my report without reverting for the moment to the field of improvement presented by
“ the presidency of Madras in the single department of irrigation. In all parts of India, profit to the State
“ and the people follows, as certainly as effect follows cause, the possession of an abundant supply of water
“ for agricultural purposes ; but in Madras results go far beyond the general average, the staple of agriculture
“in the irrigated districts being rice. The want of water brings with it abject poverty and discontent; its
“ abundance, wealth, and contentment. Every acre that is newly watered passes at once from the revenue
“ rate of dry to that of wet cultivation, guaranteeing to the Government an immediate return paid with far
“ greater case to the cultivator of the land than the lower tax leviable before. The return is immediate, and
“ its amount great. I have almost hesitated in adopting the data given by the Madras Commissioner of
“ Public Works, so extravagantly large do they appear; but they are statements founded on official returns,
“ open to verification, and unlikely to be seriously in error, when these show returns varying from a minimum
“ of 77 to a maximum of 259 per cent, on the original cost of the works, it is inconceivable that fields parallel
“ only, if paralleled at all, by those of Australia and California can be left much longer unwrought.”
The above quotations arc given because they are, in a measure, applicable to some portions of
South Australia, and to show to a small extent what has been done, and is still being done, in India,
and what must be undertaken in a similar, though, perhaps, in a lesser degree, in South Australia. At all
events works of a similar nature must be carried out if we would mitigate, or obviate altogether, the serious
periodical losses the colony is liable to incur from this ever-recurring and lamentable deficiency in water
requisite to ensure the germinating, growth, and maturity of our crops, as well as the permanency of our
pastures.
It is not to be expected that we shall be able to raise enough water to flood the entire area that would
be benefited by irrigation, but we can, by the careful selection of sites and the use of proper appliances,
provide a sufficient supply of water to germinate the seed sown, and husband the remainder, so as to bo
able to irrigate to the extent required to mature cereals, fodder plants, fruit, and vegetables, and even to
water pastoral lauds sufficient to bring up on the flats and in the valleys that rich succulent grass and
herbage which most of us know springs up with astonishing vigor after every copious shower, and the nutri-
tious qualities of which cannot be too highly spoken of. Our pastoral lands are generally of the healthiest
character, and our soil capable of large yields if watered and properly dealt with ; but to effect this object
action must not be restricted to any particular class, but must be universal—the Government undertaking
all requisite works on lines of road and public reserves to ensure the safe passage to and fro of stock,
teams, &c., and to afford the necessary accommodation of a temporary water supply to those engaged in
developing new country, or in sinking wells or obtaining water by other artificial means throughout the
country ; the boards directing necessary operations within their several districts ; and the owners, occu-
piers, and lessees of lands those upon their individual properties.
To aid in ensuring this combined action, all Crown lands not required for roads or public reserves, how-
ever poor, and however extensive or limited in area, should be leased, and clauses inserted in the lease
allowing the value of tanks, dams, wells, reservoirs, ditches, embankments, and drains, to the lessee at the
termination of the lease, or credited in any renewed lease, or scries of renewals that may be granted under the
authority of legal enactment, and after valuation by the Government; or paid by the incoming tenant to the
outgoing, should the lessee be outbid; or by the Government, should it be inexpedient to renew the lease,
in the event of the land being required for Government purposes.
Leases of vacant land should also be granted, without competition, to individuals or companies under-
taking to construct, subject to proper regulations and supervision, works for development and conservation
of water, and for irrigation, whole or partial; the leases to contain similar covenants to those granted under
ordinary circumstances. These conditions should, in fact, be extended to every lease connected with the
land, and every reasonable privilege should be granted to induce the lessees and owners of land interested in
the cultivation of the soil, agriculture, or pastoral pursuits, to do all that is possible, by small means or great,
to conserve and utilise a sufficient supply of water to promote the object in view, which really means the
permanent prosperity of the country as well as the wealth and comfort of those engaged in the occupation
and cultivation of the land.
It must be borne in mind that it is not only necessary to irrigate land where nature fails to grant a
sufficiency of moisture, but means must also be provided by which the surplus water can be removed and the
land dried at intervals This is absolutely indispensable, or the means taken to promote growth, at perhaps
groat cost and with considerable labor and skill, may merely produce a coarse and valueless sub-aqueous
vegetation, instead of useful plants, grass, and herbage, as instanced in the undrained swamps of the South-
East, and in basins having no outlet. On southern Yorke’s Peninsula, and on the Peninsulas adjoining Lakes
Alexandrina and Albert, where, owing to want of drainage, natural basins produce a growth of useless plants,
forming in some cases an impervious bed, which can only be got rid of by breaking up and destroying the
compact mass of minute vegetable organisms and draining the land through intervening ridges, or by means
of openings in their beds, conducting the stagnant waters off the land into the porous strata beneath, should
such exist. Stephens, in his Book of the Farm, 2nd vol., page 535, art. 3511, under the heading of Water
Meadows, says : —“ The mode in which water acts in producing the effects witnessed in water meadows, has
“ not yet been satisfactorily ascertained. It is not the sediment in the water that alone produces the effect, for
“ clear water produces similar effects; though, no doubt, enriching ingredients carried by turbid water, encourage
“ the growth of plants more rapidly than clear water.” Low says this, on the theory of the process :
“ The theory of the process of irrigation has not yet been satisfactorily explained. That the efltdct'is not
“ produced by the mere supply of deficient water, appears not only from the period at which the water is
“ admitted, and when in our climate the soil is always saturated with the fluid, but from the circumstance
“that effect is not produced when the water is allowed to stagnate and sink down in the soil, but ivhen it is kept
“in a current over it. When the water is suffered to stagnate the soil tends to produce carices, junci, and
“ other
No. 52.


“ other sub-aquatic plants; but when it is kept in motion, and drained off at intervals, the finest grasses
“ peculiar to the soil and climate are produced. Neither does the fact of the deposition of mud, or other
“ fertilising sediment, explain the phenomenon ; for however such deposition may increase the effect, it is
“ likewise found that water, without the least perceptible sediment, maybe employed with success.”
The appliances necessary to secure the means of irrigation, in one or other of its forms, in this country,
may he stated to be —Ist. Springs, embanked reservoirs, tanks, and artesian wells, from which the water can
be conducted by means of ditches, channels, pipes, &c., by gravitation, and distributed equally over lands
occupying a lower level. 2nd. Ordinary wells, tanks, and reservoirs beneath the surface, and from which the
water has to be raised by mechanical power to a higher level, and thence distributed over the lower lying lands.
These appliances are open to all—the more simple to persons occupying and cultivating small properties ; the
more expensive to capitalists, public companies, boards representing districts or residents of large districts,
and to the State. Water may be raised by a lever and bucket from a small stream, water-hole, tank, or
well, elevated to a cistern or trough, and conducted by pipes, guttering, or any other simple means to the
higher portion of the land to be watered, and from thence distributed by surface channels—upon one
uniform incline —over the ground, and the surplus water allowed to run to waste, or collected again, by
catchment drains leading into a tank or water-hole for distribution and irrigation of lower lands should such
be required ; or the water may bo raised by buckets and rope upon an ordinary windlass, or by an endless
band with discs passing through a perpendicular or inclined pipe or trough and revolved by a handle, or by
a Californian pump, or any of the endless varieties of pumps now in use, according to the quantity of water
required and land to be irrigated. In addition to the above simple methods, water can be collected by
the judicious selection of a site upon a higher level, which may be on the face of a hill, on a spur, or where
the hills on either side form a valley. The catchment area above must be sufficient to fill the tank, water-
hole or reservoir intended to be made, which may be rendered impervious, so as to hold water, by being
plastered thickly upon the sides and floor with clay, and into which the water from the catchment area
above may be conducted by drains or furrows, having a fall of about one foot in fifty. From a reservoir of
this kind the water can be conducted by a syphon pipe—or a sluice built in—with pipes leading to ditches,
drains, or furrows, having a similar incline to those upon the catchment area above, and distributed upon
the lands below as required. An inch of rain over an acre of land, where the land has been fairly saturated,
will give into the reservoir by the catchment drains about a hundred tons of water. Should the land allow,
these reservoirs might be repeated to nearly the level of those to be irrigated, by stopping the catchment
drains about every chain when the highest reservoir is filled, and causing the water to flow over the lands
into another series of catchment drains below—instead of going into and causing the overflow of the highest
reservoir—and by the second series of catchment drains into a second reservoir, and so on until the scries
were filled, or until the surplus water had been secured. This plan of constructing a series of reservoirs is
better than that of making overflows on high lands from reservoirs, as the formation of ruts and consequent
dessication is avoided, and there is no waste of water, as what remains in the ditches or drains is gradually
absorbed and flows downward between the subsoil and the ground, fertilising the soil and feeding the roots
of the plants to an important extent, and by waters that would otherwise run to waste. The catchment
drains are easily stopped at the required distances by a few spadesful of earth, or a few clods left alongside
the drain for the purpose, and they are quite as easily removed when occasion requires.
Should the water in the reservoir, when required for use, be muddy, or contain sediment in suspension,
it will be all the better for cultivation, but not so good for grass land.
Should the land to be watered be sandy, it will bo well to mix it, before distribution, with liquid
manure, to prevent its too rapid absorption by the soil. This plan has been adopted with excellent effect by
Mr. Thomas Bowman, on irrigated sandy soil at Campbell Park, the yield in fruit, vegetables, and lucerne
being very great, as well as that of gum, oak, and other timber planted on the same land, and which, prior to
irrigation, could not be grown readily in that exposed situation. But even on pure sand the effect of irriga-
tion is surprising. In Belgium a considerable area of sand dunes, yielding nothing, gave by irrigation, hay
worth £l6 per English acre.
In the hills, in the northern hundreds, and indeed generally, our lands arc admirably situated for the
conservation and distribution of water. The gorges and watercourses in the ranges, intersecting the long
valleys, can readily be dammed across, and when reservoirs so made are filled, can as easily bo conducted by
overflow channels of masonry to other reservoirs upon a lower level. And from each and on either side can
irrigation channels or ditches be formed, leading, with sufficient incline, on either side, and tapped for
irrigation or watering purposes where required, until the supply becomes expended; the surplus water
flowing over the land being conducted into other reservoirs, and conserved for future use. The watercourses
in the leading valleys might be similarly dealt with near their main sources, with channels or ditches on
either side extending for miles, and utilised on lands adjoining the main creek. Now a channel by which
the waters are hurried to the sea or some useless lagoon, with the banks of the creek thoroughly dessicated,
will become a means of drainage, and one by which surplus waters may again be collected, conserved, and
utilised, until but little water, if any, is lost.
In utilising the waters of these creeks, or rivers as they are sometimes called—though, except in times
of flood, a mere chain of waterholes care must be taken to reject all waters containing mineral salts hurtful
to vegetation. These are easily recognised, and where reeds, grass, and herbage round the waterholes and
margins arc superseded by an effervescence of salt, they should be carefully analysed, and avoided if proved
deleterious. Speaking of South Australian rivers reminds me of the Murray. 'There has been a great deal of
talk about tapping the river at the North-West Bend, and by a direct cut, or canal, bringing the waters
direct to Adelaide, or to the plains north of Adelaide. Each district when formed should have the levels of
all valleys, plains, hills, and prominent features carefully taken. This duty should in fact be performed
by the Government. The result would show the proposed scheme to be utterly impracticable, but the river
can be utilised to a great extent above the North-West Bend. The lands upon its banks are lower, and can
be more readily dealt with ; but below that point the banks, until below Swanport, are high, and the lands
on cither side, more especially on the west, rise considerably towards the ranges. Here the water
to be utilised must be raised. This action the Government have already under consideration.
Sketches and levels are being taken, and these may result in the construction of the proper
means to raise and distribute the waters where required. The means suggested are to
make use of the water power, which is constant and in one direction, by mooring punts
alongside and in the stream ; these punts being fitted with undershot water-wheels and force-
pumps,


pumps, driving the water from the river into large reservoirs upon the highest banks above, and con-
ducting it from thence by pipes or otherwise, as may seem best to the lands requiring its application. These
punts need in no case occupy much space, and they might be multiplied to a great extent, and adopted by
private individuals —under proper regulations —as well as by boards or the Government. They need not be
expensive, and whilst not engaged in raising water will doubtless be profitably employed in some other way
which the exigencies of the times may suggest. There is another important feature in connection with the
Murray and its tributaries which should not be lost sight of. In former years soldiers’ barracks were erected
and occupied throughout the year at Moorundee ; now, when the river is high, the water rises above the tops
of the walls of that building, showing an evident increase in the volume of the descending waters at certain
seasons of the year ; this, it is suggested, is caused by the stocking of New South Wales and Queensland
country upon its banks and tributaries, the waters now running upon the surface into the creeks and river
by tracks of stock going to and from the river to drink, most of this water being in former years absorbed
by the then porous earth ; whether this is the case or not the fact of the rise in the river at certain seasons is
beyond doubt, and if something bo not done the flats upon the river’s banks between the North-West Bend
and Lake Alexandrina will be lost to the country. This can probably be remedied by constructing clay banks
along the margins of the flats next to the river, and placing sluice gates in them at certain suitable spots ;
the flood waters might then bo retained over the flats after flodds until the silt held in suspension has been
deposited, when the water could be run off by opening the sluice gates, and the land cultivated or laid under
grass. By this means the pasture of the flats would be retained and enriched, and the land gradually
elevated, as the deposit of silt increased after each rise in the river and consequent inundation of the flats.
It may be desirable to collect a portion of the silt during next rise of the river and have it analysed for
general information.
I have endeavored to show how lands may be watered and partly irrigated upon a small scale in the hills
and upon a larger scale in the agricultural areas to the north of the capital, as well as the plains and undu-
lating lands in its vicinity, by means of wells, dams, and reservoirs—the wells upon the low lands, the dams
intersecting the flow of waters along valleys, watercourses, gorges, and rivers, and the reservoirs or tanks
upon the faces of the hills, on spurs, and at the heads of hollows, such reservoirs or tanks being repeated from
higher to lower levels, so as to conserve the whole of the water that would otherwise run to waste as reser-
voir after reservoir was filled, and also by the collection and conservation of surplus waters after such had
been used over the land. In the northern, or purely pastoral districts, the same system can be adopted, and
in many cases the long valleys are admirably situated for the collection and storage of water a few miles
from their heads, and distribution afterwards by parallel and transverse ditches along and across their course,
with supplementary tanks or reservoirs wherever such are required and the nature of the ground permits of
their construction. Many of these will doubtless be leaky at first, but this will be remedied
as layer after layer of silt held in suspension by the water is deposited, and during those years the
soil, being supplied with moisture by absorption in the vicinity 7 of the dams, will y-iekl a large
and succulent vegetation, which stock depasturing will puddle and harden the ground and make it
perfectly watertight. In the gorges of the hills there are also hundreds of good sites, and
frequently' wells can be had—as at the Moro mine—where, at a trifling cost, the water can be made
to flow, by' syphon pipes and ditches, on to the plains below. Artesian wells can also be had in
many localities —notably in the valley' extending to the east of the Moro Ranges, and on the west of Ethin-
dina, and, further north, the Barrier Ranges. These synclinal valleys should be carefully' noted by the
geologist, and the position of protruding dykes carefully shown, for the information of the officers in charge
of conservation and development of water. In fact, the important data connected wdth this invaluable work
should be set about at once. Geologists should accompany surveyors, and the whole of the available
features, sites for wells, position of material, &c., Bcc., carefully mapped out, and placed at the disposal of
officers engaged in the work, either under the Government or boards, and also of lessees likely to be bene-
fitted by the knowledge. The information may be costly to obtain, but it will be most valuable, and when
collated and placed at the disposal of those interested will yield an important return, saving much valuable
time, if not considerable sums of money.
There is one temporary' inconvenience that may occur in the construction of dams and reservoirs in the
North. Much of the soil contains salt, which becomes soluble, and causes the water in shallow holes to
become salt, after the greater portion has been used or become absorbed and evaporated. This will be
remedied after a time, as the silt, which will render the surface good holding ground, will also prevent the
salt rising, at all events, in such quantities as to be likely to be injurious to vegetation or for stock, whore
the water is used as for drinking.
'J ho South-East is differently situated to any other portion of the colony', except the Tatiara, which may-
be classed with it, not only- from its similar character, but also because the rainfall is at times deficient and
irregular. It would require to be dealt with, therefore, in the same manner as lands lying to the north of, and
in the vicinity of, Adelaide. It is "well situated for the construction of tanks, reservoirs, and dams; but the
water by sinking is only- had at considerable depths, and would have to be raised by machinery if made use
of for the purpose. From Naracoorte and Kingston to the month of the Glcnclg, the rainfall is tolerably
reliable, and in most cases sufficient for the purposes of agriculture and cultivation, but it suffers from
inundation owing to several causes. The land is mostly- plains, increasing in steppes from the sea-board
inland, each steppe having a slightly increased elevation on its eastern side, and separated by low parallel
ridges of limestone extending for miles in the same direction of, and parallel generally to, the sca-eoast, until
they- die out as they near the desert south-east of Wellington. These steppes have a natural fall from Mount
Edward and the Dismal Swamp north-westerly, and during the wet seasons —from want of openings in the
ridges —the w-ater flows along the surface of these steppes, inundating all the lands between the ridges, and
deepest along the western sides and just under the eastern fall of the ranges through which it perco-
lates, and frequently breaks out again in the form of Teatree Springs, along the lower steppe and on
the west flanks of the same ridges or low- ranges. Add to this the fact that water can be had a
few feet below the surface of the whole of these steppes, and that much of the surface water is only
got rid of by evaporation and absorption. There is one valley of natural drainage through the
district, known as the Reedy Creek. Commencing at Mount Mclnty-re, wending west-north-west, and
gradually forming a channel between two of the ridges above referred to, and finding its way- in
a northerly direction into Tilley’s Swamp by the creek at Blackford, and by Henry’s Creek further north into
swamps leading towards Salt Creek. At Blackford the greater portion of the water floods the Murrabinna
flat
No. 52.


flat and flows to lower lands towards the lighthouse buildings on the beach, and also spreads over the flat east
of Kingston and drains into the sea by Maria Creek, or into the Coorong, forming in dry weather a series of
lagoons between the head of the Coorong and the Kingston and Naracoorte railway. Reedy Creek is also
intersected by a scries of low banks, which help to retain the water up to a certain height; after this is
attained the flow is resumed, though large areas are inundated during its progress. Nearer the source, and
between Gillap bridge, on the road from Robe to Penola, the margin upon the north side is nearly flat, and
the flood waters, or some portion of them, escape in a northerly direction and find an outlet along the various
steppes between the ridges, as already explained; portions also escape and inundate the low lands between
Lake Leake and Mount Burr. Another outlet of the flood waters is by a low valley between Mount Graham
and an old washpool, known as the Rocky Waterhole, and lastly, a large and important quantity of the flood
waters escape over low lands on the south side of the creek, and flowing south-west and north-west inundate
the lands towards the Belt Range and Green Hill, and also those in the direction of the Clay Wells and the
hundred of Bray, including the south-east portion of the hundred. The waters escaping to the west
and south-west the Government have carried off by a series of drains and gaps cut through the ridges at
Narrow Neck, English and Milne’s Gaps, &c., and they arc now conducting works with the view to relieve
other localities and confine the water to the channel of Reedy Creek, down the valley of which large drains
are being formed, the main drain being 60ft. wide and sft. deep. I should not trouble you with this detail
but it has a bearing upon what follows, and is therefore necessary.
Prior to the commencement of the South-East drainage works the whole of the inundated lands were
covered by a coarse vegetation of rushes, flags, water plants, and maleluca, or ti-tree, the latter dwarf
generally, and in places where the water was abundant, of considerable height and density. But little use
could be made of this country. A large area was never dry, water stagnated, and the stock ■were subject to
serious loss from disease. The drainage was commenced to carry off the waters and render the country fit
for permanent pasture, for which much of it was admirably adapted. As the character of the soil "was
developed by the works in hand the demand for it became great, and unfortunately it was disposed of by
selection on credit for agricultural purposes and cultivation.
As water meadows or pasture, and sown with Italian rye grass, and other suitable grasses, and even
for the growth of fodder plants, its value could not well be over-estimated; but its diversion to the growth
of cereals, for which it was not adapted, was a mistake. The first crops wore good, the second diminished
one-half, and the third was still loss profitable. The soil was deficient in certain ingredients essential to the
successful and continuous production of grain crops. The drainage, though perfect as far as the reclamation
of the land was concerned, permitted the water to remain on some portions for a few days after heavy floods,
and at times, when destruction to the growing grain crops was imminent, the result to the country being
repeated complaints from those occupying the country for the growth of grain, and unnecessary expense and
annoyance to the Government. These 'complaints have led to the almost over-drainage of the land for
pasture ; but still insufficient for all kinds of tillage. In flood the farmer suffers from partial inundation ;
in the absence of rain, so complete is the drainage, that his crops suffer from want of moisture, and many of
those who have completed purchase are selling to those who limit the use of the land to pasture and the
growth of roots. This is a serious evil, as the soil, if properly dealt with, will carry a large population, and
fatten large numbers of cattle, sheep, and pigs that might readily be conveyed to the Adelaide market by
steamer from adjacent ports. So far as the alienation of land is concerned, this evil cannot be remedied.
Large areas of the best of the South-East lands were disposed of some years ago, and now form large
estates, bought almost on compulsion by the squatters when the money was needed by the State. And much
of the remainder has been dealt with in a manner likely to lead to a similar result, as its occupants,
attempting to divert its use to a purpose for which it is not adapted, will readily dispose of it to those who
can afford to pay them their price, and by whom it will be properly utilised and held with advantage and
profit. This can be avoided by leasing most of the remainder of the land for grazing or pasture, with a
right to cultivate portions, under certain conditions, and, on consent of the Commissioner, the blocks leased
to be limited according to the nature of the soil, and the leases to contain conditions for payment at end of
lease for value of works effected for drainage and irrigation ; for which purposes the greater area is well
adapted, and a sufficient supply of excellent water at hand, and favorably situated for distribution over the
principal lands in the locality'.
There arc two fresh water lakes, named after two brothers, early settlers in the country, “ Edward” and
“ Leake.” These are about from eighteen to twenty miles, in a straight line, to the north-west of Mount
Gambler, and between the cast boundary of the province and the sea-coast. They' are close together, sepa-
rated only by' a ridge about a hundred feet high and less than half a mile wide. Lake Leake has the
appearance of a volcanic crater, the lava, basalt, &c., being disposed in order as is usual in such places. Lake
Edward may' be a similar crater, but analysis proves the waters to be different, though both good. Lake
Edward is almost pure, though thirty-two feet higher than Lake Leake. Lake Edward is thirty-one feet deep,
with a rise and fall quite independent of and apart from any' local rainfall. Lake Leake maintains a nearly
similar rise and fall, and nearly' simultaneous with Lake Edward. The catchment area into each is wholly
inadequate to maintain or account for these waters, which inspection, so far as records go, show to be
artesian. Lake Edward is 354 ft. above the level of the sea; 129 ft above the Dismal Swamp, which
extends for seventeen miles to the eastward, with a varying width of from one to seven miles, intersected by
low wooded islands ; 222 ft. above the main street of Mount Gambler township ; about 300 ft. above the
level of the Blue Lake in the Mount Gambicr crater, and 305 ft, above the surface of the drains at Millicent
on the Mount Muirhead flats. From this lake water may be conducted in any' direction, either by pipes or
channels of simple form and construction; or it may be led into drains, and the drains, by means of sluice
gates, made to perform subterranean or upward irrigation, the water gradually rising in the closed drains
until it reaches the surface of the soil, and then rapidly' drawn off by opening the sluice gates ; or it can be
irrigated by flooding or by channels on the surface, though its level character may' render this more difficult
and expensive. Water can, however, be had in quantity' anywhere in this locality a few feet below the level
of the surface of the ground, and can readily' be raised and distributed by simple mechanical contrivances ;
or it can be raised by means of artesian wells—many natural wells of this kind existing —and, if bored to a
certain depth and pipes inserted, the waters would doubtless rise to the required height to bo discharged into
an elevated cistern, and distributed from the highest to the lowest portion of the ground by raised beds
intersecting the whole of the area to be irrigated.
Should the leasing system be adopted in the manner proposed, the whole of the available lands in the
South-East


South-East would doubtless be taken up, and under the supervision of suitable boards and inspection, and
perhaps a little direction and advice on the part of the Government officials, irrigated at but trifling direct
cost to the State, and with great advantage to the occupants and to the country at large. Irrigation in the
fullest sense of the term can only, I fear, be successfully practised in the South-East portion of the province
as a rule, but much may be done elsewhere to supply a sufficient quantity to germinate the crop, and water
from time to time to ensure its growth to maturity. The crop, though not so large as it would be with full
irrigation, being still large compared with those that are reaped under existing circumstances, whilst lessees
of small blocks of land and pastoral tenants of extensive areas would be largely benefitted, as well as the
community at large ; and more especially would they be encouraged to prosecute works of this nature, and
largely to increase and render permanent our pastures, were liberal laws framed to meet the expenditure
requisite to attain this object—to enable them to receive compensation for the value of the work done by a
cash payment at the expiry of the leases, or by a proportionate reduction in rent, payable on renewed leases,
after periodical valuation by the Government.
The above remarks convey, in as brief a form as my knowledge permits, the leading points connected
with the subject. I have not attempted to go into detail; such must be left to the persons appointed to
carry out the necessary works. Those in hand should be continued with vigour, until responsible boards are
appointed throughout the province to relieve the Government of further responsibility. The value of the
work to the State cannot be exaggerated, and Bills containing proper enactments to carry it out, and to raise
the means to do so, should be introduced to the Legislature without delay.
I have, &c.,
G. W. GOYDER,
Surveyor-General.
The Secretary Crown Lands, &c., See.
No. 52.
