

Pern 9ms
HANDBOOK
SOUTH AUSTRALIA IN 1887-8.
INTRODUCTION BY SIR SAMUEL DAVENPORT, K.C.M.U., LL.D.
COMPILED BY H. J. SCOTT.
AUTHORITY: H. F. LEADER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NORT H-TERRACE
1888.








SOUTH AUSTRALIA IN 1887-8-
A HANDBOOK
FOR THE
ENTENNIAL INTERNATIONAL EXHIBITION,
MELBOURNE, 1888,
INTRODUCTION BY SIR SAMUEL DAVENPORT, K.C.M.d., LL.D.
COMPILED BY H. J. SCOTT.
lY AUTHORITY: H. F. LEADER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, NORTH-TERRACE.
1888.




ROYAL COMMISSION FOR SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
dmtmnial International felribition,
MELBOURNE, 1888.
His Excellency Sir William Cleaver Francis Robinson, G.C.M.G
Governor of South Australia
Ti»-
ymifornt:
Speaker of
The Hon. John Cox Bray, M.P.,
the House of Assembly.
Humors
Hon. T. Playford, M.P.
Sir T. Elder, G.C.M.G.
Sir J. Downer, K.C.M.G.
Sir S. Davenport, K.C.M.G.
Sir E. T. Smith, K.C.M.G.
Hon. A. Campbell, M.L.C.
Hon. J. Martin, M.L.C.
Hon. D. Murray, M L.C.
Hon. W. A.E. West-Erskine, M.L.C
Hon. A. M. Simpson, M.L.C.
Hon. S. J. Way, C.J.
Hon. J. C. F. Johnson, M.P.
Hon. G. C. Hawker, M.P.
Hon. Charles Mann, Q.C.
K. Rees, Esq., M.P.
H. C. E. Muecke, Esq., J.P.
W. B. Rounsevell, Esq., M.P.
R. H. Rennie, Esq., D.Sc., F.C.C.
A. W. Meeks, Esq., J.P.
A. Adamson, Esq., J.P.
T. Hardy, Esq.
R. Dixson, Esq., J.P.
Hon. H. E. Bright, M.L.C.
Hon. W. Copley, M.L.C.
E. Ward, Esq., M.P.
L. Grayson, Esq., M.P.
A. D. Handyside, Esq., M.P.
W. A. Horn, Esq., M.P.
J. H. Symon, Esq., Q.C.
A. Abrahams, Esq., J.P.
W. C. Buik, Esq., J.P.
J. L. Bonython, Esq., J.P.
J. H. Finiayson, Esq., J.P.
G. S. Fowler, Esq., J.P.
L. P. Lawrence, Esq., J.P.
J. F. Mellor, Esq.. J.P.
W. Hackett, Esq.
T. F. Hyland, Esq.
T. W. Harris, Esq., J.P.
J. Duncan, Esq.
J. J. Green, Esq.
V. Lawrance, Esq., J.P.
R. Cameron, Esq., J.P.
T. Rhodes, Esq., J.P.
W. Everard, Esq., J.P.
L. A. Jessop, Esq., J.P.
E. C. Stirling, Esq., M.D.
G. Stone, Esq., J.P.
C. A. Murphy, Esq., J.P.
W. A. Robinson, Esq., J.P.
A. A. Kirkpatrick, Esq., J.P.
R. E. E. Regers, Esq., J.P.


©friers:
Rowland Rees, Esq., M.P., Fine Arts Commissioner in Charge of
Decoration.
Jno. Fairfax Conigrave, J.P., Secretary.
J. G. Knight, Esq., S.M., Commissioner in charge of Northern Territo:
Exhibits.
David Lewis, Clerk.
Benjamin Norwich Conigrave, Superintendent of Exhibits.


JDrIGINAL j^REFACE.
The Royal Commissioners for South Australia at the Adelaide
Jubilee International Exhibition, 1887, having requested me
to compile and edit a handbook showing the progress of the
colony after fifty years existence, I have endeavored to obtain
the most accurate information from those in a responsible
position and best qualified to supply reliable statements con-
cerning “ South Australia as it is ” after a life of fifty years.
At no period has it been my intention to make this hand-
book an historical record, because at previous exhibitions an
exhaustive history of the colony, from the points of view of the
different writers, has been ably placed before the public; but
the object now is to present to readers the position of South
Australia at this day.
I desire here to tender my thanks to the officers of the
different departments concerned for the valuable help they
have rendered, also to other gentlemen connected with the
products and manufactures of the colony, and to my colleague,
Mr. S. V. Pizey, for their able assistance.
H. J. SCOTT.
Femleigh Collage,
Norwood,
South Australia.


• »■ ; “
I
• ] '
/
' " ' ;


TO J SSUE.
The following Handbook was prepared for distribution at the
Jubilee Exhibition which was held in Adelaide last year, and
is now submitted to visitors to the Centennial International
Exhibition in Melbourne, in the hope that the information it
contains will be of interest and service to persons who may
desire to obtain a fuller knowledge of the Colony of South
Australia and its principal industries and institutions.
The reader will find in the following pages an occasional
reference to the Adelaide Jubilee Exhibition, which is now a
thing of the past, but the reader is asked to excuse this, as it
has not been deemed necessary to have a new Handbook pre-
pared, as this has been so recently compiled.
JNO. FAIRFAX CONIGRAVE,
Secretary South Australian Commission,
C.1.E., Melbourne.
June 4th, 1888.




CONTENTS.
List of Commissioners .. .. .. .. .. .. ~ 5
Original Preface ~ .. .. •. 7
Preface to Present Issue .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 9
Introduction .. ~ .. .. .. .. .. .. 13
Comparative Statistics for the last Fifty Years .. .. .. 17
Form of Government.. .. .. .. 18
Administration of Justice .. .. .. .. .. .. 19
The Aborigines of South Australia .. .. .. .. .. 21
Occupation and Disposal of Land .. .. .. .. .. 25
Survey Department .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 28
The Real Property Act .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 34
The Experimental Farm and Agricultural College, Roseworthy .. 35
Stock 37
The "Woods and Forests Department .. .. .. .. 39
Government Geologist’s Department .. .. ~ .. .. 45
Water Supply.. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 53
Adelaide Waterworks .. ~ .. .. .. .. >. 60
Adelaide Sewers and Sewage Farm.. .. .. .. .. 66
The River Murray .. .. .. .. 71
Royal Geographical Society of Australasia: South Australian Branch 74
The Railways .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 81
Main Roads .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 82
Marine Board .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 83
Muncipal Institutions .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 86
Public Library .. .. .. .. 90
Reading Room .. .. ~ .. ~ .. .. .. 90
Museum .. .. .. .. .. . ♦ .. .. 91
Art Gallery., .. .. .. .. .. 91
Institutes .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 91
Schools of Painting and Design.. .. .. 92
Royal Society of South Australia .. .. ~ .. .. 92
The University .. .. .. .. ~ ~ .... 93
Public Education .. 94
Newspapers .. .. .. .. .. 97
Post Office and Telegraph—
Post Office .. .. ~ .. .. .. .. 99
Electric Telegraph .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 102
The Observatory .. .. ~ ~ .. ~ ~ 106


Religious Denominations —
Church of England .. .. .. .. .. ..112
Collegiate School of St. Peter ~ .. .. .. .. 112
Wesleyan Methodist Church .. .. .. .. .. 113
Prince Alfred College .. .. .. .. .. .. 114
Presbyterian Church of South Australia .. .. .. .. 114
South Australian Baptist Association .. .. .. .. 115
The New Church (Swedenborgian).. .. .. .. .. 116
Unitarian Church .. ~ .. .. .. .. 116
Free Presbyterian Church ~ .. .. .. .. .. 117
Society of Friends .. .. .. .. .. .. 117
Bible Christian Church .. .. .. .. .. .. 118
Christian Churches ~ .. .. .. .. .. 119
United Free Church of South Australia .. .. ... .. 119
German Evangelical Lutheran Church.. .. .. .. 119
Methodist New Connexion Church.. ~ .. .. .. 120
The Welsh Free Church .. .. .. .. •. 120
Church of Christ .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 120
Roman Catholic .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 120 a
Congregational ~ .. ~ .. .. .. .. 120 k
Charitable Institutions .. .. .. .. 122
Central and Local Boards of Health .. .. .. .. .. 124
The Marriage Laws .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 126
South Australian Military Forces .. .. .. .. .. 128
The Police Force .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 133
Botanic Garden and its Progress.. .. .. .. .. ~137
Natural Products .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 148
Manfacturing .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 164
Northern Territory ~ ~ .. .. .. .. .. 174
Catalogue of South Australian Exhibits at Centennial International
Exhibition in Melbourne .. .. .. .. .. ..189
Catalogue of Northern Territory Exhibits.. .. .. .. 241
Index .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .. .• 253


INTRODUCTION.
(By Sir Samuel Davenport, K.C.M.G.)
Taking for the day of its birth that day on which its first
Governor landed and planted the British flag on the shores at
Glenelg, December 28th, 1836, South Australia completed its
fiftieth year on the 28th December last; and hence our jubilee.
' South Australia was not the offshoot from another colony. It
was a distinct and independent individual; not a cutting nor a
layer, but with roots and stem and branches, it had its own
complete and compact being. Besides, it had novelties in its
composition. It was the exponent of a new theory of colonization
evolved by Edward Gibbon Wakefield. Nature gave the land,
and the sale of this was to supply the capital for the introduction
of labor necessary to raise the wealth from it which should
provide for its future life.
In anticipation of the funds to be thus ultimately acquired
from land, a sufficient loan had been authorised by the mother
country.
So at its birth a fresh response was given to the prayer of
the great Milton, who, in 1641, “implored that that Divine
“ Power which had built up the Britannic Empire to a glorious
“ and enviable height, with all her daughter islands about her,
“ would stay us in this felicity ” ; and an additional illustration
was started of Penn’s theory (1680), who said “that colonies are
“ the seeds of nations, begun and nourished by the care of wise
“ and populous countries.”
In 1832 there was a great want of employment in England, and
a not inconsequent desire amongst all classes for emigration.
In 1833 Coleridge wrote —“ Colonization is an imperative duty
“on Great Britain. God seems to hold out his fingers to us over
“ the sea; but it must be a colonization of Hope, not, as has
“ happened, of Despair.”
Under these conditions of public opinion and national require-
ments was it that authority was sought to establish a new colony
in Australia; and, much aided by the great Duke of Wellington,
an Act of Parliament was passed in 1834 for the founding of
South Australia.


The execution of the Act was placed in the charge of a Board
of Commissioners, whose members were Colonel Torrens, F.R.S.,
chairman; George Fife Angas, Edward Barnard, W illiam Hutt,
John George Shaw LeFevre, William Alexander Mackinnon, M.P.,
Samuel Mills, Jacob Montefiore, George Palmer, and John Wright,
Esquires, with George Barnes, Esq., treasurer, and Rowland Hill,
Esq. (afterwards Sir Rowland, author of the penny-post system),
as secretary.
The Governorship was first offered to but declined by Colonel
Charles James Napier (afterwards Sir Charles), the hero of Scinde.
The Surveyor-General appointed was Colonel Light, who had
served with distinction under the Duke of Wellington in the
Peninsular War. To him we owe the admirable selection of the
site of Adelaide.
The colony now possesses a territory of 914,730 square miles,
or nearly one-third of the so-called continent of Australia. Its
northern boundary on the Indian Seas comprises that section of
the coast which first made known to the world the existence even
of Australia. This occurred in the year 1616, when the Dutch
navigator, Zeachen, sighted the shore and called it Diemen’s Land,
after the then Dutch Governor-General at Java. That was the
most northern portion of our present Northern Territory.
The southern boundary of South Australia was the latest dis-
covered of all the shores of Australia. This was the work of
Flinders, to whom and at whose request the British Admiralty had
given the command of the ship Investigator for exploring pur-
poses. This occurred in 1802, shortly after Flinders and Bass had
discovered that Tasmania was not a part of the main land of
Australia, but an island, severed from the continent by Bass’s
Straits.
Twenty-eight years after Flinders had mapped our southern
coasts, Charles Sturt found the River Murray, and followed it
down from New South Wales to the junction of the Darling and
into South Australia —or 1,000 miles—to the sea.
Flinders’ revelations of the coast in 1802-8, and Sturt’s report
on the valley of the River Murray in 1831, constituted the evidence
upon which, in the same year in London, a few gentlemen discussed
the propriety of founding a colony in this part of Australia. In
1834 an Act of the Imperial Parliament authorised the work. In
August, 1836, the first survey party arrived under command of
Colonel Light, with whom were officers who have survived Colonel


Light and are still with us, namely, the Hon. B. T. Finniss, Mr.
Jacobs (of Moorooroo), Mr. Lindsay (of Encounter Bay). Ships
with settlers and immigrants and stores arrived month by month in
succession till, on the 28th December of the same year, the first
Governor, Captain Hindmarsh, R.N., reached our shores, and,
landing the same day at Holdfast Bay, formally took possession
of the land in the name of the then British Sovereign, King
William IV.
Inland, South Australia is bounded on the west by Western
Australia, and on the east by Victoria, New South Wales, and
Queensland.
On the present occasion of celebrating the fiftieth year of the
colony, it will be appropriate to publish our debt of gratitude
to its “ fathers and founders.” Their work has ended, and they
mostly have passed away; we remain and reap the fruits of their
labors.
Probably due to the fact that so little was known of the lands
of the colony, intending investors were at the first slow to move.
Eventual success came through Mr. Geo. Fife Angas establishing
the South Australian Company, whose purchases of land satisfied
all requirements. Later on Mr., afterwards Sir, James Hurtle
Fisher became Resident Commissioner to the colony.
The Act authorising the founding of the colony defined certain
guiding principles. Funds for starting the colony were to come
from the sales of the land. Revenue obtained in ordinary ways
should pay for its government. The colony was not to be a
charge on the mother country. Land was to be sold at a sufficient
price, and therefore not under £l per acre. The principle
demanded that settlers should be capitalists able to profitably
work the land. Three-fourths of the payments for land were to
be invested in bringing our labor, the rest to provide for roads
and bridges. Thus three elements of success were to be gained—
capital, labor, and means of general traffic.
The settlement of population was to be regulated in groups in
order to secure the advantages of neighboring communities. For
this end the lands generally were to be surveyed in small blocks,
a standard of 80 acres per section being adopted. The sales were
to be by public auction, so that the evils of large monopolies might
be avoided. Emigration was to be as much as possible by families.
In the opinion of the writer these principles of action were well
developed, as indeed the occupation of the Adelaide plains under


the first surveys to this day bear witness, in the compact farms
and grouped gardens, and frequent townships, and the network
of roads, telegraph wires, mails, post and other conveyances, and
advantages of concentrated dwellings, which appear on all sides.
And so long as care was taken not to offer lands for sale until there
was a bond fide demand for them, with a fair chance of healthful
competition, no monopoly evil could readily have arisen. In those
days the land fund was kept separately, and was rigidly devoted
to the purposes the Imperial law had assigned to it.
The practice had not till then obtained of looking on the land
fund as ordinary revenue; nor would that have been a legal
appropriation.
But if it be grateful on this occasion to recall to mind the
benefits conferred on us by our “ fathers and founders,” it is
equally incumbent on us not to overlook the long list of sturdy
settlers, colonists of all professions and classes, officials, civilians,
pastoralists and farmers, whose intelligence, energy, and perse-
verance, hardy daring and untiring labors, sterling character, and
unflinching bravery have effected that great conquest of a savage
land, growing meat and wool off hundreds of thousands of square
miles recovered from the wilderness, where forests have been
reduced to smiling wheatfields, marshes to garden grounds—hills
to "terraced fruit grounds and vineyards—and who have constructed
cities and towns —harbors and highways —railways and metalled
roads—telegraph and telephone, to so vast an extent, considering
the few years and with a very limited population.
Then need we extend our vision outside the circle of those
officially, or as members of trading corporations, or as settlers whose
labors have so greatly and beneficially promoted our growth over our
life of fifty years, and now thankfully recognise that what of the
healthy functioning of our social and political life is subject to, and
can be strongly influenced for good or evil by the Imperial agencies
acting on and with our national being, the colony has been second
to none in the valuable services rendered to it by the Governors
who have respectively held the high position of Her Majesty’s
representatives amongst us.
From the hour of our colony’s birth—less the interval of the
174 days between that event on the 28th December, 1836, and
the 20th June, 1837 have the benign influences of Queen
Victoria’s eventful and illustrious reign presided over our
Imperial interests. When, on the 20th June, 1837, Her Majesty


ascended the throne, this colony lay in its wildest state of nature.
The kangaroo and emu fed over the glades of the Adelaide plains,
interspersed amongst the somewhat dense thickets of wattles, shea-
oaks, and lofty gumtrees. Here peace and silence were undisturbed
except by the hunting aborigines, whose “coo-ees” in the daytime
were heard from the hills, and the doleful cries of howling dingoes
at night. Beyond the erection of a few tents or reedy breakwinds,
and of wooden ready-made houses brought with them by the
colonists from London, and of a few felled trees for firewood and
other immediate wants, or for the surveyors’ labors; and beyond the
anchoring of a ship off the coast, and the haulage of goods to and
on shore, no impress of a civilised occupation yet marked the
founding of a colony. Fifty years of life have passed, and the
colony is what avc this day see it, and Avhat the subjoined statistics
declare it to be. Fifty years of our life have passed under the reign
of Her gracious Majesty Queen Victoria—Queen of Great Britain
and Ireland, Empress of India and the Colonies—whom God yet
long preserve !—and whose Jubilee sovereignty avc uoav blend Avith
our OAvn.
Comparative Statistics for the last Fifty Years.
1836.
Population 546
1846.
Population 25,893
Imports £330,099
Exports £312,838
1856.
Population 104,708
Imports £1,366,529
Exports £1,665,740
1866.
Population 163,452
Imports £2,835,142
Exports £2,858,737
Banking Deposits £1,401,565
1876.
Population 225,677
Imports £4,576,183
Exports £4,816,170
Banking Deposits £3,316,095
1886.
Population 312,439
Imports £4,852,750
Exports £4,489,008
Banking Deposits £4,962,065
B


FORM OF GOVERNMENT.
The colony has responsible Government, in which the Sovereign
is represented by a Governor appointed by the Crown, who has a
power of veto in certain cases, in accordance with the first Consti-
tution Act.
The Parliament consists of two Houses, the Legislative Council
and the House of Assembly, who are invested with plenary powers
in all matters affecting South Australia,
The twenty-four members of the Legislative Council are elected
for a term of nine years, one-third of whom retire every three years T
unless in the event of a Bill for any Act having been passed by the
House of Assembly during two previous sessions, the second and
third readings of such Bill having been passed by an absolute
majority of the House of Assembly, and a general election having
taken place in the meantime, then, if such Bills are rejected by,
or fail by reason of amendments proposed by, the Legislative
Council to become law, the Governor has the power to dissolve
Parliament, and thereupon members shall be selected to supply
the vacancies, for which old members are eligible.
Voters for the Legislative Council must be British subjects,
twenty-one years of age, and on the electoral roll for six months*
and possess a freehold of the value of fifty pounds, or a leasehold
of twenty pounds annual value having three years to run, or with
right of purchase, or , occupy a dwelling-house of twenty-five-
pounds annual value.
The House of Assembly is composed of fifty-two members*
representing twenty-six districts, who are elected for three years,
unless in the meantime a dissolution is effected and a change of
Ministry occur.
Elections are by ballot, the voting taking place between 8 a.m..
and 6 p.m. All voters must be British subjects, twenty-one years
of age, and on the electoral roll for six months.
The Cabinet consists of six members, as follows
1. The Chief Secretary.
2. Attorney-General,
3. The Treasurer.
4. Commissioner of Crown Lands,
5. Commissioner of Public Works.
6. Minister of Education.


ADMINISTRATION OF JUSTICE.
Supreme Court
Criminal. —The Criminal Law of South Australia is very similar
to that of the mother country, being based, for the most part, on
the English Criminal Consolidation Acts passed a few years ago.
There is no grand jury in South Australia, accused persons being
placed upon their trial upon information laid by the Attorney-
General. The Criminal Court, presided over by the Chief Justice
or one of the Puisne Judges, sits every alternate month in
Adelaide. Circuit Courts (in which civil as well as criminal cases
are tried) are held in the Northern Districts three times, and in
the South-Eastern Districts twice, a year. By a recent change in
the law, the accused, and the husband or wife of the accused, may
give evidence on oath, submitting, in such case, like other wit-
nesses, to cross-examination.
Civil. —Civil Sittings, presided over by the Chief Justice or one
of the other two Judges, are held in Adelaide six times in the
year. Civil cases are tried in the most important of the distant
country districts at the Circuit Courts. The English Judicature
Act has been accepted, Avith slight variations.
Appeal. —An appeal lies from the Supreme Court to the Local
Court of Appeals, consisting of the Governor of the province, and
the members of the Execute Council, Avith the exception of the
Attorney-General. Where the matter in dispute amounts in value
to £5OO there is also an appeal, either from the Local Court of
Appeals, or direct from the Supreme Court, to the Judicial Com-
mittee of the Privy Council.
Local Courts.
These Courts, resembling in their constitution in many respects-
the County Courts of England, are established throughout the
colony. They have cognizance of all personal actions Avhere the
damage claimed does not amount to more than £490, and they
have jurisdiction to any amount, Avith the consent of the parties.
They have also jurisdiction to try actions for ejectment where the
value of the land does not exceed £4OO, also in actions for the
recovery of small tenements. Causes in Avhich the claim exceeds


£2O are tried before a Judge of the Supreme Court, with or
without a jury, or before a Special Magistrate and two Justices of
the Peace, or before a Special Magistrate and a jury. These
Courts have power to apply equitable principles in their adminis-
tration of the law.
Insolvency.
There is a Court of Insolvency at Adelaide, presided over by a
Commissioner of Insolvency, -who may or may not be the Special
Magistrate presiding over the Local Court. By a recent enact-
ment power is given to Special Magistrates of such Local Courts
as may be proclaimed for that purpose to act as Commissioners in
Insolvency.
Vice Admiralty Court
There is a Vice Admiralty Court in Adelaide, the Judge of which
is the Chief Justice, having jurisdiction analagous to that of the
English Court of Admiralty.
Probate and Administration.
The law relating to wills is the same in South Australia as in
England, and the law and practice regulating the granting of
probate are almost precisely similar. With respect to intestacies,
however, the law is different from that of England. Primogeniture
has been abolished, and the real estate of intestates, not being
married women, is distributable on the principle applicable to
personalty in such cases; and the law as to the distribution of the
real estate of married women dying intestate is assimilated, mutatis
mutandis , to that regulating the distribution of the real estate of
married men dying intestate.
Matrimonial.
In South Australia, by what is known as the “ Deceased Wife’s
Sister Act,” a man is allowed to marry his deceased wife’s sister,
or the daughter of his deceased wife’s sister.
Magistrates’ Courts.
These Courts are established throughout the country, for dealing
with minor offences, and matters with respect to which they have
jurisdiction under the Police, Municipal Corporations, and other
Acts.


THE ABORIGINES.
The aboriginal population of South Australia, at the foundation
of the colony in 1836, was estimated at 12,000.
At the date of the last official census, 1881, a considerable
decrease appears to have taken place in their number, which is
given as —male, 3,198 ; females, 2,430 ; total, 5,628, exclusive of
718 in the Northern Territory. Of these the adults healthy were
3,777 ; sick and infirm, 959 ; children, 892.
A large proportion of the 959 sick and infirm appears among
the natives inhabiting the country north and east of Lake Eyre,
where disease, chiefly syphilis, is very prevalent, even among the
young children.
The aborigines of the Cooper’s Creek country appear to be more
numerous and healthy, probably owing to their hunting grounds
being better supplied with food and water, the sick and infirm
being only 118 out of a total of 2,182.
During the years 1881-6 there have been recorded 324 births
and 417 deaths, decrease during the five years 93.
The disparity in the number of the sexes, the small proportion
of children to the total population, and the prevalence of disease,
to which the natives appear more susceptible since the advent of
Europeans, show that the gradual diminution in their numbers can
easily be accounted for.
The protection of the aborigines is provided for by the State.
A special department watches over their welfare and interests, con-
sisting of a protector, who has the disbursement of the annual vote,
£5,104, and the control and supervision (assisted by a sub-protector
in the Far North), of the depots (about fifty in number), for the
distribution of rations, clothing, and medical comforts.
It is believed that the establishment of these depots in suitable
localities, and the judicious distribution of rations, &c., tends to
promote friendly relations between the settlers and the aborigines.
With a view to ameliorate the condition of the natives by in-
dustrial pursuit, as well as moral and religious training, and thus
render their labor more useful and profitable to themselves, five
(5) special reserves have been set apart in the following localities.


show:—
£
5.
d.
Total voluntary contributions received
1,248
13
7
* ‘ amount proceeds of produce raised
5,281
12
10
“ “ wages paid to aborigines
1,838
15
7
“ estimated value of all stock, produce, buildings,
&c., on the stations
35,840
6
10
containing a total of about 670,000 acres, viz.:—Point McLeay, on
Lake Alexandrina; Poonindie, near Port Lincoln; Point Pierce,
on Yorkes Peninsula; Kopperamanna, near Lake Hope, Far
North ; Hermansburgh, on the Finke river, Central Australia;
where missionary institutions have existed for several years past,
mainly supported by voluntary contributions, and the proceeds of
produce raised by native labor from land, stock, &c. About
500 aborigines are instructed, cared for, and usefully employed,
including about 120 children, who are fed, clothed, and educated at
the mission schools.
The financial returns from these institutions for the year 1886
As an illustration of the civilising agencies at work in these
institutions, and their results in introducing a new and cheering
phase of life amongst the aborigines, the following extracts are
given from the report of a recent visitor to the Point McLeay
Mission Station ;
“ The view of the settlement is very pretty. The cottages of
“ the natives with their white walls are situated near the shore of
“ the lake, at stated distances, in a line for about a quarter of a
“ mile from the left of the jetty path, the line being broken by
“ the overseer’s house, workshops, and stables. The chapel,
“ superintendent’s house, reading-room, schoolroom, kitchen, and
“ schoolmaster’s house are seen in another line to the right. Here,
“nearly thirty years ago, the Rev. Geo. Taplin camped among
“ savages, and, cut off from the nearest settlement by fifteen miles
“ of water, made a home among them, mastered their language,
“ conquered their superstitions, and, in the establishment of the
“ present mission station, made many converts to Christianity and
“ civilisation.
“ The purity of the English spoken on the station caused us some
“ astonishment. No ‘ pigeon ’ English is made use of there; in fact
“ the natives, young and old, connected with the mission, ex-
“ press themselves more clearly than the generality of Europeans.
“We were shown over the schoolroom and found 43 children
“ in attendance including two or three of the station officers’
“ children.


“ The highest number of marks recorded on the examination
“sheet was 117, obtained by the son of the superintendent; two
“native boys stood next with 114 and 113 marks respectively.
“ Mr. Hutley, the schoolmaster, informed us that, except in arith-
“ metic, many of the native children would pass the standard
“ adopted in ordinary Government schools.
“We visited several of the cottages, finding them in most in-
-44 stances clean and comfortable. In one we noticed a sewing-
“ machine, framed pictures on the walls, sideboard, and antima-
“ cassars on the chairs ; in another a harmonium. All these articles
“ were procured at the expense of the occupants. There were in all
“ eighteen of these cottages, accommodating, at the time of our visit,
“ about seventy natives, including women and children. Several of
“ these buildings are named after those who paid for their erection.
“ For the information of others who may be inclined to follow their
“ good example, it may be stated that each cottage cost £l6 ; and
“ there are about forty-five natives living in wurleys near the
“ station, many of whom would be glad to occupy cottages if there
“ Avas accommodation for them. Think of this ye dwellers in com-
“ fortable houses, erected on lands which you and your fathers
“ took from them. Think of the miserable shelter afforded during
44 the winter months by these wurleys on the cold and bleak shores
44 of the lakes. Think of the sickness engendered thereby. Then
44 let your pocket buttons cease to do duty, and alloAV you to supply
44 Avhat would be a real boon to the few remaining original owners
44 of the land of your adoption.
44 The men engaged on the station are paid at the rate of 12s. per
44 week. The most remunerative work to the mission is avool
44 Avashing, and Mr. Taplin Avishes they could command more of
44 this particular Avork than they have at present; and if the station
44 could obtain more of the avool for Avashing that is annually con-
-44 veyed past the station to Port Victor for ocean shipment, it
44 would not only command higher prices in the home markets,
44 but add considerably to the mission revenue.
44 Comparatively few Adelaideans are conversant Avith the Avork
44 carried on at this undenominational institution. Pound, shilling,
44 and pence men of the AA r orld may ask, Avhat is the use of taking so
44 much trouble on behalf of the aborigines ? What is the use of
44 teaching the children as they are taught there ? Is it not over-
-44 done ? My ans Aver to such is, visit the station and see for your-
-44 selves; go to the wurleys and observe the condition of the old


“ natives, whose inborn superstitions will perhaps ever prevent
“ them leading any other life than that of their joint occupants of
“ the wurleys, the dogs. Then go across to the mission cottages,
“ listen to the merry happy laughter of the children at play, after
“ school hours ; look at their bright intelligent faces ; mark the com-
“ fort and cleanliness of the occupants of the cottages; and if it
“be evening, see them reading the weekly newspaper to which
“ they individually subscribe. Visit the reading-room after work-
“ ing hours, and note the books and illustrated papers being
“ perused; visit the chapel and watch the behaviour of the native
“ worshippers, and then if you have a heart you will come away as
“we did. thanking God that there is such an association having
“ for its title, that of the ‘Aborigines’ Friends.’ ”


OCCUPATION AND DISPOSAL OF LAND.
The survey of land in South Australia was commenced upon the
arrival of Colonel Light and his party in the ship Rapid , towards
the end of 1836.
The site of the city having been decided upon, together with a
site for a port, the survey of town acres was proceeded with; also
a line for a canal connecting the two places, it being part of
Colonel Light’s design to have vessels ultimately brought into the
city.
The first land was sold in March, 1837, at auction, when, out of
the 1,042 acre blocks contained by both North and South Adelaide
562 were sold for cash, whilst 437 others were either selected, or
set apart for holders of preliminary land orders which had been
purchased in London, entitling the holder, for the sum of £BO, to-
become possessed of one town acre, and one country section
containing 134 acres.
Most of the original grants of town acres bear the date 23rd
December, 1837, showing that holders of orders had not long to
wait before being placed in possession of a part of their property
but, owing to delays in survey matters, caused by lack of trans-
port for camp equipage, and by disputes between those highest in
authority, the first country sections were not ready for selection
until May of 1838.
Colonel Light resigned in July following, and Mr., afterwards
Sir George Kingston, then Deputy Surveyor-General, occupied his-
position until October, when he also resigned. Mr. Ormsby had
charge of the department until March, 1839, when Captain Sturt
was appointed Surveyor-General, but shortly after accepted another
office; and Captain Frome, R.E., was gazetted Surveyor-General
on October 2nd, 1839.
Colonel Light died on October 21st, 1839, and was buried in
the public square bearing his name.
A map accompanying the third annual report of the Colonisation
Commission ordered by the House of Commons on the 13th May,
1839, to be printed, shows the progress of the survey at that
time; it gives also the names of selectors, with the sections taken
up.


The early settlers appear to have dispersed themselves from the
city as a centre, to localities where the soil offered the best
inducements for agricultural pursuits; and, as a consequence,
surveys had to be made upon short notice, in many places wide
apart. Districts Avere marked upon maps as A, B, C, D, E, F,
but these soon gave place to the more convenient divisions of
counties and hundreds. On June 2nd, 1842, the following nine
counties were proclaimed in the Government Gazette: Adelaide,
Hindmarsh, Flinders, Light, Gawler, Sturt, Eyre, Stanley, Russell,
the names given to them being commemorative of men intimately-
associated with the early history of the colony. In like manner,
it has been an invariable rule up to the present time to perpetuate
the names of governors and acting governors by naming a county
after each one soon after His Excellency’s arrival in the province,
and of South Australian notable men by naming hundreds after
them.
Colonel Gawler brought with him authority to combine with the
office of Governor that of “ Resident Commissioner for the sale of
Crown Lands,” a position previously held by Mr., afterwards Sir
James Hurtle Fisher.
In this capacity the Governor gave instructions direct to the
Surveyor-General, and conducted a good deal of correspondence
with the public upon matters connected with the occupation of
Crown lands. Each Governor in succession exercised this power
until constitutional government was granted to South Australia;
since which time Governors have had directly but little to do with
such matters, beyond formally placing their signatures to various
grants and leases issued by the Crown.
During 1839, 179,841 acres were sold, and in 1840 and 1841
the survey was effected of thirty-five special surveys, consisting
of 4,000 acres each, in various localities outside the districts re-
ferred to. Colonel Frome and his surveyors were assisted in this
iby a strong party of sappers and miners.
An important feature associated with these surveys was the
.triangulation commenced by Colonel Light upon the Adelaide
plains, and extended by his successors for the purpose of mapping
the country, and connecting the detail surveys of sections, until,
by the end of 1842, it embraced a strip of country stretching
from Cape Jervis and the Murray mouth as far north as Mount
Bryan and Mount Remarkable.
Mr. Eyre’s walking tour along the south coast, his explorations


westward from the Burra to Crystal Brook, the discovery, north-
ward, of the lake that bears his name, his journey from Port
Augusta to Port Lincoln, and across to Western Australia, are
memorable circumstances which stand connected with the survey
department, and the opening of the interior for pastoral pursuits.
In July, 1846, two new counties were proclaimed in the south-
east, named respectively Grey and Robe; and by February, 1847,
more than a dozen isolated sections were sold in them. The now
historical boundary line between this province and Victoria was
at this date being defined by the Imperial Government. Mr.
Wade and his assistant, Mr. White, however, relinquished their
work towards the end of the year at the 123rd mile. It was
resumed by others about four years later, and again abandoned on
account of the difficulty of the work; so that not until 1857 was
the line completed as far as the River Murray. Colonel Fromc
held office until February, 1849; and in the following July, Major,
since General Sir Arthur H. Freeling, K.C.8., arrived in the
colony to succeed him.
In 1851, a road was surveyed from Wellington to the Victorian
goldfields. Land continued to be surveyed when and where it
was needed. Year after year auction sales were regularly held.
The trigonometrical survey was from time to time extended further
north, north-east, and west; and, on January 9th, 1861, Mr.
G. W. Goyder was gazetted Surveyor-General.


SURVEY DEPARTMENT.
The Survey and Land Offices have for many years occupied the
south-eastern portion of what are now called the old Government
buildings, at the corner of King William and Flinders streets.
In addition to the head of the department, the staff consists of
surveyors, who, with the requisite number of assistants, are ex-
clusively engaged upon the sectional and road survey of lands
intended for settlement; a drawing staff; public land office auction
branch ; photo-lithographic, and assaying divisions.
The Deputy Surveyor-General undertakes the field duties, di-
recting the surveyors as to roads, reserves, sites of towns, suburban
and country sections.
The Chief Draughtsman superintends the examination of field
diagrams, preparation of land office and other plans, and the issue
of data of all kinds connected with survey diagrams and office
plans.
The Chief Clerk of the Land Office conducts the duties of that
branch, including the exhibition of plans, sale and leasing of town,
suburban, country, agricultural, pastoral, and mineral lands; issue
of gold leases, control of district council and parliamentary plans
deposited, and affords general information to the public upon all
subjects connected with the disposal of land.
The Photo-lithographer photo-lithographs plans required by the
public, parliament, and for government purposes. The chief clerk
conducts the general correspondence ; beside which is a Receiver
of Revenue and an accountant, the monetary transactions being
extensive.
Goldfields are under control of senior and junior wardens;
Crown lands are supervised by rangers; and vermin destruction
parties by an inspector; all of whom arc directed by, and report
to, the Surveyor-General.
In connection with the department is a chemical analyst, who
assays ores, metals, earths, rocks, water, bark, etc., that are
discovered and submitted to him, a small charge being made for
analyses of specimens from private lands; those from Crown lands
are free.


Occupation of Land.
(For pastoral purposes.)
Leases of unoccupied Crown lands may be obtained upon
application to the Surveyor-General by letter, describing locality,
and area required. Lands so applied for are gazetted, and leases
offered for sale at auction, the term being thirty-five years, at an
upset price of not less than two shillings and sixpence per squaie
mile per annum. The amount bid at auction is the rent payable
for fourteen years in succession, after which the rent is fixed bj
valuation every seven years. Ihe land must be stocked befoie the
end of the third year with five head of sheep, or one head of great
cattle, or improvements effected thereon to the value of thirty
shillings, per square mile.
Leases now Held.
Leases now held, expiring by effluxion of time, will be offered
for a term of twenty-one years, in blocks recommended by the
Pastoral Board, and approved by the Commissioner of Crown
Lands; in addition to which a deposit of ten per cent, is required
to be paid on the value of improvements then on the land, which
deposit will be held as security for the maintenance of improve-
ments in efficient repair; five per cent, upon such improvements
being allowed to the purchaser against the rent when due. The
upset price of leases of this class remaining unsold after auction,
may be reduced, and the lease be again offered at a price not less
than five shillings per square mile per annum.
Annual Leases.
Land that has been resumed from pastoral occupation for agri-
cultural purposes, and is not required in connection therewith, may,
if not applied for by the former lessee, who has the right of occu-
pation upon terms similar to those of his original lease, be offered
at auction on lease for one year, with right of renewal from time to
time for seven years.
Shape and Marking Out of Pastoral Blocks.
As a rule pastoral lands are granted in rectangular form, and
.connected with a trigonometrical station, or conspicuous natural
feature as a starting point. The boundaries are defined by licensed
surveyors at the expense of the lessee. , A


Land Occupied for Agricultural Purposes.
Agricultural lands are surveyed and marked on the ground prior
to sale, in sections not exceeding five hundred acres. Plans are
prepared, and the land advertised in the Government Gazette from
four to six weeks prior to date of offer. Auctions are held in the
land office, which is open daily to the public from 10 till 3 (exclu-
sive of luncheon time, from 1 to 2), and from 10 till 12 on
Saturdays; where all information on this subject can be obtained.
Cash Sales.
Town and suburban lands arc sold at auction for cash; terms,
twenty per cent, of purchase-money payable at fall of hammer,
and balance within one month. Also, country lands that have
been open for selection for a period of two years may be offered
at auction for cash; and any that remains open after being
so offered, may be purchased by private contract at the upset
price. Special lots of country lands may be purchased at auction
for manufacturing purposes, not exceeding one hundred acres in
extent in any one block.
Selections on Credit.
Credit selections comprise one or more sections of land in blocks
up to one thousand acres, taken up under agreement, on terms
varying according to circumstances. They may be taken up at
auction in the first instance, or by private contract when they have
passed the hammer. They are held under condition of either
personal or substituted residence, under obligation to fence, culti-
vate, plant, and to erect substantial improvements up to a certain
value during each year; the terms of payment being ten per cent,
of the purchase-money at time of selection, ten per cent, three
years later, and the balance in sixteen equal yearly instalments.
The purchaser may, however, obtain his title at the expiry of ten
years, by paying what is then due. Personal residents have prior
rights to those applying under substituted residence conditions.
Leases with Right of Purchase.
Leases of scrub lands offered at an annual rent of not less than
ten shillings per square mile can be purchased by personal residents
at auction —or by private contract if the land has passed—in blocks


not exceeding 3,200 acres, for a term of twenty-one years, at an upset
price of one pound per acre; the purchase-money to be divided, and
paid in twenty-one equal yearly payments; and the purchaser to
clear the scrub from a fortieth portion of the land every year, until
half the entire area is available for cultivation. A lessee,having com-
plied with the conditions of his lease, may complete the purchase
at any time during the last ten, years of his term. Scrub lands
that have been offered at auction, and have remained open for
three months, may be let at the upset price, with right of purchase
at one pound per acre, and with similar conditions as to clearing,
etc., but the rent forms no part of the purchase-money, nor is-
residence compulsory.
Miscellaneous Leases.
Lands are let under miscellaneous lease for the purpose of trade
and manufactures, also for pastoral and cultivation purposes, for a
term not exceeding twenty-one years, on conditions specified at
time of sale. The area that may be thus taken up is practically
unlimited.
Grazing and Cultivation Lands.
Lands for grazing and cultivation may be let at a rental of not
less than one half-penny per acre, written application being made
to the Commissioner, by whom they are referred to a Land Board
for decision. The leases are for a term of twenty-one years, and
require the lessees to reside upon the land. No person can hold
more than one block, nor can a block contain a larger area than
20,000 acres.
Leases of land in the south-eastern portion of the province, com-
prised within the limits of Schedule B of the Act, are offered at
auction at an upset price fixed according to the quality of the land,,
for a term of fourteen years, with a right of renewal for a further term
of fourteen years. The conditions require residence upon the land
and that the boundaries of the block be fenced within two years
from the date of lease. These lands, if passed at auction, may be
obtained by private contract under similar conditions.
Leases of Small Blocks for Working Men.
Working men’s homestead blocks not exceeding twenty acres,
and situated in various localites, may be leased at auction, at
an upset price of sixpence an acre, or by private contract, after


having been so offered, for a term of twenty-one years, with right
of renewal for a further term of twenty-one years, and with right
of purchase, at a price to be fixed by valuation, at the expiration
•of the first term, or at any time during the currency of the
renewed term. Residence during nine months of the year being
indispensable.
Mineral Licences.
Licences to mine for any minerals or metals except gold, may be
■obtained upon application at the Land Office, or by letter to the
Surveyor-General, upon payment of one pound, which entitles the
holder to search for twelve months over an area not exceeding
eighty acres, and to remove one ton, or by permission of the Com-
missioner of Crown Lands, twenty tons of mineral other than
gold for assay or analysis ; also to a lease of the land when a
survey of the same has been approved.
Mineral Leases.
Mineral leases not exceeding eighty acres are granted for a term
of ninety-nine years, at a rental of one shilling per acre, with a
royalty of 2£ per cent, on net profits accruing.
Miners' Rights.
Miners’ rights, entitling the holder to search for gold on any
Crown lands for one year, are issued on receipt of fee of five
shillings.
Gold Leases.
Gold leases, not exceeding twenty acres in area, are granted for
a term of twenty-one years, with right of renewal for a further
term of twenty-one years, at a yearly rental of ten shillings per
acre, under conditions specified by regulations, and in the lease.
Miscellaneous.
Licences are granted to cut, manufacture, and remove stone,
timber, salt, guano, manure, seaweed, sand, loam, etc., and for the
erection of buildings for manufacturing or other purposes; also for
depasturing stock on Crown land, on application at the Land
Office.


( Exclusive of the Northern Territory.)
Acres.
Square
Miles.
Area of province 243,244,800
380,070
INumber of counties, containing 39,301,120
—
61,408
Number of hundreds, 298 containing 21,402,560
—
33,441
Area of land occupied for pastoral purposes 123,705,600
zz
193,290
Area of land alienated 9,465,182
ZZ
14,789
Area of land held under miscellaneous, mineral, 1 „ „ rtno
and gold leases . } 2,355,023
~
3,680
Area of land granted for Education and University 370,000
=
678
(Including the Northern Territory.)
Area of South Australia 578,361,600
Zl
903,690
The following table shows the area of the province, with its
various subdivisions, sold, leased, and occupied lands:—
Area of land alienated 9,947,552 = 15,543
Area of land occupied for pastoral purposes 291,464,960 = 455,414
Area of land held under miscellaneous, mineral, 1 9fi i
and gold leases in Northern Territory ~., ) ’ ~ -


THE REAL' PROPERTY ACT.
A brief notice of the Real Property Act and its author must not
be omitted.
The late Sir Robert Richard Torrens, the author of, and first
Registrar-General under, the Real Property Act, was born at Cork
in 1814, and educated at Trinity College, Dublin. Sir R. R, (then
Mr.) Torrens arrived in South Australia in the early days of the
colony, and for some years held the office of Collector of Customs;
and it was during that time it occurred to him that the law relating
to shipping could be applied to land. He then resolved that
should opportunity offer, he woidd undertake the task of reform
in the laws relating to the transfer and encumbrance of freehold
and other interests in land. Subsequent appointment to the office
of Registrar-General afforded the opportunity, the result, after
long labor and anxious thought, being the passing, in 1858, of the
first Real Property Act.
Registration of title is the principle of the Act, taking the place
of the old deed system, which was very costly, and requiring legal
assistance in any transaction. Under the Torrens Act (as it is
commonly called) any person of ordinary intelligence can transact
his own business without legal aid.
Judge Gorrie, of Fiji, in a paper relating to the registration of
title, ordered by the House of Commons to be printed August 15th,
1881, remarks—“l do not hesitate to say that the South Australian
system reduces conveyancing to the simplest possible conditions.”
Not only is the system simple, but the cost of registration is small.
The number of transactions under the Act now exceed 301,000,
■exclusive of Certificates of Title and Land Grants, which number
123,900.
The Torrens system is now in force in New South Wales,
Victoria, Western Australia, Tasmania, New Zealand, and Fiji,
and will probably shortly be introduced into Canada.


THE EXPERIMENTAL FARM AND AGRICULTURAL
COLLEGE, ROSEWORTHY.
In order to bring about an improvement in the modes of agri-
culture pursued in the colony, the Parliament, in October, 1879,
passed the following resolution:--
“ That, in the opinion of this House, it is desirable steps should
“ be taken to establish a School of Agriculture ; and also, as a
“ necessary appendage thereto, and within a convenient distance
“ from the city, an Experimental Farm ; and to appoint an ex-
u perienced and skilful Professor of Agriculture for the purpose of
u encouraging a more rational mode of farming than at present
“ obtains in South Australia.”
To secure the services of a thoroughly competent, practical, and
scientific agriculturalist, the Parliament voted the liberal salary of
£BOO per annum, and the Agent-General for the colony in London
was entrusted with the duty of selecting a gentleman possessed of
the necessary qualifications.
Applications for the office were invited in the leading English
journals, and, after consulting those best qualified to give advice
in the matter, the Agent-General selected Professor J. D. Custance,
formerly Professor of Agriculture at the Royal Agricultural
College, Cirencester, and afterwards Professor of Agriculture to
the Imperial Government of Japan, to fill the office. Professor
Custance arrived in the colony in July, 1881, and was shortly
afterwards authorised to procure offers of sites suitable for the
purpose required. Eventually a farm containing 828 acres,
situated near Roseworthy, a distance of thirty-one miles from
Adelaide, was secured at a cost of £4,518.
In order to afford young men who desired to devote themselves
to agricultural pursuits a course of instruction in agriculture
and subjects connected therewith, the Parliament in 1881 approved
of the erection of a college capable of accommodating forty
students. The college, which was erected at a cost of £9,121
(including fittings and furniture), and of which Professor Custance
was appointed principal, was opened on February 3rd, 1885. The


course of instruction included practical agriculture, chemistry,
botany, geology, surveying, levelling, mensuration, bookkeeping,
entomology, and veterinary.
In December, 1886, ten students who had completed their two
years’ course obtained their diplomas ; sixteen are attending at the
present time.
Farmers, in common with others, have felt the pressure of a
succession of bad seasons, and have in consequence, notwith-
standing the moderate fee charged —£50 per annum—been unable
to afford their sons the benefits which the college holds out to
them. It is hoped, however, that with a return of more favorable
seasons the capacity of the college will he fully tested. Although
the building as at present constructed presents a finished appear-
ance, the original design provided for an additional wing, and such
will doubtless he added when it is required.
It is impossible to estimate the extent to which the agricultural
industry of the colony has been benefited by the experiments
already conducted on the farm and the teaching imparted in the
college ; but there is reason to believe that in some parts of the
colony, at least, a very marked improvement has taken place on
the systems of farming hitherto pursued —that agriculturists have
experienced the advantage of deep cultivation and a rotation of
crops, as compared with the practice of ploughing the same land
year after year to a depth of only three or four inches and sowing
the same kind of grain. Reforms of all kinds are proverbially of
slow r growth, and in no department of human activity more so
than in agriculture.
The Roseworthy Experimental Farm is composed of inferior
land, and has a rainfall considerably less than many other parts of
the province, but, notwithstanding these serious disadvantages, the
yield of wdieat per acre has, so Professor Custance has stated, been
three times as great as the average of the whole colony—a fact
which speaks volumes in favor of scientific agriculture, and which
farmers would do well to lay to heart.
By “The Agricultural College Endowment Act, 1886,” pro-
vision is made for setting apart 50,000 acres of Crown lands for
the support of the college.


STOCK.
Fifty years since a few merino sheep were landed in the colony
from German} 7 , and from time to time small shipments were made
from Tasmania. From this source commenced the rise and estab-
lishment of the valuable South Australian merino flocks. Sheep
were also introduced from New South Wales and Victoria, or Port
Phillip, as it was then called.
As early as 1838, there were already 28,000 sheep, with an
export of wool of no great value; but in five years from the
commencement, notwithstanding the struggles and hardships of
our pioneers, over 250,000 sheep are recorded, with an export
value of wool amounting to the moderate sum of £35,800.
Enterprising colonists pushed out into the wild bush with their
flocks, braving unknown dangers, and attacks of hostile natives,
and forming stations, and finding valuable pastures for their sheep
and cattle, until, on the completion of the twenty-first year of the
foundation of the colony, the sheep numbered 2,000,000, and the
value of the wool exported amounted to over £500,000. Since
that time vast strides have been made in the production of wool,
and in the number and quality of the sheep, so that in the fiftieth
year in the history of the colony, the sheep number nearly
7,000,000, and the export of wool is equal to about £2,000,000,
Large numbers of valuable stud sheep are exported annually to
New South Wales, Queensland, and Western Australia. The
South Australian merino is noted for the size of the carcase, and
for the great weight of fleece, long staple, and uniform character,
returning a high average value per sheep. The climate and
pastures are particularly suited for the raising of sound, large-
framed animals, which are remarkably free from many diseases to
which sheep are subject. Scab, which is prevalent and costly in
America and in European countries, has been unknown in the
colony for over sixteen years.
But few importations of horses and horned cattle occui’red in
the early days by sea; but large droves of cattle were soon brought
overland, commencing in 1837, at great risk of attacks from the
natives. Messrs. Hawdon and Charles Bonney were the pioneers


who brought over the first drove of cattle from New South Wales
down the River Murray, arriving in 1838 ; followed in a few
weeks by Mr. E. J. Eyre. In the year 1839, Mr. C. Bonney
brought the first drove of cattle from Port Phillip through the
then unknown country in our south-eastern district. Numerous
other droves followed these, and cattle stations were formed in
outlying country; in many instances it being found advisable to
first stock country with cattle. The greater and more certain
returns, however, which were obtained from sheep, had the effect
of preventing the herds from increasing in so great a proportion
as had been the case with the sheep. Horse stations were also
established, but generally in conjunction with cattle; and at the
present time there are about 400,000 horned cattle, and 170,000
horses in the colony.
Our colonists, not sparing expense, imported valuable pure-bred
cattle, and thoroughbred and draught horses, from the most valu-
able herds and studs of Great Britain; and there are now in the
colony descendants of some of the best strains of shorthorn and
Hereford cattle. The horse stock has been enriched by selections'
from the best blood of England; and a visit to one establishment
alone, at Morphettville, in the neighborhood of Adelaide, will
gratify the most ardent admirer of the horse.
The climate is admirably adapted for producing and rearing the
best description of horses, cattle, and sheep, with less trouble and
expense, perhaps, than in any other part of the world.
There are still large tracts of country in the interior, on which
horses, cattle, and sheep will thrive, and in a few years more,
with the improved means available for obtaining water, and the
certain communication from the extension of railways, it may
fairly be anticipated that the flocks and herds will be doubled in
number.
Whilst the country has been suffering from bad seasons and de-
pression in business, the value of exports in connection with stock
for the year 1886 was, horses, cattle, and sheep, £144,735; skins,
hides, and tallow, £126,831 ; and 44,792,6131bs of wool, were ex-
ported, the whole showing a very large export trade for one
interest only in the Colony.


THE WOODS AND FORESTS DEPARTMENT.
Of late years, from various causes incidental to their rise and
prosperity, the colonies of Australasia have awakened to the
necessity for the proper conservation of their natural forests and
the planting of woodlands on the otherwise unwooded portions of
the respective provinces, in order to the permanent good and well-
being of the country. Victoria and New Zealand have each given
birth to Acts of Parliament on the subject; but these are now
only being properly carried out. Queensland and New South
Wales are agitating the matter; but it remained for South Aus-
tralia to have the honor of being the first Australian colony to
establish a system of forestry in her midst.
The originator of the scheme was Mr. Krichauff, M.P., who, in
the session of 1871, called for a return eliciting information from
persons resident in the different districts of the colony in regard to
the supply, preservation, and culture of forests. The answers
were summarised and prepared by Dr. Schomburgk, the Director
of the Botanic Gardens.
Subsequent to this return Mr. Krichauff introduced, and success-
fully passed in the House of Assembly, in 1873, “ An Act to
Encourage the Planting of Forest Trees,” which provided for the
payment by Government of two pounds per acre for every acre
planted by a landowner in certain districts of the colony, according
to certain defined conditions.
During the same session a “Report on Forest Reserves” was
laid on the table of the House, which had been prepared for the
Honorable the Commissioner of Crown Lands by G. W. Goyder,
Esq., the Surveyor-General. This report made suggestions for the
proclamation of certain portions of the country as Forests reserves,
and dealt exhaustively with recommendations regarding the forma-
tion of a Department of Forests.
In 1875, a Bill was brought in by Mr. Krichauff and passed,
intituled “ An Act to make provision for the appointment of a
Forest Board, and for other purposes.” In this Act certain dis-
tricts pointed out by Mr. Goyder were defined as Forests reserves.
During the session of 1876 a short Act was passed to amend
certain portions of the Forest Board Act.
In 1878 “ The Forest Trees Act ” was brought before the House
°f Parliament and became law during that session. This Act
consolidated and amended all the laws then existing in the colony


relating to Forest Conservancy, and embraced the different matters
provided for in all the previous Acts relating to the subject.
The members of the then Forest Board consisted of G. W.
Goyder, Esq., Surveyor-General (Chairman), the late Colonel
Barber, the Hon. B. T. Finniss, the late Geo. McEwin, Esq., J.P.,
and Dr. Schomburgk, Director of the Adelaide Botanic Gardens.
The first Conservator of Forests appointed by the Board was
William Murray, Esq., of Glen Osmond, but he resigned his
position after having been one year in office.
The services of J. Ednie Brown, J.P., F.L.S., of Edinburgh,
Scotland, were then secured. Mr. Brown arrived in the colony in
September of 1878, and since then has held the position of Con-
servator of Forests in the colony.
In the year 1882 the members of the Forest Board resigned
their positions, and as the Government of the time thought the
interests of Forest Conservancy in the colony could be better
carried out under a department with the Conservator of Forests
directly responsible to the Commissioner of Crown Lands, a Bill
to give effect to this was brought before Parliament and passed.
This is called “ The Woods and Forests Act of 1882.” By this
Act the Forest Board was abolished, and all powers and privileges
of that body were vested in the Commissioner of Crown Lands,
who in the Act is designated the Commissioner of Forest Lands.
This Act is divided into six parts, relating to the following
matters :
Part T. Repeal of previous Act.
Part 11. Powers of Commissioner of Forest Lands
Part 111. Re-declaration of Forest Reserves.
Part IV. Provisions for encouraging the planting of Forest
Trees by private enterprise.
Part V. Conditions under which Forest Reserves may be
leased.
Part VI. General Provisions, Penalties, and Legal Procedure.
There are five schedules attached to the Act, viz,;—(l) List
•of Forest Reserves and defining their boundaries. (2) List of
Forest Districts in which trees may be planted with the object of
securing the Bonus under the “ Encouragement of Tree Planting ”
clause. (3) Regulations under which the Bonus of £2 per acre
for planting will be granted. (4) Form of Bonus order, (5) Form
of Mineral Certificate.
The Act has now been in force for five years, and has been
found to work admirably in every respect.


As a suitable adjunct to the clause in the Act for the en-
couragement of planting on private property, Mr. Brown, in
1881, published through the Government Printer, “ A Practical
Treatise on Tree Culture in South Australia.” This work deals
with the subject of planting and forest management in all its
forms. It is freely illustrated, and up to date over 2,500 copies
have been distributed free of charge. The work is now in its
third edition, and has been in considerable request by planters in
all the Australasian colonies.
During the last five years the Government has each year placed
the sum of £3OO at the disposal of the Conservator for the purpose
of raising trees at the several State nurseries for free distribution to
landowners in the colony. In connection with this distribution, an
annual catalogue is issued detailing the kinds and numbci of
available under the vote, the soils and situations suitable for each
kind, the conditions under which the trees are given away, some
general instructions in regard to tree planting, and other matters of
interest to planters. Over 800 copies of this catalogue are annually
applied for. About 260,000 plants are distributed each year in
this way. At the end of each season, circular letters are sent to
the recipients of the trees asking for a report as to the number alive
and the general result. From these reports it is shown that over
800.000 trees are alive and doing rvell of the number given away.
Up to date there have been five applications for the bonus of £2
per acre, given under the clause for the encouragement of tree
planting ; and it is knoivn that many more will avail themselves of
the concession during the next few years. Altogether the encour-
agement given to tree planting by the Government in this colony
has been most satisfactory.
In 1885 the Conservator began the publication from the Govern-
ment Printing Office of an illustrated work upon “ The Forest
Flora of South Australia.” It is in royal folio size, and is published
in quarterly parts, each containing five colored plates with the
corresponding text matter. The eighth part is now in couise of
preparation, and will be issued at an early date. It is expecte
that when finished there will not be less than thii ty paits. Some
2.000 copies are published. The work has been very favorably
commented upon by the press in all parts of the world, especially
the illustrations, which are produced upon stone by Mr. Barrett,
the lithographer at the Government Printing Office, Adelaide.
At the end of each financial year —June 30th—the Conservator-
issues an “ Annual Report upon State Forest Administration in


South Australia.” This gives full details of the year’s operations
of the Woods and Forests Department. It is generally accom-
panied by plans showing, in detail, the various plantations which
may have been formed under his supervision during the year under
review, as well as giving the progress which has been made in
Forest Conservancy generally in the colony. These reports are
freely distributed, and are instructive to those interested in
arboriculture.
The forest reserves and their respective areas to date are as
follows: —
District in which
Situated.
Name of Forest.
Areas at
June 30th,
1886.
Grand
Totals.
Northern District..
66
66
Bundaleer Forest
Wirrahara Forest
Acres.
22,000
48,553
160
Acres.
a
66
66
Pen wortham Forest
Mount Brown Forest
Hall Forest
84
19,312
2,467
Total area of Forest Eeseryes in Northern District ..
—
92,576
Central District ..
66
43
170
66
66
Belair Eeserve
540
230
66
66
66
66
Angas Eeserve
Eidley Eeserve
Burdett Eeserve
Finniss Eeserve
5,977
7,067
6,872
2,235
Total area of Forest Eeseryes in Central District ....
—
23,134
"Western District ..
Wallaroo Forest
4,174
Total area of Forest Eeseryes in Western District....
—
4,174
Southern District..
66
66
66
66
66
66
66
66
Mount Gamhier Forest
Mount Burr Forest
Mount Muirhead Flat Forest
Glen Eoy Flat Forest
Mundalla Forest .. .
Bordertown Forest
Cave Eange Forest
Penola Forest
Mount McIntyre Forest
250
14,742
39
8,150
1,020
1,165
5,345
8,769
5,960
Total area of Forest Eeserves in Southern District ..
—
45,440
Grand total area of Forest Eeserves at June 30th, 1886..
—
165,324


On the 30th June last the statement of all lands enclosed and
devoted to the purpose of planting, and the encouragement of a
natural growth of trees in the indigenous forests, stood as follows
Total Area
Enclosed
during
under opera--
tion, June
30th, 1886,
Enclosed at
June 30th,
1885.
Name of Forest.
1885-6.
Acres.
3,865
Bundaleer
Wirrabara
2,010
2,168
Mount Gambier
Mount Muirhead Flat
Mount 8r0wn.......
Port-road .
Kapunda'.,,
Booleunda ,
Mount Burr
Mount Mclntyre
Railway Reserves
6,685 J
There are six nurseries under the department, namely, Mount
Brown, Wirrabara, Bundaleer, Kapunda, Belair, and Mount Gam-
bier, containing an aggregate area of thirty-three acres. These
have been hitherto raising about 1,000,000 trees annually, but by
the means of recent improvements it is expected that at least
2,000,000 plants will be raised in them in the future.
Last season the department succeeded in successfully planting
over 500,000 young trees, but during the current year it is expected
that the operations will result in at least 1,000,000 trees being
added to the plantations.
The staff of the department consists, besides the Conservator, of
two clerks, four foresters, six nurseryunen, three foremen, six cadets,
and thirty-five regularly employed laborers. During the planting
season over 100 extra men are employed.
Not the least pleasing feature in connection with the department
is the fact that the revenue exceeds the expenditure by from one
to three thousand pounds annually. Last year the whole expen-
diture of the department amounted to £5,463 9s. lid., whilst the
revenue was £8,123 7s. lid. This year the revenue is expected to
be close upon £IO,OOO.
Since 1876, £58,215 18s. 7d. has been expended upon the
Forest Reserves, whilst the revenue received during the same period


from these forests amounts to £59,043 Os. Bd. Thus the whole
works of the department have been carried out without any actual
expense to the country, at the same time that the approximate
value of the permanent improvements executed upon the reserves
-are estimated at over £150,000.


GOVERNMENT GEOLOGIST’S DEPARTMENT.
The importance of a geological department in all countries is
now universally recognised. To a colony such as South Australia,
yet in its infancy, this importance is increased by reason of the
desire of the people to find out its hidden mineral ■wealth and its
subterranean water supply—for upon both of these sources greatly
depends the position which the colony may, in the future, occupy
in relation to its neighbors.
This truth was recognised by the Legislature of South Australia
in 1882, and the necessary steps were accordingly taken to establish
a department under the leadership of Mr. Henry Y. L. Brown,
F.G.S. He arrived in the colony in December, 188 2, and at once
entered upon his duties.
The colonies of New South Wales and Victoria already had
similar departments, and had geological surveys of the country in,
progress. It was deemed advisable that South Australia should
follow their example, and to further this purpose, an assistant
geologist (Mr, Harry P. Woodward, F.G.S.) was appointed, and a
staff of surveyors formed.
Subsequently, owing to depressed times, this project was aban-
doned, the geological survey staff was disbanded, and the Govern-
ment Geologist was obliged to conduct his duties without assistance.
Soon after his arrival in the colony, a flying visit -was paid to Mount
Gambier, Millicent, and Naracoorte vid Lake Alexandrina and
the Coorong.
The first place visited with regard to water supply was Wilming*
ton. A bore was there being put down, in search of artesian
water, to a depth of 350 ft. A supply of water had been struck
which rose to within 100 ft. of the surface. An examination of the
country showed that there was no likelihood of artesian water being
met with by boring to a greater depth, and the work was discontinued.
Callington -was next visited, and a report given on the probability
of well water being found on the stock-road.
After examining the country in the Hundred of Dublin, a report
was made in favor of an underground supply of water being met
with. A bore was accordingly sunk, and water -was struck at


317 ft. At a depth of 390 ft. good stock water was struck and
rose within 14ft. of the surface. The supply is over 20,000
gallons per day. A second bore has since been put down in the
same district, and a supply of 20,000 gallons per day has been
got at 212 ft.
At Barunga Gap a proposed site for boring was examined and
favorably reported upon. A bore was put down, and at a depth
of 930 ft. a supply of 26,000 gallons of water per day was obtained,
and rose in the tubes to within 345 ft. of the surface. The quality
•of the water was similar to that got in the Dublin bore.
At Wallaroo, where water is found in shallow wells in the sand
on the sea beach, a series of trial bores was recommended. The
intention was to have tested the mouth of an ancient river which
apparently exists there. One bore was put down to a depth of
165 ft., 100 ft. being in bed rock. Salt water only was met with,
and the experiment was not continued.
On the 21st March, Mr. Brown started on a journey to the
north-east country. His object was to ascertain whether the gold-
bearing rocks of Mount Browne (New South Wales), and the
■cretaceous formation in which artesian or other wells might be
found, was continued into South Australia.
Travelling from Adelaide to Beltana he proceeded to Wauka-
ringa, where a bore had been begun in search of artesian water.
After examining the strata, he advised that the work should not be
continued. From there, via Thackaringa, Mt. Browne diggings, and
Cooper’s Creek, to the north-east corner peg on the Queensland
boundary, and on to Pandie Pandie station on the Diamentina
River, Clifton Hills, and Innamincka. The return journey was
made via Strzelecke Creek to Mulligan Springs, thence to Blanche-
water, Mount Lyndhurst, and Beltana, reaching Adelaide on the
10th of July. This report shows that the gold-bearing rocks
were not found to be continued from New South Wales into this
colony. The Flinders Range is the nearest point where rocks,
likely to prove auriferous, outcrop, the intervening country being
covered with cretaceous and tertiary deposits.
The report concerning the underground water supply was,
however, of a more encouraging nature. Mr. Brown pointed out that
the water flowing from the mound and other springs, was derived
from underlying horizontal strata of cretaceous age in which it is
stored. He was, therefore, of opinion that artesian water was most
probably to be got over a large area of this formation.


In the following year artesian water was struck in a bore at
Tarkinua, at a depth of 1,220 ft., and since then has been got,
by boring, in large quantities near Hergott, Coward, Strangways,
and Mulligan Springs. These more recent bores, however, are
situated within a few miles of the mound springs.
Next an inspection of the country from Wellington, on the River
Murray, to the Victorian boundary east of Bordertown, commonly
known as the Ninety-mile Desert, was undertaken for the purpose
of reporting on the question of a water supply along the route of
the intercolonial railway. The report was in favor of boring for
artesian water. Four bores were subsequently put down—one at
Cooke’s Plains, one at Ki Ki, one at Rogers’ Gap, and the fourth
at a place not named. Unfortunately, however, these bores were
abandoned before they were finished, and no good resulted at the
time.
In September a report was made on the geology of Yorke’s
Peninsula, special attention being paid to the matter of artesian
water supply being probable in the country between Clinton and
Curramulka. In May, 1885, a journey was made from Port
Augusta to Eucla, and with regard to the Avater supply —one of the
main objects of the journey—it was not considered probable that
artesian Avater Avould be found in the country lying between Port
Augusta and the GaAvler Ranges. To the Avestward of those ranges
the prospect was more favorable. But even there it would in great
measure depend on the elcA r ation of the country above the sea;
also AA’hether the water is dammed back and sufficiently obstructed
in its passage seaAvards, to produce pressure capable of bringing it
to the surface. The report made upon this journey gives particulars
of the supply and quality of the Avater in the various Avells visited
during the journey. The Nullabor Plain, on the Great Australian
Bight, the locality in Avhich it was most desirable that Avater should,
if possible, be procured, Avas uoav reached. Some years previously
the Government had sunk a bore to a depth of 326 ft., but had
failed to pierce the chalky limestone of the older tertiaries.
The Geologist, after making a careful examination, reported
that, in his opinion, Avater-bearing drifts underlaid the older ter-
tiary limestone, and that by boring water Avould be found. On
the strength of this report the Hon. the Commissioner of Crown
Lands determined to put doAvn a bore at a sight selected by Mr.
BroAA’n. This was tAventy miles from the head of the Bight.
The undertaking was most successful; Avater Avas struck in a


stratum of sand, and rose in the bore to within 115 ft. of the
surface. The water is of good quality, and the supply, from a
depth of 200 ft., equals sixty-eight thousand four hundred gallons
per day (68,400). The bore was put down to a depth of 777 ft,
In former times the only water to be found in this immense
district was that which chanced to collect in small rock-holes, and
the country was therefore not available for pastoral purposes. But
now that it has been proved that an inexhaustible supply exists
underground a large area of country fit for grazing purposes is
made available.
The return journey was made via Mount Finke, Wilgena, and
Wirraminna, and reports were made on places where water might be
got by boring, and upon the geology of the country generally.
Following upon this, came an inspection of the country in the
neighborhood of Beetaloo Springs. This had reference to the con-
struction of dams for the supply of water to Yorke’s Peninsula.
Later on reports were given with regard to a site for boring near
Wasleys, but, unfortunately, though water was struck, it proved to
be salt.
In December, 1886,a site for a water bore was chosen at Tintinarra,
in the Ninety-mile Desert, and in March of the present year water
was struck at a depth of 246 ft. It rises to the surface and
gives a supply of 48,000 gallons per day at a depth of 35ft.
The quality is exceedingly good. A bore had previously been
put down at Cold-and-Wet station, to a depth of 830 ft., but no
water was found. This result ■was remarkable, as the tertiary
beds passed through were most favorable for the occurrence of
water.
During February, Sixth Creek and Teatree Gully were examined,
and were reported to be capable of greatly increasing the supply of
water to the city of Adelaide.
The first work undertaken in reference to mining was the in-
spection of the Woodside gold mines in January, 1883. A report
with map attached, was published in the annual report of 1882-3.
At this time the reefs had not been prospected to any depth below
the Avater level, but an opinion was expressed that to sink deeper
would be a legitimate mining venture, and would probably prove
payable. In July, the geology of a portion of the Mount Lofty
Range was mapped out, and subsequently a map was made of the
gold reserves of the hundreds of Kuitpo and Noarlunga.
During May and June, 1884, with the object of making a minera-


GOVERNMENT GEOLOGIST’S DEPARTMENT. 43
logical and geological map of the district, the country east and
west of Farina was examined. At the Cutaway Hills, Leigh’s
Creek, indications of gold were got by prospecting, and the locality
was recommended as being one worth testing systematically.
In December a geological map of the Echunga goldfields was
completed, and one of the Barossa field was begun.
In May, 1885, the Geologist inspected and reported on the
country between Port Augusta and Eucla. He considered the
country westward of Port Lincoln Gap as far as Uno, and west-
ward of the Gawler Ranges, to be metalliferous, and that, in addi-
tion to other metals, gold might be found.
Eighty miles north of Fowler’s Bay, a bed of lignite, or brown coal,
was Ausited. It can be traced across a lake for a distance of about
half a mile, and down its course for upAvards of tAV T o miles. It has
been bored into, and a section shoAved ;—Lignite 30ft. ; grey clay
and ironstone 9ft.; lignite 1 ft. At this depth the bore Avas dis-
continued.
The Gumeracha and Watt’s Gully goldfields, Burton’s mine,
Durdan mine, and other gold localities in the district Avere next
visited, and after reporting on the discovery of reef and alluvial
gold near Willunga, the sih T er-lead discoveries near Oulnina, in
the north-east Avere inspected; also other lode outcrops in that
district, as far as Thackaringa, on the NeAv South Wales border.
Before returning, the Broken Hill, Day Dream, and other Avell-
knoAvn silver mines Avere visited.
Reports Avere made on the supposed discovery of coal near
Auburn, silver near Clare, quarries on the Finniss river, and pro-
posed sites for Avells or bores in the hundred of Muloowurtie.
An inspection Avas made of country in the neighborhood of
Jamestown and of Port Lincoln.
Kangaroo Island Avas visited for the purpose of investigating a
reported discovery of tin. The Ulooloo goldfield Avas reported
°n, and a map of the field prepared. Also a large collection of
rocks and fossils Avas made, and, together Avith a geological and
aiining map of South Australia, Avas sent to the Colonial and
Indian Exhibition in London. The map is made on a scale of
e ight miles to an inch.
Early in 1886, reports Avere made on the goldfields of Talunga,
Gumeracha, and Mount Crawford, and the Mannahill reefs. At
Echunga a series of shafts and bores were put down to test the
Jeep leads.


In July silver-lead was said to have been discovered at Carrieton,
Orroroo, Robertstown, Sec., but an examination, made by the
Geologist, showed that the ores contained but little silv ex, and in
most cases none at all.
Various localities deemed to be auriferous were selected by
officers of the department, and prospecting parties were organised
to test them. The results were fairly good, and proved that gold
could be got over an immense area of country.
During August the Neales river was visited, and a report was
made on the discovery there of alluvial gold. Payable quantities
were found by the prospector, and the field has subsequently been
worked to a small extent.
In October came the news of the discovery of the Teetulpa
goldfield. This place was twice visited, and reports made con-
cerning it. The second visit was in December, and the Manna-
hill reefs were inspected at the same time, and a detailed repoit
made. Ten tons of stone from five different claims were sent by
the department to Melbourne to be tested as to value. Ihe returns
ranged from 3dwts. to 2ozs. of gold per ton.
During the early part of 1887 a record of the mines of South
Australia was compiled and published. This purposed to give, as
completely as was possible, a description of every mine opened in
the province up to the present time. Each mine is arranged in
alphabetical order under the head of the metal it produces in
greatest quantity.
In January of this year the gold-workings at Sixth Creek were
visited and reported upon. The Gumeracha goldfields, the
German and other reefs in the neighborhood, were visited, and also
the Balhannah, Grunthal, Montacute, and Mount’s mines. In
February a visit was paid to the districts of Mount Barker, the
Meadows, Blackwood Gully, Port Elliot, and Goolwa. Subsequently
an examination was made of the mines near Strathalbyn, and the
Hundred of Waitpinga. The report shows that this hundred is a
favorable one to the occurrence of gold.
The goldfields of Forest Range and Blackwood Gully were in-
spected ; and, subsequently, those in the Hundred of Myponga,
including a new discovery at Blackwood Gully.
In April visits were paid, first to the new rush at Barossa, and
then to Teetulpa and King’s Bluff in the north-east.
In addition to those journeys a great deal of work has been
done in the office, more especially in the matter of reporting on
specimens of ore sent from all parts of the province.


ore:—
£
Lead
. . 23,535cwt. — 50,376 value
Lead Ore
.. 8,789 tons—148,744 «
Bismuth and )
Bismuth Ore }
.. l,402|cwt.= 16,739 “
Manganese ....
2,078 tons= 14,857 “
Emery
— 1,022 “
On the 17th of June, 1886, the department lost the valuable
co-operation and assistance of Mr. Harry P. Woodward, F.G.S.,
Assistant Geologist.. The term for which he had been engaged
expired, and he returned to England. Besides the work already
noticed, in which he took a prominent part, he accompanied the
South Australian and Queensland Boundary Survey party as far
north as hit. 23° 10', and furnished a report on the country passed
over.
Space does not permit of an extended notice of mining matters,
nor is it essential that one should here be given. The “ Mining
Records of South Australia,” in pamphlet form, are obtainable at
the Government Printer’s, King William-road, and are also to be
had in the Exhibition Building free of charge.
The principal metal exported is copper. The statistics published
by the Government show that in the year 1843 copper ore of the
value of £23 was exported, but five years later the maximum value
was reached at £310,172, representing 16,323 J tons of ore.
In 1873, the export equalled 27,382 tons, hut owing to the fall
in prices the value was put at £133,371. Of refined copper the
first record is in 1848, when 73cwt., value £215, were exported, and
the largest quantity was in 1867, viz., 156,863 cwt., value £637,384.
In 1872, 149,050 cwt. were exported of the declared value of
£680,714. The total quantities exported up to 1886 are as
follows : £
Copper .... 3,086,134 cwt. =12,696,216 value
Copper Ore 588,305 tons= 5,920,487 “
Regulus.... 2,972itons= 117,516 “
Next to copper, the highest figures come under lead and lead
Gold is given, officially, as being 18,1520z5. of the declared value
°f £70,963, but it is well known that a far larger quantity has been
procured. During the first three years that the Echunga goldfields
were worked, viz., 1852-3-4, it is estimated that gold to the value
of £250,000 was obtained, and since then the field has afforded a
living to many men, who have worked continuously; and from the
tlme the Teetulpa field was opened in October, 1886, to the present


time, the yield is calculated as being fully equal to £200,000. Ihe
total declared value of minerals exported up to the end of 1886, is
£19,075*040.
In addition to copper, silver-lead, and gold, there are mines con-
taining bismuth, cobalt, iron, nickel, and manganese.
The reports and maps published by the department are as
follows :
General Geological Map of the Province. New Edition.
Report on Woodside Gold Mines.
Report on Geological Examination of the Province—Annual Report for
1882-3.
Report on Country East and 'West of Farina.
Report on Country North-West and North-East of Farina.
Report by H. P. Woodward on Country East of Farina and North to
hat. 23° 10'.
Report on Lakes in Mount Gamhier District.
Report on Echunga Goldfields.
‘ ‘ Country from Port Augusta to Eucla
“ Journey to Silverton.
“ Barossa and Para Wirra Goldfields, with Map.
“ Yorkc’s Peninsula.
“ Gumeracha and Mount Crawford Goldfields, with Map.
“ LTooloo Goldfields, with Map.
The Mining Records of South Australia.
Maps can he obtained at the office and also in the Exhibition
Building, free of charge, and the Reports at the Government
Printing Office.


WATER SUPPLY.
The history of our first half century reveals the fact that one of
the greatest wants of South Australia is a plentiful supply of water
for irrigation and other purposes ; and there is at this moment a
consensus of opinion that in the wise and provident conservation
and utilization of even the limited supplies of water which are
available at our command we shall lay the sure foundation of an
era of unparalleled prosperity.
In the extent and quality of our lands we can justly claim
favorable comparison with any country in the world.
Area. —The area available for profitable cultivation is, however,
limited to about one-twentieth part of our territorial area of
243,244,800 acres (this is exclusive of the “Northern Territory”
of our province). This limit is not due to the quality of the soil,
the inaccessibility of the locality, or similar cause, in which respects
there are superior advantages, but is due to an insufficient rainfall.
Rainfall. —The records at the Adelaide Observatory (the Ob-
servatory is situated on the south park lands of the city 140 ft.
above sea level) show that rain falls over the city on an average
127 days in the year, chiefly during the months of May, June,
July, and August, and that the average yearly quantity during the
last twenty-five years has been 20in. A diagram is annexed
showing the average rainfall at Adelaide, and also at Kooringa, a
town 100 miles north of the metropolis, from which the cyclic
periodicity can be inferred, if it is safe to do so from so short a
record.
Mount Lofty, a prominent feature in the landscape, eight miles
distant from the city, and 2,234 ft. above sea level, has the maxi-
mum record of 42Jin. ; the next highest—away from the same
mountain range—being Mount Gambier, in the south, with 31-Jin.
In the hilly districts, about one hundred to one hundred and fifty
miles north of the city of Adelaide, the average is from 18in. to
25in., in the heart of the best agricultural areas of the north 15in.
to 17in., and in other farming localities lOin. to 13in.
Still further in the interior, in the far outlying pastoral districts,
the minimum of 6in. to Sin. is all that falls.


Natural Waters. —Notwithstanding this small rainfall the natural
supplies of water are not so unimportant as might be inferred from
the foregoing, or indeed as generally supposed.
In the south-eastern portion of the province, south of latitude
36° 30', water of good quality, in great abundance, is found in the
tertiary limestone, for the most part very near the surface. In
many places towards the coast-line there is a considerable surface
outflow forming ever-flowing streams of no mean size. The rain-
fall in this district is from 20in. to 31in., an unusual proportion of
which is absorbed by the permeable marine limestone and sand-
stone through which, at the normal water-level of the country, the
subterranean stream slowly finds its way towards the sea. This
flowing of the underground waters can be distinctly seen in the
limestone caves, in wells, and in the lakes in the volcanic basins of
Mount Gambler.
At some distance inland, on the higher levels, the storm waters
—gathered into streams or accumulated into lakes or swamps—
soon finds its way underground to the normal water-level through
pipes in the limestone (known in the district as “ runaway holes ”).
Some of these water passages are of great interest, being in the
shape of an inverted cone, 40ft. to 50ft. deep, with a surface
diameter of above 30ft. At times of heavy rainfall these holes are
flooded over, and a whirlpool can he seen until the whole of the
water has been swallowed up.
On the lands towards the coast the Government have found it
necessary to carry out very extensive drainage works to carry off
the freshwater, and a large area has thus been successfully re-
claimed and occupied for cultivation. The farmers owning this
land are now awaking to the fact that —even in this district —the
water is too valuable to be allowed to run to waste, and in the near
future intense cultivation under irrigation will certainly be very
generally practised to the great benefit and advancement of the
province.
River Murray. —The only river of any magnitude is the Murray,
which enters the province over its eastern boundary and flows
thence in its circuitous course of four hundred and eighty (480)
miles to its dehouclmre at the southern ocean. The river is gene-
rally in flood from September to December, and at its lowest from
March to June. The annual quantity of water discharged is from
210,000 to 550,000 million cubic feet. Steamers of considerable
size navigate its "waters, and public attention is now directed to its


further utilization for irrigation, the success of which is a foregone
conclusion, and is looked forward to as a certain stride of substan-
tial progress.
Mountain Streams and Springs. —ln the chain of mountains
known as Mount Lofty Ranges, commencing at Cape Jervis on
the southern coast and trending northerly for about one hundred
miles, there are very numerous streams of delicious water having
their source in springs flowing from the upland valleys. These
waters are used to some extent for the irrigation of market
gardens, in which most descriptions and varieties of luscious fruits
and every vegetable that could be desired are grown. Similar
springs exist in most of the other mountain ranges of the province,
particularly the Clare Hills, the F linders Range, and even the
Freeling Heights, 450 miles north of Adelaide, dhere is a
remarkable hot spring near the northern extremity of the latter
range; the temperature of the water as it flows from the spi’ing
is 130° Fahr., and a considerable smoking stream is formed for
about a mile, when it is lost in the gravel bed.
Many watercourses (“rivers ” they are called when above a few
yards wide and the water constantly flowing) convey ever-flowing
streams from the mountain ranges to the plains below to serve the
wants of man and beast; but, so far, little has been done on the
plains to utilize the waters for irrigation except in the immediate
vicinity of Adelaide.
Wells. —ln many localities good water is readily obtainable in
wells at moderate depths, and large supplies are drawn from, this
source.
Incomplete geological knowledge of the province. In an extensive
country like ours it was not to be expected that the first half
century would suffice for obtaining an accurate knowledge of the
wealth which nature has stored beneath our feet, whether it be
minerals, fuel, or water.
Although much has been done to develop our mineral resources,
it is unquestionable that other rich mines of copper, silver, tin,
gold, and probably diamonds still lie concealed in our hills and
valleys.
Hitherto no coal has been discovered within our borders, but
rumors of its existence are being continually circulated, and many
practical coal miners are confident that the day is not far distant
when we shall find this storehouse of national prosperity ; scientific
opinion is, however, unfavorable.


So it is with the underground water supplies; every day is
revealing, in one part of the province or another, new—although
very old—natural subterranean reservoirs of the precious fluid.
Artesian Wells. —Up to a year or two ago the question “ shall
“ we ever have a flowing artesian well ?” was often debated, but
not satisfactorily answered. Now, however, the diamond drills
of the Water Conservation Department have brought the dehate-
able into the region of certainty by the discovery of flowing wells
in three widely separated portions of the province—viz., the Far
North on the Transcontinental Railway line; the Willochra Valley in
the northern agricultural settlement; and the South-Eastern Dis-
trict on the Intercolonial Railway line.
Mound Springs. —ln the Far North the presence of water under
conditions favorable to artesian wells was indicated by a series of
wonderful mound springs, which, in some instances, have built
up a huge dome of carbonate of lime, and the water is held in
large cups at the top; others are quite roofed over the top and
the water is concealed within; while others again have but low
walls of lime or clay and give off a flowing stream of water. It
■was apparent that this water came from a considerable depth,
and probably from’a great distance.
Cretaceous Basin. —A geological examination proved the exist-
ence of a very extensive basin, bounded on the north-east and east
by the mountain ranges of Queensland and New South Wales ;
on the south by the outcrop at the bed rocks north of Farina and
in the Freeling Heights in South Australia; and on the west
partially by the primary and igneous rocks near the Overland
Telegraph line; the precise limit on the north and west being still
a matter of uncertainty.
The portion of this immense basin within the boundaries of the
province comprise a surface area of fully 100,000 square miles,
and it has been found by boring that horizontal strata obtain from
the surface down to the bed rock, consisting of homogeneous
argillaceous silt intercalated with bands of hard blue limestone
containing iron pyrites, and their marine origin is evident from the
presence of numerous marine fossils. The Rev. Mr. Howchin,
F.G.S., has very ably investigated and described these strata.
Fossil Foramini/era. —In an article on the Foraminifera of the
beds, Mr. Howchin says :—“ These borings preserve a wonderful
“ sameness of character throughout their entire depth. This is true
“ both as to the mineral depositions and paloeontological remains.


“ The same similarity is observed when the respective borings are
“ compared with each other, a majority of the species observed
“ being common to the geological area in question. The respective
“ borings have evidently passed through beds of contemporaneous
“ age and which were deposited under remarkably uniform con-
“ ditions, and these persistent through a period of time sufficiently
“ prolonged to permit this great thickness of deposit being thrown
“ down. Thar, this deposition was carried on at a very slow rate
“is evident from the presence of Foraminifera throughout the
“ entire depth. Twenty samples from various depths were washed
“ and microscopically searched, and, with the exception of two,
“ yielded in each case more or less species of Foraminifera of the
“ following genera :— Hyperammina Reophax , two species ; Hap-
“ laphragmium, four species ; Bigenerina, two species ; Gaudryina ,
“ three species ; Verncuilina , Cyclammina , Cnstellana, Marginu-
“ Una, two species ; and others.”
The Government geologist (H. Y. L. Brown, Esq.) has also
reported on the formation which he describes as of cretaceous age.
Source of Water. —It is evident that the source of the water is
the mountain chain of Queensland on the north-east, and that
under the clay beds, at a depth in the centre of the basin of
probably 2,000 ft., x-ising to two or three hundred feet near the
shores of this secondary sea, there is a permeable bed of sand and
gravel conducting the water throughout the entire basin, and that
when the sand bed is tapped in boring the hydrostatic pressure
brings the water over the surface, unless the surface level is above
the height to which the pressure is equal.
Government Artesian Wells. —The borings in this locality by
the Government, under the Department of the Conservator of
Water, have been very successful in tapping large supplies of
artesian water; the quality is, however, slightly brackish.
The four most successful borings are the Hergott, Coward,
Strangways, and Mungamurtiemui'tie, at depths of 342 ft. 3in.,
308 ft., 365 ft. 2in., and 237 ft. Sin. respectively, with corresponding
supplies per diem of 100,000, 1,200,000, 1,200,000, and 52,000
gallons, in each case flowing from the six-inch pipe several feet
above the surface. The temperature of the water being 86° to
90° Fahr.
Artesian Well , Willochra Valley. —The boring in Willochra
Valley, about 200 miles north of Adelaide, after passing through
salt water in gravel beds near the surface, penetrated the tertiary


clays to a depth of 215 ft., when good water was struck in white
argillaceous sand. The quantity flowing over the surface is
10,000 gallons per diem, and the quality suitable for domestic
supply, locomotive purposes, or irrigation.
Artesian Well , Tintinarra. —The successful boring at Tintinarra
in the south-eastern • district passed through tertiary marine beds
of sand and limestone, highly fossiliferous, for 160 ft., and then
black carbonaceous clay to 251 ft., at which depth good water was
struck and immediately rose over the surface at the rate of 4,300
gallons per diem. The quality is excellent.
Government Wells. —lt is in the extensive tracts of outlying
country, away from the natural surface supplies, that the scarcity
of water has been most felt, and it is to these localities that the
Government have devoted the most of their attention. (In this
article the waterworks for the supply of Adelaide and other large
towns are omitted, as they are dealt with in a subsequent part of
this book.)
There are 199 Government wells for public use, giving a supply
of one million gallons per diem. To these should be added the
borings already described, yielding a supply of five million gallons
per diem.
Nullarbor Plains. —ln the Far West, on the boundary of the
adjoining province of Western Australia, there is an elevated
plateau of good pastoral land which has hitherto been lying un-
occupied in consequence of the entire absence of water.
Within the last few months the Conservator of Water has suc-
ceeded in satisfactorily completing two deep borings, which, yield
a large supply of stock water. In each of these bores salt-water
was struck at about sea-level—viz., 182 ft. and 235 ft. respectively.
The strata passed through being marine limestone and chalk,
highly fossiliferous, determined by Professor Tate, F.G.S., &c., as
older tertiary; at 414 ft. in the one, and 470 ft. in the other, blue
and black clay was entered and the water reached beneath the
clay in a sand bed at 752 ft. and 735 ft. respectively, the latter
being ten miles further inland than the former. The pressure is,
however, unequal to bringing the water higher than from 135 ft.
to 187 ft. from the surface. The temperature of the water is 81°
Fahr. The area occupied by this formation is about 20,000 square
miles, and similar success can now be safely predicted throughout
the entire plateau.
Government Reservoirs. —With a rainfall of six to ten inches
and an annual evaporation of sixty inches very little natural


surface water could be expected, and it soon became patent that
any storage tanks or reservoirs should be as deep as possible.
The construction of reservoirs in the usual way, by retaining
embankments only, is generally impossible from the level nature
of the country, and the alternative of excavating tanks and reser-
voirs in retentive clay beds has been generally adopted. The
Government, by the Water Conservation Department, have been
able to very successfully carry out these works by using steam
ploughing and scooping machinery manufactured by Messrs. John
Fowler & Co., of Leeds. A large number of reservoirs have been
thus excavated to depths of 18ft. to 25ft., and holding capacity of
three to eight million gallons.
There are 227 Government tanks and reservoirs for public use
in the country districts with a holding capacity of 237,000,000
gallons.


ADELAIDE WATERWORKS.
«
The following description of the Adelaide Waterworks and the
Sewage Farm at Islington has been kindly supplied by Mr. Charles
W. Smith, A.M., Inst. C.E., of the Hydraulic Engineer’s Depart-
ment. This departynent has under its control all water supplies to
country towns within the province, and the Adelaide sewers.
The City of Adelaide is situate on the Adelaide Plains, which
reach in a westerly direction from the foot of the Mount Lofty
Ranges to the sea.
The city is four miles west from the ranges and six miles east
from the sea. From the Thorndon Park reservoir to the city the
distance is six miles, and from the Hope Valley reservoir seven
miles, both in a north-easterly direction. The area supplied by
these tw r o reservoirs extends for distances varying from two and
three-quarters miles to twelve miles from the city, and covers over
100 square miles, supplying a population of from 90,000 to
100,000.
The levels of the city vary from 175 ft. to 100 ft. above the level
of the sea. The more elevated of the suburban townships have
supplies independent of the Hope Valley and Thorndon Park
reservoirs.
The marine township of Glenelg has a fairly large population,
and is only 17ft. to 25ft. above sea level. Port Adelaide, the chief
port in the province, is situated on the Port Creek, within two
miles of the sea, and from 13ft. to 18ft. above its level.
The source of supply is the River Torrens, where it issues from
a gorge in the western slopes of the Mount Lofty Ranges. The
catchment area equals about 150 square miles, and consists of very
hilly ranges of a slate and sandstone formation, covered with poor
soil, and sparsely timbered with “ bastard box ” and stringy bark.
The flow in the river is constant but very variable, the quantity
during the summer months not amounting to more than 7,000
to 10,000 gallons per hour, while in time of heavy winter rains the
water flows from 4ft, to 6ft. deep over a weir 140 ft. wide.
The head wmrks consist of a heavy masonry weir, about 15ft.
high, constructed in a narrow gorge of the river at a point where


it is about 200 ft. wide, and at such an altitude as suffices to give
the necessary declination to an aqueduct for conveying the water
to the two reservoirs, one of which is situate at Thorndon Park
and the other at Hope Valley. The level of the weir is 359 ft,
above low water (sea level).
No filtering appliances are necessary, as the water, after the first
of the winter floods have passed over the weir, becomes clear and
quite fit for domestic use. The sluice-valve in the weir which
governs the intake is then opened, and the water allowed to flow
along the aqueduct to the reservoirs. The flow of water is regu-
lated by this valve, which is 4ft. square, and which can be opened
or closed in two minutes. No bye-washes are therefore needed
for the reservoirs.
The aqueduct is about three and three-quarter miles long, and
consists of half a mile of cast-iron pipes 42in. in diameter, laid
partly on masonry piers, and for the greater part in a bench
excavated along the rocky and pi’ecipitous side of the gorge. At
one point it crosses the river by an aqueduct bridge 200 ft. long.
This pipe delivers into an open channel, which is continued round
the spurs of the hills. To avoid any long detours, the channel is
taken in a direct course through two tunnels of an aggregate length
of one-third of a mile. This channel is 10ft. Gin. wide at the top,
4ft. deep, excavated in solid ground throughout, and lined with
cement concrete, 9in. thick rendered. It is provided with all
necessary under and over culverts, road bridges, scour-valves,
bye-washes, &c., and has a fall of Ift. 9in. per mile, and when
running full delivers 1,000,000 gallons per hour. The aqueduct
terminates at the second tunnel, the end of which enters the Hope
Valley reservoir. At a point, however, along the aqueduct, the
water can be wholly or partly 1 diverted from the channel and con-
veyed to the Thorndon Park reservoir by a 21 in. cast-iron pipe.
The Thorndon Park reservoir was constructed in the year 1857,
and from that time until 1872 was the only reservoir supplying the
City of Adelaide, Port Adelaide, and the numerous suburbs with
water. The increase of the population and the rapid extension of
the suburbs demanded greater storage capacity. The larger
reservoir at Hope Valley, with the weir and aqueduct, was
therefore determined upon, and so designed as to ensure rapidity of
filling. The Thorndon Park reservoir is now only considered
supplementary to the larger one, but it is also intended as a reserve
iu the event of any accident occurring to the other reservoir or its


outlet works. Each reservoir is in direct connection with the city
and suburbs. Either can be used alone or together. The two
reservoirs are also directly connected by a 21 in. and 18in.
compound main. The Thorndon Park reservoir is situated in a
valley, which has been spanned by an earthern dam constructed
with a core or wall of good puddled clay, supported on either side
with selected clayey materials, well punned in 12in. layers in-
clining from the exterior slopes towards the puddled wall. This
wall is 4ft. 9in. in thickness at the top, increasing in thickness by
a batter of 1 in 12 to the natural surface of the ground,
whence it diminishes by a similar batter to various depths. The
outside slope is 21ft. horizontal to lift, vertical, and is covered
with a compact turf. The slope of the inside is 3ft. horizontal and
Ift. vertical, the entire surface of which is heavily pitch-paved
15in. in thickness. The dam is of a total length of 47 chains,
its greatest height being 44ft.; the centre portion is straight and
19 chains long ; the tw r o ends of the dam—one being 9 chains and
the other 19 chains long —are curved inwards to meet suitable
portions of banks of the valley. The outlet works consist of a
brick-in-cement valve tower, erected within the reservoir and close
to the toe of the inside slope, with outlet valves at various heights
to suit the level of the water. From the tower there is a brick-
in-cement tunnel, 6ft. 6in. x 6ft., carried through solid ground
immediately below the base of the dam to a valvehouse situate at
the foot of the outside slope of the dam. Two mains, one 18in.
and the other 12in. in diameter, are laid in the tunnel. This
reservoir contains at high water 140,500,000 gallons, the depth
being then 40ft. The high-water level is 323 ft. above the sea. At
this height the water covers an area of 27£ acres. The Hope
Valley reservoir is formed by an earthern dam crossing the valley'
at a point just below the junction of tw'o others, thus giving the
maximum storage capacity' with the minimum length of dam. The
dam is straight and nearly half a mile in length; its greatest
height is 70ft., and greatest breadth at its base 355 ft. It is formed
of good selected clay for about two-thirds of its solid contents, and
was well punned in 12in. layers by means of heavy corrugated iron
rollers drawn by four horses. The core or central wall consists of
first-class puddled clay 6ft. in thickness at the top, increasing in
thickness by a batter of lin 12 below the natural surface of the
ground, thence diminishing by a similar batter to various depths.
The inner slope is three to one ; it is protected by a layer 9in. in


thickness of 2£in. broken metal, on which is laid heavy pitch-
paving 12in. thick. The outer slope is covered with turf. At
the foot of the inner slope a cast-iron valve tower lined with brick-
in-cement and cement concrete is built, with val\ es at diftei’ent
heights to suit the varying level of the water. This tower is
connected with a strong outlet culvert of masonry lined with iron,
built in the solid ground under the seat of the dam. I his outlet
leads by a connecting main one and three-quarter miles long, 21in.
and 18in. in diameter, with the subsidiary reservoir at Ihorndon
Park. The Hope Valley reservoir is constructed to hold 886,915,752
gallons, the depth then being 51ft. 6in.; the high-water level is
347 ft. above the sea; the surface of the water at the 51ft. 6in.
level comprises an area of 162 acres.
By careful evaporation gaugings carried out daily during several
years, it is found that the evaporation from these reservoirs is 70in.
during the year, about one-half occurring during the three hottest
summer months, and the total amount being almost the same in
each year.
In connection with the two reservoirs there has been constructed
on the northern boundary of the city a service tank for the supply
of water to the suburbs between the city and Port Adelaide, and
the townships between it and the sea. This tank is placed at a
level of 17Oft. above the sea, and when full contains 1,041,000
gallons; it is 107 ft. 6in. square and 17ft. deep ; it is constructed of
pressed bricks set in cement, and roofed over with brick-in-cement
arches resting on brick piers, the whole being earthed over and
laid down in lucerne, and surrounded with ornamental shrubs and
trees. The tank is filled during the night from a 15in. main ; the
outlet pipe is 15in., and supplies two lOin. mains, carried along two
roads parallel to each other and a mile apart, to Port Adelaide.
In case of any extra pressure being required at the Port, or of
repairs, &c., to this tank, a direct supply can at once be established
between the Hope Valley and Thorndon Park reservoirs and the
Port, the inlet and outlet mains at the service tank being so
arranged that the supply to it can be at a moment’s notice cut off
and diverted to the Port mains. A somewhat similar tank, con-
taining 850,000 gallons, has been built to supply the town of
Glenelg and other suburbs lying between it and the city.
Two mains, 1 Sin. in diameter, convey the water from the two
reservoirs to the city, while secondary mains branching therefrom
supply the various suburban townships. These two 18in, mains


have hitherto been sufficient for the demand ; but another main of
1 Sin. in diameter is urgently required to be laid, taking a new line
of route towards the suburbs lying to the south and south-east of
the city.
The primary mains of from loin, in diameter to 21 in. in diameter
have a total length of sixteen miles; the secondary mains of from
15in. to lOin. in diameter have a total length of twenty-two miles;
while the distributing or street mains from lOin. to Sin. in diameter
have a total length of 462 miles. The furthest point supplied is
at the seaside, distant fifteen miles from the Thorndon Park
reservoir.
The service is high pressure with constant supply, and for
domestic use unstinted, the only restraint being, in time of drought
or a long dry summer, and the prevention of gross waste, and
stopping the supply more or less for irrigation.
The consumption fluctuates from about 1,750,000 gallons in
winter to about 6,000,000 gallons per diem in the extreme hot
summer months.
The meter system of supply is largely in use, a meter being
supplied to everyone desiring it, whether for domestic or manufac-
turing purposes. A rent, now abolished, of Is. per month was
formerly charged for the use of the meter, the price of water being
Is. 6d. per 1,000 gallons passed through it when situate outside the
deep drainage area, and Is. 3d. per 1,000 gallons if within the
proclaimed drainage area.
Telephonic communication is established between the residence
of the manager at the Water works-yard, Kent Town ; the Head
Office, Victoria-square ; Police Station ; Fire Brigade Station; the
reservoir-keeper (residing at Thorndon Park), under whose control
the two reservoirs and head works are placed, Kensington Pump-
ing Station, and the superintendent at the Port Adelaide office.
At the foot and partly on the western slopes of the Mount Lofty
Range are situated several townships considerably higher than the
Hope Valley or Thorndon Park reservoirs. To supply these
townships and their environs (area covered, about ten square
miles), the waters of several springs and creeks rising in the
ranges, and flowing therefrom through rocky ravines and gorges,
have been utilised. In three cases wells have been sunk in the
detritus which now fills the old creek bed and adjacent to present
creek, and the water is conveyed thence by a main to covered ser-
vice tanks containing about 270,000 gallons each, and placed at


such levels as to command the several townships. These supplies
are constant during the winter months, but for a few months in
the summer—December to May—the supply has more or less to be
augmented by pumping water from the Kensington pumping
station. The quantity pumped during each season amounts to
about 25,000,000 gallons, the average cost for the past four years
pumping being 4|d. per 1,000 gallons. The rate charged in these
high-level districts is now 2s. per 1,000 gallons.
In addition to the above described auxiliary works, a water
tower containing 66,000 gallons has been erected at the Sema-
phore. This was found necessary to keep a constant service on
in the district west of the Port River. The leading main is
carried over the Port creek or river by means of the swing bridge.
The main is disconnected on each occasion of opening the bridge
to allow of the passage of vessels, and water is then drawn from
the tank in water tower until the connection with the main soui’ce
is again resumed upon the closing of the bridge.


ADELAIDE SEWERS AND SEWAGE FARM.
The city of Adelaide can fairly claim to hold the unique position
of being the best drained city in the southern hemisphere. The
system of deep drainage, which has now been completed for nearly
two years, has come up to the expectations of its most sanguine
advocates ; and the concensus of opinion is that it is a pronounced
success.
The drainage area —that is, the entire district which can, by
reason of the configuration of the ground, be benefited by these
works —includes the city of Adelaide, the corporate towns of
Hindmarsh, Thebarton, St. Peters, and Kensington and Norwood.
The work of connecting with the sewers is still proceeding in the
two last named corporations.
The main sewer which receives the street sewers, is constructed
for the greater part of its length of cement concrete. That por-
tion which extends easterly from the Frome-road, Adelaide, is of
earthenware pipes of a maximum diameter of 24in. The size of
the concrete sewer varies from 3ft. Gin. by 2ft. 4in. to sft. by 3ft.
4in., and is of oviform section. It is designed to discharge 23,000
gallons per minute. Another main sewer, 3ft. 6in. by 2ft. 4in.,
traverses Bowden to receive the drainage of Bowden, Brompton,
Thebarton, Southwark, Ac. Where these main sewers join, the
section is changed to a trough shape, perpendicular sides and
semicircular top and bottom; it is sft. wide and 3ft. 9in. deep.
This section is continued until it reaches the straining shed at the
sewage farm, Islington.
The sewage farm is situate about four miles to the north of the
city, and contains altogether about 470 acres, including roads.
The sewage from Adelaide and adjacent towns flows on to the
farm by gravitation. The height of Adelaide at the post office is
154 ft. above sea level, that of the farm at the point where main
sewer enters being 41ft. above the sea. At the northern end of
farm the height is 28ft. above the sea. All the sewage is strained
before being distributed over the land.
The farm is worked on the broad irrigation principle, combined,
in the winter months, with intermittent downward filtration.


The filter beds are thoroughly underdrained, and work most
effectually, the effluent carried off therefrom being perfectly clear
and pure.
The sewage, after being strained, is conducted over the farm by
means of cement concrete carriers and wooden troughing.
The farm has been divided, by fencing, into twenty-one pad-
docks, varying in area from eight to twenty-five acres; and water
has been laid on to each for the use of cattle depasturing thereon.
The whole of the farm, excepting about twenty acres of land above
the level, is now irrigated. The soil varies from a stiff clay to a
sandy loam.
A large sum of money has been spent upon buildings on the
farm, including manager’s house, dairy, stables, cowsheds, pigsties,
&c., and the arrangements are all most complete.
The dairy, for which most of the buildings were erected, had,
after being brought into good working order, to be abandoned by
reason of the strongly expressed popular prejudice against the
produce. The farm is now, therefore, farmed with a view of
grazing and fattening of stock and the growth of root crops and
other fodder plants.
The production of the land treated with the sewage water has
been extraordinary, and it is generally considered that more
luxuriant crops could not have been obtained.
The Italian rye-grass, lucern, and mangolds, find a ready sale
at high prices.
At present the live stock upon the farm consists of about 30l>
cows and bullocks, 30 horses, 300 sheep, and 160 pigs.
The rate charged for depasturing large cattle ranges from 3s. 6d.
to ss. per week. Cattle, bought as stores, after being in the farm
for three months double their market value. The pigs are well
worthy of notice, being as fine a lot as could be seen anywhere;
they are fed on mangold leaves, pulped mangolds, lucern, and a
little meal, and also the skim milk purchased from a neighboring
dairy farm at a nominal price.
The following is a description of last year’s cropping of the
farm. Many other cereals, fodder plants, and roots not mentioned
here, were sown for experimental purposes, and the result of such
experiments will doubtless influence the manager in his next year’s
cropping :
Lucern. — About 150 acres have been laid down in lucern.
The paddocks are watered every three weeks to a depth of Sin.


The soil vai'les from a sandy loam to a stiff clay. The yield
obtained at each cutting is from four to ten tons per acre, cut
eight times a year. The lucern brakes let readily for £lO per
acre, but is found more expedient for the manager to retain all the
land in his own hands in order that the watering may be better
controlled and distributed over a larger area.
Italian Rye-grass. —About 150 acres are devoted to Italian rye-
grass, watered about four times in the year with a Sin. watering.
The average yield is about eight tons per acre.
Mangolds. —About twenty-five acres was sown with mangolds.
They were drilled in ridges about 30in. apart. The plants
were watered about every three weeks, Sin. deep. The soil varies
very much in qualits r , consequently the crop was not very uniform.
The yield was, however, tremendous, giving an average of fifty-five
tons per acre, and a maximum yield of eighty-five tons per acre.
Some of the roots can be seen in the Northern Annexe of the
Jubilee Exhibition. They are quite brobdignagian in size.
Sorghum. —Twenty-five acres of recently levelled land was sown
with sorghum, and received waterings Sin. deep every six weeks.
Although the crop was patchy the total yield gave an excellent
average. The plants were cut twice, giving twenty-four tons per
acre at each cut, and afterwards grazed. Undoubtedly this is a
most invaluable fodder plant, either for chaffed feed, grazing,
or ensilage.
Wheat (for hay).—Fifty acres under wheat yielded about two
and a half tons per acre. Three waterings Sin. deep were given
to this crop.
Barley. —About thirty acres of land was sown with barley
for seed. This crop only had one watering Sin. deep, and this
when the plant was 18in. high. It yielded twenty bushels to the
acre.
Vines. —Sewage water has proved to be generally suited to the
production of the grape. About two acres of trellised vines of all
the table varieties gave a splendid yield, about ten tons to the
acre, notwithstanding the depredations of the sparrows. About
three waterings were given during the season.
Wattles. —Owing to the success which has attended the growth
of the wattle on the farm, some of the paddocks have been planted
therewith, in widely distanced rows, the usual annual cropping of
the land going on at the same time.


There is little doubt that under good management, such as the
farm now enjoys, this property must become most valuable, and
the income that will be ultimately derived therefrom go a long
way towards paying interest upon cost of the works carried out
both in the farm and in the towns benefited by the deep drainage
system. The last half-year’s balance-sheet indicated a profit o£
£7OO.


» . . S
•y C C .9 >4 >4 £
° • ’S, S. p< • ® ® Shi
* § aa a .88. 2 . j'S £•
2 2 gJ 3 «« “ Eo « tj> m g o -g C
08 6 PAPhPh 6DMI6C.S bO.S “o eS 3
■gM '*>'&'& .S.S-S g 4 og.Sft .sj g 2^
%u ggg 5.g.11 |.s
J? 05®“ ts«>a2£ “o >
Is sfg' M ra| s
s iti <& £ i
CQ QQ CQ 05
'd
G)
0
3
£
o
o
J 0
%
P<
0
:n
k
s
&
V
6
.1
I
+3 000000000000 0000 OO 0000 O
'o 000000000000 0000 OO 0000 o
c 3 OOOO OOOO o
d o' o' cT o' o' o' o' o' o' f-H o' CD 0000 O OrHOO o
O r OOOl'- *—< o tO CO CO O lO
0) r “3OOOC0 NION W <M o *—< O
to J 5 - ~ ~
cc COOOOCOOOC><-3*--'C-2wJ gn w ‘—> ' —> <—>
O O O CO I'- »—< o tO CO CO O iO
O (MO<M(M <M (M *—<
1° ONOoV hV to NO
U-, O CO C<l o
3 a h oo
CO
O
B3 W C j. f 3
r-i bC bD m g.SO
r o3 fc^ 1 © .3.2 § ro § m H j? ’•§
.9 fi g*2 p* * fe ,g
■S ,i 4 M r*- S< 7HC -S H § „ ® 02
| ** g gflfl I ll'S'g“ J 'i p Hcc |gt3 H c^2^a
% |oHH - - HP. -§ S gtf||| .§«| §^i
g ||ll g §IJ g|§'&s|| Ig^o*!
5 $s s gHH M I'P 8J g |-g” J mil
■t «*ggss§|s^(S|* rt «£||«
§ oo g §|| .« S-«®2 L s £ & I
p I g I§§ l£ | J n
uo ao © Op- P « rt S
§ Ph
•
ft .?*,
n
H ~
ft 1
ft
« £
50 g
“« s
W Ssi
M §
'l
3 s
w -
s
g «
AI g
p I
«I
£ £
a *
s?
§
o
•<
CO
-2
o
j?
'o
d
o
s
h
o
ts
*
§
14 1
M M *3 qn go
" r SE Eh r o b S 3
OQ Sh id r'-s 03 0 Q) CD /r\ Zr- Kfl
E C 3 “rg £ S J(S
'3 ci od i ■ +_l *~~~! r 3 6O Orj r _) , r ~! Ch
3 nllhJ E
o -rtj CO O »>i Q C/3 Q, L- 0 Q|> Q O
g.|2 ,2 1-IslwalJsslll ■3S|SJ s . , S S
-A® *. CS .2
o? .s
Is fl f§ -2
II 5 I * ° S|
"" s -a I “
v ■ ■! . I “ _QD
•••• •• ••*£}
H m • • • • • • ••• CO
ci2••••• •• • • • a
,_Q «rH U «, •••• •• ...p
o •• ••». •• . • « o
• m •••• •• «»*0
pQ ’iJ •• ••• •• • • • .
02 * »■ « » * f I ** ••# ( H
f/0 CD o 3 • • • • CD ••* -O'
« » : : : ,s| ::| g
§ £ l:: S| 2: :&S
o ffl O- - cS-§£Cr;s S(B W;• o g a
E d) ggg O-g 3cs^ r is§
® u) -S3| gtfig -eg
T 3 ®cse3 005 0,5 >-i! :, h2 l ® k 2
< W H P-i O MP4PhS PhS OfflWw S


THE RIVER MURRAY.
This noble stream was first discovered by Mr. Hamilton Hume
and W. H. Howell, who started from Lake George, and crossing
the river, first named it the Hume. In 1828 Capt. Sturt, accom-
panied by Mr. Hume, traced the Macquarie River down to its
junction with the Darling, following that river down to Fort
Bourke. The following year, Capt. Sturt traced the Murrum-
bidgee to its debouchure into a magnificent stream 350 ft. wide,
and a depth from 15ft. to 20ft., which afterwards proved to be the
Murray, “ the antipodean Nile, the prince of Australian rivers,”
and which has since been found to have a navigable course of
nearly 2,000 miles. He followed the river down to a consider-
able distance, but not being able to find the true channel into the
sea, was obliged to return, after enduring great hardships.
In 1829 Sturt was again commissioned to explore the southern
rivers, and in company with Mr. (afterwards Sir) George McLeay,
sought the Murrumbidgee. They passed the junction of the river
which Hume had called after his father, but which Sturt named
the Murray, after Sir George Murray, then Secretary of State, by
which name it has ever since been known, Sturt found the natives
very numerous, and utilised friendly ones by sending them ahead
to announce his coming. They reached Lake Alexandrina, which.
Sturt named after Her Majesty the Queen; named Point McLeay
and Point Sturt, and, going around the Goolwa side of Hindmarsh
Island, walked along the shore to the Murray sea-mouth.
Passing through a period of intermittent vicissitudes, in which
no doubt the conflicting interests of naval traders played important
parts, very little of any importance has since been done to develop
the advantages incident to this interesting river hitherto.
Our legislators have comparatively ignored the commercial
advantages of this grand river, and the result has been that less
highly favored neighbors, after marvelling at our apathy, have
secured for themselves the larger portion of these advantages.
Possessed of a Avaterway far superior to that of the other colonies.
South Australia could ha\'e commercially annexed considerable
portions of the New South Wales and Victoria trade, but the


opportunity was not improved, and consequently a considerable
amount of commerce took other channels, from which it will be
difficult to divert it. Very early in the history of the colony the
keen eye of the then Governor, Sir Henry Young, recognised the
advantages that might be secured to South Australia by the
improvement of the Murray channel for navigation. But the
uncertain rises of the water, together with the limited amount of
trade, all had a prejudical effect on the important feature of
economic trade. Consequently it Avas not until 1874 and 1875,
when Mr. Boucaut again directed public attention to the importance
of the riA’er trade, that any fresh effort Avas made to utilise or
improve the advantages of our position.
Up to the year 1883, ninety-two steamers Avere employed in this
trade, forty-four being registered in South Australia, and forty-
eight in Melbourne and Sydney. The average carrying capacity
of each steamer and barge may be placed at about 200 tons, and as
much as 500 tons have been taken at one steamer load.
One draAvback to this noble stream, is the danger attendant
upon the passage through its mouth, Avhich has been a stand-
ing difficulty and disappointment to the colony. Being exposed to
the full SAveep of the gigantic Avaves of the southern ocean, this
entrance is continually shifting, silting up one channel, and open-
ing out another. Though river steamers haA r e been naA r igated in
and out several times, there is always some measure of risk about
it. But it is not too much to say that avc haA'e not turned the one
great river avc possess to full account for the convenience of pro-
duce ; for a port at its mouth capacious enough to receive large
vessels would do more than anything else to enable us to utilise the
riA r er as we ought. Without being over sanguine, avc belieA r e a
great future lies before the colony in the further development of
the RiA T er Murray trade.
Npt the least A'aluable feature of this great river is the enormous
area of splendid soil along its banks, to Avhich some practical and
economic system of irrigation might be applied. Deficient in
rainfall sufficient for the growth of cereals, and other ordinary
products, it embraces a climate of great unanimity, admirably
suited to an irrigation system. If, by a gradual system of locks,
the normal level of the river could be raised, so as to provide on
the one hand a permanent Avater carriage, and at the same time
establish a natural reticulation of water by gravitation over the
chief portions of those magnificent plains along its banks, no doubt


a numerous and happy population would be planted along its
banks.
The fact of the permanent establishment of the river through
South Australian territory as a highway of commerce would in
itself provide a reliable market for such a colony, having the
metropolis on the one side, and the vast avenue of the trade of
Bourke, Riverina, &c., on the other. Roughly estimated, it may
he computed that over 2,000,000 acres would he available for irri-
gation along its banks from the boundary to the mouth; and which
are only waiting the enterprise of the capitalist, the agriculturist,
and horticulturist, to be utilised, upon the highest system of modern
cultivation, whether by cereals, pasture, orchards, orangeries, or
vineyards.


ROYAL GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY OF
AUSTRALASIA.
South Australian Branch.
The South Australian Branch of the Royal Geographical Society
of Australasia was founded at an influential meeting of citizens
held in Adelaide on the 10th July, 1885. Branches had been
previously formed in New South Wales, where the movement was
initiated in 1883, and in Victoria in 1884.
From its position, geographically remote from the older portions
of the habitable globe, and owing to its comparatively recent
discovery, Australia has formed an inviting field for the adven-
turous work of exploration. At briefly recurrent intervals, hardy
discoverers have dared the dangers of the great southern unknown
lands, and have plunged into the mysteries of Australian untried
shores and wilds. The roll of brave men, who have won laurels
in discoveries along the extended coasts, and in the inland regions
of Australia, is rich and long.
In the dim and distant past, Spaniards, Portuguese, and Dutch,
pushed away southward, till we hear tell of a “ great south land,
afar off, under the southern cross.” And then James Cook, sent
out by the, at that time newly organised, now renowned, Royal
Geographical Society of Britain, explored the eastern shores of the
new continent; and, landing near Cape York, took possession for the
“ Empress of the Seas ” under the title of New South Wales.
Another brave rover of the seas. Flinders, found the dividing
waters of Bass’s Straits, and so proved T'asmania to be an island.
After experiences upon the eastern coasts, he brought out the good
ship Investigator , and, naming prominent features of the coast
from the Leuwin to near Eucla, discovered all the prominent
points along the shores of South Australia from her western
boundary to Encounter Bay. Spencer’s and St. Vincent Gulfs
were first seen and explored by him. Flinders, too, it was, -who
first saw and named Mount Lofty, under the shadow of which now
nestles the fairest city of Australia, Adelaide. Now ’twere a
fitting time, in this our year of jubilee, for South Australia to


dedicate some worthy and lasting memorial in honor of the man
who did so much, and in whose memory we have done so little.
Sturt discovered the great Australian rivers, the Darling and the
Murray. His marvellously adventurous trip in an open whale-
boat down the tortuous Murray river, seeking a highway to the
sea, has never yet received the attention the deed merits. The
lamented Leichardt, whose unsolved fate forms to-day one of the
most extraordinary problems of geographical adventure, sought to
pierce the continent from Sydney to Swan River. Eyre, after good
work at the head of Spencer’s Gulf, made himself renowned by
his famous “ march by the sea ” to Western Australia.
Now we have John McDouall Stuart, peer of Australian ex-
plorers, whose determined attempts to cross the continent lesulted,
in his sixth expedition, in well earned victory. In 1860, on his
second journev, he discovered Central Mount Stuart, in the heart
of the continent, planting upon its crest the British flag. And so,
from the centre to the sea the ‘ proud flag waved exultingly. In
October, 1861, John McDouall Stuart started on his sixth expedi-
tion, being his final and victorious march for the Indian Ocean.
There were with him, William Kekwick, second officer, since dead;
F. W. Thring, third officer; W. P. Auld, assistant; Stephen King,
John W. Billiatt, all living; James Frew, dead; Heath Nash;
John McGorrerey, shoeing-smith ; F. G. Waterhouse, naturalist;
still living. After many baffling experiences and great hardships,
Stuart, on the 25th July, 1862, reached the Indian Ocean in Van
Diemen’s Gulf, after, in his own words, “ having crossed the entire
continent of Australia from the Southern to the Indian Ocean,
passing through the centre.” The grand flag was raised anew on
the ocean sands of Northern Australia, and Stuarts triumph aa as
complete. He had proved that central Australia was not the
useless desert country it had been represented to be, he having
found good grazing country right away through. Iso higher
testimony is needed, nor can be given, that Stuart did his an ork
wonderfully Avell, than the fact that his track across Austialia is
now marked out by the transcontinental telegraph line Avhich binds
us to the old world; and further, that the route of the great
Australian transcontinental railroad follows the footprints left by
him. Nor can any better route be found. In connection with
Stuart’s great exploit, the names of James and John Chambers
should be recorded; for these were the men who stood by him in
his earlier endeavors, and, but for their aid, his great achievement


must have been long delayed. Honor is due also to the Soutl
Australian Government for supplying the needed assistance for th
last and successful expedition.
Mr. A. C. Gregory, at this juncture, led an expedition which
made valuable discoveries in North Australia; and later, along the
Barcoo, and Cooper’s Creek. In 1860, also, the famed and
lamented Burke and Wills expedition, of Melbourne, started on
their terrible, but successful journey to the Gulf of Carpentaria
the leaders dying at Cooper’s Creek, through being forsaken by
the party in charge of their stores. John McKinlay, having been
sent with a relief party to find Burke and Wills, traversed the
continent from Cooper’s Creek to the Gulf of Carpentaria.
Ernest Giles led an expedition in 1862, to Lake Amadeus, and the
Rawlinson Ranges, barely escaping with his life, in a waterless
range of country. The brothers Forrest, of Western Australia,,
have done marvellous work in the difficult country lying between
the overland telegraph line and Western Australia, a region of
country thrice successfully traversed by them.
In 1872, through the generosity of two honored and enterprising
citizens, the late Sir Walter W. Hughes, and Sir Thomas Elder,
G.C.M.G., who still gives ready aid in similar work, an expedition
was organised under the leadership of Colonel P. Eger ton-War-
burton, C.M.G. This expedition marked a new era in Australian
exploration, inasmuch as camels were now first employed in trans-
port, The wonderful “ ship of the desert” at once demonstrated
his superiority over the horse for such adventure, owing to his
powers of endurance, and ability to traverse long stages with no
water supply, which would be utterly impracticable to the more
sagacious, but less hardy “friend of man.” In fact, the value of
work done in Central Australia by the camel can scarcely be over-
estimated. As in Asia and Africa, so here, for long journeys over
trying, arid country, the camel has established itself as indispensable
and invaluable; yet, strange to say, though forty years ago a
gentleman from India pointed out the adaptability of the camel to
sueh purposes in Australia, it is only comparatively recently that
he has come into use. Colonel Egerton-Warburton carried on
work in the north-west. He barely escaped from the desert with
his life; but, thanks to the efforts and attention of the late J. W.
Lewis, wc have the aged and honored leader still in our midst.
Such are the leading facts respecting work done for geographical
science in Australia up to the date of the inauguration of the


Geographical Society of Australasia. Her Majesty Queen Victoria
has since been pleased to grant her gracious patronage, and to
permit the assumption of the title “Royal,” by the society. To
encourage, and assist in every way possible the interests of geo-
graphical science, is the purpose of the society, as set forth in the
statement of “objects” in its constitution. These are as follow: —
i. Scientific The advancement of geographical science, the
study of physical geography, and the exploration of
Australasia, with the islands and seas adjacent thereto,
to obtain information upon their physical features,
fauna, flora, and geological formation, &c.
ii. Commercial —The study of commercial geography, the
natural and artificial products, and the manufactures
of various countries, to promote commerce.
in. Educational —The dissemination of knowledge of physical,
commercial, and political geography among all classes,
by means of illustrated public lectures, and publica-
tions.
iv. Historical—The collection and publication of historical
records of geographical interest, and of memoirs of
notable men of Australasia.
v. The compilation, from reliable data, of the geography of
Australasia.
Very much of results attained, and of work accomplished by
some of the explorers named, yet remains unwritten. The deeds,
too, of others who, though not so prominent, have done good
service in the interests of geographical science, are still, to a
considerable extent, unrecorded. Thus many facts of value are
still unrescued. Great gaps, too, still appear upon the map of
Australia, showing regions as yet unexplored, showing work to be
done, and problems to be solved in our great island-continent.
Lying near to our northern coasts, is the, as yet little known, island
of New Guinea. Expeditions for the exploration of this “wonder-
land ” have been equipped and sent out under the auspices both
of the Royal Geographical Society of England, and also of the
Australasian section. Further attempts are immediately to be
made to traverse that island across the inland heights, from sea to
sea. A scheme for the further exploration of the Antarctic
regions is before the public. Such an expedition would doubtless
succeed in solving scientific problems of exceptional interest.


Australians realise that investigations into the mysteries of the
great Antarctic realms come rightly within the sphere of dwellers
beneath the southern cross, and by the great southern sea.
Mr. David Lindsay, explorer, has recently returned from a
journey into new country to the N.N.W. and N.W. of Adelaide.
He has made discoveries on the Finke and Macumba rivers, having
found the point of junction of these streams, northward of Lake
Eyre. The record of these is now passing through the press.
Mr. Charles Winnecke, equipped by Sir Thomas Elder, G.C.M.G.,
who had formerly accomplished good work in the mid-northern
wilds, has recently been out to the westward into new country.
Thus, gradually the unexplored regions arc becoming more and
more restricted in area. Lake Amadeus, to the north and west of
the Musgrave Ranges, in latitude 24° S., is still Undefined as to its
northern and western shores; nor is it known what waters, if any,
may flow into it in these directions. Yet farther to the north and
to the west of Powell’s Creek, lie large tracts of, so far, untraversed
country, being bordered to the north-westward by the now famous
Kimberly gold districts.
It is fitting here to give the honor due to Mr. G. W. Goyder,
F.R.G.S., Surveyor-General to South Australia, who did valuable
exploring work in N.E. North Australia, and who, for many years
has been the able chief of his department. His energy, and his
thorough knowledge of the country, have enabled him to further
for South Australia, more than any other man, the general interests
of geographical science.
The Royal Geographical Society of Australasia is very desirous
to become possessed of as much information as possible of geo-
graphical interest. Any records of early discovery upon these
coasts by American or other whalers, notes from logs of vessels
which visited these shores prior to European settlement; all such
information would be of highest value for preservation in the
annals of the society, in so far as they treat of discoveries made
upon these shores.
The aboriginal wanderers over our wide Australian wilds claim
and merit our attention. These dusky children of the soil will
soon have passed away, and we shall then find left with us but
meagre record of their race. Now, whilst they are with us, or
whilst we have in our midst men who long ago met them in their
primitive estate, is the time to rescue information which, if un-
rescued now, will prove lost for ever. The names of their tribes.


nomenclature of their country, the boundaries of their tribal
territories, their language, their customs respecting birth, man-
hood’s estate, marriage, hunting, and religious observance; their
traditions, superstitions, social distinctions, festivals, funeral rites,
burial, laws of marriage, property, war; modes of manufacture,
and use of clothing, canoes, utensils, nets, ropes, colors, ornaments,
weapons, barter, knowledge of astronomy. The opportunities to
rescue such information grow daily less. Only three representa-
tives of the once numerous and intelligent Adelaide tribe remain.
The Encounter Bay, and lower Murray River (Narinyerrie) tribes,
too, have well nigh passed away. Contact with the “ pale-face ”
has, as seems inevitable, “ civilized ” the aboriginal race off the
soil that once knew him.
The early struggles of pioneers and settlers are, to a considerable
extent unknown, because hitherto unwritten. The origin and
history of names of localities, with some sketch descriptive of
founders of interesting settlements, should all be gathered in before
the only persons who are cognizant of the facts pass away from us.
Should any visitor to our Jubilee Exhibition be in a position to
supply or to obtain items of historical interest, such would he
placed in permanent form in the “ Proceedings ” of the Society,
if sent to its honorary secretaries.
Educational.—The Society proposes to compile, publish, and
disseminate accurate information, upon Australian geography, by
means of maps and books of geography for use in schools, not
alone in our own country, but also in those of the old world, that
so may be imparted far more accurate ideas of what Australia
really is. For instance, wide stretches of country formerly shown
on maps of Australia, and spoken of in geographies as “ desert,”
are now in reality, feeding ground for countless herds of horses
and cattle, and for thousands of head of the producers of our
now world-renowned “ golden fleece.” Other lands here once
termed “desert” will, ere long, be rich in the yield of the olive,
vine, mulberry, orange, almond, apricot, fig, and other fruits and
growths, destined for the tables of our brothers and cousins in the
far away homes of “old England.” People dwelling in that “old
home” have yet much to learn of the Australia under the southern
cross; this Society is engaged in the work of diffusing this infor-
mation.
In addition to the Royal Geographical Society, the local
institution has interchange of publications with the societies of


France, Germany, Italy, Scotland, America, Mexico, Japan, and
others. There are some 400 members of the Society in Australia,
ninety of these in the South Australian branch. The Society’s
rooms in Adelaide are at No. 27, Waymouth-street; in Melbourne,
Victoria, at No. 15, Market Buildings, Collins-street west; also
branches at Sydney, New South Wales; and Brisbane, Queens-
land. The honorary secretaries will be glad to give or to receive
information of geographical interest.
Volumes of the Society’s “Proceedings,” published annually,
may be had at the Government Printing Office, Adelaide.


THE RAILWAYS.
Great facilities for intercommunication by means of railways
exist to and from all the principal centres and ports of the colony,
and to a distance of 442 miles from Adelaide to the interior; in
addition to which 207 miles are under construction towards the
centre of the continent. Further lines are still in contemplation,
and it is hoped that, in comparatively a few years, a railway will
extend across Australia from south to north, from Adelaide to
Port Darwin. With the latter aim in view, already 146 miles are
in course of construction from Palmerston on the north coast, SO 1
as to meet the southern section on its extension northwards, and
thus form an iron road from the Southern Ocean to the Gulf of
Carpentaria.
The last portion of line opened in this colony has placed
Adelaide in direct railway communication with Melbourne and
Sydney, and, with the exception of crossing the Hawkesbury river,
a bridge over which will be completed in two years ; on the com-
pletion of two short lines, one from Sydney to Newcastle, and the
other from Tenterfield to Wallangarra, lines will connect the
capitals of four of the principal Australian colonies, South Aus-
tralia, Victoria, New South Wales, and Queensland, which will
enable travellers to any or either of the latter colonies to cut short
their sea passage by landing at Adelaide, and completing their
journey by rail.
The summary of the railway returns for the year is as follows: —
On the 30th June, 1886, there were 1,211 miles of railway open
for traffic, of which 487 were on the sft. Sin. gauge, and 724 on the
3ft. 6in. gauge. Owing to the exceptionally depressed condition
of the colony for the last few years, because of drought, the traffic
returns for the last year are very low. The total tonnage of goods
conveyed was 742,942 tons. The total number of passengers con-
veyed was 3,961.650, composed of 685,940 first-class, 1,852,066
second-class, and 1,423,644 third-class; the third-class passengers
were on the Port line only. Of the whole number of passengers,
IP3I per cent, were first-class, 46’75 per cent, second-class, and
35 - 94 per cent, third-class. The earnings per train mile were 67‘52


pence, and the cost per train mile 45-57 pence. The earnings from
the railways amounted to £549,092, and the working expenses to
£370,654 75., or 67-50 per cent, of the revenue. The net profit
was £178,438, equal to 2*37 per cent, on the capital invested in
lines open for traffic, which is £7,533,500.
MAIN
ROADS
June,
Length of Main Roads in South
Australia.
District.
Unmade.
1,103*
•Central
Midland
North Midland
Northern ...,
Flinders .
Peninsula
Yictoria .
Albert ...
2,120
4,127*
Roads.
Approximate Amount
Expended
Main
£ s. d.
4,038,267 9 5
54,010 0 0
From January, 1852, to June 30th, 1886
To June 30th, 1887
£4,092,277 9 5
Prior to 1852 the records are not reliable, as the separate
expenditure on roads cannot be traced.


MARINE DEPARTMENT.
The Port Adelaide river or creek was discovered in 1836, when
"Colonel Light was Surveyor-General, and was first navigated by
by Lieutenant Pullen, who declared it to be the natural harbor for
the City of Adelaide.
In the earliest days of the colony, masters of vessles used to send
their boats ahead to ascertain the depth of water on the bar before
venturing to cross. About 1843 pilots were appointed, and an
efficient service has since been maintained at Port Adelaide, the
only port in the colony where pilotage is compulsory. Masters of
intercolonial owned vessels may however become exempt.
Before any money was expended on deepening operations, the
depth of water on the outer and inner bars was about 84ft. at low
water, and vessels therefore had to wait until spring tides, and
lighter before being able to cross the bar. Even then they often
took one tide to cross the outer bar, and then had to anchor until
the next tide, before crossing the inner bar.
Although the earliest expenditure for improving the Port
Adelaide creek was in 1849, the plant at the disposal of the
authorities was very limited and primitive, and little improvement
was actually effected up to 1876, as compared with what has been
done since. The total quantity of silt raised in 27 years, to the
end of 1876, was 1,154,576 cubic yards, whereas the quantity
raised in the following ten years, to the end of 1886, was 3,393,656
cubic yards, making a total of 4,548,232 cubic yards.
At the present date, there arc three first class dredgers con-
stantly at work improving the Port Adelaide river and harbor.
■The total amount provided to the end of 1886 was £743,106, and
die estimated value of the plant is about £240,000, including the
plant employed at the various outports and charged to the Port
Adelaide deepening loan.
brom the harbor to the outer bar is about nine miles, and the
whole of this distance, with the exception of about \\ miles in
Bight’s passage, has been deepened.
At the outer and inner bars a depth of about ll]ft. has been
entirely removed, and in some parts of the harbor, where it was


formerly dry, there is now a, depth of 22ft. at low water. The
channel from the harbor to the anchorage is 250 ft. wide, with 20ft.
at low watei’, or 28ft. at high water, with the exception of a small
portion which has 18ft at low water and 20ft at high water. Ihis<
is however now' being deepened by the dredgers, and will be com-
pleted before the end of the present year. The channel is well
lighted with thirteen beacons, so that steamers, &c., can go up or
down at any time, night or day.
A self-registering tide gauge is erected at the dockyard which
records the height of the water at any hour night or day, and
returns are published for the information and guidance of peisons-
nterested; the highest tide know r n at Port Adelaide rose 12ft.
above low' w r ater datum. This would give 32ft. of water in the
present channel.
About thirty ocean cargo steamers came alongside the wharves
in the harbor during 1886, the largest being the s.s. Hankow, 2,332
tons register and 389 ft. long. The deepest draught was for the s.s.
Hubhuck drawing 21ft. 6in., and the largest cargo taken out in any
one vessel Avas 4,240 tons, shipped by the s.s. Port Pine, AA’hich
Avas in the Port five days.
Most of the ocean-going passenger steamers Avhich trade Avith.
Australia call at Port Adelaide, but do not come up the river; they
find convenient and safe anchorage at what is knoAvn as the Sema-
phore, which is connected Avith Adelaide by rail. Mails for all
the colonies except Western Australia are landed there, and
forwarded by train to Melbourne.
The total length of Avharfage accommodation in Port Adelaide is
13,626 ft., or 2£ miles, and of this the Government OAvn 3,438 ft.
Railway lines, Avater, and gas are laid along nearly all the wharves,,
and the depth of water alongside A’aries from 16ft. to 24ft. at loav
w'ater.
Cranes capable of lifting 25 tons, and patent slips Avhich can
accommodate A’essels from 400 to 1,500 tons register, haA'e been
provided, and a dry dock of sufficient size to take in some of the
largest ocean steamers is being constructed by private enterprise.
Thirty lighthouses have been erected, six first order, tAvo second
order, three third order, and the remainder from fourth to sixth
order. The total cost of these was about £155,000. Kerosine is-
consumed in nearly all the lighthouses, and about 11,000 gallons a
year are used. The cost of maintaining the lights is about £8,500’
per annum.


Some of the lighthouses are connected by cable or telegraph,
and several signal stations have been established from which
passing vessels may communicate with Adelaide, and thence with
nearly all parts of the world.
The total number of wharves and jetties provided by the
Government for different parts of the colony, including the
Northern Territory, is 67, the longest being 5,530 ft., and another, a
screw-pile structure 4,000 ft. long. The total cost of these wharves
and jetties was about £600,000.
There are three lifeboat stations, and nine stations supplied with
rocket apparatus for saving life.
Between 4,000 and 5,000 seamen are shipped and discharged
every year in this port alone, where a Sailors’ Home has for several
years provided for the accommodation of mariners.
The shipping of the colony in 1885, exclusive of the coast trade,
was 1,072 ships of 893,092 tons register inwards, and 1,091 ships
of 913,950 tons outwards, or a total of 2,163 vessels and 1,807,042
tons register.
Port Pirie, near the head of Spencer Gulf, is the principal port in
South Australia for the export of wheat. At present vessels draw-
ing 18ft. to 19ft. can go down the river at high water spring tides,
the highest tide registered in 1886 having been 24ft. at high water.
The creek is lighted up with beacons, so that vessels can go in
or out at any time, and wharves are provided.
Port Augusta is situated at the extreme head of Spencer Gulf,
and is the principal port for the export of wool from the interior of
South Australia, and parts of Queensland.
Deepening operations were commenced in 1881. The total sum
provided is £51,228, which has been spent, and 745,399 cubic
yards of silt have been raised. Before deepening operations were
commenced there was only lift, of water in the shoalest place.
There is now a-channel nowhere less than 150 ft. wide, with 18ft.
at low water right up to the wharf.
A new Government wharf, about 1,200 ft. long, with 22ft. at low
water, has been constructed. There are other jetties, some of
which have 14ft. at low water alongside.
The channel to the harbor is well marked with buoys and
beacons, and the harbor itself is perfectly safe and commodious,
and has a depth of 20ft. to 29ft. at low water.
Other principal ports of export are Glenelg, Kingston, Wallaroo,
Port Mac Donnell, Port Victor, Port Beaehport, Port Victoria, and
Port Germein.


MUNICIPAL INSTITUTIONS.
By the Imperial Act of William IV. creating South Australia-
into a British province, provision was made for the establishment
of a municipality in the metropolitan city so soon as the population
numbered 2,000 souls. The first sale of city lands took place in
March, 1837, and, in little more than three years thereafter, the
first Colonial Municipal Act was passed (August, 1840), providing
for the election of a common council of nineteen members for the
City of Adelaide.
The elections to fill the municipal offices took place on the 31st
October, 1840, the first mayor being the late Sir James Hurtle
Fisher. Adelaide has the proud reflection of being the parent of
municipal institutions in the Australasian colonies. The first city
assessment was estimated at £BO,OOO, and the rate declared, at
fourpence in the £, produced only £1,333 6s. Bd.
The limits within which this paper is to be confined precludes
the possibility of giving an historical retrospect of the exception-
ally interesting events which have led to the building up of so-
beautiful a city as now offers itself at this jubilee time for the
admiration of visitors to the International Exhibition now being-
held within its boundaries. The sales of city lands in 1837
yielded a sum of less than £4,000 ; the estimated value of real
property in 1887, fifty years after the foundation of the city,,
amounts to £11,000,000. Land which in 1837 sold at the rate of
three farthings a foot frontage to a main street, by a depth of
210 ft., is now worth from £4OO to £5OO a foot in the same street
and for the same blocks, but only for half the depth.
In 1837 there were only fifty-one streets in the city, none less
than 66ft. wide, some 100 ft. wide, and others 132 ft. wide; there
are now (1887) 270 streets, measuring in length a little over eighty
miles. All these streets are macadamised, the watertables paved,
and the footpaths kerbed. The footpaths in the principal streets*
vary in width from 10ft. to 20ft., some of them being flagged with
marble, whilst those in the narrower streets are not less than 4ft.
wide. Thirty-two roadways, measuring thirteen miles in length y
cross the park lands in all directions, supplying means of com-


munication with the suburbs and the country districts ; whilst, for
the greater convenience of pedestrians, there are no less than sixty
well-made footpaths, twenty-six miles long in the whole, crossing
and recrossing all parts of these beautiful parks.
The municipal government of the city is vested in a mayor, six
aldermen, and twelve councillors. The elections are held on the
Ist December in each year, when the mayor and two aldermen
retire, and their successors are elected by the whole body of the
ratepayers. There are six wards, each represented by two coun-
cillors, one of whom retires on the same date as aboA’e, and his
successor is elected by the ratepayers of the ward; thus there are
always nine candidates to be elected for the council, viz., mayor,
two aldermen, and six councillors. The swearing in of the newly
elected candidates generally takes place on the 2nd December,
At the present time the annual valuation of real property
for ratable purposes amounts to £520,000 ; but, in consequence of
the depressed times, the council have reduced the total value by
35 per cent., and rates are now collected on the reduced amount.
These are as follows: —A city rate for general purposes of Is, in
the £, a health rate of If-d. in the £, a lighting rate for street
lamps of 4d. in the £, and a park lands rate of fd. in the £, making
a total rate of Is. 6Ad. in the £ for civic purposes. There are,
however, other rates collected by the Government, in payment of
water and drainage works, of Is. and Bd. in the £ respectively.
In addition to the income from rates, the City Council has extra-
neous sources of income, which vary with the times in prosperity
or depression, from £13,000 to £16,000 a year, out of which the
salaries of the officers, interest on bonded debt, and various other
accounts are paid. The bonded debt of the corporation at the
present time is less than £BO,OOO, whilst the value of the real pro-
perty belonging to the corporation is £250,000.
The Corporation has provided for the public convenience three
massive iron girder bridges over the Torrens at a cost of about
£32,000. A weir has been erected across the Torrens at a cost of
£15,000, which impounds the waters and provides a lake varying
in width from 100 ft. to 500 ft.; in depth, from 20ft. to 2ft.; and in
length two miles, which is much availed of for aquatic sports. The
whole of the park lands under the control of the Corporation,
equalling about 1,750 acres, have been planted and fenced under
the direction of the City Council; nearly every tree and shrub on
these extensive and charming healthful resorts has been put in at


the expense of the Corporation since 1855. Over the weir an iron
lattice girder bridge has been erected, from which a capital view
of the beautiful lake can be obtained.
The city is well lit with gas at a cost of about £6,000 a year ;
furnished with an abundant and constant supply of water; and
with a system of underground drainage which renders it the most
delightful place of residence in Australia. The present condition
of the city of Adelaide reflects the highest credit on the ability
and enterprise of the civic authorities, and also exhibits in a
marked degree the readiness with which the citizens have subscribed
the necessary funds for carrying out the requisite public works.
In addition to the municipal institutions of the city, there are
thirty other municipal corporations, incorporated as follows :
Kensington and Norwood in 1853 ; Port Adelaide, also Glenelg,
1855 ; Gawler, 1857 ; Brighton, 1858 ; Kapunda, 1865 ; Strath-
albyn, 1868 ; Unley, 1871 ; Goolwa, Moonta, and Kadina, 1872 ;
Hindmarsh, Wallaroo, and Port Augusta, 1874 ; Mount Gambier,
Port Pirie, Burra, and Clare, 1876 ; Jamestown, 1876 ; Yorketown,
1879 ; Port Wakefield, 1881 ; Edithburgh and Laura, 1882 ; Quorn,
Gladstone, St. Peters, Thebarton, Semaphore, and Maitland, 1883 ;
and Petersburg, 1886, The population included in these muni-
cipal corporations equals more than one-third that of the whole
colony, being 105,000. The annual value of ratable property
within their bounds amounts to £1,005,440, and the gross value to
£20,100,000; their total bonded debt does not exceed £160,000,
whilst the value of their real estate amounts to double that sum,
or £325,000, and their annual income to £120,600 for 1886. The
number of gentlemen comprised in these municipal councils is 238.
The Municipal Cox-porations have established a Municipal Asso-
ciation “ whose objects are to watch over and protect the interests,
“ rights, and privileges of Municipal Cox-porations; to take action
“ in the relation to any subject affecting Municipal bodies or Muni-
“ cipal legislation ; and to promote the efficient carrying out of
“ Municipal Government throughoxxt the colony.” The governing
body of the Association comprises a President, Vice-President,
Treasurer, and Seci’etary, with Executive Council.
The subscription is £5 ss. per year. The Executive Council
meets once a quarter, or oftener, on the summons of the Presi-
dent, if the exigencies of business require their attention. To
the ability, watchfulness, and forethought of this body is to be
attributed the enlarged powers alx-eady obtained by Municipal


Corporations, and the greater attention which is given to their
representations to Parliament or Government on matters affecting
their powers or responsibilities.
Besides Municipal Corporations there are other local governing
bodies designated districts, of which there are 121 in the colony,
governed by district councils. Each council elects from its own
body its chairman at the first meeting after the annual elections,
and the powers granted to these councils are somewhat analogous
to those of Municipal Corporations. This form of local govern-
ment was introduced by Governor Sir Henry E. F. Young in 1853.
They have charge of all the roads (not being main roads) within
their respective districts, and all other public matters of a kindred
nature. Power is given to levy rates up to one shilling in the £.
These local bodies have, in the aggregate, supervision over an area
equal to 9,826 square miles of country, their population numbering
124,112 (census i 881), their total incomes amounting for 1884-5
to £99,343. The annual assessment of property is set down for
the whole at £1,105,414 for the same period, representing a gross
value of £22,108,000. The number of members in the several
councils make a total of 614, the average number for each council
being about five. Under the term'of “District Chairmen’s As-
sociation ” representatives from the councils meet at some central
point at stated periods during the year for the consideration of
matters affecting their rights and powers, and for the arrangement
of conjoint action whenever it may be deemed necessary, in a
similar manner to that of the Municipal Association.
There are three drainage districts, governed by drainage boards
consisting of five members each, with powers somewhat similar to
those of district councils in respect to assessments and rating.
These are located in the south-eastern part of the colony, where
their efforts have won from the swamps large tracts of valuable
land suitable for agricultural purposes. These three boards have
an area of country under their administration equal to 229 square
miles, and their revenue for 1885-6 equalled £4,318. These boards
have the care, control, and management of all district drains, and
all drainage works within their respective districts, and under their
directions all such drains are cleansed, repaired, and maintained in
a state of efficiency at the expense of the Boards.
Under the control of the Hon. the Commissioner of Public
Works are other quasi municipal bodies entitled, “ Boad Boards,”
of whom there are eight, having control over 4,131 miles of main


roads, the expenditure on which during 1885 amounted to>
£181,306. Road Boards are supplied with funds by Parliament
(not having power to levy rates for road purposes). These roads-
branch out in all directions from the City and illustrate in a strik-
ing degree the excellent principles on which the roads are made,,
as well as the watchfulness and care exercised by these Boards-
in the proper and due discharge of their onerous duties.
Too much praise cannot be awarded to the unpaid representa-
tives of the people in these various local governing bodies, who r
whilst exercising the strictest economy in the expenditure of the
funds under their control, yet give such splendid results as the
efforts of their forethought and attention.
PUBLIC LIBRARY.
The Public Library contains at the present time about 24,000
volumes; in which the Proceedings and Transactions of Societies,
and scientific and literary periodicals of a high class, are well
represented. It is so far mainly an English Library, although it
includes to a moderate extent the literatures of other languages,,
ancient and modern. It is open to the public on week days from
10 a.m. to 9 p.m., and on Sundays from 2 to 6 p.m.
Readers have free access to the bookshelves, the collection of
bound newspapers being the only part of the Library which is
placed under any restriction. During the year ending June 30th,.
1887, the number of readers was 80,447.
READING ROOM.
There is a public reading-room in the Institute building, which,
is distinct from the Public Library though under the same manage-
ment. It contains English and Colonial newspapers, most of the-
leading English periodicals, and a few American and French ones-.
It is open from 930 a.m. to 9-30 p.m. There are no means of
registering the attendance, but there is little doubt that it is larger
than that in any other department of the institution.


MUSEUM.
The Museum is open on week-days from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. in
summer, and 5 p.m. in winter. The number of visitors during the
year ending June 30th, 1887, was 71,298.
The principal departments of the Museum are mammals, birds,
and reptiles mounted, and birdskins unmounted, articulated skele-
tons, spirit preparations ; also reptiles and fishes in spirit, fossils,
minerals, and shells. The minerals are properly arranged and
labelled ; the shells are now in course of arrangement.
Unfortunately the space appropriated to the Museum is very-
limited ; it is consequently so crowded that classification is impos-
sible except as regards the minerals and shells.
ART GALLERY.
The Art Gallery is open from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. in summer, and
4 p.m. in winter. It contains 54 oil paintings. 1 water-colour
drawing, 4 marble statues or busts, and 4 casts. The number of
visitors for the year ending June 30th, 1887, was 63,856.
INSTITUTES.
The number of urban, suburban, and country institutes affiliated
to the Public Library is 136.
Boxes of English and German books are circulated among them
these are sent out from the Public Library, and the circulation is
managed by its officers, but the books are not taken from the
Public Library—they are a distinct collection.
The principal statistics of the Institutes for the year ending June-
30th, 1886, were as follows :
Volumes in libraries, 114 institutes, 107,303; members, 114
institutes, 5,876; volumes circulated, 114 institutes, 182,565 ;
incomes, inclusive of Government grants, 114 institutes. £10,664
14s. lOd.


SCHOOLS OF PAINTING AND DESIGN.
These schools are held under authority of the Board of Governors
■of the Public Library, Museum, and Art Gallery. The School of
Painting, under Mr. L. Tannert, formerly of Dresden and Dussel-
dorf, contains forty-five students, who are receiving an artistic
education in joainling from nature, antique, and life. The School of
Design, under Mr. H. P. Gill, of South Kensington, assisted by Mr.
G. A. Reynolds, late of Birmingham, numbers about 150 students.
The studies embrace a geometric foundation, and are carried on
through the various grades of drawing, and include decorative
painting, drawing from the antique and the life; all the work is
done with a view that the students shall use their studies as a means
to the working out of original and artistic designs. In the evening
there are large artisan classes who receive an education in practical
drawing, classes in machine and building construction, under Mr.
R. A. White and Mr. J. G. Beaver, and a small class in practical
pottery, under Mr. G. Bosley, to instruct artisans in throwing and
turning upon the wheel. Experiments are being made in burning
glazed and colored pottery prior to the erection at the schools of a
pottery kiln.
Examinations are periodically held in art, and certificates of the
first and second grades are granted to successful candidates. State
school training teachers are instructed at this school, and are
certificated as competent to teach drawing in the State schools.
ROYAL SOCIETY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
The Royal Society of South Australia is affiliated with the
Public Library, Museum, and Art Gallery of South Australia.
The objects of the society are, the diffusion and advancement of
the arts and sciences by the meeting together of the members for
the reading and discussion of papers connected with the above
subjects, and by other approved means.
The society consists of fellows (117), honorary members (11),
corresponding members (14), and associates (2).
The management of the society is conducted by a council, con-
sisting of a president, two vice-presidents, a treasurer, a secretary,
and six other members.


Endowments.
£
Sir W. W. Hughes
20,000
Sir T. Elder
20,000
Sir T. Elder
10,000
Mr. J. H. Angas
6,000
Gosse Fund
800
Stow Prizes
500
J. II. Clark Scholarship
500
*Sir T. Elder
1,000
* Australian Literary Societies Union
220
£50,020
THE UNIVERSITY.
The University of Adelaide dates from the year 1872, when Sir
Walter Watson Hughes, of Torrens Park, invested in trustees
the sum of £20,000 to found an University. This magnificent
donation was further increased, in the year 1874, by Sir Thomas
Elder, of Rirksgate, who gave a like sum of £20,000 without
conditions. Subsequently the Hon. J. H. Angas presented the
University with a sum of £6,000, to found a Chair of Chemistry,
and Sir Thomas Elder paid over to the University a sum of
£lO,OOO, to assist in forming a Medical School.
A Chair of Music was founded for five years, by subscription by
prominent citizens, amounting to £530 a year, and to this fund
Sir Thomas Elder subscribes £3OO annually.
The John Howard Clark Scholarships, £3O a year each, tenable
for two years, eligible for those students who have completed the
first year of their course of 8.A., were established in 1882; the
Commercial Travellers'Association Scholarship in 1879; and the
Stow Prizes of £45 in 1883.
Mr. John Howard Angas established the Angas Engineering.
Scholarship of the value of £2OO a year, tenable for three years.
The number of undergraduates in the various courses for the
session of 1886 was 108, and of non-graduating students, 89.
Facilities exist for the courses of law, medicine, science, arts
and music, and evening classes have been established in English
literature, mineralogy, French, and German. The professors of
Greek, mathematics, geology, and Latin also conduct evening
classes for the benefit of students.
On this amount of £59,020 Government pay 5 per cent, annually, hy Act of:
Parliament, which amounts to £2,951. The Government have also endowed
the University with 50,005 acres of land.
* Evening,


PUBLIC EDUCATION.
In the early days of the colony a school was built on North-
terrace, and a teacher appointed to conduct it on the principles
of the British and Foreign School Society. Beyond this little was
done until 1847, when Ordinance No. 11 was passed, under which
a capitation grant was paid to schools established by private
persons.,. This was repealed by Act No. 20 of 1851, which came
into operation on May Ist, 1852.
Its aim was to introduce and maintain good secular instruction
based on the Christian religion, apart from all theological and
controversial differences. The system was under the control of a
Central Board of Education, consisting of seven members ap-
pointed by the Governor.,
The Board granted licences to teachers, and salaries ranging
from £4O to £lOO per annum. An inspector of schools was
appointed, and District Councils were authorised to visit schools
and report thereon to the Central Board. Schoolhouses were
built by local subscriptions, subsidised by the Government to the
extent of £2OO.
It having been found that the requirements of the colony were
not met by the system, a fresh Education Act was passed in the
year 1875, during the premiership of Mr. (now Mr. Justice)
Boucaut. By this the management was entrusted to a Council of
Education, with a salaried president; but the arrangement did
not work satisfactorily, and an Amending Act, passed in 1878,
transferred the responsibility to a Minister of the Crown.
The principal features of the system now in force are as
follows :—Education is secular (with permissive Bible-reading
before morning school) and compulsory; fees are charged when
the parents are in a position to pay them, but are remitted in
other cases; buildings are erected by the State when there is
satisfactory proof of a permanent average attendance of not less
than twenty; when erected they are cared for by local Boards
of Advice appointed by the Governor, and attendance is enforced
by the same bodies ; grants of land are annually made os educa-
tional endowments.


The regulations made by the Minister Controlling Education
begin as follows The object of the education system is to
“ develop the intellectual and moral faculties of the children. It is
“ not sufficient merely to give instruction, but the aim of every
“ teacher should be to train his pupils in habits of cleanliness,
“ industry, punctuality, obedience, truthfulness, honesty and con-
“ sideration for others. The discipline of each school should be
“based on the strictest justice in the relations between master and
“ scholars, as well as between scholars themselves; and all teachers
“ should remember that their own example exerts the most power-
“ ful influence in moulding the characters of their pupils.”
The general management under the Minister is entrusted to the
Inspector-General of Schools, who is assisted by a staff of six
inspectors. These gentlemen visit the schools twice a year, making
a careful examination into their general condition and the progress
of the individual pupils. A small portion of the salaries of
teachers depends upon the results of the examination, but this
amount does not exceed £24 per annum for men and £l6 for
women.
The schools are of two kinds—public and provisional. The
former have an average attendance of twenty or more, and are in
charge of certificated teachers. Provisional schools are to be found
as a rule in the thinly-populated districts, and are taught by
uncertificated persons —principally young women. In 1876 there
were in all 281 schools, with 25,889 individual scholars on the books,
and an average daily attendance of 13,622 ; ten years after (1886)
there were 504 schools, 44,405 children under instruction, and
exactly 28,000 in average daily attendance.
The curriculum includes reading, writing, spelling, arithmetic
(mental and slate), geography, grammar, composition, English
history, drill, and (for girls only) needlework. In the year 1885
an amended programme of instruction was issued, with the object
of bringing the work more into harmony with the results of modern
thought on education ; but space is too limited to enter into detail,
and those who are interested in the question may be referred to the
Education llegulations themselves. The department has found it
necessary to prepare in the colony some of the maps, diagrams, and
books required in the schools, and specimens of the work may be
seen in the Exhibition.
The teachers are trained for their work at a central institution in
Adelaide. About 380 persons have passed through this college


since its foundation. Students have generally shown by sound and!
careful teaching that they have profited by their advantages.
The salaries of the teachers employed in public schools (including
fees), vary from £llO to £450, in the case of men, and from £7O
to £250 for women. Provisional teachers receive from £6O to £ 100 1
per annum, including fees as above. Six weeks’ holiday are
allowed during the year. In reference to the discipline of the
schools it may be stated that corporal punishment is discouraged,
and may not be used at all to girls except under special authority.
By a system of exhibitions and scholarships the way is opened
for deserving pupils to pass from the primary to secondary schools,
and thence to the University. Six exhibitions arc annually offered
for competition among the pupils of the Government schools : they
are tenable for three years, and are of the value of £2O per annum
for those who attend the secondary schools as day boys, and £4O in
the case of boarders. Besides these, three University scholarships
are open yearly. The successful candidates receive £SO annually
for three years if they become students at the University of
Adelaide and pass their examinations satisfactorily.
Since the passing of the present Act 234 school buildings have
been erected, at a cost of £378,906 14s. The expenditure, from
the general revenue during 1886 was £90,767 11s. sd. on primary,
and £1,496 6s. 7d. on secondary education ; these amounts represent
the net cost to the country, fees paid into the Treasury being
deducted from the gross expenditure. Besides this, £4,341 6s. 4d.,
was spent on buildings. From the rent of dedicated lands (endow-
ment), £13,014 2s. Bd. was received ; altogether, 320,120 acres of
Crown lands have been set apart.
Some attention is being given to industrial (technical) education.
A Board is at present making careful inquiry into the question. In
one part of the country (Wallaroo) school savings banks have
recently been established by the Board of Advice, They have
already met with considerable success.


NEWSPAPERS.
The newspaper press may fairly claim to be the oldest insti-
tution connected with South Australia, as its establishment pre-
ceded the actual settlement of the colony. The first number of
the South Australian Gazette and Colonial Register , now pub-
lished daily as the South Australian Register, was issued in
London by Messrs. Robert Thomas and George Stevenson on
June, 18th, 1836, prior to the departure of those gentlemen for
the new colony, where they published the second number on June
3rd, 1837. The Register has, therefore, a record of fifty-one
years’ continuous publication, and a history of half a century as
a purely colonial paper. It has been a daily paper since 1850.
The early days of the colony witnessed numerous literary births
and deaths. Next to the Register the oldest paper existing in
the colony is the Adelaide Observer, which was established in 1843
by Mr. John Stephens, and soon after associated with the Register,
since which time the two papers have been conducted by the
same proprietary. The South Australian Advertiser was estab-
lished as a daily paper by the late Hon. J. H. Barrow nearly
thirty years ago, and it has had associated with it the South
Australian Chronicle as a weekly paper. These papers were
originally owned by a company. They passed into the possession
of Messrs. Barrow & King, and arc now the property of Messrs.
Burden & Bonython. In connection with these papers, in the year
1863, an evening paper was established, which was named the
Express. At this time there was another evening paper in exis-
tence, named the Telegraph, which became amalgamated with the
Express , the latter being called the Express and Telegraph. Sub-
sequently an evening paper was issued from the office of the
Register, named the Evening Journal.
Among the newspapers which had a brief history on the colonial
stage were the Southern Australian, the Guardian, the Chronicle,
the Adelaide Free Press, the Port Lincoln Herald, the Adelaide-
Independent, Examiner, Southern Cross, Monthly Times, Mining
Journal, and others.
The place of Punch is filled in Adelaide by a weekly journal


illustrated by lithography and entitled the Lantern ; the German
population have their Ausfralische Zeituny ; the interests of the
farmers and gardeners, which are also attended to by the weekly
papers, are looked after by the Garden and Field; the Sentinel
pays special attention to sporting matters and the needs of the
licensed victuallers ; the Christian Colonist, the Christian Weekly,
and several denominational organs devote their space to religious
news; the Pictorial Australian appears monthly, with illustrations
of current events; and the more important country towns are
served by their own special papers appearing weekly or bi-
weekly.


The business in 1840 was as follows : —
Number of letters
41,103
Number of newspapers
5l'l01
Eevenue
£232 4s. 5d.
POST OFFICE AND TELEGRAPH.
Post Office.
The Post Office and Telegraph Departments in South Australia
were amalgamated in 1870, when Mr. Charles Todd was appointed
Postmaster-General, in addition to his appointments as Superin-
tendent of Telegraphs and Government Astronomer. A brief
sketch of the history of these Departments may not be without
interest, as showing the progress of the colony from its foundation
in 1836 up to the present year, which celebrates its jubilee.
On the first establishment of the colony, Mr. Thomas Gilbert,
the Colonial Storekeeper, Avas appointed Postmaster, at a salary of
£3O a year. The business of the Department was, of course,
conducted in a very primitive way; there was no palatial Post
Office, but Mr. Gilbert deceived the mails at his residence on the
Torrens, under Montefiore Hill, where they were sorted and
delivered, one penny a letter being charged on all letters received
and dispatched. This continued until December, 1838, when it
was considered necessary to appoint a Postmaster-General (Mr.
Henry Watts), with the large staff of one clerk, who also acted as
a letter-carrier and messenger. A Post Office Act was passed in
the following year, which fixed an inland rate of 3d. on every
letter or packet, irrespective of weight or size, but on ship letters
only Id. was charged, to cover gratuity to ships. A post office
was opened at Port Adelaide, with a daily mail to and from the
city. A fortnightly mail, carried by the mounted police, was
established with Willunga and Encounter Bay, where post offices
were opened, as well as at Port Lincoln.
Mr. Henry Watts resigned in 1841, and Captain Watts was
appointed his successor, in which year there were six post offices,
viz.:—Adelaide, Port Adelaide, Port Lincoln, Morphett Vale,
Willunga, and Encounter Bay.
The first ocean mail service with England by steamers was estab-
lished in 1852, and a contract with the Peninsula and Oriental Co.


was entered into by the Imperial Government for a mail every two
months, via Singapore, in 1853. This service had, however, to be
discontinued during the Crimean war, and steam communication
was not re-established until 1857; and then, owing to the failure
of the company (European and Australian), not continuously, until
the P. & O. Co., under a new contract, commenced a monthly
service via Mauritius in 1859, the route being altered to Galle in
the following year. The mail steamers then did not call at
Adelaide v but passed on to Melbourne direct, and South Australia
had to maintain, at her own cost, a branch service to King George’s
Sound until February, 1874, since which date the P. and O.
steamers have called at Glenelg. The colony spent, during those
thirteen years (1861-74), no less than £191,471 on this branch
service.
Postage stamps were introduced in 1855, the denominations
being Id., 2d., and 6d.; and prepayment of postage by means of
stamps was made compulsory. Since the Stamp Duties Act, passed
in 1886, came into operation at the commencement of this year,
adhesive postage and revenue stamps, as they are now called, have
been used indiscriminately for payment of postage and stamp
duties, and new stamps have been issued up to £2O. Thus, there
are in use at the present time stamps of the values following:—
half-penny, penny, twopenny, threepenny, fourpenny, sixpenny,
eightpenny, ninepenny, one shilling, two shillings, two shillings
and sixpence, five shillings, ten shillings, fifteen shillings, one
pound, two pounds, two pounds ten shillings, three pounds, four
pounds, five pounds, ten pounds, fifteen pounds, twenty pounds,
besides two sizes of newspaper wrappers bearing the half-penny
impressed stamp.
The money order system was introduced on the Ist of January,
1859, when fifteen offices were opened, and the regulations
provided for telegraphic money orders, in accordance with a
recommendation previously made by the Superintendent of Tele-
graphs, Mr. Todd.
Continuing the history of the Department, it may be mentioned
that Captain Watts retired from the service on June 30th, 1861,
and was succeeded by Mr. J. W. Lewis, the Deputy Postmaster-
General, who held the position till the end of 1869, when the
Department was amalgamated with the Telegraph and Observatory
Departments.
It may be well to mention that a new Post Office Act was passed


in 1841, under which letters were charged according to distance,
up to a maximum of 2s. 6d., however weighty; and the postage
on newspapers was abolished. In 1845, the inland postage was
reduced to a uniform rate of 4d. per half-ounce, except between
Adelaide and the Port, or those posted in Adelaide for town
delivery, which were liable to only half rates. Later on, or in a
subsequent Act, a uniform inland rate of 2d. per half-ounce was
adopted; and in 1874 the postage to the other colonies was reduced
to the same rate. Act No. 214 of 1881, imposed a postage rate
of Jd. on each newspaper, but a concession was made by a subse-
quent Act, No. 374 of 1886, under which newspapers made up in
bundles, could be forwarded by the publishers, and recognised
newspaper vendors, at bulk rates of Id. per lb.
Post cards (Id.) were introduced on December Bth, 1876, and
reply cards (2d.) on March Ist, 1883.
The postal notes system came into operation at the beginning of
the present year, an Act for the purpose having been passed in
1886. They are of the,following value, viz.:—
Postal note Is. Od. .. fee
“ Is. 6d. .. “ jjd.
“ 2s. Od. ~ “ Id.
“ 2s. 6d. .. “ Id.
3s. Od. .. “ Id.
“ 3s. 6d. .. “ Id.
“ 4s. Od. “ Id.
Postal note 4s. 6d. .. fee Id.
“ os. Od. ~ “ 2d.
“ 7s. 6d. .. “ 2d.
“ 10s. Od. .. “ 3d.
“ 10s. 6d. .. “ 3d.
“ 15s. Od. .. “ 3d.
“ 20s. Od. .. “ 3d.
When in England, Mr. Todd arranged with the Imperial Post
Office for the exchange of a parcel post, which was brought into
of a parcel post, which was brought into
operation February, 1887, and has since been extended to some
other European countries and British colonies. The first parcel
post from England was, however, received in August, 1886.
The following statistical table will show the growth of the postal
service:
Length
of
Mail
Routes.
No. of
No, of
Newspapers.
Letters and
Packets.
Revenue.
Offices,
& s. d.
50,103
266,588
50,101
393,177
1,052,077
2,198,477
5,790,768
6,672,013
232 4 5
1840..,.
5,413 9 6
14,582 8 9
30,862 6 5
81,008 14 3
104,585 12 7
1850....
1860....
1,360,341
3,049,818
10,340,772
13,830,452
1870....
4,459
1880....
1886....


The following table will briefly
indicate the progress of the
money order branch, made up to the end
of 1886
Issued.
No. of
Offices.
Number.
Amount.
Number.
Amount.
£ s. d.
£ s. d.
1870.... 67
13,936
39,752
62,286
39,663 5 8
123,461 9 I
172,630 0 0
11,004
26,413
62,636
31,773 14 7
79,822 7 11
175,018 0 4
1880..,. 116
1886,... 167
With so large a territory, it will be readily understood that the
cost of the inland mail services is very great. In 1883 it amounted
to £49,404 17s. Bd., the miles travelled being 2,758,846, costing
4*lid. per running mile.
The foundation stone of the present General Post Office was
laid by H.R.H. the Duke of Edinburgh on November Ist, 1867,
It was completed in 1872, at a cost of £53,258 9s. 2d. The old
Post Office adjoining (built in 1851), was, until March, 1885, used
as a central police station, but the increasing business of the Post
Office has led to the premises being since occupied by the money
order and stamp printing branches, and also by the postal cashier.
Electric Telegraph.
The first electric telegraph in South Australia was a short line
between Adelaide and the Port, erected by Mr. James Macgeorge,
at the end of 1855.
Mr. Todd, who, at the instance of the Colonial Government, had
been appointed by Lord John Russell as Superintendent of Tele-
graphs, arrived in the colony in November of that year, with all
the necessary plant for telegraph lines to Port Adelaide and the
Semaphorp, and also to Gawler, the railways to the Port and
Gawler then being in course of construction. The telegraph to
the Port was opened in February, 1856, and to Gawler in the
following year. Telegraphic communication with Melbourne was
established in July, 1858, the length of the South Australian
section being nearly 300 miles, and the cost £19,403 9s. Od.
Stations in connection with this line were opened at Willunga,
Port Elliot, Goolwa, Robe, and Mount Gambier. Sydney was
connected via Melbourne in October, 1858, Brisbane in 1861, and,
in 1867, a direct line of communication with Sydney via Went-


worth was completed. In the meantime, the telegraph in South
Australia had been extended to Clare, Kooringa, Kadina, Wallaroo,
Moonta, Port Augusta, and other places; so that, at the end of
1869, there Avere 1,642 miles of wire erected, at a cost of £101,591
10s. 3d., and 63 stations.
South Australia’s great work in this direction was, however, the
construction of the overland telegraph to Port Darwin, a line of
nearly 2,000 miles long, carried through the very heart of Australia,
then almost, except what we knew from Stuart’s journals, a terra
incognita. The history of this line is so well known that, even if
space permitted, it is unnecessary to repeat it here. It was
authorised by Parliament in 1870, in order to meet the cable to be
laid from Singapore to Port Darwin by the British Australian
Telegraph Co. (now the Eastern Extension Telegraph Co.), was
commenced the same year, and, in the face of great difficulties,
was completed in August, 1872. Mr. Todd, at the time, was on
his way back to Adelaide from the north coast, personally superin-
tending the work and arranging the stations, and, at his camp near
Central Mount Stuart, with a small pocket telegraph instrument,
received and responded to the congratulations of the Governor,
the Government, and a large number of person this and the
neighboring colonies. The cable from Singapore had been laid in
November of the previous year, but communication through it was
interrupted in July following, and was not restored till October
21st, when, for the first time, the Australian colonies were elec-
trically connected with Great Britain, or, in a word, with the whole
civilised world. On the 15th of November, 1872, banquets Avere
held in London, Adelaide, and Sydney, to celebrate the event.
In the first instance Avooden poles had to be used, but these
have been almost entirely replaced by iron poles; and, up to the
present date, the expenditure on this great national undertaking
amounts to £492,439 12s. 7d., Avhich includes the cost of stations.
and the re-poling Avith iron poles.
The following table shows the length of the sea and land lines
connecting Australia with England:—
Miles.
Falmouth to Gibraltar, via Lisbon (sea) 1,250
Gibraltar to Malta (sea) 981
Malta to Alexandria (sea) 819
Alexandria to Suez (land line) 224
Suez to Aden (sea) 1,308
Aden to Bombay (sea) 1,664
Bombay to Madras (land) 600
Madras to Penang (sea) 1,213


Penang to Singapore (sea) 381
Singapore to Batavia (sea) 560
Batavia to Banjoewangi (land) 480
Banjoewangi to Port Darwin (sea) 970
Port Darwin to Adelaide, S.A. (land) 1,975
Total 12,425
Total length of cable 9,146
Total length of land lines .. 3,279
Total 12,425
We have the following stations
from Port Augusta :
on the line, commencing north
Distance from Adelaide.
Beltana 365
Farina 410
Strangways Springs 545
The Peake 636
Charlotte "Waters 804
Alice Springs 1,036
Barrow Creek 1,207
Tennant’s Creek 1,354
Powell’s Creek 1,467
Daly Waters 1,605
The Katherine 1,771
Yam Creek 1,848
Southport 1,934
Palmerston 1,975
The extension to Western Australia in 1876, completed the
chain of intercolonial telegraphs. The length of the South Aus-
tralian section, from Adelaide to Eucla, is 979 miles, or 759 miles
of entirely new line from Port Augusta, iron poles being used
throughout.
A submarine cable was laid from Normanville to Kingscote,
Kangaroo Island, 3834 knots, in January, 1876, connecting with
a land line 62 miles, to the lighthouse at Cape Borda, and later on
to Cape Willoughby. Cables have also been laid to connect the
lighthouses at Troubridge Shoal and Althorpe Island; and two
cables from the end of the Largs Bay jetty to a buoy in the road-
stead, by meafis of which the Orient and Messageries Maritimes
steamers are placed in direct telephonic communication with their
agents’ offices at Port Adelaide and Adelaide, a flexible’insulated
wire, joined to the heavier cable, being brought on board the
vessels, and then connected with a telephone.
The telephone system, which is entirely in the hands of the
Telegraph Department, under a special Act (No. 207, 1881), was
introduced in 1882; and telephone exchanges have been opened


Number of messages (colonial and intercolonial)
“ “ (international) ......
622,755
46,667
Total
£ s. d.
Receipts from colonial and intercolonial messages
“ “ international messages
38,367 2 9
29,764 4 7
Total receipts
£68,131 7 4
at Adelaide and the Port, besides several public telephone offices,
and a number of leased lines to private firms, and other persons.
There are now over 400 subscribers, and the length of telephone
wires in operation at the end of 1886 was miles. The total
length of telegraph and telephone lines was 5,459 J miles, or
10,310 J miles of wire, and the number of telegraph offices 200.
The business of the Department in 1886 was as follows;
Gross charges on international messages £256,526 19 6


THE OBSERVATORY.
The Observatory stands on the west park lands, and is in charge
of Mr. C. Todd, M.A., C.M.G., the Government Astronomer, who
has three assistants, viz.:—Mr. W. E. Cooke, 8.A., Assistant
Astronomer; Mr. R. F. Griffiths, Meteorological Assistant; Mr.
E. P. Sells, Junior Assistant.
The Observatory, which has recently been largely added to,
possesses a fine transit circle, made by Mr. Simms, of London, and
an Sin. equatorial by Cook &c Son, of York, besides some smaller
instruments. It is also fully equipped with complete sets of all
kinds of meteorological instruments, including barographs, thermo-
graphs, anemographs, plunometer, &c.
The transit circle has an object glass of 6in. clear aperture, with
a focal length of 85in.; it has two divided circles 30in. in diameter,
graduated to every 5' in arc, each circle being read off to fractions
of a second by means of four microscopes and pointer telescope
fixed on parallel carrying circles. The telescope is supported on
two iron piers resting on a compound system of bedplates, which
afford means of adjustment in level and azimuth; and the whole
rests on a solid granite and brick foundation. On the same foun-
dation are two collimating telescopes, one north and the other
south of the principal instrument, the axes of the three telescopes
being in the same meridianal plane. The observing room is 32ft.
by 22ft.
In conjunction with the Government Astronomers of Victoria
and New South Wales, and Captain Darwin, R.E., a determination
has recently been made of the difference of longitude between
Singapore, Banjoewangie, Port Darwin, Adelaide, Melbourne, and
Sydney, by exchanging telegraph time signals. The difference of
longitude between the Royal Observatory, Greenwich, and Singa-
pore, had previously been determined in sections in the same way,
so that the signals exchanged with Singapore gave the longitudes
of the several Australian observatories. The longitude of the
Adelaide Observatory was found to be 9h. 14m. 20‘305. E.; the
latitude is 34° 55' 33" S.
The time throughout the colony, or within the limits of the
telegraph system, is regulated by the Observatory, Adelaide time


being everywhere kept, although the difference of longitude be-
tween the west and east boundaries is from 129° to 141° east
longitudes, or 48 minutes in time. A time-ball at the Semaphore
is dropped at Ih. p.m. daily, except Sundays, by a voltaic current
from the Observatory.
The Observatory can be seen by visitors between the hours of
2 and 4 p.m., except on Saturday and Sunday; but in the evening
only by special permission of the Government Astronomer.
South Australia, including the Northern Territory, lies between
the parallels of 11° and 38° S.; it is therefore partly within and
partly without the tropics, and enjoys a great variety of climate.
On the north coast the year has two seasons —the dry, with S.E.
winds, from May to September —the wet, with a prevalence of
N.W. winds, frequent thunder storms and heavy rains, from
October to April. The N.W. monsoon rains penetrate into the
interior, but the amount rapidly diminishes as the coast is left.
Thus, taking the published observations in 1882, the mean annual
rainfall on the coast and inland at the stations on the overland
telegraph is as follows ;
Approximate
Latitude.
Station.
Inches.
Palmerston (Port Darwin)
62-523
12£° S.
13|° “
14° “
16i° “
18° “
19J° “
2U° “
23} 0 “
26° “
28° “
Yam Creek
48-768
Katherine River
Daly Waters
42-284
31-192
Powell’s Creek
19-729
Tennant’s Creek
17-615
Barrow’s Creek
15-354
Alice Springs ...
Charlotte Waters
12-830
6-493
Peake
5-548
Occasionally the monsoon, or tropical rains, extend well across the
continent, but in other years they may barely reach as far as the
Mac Donnell Ranges, and all south of that, down to Lake Torrens,
is subject to prolonged drought.
The winter rains on the south coast accompany barometric
depressions, or cyclonic disturbances, having almost uniformly a
progressive motion from w r est to east. These are heralded by
northerly or north-easterly winds and falling barometer on the
advancing or eastern quadrant of the disturbance; and as the first


indications of their approach are felt on the west coast, and they
take, as a rule, from thirty-six to forty-eight hours to pass from the
meridian of Cape Leuwin to Kangaroo Island, the telegraphic
weather reports exchanged at 9h, a.m. give timely warning of
their existence and character. Most of these disturbances pass
with their centre to the south of Adelaide, and the wind conse-
quently veers from N.E, to N., N.W., W., and S.W.; but
occasionally the centre is more northerly, and in such cases the
rains will extend well inland up to latitude 28°, or still farther
north, and perhaps be heavier over the northern agricultural
districts, .especially on and near the Flinders Range, than in the
southern portions of the colony; hut when the centre passes to
the south of Kangaroo Island the rain, as a rule, is heaviest over
the Mount Lofty Ranges, and along the coast.
Meteorological observations have been made in Adelaide for
thirty years by the Government Astronomer, who has organised, in
conjunction with the astronomers in the other colonies, an exten-
sive and very complete system of daily weather reports, embracing
the whole of Australia, Tasmania, and New Zealand, These
reports, and an isobar map, showing also the direction and force of
the wind, are exhibited at the General Post Office, and at Port
Adelaide.
There are well furnished meteorological stations at Port Darwin,
Daly Waters, Alice Springs, Farina (barometer only), Port Augusta,
Clare, the Agricultural College, Roseworthy; Mount Barker,
Strathalbyn, Eucla, Streaky Bay (barometer only), Cape Borda,
Robe, Cape Northumberland, and Mount Gambier. Besides these
more than 300 stations are supplied with rain gauges, the returns
from which are published monthly.
The temperature in Adelaide exceeds 90°, taking the average of
thirty years, in January, twelve days; February, ten days; March,
seven .days;; April, one day; October, one day; November, five
days; December, nine days; or, daring the year, on forty-five
days.


The following table gives the Mean
Readings of the Barotneter, the Temperature, Rain, and Evaporation, at the Adelaide
Observatory in 1886.
Month.
Mean Barometer
(corrected and
reduced to 32° F.)
and Sea Level
at 9 a.m.
Temperature.
Rain.
Evaporation,
Absolute
Maximum.
Absolute
Minimum.
Mean
of Month.
Humidity.
Inches.
Inches.
a
ttf
January
29-974
112-4
50-8
76-0
43
0-766
9-206
February
29-988
105-7
49-1
69-1
48
0-360
6-112
W
March
30-138
99-3
48-0
68-8
46
0-012
6-015
CO
M
April
SC-143
94-4
44-6
63-2
56
1-419
3-496
<1
May
June
July
30-186
73-5
37-7
57-2
63
1-090
2-063
>
1-3
30-361
30-180
68-
69-
35-
36-
52-8
.52-8
68
69
0-423
2-724
1-405
1-313
Q
W
*1
August
29-886
73-1
38-6
54-4
69
3-089
2-043
September
30-058
82-5
40-1
61-0
56
0-686
3-727
October
29-972
79-3
39-5
58-4
60
2-169
4-459
November
30-036
99-1
46-5
67-8
48
1-067
7-050
December
29-979
102-3
46-9
71-4
44
0-615
9-037
Year
30-075
112-4
35"6
62-7
56
14-420
55-926
0
C 2


Table showing the Mean Monthly and Yearly Rainfall at the undermentioned Stations in South Australia to the end of 1886,
together with the Greatest and Least Yearly Rainfalls recorded.
110
Month.
Port
Darwin.
Alice
Springs.
Blinrnan.
Melrose.
Burra.
Adelaide.
Kadina.
Blanche*
town.
Eucla.
Penola.
Mount
Gambicr.
January
15*136
2*359
1*450
1*646
*894
*792
*359
*780
*877
1*181
1*613
February ....
12*967
1*942
*954
1*042
*622
*683
*370
*594
*271
*858
1*063
March
11*632
1*146
1*079
1*195
1*129
1*147
1*351
1*139
1*165
1.287
1*290
0
d
H
K
April •••••••«
3*576
*741
*931
1*649
1*102
1*592
1*815
1*037
1*590
1*938
2*345
May ........
1*379
*592
1*973
3*007
2*040
3*067
2*236
1*543
1*234
3*335
3*716
June • • ••••••
‘065
*442
1*643
3*153
2*254
2*615
1*794
1*043
*809
3*758
3*858
July
•006
*428
*994
2*786
2*156
2*541
1*770
*940
*980
3*294
4*014
>•*
August
*190
*762
1*159
2*492
1*848
2*302
1*334
1*024
*830
3*697
4*286
cj
September....
•363
*641
1*226
2*576
1*948
1*796
1*417
1*081
*658
2*882
3*176
CQ
October
2*352
•817
*797
2*206
1*643
1*764
1*185
*963
•619
2*415
2*493
H
Pi
>
jNoyember....
4*458
1-004
•995
1*417
*870
•961
•841
*847
*654
1 615
1*810
December ....
11*140
*922
*670
•819
*817
*820
*405
*641
*404
1*461
1*786
Year
63*266
11*796
13*870
23*988
17*323
20*080
14*677
11*632
10*092
27*750
31*450
Greatest amount
80*070
27*210
23*460
38*780
26*097
29*209
19*280
19*710
13*775
40*947
55*675
In
1871
1879
1872
1872
1870
1875
1880
1870
1877
1863
1861
Least amount..
In
45*00§
1881
5*390
1884
7*610
1868
15*565
1881
10*316
1865
13*434
1876
10*080
1876
6*970
1876
6*373
1878
18*800
1877
21*520
1877


The following table shows the Maximum and Minimum Temperature, the Mean Temperature, and the Mean relative Humidity
(complete saturation — 100) of each Month of the Year at Port Darzvin, on the north coast, and Alice Strings, in the
Mac Donnell Ranges, or in the centre of the continent.
Month.
Port Darwin.
Alice Springs.
Maximum
Minimum
Mean
Mean
Maximum
Minimum
Temperature.
Temperature,
Temperature.
Humidity.
Temperature.
Temperature.
Temperature.
Humidity.
January
98-0
71-0
86-0
75
116-0
54-0
85-7
32
w
M
February
07-0
71-0
82-9
79
112-0
58-0
81-6
46
O
March .,
102-0
68-0
86-4
69
98-0
45-0
76-6
36
W
CO
April
104-0
70-0
85-7
65
98-0
40-0
66-9
39
W
w
May
100-0
63-0
80-8
63
86-0
33-0
59-6
43
c
June
98-0
66-0
81-2
63
87-0
32-0
60-2
44
!>
H
July
95-0
63-0
78-6
60
86-0
26-0
54-6
42
O
w
August
95-0
66-0
81-3
66
96-0
29-0
59-8
41
><
September
101-0
63-0
82-7
62
97-0
32-0
62-6
36
October
102-0
72-0
85-5
68
104-0
44-0
72-2
43
November
102-0
70-0
86-6
67
106-0
49-0
77-2
37
December
102-0
70-0
84-4
74
116-0
64-0
84-2
30
Year
104-0
63-0
83-5
68
116-0
26-0
70-0
39
1— »
V-*


RELIGIOUS DENOMINATIONS.
The Church of England in the Diocese of Adelaide,
General Description. —The See of Adelaide was founded in
1847, and by the letters patent of the first Bishop (the Right Rev.
Aug, Short, D.D.) the boundaries of the Diocese were conter-
minous with the boundaries of the colony of South Australia.
When the Northern Territory was added to the colony, it appears
to have been regarded as included in the Diocese; but as this is by
no means certain, the Primate has requested the Bishop to exercise
episcopal supervision over this portion of the colony until proper
steps can be taken for its inclusion in this Diocese. The whole
colony may be regarded as comprising three divisions—South
Australia proper, Central Australia, and the Northern Territory.
It thus stretches across the whole continent from the Southern
Ocean to the Indian Ocean. The total area comprises 914,730
square miles. The population is about 300,000, of which number
about 3,000 are residents in the Northern Territory.
The Right Rev. George Wyndham Kennion, D.D., of Oriel
College, Oxford, was consecrated Bishop of Adelaide in West-
minster Abbey on November 30th, 1882. The church members
are returned at 80,000. The number of clergy working in the
Diocese is seventy. During the year ending December, 31st, 1886,
there were 2,603 persons baptized, and the number of children
receiving religious instruction in Sunday schools was 9,656, There
are in the Diocese 128 churches and fifty-six mission stations.
The Diocesan Synod consists of the Bishop as President, all the
clergy licensed in the Diocese, and ninety-two lay members elected
by the various parishes. The finances of the Synod are managed
by a standing committee, consisting of the Bishop, the Dean, and
the Archdeacon of Adelaide, the Archdeacon of Flinders, and the
Archdeacon of Mount Gambier and the West, with seven clergy-
men and twenty-two laymen, elected annually.
The Collegiate School of St Peter, Adelaide.
The Collegiate School of St. Peter, Adelaide, was incorporated
by Act of Parliament in 1849. The buildings, upon which nearly
£30,000 have been spent, consist of a chapel, schoolrooms,


laboratory, gymnasium, boarding-house for masters and about fifty
boys, headmaster’s residence, and they stand in about thirty
acres of play ground.
The Board of Governors consists of the Bishop, the Dean, and
the Archdeacon of Adelaide, ex officio members, and the Venerable
Archdeacon Farr and eleven lay members of the Church of
England.
The Headmaster is the Reverend Francis Williams, M.A., of
Lincoln College, Oxford; the second master is J. H. Lindon, Esq.,
8.A., of Trinity College, Cambridge; the third master and bursar
is the Reverend J. C. Haynes; and there are six assistant masters.
There are four scholarships, founded by the late Dean Farrell;
they are of the value of £5O a year each, and are tenable for three
years. Two of them are limited to sons of clergymen of the
Church of England, and two of them are open. The Vansittart
scholarship, which is worth £5O per annum, is for the purpose of
educating a boy from the Mount Gambier district. The West-
minster, Christchurch, Allen, and Short scholarships are each of
the value of £lO per annum, and are tenable for two years. The
following scholarships are awarded annually :—The Prankerd, for
modern languages ; the Bowman, for physical science ; the Wyatt,
for botany or zoology; the May, for physical science; the Young,
for mathematics ; and the McCulloch, for mathematics. The Ade-
laide St. Peter’s Collegians’ Scholarship is of the value of £5O per
annum, and is tenable for three years at the Adelaide University.
The number of boys in attendance is 181.
Wesleyan Methodist Church.
Rev. J.Young Simpson, President of the Conference—residence,.
Glenelg—attends president’s vestry, Pirie-street Church, Monday,.
Wednesday, and Friday mornings, 10-30 till 12.
Rev. James Haslam, Secretary of the Conference; residence,
Essex-street, Goodwood.
Wesleyan Methodism was founded in this colony in 1837. The
first sermon preached in South Australia was by a Wesleyan local
preacher, on the sandhills at Glenelg, in 1837. The first Church
erected by the denomination stood in Hindley-street; it was
opened in 1838. The first minister was the Rev. William Long-
bottom, who was wrecked near Encounter Bay, when proceeding
to Western Australia; and, at the request of the handful of
Methodists then in Adelaide, he took charge of the Church.


1838.
1887.
Ministers
1 . .
71
Churches
1 ..
208
Hearers
,. 150 ..
.. 46,137
Sunday school scholars .
.100 ..
.. 18,838
Statistics.
The Wesleyan Church has a Loan fund amounting to £6,000
which greatly assists burdened Church trusts.
The Home Mission work of the Church is very extensive, reach-
ing from Palmerston in the Northern Territory to Millicent in the
South-East. The amount raised annually is £l,OOO.
Prince Alfred College.
Prince Alfred College, one of the finest educational institutions
in the colony, belongs to this denomination. The hon, president
is the Rev. J. Young Simpson, President of the Conference. The
Head Master, Fredk. Chappie, Esq., 8.A., B.Sc., is ably assisted
by a large and efficient staff of teachers, many of them holding
University degrees; and the splendid results of their teaching,
shown in the position taken at the University matriculation and
other examinations by Prince Alfred boys, proves the thoroughness
of the system of education carried out in that admirable institution.
The college is under the management of a large committee of
representative gentlemen. The spirit of the school is decidedly
Christian, and strictly undenominational. Some 350 pupils are in
attendance at the present time.
The Wesleyan Church has just been celebrating its jubilee
year, and the amount promised by its adherents approximates to
£20,000.
Presbyterian Church of South Australia.
Churches, 22; ministers, 14; elders, 70; managers, 173; mem-
bers, 1,736 ; sitting accommodation provided for 5,266; average
attendance, 2,382; Sabbath schools, 28; teachers, male, 104.
female 153, total, 257; scholars, male 1,011, female 1,193, total,
2,204 ; Bible classes, 19; members of same, male 119, female 180,
total, 299 ; preaching stations, 12; accommodation provided, 725 ;
average attendance, 360; prayer meetings, 21; average attend-
ance, 482.
It will be seen that altogether there are 34 places for Presby-
terian worship, Churches 22, and stations 12 ; and that accommo-
dation is provided for 5,266 and 725, total, 5,991 persons, and is
availed of by an average of 2,382 and 360, total, 2,742.


The officers of the General Assembly are—Moderator, Rev.
James Lyall, of Adelaide; Clerk of Assembly, Rev. John Hall
Angus, of Port Adelaide; Treasurer, Hon. D. Murray, M.L.C.
There are three Presbyteries, as follows: Presbytery of
Adelaide, clerk, Rev. W. F. Main, of Norwood; Presbytery of
the Onkaparinga, clerk, Rev. W. S. Macqueen, of Strathalbyn;
Presbytery of Belalie, clerk, Rev. T. D. Smythe, of Kybunga.
The Church has one missionary to the heathen, the Rev. Wm.
Gray, stationed at Weasisi, Tanna, one of the New Hebrides
islands.
Names of ministers and their location: —Angus, J. H., Port
Adelaide; Burns, J. A., Mount Barker; Gordon, J., Gawler;
Gray, T., Mount Pleasant; Lyall, J., Adelaide; Law, A., Monarto;
Macqueen, W, S., Strathalbyn; Milne, W. R., Mannum; Main,
W. F., "Norwood; Macaulay, J., M.A., Woodside and Nairne ;
Mitchell, R., Port Augusta; Paton, D., D.D., Adelaide; Rorke,
E., 8.A., Adelaide ; Smythe, T. D., Blyth.
On the 10th day of May, 1865, the Presbyterian Church of
South Australia came into existence by the union of the represen-
tatives of the three Presbyterian bodies, the Established, the Free,
and the United Presbyterian churches; and since then, up till the
3rd March, 1886, the supreme court of the Church in the colony
was the Presbytery of South Australia; upon that date a division
of the Presbytery into two parts took place, the new Presbyteries
being styled the Presbyteries of Adelaide and Belalie respectively.
Since then, a further division has been brought about, a new
Presbytery being formed in the districts south of the city, called
the Presbytery of the Onkaparinga.
The first Moderator of the General Assembly of the Presbyterian
Church was the Rev. James Gordon, of Gawler.
South Australian Baptist Association.
The opening services of the first Baptist Church in South Aus-
tralia were held on September 2nd, 1838; the membership when
the church was opened was only fifteen.
In 1862, a number of general Baptist Churches formed an
association, chiefly for the purpose of prosecuting Home Missionary
work; from time to time other churches have joined, and the
association now includes all the general Baptist Churches in the
colony.


Churches
52
Membership
3,838
Pastors
30
Sunday Scholars
5,269
Sunday School Teachers
516
Chapels
53
Other buildings used for Divine
worship 13
Seating Accommodation
13,895
Value of Church Property . .. .
£8^,256
Debts on Church Property,. ..
£19,606
Receipts for past year
£12,282
The present statistics are as follows :
Out of the Baptist Association has grown a Missionary Society,
which supports ten missionaries in Furredpore, Eastern Bengal;
Building Fund with a capital of £2,022 ; a Jubilee Debt Extension
Fund, to Avhich already £1,576 has been contributed; an Aged
Ministers’ Relief Fund, capital £2,889. The official organ of the
association, Truth and Progress , has now been in existence nine-
teen years; it is published monthly, the present editor being the
Rev. H. J. Lambert, Norwood.
The New Church (Swedenborgian) in S. A.
The Adelaide Society of the New Church has been in existence
forty years, and numbers under a hundred, of which fifty-five are
registered members, who worship in a building situated on the
west side of Hanson-street, Adelaide; the Rev. E. G. Day is the
preacher.
The Church building contains a Sunday School, a Band of Hope,,
and a Total Abstinence Union attached to the Society.
Unitarian Church.
Unitarian public worship was begun in South Australia in
October, 1855, in the building in King William-street, Adelaide,
then known as Green’s Exchange, the minister being Rev. John
Crawford Woods, 8.A., before that time minister in various places-
in the old country, and for the longest period at St. Mark’s Chapel,
Edinburgh. On the 23rd December, 1856, the foundation stone of
the Unitarian Christian Church in Wakefield-street, Adelaide, W'as
laid by the late Hon. John Baker, M.L.C., of Morialta ; and more
recently a lecture hall and schoolrooms have been erected close
by the Church, About twenty-two years ago a place of worship,
cemetery, and several acres of land at Shady Grove, near Mount
Barker, were presented to the Unitarians by Mr. John Monks, of


Shady Grove, and these Unitarian religious services are regularly-
conducted chiefly by lay readers. There are in connection with
the Unitarian Church in Adelaide, a Sunday School, a Mutual
Improvement Society, a Theological and a Children’s Libraries, and
a Minister’s class for religious instruction. The Unitarians in the
province number about 700, and there is Church accommodation
for 500.
Free Presbyterian Church.
This denomination has existed in the colony since 1854. It
holds to the Disruption principles of the Free Church of Scotland,
as these were expressed in 1843 ; rejecting Erastianism on the one
hand, and Voluntaryism on the other, and retaining the simple
Scriptural forms of worship uniform in Scotland at that period.
In 1881, the Presbytery which governed it became defunct, through
the translation of two of its ministers to the sister Church in Vic-
toria, and the death of a third, since which time the denomination
has been without a supreme governing court. It is now served by
two ordained ministers, and catechists, elders, and deacons, and has
churches at Morphett Vale, Aldinga, Yankalilla, Kingston, Lucindale,
and Spalding, as under: —
John Knox Church, Morphett Vale, by Rev. J. Benny.
Church at Aldinga, at present closed.
Church at Yankalilla, by Rev. John Anderson,
McCheyne Church, Kingston, by Catechist.
Church at Lucindale, by occasional service.
Church at Spalding, by Catechist in Gaelic, and occasionally by
Minister of Morphett Vale in English.
Society of Friends.
The Society of Friends have two places of worship in South
Australia, one at Pennington-terrace, North Adelaide, and the other
at Mount Barker; these have been regularly open for public
worship for more than forty years.
The presence of a minister of the Gospel is not essential to the
right holding of these meetings, as the Friends hold the belief that
it is their privilege to meet for worship under the authority and
friendship of Christ, without, a pre-arranged service.
There are, however, several who are frequently engaged in the
sacred office of the ministry.
They recognise in their Church the offices of ministers, elders,
and overseers.


Meetings for conducting Church affairs are held every two
months at North Adelaide and Mount Barker alternately.
Number of members, about seventy. Registering Officer, Ben-
jamin Sanders, Netley, Mount Barker.
Bible Christian Church.
The Bible Christian Connexion in South Australia consists of
the following circuits:—Adelaide, Bowden, Goodwood, Eastwood
and Kensington, Port Adelaide, Gawler, Grace, Yankalilla, Claren-
don and Willunga, Port Elliot, Mount Lofty, Mount Torrens,
Millicent, Burra, Kapunda, Auburn, Riverton, Hallett, Silverton
(N.S.W.), Kadina, Moonta, Balaklava, Kulpara, Crystal Brook,
Keilli, Snowtown, Port Augusta, Gladstone, Wilmington, Wirra-
bara, Quorn, Orroroo, Port Germein, Carrieton. There are 13(1
Churches, 21 other places in which services are held, affording
accommodation for 18,500 worshippers. There are 23 parsonages,
11 cottages, and 18 schoolrooms, the aggregate value being re-
turned at £65,396. There are 2,856 communicants, 960 teachers,
and 6,329 scholars.
The affairs of the Church are managed by an Annual Conference,
which meets in Adelaide in February. The President for this year
is Rev. John Thorne, Adelaide ; Secretary, Rev. W. W. Finch,
Gladstone.
To commemorate the life and labors of the late Rev. James
Way, the pioneer minister of the body, who, with the Rev. James
Rowe, arrived in the colony in December, 1850, Way College has
been founded. A handsome and commodious building in North
Goodwood, facing the Adelaide south park lands, has been pur-
chased for the purpose. The necessary funds are being subscribed,
the Chief Justice, Sir Thomas Elder, G.C.M.G., Mr. J. G. Ashton,
Mr. Jos. Ashton, Mr. W. G. Torr, Sir Henry Ayers, K.C.M.G.,
Hon. T. Playford, M.P. (Premier), J. H. Howe, Esq., M.P., Mr.
John Darling, and other well known citizens contributing hand-
somely to the fund. Each donor of ten guineas, before the college
opens in 1889, is styled a founder, and will have a vote in the
election of deserving boys to founders’ scholarships when vacancies
occur.
The principal places of worship of the denomination in Adelaide
and the suburbs are at Young-street, City, Goodwood, Bowden,
Glanville, Kensington, Eastwood, &c.


Christian Churches.
About forty years ago, Mr. Thomas Playford (father of the
present Premier of South Australia), gathered together a few
Christians who were willing to unite for worship upon an unde-
nominational basis. They held their meetings for some time in a
small chapel in Hindley-street, and, in 1848, removed to a larger
building in Bentham-street. Other Churches were subsequently
formed, and now meet for worship in Zion chapel, Pulteney-street;
George-street chapel, Stepney; Hindmarsh place, Hindmarsh
Burnside, Kersbrook, and Stansbury. There are Sunday schools,
and other auxiliaries to Christian work, connected with these
Churches.
The above Churches practise the immersion of believers, weekly
communion, and give prominence to the doctrine of the personal
pre-millenial advent of the Lord Jesus Christ.
The work and business of these Churches is carried on and con-
ducted by pastors and deacons, elected by the members of each
church.
United Free Church of South Australia (Incorporated).
In connection with this body there are three chapels, affording
accommodation for 800 persons. —Adelaide, Wayraouth-street,
Burnside, Thebarton. Rev. B. P. Mudge, Minister, West Ade-
laide.
These churches were formerly connected with the Victorian
district of the U.M.F. Churches, but a separation having taken
place in 1884, the churches in South Australia assumed the name
contained in their deed of incorporation as above.
German Evangelical Lutheran Church.
The German members of the community possess about 80 places
of worship, accommodating 9,000 to 10,000 persons. Of these,
50 are chapels with sittings, 30 school or other rooms used for
worship, capable of holding 1,000 attendants. There are 4d
schools, 45 teachers, and about 1,350 scholars, in connection with
the undermentioned chapels (denominational day schools) :
Adelaide, Rev. E. Homann; Appila, Rev. L. Kaibel and W,
Euhlbom; Bethanien, Rev. G. A. Heidenreich; Blumberg, Rev,
H. Harms; Callington, Rev. K. Dorsch; Caltowie, Rev. J.
Thiessen; Condowie, Rev. A. Ddhler; Carlsruhe, Rev. G. Bertram j


Dutton, Revs. E. D. Appelt and J. Bode; Emmaus, Rev. D.
Georg; Emu Downs, Rev. J. Hansen ; Gawler Town, Rev. Jul.
Rddiger; Hahndorf, Revs. C. F. A. Strempel and F. Braun;
Hoyleton, Rev. H. Meyer; Klemzig, near Adelaide, Rev. C.
Maschmedt; Langmiel, near Tanunda, Rev. J. C. Auricht; Light's
Pass, Revs. J. P. Niquet and G. J. Rechner; Lobethal, Rev. Rud.
Ey; Mannum, Rev. L. Kuss; Mount Gambier, Rev. F. W.
Matschoss; Nain, Rev. C. F. W. Heinze; Point Pass, Revs. F.
Rechner and Drautz ; Rosenthal, Revs. G. Dost and Ph. J. Oster;
Tanunda, Rev. J. Reusch; Yorketown, Revs. T. Koschade and
J. H. Hoopman.
Methodist New Connexion Church, Franklin-street, Adelaide.
The above Church opened a mission in South Australia in the
year 1861. The first minister appointed was the Rev. J.
Maughan. During his ministry the Church in Franklin-street
was erected. It will seat 500 people. It is acknowledged to be
■a convenient and beautiful structure. The original cost was about
£5,000. The present debt upon the estate is £l,BOO. A branch
Ghurch and Sunday school was opened in Goodwood in 1886, and
is being worked with cheering success. The present minister is
the Rev. E. Gratton.
The Welsh Free Church, Adelaide.
This Church was established in the year 1879, and meets for
worship in the lower schoolroom of the Flinders-street Presbyterian
Church.
It is an union Church, composed of members from all the
different denominations. As there were not enough of any one
denomination to start a Church, they all agreed to differ, and meet
together to worship God in their own tongue.
The Rev. Richard Jones, formerly of Monmouthshire, held the
pastorate of the Church till very recently.
Church of Christ.
In connection with this body there are Churches at the following
places: —Grote-street, Adelaide; Kermode-street, North Adelaide;
Robert-street, Hindmarsh Chapel-street, Norwood; Park-street,
Unley; also, at Alma, Balaklava, Baroota, Cameron, Dalkey, Ful-
ham, Hall, Langhorne’s Bridge, Lochiel, Long Plains, Mallala,


The Catholic Church.
The Catholics of South Australia petitioned the late Archbishop
Folding (then Vicar Apostolic) in 1839, to send them a clergy-
man; and, in January, 1840, the Vicar General Ullathorne arrived
in Adelaide, and celebrated mass for the first time in the house of
Messrs. Johnson & Phillips, near East-terrace. His stay was
necessarily short; yet he made arrangements for the coming of
the first priest, the Rev. William Benson, towards the end of the
following year. He had a wooden building in Waymouth-street
as a church and residence.
In 1842, Adelaide was made an Episcopal See, and was offered
to Dr. Ullathorne; he declined, however, as he determined on
residing in England. In 1844, Dr. Francis Murphy, of Sydney,
accepted the charge, and was consecrated on September Bth, and
took possession on November 6th. He died April 27th, 1857,
His successors were Bishops Geoghagan and Shiel.
Adelaide was erected into an Archiepiscopal bee by Pope Leo
XIII. on May 20th, 1887, and Dr. Reynolds nominated its first
Archbishop. The new Province embraces Southern and Western
Australia, having Perth, Port Augusta, and Port Victoria, as
Suffragan Sees.
The Catholic population of the colony is estimated at 42,000*
and is at present attended by an Archbishop, a Vicar General,
three Rural Deans, and forty-seven Priests.
The educational requirements are attended to by the Jesuit
Fathers at Seven Hills College; the Christian Brothers’ College,
Wakefield-street; a boarding and day-school at New Cabra, Good-
wood, is conducted by Sisters of the Order of St. Dominic, who
have also select day-schools in Franklin-street. The community
in the above convents number eighteen. There are two com-
munities of Sisters of Mercy, one in Adelaide, with two largely
attended schools, and the other at Mount Gambler, with boarding,
day, and poor schools. These Sisters attend hospitals, prisons, and
the sick poor in their homes. There are twenty-four Sisters in
these communities. The Dominican Nuns of the Congregation of
St. Catherine of Sienna number seven in community. They con-
duct a boarding and day-school at North Adelaide.
The Sisters of St. Joseph have a care of the Orphanage, the
Refuge for penitent women, and a House of Providence for poor
women and as a home for young girls seeking situations. They
also attend to several schools throughout the colony, which arc


largely attended. The sisterhood numbers ninety-six. Beside the
schools under the care of the several sisterhoods, there are many
others conducted by lay teachers.
The churches number 64; mission churches ( i.e ., serving for
schools on week-days, and churches on Sundays), 29 ; stations,
visited by the clergy periodically, 103. The new diocese of Port
Augusta embraces all country north of the County of Victoria.
The Congregational Churches of South Australia.
The first minister of this body was the Rev. Thos. Q. Stow, who
landed on October 18th, 1837, within a year of the foundation of
the colony, since which time there have been ninety-eight ministers
holding office as Congregational pastors. There are at this time
(1887) thirty ministers, of whom twenty-three are holding charges,
and the others doing work, either in occasional public ministry, or
other church work.
From the constitution of these churches, accurate statistics are
difficult to obtain; but the following may be looked upon as ap-
proximately correct: —Church members, 2,430; adherents, 10,000;
Sunday scholars, 5,000: buildings for public worship, 42; sittings
in them, 10,126; preaching stations in rooms, 24; sittings in
them, 3,835; total sittings, 13,961.
The following Societies are connected with the Congregational
Churches of South Australia :
1. The Congregational Union. Income, £355 15s.
2. The Parkin Trust, for education of ministers, and other
purposes. Capital, £15,222; income, £569 Bs. Not available
until the income reaches £l,OOO.
3. The Parkin Congregational Mission, for gifts to widows, and
Bush Missions. Income, between £1,200 and £1,400 a year.
Not available until 1890.
4. The Chapel Building Society, for assisting in the erection of
places of worship. Capital, about £2,500.
5. Ministers’ Provident Fund. Capital, £3,630.
6. Lay Preachers’ Association. Members, 25 ; stations round
Adelaide, 8; with about 40 or 50 more members in the country
districts.


Milang, Millicent, Mount Gambler, Point Sturt, Port Pirie, Stirling
East, Strathalbyn, Wild Horse Plains, Yatina, and York. The
number of members in connection with these Churches is 1,800,
and scholars in Sunday schools about 1,300, constant additions to
which numbers are being recorded.
Brethren T. H. Bates, J. Colbourne, T. J. Gore, M. Wood
Green, and W. Judd, are engaged as evangelists. Mr. Green being
now on a visit to America and England, in the interests of a Bible
College which it is proposed to establish. In addition to the
evangelists, a large number of brethren take part in the conduct
of the public services and in carrying on the general work of the
Churches, Representatives of the various Churches meet in
Annual Conference in September, to report progress and devise
means for further usefulness, in preaching the gospel, and estab-
lishing Churches throughout the colony as centres for Christian
work and effort. Further particulars concerning this body may be
obtained by addressing communications to the Secretary of the
Church of Christ, Grote-street, care of Mr. David Gall, Tynte-
street, North Adelaide.


CHARITABLE INSTITUTIONS.
For the relief of infirmity and distress, the following Govern-
ment institutions have been established in and near Adelaide:—
The Adelaide Hospital is situated on a well-drained spot
east of the Exhibition building; and connected with it is a
dispensary for out-door patients, facing the exhibition road. The
hospital has accommodation for 231 patients, but the number of
beds occupied seldom exceeds 170. It is controlled by a committee
of management, consisting of members of the medical profession
and laymen. The institution is supported principally out of the
public revenue; voluntary subscriptions contribute nearly one-
seventh of the annual cost. The resident secretary is Mr. E. H.
Hallack, whose residence is adjoining the dispensary. Visiting
days are Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays, from 2 to 4 p.m.
A Government hospital is also established at Port Adelaide, and
country hospitals are to be found at Mount Gambier, Wallaroo,
Port Augusta, Port Lhxcoln, Clare, and at Teetulpa goldfields.
Luxatig Asylums. —The Adelaide Asylum for the Insane on
North-terrace, to the east of the Botanic Gardens, and the Parksidc
Asylum at Parksidc east, are supported by the State. Fees for
maintenance are levied where the relatives can afford to contri-
bute, but such recoveries bear but a very small proportion to the
annual outlay. The cost of both asylums for the year ended June
30th, 1886, was £25,033 6s. lid., whilst the fees for maintenance,
&c., amounted to £2,257 3s. Id. Dr. Alex. S. Paterson, Colonial
Surgeon, is the resident medical officer at Adelaide, and Dr. W. L.
Cleland at Pax-kside. Steward and secretary to both asylums,
Mr. John J. Hannah. Visiting days for the public at both asylums,
10 to 12, and 2to 4 daily, excepting Sundays. Visiting justices,
appointed by the Government, make frequent visits to examine
into the general condition of the institution.
The Destitute Asylum on North-terrace, at the rear of the
South Australian Institute and Public Library, is also supported out
of the public revenue. Besides offices, and residences for officers,
a lying-in department is included in the same enclosure. Relief is
dispensed by a board, which meets every Thursday, at 10 a.m.
The superintendent and secretary, Mr. Arthur Lindsay, resides on
the premises.


The industrial and reformatory schools formerly under the
control of the Destitute Board, have been recently separated, and
placed under the jurisdiction of a State Children's Council;
president, Dr. Stirling. The offices of the State Children's depart-
ment are in Freeman-street.
The boarding-out system is very extensively adopted throughout
the colony, but there arc still the following Government institutions
occupied by deserted and criminal children: —Industrial and Re-
formatory School for girls at Magill; and Reformatory School for
boys, hulk Fitzjames , Largs Bay.
Amongst the principal private institutions, supported by private
subscriptions, and deserving of general sympathy and aid, are the
following: —Home for Incurables at Fullarton; Convalescent Hos-
pital, St. Margaret, Military-road, Semaphore; the Ccttage Homes-
for the aged and infirm poor and widows, situated in Stanley-
street and Kingston-terrace, North Adelaide ; Adelaide Children's
Hospital and Training School for Nurses, Brougham-place, North
Adelaide, visiting days, Tuesdays, Thursdays, and Sundays, 2 to 4
p.m.; the South Australian Institution for the Blind, Deaf, and
Dumb, at Brighton; Industrial School for the Blind, Brougham-
place, North Adelaide, open daily, 9 to 5 ; the Orphan Home, for
the reception and training of orphan girls, Carrington-street,
Adelaide; the Servants’ Home, corner of Flinders and Freeman-
streets, Adelaide; Adelaide Retreat for Women, at Walkerville ;.
Inebriates’ Retreat, at Belair; the Bushmen’s Club, Whitmore-
square and Gilbert-street, Adelaide; Prince Alfred Seamen’s Home T
St. Yincent-street, Port Adelaide.


CENTRAL AND LOCAL BOARDS OF HEALTH.
The laws relating to sanitation are contained chiefly in the Public
Health Acts of 1873, 1876, and 1884. These are administered
by the Central Board of Health and by Local Boards.
The Central Board was established in 1873, and consists of the
President and four other members appointed by the Government.
Local Boards.—All municipal councils are Local Boards of
Health for their respective towns. Other local boards are formed
from time to time by order of the Government. There are at
present thirty-eight local boards.
Local boards have powers to make orders and regulations for the
removal and prevention of nuisances within their respective districts.
In cases of neglect the Central Board has authority to compel local
boards to do what is necessary or proper for the purposes of the
Health Acts. In places where there is no local board the Central
Board has direct jurisdiction.
In emergencies the Central Board has power to make special
regulations for the cleansing, purifying, and ventilating of streets,
houses, churches, schools, and other places of assembly, the erection
of public closets, the speedy interment of the dead, and generally
for preventing the spread and mitigating the effect of infectious
diseases; also for the provision of medical aid and medicine for
persons infected. In cases of smallpox and other dangerous infec-
tious diseases not usually met with in the colony, the Board has
very extensive powers to enable it to stamp out promptly the disease
on its earliest appearance.
The Central Board has also authority to order an inquiry, and
to compel the attendance of witnesses whenever it requires infor-
mation on any matter (whether of scientific opinion or fact) con-
nected with the discharge of its duties.
The administration of the Adulteration of F ood and Drugs
Act is also intrusted to the Central and Local Boards of Health.
The Quarantine Act is administered by the Government under
the advice of the Central Board. All Health officers are required
to correspond with and to report to the board on all subjects
to quarantine.


CENTRAL AND LOCAL BOARDS OF HEALTH. 12-S
Under the Vaccination Act every child born in the colony must
he vaccinated within six months of birth. The president of the
Central Board of Health is also Vaccination officer for South Aus-
tralia. He is required to maintain a supply of efficient vaccine
lymph, and to exercise a general supervision over the public
vaccinators throughout the colony.


THE MARRIAGE LAWS.
Marriages may be celebrated by the Registrar-General, the
Deputy Registrars or District Registrars, and by officiating
Ministers of all religious denominations whose names are ordered
by the Governor to be entered on a roll kept in the Registrar-
General’s office. An officiating Minister may use any form of
marriage usual with his denomination, and his signature on the
marriage certificate is evidence that the marriage has been cele-
brated in due form.
Before any marriage can be celebrated the parties must either
have obtained a certificate from the Registrar-General or a District
Registrar that fourteen days’ notice has been given, and that no
authorised person has forbidden the issue of the certificate, or they
must obtain a licence from the Registrar, his deputy, or a District
Registrar, or from an officiating Minister. After the issue of a
-certificate, or the granting of a licence, a marriage may be cele-
brated at any time within three months. Caveats against the
granting of a licence or a certificate may be entered by any person
who objects to the marriage; after which the marriage cannot be
celebrated until after due inquiry.
Before marriage a minor must produce the written consent of
his or her parent or guardian, unless satisfactory grounds for not
having obtained such consent shall be assigned.
The person celebrating the marriage must make out, in triplicate,
a certificate of the marriage; one copy is to be given to the parties
thereto, another is to be sent within seven days to the Registrar of
the district, and the third to the Registrar-General.
Each District Registrar and officiating Minister must also send to
the Registrar-General a quarterly return of all marriages performed
by him during the preceding three months, or a nil account if no
marriages have been performed by him during this period.
The Registrar-General is required to arrange the certificates he
receives, and have them bound, and kept safe for reference.
Certified copies are to be evidence.
In case of fraudulent marriages (through false declarations or


otherwise), the guilty party may be made to forfeit all property
accruing from the marriage.
The fee for a marriage at a registration office is ten shillings.
The fee for a licence issued by a Registrar is three pounds. These
fees are paid into the Treasury.


SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
MILITARY
FORCES.
These arc at present as shown in the table below
Nature of Forces.
I. Staff S.A. Forces
11. Permanent
Military Force
Active Militia..
111. < Acting Militia
I Reserve....
IV. Reserve Militia..
V. Volunteer Force.
Grand total


The origin and history of these forces is shortly as follows :
/. Permanent Military Force. — S.A. Artillery.
In 1878 an Act was passed (amended in 1880) authorising the
formation of a standing (or permanent) Military Force of 4 officers
and 130 men.
This Act was not canned out until 1882, when a force of one
officer and twenty men (Garrison Artillery) was raised under the
Act.
This force was increased in 1885 to two officers and fifty men,
under the command of Major Gordon (late Royal Artillery), and
was slightly reduced to its present strength in 1886.
11. Active Militia and Active Militia Reserve.
The first organisation for a force of this nature dates from 1854,
when a Militia Act was passed, empowering the Government to
call a force of 2,000 men, to he hallotted for from the citizens
between eighteen and forty-six years of age, if sufficient volunteers
were not forthcoming.
No action was ever taken under this Act.
In 1865-6 an Act was passed authorising the calling out of a
body of not less than 540 nor more than 1,000 paid volunteers,
this force being styled the Volunteer Military Force, at ss. per
day; also a Reserve Force of 1,000 men at the same rate.
This Act was amended in 1867, higher pay being given by it to
Artillery, and a Troop of Cavalry (providing their own horses)
being authorised.
No men were, however, raised under these Acts for many years.
But, in 1877, the strong warlike feelings awakened throughout
the colony determined the Government of the day to take active
steps towards raising definite organised local forces under the
above-mentioned Acte.
Imperial officers with a small staff of drill instructors were
obtained from England to organise a body of 1,000 paid volun-
teers, raised under the Acts of 1865-6-7. These officers were in
the first place :—Colonel Downes, 11. A, (now retired with the rank
of Major-General), as Commandant, and Major Godwin, of the
103rd regiment, as his principal staff officer (D.A.A.G.).
Amending Acts were passed in 1881-2, allowing of a maximum
of 1,500 men of this force being raised instead of only 1,000.
In 1885, Colonel Downes (now Secretary of Defence, Victoria),


having previously retired from the army with the honorary rank
of Major-General, was succeeded by the present Commandant,
Brigadier-General Owen, Royal Artillery.
The post of D. A. A. General has been filled up by Imperial
officers (Major Fergusson, Rifle Brigade, and Major Jervois, Royal
Engineers), up to last year. It is now vacant, the O. C. Permanent
Force doing the work temporarily as acting D.A.A.G.
In 1886 a “ Defence Forces Act ” was passed (as drafted by
Brigadier-General Owen), repealing all former Acts relating to the
Militia, and the paid and unpaid Volunteer Forces, and consolidat-
ing and amending the law as to the same.
By this Act the paid Volunteer Force is styled by its proper
title, “ South Australian Militia,” with its Reserve, the latter con-
sisting of men who have already served one or more terms of three
years.
If called out by proclamation for actual service, the Militia may
be ordered to serve in the other colonies in case of danger, for the
defence of a neighboring colony might in some cases be the most
rational means of defending South Australia,
The Defence Act, 1886, aimed also, especially at the simplifica-
tion and consolidation of the laws relating to this and the other
forces of the colonies.
111. Reserve Militia.
Provision for a paid force of this description, to be raised by
ballot, of the able-bodied men of the colony in case of great
emergency, was made in 1884, by the Act above mentioned, in
which such force was termed “ Militia.”
This Act, being in many ways obsolete and not in a form easily
applicable, was repealed by the Defence Forces Act, 1886, which
latter provides in a practical form for the raising by ballot of a
paid Militia Reserve on proclamation either to complete the Active
Militia to the strength authorised to be raised, or, in case of danger,
in addition thereto in such number as may be required.
This Force is not in existence at present, but the colony has
been diviied by proclamation (under the Defences Act, 1886)
into the necessary territorial military districts, and in case of
emergency the required machinery for raising it could easily be
put into operation.
IV. Volunteer Force.
This is a purely Volunteer Force, not paid except by a capitation
grant for such members as make themselves efficient.


III. An active Militia of the following ordinary establishment*
Cavalry (2 Troops, Lancers)
6
60’
Field Artillery, 1 Battery (Eight 16 Pr. Guns) ....
6
75
Garrison Artillery, 1 Battery
6
120
Infantry, 2 Battalions
40
680
Medical Staff and Ambulance Corps
6
15
64
950
With the Active Militia Reserve, 2 companies t ....
6
120
The Government supplies arms and accoutrements free, as well
as a certain proportion of ammunition.
At various periods Volunteer corps of different descriptions have
existed in the colony.
In 1877 they had all been merged into the “South Australian
National Rifle Association,” organized by an Act passed in 1878
under the control of a council, with provision for military
inspection by an officer appointed for the purpose.
In 1881 and 1882 amending Acts were passed, changing the
Rifle Association into a Rifle Volunteer Force, and placing it under
the command of the Military Commandant.
By the “ Defence Forces Act, 1886,” the council ceased to*
exist, and the Volunteer Force as it now exists was established,
being the former Rifle Volunteer Force with provisions tending to
make it more complete as a military organization.
The last mentioned Act also allowed of the raising of Mounted
Infantry Volunteer Corps. Four of such corps, numbering about
150 officers and men, have already been raised under this Act.
All matters simply appertaining to rifle contests and matches
for this and the other forces were handed over by the Act of
1886 to a new “South Australian National Rifle Association,”
without any military or quasi-military functions, but somewhat on
the model of the English N. R. Association and of similar associa-
tions existing in other colonies.
In the event of threatened invasion or rebellion, the Militia
Force and Volunteers are liable to be called out for service, and
would then be employed under the provisions of the Army Act*.
1882.
The S.A.M. Forces, therefore, in addition to—
I. Head Quarter Staff, consist of—
Officers. Men,
11. A small Permanent Garrison Artillery (S.A. Artillery) of 2 45
* This is the authorised establishment, but it is not complete at present.
+ This is the establishment aimed at lor the present.


IV. Reserve Militia.
No establishment laid down. To be raised, if necessary, in
case of great emergency.
V. Volunteer Force.
Officers. Men.
Mounted Infantry (four companies) 8 120
One organized battalion of six companies
Infantry. < Twenty-one companies organized in ter- i 1,200
\ ritorial districts. J
83 1,320
The Cavalry are armed with lances and M.H. carbines.
Garrison Artillery and Infantry with M.H. rifles.
B. Defences.
The land defences of
Glenelg) consisting of ;■
Adelaide and
its ports (Port Adelaide
Name of Fort.
Armament.
Remarks.
Crlanville.
Two 20-ton lOin. K.M.L.
Earthworks, with
bricks, &c.
guns ; two 64-pounder
R.M.L. guns.
Two 12-ton 9in. R.M.L.
Largs
Masonry, revelment, &c.
guns ; two 80-pounder
E.M.L. guns.
A new battery is also proposed to be
of Glenelg, and to be armed with
ordnance of the latest description.
built in the neighborhood
powerful breech-loading


THE POLICE FORCE.
One of the earliest acts of the first Legislative Council of this
colony was to pass an Ordinance which authorised the formation of
a Police Force. This measure was agreed to in the year 1839, and
it was then that the force was first put on a proper basis in this
colony.
The colony is divided into six divisions—The Metropolitan
Division, which includes Adelaide and the suburbs; the Port
Adelaide Division; the Central Division; the South-Eastern
Division, which has for its head-quarters Mount Gambier; the
Northern Division, which has for its Central station Clare, and
which comprises the districts between Balaklava and Port Pirie
and Yorke Peninsula; and the Far Northern Division, which
extends from Terowie to Alice Springs, and includes what was
formerly known as the Western Division. The force throughout
the colony is, of course, under the control of Commissioner
Peterswald, but the divisions are placed under the immediate
supervision of Inspectors Hunt, Saunders, Sullivan, Besley, and
Woodcock, each of whom is allotted a separate division, for the
good conduct of which he is responsible to the Commissioner of
Police. They are assisted in their duties by Sub-Inspectors
Doyle, Shaw, Rollison, and Field. The Metropolitan and Port
Divisions, from the fact of their containing the largest proportion
of the population, of course, absorb the greatest number of the
force, and there are stationed in them, in addition to the com-
missioned officers, 7 sergeants, 6 corporals, 35 troopers, and 160
foot police; in the Central Division there are 1 sergeant, 2
corporals, 41 troopers, and 12 constables; in the South-Eastern
Division there are I sergeant, 2 corporals, 17 troopers, and 4 foot
police ; in the Northern Division 2 sergeants, 3 corporals, 20
troopers, and 17 foot police ; and in the Far Northern Division 3
sergeants, 2 corporals, 55 troopers, and 13 constables. In order
to preserve the proper working of the force a system of visiting
has been introduced by which every station in the colony is visited
once a month by the Inspector, Sub-Inspector, or one of the
sergeants, with the view of drilling the men, inspecting their


quarters, and examining the books, reports of each visit having
to be forwarded to the head office, where they are carefully
examined. The fact which must strike the most superficial
observer is the extreme disproportion of the numbers of the Police
Force in this colony with those of the neighbouring provinces of
Victoria and New South Wales, the mounted troopers alone in the
latter colony exceeding the whole of our force by over 100 men.
The population of South Australia, of course, is not so great as in
those two provinces, but the exceedingly large area which has to
be kept under police supervision taxes the resources of the depart-
ment to the utmost, and it is only by the most strenuous exertions
■of the officials, and the hearty co-operation of the men, that it can
exercise a control over such an extent of territory.
The Troopers.
“ The duties and powers of a mounted constable differ in no
“ respect from those of an ordinary police constable.” These are
the words used in the Police Manual when dealing with the
work of the trooper, but the exigences of the service have
rudely set aside this rule, and have thrust upon this branch
of the force duties of the most multifarious character. In
the country the mounted man has to act in many instances as
bailiff; he is also Crown Lands Ranger; he has to collect jury
lists for the Sheriff’s Department; agricultural statistics for the
Under Secretary; to co-operate with the Inspectors of Schools in
seeing that all the children in the neighbourhood in which he is
stationed are sent to school; to keep an eye on all cases of desti-
tution, and communicate with the Destitute Board in reference to
them ; to destroy vermin, and give certificates to scalphunters ;
and to carry out any other special work which a paternal Govern-
ment may call upon him to perform. None of these duties are
allowed in the slightest way to interfere with his ordinary police
work. When in charge of a station he has to patrol the country
in the neighbourhood of his post, and keep a daily journal of all
transactions ; he has to make himself acquainted with the people
and the physical character of the district, and keep a watch over
suspicious persons, besides marking down a description of their
appearance; his horses must not be neglected, and station and
stables must be kept in a perfect state of cleanliness; and, above
all things, he has to be ready to start away to any part of the
district in a case of emergency. His duty also calls upon him to


arrest all offenders, and in the great majority of instances to act as
Crown Prosecutor. It will thus be seen that the idea that a
police trooper in the country districts has little to do, and even
less responsibility, is but a popular fallacy, and it is clear that the
public get more than an ample return for the amount of pay that
is received by the men. The most arduous work falls upon the
troopers in the Far Northern Division, where they have to keep a
strict watch over the natives, and to hold themselves in readiness
to visit any part of the interior where deaths under suspicious
circumstances may be reported to have occurred.
The Foot Police.
The number of foot constables considerably exceeds that of the
troopers, this fact being of course due to the larger proportion of
population that they have to exercise control over. The metropo-
litan and Port forces are under the control of Inspector Sullivan
and Sub-Inspector Doyle and thirteen non-commissioned officers,
who are either sergeants or corporals, and the duties of the men may
be briefly summed up as being to protect property and to prevent
crime. The patrolling police are divided into watches, who have
to be on duty for eight hours during either the day or the night, as
the case may be, and they are under the immediate supervision of
the corporal, who is responsible for the presence of a man on his
beat, and for the general conduct of his duties. Since 1882 the
system of employing troopers to act as night patrols in the less
populous parts of the city and in the suburbs, owing to the numerical
weakness of the foot police, has been adopted, and has been found
to answer exceedingly well.
The Detectives
Are under the control of a sergeant—Mr. F. J. Upton—but
their work is so important and of such a delicate nature that they
really are under the constant personal supervision of the Commis-
sioner of Police himself.
The duties of a detective are most onerous. He has to make
himself acquainted with the members of the criminal classes; he is
expected to know if there are any accessions to its ranks from the
other colonies or from abroad; and he has also to note anything
suspicious that may happen among them. If a case is put into his
hands at the office he has to interview the complainant, and then
from information supplied to him he sets about unravelling the


mystery. The task is sometimes one of much difficulty, but he is
supposed to overcome that and to bring the criminal to justice-
The records show that as a rule he is successful in his efforts,
although there are cases in which he is foiled. Every morning the
Commissioner holds what may be termed a levee at the Detective
Office, at which all the men attend. The object of this gathering
is that they may consult together as to the cases which are then in
course of investigation or which need inquiry. It is a fixed rule
that should one of the detectives meet some clue which would be
of use to a comrade he is expected to communicate it to him at the
earliest possible moment, otherwise he is liable to severe censure;
but no interference by one man with another is permitted, as if such
a thing were allowed it would only lead to much jealousy.
The Police Fund.
This fund was established by Act of Parliament, its object
being to provide for the compensation of police officers who
claimed to retire under the provisions of the Civil Service Act,
or who were obliged to resign on account of ill-health, or from
injuries received in connection with the performance of police
duties. A portion of it was also devoted to rewarding police
officers for meritorious services, or for reimbursing any member of
the force the costs and expenses which he might have incurred in
defending himself in the discharge of his duty, provided the Chief
Secretary does not consider him blamable in respect to such
action. The funds are invested from time to time in the names of
the trustees, who are the Commissioner of Police, the Under
Secretary, and the Under Treasurer for the time being. Previous
to the Police Act, No. 15 of 1869-70, being passed, the fines which
the police were entitled to were distributed annually among the
members of the force, but now all of them are paid to the credit of
the fund. On April 20th, 1870, there was a balance of £1,970 in
hand in the Bank of Australasia, where the account is still kept.
Only one claim for legal expenses was made, and now there is a
good round sum to the credit of the fund.


BOTANIC GARDEN AND ITS PROGRESS
(Extracts from a sketch by Dr. Schomburgk, Curator.)
This being the year of South Australia’s jubilee, in Avhich it is-
not only of public interest, but of public importance, that the
progress made by the province in the fifty years of its existence
should be placed on record, I have considered it advisable to
furnish a brief sketch of the Botanic Garden from its foundation
down to the present year. The establishment of a botanic garden
in the neighborhood of the city was contemplated when South
Australia was first surveyed. A site for this garden was marked
on the early maps of the city on the north banks of the River
Torrens, as may be seen by reference to the original plan of
Adelaide, in the Survey Office. This site was used for the purpose
for a few years, but nothing was done to make the Botanic Garden
a success until the end of the year 1854, when the matter was
taken in hand by the Governor, Sir Richard Graves Mac Donnell.
The preliminary arrangements were completed early in the year
1855, and the first meeting of the Botanic Garden committee
took place on March sth. The first members were Mr. John
Bentham Neales, Mr. Matthew Moorhouse, Mr. William Wyatt,
M.R.C.S., Mr. Charles Bonney, Mr. Joseph Hall (mayor of
Adelaide), Mr. John Bristow Hughes, and Mr. William Young,
husband, the last-named gentleman being elected chairman. A
few days after the first meeting the members of the committee
proceeded to select the present site which was determined upon
and set aside for the Botanic Garden. It includes about forty acres
of land, being portion of the Government reserve, which extended
from North-terrace to the southern bank of the River Torrens,
and from the Company’s Mill-road, on the east, to the city
slaughterhouse, on the west, and was placed under the superin-
tendence of Mr. George Francis, F.H.S.
In July, 1856, the first report of the directors of the garden was
published—it contained a mere official representation of the work
that had been accomplished. In itself it was not much, but what
had been done, had been done well. The importance of the task.


which was confided to them seems at last to have been brought
prominently before them, and in May, 1857, application was made
to the Government for a special grant of £I,OOO for the erection
of a conservatory. This was readily granted, as well as £I,OOO in
addition to the grant, £2,500, that had been made for the year,
which was asked for to meet the expense for the succeeding year.
The intention of the Government to erect a suitable building for
agricultural and horticultural shows had been held in abeyance for
a considerable time, for in May, 1859, an application was made to
the Government for funds to erect the building. The building
was erected, but it was not placed under the control of the
directors of the garden. It remained in the hands of the Govern-
ment, but was eventually placed under the charge of the South
Australian Agricultural and Horticultural Society, which still
retains it and controls its affair.
One of the drawbacks that had been experienced by the founders
of the garden was the want of a proper supply of water. They had
nothing to depend upon except the ordinary rainfall and the water
which was collected in the lakes. In the dry weather it was a
costly and laborious work to draw water from the ponds and dis-
tribute it over the large area that was then under cultivation.
Large numbers of the plants were exotic, of a delicate nature, and
could not properly become acclimatised without a sufficient supply
nf water to carry them through the rigors of the South Australian
summers. The Adelaide waterworks were then almost completed,
and the Government sanctioned an application to have the water
laid on to the garden. These works, being constructed on the
principle of gravitation, with constant service at high pressure,
supplied all that was wanted, and after the connection was made
with the water mains, a marked improvement in the condition of
the plants became soon apparent. The supply is abundant, and of
good quality, and has been the means of causing a considerable
saving in labor. It has also rendered the acclimatisation of many
trees, shrubs, and plants, a complete success, which, without it,
would in many instances have been extremely difficult, and in
-others impossible. Since the water has been laid on, although in
some years of drought the supply has been somewhat restricted, it
has always been sufficient to keep the garden in proper condition.
On the sth of August, 1865, Mr. Francis forwarded his resigna-
tion to the board. It was accepted with expressions of regret, and
with a suitable acknowledgment of the value of his labors on behalf


of the establishment. Shortly after his resignation, Mr. Francis
died, and an obelisk to the memory of the late director was erected
in the garden, having attached to it a plate, bearing the following
inscription :
remembrance
of the late
212®. iFtancte,
F.L.S., F.H.S.,
First Director of this
Garden, by whom it was
planned and laid out
in the Year
A few weeks after the decease of Mr. Francis, Dr. R. Schom-
burgk assumed charge of the garden on the 14th September, 1865,
Shortly after his appointment it was determined to add some
new and useful features to some parts of the area which
had not been brought into cultivation. An experimental garden
was projected, besides the erection of a new and larger aviary, and
in addition it was proposed to form a scientific arrangement of the
natural system of plants in another portion of the site which had
not yet been broken up. It was further resolved to make an
extensive rosery, and to lay out and ornament the banks of the
creek which ran through the garden. An aquarium for aquatic
plants, -which had been in hand for some time, -was reported
complete in the middle of the year 1866.
In the year 1867 the Sultana grape was introduced into the
garden from the Cape of Good Hope. The statue of Niobe and
that of Kisz’s Amazon, the original of which attracted such atten-
tion in London at the great Exhibition of 1851, were presented to
the board of management. They had been procured by the exer-
tions of private persons w r ho collected subscriptions to purchase
them. Canova’s Venus was also added to the garden. The
years 1866-7 were marked by considerable activity in the develop-
ment of the garden. The glass and hot houses and the con-
servatories were supplied with a new and improved system
of warming by means of hot water pipes, and the aquarium,
82ft. by 42ft., for the cultivation of rare aquatic plants, gave
additional means of reproducing and bringing to perfection
many of those which grow in other parts of the world. Much
attention was paid to the improvement of the lakes; though
the drainage plan adopted by the Corporation of Adelaide was


altered, the improvement, such as there was, was not great. At
the close of 1866 the number of plants in the garden was about
5,000. An experiment was made to cultivate the tea plant, which
there is reason to think may become acclimatised in this colony, but
the seed failed in South Australia, and Baron von Mueller, the
Director of the Botanic Gardens in Melbourne, was not more
successful with those which he planted. The failure was due to
the use of unsuitable seeds and our dry climate. Very large
additions were made to the zoological collection, which now had
grown to considerable proportions. The museum also had been
enriched by many valuable and interesting objects, and the botanic
library had been increased to a total of 230 volumes.
His Royal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh paid a visit to the
garden when he came to the colony in the Galatea , and he planted
a Cedrus deodara as a memorial.
One of the greatest achievements in the history of the garden
has been the construction of the Victoria House—built for the
purpose of accommodating the giant South American water lily, the
“ Victoria Regia,” as well as for the reception and cultivation of
epiphytal and terrestrial orchids and other plants which require a
high degree of humidity and heat. The first “ Victoria ” was
planted on the 22nd July, 1867, in the tank especially made for
its reception, 36ft. by 26ft. Its progress surpassed all expectation.
It produced in the course of six months no less than fifty-four leaves,
the largest of which was 6ft. 4in. in diameter —and forty-one flowers
with nearly thirteen inches in diameter. The growth of the plant
was so vigorous, that notwithstanding the large size of the tank in
which it grew it became necessary to cut away two or three leaves
every week in order to make room for the young ones as they came.
The lattice leaf plant, Ouvirandra fenestralis, a native of Madagas-
car, was also planted and cultivated but did not do well. The
house afforded an abode for 1,169 other tropical plants, so that it
proved to be an excellent investment of the funds expended upon
it, and one of the most attractive of the objects collected in the
garden. The ordinary expenditure upon the purchase of new plants
was largely supplemented by donations of rare and valuable speci-
mens contributed by private individuals, ladies and gentlemen who
are at all times active and assiduous in increasing the general
collection. Over 3,250 trees and shrubs were planted in the course
of the year. The number of plants, trees, and shrubs distributed
for the adornment of public places amounted to 3,387.


The experiments made with the Sultana grape were most suc-
cessful, and in 1869 1,100 grafts were distributed amongst vine-
growers, of which more than two-thirds grew well. A collection
of wine grapes from the celebrated collection in the Jardin de
Luxembourg, which were new to this colony, throve well, and
were distributed amongst persons who were likely to turn them
to good account. The Guinea grass, Panicum giganteum, which
had been introduced into Queensland, was sent to this colony by
the Acclimatisation Society of Brisbane, and it has proved to be
well suited to the climate of South Australia after ordinary care
and attention have been bestowed upon it when first planted. The
introduction of the variety of the mulberry known as the Morus
cedrona , was followed by excellent results. All the young trees
which were planted out throve admirably, and it proved that the
climate was well adapted to the production of a good quality of
raw silk, for which there is always a good demand in Europe.
The annual report for the year 1870 dwelt upon the necessity
that existed in the colony for the cultivation of forest trees. The
suggestions made have not so far produced any startling or indeed
even adequate results. The establishment, however, of a forest
department has shown the value of the suggestions made, and the
South Australian system of forest conservation is now most suc-
cessful. It is not excelled in any of the Australian colonies—
indeed, South Australia may be regarded as the only colony where
the work of cultivating forest trees has been undertaken on a scale
at all commensurate to the importance of the industry. In recent
years a very large supply of the timber suitable for railway con-
struction has been drawn from the forests, planted and maintained
by the State, and in future years there is every probability that
South Australia will be completely independent of extraneous
supplies in this direction. This is one of the advantages which
have sprung from the planting and distribution of forest trees by
the committee of the Botanic Garden.
The new Palm House, the construction of which had been
determined on, was ordered in Bremen according to designs by
Herr G. Runge, architect, made for a gentleman named Rother-
munde. Its dimensions were, length 100 ft., width 35ft. The
length of the rotunda and dome in the centre is 37ft. and of the
wings 35ft. Its site was on a terrace about 6ft. above the level of
the adjacent parts of the garden. The house, which was con-
structed of iron and glass, was surrounded by a broad walk and a


grass margin, adorned with flower-Jbeds, statues, and fountains,
with two broad flights of steps leading to the entrance doors on
the north and south sides. The terrace itself was 150 ft. long by
75ft. broad. In order to obtain the earth required for the terrace,
a small lake was excavated in the creek. The erection of the
house was commenced as soon as the material came to hand, much
of the work being performed by the artificers and laborers em-
ployed about the garden. The ironwork of the house was put
together under professional supervision. The interior arrange-
ments are briefly these :—ln the centre of the rotunda there is a
magnificent specimen of the Latina barbonica, surrounded by a
large group of plants with variegated leaves. These are arranged
in a circle enclosed with gilt and painted tiles so as to give it the
appearance of a large but elegant basket of flowers. This group is
50ft. in circumference. East and west from this centre piece there
is an avenue Oft. wide flanked with fern trees from New Zealand,
Port Natal, and Queensland. The eastern and western ends of
the building terminates each in a semi-octagon. The eastern bay
contains a basin and a fountain surrounded by a fine collection of
ferns, such as Dicksonia antartica, desaplula coaperi, and Leichardt-
iana. In front of the basin some smaller kinds are planted,
viz. :—Adiantum amabile, A. concinnum, Farleyense Gymno-
grammas, Lomaris, Blechnums, Pteris, &c. The empty space
between them has been planted with Lycopodiums, which now
forms a splendid carpet. The western semi-octagon is converted
into a grotto formed of stalactite, imported from the Black Forest,
in Germany. It is about 10ft. high, and Bft. broad; a small cas-
cade falls from the back into a basin, over quartz and sandstone
rocks. The top of the grotto is decorated with dracaenas, palms,
&c., intermixed with climbing plants, the effect of which is excel-
lent, as the creepers drop in festoons over the stalactite. The
inner wall of the grotto is planted with philodendron, daguense,
melanochrysum, pothos, argyrase macrophylla, &c., which, growing
on the stalactite itself, spread their leaves most symetrically. The
walks are enclosed with ornamental borders, two feet high, made
of bricks and cement, with a tasteful coping, and the floor is
covered with red and black octagon tiles, which have a very good
effect. The brackets which support the roof and the sides of the
wings of the house have been planted with choice climbing plants,
which now help to shade and cool the house. As far as the Palm
House itself is concerned, it may be regarded as being as perfect


as it can be made. It hgs, however, one fault, which the
abundance of material available for furnishing it, soOn made
apparent. It is too small. If it -were twice the size all the space
could be used to advantage, and it seems not impossible that it
will be found absolutely necessary to make further provision for
exhibiting the noble collection of plants, &c., which now are neces-
sarily placed in situations where the public at present have na
access to them. The Palm House was completed in 1873, and it
forms one of the prominent objects in the garden, and its contents
one of the most attractive. The total cost of the building has
been about £4,000.
The necessity for providing a new museum for the reception of
specimens of plants and their products, models of fruits, fungi, Sec.,
was pressed upon the legislature in 1877, and in that year a grant
was sanctioned by the Parliament for a suitable building. Ibis
was the origin of the Museum of Economic Botany, which has now
been constructed and furnished. Before this building was begun
a considerable addition was made to the storehouse, which had
been erected in the previous year. It was 45 feet long by 25 feet
wide, but it was extended to a length of 71 feet, so as to find room
for 600 additional plants. Besides this a new entrance gate, of a
highly ornamental character was placed on North-terrace. It is
designed in good taste, and forms one of the most striking features
of the terrace, leading, as it does, immediately to the brook walk,
which runs down the centre of the garden, 'there is not a more
elegant entrance gate to any domain in the colony. It was im-
ported from England, and the cost was most moderate.
The new Museum of Economic Botany was designed by Mr.
E. J. Woods, Architect-in-Chief, and built under his superintend-
ence. It is in the Greek style, and the first of the kind in South
Australia. It is 104 feet long by 40 feet wide, and 25 feet high.
It is entered through a portico reached by a flight of six steps. It
is lighted by six windows on the north, and the same number on
the south side of the building, and by three in the western end.
These are all eight feet high, and proportionally wide, so that the
light is excellent. The ceiling is beautifully decorated. Between
the windows the show cases are placed ; these are fixed at right
angles to the windows, and are nine feet in height, thus both sides
of the cases can be made available. Under the windows, and in
the recesses formed by these cases, other covered cases in the form
of tables are placed lengthwise, and two rows of show cases rest-


ing on tables extend down the centre of the room from east to
west. At the eastern end of the btiilding a separate room has
been set aside for the Herbarium. The plants which compose it
are contained in portfolios arranged in shelves, and each portfolio
is labelled on the outside with the orders and genera it contains,
so that any particular genus which may be wanted can be found
without difficulty.
The objects collected in this museum are of the most varied and
useful as well as of an interesting nature. No justice can be done to
the labor and pains by means of which the museum has been
finished, nor to the scientific and intrinsic value of these specimens.
A mere catalogue of its contents would convey a very inadequate
notion of what it really is. It may be stated that a more instruc-
tive and attractive exhibition of the products of the vegetable
kingdom, and of the uses to which they are applied, cannot be
found in any other colony in Australia.
There are many thousands of objects arranged in the museum,
and they are continually on the increase. The value and attrac-
tiveness of this museum is probably greater than that of any other
part of the garden.
The ground surrounding the museum has been laid out in lawns
and flower parterres which are designed in the Greek style in
order to harmonise with the building itself. Statues, which repre-
sent the four seasons, have been placed on the lawn surrounding
it. The collection in the Economic Museum has robbed the old
museum of none of its valuable features, the cases and shelves of
that building being well filled, and offering in their own way much
for the amusement and instruction of visitors. The Economic
Museum was opened to the public in 1880.
From that year down to the present time there has been little
undertaken in the development of the garden which requires
special mention. Small improvements in various directions are
continually going on, which to the constant visitors do not attract
much attention. A few months absence, however, soon shows
what has been done in the interim, for although the garden itself
does not now admit of extension, the constant additions and small
alterations that are made to and in the portions of the area which
are already occupied show that the work of improvement and
ornamentation is increasing.
To the outside observer the garden looks merely as if much
money and pains had been devolved to the laying out and arrange-


ment of extensive pleasure-grounds, and that the Government
Avhich supplied the funds had been laudably and liberally solicitous
for the instruction and amusement of the inhabitants of Adelaide
and its visitors.
This, perhaps, is the least praise that can be bestowed on the
establishment, because it is the most common ; but the establish-
ment of the Botanic Garden, whatever might have been the original
inception of its founders, has developed higher aims and more
solid results than could have been expected from the modest scale
on which the first operations were undertaken. If the very
moderate grants of public money which have annually been voted
for the use of the committee which undertakes from year to year
the general responsibility, are considered—if the fluctuations in
the prosperity of the colony are duly weighed, and the difficulties
of contending with trying and uncertain seasons are fairly regarded
—it will not be denied that an amount of success has attended the
exertions of those who have been intrusted with the care and
control of the garden, -which could scarcely have been anticipated.
This, sc) far, is a matter of congratulation to the colony, but it
does not rest at that point. The garden has not only formed a
centre of cultivation, but it has been the source from which reliable
and valuable information has been disseminated over the whole
colony. The reports which have been published from year to year
have been to some extent taken up by details which related to the
actual work performed in forming and extending the garden, but
the greater portion of those reports has consisted of descriptions of
new forest trees, shrubs, and plants (medicinal and otherwise),
vegetables of various kinds, grasses, cereals, orchids, and plant
flowers useful for making perfumes. These descriptions have been
supplemented by directions as to the methods of cultivation, the
times of planting, the soil and climate best suited to their habits
and constitution. Such descriptions, followed as they were by
timely and judicious distributions of the seeds, trees, &c., have
been the means of diffusing knowledge of the most valuable and
varied character, and have brought to the agriculturists, market
gardeners, and others, a knowledge of many resources of the highest
value. Up to the present time, the really useful work that has
been performed in this way has been great, though the results are
not quite so apparent as they might have been expected to be.
This may be attributable in some measure, to the very long cycle
of dry and otherwise unfavorable seasons which have been so in-


jurious to every kind of agricultural pursuit. The serious com-
mercial depression has also contributed its share in restraining
experimental productions, because, with a restricted money market
and scarcity of capital, new enterprises have necessarily been kept
in the background. The real success of the gardens in all respects,
encourages those who manage its affairs to hope that every future
year will be able to furnish evidence of progress, both in the garden
and in the colony, even greater than that recorded in the year of
jubilee.
It is entirely due to the efforts made through the management of
the garden, that the public attention has been so thoroughly
awakened to the advantages and profits which may be derived from
the systematic cultivation of the wattle. A small pamphlet on this
subject has been printed and circulated by this means. Before
this, mention had frequently been made of the subject, es-
pecially in a paper read before the Chamber of Manufactures on
•“ Forest Tree planting.” In the colony of Victoria, the matter
was considered so important that the Government appointed a
board especially to inquire into it. The board collected a vast deal
of valuable information, which has been made public. The know-
ledge and suggestions circulated by means of the directorate of the
South Australian Botanic Gardens, has been to promote and stimu-
late the planting of the wattle on a large scale by private persons,
and more recently the matter has been taken in hand by the
■Government, which is now about to establish wattle plantations in
parts of the colony. The full effects of the efforts now
called forth to establish the wattle industry cannot at the present
moment be properly estimated. A few years must elapse before
substantial results can be ascertained. It is certain, however, that
;a valuable industry has been established which will render one
branch of agricultural cultivation in the colony a solid im r estment,
instead of a speculation depending upon the uncertainty of the
early seasons.
Another matter which goes to show the great value of the garden
as a means of public instruction, which should not remain unnoticed,
is a sketch such as this. Other productions have been introduced
and distributed by the director, and thus brought into consideration
in South Australia. Few except those who have cattle to provide
for can estimate the value of some of the grasses which have been
brought here through the Botanic Garden. Some, it is true, have
not succeeded; others, however, have answered all the expectations


formed of them, especially the various kinds of sorghums or millets,
including the broomcorn, which has been introduced from Califor-
nia. All kinds stand the dry weather and hot winds well, and
provide a nutritious summer fodder. Previous to their introduction
there was only one variety of the sorghum grown in the colony,
known as the “ Farmer’s Friend.”
A most important addition to our wheat plants has been made
by the introduction of “Du Toit’s ” wheat, otherwise known as
African bearded wheat. The accounts which have been received of
the success of this cereal are most satisfactory, and it is now recog-
nised as the most reliable of the varitiesof wheat which the farmers
possess. This variety was brought here by the Government and
distributed by the garden, which had called attention to its great
value.
Several important and useful varieties of fibre plants have been
experimented on and distributed, though, probably owing to the
general scarcity of water, their cultivation has not reached large
dimensions.
It would occupy too much space to enumerate all the plants—
medicinal, dye, and others—which have been placed at the disposal
of the farming industries through the agency of the garden. A
beginning has, however, been made, and it is hoped that the
efforts of the direction to encourage cultivation will bear sub-
stantial fruit in the near future. The results so far as they have
been ascertained may not at present be great, but they have fully
established the fact, that for successful agriculture there is no
longer any necessity for farmers to rely, as many of them have done,
upon the uncertainty of the cereal products in such dry seasons as
we have recently passe d through.


NATURAL PRODUCTS.
Cereals.
The great extent of land in South Australia suitable for the
production of cereals made wheat raising one of our chief indus-
tries. It was engaged in by many who, without any previous-
knowledge or training, took up our virgin soil, and preferred to
cultivate that crop which gave the least trouble to settlers inade-
quately provided with implements suited to the climatic conditions
of a new country. Notwithstanding these drawbacks, they suc-
ceeded in making for themselves comfortable homesteads, and
gathering around them the luxuries, as well as the comforts and
pleasures of life.
From the establishment of the colony until 1850, when the-
first exports of wheat were made, only sufficient was grown to
supply the wants of the inhabitants; but in the year 1845, Ridley’s
Adelaide stripper revolutionized the method of reaping, and
enabled our farmers to indefinitely extend the area of appropriate
land suitable for wheat-culture. Later on, the stump-jumping
plough and the mullenizer further materially assisted in the
process of extracting from the soil, with a limited expenditure of
time and labor, a maximum of profit, until our exports for 1886,
which may be considered a very low average year, because of the
drought, Avere of the value of £2,205,249, including—Barley,
£424 ; bran and pollard, £20,351 ; flour, £585,640 ; oats, £1,628 ;
Avheat, £1,576,873 ; meal, £l4l ; hay and chaff, £20,192.
Owing to the dry, sunny climate of South Australia, the per-
centage of gluten in our Avheat is much greater than in that of
any other grown, either in the Australian colonies or India; and
hence Adelaide wheat fetches the highest price in the market. But
the markets of the rvorld have undergone much change during the
last fifty years. We are now in daily or hourly communication with
each other by means of railways, steamships, or the electric tele-
graph lines; therefore, if there be local deficiencies in one part of
the Avorld, they are quickly supplied from the surplus stores


available elsewhere. Hence, for the last few years, a uniform
price in the London markets has been steadily maintained, and I
see no reason for anticipating a prospect of permanent increase in
the market price of wheat. Competition is so keen through-
out the world, and all the surplus supplies find their way to
England from the wheat-growing districts of America, India, and
Australia, from whence they are distributed throughout Western
Europe, that it would only be by a total failure of the crops in one
or other of the grain-producing countries that an immediate
advance in price could take place.
This competition, however, has had a beneficial effect upon our
agriculturists. Adversity has forced them to rely no longer exclu-
sively on wheat-raising, but to combine mixed agriculture with
stock and dairy farming, fruit culture, and vine growing.
Oats are grown in very limited quantities where the climate is
cooler and moister than the average. Seldom for sale in the
Australian markets, but principally for use as hay, and for feeding
purposes.
Barlerj yields very good crops of excellent quality, but there is
not enough grown to supply the wants of the local brewers.
The barley from Kangaroo Island is in good repute, and most
of omr brewers have encouraged its production with such success
that soon w'e hope to be independent of importations.
Maize grows luxuriantly at the north; and at the Hergott bore,
Avhere irrigation has been applied, some splendid specimens were
grown; but in any part of the colony where water is plentiful,
there feed is abundant.
In the south-east corner of the province, where the drained
lands reclaimed from the marshes are planted with root crops,
nearly 100,000 acres have been sold at an average of £2 per acre.
In the Mount Gambler district potatoes are grown, averaging from
nine to thirteen tons per acre. Beetroot, mangold, and all root
fodder plants thrive luxuriantly south of Adelaide; and, under the
beneficent system of water conservation and irrigation, all kinds of
fodder crops can be raised throughout the settled districts of the
north.
The ignorance which had existed of the capabilities of our
colony is exemplified in a most remarkable manner by the facts
which have come to light relative to the so-called “ desert.” That
calumny was effectually cleared aw'ay during the construction of
the overland'railway line, and just lately there has been shown in


Adelaide specimens of several kinds of cereals, grown by the
officers of the Woods and Forests Department, at a place which
“ so-called ” experts stated would not bear a blade of grass.
The first exhibit on the right of the main entrance to the
Exhibition building is one most interesting and instructive. Within
the compass of a few feet are shown a formation of wheat, beans,
peas, millet, and maize ; the supports of the superstructure being
made from woods grown on Yorke Peninsula. Upon these rest
cases containing dried fruits, currants, raisins, figs, prunes, &c. ;
specimens of the finest Brandis almonds grown in the colony; pure
and delicious transparent olive oil, silk cocoons, fleeces of wool,
bunches of grapes, specimens of the carob bean, all tending to
prove the truth of the opinion expressed by the Executive Com-
missioner of the Exhibition, Sir Samuel Davenport, that “We
“ live in a country flowing with milk and honey, wine and oil, and
“that it is our own fault if we do not cultivate the gifts the gods
“ provide us.” Another eminent authority, Sir Robert Dalrymple
Ross, Speaker of the House of Assembly, states that “ Within
“ sight of Adelaide city, on the Mount Lofty Ranges, there is
“ room for a million of souls to obtain a comfortable living,”
Olive OH.
The Olive has for a long time been grown near Adelaide. As far
back as 1851, samples of the oil were shown at the great Exhibition
in London, and obtained honorable mention. At Philadelphia in
1876, at Paris in 1878, at Sydney in 1880, at Melbourne in 1881,
at Calcutta in 1883, and at the Colonial and Indian Exhibition
last year, olive oil from South Australia invariably carried off
the premier prize. At present the price it fetches per gallon is
10s., and most of the production is sold for distribution in this and
the adjoining colonies.
Honey.
In South Australia bee-keeping has become an important in-
dustry. Our extensive forests of eucalypti growing on the ranges
near Adelaide favors its development, and much assistance was
given by the Chamber of Manufactures in importing Ligurian bees
to be kept at Kangaroo Island, from which Australian bee-keepers
can draw their stocks. The report of the expert at the Colonial
and Indian Exhibition states, “ Some fine samples of honey were
“exhibited in the court of this colony.”


The following information is extracted from the report of the
expert appointed by the Royal Commission for the Colonial and
Indian Exhibition, Thomas Wardle, Esq., F.C.S., states—
“ An excellent exhibit of white cocoons was made by Dr. W.
“ Lennox Cleland, Resident Medical Officer of the Parkside Lunatic
“ Asylum. These cocoons had been sent over in considerable
“ quantity, and I undertook to have them reeled, and the resulting
“ raw silk made into silk fabrics. I obtained 3ibs. 14ozs. of raw
“ silk, and Messrs. J. Birchenough and Sons have thrown and
“ manufactured it into a beautiful series of handkerchiefs, &c.,
“ and have sent me the following report of it:—‘The silk reeled
“ ‘ at Leek from Australian cocoons is on the whole very satis-
“ ‘ factory. As a winding silk it is superior to China silk, and
“ ‘ about equal to a good Japan or Italian. Its elasticity is not
“ ‘ so good as the last two classes of silk, and in places the thread
“ ‘ has a tendency to split, and where this occurs the result is
“ ‘ disappointing. There seems to be an absence of gum, which
“ ‘ will account in some degree for this slight fault. The silk is
“ ‘ clean, and would be passed as a good silk for a throwster,
“ ‘ there being an absence of slubs, knibs and dirt, which is
“ ‘ greatly in its favour. The general sizes seems to be 16 to 20
“ ‘ deniers, but it will range from about 10 to 24 deniers, single
“ ‘ thread. As to its value, it is difficult to assess it until it has
“ ‘ passed through every process ; but to judge from the present
“ ‘ appearance and values, it should be worth about 20s. per lb.’
“ The cocoons were reeled by the French reeler who was sent over
“ to the Exhibition by the kindness of the Chamber of Commerce
“ at Lyons, through the instrumentality of Monsieur J. Dusuzeau,
“ Directeur of the Laboratoire de Sericiculture of Lyons. After
“ the close of the Exhibition the reeler came down to Leek and
“ reeled the cocoons in the adjoining house to my own, where I
“ had daily opportunities of observing the work. The reeling
“ machine used was similar to that employed at the Exhibition,
“ but of a more simple and economical construction. I have had
“ it made to send out to India as a Government pattern, and would
“ strongly recommend its adoption to those in Australia who wish
“to reel cocoons. It contains all the elements of the best
“ appliances of Italy, the use of which I have studied, but so
“ simplified as to be capable of cottage use, for which purpose in


“ India I have designed it in order to give so agreeable an occu-
pation to the women there wirose caste customs of almost
■“ perpetual indoor life are well known.
“ Many particulars respecting this method of reeling, and of the
“ silks of silk-producing countries will be found in my Descriptive
“ Catalogue of the Indian Silk Culture Court above referred to.
“ The following is the result of ray laboratory examinations of
“ the cocoons before-mentioned, exhibited in the South Australian
“ Court:—
Species of cocoon and Colony in which it is produced. —Mulberry-fed
silkworm cocoon (Botnbyx mori) , South Australia.
Description of cocoon. —Form: elliptical-oblong with slight medial de-
pression. Color: white. Texture: compact. Reeling: good. Rave
composed of two cylindrical structureless brins.
Weight of cocoon. —o - 366 gramme.
Dimensions of cocoon. —3s x 16 millimetres.
Length of have reeled. —497 metres.
Weight of have reeled. —o'l62 gramme.
'litre of have, milligrammes per 500 metres. —l63 milligrammes.
Tit re of have, in deniers. —3 - 06.
Mean diameter of have. —o - 0473 millimetre.
Mean elasticity. —24 - 07 per cent.
Mean tenacity. —l 3 -43 grammes.
Percentage of silk reeled from the cocoon. —44 - 26 per cent.
“Trials of the have —(i.) 10 meters from the end at the outside
■“ of the cocoon; (n.) at the middle of the cocoon; and (in.) 10
•“ meters from the end at the inside of the cocoon
111.
427
Diameter of have in ten-thousandths of )
a millimetre )
Percentage of elasticity. Average of six 1
estimations /
Tenacity or breaking strength in grammes. j
Average of six estimations j
Weight in milligrammes of each
100 metres of have reeled from
the cocoon, commencing at the
end of the have which is at the
outside of the cocoon
f 97 metres!
| remained, |
■< weighing i
I 27 milli- |
t grammes. J
“ I must not conclude my notice of this Court without mentioning
“my indebtedness to Sir Samuel and Lady Davenport for their
and Lady Davenport for their
“ great courtesy and kindness during the Exhibition, and the


■“ affability with which I was always received when making
“ inquiries for this report. The interest they take in silk culture
•“ is such that South Australia promises one day to be an important
“ silk-producing colony.
“ Whether all the circumstances which are favourable to such a
■“ consummation offer sufficient inducement to emigrants acquainted
“ with sericiculture I am unable to decide, but I think the subject
“ well worth consideration, especially as the objection which I
“heard put forward so frequently in 1878 at Paris, I have
“ fortunately been able to meet. It was then said that although
“ the climate and country were quite favorable to the culture of
“ the silkworm, labor was scarce and too dear for its application to
“ cocoon-reeling to be thought of. This objection also held good
“ with regard to other parts of Australia. '
“ Feeling this obstacle in itself to be insuperable, I set about
“ casting for a remedy, and my visit to India supplied one, which
“ was as follows : —Australia need not [trouble itself with cocoon-
“ reeling at all, but should export the cocoons as raw produce to
“ the reeling districts of Bengal, where they can either be reeled
“by commission, or, what is better, bought outright. I found in
■“ Bengal a non-continuous state of silk-reeling owing to the bunds
“ or cocoon harvests having their respective reeling seasons imme-
“ diately following them, notably after the July or rainy bund, and
“ the November, or cold-weather bund.
“ Briefly, the natives are only occupied six months in the year,
■“ and they would gladly welcome arrivals of cocoons from Australia,
■** or other sources, to give them continuous employment.
“ I have it on the authority of the extensive firm of Messrs.
“ Robert Watson & Co., through their agent and director Mr.
“ Morey, who has the management and control of their numerous
“ filatures in the Rajshahi district, where a considerable proportion
“ of the population is employed in cocoon-reeling, that it would be
“ a very great help indeed if they could be supplied with cocoons
■“ to keep their factories or filatures going all the year round, instead
“ of about six months only out of the twelve as at present.
“ Mr. Morey informed me that importing cocoons from China
“ could be made to pay, and that their factories could take all the
■“ cocoons which the colonies could produce for some time , as the
“ very best qualities of silk could be reeled from them.
“ As regards the value of cocoons reared in the colonies, at the
present prices of raw silk—ltalian 225. 6d. per lb., China 15s. 6d.


“per lb., Bengal 15s. per lb., French 225. 6d. per lb., Japan 19s.
“ 6d. per lb.—it would not be less than 2s. 6d. per lb. in the dried
“ state.
“ The best arrangement would probably be to pay so much per
“ lb. for the silk, allowing the reelers a fair profit; but, at any rate,
“ there would always be a market for the cocoons, the chrysalides
“ having been first killed, and the cocoons well dried before
“ packing.
“ For two parcels of cocoons, which I have had to buy from
“ Marseilles for the Royal Commission of the Colonial and Indian
“ Exhibition, for the unbroken continuance of the cocoon-reeling
“ in the Indian Silk Culture Court, I had to pay ss. per lb.
“ Silkworm eggs can be easily obtained from any of the countries
“ the price of whose raw silk is above quoted.
“ The yield of raw silk from 11b. of cocoons is about l|oz.
This information, coming from such an eminent authority, ought
to call attention to the importance of sericulture in our colony ;
and the further extract from Baron von Mueller may be of advan-
tage to those desirous of engaging in silk culture, an industry
most suitable for ladies and children.
“ Superior varieties of mulberry can be grafted with ease on
“ ordinary stock. M . Indica, L., M. macrophylla, Moretti, M.
“ Moreitiana, Jacq.. M. Chinesis, Bertol., M. latifolia, Poir.,
“M. Italian , Poir., M. Japonica , Nois, M. JByzantina, Sieb., M.
“ nervosa , Del., M. pumila, Nois., M. tortuosa, Audib., as well as
“M. Constantinnpolitana , Lamarck, with which, according to Prof.
“C. Koch, is identical M. mullicaulis of Perrottet, are merely
“ forms of M. alba, to which probably also M. Tatarica, L., and
“M. pabularia, Jacquin, belong. The variety known as M. Indica
“ produces black fruits. The raising of mulberry trees has recently
“ assumed enormous dimensions in California, where between seven
“and eight millions were planted since 1870. The process of
“ rearing the silk insect is simple, and involves no laborious
“ exertions. The cocoons, after they have been properly steamed,
“ dried, and pressed, readily find purchasers in Europe, the price
“ ranging according to quality from 3s. to 6s. per lb. The eggs of
“the silk moth sell at a price from 16s. to £2 per oz. In 1870,
“ Japan had to provide two millions of ounces of silk ova for
“ Europe, where the worms had extensively fallen victims to
“ disease. As an example of the profit to be realised, a Californian
“ fact may be cited, according to which £7OO w r ere the clear gain


“from 31 acres, the working expenses having been £93. The
“ Commissioner of Agriculture of the United States has estimated
“ that, under ordinary circumstances, an acre should support from
“700 to 1,000 mulberry trees, producing, when four years old r
“ 5,0001b5. of leaves fit for food. On this quantity of leaves can
“ be reared 140,000 worms, from which ova at a net profit ranging
“ from £BO to £240 per acre will be obtained by the work of one-
“ person. Mr. C. Brady, of Sydney, thinks the probable proceeds-
“of silk culture to be from £6O to £l5O for the acre. The dis-
“ crepancies in calculations of this kind are explained by differences*
“ in clime, soil, attention, treatment, and also rate of labor.
“The results of Mr. Brady’s experience on the varieties of
“ Mortis alba are as follows :—ln the normal form the fruits are
“ white, with a purplish tinge more or less deep ; the bark is pale ;
“ the leaf is also of a pale hue, not very early, nor very tender, nor
“ very abundant. It may be grown on moist ground so long as
“ such is drained, or it will live even on poor, loose, gravelly soil,,
“bordering on running water. The Cevennes variety is a free
“ grower, affords a large quantity of leaves, though of rather thick
“ consistence ; all varieties of the Morns Bombyx like these leaves,
“ whether young or old ; it is also called the rose-leaved variety ;
“ the silk which it yields is substantial in quantity, and also good
“in quality; it does best on rich dry slopes. The bushy Indian
“ variety has a fine leaf of a beautiful green, which, though light
“in weight, is abundantly produced ; it can be cut back to the
“ stem three or four times a year; the leaves are flat, long, and
“ pointed, possess a fine aroma, and are relished by every variety
“ of the ordinary silk insect, though all do not thrive equally well
“on it; the silk derived from this variety is excellent, but not
“ always so heavy in quantity as that produced from the rosy
“ variety ; it prefers rich, low lying bottoms, is a greedy feeder,
“but may thus be made to cover an extraordinary breadth of
“ alluvial or manured land in a marvellously short space of time.
“ At Sydney Mr. Brady can provide leaves from this Indian variety
“ all through the year by the removal of cuttings, which will strike
“ their roots almost at any season ; it also ripens seeds readily, and
“ should be kept at bush size ; it requires naturally less space than
“the other kinds. A fourth variety comes from North China ; it
“ has heart-shaped, flat, thickish leaves, which form very good food
“ for the silkworm. Mr. Brady, as Avell as Mr. Martelli, recom-
“ mend very particularly the variety passing under the name of


“ Morns muUicaulis for the worms in their earliest stages. The
“ former recommends the Cape variety also; the latter wishes
“likewise the variety called Morns Morettiana to be used, on
“ account of its succulent nutritious foliage, so well adapted for
*' the insect while yet very young, and also on account of producing
“ the largest amount of food within the shortest time. The Manilla
■“ variety, above mentioned as Morns multicaulis, comes into bear-
•“ ins: several weeks earlier than most other sorts, and should
“ therefore be at hand for early hatched worms. An excellent
“ phytological exposition of the numerous varieties of the white
“ mulberry tree is given in De Candolle’s Prodomus, xvii. 238-245
“(1873).”
Since the foregoing appeared in print I have been informed by
Dr. Cleland that:
“As carrying out Mr. Thomas War die's suggestions respecting
“ India as being a likely and suitable market, you will be pleased
“ to hear that communications have been opened up with certain
“ leading people in Calcutta, by Messrs. Harrold Bros., and that I
“ have promised my next year's crop of cocoons as an experimental
“ shipment. These ivill be dispatched next January ”,
Wattle Bark.
The exports of wattle bark during the last ten years have
amounted to £421,078. In 1886 the value of shipments amounted
to £51,176. Over the hill sides, in the plains, on the Murray
flats, and in fact all over South Australia, the indigenous wattle
can be grown, and become a source of revenue for our farmers,
squatters, and others interested in the development of the country.
The poorest land upon the hill sides of Adelaide ranges will well
repay any attention which may be given to it.
For the information of South Australian growers and shippers,
I have extracted the following from the report of the expert
appointed by the Royal Imperial Commissioners for the Colonial
and Indian Exhibition at London last year: —
“They have an admirable tanning agent in the bark of the
“ acacia mimosa, or 4 wattle,’ as it is spoken of in the country.
“ The leather produced by this bark is some of it of bright
“ color and high excellence, and large quantities are sent to
•“ England, where it sells as readily as the production of their
■“ tanvards. The black wattle bark is the richest in tanning pro-


“ perties, and the best is that shipped from Adelaide, where the
“ chopping, grinding, packing, &c., is as well done as it is capable
“ of being.
“ The manufacture of extract from both the wood and bark of
“ the mimosa was mentioned by one of the representatives of the
“ Australian courts as having been commenced, and if successfully
“ carried out, it might be the means of economising freight on
“ such a long sea voyage. Otherwise tanners in this country are
“ very well satisfied with the bark, whether chopped or ground,
“ sent by the best known shippers; and the skilful combination of
“ this most valuable tanning agent with English oak bark, myra-
“ bolanes, and valonea, has enabled experienced tanners to produce
“ sole leather little inferior to that made from pure oak bark, in
“ half the time, and at a material reduction of the cost of tanning
“ compared with that of the old system.”
The Conservator of Forests, Mr. J. E. Brown, estimated —
“ Profits to be derived from Wattle cultivation. —We now come
“ to consider the most important subject of this report, namely,
“ that of the profits which may be derived from the cultivation of
“ the wattle tree.
“ At the distances apart which I recommend the trees to be
“ grown —namely, 4ft. to 6ft.—there will be an average of 1,200
“ trees to the acre. In order, however, to make due allowance for
“ blanks, I shall base my calculations upon there being 1,000 only
“ to each acre.
“ At the present time, bark is selling at £7 10s. and £8 per ton,
“ and there is every chance of a still higher price being obtained
“ for it during the next few years. Still, to be on the safe side,
“ I will put its value down at £5 per ton only.
“ I give £5 per ton as the probable yield per acre. That this is
“ a low estimate will be admitted, when it is considered that this
“ only allows for 1 Olbs. of bark to be taken from each tree.
“ I shall now give a tabulated statement of the probable revenue
“ and expenditure during a period of seven years, in connection
“ with a wattle plantation, formed upon 100 acres of land specially
“ purchased for the purpose, and upon which wattles had not
“ previously grown.”
Revenue.
£ a. d.
To value of property increased and improvements, say 400 0 0
“ “ 500 tons of bark at £5 per ton 2,600 0 0
£2,900 0 0


f
s.
d.
By purchase of 100 acres, at £3 per acre
“ cost of substantial fence all round, say miles, at
300
0
0
£50 per mile
75
0
0
“ ploughing 100 acres, at 8s. per acre
40
0
0
“ cost of 30lbs. of seed, at Is. per lb
1
10
0
* ‘ labor sowing the seed in rows, say at 5s. per acre..
25
0
0
“ * scarifying between the rows twice, at 4s. per acre..
20
0
0
“ thinning and pruning for two years, at 10s. per acre
per annum
100
0
0
“ forming firebreaks during the third to seventh year,
say £5 per annum
25
0
0
“ sundries
50
0
0
“ interest on money expended during the seven
years, say
“ cost of stripping 500 tons of bark, at 25s. per ton..
280
0
0
625
0
0
“ cost of carting same to market, at 10s. per ton ....
250
0
0
Balance, being clear profit 1.
,108
0
0
£2,900
0
0
Expenditure.
Industrial Fibres.
The fibres sent by the Government of South Australia to the
•Colonial and Indian Exhibition were analysed by that eminent
•chemist, G. F. Cross, Esq., of Lincoln’s Inn Fields, whose report
was so satisfactory that the Executive Commissioner, Sir Samuel
Davenport, instructed his firm to test the samples in a practical
manner, for the purpose of finding out those natural products
which, from their abundance, might be adapted to the require-
ments of the colony. I append the report, as follows: —
“ The South Australian Commissioners exhibited two fibrous
“ substances— ‘ Mullett’s ’ fibre, the long sword-shaped leaves of
■“ the Lepidosperma gladiatum , and ‘ Porcupine Grass.’
“ These fibres on analysis yielded the following percentages of
■“ cellulose respectively : 34-4 and 36‘5. The Lepidosperma ex-
“ amined in transverse section under the microscope, was found to
■“ contain a fair proportion of fibrovascular bundles, of which the
■“ constituent bast fibres have an average length of U5-2’5 mm.
“ These results were such as to justify a paper-making experi-
•“ ment, for which, with commendable foresight, the Commissioners
“ had brought a sufficient quantity. The raw material was sent to
“ the well-known paper mill of Mr. E. Joynson, of St. Mary Cray,
•“ Kent, he having kindly volunteered to personally superintend the
“ work of converting it into paper. The substance was * pulped ’
“ by the process of boiling, at 401bs. pressure, with basic sulphite
“of soda (20 per cent.); afterwards washed, bleached, and beaten
“in the ordinary way. A small portion was made into sheets on a


“ hand frame, and yielded a paper of a slight yellowish colour,
“ which left nothing to be desired in point of strength.
“ The bulk was run on the machine, the operation being wit-
“ nessed by Sir Samuel Davenport and Mr. Scott. Here also an
“ excellent paper was produced, exceptionally strong, and taking a
“ good finish in the glazing rolls. The result was altogether
“ satisfactory, and Mr. Joynson asked to be supplied with sufficient
“ raw material for making a ton of paper, in order farther to de-
“ monstrate its paper-making qualities. This request has been
“ complied with, and a quantity of three tons is now on its way.
“ It is intended to make this into paper for exhibition in Adelaide
“ this year. The Porcupine Grass having been found on preliminary
“ investigation to be more nearly allied to the well-known Esparto,
“ was pulped on the usual plan of treating the latter, viz., boiling
“ under pressure with caustic soda solution. The grass, however,
“ having been collected by amateurs, and therefore with a plentiful
“ admixture of roots and seeds, yielded a very unpromising mixture.
“ By carefully picking over a small portion, and beating it in a
“ model beater, after bleaching, some excellent pulp was obtained
“ and made into sheets on the frame. In this way the paper-
“ making qualities of the fibre was satisfactorily demonstrated.
“ In these two raw materials, therefore, the colony has a supply
“of good paper-making fibre: their value will of course be
“ determined very much by local considerations. The papers
“ which they make are similar to those obtained from Adansonia
“ and Esparto respectively, the yield being some 10 - 15 per cent.
“ less. This will convey a better idea of their market value than
“an attempted money estimate, which would probably be mis-
“ leading.
Fresh Fruits.
The Commissioners appointed to arrange for the representation
of this colony at the Colonial and Indian Exhibition in London
last year wisely expended several hundred pounds in making
experiments to show whether our surplus stock of fresh fruits
could be exported with profit to the grower.
The authorities in London erected a market within the Exhibi-
tion, and there each shipment, as it arrived, was placed and sold.
Hundreds of thousands of English people realised for the first time
that Australia was a country so extensive that all the fruits of a
temperate climate, and most of those of a tropical or semi-tropical


character, "were grown here; and the fruitgrowers of South Aus-
tralia saw the possibility of an unlimited extension of orchards-
nestling amongst the ranges near Adelaide, the produce of which,
would always command a profitable market in the Old \\ orld.
There are upwards of 600 market gardeners with holdings ranging
from three or four acres up to fifty, of which the united acreage
exceeds 12,000; but in view of the successes which attended the-
experimental shipments of apples, pears, and oranges last year, it
may confidently be looked for that the vast area of uncultivated
lands lying within easy distance of a shipping port will rapidly be
planted with fruit trees which will come into bearing, the produce
of which can be delivered in London at a season 'uhen theie is no
other fresh fruit available of a similar kind.
Judging from the open market returns, as seen at the Colonial
and Indian Exhibition, the average price realised for a case of
apples or pears is 255., provided the fruit is properly selected,
packed, and shipped in cool chambers. The report of the expert
states:
“ This colony made a very successful show of fresh fruits. Its
“ grapes, apples, and pears were of special interest, not so much
“ for what they were in themselves, as for the possibilities which
“ they foreshadowed, and the promise which they held out of an
“ extensive and prosperous fruit trade between the Australian
“ colonies and the mother country. The resources of civilization
“in this instance are evidently being directed to a comparatively
“ unworked field; and there is no reason why this trade in fruit
“ should not grow into permanent benefit alike to producer and
“ consumer. The special points wherein some shipments failed
“ have already been pointed out by Mr. D. Tallerman, who had
“ charge of the Colonial Market, and it is unnecessary to repeat
“ them here. The knowledge, so far gained, will be of great
“ benefit in arranging for future consignments. In packing fruit
“ it is suggested that ‘the cases for fruits should be of the ordinary
“ ‘ flat shape, with one or two partitions. I find,’ says Mr. Taller-
“ ‘ man, ‘ that the fruit from Adelaide, in the old-fashioned cheap
“ ‘ Tasmanian cases, with the apples papered, has arrived in good
“ ‘ condition. Some South Australian shippers simply line the
“ ‘ cases with paper, and pack their apples loose, and they have
“ ‘ arrived equally well; but I recommend that all large and choice
“ ‘ fruits be papered.’
Another method of packing is that successfully adopted by Mr.


Jno. Bowman, of Auckland, New Zealand, some of whose fruit
was twelve weeks on the voyage :
“ His mode of packing seems to have resulted satisfactorily.
“ Mr. Bowman’s apples were packed in a close case of Kauri pine,
“ with no holes for ventilation. Each apple was wrapped in tissue
“ paper, and completely surrounded with chaff, so tightly packed
“ that the fruit could not shake about. The apples were from
“ one-and-a-half to two inches apart at the nearest point. Each
“ layer of apples was separated by a wooden shelf. The chaff
“ was not dried artificially before packing. On opening the case,
“ from 10 to 13 per cent, only were found unfit for use, the rest of
“ them being in perfect condition, and still retaining their bloom.
“ The apples had not sweated at ail, nor had the dampness from
“ the bad fruit affected the good cases near them. The fruit being
“ large and fine attracted great attention from visitors, and when
“ placed in a glass case in a prominent part of the Court, was
“ generally taken for models similar to those shown by the
“ Australian colonies.
“ Although packed in the colony three weeks before subsequent
“ arrivals, some of these apples were still good in the case after
“ three weeks’ exposure here. Mr. Bowman’s apples are stated to
“ have been packed in the last week in March, or more than three
“ weeks before those of other exhibitors. A small barrel had
“ been packed nearly twelve weeks when it was opened, and from
“ the apples being wrapped in tissue paper and closely packed in
“ chaff, only 14 per cent, of the contents were damaged.”
Dried Fruits.
The report of the expert on these articles states :
“ The dessert raisins, Zante currants, and Sultana raisins, shown
“in the South Australian Court, were of a most interesting
“ character, and compared very favorably with the best qualities.
“ usually imported into England. It is evident that South
“ Australia, no less than the Cape of Good Hope, can supply both
“ the European and American markets to a large extent with these
“ dried fruits, and they have done well to display in so enterprising
“ a manner their special capabilities.”
There is no doubt as to the capability of this colony to produce
both raisins and currants, and especially almonds. It is now
known that no part of Australia is more favorable to the growth
of the almond than the neighborhood of Adelaide. At the present


time the production of currants is only a sixtieth part of the
requirements of the colony, and there is no reason why they should
not be grown and exported to all the Australasian colonies and to
England. All these industries can be carried on with very little
outlay in money, and by the families of small holders of land.
Wines.
One of the most important industries of the colony is that of the
culture of the vine. The area of land available which, by soil and
climate, is capable of producing good wine is unlimited. Nature
has been very generous in her gifts to us, and we have not fully
availed ourselves of the advantages offered. At the present time
there are only about 600,000 gallons of wine annually produced in
the colony. By the latest statistics, up to 1885 there were 4,850 acres
planted; but during the last few years vine-planting has been so
extensively carried on that within two or three years the output
will be very largely increased, and the success of South Australian
wines at the Colonial and Indian Exhibition, where they were
placed before the public, pure and adulterated, will so stimulate
viticulture that we may confidently look forward to a time when
our exports of wine will rank in importance with those of wool
and wheat. But the risk of inducing farmers and small holders of
land to plant vines must not be forgotten. Unless they are satis-
fied that a market for their grapes is immediately available, the
inducement to plant will fail, and the reaction will be worse than
disastrous to the colony, if those -who have planted vineyards find
that there is not a ready sale for their grapes. The Government
might fairly give their moral support—and some part of the
material support—in the initial stage of establishing a Joint Stock
Company for the purpose of purchasing grapes and crude wines
from vignerons, storing it until properly matured, employing
skilled labor to treat the wines in the cellars here, and further
.assist to establish agencies abroad.
The British Government are holders of £4,000,000 worth of
•shares in a commercial undertaking the Suez Canal. Our
Government might legitimately assist in the establishment of a
South Australian Vineyards’ Association in a similar way. The
consumption of our own wines is gaining favor here every day;
persons who had never before kept any but foreign wine in their
cellars are now using South Australian wines in preference to the
imported. The exports to the Old World, New Zealand, and the


other colonies have increased in a surprising degree, because that
adversity has taught our vignerons a bitter lesson, which they have
profited by. There are fewer winemakers in the colony now than
there were in 1866, when the acreage under vine cultivation was
6,629, and the number of gallons of wine made was 895,000, but the
quality in 1887 is much better. The practice of our larger wine-
makers buying the produce of the small grower of grapes has
enabled them to ship wine joi a uniform character year after year,
which has attained a standard of excellence in the market of the
Old World. The initial difficulty of introducing Australian wines
has been overcome, and their repute is such that every effort
ought to be made to extend the trade.
The ravages of phylloxera in France have decimated the vine-
yards there, and we have now an opportunity to take advantage of
the feeling in the mother country in favor of a trade federation
Avith her colonies; and the prestige gained for Australian wines at
the exhibition clearly points out to us a plain duty—that of en-
couraging, by all the means in the poAver of the GoA'ernment of
this colony, an extensive culture of the vine, Avhich may be done
in many ways. One is the appointment of a Professor of Viti-
culture in connection Avith the present Agricultural College, Avhose
duty it Avould be to analyse the soils of proposed A r ineyards, advise
the class of vine to be planted in that particular soil, instruct our
farmers and small holders in the proper method of planting, prun-
ing, and rearing the A-ines, procuring the most approved methods
of pressing the grapes, and generally advising intending vignerons
•on the management of the cellar.
What is Avanted is men from the southern countries of Europe,
from climates similar to our OAvn ; men Avho ha\ T e been brought up
from their infancy in the culture of the vine, and the drying and
preserving of the grape and other fruits. Special inducements in
grants of land might with advantage be made to a feAv Avell selected
men to emigrate to this colony. With a competent Professor of
Viticulture in connection Avith the Agricultural College, who should
be required to advise small landholders Avhat land is suitable for
planting to vines and fruits, and the kinds best adapted to different
localities ; Avhen all this is done, avc shall have assisted in rearing
in our midst a yeoman race of farmers working their own land,
growing grain, raising cattle, poultry, and dairy produce, and
living contentedly beneath their OAvn vine, fig, and olive ees.


MANUFACTURING IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Although manufacturing has not been recognised as one of the-
leading interests of South Australia, it has, nevertheless, been an
important factor in its development. The great producing interests
of the colony have been largely indebted for their extension and
development to the special machines, implements, and tools, which
our colonial machinists and engineers have devised for their use.
The squatter, the miner, and the farmer, have each called in the as-
sistance of local artizans to make convenient and suitable appliances
for performing many of the operations connected with their occu-
pations; the squatter obtains excellent engines, boring tools, pumps,
and windmills, to help him to find that greatest of all wants of our
interior, water; wool scouring and drying machines, and wool
presses for station use, the bullock dray, the Avagon, and the buggy,
are all found to be indispensable requirements. The miner avails
himself of the services of the large engineering establishments in
Avhich every detail of plant required for this important industry are
obtained; powerful steam engines Avith the Avinding and pumping
gear, doAvn to the simplest tool used by the miner, are supplied by
these Avorks; and there are several improved machines Avhich have
attained a more than local reputation, on account of the economy
and efficiency obtained by their use. In an especial degree the
farmer has been indebted to the inventive genius of the local
machinist for the production of implements and machines for his
use ; it Avas only by reason of the invention of the Ridley reaper,,
or as it is better knoAvn outside the colony, the Adelaide stripper,
that Avheat can be grown profitably in South Australia. Without
this machine it Avould have been impossible for the farmer to
have gathered in the golden grain—Avhich has been pronounced
to be the finest in the world —from the immense area of ground
Avhich he cuhbvates. To those acquainted Avith the slower methods
of haiwesting folloAved in the older countries of the Avorld, the value
of this machine will be apparent Avhen they are told that one man
can reap and thrash ten acres of Avheat in a day by its use.
There are a large number of factories for the production of
agricultural machines and implements in the colony; hardly a toAvn-


■ship but has its blacksmith’s and machinist’s shop, where not only
repairs are executed, but in most of them a considerable amount of
new work is done. To some of those small shops the colony is in-
debted for the invention of novel and valuable implements, such as
«tump-jumping ploughs, mullenisers, and some most efficient
grubbing machines, all of which are specially designed for cultivat-
ing the scrub lands of the colony. Winnowing machines, mowing
machines, ploughs, scarifiers, harrows, &c., are all made in large
numbers, and adapted by our manufacturers to the new conditions
under which much of the farming operations of this colony are con-
ducted.
Although generally the tendency is for manufacturing establish-
ments to become centralised, yet we have workshops of considerable
magnitude in most of the large towns, such as in Port Adelaide,
Gawler, Kapunda, Mount Barker, Strathalbyn, Balaklava, Port
Augusta, Quorn, and others.
In this iron age, engineering works and iron foundries are
necessarily prominent amongst the factories of any country. To give
even a brief sketch of the iron works of the colony would occupy
a much larger space than can be devoted to it here. Suffice to say
we have more than one forge capable of turning out forgings
of five or six tons in weight, steam hammers of varying capacity
are at work in dozens of factories, railway carriage axles and buffers
.are being made by the hundreds, and heavy forgings for mills,
steamers, dredgers, &c., are turned out whenever the demand is
made for them. Our iron foundries are not behind the forges in
their capacity for producing good work; castings weighing up to
■eight tons have been made, and the light castings will hold their
own for excellency of design and finish when compared with the
productions of older countries. Cast-iron pipes are extensively made
in more than one establishment, and in the largest factory of this
kind an output of £B,OOO per month can be maintained through-
out the year.
The whole of the requirements of the colony in connection with
the various schemes for water conservation and irrigation are
being met by our local factories. Workshops for the construction
of boilers, bridges, viaducts, girders, and other riveted work are also
carried on in our midst; leviathan punching and shearing machines
and hydraulic riveters are in use in several of them ; and a number
of large contracts for iron bridges and other works have been suc-
cessfully carried out. All the ironworks referred to are replete with


machine tools for turning, planing, slotting, and shaping the work
produced in them, most of those tools having been imported from
firms having a world-wide reputation for the excellency of their
productions; at the same time, we find here, as in other directions,
our artizans frequently design and make special tools suitable for
the economical production of the work they are called upon to
supply. It is a matter of surprise to many visitors to find such
costly machinery in use in the works, but the comparatively high
standard of wages here requires the manufacturers to study how to
obtain the best possible return from the wages paid.
At Port Adelaide there are a number of shipbuilding establish-
ments, which are capable of meeting any demand that may be made
upon them by vessels visiting the colony. Several steamers and
sailing ships have been built, both in wood and iron, and, just
lately, one of the intercolonial iron steamers was cut in the middle,
and lengthened 40ft. Beautifully finished and fast-sailing yachts
have also been made for the yacht clubs. The slips are capable
of taking up any vessels trading to our ports ; there is also in
course of construction a dry dock, by the old-established and enter-
prising shipbuilder, Mr. Fletcher, which will accommodate any of
the large ocean-going steamers. There are also Government
yards situated at Port Adelaide, under the management of the-
Marine Board, where dredgers and barges for the deepening
operations have been made, at prices that compare favorably with
the cost of imported work of the same sort.
The Government have extensive workshops at Adelaide and
Islington, for the manufacture and repair of railway rolling-stock..
In those works all the repairs are effected, and a considerable
number of railway carriages, first, second, and third-class, as well
as trucks of all descriptions for carriage of goods, are made. A
number of carriages and trucks have also been made by private
firms for the use of the railways of the colony. Practically, the-
whole of the rolling-stock in use on our railways is now manufac-
tured in South Australia, with the exception of locomotives.
Several of these have been re-built, but none have yet been con-
structed throughout, although there is no doubt but within the
next few years this work will also be undertaken.
Passing from the construction of vehicles for railway purposes
to those for ordinary roads, we find every variety of carriage, either
for business or pleasure, produced by our colonial builders, from
the stately four-in-hand drag, replete with all the conveniences and


comforts for both the inner and outer man, down to the homely
village cart, and from the family carriage of our American cousins,
the rockaway or carryall, to the spider-like trotting sulky. All are
produced by our local makers, rivalling, in style and excellence,,
the famous productions of Longacre, London, or Broadway, New
York. Our Australian carriage-makers are gradually developing
a style of their own, which partakes in part of the English and
American; avoiding on the one hand the weight of the English
carriage, and on the other the excessive lightness of the American,
they produce vehicles suitable for the country and climate, and to
stand the work required of them.
During the last ten years we have followed the admirable system
of tramway communication initiated by America, and the Tramway
Companies are now supplied with cars made in the colony, equal
to those used in the birthplace of this institution.
Although amongst our natural productions we do not find much
timber suitable for manufacturing or building purposes, yet, as
nearly all the timber used in the colony comes in bulk, a number
of sawmills have grown up, in which sawing, planing, moulding,
and many other operations in preparing timber for use, are carried
on; timber bending for wheelwrights and carriage builders is also
done here; and in our joiners, carpenters, and cabinet-makers
workshops much of the Avork is of a very high class, and is suitable
for withstanding the very hot and dry climate of this country.
Visitors to the colony are favorably impressed with the excellency
of the designs, and the artistic and substantial character of the
workmanship shown in our public buildings, our banks, and
business premises in Adelaide and the principal inland towns.
There are also many gentlemen’s residences in the city and suburbs,
in the hills, and at the seaside, which display a high degree of
skill and taste on the part of the designers and artizans.
The quarries of this province have experienced serious vicissi-
tudes, and are comparatively undeveloped. The leading quarry of
freestone was the celebrated Teatree Gully quarry, from which the
stone for the Town Hall, Post Office, portion of the Bank of South
Australia, King William-street, and the Imperial Chambers, besides
innumerable private residences, was obtained. In respect to
durability and uniformity of color, this stone is of the best
standard; and the district of Houghton and surrounding neigh-
borhood abounds with similar deposits, should the demand for it
revive. Many of the earlier-built houses Avere built of a slate


formation, from the long-established Glen Osmond quarries, upon
whose property is an abundant supply of indurated sandstone,
which largely supplies road metal for city and district roads. In
this, and the output of building stone, these quarries may be said
still to be inexhaustible. Large freestone quarries have also been
■opened at Mitcham, from one of which handsome buildings in
Pirie-street, besides various churches and private residences, were
built. At Stirling East there are also very extensive freestone
formations, much in use in Adelaide and the suburbs, and of which
the Wesleyan Church at Norwood is a fair specimen.
At Port Adelaide the buildings are chiefly built of a very handy
and durable indurated sandstone, which is procurable in large
quantities in handy-sized blocks, with natural bed and face, in the
neighborhood of Dry Creek. In these quarries is also a large
output of metal. The chief quarry, for both building stone and
metal, is worked by stockade labor at the Dry Creek Prison.
There is also a very large deposit of coraline limestone underlying
the southern portions of the province, cropping out on southern
Yorke Peninsula in cliffs forty and fifty feet in height, with
natural beds ten to eighteen feet apart, and capable of turning out
stone of the largest dimensions, requisite for any work. The same
formation crops out again on the bank of the Murray, and joins a
similar one near Geelong, and from which the Anglican Cathedral
in Melbourne is being erected. This formation would no doubt
develop into a valuable adjunct in cheap building, if the demand
for building stone were to revive. The Post Office at Largs Bay,
the Wesleyan Church, Port Adelaide, the stores of the South
Australian Company; and a large house at Waikerville, the
property of T. S, Horn, Esq., are built of this stone. Recently a
valuable quarry of freestone, which was first used for the viaduct
of the Strathalbyn to Goolwa railway at Currency Creek, has again
come into favor, and is now being very satisfactorily used in the
handsome building in course of erection at the corner of King
William-street and North-terrace for the Bank of New South
Wales. Granite is also being profitably worked from the quarries
at Port Elliot, from whence the chief of the kerbing in the city,
and pitchpaving for crossings, is obtained. It is capable of carry-
ing high finish, and has been very successfully used in the base of
the new Parliament Houses now in course of erection, and the
Bank of Australasia. In the latter building are noticeable two
very handsome columns the whole height of the doorway, which


are evidence of the capabilities of these quarries to turn out stone
of any dimension. Marble, too, is very abundant in various parts
of the province, chiefly near Kapunda and Angaston. It is worked
for building and ornamental purposes; and the various hues, from
black to a pure white, have already insured for these quarries a repu-
tation for excellence which warrants the hope that they will find
customers outside the province. The facade of the new Parliament
Houses is built of marble from the Kapunda quarries, and the
carvings of the capitals of the columns, under the skilful hand of
the sculptor, Mr. Maxwell, will demonstrate the excellence of the
stone for monumental work. The capital of the chief column
•weighs nearly five tons. Marble is also much used in the city
for pavements, much of that newly laid being of this material.
There are also at Mintaro and Willunga very large deposits of
slate for flagging, which is also used by the city corporation;
and especially large flags are procurable from these quarries. The
Willunga quarries have established a reputation in the V ctorian
market for roofing-slate, and no doubt this industry might be very
much augmented if persons building would use this system of
roofing in preference to so much galvanized iron.
There are many specimens of architectural merit in the city
and suburbs, in which the talent of the architect, the skill of the
workman, and excellent quality of the materials used must vie
with one another for meritorious appreciation. Notably may be
mentioned the National Building Society, Victoria-square, with
base of Melbourne bluestone, and superstructure, as regards
facade, of Sydney freestone; the Supreme Court, built of a very
excellent stone from near Government Farm; the Public Offices,
Victoria-square, with base of Melbourne bluestone, and facade of
Sydney freestone; Stow Church, of Dry Creek sandstone, and
Teatree Gully facings; the Bank of Adelaide, of Teatree Gully
base, and Sydney freestone; the Bank of Australasia, of Port
Elliot granite base, and Omani (New Zealand) stone for the super-
structure ; the Bank of South Australia, of Teatree Gully, and
carvings of Sydney stone; the National Bank, and Imperial
Chambers, of Teatree Gully stone; the Australian Mutual offices,
of bluestone base, from Victoria, and superstructure of Sydney
•stone; the English and Scottish Bank, of Sydney stone. All these
buildings, and many others, such as the University, and the Public
Library and Museum, although chiefly built of imported stone,
-speak unmistakably of the talent of the architects, and the excel


lent handicraft of the artizans, thus illustrating the great strides-
we have made in such matters since the time when some of the
older houses on North-terrace and in Hindley-street were once the
chief buildings of the city, and the residences of our leaders of
society some thirty or forty years ago.
At Kapunda there is a magnificent marble quarry, from which
an unlimited supply of this beautiful material can be obtained.
The new Parliament Houses are now being built with this stone.
Very expensive and complete plant is used for getting the stone
out. It is obtained in large blocks, some of them weighing-
-7 tons. Slate is obtained in different parts of the colony, princi-
pally at Willunga and Mintaro; the Mintaro slate especially is of
an excellent quality, being unsurpassed in the world for evenness
and finish, and is suitable for tops for billiard-tables, and other
work requiring first-class slates.
Brickmaking is carried on in many parts of the colony. Several
companies and private firms employ very complete machinery for
this purpose, and Hoffman’s kilns, and several modifications of
them, are used for burning. Bricks are produced suitable for the
very best buildings, and also for tanks, and other work requiring
the highest quality.
Terra-cotta work is made in several places in the colony, and one
of the finest exhibits in the South Australian Court is that
designed and executed by Mr. Shearing, of Hindmarsh.
Brickmaking is an industry largely carried on at Hindmarsh,
where several factories are in existence, turning out all classes of
bricks, white, red, and black, as well as glazed bricks and tiles,,
suitable for all designs. Firebricks are now manufactured from a
mixture of Hindmarsh clay with Teatree Gully kaolin, and are said
to be equal to the imported article. The industry also embraces
the manufacture of all kinds of wine-jars, jam and pickle pots,
water-coolers, airbricks, and retorts for gas-making, together with
the necessary drainpipes required for the extension of the sanitary
system of deep drainage. Of late the eesthetical tastes of the
people have been gratified by the establishment of a manufactory
for terra-cotta work. It is only another instance of the wisdom of
the ancients, for where we read of the disentombment of buried
cities we find at the same time records of designs in the imperish-
able clay brought to light after many centuries; here in a new
country, where art and skilled labor is at a premium, the establish-
ment of a terra-cotta manufactory points to an advancement in the-
new path of art and industry.


Earthenware pipes are also produced for our own requirements,,
the demand for which is very large, on account of the extensive
■works in connection with deep drainage of the city and suburbs,
unlimited supplies of excellent clay being obtainable for this-
purpose.
The tanning industry has been in existence for a good many years-
in South Australia. Of late years great improvements have been
effected in the plant and machinery used, and a much better article,
a greater output has resulted therefrom. Works of this character
are of especial value, because they utilise a material which is
entirely a South Australian product; and the wattle tree, which is-
also a South Australian product, is largely used in the operation of
tanning. Every description of sole and dressed leather is made in
large quantities, and considerable success has also been attained in
the production of light leather and moroccos; the only kinds not
yet attempted are enamelled and japanned. Scouring machines are-
used for doing the wet and dirtiest part of the tanner’s work; and
band-splitting machines capable of slicing a hide into three pieces
are also used. Our South Australian leather obtains a high
reputation both in the colonies and England. The value of bark
of the wattle tree for tanning purposes is well known, and it has
for years formed an article of export to England from this colony.
Within the last few years a new industry has sprung up in the
colony which promises to become of great importance and value;
instead of waiting until the tree is from seven to ten years old
when it becomes profitable to strip the bark, by the new process
the tannin can be profitably extracted within two years of the tree
being planted. The process consists in taking the whole tree,
timber, bark, branches, and leaves, and slicing them in a machine
into shavings, and by steam and pressure extracting the tannin,,
which is obtained in a liquid form like treacle, the use of this
material being said to produce better results than the bark itself.
Boot and shoe factories.—There are a large number of boot and
shoe factories in Adelaide and other towns in the colony. All the
most recent machinery for the economic production of these indis-
pensable articles are in use in them, and they give employment to
a large number of persons of both sexes.
Although, on account "of the limited population of the colony,,
special factories for the production of one article do not obtain to
so large an extent as in older countries, yet many articles are made-
to order by our local manufacturers, which could not be carried on


as a separate industry. Such things as billiard-tables, looking-
glasses, pianos, glasscutting, and many others, demanding skill
and taste in their production, are successfully produced by our
mechanics.
Factories for the manufacture of iron and tinplate goods are now
thoroughly established, and produce fire and burglar proof safes
and doors, ranges, ovens, bedsteads, galvanised-iron work, tinware
and japanned ware, in all their respective branches, equal in every
respect to imported goods—one factory alone, that of Messrs. A.
Simpson & Son, giving employment to nearly 200 men and boys.
This enterprising firm has spared no expense in introducing the
latest improved machinery for the production of their various goods,
and have succeeded in being able to supply other colonies —the
fire-proof doors for the new Government Offices, Hobart, and the
Town Hall, Albany, being supplied by them. Not least amongst
the industries carried on by Messrs. Simpson is the manufacture of
jam, tea, and coffee tins, and packages of all kinds, and the
work of galvanizers and tinners.
Two organ building factories.—Several churches and other in-
stitutions have been fitted with organs by our local firms, which,
by their excellent design and workmanship, afford pleasure to the
■eye as well as the ear.
Jewellery and silverwork is manufactured in all styles and
-designs, and compares very faA r orably with the imported article.
Mounting emu eggs in sterling silver is an industry in which South
Australia is not equalled by any other colony, and great numbers of
these eggs are sold to English and European buyers. Silverton
silver is used for all silversmiths’ work, and such articles as tea and
•coffee services, trays, salvers, cups, claret jugs, &c., &c., are made
to equal, if not to surpass, anything imported. Jewellery is made
in great variety, and of better quality and strength than that im-
ported. Stone-setting is also carried on with great success.
Altogether the industry promises to grow to a large scale, and
will, when times improve, give many men employment.
There are at present in the city five cooperages, and several
-smaller ones in the country districts, turning out casks and vats for
vignerons, from the usual quarter-cask size to that of the large
■vats with a holding capacity of upwards of 5,000 gallons. The
timber used is chiefly oak, but of late years a species of native
blackwood has been tried with success. The very large vats used
in the wine cellars are mostly made of red gum, of which one with


a holding capacity of 10,200 gallons was lately manufactured. The
principal uses for casks are as follows:—Wine, beer, oil, tallow,
beef, pork, butter, &c.
Soap and candle works have been in existence since 1840,
turning out an average of 35 tons ■weekly of household soap for
washing purposes, 30cwt. of fancy soaps for the toilet, and 1,500
boxes of candles. Of late years, Avith the advantages of protection,
the soapmakers have been enabled to provide themselves Avith
machinery to supply nearly tAvo-thirds of the demand of the colony
in soaps, candles, lubricating oils, and axle-grease, of a quality
such as may fairly compete Avith that of the imported.
The manufacture of confectionery has made considerable advance
of late years, and is noAv firmly established in the colony. There
are a number of factories, giA'ing employment to about 100 hands.
The larger factories are fitted Avith the most improved and com-
plete machinery, and are producing not only the ordinary but also
the higher-class confections, equal in quality to the imported
article, and at an advantage in price to the consumer. A great
portion of the machinery used in the manufacture of confectionery
has been designed and made in the colony, thus advancing the
interests of others not directly connected with this industry.


NORTHERN TERRITORY.
This immense tract of country is hounded on the south by the
26th parallel of south latitude, on the east by the 138th and on
the west by the 129th meridian of east longitude, and stretches to
the Indian Ocean. It contains an area of 35,116,800 acres, and
was provisionally annexed by royal letters patent to the Province
of South Australia in 1863. In the next year settlement was
commenced, and 250,000 acres were sold (half in Adelaide and
half in London), at 7s. 6d. per acre, in sections of 160 acres.
With each section a town allotment of half an acre was sold at
the same price. In April, 1864, the first party left for the Terri-
tory, under the command of the Hon. B. T. Finniss. The party
disagreed as to the site of the settlement, and Mr. Finniss was re-
called. But little progress in colonization was made till 1869,
when the Surveyor-General was dispatched to complete the survey
of 600,000 acres of land, and to lay out the site of Palmerston,
the present capital.
In 1872 the great undertaking of uniting Adelaide and Port
Darwin by an overland telegraph line was completed. This work,
which cost upwards of half a million of money, was carried out
entirely by South Australia. In the neighborhood of Pine Creek
the men employed in making the telegraph line discovered gold.
Gold.
In 1873 a most unreasonable gold mania started in Adelaide.
Companies were floated and mismanaged. Much money was
lost by the shareholders. Reefs now known to be as rich as
any in the world were abandoned. The auriferous character
of the country, however, still attracted attention, and in 1880
the Government Resident reported there were 150 Europeans and
1,500 Chinese engaged on the reefs and alluvial diggings, and
that fully £20,000 worth of gold was exported during the year,
half of which found its way to Hongkong.
The present Government Resident, in his report at the close
of 1884, writes:—“The export of gold during the year reached
“ 21,6750z5., of the value of £77,935. Considering the meagre
“ amount of capital invested, the great natural difficulties which


•“ impede travelling and carting, the enormous cost of provisions,
“ and the primitive appliances, this may be accepted as an authori-
•“ tative indication that rich deposits of gold exist in the Northern
“ Territory. When Pine creek is within a ten hours’ journey
■“ from Port Darwin and the auriferous country will be traversed
•“ by the railway, the Government Resident who writes the report
“ for the year after the railway has been opened will have a
“ different record to give.”
In the early part of 1886 the Hon. J. L. Parsons visited the
goldfields, and writes a follows : —“ At Bridge creek I was shown
“ handsome nuggets from the alluvial diggings, where men had
“ been making £l2 per week. At the Howley I saw 50ozs. of coarse
gold bought from a Chinaman. At Burgan’s creek the bark
“ huts of a large Chinese digging population indicated they were
■“ still getting gold. Of course it is useless to ask a Chinaman if
“he is getting gold. He invariably replies, ‘Me catchee no gold,’
“ or ‘ Me catchee little bit,’ with a melancholy shake of the head
“ as if he were much to be pitied, when, perhaps, he is making
“ his fortune, and looking forward to being in China in a few
“ months. Passing through the old Fountain Head, the Chinese
“ were scattered over the workings, and busily employed at
“ Grove-hill and the Twelve. At the Union I heard the grati-
fying news of a crushing of two tons of quartz from No. 3
“North Union which had yielded 37ozs. of gold; and news also
“of several other claims turning out rich stone. At Pine creek
“ Mr. Olaf Jansen had just struck on a rich leader, some fine
“ specimens of which I picked out from the ground myself, and
“ a splendid specimen from which, at Mr. Jansen’s request, I
“ forwarded to the Hon. the Minister of Education. At the
“ Christmas claim there was a stock of stone which Mr. Jansen
“assured me would go llozs. to the ton. I also visited Fitz-
“ gerald’s claim, but even stone yielding 3ozs. to the ton was not
“ sufficient to detain him from the Kimberley.
“ Leaving Pine creek we crossed over rough country and
“ camped on the Driffield. The next night our camp was at the
“ Edith. From the Edith, on the following day, we made the
“ Katherine station, and were hospitably received by Mr. and
“ Mrs. Murray. Even the casual and amateur observer cannot
“ fail to see the indications of probable mineral wealth extending
“ beyond our known metalliferous area. Granite, slate, quartz,
“ diorite, are conspicuous, and the whole stretch of country up to


“ the tablelands will, when the railway comes near Pine creek, be
“ diligently prospected, and carry, I feel sure, a large mining
“ population. At the Katherine river I was given a handsome
“ nugget, rich gold in quartz, which had been obtained on the
“ Stow creek by a small prospecting party, but the immense cost
“ of getting stores to the place had compelled them to relinquish
“ further search. Of the existence of good gold from the country
“ between the Daly and Fitzmaurice all round under the table-
“ lands, no experienced miner who has travelled over the country
“ has the slightest doubt.”
The testimony of the Rev. J. E. Tenison Woods, F.G S., &c.
—a very high authority —is of the most encouraging character.
He says—“ The gold in the Territory is found in exactly the same
“ manner as in other parts of the world. It is needless to repeat
“ what these conditions are. The stone in those reefs which have
“ been worked is rich, and would pay well to work in any country
“ but this, where wages and cartage are so enormously high. The
“ gold generally is of high standard. The total amount exported
“from August, 1880, to September, 1885, is 121,7790z5., of the
“ value of £432,959. This, of course, is not by any means a full
“ statement of the gold obtained in the Territory. The amount is
“ large, but divided amid the number of mines worked, and the
“ number of miners employed, it is relatively very large, and
“ shows the richness of the country.
“ Of two things I am convinced —first, that not one of the mines
“ hitherto worked or abandoned has been exhausted of the gold;
“ secondly, not 25 per cent, of the auriferous reefs of the country
“ have been fairly tested. If a prospector does not get a good
“ assay from a bagful of stone, which he digs from the top of the
“ ‘ blow,’ the whole is condemned. The test, of course, is utterly
“ insufficient. The chances are much against the prospector
“ striking on the shoot of gold at the first blow of his pick. Who
“ does not know the thousands of instances where rich mines have
“ lain idle for years from bad prospecting ? A slight examination
“ convinces one that many of the reefs in the Territory contain
“ rich metal, even though the prospector has turned away from
“ them. The gold in most of the reefs is remarkably clean
“ and pure, with little sulphur or arsenic or other troublesome
“ minerals.
“ Some mines are an exception, and the sulphurous tailings in
44 them are considerable. It would be well if the miners -would


“ follow an important piece of advice, which has reference to
“ tailings. They should he stacked like compost heaps, with
“ equal quantities of leaves, branches, grass, or any decaying
“ vegetable matter. In a couple of years the pyrites will be con-
“ siderably or completely decomposed, and can be treated in the
“ mill without any roasting. Pyrite heaps are often very rich in
“ gold, and will soon pay for their keep.
It may certainly be said that the quartz reefs of the Northern
“ Territory have never had justice done them by first-class ma-
“ chinery. Indeed, it is stated that the Union reefs have been
“ brought to ruin by the battery employed, which let large quan-
“ titles of amalgam go down the creek; but with small capital,
“ enormously high wages, and equally high cartage, it could
“ hardly be otherwise. When these shall have been adjusted to
“ the rates of the value of the quartz, then the day of the mines of
“ the Northern Territory will have come. Everything is hoped
“ from the railway to bring this about; there is plenty of material
“to work upon. I regret being unable to give the proportion of
“ gold produced to the quartz crushed. I believe the average js
“ high, generally over an ounce. Some of the crushings of the
“ top stone have been enormously rich. Thus, at the extended
“ Union, in 1877, 40 tons of quartz yielded 7400z5. of gold. This
“ is exceptional, and belongs to the returns which miners always
“ expect to obtain from the capping of reefs, where the gold lies,
“ which has weathered out of the stone through countless ages.
“ In reference to this, I have been asked to give an opinion as
“to whether deep sinking will give increased returns. For in-
“ creased returns, I should say that there is nothing peculiar in
“ the ground which would lead one to expect it. In those mines
“ where the shoots of gold have a tendency to form pockets of
“ metal, the ground may become richer at any moment, especially
“av here the quartz lode is intersected by veins of diorite; here
“ rich gold will nearly always be found, and often as much in the
*• diorite as the quartz. All questions connected with deep sinking
“ are best answered by the diamond drill, but seeing how few of
“ the mines are able to pay for an efficient battery, it is hardly
“to be expected that they could pay for drill exploration. Be-
“ sides, the question of deep sinking is not important. Just now
“ there is plenty of payable stone within easy reach in most of the
“ mines if labor and cartage were only obtainable at a price com-
“ mensurate with the value of gold.


“ In the alluvial workings the conditions are precisely similar to
“ alluvial gold in other parts of the world—the sinking is shallow,
“ sometimes mere surfacing, and the gravel scarcely watcrworn.
“ This is the more extraordinary as the rainfall is much greater
Xi here than in Victoria or New South Wales, where the drift
“ gravel is so much rounded, but the elevation is much greater.
“ The alluvial diggings are generally in shallow valleys with low
Xi ridges on each side. Curiously enough, rich gold has been found
** in valleys where on the ridges forming the valley not a trace of
■“ a quartz reef could be found Finely-divided gold, no doubt,
“ exists to some extent in the slates, and this must be the ex-
“ planation of fine gold in alluvial far from any reefs, just like
■“ stream tin. True stream tin is not derived from reefs or lodes,
“ but from finely-disseminated particles of tin in granite. Nuggets
Xi are not common, and never of very large size. The very fine
■“ gold would appear to be inexhaustible, as the Chinese always seem
■“ able to make a living, no matter how often they turn over the
“ old headings.
“ It only remains to say that, as the reefs containing good gold
■“ are far from being all discovered in the Territory, so it is with
■“ the alluvial. There are gullies and flats innumerable which
“ have never been even prospected; they are all connected with the
■“ auriferous slates, and even with quartz reefs. To name them
“ would be endless, but I especially mention the country between
“ Mount Wells and Mount Douglas, amid the ranges on the east
•“ side until the ranges fall away, a distance of between forty and
fifty miles.”
The quantity of gold exported through the Custom-house during
the past six years may be set down as five tons weight , and valued
at half a million sterling.
Other Minerals.
But the Territory abounds in other minerals. At Mount Wells,
Mount Shoobridge, and the Finniss River the deposits of tin are
-extensive and rich. This metal, in the opinion of the Rev. J. E.
T. Woods, will eventually be one of the great sources of mineral
riches in the Territory, especially as it occurs in the form of reef
tin, which is so comparatively rare. The most of the tin dis-
coveries in Australia have been made in stream tin, which is never
of a permanent character. The Port Darwin Tin Mining Company
have done a great deal in the way of building, erection of ma-


-chinery, and construction of dams. After many disappointing
delays, the company is about to commence in earnest the dressing
-of ores from their lodes.
The copper mines have so far been confined to those on the
River Daly. The Wheal Danks Mine promises the owners a good
return, even with the present low price of copper. In one spot a
lode is reported 2ft. wide, discernible on the surface, A shaft
80ft. deep has been sunk, still carrying the lode, which increases
from oft. to 6ft. in width. The ore is the grey or vitreous copper,
red oxide, and green and blue carbonates. What has been
recently raised looks equal to 40 per cent., and a great portion
of it to over 50 per cent. As these mines are situated near
the place of shipment the profits will, of course, be correspond-
ingly higher.
Recently much attention has been given to the silver deposit,
and large areas have been taken up under licences at the Mary,
Grove Hill, and the Union. About thirty miles to the east of the
Union is the Eveleen Silver Mine. Here expensive smelting
machinery has been erected, and large quantities of silver
moulded, while thousands of tons of ore are at surface waiting to
be dealt with. This mine is believed to be one of the richest in
Australia, and will doubtless, if properly managed, yield splendid
returns to the company.
Very little is yet known of the vast mineral resources of the
Northern Territory. The Rev. Tenison Woods says it is excep-
tionally rich in minerals, only a small portion of which has been
made known to the public. He believes the same quantity of
mineral, veins of gold, silver, tin, copper, and lead will not be
found in an equal area in Australia, and doubts if many provinces
Avill be found in any country so favored as Arnheim’s Land, in
respect to mineral riches.
Pastoral.
The pastoral interests of the Territory have now assumed large
proportions. Pastoral blocks of land, not exceeding 400 square
miles, can be leased for twenty-five years at a rental of 6d. per
square mile for the first seven years, and 2s. 6d. per square mile
for the remainder of the term. Pastoral lands must be stocked
within three years of the date of application for lease at the rate
of at least two head of great cattle or ten head of small cattle for
•every square mile. More than one-half of the whole area of th,c


Territory is now held by pastoralists, and 183,883 square miles-;
have been declared stocked to the extent required by the terms of
the lease. The reports of the condition and increase of stock
from all directions arc highly satisfactory. Every year the
country improves, and, when the natural rank grasses are fed
down, its value will be greatly increased. The Austral Downs
and Herbert river districts are well suited for sheep. It is
estimated the flocks already number 60,000. Writing of the
Avon Downs clip, Mr. Little reports that the wool from Mr.
Guthrie’s station was of so good a quality that it brought 16d. per?
pound in a very low market. Mr. Little, who is thoroughly
acquainted with the country, estimates that the tableland to the
south of the McArthur, when improved, will carry from 4,000,000
to 5,000,000 of sheep.
The Government Resident, says:—“ Pastoral occupation, om
“ large areas, principally for cattle-raising purposes, is also attended
“ with considerable success. Mr. C. B. Eisher and other pas-
“ toralists who have stocked country have, after overcoming initial
“ difficulties, met with encouraging residts. Station-owners in the*
“ Territory are beginning to get over the difficulties of acclimatiz-
“ ing stock brought from Queensland, and are stocking freely
“ while the strip of country from McArthur river to the head
“ waters of the Victoria river has been declared stocked. The
“ sheep are doing well on the Herbert river blocks and elsewhere.
“ The pastoral industry has reached such a stage that the pressing
“ necessity for finding a market for the surplus stock is obvious-
“ to all interested in pastoral pursuits, and it is to be hoped that in
“ addition to obtaining access to the markets of the East for the-
“ live stock, that the proposal to establish meat-freezing works om
“ the Adelaide river will be successful.”
No doubt the central and southern part of the Territory will
become an extensive horse-breeding district, and that a ready
market will be found in India for well-bred animals, suitable for ■
remounts and general use.
Rivers, and Agricultural Land.
A large and valuable amount of information as to the extent
of the rivers and the character of the land on their banks has
been obtained by Captain Carrington, commander of the Govern-
ment steamship Palmerston. In April, 1884, he steamed up the


McArthur twelve miles, the Palmerston drawing lift. Sin. Be-
yond that the river has to be navigated by vessels of less draught.
The newly surveyed township of Borroloola is situated thirty-
seven miles from the mouth of the river. There is good agricul-
tural country in the neighborhood.
Later on in that year the Palmerston explored the Victoria
river. Captain Carrington reports it navigable for vessels of the
largest class for fifty miles from the sea. This river is the natural
outlet for about ninety thousand square miles of splendid pastoral
country.
The Daly, the entrance to Avhich is two miles wide, was next
examined. The rise of tides at springs varies from 18ft. to 21ft.
The river can be entered by vessels drawing 18ft. at high water
ordinary springs. For some distance from the mouth the land is
■admirably adapted for cultivation. The banks are a series of
jungles and grassy plains. The soil is good, easily worked, and
well fitted for the growth of sugarcane. Liberian coffee and in-
digo would also grow well. A grant of 10,000 acres, about fifty
miles from the entrance to the river, has been made to a company
subject to the condition of the plantation clauses of the Northern
Territory Lands Act. These conditions are that the cultivation
of the land must be commenced within three years; that there
shall be planted Avith sugarcane or other products suitable to
the climate not less than 200 acres ; that the sum of £5,000 shall
be spent in cultiA’ation and the erection of machinery, and that
not less than 250 tons of merchantable sugar, or other agricultural
or horticultural products of equal value be obtained from the
land. Upon these conditions being complied Avith the company
Avill obtain the fee-simple of the 10,000 acres.
After examining the Roper, Goyder, Blyth, Liverpool, and King
rivers, Captain Carrington explored the Alligator rivers. The
:South Alligator Avas ascended for sixty miles, and the Palmerston
taken up thirty miles. On each side of the river the jungle is a
dense mass of luxuriant tropical vegetation, consisting of large trees
with a dense undergroAvth. The East Alligator was traced for a
distance of fifty miles, and the steamer taken up fifteen miles. The
river is navigable for small crafts drawing eight or ten feet forty
miles. The plains that border this river, with the jungle lands
beyond, differ in no particular from those of the South river. The
West Alligator Avas traced a distance of tAventy-two miles; it is
fringed with dense mangroves throughout. The South and East


Alligator rivers were subsequently visited by Mr. Holtze, the-
Government gardener, who gave his opinion that the lands bor-
dering these rivers are particularly well suited for the cultivation
of rice.
The Adelaide, the nearest large river to Palmerston, is a splendid
stream, navigable for eighty miles, and so regular and deep that
vessels can lie and discharge within a few feet of its sides. The*
land on its banks is suitable for the cultivation of sugarcane,
banana, pine apple, coffee, indiarubber, and indigo. There is a
coffee plantation at Beatrice Hills where the plants are growing
remarkably well. The first picking will be made this year, and a
good exhibit shown at the Jubilee Exhibition.
The Government Resident (Hon. J. L. Parsons) has recently
visited China and the East, with a view of collecting information
regarding tropical products suitable to the Territory. Hongkong,.
Canton, Macao, Saigon, Singapore, and Batavia were visited with
this object, and he states :
“ The result of careful observations at the places I have men-
“ tioned is, that I am confident that rice, Liberian coffee, sugaiv
“ millet, ginger, tapioca, and a great variety of other tropical pro-
“ ducts may be cultivated with the utmost success in the Territory..
“ At present, owing to the difficulty of obtaining suitable labor and
“ other causes, very little progress has been made in the cultivation of
“ tropical products ; but if any arrangements can be made for the
“ introduction of coolie or other cheap labor, there is no reason, so-
“ far as I can see, why the agricultural interest should not be de-
“ veloped with the most beneficial results to all the southern
“ colonies. The principal sugar plantation, which is being worked
“by South Australian capital, is not accomplishing such good
“ results as were looked for ; but this is owing to the unsuitability
“of the land selected. The crop of sugar, however, which we saw
“ at the new Government garden at Palmerston, is finer than any
“we saw elsewhere during our trip. There are thousands of
“ square miles of good sugar-growing land obtainable on the banks
“ of the various rivers.”
The land laws of the Territory are liberal in the extreme.
Twelve hundred and eighty acres can be selected on credit at a
rental of sixpence per acre, with a right of purchase at twelve and
sixpence per acre, and any lessee who bona fide cultivates 640 acres
with tropical products during the first five years of his lease is-
relieved from further payment of either rent or purchase-money,


and is entitled to a grant of the 1,280 acres in fee-simple. Any
area in excess can be purchased at auction at the upset price of
twelve shillings and sixpence per acre. There are now open for
selection or sale for cash 240,000 acres.
Railways.
The Palmerston and Pine Creek railway, which is now in course
of construction, is 145 miles in length. It is on the 3ft. 6in. gauge
—the same gauge as the northern lines of South Australia and
the colonies of Queensland and Western Australia. The sleepers
throughout are of steel. It will traverse the centre of the known
metalliferous country. It will reduce the cost of working gold and
other mineral claims by at least fifty per cent., and will give cheap
and certain carriage for passengers and goods between Port Dar-
win and the mines at all seasons of the year. It will also lessen
in the same proportion for the 145 miles of railway the cost of
station supplies, and materially contribute to the pastoral occupa-
tion of the Crown lands.
A Royal Commission is now sitting to collect evidence and make
a recommendation as to the best means of completing the Trans-
Australian railway; and it is confidently expected that before the
completion of the line to Pine creek, another section at least will
be undertaken. The contract for the construction of the Palmers-
ton and Pine creek railway was taken by Messrs. C. & E. Millar,
for £605,424, the class of labor being at the option of the contrac-
tors. Port Darwin, which will be the terminus of the Trans-Aus-
tralian railway, has the largest and safest harbor on the north coast
of Australia. During the past eighteen months H.M.S. Myrmidon
and Flying Fish have made a careful survey of the harbor itself
and of the approaches from the east through Clarence and Dundas
Straits. As the terminus of the overland telegraph line and of
the two cables from Java, Port Darwin is a place of great im-
portance. The attention of the Imperial Government has been
called to the natural facilities which it offers for an Imperial station
for coals and munitions of war. In addition to the necessity of
protecting telegraphic communication, the steamers in the Aus-
tralian and China trade make Port Darwin the first place of call,
and the last port of departure. In view also of the large trade
which must arise out of the Trans-Australian railway, and the
strategic position of Port Darwin, it must be the chief port of
North Australia.


(A Brief Outline, by J. G. Knight, Commissioner for N.T. Exhibitors.)
If oT e.—The Northern Territory Court is on the Promenade, down the first
flight of steps at the back of the main building,.
Port Darwin, the principal harbor for shipping in the Northern
Territory, is situated in latitude (of Fort Hill) 12° 28' 30" south,
and longitude 130° 52" east. The harbor is fine and spacious
■comprising many square miles of water, varying from four to
fifteen fathoms. Spring tides from 16ft. to 24ft.
The principal cattle stations already established are those of the
North Australian Pastoral Company on the Daly River, Glencoe,
and the Victoria River, the latter comprising 35,435 square miles
of country ; W. J. Browne’s Spring Vale Station, on the Katherine,
and Delamere Downs, the latter covering 2,848 square miles;
Acres k Suttor, north of Roper River, 6,450 square miles ;
Amos, Amos, k Broad, south of Gulf of Carpentaria, 19,033 square
miles ; Buchanan, W. F., Wave Hill Station, Sturts Creek, 4,570
square miles; Campbell, Lewis, k Wreford, Coburg Peninsula,
1,250 square miles ; Carandoth Pastoral Company, on Queens-
land boundary, 1,600 square miles; Chewings, Chas., near Alice
Springs, 4,145 square miles ; Chisholm, J. Wm,, k Broad, A.,
north of Herbert River, 3,162 square miles ; Christian, J. B. and
W. M., near Anthony Lagoon, Walhallow Downs, 2,510 square
miles; Christian, J. 8., 1,000 square miles; Costello, John, Roper
River, 16,084 square miles ; Douglas, Walter, Powell’s Creek Run,
16,705 square miles; Fisher, C. B. (North Australian Pastoral
Company), Victoria River, 35,435 square miles ; Gardiner, C. F.,
and Co., north of Herbert River, 2,065 square miles; Sides,
Hatten, Gibson, k Robertson, Limmen Bight River, 2,336 square
miles; Gilbert, Joseph, near Alice Springs, 1,200 square miles ;
Youl, Gordon, k Willoby, near Charlotte Waters, 8,620 square
miles; Grant-Thorold k Stokes, east of Alice Springs, 2,600
square miles; Guthrie, T., Herbert River, 600 square miles;
Hay, Adam, on the Field River, 1,600 square miles; Hodgson
Downs Pastoral Association, north of Daly Waters, 4,707 square
miles; Lamb, Ed. Wm., 780 square miles; Lee, Lionel Wil-
liam, near Tennant’s Creek, 1,000 square miles; Tennant, Love,
and Love, near Alice Springs, 5,240 square miles; Macartney,


J. A., Arnheim Land, 11,342; Macpherson, E. A.; Maher,
McKinnon, Power, Cochrane, k Todd, east of Powell’s Creek,
2,400 square miles ; Mclllwraith, Forrest, k Collins, north and
south of Herbert River, 13,042 square miles ; Mercantile Bank
of Sydney, near Creswell Creek, 3,015 square miles; Melrose,
George, south of Alice Springs, 2,563 square miles; Murray,
David, Barrow’s Creek Run, 12,293 square miles; The Musgrave
Range Pastoral Company, south of Victoria River, 6,220 square
miles; Panton k Osmand, west boundary of province, 2,100
square miles; Patterson, D. W, H., on the Palmer and the Elsie
Station River, 3,416 square miles; Walker k Parke, Henbury,
Finke River, 2,195 square miles ; Richardson, T. L., near Herbert
River, 4,017 square miles ; Rocklands Pastoral Company, north
of Herbert River, 975 square miles; Macdonald, Smith, k Co.,
Creswell Creek, 7,281 square miles; Tyson, Jas., jun., near Gulf
of Carpentaria, 1,500 square miles ; Warburton, R. E., Erldunda,
970 square miles.
Some of these stations are devoted to the breeding of horses.
Sheep thrive on the Herbert River, Austral Downs, and Doon
Downs Stations, while the flocks of ration sheep at the various
telegraph depots keep in good condition and increase in satis-
factory ratio.
The cultivated lands grow sugar-cane, rice, cotton, yams, sweet
potato, maize, tobacco, coflee, cassava, arrowroot, ginger, castor
oil plant, millet, sorghum, tacca, pea nut (for oil), teal seed (for
oil), manila and sun hemp, and many other like products of com-
mercial value.
Indigo and cotton are spreading over Palmerston like weeds,
and seem to thrive on hard rock as well as on good soil.
Tropical fruits, such as the pineapple, banana, plantain, papaw,
&c., grow in abundance, and are remarkably cheap. The orange,
lemon, pomelo, custard apple, mango, and other fruits peculiar to
warm climates are cultivated with success.
Vegetables in great variety are grown by Chinese gardeners
wherever there is any settlement, and the Chinese also supply
Palmerston with fish daily, from the waters of Port Darwin,
The average rainfall is about sixty-five inches. The wet season
extends from October to April and the dry one from May to
September. During the north-west monsoon the maximum tem-
perature in the shade is 96° in the day, while the minimum in the
night is 65°. With the south-east monsoon the maximum tem-


perature in the day is 89° and the minimum at night is 56°. The
above figures refer to temperature near the coast; as we leave the
seaboard the climate becomes drier and colder, until in the centre
of the continent the thermometer falls below 30°, and the average
annual rainfall is about thirteen inches.
The country is rich in minerals, and during the last fourteen
years has yielded a large quantity of alluvial gold, the ground,
more or less auriferous, extending from Bridge Creek to Hous-
childt’s rush, a distance of about ninety miles.
Gold bearing reefs of considerable extent have been opened at
the Stapleton, the Howley, the Britannia, Bridge Creek, Yam
Creek, the Fountain Head, the Twelve Mile, the McKinlay, the
Union, the Extended Union, the Lady Alice, and Fine Creek, the
distance between the first and last named places being about
eighty-seven miles.
Gold is also now being found at the southern extreme of the
Northern Territory, viz,, at “ Alchebugana,” fifteen miles north
of the Peake. It is also known to exist at Alice Springs, in the
Todd, at Short’s Range near Tennant’s Creek, and doubtless
whenever systematic prospecting takes place gold and other
valuable minerals will be found in many parts of the interior of
the country.
Copper is abundant, particularly on the Daly River, which seems
to be its home, the percentage of metal being so high that, not-
withstanding the present low price, two mines, viz., the Daly River
Copper Company and Wheal Danks, are being worked at a good
profit, and steps are being taken to erect smelting works on the
ground.
Good deposits of copper have also been found at the Howley,
within a short distance of the railway now in course of con-
struction.
The Government railway from Palmerston to Pine Creek (145-
miles), now being vigorously pushed on by Messrs. Millar Brothers,
will prove to be the greatest boon ever conferred upon the Terri-
tory by reducing the cost of carriage to and from the mineral
districts, and thereby lessening the cost of production and also of
living. At present, during the rainy season, wheeled traffic is
absolutely suspended, and teamsters have to turn out their horses
and bullocks for more than a third of the year.
The section of the railway now in hand must be regarded as
part of the transcontinental line destined to be extended south-


Avard, just as that to the Peake must be extended northward, till
the two extremes meet to form a union between Adelaide and Port
Darwin. This being achieved South Australia will command two
great outlets for commerce, one at the north and the other at the
south ends of our vast Australian continent, and will then possess-
advantages for trade far beyond those of any of the other colonies-
of Australasia.


, ■.«
V


3 1508 00074602 9


■S r' :* $
x- ' 1 ' ’ v ■
’ . • /• ; ■
