









COLONISTS’ HANDBOOKS.
NO. 4.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
CONTAINING,
FROM GOVERNMENT SOURCES,
STATISTICAL AND OTHER INFORMATION.
USEFUL COUNSELS TO EMIGRANTS.
WITH MAP,
fCBLISIIED UNDER THE DIRECTION OF THE TRACT COMMITTEE.
LONDON:
SOCIETY FOR PROMOTING CHRISTIAN KNOWLEDGE;
NORTHUMBERLAND AVENUE, CHARING CROSS, W.C. 5
43, QUEEN VICTORIA STREET, E.C. ;
26j ST. GEOROE’S PLACE, HTDE PARK CORNER, S.VT.
BRIGHTON: 135, north street.


TABLE OF CONTENTS.
MAP OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
Chapter I.— A Few Words to Emigrants —X, Introductory; 2, Reasons for Emi-
grating ;3, Qualifications of an Emigrant; 4, Choice of a New Country;
5, The Emigrant leaving Home and on the Voyage; 6, Arrival; 7, Health;
8, Education; 9, The Emigrant as a Member of Society and of the State;
10, The Emigrant as a Churchman 3
Chapter ll.—l, Description; 2, Population; 3, Government; 4, Climate;
' B, Means of Communication; 6, Post Office and Telegraphs 10
Chapter lII.—I, Agriculture; 2, The Land Order Warrant System; 3, Mining... 16
Chapter TV.—l, Regulations for Assisted Passages; 2, Advice to Emigrants;
3, Education 25
Chapter V.— Church and Religion 37
Chapter Vl. —Simple Mints for Preserving Health. —1, The Ventilation of your
House; 2, Cleanliness of your Rooms; 3, Cleanliness and Dryness about your
House; 4, Hints on the Water you Use; 5, How to make a Filter; 6, What
to Drink; 7, Food; 8, Closets 39
Appendix A.—Commendatory Letter 42
Appendix B.—Prayers for the Use of Emigrants 43
Late Archbishop’s Letter 48


A FEW WOEDS TO EMIGEANTS.
CHAPTEK I.
1. It may be taken for granted that the reader of this
little book has, for some reason or other, made up his mind
to emigrate—to leave, either alone or with his wife and
children, his own country and his present way of living,
and to seek a new country and enter upon a new way of
living elsewhere. He will find in this book, in simple
form, a large amount of accurate information. This
information is supplied by the kindness of those well
acquainted with the matter, and may be thoroughly
relied upon.
We propose to introduce this by a few friendly sugges-
tions to the emigrant on his Reasons for Emigrating; the
Qualifications essential to his Success; his Choice of the
Country best suited to him.
2. Reasons for Emigrating.—Every emigrant, of
course, proposes to “ better ” himself. He wishes to find
better —that is, more regular and constant—work; or better
wages, or a better position—that is, a position in which he
may be his own master, and have his own land or his own
business ; or a better climate — i.e., a climate more suited to
his health. He may have found the competition and the
struggle too severe in the old country, and have failed to
find anything to do, and he looks, perhaps, for an opening


where men are scarcer. All these classes of persons pro-
posing to emigrate may be nearly sure of finding what
they want in one part or another of the earth’s surface.
Many people, however, emigrate from England every
year who have no good reason for doing so with hope
of success. Some are actuated by mere restlessness and
love of change; others have been deceived by highly-
coloured reports, or unwisely suppose that they are sure
to succeed, because some one else, whose circumstances
may be quite different, has succeeded. One of the
objects of this book is to enable its readers to judge
beforehand whether there is any good reason for hoping
that they would succeed if they were to emigrate. AV e
desire to prevent disappointment as well as to give sound
advice.
3, Qualifications of an Emigrant. —Probably, those
who thus wish to leave their country are not men of largo
capital. Capital, whether large or small, is, of course, a
very valuable qualification for an emigrant. But it may
be said generally that the classes of emigrants, with or
without capital, to whom the Colonies offer the best
promise of success, are Farmers, Agricultural Labourers,
and Mechanics. Besides Farmers and Agriculturists, it
should be pointed out that Domestic Servants of good
character can almost always find employment in the
colonies. The want of female labour is strongly felt in a
now colony, and such labour is accordingly valuable and
well paid. It may be observed as a fact, whatever may
be the worth of it, that a large portion of girls of good
character, emigrants from England, marry soon after their
arrival; though it would, of course, be rash to go out
with such a view. Strong arms and guide hands are of
themselves good capital in most new countries, especially
if they are accompanied by a shrewd head, which knows
how to use them. But the most important of all are the
moral qualifications. The emigrant must have a cheerful
industry ready to turn itself to anything, not above any
kind of honest work; he must have patience to wait for
success, and courage to persevere in spite of difficulties and
occasional failures; he must have temperance and sobriety
4
Advice to Emigrants.


to keep his body and mind fit for his work; he most have
frugality, to lay by for bad seasons, or sickness, or old age;
and he must have self-dependence, as he will have to think
and act for himself far more in a new country than in
an old.
4. Choice of a New Country. —But though persons
with such qualifications as those spoken of may bo en-
couraged to emigrate, it is rash and foolish to think that
any country out of England will give equal advantages to
all classes of emigrants, or to suppose that it does not
much matter where a person goes, whether to Canada, or
the United States, or Australia, or New Zealand, or Capo
Colony, if only he emigrates. Many have come hack to
this country bitterly disappointed, and have said that
emigration is a mistake; whereas the mistake has been
their own, in not considering carefully where they would
find the circumstances best suited to them. Emigration
is a step generally taken once for all. It can only be
retraced with great loss and difficulty, and, therefore, the
greatest care should be used that it be not a false step.
An intending emigrant should not be satisfied with
hearing that So-and-so went out to Australia and made
his fortune. lie must consider his own wants, and what
his means and powers are; and then find out where ho
can employ those means and powers to the best advantage.
Now, there is a large number of new countries open to a
man, each of them, perhaps, having something to recom-
mend it. How can he find out which will suit him? If
he has sensible friends who have already gone out, who
know what he is and what he can do, they may be able to
advise him. But, failing this, there are in London repre-
sentatives of nearly all the English colonies and de-
pendencies, and the foreign countries, which have openings
for emigrants. Most of these publish short papers giving
the latest information about the state of the countries
which they represent, showing what inducements are
offered to emigrants in the way of free grants of land or a
free or assisted passage, what tradesmen or mechanics are
most likely to find employment, what is the current rate
of wages-, what food is to be had, and what is the price of
5
Choice of a New Country.


it and of the other necessaries of life. Besides this present
hook, others will shortly be issued from the same source
with information about other countries. Government or
other official advertisements are from time to time inserted
in the newspapers, asking for mechanics or men skilled
in certain trades who are especially wanted in one colony
or another, and pointing out the advantages offered in the
way of a free or assisted passage, and the wages to be
earned. Articles are occasionally printed in the Times and
other newspapers by persons who have visited or resided
in some of the countries open to emigrants, from which
much may be learnt about the prospects of trade, or agri-
culture, or other industries in those countries. If the
person intending to emigrate has not the opportunity of
seeing these papers, and does not himself know how
to get the information which he needs, he should not
hesitate to go to the clergyman of his parish, or any
clergyman of whom he knows anything, and ask his
assistance in learning what he wants. The Eev. J.
Bridger, Emigrants’ Chaplain, St. Nicholas’ Church, Liver-
pool, will also answer as far as possible inquiries addressed
to him by intending emigrants, or by clergy on their
behalf.
6. The Emigrant leaving Home: and on the
Voyage. —Let it be supposed that the emigrant has
chosen his new country, and secured his passage. From
the information he has obtained he will, according to his
means, have provided himself with the most useful tools,
utensils, and other necessaries for his new home. He
should certainly not forget to take a Bible and Prayer
Booh, and two or three other good books. He will have
time to use them on the voyage out. He will find it very
useful to provide himself with a letter of commendation
from his clergyman to be presented to any clergyman who
may be nearest to the spot in which he settles. A form
for such a letter will be found at the end of this book.
A clergyman would readily copy it out and fill up the
blanks; or he might get a form from the Society which
publishes this book, the address of which is to be found
on the title-page. With such a letter, which he should
6
Advice to Emigrants.


take care to use at once, lie will always make sure of a
friend ready to welcome liim on liis arrival, and a friend
who is likely to be well-informed, and sure to be dis-
interested and trustworthy. He will certainly have
many idle hours on his hands during the voyage, and will
find himself in the midst of very varied company, some of
it not very good. If he has any money, or money’s worth,
he will very likely be invited to gamble it or drink it
away on the ship or as soon as he lands; or he may be
persuaded to join in some speculation or scheme or
adventure, honest or dishonest, in which he is told that he
is sure to make his fortune, but in which he will have to
begin by parting with what he has. He must take care
not to be caught in any of these traps. He will have
many opportunities of showing that he is made of good
stuff by obeying all rules and regulations made by the
ship’s officers. Let him determine to show himself always
for the side of order, good humour, unselfishness, friendli-
ness. Above all, if he has the happiness of being a
religious man, let him not be ashamed of it, but so show
it that he may encourage others.
6. Arrival. —On his arrival and during his land journey
the emigrant is sure to be beset by a host of so-called
agents. It is to be hoped that he will have made up his
mind beforehand where to go and what to do, and that he
will not allow himself to be turned aside from his plan.
He should push forward to his destination, so as to waste
no time or money on the way. He will find it quite long
and costly enough. If he should be in any doubt, lie
should look out for a clergyman, who will be sure to advise
him well. If he should happen to be going to any of the
great British Colonies, he will generally find officers,
whose express object is to befriend in every possible
way new settlers like himself.
7. Health. —The climate and the open air life he will
lead will be in favour of the emigrant’s health. But he may
be far away from any doctor or medicine, and illness to him-
self or his family would be a far more serious calamity
than in the old country. A few hints will be found
7
Arrival, etc.


further on, attention to which may save him from some
dangers.
8. Education. —The emigrant with a family should
not he so cruel to his children as to allow them to grow
up without education. Happily in most Colonies there is
an opportunity of giving this advantage in life to all of
them, and South Australians consider that they are not
one whit behind in this important matter.
9. The Emigrant as a Member of Society and of
the State. —There may be some temptation to a man who
has come to win a living and a home for himself and his
family in a new land to think of that, and that only, and
to forget that he is a part of a new society and a new
nation. He should, of course, not waste his time or
neglect his business. But it is not good for man to live
alone. Men are made for mutual help, and to form
societies. They can do things when they are working-
together that none can do alone. The new-comer ought,
therefore, from the first, to try to establish and maintain
friendly intercourse with his neighbours ; to take and give
help; to interest himself in all that concerns and interests
them; to use his vote, if he has one, or whatever power
he has, for the good of the State to which he belongs, and
of his fellow-citizens; to do all he can to support and
maintain a good and orderly Government; to show him-
self a true patriot, by helping to get righteous, laws and
worthy institutions, and to form good customs for those
that shall come after him.
10. The Emigrant as a Churchman. —ln whatever
other sense he is a Churchman, there can be scarcely a
doubt that the reader has received baptism from the
Church, and thus been made a “ member of Christ” and of
His Church. He has, perhaps, been married in church.
He has grown up within sight or sound of a parish church,
and has had the right to the services of his clergyman—
one who really belonged to him and in whom he had a
right —whether he chose to use them or not. He will not
find an established church in his new country. He will not
find the old ivy-grown village church, or the handsome
8
Advice to Emigrants.


town church, with its bright decorations and beautiful
singing, and its doors open to all. But he will find the
Church everywhere —that great body, with its bishops
and clergy, who have had their commission handed down
to them from Christ Himself, who minister the sacraments
which He ordained and all other means of grace. As a
Churchman, the emigrant should not think that the
“ Church ” is only a religion for England, and that he
must look out for another religion in other places.
Let him be staunch and faithful to his Church and
its Lord. He will find that he has his bishop and his
Church clergyman wherever he goes (see “ Ecclesiastical
Information ”). And if the latter lives a long way off,
and there is no church building and no regular service
yet established where he is, he should join with those
living near him to get one as soon as they can. Till they
get their own church and regular service, they should
arrange to meet in each others’ houses Sunday by Sunday,
and read through the service together. He will be a true
friend to his neighbours who has the courage to start this
habit. Let the Sunday be regularly and religiously
observed. It has been found by experience to be almost
as great a temporal blessing as it is a spiritual. Our
advice would be: —Go regularly to church, and especially
to the Holy Communion. Take the earliest opportunity
of having your children baptized. Let your children go to
Sunday School, if there be one within reach; if not, teach
them the Catechism and give them a Bible lesson at home.
Have your children confirmed as soon as they are old
enough. Gather your family together for family prayer
every morning and evening. Never omit your own daily
private prayer (for some prayers for your own use, see the
end of this book) and the daily reading of the Bible, if it
be but a few verses. Bring up your children in the habit
of prayer and Bible reading. Support and help your
bishop and clergy in all their efforts for your own and
your neighbours’ good. Religion will bring brightness
and comfort to your own heart and home, and a strong
Church will be a strong backbone to the nation.
9
The Emigrant as a Churchman.


CHAPTEE 11.
1. Description.—The colony of South Australia was
founded in 1836, though for some years previously there
had been settlers on the southern shores. This colony
has a very extensive coastline, forming its southern and
northern boundaries, and has a great advantage over the
other provinces of the group in the possession of several
large gulfs. St. Vincent and Spencer Gulfs are in the
south, and, reaching as they do to a considerable extent
into the interior, give means of water carriage to a
very large part of the colony. It was upon the eastern
shore of Gulf St. Vincent that the first settlement took
place, and within a few miles of the landing-place are the
capital of the colony and its principal port. Separating
these two gulfs is Yorke’s Peninsula. Besides Port Adelaide
there are several important harbours along the shores of
the two gulfs, the most noted being Ports Augusta, Pirie,
and Wallaroo in Spencer’s Gulf, and Port Wakefield in St.
Vincent’s Gulf, all of which are termini of important
railway systems. Adelaide is the chief town, with a
population of 38,000. It is a very handsome city, with
fine streets and parks.
In 1863 the boundaries of South Australia were further
extended by the addition of what is known as “ The
Northern Territory,” which consists of the country
stretching northward from the 26th degree of south lati-
tude to the Indian Ocean, and lying between the 129th
and 138th degrees of east longitude. South Australia
therefore now extends from the southern to the Indian
Ocean, and contains an area of 903,690 square miles, of
578,361,600 acres. A point on its northern coast is within
300 miles of the Island of New Guinea.
2. Population.—The population of the colony has not
multiplied at such a rapid rate as could have been wished,
but the advance has been steady and continuous. Natural
increase has been the chief source of supply, but immigra-
tion at the public expense has also contributed somewhat
to the population. The number of persons now coining
10
Advice to Emigrants.


from the United Kingdom is rapidly increasing, owing
largely to the greater facilities provided by the P. & 0.
and Orient Steam Companies, each of which have steamers
calling at South Australian ports fortnightly. The Orient
steamers proceed direct from London, via Plymouth, to Port
Adelaide, and make the through voyage in from 36 to 40
days, thus affording excellent opportunities to persons of
all classes who propose making South Australia their
future home. The Government offer special inducements
in the shape of land order warrants to all suitable
persons proceeding direct to the colony and intending to
remain there. During the last two or three years, a con-
siderable number of persons have come there from the
neighbouring colonies, and principally from Victoria,
which at one time offered irresistible attractions to many
South Australians. The total population of the province
is estimated at 300,000. During 1879 the births num-
bered 9902, marriages 2229, and deaths numbered 3580,
the excess of births over deaths being thus 6322. The
proportion to each thousand of the population was—
births, 38-8; marriages, 8*78; and deaths, 14-03. The
marriage rate in 1869 was only 6*68, and the increase was
steady until 1878, when the rate was 9-47. Last year,
owing to temporary depression, there was a slight falling off.
3. Government.—ln 1856 the present Constitution
Act was passed, and having received the royal sanction
was proclaimed in the colony in October of that year. By
this Act the work of legislation devolves upon a governor
and two Houses of Parliament. The Parliament is tri-
ennial, and the sessions are generally held annually. The
two Houses are called respectively the Legislative Council
and the House of Assembly. For electing members to
the former the whole province is one electoral district.
A member must be thirty years of age, and must have
resided in the colony for three years. Electors for the
Legislative Council must be twenty-one years of age, and
have a freehold estate of £SO value, or a leasehold of £2O
annual value with three years unexpired, or must occupy
a dwelling-house of £2O annual value. There are eighteen
members of the Legislative Council, who nominally retain
11
Government.


their seats for twelve years. As, however, there is a pro-
vision that one-third of their number shall retire every
fourth year, the average length of service is reduced by
deaths and resignations to considerably under twelve
years. This House cannot be dissolved by the governor.
The House of Assembly at first consisted of thirty-six
members, elected by seventeen districts, two of which
returned only one member, while Adelaide returned six.
In 1861 a redistribution of seats was made, based upon
population. The colony was then divided into eighteen
districts, each electing two members. In the session of
1874 a further alteration was made, by which the colony
was divided into twenty-two electoral districts, three
returning three members each, one returning one, and the
remainder two each, so that the Parliament now consists
of forty-six members. Under the present Constitution
Act all persons qualified to vote are eligible to become
members of the Assembly, which is elected by manhood
suffrage, the only requirements being that the voter shall
be twenty-one years of age, that his name shall have been
on the electoral roll six months, and that he is untainted
by felony. Aliens not naturalized are incapable of voting ;
but all that is required to become a naturalized subject is
to take an oath of allegiance and pay a fee of 10s. 6d. All
elections are conducted by ballot. Judges, officiating minis-
ters of religion, and aliens who have not lived five years
in the colony, are ineligible for election to either House.
4. Climate. —The climate of South Australia, though
liable to frequent changes of temperature, is one of the
healthiest and most delightful in the world. In the height
of summer the heat is frequently excessive, the thermometer
having on a few occasions registered 115° (Fahrenheit) in
the shade, but a week rarely passes without two or three
days of cool breeze, and even at the greatest heat the air
is so dry that there is none of the oppression felt in
moister climates. Eain falls in every month of the year,
but the greatest quantity, of course, comes in the winter,
which is at its height in the months of June, July, and
August. The average rainfall for the year in the neigh-
bourhood of Adelaide is about 21£ inches. Eain is rarely
12
Advice to Emigrants.


continuous, and even at the wettest season bright sunny
days are the rule rather than the exception. The tem-
perature in the daytime in the depth of winter is very
seldom below 60°; but in the hilly districts ice is fre-
quently seen, and snow occasionally falls there. Besides
being admirably suited to innumerable vegetable produc-
tions, of which we shall speak hereafter, the climate of
South Australia has been found very beneficial to persons
suffering from weak chests.
5. Means of Communication. —Railroads. —There
are now 614|- miles of railway open to the public, made
up as follows :—Adelaide and Semaphore, 9j ; Dry Creek
and Port, 5; Adelaide and Hallet, 127|; Strathalbyn
and Victor Harbour, 32; Port Wakefield and Hoyleton, 28 ;
Hoyle ton and Blyth, 14; Port Pirie and Gladstone, 32|;
Gladstone and Caltowie, 11|; Caltowie and Jamestown, 8;
Port Broughton and Barunga, 10; Kingston and Narra-
coorte, 53; Kadina, Wallaroo, and Moonta, 16|; Kapunda
and North-West Bend, 57; Port Wakefield and Kadina,
35 ; Kadina and Barunga Gap, 26; Eivoli Bay and Mount
Gambier, 50|; Hamley Bridge and Balaklava, 21^; Ba-
runga Gap Extension, 6|; and 70 miles of the Port
Augusta and Government Gums line.
The following lines are under construction: —Port
Augusta and Government Gums, 199 (including the 70
already opened); Adelaide and Nairne, 33| miles; and
the Hallett and Terowie line, 20| miles.
There are at present only three lines of railway in
private hands, viz., the Adelaide and Glenelg, the Brighton
and South Coast, and the Holdfast Bay Railway, making
in all about seventeen miles. They are built on the 5 ft.
3 in. gauge. The Holdfast Bay line is just completed,
and is one of the cheapest lines in the colony. This
company have running powers over the first portion of
the Adelaide and Nairne Railway.
Roads. —The main-road system of South Australia is
acknowledged to be the most efficient in the Australian
colonies. From the earliest days large sums have been
spent upon the construction and maintenance of macada-
13
Means of Communication.


mized thoroughfares, and the roads through the Mount
Lofty Eanges especially are excellently made. The main
arteries are constructed and maintained at the public
expense, the local roads being under the charge of District
Councils; their expenditure upon such roads derived from
local rating is supplemented pound for pound by the
Government. There are now over 3300 miles 35 chains
of main roads in the colony, on which in the financial
year 1878-9 £85,000 was expended in maintenance. It is
proposed to spend £IOO,OOO during the current financial
year. The majority of the main roads are under the care
of “ Local Boards of Main Koads,” of which there are
eight. The Central Board, which meets in Adelaide, has
1031 miles 40 chains of main line under its charge; the
Northern Board, 350 miles; the Flinders Board, 129
miles; the Victoria Board, 162 miles 48 chains; the
Albert Board, 356 miles 14 chains; the Peninsula Board,
295 miles; the North Midland, 168 miles 40 chains ; and
the Midland, 372 miles. In parts to which the jurisdic-
tion of Boards, Corporations, and District Councils do not
extend, the Commissioner of Public Works exercises direct
control over the making and maintaining of the roads.
6. Post Office and Telegraphs. —The principal feature
of South Australian telegraphy is the construction of the
line across the centre of the continent to Port Darwin, a
distance of about 2200 miles. This lino is the means of
bringing the Australian colonies into continuous communi-
cation with England and the rest of the European countries.
The first line of telegraph in the colony was erected
in December, 1855. It extended from Adelaide to the
Semaphore at Port Adelaide, a distance of about nine
miles and a half. In 1870 there were 75 telegraph offices,
1183 miles of line, and 1718 of wire. The messages
numbered 128,485, and the revenue reached £10,649. At
the end of 1879 there were 4393 miles of lines and 5934
of wire, the length of lines authorized or in progress
being 850 miles. There are 149 telegraph offices and 237
operators connected with them. Last year the number of
telegrams (local and intercolonial) was 494,620, and of
international telegrams 21,028. Communication is estab-
14
Advice to Emigrants.


listed with the colonies of Victoria, New South Wales,
Queensland, Western Australia, Tasmania, and New
Zealand. The telegraphic tariff of the colony is as
follows : —From Adelaide to London, 10s. B d. per word,
inclusive of names and addresses. Between Adelaide and
its shipping-place, Port Adelaide, 6d. is charged for ten
words, exclusive of addresses, &0,, and Id. for every ad-
ditional word. The inland rate is Is. for ten words, and
for intercolonial messages 2s. to Victoria, New South
Wales, and Western Australia for ten words, 3s. to Queens-
land, 7s. to Tasmania, and 10s. 6d. to New Zealand, the
additional amounts in the last two instances being ren-
dered necessary in consequence of the cable charges.
The head-quarters of the Post and Telegraph Offices
are the Adelaide Post-office, a very handsome building
of fine white freestone, the foundation-stone of which was
laid by the Duke of Edinburgh during his visit to the
colony in 1867. Its chief feature is a spacious public
hall, around which are placed the various departments.
The roof is coved, and partly of glass, which gives a
very fine effect. The Albert clock tower is 149 feet in
height. By railway, coach, and ship, the average number
of mails dispatched from Adelaide daily is 326. As show-
ing the great progress which has been made in the postal
business, the following figures may be interesting:—ln
1870 there were 274 post-offices throughout the colony;
the letters carried during the year numbered 3,049,818,
and the newspapers 2,198,477, and the revenue amounted
to £30,398. On December 31, 1879, there were 449 post-
offices. During the year 1879, the number of letters and
packets which passed through them had increased to
1,008,414, and of newspapers to 5,141,956. The revenue
of the post-office in 1879 was £73,174 2s. s d. Money-
order offices are established in connection with many of
the post-offices; in 1879 there were 108 of the former,
and the number of orders issued by them was 34,181,
covering an amount of £108,826, the net revenue derived
therefrom being £1153. Money-orders are allowed to
be sent by telegraph. Eegular communication with the
adjoining colonies is maintained by steamers, and also
15
Post Office and Telegraphs.


daily by an overland mail to Melbourne, which travels
500 miles in sixty-four and a-half hours. The inland and
intercolonial rate charged is twopence per half-ounce for
letters, and newspapers not more than seven days old are
forwarded free to any place beyond the town in which
they are published.
A direct fortnightly mail communication with Europe
and the East is carried on by the P. & 0. Company, who
have a contract with the Victorian Government, to whom
South Australia pays a yearly sum in proportion to the
amount of mails carried. The service is punctually per-
formed, on an average in about forty days. The mail
steamers, whose outward terminus is Melbourne, now call
at Adelaide; but prior to their doing this, so anxious was
South Australia not to lose the advantage of her geo-
graphical position, that at great expense she regularly
dispatched a steamer to King George’s Sound to meet the
ocean vessels and tranship the mails. On letters the
charge is 6d. per half-ounce, on newspapers Id. each. The
vessels of the Orient Steam Navigation Company also
arrive and depart fortnightly and carry mails, and there
is monthly a mail carried by the French packet of the
Messageries Company, so that it may almost be said that
there is weekly communication with Europe. American
mails are brought by a line of steamers run between San
Francisco and Sydney.
CHAPTER 111.
1. Agriculture. —The general character of the land
in South Australia, so far as it has been taken up for
farming purposes, is in a high degree favourable for
advantageous settlement. It may be divided into three
classes—the plains, which for the most part are at once
available for the plough; the hilly country, where more
or less clearing is necessary to be done to fit it for cul-
tivation ; and scrub lands, which in some cases are of
very inferior quality, but in others are only kept from
being cultivated owing to the expense and labour that
would be involved in removing the timber. A fourth
16
Advice to Emigrants.


class might be added, consisting of comparatively level
country, sprinkled with sheaoak and other small timber,
which can be removed at a comparatively slight cost.
Notwithstanding the comparative dryness of the climate,
the rainfall being about 21 £ inches, the soil proves very
productive. Not only do English fruit and cereals of all
kinds grow to perfection, but many semi-tropical fruits
and vegetables do equally well, the earth yielding a
bountiful return for a very moderate expenditure of
labour. The area of land tilled in South Australia is, as
compared with the population, enormous, far surpassing
anything known in the other colonies. Besides wheat,
the staple growth of the colony, attention is bestowed
upon the production of hay, barley, oats, rye, potatoes,
field peas, lucerne, and, to a small extent, flax, hops, and
artificial grasses ; but the whole of these articles combined
do not occupy much more than one-half the area devoted
to wheat. The total yield of barley during 1878-9 was
342,933 bushels, gathered from 12,089 acres; of oats,
35,202 bushels, from 2931 acres; of peas, 48,191 bushels,
from 4233 acres; of hay, 210,974 tons, from 218,359
acres; and of potatoes, 14,378 tons, from 5398 acres. It
should be stated that a number of associations exist
throughout the colony which give attention to agricul-
tural matters. The Central Association—the Eoyal
Agricultural and Horticultural Society —carries on opera-
tions upon a very large scale, and is doing useful work
in promoting the interests of the cultivator of the soil.
Within the last year or two, Farmers’ Associations, on
pretty much the same model as the “ Granges ” of America,
have been organized in different parts of the country.
The land now being occupied is from 60 to 280 miles
from Adelaide, and situate from a few hundred yards to a
hundred miles from shipping places on the coast. The
extent of land under cultivation with wheat is increasing
with amazing rapidity, the figures for last season being
1,458,096 acres. The production of wheat at the last
harvest gathered in December, 1879, was 14,260,964
bushels, the season being a moderately favourable one.
The increase on the totals of the preceding year was
17
Agriculture.


in area 152,24-5 acres; in quantity 5,028,915 bushels.
The ability to gather in the largely extending areas of
corn is explained by the fact that harvesting in South
Australia is done by means of Eidley’s reaper, or stripper,
which removes and thrashes the heads in one operation.
This machine, invented by Mr. Eidley, a South Australian,
has proved a perfect godsend to the colony. At the most
it requires only two persons to attend to it, and is fre-
quently worked, owing to the dearth of labour, by one
man, who drives the horses and steers the machine him-
self. One of these machines will reap and thresh from
eight to ten acres of crop per day, after which the grain
has merely to be passed once or twice through the winnower
to be ready for market. Although the average yield per
acre is not so high as in some other countries, the quality
of South Australian wheat, probably owing to the climate,
is superior to any other.
The olive thrives luxuriantly in South Australian soil.
Many of the best varieties were introduced soon after the
colony was established, and for years small quantities of
oil of very excellent quality have been made. It is only
during the last three or four years, however, that syste-
matic attempts at its manufacture have been made. These
attempts are owing largely to the advocacy of the interest
by Mr. Samuel Davenport. There are now several persons
engaged in the business, and some thousands of gallons of
olive oil will be made during the present season. The
Sheriff (Mr, W. E. Boothby) has taken especial interest
in the industry, and the Park Lands near the gaol are
covered with olive trees, which yield good crops. The oil
when made commands a ready sale at 10s. per gallon,
being equal to the best imported. Several attempts have
been made to establish sericulture as a colonial industry,
but hitherto with no very substantial results. Some of
the cocoons produced here, which were sent to Marseilles,
have been pronounced by the firm of silk merchants to
whom they were consigned to be “equal to any ever
wound by them.” The climate of South Australia appears
to be admirably suited to the silkworm, where the mul-
berry trees required for its food grow rapidly and
18
Advice to Emigrants.


luxuriantly. The colony has also been proved experimen-
tally to be well adapted for the growth of many other
products. Hops are successfully and systematically grown
in the South-Eastern district; tobacco thrives with very
little attention in many places, although it has not been
systematically cultivated; the castor-oil plant (Eicinus)
grows with the greatest freedom; and the sunflower is
quite at home in our warm sunny plains. Besides these,
mustard, rape, canary seed, grain, lupin, maize, lentils,
chicory, osier, broom, millet, esparto grass, opium, cochi-
neal, and many plants used in distilling various perfumes,
have also been grown here, and are therefore recommended
not upon mere speculative grounds, but from actual know-
ledge of the suitability of the climate for their production.
The greatest hindrance, as in most other matters, is the
scarcity of labour, which will always be more or less a
difficulty to be encountered. The list we have thus given
must not be understood as exhausting the agricultural
and horticultural products which the colony is capable of
growing, as it only includes those which are, or may be-
come, important sources of wealth. We may add, there-
fore, that almost every description of garden plant and
forest tree, from the violet and the oak of the cold northern
climes to the ferns, cacti, and gorgeous flowering shrubs
of semi-tropical countries, may be seen in the gardens in
and around the city of Adelaide.
Wine-growing has, from the early days of the colony,
been properly regarded as an industry for which our
soil and climate are particularly suitable, and although
originally carried on with all the drawbacks of inexperi-
ence and consequent risk of failures, there is abundant
evidence that wine of the finest quality can be produced
in South Australia. The rich chocolate loam and the
ferruginous clays of our hillsides and plains are admirably
adapted for the production of wine grapes of excellence.
Indeed, it is marvellous over what a stretch of territory
in the province the vine flourishes. Nearly all the best
kinds of grapes from France, Spain, and elsewhere have
been introduced, and our vigncrons have, during the last
few years, both discovered those best suited for our climate
19
Agriculture.


and learned the proper way of treating them so as to
bring them to perfection. The wines produced vary from
those of the lightest and most delicate character to the
full-bodied and generous wines such as are produced in
Spain and Portugal. The extent of land planted with
vines in 1878 was 4207 acres, and the produce of wine in
1877-8 was 453,303 gallons. These figures exhibit a
satisfactory increase in the returns for the previous twelve
months. The greater part of the wine grown here is
consumed in the colony, where a taste for the good and
pure article is gradually and steadily growing. A mode-
rate trade has been established with the neighbouring
colonies and other parts of the world, one or two growers
shipping their produce regularly to England, where a
remunerative market is obtained for them. The wines
have also secured medals, prizes, and honourable mentions
at all the international exhibitions. At the Sydney
exhibition the proportion of prizes obtained was enormous.
The value of the wine exported during 1879 was £16,019.
Spirit manufacture is also carried on to a considerable
extent.
The varied climate of the colony is remarkably favour-
able to the cultivation of fruit. In good seasons many
kinds grow in such abundance, and the price is so low,
that it does not pay to bring the produce into market,
and it is consequently left to rot where it falls. The
earliest of the spring fruits is the loquat, which ripens
before the end of September. Cherries and strawberries
follow in October and November, and then gooseberries,
currants, and raspberries make their appearance. At
Christmas time the first of the apricots and figs are ready
for eating, and soon after peaches, plums, and grapes in
abundance are ready not only for homo consumption but
export, considerable quantities being sent to the other
colonies. Apples, pears, melons, and a variety of other
fruits carry the supply on till the orange season, which
begins about June and lasts until November. In former
years almost the entire stock of oranges was obtained
from Sydney; but now, although the trees require arti-
ficial watering, they are very prolific, and at particular
20
Advice to Emigrants.


periods supply some of the intercolonial neighbours.
The sultana, muscatel, and other vines are largely grown
in the vineyards which are established all over the
country. The produce from them is made into raisins,
and the quality is pronounced by good judges to be ex-
cellent. During the summer season an immense quantity
of jam is made, much of which is exported.
2. The Land Order Warrant System. —ln the system
of immigration nowin three provision is made for enabling-
colonists to nominate their friends for assisted passages.
These friends have to undergo examination as to then-
suitability for colonists before they are sent out, as every
carets taken that none but thoroughly strong and healthy
persons are introduced at the Government expense, but
the obvious advantage of the plan is that such of the
nominees as are declared eligible have on their arrival in
the colony some one to take an interest in them. The
system has become exceedingly popular, and there are
still a considerable number of nomination certificates out-
standing. What is known as the “assisted passage”
system is still, however, in operation, and residents in the
colony, and persons now arriving or to arrive, who decide
to settle here, can obtain, on application at the Crown
Lands and Immigration office in Adelaide, assisted pas-
sages for their relations and friends, if eligible, by contri-
buting a small proportion of the passage-money. Persons
nominated under these regulations have a prior right to
passages, and are accordingly afforded opportunities of
joining their friends in the colony. A statement of the
classes that are eligible for assisted passages, and of the
amount to be contributed, will be found on page 2u of this
pamphlet.
A feature in the immigration laws deserving of special
notice is the land order warrant system. The nomina-
tions just referred to are intended for persons of the indus-
trial classes, while the land orders are offered as an
inducement to persons of all grades who, having a litths
capital, desire to make a new home for themselves and
their families, the order is issued with a view to enabling
such persons to recoup themselves, in part at least, the
21
The Land Order Warrant System.


cost of their passages out. The course to be adopted to
secure these orders is this :—Any person having decided
to proceed to South Australia and settle there should inti-
mate such intention to the emigration agent for the
colony, whose office is 8, Victoria Chambers, Westminster,
S.W., London. The emigration agent will then require
him to furnish certificates, on a form which will be sup-
plied for the purpose, to the effect that he has paid his
passage-money in a ship that is to sail direct to South
Australia, and that he has not previously resided in any
of these colonies, also a certificate as to the health of him-
self and his family. He should then call at the office of
the emigration agent (as above) with these certificates
for examination and approval, when, if approved, a land
order warrant will be issued to him, after which he can
proceed on his voyage. Care should be taken that all
these requirements are strictly complied with, as it is
absolutely necessary to obtain the warrant before sailing ,
otherwise there is no claim whatever for a land order.
On arrival in the colony, the holder of the warrant should
call at the Crown Lands and Immigration Office, Adelaide,
when his warrant will be exchanged for a land order.
The value of the land order is £2O for each adult, and £lO
for each child between the ages of one and twelve years.
If the recipient of the order decides to take up land he
should call at the Government Land Office, Adelaide, where
all information he may desire upon the subject will be
given. When he has resolved upon a block of land, he
may tender the order in part payment for same, and in
this way he will secure (without the sacrifice of any of
the capital he may have brought with him) the right to
what may, by his own industry, become in the course of a
few years a valuable property. Thus, a family consisting,
say, of a father, mother, and five children over the age of
one year, would be able to claim orders worth at the lowest
computation £9O. This amount would be sufficient to
meet the first payment of interest upon 900 acres of land
if taken up at £1 per acre, or upon rather more than 640
acres if taken up at 275. or 28s. an aero, the average rate
which land sold upon credit has realized of late. This
22
Advice to Emigrants.


in many parts of the colony would be a holding quite
large enough to give profitable employment to a family
of seven.
To enable the new-comer to set to work with a reason-
able prospect of success, he should have money enough to
purchase four or five horses, a couple of ploughs, a pair or
two of harrows, and a few other articles ot husbandry.
He should also be able to spend a few pounds in providing
a small residence for himself and his family, and to have
enough to keep him and those dependent on him during
the months spent in putting in the crop and obtaining a
harvest. As we have before explained, it is only here and
there that any large amount has to be devoted to clearing
the lands, and supposing the selection is taken up not
later than March there is every likelihood of the selector
being able to obtain a crop the same year. The system of
farming here is so simple that the most inexperienced
hand would have no difficulty in making a start. The
cost of ploughing, sowing, and harvesting is comparatively
small. There is no need to buy a reaping machine the
first year, as it is easy to obtain the loan ot one, but it is
no doubt the part of wisdom for the farmer to provide
himself with all those labour-saving appliances as soon as
possible.
With a capital of two or three hundred pounds, a
selector might with safety start farming in South Aus-
tralia. Indeed, there are innumerable instances in which
a beginning has been made upon a much smaller amount.
The second instalment of interest—also ten per cent. —
falls due in three years, and of course it is necessary for
the farmer to observe the conditions as to improvements
and cultivation. It must be evident, however, that the
land order warrant system affords to persons in the
mother country, who, having a little money, are anxious
to obtain a home for themselves in the colonies, a ready
means of economizing their funds and getting a start in life
as tillers of the soil or otherwise in South Australia. This
colony is so admirably adapted to agricultural pursuits,
and particularly to wheat-growing, that it offers peculiar
inducements to intending settlers. Those persons who
23
The Land Order Warrant System.


have obtained land orders, but who do not propose to
take up land, can transfer the orders after a residence of
two years in the colony. They will have no difficulty in
procuring almost the full nominal value for them.
3. Mining.—The mineral resources of South Australia
are vast and rich. Gold, silver, copper, iron, and lead
exist in many parts of the colony, and have materially
promoted its prosperity. Recently a silver-lead vein has
been struck at Kangaroo Island, which is reported to be
rich. Several gold-fields have also been discovered and
worked, but although gold is to be found in nearly every
part of South Australia, none of the deposits of the pre-
cious metals have so far proved of great extent.
The colony is rich in iron ores. It has been stated that
there is scarcely an acre of ground which does not contain
a slight proportion of this valuable metal. Some very
large veins of iron ore —several as much as forty feet in
width—have been discovered. The ores are entirely free
from arsenic or sulphur, and yield excellent iron. Unfor-
tunately the enterprise of smelting has not been very
vigorously prosecuted.
It is, however, in copper that South Australia is prin-
cipally rich. In more than one season of agricultural
depression the copper-mining industry has come to the
rescue of the colony and tided it over its temporary
troubles. The first discovery was made in 1842 by a son
of Captain Bagot, a very old and valued colonist, at
Kapunda, forty-five miles due north of Adelaide. In the
following year operations were commenced, and from the
first proved to be very profitable, although many obstacles
had to be overcome.
The mineral resources of the Far North, as yet scarcely
touched, are believed to be enormous. Lodes of copper
ore can be traced for miles across the country. There arc
a great number of mines to the north, north-east, and east
of Port Augusta, from which a quantity of ore has been
raised. The difficulty of cartage and its immense cost, as
well as the high price of labour, has, however, checked
enterprise in this part of the colony. Sooner or later it
will be opened out by railway, and the rich deposits will
Advice to Emigrants.


no doubt eventually be worked to great advantage. Some
idea of the value of the mineral industry in South Aus-
tralia in the past may be gathered from the fact that
since the first mine was discovered the total value of tho
copper, copper ore, and regulus exported up to the end of
1878 has been £16,106,944, of other minerals exclusive of
gold, £294,612.
CHAPTER IY.
1. Regulations for Assisted Passages. — The Emi-
gration Agent for South Australia is authorised by the
Colonial Government to provide passages under “the
Emigration Act, 1872,” to the following classes subject
to payments as under, which must be made before sailing,
no promissory notes being taken either here or after arrival in
the colony.
Mechanics, navvies, agricultural and other labourers,
copper miners, etc., under fifty years of age (and if married,
their wives and families).
(For males or females under forty years
Married. - of age - - ... £4 each,
j For males or females over forty years
V and under fifty ~, ... £8 each.
Free passages are now granted to children under
twelve years of age, and girls accompanying their parents.
Males of twelve years of age and upwards, members of
families or otherwise, will be required to pay £4 each.
Emigrants are not in any way hound to the Government or re-
quired to make any payment in the colony for their passages, hut
are at perfect liberty to choose their otvn employers and to make
their own bargains for wages; and any person under forty-five
years cf age proceeding under the assisted passage regula-
tions who shall, within thirty days after arrival in tho
colony, apply in writing to the Commissioner of Crown
Lands and Immigration to be allowed to pay the balance
of his or her passage-money (which shall not exceed, in
the whole, the sum of £l5 for every statute adult), and shall
25
Regulations for Assisted Passages.


also pay the balance of such passage-money within twelve
calendar months from the date of such application, shall
he entitled to a land order of the same value and granted under
the same conditions as referred to hereafter under “ The Full
Paid Land Grant System,” but it should be understood
that no more money need be paid in the colony unless
applicants choose to apply for land orders.
These land orders will be immediately available in cases
where the holder desires to occupy, reside on, and cultivate
the crown lands. They will be received as payment,
or part payment of interest on the purchase-money of any
land open for selection, or for sale, but no land grant will
be issued under them until the holder and the emigrants
have resided in the Colony two years continuously.
If married, applicants will be required to produce, for
inspection, their marriage certificates, and proof of ago
will, in all cases, bo necessary where the age is forty years
and over, as well as for children verging on one or twelve
years of age.
If eligible and approved, the candidates will receive, as
soon as the necessary arrangements will admit, an em-
barkation order, naming the ship and the time and place
of joining her. Should it bo found that any of the
signatures attached to the certificates which will bo
required are not genuine, or that any other deception is
attempted, the application will he rejected; or should any
one, on personal examination at the port of embarkation,
or on board, be discovered to have made any mis-statement
whatever, with regard to age, trade or calling, health, etc.,
such person will not be allowed to proceed in the ship. To pre-
vent disappointment, therefore, applicants should be very
careful to have their trade or calling and ages, as well as
state of health, correctly described in their application
form. The embarkation order is not transferable; and ,
until such order has been received by the applicants , they
should on no account quit their employment, or malce any
preparation for departure. Any one personating an emi-
grant named in the order is liable to a heavy penalty.
If, after receiving an embarkation older, any person
should be prevented from proceeding in the ship, the
26
Advice to Emigrants.


emigration agent should be immediately informed, that
he may fill up the vacancy, if practicable. Any person
failing to attend at the appointed time or place for
embarkation without having previoualy given timely
notice, and a satisfactory reason for non-attendance, will
forfeit all claim to a passage.
When a ship has been chartered, or passages engaged,
embarkation orders are sent to those interested. The
embarkation order is generally issued about three weeks
before the time of embai'kation (except where vacancies
by defaults have to be filled up, when the notice is
necessarily shorter), and the embarkation order, therefore,
is usually the only intimation which the emigration
agent can give of the time of sailing; persons, therefore,
should not leave their employment, or make preparations
for the voyage, until they have received the same.
Emigrants may take out the necessary tools of their
trades that are not bulky, hut must not bring with them to the
Emigrant Depot mattresses, feather beds, pillows, firearms,
offensive iveapons, gunpowder, percussion caps, lucifer matches,
beer, wine, spirits, articles of food of a perishable , description
or that require cooking, such as butter, eggs, potatoes, etc., nor
any articles of a dangerous, noxious, or offensive nature, or
likely to become so. AU such articles are prohibited and are
not allowed to be taken on board. If after arrival at the
port of embarkation they or any of their family are found
not to be in a fit state of health to embark, or have any
mental or bodily defect likely to impair their usefulnsss
as labourers, or to have left any of their young children
behind, or to have brought with them more children than
are mentioned in their application form, they cannot be
received on board the ship, or, if embarked, must be landed
again, without have any claim for a passage.
Only first-class sailing vessels are engaged, which are
fitted with a proper regard to the health and comfort
of the emigrants as well as to the preservation of good
order amongst them. A surgeon-superintendent is always
appointed for the protection and medical charge of the
emigrants, the single women being under the charge of
an experienced matron appointed for the purpose.
27
Regulations for Assisted Passages.


The port of embarkation will be Plymouth, and
emigrants are lodged and fed, free of charge, from the day
named in the embarkation order.
Sums varying from ss. to 15s. per adult, according to
distance from the port of embarkation, are allowed by the
emigration agent towards travelling expenses, but these
payments are only made to approved candidates on arrival
at the Plymouth depot, and who produce the embarkation
orders for the ship they are summoned for.
The emigration agent supplies, free of charge, pro-
visions, medical attendance, and cooking utensils, on
board the ship; also new mattresses, bolsters, blankets and
counterpanes, canvas bags to contain linen, etc., knives
and forks, spoons, metal plates, and drinking mugs, which
become the property of the emigrants on,their arrival in
the colony, unless through disease having occurred during
the voyage the Government decide to destroy them.
The emigrants are victualled on board in convenient
messes. Each person over twelve years of age receives
weekly not less than 3f lbs. of meat, G ozs. of suet, 6 ozs.
of butter, 1 lb. 12 ozs. of biscuit, 4 lb. G ozs. of flour, 1 lb.
of oatmeal, f lb. of rice, 2 lbs. of potatoes, or f lb. pre-
served ditto, peas and other vegetables, 8 ozs. of raisins,
1 oz. of tea, and 2 ozs. of coffee, f lb. of sugar, and f lb, of
West India molasses, with salt, pepper, and pickles, 3 ozs,
cheese, 2 ozs. jams and marmalade, If ozs. compressed
vegetables; and 3 quarts of water daily. Children between
one ahd twelve years of age receive half rations, and for
those under one year old there is a special dietary scale.
There is also an abundant supply of medical comforts,
such as arrowroot, wine, preserved milk, etc., for use in
cases of sickness.
Eligible Candidates. —The candidates must be in the habit of working
at one of the callings in demand at the time in the colony, and must
bo going out with the intention of doing so in one of those occupations ;
but it must be distinctly understood that in the event of their not
obtaining work at their own trades, they must agree to accept any
kind of work that may offer on railways, or otherwise, and in no case
does the Government guarantee to find work for emigrants. They
must be sober, industrious, of good moral character, in good health,
free from all mental and bodily defects, within the ages specified,
28
Advice to Emigrants.


appear physically to be capable of labour, and have been vaccinated or
had the smallpox.
Ineligible Candidates. —Passages cannot be granted to persons in-
tending to proceed to any other Australian colony than South
Australia, or who have previously resided in Australasia, and have
returned from thence; to persons in the habitual receipt of parish
relief; to children under twelve, without their parents; to husbands
without their wives, or wives without their husbands (unless in the
last three instances, the parents, husband, or wife be in Australia).
Candidates must find their own outfit, which will ho
inspected before embarkation by an officer duly authorized
by the emigration agent, and they will not he allowed to
embark unless they have sufficient stock of clothing for the
voyage, not less for each person than —
For Males.
Six shirts.
Six pairs of stockings.
Two ditto shoes or
boots.
Two complete suits of
exterior clothing.
Two warm flannel
shirts.
There must be at
Forp Females. j For Children.
Six shifts. Niue shirts or shifts.
Two flannel petti- j Four warm flannel
coats. j waistcoats.
Six pairs of stockings. I One warm cloak or
Two ditto shoes or outside coat.
boots. Six pairs of stockings.
Two gowns (one of Two ditto strong
warm material). shoes.
Two suits of exterior
clothing.
least three sheets for each berth, and
4 towels; 2 lbs. of best yellow soap, and 2 lbs. of marine
soap for each person, which can bo purchased at the
Emigrant Depot, Plymouth. The necessary brushes and
combs, and clothes brushes, for cleanliness, must be pro-
vided by the emigrants. As a general rule, it may be
stated that the more abundant the stock of clothing the
better for health and comfort during the passage. The
usual length of the voyage is about three months, and at
whatever season of the year it may be made, the emigrants
have to pass through very hot and very cold weather,
and should therefore be prepared for both; two or three
coloured serge shirts for men, and an extra supply of
flannel for women and children are strongly recommended.
For further information and forms of application
address, prepaid, the emigration agent, as above.
Persons approved as suitable by the Emigration Agent
29
Regulations fur Assisted Rassages.


for South Australia, paying their own full passages, and
proceeding in ships sailing direct to South Australia, are
entitled to receive a land order warrant of the value of
£2O for every adult above twelve and not exceeding forty-
five years of age, and £lO for children between one and
twelve years of age.
Land order warrant certificate forms on application.
N.B. —Perfectly free passages are, at present, granted
to single female domestic servants, if of irreproachable
character. Application should be made personally, if
possible, or by letter ,] prepaid, direct to the Emigration
Agent for South Australia, 8, Victoria Chambers, West-
minster, S.W.
2. Advice to Emigrants.— : The following is the course
to be adopted by persons wishing to secure land order
warrants from the Emigration Agent for South Australia,
viz.:—Any person having decided to proceed to South
Australia and settle there should, after selecting the vessel
by which to proceed (either sailing ship or steamer, pro-
vided it is bound direct for Port Adelaide), and having paid
the passage-money, forward the receipt for such passage-
money to the emigration agent for the colony, whose office
is “8, Victoria Chambers, Westminster, S.W., London,”
and ask that a land order warrant may be issued to him.
The emigration agent will then require him to furnish
certificates, on a form which will be supplied for the pur-
pose, to the effect that his passage-money has been paid in
a ship that is to sail direct to South Australia, and that he
has not previously resided in any of these colonies; also, a
medical certificate as to the mental and bodily health of
himself and family. He shoxild then call at the office of
the emigration agent with these certificates for examina-
tion and approval, when, if approved, a land order warrant
will be issued to him, after which he can proceed on his
voyage. Care must be taken that all these requirements
are strictly complied with, as it is absolutely necessary to
obtain the warrant before sailing, otherwise there is no
claim whatever for a land order on arrival. If any person
should be in doubt as to the first step to be taken, he
should communicate with the emigration agent (whose
30
Advice to Emigrants,


address is given on p, 30), when all doubts will be promptly
set at rest. This should, of course, be done before the
passage-money is paid. Persons are specially warned to
consult the emigration agent, and not the shipping
agents (as they are apt to do). The former is the pro-
perly authorized person to give information on this sub-
ject, and a direct application to him will save disappoint-
ment. They should apply in good time, so as to allow
everything to be done, and the warrant issued before the
time appointed for sailing. The emigration agent has
no power to grant warrants to persons who are not
proceeding in a vessel bound direct for Port Adelaide.
It does not suffice to book for Adelaide via Melbourne.
This latter point should be particularly borne in mind,
as it frequently happens that a man pays his passage-
money in a ship advertised perhaps for “Australia”; but
when he calls at the emigration agent’s office it is found
that the ship is not going direct to “South Australia.”
Consequently the emigration agent is unable to grant
him a warrant. It should be added that a vessel calling,
for instance, at King George’s Sound, on the way to the
colony, would still be held to come direct.
Appended are the addresses in England of the principal
shipping agents and those of their representatives in the
Colony. First there is the P. &0. Steam Navigation Com-
pany’s line of steamers, which carry the mails, and are de-
spatched fortnightly from London for Adelaide. They have
only first and second-class passenger accommodation. The
rates are £7O for first, and £45 for second. The head offices
of the company are 122,Leadenhall Street,London. Messrs.
Elder, Smith, and Co., of Glenfell Street, Adelaide, are the
South Australian agents. The average duration of the
passage time is between forty and forty-five days. Messrs.
Elder, Smith, and Co., of Adelaide, are also agents for the
Elder line of sailing ships, some of which are always
loading in London. The agents there are Messrs. Trinder,
Anderson, and Co., 4, St. Mary Axe, London. The rates of
passage are—From forty to fifty guineas first-class, twenty
guineas second-class, and special arrangements are made
for parties of emigrants agreeing to go by the same vessel.
31
Advice to Emigrants.


The average duration of passage time is about eighty
days.
The Orient line formerly offered specially favourable
means whereby emigrants could reach the colony, as they
carried third-class passengers for Adelaide at exceptionally
low rates. They now, however, only occasionally come
direct here from London. They usually proceed to
Melbourne. Only those that are advertised to call at
Adelaide on the outward voyage are now available for
land order warrant people. The London agents are
Messrs. F. Green and Co., and Messrs. Anderson, Anderson,
and Co., Fenchurch Avenue, and they are represented by
Messrs. J. Stilling and Co., of Glenfell Street, Adelaide,
who have also sailing ships cai-rying passengers on much
the same conditions as obtain in those of the Elder line.
There are some first-class sailing ships in this line, such
as the Hesperus and the Torrens. These are, of course,
available to persons bringing land order warrants.
Messrs. Harrold Brothers, of Hindley Street, Adelaide,
are agents for several lines of sailing vessels and steamers,
the rates of passage by which vary from £2O to £45,
with special arrangements for families. The London
offices are—Mr. J. H. Flint’s, 112, Fenchurch Street,
London, E.C.; Messrs. Devitt and Moore’s, No. 39, of the
same street; and Messrs. F. Green and Co.’s., Fenchurch
Avenue, London, E.C.
Messrs. George Wills and Co., of Grenfell Street, Adelaide,
are also agents for several lines of steamships and sailing
vessels, on which about the same rates are charged. These
are Money Wigram and Sons’ line, the London representa-
tives being Money Wigram and Sons, and Morgan and
Alport, of 7, Leadenhall Street; and the Sloman steam
line London agents, Trinder, Anderson, and Co., 4,
Leadenhall Chambers, St. Mary Axe.
Messrs. D. and J. Fowler, of King William Street,
Adelaide, represent a number of vessels, the conditions of
passage in all being very similar.
The holder of the land order warrant should on arrival
call at the Crown Lands and Immigration Office, King-
William Street, Adelaide, where his warrant will be
32
Advice to Emigrants.


immediately exchanged for a land order. The value
of each order is £2O for persons between twelve and
forty-five years of age, and £lO for each child between
the ages of one and twelve years. That order may bo at
once exercised in the purchase of crown lands, or any
person who does not wish to use it may transfer it to any
other person after remaining in the colony two years.
There are some land agents who will pay up to 5 per cent.,
and sometimes even as high as 2|- per cent, of the full
value of the order. But if the recipient of the order
desires to take up land, he would of course proceed to the
land office department of the same building, where full
information would be given to him. When he had chosen
a block of land, he might pay the orders as part purchase,
and in this way secure the right to what may probably,
by the exercise of his own industry, become in course of a
few years a valuable freehold. Thus a family consisting
of a father, mother, and five children over the age of one
year, would be able to claim orders worth £9O.
This amount would be sufficient to meet the first paj r-
ment —one-tenth of the value —upon between four hundred
and nine hundred acres of land (which varies from £1
to about £2, according to quality), upon which there
would not be any further payment till the end of the
third year. Then 5 per cent, of the balance would have
to be paid, and so on till the debt is cleared off, or by
special payments the fee-simple may be obtained in ten
years. In this case the advantage of the land orders is
strongly apparent, as the capital they represent would
leave the money the immigrant might bring with him free
for the purchase of stock, plant, and so on.
The following, taken from the Register newspaper of the
25th of November, 1882, shows the current rates of wages
in South Australia;—
Bootmakers. —Piecework is the rule in the principal factories, although
there are now several men on daywork, who earn from 40s. to 50s.
per week, while expert hands receive as much as £3. The present
prices at piecework are:—Men’s E.S., making Is. 6 d. to 25., finish-
ing Is. to Is. 4 d.; strong lace, making Is. 10 d. and 25., finishing
B d. ; bluchers, making Is. 6d. to Is. 10cZ., finishing B d. ; women’s
E.S., making Is. 2d. to Is. 6d., finishing Id. to Is.; strong lace,
33
Advice to Emigrants.


making Is. 2d. to Is. 4 d., finishing Gd. and Id.; slippers, making
4 d., finishing 3d.; girls’ E.S. (10-13), making lOd. and lid.,
finishing Id. ; lace, making 9 d. and 10d., finishing s d. and Gd.
per pair. Female machinists receive from 20s. to 275. 6d. per
week, and fitters are in good demand at from 12s. to 21s. Most of
the work is now daywork. Clickers (good sharp hands) are in
fair demand, and earn from 355. to 455. First-class men com-
mand 475. Gd. The trade is fairly supplied with good workmen,
but some good hands in all classes, both men and women, could
readily find employment at first-class wages. Trade is generally
• brisk.
Guilders.—ln this trade firms have adopted the eight-hours system.
The prices ruling are:—For stonemasons and wallers, 10s. to
12s. per day; stonecutters, 10s. to 125.; plasterers, 10s. to 125.;
bricklayers, 10s. to 125.; slaters, a shade higher; carpenters, 9s.
to 125.; bench hands, 9s. Gd. to 125.; labourers, Bs., eight and
nine hours. Trade very active; constant work. Masons and
bricklayers very much required.
Bakers. —Foremen are receiving from £2 25., and second hands from
£1 10s., with board and lodging; skilled confectioners propor-
tionately higher.
Brickmakees. —13s. per 1,000 on the hach. Brickmakers wanted.
Bookbinders. —Forwarders, 455. to 5 55. full; finishers, 50s. to 60s.
Brassfoundees. —£2 10s. to £3 per week; brassfinishers, £2 10s. to £3.
Finishers in request.
Butchers. —Engagements are made by the week. The present rates
are—For shopmen, 355. to 505.; youths, 15s. to £1; slaughtermen,
30s. to £2 10s.; and smallgoods men, from 30s. to £2 ss. with
board. Men and boys wanted.
Cabinetmakers. —Engagements are chiefly made by piecework, but
when by time the following are the customary rates per day of
eight and a half hours :—First-class workmen, 9s. to 10s.; second
ditto, 7s. Gd. to Bs. Gd. ; upholsterers, 9s. to 10s.; makers of deal
tables, meatsafes, etc., from 7s. Gd. to 9s. Good hands are all
fully employed.
Carters. — 2os. to 30s. per week, with board, or 6s. to 6s. Gd. per day.
Clerks.—A sin to send them out.
Coachbuildees. —The wages per week vary according to the following
scale : —Smiths, from £3 to £3 10s.; bodymakers, from £2 14s. to
£3 35.; wheelers, £2 10s. to £3; painters, £2 14s. to £3; trimmers,
ditto; vicemen, £1 10s. to £2. Supply fair.
Coopers. —Work is chiefly done by the piece; when otherwise, how-
ever, the day is understood to consist of eight hours, for which the
remuneration varies from Bs. to 10s. per day. Coopers on piece as
follows: —Wine casks, 225. 6d. per tun ; tierces, 4s. Gd. (new) each;
hogsheads, 6s. each; ten-gallon kegs, 3s. 2d. to 3s. 4 d. each; five
ditto ditto, 2s. Gd. each; two ditto ditto, Is. Gd. each; tallow casks,
13s. Gd. to 15s. per tun; ditto, 7s. Gd. per half tun. Fairly
supplied.
34
Advice to Emigrants.


Coppersmiths. — ls. to 10s. per day. Very little of this work done in
this province.
Farriers. —Firemen, per day of ten hours, Bs. 6d. to 95.; doormen,
from £2 2s. to £2 10s. per week; inferior hands, 80s. to 365. Fair
supply.
Female Domestics. —Per week, with board and lodging—General
servants, Bs. to 12s. and 145.; cooks, 10s. to 205.; housemaids, Bs.
to 125.; kitchenmaids, Bs. to 10s.; housekeepers, 14s. to £1 ;
laundresses, 10s. to 165.; nursemaids, Bs. to 125.; nurse-girls, 4s.
to 75.; charwomen, 4s. per day. A great scarcity of useful
female domestic servants.
Gasfitters. —In regular employment the wages vary from £2 to £3
per week; when employed by the day they receive from Bs. to 10s.
Full handed.
Galvanized Iron and Zino Workers. —Daywork, from 9s. to 12s. ;
week of forty-eight hours, £2 2s. to £2 145.; boys, from Bs. to 20s.
Men very much wanted.
Gardening. —Gardeners, 6s. Gd. to Is. per day; digging, Gd. (sandy
soil) tb Is. per rod (ordinary garden); trenching, by contract;
pruning, 3s. Gd. to 4s. per hundred vines, 6s. to Is. daywork.
Hairdressers. —£2 to £3. Good hands required.
Ironworkers. —Boilermakers, per day of eight hours, get from 10s. to
lls. and 15s. for good workmen; labourers from 6s. to 7s. and Bs.
Iron Trade. —General smiths, 9s. to 12s. per day; first-class smiths,
12s. per day; fitters, 9s. to 10s. Gd. per day; wheelwrights, Bs. to
10s. per day; moulders (first-class), 9s. to lls. Gd. per day;
engine-drivers, 6s. to 9s. per day: sawyers, 7s. to Bs. per day;
carpenters, Bs. 6d. to 10s. per day; turners, Bs. to 10s. per day;
foundry labourers, 6s. to 7s. per day; furnace men, Bs. per
day; iron turners, 9s. to lls. Gd. per day; strikers, 6s. to 7s. per
day. Fair demand and constant work.
Jewellers. —Fifty hours per week. Ordinary workmen, £2 10s. to
£3 15s. per week, and more skilled workmen, engravers, etc., £3.
Constant work for good hands.
Locksmiths and Bellhangers. —Work eight hours, 9s. to 10s. per day.
Fair supply.
Millers. —50s. to 60s. per week.
Mattressmakers. —Piecework, 3s. Gd. to 4s. Gd. per pair.
Patternmakers. —Eight hours, from Bs. to 10s. per diem. Much
wanted.
Plumbers. —Very good hands obtain from 10s. to 14s. per day of eight
hours. Plumbers are now greatly wanted in this colony.
Painters and Paperhangers. —These tradesmen generally receive Bs.
to 9s. per day of eight hours. Grainers and writers, 10s. to 12s.
per day, or Is. 3d. per hour; very good writers and grainers, lls.
to 15s. per day.' Fair supply.
Printers. —Compositors, morning papers, Is. Id. per 1000; jobbing
hands, £2 15s. per week; pressmen, £2 15s. Supply and demand
fairly equal.
35
Advice to Emigrants.


t
Reaping, by machine, from 4s. to 6s. per acre ; two horses.
Station Hands. —Drovers, £1 to £1 10s. per week, or 10s. 6c?. per day
and find themselves; boundary-riders, 17s. to 255. per week;
shepherds, 15s. to 20s. per week; married couples, per annum,
£52 to £75; bullock-drivers, 20s. to 255. per week; knockabout
hands, 20s, per week; bush carpenters and blacksmiths, 30s. per
week; cooks, 20s. to 255. per week, 40s. to 50s. during shearing;
water-drawers, 18s. to 20s. per week. New arrivals, £4O per
annum; ditto married couples, £5O to £6O per annum. All the
above are with rations and expenses paid up to the station.
Supply equal to the demand.
Saddlees. —Most of the work done in this trade is daywork. The
following are the rates: —First-class harnessmakers, 7s. 3d. to Bs.
6d. per day of nine hours all the year round; second-class or
jobbing, 6s. to 7s. per day; first-class saddle hands, £3 to £3 ss.
per week. Both harness and saddlemakers very scarce.
Sailmakeks. —ls. 2 d. to Is. 3d. per hour, eight hours per diem.
Supply equal to demand.
Sawyeks. —Logs at pit, 13s. per 100,
Seamen’s wages per month are:—lntercolonial, A. 8., £4 10s. to £5;
0.5., £1 10s. to £3 10s.; foreign, £5 to £7 per month. Hands
plentiful; higher wages expected coming season.
Stonebkeakees. —24 gauge, 2s. 3d. to 3s. per yard. Fair supply.
Stoeemen.—3os. to 50s. per week.
Sheaeees, —2os. per 100. Shearing hands:—Cooks, 405.; cook’s-mates,
15s. to 205.; butchers, 20s. to 255.; woolrollers, 155.; pickers
(boys), 35.; knockabouts, 15s. to 205.; yarders, 15s. to 205.; hut-
keepers, 12s. to 155.; bullock-drivers, 255.; all with board and
lodging and fares paid to stations.
Tentmakees. —6s. 6d. to 10s. per diem.
Tailoes. —Wages lOd. per hour piecework, or Is. per hour daywork.
Good workmen are now earning from £3 10s. to £4 10s. per week.
General supply equal; first-class hands in demand.
Tannees and Cueeiees. —The working day is ten hours. Beamsraen
in the lime yard get from £2 to £2 10s. per week; strikers and
finishers from 30s. to 405.; tanners from 30s. to 365.; curriers’
work is all done by the piece and on agreed conditions ; average,
£2 to £3. Full handed now.
Tinplate Woekees. —The majority are employed at piecework. Day
workmen receive from 10cZ. to Is. per hour. Good workmen and
boys required.
Wheelweights. —ls. to Is. 3d. per hour. Trade busy.
Wheat-cleanees at winnowing-machiue, 1 id., 2d., and 3d. per bushel,
bagged and sewn.
Watchmakees work eight hours, wages £2 15s. to £3 10s, Always a
demand for first-class workmen.
Miscellaneous.— Cabmen, 20s. to 30s. per week, with board and lodg-
ing; bushmen, 355. to 40s. per week, without board and lodging;
ostlers, 20s. to 255. per week, with board and lodging.
36
Advice to Emigrants.


3. Education. —The object kept steadily in view is
the education up to a certain standard of every child
in the colony. The standard is a low one, the only
compulsory subjects being reading, writing, and arith-
metic, but instruction is also given in other branches.
The ages during which children are obliged to attend
school are from seven to thirteen, and the rule is made
imperative except as regards those who are able to show
that they are being otherwise educated or have attained
the standard. The Act establishing the present system
was passed in 1875. About a year and a half ago the
compulsory powers of the Act were brought formally into
operation, and school visitors were appointed to wait on
the parents and try and induce them to send their children
to school. There are now a superintendent and seven
school visitors. The compulsory clauses are being en-
forced in twenty-three districts, but so far there have
been exceedingly few prosecutions, the moral suasion
exercised by the visitors and the threat of legal proceed-
ings having been enough to induce nearly all parents to
send their children to school during the thirty-five days
in each quarter of a year which the law requires them to
attend. Uniform fees of 4 d. per week for children under
eight years of age and 6d. for older children are charged
in all schools ; but in cases where the parents are too poor
to pay for the education of their children, that duty is
taken upon itself by the State.
CHAPTER Y.
CHURCH AND RELIGION.
This book would be very incomplete if it gave no infor-
mation upon the great subject of all—Religion; and if it
afforded no guide to the intending emigrant or new settler
to those Church ministrations, which have been so ready
to hand in the old country, even when not regularly used,
but which will probably be more truly valued in a distant
home, where no past generation has left a spiritual inhe-
ritance to their children; and there, consequently, the
means of grace have to bo sought for rather than continu-
37
Education.


ally offered. In South Australia, as in other parts of the
Colonial Empire of Great Britain, there is entire and
absolute religious equality. There is no Established
Church, no interference by the State with the internal
affairs of any denomination, and no restriction of individual
effort for the extension of religious views. All bodies are
well represented, and their ministers are well supported.
The Church of England —as we should call her—in the
Colony of South Australia is very ably administered. The
diocese was founded in 1847, and is now presided over by
an earnest prelate—the Eight Eev. G. W. Kennion, D.D.,
Bishop of Adelaide. There are 107 parishes or mission
stations. The number of clergy is 52, and there are 3228
communicants. Any of the clergy will gladly enter into
communication with settlers, who would do well to make
themselves known to the clergyman of the district in
which they intend to reside.
DIOCESE OF ADELAIDE.— South Australia.
Bishop —The Eight Eev. Augustus Short, D.D. 1847.
(Eesidence —Bishop’s Court, Adelaide.)
Bean —Very Eev. Alexander Eussell, B.D.
Archdeacon of Adelaide— Ven. Charles Marryat, M.A. (in England).
Archdeacon of Flinders —Ven. George Dove, M.A.
Missionary Archdeacon —Yen. G. H. Farr, M.A.
In a new settlement fresh parishes or stations will con-
stantly be formed, and in no way will a new-comer be
doing more good for himself or more honour to God than
by striving to show his allegiance and devotion to the
Church of his baptism. A great deal of the interests of
religion will centre round his person; if he and his family
be found to be consistent and faithful Church-goers, they
will win the respect of the community amongst whom
their lot is cast, and they will also themselves feel the
consolation and support of the Divine Presence in the
midst of new scenes and new conditions of life. There
are few colonists who have not found the friendship of
the local clergy a real blessing.
Agent-General in England for South Australia—Sir
Arthur Blyth, K.C.M.G , 8, Victoria Chambers, Victoria
Street, London.
38
Advice to Emigrants.


CHAPTER YI.
SIMPLE HINTS FOR PRESERVING HEALTH.
1. The Ventilation of your House. —Plenty of fresh
air is necessary for the proper action of the lungs and for
the blood. Ventilation means the art of supplying fresh
air without draughts. If you have only one room, always
open the window and air the room well before going to
bed, particularly if you have been smoking. Luring the
greater part of the year the window may be a little open
all night if you have the means to give yourself and wife
and children plenty of clothes, but do not let the air blow
upon you. If you feel the draught too much with the
window open at the top, nail a piece of wood, placed
slantingly, along the top of the window and reaching three
or four inches above it; open the window about one or two
inches, and the air will strike against the slanting piece of
wood as it enters, and be directed towards the ceiling and
will not be felt. If you have any fireplace which you do
not use in the summer, never stop it up; the chimney is a
good ventilator; also, never close the regulator if you have
one in a grate.
2. Cleanliness of your Rooms. —The air of a room
can hever be pure if the room is dirty. Uncarpeted rooms
should bo carefully swept every day, but not washed too
often, as wood or bricks both absorb and retain water for
some time, and make the air damp and cold. Wash in
warm, dry weather, when the windows can be fully opened.
The greatest impurity is, however, often given by the
bed or furniture. Take great care that these are wiped
and kept clean; all the bedclothes and mattress should be
fully exposed to the air for an hour every morning, and
the blankets should be shaken.
3. Cleanliness and Dryness about your House. —
Do not allow any heaps of refuse to remain near the house;
the air cannot be pure if these are constantly adding effluvia
to it. The dust-bin is often badly placed in houses, and
39
Church and Beligion.


is too seldom emptied. Potato-parings, pea-husks, and
remains of food, should either he burnt or put by for the
pig or chickens. All the dirty house-water should be put
on the garden, and not allowed to soak under the house,
as too often happens. This water contains organic sub-
stances which are fertilizing, and the remains of the soap
used in the house is also very good for vegetables. If
a butt can be obtained and the dirty water poured into it,
the garden could be watered from time to time. Take
care that the rain from the roof does not soak under the
house, or cause dampness of the walls.
4. Hints on the Water you Use. —If you have to
fetch water from a distance and to store it in your house,
never keep it in bucketa or open pans. It is sure to get
foul; dust falls into it, and it will absorb substances from
the air. 4 Wood also gets soft, and may make the water
impure. Put it into glazed earthenware or stoneware
jars with covers—these jars are cheap and strong—every
now and then throw out all the water, and wipe the in-
side of the jars with a clean cloth. If the water is from a
surface stream or shallow well, it is probably a soft water,
and will act on metals. In that case do not use metallic
vessels more than you can help. Use iron vessels for
cooking, and if they require mending, take care they are
not mended with lead solder, which the water can dissolve.
Many cases of lead poisoning have occurred from, this
solder being used. With such a soft surface-water do not
even use zinc pails, but draw it in wooden buckets and
store in stoneware jars.
5. How to Make a Filter. —The filtration of water
is not difficult, even if you cannot afford to buy a regular
filter. A simple filter can be made as follows:—Get a
common earthenware garden flower-pot; cover the hole
with a bit of zinc gauze, or a bit of clean-washed flannel,
which should be changed from time to time; then get
some rather small gravel, wash it very well, and put It
into the pot to the height of 3 in.; then get some white
sand and wash it very clean, and put that on the gravel
to the height of 3 in.; then buy 2 lb. of animal charcoal,
Advice to Emigrants.


wash that also by putting it into a jug and pouring boil-
ing water on it; then, when the charcoal has subsided,
pour off the water, and put some more on for three or
four times. When the charcoal has been well washed,
put it on the sand and press it well down. Have 4 in.
of charcoal, if possible. The filter is now ready, pour
water into the pot, and let it run through the hole into
a large glass bottle. After a time the charcoal will get
clogged, or foul. Take off a little from the top and boil it
two or three times, and then spread it out and let it dry
before the fire. It will then be as good as ever. If you
have a rain-water tank, always filter the rain-water before
using it for drink or cooking, as rain-water often is col-
lected from dirty roofs or becomes impure in the tank.
6. What to Drink. —If you wish to keep good health
to old age, never touch spirits. Nothing can be better,
both for you and your family, than skimmed milk at dinner
and supper. It is well always to boil it, and a little sugar
makes it still more agreeable. When you have had any
heavy work to do, do not take either beer, cider, or spirits.
By far the best drink is thin oatmeal and water with a
little sugar. The proportions are a \ lb. of oatmeal to two
or three quarts of water, according to the heat of the day
and your work and thirst; it should be well boiled, and
then an ounce or ounce of brown sugar added. If you
find it thicker than you like, add three quarts of water.
Before you drink it, shake up the oatmeal well through
the liquid. In summer, drink this cold; in winter, hot.
You will find it not only quenches thirst, but will give
yrou more strength and endurance than any other drink.
If you cannot boil it, you can take a little oatmeal mixed
with cold water and sugar, but this is not so good; always
boil it if you can. If at any time you have to make a very
long day, as in harvest, and cannot stop for meals, increase
the oatmeal to £ lb., or even f lb., and the water to three
quarts, if you are likely to be very thirsty. If you cannot
get oatmeal, wheat flour will do, but not quite so well. It
is quite a mistake to suppose spirits give strength ; they
give a spurt to a man, but that goes off, and if more than
a certain quantity is taken they lessen the power of work.
41
A Few Simple Hints for Preserving Health.


7. Food. —Many kinds of vegetable food, oatmeal, maize,
peas, and beans contain almost as much flesh-forming food
as meat, and, when properly cooked, form a wholesome
and agreeable substitute for it. Extravagance might be
avoided and much more pleasure found in food if trouble
were taken to learn how to cook some of these simple
things.
8. Closets. —One of the best kinds of closet is an earth-
closet. As good an earth-closet for a cottage as any, is
simply a zinc bucket coming up close to the wood of the
seat, and with a handle to enable it to be lifted out. The
wooden top of the seat should be made with a hinge, so
that it can be lifted up and the bucket removed and
emptied from time to time. Yery little earth is necessary
if no slops are thrown into the bucket, and the earth can
be thrown in with a shovel. It should be quite dry. In
the winter time it should be dried under the fire before
it is used. The material from an earth-closet may be put
into a hole in the garden, and afterwards dug in as
manure. All places of this kind, as well as water-closets,
require attention and give a little trouble; but he must be
the most careless of mortals who, in a matter so important
for health, will not give half an hour’s work every week to
preserve cleanliness, and really no more time is demanded
than this.
Appendix A.
COMMENDATORY LETTER.
Reverend and Dear Sir,
I desire herewith to commend to your pastoral
care and brotherly good offices,
from the Parish of ii
in the Diocese of
who is about to settle in
And I certify that
Dated this
42
Advice to Emigrants,


It is suggested that any clergyman giving a letter com-
mendatory to a parishioner should copy out the letter in
his own hand, in preference to using a printed form ; and
his letter would probably bo still more valued, and likely
to be more useful, if it could be written on the back of a
photograph of the parish church or the cathedral of the
diocese, or have such a photograph appended to it.
Appendix B.
PRAYERS! FOR THE USE OP EMIGRANTS.
MORNING PRAYER.
In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the
Holy Ghost. Amen,
Lord, help me to pray.
Most gracious and merciful God, I worship Thee with
the lowliest humility of my soul and body. All thanks
and praise be to Thee for the safety, rest, and refreshment
of the past night, and for the renewed life of another day.
Blessed above all be Thy Holy Name for Thy promises of
forgiveness and salvation, of grace and goodness in Jesus
Christ. Fulfil these promises to me this day, I most
humbly beseech Thee.
Deal not with me according to my iniquities, but be
merciful unto me, and save me from the guilt and power of
sin. Give me true faith in the Lord Jesus, and peace and
joy in believing.
Let Thy Holy Spirit dwell within me, as the Spirit of
wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and
ghostly strength, the Spirit of knowledge and true god-
liness.
Bless me, 0 gracious God, in my calling, and enable me
to do my duty faithfully in whatever work Thou shalt be
pleased to employ me. Be nigh at hand to preserve me in
all dangers and temptations. Support and comfort me
43
A Few Simple Hints for Preserving Health.


%
under every anxiety, care, and sorrow. Provide for all my
necessities, whether of body or soul.
May I remember Thee all the day, and ever speak and
act as in Thy sight. Help me to be holy and righteous,
charitable and humble, cheerful and contented. Let my
condition be blessed and my behaviour useful to my neigh-
bours and pleasing to Thee,
Bless all my dear friends and relations, especially
[ ]. Comfort and relieve the sick and sorrowful,
the needy, and him that hath no helper. Let ihy mercy
descend upon the whole Church, especially upon that part
of it to which I belong. Prosper the country in which
I dwell; and let Thy mercy and goodness extend to
all nations. Hear me, O Lord, in these my prayers
and thanksgivings, and answer me according to Thy
wisdom and love, for the sake of Jesus Christ our Saviour.
Amen.
Our Father, which art in heaven, Hallowed be Thy
Name. Thy kingdom come. Thy will bo done in earth,
As it is in heaven. Give us this day our daily bread.
And forgive us our trespasses, As we forgive them that
trespass against us. And lead us not into temptation ;
But deliver us from evil: For thine is the kingdom, The
power, and the glory, For ever and ever. Amen.
The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the love of God,
and the fellowship of the Holy Ghost, be with us all ever-
more. Amen.
EVENING PRAYER.
Lord, help me to pray.
Almighty and most merciful God, in Thee we live
and move and have our being. Thou, in Thy love,
openest Thy hand and satisfiest the desires of all things
living.
Through Thy undeserved goodness, I have been pre-
served in body and soul through another day. Glory and
honour be to Thee for all the blessings of providence and
44
Advice to Emigrants,


grace which Thou hast bestowed upon me from morning
until evening.
lam not worthy of the least of all Thy mercies; for
my sins cry out against me. 0 that I may be truly and
deeply sensible of them, and may confess them humbly
and sorrowfully ! I have this day fallen short in my duty
to Thee and my neighbour. I have in many things
offended against Thy holy law. All my negligences and
ignorances ; all my faults and sins are before Thee. Have
mercy upon me, 0 God, for against Thee have I sinned
and done all this evil in Thy sight.
Give me tenderness of conscience, and produce in me
unfeigned repentance. I would plead Thy promises of
forgiveness, I would put my whole trust in Thy mercy
in Christ Jesus. For His sake pardon my iniquity, for it
is great. May His precious blood, which cleanseth from
all sin, be effectual for the washing away of my iniquities.
Through His merits may I enjoy peace of conscience and
peace with Thee, now that I am about to lie down and
take my rest.
Thou hast brought me another day onward in my life,
and lam one day nearer to the end. Teach me to number
my days, that I may apply my heart unto wisdom. Keep
me ever mindful of the solemn account I must ere long
give before the judgment-seat of Christ. 0 that, when-
ever the hour of my death comes, I may fall asleep in
Jesus! May my body be laid in its bed of darkness in
hope of a glorious resurrection, and may my soul pass to
the regions of light, and live with Thee in undying holi-
ness and happiness.
Lord, I am unworthy to ask any petitions for myself or
for others; yet I would humbly beseech Thee to hear me
as for myself, so also for all whom I love; for all who
have ever done me good; yea, even for all mine enemies.
The wants of every creature are known to Thee ; supply
those wants, I heartily pray Thee, according to Thy power
and wisdom and goodness.
Preserve me while I sleep. Thou art about my bed;
defend me, 0 God, from all dangers which may happen
to the body, and from all evil which may assault and hurt
Prayers for the Use of Emigrants.


the soul. Spare me, if it be Thy good pleasure, to another
day. May I awake up to praise Thee and to serve Thee
better than I have ever before done.
Of Thy goodness and mercy, be pleased, 0 Lord, to
hearken to these my prayers for the sake of Jesus Christ,
my only mediator and Saviour. Amen.
Our Father, etc.
The grace of our Lord, etc.
DURING A VOYAGE, FOR YOURSELF AND THOSE WHO SAIL
WITH YOU.
Almighty God, Who alone commandest the winds and
the waves, and they obey Thy voice, mercifully hear my
prayers, and deliver me and all who are in this ship from
the dangers of the sea and from all sad accidents. We are
not able to save ourselves from the least misfortune to
which we are liable; to Thy favour and protection I com-
mend myself and others, our souls and bodies, and all that
belong to us.
Lord, pardon our sins, turn away the judgment which
we justly deserve, prosper us in our voyage, bring us to
our haven in peace, and grant that we may, at last, reach
the land of eternal rest, through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.
ON SAFE ARRIVAL AFTER A JOURNEY OR VOYAGE.
Accept, 0 Blessed Lord, my humble and hearty thanks
for Thy merciful preservation of me during the voyage (or
journey) which is now at a prosperous end. Thy fatherly
hand has been over me, Thy loving protection has been
round about me by day and by night.
O Lord, make me ever mindful of this, and of all other
Thy favour and goodness to me, Thine unworthy servant.
Help me, who have now once again been kept and upheld
by Thee, to show forth my thankfulness by leading a holy
and Christian life, and serving Thee faithfully the re-
mainder of my days; through Jesus Christ, my only Lord
and Saviour. Amen.
46
Advice to Emigrants.


ON FIRST SETTLING IN A NEW COUNTRY.
Almighty God, who fixest the bounds of our habitation
and blessest the homes of Thy people, be mercifully pleased
to let Thy loving presence be with me in my new dwell-
ing-place. Thou art the God who changest not ; here and
everywhere Thou art the same. Give me sure trust and
confidence in Thee. May I here enjoy Thy blessing which
is life, and Thy lovingkindness which is better than life.
Give me courage and cheerfulness, patience and hope.
In every time of loneliness and discouragement and
anxiety may my trust be in Thee. Keep me from mur-
muring and unbelief and forgetfulness of Thee. May I
set Thee, the Lord, always before my face. Though far
removed from the restraints that may have been about me
in my former home, yet may I be on my guard against
everything that would dishonour or displease Thee. May
I preserve a sense of God and religion in all places and
companies. May I never be ashamed of Thee or of Thy
service.
Prosper me in all my lawful undertakings; grant me all
things that pertain to life and godliness ; give me health
of body and of soul. Help me to be contented and
thankful in all circumstances. Sanctify to me both the
successes and failures, the labours and the recreations,
which are here to be my lot. May I not live for myself
alone, but endeavour to do all the good I can, both bodily
and spiritual, to my neighbours. Above all things, grant
that I may seek first the Kingdom of God.
0 Lord, bless and keep me. O Lord, lift up the light
of Thy countenance upon me, and give mo peace now and
for evermore, through Jesus Christ my Saviour and Re-
deemer. Amen.
Our Father, etc.
The grace of our Lord, etc.
47
Prayers for the Use of Emigrants.


THE CHURCH AND EMIGRATION.
Tli 6 late Archbishop or Canterbury issued in December, 1881, the
following circular letter on the subject of the Church and
Emigration:—
“My Reverend Brethren and my Brethren of the Laity,—l am anxious to direct
attention, from a Christian point of view, to the vast movement of people which has
for some years been going on between Europe and the British Colonies, and especially
between England and America.
“Official returns show that during the first nine months of the present year
313,716 emigrants left the ports of Great Britain, nearly 200,000 of whom were British
subjects. The destination of more than 158,000 of these emigrants was North
America.
“It has been proposed that a systematic endeavour should be made to establish
more direct communication than at present commonly exists between the Church at
home and the Church in our Colonies and in America, with a view to the Christian
welfare of the vast population which is continually passing westward from our
shores.
“The proposal is in accordance with the recommendations adopted by the Lambeth
Conference of 1878. It has obtained the hearty consent of many of the bishops and
clergy of the Anglican Communion in our Colonies and in the United States, and I am
anxious to commend it to the notice of the parochial clergy of England.
“ The scheme, which is still in its infancy, is at present under the management of
a joint committee appointed by the Society for the Propagation of the Gospel and the
Society for Promoting Christian Knowledge. Its objects, in outline, are as follows:
“(a) To supply the parochial clergy of England with accurate information respect-
ing the various fields for emigration, including special reference to the religious and
educational advantages which they severally possess.
“ (6) To publish, in a cheap form, a series of simple handbooks for the use of
emigrants to our different Colonies and to the United States, containing, together with
other intelligence, correct information as to the clergy, churches, Sunday and day
schools, etc., in the various places in which emigrants are now settling.
“(c) To make such arrangements as may be found possible for the due care of
emigrants from England on their arrival in our Colonies and in the United States,
This would include the provision of commendatory letters from the parochial clergy
in England to the clergy in whose neighbourhood the emigrants propose to settle.
“ Full information respecting the scheme can be obtained on application to the Rev,
J. Bridger, Emigrants’ Chaplain, St. Nicholas’ Church, Liverpool, to whom all com-
munications on the subject should be addressed.
“It is, I think, impossible to exaggerate the importance of this subject, and I there-
fore commend it to the earnest and prayerful attention of my brethren the parochial
clergy of England and the laity of our Church.
"Lambeth Palace, December 20, 1881,
“A. C. CANTUAR.”
PRINTED BY WILLIAM CLOWES AND SONS, LIMITED/ LONDON AND BECCLES.




LIST OF CLERGY IN SOUTH AUSTRALIA,
Bishop —The Eight Rev. George Wyndham Kennion, D.D., 1882.
Vicar General and Commissary —The Very Rev. Alexander Russell, B.D.
Dean —The Very Rev. Alexander Russell, B.D.
Archdeacon of Adelaide— The Yen. Charles Marryat, M.A.
Archdeacon of Flinders —The Yen. George Dove, M.A.
Name. Station.
Andrews, Rev. Canon St. Bartholomew’s, Norwood.
Blackmore, W. G Curate in Charge West Coast Mission.
Bussell, W. J Christ Church, Strathalbyn.
Blackburn, Thos., B.A. 80nd.... St. Thomas’, Port Lincoln.
Coghlan, F. R , B.A. Oxf. ... St. Luke’s, Adelaide.
Coombs, Rev. Canon, Rural Dean St. George’s, Gawler.
Oopinger, H. E. Priest in Charge of Areas Mission.
Corvan, J. IL, 8.A., T.C.D. ... St. John’s,Laura; St.Paul’s,PortPirio.
Craig, B. T., D.D. Oxf. ... Christ Church, Mount Gambler.
Dendy, Rev. Canon, D.D. Oxf. St. Peter’s Cathedral, Adelaide.
Dodd, P. R. P., M.A. Oxf. ... St. Augustine’s, Port Augusta.
Donaldson, J. M. Christ Church, Kapunda .
Dove, Ven. Archn., M.A. Camb, St. Andrew’s, Walkerville.
Farr, Ven. Archn., M.A. Camb. St. Bede’s, Semaphore.
French, S., M.A. Camb. ... St. Peter’s, Glenelg.
X'iC/llUil, K 7., XTX.XX. VcUUW. ~, A Utci Of VTMJLLfI^.
Gibbes, G. E St. John’s, Mount Pleasant,
VTiUUUB, VT. -Hi. ... ... ... K3U UUIiUB, ILLUUNb X IUUfcKUIt.
Gower, John William Christ Church, Mount Barker.
Green, Rev. Canon St. Paul's, Port Adelaide.
f TnnrLinr, TX7 CJ A .. 1.
Hawkins, C. W. St. John’s, Auburn.
Hayward, R St. Paul’s, Narracoorte.
Haynes, j. C St. Augustine’s, Virginia, etc.
Hayward, R. (Priest Missionary) St. Peter’s, Robe, etc.
Hocter, J. F., M.A., T.C.D. ... St. Michael’s, Mitcham.
Homier, A St. George’s, Woodforde.
Houghton, J Holy Trinity, Riverton.
Howell, Rev. Canon, M.A. Oxf. Holy Evangelist’s, Goolwa.
Howitt, H. St. Mary’s, The Burra.
Jenkins, E. ... St. Matthew’s, Kensington.
Kenny, R., M.A., T.C.D. ... Priest in Charge of Northern Mission.
Marryat,Ven. Archn., M.A. Oxf. Christ Church, North Adelaide.
Marshall, W. F. Assistant Curate Areas Mission.
Morse, Rev. Canon, M.A, Camb. Christ Church, Yankalilla.
Mu.lie, W. H.
Pollitt. H. M.
Poole, F. S., M.A. Camb.
Reid, R.
Richmond, F.
Russell, Very Rev. A., B.D.
Sells, A., M.A. Camb. ...
Taplin, C. G.
Williams, Hartley
Webb, R. 8., M.A.
Whitiugton, F. T.
Whitton, M. M.
Yeatman, E. K., M.A.
Youngs, (J. H. ...
St. Saviour’s, Glen Osmond.
All Saints, Ilindmarsh.
St. John’s, Adelaide.
Holy Trinity, Adelaide.
St. John’s, Maitland.
St. Paul’s, Adelaide.
St. Peter’s, WiUiamstowu.
St. Mary’s, Wallaroo.
Holy Cross, Mount Gambier.
St. Barnabas, Clare.
Bishop’s Supply Chaplain.
Missionary Curate, South Yorke’s
Peninsula.
Koolunga and Yacka.
St. Mary’s, South Road.
