

th PRm
Qb^
/T/* P
tCJIt I
<s* i
7'f-
/&4f.
n
> Vv-a—\jU»-
ijw> # J^CXV'
Jy~b ~~ l 6 z~-






Art. IV. Second Report from the Select Committee on South
Australia. Ordered by the House of Commons to be printed,
10th June 1841.
In the discussion of the ‘ Wakefield Theory of Colonization,’
which appeared in a former Number of this Journal, we
briefly noticed the settlement of South Australia as an experi-
ment, devised by the especial patrons of that theory, for the
purpose of bringing its merits to a practical proot—an experi-
ment of which the issue was still to be seen. We explained
the circumstances out ot which the scheme arose, the general
principles by w’hich it was distinguished from previous enter-
prises of the same kind, and its progress up to the date of the
latest accounts then accessible to the public ; and without pre-
suming to treat it as a failure, merely because the boasted evi-
dences of success appeared to us to be fallacious, we confessed
a growing anxiety to receive some indications of stable and per-
manent prosperity more substantial than the value of Bonds in
the market; or the number of capitalists who might be willing
to stake large sums of money upon the chances of the specula-
tion turning out well. For at that time, though we had heard
much of the increasing value of land, as indicated by the enor-
mous prices paid for lots in favourable situations—much of the
unexampled 4 attractiveness’ of the new colony, its streets,
squares, wharfs, public buildings, and club-houses much of
the rapid influx of settlers and of British capital, and some-
thino* of a growing revenue derived from customs’ duties upon
goods imported ; we had as yet heard nothing of exports or of
internal production —nothing of new sources of wealth opened in
the colony itself—nothing, in short, of the creation of that pro-
mised fund from which was to be derived the interest upon all
the capital permanently invested there, as well as the means ot
repaying all the borrowed money which had been laid out in
colony * attractive.’ Of the creation and growth of
this fund we were anxious to hear; because, unless the bosom
of the new land should prove capable of producing supplies
of new wealth sufficient to remunerate the capitalist for his
advances, it was plain that—how long soever the game of specu-
lation might be carried on, how long soever the money might be
shifted from hand to hand, how many fortunes soever might be
made and lost before the cheat was finally detected, and upon
whomsoever the loss might ultimately fall —it must end at last
in failure and disaster.


Not many weeks after our remarks were written, serious
apprehensions began to prevail that all was not so well in South
Australia as it had been represented, and South Australian reve-
nue Bonds were no longer negotiable; and these apprehensions
were shortly confirmed by the refusal of the Commissioners to
honour bills drawn upon them by their own officer resident in the
colony—a virtual declaration of insolvency ; and a reference of
the whole matter to Government, on the ground that they could
no longer carry out the provisions of the act without further
powers than those with which it entrusted them. The result of
this reference, as our readers are aware, was the appointment of
a select Committee of the House of Commons, by whom the
whole case was minutely investigated, and on whose recommen-
dation a temporary advance of L. 155,000 was made by Parlia-
ment to enable the Commissioners to meet the immediate emer-
gency. Their second Report, containing a series of recommen-
dations as to the future government of the colony, lies before us,
(with evidence and an appendix,) in one of those huge folios in
which our legislators think it expedient to seclude from idle
curiosity the fruits of their graver deliberations; and will, accord-
ing to an intimation given by Lord Stanley in the House of
Commons, speedily occupy the attention of Parliament. Had
the getters up of this and similar experiments used a similar
vehicle for the conveyance of their communications to the
public, we might have been content to leave this history of the
progress and issue of it to make its own impression. But adver-
tisements, prospectuses, leading articles in newspapers, and
even pamphlets, find their way into heads where no folios can
follow them ; and we hope, therefore, that in reducing to a circu-
late shape the more material results of this important inves-
tigation, and committing them to the wings of our lighter octavo,
we shall be performing no unacceptable service to the idler pub-
lic, whom it much concerns to be truly informed of the fate of
such projects; inasmuch as it is to the idler public that all new
projects, requiring borrowed money to set them on foot, espe-
cially address themselves. The broad fact, indeed, that up to
this period the experiment has proved a failure, is sufficiently
notorious. The creation, within so short a time, of so great a
financial embarrassment—the demand upon the public for
L. 155,000 before four years were out, to save from absolute
ruin a colony in behalf of which it has been constantly promised
that it would at least cost nothing to the mother country—
speaks for itself in language which every body can understand,
and nobody can dispute. Which of the parties concerned has
been most to blame, may admit of controversy; but the result


which they have brought out amongst them, will not be popularly
recognised under any better name than failure. Admitting, then,
that the experiment has failed, the question is, what and how
much we are to infer from the failure; what light does it really
throw upon that theory of colonization which it was meant to
bring to the test; and whether, giving up as vicious the prin-
ciples of the South Australian colonization act, we must give up
the ‘ Wakefield principle’ along with them? Our own opinion
is, that the question as to the soundness and practical efficacy of
that principle, as expounded by us on a former occasion, remains
exactly where it was, and is not at all affected by the issue of this
experiment; the miscarriage of which is sufficiently accounted
for by other parts of the scheme quite apart and separable
from it, though unfortunately placed in the same boat. The
principles of navigation are not answerable for the wreck of a
vessel entrusted to an ignorant pilot, or sent out without proper
equipments; nor must Mr Wakefield’s theory of colonization be
too hastily condemned, because it has not been able to overcome
the threefold disadvantage under which he was content that it
should be tried—of a territory unexplored and unfavourable, a Board
of managers inexperienced and irresponsible, and a supply of
money drawn from a source at once expensive and uncertain. We
formerly intimated our opinion, that in expecting it to triumph
over all natural disadvantages, its patrons expected too much
from it. Our belief that it was sound, and our hope that
results of great practical importance might be expected from its
operation, we as yet see no reason to abandon. But to make
our conclusions more intelligible, it will be convenient to begin
with some account of the negotiations, and the abortive schemes
that preceded the introduction of the measure which was specially
adopted.
That Mr Wakefield, once satisfied as to the value of his theory,
should be in a hurry to see it at work, was natural and laudable ;
that he should be duly cautious and deliberate in maturing his
plans, and surveying his ground, was hardly to be expected.
How soon after the promulgation of his doctrine South Austra-
lia was fixed on as a fit field of operation, we are not informed :
but the choice seems to have cost very little trouble. Of the
‘ huge cantle’ which was to be cut out of the globe for this pur-
pose, scarcely any thing was then known—except the latitude and
longitude, the general temperature of the climate, and the aspect
of the land as seen from the coast. How far the fertility extended
inwards, whether the appearances of fertility on the coasts were
not themselves superficial, what supply there was of water, what
the soil was capable of growing, whether the selected territory


consisted chiefly of grass or jungle, sand or rock, mountain, plain,
or swamp—all this was left to the imagination. But where no-
thing is known, more may be hoped—and, whatever might be the
qualities of the land, at all events it was waste, and remote from
other settlements. The very beauty of the thing was, that by
securing the just proportion between the surface of the land and
the labouring population, it would make all lands alike fertile.
If the soil proved less rich than was expected, it was only to
bestow more labour upon it—if more labour were wanted, it was
only to pour in emigrants more rapidly—if more means of emi-
gration were required, it was only to raise the price of land.
Certainly an only child does not suffer more from the blindness
of parental affection than an only theory. The territory 4 lying
‘ between the 132 d and 141st degrees of east longitude, and be-
-4 tween the 20th parallel of south latitude on the north, and the
4 Southern Pacific Ocean on the south,’ was voted 4 eminently
4 fit for the reception of emigrants or settlers’—and negotiations
commenced accordingly with the Colonial Office in the beginning
of 1831.
Lord Howick, then Under Secretary for the Colonies, thought
favourably of the principle, and was disposed, under proper
cautions, to make the trial; and Lord Ripon had no objection,
provided it could be done without an additional item in the
estimates, and without involving the Government, should
the scheme prove unsuccessful, in the discredit of the failure.
To provide against this, it was proposed that the Government
should have nothing to do with it; but that it should be undertaken
by a Company, with a paid-up capital, upon whom, along with
the management, would devolve all the risk and all the respon-
sibility. • A Company, with a capital of L. 600,000, was to under-
take the charge of founding, peopling, and governing the new
settlement; of managing the land sales according to certain prin-
ciples to be defined in their charter; of applying the proceeds to
emigration ; and of advancing money to defray the preliminary
outlay;—and if, on trial, the plan did not succeed— i. e. if the
population did not reach a certain amount within a certain period,
it was to be given up; i. e. the peculiar principles on which the
Colony was to be established were no longer to be insisted on:
South Australia was to be as New South Wales, or as Van Die-
men’s Land. This sounded fairly. But if the Company were
thus to undertake all the responsibilities of Government, they
must, of course, be trusted with the authority of Government
likewise; and the authority which they required amounted to
little less than a delegation of all the substantial powers of
sovereignty. This Lord Ripon was not prepared to sanction;


and without this the project could not proceed. Accordingly,
after a year and a half spent in fruitless endeavours to adjust the
difficulty, the proposition was abandoned. And in truth it might
as well have been given up at first; for the condition required by
Lord Ripon was obviously impracticable. Unless it could have
been contrived, that in case of failure not only the pecuniary
losses, but the social and political consequences also, should fall
upon the projectors alone, it was plainly impossible for Govern-
ment to escape responsibility for the issue of an experiment
which could not be tried without its express sanction. By
deputing others to conduct it, Lord Ripon might indeed throw
upon them a subordinate responsibility ; but so far from absol-
ving the Ministers of the Crown by that means of the responsi-
bility in chief, he would rather involve them in a double respon-
sibility —making them answerable, not only for the propriety of
the experiment, but also for the fitness of the instruments.
Up to this point, it might be thought the obstacle to this
undertaking lay solely with Lord Ripon, who demanded a condi-
tion from the undertakers which he refused them the means of
fulfilling. But from the correspondence which took place on the
revival of the project during Lord Stanley's administration of the
Colonial department,it appears that this condition of the scheme—
namely, that the Government should have no concern in the prac-
tical management, was one which the undertakers themselves
were prepared to insist on quite as obstinately as Lord Ripon;
for Lord Stanley interposed no such stipulation, but, having
made up his mind to sanction the experiment, was quite ready to
take his share in the charge of it. The idea of a Sovereign
Company being now abandoned, the following plan was next
proposed:—The limits of the Colony being marked out, a gua-
rantee was to be given by Government that no land should ever
be sold within those limits below a certain price—that the whole
of the sum derived from the sale of land should be employed in
conveying to the Colony young pauper labourers of both sexes in
equal proportions—and that the maximum price of Government
land, though it was to be advanced from time to time, should
never be reduced. The Governor and all the officers were to
be appointed by the Crown ; and upon the Governor was to de-
volve the whole power and responsibility of the government,
* until the Colony should be thought sufficiently advanced to
« receive the grant of a Legislative Assembly.’ But since the
entire revenue derived from land sales was to be spent in emigra-
tion, a fund would still be wanting for the purposes of the civil
government. Provision was to be made for this by a Joint Stock
Company, who were to make themselves ‘ responsible to the


‘ Government for a paid annual income’ during- a certain period
—the money so advanced constituting a colonial debt: in consi-
deration of which they were to have the pre-emption of 100,000
acres, to be selected within a given time, at the first minimum
price ; and the privilege, so long as those advances should be con-
tinued, of selecting the emigrants.
This scheme was at least intelligible or feasible. South
Australia was to be a Crown colony, governed in the usual way;
only that the expenses of Government, instead of being provided
by a Parliamentary grant, were to be advanced on speculation
by a Joint Stock Company trading in land, and looking to the
profits of that trade to pay the interest and cover the risk. To
a project framed on these principles, Lord Stanley was ready to
accede, subject to certain stipulations; of which the chief was,
that the security for the fixed income applicable to the civil
government should be good. This was in August 1833. But
though the proposal originated with the South Australian Asso-
ciation, its purpose appears to have been premature. If the
conditions satisfied Lord Stanley, they certainly did not satisfy
the Association. Whether it was that capitalists hung back, and
would not subscribe on such conditions; or that the distrust of
the colonial office had been revived by the intervening discus-
sions ; or that the practical management had got into other
hands; or that the plans had been originally proposed in the
hope that Lord Stanley would object, as Lord Ripon had done
before, to risk his credit by taking any direct path in carrying it
out, and that so the demand for larger powers might seem to be
forced upon the Association against their own desire; or what-
ever may have been the cause, certain it is, that when the plan
came to be drawn out in detail, it had assumed an aspect so dif-
ferent that it can hardly be recognized as the same. By the
draft Charter, which was submitted to Lord Stanley in February
1834, it was proposed to transfer to the proposed Company not
merely all the requisite powers for managing the emigration and
trading in the land, but the entire authority of government,
checked by a veto on the part of the crown. They were to have
power to make, or delegate the power of making, all laws, insti-
tutions, ordinances, &c.; to constitute all courts ; to appoint all
governors, judges, and magistrates ; and to levy all rates, taxes,
and duties. To the Crown was reserved the power of disallowing
any of their acts and appointments in the first instance, and of
removing their officers in case of misconduct; but it was to ori-
ginate nothing ; nor could it otherwise interfere. When Lord
Stanley objected to this delegation of authority, and refused to
entertain the project further, unless it were agreed that ‘ the
VOL. LXXV. NO. CLI, K


4 government of the colony should be left in the hands of the Crown
‘ and its constitutional advisers, until it should be able to govern
4 itself,’ he was informed by Mr Grote, writing in behalf of
the Association, that his objection was 4 fatal to the project of
4 a chartered colony ; for, of course, no body of persons would
4 consent to take the trouble and responsibility of such an under-
-4 taking, without at the same time obtaining sufficient authority
4 for carrying their objects into effectand as he declared, at
the same time, that to be a joint stock company for the purchase
of land never was the object of the Association, and that 4 for
4 such a company to purchase land at a lower price than that
4 which should afterwards be paid by others,’ would be directly
contrary to one of their first principles,* it was plain that that
project was at an end.
' * These assertions contrast so strangely, not only with the actual
provisions, but with the proposed object of the original scheme, that one
would almost think an entire chapter, in the course of which the views
of both parties had completely changed, had dropped out of the corre-
spondence. On the 6th July 1833, Mr Whitmore forwards to Lord
Stanley ‘ a project for founding a new colony on the southern coast of
‘ Australia, by means of the purchase of waste lands from Government,
‘by a joint stock company and by individuals and the views of this pro-
posed company he thus explains :— 4 The inducement to the company to
‘ found this colony is this right of preemption at the first minimum price.
‘ Having the first choice of land, they will be able to select that upon
4 which the seat of government will be placed, &c. The profit of the
4 company will arise from the additional value which the increase of popu-
-4 lation, and the growth of capital, always confer upon land, and from the
4 increase in the minimum price at which the Government land will be
4 sold; while the price paid by the company for their land will be uniform
4 at whatever period it may be taken up.’ On the 21st March 1834, Mr
Grote replying, in the absence of Mr Whitmore, to Lord Stanley, re-
marks, as the draft charter says :— 4 It is true that, at the interview to
4 which you refer, Mr Stanley suggested that the Association should be a
4 joint stock company for the purchase and sale of land ; but this never
4 a-as the object of the present Association ; and 1 may add, that the pro-
-4 posal at the conclusion of your letter, for bestowing land on such a cora-
-4 pany at a lower price then, than that which should afterwards be paid by
4 others, is directly contrary to one of the chief objects of the Association ;
4 viz. that in the intended colony land should be uniformly sold upon
4 equal terms to all applicants.’ It would appear that there must have
been somebody behind the curtain who understood the objects of the
Association much better than its more prominent members ; for we ob-
serve that in the draft charter, though it was provided that the company',
instead of any right of pre-emption, should have the whole territory
conveyed to them in trust, therefore, that in their separate capacity they


It appears, however, that the difficulty was not in finding per-
sons who would take the ‘ trouble and responsibility,’ but who
would purchase shares, ‘ without having sufficient authority
4 to carry their objects into effectfor it was not proposed
to try whether the project of a colony, founded on Wakefield’s
principles, would not have credit enough in the money market
to enable them to raise the requisite fund, by way ot loan,
on the security of its future revenues. The fundamental prin-
ciple of selling the land at a minimum price, and spending the
entire proceeds upon immigration, was to be established by act
of Parliament; the management of the land sale and the im-
migration to be entrusted to a Board of Commissioners, who
were to be further charged with the duty of raising the loans;
the powers of government to be vested in the Crown, 1o this
proposition Lord Stanley was also ready to accede, provided he
could be satisfied that the territory selected was fit for the pur-
poses of colonization—that at least L. 35,000 would be invested
in the purchase of land—that there were persons ready to embark
for the colony with a capital of not less than L. 50,000 ; and that
an annual income, applicable to ‘ the support of such parts of
‘ the establishment of the colony as might seem to her Majesty’s
‘ Government absolutely essential,’ of L. 5000 for the first three
years, L.BOOO for the next three, and L. 10,000 for the four fol-
lowing, could be effectually guaranteed. The Committee of
the Association undertook to satisfy him upon all these points;
but before the negotiations were concluded, Lord Stanley
resigned his office, and the final decision upon the proposition
devolved upon his successor. In urging the new Secretary not to
delay that decision, the Committee represented the plan as one
which had been already approved—every condition required by
his predecessor having been complied with ; and which only
waited for an official announcement of the official sanction which
it had already received. How far this representation was just,
we cannot tell—Lord Stanley’s latest views having been ex-
plained at an interview of which there is no record in these
papers. All we can say is, that if he was really prepared to
sanction the measure in the shape which it ultimately assumed,
could not trade in land ; yet, by the 34th clause, they were to have the
power of incorporating as many land-trading companies as they pleased,
on such conditions as they pleased—a privilege much more extensive,
and one which might be made much more profitable. For it does not
seem that they were precluded from incorporating themselves, or any
number of themselves, for these purposes.


he must either have misapprehended the effect of some of its
provisions, or altered his mind on two important points which,
once at least, he had been prepared to insist on. The question
as to the fitness of the territory for colonization, was expressly
waived as one on which those who proposed to emigrate must
judge for themselves; and the clauses relating to the revenue
fund, instead of securing to the Crown a fixed income for carrying
on the government of the colony, left to the Commissioners
(apparently, however, through some oversight) not merely the
duty of raising, but the right of appropriating, the loan at their
own discretion, without any check whatever; except one which
made the arrangements with regard to salaries contingent upon
the approbation of the Treasury. By this arrangement, whether
attributed to oversight or to foresight, the clauses which reserved
to the Crown all the ordinary powers of government became
practically useless. The blood and sinews of the Government
being under the control of the Commissioners, the Crown with
all its powers had no effectual authority. The Commissioners
could do many things without the consent of the Crown; but the
Crown could scarcely carry a single point against the Commis-
sioners. Even the power of appointing and removing at pleasure
the members of the Commission, was one of which practically
but little use could be made. The sole chance of getting the
project started under such conditions, vested in the confidence
reposed by a section of the public in the new principle ; and it
was notorious that the faith of that section in the Wakefield
theory of colonization was not more deeply rooted, than their
faith in what we have called the Wakefield theory of the Colonial
Office;—their settled distrust of the capacity, the intentions, and
the integrity of all ministers of that department. To intrust the
duty of the Commissioners to any person enjoying the confidence
of the Government, but not enjoying the confidence of what now
began to be called ‘ the South Australian public,’ would have
been the same thing as to crush the scheme. None but the im-
mediate disciples and known supporters of Mr Wakefield would
have had either the zeal or the influence necessary for overcoming
the preliminary difficulties. Accordingly, it was left to the chair-
man of the Association to suggest the names of the Commis-
sioners; and of the eight gentlemen recommended by him no
objection was taken to any; and the two others who were added
as representatives of the Government, do not appear to have taken
any active part in the proceedings. Under these auspices, the
great experiment was at length afloat, with every prospect of
success —if success were to be ensured by giving the projectors
their own way; but with many chances of failure should they
prove unequal to the management of it.


It was necessary to go through these details, in order to show
clearly in what relation the several parties concerned in this pro-
ject really stood towards each other—a relation which the mere
terms of the act, and power of the Commission, without refer-
ence to the preceding correspondence, from which are to be
gathered the feelings and purposes, the understood expectations
on one side, and the understood admissions on the other, and all
the indirect or unexpressed obligations of the parties, would very
imperfectly represent. At this point it will be convenient to exa-
mine the project more carefully, and to consider how far it can
be regarded as a fair trial of the Wakefield principle, and how far
we are bound to abide by the issue.
Now, in the first place, it is to be observed that this project
involved not a simple but a complex experiment—not one but
three principles of colonization, hitherto untried, were to be tried
all at once in the case of South Australia. It was to be a ‘ self-
supporting’ Colony—that was one principle ; —and a colony
governed by a few private gentlemen, without any previous
experience in such a task, without any effective check upon their
proceedings, without responsibility to any other department ot the
State, and without any direct interest in the success of their expe-
riment—that was a second principle. And thirdly, it was to be a
Colony founded on the system of selling the land, and spending
the proceeds on immigration. So far as this last is concerned, we
will not go so far as to say with Mr Wakefield, that the experi-
ment has been ‘ eminently successful’—but we will say that there
has been no indication of failure. The rapid influx of capital
and of population during the first three years, did not prove that
the system was a sound one, but only that many persons believed
it to be sound. The sudden check and financial embarrassment
in the fourth, did not prove it to be unsound ; but only that the
speculation had been carried too far, and that the finances had
been mismanaged. The tree was in blossom, and has suffered a
blight. We must wait for another season before we can know,
by proof, what kind of fruit it will bear. Leaving, therefore,
the Wakefield theory of colonization as still subject to the
remarks with which we quitted it a year and a half ago, we
turn to the two collateral novelties involved in the project, con-
cerning which the issue proves much. To the ‘self-supporting’
system, and to the usurpation by private gentlemen of the proper
functions of Government, may be distinctly traced the difficulties
which have arisen ; and we believe it to be far from unfortunate
that these popular parts of the scheme have been so soon and so
fairly brought to the test, and illustrated by so conspicuous an
example.
By the ‘self-supporting system of colonization,’ (the notion


of which Mr Wakefield seems to us to treat with more ridicule than
it deserves,) we understand that system, on the credit—that is to
say, on the supposed merits—of which you can borrow the means
of founding, settling, and peopling a colony,—supporting it on
the promise of the future revenue, until such revenue shall be
actually forthcoming. Every moneyless inventor who brings his
inventions into the market, by means of capital borrowed on the
faith of its future value, proceeds on the self-supporting system.
The man who persuades his friend that he has discovered a
secret in farming by which he can make his fortune, and so
obtains a loan of money to buy land for the purpose of trying it,
is a self-supporting farmer. So the South Australian Association
proclaim a new mode of colonization, by which a large revenue
may be raised within a short time; and, having no money of their
own, persuade people to lend them money at ten per cent to carry
this scheme into execution. If they are right—if the new sys-
tem prospers, and creates a revenue equal to the payment of the
debt and the interest—then all is well. The colony, most
strictly speaking, has supported itself. There it is; and it lias cost
nothing to any body.
But though we see nothing absurd in the notion of a self-sup-
porting colony, nor do we feel justified in calling the name, as
Mr Wakefield does, ‘a kind of puff/—(though no doubt it has been
much used for puffing purposes,)—yet to the manner in which
South Australia has been required to support itself, we see very
serious objections ; nor can we perceive any corresponding advan-
tage. By refusing to advance any public money, and throw-
ing the Colony upon the money market for supplies, it was
intended to hold the public safe, and throw the whole risk upon
private speculators. And if the failure of the speculators had
involved nothing more than the ruin of those private speculators,
the precaution would have been effectual, and not unreasonable.
But the fact is, that the insolvency of a colony, established under
the sanction of Government, with thousands of people in it, is a
calamity which Government can never throw aside, as the result
of a private speculation with which it had nothing to do. If not
bound to uphold its credit, (a point which it would not be easy
to maintain,) it is at least bound to save the inhabitants from
destruction. If the speculation be a good one—that is, if the
money be lent on good interest or good security—it is much better
that the mother country should make the advance, which it can do
on much better terms to both parties than private capitalists: if not,
then it ought not to be sanctioned at all. For if unsafe with pub-
lic money lent at four per cent, it must be many times more un-
safe with private money lent at ten; and if it fail, the failure must


be a public, and not a private matter. The mother country
must pay for the losses, whoever may have the benefit
of the gains. But there is a more serious objection to this mode
of raising supplies than either its extravagance, or its futility as
a security against expense to the mother country, or the almost
irresistible temptation which it offers to a system of puffing—
namely, its precariousness. During its earlier years, not only
the prosperity of the Colony,* but the very lives of the inha-
bitants, depend upon the regularity of the supplies ; and that
regularity depends upon the facility of borrowing money from
private capitalists; who, being only concerned for the security of
their own speculations, will refuse to lend the moment they
apprehend any difficulty about the repayment. Twenty accidents,
against which no foresight can provide, may discredit the specu-
lation in their eyes. There need not even be any just ground
for alarm. A false rumour will stop the supplies for the time as
effectually as a true one. The Colony may be ruined by a ‘ lead-
ing article/ as suddenly as it was created. A puff may break it,
as a puff has made. In the short history of South Australia,
something of this has been actually experienced, and more is
suggested. We trust that the lesson has not been read in vain,
and that no second experiment, resembling it in this feature, will
be attempted.
Nor is this short history less valuable for the considerations
it suggests with regard to the other novel feature which we
have noticed—the delegation to private projectors of the duties
which belong properly to the recognized and responsible autho-
rities of the country. There is scarcely any popular preju-
dice more unreasonable, but there is scarcely any more preva-
lent, than that which leads men to place more confidence in those
of whom they know nothing, than those of whom they know
much. Hoping always for more than we can have, and knowing
that we cannot get what we want from the one, we turn to the
other, of whom, knowing nothing, we do not know even that.
Thus it is in the disputes between Government and projectors.
Government has existed for centuries, and has wrought no mi-
racle ; whilst every year sends forth some sanguine or interested
projector, burning with anxiety to show how some miracle may
be wrought. The objections which he is met with fail to con-
vince him ; the discouragement makes him fierce. The refusal
to adopt his views, he attributes to secret hostility. The public
take part with the untried promiser against the tried non-perfor-
mer. The matter is brought before Parliament. The ignorant
lookers-on (who form a considerable majority in both houses)
are easily persuaded that the thing is an experiment, and ought


to be tried ; and that since the responsible officers of the Crown
say they cannot undertake to bring it to a successful issue, the
trial must be made by the projector himself, who says he can.
The necessary powers are accordingly conveyed to him by act of
Parliament, and the Government is only too happy to get rid of
the responsibility, the trouble, the importunity, and the abuse,
all at the same time.
Nor is this arrangement without its plausibilities. The pre-
sumptions against government in respect both to zeal and ability
for making the best of a new thing, are not altogether unfair.
To plod on in the old ruts, to be jealous of all nostrums and
novel theories, will always be the tendency of the executive,
constitute it as you may; because the credit of success in such
cases bears no proportion to the discredit of failure. They
are the trustees of the nation ; and, like all trustees, are more
concerned to keep things from growing worse than to make
them better. Therefore, under the best constituted executive,
many good things will be left for private projectors to suggest;
and these projectors will have many plausible, and probably
some just grounds of complaint. In the case of our own Go-
vernment, their aversion from all that is unprecedented is unduly
strong, and amounts to a serious defect. It is not to be denied
that the inventive department, owing to the total want of any
agency working in that direction, is weak and languid; and the
distrust of other mens’ inventions proportionally active. Nor is
it less true that, from want of a better supply of effective ser-
vants, and of stimulants to zeal and activity, many of its duties
are neglected and mismanaged. The popular error is not in
apprehending that the government will do the work ill, but
in assuming that the projector will do it better; as if the
censure of blunders in others offered any security that the
censurer will commit no blunders himself. The delusion is a
gross one, which the least reflection must dissipate ; but it is
wonderful how few of us are not, more or less, under its power.
Let the securities for zeal, and ability, and integrity, in the
discharge of their office by the ministers of the Crown be as
defective as the most discontented projectors can assert; yet it
is obvious that they are better than you have any where else.
However defective the instruments they have to work with, they
have at least a more extensive command than any other body, of
the best instruments that are to be had. However inadequate
the responsibility under which they act, they at least act under
a more definite and effective responsibility than can be thrown
upon any private persons, or Board of persons. However prone
to avail themselves of the privilege of office for the purpose of


shielding from enquiry what will not bear inspection, they are
at least well known themselves—are liable to be called to a
severe account in case of ultimate failure or palpable miscon-
duct ; and, conscious of living in the public eye, are deeply sensi-
tive to public censure. Whatever objections may be urged
against their methods of transacting business, their methods are
at least the gradual growth of many years of trial; they include
all the improvements prompted by long experience—all the
securities against irregularity, all the precautions, checks, and
helps of which time has suggested the expediency. That each
man, indeed, should believe of himself that he could arrange
every thing much better, (especially having never tried,) is not
surprising ; but why we, his neighbours, should believe it of him ,
is a matter for much wonder, though as old as the world. To
any one who thinks, it must appear undeniable, that though
securities for the good management of a new experiment in the
hands of Government are bad enough, compared with what they
ought to be ; yet compared with the security we have when the
management of it is transferred to a Board of private gentlemen
labouring under a superfluity of public spirit, it is ample, and
worthy of all confidence. The case before us supplies as apt an
illustration as we could wish. Nearly seven years ago the
charge of colonizing South Australia, with all powers and pri-
vileges appertaining, was committed to eight gentlemen uncon-
nected with the Colonial Office; because the Colonial Office, not
having due faith in the principle, could not be trusted for carry-
ing it out. They had every facility for conducting their own
scheme in their own way. They were allowed to select their
own officers; and we doubt whether they could quote a single
measure which they were prevented from taking, or a single im-
portant point in which they were thwarted, from the day of their
appointment to that of their dismissal. It is now notorious that
in the hands of these eight gentlemen, (for it is to be observed
that the embarrassments had risen under their instructions, and
before the news of the revocation of their commission had reached
the colony, though the duty of dealing with them was inherited
by their successors,) this great charge has miscarried; —that the
result of their five years’ administrations has been an advance
of L. 155,000 by the mother country, as the only means of
avoiding immediate and extensive disasters in South Australia.
How many of our readers can repeat the names of these eight
gentlemen? Mr Wakefield was not among them. He abjures
all responsibility, and now declares that he always apprehended
some evil results from the arrangement. Had the responsibility
been laid upon any of the regular departments of state, the issue


would have remained as a personal blot upon the reputation of
the minister at the head of it. As it is, it rests upon who knows
whom ?
That it was only an experiment , cannot be admitted as an ex-
cuse for thus confiding the conduct of it to inexperienced hands.
There is a mischievous fallacy lurking under that word experi-
ment. *lf you will not try my experiment yourselves, stand
‘ aside and let me try it,’ is the cry of the projector to a dis-
trusting Government, and all the people think it reasonable. Go
into the fever ward of an hospital, announce an improved mode of
treatment, and call on the surgeon either to try it himself or to
let you try it, —he will answer that he has no right to do either
the one or the other—either to make experiments, or to allow
them to be made upon the patients under his charge—the failure
of the experiment may be the death of the patient. But let the
inventor of an improved method of colonization demand of the
State, that if his method be not adopted generally, he shall at
least have a colony made over to him to try it on, and nobody
doubts the reasonableness of the demand. It is forgotten that
the trial cannot be made at the sole risk of the inventor, and
that the State is fully as answerable for evils that may arise from
permitting hazardous experiments to be tried by others, as for
refusing to adopt wise and safe ones itself. The duty of the
Government in such cases is plain—to entertain all projects for
the good of the community; to take up and give effect to those
of the wisdom of which it is satisfied; and resolutely to refuse
its sanction to all such as it is not prepared to adopt.
We have dwelt thus long on this part of the subject, because
we regard the establishment and the clear convincing illustration
of these positions, (obvious as they seem,) as by far the most
important result of this South Australian embarrassment. It is
of little consequence comparatively to trace the chain of events
which led to it, or to settle who has been most in fault; provided
the result itself be set up as a conspicuous and standing example
to warn all Statesmen and Parliaments against giving way to
these popular delusions, or indulging themselves in this indolent
legislation. The remedy for the many defects of our administra-
tive government, is to be sought in the improvement, and, if
necessary, the reconstitution of the establishment itself—a work
which will find all reformers enough to do—not in transferring
its duties to other and untried hands.
With regard to the eight South Australian Commissioners
themselves, we cannot fairly charge them either with any great
negligence, or any great incapacity in the discharge of their
trust. They appear to have been active and pains-taking—the


immigration department seems to have been prosperously con-
ducted—there has been no lack of exact and careful instruc-
tions ; and, considering the novelty of the circumstances and their
own inexperience, we do not know that it could be reasonably
expected of them that they should do the work better. The
thing they had to do, had never been attempted before—the
means by w T hich it was to be done, had never been employed be-
fore—they themselves had neither precedent to guide them, nor
previous experience in the kind of duties which had devolved
upon them. ‘ The act,’ (says the Report of the Committee,)
4 required that provision should be made for the reception, in a
4 vast unexplored wilderness, and for the protection and good
4 government of a population flowing in at a rate of unprece-
-4 dented rapidity. The making of all necessary arrangements
4 for that purpose was confided to a board of private gentlemen,
4 not placed by their commissions under any adequate control
4 in the exercise of their duties ; and acting at a distance of
4 16,000 miles from the scene on which the experiment was to
4 be tried. The only provision placed at their disposal for de-
-4 fraying the costs of the undertaking, was a power to borrow
4 money from private capitalists on the security of the future
4 revenues of that unexplored wilderness; a precarious provi-
-4 sion, therefore, and subject to interruption from a variety of
4 accidents which they could neither foresee nor control.’* We
do not quarrel with them for failing in the execution of such a
charge ; their great error was in consenting to undertake it.
To transfer to an unwatered wilderness, root, branch, and
blossom, the conceptions which flourished so fairly in Adelphi
Terrace, and make them prosper there, was no easy task. Their
policy, their plans, and their precautions, read smoothly enough
on paper, and every thing seems provided for. The design is
clearly and carefully drawn. But when we turn to the impres-
sion which was actually printed off on the rugged and uneven
ground of South Australia, a most distorted, blotted, and imperfect
figure presents itself. The internal history of the colony exhibits
a series of miscarriages, one treading upon the heels of another.
First, the Governor quarrels with the Surveyor-General about
the site of the capital ; and the colonists split into factions before
they have set up their houses. Then the Surveyor-General
quarrels with his instructions, and throws up his office in disgust.
Then his surveys stand still, to the great inconvenience of the
purchasers of land, who have been promised immediate posses-
* . "Report, p. 9.


sion. Then, in the urgent necessity of carrying the surveys
forward at any cost, vast unforeseen expenses are incurred. Then
the Governor quarrels with the resident Commissioner, and must
be recalled. Then the resident Commissioner with whom he
quarreled is convicted of gross irregularities in his capacity of
Colonial Treasurer, and is dismissed under serious suspicion of
peculation. Then this Colonial Treasurer is replaced by an-
other, ‘ who appears to have been most irregular,’ and who
was shortly obliged to be placed in the hands of the Attorney-
General for not rendering his accounts. Then the Colonial
Storekeeper is found to have been guilty of great irregularity,
proceeding * partly from the confusion of the colony,’ but prin-
cipally from his ‘ utter unacquaintance with the principles of
‘ public duty ;’ a deficiency for which ‘ several other heads of
‘ departments had to be dismissed,’ and which ‘ had been, and
‘ still was, a great cause of the difficulties of the colony.’ Then
the new Governor, in his zeal to correct all these irregularities, is
obliged to treble the charges of the civil establishment; and
under the inevitable necessity of providing for the stream of
immigration which was poured in upon him, together with his
great anxiety to prevent what he calls ‘ stagnation,’ is involved
in an expenditure not only beyond his authority, but beyond his
power of calculation, and beyond the utmost means of the Commis-
sioners to meet; —an expenditure of which he was unable to form
the roughest estimate, but which was increasing quarter by quarter
from a rate of L. 12,000 per annum to a rate of L. 140,000; and all
this without even the advantage of a knowledge on the part of the
Commissioners of the demands which were coming upon them.
Upon a comparison of Colonel Gawler’s Despatches, announcing
the progress of hisexpenditure, (which will befound at pp. 220-266
of the appendix to the report,) with the dates of the bills drawn by
him upon the Board in England, (which will be found at p. 172 of
the same,) it may be distinctly shown, that before June 1840
the Commissioners had no reason to suppose that the annual
demands upon them would exceed L. 42,000 per annum ; that the
bills presented for payment during that month indicated a
demand of L. 140,000; and that the next month brought them,
along with the first complete financial statement which they
had received, a warning that for some time to come they must
expect no less. This it was which brought the matter to a
crisis; for it was now plain that the powers of borrowing, with
which they were entrusted by the act, even if used to their
fullest extent, would not enable them to satisfy all their lia-
bilities. Accordingly, in August, they suspended all further
payments, and then threw themselves upon the government.


Colonel Gawler was recalled, and Captain Grey was sent out
to declare a bankruptcy, and commence a system of rigorous
retrenchments; and all other questions connected with the subject
were to stand over until a Committee of the House of Commons
should have reported upon them.
The recommendations of the Committee are embodied in a
series of resolutions, which are introduced by an explanatory
Report, containing a statement of the grounds of them, a rapid
but fair account of the origin and nature of the embarrassment,
and a judgment upon the conduct of the several parties impli-
cated. Of the measures recommended by the Committee with a
view to the better administration of the affairs of the colony in
future, the most important are the dissolution of the Board of
Commissioners; and the placing of South Australia, as to its
general government, on the same footing with other Colonies
belonging to the British Crown; —the making of provision by
Parliament for such advances of money as may be necessary for
maintaining its existence ; the advances, with interest at not
more than four per cent, to be charged to the colony as public
debt; —the relaxation of the existing rule as to the disposal of
land, so far as to allow one-half of the proceeds to form part of
the general revenue, the other half being still devoted to immi-
gration ; to admit of the reservation by the Crown of any lands
required for public purposes, or for the benefit of the aborigines ;
and to throw the cost of survey upon the purchaser, by an
acreable charge in addition to the purchase money, instead of
charging it as heretofore to the general revenue;—the establish-
ment, instead of the uniform price system which has hitherto
been adopted, of that of public auction at a minimum upset
price, with some modifications, however, tending to combine the
advantages of both; —namely, first, a provision that the sales by
auction shall take plac e periodically ; second, that between these
periods any land which has been put up and not sold shall be
purchasable by the first applicant at the minimum upset price ;
third, that blocks of land, containing not less than 20,000 acres
each, may be sold by private contract, only not below the mini-
mum price; and lastly, that the minimum price itself may be
raised above its present amount of L.l per acre, ‘ with a view to
‘ the principle of maintaining such an amount as may tend to
‘ remedy the evils arising out of too great a facility of obtain-
‘ ing landed property, and a consequently disproportionate sup-
* ply of labour, and exorbitant rate of wages'
It will be seen, therefore, that if the recommendations of the
Committeebe adopted, the Wakefield principle will at length have
a fair trial in South Australia ; as soon, at least, as the arrears due


to past mismanagement shall be paid off; for it will no longer be
under the same gaberdine with the two companion principles which
we have spoken of above. The colony will have a source of sup-
ply not liable to fail, because it is a case of extremity ; and it will
have the best security for good government during its infancy
which the nation has been able to devise. At the same time the
4 Wakefield principle of colonization,’ properly so called, is
retained entire ; excepting among those parts of it, (relating to
the ‘ sufficient’ price and the application of the entire proceeds
to immigration, and to the uniform price as distinguished from
the auction system,) against which we argued at length on a
former occasion ; and one of which at least Mr Wakefield himself
has now given up.
The only part of these recommendations to which we are
disposed to demur, is that which relates to the raising of the
minimum price. Not that we have any positive reason for
thinking that the price of land in South Australia will not bear
to be raised higher, but we do not see our way through the
process by which it is proposed to determine it. It ap-
pears to us that there lie at the bottom of the reasoning on this
matter, two assumptions which will not be found to bear the test
of experience. The first is, that the value of the land may be
increased to any extent by increasing the price. The second is,
that by regulating the minimum price and the quantity of immi-
gration, it is possible in a new country to reduce the price of
labour; that is, to place the labourer so far at the mercy of his
employer as to force him to be content with less than he wants.
‘ In a colony,’ says the Report , ‘ where the extent of available
4 land may, when compared with the population, be practically
4 considered as unlimited, ordinary land, if all were allowed to
* appropriate what they pleased, would have no value whatever,
4 and it only acquires a value from the policy of not allowing it
4 to be appropriated, except by those who purchase it on certain
4 terms.’ All this we admit; but we are not so clear as to the
inference which is drawn from it in the next sentence. 4 As the
4 value acquired by land under such circumstances is artificial, so
4 it may be made higher or lower at the discretion of the authority
4 by which it is created .’ Now, surely there are other limits to the
value of land besides the price demanded for it. By raising the
price as high as you please, you may make it as difficult as you
please to get; but not therefore as much worth having. You
may make a thing so dear that it is not worth buying at the
price. You may make a penny roll as dear as a quartern loaf,
if you have the command of the wheat market, but you cannot
make it feed as many people. Make bread so dear that people


cannot buy enough to live on, and they will feed on potatoes.
So with land. So long as the produce of the soil will pay a
reasonable interest on the price demanded, you can raise the
value by creating an artificial scarcity ; but as soon as the price
rises above that point, the artificial scarcity will operate only as
a prohibition upon the sale. The question is, how high you can
price waste land in South Australia without making the purchase
of it a bad investment of capital, or a worse than can be had
elsewhere ?
If indeed by applying the additional price to the introduction
of labour, you could be sure to cheapen labour in proportion—
this artificial value might be increased indefinitely, until the pro-
ductive powers of the land, as well as the value of its produce,
reached their maximum. But this brings us to the other ques-
tion ; Is it practicable by any regulations to make a labouring
population in a new colony so dependent upon the employer of
labour, that the rate of wages shall sink in any thing like that
proportion—or indeed that they shall sink at all ? Certainly
no tendency of the kind has appeared in South Australia. And
we strongly suspect, that if the principle recommended by the
Committee be adopted, of ‘ progressively increasing the price of
4 land until the object of establishing a due proportion between
4 the supply and demand for labour, and between the population
4 and the extent of territory occupied by it, shall have been
4 accomplished’—or as it is expressed in another page, until such
a price be imposed 4 as shall prevent a greater quantity of land
4 from being bought than the number of inhabitants is sufficient
4 to make use of to advantage’ —one of two things must happen ;
either such a price must be demanded as no capitalist can afford
to give; or such stringent regulations with regard to the labour-
ing population must be adopted, as no Government will be able
to enforce. Labour may be made more plentiful, we doubt not;
but we doubt whether within any appropriate period it will be-
come more cheap. The value of the land will in that case be
determined by the nett profits of the produce which it can be
made to yield ; and the price must follow the value.
There is one other point on which the Report is not quite
satisfactory to us. In their judgment upon the conduct of the
several parties who have been implicated in the affairs which
have led to this embarrassment, they appear to us to have ex-
tended their indulgence to Colonel Gawler too tar. No doubt,
a man who has not had an opportunity of making his defence is
entitled to large allowances ; and although it is difficult to be-
lieve that he has not done things on too grand a scale, and has
been far more liberal in his expenditure for the benefit of the


Colony than its pecuniary circumstances justified; we are not
masters of the circumstances sufficiently to say positively, that,
had he not determined to incur that expenditure, a worse result
might not have happened. But the charge against him is not
merely that he involved his employers in a debt so far beyond
his authority, and beyond even their means to pay—circum-
stances may be imagined in which an officer is justified in assum-
ing such a responsibility—but that he did it without giving them
any adequate warning of the extent to which he was prepared
to go. He not only drew bills upon them for thousands upon
thousands beyond his authority, without specifying the particular
services for which they were drawn—this, in the confused state
of affairs, it may have been impossible to do with exactness—
but he did not furnish them with the means of conjecturing, within
any reasonable limits of approximation, what amount they were
to be prepared for. It is true that he kept warning them in
general terms that he was forced to incur ‘enormous’ expenses,
the responsibility for which ‘ filled him with anxiety but what
did an ‘ enormous’ expenditure mean, when the authorized expen-
diture was L. 12,000 a year? Was it twice as much, or three
times, or four times as much ? The only account (previous to
that upon the receipt of which his Commissioners threw up their
charge) on which any definite conjecture could be built as to
the total amount for which they must in future be prepared,
was that which accompanied the half-year’s Report dated 2Gth
November 18.39, and which must have been received by them in
February 1840. In this despatch he recounts the causes which
have made his actual expenditure so much exceed the expected
estimate; gives a list of the things he has had to do; and adds,
all this has been done (not ‘ has yet to be done’) ‘ in a very
‘ expensive period .’ This account therefore did not indicate an
increased, but rather a diminished expenditure thereafter. Now,
the bills drawn by Colonel Gawler, in excess of the regulated
estimate, for the services of this year, amounted to L. 42,000 ;
an excess quite large enough to answer the general terms in
which he had spoken, and to justify his anxiety. But while this
account was on its way home, at what rate was Colonel Gawler
actually drawing upon them ?At a rate of L. 50,000 per annum,
or L. 60,000, or L. 100,000? No, but of L. 140,000! Now, we
contend that Colonel Gawler—however impossible it may have
been for him to form an exact estimate, or even an estimate
nearly approaching to accuracy, of the expenditure for the half
year before him—ought to have been able to make a guess within
a hundred thousand pounds. He should have been able to give
his employers some idea whether, when he talked of enormous


excesses above the regulated estimate, he meant twice as much,
or twelve times as much. And this was the rather required of
him, because the very ground on which he justifies his assump-
tion of such responsibility, is the total incapacity of his Commis-
sioners to form any judgment for themselves; and because he
knows that their resourses were not unlimited, and that his drafts
must be trespassing very closely on the limits of these. The
Committee say that they ‘ are not ’ prepared to affirm the in-
sufficiency of the grounds on w r hich he has alleged his inability
‘ to furnish information as to the specific services for which he was
‘ about to draw, or to supply any estimates of the total amount
‘he should be compelled to draw in the course of the year.’ It
appears to us that the Committee ought to have heen prepared to
allege the insufficiency of these grounds ; and that, from the
principle involved in their hesitation to do so, inferences may be
drawn, of which very inconvenient and dangerous applications
may be made by all officers serving the Government in distant
places. If the excuse is good for the expenditure of hundreds of
thousands, it is as good, or better, for the expenditure of unau-
thorized millions ; inasmuch as the inability to ‘ furnish infor-
‘ mation as to the specific services, and to supply estimates of the
‘ total amount,’ would be ten times as great. We regret this
piece of false candour and indulgence on the part of the Com-
mittee ; because it may be construed into an intimation that
there were not sufficient grounds for recalling Colonel Gawler—
a measure than which none was ever more imperatively called
for. In other respects, the Report appears to us to contain a fair
judgment upon the conduct of all parties.
The Evidence contains a good deal of interesting and conflict-
ing testimony as to the natural productive capacities of South
Australia; of which Mr Angus has a high opinion. But there
is so little solid experience as yet to build on, that such opinions
can be entertained only as conjectures; and, as we said before,
we must wait to see what fruit the tree will bear, and what it
will sell for, before we can form any grounded conclusions.
What is certain is, that a very large proportion of this selected
territory turns out to be unavailable from natural sterility—so
barren that it will be worth nothing to a purchaser, however
much you make him pay for it—and so much of it, that it was
at one time thought advisable to alter the boundaries of the
colony, for the purpose of taking in a more fertile tract between
it and Port Philip. Some considerable tracts of very good land
have, however, been discovered since; and we hope that the barren
parts will only operate as an anti-dispersive; and that no prac-
tical evil will result from the unfortunate selection of the field of
VOL. LXXV. NO. CLI. L


operations. With regard to this part of the question, however,
pending the arrival of some more decisive indications, we must
be content with quoting, in their own words, the result of the
enquiries of the Committee as to the present position and pro-
spects of the province :
‘ The public debt charged on the future revenues of South Australia,
including the sums raised by the Commissioners, the advance recently
made by Parliament, and the proposed farther advance to the Emigration
Fund, will amount to L. 296,000. The annual interest payable upon it
will be about L. 15,000. The number of inhabitants is supposed to be
about 15,000. The ordinary revenue, which has been progressively in-
creasing, may now be estimated at about L. 30,000 per annum. The
ordinary expenditure, which has been increasing still more rapidly, is now
proceeding at a rate amounting, together with the interest of the loan,
to about L. 70,000 a-year ; and although it may be hoped that some
reduction may be effected by the present Governor, your Committee are
unable, from want of detailed evidence in this country, to speak with
any confidence on the subject.
‘ With regard to the natural resources of the colony, the value of the
produce, and the amount of revenue which it may hereafter yield, your
Committee have not been able to obtain sufficient data to justify them in
pronouncing a decided opinion ; they would, however, refer to the evi-
dence given by Mr Angus, as showing the recent progress of agriculture,
and the aptness of the soil for raising grain, and for pasturage; to that
of Mr Elliot in explanation of the quantity of available land still un-
sold ; to a statistical report transmitted by Colonel Gawler, and to the
general tenor of his despatches, as encouraging the hope that, after
making allowance for very large tracts of wholly unavailable land, the
natural capacities of the colony are considerable ; and that as its tillage
extends, and its stock multiplies, it may in due time yield an ample
revenue, and become a valuable appendage to the British crown. For the
present, however, it does not appear to your Committee that there are
any certain grounds for expecting either such an increase of revenue or
such a reduction of expenditure, as would obviate the necessity of mak-
ing provision out of some fund, over and above the ordinary revenue,
for an annual deficit of a large amount.’—( Report , p. x.)




.
f
