

■£ 4- i?
fi tt CKt - v •/' ■ ' '■ u
affw-i
THE
WESTMINSTER REVIEW,
VOLUME XXIII.
JULY—OCTOBER, 1835. •
LONDON.
JOHN MAC RONE, 3, ST. JAMES’S SQUARE,
*T. C. HANSARD, 32> PATERNOSTER ROW.
1835.


T • . •


The author will probably object to being ‘ damn’d with faint
praise/ But the fact is that he has placed himself by this
effort, in the first line of modern political novelists; and that
there is nobody except the author of the ‘ Radical/ who stands
out as a model for him to overtake or to pursue.
Art. XIII.—I. Colonization of South Australia. By R. Torrens, Esq.,
F. R. S. Chairman of the Colonization Commission for South
Australia.—London; Longman. 1835.
2. Colonization ; particularly in Southern Australia; with some
remarks on Small Farms and Over-population. By Colonel Charles
James Napier, C.B.—London; T. and W.Boone. 1835,
OLONEL Torrens’s octavo volume consists of above 300 pages
of letter-press, with an appendix exceeding twenty pages.
The first part of the body of the work, is in the form of a letter
of twelve sections, addressed to the author of the history of the
Indian Archipelago; whose work was published about fifteen
years ago. This portion of the book has especial reference to
the new scheme propounded for colonizing South Australia. Its
style is pamphleteering and polemical, and perhaps somewhat
out of keeping with the dignity of a Chairman of a Parlia-
mentary Commission. The second part of the work, is in the
usual cold, cramped, and unpopular manner of the author’s
politico-economical writings. Now and then, there are made,
throughout the work, some efforts at pleasantry, which force
upon the recollection the Hindu lawgiver’s description of a
graceful woman, one that walked ‘like a flamingo, —or a
young Elephant.’ The tone is also sometimes angry and vitu-
perative ; for the author evidently labours under the fancy, that
to expose what an opponent deems to be a public delusion,
can arise only out of a desire to do mischief. The Appendix
consists of the Act of Parliament for the formation of the
colony ; of two letters, under the ominous and euphonious
signature of Kangaroo; and of a short letter from A. B.
heartily approving of Kangaroo’s opinions. Kangaroo, by the
way, notwithstanding his ugly and exotic name, is a better
writer of the vernacular tongue than his principal. After the
perusal of a few pages, his objdct is readily discovered; whereas,
the perusal of many pages of the other part of the performance
will by no means afford the same sort of satisfaction. In the
brief examination which it is now proposed to make, the
opinions of both writers will be reviewed.


The first point which will be taken under consideration, is,
the suitableness of the soil, climate, and locality of Australia,
for agricultural and commercial pursuits; or, in other terms, the
eligibility of this country, in preference to all others, for the
purposes of such a colonization as the projectors of the new
scheme speculate upon. In the course of near 330 pages, there
is not one new fact brought forward to show the peculiar eligU
bility of Australia; but, in lieu of these, there is abundance of
assertion, and of most exaggerated assertion too. In the former
article of this Journal, the excellence of the climate both in point
of salubrity and of agreeableness, was not only admitted but
dwelt upon. The peculiar suitableness of the country for the
production of fine wool was also insisted upon. This seems now
to be conceded, for the first time; for the author, in one of
his arguments, assures us that labour employed in growung wool
is more productive than labour employed in growing corn, by
fifty per cent, or one half, which is of course quite conclusive*.
The climate, and pastoral capacity of the country, may therefore
be considered as settled points.
If it be more profitable by one half to grow wool than to grow
corn, this alone would seem sufficiently to imply, that for
tillage, there is some natural defect in soil and climate. Colonel
Torrens, however, notwithstanding his own admissions, argues
for the extraordinary fertility of the Australian land ; and then
proceeds to make partial quotations from Dr. Laing, Mr. Car-
michael, Captain Sturt, and Major Mitchell, to prove that it is
so. These gentlemen admit, and it would be very strange if it
were otherwise, that in so vast a territory, there are, here and
there, patches of fertile land, while sterility is the common
character of the entire region.
The author of the Van Diemen’s Land Annual is an authority
that has occasionally been resorted to by Colonel Torrens.
* On the average,’ says this experienced writer, ‘ one acre of
land in Canada is worth four in this islandt*’ One acre of land
then in America is worth four in Van Diemen’s Land, —that
portion of Australia which has heretofore been considered as
the most suitable for agricultural industry, and from which
the projected colony proposes to draw its earliest resources.
But this is not all ; in the month of May 1833, the price of
wheat in Van Diemen’s Land averaged 345. per quarter; which
o
* Colonization of South Australia. By R. Torrens, Esq. p. 168.
+ Ross’s Van Diemen’s Land Annual, and Hobart Town Almanack,
for 1834.


is at least fifty per cent higher than the price of the same article,
at the same time, at any of the Polish corn marts. In May
1834, the price rose to 6'6’s., or was nearly doubled, in consequence
of the prevalence of drought. By the last accounts, the price
had risen to 965., or had been very nearly trebled in little
more than the space of one year. At this last point, therefore,
it had reached the price which corn had attained in this country
some twenty years back, —the joint effect of dense popula-
tion, high rents, war, and a currency depreciated by one
fourth part of its entire value. This, let it be remembered,
happened at the very moment in which the authors of the new
scheme were vaunting the fertility of the Australian soil. All
who have had experience of Australia, assure us that it is com-
paratively sterile ; and those who have had no experience at all,
assure us that it is fertile. Whose authority men of sense ought?
to prefer, is clear enough.
Some observations are made by Colonel Torrens on the useful
natural and possible agricultural products of Australia. The
remarks made on these afford capital specimens of the vague
assertions and loose conclusions of the projectors, and their
extreme ignorance of such subjects. Mr. Bennett the botanist
says, he found a species of linum or flax growing on the banks
of an Australian river. So he might; because there are about
fifty species of linum , of which only one yields good flax, and
only four yield any at all. Upon this hint f rom Mr. Bennett,
however. Col. Torrens proceeds to argue that his colony will
produce flax for exportation. Silk-worms, Colonel Torrens hears,
are sometimes fed in India on the leaves of the Palma Christi;
and as the Palma Christi will grow in New South Wales, he
consequently concludes that silk may become a staple of the
colony without waiting for the extensive introduction of the
mulberry. All silk made by feeding the worm with any other
plant than the mulberry, is execrable; and if it were raised in
the greatest abundance, and with the greatest cheapness, it
would find no market. But silk, whether the worm be fed on
the mulberry or on any other leaf, can be raised neither
abundantly nor cheaply; for that can only be done, and in fact
never has been done, but where the price of labour is very low,
as in the most populous parts of India, in China, and in Italy.
In Van Diemen’s Land, Doctor Murdoch produced some
opium from a few poppies ; therefore, the climates of Kangaroo
island. Cape St. Vincent, and York Peninsula, will produce
‘ this most valuable staple of the China trade.’ The culture of
the opium poppy, and the gathering of the crop, demand
elaborate manipulations, and pan only be conducted where


labour is at a very low price, and the climate very warm. It is
impossible to speculate upon an article less suited for a new
colony. Mr. Bennett says that he found some species of Indigo-
fera, though he does not tell us which, to the westward of
the Blue Mountains. Dr. Laing, a clergyman, who had never
been engaged in any agricultural pursuits, assures his readers
that indigo to any extent may be cultivated in Australia; and
Colonel Torrens, putting that and this together, and finding that
there are imported into England between six and seven millions
of pounds of that drug, and to the value of above 1,700,000/.
sterling, concludes, without hesitation, that indigo will become
a staple product of his colony. He will find himself much mis-
taken ; its growth and manufacture require cheap labour, and
the only country that affords this, and at the same time has a
‘suitable climate, Bengal, has obtained very nearly a monopoly
of the supply of Europe, Asia, and America. Further, Colonel
Torrens must understand, that even in the Bengal provinces, the
culture of indigo does not succeed well everywhere; experience
having shown that it is neither abundant in quantity nor good
in quality, beyond twenty-five degrees from the equator, and
the favourite portion of his colony is ten degrees beyond this
limit. Colonel Torrens expects that vegetable oils are to become
a staple export of his colony; because Dr. Laing, the above-
named clergyman, who had no agricultural experience, in-
forms him that the castor-oil plant grows luxuriantly in Aus-
tralia. The Colonel himself, on his own authority, informs us
that it is a tree, and that it is indigenous. It is neither tree nor
shrub, but a succulent vegetable ; and it is not indigenous either
in Africa, Asia, or Australia, for it is a native of America.
Besides, it is a plant which grows luxuriantly only within
the tropics. But if it grew ever so luxuriantly, and ten degrees
beyond the tropics, the oil it produces is small in quantity, bad
in quality, and little suited for any other than medicinal purposes.
The author, therefore, in this case, is probably at fault in his
botany, his agriculture, his geography, and his statistics. Plants,
says Colonel Torrens, producing the camphorated oil which so
closely resembles the Cajeputi, are indigenous in Australia, and
as Cajeputi oil sells in the London market at Id. an ounce, it
may be presumed that something like Cajeputi oil may be sold
in the London market at Id. an ounce, and become a great
staple product of the new colony. The ordinary price of
Cajeputi oil in the London market is not Id. an ounce,
but about half that price. What ‘something like it 1 may
fetch, has not yet been determined. But if Kangaroo Island
had a monopoly of all the Cajeputi oil consumed in Europe,


Asia, and America, it would hardly amount to a thousand
pounds value.
Great fault is found by Colonel Torrens with the writer of the
former article in this journal on the Australian colony, for
asserting that the trees producing gum Arabic and the manna
of the druggists, namely the acacia vera and the fraxinus
ornus, do not exist in Australia. It seems that the writer was
correct after all; and this too, on the evidence of the very
passage which is quoted to refute him. There are many trees
which yield gums, but there is only one which yields, gum
Arabic. Of all the acacias, which are a numerous race, there
is but one species which yields this particular gum, and there is
no evidence that it exists out of Arabia. There are many trees
which yield a sweet juice which when inspissated resembles
manna, but there is only one kind of ash, and this is a native of
the South of Europe, which yields the officinal manna. The
manna of Australia, or what the settlers are pleased to call so, is
the produce, not of a Fraxinus, but of a Eucalyptus. Instead of
being drawn from the trunk of the tree, it distils from the bark,
and in such minute quantity, that the natives fancy it to be the
excrement of a grasshopper*. It may be permitted to make
the author a present of the excrement of the grasshopper, as one
of the staple exports of his new colony. Because the colonists
give wrong names, derived from fancied affinities, there is surely
no necessity why men of sense and information should mistake
the objects to which the misfiomers are applied. The Australian
colonists and convicts may talk of ‘ Blue Gum ’ and ‘ Red Gum ’
as long as they please ; but they will not be able to impose
them on the druggists and hat-manufacturers of Great Britain
for gum Arabic. Such are the statements of the men who are
for founding an empire upon a new principle, or, as it is ex-
pressed in the dedication of the work under review, of ‘ building
a nation for a monument.’ Mr. Spring Rice must surely be
proud of such splendid efforts to hand his fame down to
posterity.
The truth is, that there is no country in the world, of the same
extent, of which the spontaneous products are so scanty and so
worthless. Not one native esculent fruit has yet been dis-
covered in any part of the Australian region ; not a corn, nor
an esculent root, save a single fern. The climate is too warm to
produce valuable peltry; and if it were otherwise, the native
animals are not of the kind, nor in sufficient numbers, to yield it.
♦ Bennett’s Wanderings in New South Wales.


The most respectable four-footed animal of the deserts of
Australia is the kangaroo, and he is followed, at long intervals,
by a short-haired dog,—an opossum,—and a rat; which exhausts
this department of Australian zoology. One striking fact tells
volumes against the soil, climate, and localities of Australia. It
is the only considerable portion of the globe in which man has
not advanced one step from the mere state of savage existence.
The inhabitants have tamed no animal, save the dog, whose
nature it is to follow man whether he will or not; they have
learned the use of no metal; they have not manufactured a rag
of cloth, and men, and women too, —go literally stark naked,
without even the precaution of a fig-leaf. Now and then a lucky
hunter may throw a kangaroo or opossum skin over his shoulders;
but the very orang-outang will do the like when he is trembling
with cold. How, indeed, could a spontaneous civilization have
arisen among these men ? The country affords no wild animal
capable of labour when tamed ; it yields none of the cereal
grasses; not one valuable esculent root. Even a precarious
supply of water, by itself would be almost sufficient, in a rude
and infant society, to hinder permanent location, and compel
the savage to continue his wanderings. But if spontaneous
vegetable and animal products existed in ever such abundance,
the labour of collecting them would imply separation and not
concentration. In every part of the east, the tribes who make
it their calling to collect such products, are invariably found
to be in a low and semi-barbarous state of society; mere
wanderers over the forest, with hardly a home or a habitation.
Colonel Torrens has a section expressly headed, —‘ Superior
commercial capabilities of Australia exemplified, by comparing
the actual imports and exports of the Australian Colonies with
those of other countries.’ He compares the exports and imports
of our Australian possessions with those of some others of our
colonies, with reference to their respective populations; and
sums up the statement as follows.— ‘ The Colony of New South
Wales has a commerce more than four times as great as the
Canadas, four times as great as Nova Scotia, three and a half
times as great as the Cape colony, and twenty-three
times as great as Ceylon; while it opens, in proportion
to its population, a demand for British merchandise, more
extensive by four-fold than the Canadas, by nearly three
and one fourth fold than Nova Scotia, by three and one-third
fold than the Cape colony, by four-fold than the Mauritius,
and by 226 fold than Ceylon,’ [page 222.]
If the public accounts had been kept with ever so much accu-
racy and were in all respects unexceptionable, the test of com-


parative prosperity applied by Colonel Torrens is the most
fallacious that can be imagined. One or two examples.: will
show this. In 1832, Newfoundland contained a population of
sixty thousand inhabitants ; being exactly the same as that of
New South Wales. Now the trade of New' South Wales,
export and import, as exhibited by the Custom House returns
for 1831, amounted to 537,361/.; whereas, the corresponding
items, for Newfoundland, amounted jointly to 612,421/. The
prosperity of Newfoundland, therefore, according to the scale of
Colonel iTorrens, is greater than that of New South Wales by
14 per cent. But, the truth is the very reverse. New South
Wales is really a prosperous colony; and Newfoundland, not
only nearly stationary, but one of the most miserable colonies
ever founded by Great Britain.
Take another example. The total amount of the exports and
imports of Van Diemen’s Land, for 1833, as they are given by
Colonel Torrens from the colonial statements, is 600,000/., and
the population is, in round numbers, 30,000. The total trade of
Sincapore, export and import inclusive, in the year 1831-2 was
3,346,152/.; and its population, somewhat less than 20,000.
Upon perusal of such a document, Colonel Torrens ought con-
sistently to argue thus. The prosperity of Sincapore is above
eight-fold that of Van Diemen’s Land, and more than ten times
that of New South Wales. Colonel Torrens states that the con-
sumption of British goods in New South Wales is 61. 125. Bd.
per head; whereas that of each individual in Van Diemen’s
Land is no less than 11/. It is wonderful that this dis-
crepancy between the consumption of two colonies of the
same nature, under the same circumstances, and nearly in
the same state of advancement, did not point out to him the
weakness of the statements which he has exhibited. Colonel
Torrens while he makes the consumption of British goods for
Van Diemen’s Land 11/. per head, makes that of Nova Scotia,
Cape Breton, and Prince Edw'ard’s Island, only 1/. ss. per head.
How does the reader imagine this statement is made out ? He
takes the value declared by the British merchant at the English
Custom house, in the one case; and the colonial price in the other.
He takes the prime cost in the one instance, and in the other
adds the freights, charges, and profits, after a voyage of fifteen
thousand miles. He takes the price in the one case where
the market rate of interest is 4 per cent; and in the other,
where it is 10 per cent, and profits of course in proportion.
Now, as to the site of the future nation, in what spot the first
germ is to be planted, between the wide limits of the 132nd
and 141st degree of J3ast longitude, and between the 26th and


38th degree of South latitude, is not yet determined ; and this
too, almost a year after the passing of the Act of Parliament,
and five years after the first agitation of the project. As to
soil, save the evidence of an occasional plump kangaroo, no
one knows anything of the matter. Nay, it is by no means
ascertained, that there is anywhere even a perennial sup-
ply of potable water, to slake the thirst of man or beast.
Colonel Napier, the governor selected by the projectors them-
selves, and named by the crown, is extremely edifying upon
these topics. After justly ridiculing the scanty information
possessed by the projectors, and more than insinuating that the
alleged facts are little better than Travellers’ Tales ; he empha-
tically concludes thus : —‘ On such flimsy information shall we
build a town, intended for a capital?—if so, the first building
erected, should be a bedlam*.’ The * most unkindest cut of
all but how could Brutus avoid giving the blow, seeing that his
own reputation was on the very brink of the portentous whirlpool
produced by the puffing and agitation of the projectors. In
his appendix, Colonel Napier quotes a letter to his own address,
from a man of distinguished scientific acquirements, and who
with the exception of Captain Sturt, has actually seen and
examined more of the Australian territory than any other man
living. He tells his correspondents, that the very leaves of the
greater part of the plants of Australia, are formed so as to catch
every drop of dew that falls in this parched region ; their organiza-
tion being for this special purpose distinct from that of the plants
of every other part of the world, and constituting an obvious
provision of nature to enable them to withstand the frequent
droughts of the climate. The letter concludes in these re-
markable words. * With these proofs before you of the na-
tural disposition of that country generally to drought. I’ll
leave yon to say how far it is at all practicable for the com-
missioners appointed to conduct the proposed plan of South
Australian colonization, to carry into effect their design of con-
centration and combined labour, in other terms to oblige the
colonists, huddled into a corner of their vast grant of waste
land, to pursue, by a combination of downright labour, those
refined and extravagant systems of husbandry which the pro-
jectors have so fully contemplatedf.’
Of the extravagant statistics of the projectors, one sample
will suffice. ‘The site of the new colony is within a week’s
sail of Van Diemen’s Land, and has an uninterrupted com-
munication by means of a great navigable river and its
Colonization, by Col. C. J. Napier, p 109. f lb, p, 248.


tributaries, with the settled country of Yas Plains, in the
adjoining colony of New South Wales*.’ These are the
words of Colonel Torrens. The distance between Spencer’s
Gulf, the conjectured seat of the colony, for all here is
conjecture, and Hobart Town, is in a straight line above
1000 miles, and the sailing distance, under the most favour-
able circumstances, will certainly exceed 1200. The ship that
performs the voyage, then, must sail at the rate of near 200
miles a-day, which few merchant ships ever do, and she must
have a fair wind all the way in the outward and in the home-
ward voyage, and all this in the region of variable winds. The
outward and homeward voyage, which is represented as of a
fortnight’s duration, will probably on an average occupy three
months, or eight times its alleged length. This, however, in the
way of intrepid assertion, is but a mere peccadillo to what
follows. One would imagine, from the statement, that ‘ Yas
Plains, in the adjoining colony of New South Wales,’ were
within a stone’s throw of the projected site of the new settle-
ment. Let the reader then travel to Yas Plains by the
speediest route. The depth of Spencer’s Gulf is not much
less than 250 miles ; and for aught any one knows to the
contrary, the young nation may be planted at the very head of
it. From its entrance to the entrance of the lake Alexan-
dria, is at least 150 miles. The lake Alexandrina is 60 miles
broad. The navigation of the Murray and its tributaries, to
Yas Plains, is 1000 miles; and Yas Plains are 200 miles from
Sydney. For aught that appears in Colonel Torrens’s map, a
line-of-battle ship might enter lake Alexandrina; but prac-
tically it is not available for a fishing-boat. This is not all,
however, that obstructs the ‘ uninterrupted communication by
the great navigable river.’ The navigation of the Murray is
interrupted by falls, and huge masses of drifted timber; and,
on its banks are found the most numerous and hostile popula-
tion yet discovered in Australia, and from whom the prudent
Captain Sturt and his companions escaped only by the next
thing to a miracle. When the South Australian colonist
reaches Yas Plains, he will find himself among a few scattered
shepherds. In short, the place which Colonel Torrens repre-
sents as if it were a neighbouring parish, is near 1500 miles
off, through variable winds, uncertain currents, intricate naviga-
tion, woods, wilds, and savages ; and when you reach the land of
promise in Yas Plains, all you can see of your countrymen are
a few scoundrelly convict shepherds, it may be, gorged with
• Colonization of South Australia. By R. Torrens, Esq. p. 14.


kangaroo and drunk with rum. When men can travel like
carrier pigeons, and in their flight carry packs of merchandize
on their backs as these birds carry letters about their necks,
then, and not a great deal sooner, will an easy intercourse be
carried on between the new nation on the shores of Spencer’s
Gulf, and the pastoral inhabitants of Yas Plains.
There is no subject on which the projectors of the new colony
are so sanguine of success, as in their application of the doctrine
of concentration of labour to a systematic irrigation of the land.
It must be admitted that there is no country which stands
more in need of irrigation than Australia; but it must also be
admitted, that there is no country in which it is so difficult to
carry it into effect, and no state of society to which it is less
suitable. Colonel Torrens and his friends fancy that because
irrigation is beneficially practised in the south of France, Italy,
and Spain, Persia, India, China, and Java, it is equally applic-
able and equally practicable in Australia. Colonel Torrens in
this and other matters, acts the part of an injudicious and
indiscriminate captain of a press-gang; he presses into his
service alien as well as citizen, the lame, the blind, the impotent,
and the disaffected, and he must not be surprised if his crew
mutiny, deliver over the ship to the enemy, or strike on the
first summons without firing a shot. No one, let it be observed,
denies the beneficial effects of irrigation. The watering of
lands at command, multiplies the produce of the soil, in almost
every country. In the south of France it frequently doubles it.
In Italy and Spain it multiplies it sometimes three and even
four-fold. In India and Persia, it seldom multiplies it less than
five-fold, and often as much as ten-fold. Nay, in these last-
named countries, it produces rich crops from sterile sands
on which, in their ordinary state, a blade of grass will hardly
grow. But all this does not prove that the beneficial results
arise from combination of labour. In some situations, the
irrigation is the result of natural circumstances, with compa-
ratively very little assistance from art. Of this there are
examples in the regular periodical overflowings of the waters
of the Nile and Ganges in their respective Deltas, as well as
in the plains of some Eastern countries which are regularly
and periodically overflowed by the rains of the monsoon. The
chief labour here, and it is commonly of a very rude kind
and implies neither combination of labour nor combination of
capitals, is in the direction and control of the water. The same
is the case in the island of Java, one of the most fertile spots
in the world. A chain of twelve or thirteen mountains, running
along the length of that island to the extent of 600 piles, and


for the most part not under ten thousand feet high, pour down
their perennial streams upon plains and valleys of rich volcanic
mould ; and a million of petty proprietors or occupants, with
little or no combination either of capitals or of labour, direct
them into their respective fields, and the result is a scene of
cultivation not excelled in richness by the plains of Belgium
or Lombardy. Yet it is from the evidence of this last-named
country, that Colonel Torrens does not hesitate to infer the
practicability of extensive irrigation in Australia. Java is
within a few degrees of the equator, and within the reach of a
monsoon of extraordinary regularity. South Australia is more
than thirty degrees from the equator, and there is no monsoon.
In Java, such is the regularity of the supply of water, that
there has been no famine in the country for ninety years,
and a partial scarcity in only one, and that produced by a
civil war of six years continuance, and the cholera, which in
the year in question, swept off about two hundred thousand
of the inhabitants. In Australia frightful droughts return in
cycles of nine or ten years; and, such is the inconstancy of
the seasons for agricultural purposes, that the price of corn in
one year is threefold that which it has been in the preceding.
In one year the people have more corn than they can eat or
find a market for; and in the next they are on the verge of starva-
tion, and importing largely from foreign countries at exorbitant
prices. There is dissimilitude, and not similitude, in the two
cases which Colonel Torrens fancies to be parallel.
Even in Europe, the greatest works of irrigation owe their origin
to the natural facilities afforded by climate and locality. The most
magnificent of these are in the Milanese. The irrigation of
Lombardy is chiefly owing to the height of the Italian lakes,
which feed the rivers and canals above the level of the irrigated
countries. The lakes Maggiore and Como are 900 feet, and
Lugano 1100 feet, above the level of the city of Milan, and
hence the facility with which a vast tract of country is watered
and fertilized. These facilities admitted and even invited the
construction of considerable works of irrigation in a rude age;
for several of the great works of irrigation in Italy are traced
as far back as seven and eight hundred years, and of course to
a comparatively dark and rude period, even for that country.
They were, as in the East, the work of Princes, great Lords,
and wealthy Monks and Priests. What evidence they give of
voluntary combination of labour, the spectator is utterly at a
loss to conjecture.
Are similar works of irrigation suited to the circumstances of
society in any new colony ? Certainly not; any more than re-


fined manufactures, of the nature of which they partake; for
in a new colony the price of labour is and ought to be high,
and the capital disposable for great undertakings does not exist.
Are they suitable to the physical geography of New South
Wales ? There may be, and no doubt there will eventually be
found to be, particular localities, here and there, where in a
more advanced period of society, a partial system of irrigation
may be advantageously practised ; but generally speaking, there
are few countries to which it is less applicable. The rivers of
Australia appear the most unmanageable in the world. ‘ Fall-
ing rapidly,’ says Captain Sturt, * from the mountains in
which they originate, into a level and extremely depressed
country ; having weak, and inconsiderable sources, and being
almost wholly unaided by tributaries of any kind ; they naturally
fail before they reach the coast, and exhaust themselves in
marshes, or lakes Water for the purposes of irrigation,
cannot be conceived under circumstances more unmanage-
able, than it is represented in this faithful statement. To a su-
perficial observer, the heat and drought of New South Wales
would seem to point out the climate as one peculiarly suitable for
the practice of irrigation. This, however, turns out not to be a
correct view. In ordinary seasons, there is a sufficient fall of
rain, although even within the year, it is very irregular ; the rivers
being atone moment dry beds, and infour-and-twenty hours rising
thirty feet, overflowing their banks, flooding the neighbouring
country, and destroying the hopes of the husbandman. The pe-
riods of extraordinary and long-continued drought have been
found by experience to recur every ten or twelve years. In these,
not a shower falls for a whole year, sometimes not for two, and in
the last great visitation there was hardly a shower for three years.
‘ The surface of the earth,’ says Captain Sturt, ‘ became so
parched up, that minor vegetation ceased upon it. Culinary
herbs were raised with difficulty, crops failed, even in the most
favourable situations. Settlers drove their flocks and herds to
distant tracts for pasture and water, neither remaining for them
in the located districts. The interior suffered equally with the
coast, and men at length began to despond under so alarming
a visitation. It almost appeared as if the Australian sky were
never again to be traversed by a cloudf/ Nothing can be more
unlike to those countries in which an extensive artificial irriga-
tion is practised, the south of France, Italy, Spain, India, and
* Two Expeditions into the Interior of South Australia, by Captain
Charles Sturt, vol. i. Preliminary chapter, p. xiii.
f Sturt, vol. i. chapter i. p, 1.


China. There are no ranges of mountains of sufficient eleva-
tion to yield a perennial supply of water, like the Alps, the
Pyrenees, the Ghauts, and the Himalaya; and there is no
monsoon to supply their place. What association of capitalists
in their senses, or what Government that was ordinarily sane,
would contemplate the construction of expensive embankments
in rivers that might capriciously be either torrentsor dry beds for
half a year together, or speculate upon great reservoirs that
might have no supply of water for a whole year, or for two,
or even three years running ?
A few words now for the principle, or more correctly the hy-
pothesis, of the projectors. The words * dispersion’ and ‘ concen-
tration,’ are now out of favour with the projectors; and they pro-
pose to ‘get rid of them,’ by substituting the terms‘separation and
combination*. ’ ‘There is,’ saysColonelTorrens, ‘in every country,
some proportion or other between capital and labour, which is most
conducive to the progress of wealth, and which gives the highest
rates of profit and of wages which the state of industry and the
quality of the soil render possible. This proportion is the best
proportion ; and it may be called, the proportion of equilibrium
and of rest f.’ The use of new-fangled terms will hardly help
the projectors out of their dilemma. He might just as well have
said, * There is a certain degree of heat which is most congenial
to the human frame, say 74° of Fahrenheit’s Thermometer.
Between heat and cold, it may be called, the proportion of
equilibrium and of rest. And this proportion of equilibrium and.
of rest, shall be produced by Act of Parliament, which Act is to
be the 4th and sth of William the 4th, chapter 95.’ The ‘ pro-
portion of equilibrium and of rest,’ then, which is to produce
combination of labour followed by all the prosperity which is to
spring out of the new principle, is to be brought about by the
simple and to all appearance rude and vulgar means, of
making land infinitely more dear than ever land was before in
any new colony, ancient or modern. Cheap and fertile land
has hitherto been considered the best machinery for yielding
cheap food. But render the machinery costly and consequently
unproductive, and you will, say the projectors, increase its pro-
ductive powers. This seems to common sense the argument of
the projectors. It ought to be followed up in manufacturing
industry. To begin, let the Government of the new colony make
a monopoly of the forests in the neighbourhood of the
settlement, so that no man shall be enabled to obtain cheap
timber to make his ploughs, harrows, and carts. This ought of
Letter of Kangaroo, in Col. Torrens. App. p. 15. t Torrens, p. 13.
VOL- xx lll . Westminster Review . Q


course, according to the theory, to produce concentration, and
tend to the rapid prosperity of the settlement. Colonel Torrens
did not always entertain such opinions. He tells us truly
enough in one of his books, that when instead of human
labour a machine is employed in agriculture, c the same effect
is produced as if increased natural fertility had descended on
the soil*. 1 If the soil itself, considered as a machine for grow-
ing raw produce, be wilfully enhanced in cost and conse-
quently deteriorated, is not. Colonel Torrens is seriously asked,
the same effect produced as if increased natural sterility had
descended on the soil ? The minimum statute price which it is
proposed to exact, the reader is aware is 12s. per acre ; but
upon the actual price to be exacted, the projectors themselves
are not agreed. Colonel Torrens thinks 40s. might do. Land
in the new colony, he says, * instead of being extravagantly
dear would be, in fact, remarkably cheap at 21. per acre f. 1
Kangaroo is better pleased with 725. ‘ I can think of nothing,’
he says, ‘ so likely to excite their curiosity [that of the colo-
nists], —to teach them all the advantages of a sufficient price,—
as the fixing of a price that would astonish them Twelve
shillings an acre are not satisfactory ; forty shillings are better;
but seventy-two shillings will ensure success. The gist of their
reasoning may be thus illustrated. By no means run your
three-year-old colt a mile heat with a feather weight, though
by the rule of the race you are allowed to do so; but begin by
putting twelve stone upon his back, the weight assigned to the
aged horse. If twelve stone will not do, try forty; and if you
should find this break his back, lay seventy-two stone upon him,
and you will f astonish him ’ and win the purse. If the writer of
the Van Diemen’s Land Annual, already quoted, be correct in
stating that an acre of land in Upper Canada is worth four in
Australia, (and knowing something of the matter, he is surely
more likely to be in the right than the projectors who know
nothing at all), it necessarily follows that the price fixed by
Kangaroo, and which with great justice he tells us is calculated
to astonish the colonists §, is not really 72 5. to the colonist who
has the choice of settlement, but 2885.; and this too after per-
forming a voyage f five or six times the necessary distance
*On Wages and Combination, by R. Torrens, Esq, M.P.; 1834.
f Colonization, by Colonel Torrens, p. 67. I App. p, xix.
§ Colonel Napier approves of the ‘Concentration’ doctrine; and the
naked principle seems all of the scheme that he does approve of. His
price is 30«. per acre, but as he is sensible that there is no fixing the
labourer to the spot when there is cheap land in the neighbouring colonies,
he proposes demanding the passage-money from the labourer and his
wife, if they should move; that is, a fine of 30/.


in search of it, and getting, on your arrival, an expanded
surface of indifferent land instead of a compact estate of
fertile land. The average gross price fetched by all the
lands sold by the American Government in 1831, was ss.
2d., and in 1832, ss. Id. per acre. Now, as no one will pre-
tend to say that the lands sold by the American Government
are not on an average of equal value with those of Upper
Canada, it is perfectly clear that the real prices proposed to be
exacted in Southern Australia are equivalent respectively to at
least nine times, thirty times, and forty-seven times, the price
exacted in America. Even if every acre in Australia was as
fertile as every acre sold in America, still the prices proposed
would be 134, 680, and 1300 per cent beyond the American*.
A curious anomaly presents itself for the first time in
Colonel Torrens’s book. In the earlier schemes of the pro-
jectors, the pastures were to have been rented, and to
have formed a considerable source of revenue to the state.
They are now to be occupied by the settlers for a * nominal
rentf.’ That is to say, the kind of husbandry which is
most favoured by nature, for which the soil and climate are
best fitted, is to be exempt from taxation, and that which is
least favoured by nature, is to be heavily taxed, if this be not
a prohibitory duty upon growing corn and a direct encourage-
ment to rearing sheep and cattle, it is hard to say what is. If
carried into effect, it ought to produce not ‘ concentration’
but ‘dispersion’ with a vengeance, — convert ‘the nation,’ in
short, into a horde of wandering Tartars, living upon milk
and flesh, and getting drunk on fermented mare’s milk. In
twenty years time they would become a nuisance to the very
convicts of New South Wales.
With these monstrous charges for the land, profits are to be
high, and wages high too. That is to say, when the capital
which is to yield profit and pay wages is buried in the soil,
the funds are still to exist which will enable the capitalist to
pay high wages. It might be supposed that the capitalist
would be compensated for his first heavy outlay in the purchase
of his lands, by a low rate of labour. This is the advantage
which the slave-holder has, for his first large outlay in the
purchase of the slave. Nothing of the sort, however, in this
case. The wages are, in fact, to be a great deal higher than
* Since what is in the text was written, the projectors have condescended
to name 20s. as the price to he exacted ; and apparently for no other reason
than that 20s. make a pound, and a pound is an integer,
f Torrens, p. 73.


anywhere else; those of a field-labourer, for instance, are
estimated at forty shillings a week, which is about double the
wages of field-labour in Upper Canada, near three times its
amount in Lower Canada, and four-fold its amount in New
South Wales. Yet the proprietor of the land, drained of his
capital by the heavy exactions in the price of land at one
end, and by wages four times as great as in the neighbouring
colonies on the other, is still to realize enormous profits.
f Twenty per cent in mortgages,’ says Mr. Carmichael, speaking of
the present state of Australia, ‘ is not an uncommon return for money
so lent. Fifteen per cent may be taken as the average return of
capital so invested.*’
This passage is quoted by the projectors with great satisfac-
tion. If, they argue, the profits of a landed investment be so
great in the ill-regulated colony of Australia, how magnificent
must they not be in our well-regulated colony ? The man who
can afford to borrow money at fifteen per cent on mortgage, it
may safely be presumed, ought to make at least twenty-five
per cent by his agricultural speculation. The profits of the
agricultural capitalist ought at least to be proportional to the
rate of wages. So then, if the agricultural capitalist in New
South Wales, makes 25 per cent upon his investment, paying
25/. for the wages of field labour, the lucky agriculturist of the
new colony, who pays four times as much wages, ought to be
compensated with proportionate profits, that is, make 100 per
cent upon his capital, or in other words double that capital
every year. All these speculations, to be sure, are at direct
variance with experience, and with the admitted principles of
political economy. f Let me request your particular attention,’
says Col. Torrens, ‘ while I endeavour to state the grounds upon
which I confidently believe that the doctrine of Mr. Ricardo is
not true, under the actual circumstances of the world, and that
the profits of the capitalist may be increased, while the con-
dition of the labourers is improved f.’ Upon this the author
proceeds to weave a web, which for expansion and intricacy
would do credit to one of those gigantic spiders that spread
their toils in the forests of the equator.
The only advantage which the owner of the land is to pos-
sess, is to consist in his having a constant supply of labourers.
This is to be secured to him, by the government of the colony
importing labourers on his account, and the incapacity of
the labourers when imported of becoming, from their poverty,
Carmichael’s Hints relating tq Emigrants. 1834. f Torrens, page 31.


proprietors of land. The labourer is, in fact, to be adscriptus
glebts for a period of six years or thereabouts; he is to be
placed in pretty nearly the same position in which the West-
Indian slave was proposed to be placed by Lord Stanley’s first
abortive scheme of emancipation. If it should be objected to
this, that one of the chief inducements to emigration hitherto
has been the ardent desire on the part of the emigrant to
become the independent owner of a few acres of land ; —the
projectors reply, that the passion is a mere English association,
and not worth regarding. Yet as far as the experience of the
world has hitherto gone, and in this matter it is at least equal
to five-and-twenty centuries, it is sufficiently testified that the
prejudice in question is also Jewish, Greek, Roman, French,
German, Hindu, Chinese, in a word is universal wherever
life and property enjoy any tolerable degree of security. In
many countries the bare possession of land implies freedom,
and indeed in some, nobility; and the incapacity to hold it,
villeinage or slavery.
But the projectors have been before told, and it must now be
repeated, that the labour-market when left to itself, is just as
likely to be overstocked as understocked, and that at all
events, when supply and demand are left to regulate themselves
without impertinent interference, neither gluts nor deficiencies
of labour are likely to be of any continuance. One example
will suffice in illustration. The new colony of Sincapore
already referred to, although it has now existed sixteen years
and was an untrodden desert when first occupied, has never in
all this time wanted labourers in due proportion to the demand
for them. On the contrary, it has been once or twice glutted
with them, the community suffering inconvenience, not from
having too small, but too large a supply. They came to it from
the neighbouring countries, from Hindostan, a voyage of a
month or six weeks, and above all from China, a voyage in
crazy junks, which averages from twenty days to six weeks,
and which is as long and more perilous than the voyage from
the British Islands to New York. From five to six thousand
Chinese able-bodied male labourers, commonly from the age of
twenty to thirty-five, land every year upon its shores. From
1000 to 1200 supply the local demand, and the rest disperse
themselves in the neighbouring countries to seek employment.
The inducements to their emigration are obvious. In the coun-
tries to which they emigrate, the wages of labour are about
four times as great, and the principal necessaries of life are not
one third so costly, as in their own country.
But is the dispersion, from which so many evils are alleged


to have sprung, a real evil, calling for the interference of the
legislature? Quite the contrary. Voluntary dispersion is an
advantage. It is only in the hope of improving their condition
that individuals disperse themselves, or in other words spread
themselves into the desert or forest, abandoning society and
quitting those parts of a new colony in which the colonists are
most concentrated. It is only the most enterprising and hardy
people, that will forsake the comforts and conveniences of society
for such a purpose ; they never disperse until they are necessi-
tated to disperse j—until they find it more for their interests to
spread than to keep together. The best of all colonists are the
English,—saving always their descendants, the Americans. It is
the latter, alone, that furnish the rough pioneers of colonization
and civilization, the backwoodsmen and squatters. These pave
the way for those who pursue the more regular efforts of
industry ; these select the best lands, cut down the forest, and
roughly till the soil, as a preparation for the more regular efforts
of others. To such they dispose of the land, and then start
in quest of new adventures. The Americans are charged with a
want of love of locality, and a passion for übiquity. This is the
very thing which makes them what they are admitted to be, the
best of all settlers in a new country. In short the backwoods-
men and squatters constitute, in colonization, a branch of the
division of labour, and to attempt to suppress or repress their
enterprise would be a gratuitous folly. Only a short year
back, and Colonel Torrens himself was enamoured of this part
of the character of the Americans; for he thus eulogizes
them for it.
f In that country of the free, there is a population of twelve millions,
doubling in a period of about five-and-twenty years. The mean annual
increase is upwards of half a million of souls ; and of this increase,
the greater portion spreads over the unreclaimed lands of the western
territory. Here the forest recedes before them ; towns and villages
rise up as by enchantment; and the tide of agricultural improvement,
and of Christian civilization, flows with still increasing velocity, from
the shores of the Atlantic towards those of the Pacific*.’
The tide which in 1834, was rolling f with still increasing
velocity from the Atlantic to the Pacific,’ Colonel Torrens in
1835 proposes to render as dull, and stagnant, and bitter, as the
waters of the Dead Sea. Of all civilized nations, the French
make the worst colonists, and precisely because the characteristic
* On Wages and Combination, by R. Torrens, Esq., M.P. 1834. p. 129.
230
July
South Australian Colony.


of their nation is the very opposite to that of the American. They
are fond of the amusements of the town; fond of society, and
disperse with reluctance. A French farmer has a propensity
to quit his labour and run perpetually to the town tor gossip and
amusement. In short the love of concentration is so strong
in the Frenchman, that compared with the American or Eng-
lishman, he makes a very indifferent colonist; while according
to the theory, he ought to make the best of all.
The projectors shall now be treated with a few examples of
the effects of concentration, not in advancing but in retarding
the progress of society. Of course they can only be drawn from
the example of bad governments, or the blundering legislation
of those which have good intentions and nothing else. The late
Sir Thomas Munro, Governor of Madras, had under his exclusive
rule as a Commissioner, certain districts of the peninsula of India,
which he estimated to be equal in size to the kingdom of Scot-
land. One half of the fertile land was, according to him, untilled
and unoccupied. The country had been in the previous occupa-
tion of those great masters of concentration, Hyder Ali and his
son Tippoo. At an interval of seven years, a census was
taken of the population, and it was found to be 1,917,376.
Were it not for the pressure of the land-tax. Sir Thomas Munro
was of opinion, that population ‘ ought to increase even faster
than in America; because the climate is more favourable, and
there are vast tracts of good land unoccupied, which may be
ploughed at once, without the labour and expense of clearing
away forests*.’ The land-tax was continued, and a census of
that population which ought to have increased ‘ even faster
than in America,’ was taken at an interval of sixteen years, and
the number was found to be 2,022,317; virtually therefore it had
continued stationary. The population of the United States with
which it was compared, had very nearly doubled itself between
1810 and 1820. In Bengal, where the land-tax had been fixed
in perpetuity, the population in forty years time was found to
have increased from twenty to thirty-two millions ; the result of
extended and improved culture. In the case of Sir Ihomas
Munro’s districts, the tax on new lands which was adequate to
stifle the increase of population, was just 3s. 6d. per acre per
annum ; and this too, not in a new country, but in one where
the population was at the rate of eighty to the square mile, and
where rent has probably existed for three thousand years.
The new settlement of Sincapore affords a capital example
of the evil effects of demanding a high price for land. It was
* sth Report of Committee of House of Commons, on Affairs of East
India Company. 1813, pp. 786 and 900.


taken possession of by the British Government in 1819, when it
contained a village of 150 piratical fishermen, who for all useful
purposes had better have been absent; and there was not an
acre of land under cultivation. Saving the sites of the fishermen’s
huts, the whole island, amounting to about 300 square miles,
was covered with a dense forest. In 1832-3, the import trade
amounted to 8,589,174 Spanish dollars, and the export to
7,087,028; the aggregate of the two being upwards of three
millions sterling. The population, as already stated, exceeded
twenty thousand. It would be difficult to imagine a case more
favourable to the ‘ concentration and combination of labour’
principle, than Sincapore. The island is sea-girt; and a pros-
perous town, with an active demand for the raw produce of the
soil, is on the very spot. It has been tried ; and not only failed,
but positively arrested all agricultural improvement. During the
first seven years, land was given away liberally and gratuitously
to any one who would clear and cultivate it. In evil hour, a tax-
monger, an advocate, it may be supposed, of the ‘concentration
principle,’ found his way into the administration, and imposed
that tax which has since arrested all agricultural operations. This
tax is ten dollars per acre, or 405., with permission to pay in
another form by instalments; —the very sum, as it happens,
suggested by Colonel Torrens, and not a great deal more than one
half of that which Kangaroo suggests for ‘ the astonishment’
of his new colonists.
One of their own witnesses shall here be produced against
the projectors. This is Mr. Bennett, the author of the ‘ Wander-
ings in New South Wales,’ whom Colonel Torrens calls when he
brings him forward to prove that the * blue ’ and * red gum,’
and gum Arabic, are identical, and that what is so minute as to
be mistaken for the excrement of a grasshopper, may become a
considerable article of export as a substitute for something else
that is like it, —‘aman of science,* ‘a scientific traveller,’ &c.
He happened to visit Sincapore after seeing Australia. When
he has expressed his pleasure and surprise at the novel scene
of commercial prosperity exhibited by a settlement recently
planted, as it were, in a desert, —he thus proceeds to give judg-
ment against the ‘concentration principle.’
‘ On riding or driving in the vicinity of the settlement, the character
of the country and soil appears well calculated for the cultivation of
coffee, sugar, cotton, pepper, and other tropical productions, as well as
of rice. But most of the land is permitted to continue in a state of
primitive jungle ; industry and cultivation having been checked by the
enormous quit-rents enforced upon the purchasers or tenants of land,
by the government. Until this ill-judged and ill-advised measure is


changed, the cultivation of this beautiful island, now for the most part
covered by a continued forest, cannot advance*.'
Strange as it may seem to the reader, this same settlement
of Sincapore has been quoted over and over again by the South
Australian projectors, as a flagrant example of the evils arising
from permitting the population to scatter, and not forcing them
to concentrate by legislative enactment. In so far as ‘concen-
tration’ could do mischief, it has done so at Sincapore. The
truth is that, generally, in that settlement commercial pursuits
are more profitable than agricultural, and raw produce, except
in the case of fruits and fresh vegetables, can be imported more
cheaply than it can be raised. The ‘ concentration principle’
has done all the mischief it could effect; and Sincapore, from the
natural advantages of its commercial position, and its total
freedom from commercial imposts, has thriven in spite of it.
But the most complete and conclusive evidence after all,
against the exacting of a high price for land, is derived from
the Australian territories themselves, the very country in which
the authors of the new scheme propose to establish their principle
in its most exaggerated form. For the lands first granted in
the colony of Van Diemen’s Land, the nominal rent of a pepper
corn only was exacted. This was afterwards changed to a quit
rent of 2s, per 100 acres per annum, or near one farthing per
acre. In 1823 the quit-rent was raised to 15s. per 100 acres,
and so it continued until 1826. From that time until 1831, the
quit-rent was ‘5 per cent, per annum on whatever price the
Commissioners appointed for its valuation might decide the
grant to be worth, at the time it was located to the settlerf.’
In 1831 the granting of land ceased altogether, and it was
enacted by the home authorities, that none should hereafter be
sold except by public auction, at a minimum price of ss. per
acre, or an annual rent of three pence per acre, equivalent to
five percent. In 1831 scarcely any of the old and comparatively
trilling quit-rent could be realized.
The author of the Van Diemen’s Land Annual observes, on
the regulation of the Colonial Government for selling the
lands at a minimum price of ss.
‘ Until this day, a period of about three years that the plan has
been in force, onlv one individual, and he a retired officer, who received
(he commutation of his pay, has purchased a farm of unlocated land
upon these termsj.’
* Wanderings in New South Wales, China, Sincapore, &c 1834.
f Van Diemen’s Land Annual, and Hobart Town Almanack, for 1834.
I lb.


Such have been the results, in a colony of some maturity, of
demanding a price for the land of only one-eighth part of the
amount of that which Colonel Torrens would exact, and less
than one-fourteenth part of what * Kangaroo’ would exact in a
colony not yet founded, or when founded, exact while it was
struggling for existence.
In none of the publications of the authors of the Australian
project, have the ways and means of raising a revenue to main-
tain the new colony been discussed or even touched upon,
save in that of Colonel Napier, who can hardly be said to
belong to them, and who suggests a graduated poll-tax. The
subject was a ticklish and alarming one, and the projectors
have no doubt exhibited the better part of valour in escaping
from it. There is to be raised on bond a sum of 200,000/., at an
interest not exceeding ten per cent. Fifty thousand pounds are
to be raised for carrying out poor emigrants, and the larger sum
is to be raised on the security of the Colonial revenue ; that is
to say, of a revenue the nature of which is never once touched
upon. To be sure, there is to be for this larger sum the collat-
teral security of the land. So says the statute, but the land
had already been mortgaged for the Emigration Fund. Thus we
have 50,000/. to be raised on the security of lands in a terra in-
cognita, and a sum of 200,000/. on the security of financial
resources in nubibus. Twenty thousand pounds must be paid
into the public Exchequer of Great Britain as a security that the
mother country shall not be subjected to any expense on account
of the new project; and 35,000/. of the proceeds of the sales of
public lands, by anticipation, must be paid into the Exchequer,
before the project is allowed to have any substantial existence.
Raising 200,000/. at ten per cent, will cost 20,000/. per annum ;
butfromthismustbededucted theinterest which Government will
allow for the 20,000/. deposited in Exchequer bills as a security
that the public shall not be loaded with any part of the expense,
and for which the Government will pay interest, say 4 per cent.
This will reduce the interest of the debt to 19,200/. Colonel
Torrens estimates the interest on the bonds at six per cent, and
charges the writer of the former article in this journal with
exaggeration for making it ten, the highest limit permitted by the
statute. Now surely the exaggeration is upon his own side,
seeing that he holds out the prospect of the new colonists making
much more by the investment of their money, than Mr. Car-
michael shows is now made in New South Wales, and the average
of which is 15 per cent. Colonel Torrens should recollect when
he talks of six per cent, that the security is not English security
but Australian security -security upon the lands of an unknown


and unexplored country, and upon the revenue of a people whose
very existence is a hypothesis. The government of this
country, and even the Colonial Commissioners, are by express
enactments in the statute, exempted from all risk and respon-
sibility. But the best evidencethat six per cent is not sufficient,
nor ten, nor perhaps even fifteen per cent, is that none of
the parties have ventured to hint that any monies have
yet been raised for the purposes of the colony; not the
35,000/. on account of the sale of lands, to be deposited in the
hands of the public trustees, nor even the 20,000/. to be placed
in the Exchequer as a security to the mother country. Yet
the bonds have been in the market for eleven months. Don
Miguel while cooped up in Lisbon, and Don Carlos in the
mountains of Navarre, could raise money on their bonds; but not
so the South Australian Commissioners, freely discharging their
paper pellets from Lincoln’s-Inn-Fields. The ‘ new nation ’ is
just where it stood five years ago, and where it is ever likely
to stand, in the mere imaginations and publications of
the projectors. The first Colonial Commissioners named
have given in their resignations; the governor selected
by themselves, has resigned and given his reasons for his
resignation, which he has published in his correspondence with
the Secretary of State and the Australian Commissioners.
Colonel Napier will not undertake the adventure without troops
and without money. The Commissioners in their reply to a
letter from him say, that they will adopt arrangements for
preserving order and for securing obedience to the laws in the
new Colony ; which arrangements, however, they do not think it
expedient in the mean time to detail. They inform him that
his demand for men and money is at variance with * the self-
supporting principle;’ and they conclude by repeating their
favourite dogma, that the most flourishing British colonies in
North America were founded without pecuniary help from the
mother country and without the aid of military force. The
Governor dissects or rather makes mince-meat of their letter,
paragraph by paragraph. He reminds them that by the Act of
Parliament, they have no authority for making arrangements
for preserving order and securing obedience, and that such
matters rest with their superiors. He ridicules 4 the self-
supporting principleand points out, as was done by the
writer of the former article in this journal, the gross fallacy of
the often-repeated assertion that the most flourishing of the
British colonies in North America, or any British colonies
anywhere, were founded without charge to the public. Like
a man of sense, experience, and forecast, he sees a thousand


difficulties in the project, which those who write their dreams and
the interpretation thereof in Lincoln’s-Inn-Fields, cannot see.
But now to the expenses. Colonel Torrens estimates the
ordinary expense of the Colonial Government at 10,000/. per
annum; and takes 10,000/. more for the erection of buildings
and other incidental charges, making 20,000/. Colonel Napier
estimates the mere expense of a military force, or rather of such
a substitute for it as the local government should think neces-
sary to adopt ‘on the self-supporting principle/ at 12,000/. per
annum. Even with Colonel Torrens’s estimate of 20,000/, for the
expense of Government, to cover such a charge with the interest
of the debt, viz. 19,200/., it will be necessary to sell public
lands and raise a net revenue, amounting in the aggregate to
near 40,000/. per annum. When the colony then amounts to a
population of 2,500, the taxation per head will amount to 16/.
When it amounts to 10,000, it will be 4/. per head ; and when
it amounts to 20,000, on the extravagant supposition that
30,000 may be as cheaply governed as 2,500 it will still be 1/. 65.
B d. In short, with the exception of England and Holland, the
new nation from its birth will be more highly taxed than any
old or new country in the universe.
It is indeed clear that notwithstanding ‘ the self-supporting
principle,’ the new colony must eventually be as expensive, if
not more so, than any other colonial government. In the first
place the colony must pay, in common with every other colony,
its share of the charges of the Colonial Office ; then, there are to
be three Commissioners, a Treasurer, a Secretary, clerks, and
surveyors in England; with a Governor, resident Commissioner,
Secretary, Judges, magistrates, courts, surveyors, and chaplains
of the established Churches of England and Scotland, in the
colony. The Act provides, that the salaries to be paid to all such
persons as may be appointed under the Act, shall be fixed by those
rigid economists the Lords of his Majesty’s Treasury. The
charges of the Home Commission, at least, are surplus to the
charges of any other colony under the Crown. With respect to the
proceeds of the sales of lands, there are presented statements
the most hyperbolical. A population 0f6,000, the projectors say,
will produce an effectual demand for 80,000 acres. Of course
these 80,000 acres, at 12s. per acre, will produce 48,000/.; at
2/., 160,000/ ; and at M. 125., 288,000/. Not quite so fast,
however ; for this is not quite correct even by the projectors
own showing. In the refined system of husbandry which
they propose to introduce, there are to be four labourers and a
farmer for every 200 acres*, and of course these are to have
* Torrens, p. 36.


numerous families, in a colony so rapidly advancing in population
as well as wealth as this is to be. Take the women and children
however, at only four, and then there will he five families of five
individuals to every 200 acres; which makes a population, not of
6.000 inhabitants for 80,000 acres, but of 10,000. Then again,
according to their own statements, there is to be one artisan, to
one farmer and two agricultural labourers*. The mechanic,
of course, has a family of the same amount as the agricultural
labourer; and therefore their population of 6,000 rises by their
own showing to 13,333, Still there is to be added the population
engaged in trade and the fisheries, —that population which is to
produce a demand for the produce of this refined rural industry,
—in short the population of the town, including the mechanics.
The projectors shew that the population of Sydney, and they
consider this an evidence of prosperity, is equal to one-fourth
part of that of the whole colony f. Suppose, however, that the
trading part of their town is equal to one-sixth part of the whole;
then it necessarily follows, that to produce an effectual demand
for 80,000 acres will require a population, not of 6,000, but
of 16,000. The bubbles of the projectors burst, with the very
breath of those who approach to examine them.
The Americans derive a considerable branch of their public
revenue from the sale of lands ; and because the Americans,
a mature nation, with a population of twelve or fourteen millions,
derive such revenue, the new colony is to derive a still larger
revenue with 2,500 inhabitants, or 5,000, or 10,000, or 20,000.
Every American of the twelve or fourteen millions, that
emigrates at all, emigrates to the new lands of his own country.
The bulk of the emigrations from France, Germany, Switzer-
land, Poland, as well as much of the emigrations from England,
are also directed to the new territories of America. The twelve
or fourteen millions have no sea to cross, and the rest have a
voyage to perform of not more than 2,500 miles. If emigrants
proceed to the new colony at all, it can only be from England ;
for British subjects alone are privileged there, and whoever goes,
except the handful on the spot, will have to cross a sea of
15.000 miles. The projectors, fancying that the whole stream
of English emigration is to be directed upon their colony,—as if
England had no other colony, and there was in the community
an intense desire to prefer dear lands to cheap ones, —proceed in
the following strain of hyperbole. ‘ If, in the United States, con-
taining a population of 12,000,000, the increase of wealth and
numbers requires an additional territory of 3,000,000 of acres
* Torrens, p. 62.
+ lb. p. 145.


yearly;—in the United Kingdom, containing a population of
upwards of 24,000,000, the increase of wealth and numbers
would create, under a well-regulated system of colonization, a
demand for 6,000,000 acres of waste land annually. These, sold
at 12s. per acre, would give an emigration fund, not of 2,300/,,
but of 3,600,000/., which would convey not 105, but 240,000
selected labourers, from the mother country. Sold at the proper
price of 21. per acre, the waste land demanded by the increasing
wealth and numbers of the United Kingdom, would produce,
under a well-regulated system of colonization, an annual
emigration fund of 12,000,000/*.’ The reader will be pleased to
understand, that this very moderate passage, is a careful cor-
rection of an alleged exaggeration on the part of the former
reviewer.
The actual quantity of land sold by the American govern-
ment in the year 1831, the latest year for which the accounts
received in this country are complete, was 2,777,856 acres, and
the gross amount of sales 3,557,023 dollars, equal to about
700,000/. From this, however, was to be deducted
the original purchase money paid to the native inhabitants, —to
foreign states, as in the case of Louisiana, and in some in-
stances to particular states of the Union, —the charges of
surveys and collection, of the making of roads to some extent,
and the civil and military charges of maintaining the adminis-
tration of the particular territories in which the lands are
situated; so that in reality, the balance remaining would form •
but a very inconsiderable branch of the revenue of a great
State. But besides this, the revenue derived from the sale of $
lands is admitted in the public documents to be falling off, and the
policy of this financial resource begins to appear to the Americans
exceedingly questionable. These sales of land, however,
extended to ten states or territories ; and it is expressly stated
in the American official documents, that ‘ more than 3,000,000
people are interested in Say then that the population
of the new colony amounts, —although, should it be established,
it will probably not do so in less than thirty years,—to 30,000
inhabitants, all of course interested in the sale of land. In
this case, if the gross revenue afforded by 3,000,000
purchasers be 700,000/,, the gross revenue arising out of
* Torrens, page 107.
f Letter from the Secretary to the Treasury transmitting his annual
report on the state of the Finances, 1832-3.
1 II).


30,000 purchasers will be 7,000/.; of 10,000, 2,333/.; and of
6,000, not as alleged 48,000/., but 1,400/., or about one thirty-
fourth part of the amount. All this too, supposes that the
new state is to be as prosperous at first starting into life, and
throughout its progress, as the American nation is now after an
existence of nearly 200 years.
Not one word, by-the-bye, is said throughout the publication
of the projectors, respecting payment to the native inhabitants,
the owners of the soil. On the contrary, in the preamble to the
Act of Parliament which was framed by them, the lands are
declared to be ‘waste and unoccupied/ This is not true ; the
country, as far as it has been examined, has been found to be
better peopled than any other part of the Australian continent.
The hunting-grounds will be found there as everywhere else,
to be the property of particular tribes. Among the natives
inhabiting the neighbourhood of King George’s Sound, even a
private right of property is vested in individuals, according to
Mr. Scott Nind, who resided two years among them # . If the
natives, therefore, who occupy the lands of the new colony are
not to be hunted down like wild beasts, a troublesome and
expensive process, independent of other more serious objec-
tions, —they must be paid for their lands; and this will form a
serious deduction from the gross amount of the pittance which
will be received for them at a public sale.
The writers of this and the former article have been charged
with personal hostility to the South Australian project.
They are not themselves sensible, that they have been
actuated by any such spirit. They watched the project
from the moment of its birth ; they thought the projectors
were deluding themselves; but, as long as the public were
safe, they were silent. When they found, however, that there
were parties in the country of sufficient credulity to listen to
them, they thought it high time to speak out, and expose one
of the most vain delusions which ingenious men ever took up,
or obstinately persevered in. Perhaps they have been a little
too successful, in baffling the authors of the scheme, and hence
possibly a good deal of the intemperance with which they
have been assailed. The success of their endeavours, if they
have had any success, will more than compensate for the
anger of disappointed partizans, whom they have charged with
no other offence than being deluded themselves, and strenuously
propagating their delusions as discoveries in Political Science.
* Journal of the Royal Geographical Society, vol. i.
239
South Australian Colony.
1835.
