

SOUTHERN SUNBEAMS
An Australian Annual
FOR THE FIELD, THE RIVER, AND THE
HOME CIRCLE
BY CHAS. P. WILLIAMS
Profusely Illustrated by
HERBERT J. WOODHOUSE
CONTAINING
TALES
KING PETER’S FALL (with Illustration)
HOW WE STARTED OUR DRAMATIC
CLUB (with Illustration)
THE MYSTERY OF FRITZ REIN-
HARDT
DARRIWELL
FETTERS OF GOLD
IDALIA’S HISTORY
&c., &c.
ILLUSTRATIONS
POPULAR COLONISTS OF 1880
SPORTING AND DRAMATIC HEADS
HOLIDAY FOLKS
SPOTS ON THE GIPPSLAND LAKES
EDWARD TRICKETT
AUSTRALIAN FLOWERS
INTERCOLONIAL THUMB NAIL
SKETCHES
PICTURESQUE TOWNS
&c., &c.
MELBOURNE
WALKER, MAY & CO., PRINTERS, 9 MACKILLOP STREET
(OFF 56 BOURKE STREET WEST)
1879


MELBOURNE:
TRINTED BY WALKER, MAY, AND CO.*
9 MACKILLOP STREET.


PREFACE.
Few words are necessary to introduce this book. It is placed
before the public as a production of leisure hours for hours of leisure.
It is the result of moments that were caught as they fled during
the past few months —that were made use of as they were passing
away.
That “Southern Sunbeams” is the first joint essay of its author
and artist in literature might be urged as an excuse for any
shortcomings there may be. While, perhaps, being an excuse, it
would hardly be a recommendation. “ Many complain of neglect,”
wrote Dr. Johnson, “who never tried to attract regard;” and it is
felt that debutants* in the world of literature, like those on the stage,
have never in vain sought for a fair hearing from the Australian
people.
And so let it be with this book. Its “beams” have now risen
above the horizon, and should they find favour and approbation
at the hands of Friends on their holidays and Friends at home, then
this joint work of pen and pencil will not have been issued in vain.
Melbourne, December , 1879.


CONTENTS.
Page
King Peter’s Fall : a Story of Days Gone By (with
Illustration) ------ 5
How we Started our Dramatic Club (with Illustration) 18
The Mystery of Fritz Reinhardt - - - 23
Darriwell ; or, How the Winner of the Melbourne Cup
was Tipped ------ 3°
“ Fetters of Gold” - - - - - 37
Idalia’s History ; or, Three Scenes in a Life - - 46
ILLUSTRATIONS.
Popular Colonists, 1880 (double page)
A Tender Question (“ King Peter’s Fall”)
Amateurs at Work (How we Started our Dramatic Club)
(double page) -
Spots on the Gippsland Lakes
Edward Trickett
Intercolonial Thumb-Nail Sketches
Sporting and Dramatic Heads
Australian Flowers
Picturesque Towns
Holiday Folks


SOUTHERN SUNBEAMS.
KING PETER'S FALL.
A ROMANCE OF DAYS GONE BY.
I.
Night, a glorious night—a time to be remembered when other
things are hidden by the mantle of the past. , , f
The air is laden with the scent of wattle blossom, and the not
unpleasant odour of gum leaves recently burnt, as it careers m its
evening flight over glen and hill, breaking the solemn sflence with
the ru!tle of the leaves. It is eight o’clock at the Homesdale
station of Mai or Foster, in 1849.
Situated near the Blue Mountains, in New South Wales Major
Foster’s home was one of those that would bring a word of admiring
envy from the most contented mind. The mountains m the distance
may have appeared uninviting and monotonous, but for miles round
there were the tall gum trees, giantesque and grand, dwarfing m their
immense bulk the form of man. Further off, on some the bush-fire
had left its mark lightly, some had been almost consumedL byt
dread hungry foe—the child of mcaution, design, or chance,
its effects a ravaging demon that continues its fiery march, lapping
up forests in its wrath, holding the country m its red, searing
embrace, and at length leaving it blackened, grassless, gaunt-looking
and death-like, a funeral pyre of smoke and ashes.
The air in its frolic blows pleasantly past the verandah where two
shadows are cast by the light of the early evening moon They are
the forms of a man and a girl. They were silent, and evidently
thinking. Perhaps the thoughts then passing in their ™ l^ s c< ?“‘
pelled silence-it may have been the silence of unspoken love, but
there was nothing to show it might not have been the natural result
of indifference or of having nothing to say. f
Yes Thought—that wondrous electricity of the mind that now wafts
us back to the past and brings in array before us the joys and
sorrows of days that have gone —may have been busy then. Or,
was it that Thought, and its potent companion, Imagination,
conjuring up in the future a figure of happiness—a figure gladsome
and bright in conception, and pleasing in its beauty, the radiant
beauty of unreality ? t
The girl’s form is full and statuesque. She is no puny creature or
doll of fashion. The forehead is broad, showing that it contains a


mind little given to frivolity or uselessness. The eyes are dark, very
dark, with a glorious deepness in them that arrests the attention at
once. They can be cold and haughty, but are also able to express
sincere heartfelt feeling and sympathy when there is occasion. The
hair, also dark and luxuriant, is fastened in good simple style ; and
on the face is the gentle stamp of truth and openness. You would
say, if you looked at her, that Isabelle Foster was one of those
whose form and mind would lovingly and intellectually make happy
the home of any man who would have the good fortune to win a
woman like this—whose whole soul is noble, whose face once seen
is not easily forgotten. There is no acquired mincing elegance in
her manner, but in its place that natural grace which is so rarely
found, but when found —irresistible. Her hand plays quietly, but
not nervously, with the creeper by the window as she speaks :
“My father is rather late; but I have no apprehension, for he
knows the country so well.”
Here it must be premised that the words are addressed to that
unequally silent young man commonly known as Jack Hamilton, who
has, when in the company of his men friends, plenty to say, but
now finds his fund of conversation not too rich or overflowing in her
presence.
“ I did not think you were apprehensive of any evil or mishap,”
he said. “ You never are, that I know of.”
“ I should think not. Fear ! I would not own to such a feeling,
except on a very great emergency.”
, “It is the mother of safety, they say,” rejoined the young man,
“ though nervous people are a great bore—are not they ? I suppose
they think it attracts sympathy and attention.”
“ Rather a tiresome attraction, then, I should think. No ; lam
not very nervous or weak-minded. But here am I talking when
papa will expect a cup of tea ready for him.”
“ The servants will get that. Do not go ! At least, I mean, stay
a little while longer.”
“Not a moment. Besides, I always make his tea myself. That
is a duty, you know, while talking to you is ”
“ May I hope a —pleasure.”
“ Well, not exactly—call it an idle recreation; and in too much
idleness, you know, I never indulge.”
The young man looked up, but she was gone. So, having
nothing else to do, Jack Hamilton acted like most people when they
are in this position, and had a smoke. Having crammed an immense
quantity of dark tobacco into a black pipe of a colossal size and
form, he sits on the steps and is, in a few minutes, transformed into
a human chimney, though not a bad-looking one. He looks the
picture of well-controlled strength, temper, and dauntless courage.
He had ridden that day many miles from one of the neighbouring
stations, of which he was the manager, to this Homesdale station, to
see —well, it might have been to see Major Foster, or it might be to.
see the young lady who was now making the said Major’s tea, or
both; and we might guess at a still greater reason for his comings


It was strange how gentle and low his voice became when speaking
to her. To his fellow-men, and those under him, this was not
always so, for he knew how much better it was to say a thing once,
and mean it, than to repeat it several times in a tone of half-
determination. Still, in this girl’s presence, courageous man as he is,
he feels ill-at-ease. His heart has long told him that he loves her;
but he fears, like many another man has feared, that he may not be
successful when the time comes to leave the unsatisfactory shore of
mere compliments and commonplace, and cross the Rubicon by a
declaration of his feelings. As he smokes he thinks, lover-like, she
is so different from all other women he has seen, thus indulging in
the usual idea of thousands who, in their egotism, think that the
woman they have fixed their eyes on is obligingly made by Dame
Nature, in mind and body, in quite an improved mould to all the
rest. It is a pleasingly selfish idea while it lasts, but it often causes
a little recantation of the pet feeling when time has sped on a little.
Jack Hamilton is thinking of the impending crisis in his life, and
has wandered far into the realms of speculation as he hears her, who
is the cause of his cogitation, calling to him :
“ If someone would stop blowing smoke into the parlour and all
over the house, I might be inclined to say, 1 Thank’ you.”
“ I beg pardon—l was thoughtless,” he says apologetically,
forgetting that thoughtfulness, and not the want of it, was more to
blame for the mishap.
“Oh ! I knew that,” said Isabelle. “ Men always are —only
some are more than others.”
“ And I am among the ‘ some ’ men, I suppose. Then I will
shut the door.”
“ That would be very polite, indeed, for I am standing in the
doorway, and have no objection to the evening breeze.”
“Well, come out and meet your father. The smoke will not
hurt you then. Will you ? The tea will not require watching.
Surely it is by this time strong enough to take care of itself. Please
come.”
“ Yes,” said Isabelle; and having put on a large and useful garden
hat, she walked with Hamilton down the track to the gate which
gave entrance to the enclosure in which the house was. Soon they
saw horse and rider coming along, evidently both tired after their
long journey through the pasture lands and distant country. Major
Foster sees his daughter, and calls out:
“ Look out, Belle ! and see old Trooper clear that after his long
stride ! ”
No sooner was it said than done. The old horse, guided and
lifted by his master’s hand, clears the fence cleverly and well. Then
Foster says, “ Ha! Hamilton —you here ! I am glad of that. I
was thinking my little Belle would have been lonely while I was so
long away.”
“Oh ! I wasn’t lonely, papa,” said Miss Foster, “ and I should
never be, in Mr. Hamilton’s presence—if tobacco smoke is a cure
for the complaint.” *


At which, Jack Hamilton goes on ahead, to tell them at the house
that the “ boss ” has come.
“ You should not say that,” answered Major Foster. “ Besides—”
“ Besides what, papa ? ”
“ I have been looking on a dying man to-day, child, and I have
been thinking—that I shall not always be with you —you know—to
take care of you —”
“ How horribly seriously you talk,” said the girl.
“ Yes, but truly; and I said to myself, what will become of my
Belle if—well, you know what I mean.”
“Why, papa, your long day’s work has made you quite low-
spirited—and that horrid old King Peter, too ! A cup of tea will
drive such thoughts away, and Mr. Hamilton has got ever-so-much
to talk to you about. He must have quite a wealth of conversation
at his command for you, for he has bestowed very little of it on me.
Hush, here he is ! ”
Major Foster has dismounted, and one of his servants —an
assigned-out man, but a trusted one—has taken his horse round to
the stable. Then, having given his daughter a hearty kiss, he
shakes hands in grand boisterous fashion with Hamilton, with many
words of welcome 'and kindness. It is easy to see that these men
are fast friends, and, despite their ages, real “ chums.” There is a
bluff honesty in their whole bearing towards each other that shows
how true is their friendship, and how sincere is their mutual liking.
Soon they sit down to tea, at which the grand old chief of Homes-
dale eats ravenously, talking all the time on almost every con-
ceivable subject; —what is the latest news from Old England; will
the coming Exhibition—this new idea that the Prince is so busy
with—be a success ; how is the country looking in his direction, and
is there plenty of grass ? Has Hamilton forgotten that song he once
sang when they were in Sydney, that went like—and here the good
major tried in vain to give an idea of the melody.
Then the talk changes to other topics, and Hamilton is asked to
recite there and then some verses of that pathetic Lowlands ballad
that Foster likes so much; and this Hamilton at last does, with
many a timid look at the young girl who sat in the shade in wrapt
attention.
“ Thou hast vow’d by thy faith, my Jeanie,
By that pretty white hand of thine,
And by all the lowing stars in heaven,
That thou would’st aye be mine ;
And I have sworn by my faith, my Jeanie,
And by that kind heart of thine,
By all the stars sown thick o’er heaven,
That thou shalt aye be mine.
Foul fa’ the hands wad loose sic bands,
And the heart wad part sic love;
But there’s nae hand can loose the band
But the finger of Him above.
Though the wee, wee cot maun be my bield,
And my clothing e’er sae mean,
I should lap me up rich in the faulds of love,
Heaven’s armfu’ of my Jean.


Thy white arm wad be a pillow to me
Far softer than the down,
And love wad winnow o’er us his kind, kind wings,
And sweetly we’d sleep and soun’.
Come here to me, thou lass whom I love,
Come here and kneel wi’ me ;
The morning is full of the presence of God,
And I cannot pray but wi’ thee.”
The young man stops, and everyone is silent for a few moments—
their hearts as it were charmed to quietude by the simple words of
the old sweet song. Then Foster, thinking the pause has continued
long enough, bursts out with — ,
“By Jove! I've heard strange rumours to-day; and 1 aont
know what to think of them. I hear that gold has been found in
such quantities this time, that there can be no mistake about it.
« Hurrah ! ” said Jack Hamilton, “ now for some fun ! ”
“Do not be so hasty, Jack,” said Major Foster, “and I will tell
you. You remember how Clarke said, a few years ago, at Musswell
Brook, that if the people there knew what a mine of riches was
hidden under their feet, they would not rest in their beds. Well, 1
have always believed that gold is near here, on account of those
specimens that were picked up on the western slopes ; but when
they find it in payable quantities—what a day that will be! ’
“Yes; pray go on,” said Isabelle, “I am getting quite curious.' _
“ Well,” said the major, “You know King Peter. They say he is
mad; but I think his strangeness is caused more by drink than
anything else, though where he has been able to get the liquor I
never could tell. I think, however, I can unravel the mystery now.
I called to see him this evening, and he called me to his bedside
and said that he had something to say to me —that he had a secret
on his mind which he thought, as I had been a kind master to him,
he would tell me. When a man’s dead, he said, it is no manner of
use his having known where gold is—is it?
“ There was something earnest in his manner that attracted my
attention ; but then I noticed that he suddenly became as morose and
strange as ever. He talked about his misery, and how he cared for
no living soul, and nobody cared for him except Bill. . (
“‘ I am going to send Bill to stay with you, King Peter, 1
“ ‘ That’s right,’ he answered. ‘ Send me Bill —old Bill; and of
the gold, I will tell you before I die. Perhaps you do not believe
me. Well, all right. Perhaps you do not know how I got the
drink. I will tell you that, too. But send me old Bill, and that
soon. Yes, soon, for I feel there is no time to lose.’
“ And that is what lam going to do,” said Major Foster, for I
really believe there is something in the old man’s story.”
At this moment a fine-looking old man passed in front of the
window, and one whose face did not bear the low characteristics of
convictude. His white hair lay in curls on the forehead and hung
low down at the back, giving him a venerable appearance. He came
up and, in a respectful tone, said—


“.I hear King Peter is ill, sir. May Igo to stay with him till the
end?”
“ Yes,” answered Foster. “He cannot last long, poor old fellow,
and I can trust you with the brandy I send. Put the horse in the
cart, and take some blankets and the things my daughter will give
you. Be kind to him.”
“ I will,” said Bill. “Heis my * mate,’ and I will not forget him.
I shall soon be ready.”
Within a quarter of an hour the old man had started with the
things which the quick hand of Isabelle had got together, and the
Major was as jolly and as talkative as ever.
“ Old Bill is a decent fellow,” said he. “ I have heard that there
were some doubts at the time about his guilt. It was a bad case of
robbery, with great violence; and they all say they are innocent, you
know.”
“ But I believe Bill,” said Isabelle. “Heis so trustworthy.”
“Yes,” said Foster, “he is a very reliable man; and he is cer-
tainly one I have trusted very greatly. I hope some day, to please
you, Belle, he will be found to have been innocent—rather a remote
contingency to look forward to, though.”
The tea has by this time been moved away, and something stronger
has been placed on the table. Tobacco is produced, and Major
Foster fills his evening pipe. Then the men talk and smoke, and
Isabelle begins her fancy work, occasionally stopping to listen to the
conversation and the incidents and adventures which Hamilton is-
relating—
“ But still the house affairs would draw her thence ;
Which ever as she could with haste despatch,
She’d come again ”
and look at the handsome face of the enthusiastic Jack, who, she
could not help seeing, was extremely good-looking that evening. Her
eyes would then rest on her father, and her thoughts wander back to
the mother she had never known, save by the loving words in which
her father spoke of his brief married life, and of the wife who had made it
happy, soon to be taken away from him and her child. And Isabelle
felt she could not leave him. She wished things would be good
enough to go on as they were for a long, long time, and that the
time might never come when someone might ask her decision as to
whether
“ What are you thinking of, Belle ? ” said her father, turning to her
suddenly; and hereupon Miss Isabelle gave a sudden start, and a
faint blush overspread her face. You may have noticed that people
do blush in this way when interrupted in thinking of something
they would not like known or spoken aloud. And so Miss Belle was
rather confused for a moment; but she soon regained her composure,
and said—
“ May I go out with you to-morrow, papa? ”
“ Certainly,” said Foster; “ a scamper over the country on horseback


■will do you good. If lam busy at home, I suppose Mr. Hamilton
will have no objection to accompany you.”
“ But you must come too, papa,” said Isabelle. “ Now, you must
promise me this, will you not ? ” # .
Then Foster said he would try, and it was time for children to be in
bed; and he must have two kisses instead of one as a penalty for
staying up so late. Isabelle then gave her hand to Jack Hamilton,
which hand she thought he held quite long enough in his as he spoke
of the expedition of the morrow, and what pleasure it would give him.
In another moment Isabelle was in her own room, and wondering
how strangely her heart beat. However, she said to herself that
night, before her eyes closed in sleep—
“No! I do not want to leave Homesdale yet, whatever Jack
thinks. Papa must certainly come with us to-morrow ! ”
11.
The old man lay on his stretcher in the lonely hut on his last night
before death. Restless and disturbed in mind he appeared to be,
for the past came before him in all the clearness with which the
dread life-destroyer endows his prey on his approach. _ The thoughts
would rush on his mind, and sit in session there in spite of his
efforts to drive them away. Wearily, he passed his hand over his
brow, that throbbed and ached as the hideous procession of the
thoughts of days that had been, passed in dreadful distinctness
within it. No wonder poor King Peter groaned in his agony, and
covered his head with the blankets to try to shut out the horrid
spectres that take possession of his mind.
Over years never to return, the memory of his youth came to him.
In rural England he had passed it. He fancied himself once more
a child at his mother’s knee, and being gently chidden by her kindly
voice. He had thought not of death in those days. The world had
seemed so gladsome and full of enjoyment. The recollection of his
sisters now prevailed, and he remembered the many rambles he had
enjoyed with them through field and lane in the days of the spring
time of his life—those sisters who had then loved him so much.
Thank Heaven, they had forgotten him now!
Then came thoughts of his going to London, his fast companions,
his career —first of self-indulgence and then of vice and shame the
undetected offences he had committed upon the weak and the
unwary, the gains dishonestly come by, that were soon spent in
vicious dissipation j then more crimes, until at length the law had
seized him with its iron grasp, and had condemned him to transpor-
tation ; the voyage out, than which nothing worse can be imagined ;
and after that, his wretched life, and now his wretched end. No
wonder he had been glad to drown the recollection of such a past.
Sometimes he had thought he would be glad to die, but now, when
that hour was so quickly approaching, he feared, and swore at his


hard fate, and grovelled in his abjectness before the dreadful
farewell he would so soon have to take of life. He mutters to him-
self, and at times speaks incoherently, imaginging people are round
his bed. Then reason returns, and, in a voice of despair, he
cries—
“ They have left me to die alone !—to die alone ! ”
No ! Was it ? Was it a sound of a horse approaching ? Was it
really something human, or was it a warning that his time had at
last come ? Was it succour and society in this dreadful and
appalling hour ? The sound had now stopped. It was, then, some-
one. Yes, it was Bill—old Bill, his friend —his mate, who had not
forgotten him. He called out in his delight, but he felt so weak
so weak; and then a voice fell on his ears —
“ Lie down, man; I have brought you something/’
The tone enforced obedience, and shortly after came the words
from the prostrate man —
“ Brandy ! give me brandy ! ” .
Bill poured out some of the liquor in a cup, and held it to Peter’s
lips, who drank it off eagerly, and said—
“ Thanks, Bill; thanks, old friend. It does me good. It makes
me strong. I am glad you have brought it, Bill. I have really
prayed for it—indeed I have. I could not die quietly alone.”
“ You have been my mate,” was the answer. “ I have come to
nurse you, and you might get well again, you know.”
“ Never. No, I shall never be well again. My time has come.
I feel it in my head and in my heart. I am not long for this
country, Bill, and I shall turn up to the muster roll on the other side
very soon.”
“ Then go to sleep,” said Bill. “We have all got to die. It s
no particular use talking about it.’
The words were rough, but kindly meant. The old man felt that
to control so wild and unruly a spirit as King Peter’s he must speak
in a peremptory fashion, and, in fact, stand no nonsense. Dying
was a fact; he had seen men die many a time—yes, and suffer too,
for the matter of that—and Peter was evidently far gone, and it was
no use encouraging his talking ; more especially as he himself
wanted some sleep. He rolled himself up in one of the spare
blankets, and stretched himself out on the floor, determining to have
a short sleep and then to get up and see how the sick man was
resting. Soon he had closed his eyes, and all was silent, save when
the heavy breathing of the old shepherd made itself heard in
irregular and fitful gaspings. Bill had not long lain still when he
heard his name called, and on rising he saw his charge sitting up
in the bed.
“ i’ll tell it. Bill shall know. Where are you, Bill ?
“ Lie down, or I’ll make you,” said Bill, gruffly; and then adding,
in a kinder voice—“ Now, go to sleep, mate; it will do you good,
perhaps.” .
“ I will not,” said King Peter. “ I’ve got very little time in this
world, and in that time I will have my own way. I have got some


thing to tell you, Bill—something that will make your eyes less
sleepy, something that will make your fortune.
“All right,” said Bill, “ I suppose I must let you have your way,
considering your time is getting precious. You are having one of
your old fits about gold again.”
“It is about the gold,” said King Peter. “ You and all of you
thought I was a fool, did not you, for saying that I had found gold
near these mountains. You laughed at me, and thought I was mad.
Now I will show you who was the fool. Just listen to me.”
Bill composed himself into a comfortable resting attitude, leaning
against the side of the hut, and old Peter went on :
“ I tell you this, Bill, because you have been my mate, and
because I feel lam going to die. I would not tell the boss to-day,
because I said to myself— £ No, Bill shall know this—he wants it
more. I’ll tell Bill where the gold is, and then he can go to Sydney
when I am dead, and offer to discover it if they pardon him, and
he will get free ’ — ”
“Do not you know how they served the man who did that ? Why,
they gave him 150 lashes.”
“Yes,” said Peter, “ but he could not point out the place. Now,
I can do that; and, if I tell you, you can be free, and rich, and
prosperous again.”
“Nothing can give me back my years of prison; but why did not
you yourself make use of this knowledge ? That is what I want to
know.”
“ Why I did not tell everybody ? That’s my business. I had
what I wanted when I could get the drink. Besides, I hated the
people here, and I would not benefit them if I could help it, would
I? Bill, I have searched about these hills and creeks day and
night, stealthily and quietly, so as they should not think I knew
anything. I came upon some specimens. I knew what they were.
I dug, and fossicked about again, and at last I found some more.
Then my grand success came. I had felt before my knowledge was
limited, but now it was complete. I knew something worth knowing
at last. I know where the gold is—yes, I will show you to-night — ”
With the effort of talking, the old man appeared to faint with
weakness. He called for some brandy, which restored him in some
measure.
“ You cannot leave this place in this state,” said Bill. “Tell me
where the place is.”
“ I am not so bad as you think. Let us go. I will show you
the place, but I will not tell it you. Put me in the cart, and drive
me to where I tell you. I can walk the rest if I lean on your
arm.”
“My orders are to stay here with you,” said Bill decidedly, and
at the words the sick man’s voice raised itself shrill and fierce in his
energy:
“ Look here, Bill. Fool, do you refuse a fortune and a pardon?
Do you wish to stay here, like this, and to die, nothing but an
assigned-out lag ? It is you that are mad now. Besides, we shall


be back soon. I feel such strength when I talk about gold. Bring
the brandy with you, and I will show you the place, as truly as one
man can show another. What do you say ?”
“ I will do this; but if you are making a fool of me ? ”
“ No, lam not —I swear lam not; but be quick, be quick. The
moon will soon go down, and the morning will be coming. Dress
me ; put the horse in the cart, and you shall know all. Be quick
for Heaven’s and your own sake, and your old friend.”
In a few minutes the cart was ready, and all was prepared for
starting. With the bottle of brandy carefully in his pocket, to help
King Peter on the way, Bill placed the old fellow in the cart and
took the reins, to drive in whatever direction he should be told.
Then they moved away, and soon all was quiet in the hut where old
Peter, the gold-finder, had lately lain.
111.
Morning had broken at Homesdale station, and breakfast being
over, Foster went to see about the horses. He rode Trooper, of
course; Hamilton, his own; while Isabelle’s mare was a beautiful
grey of which she was reasonably proud. She could do what few
ladies successfully accomplish, namely, sit a horse securely and
gracefully, for one of these qualities is too often sacrificed for the
sake of the other.
“Go on, you two, slowly,” said Foster, “for I have some direc-
tions to give, and will soon catch up to you.”
And off go Isabelle and Hamilton at a walk, both in high spirits,
in the glorious morning sunshine that shone out not too strongly.
Everything around looked joyous and bright. They were silent for
some minutes, and when Homesdale was quite hidden from view
Isabelle pulled her horse up and said :
« Papa ought to have caught up to us by now.”
«He is busy,” answered Jack Hamilton ; “ we talked a long time
last night, and I know he has much to do. I feel lam only a dull
companion.”
« Oh, no ! Besides, some people’s dulness is rather preferable to
their conversation,” said Isabelle, trying to look as disagreeable as
were her words, but failing miserably in the attempt.
“ Severe, but true. I was silent, because ”
“ You had nothing to say. A very good reason.”
« Severe, but not true this time,” said the young man. “ Now I
will tell you why your father has not overtaken us. I asked him not
to —for a little while.”
“ You dared! ” said Isabelle. “ Mr. Hamilton, I did not think —”
«I am sorry if I have offended you. Let us move on a little.
There are times and seasons in a man’s life when he feels he must
speak out, even at the risk of offending his hearers. May I tell you,
Miss Foster, how your presence is dear to me —how the recollection
of you has charmed my life in many a weary hour ? I have thought


A TENDER QUESTION.




that you have regarded me for some time as a friend. May I hope
that I have any chance of being something nearer to you ?”
“Oh ! Mr. Hamilton. Why cannot you let me continue to look
upon you as a friend?” ~ „ . . ,
u The title is but a cold one at best,” said Hamilton, passionately.
“ Nay, Miss Foster—or, may I call you Isabelle ?—I love you ! . Can
I hope to aspire to possess what, in my eyes, is the brightest jewel
the South contains —your love ? Is the idea distasteful to you.. it
so, pray be silent; for I could not hear from you that I had given
you pain by my foolish confession. If I have erred •
Isabelle was alarmed by the young man’s vehemence. She couid
not, she found, look upon his anxious face without feeling m greater
intensity the sentiments which she had long, in the inmost recesses of
her heart, felt towards him. She quietly said—
“ Well, Mr. Hamilton, I do not dislike you.”
The words gave Jack courage. He felt his ground more securely
now, and he pleaded his cause so eloquently, that Isabelle, w ] lo had
never been made love to before, began to think she did not find. me
novel sensation by any means an unpleasant one. They talked
earnestly for some minutes, while the horses —at least, so it would
appear from a distance—were standing very close beside each other.
With a gentlemanly grace, Hamilton had pressed Isabelle s hand to
his lips, when she turned and said
“ You must wait until to-morrow for your answer. I cannot leave
my father so soon, Jack.” .
“ Jack!” indeed. It was curious how quickly his Christian name
had taken the place of the formal “ Mr. Hamilton.
“ I will wait till to-morrow, Isabelle,” said Hamilton ; I hope you
will not keep me a moment longer, dearest.”
u You are already becoming husband-like,” said Isabelle, laughing.
“ Remember I have not promised to love, honour, and obey you
yet,- Mr. Hamilton.” . n a
“If you but love me, Isabelle, lam content. The rest all flows
from that one word, ‘ Love.’ ” . , . . „
In this way Jack Hamilton had almost won in his wooing. He
did not see why he should be made wait until the morrow, but he
forbore to ask for too much happiness at once. He felt that there
was a reason for Isabelle’s deferring her final reply, and as he was
sure it would be favourable he could afford to wait. Isabelle, on her
side, felt happy. True, she had lost a friend, but had she not gained
an honest man s heart, and had given her own in exchange.
When the old and trusted Bill started on his journey with King
Peter, he had his misgivings that it would have been better that he
had obeyed his instructions and stayed in the hut with the man who
was now urging him on, and repeating his promise to show him
where the gold—that magic lever that moves the world—was to be
found. He would have turned back several times, but King Peter
angrily ordered him to proceed. At length they could go no further
in the cart so Bill took the horse out of the shafts, and deposited old
2


Peter on the ground. The old man seemed, after a little rest, to be
endowed with an almost supernatural strength, and with the help of
Bill's arm he could soon walk slowly along. He incessantly talked
of the gold—that they were near to the place now, and how soon
Bill would know where fortune and wealth were to be found. In
the quiet bush, and as they ascended the steep declivities with much
difficulty, old Peter cried out —
“Yes, Gold, Bill. lam a King ; and you shall be my heir. It
shall be all yours; and you shall be rich and free. Help me on !
Help me on ! ”
They had now got to a high part of the mountains, and they rested
for breath.
“ Higher still, Bill! I can see the place from there where that
tree is growing. I see the Keeper of the Gold beckoning to me to
come quickly. Ha ! ha! old Fiend ; I have found out your store,
and Bill shall rob you of it. You smile with your cursed yellow
face, do you ? Curse it, Bill! I have lost sight of him. He has
gone!”
Bill saw that Death was fast approaching the old man, and that he
was talking to a phantom of his imagination, nodding to it,
laughing triumphantly, and then sinking to the earth with fatigue.
“ Who has gone ? ” asked Bill. “ What did you see ? ”
“ The Gold-keeper—he knows lam king over him. He does not
want me to rob him of his treasure, and defies us. But we shall
conquer him. We shall kill him and take his gold away. There he
is! He comes close 1 Keep me from him ! Keep him off! Keep
me from him ! ”
“ Do not be an idiot,” said Bill, looking round.
“ Idiot! ” cried Peter; “ take care that Ido not hurt you for that
word. lam not dead, Bill ; and I can strike a blow yet. If you
anger me, I will kill you here where we stand ! ”
“ I defy you; and if you are not quiet, I shall do you a mischief.
Leave go, I say ! You shall not have the brandy ! ” ,
For, with the cunning of a lunatic, Peter had seized the bottle out
of Bill’s pocket, and lay on the ground perilously near the edge of a
precipice, trying to prevent the bottle being taken away. Bill’s
passion was rapidly rising. He felt his blood surging through his
veins as though it were fire ; and, passionate by nature, it was a great
effort to control himself.
“ Peter, you shall pay for this. You have fooled me. May you
and the gold ”
“ Don’t come near me ! ” cried Peter, who had beaten Bill off with
the stick he carried. “ Here’s your health, fool. You thought to
find out King Peter’s wealth, did you ? Stand off, I say ! Yet stay ;
be kind to me, Bill, and I will show you yet ”
“ Come back ! ” said Bill; “ you will fall! ”
“No, I will not. The Gold-keeper has charge here. I see his
yellow locks waving in the breeze, and his eyes shining as if they
were on fire. Stand off! Let me have my own way, and I will
show you yet.”


The recollection of his broken trust, how he had been evidently
deceived by King Peter, and played with like a child, came over Bill.
He cried out fiercely—
“ Curse you ! Come back ! ”
« Then take that,” said King Peter, as, infuriated with madness,
he dealt Bill a heavy blow with the bottle on the temple, and laid him
almost senseless. In his half-stunned condition, Bill seemed to hear
a laugh as of a demon, and could see a form standing on the brink of
the steep incline. He made an effort to approach and seize it. A
word of warning came from his lips, but to no purpose. The form
had suddenly disappeared, and soon there was a deep thud below
a cry as of dying agony, and then all was still.
Bill looked round to see if there was not really some person
present whose form the poor madman had in his madness taken to
be the phantom of the rich monster his secret had created in his
mind. All was silent as the grave. Then Bill fully realized what
had happened. King Peter had met his death on the spot where he
had dreamt of —perhaps found —gold.
A year or so afterwards, there are three persons assembled at
Homesdale station. They are, of course, Major Foster, Jack
Hamilton, and Isabelle, now Jack’s wife. They speak of the awful
event of the night on which King Peter died, and how Old Bill was
found near the body, half out of his senses through the blow he had
received and the excitement he had gone through. Bill is still with
them, but he never speaks of that night, or how he was, as he thinks,
fooled by old Peter. However, later on there will be persons
who will think, guided by the light of the subsequent gold dis-
coveries, that there may have been some truth in King Peter s
words. That gold was found in small quantities for many years
before 1851 there is no reason to doubt; but whether King Peter’s
story was true that he had found it in such quantities as to merit the
name of a “ Discovery of gold,” or whether it was the offspring of a
mind continually brooding over the subject, who can tell ?
Jack Hamilton is now a partner of Major Foster in the Homesdale
run. It was the thought of leaving her father that made Isabelle
pause before giving her final decision, but now that necessity has
been obviated, and she has near her the two creatures on earth she
loves best—her beloved father and her kind husband, and the hearts
of those in Homesdale station beat more warmly and kindly towards
one another each day.


HOW WE STARTED OUR DRAMATIC CLUB.
It had been talked of for weeks. In fact, it seemed to us, by all
laws of demand and supply, all rules of work and relaxation,
that the time had come when Happiville should have a Dramatic
Club.
The restless spirits of the district could not remain quiet any
longer. It was time that the “cold veil of silence” which had
hitherto hidden them from the world should be thrown aside. One
young gentleman thought he “ wouldn’t make such a bad show, you
know,” as Romeo, or Ralph Rackstraw —he didn’t care which.
Another said his opinion was that the gentleman was more fitted to
play an Irish servant or a waiter. “ All right,” was the reply, “so
long as I get the best * bits.’ ” And so Mac Hamlet played the
waiters with great success ever afterwards.
Young Wiggs said that he knew a fellow who had been last week
introduced to a man whose brother had shaken hands with the
celebrated Smithson, of the Regal Theatre. And, on the strength
of this, Wiggs thought himself an authority on actors and acting.
The first thing to do was to call a meeting, and everyone said Mr.
Claudius Davenant should take the chair; and as Willie Phillips had
the reputation of being in training for the champion lazy man of the
colony, he was appointed to the heavy labour of taking down the
minutes, which he did most successfully, if they had not been quite
so hard to decipher afterwards. After a little discussion and a great
deal of interruption, Mr. Wiggs, who had carefully written out his
speech beforehand, was called upon to move the first resolution.
He commenced by remarking that this was the age of progress.
Here, however, the notes he had carefully prepared became mixed
up, and for a time progress seemed not to visit the oratorical
utterance of Wiggs. But, relying on his great knowledge of acting,
he started again. Was it to be supposed, he asked, that Happiville
could afford any longer to be backward in the march of intellect ?
Had not the time now arrived when a club should be formed, having
for its object the representation of the greatest works of the British
dramatists —of some of those plays that had been left as a rich
legacy to us by the writers of them. What was more ennobling, or
more instructive, than a splendid drama, well performed ? He
moved that a Dramatic Club be at once formed, and suggested that
one of the first pieces produced should be his own unpublished
tragedy, “ Alonzo’s Return.” Of course there might be a farce
afterwards.
“ The farce would come first, then,” said Mac Hamlet, meaningly ;
at which there was a general laugh, and Wiggs coloured a little, and
then quietly sat down.
Someone then said that he thought a play of Lytton’s might do,
but—


“ Well, we cannot play ‘ Money,’ ” said Mac Hamlet, “so let us
try ‘ Raising the Wind.’ ”
The chairman said he must really call the meeting, once and for
all, to order.
“ Order what ? ” asked a thirsty actor ; “ I have no objection.”
“ Silence ! ” said the chairman. “If we are to form a club, do not
let us have a ‘ Comedy of Errors ’ for our first piece.”
At this remark order was restored, and the motion, having been
seconded, was carried unanimously.
A letter was here read which had just been handed in by the
members of a society, asking for particulars of the intentions of the
club, and particularly requesting that nothing out of Shakespeare’s
plays should be performed in the Happiville district, as they
considered them improper.
It was ordered to be received.
Then more resolutions were moved and carried, appointing
president, stage manager, secretary, and other officers; and we
separated that night satisfied that we had taken a step that
would rouse Happiville from its rural lethargy, and bring ourselves
into public notice at once. We felt that the days of great deeds had
not yet passed. We cared not for criticism —we rather invited it.
We did not reckon that “ Oh, that mine enemy would write a book ”
might be changed with tenfold force into “ Oh, that mine enemy
would play a part.” We did not know then that as soon as you step
before an audience you must submit to be remarked upon and
satirized by the meanest person in it. No, our future career as
members of the Happiville Dramatic Club seemed to be brilliant in
prospect, and we expected to pass a time where there was little work
and much social pleasure.
The selection of pieces for our first performance was immediately
proceeded with. Up till now we had only indulged in that very
cheap but pleasing pastime—conjecture; but now we had come to
reality. We ransacked the old drama, we read the new, we spent
halfcrowns on Dick and sixpences in Lacy, looking at comedies,
tragedies, farces, and burlesques, with a view to a proper selection.
In our opinion, to the members of the Happiville Dramatic Club,
Seneca could not be too heavy, nor Plautus too light. If you read
Shakespeare for Seneca, and Maddison Morton for Plautus, in this
sentence you will learn our ideas to a nicety.
We found our task a difficult one. Everyone had his own opinion,
and so everyone stuck to his own wares, and did not care about
those of others. After much time and tobacco had been consumed,
we eventually decided that the Trial Scene from the “ Merchant of
Venice,” an original farce by a local author, and another piece should
comprise our first programme. The stage manager then had to cast
the pieces, and persuade each member that the part he had received
was exactly suited to him. This was, apparently, a hopeless task
also, but it was at length surmounted, and we breathed freely again ;
and when the local newspaper said, “We expect to witness a grand
performance at an early date,” our hearts beat with joyful anticipation.


Then came our first rehearsal; and the recollection of those merry
fellows who joined in it is still green in the memories of those who
were banded with them in dramatic friendship on the occasion.
Where are you now, you genial, impulsive Fox Phipps? do think
of you walking down the shady side of Pall Mall appears, strange
now. And you, Dick Rover, who were our companion in many
a day’s pleasure, whose horse and dog were looked for with anxious
eyes as the heralds of your presence ? New South Wales called you
away, and we have seen but little of you since. And there was the
poetic Davenant, the prince of companions, who always worked
harder than any other of us to make our club a success. True, we
have you still, and so also do we possess the quiet, the sedate
Mac Hamlet, who would smoke on with all the complacency of an
Indian chief, until, with some, witty saying or quaint thought, he
would raise our laughs. Yes, time may rob us of all of you, but it
cannot take from us the recollection of hours passed in your society.
But did our first rehearsal “go off” well? you will ask. Well, not
exactly. We thought three pieces not enough for a start, so we
rehearsed several, as you will see.
When the tyrant Gesler had to say, in gratified tones—
“ I thank thee, Sarnem, for the thought! ”
Alas ! Sarnem had no thought to unfold. He knew it was some-
thing about a “preconcerted thing,” and oh ! it was “ all right.”
When the honest young man generously informed the usual
clamorous creditor in one of the pieces that
“ There is the sum twice told ! ”
Had he that money —or the imitation of it? No, he never had it—
not even when he declaimed the words before the audience. It
was curious he could not think of it, but he supposed Oh !it
will be all right.” . , . , . . ,
One had learnt his part so well that, in his dramatic frenzy, he
called out (not at rehearsal, but on the platform) the stage direc-
tion, “ A crash is heard,” so that all the Happiville Thespians were
for the moment convulsed with laughter. Another knew nearly
every one’s part except his own. The latter he never knew.
The fight went off well. Of course there was a prolonged and
deadly fight j and, as two walking-sticks, a glass bottle, and a lamp-
glass were broken in the course of it, this showed how much in
earnest the contest was meant to be.
It certainly was not right for the Duke in the trial scene to take
“ the learn’d Bellario’s ” letter out of an envelope with a twopenny
stamp upon it before he read it to the magnificoes and the other
dramatis persona present. But these were mistakes, which on the
evening itself would be all right. It seemed that everything was to
be “all right” then. Even the left entrances were “ all right” too.
On Saturday afternoons we painted scenery, and the band
rehearsed. Once a man was heard to ask —


“ Well, I never did. Do you call that “ Home, sweet Home ?
Tell me, good passers-by, or am I dreaming or unwell ? In child-
hood’s happy hours I heard it once.”
“ Well, you see,” said a quiet old gentleman, “ It’s as near that as
anything else ; so what have you got to complain of, I should like to
know.” # ,
At the scene painting, our principal artist talked learnedly ot
perspective, point of sight, and colour. Mac Hamlet said he talked
so much about them that he lost sight of points he should have
remembered. Then there were other members dressed (luckily) in
old clothes, in various uncomfortable attitudes, and you could not
decide at once as to which obtained most paint, their clothes or the
canvas. One wanted to point out —and he was none other than
the secretary —that some should work, others direct and criticise.
A brush was immediately put into his hand. # t
In the evening we retired somewhat fatigued, but wishing for the
next Saturday to come round, to re-tire ourselves at scene painting
once more.
At length the long-expected day arrived; u and on that evening,
when the audience rolled up,’’ how delighted we were 1 The man
who denied that he was delighted would have been expelled, I
believe, there and then. The overture was played, and then the
audience were on the tip-toe of expectation. Fair creatures were
seated in that hall, who did £ ‘ so hope he would play his part well.
And there were also present the old inhabitants of Happiville, who
didn’t “ exactly see the fun of it, and hoped they would not
catch cold in the night air.” There were the boys of the district;
Oh ! the boys, whose enjoyment is to each play his part —whistling.
But above all, through the curtain we could see the ladies, and who
cared for the rest ? Soon we knew it would be —
‘ ‘ And girls threw bouquets
To boys, who bowed and bowed again,”
and we were happy. Our l< making up ” was well done. Alphonse
Karr says, “La toilette est la cuisine de la beaute, and on the stage
a good “ make up ” goes a long way, you know, in some people s
eyes. “ Oh, he was well made up,” they often say. It is a sort of
charitable criticism by which people can avoid saying anything about
the acting.
The curtain has gone up; the first piece is nearly over, and only
the “ tag ” remains to be spoken. The prompter has his hand on
the curtain ropes. Now, whether it was his too great anxiety to make
the piece end with eclat , or whether it was the fault of those on the
stage, we could not determine, but certainly the curtain came down
on the heads of the too forward amateurs, and the audience laughed
in a hearty manner. Of course, we came out and bowed with
satisfaction and delight, Johnson especially, with charming artlessness
and a gratified smile, not noticing that his wig had fallen into the
orchestra, and was adorning one of the heads of the band a bald


headed old gentleman, who became rather angry under the ornamental
decoration.
The tragedy scene was fairly successful; and the farce, though two
chairs and a table (on which was a vase of flowers) were turned over,
was said to have passed off well. Certainly the curtain would only
descend half-way, and there provokingly stuck. A young boy here-
upon cried out, “You don’t call that worth two shillings, do you?”
but he was nobody, and we felt we had become somebody, and there
is a slight difference, so we forgave him.
At the end of the season our dinner came off, at which the oratory
was a masterpiece of good sense and hesitation. The stage manager’s
health was proposed by the president, and the president’s by the
stage manager. The treasurer, secretary, prompter, and property
man were not forgotten. Then songs, comic and sentimental,
followed, and were sung really to a bumper house; and we heard
some of our members separated— vide illustration.
This is a few years ago now, and old time has crept on, and the
Happiville Dramatic Club has lost some of its old members, and has
gained many new ones. But the heroes of the first performance
many a time and oft tell their new friends, with an air of pride, of
their “ Early struggles in the days gone by.”
The days gone by ! Yes ; and if you look further back to the date
of the first dramatic performance in Australia, you will find that, on
January 16, 1796, a performance was given in Sydney, at which the
pieces played were “ The Revenge ” and “ The Hotel.” By one
writer it is stated that on 4th June, 1789, the second anniversary of
the birthday of His Most Gracious Majesty George 111., it took
place, and that Farquhar’s Comedy “ The Recruiting Officer ” was
the play then performed. But suffice it to say that it was by
amateur actors, though those actors were, it is to be feared, profes-
sionals in less respectable arts. They were convicts. Let us picture
the scene.
The British flag had been hoisted at Sydney Cove by Captain
Arthur Phillips on 26th January, 1788; and, at length, the better-
behaved portion of the convicts were allowed to erect a theatre.
The admission was one shilling, and it was allowed to be paid either
in meat, spirits, or flour, if money was not forthcoming.
There was Barrington—one of Australia’s first historians—whose
strange career is well known to us —a pickpocket; but, withal, a
smart fellow for other things than the handkerchiefs and snuff-boxes
of the period. Well, who so likely as he to write a prologue ?of
which effort he is rather modest, for it is most witty and appropriate.
If all prologues were as good now-a-days, one might not grumble—
for of its sincerity there can be no question. It begins with
appropriate force, and then the eye rests on a now oft-quoted
line—
“ True patriots all, for be it understood,
We left our country for our country’s good.”


















The pickpocket-poet then goes on to say that—
“To seek Macbeth we have not far to roam ;
And sure, in Filch I shall be quite at home.
*****
Macbeth, a harvest of applause will reap,
For some of us, I fear, have ‘murdered sleep.’
His lady, too, with grace will sleep and talk !
Our females have been used at night to walk.
Sometimes, indeed—so various is the art —
An actor may improve and mend his part :
‘ Give me a horse,’ bawls Richard like a drone ;
We’ll find a man would help himself to one.
Grant us your favour, put us to the test,
To gain your smiles, we’ll do our very best.”
The wit comes to us fresh and clear after the years that have flown,
and actors and audience have, like stage ghosts, vanished. The
kangaroos of the then thinly-wooded Circular Quay are gone, and we
can picture to ourselves the expatriated actors and audience enjoying
the stage wit. Let us hope it served to cheer them in the dark
days of convictism, when men were not reclaimed, but were ruled like
so many beasts with one idea, and that idea—Severity.
Since that day many have trod their brief half-hour upon the stage,
and now are heard no more. The genius of Brooke has flashed on
us, and is now quenched in the unpitying sea. Others have arisen
and come to us, but none to take his place.
THE MYSTERY OF FRITZ REINHARDT.
“ Stern, deplorable truth—that a dead fool knows more than the
wisest living man ! ”
These words were spoken by me, Herbert Fortescue, as I sat at
midnight in the library of the old mansion where I had asked a night’s
lodging in one of my wanderings through Germany. It was a
curious place; and I had come to visit it quite by chance. In Paris
1 had spoken to the Baron Von Dalberg of his Fatherland, and what
beauties the old majestic castles might afford for my pencil. “If
you wish, sir, to see one of these,” he said, “ call, in your next
wandering, at my Castle Dalberg, and my old servant will show you
everything you wish to see. Do not expect great things, but, if you
like it, stay there as long as you like.” I remembered the Baron’s
words, and took advantage of his invitation.
I had found, on my arrival, as picturesque and romantic a mansion
—partly a ruin—as any I had in my wanderings met with. The
ivy-covered walls seemed to be dragged down by their clinging
companion, and on the east side were crumbling to the earth. Rank
weeds grew in the court-yard, which my imagination lighted up with


many a gay scene which must have taken place there when the house
was tenanted by my friend’s ancestors. In the park outside were
gaunt, mysterious-looking trees —trees that seemed to hold a secret
of the past in their trunks, as they stood out in ghastly grandeur
against the sky. I looked at the house as it stood in the moonlight,
and thought it was a truly romantic spot, but hardly a cheerful or a
habitable one.
I was about to turn aside, when I perceived an old man approach-
ing from the right-hand side of the court-yard, walking slowly and
hesitatingly along. His white locks blown hither and thither by the
evening breeze, and his stern face, suited well the gloomy scene of
which he appeared to be the sole guardian. I hesitated no longer,
but went boldly up and introduced myself; and, as I did so, I saw
that he was blind. Soon, however, I was seated in the library of the
house by the side of a grand fire blazing in the old-fashioned grate,
quite prepared to make the best of the dismal surroundings until the
morning dawned.
The room was too large to be inviting or snug ; its decorations
and furniture too old to remind one of anything but the past. The
books on the shelves—those crystallized efforts of genius now long
dead —were dusty and rotten with age. The furniture, which I
pictured to myself had been used in how many studious hours by
those now departed, was antique ; and only the fire seemed to be of
that day in which I lived. It blazed and burnt as I watched it; and
I, having nothing else to do, looked with satisfaction on the logs my
blind friend had placed near the fireplace, as they would enable me
to procure warmth during the night.
I asked myself “ Why does Dalberg keep this old blind fellow ? ”
And as I spoke I noticed outside the window the bent form of the
old man pass and repass, evidently in quest of something—what, I
could not tell. “ Rather an eccentric boy,” I thought, “ thus to
wander about at night ” —but I forgot day and night were all the
same to him. And so I mused for some time, waiting for the
morning to dawn.
How long I stayed musing, I never knew ; but on awaking I found
the Baron’s faithful servitor standing opposite to me, with his face
lit up with a curious joy. “ Can he be joyful ? ” I asked myself—
he for whom no sun or moon can break into his fearful night, for
whom no book can unroll its page, or flower unfold its blossom.
He joyful, while condemned to sightless solitude ! Impossible !”
He approached the fireplace, one hand behind him, and waited.
“ Have you found anything, Max ? ” I asked.
“ Yes,” he answered simply; “ nothing of a kind uncommon
either in the earth or above it. It is a skull.”
And so it was, and in a fair state of preservation, save
“What is that?" I asked, in a tone of surprise.. “A crack, a
fracture over the temple ! The man whose thoughts this skull carried
must have come to his death by an accident or by ”
“No accident—by murder!” the blind man cried. “I know it is
his! I knew I should find him at last —at last! ”


From the excitement of his manner, it struck me for the moment
that his brain had been turned by his long years of solitude and
blindness, but soon he continued —
“ Look here, sir, Fritz Reinhardt was my friend; we parted twenty
years ago, and now we meet again ! I have searched for years, and
lam now rewarded. I have found him at last.
“ And you think —you believe this skull to belong to your de-
ceased friend ?” I inquired. . . .
“ Yes,” he added, taking the hideous thing in his hand, twenty
years ago I looked at the warm flesh that covered these bones, and
shook Fritz by the hand. Alas ! I never saw him again.
“It is a strange story. Know then, sir, that one night— twas
twenty years ago—Fritz Reinhardt stood at the door of my little
cottage in the glen, and kissed the fair young face of my child.
She was to be his bride on the morrow, and Fritz was strong,
handsome, and good. She was the prettiest girl of all the hamlets
round, and loved Fritz, so that I welcomed him as a son. i was
hearty then, and could see my darlings with pride, pleasure, and
with love. „ , . , ,
“ My Anna was pure and trustful —one of those who are not born
with natures suitable for this hard world. I shall never forget the
happy look in her face. No ;it has been with me mmy blindness
and in my sleep. Do you know, sir, when we blind ones dream we
see? So I have prayed to dream of my beautiful child. 1 nave
prayed; but no prayers will bring back the past—oh . that they
Here a spasm of pain came over the old man’s face. I begged
him to postpone the narration of his past experience until t e
morrow, but he said he would rather speak of it now. He might
die before the morning’s sun, and I must know all. _
“ Fritz disappeared that night. He had promised to be at our
door with the sun to wish his bride ‘ good-morning,’ but he came no .
I can hardly speak of it. He came no more.
“We searched, and found nothing. The neighbours said sneer-
ingly, ‘ Your fine mate for your bird has flown,’ but I heeded not. 1
believed it not. I believed in Fritz, and I searched and inquired,
but to no purpose. ‘He has been murdered,’ said I; but people
laughed, and said, ‘ Impossible ;we must, have found him. And I
turned away, and searched again, while the dear light in my nna s
eyes grew more dim with suspense each day. She shrank from all,
like a young bird whose mate has been killed yes, killed, I sai , y
the hand of one I knew not. .
“ One day, worn out by care, and beginning to despair of success,
' I entered my house by the back door. At the front of it 1 saw two
persons. My poor Anna was one, and the other was Carl Muller.
I listened. I heard it, sir. I heard the villain make love to my
child. I heard him say he had loved her for years better than
Fritz ever had. He asked her to love him—to marry him, and
forget Fritz. She raised her feeble voice in rejection of his
proposals.


“ ‘ Fritz will return/ she said despairingly.
“ ‘ Nay, Anna ! be reasonable/ he answered ; : he has gone away,
and is perhaps dead. He will never return again.’
“ A consciousness—a recollection—came like an electric flash in my
brain, and I stepped forward and said—
“ ‘ No, Carl Muller ; he will not return, for you are his murderer /’
“ Ah! fool to have forgotten it! ’Twas then I remembered a
figure passing the door on the night my Fritz disappeared. Facts
will lie dormant in the mind for years until something calls them to
our recollection. Now the light came. I knew it now too well. In
a moment I sprang at the man like a tiger seizing his long-desired
prey. I fixed my fingers on his throat.
“ But I was weak, and I staggered and fell. My fingers loosed
their hold, and the wretch knelt on me, saying—
“ ‘ Anna, I spare your father’s life for your sake ; but if he raves
like a madman again, he shall not escape so easily. Now, look
to him—he has had a fit.’ And in a moment he was gone.
“ I had a fever that kept me delirious for weeks, during all which
time my poor child scarcely left my bedside. I raved about Fritz,
and how I would bring his murderer to justice. And in the tedious
days of convalescence I planned how I would search for and find
Carl Muller—but he had gone to Australia or America, people said.
I laid my case before the magistrates, but they could do nothing.
They said you must have, in law, a corpus delicti as they called it, or
how did they know that Fritz Reinhardt was not alive and well in
some other country ? I laughed ; I knew better than they. I knew
that Fritz was dead, and that Carl Muller had murdered him. And
if I was to find Fritz first—well, I would do it. Nature, everything
would aid me, I knew, to punish so foul a crime.
“ I searched, and my poor Anna became pale and like a shadow.
It will make her well, I said, to know that Fritz died—though foully
murdered—still loving her. But it was to no purpose, for in a few
months she died, with her thin white hand in mine, her blue eyes
fixed on my face with a tender gaze, but growing so dim as the hour
of death slowly approached. She breathed her last with a prayer for
Fritz and myself, and that we should soon meet again. And when
I kissed her lips with the passionate fondness only a parent can feel
by the side of a dying child, I saw that her pure spirit had fled. And
I was left alone—alone with my destiny of vengeance on the guilty
one.
“ I could not remain there, in the awful stillness of the night, with
the pale stiff form of my child before my eyes ; so I went into the
woods to search once more. I thought of my dead girl, and I
swore by her pure spirit to find what I was looking for. A storm
came on, but I continued, heedless of its violence. I could find
nothing, and, baffled and angry, mad with grief and full of rebellious
feelings, I swore a dreadful oath against heaven, that echoed down
the glen as the awful words left my lips. A fearful crash came, as
though the earth had opened. The lightning leaped from the clouds,
and I was struck down blind !


“ Yes, blind as lam now, sir. I feel it yet! Pray, give me your
hand.”
I reminded Max that he had not yet told me how he had become
possessed of the hideous skull.
“In this way,” he answered. “ Last night I determined to search
again in the ruins of the house that Carl Muller had occupied.
He had been building it about the time I lost poor Fritz ; and when
he left the district no one cared to live in it, for it is gloomy and out
of the way. I was there to-night, and a thought struck me. I was
not long in following it up—not long, after searching for twenty
years ; and I can use a pick and spade still, when duty nerves my
arm. I dug deep down. I passed the crumbling ruins and the earth
through my hands. I got to the foundation, and at last I succeeded
in my search. ’Twas Reinhardt’s head. I knew it. I laughed with
a delight that made the hills ring again. I put my fingers into where
once had been the dark eyes that looked tenderly at Anna so long
ago. I felt the fracture, and I cried out, ‘ I have found you out at
last, Carl Muller ! You murdered Fritz, being jealous of his good
fortune, and buried him here in the foundations—deep, deep down —
with heavy stones upon him !’ And so he did.”
Here the old man stopped, exhausted with excitement, and handed
me the skull again. “ Leave it to me, my friend,” I said, “ and we
will examine the spot to-morrow ; and there may be further evidences
of Muller’s guilt, whereby a prima facie case may be established.
And now to bed, old Max. Place the skull on that little velvet
cushion on the pedestal in the corner, and in the morning we will see
more of this most mysterious story. Good-night.”
Max did as I had requested him, and soon left the chamber,
feeling his way, as he always did.
. And I was left to thought and solitude. I heard the old man
laughing and chuckling in successful glee as he ascended the stairs.
Then I heard him shout out the names of “ Fritz ” and “ Carl ” in a
half-maniacal scream ; but his voice soon died away, and I heard
him no longer.
I have noticed that, when a person does not wish to think on a
certain subject, his thoughts will often fix themselves on it, and hold
to it with a tenacious mind-grip in spite of him. And so it was
with me. I thought again and again over the strange history con-
nected with the horrid skull on the pedestal before me ; and, as I
did so, I noticed my lamp to suddenly flicker, and then go out. I
moved in my chair, watching the moon on its career through the
sky. I saw it approach a dark rain-laden cloud that hung threaten-
ingly over the earth. It was very evident that in another minute I
should be in darkness.
I looked at the lamp, and there was no oil. The fire also appeared
to have suddenly, like a human thing, expired. I had no candle,
but I cared not. Darkness and I had been old companions in the
long watches of the night before this, and I felt amused at my
action. What cared I for the black cloud? Nothing. The clock
in the hall struck, in a tone that sounded like a human groan, One !


and at that instant I was in darkness. The black cloud had
asserted its influence.
Darkness, did I say? No! I was not in darkness. A lurid
light suffused the room with a kind of supernatural glare. I looked.
Gracious heaven !it came from the skull. It shone out of the
ghastly places where once eyes had flashed such fire—doubtless at
the hour of death. It was light that I felt was not •of this world.
It seemed to fill the room like a yellow vapour, and insinuate itself
into every corner. I could read the titles of the deserted, forgotten
old books plainly. I could see the picture that hung over the
door look quite life-like and health-like under its influence. It was
horrible !
I felt that I should not believe my eyes—but then I could not
help believing them. I moved uneasily in my chair, and tried to
think of something else ; but all to no purpose. It was too real to
doubt about. The light did come from the skull.
“ I will not be played upon,” I cried. “ The shortest way to end
this wretched delusion is to throw the cursed thing out of the
window, in spite of Max and his story. It has lain long enough in
the ruins; let dust go to dust once more !
I determined on this plan, and resolved to carry it out imme-
diately, for I felt my courage fast giving way. The black cloud
still obscured the moon, and every moment the glare from the
skull became more intense. I felt my senses forsaking me. I
approached and seized the hideous object.
I could not move it! I tried, while drops of a clammy perspira-
tion stood on my forehead. All was immovable. I stopped for a
moment, and this seemed to give me courage. Is it a warning, I
asked myself, of something unknown ? Has it tidings of those ones
I have lost to give me, whose faces I shall never see again? I
determined to profit by it, and I boldly advanced and said —
“ Speak ! lam not afraid !”
The room was again in darkness that was oppressive and terrible,
and a voice, thin and spectral, came from the pedestal—
“ Mortal, made of dust! You, who have tried to pry into the
grave’s mouth and the worlds beyond. Do you dare now ?
I knew not what to say, but curiosity and incredulity raged
together in my mind.
“ Answer, phantom. Give me proof!”
The light appeared again, and I saw with dazed eyes the skull
now clothed with healthy flesh, with the flush of manhood on its
cheeks, the fire of life in its eyes.
“ You are Fritz Reinhardt,” I said.
“ I am,” said the head, and I saw the lips move as they answered
me thus laconically.
“Who was murdered by Carl Muller,” I continued fearlessly.
“ Yes. This night twenty years ago.”
“ I know how you came here,” I said. “ But how can you
assume your life-like appearance. Tell me that ?”
“ Hush!” said the lips again. “ Know you not that it is allowed


to a man, when suddenly torn from life by murder, to keep his
individuality on earth as well as in the other world until his proper
death-hour comes, or until his murderer die? Have you never
heard of murderers being haunted by the spectres of those whose
lives they have taken, following them, whispering in their ears that
they, too, must die some day? That is how lam here.”
I could stand this no longer. I had no desire to descend, like
the Virgil-lead Dante, into Hades. I would prove this thing to the
uttermost. I would solve the mystery somehow \ but how could I
while the horrid vision held me spell-bound by its hateful appearance?
I seized a book—’twas a ponderous tome—-and with all my strength
hurled it at the fearful apparition.
There was a terrible crash, and it seemed as if morning had
suddenly broken. I looked around. Where was the skull ? Ah,
yes, there it was — on its pedestal , as before ! I had dreamed, and a
book falling off the table had awakened me thus rudely.
Where was Max ? I asked myself. I rubbed my eyes to make
sure I was really awake, and determined to go and find him.
I went through the hall, along narrow corridors, up staircases, and
through the old rooms, but found nothing. “ Can he have been a
phantom, or the spectre of a dream?” I asked myself. But soon
my search was ended.
High up in the battlements I found a room like a hermit’s cell,
and on the bed was Max, apparently sleeping placidly and happily.
A smile was on his lips.
“ Max ! Max ! get up ; it is day ! ”
But there was no movement. On examination, I found he was
•dead. His search and his life had ended about the same time.
I descended the stairs, and hurriedly buried the skull in the
garden, glad to hide it from my sight. Then I locked up the great
door, and making the best of my way to the nearest house, gave the
inmates the key, telling them that Max was dead. The next hour I
was once more on my walking tour, over hills and through valleys,
happy in gazing on nature, and making companions of the “ oaks
and rills ; ” rising at early morning, when through the low clouds the
fair sun’s rays first kiss the earth, and going to rest when the moon s
pale influence first envelopes the evening scene ; merely a pedestrian
—a lover of nature —and nothing more.
Once, on my return to a busy, panting city, I thought of the
strange night I had passed at the Chateau Dalberg. Could there
be any truth in the old man's story ? While thinking thus, my eye
fell on a paragraph in a Melbourne newspaper. It ran as follows: —
“ A most determined suicide is reported from Ballarat as having taken place on
Friday last. A man who has gone by the name of Muntz, but whose real name
is said to be Muller, has for some time been subject to strange fits of mental
depression. From the evidence at the inquest, it appeared that Muntz behaved
very strangely on Friday evening, saying he was haunted by a horrid phantom.
In the morning his body was found hanging from the roof of a lonely house
he occupied. A bottle containing poison was on the table. It is stated Muntz
has for some time been drinking heavily. The jury returned a verdict of
4 Suicide while in a state of unsound mind.’ ”


I laid down the paper, and lit a cigar. Then I saw how the
murder of Fritz Reinhardt had been avenged—not by the arm of
the law, but by the murderer’s own hand. lam now resolved that
if my friend the Baron ever again suggests his chateau as a romantic
spot to visit on my next holiday ramble, I shall politely say to him—
“ No, thank you.”
DARRIWELL;
OR, HOW THE WINNER OF THE MELBOURNE CUP WAS TIPPED.
If you deny that The Three Stars is a cozy hotel, and that Bumper,
who keeps it, is a jolly, well-meaning, jovial old Boniface—well, that’s
where you make the mistake. True, his wife’s temper is not all that
could be desired ; but, then, you know every husband has not the
courage to adopt Petruchio’s tactics in the early days of his married
life. It may even be doubted that Mrs. Bumper (nee Tabitha Tangle)
was not of metal too stubborn to be tempered, or rather made good
tempered, by anything her husband might have done. But, never
mind, Bumper’s hotel is a comfortable one, his wife a good business
hostess, and he himself a model publican, who keeps the law and
never thinks of Sunday trading—when a policeman is standing near
his house on the Day of Rest.
It is the night before the Melbourne Cup, and Bumper’s bar and
parlour have more occupants than usual. There was Mr. Boohoo,
the gentleman who had come down on purpose to discuss the
present situation in Zululand, and who had a wonderful facility of
putting-down by the aid of big words and abstruse questions anyone
who dared to discuss the aforesaid situation in a way Mr. Boohoo
did not agree with. Then there was old John Thrifty, a good old
man who “ would be talking.” He was a stout friend of Boohoo’s,
and always noticed which side Boohoo took in the discussion before
he ventured to express his own opinion. This opinion, it may be
surmised, did not differ in any way from his friend’s way of looking
at the subject.
“Another drop of that beer, Missus,” said one of the liquor-
loving sons of toil, advancing towards Mrs. Bumper, who was
behind the bar. Her husband was with some chosen friends in the
parlour.
“Another! Jim. I would like to see the colour of the money for
it first. Besides, lam surprised at a great hulking fellow like you
staying here, when your wife is a-waiting up for you.”
Here it may be remarked that Mrs. Bumper seldom remembered
aught of lonesome wives or the supperless children when her
customers had any money to spend. These little matters were then
not to be spoken of. Of course, it was no business of hers.




(1) SYDNEY HEADS GOVEHOUSE. & TOWN, HALL.
(2) SRISBANE.
(3) LAUNCESTON
(5) NELSO
(6) TWO FOLD BAY.
(4) CLENELO
(7) THE SOUTH ESK.
(8) FIJIAN SKETCH






“Where’s the money for it?” she repeated, for the impecunious
Jim did not pretend to hear the first time.
Jim walked somewhat unsteadily to Mr. Boohoo, who was just at
that moment engaged in discussing the effect of immigration on
the tobacco-producing industry. Having whispered “ All right,” to
Mrs. Bumper, he requested Mr. Boohoo in forcible terms to “ shout.”
To be interrupted in a controversy on so interesting a subject was
too much ; so he paid not the slightest notice.
“ Well, I never !” said Jim. “ You won’t do it ?”
Mr. Boohoo shook his head.
“Then, good-night! ” said Jim, going to the door; “ and I hope
you may win over the Cup. You, as has money in your pockets, will
have a proper sort of day. I’ve got none. Good-night! ”
Just at this moment the cheery face of the landlord appeared. He
had heard Jim’s words, and went over and spoke to him. Suffice it
to say, Jim did not go home without enough to buy his next day’s
dinner ; and pursuing his way, he muttered a rude blessing—the only
one he knew—on his good friend’s head.
“Why shouldn’t I give it him?” thought Bumper, as he looked
at his wife. “ It’s race time. In two minutes it will be Cup Day.”
Then he went to tell his friends in the parlour, but first he lowered
the gas as a gentle reminder. “ What’s the meaning of this ? ”
asked a jolly-looking old fellow who occupied the arm chair. “ What
on earth’s the meaning of this? ”
“You must clear out, Jovial Joe, and you too, gentlemen,” said
the landlord. “It is striking twelve o’clock.”
It was the herald of the glorious day, and of light so soon to come
—the day of rest to some, the day of pleasure, tiring pleasure to
others—one that had been looked forward to by many as a time
when, leaving work aside, pleasure would be triumphant. So every
one was glad that they had lived to see another Cup Day. The
lateness, however, of the hour did not appear to strike some of
Bumper’s customers ; and the strains of a rather ancient ditty were
now heard in the direction of the bar parlour.
“ Stop that, Jovial Joe ! ” said one of his boon companions, who,
like himself, has seen better days. “ Come, let us go.”
“Very well,” said Joe, “ but not before you hear this;” and he
sang—
“ I’ve some money for to spend,
And some money for to lend.”
“ Perhaps, then,” said Mrs. Bumper, sharply, “ if you’ve got some
money, you will pay off this ’ere score. It comes to four and six, as
sure as my name is' Tabitha Bumper; and it’s past twelve o’clock.”
“ You sh —shouldn’t have taken my words up so lit—literally.
But it’s all right. Here’s the money (and Mrs. Bumper held out her
hand rather eagerly). No it isn’t! Ah, here it is! No it ain’t.
Mrs. Bumper, I haven’t got any.”
“ Well, if I ever did see such a tantalizing old fool,” said the
landlady.
3


“I’ll pay it,” said William Johnston, who was Joe’s particular
friend. “ There’s five shillings, and keep the odd sixpence for next
time. And now, Charley Garrick, take his other arm and we’ll see
him home. Good-night all.”
And, suiting the action to the word, Joe made his exit from the
Three Stars, supported by his two friends, one on each side, as they
went down the street breathing the cool night air.
“I don’t think you can walk home to-night, old Joe,” said
Johnston, noticing the peculiar inclination of Joe’s legs, despite his
and his friend’s efforts, to walk into the gutter.
“Jolly life,” said old Joe, “Merry Christmas to you; happy
Easter —in fact, anything you like, my dear friends. Don’t want to
go home ; mean to walk about all night, and sing jolly songs. Light-
hearted as a bird ; don’t owe anyone anything.”
“Oh, indeed,” said Johnston; what about my five shillings, old
fellow, and the five shillings before that, Joe; and the half-crown a
week ago ; and the ”
“Be quiet,” said Joe. “ No, you don’t come over me—oh, no !
Now, then, places, ladies—off we go ;” and he seized Johnston in his
arms, and danced down the pavement, letting his partner go only
when they bumped against the shutters of a closed shop.
“ Ah, you don’t know when you talk to a gentleman,” said Joe,
and he sat down on the kerbstone. “ Now, lam ‘reclining under the
spreading beach,’ by Jove ! ”
The two other men drew aside.
“ Where can we stow him for the night ? ” said Johnston.
“ Let us have a lark with him,” said Charley Garrick. I should like
old Joe to wake up next morning and not know where he is. It’s
too far to take him home. And what’s more, he won’t come.”
“And, what’s more, I’m going to have my five shillings’ worth of
fun out of him,” said Johnston.
“ Hullo ! asleep !” Here Joe, from the kerbstone, indulged in a
sonorous snore.
“ Where can we put him ? ” asked Garrick.
“ Well, he ought to go where the men who won’t pay their debts go.
Some go to gaol.”
“ That isn’t open.”
“Hard-up people go to the pawnshop, you know,” said Mr.
Johnston.
Here Moses Moses, of the Bullrush Pawn-office, two doors off—one
of the oldest in the city—was seen to come out with a jug in his
hand for his supper beer. The thought struck both simultaneously—
“ We’ll put him there and pawn him!” There was no time to be
lost. Mr. Moses Moses was already half over the road, in a straight
line with the public-house opposite. Carefully he had, as he thought,
shut his shop-door, and would be back again in a few minutes.
The door was tried. Joe was roused from his sleepy condition,
and told that he was at home. The door was opened, and in less
than two minutes Jovial Joe was reclining, stowed away quietly in a
corner, and with plenty of cast-off clothes (bed-clothes Charley Garrick


called them), so that he could not be seen. The two men came
carefully out through the darkness, and having shut the door, they
watched the returning form of Moses Moses, and went to have a laugh
and a drink over the adventure, and what Jovial Joe would think
next morning when he awoke
That night Jovial Joe lay half-asleep, half-awake, in a pawnshop.
It was a curious place the Bullrush Pawn-office; but are not all
pawnshops curious places? An odour of impecuniosity seems to
distil itself from the clothes and pawned articles, that, like their
owners, have seen better times. It seems to permeate the air within.
But the Bullrush Pawn-office was, perhaps, one of the best conducted
of its class ; for not alone were articles of every-day use to be seen
inside, but also the left-off garments of the stage. There were
theatrical costumes in which many a hero of the moment had strutted
about. Dresses for “ Mephistopheles ” and “ Fra Diavolo” hung by
the side of costumes suitable for stage noblemen, that had covered
the limbs of many a poor “ super/’ who managed to play lords and
grandees of influential aspect and august mien on thirty shillings a
week. A clown’s dress was in the corner, on a nail, elbowing—yes,
actually elbowing an “inky cloak,” in which, no doubt, “Hamlet”
had many a time and oft been played. It had evidently greatly
suffered from the “ slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,” for there
was a gash in the front, where Laertes’ envenomed rapier had, seem-
ingly by accident, penetrated. Indeed, this—the theatrical part of
the stock —did not seem to hang easily together, for the ancient
jealousy and professional rivalry of their former owners still perhaps
lingered round their cast-off clothes. The other articles appeared
to lie side by side in a kind of friendly way—brought on, it may be
supposed, by the thought of old times. The watches marked all
times. The lady’s small one, on the left hand side of the window,
was, like some of its late wearers perhaps, rather incorrect, and,
perchance, like them also, had stopped its earthly course altogether.
But, from the dusty old coat, pawned by a labourer for the price of a
glass of beer, to the gawdy jewellery pledges, the articles had an air
about them this night that seemed to say—“ We are all in gaol like
Pentridge prisoners ; but let us look smiling, for it is Cup Day ! ”
*****
The Town Hall clock struck “One!” Jovial Joe woke with a
start, for he had not heard the chimes, and that precise One !
seemed like the report of a field piece.
“Where am I ? ” said he, jumping up, and in doing so a couple of
hats, dislodged from the top of the higher shelf, fell upon him.
“ Don’t! Don’t! ”he cried. “ I want none of your rubbish.
Leave me alone.’’
Then he looked round, by the aid of a gleam of light from the
street lamp outside. Yes, there was the light. It fell in ghastly
fashion across the floor. It shone straight on the face of an old
eight-day clock, which Joe was sure blinked and winked in an
uncomfortable manner. It lighted up the gold fringe and tinsel on


the stage dresses. It, no doubt, shone on the three golden globes
outside, over the door. The sight was enough for Joe, and he
exclaimed, in a voice made sober by surprise—
“ I’m in a wretched pawn-shop.”
The face of the old clock assumed an expression of sorrow, as
though its feelings had been deeply wounded by the contempt
painted on Jovial Joe’s countenance. It moved its hands round and
round in a terrible manner —evidently into the middle of the next
week, Joe thought. Minutes, hours, days passed, according to its
reckoning, but at last it stopped, exactly at ten minutes past one,
with such a click that Joe was sure it wished to say something. So
he said—
“ You are a curious old fellow, you are. Time flies with you
pretty fast, I fancy.”
“ Time flies ! Foolish mortal ! ” answered a voice that
came from the inmost recesses of the clock’s internal economy —
“Ah, yes, time flies, and I ought to know. I have marked the
fleeting hours for fifty years. Listen, mortal! Ten years ago this
very night I was cleaned out —I never went well since.”
“ Cleaned out!” said Joe. “ Were you ? I sympathize with you.
I know what that is. It’s a very painful feeling. lam sorry for you,
old clock.”
“ Thank you ! ” continued the clock. “ Give me your hand,
Jovial Joe.”
Jovial Joe stared, and nothing more.
“ Your hand ! ” repeated the clock, in a voice of thunder, and with
the exertion its bosom heaved, and the hands, with a sudden jerk,
moved from ten minutes past one to thirteen and a half minutes to
ten.' Then they stretched themselves straight in the direction Joe
stood, who stared harder than ever.
“Your hand!” roared the clock. “Be kind to me. Get me
out of this prison. Mend me, and treat me well. Jovial Joe, do
take me away, and I will amuse you, and make your life pass, oh, so
quickly. lam a greater time-killer than all you folks that try it so
hard.”
“ I cannot do it,” said Joe—“ I cannot take you away. You are
pawned. You know I cannot take the pledge ”
“ Better for you if you did,” interrupted the clock. “ Will there
never be an end to your drinking and keeping late hours. Keeping
late hours !—it’s more like losing them. But, come, I wish to give
you a helping hand, and why don’t you take it ? ”
“ Excuse me, gentle sir,” said Joe, bowing—“An infirmity in my
childhood prevents me from ever shaking hands. So, kind Mr.
Timepiece, pardon me.”
The clock’s face appeared clouded. Its hands now marked the
dread hour of midnight, and in its rage at Joe, and not being able to
strike him, it struck all the twelve hours in succession. Time had gone
ahead of it so long, and perhaps it was doing its best to catch up the
lost hours. Joe stood bewuldered, both by the noise and by what he
saw. According to the way the clock had marked time he had been


in the pawn-shop fully three weeks. But soon a voice from the
recesses of the window accosted him —
“ Don’t mind that cantankerous old creature,” said a wedding ring,
in a tuneful voice. “It always was a low fellow. I belonged to the
aristocracy.”
It was a wedding ring, and its late wearer must have possessed a
small hand. Who knows but that it had encircled the finger of one
who had belonged to a family he had known, placed on a delicate
hand at the moment which bound two mortals together to happiness
or misery, until death should part them. The thought fired Joe’s
curiosity. The ring was there, and he should like to know some-
thing of her who had worn it.
“ Tell us your history,” said Joe ; and, taking the ring, he gently
placed it on the counter, with the lamplight shining full on it. “I
have got to stay here all night. So, fire away ! ”
“ Are you going to listen to that brazen thing’s yarn ? ” asked the
old clock, in an angry voice. To be sure it was angry, for it let
its weights down with a bang as though it thought itself insulted.
Joe jumped right against the clown’s dress hanging on the wall,
and the touch of a mortal man seemed to have suddenly endowed
the costume with powers of speech.
“ Here we are again !” it said. “ Come on, Joey ! ” Then with
great caution it unhooked itself from the nail, turned a somersault,
and sat down by the ring on the counter. Joe took the chair.
There was only one in the place, and he did not wish to lose it.
Clowns, he knew, would do anything—he had seen them in the
pantomime.
“Well, now, I call that sociable,” said Joe. “Mr. Clown, you
have committed many a theft in your time, and must have remorse
of conscience—if you have one. The policemen you have killed,
the mothers robbed of their innocent children, the windows you
have broken, you old sinner, you ought to be—to be— ”
“To be, or not be ! ” resounded through the room ; and the
Hamlet dress, still with the gash painfully apparent, but with princely
step, walked out into the middle of the shop.
“ What do you want to know ? ”
“ Please,” said Joe, as the thought struck him, “ who’s going to
win the big race to-day ? ”
“ Ask the clock,” said the clown’s dress; “he knows all about
time.”
« You have lost money,” said the clock. “ You are down in your
luck. You have not as much metal in your pockets as would make
a screw to put me to rights ; and you ask for this secret.”
“ Yes, please,” asked Jovial Joe. “ Tell me this, and I won t ask
you anything more.”
“ Then look,” said the clock ; “ use your wits—such of them as
you have left —and read this :
4. ®enrg. 10 +l.


“ ‘ For Henry Bien ’ —there’s no such horse. Well, you are a
flat,” said Joe.
“ Take care, and read the secret properly,” said the clock.
“ Here he comes. Ha !ha ! ”
Yes, he had come—not the gallant Cup winner, but the owner of
the Bullrush Pawnshop ; and he was preparing to kick Jovial Joe
into the street. Joe rubbed his eyes, and tried to explain matters.
It at first was of no avail; but in the end the good Mr. Moses
pardoned him, and determined not to leave his door open when he
went for his supper beer on another occasion.
“ I’ve had a dream ! ” exclaimed Joe, in the words of Bottom the
weaver. “ Why, there’s the clock, but where is the tip ? Dear me 1
what was it ? I forget. But it is only a dream ; and here am I,
poor in pocket, and as much in the dark about the big race as
before ! ”
That night, when the Melbourne Cup of 1879 had been lost and
won, to Garrick and Johnston and to the jolly landlord of the Three
Stars, Joe told his story. He remembered the dream then. Yes, it
was “4, Henry, Bien, 10 + 1.” What could it mean ?
“ 4 is, of course, the fourth letter of the alphabet,” said Charley
Garrick. “ That is plain. So we have got ‘ D.’ ”
“ And ‘ Henry,’ ” cried Johnston exultantly, “ is a lengthened form
for ‘Harry,’ or ‘’Arry,’ as some h-less people say. Why, it’s as
plain as a pike-staff. So, then, we have ‘Darri.’”
“ But what is Bien ?” asked Joe, anxiously.
“Dat is French for ‘ Well,’ ” said Monsieur Leclef. “ Vy, it is as
evident as the Town Hall clock.”
“ Don’t speak to me of clocks,” said Joe. “My grandfather’s—
or that of any of my relations—not even the ‘Larboard Watch.’ Of
course it is—it means
d-’arri-well,
And ‘ic + 1 ’ means eleven —his number on the card. How plain
it is, and what wonderful things dreams are ! ”
Yes; so they all are—after the race is over.
We suppose the old clock is still in its place; and if it remains
there so long as next November, surely its “ tip ” will be worth while
attending to. As to these dreams—well, it only, of course, requires
a little ingenuity to find them out.










“ FETTERS OF GOLD."
“ I give, devise, and bequeath the rest, residue, and remainder of my
real and personal estate to Joseph Herman upon trust, to stand seized
and possessed of the same for the use and benefit of my late sister's child,
Ethel Danville, for her absolute use and benefit. Nevertheless, it is my
express wish and desire that if the said Ethel Danville dut mg her
minority marry without the consent of the said Joseph Herman, or
refuse to be subject to his guidance or under his control, that the share
and benefit which is given and devoted to her under this my will be paid,
applied, and disposed of in aid of the Society for the Conversion of the
Chinese from the Doctrines of Confucius, and that she return immedi-
ately to the miserable and wretched position from which I rescued her!'
So ran the most important clause in old John Ramshaw s will,
which lawyer Sharp read out one dull afternoon, after the funeral, to
the friends and relations of the deceased.
Ethel started up, pale with surprise and dread, as the sentence fell
on her ears. She could hardly believe it, and she shuddered at the
golden chain that placed her under the guardianship of Joseph
Herman, whom she feared and disliked. The others present looked
upon her with envy as they murmured a few words of congratulatory
hypocrisy after the manner of the disappointed.
‘‘So, I understand,” said Charles Ramshaw, the now disinherited
son of the old man who had just been carried to his last home
without a tear —“ so by this I understand that my father has thought
proper to cut me off—not even with a shilling.”
“That is the unfortunate fact, Mr. Charles,” said the lawyer, “and
lam very sorry to say it. Divisions and dissensions between father
and son are very bad —very injudicious things, indeed ; very painful
—ahem ! —as we all see.”
“Yes,” said Herman, who was now guardian to the trembling
Ethel, “ if young men will not behave —will not, I mean, obey and
cherish their kind parents ”
“ Sir,” said Charles Ramshaw, “ I prefer not to listen to any
lectures or strictures on my past conduct, or I might be tempted to
make some on yours. For years my father has been no father to
me, as you know, and I, in turn, have experienced no filial instincts
towards him. You,” he continued, with a sneer, “Joseph Herman,
confidential friend and adviser, were the cause of this ; but you did
not succeed wholly in your plan. Miss Danville, I leave this house
your house now—for ever. It costs me a pang, I admit, for the
days of my childhood —when my poor mother hid me from my
father’s anger—come back to me; but I shall not dispute your good
fortune, or ” _
“ Oh, Charles,” exclaimed Ethel, taking the young man s hand, I


am the cause of this. You must not leave here: this house is
rightly yours, and I ”
“ Silence,” said Herman, sternly. “ Girl, you have no voice in
this matter. This man has his punishment, and he has well deserved
it. Let him go ! ”
“ Miss Danville, I thank you for your kindness,” said Charles,
“ as much as I feel contempt for your guardian, and deny his words.
No ; you have nothing to say—you are bound by this will to him.
Again, I thank you; but (turning to Herman) as for you, sir—you
who have done me this evil, we may meet again some day under
circumstances less pleasant than these appear to be to you.
Farewell !”
With a bow of mock politeness he was gone.
The others stayed to hear the remainder of the will read, betraying
as much interest in the formal attestation clause as in any of the
others, as though some bequest, however trifling, might not be
discovered there. Soon, however, they departed, and Ethel was left
with the solicitor and Joseph Herman. As these three sat by the
fireside, their faces presented a curious contrast. Outside, the
weather was bleak and uninviting, and it seemed to Ethel reflected
on the faces of Sharp and Herman. All were silent for some time,
during which Mr. Sharp took a pinch of snuff in a business-like
manner, as much as to say he had performed his part to his own
satisfaction. He was one of those men who always did everything
as a matter of business. There was nothing spontaneous in his
actions at any time. When he thought it proper to condole with
people, he repeated the same words, or in effect the same expressions,
that he had used on any former similar occasion. When he suffered
himself to be in a good humour, and this was very seldom, he
laughed the same little dry laugh, having the same harsh, ungenerous,
unhappy sound. He was like an actor; his actions being dictated
by the business of the scenes through which he passed, showing no
one his real feelings, even for a single moment, so that everyone felt
it was, indeed, as impossible to penetrate into the mind of Silas
Sharp as it would be to try to see through the dirty windows of his
office on which the announcement describing his name and pro-
fession was placed.
Joseph Herman now and then looked at the girl with ill-concealed
admiration. “ She might thank me,” he thought, “ for what I have
done for her. She shall thank me, aye ! and treat me as I should
be treated, before many months are over.” His nature was, perhaps,
as hard as the lawyer Sharp’s, but out of it had grown a love, a deep
feeling for this girl, that seemed to dominate his very soul—that had
inspired within him a purpose which his firm nature would soon find
a plan to carry out. Ethel’s face, without being of an excellent
mould, was winning and pretty. It was a face which showed that
she had gone through much trouble in the past, and had felt it
deeply on account of a deficiency of character to bear up against it.
She was but seventeen, but still there were lines of determination
round the mouth and a look in the eyes that showed that the


misfortunes of the past had left their mark, and would greatly
influence her future life. The hair was light golden, the figure well
formed, but neither were the eyes expressive or deep enough to
show any great intellect or soul beneath them. It was a pretty
face, that men would fall in love with, that men would wish to marry;
and Ethel had quite sufficient brains to take her position among the
country ladies round as an amiable and lovable girl, and (as she now
had a fortune) a very suitable bride for any of their sons or brothers.
“ Then, I am to be wholly under Mr. Herman’s control, sir ?’’
asked Ethel at last.
“Certainly, Miss Danville,” answered Sharp, “and I should
strongly advise you to be so. Indeed, for your own interest you
must. The facts that you have as guardian a gentleman of Mr.
Herman’s character (here Herman bowed, but Sharp continued) for
business, and the society of his mother, will place you in a most
favourable position as to those who must now stand in loco parentis —
ahem ! —in a parent’s place to you—who must now take care of a
young lady like yourself.”
“ I took care of myself, sir, before my uncle recollected that he
had a niece—that it was his sister’s child that was lost to all her
relation’s memories in the cold world of London, where she earned
her bread. I took care of myself then.”
“Do not rake up unpleasant recollections,” said Herman. “ You
will be very happy, if we can make you so.”
“ Quite true,” said Mr. Sharp; “unpleasant memories are always—
ahem ! just so —unpleasant. Recollections of past suffering are things
that should not be touched upon. Indeed, they should not. Except,
of course, occasionally ; when—ahem ! —occasion demands.”
Here it may be noticed how bountifully Mr. Sharp was supplied
with that valuable diplomatic and legal gift of saying a good deal that
might be taken either way.
“ Then, what am I worth ? ” asked Ethel.
“ I cannot say with exactness, Miss,” answered Mr. Sharp, “ but I
should say, speaking at random, about
“ You had better also say,” suggested Herman, “if Miss Danville
fulfils the testator’s —her uncle’s —condition, as expressed in the will.”
“ Ah! yes ; exactly. I was coming to that (in reality he had quite
forgotten it for the moment). The property is left to you ; subject,
of course, to your being under the direction of my friend here. A
most wise provision, if I may be allowed to say so. Ah ! ” continued
the lawyer, “my poor old friend knew what he was about. He was
a man of business, Miss Danville. It seems very strange. Well, I
will take one other glass of port —his old port. He prided himself
on it, poor fellow. It was the only luxury in which he ever indulged.”
And Mr. Sharp poured the glass of wine down his throat with
mathematical accuracy, as if his feelings (as a matter of business)
overcame him.
“ Is there any way in which I can show my willingness to fulfil
this condition ? ” asked Ethel.
“ Not now, Miss Danville,” said Mr. Sharp. “Your future con


duct will do that. And so, good-day; ” and Mr. Sharp opened the
door, and went out to where his horse and gig were waiting for him.
Ethel went to the window, and looked at the pitiless rain as it was
blown about by the fierce gusts of wind. The announcement of her
sudden wealth had made her silent, and she almost, forgot that
Joseph Herman was in the room. His face betrayed his chagrin at
seeing his presence forgotten, and he soon advanced to where the
girl stood.
“ The lawyer is right, Ethel,” he said to her. “ Your uncle has
wisely selected me for your guardian. Now, do not think me
stern, harsh, or unimpressionable. Be but compliant; do not be so
reserved with me, and the bonds of my control shall be of roseleaf
lightness. We have not known each other very long, but soon you
will see that I care for you too much, girl, to harass you with
commands. Do not treat me as a foe, and your wishes shall be
mine ; and ’tis by this that I promise so.” He would have stooped
down’and kissed her, but she sprang from his side, with a word of
cutting, contemptuous indignation on her lips. With difficulty she
controlled herself, and Joseph Herman laughed a small cynical
laugh, and said he must go and see if the servants were not idling
their time away. “ Good-bye, then,” he said ;“ I shall be back
presently to take you to my mother’s house.” _ .
“ Good-bye,” said Ethel, giving him her hand, which he held in
such close grasp as even to give her pain. He then left the room
with the jaunty step of a young man. Ethel went back to the
window. “ Yes,” she said to herself, “ is worth having,
coupled with whatever condition, to one who has known want who
has almost starved.” Then she sat down, and hastily wrote a few
lines on the deep black-edged paper which lay on the table, placing
them in an envelope, which she directed and put in her pocket. As
she did so, she exclaimed unconsciously, but with determination—
“ Yes; ,£30,000 is worth having, with any terms, to one who has
known want —has starved, has loved” _ .
Then, frightened by the sound of her own voice, she buried her
face in her hands, remaining in deep thought as the clock ticked the
moments on, and the clouds shed tears for the death of autumn—t le
only tears that had been shed that day near old John Ramshaw s
house.
11.
It is now nearly two years since the events of the preceding pages,
and life has passed not pleasantly with Ethel Danville. Her heart had
long been given to one who had known her in her days of poverty,
and nothing had shaken her allegiance to or changed her love for
him. She had written to him to tell him of her good fortune, and
had, despite the vigilance of Herman, seen him several times in her
afternoon walks. They loved each other, these two, and the time
was weary before they could be united. In the meantime, Joseph
Herman had made no secret of his love for her. He had tried all the


means in his power to make her throw aside the feeling of coldness
and disfavour with which she regarded him. First he had killed her,
almost, with kindness and solicitude. “ I will make her love me,”
he said; “she shall be my wife in spite of all —aye, almost in spite
of herself.” Then he tried to make her fear his power over her; but
in this her love for the absent one had sustained her, and made his
efforts powerless to change her demeanour towards him. Often she
was very unhappy, and at times miserable ; for Joseph Herman had
now become morose and tyrannical, she thought; and his continued
efforts to bend her will to his, made her feel that though the wealth
which had fallen to her had brought her comforts and position, it had
also made her subject to the daily annoyance of this man’s presence
and his odious advances towards her. She had not sought this gold,
but, like Tarpeia, now felt crushed by the weight of it and the
trouble it had brought to her.
She loved Harold Grant with her whole nature, with all her life.
He had trodden the up-hill road of existence when she had known
what it was to be poor. He had tried to live by his pen, but, like so
many others, had failed ; and when he had been sick and ill almost
to death, she had tended him—a service which he had repaid by
giving her his heart, and steadfastly trying, on his recovery, once
more to make a name for himself. In their poverty these two had
loved, had sighed for happier days ; and he had borne up so manfully
against his misfortune, and had sustained her in her own, that she
would never cease to think kindly of him. Suddenly elevated to a
position of affluence, she determined, in spite of all Herman’s
designs, to love Harold still; and love him she did, as he toiled
in the busy, high-pressure city —the metropolis, where there is so
much wealth and so much poverty —with what object she knew.
And in this way time had passed on.
To-day, there was something heavy in the atmosphere, and a
heaviness also lay on her heart, which she could hardly bear. She
had not seen or heard of Harold Grant for some time, and as for
Herman, her feeling of coldness to him had developed, through his
persistence, into a loathing and disgust which she could not conceal.
Life had become a burden. At this moment she almost wished for
death, or any change from the place which, being haunted by his
presence, was hateful to her. She heard a footfall in the passage,
and she felt that it was Herman’s, for the heaviness of her heart told
her he was near.
He entered the room with his usual forced gaiety of manner.
“ Come, Ethel,” he said, “ Come for a walk. You look pale and
ill. Come and put some roses in those cheeks. lam going to the
More Farm, and ”
“ Thank you. Ido not care,” said Ethel.
“ Now, be reasonable, and oblige me this once, Ethel. It is very
seldom you do so. You are rather cruel to me. Besides, I want to
talk to you.”
“Cruel!” exclaimed Ethel. “It is not I who am cruel, Joseph
Herman. You are my guardian. I cannot help that; but if you


have any of the consideration for me that you say you have, do not
ask me to make a friend or associate of you. It can never be.”
“ You are proud, Miss Danville; but I think I know something
that will make you more civil. You have kept your secret well. ’
“ What secret ?” gasped Ethel. “ You do not mean ”
“So you suspect it, Miss Danville,” said Herman ; but he changed
his tone, and continued. “Now, Ethel, listen to me. lam one
of those not easily dissuaded from my purpose. When I have made
up my mind to attain a certain object, and if though it take years, I
will wait and watch until I succeed. I would not hurt you ; but I
cannot see you each day indifferent to me like this. I love you with
a love daily increasing. I love you ! I kneel to you here, as I do
now, and ask you ”
“Rise, Mr. Herman,” said the girl, haughtily; “you ought to
know that each word you utter is an insult to my defenceless state.
My uncle did not know that he had rescued me from want and
misery for this.”
“ No, Ethel,” said Herman ; “ but he liked me. I was his friend
—his adviser. I did his business for him. I invested his money in
profitable speculations. I made more money—not for myself—for
him. I won his confidence. This money, which you —we —shall
enjoy, I made. I became his second self. I won his heart, as I now
sue for yours. It is my ambition —the wish and end of my life—to
hold you in my arms as mine—to gaze on your fair, white face, and
know you belong to me ; in a word, to love you, to live for you, to
be your slave.”
Here he stopped with the excess of his passionate emotion, and
kissed her hand—still grovelling to the earth like an abject being.
She trembled as she looked at him. His lips seemed to burn her
hand, and she drew it angrily away. Then he rose and said -
“ You refused this. You have thwarted my every wish since I
have known you, and now you condemn me to a life of unhappiness.
Am I a dog, to be spurned from your presence —a cur, whom every
one fears or looks upon with contempt ? If lamso in your opinion,
take care. Ethel Danville ! I can bite —aye, and wound ; yes, deeply
and remorselessly.”
“ You can do all evil against me,” said Ethel; “ I care not. I
will break away from these wretched chains of wealth that bestow on
you this power over me. I will leave this house.’
“Where will you go?” asked Herman, with a sneer. “It will be
a nice sight to see you once more ”
“Silence, sir !” cried the girl, for she knew the taunt he was going
to utter. “ I beg of you to let me leave your presence. I cannot
love you or be yours. I would sooner die !”
“Be it so ! ” said Herman, pale with rage and disappointment.
“ Then, you defy me. Read this.”
It was a letter from Harold Grant.
“ It is an elegant composition, truly,” continued Herman with a
sneer, “ and it is very proper conduct, no doubt, to carry on clandes-
tine correspondence with a young man. You have met, too, I


understand —no doubt very innocently. Are you mad ? Do you
love this man ? ”
“ I do/’ said Ethel, firmly. “ I would he were here now to chastise
you for this insolence.”
“ Then beware! for you tread on unsafe ground. You have
disobeyed me. I can turn you out penniless and character- less into
the world. Be careful! ”
A well-directed blow felled him to the ground. It came from the
strong arm of Harold Grant.
“ Monster ! ” he said, “ the most hideous reptile of earth is not so
vile as you ! Go, Ethel, this is not a fit scene for you to witness.
Leave me to arrange this with Joseph Herman.”
“ I forbid her to leave the room,” cried Herman, trembling with
rage. “ You and I will have a heavy account to settle for this. I
forbid her to leave this room.”
“She shall do as she likes,” said Harold. “ Ethel, will you go or
stay ? ”
“ I will stay,” said the girl, clinging to him for protection.
“ Then hear me,” said Herman. “Are you aware that the only
result of your conduct will be to reduce this young lady to poverty?”
“I care not,” said Harold. “She is dearer to me for that. She
will have stayed no longer with you.”
“ You talk like a child. You are an honourable man, truly, to try
to make a begger of her whom you love. It is a romantic but rather
unmanly action. Do not you think so? You are in debt, of course.
Your conduct still appears rather absurd, and even selfish. You say
you love this girl. You have injured her deeply.”
“ Your words are those of a rival,” said Harold Grant; “of a man
who has abused his position to force an orphan girl to be his—who
has tormented her with his love. If you are a man you will not
continue this.”
“ She shall consent,” said Herman. “I do not wish to hurt her ;
but believe me, young man, if I see you here again, or if I find you
corresponding with her, I will exercise my power. You are silent.
I think you are becoming sensible now of the mistake you have
made.”
“He is right, Ethel,” said Grant. “I am hurting you, am I not ?
lam poor, lam in debt. *1 could not see you work as before. I
will go.”
“ Yes, go,” said Herman. “No farewell. If you wish to see her
to-morrow, in my presence, I will permit it. You see you have been
a fool.”
“ Ethel, I love you ! ” cried Harold, taking her in his arms. “It
is for your sake that I leave this house. To-morrow ”
“ Enough of this,” said Herman. “ Granted she loves you, is it
generous of you to act like this ? Till to-morrow you leave this
house. You see lam calm ; take care and do not provoke me.”
Ethel’s tears were falling fast now, and with an effort Harold left,
withdrawing from the room as quickly as he had entered it. Joseph
Herman turned to the agitated girl, and said—


“He is gone, you see. He is wise. He knows what poverty is,
and fears my power. He may come to-morrow, and until then
I will give you time to reflect whether you prefer starving with
that man, and dragging him down with your helplessness, or
living in comfort in this house. Think well over this, for on it your
life’s happiness depends. Good-bye.”
Then Ethel withdrew to her own room, and Joseph smiled as he
saw how much in his favour the game had turned. Still he was
angry with himself and all. The blow which he had received, and
which he had been too much of a coward to return, rankled in his
mind. He plotted a deep revenge against Harold Grant for the
morrow.
That evening at tea he said “ Mother, lam going to the More
Farm, and may drop in at the Crown to see if Hobson is there. He
is an idle fellow, and I think I have some work for him to do ; so,
please, do not wait up for me.” In half-an-hour’s time he had left
the house.
It was a night to be kept in memory that followed this eventful
day to Ethel Danville. As she lay sleepless in her room, her mind
travelled as a mind ill at ease will travel over the scene which had
so lately occurred. Outside she could see the heavy clouds hanging
like huge dark palls over the quiet earth. She opened her window
to breathe the night air. It was eleven o’clock. Had not, then,
Herman returned from the More Farm ? It was not usual with him
to be out so late. She thought of Harold, and of what events the
morrow would bring. She was too true-hearted a woman to add her
poverty to his, and drag him down in the battle of life by the weight
of it. But it was hard to part from him even for two years, and still
harder to bear those two years in the same house with her guardian.
Worn out, at length she sought her bed, and in repose found relief
for her over-charged mind.
She felt sure the morrow would bring some new scheme of revenge
on her enemy’s part, and was glad to close her eyes to the world and
its surroundings, which were causing her so much pain and unhappi-
ness.
And the night passed quietly away. In the early morning she
was aroused by the sound of hurrying footsteps. There were men
in the garden, and the servants were talking to them anxiously and
excitedly. She hastily dressed and went down-stairs.
“Where is Mrs. Herman?” asked Ethel of old Doctor Jones, who
stood in the hall.
“ Pray, be calm, Miss Danville,” he answered hurriedly. “ This
is a sad blow—a sad blow to all of us. Do not agitate yourself.
You will need all your self-control.”
“ What has happened? Where is Mr. Herman? Has he not
returned ? Pray, tell me.”
“ He is dead ” —answered the doctor.
“ Dead ! ” cried Ethel, turning pale as marble with the shock.
“ Yes, dead; pray be calm. Murdered between here and the
More Farm,” said Dr. Jones solemnly, as he turned away. But his


attention was soon called to her to whom he had just spoken. Ethel
had fainted. . f
The shock had been too sudden and too terrible. In those tew
moments a dreadful idea had flashed through her mind. Who had
done this deed ? Was she at this instant freed from Herman only
to be afflicted by a still greater sorrow ? Who had murdered him ?
She feared—her heart seemed to turn to lead, and then she lost
consciousness.
The doctor busied himself, and soon, by the help of his attentions,
Ethel regained the senses that had forsaken her. She opened her
eyes with a frightened stare, and asked
“ Where is he ? Oh ! let me see him. Harold ! ”
“ The men are bringing the body along, Miss Danville, answered
the doctor, “and now I shall take you to Mrs. Herman. You both
need consolation at this hour.”
Yes, he was dead —this man who had left the house but a few
hours before, bent on measures of revenge. It was not a pleasant
sight to look at the body as it lay in the hall, with an ugly death-
bringing wound on the temple, the murder had evidently been a
savage and brutal one. The face was hideous, and partly beaten
in and hardly recognizable. It was a sight to make the strongest
turn away from such a ghastly object. In the parlour sat Mrs.
Herman in tears, and wringing her hands at the loss of her son. He
had been a good son to her, and now he was dead —murdered by a
cruel man, whom she knew not. There would be no one to comfort
her old age now. .
• Ethel sat pale and motionless, with a terrible fear in her heart
that Harold Grant had done this deed. She was paralyzed by
the thought that Herman and Harold had met the night before,
and, stung by insult and maddened by Herman’s taunts, he whom
she’loved had plunged his soul into crime never to be repaired.
“ Where is the murderer ? ” she asked, at length, rising up with a
forced calmness. . , .
“ They have arrested him,” said Doctor Jones. He is now being
taken to gaol, past the door of the house.”
“ Let me see him —I must see him 1 ” Ethel cried, as they made
efforts to detain her. Though it were Harold, she would see him.
Though he were guilty of this deed, he was still in her eyes worthy
of sympathy. He had been provoked to do it, and she must see
him. With agitated steps, she ran to where the men were bringing
the murderer past the house. , T7 . r ,
Good heavens! it was CHARLES RAMSHAW!
With mad strength he tried to release himself from his captors.
He fought with them. He struggled with the bonds that held him
safe, but it was of no avail. As he was brought near the trembling
girl’he suddenly became calm, and looked at her in a way that
seemed to indicate that he was searching in his memory to find out
who she was. He was changed—greatly changed. There was a
look in his eyes as of a wild beast that has been sated with revenge
oq prgy. To such a pass had drink, vice, and lawlessness


brought the unfortunate and dissolute Charles Ramshaw. He and
Joseph Herman, as he had promised, had met again.
A cry of relief broke from Ethel as Harold Grant came forward
and gently caught her in his arms, with kindly words of advice to
spare herself this dreadful scene.
sf: * sf: sf:
A year has now elapsed, and time has, with its healing hand,
blotted out some of the sad recollections of the past events. There
are two persons walking on the quiet beach of a little seaport town
in the south of England. They are Harold and Ethel, who are
staying here prior to their tour in France and Italy. In the hand of
Ethel, curiously enough, is a book “ by Harold Grant,” and her face
lights up with a glad smile as the author—her husband—tells of his
past successes, and his ideas for the future. He is telling Ethel
that she is a very kindly critic, at which she turns and says —
“ Yes, I admit I am prejudiced in your favour, dear Harold.”
ID ALIAS HISTORY;
OR, THREE SCENES IN A LIFE.
There have lived Joan of Arc and Charlotte Corday. There still
lives—but it is only a living death —Idalia Poltheim.
It is but two years ago, but at a time when the eyes of the
civilized world were fixed on Turkey’s struggle with her hereditary
foe. Although there are many tears being shed and many families
desolate for those who have fallen under the bravery of the Turks,
still, even now, revelry does not cover its head with mourning, or
hush its voice. At St. Petersburg, there is being celebrated the
betrothal feast of Idalia the beautiful, the talented, with the rich
Poltheim, whose estates near Kief are large, and whose roubles are
said to be almost inexhaustible. He was not one of the hereditary
nobility—of which hereditary nobility there are, by the way, in
Russia, no less than 650,000. He had been a merchant at Odessa,
and belonged to the first class of the commercial guild. He had
lent money to all comers —more especially to the nobility—and now
had attained to what he considered the height of his ambition in
wedding Idalia, whose hand had been sought by many, and whose
smiles, being so rare, were prized by her suitors beyond jewels.
How had Idalia, asked everyone, accepted old Poltheim ? They
had watched her as she plighted her faith to her old and by no
means prepossessing future husband. True, there are marriages all
over the world for interest, but Idalia was known not to care for
wealth —in fact, had openly scorned it. “Ah! but she was just


like the rest,” said they; and so said young Michael, who loved her.
Yes, just like the rest.
The ceremonies are over, the lock of the bride’s hair has been cut
off, and the silver and turquoise betrothal ring has been presented
by the bridegroom to Idalia. Her face has been pale, but not more
pale than usual in its cold and haughty loveliness. It was impossible
to see whether this marriage into which she was now about to enter
was or was not entirely of her own choice, and to her liking. While
congratulations are still being spoken, her brother walks to her side
and withdraws the bride a little apart from the gay company
assembled. He says, in a low voice—
“ Idalia, it is done —the decree of the Council of Liberty has been
obeyed. Do you not feel the greatness, my dear sister, of the
sacrifice you have made of your beauty—of your heart ? ”
Do I look regretful, Alexis? ” the girl answered. “ The sacrifice
was commanded. Well, for the cause, I have consented.”
“ There is Michael, who loves you, here,” said her brother. “ He,
when he hears of your generous act, will doubtless join with us.”
“Nay, spare him ! He is too young. You make me feel a
woman again when you speak of him.”
“ I speak but the words of our society. Does not the law of our
association demand it? We are not poor, trodden down, lately-
emancipated serfs. We are a Society of Intellect that will spread,
and is spreading its branches into the army, the government offices—
aye, into the Privy Council of the Emperor; soon to destroy this
cursed despotism, and raise Russia from its degraded state. Michael
shall join us.”
“Do not urge me too much, brother. Be content with what you
have already made me do.”
“I am content,” said Alexis—“ more than content. I shall con-
vey to our chief intelligence of the way in which the order has been
by you obeyed. Farewell! ”
The betrothal festivities now continued, and there were none
there seemingly more joyous than Idalia. Her future husband was
attentive to her slightest wish, and indeed had always been reckoned
one that would be indolently complaisant, and not too exacting. He
certainly looked very old as the evening progressed, but, then, was he
not rich ? And if he were a little old—well, for Idalia’s sake, people
thought it was not to be complained of. Youth would not be for so
long mated with age. Spring would not be so long joined to winter.
And so the evening goes gaily on.
That night, when all was hushed in silence, a trusty messenger .is
despatched by Alexis Petrozoff with the following message in
cypher: —
u Your commands have been obeyed, and Idalia, my sister, is now
the bride elect of the rich Poltheim. Her behaviour was grand, and
worthy of a daughter of Liberty. It was a sacrifice; but one which,
when the needs of our society, and your commands, were made
known to her, she did not hesitate to make. It will now be a.
4


scheme to get the money, which I will devise and shortly will
execute. Poltheim is niggardly, but should he refuse my sister the
required amount it will be for us to adopt other means. But expect
nothing further of Idalia yet. The first step is the worst, and one
which she must have time to regret. And when regret has once
come, the rest is easy.
“ In the name of our murdered friends,
“ A.”
There were further rejoicings when the marriage took place, a
month or so after the betrothal. Before the marriage there was yet
time for Idalia to break off the union with Poltheim, but, held by
the chains of the society to which she belonged, she did not do so.
And when the old man took his handsome bride, at the wedding,
ceremony, from her brother, little he knew what hidden decree had
given her to him, or how dangerous a society the woman belonged to-
whom he then called wife.
The next scene is at the hall of Poltheim, near Kief, and it is
eighteen months since the events previously mentioned. Idalia, now
the wife of the rich estate owner, has position and power. But of
what avail are these ? she asks herself. Her husband is a miser, and
the demands of her brother for money are incessant. It is the
time of plots, and plots cannot be carried on safely without money.
The Treaty of Berlin had been signed, and the eyes of the Czar’s
Government were turned from the late struggle in the East to the
nihilist conspiracies at home. Gangs of political offenders—exiled
to Siberia by the sbirri of Alexander —were continually starting for
that land of suffering and sorrow. Some were going to the mines—
to always sleep and work below the surface of the earth, until death
mercifully should come to release them. The Siberian prisoner, in
this dreadful part, turns in five years from a middle-aged man to
one apparently on the brink of the grave from old ag 2 and
decrepitude—their only occupation, every day but two in the year,
being work \ their only comfort —and that a debasing one the
intoxication produced by the vodki, which they sometimes surrep-
titiously obtain. Still conspiracies went on. It could not be
stamped out then —this society, which appalled the Czar and
troubled his ministers—and it has not been put down now. Even
the newly-returned army is suspected, and even it is placed under the
eyes of the police, and arms must be reckoned and accounted for.
Yera Sassulitch, being arrested for a misdemeanour, is tried before a
jury of her countrymen, and, among acclamations, is acquitted. No
further jury trials for political offences take place. It is easier and
more sure for the State itself to be accuser, judge, and executioner.
And thus the battle between Despotism and Nihilism goes on —
seemingly with increasing vigour and activity on both sides.
And so-Idalia asks herself of what avail has been her sacrifice
if her friends cannot benefit by it in their hour of need. Her


husband at this time is absent at Odessa, the place of his business
triumphs; and as she paces up and down the spacious room, there
is the sound of horses’ hoofs outside, and soon her brother Alexis,
who has come from the scene of the last plot that has failed, enters
the room.
She is handsome, this woman, in her imperial style of beauty.
The face is intellectual, the hair dark, the brow full and commanding.
Still, in her brother’s presence, all cause for deception being removed,
she appears anxious and eager to have the latest intelligence of how
this, the latest raid by the police upon the secret printing press, will
turn out*, and who is implicated in, and who will suffer for it. After
hurriedly giving the details, he says —
“ They are arrested, all of them, with the exception of Serge and
Michael, who have escaped, and are now in hiding.”
“ Michael, he escaped ! ” exclaims Idalia, vehemently. “ Did you,
then, have no pity for him ? Must he also become a conspirator ?
You did not tell me this.”
“ Michael has, acting on noble instinct, joined us in this,” said
Alexis, “and will suffer —aye ! die with us, if necessary.”
“ And I fear it will be necessary,” said Idalia.
“Very possibly.”
“Then, why do you come here?” asked Idalia; “why do you
-come to ask for what I have not ? I have pleaded every excuse to
get money from my husband. I will plead no more.”
“ Then Michael will be arrested,” said Alexis quietly. He wished
to see what effect this would have upon his sister. “ You give him
into the hands of his enemies.”
“ Nay, it is you who have placed him in this danger,” answered
Idalia. A more than anxious look had stolen over her face, and
after a pause, she turned and said, “ I have done all—all I have in
my power to accomplish. I can do no more.”
“ ’Tis only six hundred roubles I want.* You will let Michael be
banished for so paltry a sum ! O Idalia ! There is yet time and
■opportunity to show your devotion to our cause —now more than
-ever in want of it.”
“ What do you mean ? You cannot mean that ”
“Hush!” said Alexis. Then he bent his head down and whis-
pered a word that made the woman to whom he spoke turn pale.
An anxious controversy followed, and continued that night until late.
Artfully did Alexis work on the feeling of Idalia for Michael’s safety.
With diabolic ingenuity he spoke of Michael, freedom, and widow-
hood, in sentiments that could point to but one conclusion —could
bring about but one result. The woman was bound, he knew, to
the society; but he knew some stronger object must prevail to make
her consent to what he wished. Where they lived were lerrorism
and unhappiness. In another land there would be every good; for,
where Freedom was, there was all happiness. If anything was to be
-done, it must be done at once, for he feared the police were only
About


too surely on Michael’s track; and, once arrested, it would be too
late. “ I long for happier days, Idalia,” he urged; “ but I cannot
leave my friends. You are different, and your action shall have its
reward.”
“ I leave at daybreak,” he said, as they parted that night.
“ When does your husband return?”
“To-morrow!” said Idalia, still pale, but with the look of
resolution and fearlessness in her face.
There is but little more to tell of the history of Idalia Poltheim,
for the closing scene is easily described. It occurred only a few
months ago, and may be read in the journals of that period. The
crime which she committed to obtain the necessary funds for the
preservation of her friends and the propagation of their principles, is
there described. The desperate and successful attempt to release
Michael and Serge which she made, and which led to her own arrest,
was also mentioned at the trial, and commented on by the judge as
one of the most daring and extraordinary ever known. Having
entered the guard-house in disguise, with drugged liquor she made
the soldiers asleep, and thus her friends escaped. The trial made a
profound sensation at Kief and in its neighbourhood. The sentence
was transportation to the mines—never to return.
The above is no idle tale or unreal history. We all know what an
important part women played in that great upheaval, the French
Revolution, of which Carlyle and so many others have written.
That was as the irruption of a mighty volcano, which with its fierce
larva-flood bore away Throne, King, and Queen, and marked a new
era in the world. And when the history of Nihilism comes to be
written, there will appear the name of one who foolishly and
enthusiastically sacrificed herself and everything in its cause, and
that name will be Idalia Poltheim.
ERRATA.
P. 24, line 31, for “boy” read “old boy.”
P. 29, line 8, for “Virgil-lead” read “Virgil-led.”
Walker, May and Co., Printers, 9 Mackillop Street (off 56 Bourke Street West), Melbourne.






