





U PrvJsiA iu oA~i Uc
V f f
/ **
( 359 )
Art. IV. — l. Capper's South Australia , containing the History
of the Rise, Progress, and present State of the Colony. By
Henry Capper. Third Edition.
2. The Land of Promise. By “ One who is going.” London :
Smith Elder, & Co.
3, Six Months in South Australia. By J. Horton James, Esq.
London : J. Cross.
4. Fourth Annual Report of the Colonization Commissioners for
South Australia. 1839.
People do not emigrate for amusement. Jhere must be a
strong urgent inducement of a severer sort to induce men to
turn their backs upon the land of their birth, the places which
they have known, the friends and acquaintances they have been
among from their youth up; to separate themselves from feelings
and wishes strong, not only for life, but after death also; to
cut themselves oft from home associations, with prospect of nevei
again renewing them. Well known instances there have been of
individuals and bodies of men abandoning their country for con-
science sake, to seek where they might freely, without molestation,
worship God according to their consciences, or be exempt fiom
oaths and engagements which they could not conscientiously take.
Such notions have pretty much passed away in our days. The
inducement which now sets men on emigration, is almost entirely
of another sort. It is simply to better themselves in the world.
Either they cannot find a living for themselves at home, or not
in the sphere of life in which they have been brought up, oi they
hope to raise themselves a step, or make a fortune quicker than
at home. These are the inducements which lead men to emi-
grate. Accordingly they are not for the most part inclined to
complain in other respects, if their chief end seems likely to be
answered. They have expected to have to rough it. Ihey did
not go out expecting ease, comforts, luxuries, all at once. What
they wanted was to make money, to make more than they could
at home. They leave difficulties behind them ; they are not so
unreasonable as to suppose they will meet with no fresh ones.
They look to being relieved of the difficulties they leave behind,
but are not so unreasonable as not to be prepared for others of
another sort in their stead. I hey think however, of course, that
the balance is in favour of the step they take ; and if not at first,
yet on the long run. The one serious objection they would con-
sider to the land of their choice would be, that it did not afford
opportunities for making their way and getting on. While they
thrive, they will report well of the land, so well as to disappoint


strangers on coming out, who do not consider what, after all, is
the one chief recommendation of a new land, to those who pro-
fess themselves well satisfied with the step they have taken, and
invite others to make the same experiment, viz. that it affords
good and certain prospect of making a fortune; at any rate, of
making money quicker than there was any chance of at home.
While this is the case, it is, of course, to be expected, that the
settlers will take the most favourable view of things. A silvery
halo, or some more precious tint, will light up and tinge all
the objects around them, and they will describe accordingly.
Local advantages will be magnified, prospects be set forth in the
most tempting way; inconveniences, hardships, and risks, will be
kept in the back ground, and made as light of as may be. Par-
ticularly this will be the case, if a bad impression on the public
mind at home concerning the new settlement would be likely to
operate to the manifest disadvantage of the colony, and to the
prospects of the success of the new settlers. People are slow
also to believe they have taken a wrong step, still slower to ad-
vertise others of it; particularly if they can persuade themselves,
that if others would but continue to think as they once thought,
they would do well enough yet, or, at any rate, get well out of
their mistake: and that theirs and others’ success depends on
keeping up an impression on the public mind, which, after all,
may seem to them to do no great harm, even though it be not
quite correct. Phe more sanguine will be slow to think their
case bad, the more prudent, if embarked with them, will be slow
to communicate suspicions, which may prejudice their own in-
terests.
On the other hand, for the same reason that persons embarked
in a concern, or prospering in it, will give a hopeful encouraging
view of the enterprise in which they are engaged ; a disappointed
man, or one engaged in an opposite interest, equally well in*
tentioned as to enlightening the public, only of course, not too
much to his own detriment, will give a very different account of
the same things. What the one w-riter keeps in the back ground,
with the other are all prominent, and points of chief importance.
Neither one may state w'hat is positively untrue, although the ac*
counts they give of the same things and places may have nothing
in common but proper names. Scenery, climate, soil, manners*
persons, places, prospects, the actual state of things, comforts and
hardships, present a very different aspect from the mouths and
pens of the two authorities, both perhaps speaking and writing
from what they have themselves seen and experienced; the one
description being from the thriving, active, enterprising, high
spirited person, who has found his bold step answer, and sees a


good prospect of rising; the other, from a disappointed ad-
venturer, or a dispirited, desponding one, who likes his ease, and
cannot face difficulties with spirit and cheerfulness, and who, from
whatever cause, has not found a good marketable price, whether
for himself or his wares. Often statements are so very contradic-
tory as to baffle all power of adjustment; but often they are
easily reconcilable. The writers, from some cause or other, are
at cross purposes. They are like persons peeping through dif-
ferent holes, and through different coloured glass, at the same
objects, though thus brought out in different positions, and under
different shades of light. Both are taking partial views, both ac-
cording to their actual position and circumstances, or according to
the idea uppermost in their minds. This admits of easy illustra-
tion. Suppose an opening for the office of resident managing-
director of the iron works at A., or of superintendent over the coal
pits at B. I advise with two friends as to undertaking either of
them. The one sets vividly before me the discomforts and anxieties
of the employment among an ill conditioned, turbulent, riotous po-
pulation, in a dreary, unhealthy country, with no society, and con-
stant disagreeable inspection of the works at the furnaces, or below-
ground. The other briefly puts in, “ the salary is £ 1000 a year,”
is it not? What can be more unlike than the two views, what clearer
than each by itself, who does not appreciate the business-like soli-
dity of our second friend’s pertinent inquiry? Or let the matter in
doubt be emigration to Australia. From one I hear of heat, and
drought, and fleas, and wandering unsettled life, of bad diet, and
short commons, of personal risks, of inconveniences, privations,
and he adds, perhaps, “ I have myself tried it and come away. The
only way to make it answer is so and so, and that I could not bear,
so I came away, and would not go again, if you were to pay me
for it.” The other observes, “such an one went out to Adelaide,
with nothing but a capital for a small flock, and in a few years he
returned with £60,000, made in sheep farming.” Each view has
its truth, though it is quite clear who speaks to the point, if my
object be to make money. Whether a third friend might not
point out considerations of more importance, requiring much
more consideration, to be well weighed before I made my deter-
mination, is another question.
A few amusing contrasts will be given by and bye, from the
works at the head of this article. At present it may be as w'ell to
give a short account of the province of South Australia, its pre-
sent condition, and what it holds out to the emigrant.
The province of South Australia is a portion of the vast island
or continent of that name. It is about the same distance from
the south pole that we are from the north pole, and is a voyage of
NO, LVIII. —APR. 1841. B B


] 6,000 miles from us by ship’s course. The summer months are
December, January, February ; the winter, June, July, and Au-
gust, which is rather a season of rain than of frost and cold.
The whole length of the continent from east to west is from
1500 to 1800 miles, and about 1400 from north to south. Of
the interior of this vast extent of country little or nothing is
known. It has not yet been traversed, nor is it certainly known
what tribes there are in the central portion, or even whether it is
inhabited at all. Hitherto exploring parties have not penetrated
more than a few hundred miles up the country ; neither are there
any new settlements except within a few miles of the coast. The
land was first discovered by the Dutch or Spaniards about 1609.
It was afterwards touched at by many voyagers, chiefly Dutch,
from whom it obtained the name of New Holland. The eastern
part of the country was totally unknown till 1770, when it was
explored by Captain Cook, and the British government took pos-
session of the country in 1778, under the name of New South
Wales. It was then made a penal settlement, and more than
700 convicts sent out with the first governor. In 1828 a colony
was established at Swan River on the western side of the island.
But it was not till 1836 that the province of South Australia was
formed. This province is situated, as its name implies, on the
southern coast: on the eastern side are the provinces of New
South Wales : on the west, the boundaries of the colony of
Western Australia, of which Swan River is the chief settlement.
It has a line of coast of about 1300 miles, and extending inland
somewhere about 600 or 700 miles. The actual length of the
province from east to west is not much more than 600 or 700
miles, and the great length of coast it presents is from being in-
dented by the great inland seas called Spencer’s and St. Vincent’s
Gulphs. Thus it contains an extent of country nearly double
that of the British isles. This coast is little more than laid down
in maps with names to the different headlands, bays, &c. For as
yet there are but two settlements of any importance in the pro-
vince—that at Adelaide, which is laid down for the capital of the
province, and that at Port Lincoln, which is on the western horn
of Spencer’s Gulf. The climate seems on all hands to be allowed
to be excellent. Even Mr. James says, “ except the ophthalmia,
the writer saw nothing indicative of disease,” and the inhabitants
“appear free from the prevailing diseases of New South Wales, viz.
the dysentery and influenza.” The report of the commissioners,
however, states that “ a mild form of dysentery” is at times very
prevalent. “ Fevers and agues” (say the commissioners) “ are un-
known. Exploring parties sleep upon the ground without hazard
to their health. Persons labouring under pulmonary disease have


been restored to health by a residence in the colony.” We, too,
have heard a person well acquainted with the country say, that he
had never known a case of consumption. But it is time to con-
trast some of the conflicting statements as to the colony and its
capabilities, made by the writers at the head of this article. The
writer of “ The Land of Promise” has live pages full of testi-
monies to the excellence of the climate, from persons in the
colony.
“ The temperature at noon” (says Mr. Capper) “ is much higher than
it usually is in England at the same time in the corresponding seasons,
but there is little difference in the temperature of the morning and even-
ing. The air is generally tempered by a cool and delightful sea breeze,
which blows steadily and regularly throughout the day, and is succeeded
at night by an equally steady and grateful breeze from the land. Ihe
sky is usually clear and brilliant, and the atmosphere not subject to those
sudden vicissitudes of heat and cold that w r e have in England : for though
in the summer the heat is considerable, and during the months of January
and February the thermometer has stood at 120°, the air is so pure and
elastic, that it never causes the low-spirited feeling that the heat of
summer does in England. This, however, does not last above twelve or
fourteen days, and is not continuous, as after two or three days of this
weather, there is generally a day or two of fine weather, and so alter-
nately for about a fortnight. Throughout the summer hardly a week
occurs without the most refreshing showers.”—p. 44,
“ From April to November,” observes Mr. James, “ the climate of
South Australia may challenge comparison with the most favoured regions
of the globe, and is in every respect suitable and even delicious to an
Englishman’s tastes and feelings.” But for the other four “ the heat is
oppressive and almost intolerable,” such as “ I never remember to have
felt in any part of the tropics even ; it dries up every thing all
garden vegetation : it pulverises the dust in the camp at Adelaide, that
it is reduced to an almost impalpable powder, and penetrates every article
of clothing from its extreme fineness, whilst as much caution is requisite
in stepping across the road, as if a person were going through the
muddiest part of Piccadilly or Whitechapel. Half the people you see
have got bad eyes, tbe dandies even wearing veils.”—pp. 17, 18.
Poor Adelaide during this season “ never feels the refreshing
eastern wind,” which is the cool and constant wind in summer,
because “ the township is placed close under the western side of
Mount Lofty.”
The commissioners pronounce South Australia to have the
advantage of water communication above any other portion of
New Holland, being traversed by the Murray, the only consider-
able river in the country capable of inland navigation, and that
when its tributaries are cleared of obstructions, occasioned by the
fallen timber, it will be navigable for boats for upwards of 1000
miles. This river discharges itself into Lake Alexandrina, a
B B 2


fresh water lake, “ forty miles in length and thirty-five in breadth.”
Still more glowingly is the “ water privilege” of the province
celebrated in a number of the South Australian Gazette.
<f Wherever the seaport of the capital of South Australia be placed,
nearest and easiest of access from the Murray, there the New Orleans
of this new empire is at once formed. We have the great Murray for
its sister the Mississippi ; the Darling for the Missouri 3 the Murrum-
bidgee for the Ohio.” —Land of Promise, p. 88.
On the other hand, Mr. H. James seems all in a fever when
he begins to speak about water. Certainly the country must
have been too hot for him. Indeed we have heard it significantly
observed, that Mr. James found it prudent to quit Australia on
that account.
“ The whole continent,” he says (p. 11), <f is cursed with a general
want of water.” “ Where are the rivers,” (he asks in another place
with impassioned eagerness) “ and what their names, that rise in the
new colony ? Is there one ? For the little streams Hindmarsh and
Kangaroo can hardly be designated as rivers. The Yass even is a puddle,
and the Turnat a mere mountain torrent Even the Murray and
its 1000 miles of navigation will all end in disappointment.” —p. 130.
Yet elsewhere he says of it,
“ That for the last 200 miles of its course it is as broad as the 1 hames
at London Bridge.”—p. 13.
The different ways in which the organs of sight are affected by
the appearance of water in that country, might be instanced again
in the case of the <( Torrens ;” Mr. Capper saw in it “ a pretty
stream,” with “ picturesque sheets of water” along its valley.—
( Capper , pp. 38, 39.) According to Mr. James, it is the tiny
Torrens “ which you step across without knowing it.”—p. 30.
<f It all but vanishes; in the few places where it runs at all, there
would be plenty of room for the whole of it to run through an Irish-
man’s hat; and a far better river is made every day in the London streets,
when the parish turncock opens a plug. There are, however, several
pretty good holes, which have too much water in them to be entirely
exhausted by the sun’s heat, and it was on account of these water holes
that the town was placed in this unfortunate situation.”—pp. 17, 18.
Indeed, in Mr. James’s view, Adelaide is a concentration of
all that is bad : ill-chosen as to its position in the province, and
as to site in that particular part —unsuitably and absurdly laid
out as to extent and size of streets and squares, which are of a
scale almost to require “ a cab to get across them and where
people lose themselves in the dark, and have been constrained to
pass the night “ sub dio,” finding no human habitation, and no
one to direct them ; the harbour miserably inconvenient from


shallowness and irregularity of the tides; the settlement at the
port but a few wretched straggling huts, with ill-conditioned un-
civil inmates; water scarce to be had even tor money; a wretched
sandy hot road of eight miles from the port to the town, with no
facilities for communication. These are the heads ot his griev-
ances, about which he inveighs the more bitterly, because Port
Lincoln presented every thing that was desirable for the chief
settlement, and nothing but the dense stupidity of the surveying
staff prevented its being chosen for the site of the capital. As
it is, in Mr. James’s judgment, nothing can prevent Port Lincoln
from being sooner or later the emporium of the new colony.
The removal of the seat of government must follow, “ and then
the city of Adelaide will dwindle down into a second or third
rate provincial village of the interior.”—p. 8.
Why the site of Adelaide was chosen where it is, and why Port
Lincoln was passed over shall be told by and bye. But first we
wish Mr. James to tell the full amount of his miseries, they throw
light on the reasons of his feeling them so acutely. The reader
is to suppose himself to have sailed some way up St. Vincent’s
Gulf and to have taken the pilot on board, and now let Mr.
James tell his own tale.
“ In about half an hour two white buoys or beacons are seen a-head
very close together, and between them is the narrow entrance. One of
the sailors is now ordered into the chains with the hand-lead to ascertain
the depth of the water. While he is crying out ‘by the mark three-
quarter less three,’ the passengers are looking over the sides of the ship
at the bottom, which is seen distinctly, and presently bump the vessel
strikes upon the mud and sand. This is the bar of Port Adelaide. .. .
The captain frowns, whilst the pilot thinks nothing of it, but walks
about calm and unruffled as if he were in his own parlour; the sails are
not even clued up, because the pilot thinks she will float again in the
course of an hour or two .... that every ship touches more or less on
entering the port The careful captain .... is not a little annoyed
at having the matter treated so coolly, and wonders that the pilot,
knowing the ship drew fourteen feet water, should attempt going over
the bar with barely thirteen feet on it. About sunset or a little before,
the flood-tide is making .... and you are gliding pleasantly along up
the narrow and muddy creek, with shoals on either side. Presently the
ship has to cross a second bar and soon after you are in deep
water. There is here a turn in the creek, and as it is dark and the wind
against you they bring up for the night. In the morning the passen-
gers find themselves sailing up a narrow dirty ditch fringed on both
sides with odious mangrove trees, and nothing to be seen on either of
the low swampy shores but the dwarf tea trees or melaleuca. Ihe
shores resemble the worst parts of the coast of Essex look
out for a landing place in vain, though the ship now anchors again and
you are at the end of your voyage. r lhe boat is being lowered to put


the passengers ashore. ... It is now 10 o’clock, and unless you make
haste you are informed there may be some difficulty in landing, as the
tides are here very unaccommodating, being always low water in the
middle of the day. You ask if this is Port Adelaide? the answer is
Yes ! You step into the boat .... the landing place is about a mile
higher up, and you already see the bottom, and in a few minutes you
stick fast in the mud. . . . The tide is fast falling. . . . The good na-
tured sailors seeing there is nothing else to be done, step out of the boat
into the water, trowsers and all (! !) [only think actually—when was
such a thing ever heard of at a civilized European port ?] and succeed in
pulling the boat along a considerable way; but presently she is again
stuck as fast as ever in the broken shelly bottom. What is to be done—
which is the landing place —the iron store is seen about a quarter of a
mile off, and the passengers now must all get out, and walk as the
sailors have done, but it will be too deep, it will be up to our knees ex-
claims a lady with new shoes and silk stockings : never mind, you must
either do that or wait till dark, so here goes ; and out they bring ladies
and all ... . and long before they reached the landing place they run
a risk of falling in the water, not to say suffocation in the mud
The shore is an uninhabitable swamp Arrived on the dry land—
the party wash the mud off their legs, and put on their shoes and stock-
ings .... and then walk up the side of a little canal, as it is called,
which brings them to the only spot of land at the creek free from inun-
dations, which is called the Sand Hill, where one or two grog shops,
made of branches of trees, are seen This is Port Adelaide ! Port
Misery would be a better name, for nothing can surpass it in everything
that is wretched and inconvenient They ask for a drink of water
before starting —there is not such a thing to be had ; but the bullock
carts are expected down every minute with the usual supply. Arrived
at Adelaide they find that all have had to go through the same miserable
landing at the port, and some of them had even suffered considerably by
falling down in the mud. They like the company they meet, so their
spirits rise and they make up their minds to think well of every thing,
and in their letters to any London friends to recommend the place, but
not a word about the mud.” —p. 28 —31.
Now if one did not know how differently different persons es-
timate difficulties and inconveniences, e. g. how differently a
cockney would describe the difficulty of a voyage to Margate, and
the miseries of landing upon a dirty bank or slippery quay, or the
hazards and exposures of a day’s snipe shooting in the marshes,
and another who had been a sailor or traveller, or accustomed to
country sports, it would seem that this could never be the place
which others speak of in very different terms. Of course large
allowance is to be made. To a person who had never seen such
an outrage against Wellington boots and trowsers, it may have
seemed a great and unusual hardship for sailors to step out of a
boat into the water u trowsers and all or to a person, whose
greatest exposure to soiling has been in the casualties of London


crossings, perhaps nothing short of a strong feeling of self-interest
in the concealment of it, would prevail on him not to send home
to his friends, though at a distance of a four months’ voyage, the
account of a fall in the mud. Yet it is conceivable that many
even in this country, who had never made a longer voyage than
to Southend, would think neither the one a marvel, nor the other
an insuperable objection to the place where the event had befal-
len him. However, merely as to matter of fact, does Mr. James
really pretend to affirm that all he met at Adelaide had to go
through the same miserable landing? Perhaps he would translate
and interpret the common saying “ exceptio probat regulam” dif-
ferently from the usual way. Perhaps he may have made the
general rule of landings at Adelaide according to the manner of
his own and certain others, though in truth the exceptions.
It is but fair to Mr. James to say it would have been very sur-
prising for him not to have had a very keen sense of the nuisances
and inconveniences to which he was exposed on his first landing
and taking up his quarters at Adelaide. His standard for com-
forts and necessaries had been raised very high, too high for him
not to be keenly alive to the sudden change. He had been living
in clover, or as the French more graphically describe “ comme
un coq en pate.” Nothing can be more delightful than his de-
scription of the voyage. “ The routine on board is very pleasant,
and is something like the following: we are supposing the pas-
senger a single gentleman .... paying 701. for his cabin. It
cannot be done for less, and any person offering it for less must
intend to abridge you of those comforts on board, which are
really necessary.’ * Now attend, good reader, to an account of
“ comforts really necessary.’'
“At seven o’clock in the morning every body generally rises, and is
on deck by eight bells or eight o’clock, by which time the decks are dry,
awning spread, and you touch your hat to the captain or officer of the
watch, and take a turn or two before breakfast, which is on table punc-
tually at half-past eight, and consists of curry and rice, with pickles,
cold chicken, sausages, ham or tongue, liver and bacon, pork or mutton
chops, with hot potatoes, rolls, tea, coffee, toast and butter; it is in short
a dinner with the addition of tea and coffee. ihe appetite is generally
ravenous at sea, and every body eats twice as much as they do on shore.
[And very unlucky this is for those who have to keep themselves, but when
the board is contracted for, there is less reason to be squeamish.] “At
* The author of the Land of Promise sets his scale of necessary comforts somewhat
lower. He recommends “an intermediate passage to those who can dispense with ap-
pearances, particularly families, the difference being principally in the dietary, for
many of the intermediate cabins are quite as good as the other cabins. The passage
then costs about 351.”— Land of Promise, p. 177 ; Capper, p. 138. 5 1, extra laid out
in a few specified articles they consider quite sufficient to satisfy ordinary necessities.


twelve o’clock the passengers go into the cabin or cuddy to lunch. This
is not a formal meal and is conducted without any fuss or ceremony, and
merely (!) consists of a glass of bottled porter or ale, a crust of bread
and cheese, or a slice of cold ham, while the ladies perhaps are satisfied
with a glass of wine in their own cabins. At three o’clock comes the
dinner, and the most important matter on board ship to those who are
merely passengers, and it may be generally seen that the two most plea-
sant noises on board are the sound of the reel and the dinner-bell. The
reason is plain, because the sea air is so bracing and healthful, that
though you are always eating you are always hungry; and most ships
properly and liberally conducted, land each of their passengers from ten
to fifteen pounds heavier than they received them on board. The ladies
always attend the dinner table, and generally by their neat and pretty
dresses add very much to the pleasure and beauty of the feast. All the
art of the cook and steward have been called in aid to make a show for
dinner, which besides a clean damask table cloth, and a profusion of
silver and glass, without which no table can look handsome, the dishes
consist of soup invariably, and generally of better quality than is given
on shore, either mock turtle, ox tail, boulli, peas, mutton broth, or mul-
ligatawney; followed by roast and boiled meat, fowls, goose, turkey,
ducks, mutton or pork, curry and rice, hash, and ham ; and concluded
by two sorts of pies and puddings, with a dessert of almonds, raisins,
figs, nuts and apples, all washed down with as much porter, ale, port or
sherry as you like, and generally on Sundays with a glass or two of
champagne. This makes the afternoon fly pleasantly away, and by the
time your last cigar is finished, and you have tired yourself with walking
on deck, tea and coffee is announced for those who choose it at seven
o’clock, and then the pleasantest part of the twenty-four hours com-
mences, viz. the evening, which is either passed at cards, chess, reading,
music, dancing, walking arm-in-arm with the ladies on the quarter-deck
and pointing out to them the glorious sunset and the evening planet. . .
At nine o’clock, those who may require a little supper have only to say
so to the steward, and a bit of something cold and a glass of grog and a
cigar finishes the evening, and at ten or half-past ten the passengers turn
in, and all the lamps and candles are extinguished.”— James, p. 3—6.
Mr. James is both sentimental and sensuous: if we may use that
word for “having a taste for eating and drinking.” He likes ladies;
walking, talking, and dancing with them. He likes their “ neat and
pretty dresses,” and considers they even “ add very much to the
pleasure and beautfl' of the dinner feast: i. e. the intrinsic and in-
herent pleasure of dinner is enhanced by their presence. Still his
softer feelings do not appear, for a moment, to affect his deliberate
judgment of the relative importance of the ladies and the table. Is
it any wonder, if, after weeks, to the delights of which Mr. James evi-
dently did substantial justice (having been landed no doubt from ten
to fifteen pounds heavier than he went on board), and which he fondly
hoped were but a faint type of the way of living in the colony, he
should arrive at Adelaide, after being wet up to his knees, and a hot


walk of eight miles, “hungry, thirsty, and fatigued—covered with
dust and perspiration—and with feelings of shame and disappoint-
ment at being so taken in ?” Is it surprising that his recollection of
Adelaide should be embittered, and that he should reflect with feel-
ings of irritation upon a dinner “ rough, dirty, and uncomfortable,”
consisting “ merely of a baked leg of mutton at the top, with a
baked shoulder at bottom, and a dish of small potatoes in the
middle —nothing else whatever —neither pie, pudding, or cheese.”
Contrast this bill of fare with what had been daily on board ship,
and judge how a person such as Mr. James seems to be must
have felt the difference. There is quite a pathos in all his list of
grievances : as if his standard for the casualties of the voyage and
refreshment after it, had been taken from a lord mayor’s voyage
down the river, on a hot midsummer’s day, and back to Black-
wall for the pleasures of turtle, white bait, and venison. Think
what his worship and the worshipful company would feel, if after
the fatigues of the day they were shown into the room at Love-
grove’s to a table spread with a dirty cloth, and graced with “ no-
thing else whatever” besides bread and cheese and porter, and then
sympathise with Mr. James. We are sorry to part with him at
such a dismal time, but must turn to the views of more matter-of-
fact writers. And to prevent the need for returning again to this
book, it may be as well to say here, that it seems to us quite unfit
to be taken as authority on any one subject. The writer seems
to have a notion that his advice is of more value than others set
by it; and because it appears to have been scarcely noticed when
he was disposed to obtrude it, resents the neglect accordingly.
For style and matter, his book is very much what might have been
expected, had it been written by the sort of persons whom he
describes as most useless, or, to soften the term, least likely to
succeed in the colony; persons, who; according to his own descrip-
tion, not having “ capital either in their hands or pockets,” find
“itis of little use having it in their heads” (p. 38, 73): sharp and
quick rather than sound, disposed to stand upon their intellectual
superiority, not inclined to work steadily in any branch of trade
or farming; who would consider it “ a great sacrifice (simply of
course on the score of discomforts ) to lead a hermit life for five
or six years,” and follow' and tend their own flocks, yet without
capital to procure the labours of others : persons, in short, entirely
out of their element, who naturally must soon tire of the colony,
and as naturally, when they come aw'ay, (a step likely to become
necessary before long,) will not bestow much commendation on
the place and system where their deserts have been so appreciated.
As for Mr. James himself, he has too much taste for feasting not
to have been disgusted with the roughs of a new settlement. In


justice, however, to the reputation of the rising colony it is right
to state, that the settlers are not forgetful of their stomachs,
Mr. Morphett, a great authority in Australian matters, speaks
briefly, but as if he well understood the subject, on t( the style
of living and tone of society” at Adelaide, “ the neatly and in some
cases elegantly spread dinner tables —well cooked dishes cham-
pagne, hock, claret, and rnarasquino—the presence of some well
dressed and well bred women —and the soothing strains of a piano.
How came Mr. James to be so unfortunate as not to fall in with
these “ agr6mens.”
As to the real condition of the colony, it really does seem quite
idle to speak of it as a failure, or to question its offering con-
siderable inducements to a person intending to emigrate. To
suppose that it combines all the advantages of other colonies put
together, or that a person is to make a fortune as it were by
simply remaining there for a few years, and without well con-
sidering what he has to do and how best to do it, and forming his
plans with all the prudence he can, is assuming what no one in
his senses ever claimed for it. Whether also other colonies may
not be preferable is a matter of inquiry. But it seems undeniable,
that the South Australian emigrant, if there have been reasonable
prudence in his first step, has a great opening, and under very
favourable circumstances for making himself an independence,
without any extraordinary hardships, without having to cut himself
off from all social intercourse, and without more risk of casualties
than elsewhere, and in a very fine and genial climate. South
Australia has its peculiar advantages: so have other colonies.
The intending emigrant must endeavour to strike the balance
between them as he best can. Constitution, tastes, capital, con-
nexion, previous habits, and previous acquaintance with this or
that branch of industry, in 'which there is most likelihood of
thriving in one or other colony, all these are points for considera-
tion and consultation before a man embarks himself in a specu-
lation, where the stake is the chance of making or improving a
fortune; and in which he not only embarks his capital, but him-
self, leaving his home and country, and giving himself up to
superintend his own adventure for a course of years. If he em-
barks ignorantly, without having first well considered these, he has
himself to blame when he finds the colony does not turn out to
him the El Dorado of his groundless fancies.
A few extracts on the actual condition and progress of the
colony shall be here given, upon authority, which one certainly
ought to be able to trust.
At a meeting of the provincial council in April last, the late


governor, Colonel Gawler, in the financial paper, which he then
read, made the following statement: —
“ The establishment of the colony has cost a large sum, but it is pro-
bable that no British province has ever attained to the same condition,
at, to say the least, a smaller price. However great the expenditure
may be, the results are great also. Three years and a half ago the spot
on which we are now standing was a desert unknown to Europeans.
Now we are surrounded by a populous, and, to a considerable extent,
handsome city. Our principal streets are lined with well filled ware-
houses and shops, and crowded by all the attendants of active traffic.
Handsome and substantial buildings are to be seen on every side, and are
rapidly increasing. Our port, which a few years since was an unknown
salt water creek, covered only by water-fowl and enclosed in a mangrove
swamp, is now filled with large shipping from Europe, India, and the
neighbouring colonies. The swamp is traversed by a substantial road,
and handsome wharfs and warehouses are rising on its borders. A
steam tug is promised by the commissioners, and with such conveniences
there will not be a finer harbour for vessels drawing under sixteen feet
water. Ships of larger dimensions may discharge their cargoes from the
gulf, which is in itself a secure roadsted. The neighbourhood of the
capital is studded with numerous and populous suburbs and villages;
while the more distant country is rapidly assuming in population that
healthy and natural proportion, which it ought, to the metropolis.
Farming establishments are in active formation on every side, and it is
now a matter not merely of hope, but of sober expectation, that our
magnificent agricultural vallies will soon be filled with produce sufficient
for home consumption. Flocks and herds of cattle from New South
Wales, following each other in countless succession, already cover a tract
of 200 miles in length.”
In a letter of the 6th April, 1840, he writes—
“ The inhabitants of Adelaide and its immediate neighbourhood I
consider about 8000 souls. In the outports and rural settlements there
are from 4000 to 5000 more settlers Before this letter shall have
reached England, it is most reasonably probable that our rural population
will have increased by one half, and that before an answer can return to
us, it will have at least doubled its numbers.”
This very rapid growth is the more remarkable, if contrasted
with the case at Swan River or in Van Dieman’s Land. Swan
River has been a settlement about a dozen years, or nearly so,
and there is not a population of above 3000 now, and after forty
years from its first settlement, there are, it is believed, not many
more in Van Dieman’s Land.
The Commissioners’ Report states the amount of sales of public
land in the colony was 93,059/. in the year 183 Q, and the justice
of their remark upon this can hardly be disputed, viz. that “ when
capitalists residing in the colony pay down such a sum for land,
which they have seen and examined for themselves, the fertility of


the soil, and the superior advantages which it offers to opulent
settlers, are established upon evidence, to which no suspicion can
attach.”— Report, p. 10.
Some notion again may be formed of the condition of a colony
from the stir of business in it. Where a place is dwindling in
importance, and there is a growing bad opinion of it, capital will
not be invested, there will be diminishing demand and decreasing
supply. There will be little doing. We have lately taken up a
number of the South Australian Register, and have come there
upon advertisements, which certainly indicate that there must be
a good deal of capital in the colony, and many anxious to invest
it there, not to withdraw it. Such as an advertisement for the
sale of 10,000 sheep on their way overland to the colony, another
for the sale of 800 head of cattle and 40 horses, an evidence,
surely, that pasture must be abundant. Then, besides various
other advertisements for sale and purchase of sheep, bullocks,
cows, wines, &c. &c. there are Waterloo House advertisements of
finery on sale, others of religious tracts, others about the terms
of boarding houses.
We will add the testimony of the present governor. Captain
Grey, who sailed about three months ago. In replying to an
address of the committee of the South Australian Society, he
says—
“ I trust that prosperity may attend my administration of the affairs
of that colony, and am the more anxious on this point, from the convic-
tion 1 feel, that South Australia possesses resources of no ordinary kind.
After having visited many portions of Australia, I am confident that no
part of that continent excels, and that but few equal. South Australia in
fertility of soil and other natural capabilities.”
Upon this head, the Fourth Report of the Colonization Com-
missioners for South Australia, printed by order of the House of
Commons, may be consulted, p. 12—15.
It has been the misfortune, however, of this, as of other colo-
nies, to have been over-puffed. People have bought land really
as if they supposed that they could of course sell it at a
profit to the next person they chanced to meet, and that every
day’s holding ought to give it an increasing marketable value, and
that it would “ fructify” of itself, without any looking after or any
outlay of capital. They have sent out flocks, and expected as
much increase from them as if the wool would of itself become
double milled superfine Saxony cloth on the voyage home. It is
hard to blame the colony for having failed to realize such expec-
tations. But things find their level. And as the colony settles
down into a natural healthy state, proprietors looking after their
own land and holding it for a possession not as a mere specula-


lion, and the market for shares becoming flat, it will be decided
as a failure, and some new favourite spot will be the theme for
land jobbers, who want something to gamble in, not to hold. It
will then take its place gradually as other colonies, as a place for
permanent investment of money, according to its own real advan-
tages, whether of soil, climate, position, and such like, as they are
found really to be, and as the report of the actual condition of
residents will prove it to be. There may be, for a while, a kind
of check given to the hitherto rapid growth (as some say unparal-
leled) of the colony, from disappointment of foolish expectations,
and from the fever of speculation setting some other way, but the
colony will not suffer on the long run. If it be what numbers of
most respectable competent authorities pronounce it, it will in-
crease and be an important settlement.
Mere prosperity puff’s are readily conceived; such as, how
every one who goes out makes his fortune —how all are happy
and healthy in South Australia—how, since it is not a convict
settlement, therefore there is no crime—how there is no loss in
lambing season—how the flocks are never thirsty, except when
and where there is plenty of water —how all fruits and vegetables
come in succession, just as they are wished. These are ordinary
puffs. But we have met with two of such rare sublimity, that we
cannot resist extracting both. The first is the account of the first
“ location,” quoted in “ the Land of Promise,” from the South
Australian Record.
“ The landing of the little band in their new country, recalls the aw-
ful emigration of Noah, and the promise that painted his horizon, and
that of Moses. It reminds us of the Tyrians at Carthage, of .Eneas and
the dominions of the west, which tradition tells us was founded by
him : of the stout-hearted Britons, who built up the great, though still
young nations of America} and nearer to the present scene, the colonies,
whose errors of constitution have served as an impressive lesson, while
their unexampled prosperity points to the commercial fortune of the
newer settlement. To the emigrant who was present at the formal as-
sumption of the new country, and believed according to the justest hopes,
that he was assisting at the foundation of a new people, every occur-
rence of the day was more momentous, than if they had been awaiting
in the royal bed-chamber the birth of a future king. They were usher-
ing into existence a whole nation. To those who, from a distance,
contemplate the placing of a people, where late there was a blank in the
great map of the world, and who have the glorious expectation of seeing
within the short space of man’s life, in one and the same spot, a desert,
a settlement, and a busy city, every act of the solemnity is full of mean-
ing, intrinsic or extrinsic.” [We have not the book by us, but we
think there was mention of God save the king sung, and three cheers
given, if so, ‘ f full of meaning, intrinsic or extrinsic.”] * f It forms the


bright strong line between barbarism and busy civilization. It is the
first act in realising the dream of the philanthropist, the emigrant, and
the ambitious coramercialist, who, like Alexander, but with less equi-
vocal reason, find the civilized world too small for their activity and their
desires.”—p. 100.
Verily there is no learning, ancient or modern, classic or bar-
barian, mythological or theological, the writer must not have
ransacked for this choice extract. The other, which is the au-
thor’s of the “ Land of Promise,” is even still bolder: for de-
scending from the cloudy height of declamation and generalities,
he comes to facts, and draws a picture of what the emigrant
labourer is really to look to making his own.
“ The man, who left England not very different from a pauper is now
a land-owner j and a land-owner in a place, where an acre of land is
worth from 401. to 150/. But the position of the same man in society
ten years hence, defies calculation or conjecture. Had he stayed in
England, ten years hence he might have been living in a workhouse,
and glad to live there too. But the comparison does not stop there.
How does it not affect his children ? Compare the hard-worked, coarse-
fed, uneducated clown, (for no working man can secure even a decent edu-
cation to his child as things go) sometimes a labourer, sometimes glad to
go on errands, or to clean boots and shoes, rude, care-worn, sulky, stupid,
shouldering along in fustian clothes and hob-nailed shoes —compare
such a being with the land-owner of South Australia, perhaps a mer-
chant, possibly a member of the local legislature ; intelligent, comfort-
able, happy, and promoting happiness all around him. It is the same
child of the same man, under different circumstances. The two pictures
may seem highly coloured; but they are in fact the probable consequence
of the two different modes of living at the father’s choice.”—p. 202.
Why, such a passage, publicly and impressively read in the
market-place of a sea-port town, with a ship waiting in the offing,
would be enough to depopulate it of all the able-bodied inhabi-
tants, and to set all the bachelors on immediately seeking part-
ners for the voyage, in the hope of such an illustrious progeny.
It is candid to allow the two pictures “may seem highly coloured.”
Nevertheless is it to be wondered that there should be a sort of
indignant sense of disappointment in the public mind against a
settlement, which, after so auspicious and august a commence-
ment, has so little realised such sober anticipation of its success ?
To descend, however, to a calmer judgment on the facts and
evidence on which to found an opinion. The truth of the case
is, perhaps, not very far from this First, the great question
about the climate is, how far the drought will affect productive-
ness and the healthy condition of stock? Water is the want of that
country. Yet, even this seems to be rather from the scorching
heat of three months in the year, than from absence of rain. Mr.


James states, that “ by a register kept very accurately at the
government house, during the whole of the year 1837, it rained
115 days and clear 250, and this may be reckoned upon as a fair
average of a series of years.” (Report, p. 13). Secondly ; On this
account the vegetation there presents to an European eye a dry
parched appearance, though the pasture is good and nutritious.- —
“ I can recollect perfectly well,” says Mr. Morphett, “ the dis-
concerted and dismal look with which most of the first party
regarded from the deck of the ship, the dried and scorched ap-
pearance of the plains, which, to their English ideas, betokened
little short of barrenness. So that a hasty survey of the country is
likely to leave an unfavourable impression.” ( Land of Promise , p.
111.) Thirdly; The climate is undoubtedly healthy. Fourthly;
That the productiveness of the soil cannot yet be spoken of
with certainty. It may turn out worse than it appears, as it gets
worked, and as there becomes need to grow grasses, it may prove
deeper and richer along the vallies and plains than expected.
Fifthly; That upon the whole, with a view to all ends contem-
plated, the spot selected for the capital has been judiciously
chosen, though the plan for it may be too extensive. Other spots
might be preferable in this or that respect, but the country
about Adelaide combined the most of them.
The Commissioners stated the best site for the first town would
be that which combined in the highest degree the following advan-
tages ; a commodious harbour, safe and accessible at all seasons
of the year ; a considerable tract of fertile land immediately ad-
joining; an abundant supply of fresh water ; facilities for internal
communication ; facilities for communication with other parts ;
distance from the limits of the colony, as a means of avoiding in-
terference from without, in the principle of colonization, and the
neighbourhood of extensive sheep-walks ; also, of a secondary
value, a supply of building materials, as timber, stone or brick,
earth and lime, facilities for drainage and coal. ( Land of Pro-
mise, p. 97.) Port Lincoln, the only place put forward as prefer-
able to Adelaide for the site of the capital, “ has no good or clear
land, and but one spring of water, and that below high water
mark. The harbour is surrounded by shoals, rocks, tide ripples,
and other difficulties, which render the approach very dangerous;
but these passed, the harbour is all that has been described.”
Our present system of colonization is very much against a
steady progressive advancement of a new settlement, and would
go far to account for sudden change of public opinion about the
colony. As with other things, so is government glad to get rid of
the outlay, risk, and responsibility of planning and conducting the
settlement of colonies. Colonization, instead of being a government


concern, as it ought to be, is an affair of a company of private in-
dividuals. Instead of being conducted by the ruling powers, to
relieve the pressure on the means of subsistence of the population
at home, and to provide for the maintenance and general welfare,
so far as may be, of those who are induced to emigrate; it is an
association of individuals for enriching themselves—a money
speculation—in which the emigrants are chiefly viewed as instru-
ments of wealth. That is what they are wanted for, and simply
for that the company desires to procure them. If sending out
machinery would ensure a higher rate of interest on the shares,
the directors of the company would charter ships to convey ma-
chinery, instead of men, women, and children. How should it
be otherwise ? the shareholders having no other interest in the
concern than as an investment for money. Philanthropy !it
would be absurd to name it as prompting the purchaser of a
town and country allotment in and near Adelaide to buy. He
would, of course, laugh at the notion of being complimented
for his disinterested benevolence, and for his desire to ameliorate
the condition of his suffering countrymen at home, because he
had invested a large sum in South Australian shares. Hence it
comes, that persons purchase land without the smallest thought
about the colony as a colony, or of doing any thing for the benefit
of the settlers, except upon a reasonable consideration of profit
to result from it. It is bought and sold as no more than an in-
vestment in the stocks. This sort of land-jobbing, by persons
who neither have, nor ever think of having, a real interest in the
concerns of the colony, beyond a money interest, must be preju-
dicial to the colony. There will be impatience about realizing
the investment; so immediate return is looked for. The colony
is thus forced, as it were, into an unnatural state. It is expected
to discharge the functions of a full-grown state all at once : it is
expected that it should support itself and run alone almost as
soon as born.
“ Planting of colonies,” says Lord Bacon, “ is like planting of woods,
for you must make account to lose almost twenty years profit, and ex-
pect the recompence in the end : for the principal thing, which hath
been the destruction of most plantations, hath been the bare and hasty
drawing of profits in the first years. It is true, speedy profit is not to be
neglected, as far as may stand with the good of the plantations, and no
further Let not the government of the plantation depend
upon too many counsellors and undertakers in the country that planteth,
but upon a temperate number; and let those be rather noblemen and
gentlemen, than merchants 3 for they look ever to the present gain.’’—
Essay of Plantations.
It is but justice, however, to state, that little as it might have


been to be expected, considering how much the subject of coloni-
zation is brought before the public as a mere investment for money,
yet much care and attention has been given to benefit emigrants.
The Commissioners’ Report and the writers of the works at the
head of this article all recognize the duty of promoting their
welfare to the utmost.
The Commissioners state: —
“ The remuneration paid to the various agents employed throughout
the country in selecting emigrants, was so regulated as to give to each
agent a direct pecuniary interest in the good conduct of the labourers he
selects for a free passage; that in order to promote the formation of habits
of temperance amongst the emigrants during the voyage, all intoxicating
liquors are excluded from the usual dietary, while care is taken to place
at the disposal of the surgeon superintendent a sufficient supply of wine
and porter to be used as medical comforts in cases of depression or disease;
that every emigrant ship is furnished with a library, consisting of moral
and religious tracts and of books of useful and entertaining knowledge,
and that, in ships conveying 150 emigrants and upwards, a school-master
is appointed and a regular system of moral and intellectual instruction
carried on during the voyage.’’—p. 7.
It is true a person might just point out, that all this is done,
with the view of “securing to the colony the incalculable advantage
of an industrious and moral population;” that is to say, not so much
for the sake of the emigrant, but to set off the colony to advan-
tage in that particular, in which its unfortunate penal neighbours
must be at disadvantage. Again, it is stated by one of the writers,
that “the directors have made every effort to ensure the observance
of religious worship regularly on board their ships and at each of
their stations in the colony. They have supplied their overseers
on shore with religious books . . . and they state, that they shall
be happy to receive donations of books from their constituents for
this worthy purpose . . . they neither send ardent spirits nor coun-
tenance such as do.”
“ On arriving at Port Adelaide the emigrants are consigned to
the care of the emigration agent,” who provides their lodging and
directs them how to obtain employment. “ After a few weeks
the emigrants are required to leave the commissioners’ habitations
to make room for new comers.” The colonization commissioners’
instructions direct their resident commissioner to “ take care that
no labouring emigrant falls into a state of destitution.” He is
authorized to provide a maintenance for all such persons and their
families, until they shall have obtained, or whenever they shall be
without employment, at wages adequate to their support, upon
the public works,—(See Capper, l6l).
It is pleasant to see this. It is some little compensation for the
unrighteous indifference of the rulers of the state, that an associa*
NO. LVIII. APR. 1841. CC


tion of private individuals for mere business relations with the
colony, should do something, when the state does nothing for her
own people. For South Australia is distinguished from all British
colonies by the circumstances, that no provision has been made by
the state for the promotion of religion.* “No part of the public
resources is, or is to be, applied to religious purposes.” Parlia-
ment granted this special boon for the welfare of the new colony,
that in the administration of its finances all religious purposes
should be excluded. And people are found to glory in this as a
privileged immunity, that religion is to be entirely left to itself.
Let it not then be wondered at, that nothing has been said of
the religious case of the colony. It is after the fashion of political
economists and philosophical historians to discuss such subjects
as colonies, government and the like, without allusion to a subject,
which does not occur to them as having a place in that which they
are concerned with. Religion has its proper pigeon-hole, and
unless there be direct application for it, should not be drawn out
of its recess and mixed up w ith other articles. What, for instance,
can it have to do with colonization? the political economist might
ask. “The light in which the present state of our country calls
upon us to view colonization, is as a drainage for our surplus
population. Therefore the chief point to be considered is, where
to dispose this population most advantageously to the mother
country and at the least outlay of skill, time, and capital.”
Granted: and therefore further, a capacious tunnel beneath the
sea, so contrived, that our surplus once safely settled in it, might
be hermetically sealed up, so as to cause no more trouble or ex-
pense, would be better to this end than any ordinary plan of
colonization. Government would console itself in its paternal
regrets for seeing no more of them with pronouncing it “a happy
release.” Indeed the manner in which ship-loads of emigrants are
exported looks too much like the mere desire to be rid of them, to
have no further thought or care about them: or at least as if the
thought on what their future religious opportunities may be never
crossed the minds of those who promote their removal. How-
ever, since the subject of religion might enter into a person’s
calculation while considering the desirableness of leaving his
native country, some little notice shall be taken of it here;
albeit a political economist might, as we observed, hold it an
unnecessary embarrassment in adjusting the pros and cons, which
deserve to be weighed, to introduce any thing of this extraneous
matter of religion. Mr. Malthus furnishes a curious instance of
this. He is apologising for those, who, even after the profit and
loss view on the score of bodily comfort, have decided in favour of
• See Gladstone, p. 269.


emigration, yet hesitate about it. He really does not condemn
them, but rather suggests the excuse of amiable weakness: and
with equal candour and discrimination he maintains, that the fact
of their hesitation does not in itself disprove that what they hesitate
to exchange is nevertheless a lot of hardship.
“ It will be said, that, when a prospect of advantageous emigration is
offered, it is the fault of the people themselves, if, instead of accepting it,
they prefer a life of celibacy or extreme poverty in their own country.
Is it then a fault for a man to feel an attachment to his native soil, to
love the parents that nurtured him, his kindred, his friends, and the
companions of his early years ? Or is it no evil that he suffers, because
he consents to bear it, rather than snap those cords, which nature has
wound in close and intricate folds round the human heart?” —On Popu-
lation, vol. ii. 17.
is it not a little surprising that a clergyman should not have
thought of another reason, which might well make a man pause,
before he settled in a far distant land, where no provision at all
was offered him for serving his God, for receiving the holy offices
of his faith, where he would be quite cutoff from all outward
participation in the privileges of a member of Christ, where, if
children were born to him, he could not answer for their being
grafted into the body of Christ’s Church, where, if he or they
died, he could not secure the rites of Christian burial. As poor
people say, it is a fine thing to be a scholar, so say we, it is a fine
thing to be a political economist, but to be sure it does not always
help a man to a clearer common sense view of things. We do
really mean to take it for granted without offering any proof, that
many would pause upon this consideration, and that all ought
very well to weigh it, before they entailed upon themselves the
consequences of such a step.
There is perhaps more reason for the emigrant turning his
schemes towards South Australia to consider this, than in the case
of other colonies. This colony has the unenviable distinction of
being the only British colony, we believe, no part of the public
resources of which is, or is to be, applied to religious purposes.
The voluntary system alone is contemplated. Let us see what
the emigrant has to look to, and how the system has worked. We
will answer this by quoting a passage from a recent periodical,
which speaks favourably of the religious provision for this colony.
“ The religious wants of the settlers have also been duly cared for:
and in so doing, the directors have evinced freedom from any thing in
the shape of prejudice, by offering a free cabin passage to ministers of
every denomination, provided the grounds of application in each case are
satisfactory to the Board. The principal condition imposed by the
Board is, that there should be a congregation, that is, that there should
c c 2


be a number of persons, whose opinions the minister applying for a pas-
sage represents, sufficiently large to render a spiritual pastor necessary.”
We certainly were not a little surprised to light upon this pas-
sage in a contemporary publication. This, then, the editor con-
siders to be duly caring for religious xvants, from whence it would
appear, first, that where there is no demand, there need be no sup-
ply of religious teachers; that is, supposing a clergyman applied
to such a board of directors for a free passage to a settlement of
Jews, Quakers, or Baptists, to the work of endeavouring to con-
vert whom he desired to devote himself, they would refuse it on
the ground that he did not represent the opinions of any number
of persons there. It is a strange sounding phrase, that a minister
is to be the representative of the opinions of those for whom he
ministers. Secondly, a spiritual pastor is not necessary until a
congregation reach a certain numerical amount. That is to say,
that supposing there chanced to be fifty churchmen in a settle-
ment, where the rest were Independents or Quakers, then fifty
would not be considered to need a pastor, because there lacked
five or what not, of the “ sufficiently large” number, though
meanwhile they would be cut off from the ministrations of the
Church. God would have spared a whole city lor ten righteous - ’
sake. Would the directors consider ten times ten a number
worth looking after by a pastor? Thirdly, it appears hence, that
all sects and heresies should be set upon an equal footing with
the Church, and the board of directors should in their governing
capacity be strictly impartial, in showing no preference to the
propagation of truth, in putting no manner of check upon but
rather encouraging the diffusion of error, at least when the error
has attained a certain numerical strength. Would they grant a
free passage to one of the Socialist denomination, or the Jewish,
or the Socinian denomination ? Consistently with their principle,
they ought, provided only such an applicant represented the opi-
nions of a sufficient number to make his ministry necessary. And
what has been the demand in the colony ? Or, rather what has been
the supply resulting? “The inhabitants of Adelaide and its im-
mediate neighbourhood amount, I consider, to about 8000 souls
For them there is one church completed which will hold 600.
Another is commenced for 600 more.” Again Colonel Gawler,
W'i ites :
“It is, I consider, of very great consequence, that we should not wait
for congregations to build Churches, but that Churches should spring
up in advance of the increase of population to receive congregations. A
Church cannot lie built under five or six months, and emigrants left
for that length of time without the accommodation, are very likely to
fall into indifference or to join other denominations. Among the set-


tiers in a new colony a large proportion, by giving up old habits and as-
sociations in the mother country, have loosened their attachment to early
religious forms, and are ready to unite with the first congregation that
presents itself conveniently to them. It would give me great satisfac-
tion to see a bishop appointed to this province alone : a man in that
office of diligence and earnest piety would have an immense sphere of
usefulness before him in procuring and stationing his clergy, and urging
the erection of schools and churches.
“ It is strange, that, while men of all other professions and occupa-
tions should have had boldness of speculation enough to venture their
fortunes in South Australia, there should not have been found clergy-
men with boldness of faith enough to undertake a similar risk. Mr.
Howard is the only one in the province. They might, I conceive, ob-
tain free passages by offering themselves for the very important office of
superintendent of emigrants in large ships.”
There is a great deal that is thoughtful and excellent in this let-
ter. There are those who would feel the latter part as almost a
call upon them. Would that the feeling might rest in the breasts
of a few of them, and ripen into the steady determination to
“go over and help them!” There is indeed much to be done.
There are great discouragements; many things from which a
person shrinks, but there is also a brighter side. At present there
seems all confusion. Men seem to blend all denominations together
as if they were all equally true. To begin with the person who
ought to take the lead in opening people’s eyes —Mr. Howard,
the only clergyman there. The writer of the Land of Promise
says of him, “he is much respected by all parties. He has de-
clared his readiness to extend the right-hand of fellowship to all
who love the Lord Jesus in all sincerity.”—p. 130.
M. James, we think, observes somewhere, that Mr. Howard
and Mr. Stow “ are an honour to their respective churches.” The
Commissioners’ Report speaks of the schools conducted by the
Rev. J. Q. Stowe, the Rev. Mr. M‘Gowan, the Rev. Mr. Drum-
mond, and the Rev. J. Skey. We believe that all these gentle-
men are severally teachers of different denominations, not one of
them being a minister of the Church ; yet there is nothing to mark
this in the Report. We have heard also that Colonel Gawler,
as governor, attended the laying the first stone of some meeting,
if he did not himself lay it. What entire confusion all this must
create in men’s minds, having very small acquaintance with the
nature and blessings peculiar to the Church, to begin with, being
very much occupied, perhaps unable to partake of her ministry
except at long intervals, and seeing all distinction thus practically
merged. An instance may be given of how little men consider
the true nature of Church authority, and whence it is derived.
The charier granted to this province provides that it shall not be


subject to any laws of the rest of Australia; and thence, influ-
enced by confusion between the Church as she is in herself, and
as she is established, persons concluded, that for the Bishop of
Australia to exercise any jurisdiction in the province would be an
infringement of the charter; and, accordingly, the province has
stood upon its being exempt from his pastoral superintendence as
a kind of privilege, and, as we have understood, protest has been
made against his exercising any episcopal functions in or for the
province.
How ever, great allowance is to be made for all sorts of con-
fusions like these, among well-meaning but ill-instructed persons.
The acts and declarations of government at home, and even more
in our colonies, if we had an exact account of them, have
tended much to unsettle men’s minds about the Church —to give
a kind of sanction and authority to old worn-out saws of liberalism,
heresy and schism, and to make them forget there is is an article
in the Creed which proclaims the Church One Catholic and Apos-
tolic. They have acted, as near as they well could, as if they
held the Gibbonian sneer to be true, that in their minds all reli-
oions were equally true, and all equally false.* Is it to be won-
dered at, that these things should have an effect where the Church
is tyrannized over and degraded by state authorities, in which
there is no discipline, and even where those respected in it decry
any thing of bold and self-denying zeal beyond the usual practice
as extravagant.
Still it is an encouraging sign for the state of the Church in the
colonies to know, that not a few feel that they are bound to make
sacrifices for the establishment of the truth in those settlements
with which they are connected by purchase of land or relations
of trade, and are willing to do so. One individual has given
2000 i. for building a church and parsonage, with two hundred
acres of land in Adelaide, producing 150/. a year. Others also
have oiven money and land, not of course after the same measure.
Why might not those who are disposed to do what they can,
year by year invest a given portion (which they can settle with
themselves) of the increase God may give them on their colonial
property and produce, for the benefit of that colony; the interest
of the money to be paid year by year to the bishop, if there be
one, or to other trustees, to be by him or them dispensed in aug-
mentation of such stipends as might be fit?
At best, however, we present but a poor appearance compared
with the doings of men in time past, poor in respect of our care
* How differently some of the government instructions to colonial governors would
run from the tenor of the advice of Lord Bacon to Sir G. Villiers about the administra-
tion of the colonies. “ For the discipline of the Church in those parts, it will be ne-
cessary that it agree with that which is settled in England, else it will make a schism
or a rent in Christ’s coat, which must be seamless.”


and provision for holy things, and of our sacrifices for maintaining
them, and in respect of the value we seem to entertain for a
Christian’s birth-right and privileges.
Thus, in Canada, we are for resuming what was once granted
for the benefit of the Church, as in the case of the clergy reserves,
and that without giving anything like a fair equivalent. At home,
when the religious wants of the nation have multiplied cent, per
cent., we frame a scheme for supplying them, not out of our own,
but by taking up, in order to redistribute, some of the funds which
the Church already has in possession. The notion of a dominant
Church, of one body to be adhered to, upheld and promoted, be-
cause of the truth, of which it is the witness, keeper and interpre-
ter, is scouted and protested against as bigotry and intolerance.
The only provision abroad, that religion is to find from the state,
is to provide it in the form it may be wished, here or there, by a
given respectable number of its subjects, of this or that denomi-
nation or persuasion: the state, as a state, entertaining all per-
suasions and avowing none. Its acts in contributing to the sup-
port, directly or indirectly, of all kinds of bodies calling themselves
Christian, are a kind of perpetual repetition of the question,
“ What is truth?” So much for the public acts of the government
of a Christian country in an age priding itself on enlightened and
enlarged view's.
We may look a moment to what has been done in other times
and by other nations, as to providing for religious wants of colo-
nies. Present practice, without further commentary, sufficiently
proves with how little sympathy such views would be regarded in
our times. Robertson thus describes the conduct ot Spain to-
wards her American colonies: “The inconsiderate zeal of the
Spanish legislators admitted them (tithes) into America in their
full extent, and at once imposed on their infant colonies a burden,
which is in no slight degree oppressive to society, even in its most
improved state.” Probably society “in its most improved state,”
according to Robertson, would find it most oppressive, because
he would so describe a state of society, which had most artificial
wants, and therefore also the keenest sense of the value of money.
He himself calls “ the payment of tithes a heavy tax on industry,”
and adds, that “ if the exaction of them be not regulated and cir-
cumscribed by the w isdom of the civil magistrate, it becomes into-
lerable and ruinous.”— {Robertson's America, \\\. 313. Bvo. edition.)
To resume his description: “ The hierarchy is established in
America in the same form as in Spain, with its full train of arch-
bishops, bishops, deans, and other dignitaries. The inferior clergy
are divided into three classes, under the denomination of curas,
doctrineros , and missioneros. The first are parish priests in those
parts of the country where the Spaniards have settled. The


second have the charge of such districts as are inhabited by Indians
subjected to the Spanish government, and living under its protec-
tion. The third are employed in converting and instructing those
fiercer tribes, which disdain submission to the Spanish yoke, and
live in remote or inaccessible regions, to which the Spanish arms
have not penetrated.”—(p. 333.) All that this is quoted for is to
show, that a great deal was done for the religious improvement of
their colonies, not only for emigrants, but also for newly-acquired
native subjects, nor were even the independent and hostile tribes
left without an effort for their conversion; so much done as to
offend the modern historian.
To be sure Robertson does not appear to be a writer, who con-
siders the subject of religion to belong at all to the subject of the
settlement of colonies. Thus he professes to relate the history
of the colony of Virginia in detail, considering it to merit particular
attention. He says, “it (the history) will exhibit a spectacle no
less striking than instructive, and presents an opportunity, which
rarely occurs, of contemplating a society in the first moment of
its political existence, and of observing how its spirit forms in
its infant state, how its principles begin to unfold as it advances,
and how those characteristic qualities, which distinguish its maturer
age, are successively acquired.”—(Book ix. p. 37, 4to. edition.)
There are more than fifty pages of this historical sketch, and
the religious state of the colony is, we think, never so much as
mentioned. But we may be sure such men as Lord Southampton,
Sir Edwin Sandys, and Nicolas Ferrar, would not have been lead-
ing persons in the direction of the Virginian Company, without
turning their attention and sending instructions to the colony on
this subject. Indeed such passages as those in the life of Ferrar,
relating to the business of the Virginian Company, are sufficient
to establish this. For when the company’s instructions and letters
had been read before the council, which was examining into their
affairs with the determination to lay hold on any plan for dissolving
the company and depriving it of its royal charter, the Marquis of
Hamilton observed to the board, “ 1 do assure you, that if our
attendance here were for many days, 1, for my part, would
willingly sit them out to hear so pious, so wise, and indeed politic
instructions as these are.” And to the same effect the Earl of
Pembroke, “ they (the letters) abound with soundness of good
matter and profitable instruction with respect both to religion and
policy.”— (Wordsworth’s Eccles. Biogr. v. 138.) And his biogra-
pher seems to think it likely, that Ferrar had at one time resolved
“ to settle in Virginia, and spend his life in the conversion of the
natives, or other infidels in that country.”—(p. 123.) These
papers would be very interesting documents, and might furnish
many useful suggestions to companies and colonists.


The case also of Lower Canada is not unworthy of attention as
administered by France, both in respect of the zeal and earnestness
there seems to have been to make adequate provision for the re-
ligious wants of the colonists, and also of the good effect which
this care is said to have produced. The extracts are taken from
the work of a countryman of Robertson’s, John Mac Gregor’s
“ British America.” He does not appear to lament, as Robert-
son, the liberal endowments made for the service of God and the
welfare of men’s souls, or to think them wasted, even though no
immediate effects resulted from them.
“ Two years after (i. e. 1622) the Duke de Ventadour, having
entered into holy orders, took charge as viceroy of the affairs of
New France, solely with the view of converting the savages.”
There were, it appears, great bickerings and dissensions in the
province; and, whether truly or not, religious scruples were al-
leged as the cause of them. “T he cardinal de Richelieu endea-
voured to put an end to these causes of dissension by establishing
the company of New France. The company, consisting of one
hundred associates, engaged to send 800 tradesmen to Canada,
and to supply all of those whom they settled in the country with
lodging, food, clothing, and implements for three years, after
which period they would allow each workman sufficient land to
support himself, with the grain necessary for seed. The com-
pany also engaged to have 6000 French inhabitants settled in
the countries included in their charter before the year 1643, and
to establish three priests in each settlement, whom they were
bound to provide with every article necessary for their personal
comfort, as well as the expenses attending their ministerial la-
bours, for fifteen years; after which the cleared lands were to be
granted by the company to the clergy for maintaining the catholic
religion in New France.” Again, “ the ardent spirit of enthu-
siasm, which went forth during that age, to accomplish the con-
version of the aborigines of America, led to the establishment of
religious institutions in Canada ; and though these establishments
did little for the immediate improvement of the colony, yet, as
points of possession occupied by persons whose avocations were
professedly holy and useful, they formed the foundation on which
arose the superstructure of those morals and habits that still, and
will long, characterize the Gallo-Canadians.” We have heard
or read it somewhere, that the Lower Canadians have always
hung much together in their settlements, being unwilling to re-
move where they would be beyond the sound of a church bell.
Let any one judge, which reads more like the manner of colo-
nizing becoming a Christian nation, that pursued by the Spaniards
or French towards their colonies, or that by England now to-
wards her Australian settlements. She sends forth, and encou-


rages or facilitates the sending forth of, thousands to that land,
and extends no care to keep them in the faith of their fathers, and
to supply them with those religious privileges they had opportu-
nity for at home. She leaves them, as the ostrich her eggs, in
the waste sandy desert, to be acted on by God’s ordinary influ-
ences as they may chance to come ; to the chilling, scattering
winds of vain doctrine, or the genial warmth of mere natural piety,
as may be, unknowing and careless what they may be hatched into.
—What can be more grotesque than to read almost five long folio
pages out of the Commissioners’ Report of twenty-seven, enlarging
on the subject of a constitution lor the province, and near two
upon the subject of municipal corporations, recommending to her
Majesty’s Principal Secretary of State for the Colonies, as if it
were a thing of pressing importance, “ that the towns of South
Australia respectively, as they acquire a population of two thou-
sand, may, upon application to the governor and council of the
province, obtain a municipal corporation, consisting of a common
council of at least fifteen members, a body of aldermen, of at
least three members, and a mayor with further suggestions for
the allaying and softening party feeling, and party disappoint-
ment in the elections. Really it has an air of childishness about
it which is quite absurd. It is like a nurse’s talk to children,
that “ Georgy Porgy shall by-and-bye ride in a coachy poachy.”
To be sure, there is a graver view of such folly. The children ask,
or at any rate need bread, and the parents give them a stone; or
perhaps it may be more truly said, promise them a scorpion—the
sc n'pion of miserable corporation feuds, jealousies and corrup-
tions, to sting them.
We would, in conclusion, offer a suggestion or two respecting
three classes of persons in different ways concerned in emigra-
tion matters.
First. Since the state withdraws from its duty, it is the more
incumbent for individuals to consider what they may do. When
landlords or companies induce the poor to emigrate, let them
consider the duty of supplying to them those Christian privileges
from which they are withdrawing them. If emigration is to their
benefit as a company, in raising the value of land in the colony,
or as landlords at home, in lightening them of the burden of a
poor overgrown population, let them be ready to make sacrifices,
and lessen the gain of the removal of their poorer brethren, by
providing for them Church and pastor —the means of Christian
instruction, the Christian sacramental means of grace. How can
clergymen recommend, or rather not check parishioners, who
might be inclined to emigrate, simply on the ground that there
seems no small responsibility involved in a clegyman suffering any
one committed to his charge to cut himself oft' from the ap-


pointed and promised channels of divine grace, without setting
before him what his silence would certainly be a sort of encou-
ragement to make light account of? Does it seem right and
faithful to let a person who has been accustomed to look to you
as one to advise and warn him about spiritual things, to give
any countenance to the notion, that you do not think it a very
serious thing to go where all these things may be lacking to
him ?
Secondly. People of education should be a little more thought-
ful than is implied in the way they act and speak about emigra-
tion. You hear of persons well educated and well instructed
embarking for Australia simply to make a fortune, who must be
well aware, that while they are away, it is probable their pri-
vileges as members of the visible Church on earth must be, as
it were suspended. They will be in the way of no ministerial
offices of the Church—no sacraments, no prayers, no Christian
burial. They seem as if they thought their spiritual life would
be in no way impaired or injured by this kind of supensionin the
exercise of its functions, and that they will be where they were
at any rate, when after a lapse of years they return home again,
and resume what has been so long broken off. They set about
making their fortunes before strengthening themselves spiritually
and laying up for themselves a store of better treasure in heaven,
through the strengthening means of grace, to be had only within
the Church and her ministrations. Would a Christian of primitive
days, for money, have cut himself off from the Apostles’ doctrine
and fellowship, from the breaking of bread and prayer ?
Thirdly. Labouring people should also reflect, and not pass
over all considerations of religion, when they entertain the subject
of emigration. It would be a very good thing if they made it a point
that they would not go out unless a clergyman was provided for
them. If they did so, it would of course be provided. It would
only be for a sufficient number to unite in making this demand, and
to express a willingness to go out if this were provided for them.
These are the kind of persons who would be most sought for,
as more likely to be useful members of society in the new land,
more likely to settle and make it their home, and to raise the tone
of those about them. It has been before said, that there is much
in the Commissioners’ Report and in the books on this subject,
which show the writers are aware they have a duty to make some
provision, and do not wish to evade it. Neither is the sort of
case without precedent. The Protestants of Zillerthal w'ent from
Hamburgh in a body with their pastor, and settled in a body
near Adelaide as an entire village.
387
South Australia.


Art. V.—l. Clerical and Religious Advertisements.
2. The Newspapers of the Day.
If it be asked, what are the Annals and Fasti of England and the
English Church, we know not what answer to give, except it be
the Newspapers ; which are not only a fuller, but also a more au-
thentic and imperishable record of our times, than tablets of brass
or marble. With a kind of photogenic fidelity they give every
thing as it is, transmitting to posterity the very shadow and
image of things, down to numberless particulars which we over-
look ourselves. Everybody sees his own age by the light and
colouring of a theory, which partially blinds him to facts. We
do not believe even what we see; that is, we see many things as
in a dream, taking no note of them ; they so little concern our taste
or convenience, or our opinions, that to us they are not. We may
gather how little we really apprehend and recognize what is lite-
rally under our eyes, by reading the remarks of foreigners upon
our country : and we may form some idea of it by going abroad
ourselves. If anybody, be he ever so minute and wakeful an ob-
server, should try to write an account of his own times, so as to
convey to posterity a picture as true to fact as human wit and
honesty can attain unto, it would still be found, on reference to a
file of new spapers, that he had left nine tenths of his story untold,
and perhaps the most essential features untrue.
It cannot be doubted that the daily press will furnish the most
important materials for the future historian. One’s head aches to
think of the overwhelming labour that awaits him, and the hours
wasted in turning over the vast mildewed leaves of the Times, or
the Morning Chronicle. The antiquarian, hunting out changes
of fashion, and hoping to light upon bits of quaintness to set off
the style of his narrative, will have to run through three hundred
times three hundred advertisements, for every year of his search
through the former of these journals. The heart sickens at the
bare prospect.
It becomes then a most important question, what sort of a
figure we make in this same mirror of truth. In the first place,
we deserve to have very full and particular justice done to our
merits, inasmuch as we exact overflowing measure from past
generations. With regard to them, we are thoroughly alive to the
fact, that historic truth is not to be gained from the direct state-
ments of monkish historians, learned chroniclers, and state
apologists, so much as from the indirect testimony of private
correspondence, household accounts, poetical satires, the mutual
recriminations of hostile parties in Church and State, and the dis-
388




