

\ y GrTV-V P
Handbook No. 4.
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
HANDBOOK,
WITH MAP.
COMPILED BY
WALTER PAT ON, M.A . ,
AND ISSUED BY- THE
EMIGRANTS’ INFORMATION OFFICE,
31, Broadway, Westminster. S.W.
Office open daily, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. ; Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 1.30 p.m.
•Note I.—This Office was established by Her late Majesty’s Government
in 1886 for the purpose of supplying intending Emigrants with useful and
trustworthy information respecting emigration chiefly to the British
Colonies, and is under the direction of the Colonial Office,
Note 2.—The Australasian Circular should be read with this. The
Circular is revised quarterly, and may be obtained gratis. For List
of Publications, see Back of this Cover.
Note 3.—The Notice Boards of this Office are exhibited, and the Cir-
culars may be obtained free of charge at more than 1,100 Public Libraries,
Urban District Councils, and Institutions; and the Handbooks and
additional information may also be obtained at the Public Libraries at
Manchester and Swansea, and the Mitchell Library at Glasgow. There
are collections of the products of the various Colonies at the Imperial
Institute, South Kensington, London, and information is given with
regard to them which may be of interest to intending emigrants.
Note 4.—Letters to this Office need not be stamped, but prepayment
for Handbooks must be made.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE;
DARLING & SON, Ltd., 34-40, Bacon Street, E.
And to be purchased from the EMIGRANTS’ INFORMATION OFFICE,
81, Broadway, Westminster, S.W.; or
WYMAN AND SONS, Ltd., Fetter Lane, E.C.; or
OLIVER & BOYD, Tweeddale Court, Edinburgh ; or
E. PONSONBY, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin.
May 1908.
Price One Penny.








SOUTH AUSTRALIA
HANDBOOK,
WITH MAP.
COMPILED BY
WALTER FAT O N, M.A.,
AND ISSUED BY THE
EMIGRANTS’ INFORMATION OFFICE,
31, Broadway, Westminster, S.W.
Office open daily, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. ; Saturdays, 10 a.m. to 1.30 p.m.
Note I. —This Office was established by Her late Majesty’s Government
in 1886 for the purpose of supplying intending Emigrants with useful and
trustworthy information respecting emigration chiefly to the British
Colonies, and is under the direction of the Colonial Office.
Note 2. —The Australasian Circular should be read with this. The
Circular is revised quarterly, and may he obtained gratis. For List
of Publications, see Back of this Cover.
Note 3. —The Notice Boards of this Office are exhibited, and the Cir-
culars may be obtained free of charge at more than 1,100 Public Libraries,
Urban District Councils, and Institutions; and the Handbooks and
additional information may also be obtained at the Public Libraries at
Manchester and Swansea, and the Mitchell Library at Glasgow. There
are collections of the products of the various Colonies at the Imperial
Institute, South Kensington, London, and information is given with
regard to them which may be of interest to intending emigrants.
Note 4. —Letters to this Office need not be stamped, but prepayment
for Handbooks must be made.
LONDON:
PRINTED FOR HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE
DARLING & SON, Ltd., 34-40, Bacon Street, E
And to be purchased from the EMIGRANTS’ INFORMATION OFFICE,
31, Broadway, Westminster, S.W.; or
WYMAN and SONS, Ltd., Fetter Lane, E.C. ; or
OLIVER & BOYD, Tweeddalb Court, Edinburgh ; or
E. PONSONBY, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin.
May 1908.
Price One Penny.


INDEX.
Adelaide B
Advances to farmers ... 28, 25
Agent-General 25
Agriculture 6,17
Agricultural College 16
Army Pensioners 12
Arrival, best time for 7
arrangements on ... 9
Building Societies ~. ... 17
Bush Fires Act . ... 24
Cattle 19
Charitable Institutions ... 17
Clearing Land ... 19
Climate 6, 7
Closer settlement ... ... 28
Clothing 10, 13
Compensation to workmen ... 23
Conciliation Acts 24
Copper 21
Cost of living 12
Customs 11
Dairy farming 20
Demand for labour ... ... 11
Divisions :
(1.) The Counties 3
(2.) Western and Central 5
(3.) Northern Territory ... 5
Early Closing Acts 25
Education ... 16
Emigrants, frauds 0n... ... 8
Exports 6, 14
Factories Act 23
Fares 8
Farmers and farm hands ... 11
Food, price of 12
Friendly Societies 17
Fruits * 20
Game Act 24
Gold 21-23
Government 15
Homestead blocks ... ... 22
Honey 20
Horses 19
Hospitals 17
Immigrants, prohibited ... 9
Imports 11
Irrigation Settlement ... 22
Page
Justice •••
Labour Bureau ... ••• 9
Land Laws ... ••• 6, 22
Price of 1®
Transfer 23
5) , * ** 1/7
Libraries ■*'
Liquor 2a
Manufactories 22
Marriage 24
Masters and Servants Act ... 23
Mechanics H
Merchant Shipping Acts ... 8
Minerals 5,6, 21, 23
Money 1®
Northern Territory •>
Outfit
Pastoral Settlement ... 6,19, 28
Population 6, 7
Post 1(5
Poultry 20
Products ... ... ••• 17
Professional persons 12
Railways 1®
Rabbits 16
Rainfall... ... ••• ••• 3-6
Religion 1®
Renmark 22
Rent 12
Revenue 16
Savings Banks 16
Sheep 16
Shipping Companies 7
Silver 21
Sparrows 24
Sports I 7
Telegraphs 16
Vaccination 24
Vegetables 4,20
Vermin Acts ... 24
Wages ... ••• ...6,13-14,24
Wine 21
Women ... ... ••• H
Working out passages ... 7
Workmen’s Lien 24


SOUTH AUSTRALIA.
South Australia was first settled in 1836. It is now one Area,
of the States of the Commonwealth of Australia, It is, with
the exception of Western Australia, the largest of these
States, and stretches across the whole continent from south
to north. Its area (including the Northern Territory, which
is the larger portion) is 578,361,600 acres, or seven times as
large as that of the United Kingdom,
South Australia may be divided into (1) the Counties, Divisions of
(2) the vast interior plains of the State, and (3) the Northern the State
Territory.
I. It is in the counties that the population of the State is I. The Oouir
mainly located ; this is the only part of the State where ties-
agriculture is carried on. They are now 46 in number (see
Map), and have a total area of million acres. There are
excellent means of communication by the macadamized roads
as well as by railway and sea. The whole area comprises a
great variety of soil, rainfall, and climate, and must, for the-
sake of clearness, be sub-divided into the following sub-
divisions (see Agricultural Statistics Report, 1906-07) :
(1.) The Central Division , which includes the counties (see Central
Map) of Adelaide, Gawler, Light, Albert, Alfred, Eyre, Sturt, Division.
Hindmarsh, Fergusson, and Carnarvon, and is the most
populous part of the State. It consists of mountainous
ranges, hills, and plains of superior agricultural land. The
rivers Murray, Torrens, Light, &c., and the numerous minor
water-courses attest the sufficiency of the water supply. The
climate is temperate, and the rainfall reliable, varying over a
number of years from 42 inches in the hills to 16 in the
plains, the average fall at Adelaide being 21 inches. Its
area is nearly 9,000,000 acres, of which over a third has been
alienated, and an eighth part cultivated with cereals, fruits,
vines, vegetables, &c. There are also considerable numbers
of stock. It is intersected by rail and road, so that facilities
for transit are excellent; the bulk of the arable land is
situated within 15 miles of a railway station or shipping port.
In this division is Adelaide, the capital (founded in 1836). Adelaide.
It is situated on the River Torrens in the middle of a large
plain, about eight miles from Mount Lofty (2,334 feet in
height), and has a population, including that of the suburbs
750 Wt 22388 12/08 D& S 6 34338 r A 2


South Australia.
within a radius of 10 miles, of 173,235, of whom 90,654
are females. It possesses handsome buildings, churches of
many denominations, clubs, libraries, and all the conveni-
ences of a modern city ; it is, moreover, one of the best
drained cities in Australia. Market gardens, full of all
Vegetables. kinds of fruits and vegetables, abound in the neighbourhood,
and a little further off there are good farm-houses and
extensive farms. Twenty-five miles by rail to the north of
Crawler. Adelaide is Gawler, a thriving manufacturing town, situated
in the centre of a large agricultural district, and famous for
its flour mills and extensive engineering works.
Lower North (2.) The Lower North Division, which includes the
Division. counties of Burra, Stanley, Daly, Victoria, Kimberley, Young,
and Hamley. It possesses a temperate climate, but with an
earlier season by some weeks than that in the Central Division.
There is a fair rainfall, averaging from 13 to 25 inches, accord-
ing to the level of the country. Two mountain ranges traverse
it from south to north, with broad well-watered plains of ex-
ceptionally good arable land intervening. Some of the table
land is 1,500 to 2,000 feet above sea level. The greater part is
very valuable sheep country, and farmers and graziers are
increasing their flocks considerably. Its area is 8,000,000
Uenmark. acres, of which 1,045,000 are cultivated. The Renmark
Irrigation Colony ( see p. 22) is in the County of Hamley.
Port Pirie The general trade of Port Pirie (169 miles by rail from
Adelaide) has increased enormously of late years, owing to
the traffic from and to the Broken Hill Mines in New South
Wales ; smelting works have been established here. The
Wallaroo. Wallaroo, Burra, Kurilla, and other copper mines employ
hundreds of hands, and large smelting works are carried on
Kadina. at Wallaroo as well as at Port Pirie. At Kadina also, near
Moonta. Wallaroo, and at Moonta, 12 miles from Wallaroo, there are
extensive copper mines.
Upper North (3.) The Upper North Division, which includes all the
Division. counties north of Port Pirie. The climate is hotter and drier
than in the Central and Lower North Divisions, the average
rainfall in the farming districts being only about 12 to 15
inches, and less elsewhere. It is well suited for stock, but,
excepting in the south, it is too hot and dry for agriculture.
Outside the counties of Frome and Newcastle, through which
the Flinders and Eastern ranges run (Mount Brown being
2,4oofeet),the country chiefly consists of extensive plains with
low rises and little surface water, and is subject to
drought. Much of the country to the eastward is 1,500
feet to 2,000 feet above sea level, with a consequent lower
temperature. The area is 9,000,000 acres, of which 586,000
are cultivated; there are also many horses, cattle, and
sheep.
South- (4.) The South Eastern Division, which includes the
Eastern counties of Russell, Cardwell, Buckingham, McDonnell,
Division.


South Australia.
Robe, Grey, Buccleugh and Chandos. The climate is
colder, and the rainfall heavier than in any other part
of the State (except Mount Lofty Range), viz., 20 to 30
inches. The land is low-lying, with isolated hills or ridges :
and a large portion of the surface is covered with water,
but some thousands of acres have been reclaimed or improved
by drainage works. The whole area is 10,000,000 acres, of
which only 152,000 are cultivated, the country being almost
entirely devoted to grazing ; the live stock includes 1,723,000
sheep, besides cattle and horses. There is good communication
by sea and rail with other parts. The principal town
is Mount Gambier (population 3,162), a corporate town at the Mount
foot of Mount Gambier in Grey county ; it is 305 miles by Gambler,
rail from Adelaide. The soil here is very rich, and
English fruits, potatoes, grapes, hops, and wheat thrive.
Altogether this is one of the best districts of the State, the
climate not being so hot as in other parts.
(5.) The Western Division , which includes the newer Western
counties of Flinders, Jervois, Musgrave, Robinson, Way, Division.
Dufferin, Hopetown, and Kintore, &c. It has an equable
climate, and a fair average rainfall (20 inches) on the
coast. Its area is nearly 16,000,000 acres, of which only
272,000 are at present under cultivation; the land is
principally used for sheep, of which there are 414,000.
The Port Lincoln district has attracted many settlers
lately, and much land is being taken up for agricultural
and pastoral purposes.
11. The second division of the State includes the vast 11. Western
regions (192,000,000 acres) which are not comprised in the and Central
counties, and merges into the Northern Territory in lat. 26°. 18 nc s ‘
Part of this division consists, so far as it is known, of
desert and salt lakes ; other portions are well adapted for
sheep ; but the annual rainfall is far too light for grain-
growing, being only from 6 to 9 inches.
111. The enormous area of the Northern Territory of HI. The
South Australia includes country more or less adapted to the ort ?! e ™
cultivation of tropical products—tobacco, indigo, cotton, ern orj '
tapioca, rice, coffee, and, in parts, sugar cane. The
Territory, however, mainly depends on mining and pastoral
industries.
The total exports in 1907 were valued at 345,721/. The Exports,
main exports are minerals and cattle. Of minerals, gold,
copper, and tin are the most important, but silver, lead, Minerals.
and wolfram are also mined to a small extent. Mining
results as a whole are disappointing and there is a lack of
substantial development : the output of gold was much
smaller in 1907 than in 1906. The pearl shell industry
round Melville Island is profitable.


South Australia .
Population. The estimated population of the Northern Territory at
the end of 1907 was 3,597, of whom only 587 were females.
There are also some 20,000 aboriginals.
Climate. The climate of the Northern Territory is tropical, except
on the table lands, where the temperature is lower. There
are two seasons, the dry and the wet. The wet season
lasts from November to April, with an average rainfall of 63
inches at Palmerston, but the rainfall further south is far
less. During the wet season the heat is oppressive, but
at other times of the year the days are bright and clear.
Agriculture. The Northern Territory is well suited for tropical pro-
ducts in parts, mainly on the banks of the rivers, but
with the exception of the Chinese, who cultivate maize, and a
small quantity of rice, no one carries on farming operations
to any extent.
Pastoral The grasses of the Northern Territory are very rich and
Industry. nourishing, especially for cattle, but an unfailing supply of
water is the great want. More attention is beginning to be
given to horse-breeding for Indian remounts, for which the
country is very suitable. In 1907 there were 18,000 horses,
354,000 cattle, 36,000 sheep, and 15,000 goats.
Crown Land Crown lands in the Northern Territory are regulated by
Northern^ 6 Northern Territory Crown Lands Acts, 1890-1901,
Territory. Applications for Crown land are made to the Land Office,
Palmerston. If the application is for country land it
is referred to the land board of the district in which the
land is situated ; the board fixes the price, rent, and area of
the land applied for. The land may be taken up either (1)
on lease for 21 years, with right of renewal for 21 years,
and of purchase at not less than ss. an acre, or (2) on
perpetual lease. Pastoral leases are granted at not less than
is. a year per square mile. Leases on special terms are
granted for the growth of rice, sugar, cotton, &c., and for
the encouragement of horse breeding.
Northern A miner in the Northern Territory must hold a miner’s
Territory right, which costs ss. a year. Mines are inspected and must
Mmuig Act, mac [ e ga f e as f ar as possible. No uncertificated engine
driver may be employed. Lands may be leased for mineral
purposes (except gold) for not more than 99 years at a
yearly rent of Is. an acre, and per cent, on net profits.
No person may hold more than 640 acres. The lessee
must keep employed for nine months in every year not
less than one man for every 20 acres. Gold mining leases
up to 40 acres are granted for not more than 42 years at a
yearly rent of Is. an acre, and 2-£ per cent, on net profits.
The lessee must work the land with not less than one man
for every J 0 acres.
Wages in the Miners are mainly Chinese who are paid ss. 6(7. to 6s. a
Northern day. The wages paid in mines to Europeans are : —engineers


South Australia.
5 1, to 6?. ss. a week, engine drivers '6l. 10s. to 4/., miners
61. 10s., carpenters and blacksmiths 4£., and labourers 61.
Anyone who settles in the Northern Territory must be
prepared to put up with tropical heat; the climate, however, Territory,
is not unhealthy, and can be endured by Europeans who
live carefully.
Outside the Northern Territory the climate of South Climate of
Australia is much hotter and drier than that of the United
Kingdom ; it is more like that of southern Italy. The seasons than the
are nearly the opposite to what they are at home. The four Northern
hottest and driest months are December to March inclusive, Territory,
when the heat is sometimes increased by hot winds, but the
dryness of the atmosphere renders it bearable. Some of those
•who can afford it spend the summer on the hills, or at
watering-places along the south-east coast. The remaining
months of the year are very pleasant, the weather being
bright, dry, and warm. The winter is wet and there is very
little cold weather. The climate is healthy.
The best time for arriving in the State is from May Best time for
to October ; speaking generally, the emigrant would always arriving,
do well to arrive in good time to settle down before
the hot weather comes on, and the shearing and harvest
begin.
The estimated population of South Australia, exclusive of Population,
that of the Northern Territory and of aborigines, on 31st
December 1907 was 392,431.
The following are some of the principal shipping lines Shipping
between England and Adelaide, with their London addresses, companies.
Vessels of one or other of these lines leave almost every
week ; particulars as to sailings will always be found adver-
tised in the newspapers, or may be obtained from the shipping
companies. There are no boats direct from Scotland or
Ireland, so that Scotch and Irish emigrants must go by
Liverpool, Plymouth, or other English port. Emigrants have Workingi out
little or no chance of working out their passages ; permission passages.
rests with the shipping companies, but it is scarcely ever given.
Peninsular and Oriental Steam Shipping Co., 122, Leaden-
hall Street, E.C. N.B. —No steerage passengers are taken
by this line.
Aberdeen Line, G. Thompson and Co., 7, Billiter Square,
E.C.
Orient-Royal Mail Line, 5, Fenchurch Avenue, E.C.
White Star Line, 30, James Street, Liverpool.
Federal-Houlder-Shire Lines, 146, Leadenhall Street,
E.C.
North German Lloyd (via Antwerp for third-class
passengers), 2, King William Street, E.C.
W. Lund, 3, East India Avenue, E.C.


3rd class
... From 16 1.
2nd class
... From42Z.
1st class
... From 50 1.
South Australia.
Merchant The Merchant Shipping Acts, 1894 and 1906, require
Acte ?! 894 emigrant ships to be seaworthy, to have proper accommoda-
tion, to furnish good and sufficient food, to provide medi-
cines, and, on large ships, to carry a surgeon, and in other
ways protect the interests of emigrants. If the ship impro-
perly fails to start on the day contracted for, the emigrant,
or any emigration officer on his or her behalf, may claim
subsistence money till it does start. Short summaries of
these regulations are posted up in every ship ; emigrants
who find they are not being treated fairly, should imme-
diately complain. Passengers by companies, which do not
take third-class passengers from British ports, are not pro-
tected by these regulations.
Fraud on By the Act of 1906, any one who fraudulently induces, or
Emigrants, attempts to induce, any person to emigrate, is liable to
fine or imprisonment.
Passages. (a.) Free passages , Assisted passages , or Nominated
passages , none.
(b.) Unassisted passages from England to Adelaide ( fares
liable to change: consult advertisements in daily news-
papers) :
By Sailing Vessels
(about 90 days)
occasionally.
By British Steamer
(from 38 to 44 days).
3rd class Sailing vessels some-
times carry pas-
2nd class J sengers, generally
saloon only at
Ist class J about 42 1.
Children. As a rule in steamers,
children from
3 to 12 years of age
travel half price ; one child under 3 years, free (no berth
provided) ; other children under 3 years, quarter fare.
Ship-kit. Food (three or four good meals a day), sleeping accom-
Luggage. modation, and medical attendance are in all cases included
in the fares given above. Each third-class adult passenger is
allowed 15 cubic feet of luggage free, second-class 20, and
first-class 40 cubic feet free ; and children in proportion to
their age; extra luggage costs Is. 6d. to 2s. per cubic
loot. Two boxes, each 2| feet long, 2 feet broad, and
JL feet deep, make up 15 cubic feet; and two boxes, each2|
feet long, 2 feet broad, and 2 feet deep, make up 20 cubic
feet; but any sized boxes will do so long as the permitted
quantities are not exceeded. Luggage required for use on the
voyage should be labelled “ Wanted.” A box for use in the
cabin should not be more than 3 feet long, 21 inches
wide, and 14 inches high ; one box of this size can be


South Australia.
taken in the cabin by each adult passenger, and is reckoned
in the allowance. By sailing ships 40 cubic feet are gener-
ally allowed free to saloon passengers ; other passengers are
seldom taken. See also Railways, page 16.
There is no Government depot for emigrants, but a Arrange-
Government Labour Bureau has been established for the ments for
purpose of facilitating the obtaining of employment. The
Bureau is situated in Victoria Square, Adelaide, and a register labour
is kept of all persons applying for employment; a register of bureau, &c.
employers applying for labour is also kept. No labour is
employed in the public service except through the Bureau.
There is a Y.M.C.A. at Adelaide in Gawler Place, and a
Y.W.C.A. in Hindmarsh Square. Emigrants who have
friends in the State should communicate with them
beforehand. As to prohibited and contract immigrants, see
the next paragraphs.
The Commonwealth Immigration Restriction Acts, 1901 Prohibited
and 1905 (which apply to South Australia as one of the six Immigrants,
States of the Commonwealth of Australia), do not affect the
ordinary British emigrant, but they prohibit the following
persons from landing in Australia :
(a) Any person who fails to pass the dictation test;
that is to say, who, when an officer dictates to him
not less than fifty words in any prescribed language
fails to write them out in that language in the
presence of the officer ; [N.B. Emigrants from the Wo language
United Kingdom are not subjected to the dictation test for
test]. British
(If) any person likely to become a charge upon the ants ‘
public or upon any public or charitable insti-
tution ; any idiot or insane person ; any person
suffering from an infectious or contagious disease of
a loathsome or dangerous character ; any person
who has been convicted of an offence, not being
a mere political offence, and has been sentenced
to imprisonment for one year or longer therefor, and
has not served his sentence or received a pardon ;
any prostitute or person living on the prostitution
of others.
Every contract immigrant (i.e., every immigrant to Contract
Australia under a contract to perform manual labour in Immigrants
Australia), unless otherwise prohibited by law, may land in Act, 1905.
the Commonwealth if the contract is in writing, and is
made by or on behalf of some person named in the contract
and resident in Australia, and its terras are approved by the
Minister for External Affairs.
This approval is not given if (1) the contract affects an
industrial dispute ; and if (2) the remuneration and other
terms and conditions of employment are not as advantageous


South Australia.
to the contract immigrant as those current for workers of
the same class at the place where the contract is to be per-
formed.
If before the Minister approves the terms of the contract
the contract immigrant lands in Australia, the contract is
absolutely void.
In the case of contract immigrants, who are not British
subjects , the employer must also prove that there is difficulty
in his obtaining within the Commonwealth a worker of at
least equal skill and ability.
Non-British
emigrants.
This Act does not apply to domestic servants or personal
attendants accompanying their employer to Australia.
Domestic
servants.
The British statutes relating to emigration, and other
information bearing on assistance given in this country to
intending emigrants, will be found in the Immigration
Statutes and General Handbook, published annually by the
Emigrants’ Information Office, price 3 d. post free.
Emigration
Statutes,
No large outfit is necessary, nor need it be new. Emigrants
having knives, forks, spoons, bed and table linen, kitchen
utensils, sewing machine, light tools, and other small articles
or ornaments, should take them, but not heavy furniture nor
rough common tools, as free luggage is limited. Emigrants
should take all the clothes they have, whether old or
new, but it is unnecessary to lay in a large stock of
heavy clothing before starting. If possible, not less
than the following should be taken for the voyage and
subsequent use. For men , two pairs boots, one strong
suit, two pairs white or light tweed trousers, and
one jacket of similar cool material, one cloth cap, and
one broad-brimmed straw or felt hat, one pair slippers or
canvas shoes, one overcoat, handkerchiefs, towelb, strong
canvas bag, and six articles of each kind of undeiclothing.
For women , two pairs strong shoes, one warm and two
cotton gowns, one broad-brimmed straw or felt hat, and
one close-fitting hat, one pair slippers, one cloak or shawl,
six articles of each kind of underclothing, handkerchiefs,
towels, canvas bag, and sewing materials. For children , one
warm cloak or greatcoat, two pairs strong shoes, two warm
suits, and six or nine articles of each kind of underclothing.
Two or three coloured serge shirts for men, and an extra
supply of flannel for women and children will be very useful.
If the emigrant is going by sailing ship, extra warm cloth-
ing will be required. There are some opportunities for
washing clothes on board. On sheep and cattle stations in
South Australia a man generally wears white moleskin
trousers and a flannel shirt; coats being worn at times
only.
Outfit:
for men.
formomen.
for children.


South Australia,
A full list of duties, and of articles exempted, can be Common-
seen on personal application at this Office. A duty ranging wealth
up to about 30 per cent, of the value thereof is charged on
all goods that are not charged specific duties, or which are
not exempted from duty. Passengers’ personal effects are
exempt from any customs duty. These include all wearing
apparel and all articles of personal adornment or use, which
are bond fide the property of the passenger and not for sale.
Besides personal effects, passengers’ furniture and household
goods which have been in actual use by such passengers for
at least one year, not exceeding 50/. second hand value per
adult passenger, are admitted free of duty. Most tools of
trade (other than machinery) and many agricultural imple-
ments are also admitted free of duty. Two members of a
family, from 12 to 18 years, may be reckoned as one adult.
There is great scarcity of female domestic servants, and P® man^ for
especially of general servants. The demand for shop- a our:
women, dressmakers, milliners, &c., is small. The South omen ‘
Australia Clothing Board has fixed the lowest wages to be
paid to tailoresses, buttonhole makers, &c., over 21 years
old, engaged in preparing men’s and boys’ ready-made
clothing, at 3 s. per day of 8 hours. The lowest wages
payable to dressmakers and milliners having five years
experience have been fixed at 16s. per week of 48 hours.
There is a good demand for skilled carpenters and black- Mechanics.
smiths. Mechanics should always remember that trades are
not so sharply defined as in England. A carpenter, for
instance, will often act as a joiner, wheelwright, or cooper ;
a bricklayer, as a mason or stonecutter ; a general labourer,
as farm hand or ploughman. They should also take the
first fair offer of work, and should avoid lingering in the
large towns.
The classes most likely to obtain employment are married Farm and
couples without children, strong youths for stations and ■ s d ltwn tiands
farms, steerers, haymakers, men able to work binders and
strippers, shepherds and drovers, men cooks for stations,
country blacksmiths, rabbiters, garden hands, milkmen,
grooms, coachmen, and ploughmen.
For farmers with capital, the prospects are generally Farmers.
fair. Fruit growing and wine making offer to men of
capital and experience steadier prospects than ordinary
farming, and are capable of unlimited extension. Expe-
rienced fruit growers with a capital of 500/. to 1,000/.
should do well. But no persons should invest money
in land until they have gained experience of the State.
* For changes, see the quarterly Australasian Circular, issued free
by this Office, and the monthly report compiled and issued by it free,
and inserted in the Labour Gazette also price Id. The Emigrants’
Information Office does not procure employment for emigrants.


South Australia.
It is better for them to work at wages, or to help a
friend, than to plunge at once into farming in a country
where soil, climate, seasons, and the mode of farming are
very different from what they have been accustomed to.
The delay incurred by learning these differences will be
more than compensated for by the experience gained.
Copper mining and gold-mining are carried on, but
owing to the recent fall in the price of copper, the copper
output has been reduced and many copper miners have been
discharged.
Clerks, shopmen, and warehousemen are not advised
to emigrate, unless they have situations to go to.
Miners.
Clerks.
For information as to barristers, solicitors, teachers,
medical men, police, auctioneers, architects, nurses, railway
employees, teachers, &c., see the Professional Handbook,
issued annually by this Office, price 3d. There are, as a rule,
plenty of such persons in the State.
Professional
persons.
An advance of pension is allowed to army pensioners
who are about to emigrate to become settlers in a British
possession out of the United Kingdom ; but no advance is
allowed to a pensioner proceeding to a foreign country, or
to a pensioner who returns to the United Kingdom and who
wishes to go out again to a Colony. Proof is required (1)
that the advance is necessary, and sufficient, to enable him
to emigrate, (2) that he is in good health and able to work,
and (3) if the pensioner is married and leaves his wife and
family behind, that he has made sufficient arrangements for
her or their support. All applications for information on
this subject should be addressed to the Officer by whom the
man’s pension is issued.
Army
Pensioners.
Cost of living,
House rent.
The rent of a house with four rooms and offices suitable
for an artisan and his family in Adelaide and other towns
varies from Bs. to 12s. 3d, per week ; in the country the
rate is from 3s. to 10s. a week. Large numbers of artisans,
however, reside in their own freehold cottages.
Board and
lodging.
At private houses, in towns, board and lodging for single
men, shopmen, &c., cost 14s. to 18s. per week ; and for
single females, 12s. to 14s. In country districts the rate is
about 12s. to 15s. a week. For farm labourers, see note after-
wages below.
Provisions
Retail prices per lb. in Adelaide are roughly as follows:
Bacon ... Id. to 11(7.
Beef ... 4 d. „ Sd.
Bread, 2 lb. loaf, 3d.
Butter ... 10(7. to Is. Ad.
Cheese ... bd. to Sd.
Coals, per ton ... 235. to 28s.
Coffee .. Is. to Is. Sd.
Firewood (per ton) 18s. to 235.
Flour ... 1 \d. to 1 \d.
Milk, per quart, s d. to 3d.
Mutton ... 2 \d. to s d.
Pork ... Id. to Sd.
Potatoes, per cwt 3s, to 10s.
Sugar ... 2d. to 3c?.
Tea... ... Is. „ 2s. 3d.
Tobacco ... 4s. 3d. to 7s.


South Australia.
Clothing is a little dearer than it is at home. Clothing
The rates of wages in the State ai e approximately as Rate of
follows ; but, as wages are always liable to change, these wa " es -
rates must not be relied on too strictly :
I. —Domestic.
With hoard and lodging.
(1) Per week’. — Housemaids ... 10s. to 14s.
Cooks (female) 12s. Qd. to 16s. Laundresses ... 12s. „ 18s.
General female
servants
10s. „ 14s.
Farm.*
With hoard
and. lodging.
(1) Per year.
Married couples... 60?. to 70?.
Dairymaids ... 10s.
Farm hands ... 18s. to 255.
Harvest hands... 30s, „ 40s.
Milkmen 15s. to 17s. 6c?.
Ploughmen ... 15s. to 20s.
(2) Per week.
Cheesemakers (factory) 60s.
lll.— Sheep and
Cattle Stations.*
with rations.
(1) Per year ,
£
Boundary-riders... ... 52
Stockmen... ... 65 to 75
Bullock drivers ... 58 to 70
Teamsters... ... 52 „ 70
Bush carpenters ... 65 „ 75
Cooks, male ... ... 45
(2) Shearers, per 100
sheep shorn, with
rations ... ... 20 s.
Generally useful men ... 40
Hut keepers ... 30 to 40
Married couples ... 60 „ 70
Sheepdrovers ... 65 „75
Shepherds ... 25 „ 40
(3) Per week , with rations:
Shed hands ... 255. to 30s.
„ „ boys 17s. 6c?. „ 20s.
IV.— Hotel.
Per week , with hoard and, lodging.
Barmen 20s. to 30s. Ostlers ... ... 18s. to 255.
Boots ... ... 15s. „ 20s. Stable helps—youths ... 10s.
Y.—Trades, &c.
Per day , without hoard or lodging.
Bakers Bs. 4c?.
Blacksmiths ... 10s.
Boilermakers {per hour) ls.3c?.
Bricklayers 10s. to 11s.
Brickmakers (per
1,000) 10s. 6d.
Bookbinders
9s. 2d.
Butchers {per week) 50s.
Cabinet-makers {per
week) ... 51s. to 7-2 s.
Carpenters and
joiners {per week) 60s.
Carriage builders Bs. 6c?.
Coopers ... ... 9s,
* Scale of rations per week : —lO lbs. flour, 12 lbs. meat, 2 lbs. sugar,
1 lb. tea. Married farm labourers have cottage provided rent free, and
fuel and water gratis. Servants are conveyed up country at employers’
cost.


South Australia.
V. —Trades, &c. — cont.
Per day , without hoard or lodgi
hoard or lodging
—cont.
Curriers Bs. 6d.
Plasterers... ...9s. to 10s,
Plumbers... ... 10s,
Engineers ... 10s.
French polishers... 9s.
Galvanized - iron
Printers 9s. 2d
Saddlers ... ... 6s.
workers ... 9s. to 10s.
Sawyers ... ... Bs,
Shirtmakers (per hour') 4 d.
Gasfitters ... ... 9s.
General labourers 6s. to 7s,
Shoemakers (skilled)
50s. to 70s. per week
Stone Cutters ... 10s.
Harness-makers ... 7s.
Hatters ... ... 10s.
Tailors ( per hour) Is.
Tanners ... ... 7s. 6d.
Ironworkers ...10s. to 11s.
Masons and brick-
layers (per hour)
Is. to Is. 4 \d.
Millers ... ... 9s.
Tinsmiths 7s. 6c/.
Turners, wood (per
week) ... 30s. to 60s.
Upholsterers ... 9s.
Wheelwrights ... Bs. to 9s.
Miners ... ... 7s. to Bs.
Painters and glaziers Bs. to 10s. Wheelwrights ... Bs. tc
Note. —Farm labourers are usually boarded and lodged,
single men are, as
men with families.
a rule, preferred to married
A high rate of wages does
not necessarily imply a demand for labour. The
ordinary working day for artisans is eight hours,
except where otherwise mentioned, and Govern-
carried out under the eight
ment contracts are
hours system.
Exports and The values of the exports and imports in the last
Imports : years available were as follows ; nearly all the trade
with the United Kingdom and British Possessions
1905*. 1906*.
£ £
Exports 9,490,667 11,983,171
Imports 8,439,609 9,702,264
South Australian pro-
ast two years available
The principal articles and values of So
duce or manufacture exported in the last
were as follows :
Exports.
Northern Territory included,


South Australia.
Other important articles of export were bark, butter, eggs,
frozen lamb and mutton, fruit, gold, hay and chaff, salt,
and wine. The total exports in 1907 were estimated at
13,769,399?., and the imports at 12,120,052?.
The general revenue and expenditure for the last two Revenue and
years were as follows : expenditure.
Revenue
2,938,602
2,840,371
3,551,696
8,278,171
Expenditure
The total Public Debt in 1907 was £30,526,718, raised at
various times for public works. An income tax is levied
and an additional land tax and an absentee tax. The income income Tax.
tax is 9 d. in the £ on income up to 800?. derived
from property, and above that sum Is. in the £ ;
on income derived from personal exertion, the rate on
incomes up to 800?. a year is 4tK?., and on incomes above
that sum it is 7 d. When the income is less than 400?. 1
the first 150?, are exempt.
The Government consists of the Governor, a Legislative Government
Council, and a House of Assembly.
All persons not under 21 years of age, whether male state
or female, married or unmarried, (1) who have lived Franchise.
in South Australia for six months continuously, and (2)
who are natural-born or naturalised subjects of the King,
and (3) whose names are on the electoral roll for any House
of Assembly district, may vote for the election of members
of the House of Assembly (Act of 1904). The qualification
to vote for members of the Legislative Council is rather
higher (Act of 1907). The elections are by ballot. A
member of either House, if he does not receive an
official salary, is paid 200?. a year (Act of 1890). Members
of the Commonwealth Parliament may not be members
of either House of the Local Parliament (Act No. 790,
passed in 1902).
South Australia is one of the States of the Commonwealth Common-
of Australia. All persons not under 21 years of age, whether wealth
male or female, married or unmarried, who have lived in Franchise.
Australia for six months continuously, are natural-born or
naturalised subjects of the King, and are on the electoral roll
for any electoral division, may vote at the election of mem-
bers of the Senate and House of Representatives (Common-
wealth Franchise Act, 1902).
Local Government is general. Local
All religious bodies are represented. There is no estab- Government
lished church. About 30 per cent, are members of the Religion.


South Australia.
Church of England, 25 per cent, are Methodists, and 14 per
cent, are Roman Catholics.
Justice, The administration of justice is very similar to that
in England.
Education. Education is free, compulsory and secular ; but the teacher
may, if he likes, and must if requested by 10 parents of
pupils, read out a portion of the Scriptures for half an hour
before school begins. There are also many Sunday schools.
There are many scholarships and exhibitions open to all.
There are several colleges, such as St. Peter’s and Prince
Alfred Colleges, where higher education and religious in-
struction are given ; and a University at Adelaide.
Agricultural There is an Agricultural college situated on Govern-
Coiiege. ment Experimental Farm at Roseworthy, about 30 miles
from Adelaide ; the fees are 30/. a year, including every-
thing. The course includes the principles and practice
of agriculture, stock-keeping, fruit-culture, book-keeping,
veterinary, physical and natural science, surveying, wool-
classing, and viticulture. Practical work in the fields is
taught in so far as the limited area of the land allows.
There is another Agricultural School at Adelaide for boys
under 15 years of age in connection with the School of
Mines and Industries,
Money. British money is used throughout the State. Persons are
recommended not to take their money in cash, but by
means of one or more money orders payable to themselves
Money at any post office in the State ; they cost 3 d. to ss. 3c/. for
Orders. sums up to 40/. Large sums should be transmitted through
a Bank.
Savings The rate of interest allowed to depositors in the Savings
banks. Bank is liable to be changed annually, and for 1906 was
3|- per cent.; one out of every three persons in the State is
a depositor. Money up to 500/. may be deposited, but
interest is not given on sums beyond 250/.
Railways. The various lines will be seen by reference to the map ;
1,832 miles are now open, besides 146 miles in the Northern
Territory. Children not over 3 years old travel free, and
over 3 years and not over 12 years half price. There are
T ,. nnnnp only first and second classes ; 84 lbs. free luggage are allowed
99 9 ‘ in the second class, and 112 lbs. in the first. Adelaide is
connected by rail with Melbourne, in Victoria ; Sydney, in
New South Wales ; and Brisbane, in Queensland (1,782
miles from Adelaide).
Post. The rates of postage, from the United Kingdom, are,
newspapers \d. every 2 ozs. ; letters, Id. every oz. ; post-
cards, Id. each ; parcels post, Is. for the first lb., and 6c/.
per lb. afterwards, up to II lbs. ; telegrams, 2s. 9c/. and 3s. a
word.


South Australia.
There are numerous public libraries, building societies, Libraries,
friendly societies, &c. Members of societies in the United Friendly and
Kingdom should apply to their own society for letters of
introduction to the corresponding society in the State.
Cricket and the other British sports are common. por s *
There are hospitals and charitable institutions at all places Charitable
of any size. There are no poor rates ; poor relief is furnished Institutions,
from the general revenue. £“ r Eel,et -
The various products and industries of South Australia Products
have been repeatedly referred to in the foregoing pages ; £ustbibs
they are here grouped together. See also exports on
page 14.
Agriculture is confined to the counties (see Map). The Agriculture,
greater part of the land is held under lease. The cultivated
land in 1906-07 was 3,246,835 acres, which was less than in
the previous year. The principal field crops are wheat,
hay, barley, oats, sown grasses, and potatoes.
More than half of the cultivated ground is under wheat ; Wheat.
most of the total wheat acreage is in Daly, Victoria,
Dalhousie, Frome, Fergusson, Gawler, and Stanley counties,
Daly having much the largest acreage. The total acreage
of wheat reaped in 1906-7 was 1,686,374 acres, which was
less than in the previous year. The average yield per acre
of wheat reaped in the last two years was 11 bushels,
which was above the average. In 1906-7, the county
which had the highest average was Grey, which had an
average of 15 bushels to the acre. No wheat was sown
in some of the counties. The reaper and binder is almost
universally used.
The area grown for hay in 1906-1907 was 298,000 acres, Hay.
which was 20,000 acres less than in the previous year,
the average yield being 1*34 tons an acre. Hay in South
Australia is the produce of wheat, oats, or barley, mown
when in the doughy stage. The largest hay-growing county
is Adelaide, then Light, Victoria, Gawler, and Daly.
28,000 acres of barley were cultivated in 1906-1907 Barley.
as against 26,000 acres in the previous year. It is chiefly
grown in the Central Division (see page 3) as in counties
Adelaide, Carnarvon, Fergusson, and Hindmarsh; but Grey
in the South Kastern Division produces as much as any
other single county ; Flinders also in the Western Division
has 1,500 acres. The average yield varies from 12 to 19
bushels an acre.
57,000 acres of oats were cultivated in 1906-1907, chiefly Oats.
in the Central Division and Grey County, but also in Daly,
Flinders, Russell, Buckingham, Victoria, and Stanley
counties, being the same area as in the previous year.
The average yield varies from 7 to 16 bushels an acre.
S. Aust. • B


South Australia.
Peas were grown in very few counties except Adelaide and
Hindmarsh, where pig-rearing and bacon-curing are cme* y
carried on; the total area in 1906-7 was 7,100 acres, lins
crop gives, as a rule, a better return than wheat ; tne
average yield is 11 to 20 bushels an acre.
The area under sown grasses is 24,000 acres. This culture
is practically limited to the County of Grey m the South
Eastern Division ; it is extending among small farmers and
graziers, who are more generally keeping flocks, and is not
confined to the large estate, holders. There is besides a
large quantity of hay. Lucerne is cultivated in many
parts, the area in 1907 being 15,000 acres; the largest
cultivation is in Adelaide, Stanley, Grey, and Victoria
Peas.
Sown
grasses, fc.
counties.
Minor crops include sorghum, turnips, mangolds, onions,
melons, rye, rape, mustard, wattles for bark (mainly in
Adelaide, Hindmarsh, and Robe counties, the total quantity
stripped in 1906-7 having been 7,600 tons), chicory, hops,
maize, &c. In wattle growing the settler has to wait sor b
years before the trees are ready for stripping; alter that the
profits should be considerable.
The mode of farming in bouth Australia is very different
from that pursued in the United Kingdom. In March or Apn
the early rains are looked for, and ploughing is very general
during the three months of April, May, and June, ihe
heat of summer hardens the ground, so that ploughing is
difficult and costly prior to the advent of the rams.
Sowing is begun in April, May, or June, according to the
locality, and, as a rule, is completed by July. In recent
years sowing has been done by mechanical seed sowers,
which are largely manufactured in the State. The opera-
tions of rolling and harrowing are very much the same as
on British farms, except that the ground being drier and
more friable requires less working. The principal rams
are expected to fall in June and July ; in August, as the
davs lengthen, the crops shoot up, and in the next two
months they grow rapidly. As the month of November
approaches, the crops begin to show for ear Hay
harvest is generally in full swing by the middle of
November, the corn harvest following immediately after-
wards The forwardness of the crops depends upon varying
circumstances, such as early or late varieties of wheat, early
or late sowing, or favourable or unfavourable climatic
conditions. By the beginning of December, when the
summer has set in, reaping operations have fairly com-
menced ; and by Christmas, harvesting is general throughout
the State. Artificial manures are being used more extensively
each year, and there has been a fairly general improvement
in the chief agricultural areas in farming operations.
Irrigation also is being resorted to more extensively,
Minor crops.
Mode of
farming


South Australia,
as at Reninark and other settlements on the Murray
(see p. 22).
Owing to the improved methods of farming and con- Price of land.
sequent larger returns, and recent high prices for products,
land values have considerably risen in the better districts.
Artificial manures, and the drill have practically doubled the
producing capacity of the land. The export trade of frozen
lambs also helps the small landowner, and has been another
factor in raising the price of land in well watered districts.
Not much unimproved land suitable for farming or stock-
keeping is now left, except in very large holdings in
the drier parts. Improved agricultural or dairying land
now costs from 51. to 7 1. 10s. an acre, or may be rented at
ss. to Bs. an acre ; fruit-growing land costs 6/. to 10?. an
acre, and land for stock-keeping costs 4?. to 61. an acre ;
for good land close to Adelaide the prices are higher. An
ordinary farm suitable for general farming, with fruit grow-
ing, would be 150 to 200 acres, and the capital required to
work it would be 300?. If the farm is for wheat growing
and grazing only, the area should be not less than
500 to 1000 acres, and the capital not less than 15s. an acre,
exclusive of the price of the land. But the addition of fruit
growing is likely to make the farm much more profitable.
Good dairy farms in the south-east cost 10?. an acre. Clearing Clearing
timber land, where needed, costs from 11. an acre, and scrub land.
land 10s.
The sheep and cattle runs range from a few square miles Pastoral
up to several hundred in extent. Very large quantities settlement,
of wool are exported every year; in 1906 the quantity
was nearly 42 million lbs. Considerable quantities also of
frozen lamb and mutton are exported. The number of sheep
increased to 6,625,000 in 1906-1907. Nearly all of these
were depastured within the counties, the largest numbers
being in Grey, Robe, Stanley, and Victoria counties
(see Map) ; an average block contains 50,000 acres, carrying
5,000 sheep.
Drought destroys large numbers of sheep at times. It
is hoped that by the sinking of artesian wells, the storing
of water, and irrigation, the danger of drought may be to
some extent obviated. Rabbits also do much damage, and Rabbits.
wild dogs and foxes have increased considerably. Rabbits
are now being exported frozen to England, and it is hoped
that this industry may reduce their excessive numbers.
Cattle decreased from 412,000 in 1895 to 326,000 in Cattle.
1907. Most of these were in the counties, the largest
numbers being in Adelaide and Grey counties.
Horse breeding seems profitable, especially in the Upper Horses.
North, where considerable breeding stations have been estab-
lished with some success. The total number of horses in


South Australia.
1907 was 207,000, being rather more than that in the
previous year.
More attention has been shown to the breeding of pigs
during the past few years, and the total number is now
111,000. A good breed has been introduced, and there
are considerable bacon curing establishments at Mount
Gambier and Mount Barker.
Dairv
There would seem to be excellent prospects for dairy
farmers. A large amount of export trade in dairy produce,
especially in butter and eggs, is already done with the
other Australasian States. A trade with England is now
being opened up by means of cool chambers on the mail
steamers, which is capable of unlimited expansion. Butter
and cheese factories have greatly developed in the State
of late years, and there are also several creameries. The
milch cows are principally in the counties of Adelaide,
Light, Grey, Victoria, Sturt, Frome, and Hindmarsh.
Adelaide county has much the largest number of poultry,
then light, Gawler, Daly, Stanley, and Victoria. Consider-
able quantities of honey are produced, mainly in the Central
Division, the best honey selling at about 2 \d. to 3 d. per lb.
farming.
Poultry.
Honey.
Fruits.
Every kind of fruit that can be grown in the United King-
dom is found, as well as olives, oranges, guavas, grapes,
lemons, almonds, &c,, growing in the open air, and thriving
most luxuriantly. The country is well suited for the
growth of fruits, and in this and the wine industry,
there are more openings in the future than in any other ;
the number of fruit trees has considerably increased
during recent years. Fruit growers with a capital of
5007. to 1,0007. should do well. The area of gardens
and orchards is gradually spreading, and is now several
thousand acres, the County of Adelaide having the
greater part of the total acreage. Fruit-preserving, can-
ning, and drying are important industries carried on
under the most improved methods, and the export of
both fresh and dried fruits is becoming considerable.
There is still some import however both of fresh and
preserved fruit; but it is hoped that as the cultivation of
fruit increases in the State this import will disappear.
Though Adelaide is the principal county in which fruit
cultivation is carried on, there are also considerable areas
under fruit in Light, Stanley, Hindmarsh and Frome counties,
and in Hamley, which includes Renmark (p. 22).
Potatoes are grown mainly in the neighbourhood of Mount
Gambier, in the south-eastern district of the State (.see
page 5), the total acreage in the State in 1906-07 being 9,900
acres, or more than in the previous year. In the Mount
Lofty Ranges also potatoes are grown regularly along with
the other crops of common garden vegetables, but the culti-
Vegetables.


South Australia.
vation there is not so large. Upon the plains the crops are
uncertain owing to want of rain. The average yield of
potatoes is from 2 to over 3 tons an acre.
The soil and climate are very suitable for the production Wine,
of all sorts of wine. The Adelaide plains produce wines
similar to those of the south of Spain, whereas the hilly
districts are adapted to the growth of clarets and the
lighter descriptions of wine. The area under vines has
continually increased, and in 1906-07 there were 22,600
acres. Out of the total area under vines, four-fifths
were in the Central Division, mainly in the counties of
Adelaide and Light. Stanley and Hamley (Renmark)
counties are the chief wine growing districts in other
parts of the State. In many good parts land may be
bought for 61. to 8/. an acre, but in some districts it
costs as much as 15 1, to 30?. an acre. Two tons of
wine grapes, or from three to five tons of table or raisin
grapes to the acre, is a fair average return. Great pro-
gress has been made during the last few years, and new,
clean, and modern appliances have taken the place of old-
fashioned methods. There are great possibilities in this
industry, which in time will no doubt be one of the
main industries of the State, provided that an adequate
market on the spot or elsewhere is assured, and that
the price of grapes does not fall too low ; a depot has
been established in London under Government control in
order to promote the industry ; the export trade is now con-
siderable. Ten or twenty acres are quite enough to start vine-
growing on. To bring vines into full bearing costs 20?. to 30?. an
acre ; and a cellar must be erected aud equipped, which costs
nearly 1,500?. The phylloxera has not appeared in the State,
but the Phylloxera Act, 1899, was passed for the protection
of vineyards, and the Phylloxera Board appointed under it
is at work.
The production of copper and copper ore in 1906 was Minerals:
164,160 cwts. The mines at Wallaroo and Moonta, (l.) Copper,
which employ some 3,000 hands, are practically the only
important mines that have been working during recent years.
There was a great revival of copper mining in 1906 owing to
the high price of copper, and old mines like those at
Kapunda and Burra were restarted, but this revival has since
subsided. For values exported see p. 14.
Gold is found near Mannahill, Tarcoola (N.E. of Port (2.) Gold.
Augusta), and other places, and Government batteries have
been erected, but the results are not large ; for the value
of exports, see p. 14. The quantity of South Australian gold
produced in 1906 was 8,037 ozs.
Silver-lead mines are being worked to some extent near ( 3 -) Silver
Farina and elsewhere, but the results are very small ; and
gypsum is found in one or two parts. There are large


South Australia.
deposits of iron ore at Iron Knob in the north of Eyre’s
Peninsula, which are being worked. The production of
salt for curing purposes and domestic use has considerably
increased of late years on Yorke Peninsula and Kangaroo
Island, the total in 1906 being 55,000 tons. There are also
several freestone and sandstone quarries, which have not
been much developed at present; granite at Port Elliot;
marble near Kapunda and Angaston ; and slate at Willunga
and Mintaro.
Manufac- The manufactories, with the exception of a few, are not
tories. very large and employ some 16,500 males and 3,739 females.
The principal are those for making machinery and
agricultural and other implements, saddlery and harness
factories, breweries, boot and shoe and clothing factories,
smelters, printing establishments, and coachbuilding and
cabinet factories. There are shipbuilding establishments at
Port Adelaide, and carriages, &c. are made at the Govern-
ment railway works. There are also a good many brick-
making, chaff-cutting, and wine making establishments,
butter and cheese factories, tanneries, and saw-mills. Most
of the timber suitable for manufacturing and building
purposes is imported, as very little grows in the State.
Renmark There is an important irrigation settlement at Renmark,
Irrigation on the Murray, which has been financially assisted by the
settlement. G overnm ent. The distribution of water is in the hands
of an Irrigation Trust, which is elected by the ratepayers,
and the cost for five thorough waterings is about 17s. 6c?.
an acre. The total population in 1907 was about 1,000,
and there were about 4,200 acres under intense
cultivation by irrigation. The principal fruits grown
are currants, sultanas, and muscats ; there are also consider-
able quantities of apricots, peaches, and oranges, and smaller
quantities of lemons, pears, olives, nectarines, &c., besides
369 acres under lucerne. A considerable amount of fruit
is dried and preserved. Attention is also now being
successfully given to dairying. The climate is hot in
summer, and the rainfall is small. Altogether the settle-
ment is in a “ fairly prosperous” condition, and its prospects
are steadily improving. A settler should have a capital of
500?.
Crown Land The disposal of Crown Lands, other than those in the
Laws. Northern Territory, for which see p. 6, is regulated
by the Crown Lands Acts, 1903-1906. Such lands
may be taken up on perpetual lease or agreement
with covenant to purchase; the price or rent and area
are fixed by the Land Board. Under these leases minerals
are reserved to the Crown, and the lessee is required
to fence and keep the land free of vermin.
Homestead Small homestead blocks may be obtained. Personal
blocks. residence for nine months in each year by the lessor or


South Australia.
his family is required, and the destruction of all rabbits
and other vermin. This system of small blocks continues
to be successful near Adelaide and in other favourable
localities where work is obtainable, but not where the land
is isolated, so that now there is very little demand for them,
and the number of holdings has declined. The Government Advances of
may lend money up to 502. to a block holder to aid him money.
in erecting or completing permanent buildings on his block,
or in permanently improving the land.
The Government may repurchase land for cutting up Closer
into blocks, not exceeding as a rule 2,0002. in value, and settlement,
selling the-same to purchasers, the money to be paid in
from 9to 35 years. Under previous Acts, 251,476 acres had
been purchased up to June 30,1906, at a total cost of 643,5292.
The number of allotments was 921, and that of the popu-
lation was 3,058. Wheat was the principal crop. There
were also sheep, cattle, horses, and poultry. “ The system
of repurchase for closer settlement has, so far, answered
remarkably well,” and “ the rents and instalments have been
fairly well paid.”
Leases of Pastoral lands are granted for 42 years subject Pastoral
to a re-valuation of the rent for the second 21 years ; and Aot > 1904 -
on conditions of stocking the land and keeping it free of
vermin.
Land is transferred very cheaply and rapidly on the lines Land
of the Torrens system. Registration is compulsory. (Real Transfer.
Property Acts, 1886-87.)
A miner’s right costs 5.9. a year, and entitles the holder to Mining Acts,
prospect for any metal, mineral, coal, or oil, and to peg out 1898-1905.
a claim of a certain area. He may obtain a lease of the land
on the condition (amongst others) of keeping a certain
number of men mining or prospecting upon it. Acts of
1888-1901 permit mining for gold, copper, silver or other
metals on private property under certain conditions. No
boy under the age of 14 years, and no female of any age,
may be employed underground in any mine.
Complaints in South Australia by servants against masters, Masters and
or masters against servants, may be summarily decided and
compensation awarded by two justices. ’
The Workmen’s Compensation Acts, 1900 and 1904, make Compensa-
an employer liable to his workmen (including seamen) in
certain cases of injury.
No woman, and no boy or girl under 16 years of age, Factories
may be employed in a factory for more than 48 hours A - ct > 1907 -
a week, except by leave to meet exigencies of trade ; no
child under 13 years of age may be employed in any
factory without leave of the Inspector. Wages boards, com-
posed of representatives of employers and employees, must


South Australia.
be appointed in certain trades to fix the minimum rate of
wages and the maximum hours per week. There is an
appeal from a Wages Board to a Court of Industrial Appeals,
which is to consist of a Judge of the Supreme Court.
Dangerous machinery must be fenced, and factories must
be properly kept. The Factories Act applies to Adelaide,
and to any other district defined by resolution of both
Houses of Parliament.
The Game
Act. 1886.
By the Game Act, 1886, (1) certain animals are pro-
tected, in the counties and islands only, during certain
seasons of the year ; (2) trespassers in pursuit of game on
enclosed land, except land held on lease from the Crown for
pastoral purposes, may be fined bl. The Birds Protection
Act, 1900, limits the destruction of birds.
Bush Fires By the Bush Fires Act, (1) no scrub may be burnt
Act, 1885. during November, December, and January ; (2) no
stubble may be burnt from November to the end of
April, except during stated hours ; (3) no smoking is
allowed in the open air within 20 yards of hay, corn, or
stack, from November to the end of April, except with a
pipe properly covered.
Vermin Acts, In consequence of the damage caused by wild dogs,
1905 and foxes, and especially by rabbits, all owners and occupiers
1907. 0 f j an( j aro Coln p e u e( i by j aw to destroy these and other
vermin.
Sparrows, Sparrows are to be destroyed in proclaimed districts.
(Sparrow Act, 1889.)
Vaccination. Vaccination is by the Act of 1882 compulsory, under
penalties not exceeding bl. ; but by Acts of 1901-6-7 the
conscientious objector is excepted.
Marriage. 1. Marriage is allowed with a deceased wife’s sister (Act
of 1871). 2. Children born before the marriage of their
parents become legitimate after such marriage (Acts of
1898 and 1902).
Workmen’s By the Workmen’s Lien Acts a workman has a lien for
Lien Acts, bis wages up to 12 1, on the estate or interest in land of
1896 and the owner or occupier on which he is doing work, and a
contractor or sub-contractor has a similar lien for the contract
price.
Wages The wages of a clerk, servant, labourer, or workman may
attachment not be attached.
Act, 1898.
Conciliation The Conciliation Act of 1894 was passed to facilitate the
Act, 1894. settlement of industrial disputes by means of Public and
Common- Private Boards of Conciliation. There is also a Common-
wealth Act wealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration established by
1904. the Commonwealth Act of 1904 for the prevention and settle-
ment of industrial disputes. By this Act lockouts and strikes


South Australia.
are prohibited under penalty of I,OOOZ. in the cases of
certain industrial agreements, and of organisations registered
under the Act.
The State Advances Acts, 1895-6, establish a State Advances to
Bank, and enable the State to make advances to farmers Farmers-
and other producers, to local authorities, and in aid of
industries.
Local option prevails. No liquor may be supplied (1) on Sale of
Sundays except to travellers and lodgers, nor (2) to children liqtlor-
below 15 years of age. (Acts of 1880 to 1905.)
In Adelaide shops, with some exceptions, must be closed Early Closing
by 6 o’clock on four days, by 9 o’clock on one day, and by 1900 “
1 o’clock on one day in each week. In country districts shop- ‘ ' ‘
keepers may ask for similar provisions. But by the Act of
1902, a shopkeeper may with the assistance of one member
of his family keep his shop open till any time on any day.
For further particulars on the State, apply to the Address of
Agent-General for South Australia, at Threadneedle House, Agent-
Bishopsgate Street Within, London, E.C. ; or to the General -
Chief Clerk at this office (office hours 10 to 5, and on
Saturdays 10 to 1.30), where Maps and Directories may be
seen.
Note. —The Emigrants’ Information Office will be glad to
receive suggestions and information, more especi-
ally from Colonists. Revised editionsLof this
Handbook are issued every year.
S, A nst.


LONDON:
PRINTED FOR HIS MAJESTY’S STATIONERY OFFICE,
By DARLING & SON, Ltd., 34-40, Bacon Street, E.
1908,




The following’ Publications are issued by the Emigrants’
Information Office, and may be obtained post free from the
Chief Clerk, 31, Broadway, Westminster :
Price.
I. A Quarterly Poster—exhibited in all Post Offices Free.
11. Quarterly Circulars on Canada, Australasia, and
the South African Colonies. They will be sent
regularly to anyone desiring them Free.
Circular on the Emigration
of Women ... Free.
The following Handbooks published annually
Canada ... ... Price Id.
New South Wales „ Id.
Victoria „ Id.
Tasmania ... Price Id.
New Zealand ... „ Id.
Cape Colony ... „ Id.
Natal „ Id.
South Australia... „ Id.
Queensland ... „ Id.
Western Australia „ Id.
Transvaal ... „ Id.
Orange River Colony „ Id. ■/]
Each of the above Handbooks contains a Map.
Professional Handbook: showing the necessary
qualifications in the above Colonies for architects
and civil engineers, auctioneers, barristers and
solicitors, chemists, civil service, clergymen,
clerks, commercial travellers, dentists, governesses,
Cape mounted riflemen, notaries public, nurses,
physicians and surgeons, police, railway servants,
surveyors, teachers, and veterinary surgeons ... 3 d.
Emigration Statutes and General Handbook: deal-
ing with all British Statutes on Emigrant Ships,
and Emigration ; and Emigration Societies, &c.... 3 d.
The above 14 Handbooks, bound together, with all
the Maps 2s. o d.
V. Pamphlet on the West Indies, with Map ... 6d.
Pamphlet on Newfoundland, with Map ... Id.
Pamphlet on Ceylon, with Map Id.
Pamphlet on the Federated Malay' States, with
Map 6d.
Notes on the West African Colonies, with Map... 6d.
Pamphlet on the East Africa Protectorate, with
Map ... ... 6d.
Pamphlet on the Uganda Protectorate, with Map 6d.
Pamphlet on the Nyasaland Protectorate, with
Map ... 6d.
VI. On Foreign Countries, occasional Pamphlets :
United States Circular Free.
Summary of Consular Reports (North and South
America) ... ... &d.
Handbook on the Argentine Republic, with Map 2d.
All the above may be obtained post free from the Chief
Clerk, Emigrants’ Information Office, 31, Broadway, West-
minster, S.W. ; the Handbooks may also be obtained, either
directly or through any Bookseller, from Wyman & Sons,
Ltd., Fetter Lane, E.C. ; or Oliver & Boyd, Tweeddale Court,
Edinburgh ; or E. Fonsonby, 116, Grafton Street, Dublin.
