

m
m
CO
CSI




Southern Seas Story Book
General Editor
Henry Stead
EDITED BY LILIAN M. PYKE
Author of
Sheila at Happy Hills
Camp Kiddies
Max the Sport Etc.
PUBLISHED BY ALEXANDER McCUBBIN
152 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne


,^ MLTH w -%/v
' # %
9 DEC 1920 f
' ?l " ®f THE
Preface
EDITOR'S NOTE.
THERE'S something in the Southern Seas Story Book for
everyone in the family from six to sixty to read..
Father, who hasn't forgotten the days when he was a boy
at school, will give many a reminiscent chuckle and sigh as he forgets
to pass it back to Tom, from whom he has borrowed it just for a
minute. Mother will hail with joy something that will keep the
family quiet at the end of one of those perfect days in the holidays
that parents know so well. Big sister, engrossed in the play, will
promise the little ones something out of the story-book if they will
be good till she finishes.
Through it all will be found that purely Australian atmosphere
just as distinct as the incomparable taste of billy tea.
Everyone wants a happy book, and one that will leave a uwe-
want-more'' feeling, and if sometimes just a little note of pathos
creeps in, well, otherwise it wouldn't be true to life.
We want to know how you like the Story Book. Any letters
of constructive criticism will be welcomed.
Let us know, too, what sort of a monthly paper you would like.
If wc find that this is the sort of thing you want, —good Australian
stories by good. Australian writers, —there is a likelihood of a
Southern Seas Story Book coming out monthly, a little smaller than
this, at a shilling.
Space is limited, and so probably is your patience, so, in case
you are just reading this for politeness, we won't keep you from
the stories any longer. Be happy and you'll be good.
A Merry Xmas and a Bright New Year to all in the lands of
the Southern Seas
The Editor


Index
The Nugget of Gold 5
Lacrosse —The Game for Thoroughbreds '.. .. 8
The Voyage of the Ina 11
The Dwarf's Tea Partv 16
Billy Turns Detective 17
Southern Seas Story Competition 20
Boys' School Story—Piddington's Position 21 y
Girls' School Story—Peggy 23
Adventure Story—Guarded Gold 26
Shaky Knees and the Dragon .. 29
The Saving of Winnebango .. 34
A Private Performance 40
Motherkins 44
An Interrupted Flight 46
Poetic Justice 50
If I were Rich .. 54
The Bush School ... .. .. .. •• •• •• 55-
v The Baker that Baked .. .. • • • • • • • • 64
The Water-Lily Fairy •• •• •• •• •• •• 65
The Platypus 66
Fear Triumphant •. 68
The Fox and the Rooster * 70 j
All Owing to the Strike 7L




"By jingo!" he said. "Why, it's a nugget, isn't it?"
The Nugget of Gold
A Schoolboy Yarn, by "One of Them/'
HAWKINS was one of the queerest chaps
I struck during the time I was a
boarder at "Ours." He was a fattish
kind of fellow, with a face that reminded you
of the suet pudding which the school cook
seemed to think was the correct dessert to
serve up to schoolboys. It has often struck
me that tradition has a lot to account for.
Whereas (that sounds awfully legal, like the
blue paper I got once when I exceeded the
speed limit on my motor bike), the Australian
climate simply howls for a diet of grills and
fruit-salads, the future men of the race are
compelled to consume stews restewed and pud-
dings of the spotted Dick type. You may think
this has nothing to do with nuggeta, out I
have done a term or two of logic, and am try-
ing to get back to first causes. I want to
make excuses for Hawkins if I can. I like to
do a chap justice, and maybe a constant board-
ing-school diet had something to do with his
pudding-faced appearance and general lack of
interest in ordinary things.
For myself, I have not been a boarder long
enough to be affected, as you may have
noticed from my character, as revealed in the
yarns I tell you. Our literature master tries
to cram down our throats that the really great
do not betray themselves by their writings.
I am sure you could not tell from Shake-


speare's play much about his private history;
though, judging from his sonnets, there are
indications that he must have had a love affair
or so. But then, of course, that might be said
about almost any man.
From this you will see that if you can
gather the kind of chap I am from what I
write about, I may not really have been born
great, but, of course, there is always a chance
that I may achieve greatness, and also a bit
of pocket money from the yarns.
To get back to Hawkins, who, on account
of his size and general appearance, was usually
called Jumbo, I must tell you that the only
time he was ever seen with a bat in his hand
was at a compulsory practice, and not always
then, as he seemed to have the luck of a
Chinaman in getting some ache or pain on
those days. Of course, for a chap who lives
almost exclusively •on stew or spotted Dick,
it is comparatively easy to be unwell any old
time, and this just proves my theory, but it
would hardly account for corns, ingrowing toe-
nails, stiff necks, and sprained wrists, wTiich
were among the list of reasons why he could
not take part in any school sports.
What Hawkins really liked was collecting.
I don't mean pocket money, for, of course,
there is nothing unusual about that. All school-
boys have that hobby. But Jumbo was never
so happy as when he had some new kind of
stone, or soil, or plant, or grub that he oould
take out of his pocket, and gloat over at in-
tervals. He would risk having his half-holi-
days and Saturdays docked, by going out of
bounds, not as you might think, to buy tucker
or to meet a girl, but to capture some particu-
lar kind of wog he had happened to hear fre-
quented a spot near "Ours."
I can understand a chap keeping a dog,
which can, in a way, return your affection, and
can make a row when you feel like having a
romp, but imagine anyone trying to cultivate
reciprocal affection with a slater, those beastly
slimy grey things you find under stones. Of
course, there are rules against a chap keeping
a sensible thing like a dog at school, but none
at all about a woolly caterpillar. You can
chain a dog up, and be sure of him keeping
in his kennel, but with Jumbo's creepy craw-
lers, there was no keeping them in bounds
at all. As far as anyone knew, they might
crawl across your face in the night, or manu-
facture one of their beastly cocoons in your
pyjama leg.
One of his butterflies fancied my best silk
handkerchief as a suitable spot for depositing
its eggs, and I never noticed it until I wore it
sticking out of my pocket at a school play,
where I was sitting with one of my sister's
friends who wanted to be in the limelight,
and be seen by her schoolmates with one of the
chaps from "Ours." I was the victim, but she
was jolly sorry when she found a creepy
crawly climbing over her bare arm. The jolly
eggs had settled upon that particular moment
to hatch, the handkerchief having laid by in
my drawer for some time, owing to there being
no festive joint' taking place. The creatures
had wriggled themselves from my pocket on
to her, and there was quite a scene for a little
while. Of course, I got the blame, and my
sister said I had done it on purpose, to pay
her out for asking me to let Flossie sit with
me, and she immediately knocked off knitting
me a silk tie in the school colours, for which
I had purchased the material at enormous
expense.
I got no sympathy from Jumbo either, who
had been wondering where his silly old insect
had laid her eggs, and seemed inclined to
blame me for removing my handkerchief, and
causing the wholesale destruction of the
butterfly's offspring. I don't see why he should
have been so soft about it, when the parent
of the worms had been dead and buried quite
a time. Perhaps he had a tender spot in his
heart for the sad fate of the orphans.
This will show you that Jumbo was not
quite normal; but, on the whole, we chaps
tolerated him, and put up with finding lumps
of clay and other perfectly useless geological
specimens in the dorm, and study overflowing
from Hawkin's place into ours. Certainly they
came in handy as missiles when an argument
arose, though this was far from being the
reason why Jumbo had collected them.
The chaps got to humour Jumbo in his
hobby, especially those who did not sleep in
the same dormitory with him. It was safe
enough for them, as they ran no risk of their
gifts reacting on them. I never contributed
anything to Hawkins' collection since a praying
Mantis I had given him chose my nose to per-
form his devotions upon one night when I
was asleep. When I ventured to protest.
Jumbo said it was one of their characteristics
to pick out the most prominent spot in the
vicinity for the performance. There is no
chance of a Mantis hiding his light under a
bushel. When he wants to pray, he does so
regardless of spectators. There were other
victims besides myself to Jumbo's obsession.
Billy Wagstaff, .a junior in our dormitory, had


frequently suffered from spiders' eggs hatch-
ing in his hair-brush case, and having his
tooth-brush holder used as a receptacle for
unwary tadpoles. Indeed, he grew quite nasty
about it at times, but as Jumbo was so much
bigger than he was, he was unable to lend any
weight to his arguments.
The chaps were more surprised, therefore,
when Tom-tit came back after the Easter holi-
days with a new specimen for Jumbo. In case
you may be hazy about the origin of Wagstaff's
nickname, I may mention that his real com-
nomen suggested.Wagtail, and as a Wagtail is
not a Tom-tit, though something similar to one,
that is what they called him.
This specimen, carefully wrapped in cotton-
wool, he handed over to Jumbo with quite an
important air. Jumbo didn't say much until
he opened the box, as he had had similar pre-
sentations which had turned out to be either
something unpleasantly odoriferous, or else
quite worthless. But his dull eyes actually
sparkled when the object was revealed, and
his face lit up in a way that must have re-
warded Tom-tit for his thoughtfulness. "By
jingo!" he said. "Why, it's a nugget, isn't it?
It's quite a decent specimen, and not a bad
shape," which, of course, was the very highest
praise from a boy. "Yes," replied Tom-tit,
"you may well be pleased, Jumbo. That
\
nugget has a history. It came from a mine
way up at Red-gum Range, and was embedded
in a whitish substance surrounded by enamel.
You will notice the peculiar shape of it. A
chap I know said there never had been another
exactly like it."
Jumbo was frightfully interested in this
nugget, and Tom-tit got no end of tips from
him while its novelty lasted. Its fame reached
beyond the bounds of the dormitory, and we
were quite pestered by the number of chaps
who came to view it. Though only small, it
certainly was an interesting specimen, and
Jumbo got quite a swelled head over it. He
was so proud of it that he told the geological
master about it, and he became so interested
in it that he begged Jumbo to let him have it
for the school museum. Tom-tit had become
quite tired of answering questions about its
history, and in the end refused to give any
more information about it, referring the en-
quirers to Jumbo, who was always quite will-
ing to tell all he knew, and a good deal that
he didn't.
"The School Magazine" broke out with an
illuminative essay on the subject of Hawkins'
nugget, and some of the old boys, who had be-
come antiquaries or some such birds since
leaving college, came up to see the specimen.
In fact, it brought "Ours,"' and, incidentally.
Jumbo, quite a quantity of fame.
One afternoon I had to visit a dentist in the
city about a molar that jumped every time I
ate ice cream. I hated dentists, but couldn't
give up ice cream when the temperature was
110 degrees. There was someone in the sur-
gery when I arrived, so I seated myself in
the waiting room and read a "Bulletin" a few
months old. The door was a little open be-
tween the rooms, and my attention was sud-
denly attracted from "Aboriginalities" by a
voice, which I knew was Tom-tit's.
"Yes, it's been aching a treat," he said, in
response to a remark of the dentist.
"But I filled that cavity for you last year,"
plied he of the forceps.
"Yes," replies Tom-tit, "but the filling came
out."
"You are a careless young beggar," said the
dentist; "I took a lot of pains with that gold-
filling. The cavity was such a peculiar shape.
I remember it well, because after I took the
first impression I put a piece of wax on my
glass stand, and a small kid that a patient
brought in got hold of it and ate it up."
The Tom-tit laughed. "I remember," he
said. "You had to take a second impression."
By this time a slow suspicion was gradually
assuming shape in my by no means dull brain.
The conversation went on: "So you lost the
filling, did you?" There was a pause, filled in
by the clicking of instruments.
Then the Tom-tit spoke: "Look here! I'll
tell you a joke if you promise not to hurt me
with that instrument."
"Fire away," said the dentist.
I was not surprised by this time to hear the
Tom-tit tell that man the whole of the story
of Jumbo and the gold specimen. I thought
the dentist would have broken some of the
glassware in the surgery. Passers-by must
have thought someone was having laughing-
gas.
By this time I considered I ought to make
my presence known, so I stepped to the sur-
gery door and coughed. The Tom-tit's face was
a study when he saw me. "I suppose the
joke's all up now, Wispy?" he said. "But oh!
it was great while it lasted; I've never en-
joyed a term at 'Ours' like it."
"You make a mistake," I said, with dignity.
"I'm only sorry I didn't think of it myself. As
for the joke being up, I don't know so much
about that. We can't have 'Ours' made a sub


ject for public jest. Once the boys at the High
hear it, our reputation is done for."
"I didn't think of that," said the Tom-tit,
and the dentist murmured, "Brains."
I blushed, but felt I deserved it.
"Then," said the Tom-tit, slowly and reflec-
tively, "that gold-filling will have to remain
where it is in the museum."
"Yes," said the dentist, "and it will cost your
father two guineas for a new one."
"It was worth it," said the Tom-tit, re-
signedly.
Visitors to the museum at "Ours" are shown
to this day the wonderful little nugget pre-
sented to the museum by Hawkins, and Wag-
staff, Senior, in blissful unconsciousness that
he was paying the piper, cheerfully footed the
dentist's bill for the Tom-tit.
Lacrosse —The Game for Thoroughbreds
A.O.T.
A GAME for thoroughbreds," said one
of the leading judges of Victoria
when making a speech about the
game of lacrosse, and no doubt he was right,
too, as it is only the best-developed athlete
and those with the soundest constitution who
can stand the strain of a hard match, or the
training preparations that are necessary to
keep in form. In addition to strength, one has
to possess more than a good supply of what
is termed "common sense," and a w r ill that
commands him to "carry on," despite his feel-
ing of physical exhaustion.
In a match where all players are first-class
lacrosseurs, there is no game to equal it for
thrilling and exciting moments, or where the
fortunes of play change so quickly. Ask a
good all-round "sport," w T ho has donned the
flannels to play cricket, taken the jersey and
joined a football team, played hockey, tennis,
or baseball, and has experienced all the thrills
and excitements that these games can pro-
vide him with, and he will shake his head and
say truthfully that "none of them" can equal
the w r onderful game of lacrosse. The finest
points of all the popular games are to be seen
in lacrosse, and let it be remembered that all
the objectionable practices have been left out,
while there are many features peculiar to the
lacrosse game itself that make it very in-
teresting and pleasing to player and onlooker.
A boy who is strong and active, and keen
on taking up some kind of clean, healthy sport,
cannot do better than join a lacrosse club;
and besides finding his interest growing
rapidly, he will also .find himself soon out-
growing his clothes. It is an invigorating and
healthy pastime at first to master the art of
"catching" and of "passing" a simple rubber
ball with the stringed racquet, but this will
provide a lot of fun and amusement until it
comes quite easy. And where is the Austra-
lian boy w r ho does not feel pleased and proud
at accomplishing something that is more diffi-
cult and skilful, rather than follow some game
which anyone can succeed at w T ith ease?
Dogged determination is instilled into one
from the beginning. It was not surprising to
see our soldier lacrosseurs in large numbers
gaining distinctive decorations in the war.
They knew what counted most. I remember
my elder brother introducing a weird-looking
lacrosse stick into our home for the first time.
We made fun of it, and ridiculed the enthu-
siastic one at first, but he challenged anyone
of us to find out the knack of catching even a
small toss of the ball in two hours' time. So
simple as it looked, we had to be shown be-
fore we could manage it, and we all got very
keen on it from then on.
The incentive to succeed is always upper-
most in the boy with a stout heart and plenty
of grit and determination, and the pupil who
takes up lacrosse with these essentials pro-
minent in his nature will make a name for
himself at the game. The novice wiio wants
to take it easy and "Doesn't care who wins the
boat race," soon gets weeded out as useless,
and here also we see the force of the remarks
at the beginning, that "Lacrosse is a game for
thoroughbreds."
If .we look back into the early history of
lacrosse, it will be found that the game
originated w r ith that fine, fleet-footed, keen-
eyed and sturdy race of Indians of North
America. The different tribes called the game
by different names, but the name, "Baggat-
aw T ay," was used most of all. With them a
match would last for several days at a stretch,
and the distance between the goal nets was
nothing less than a mile, and sometimes 10
or 12 miles, and take in the whole of the
country between two villages. One tribe w r ould
get up a contest with another tribe, and a
goal net would be placed in each village. The
number of players would ,be anything over




THE EVENING HOUR.
(Interior.)
JOYCE PYKE.
W hen night s dark curtain falls o'er land and sea
And stars their twinkling glories show,
And drowsy birds sleep in each silent tree,
Then comes the sweetest hour I know.
1 sit within the softly-lighted room,
And gently touch the ivory notes —
Out to the garden, where the roses bloom
Each year, melodious music floats.
The frowning pictures on the wall awake,
And look on me with wistful gaze;
The lamp-light a dreamy hue doth take,
And seems to me a rainbow haze.
I hear soft footsteps and a rustling noise
Of long-dead dames, who live again
Their lives of sorrows and of sparkling joys.
The music falls and swells, and then.
The door opes wide ; the call comes, " I ime for bed" ;
The harmony is stilled, and I
Arise, and see that all the ghosts have fled —
Fled with the music, silently.


200, the pick of the tribe, and the greatest
pride was felt in being one of the chosen. We
read that preparations would be carried on
for weeks and weeks beforehand, and all man-
ner of customs were adopted to improve their
speed and stamina. The interest taken in
these preparations worked the rivals into a
high pitch of excitement, and you can just
imagine how all would feel on the day of the
match. Before commencing to play, the whole
of the tribe w r ould go through weird antics,
war whoops, queer chants, and fanciful gestures,
while the players were given the final training
attentions. In some cases, this consisted of
taking sharks' teeth, and cutting into the
players' arms, legs and shoulders, with the
idea of smarting them to exert themselves to
the utmost. The fierceness of those games
can be well understood when these peculiar
methods w r ere practised for a match in which,
perhaps, up to one thousand players would
join in, in deadly earnest. The whole popula-
tion for many miles around looked forward
to it. The keenest interest was taken by
young children, as well as the veterans. So
much importance, though, was attached to the
winning of the matches, that treachery became
a habit, and many tricks and foul play were
resorted to, which created severe bitterness
between the tribes. The Government had to
step in and clear the game of those practices,
which too often caused the death of those who
had become marked men because of their ex-
treme cleverness.
The players used to carry small hatchets
hidden in their clothing, so that, when op-
posed in a lonely part of the long field by
players of the other side, they would use these
hatchets to give the adversary a knock-out
blow. Treachery also was used in an en-
deavour to overcome the garrison of one of
the forts in the country held bv British sol-
diers. The garrison had been asked to attend
a supposed "important" match, and when the
excitement was at its height, the ball was
worked across to one side of the fort, and at
a given signal it was thrown over the wall
into the fort. A rush was made for the gates,
with the idea of gaining possession of the fort.
Fortunately, however, they were not left with-
out a few soldiers being on guard, and the
rush was delayed sufficiently to give sdme of
the surprised lacrosse onlookers an oppor-
tunity of beating off the Indians. This was
not accomplished without a severe struggle.
The squaws (Indian women) had brought
tomahawks concealed in the blankets and rugs.
Deafening war whoops'raDg out, lacrosse sticks
were discarded for tomahawks, and the sol-
diers and traders, who were invited to see
the match, were murdered in cold blood. Only
twenty escaped. The barbarous tricks have
passed out now, but refined and gentlemanly
as it has developed since those days, it can
never shake off the memories of the Indians'
craftiness.
From witnessing these tribal matches, the
French, and later the British, people in Canada
saw what a glorious game it was, and cultivat-
ing the art, they soon waxed enthusiastic on
its merits as a field sport, and developed it on
improved lines, so that now it is the prettiest
game in the world to watch, the openest, the
fastest, trickiest game to play, and in all re-
spects as fine a game, as far as exercise and
health-giving properties are concerned, as any
other field sport known.
It was proclaimed the National Sport of
Canada in 1867. Since then the Canadians
improved the rules of lacrosse; the racquets,
too, ha\ e been modified to suit the present
style of play. In appearance, the racquet is
more like a snow-shoe than anything else I
can think of. The netting is made of strings
of greenhide or clock-string meshed like net-
ting to about half the length of the stick. The
leading string can be tightened or loosened to
suit the player. A "baggy" stick »will make
catching easy, but will retard throwing, so a
player has to practice until he finds the happy
medium between the tight and loose strings.
The ball is made of spongy rubber, with an
outside coating of harder or solid rubber, the
v eight being 5 to Boz. The novice must first
learn to catch the ball by holding the racquet
upward or outward to meet the ball as far away
as he can reach, and then quickly drawing
the stick back in the same direction as the
ball is approaching. If the stick is drawn back
at almost the same rate of speed as the flight
of the ball, it stands to reason that the ball
must become "dead" when it does strike the
net. After this has been mastered, he must
learn to lessen the length of backward move-
ment of the racquet. A short, quick catch can
be made il it is done at the exact moment of
contact between the racquet and the ball.
Some players have made such a fine art of the
catching that no movement at all is percep-
tible; indeed, the action appears to be a for-
v ard one instead of backward. Throwing the
ball is easier. A flick is given to the ball as
it leaves the end of the racquet. Bear in mind
that it requires a lot of constant practice to


>w
A-
handle the stick properly, but the boy who
admires cleverness will soon try to excel, and
will find that the time spent in learning is
not unpleasant.
Lacrosse is easily practised; two boys or
t 'o hundred boys can practise catching and
hrowing with no other accessories than
racquets and balls; while much enjoyment will
be found in merely throwing a ball against a
wall and catching it again, gradually getting
closer and closer to the wall to improve the
quickness of the eye and the movement of the
racquet, because the harder you hit the wall
the quicker you will have to be to catch the
ball on the rebound.
IN A MATCH
The playing time is divided into four terms
of about 20 to 25 minutes each, the players
merely changing across the field, and taking
up their positions to attack the goal that they
were defending previous to the "change." At
"half-time," a longer interval of 10 to 15
minutes is allowed. To start the game, the ball
is placed on the ground in the centre of the
associations are invited to send representa-
tives to compete in the tournament. South
field. The two opposing "centre" players place
their racquets on either side of the ball. At
the word "play." the sticks are drawn sharply
apart, so that the ball is forced out and into
play. The ball is picked up with the racquet
and passed from player to player, while the
opponents try to intercept the possessor or
dislodge the ball with a stroke of the racquet.
A pretty feature of the game is the clever
manoeuvring that goes on between the two
sides —the one trying to get closer and closer
to the goal, with the object of scoring, and
the ether forcing the goal-throwers out of
range. The "check" is the method by which
the players disarm the man who is carrying
the ball by dealing a swift blow just before or
after he has received the ball. There is great
skill required to catch the ball when running
at tcp speed, and throwing at the goal before
an opponent can check it. The goalkeepei
stands between the goal posts, which hold a
net. The side scoring the greatest number of
goals during a match is declared the winner.
In the early days, the side which scored five
goals first was the winner. But that was al-
tered because in some first-class matches the
game was over in a few minutes, so rapid is
the play. The ball is ever on the move, and
the players are continually on the alert. Man-
to-man struggles are a feature of the game. It
may happen that no other players than two
opponents will be within twenty yards of the
ball (fighting for its possession). Yet there is
no other game played where the combination
of players is so essential to success. Indivi-
dualism has its opportunity for brilliancy, but
a team must work together to win, and any
selfishness will spoil their chances of winning
without a doubt. In Australia, lacrosse is
played well in all the States, and periodical
contests take place between one State and
another as opportunity offers, and at longer
intervals a carnival is held, at which all the
Australians and Victorians are considered to
be on about equal terms on standard of players,
followed by Queensland, New South Vales,
Western Australia, and Tasmania. A Canadian
team visited Australia in 1907, and toured all
the States in turn, and played several test
matches against combined Australian teams.
They were successful in all, excepting the first
test match, which was won by Australia.


The Voyage of the Ina
R. Jackson
"Owing to the death recently of Captain
R. N. Gilder, the ketch Bridget 8., well known
in the Victorian and Tasmanian coastal trade,
has passed into the hands of Mr. Harold
Gilder, of Thornbury, the late owner's
SO that is my legacy/' said Harry Gilder,
coming to a stop.
"Good-o," remarked Norman Thwaites.
"I'm glad it wasn't much further. She looks
quite an ocean-going craft."
nephew. The ketch, we understand, is
undergoing repairs, and will not resume sail-
ings for a few weeks."
"Flinders, or —or Burke and Wills would
have been glad of her," replied Harry. "My
uncle always reckoned she was the most sea-
worthy craft for her size around the Australian
coast. He was very proud of her."
The letter was from a lawyer, and the gist
of it was that Harry was legally entitled to
take over the Bridget 8., at any time from
It was to a rather lonely part of the Yarra
, V , p. . \ the date mentioned above
had come, to find the
that the two young men
Harry handed the two documents to Mr.
Tinker, reaching over the edge of the wharf
to do so. Then he and Norman jumped down
on to the forward deck.
"ketch" they sought moored to a crazy old
wharf that showed the ravages of time. Some-
what to their surprise, however, they found
that the vessel appeared to be immensely
superior to its surroundings. Fresh paint ap-
peared everywhere, and everything about the
decks was spick and span. To the young
men's unpractised eyes, the simple rigging of
the two masts seemed to have been recently
renewed.
After a somewhat difficult perusal, the watch-
man held out his hand.
"■So ycuTe the eld boss's nephew?" he said.
"He often spoke of you. Said you were the-
only one he had to leave his earthly goods to.
And now he's left them!"
Harry shook hands and introduced Norman.
"She's been well looked after," said Norman.
"She was my uncle's work and recreation,
his hobby and his business," said Harry. "When
he died so suddenly, I believe he had been
contemplating a longer trip than usual in her,
although I really know so little about his
movements."
"I never saw much of uncle, but I've heard
c.f ycu, Syd.," said Harry. "You sailed with
him for some years?"
"That's right. I suppose you'll want the
old hooker readied up for work again soon?"
"Yes. But the first thing you can do is ta
paint a new name on her."
At that moment an enquiring head appeared
from the entrance to the cabin on the forward
deck.
"Ain't the Bridget B. good enough?"
"I think the name had better cease with
my uncle's ownership. Perhaps he would like
it better that way."
"Good day," called Harry. "This boat is
the Bridget B.?"
"That's right." said the man. coming up 011
to the deck.
"What'll I call it?"
"Oh —the Ina, I think.
"That'll be cheaper to paint, any way. Now,
boys, would you like a look over your craft?"
"I see the name has been painted out."
"That's right. She was being overhauled
when the owner, old Bob Gilder, died, and
the name was painted over then. Perhaps the
new owners will paint it in again."
The look-over pleased the new owner con-
siderably. Everything was ship-shape, and
under the rear hatch they came upon a brand-
new six-cylinder motor which was already fitted
to shaft and propeller.
"Perhaps the new owners might find a better
name."
"This'll do me," exclaimed Harry. "I know
nothing about sailing, but I can run a motor."*
"That's right. Bridget B. mightn't appeal
to some. Though old Bob liked her by that
better than any other name."
Then he explained to Tinker that he and
Norman intended to celebrate the acquisition
of the Bridget 8.. or Ina, as it was now to be
called, by a few weeks' holiday cruise. After
that —well, the vessel could enter trade again,
under a suitable command.
"Are you the caretaker?"
"That's right. Syd. Tinker
Harry felt in his pocket, and produced a
newspaper cutting, and a letter. The former
was an extract from the shipping news of a
Melbourne daily, which read somewhat as fol-
lows: —
There was accommodation for six in the
cabin, and a sail-locker forward where the


things could be stored. Near the rear mast
("mizzen-mast," Norman called it) was a little
cook's galley, where Svd. assured them most
efficient meals could be turned out.
When the young men left for their walk
back to the city, they were full of eagerness
to complete arrangements for their forthcoming
voyage, the destination of which they had not
yet decided upon.
A week later, Harry called up Norman ex-
citedly on the telephone.
"Can you see me in town, at lunch?" he
asked. "I've news."
"Right," said Norman.
At lunch, Harry asked: "Can you start next
Monday—for Tofumira?"
"What's to-day? Thursday. Yes, I think so.
But what's- the hurry? And where's Tofu-
mira?"
Harry explained. They were to combine
pleasure with business. That morning a man
had been to see him with regard to chartering
the Ina for a trip to the South Seas —to the
Island of Tofumira, to be precise. That was
about 300 miles north of Fiji. All that the
man wanted was a trip to Tofumira and back,
with a stay of about a week at the island, an
out-of-the-way place. When Harry mentioned
that he had no sailing master or crew, Jamie-
son, the prospective charterer, offered to bring
along a man who was a skilled navigator, and
who knew the locality intimately —an old
Island-trader captain, in fact. A friend was
to accompany Jamieson.
Very satisfactory terms were agreed upon,
and Harry had undertaken to sail on Monday.
"Now," he said, at the conclusion of his
explanation of the position, "what do you
think about it?"
"I shall be ready," said Norman.
At 2 o'clock on Monday afternoon, the Ina
sailed down the river, under the power pro-
vided by the petrol-driven engine, of which
Harry took sole charge.
The crew consisted of Murray, the captain
introduced by Jamieson, a medium-sized,
grizzled-looking man, whose beard did not en-
tirely hide his massive jaw-bone; Syd. Tinker,
a useful man about such craft as the Ina, but
with no knowledge of navigation; and Harry
and Norman, who agreed to help in the run-
ning of the ship in any way they could.
The passenger list comprised Jamieson, a
tall, well-set-up man of middle age, and Albot,
his friend, a fat and taciturn individual, with
a drooping, fair moustache.
Altogether, there were six bunks provided
in the cabin, but Murray and Tinker decided
to sleep in the sail-locker, where there was
ample room, in order to avoid, as Tinker put
it, "congestication."
They were well provisioned, and had ample
petrol, and, at the captain's suggestion, there
was a small cargo of timber in the hold for
delivery at Suva on the voyage out.
There was a fresh wind in the Bay, where
the engine was cut out, to remain in idleness
until lack of wind rendered its use necessary
again.
For the first six days, all went well. Jamie-
son and Albot proved themselves rather plea-
sant travelling companions, and Murray an effi-
cient seaman, w r hile the two young men gra-
dually picked up the points of sailing a ketch.
What was Jamieson's precise business at
Tofumira. neither Harry nor Norman knew,
nor cared particularly. They were having a
very pleasant run in very pleasant weather,
towards lands they had long wanted to see,
with the comforting knowledge that their holi-
day, as they regarded it, would, if anything,
be a source of material, as w r ell as tempera-
mental, profit.
On the seventh day came the first discordant
note, vague though it was. Harry was engaged
on some job in the "engine-house," wffien Tin-
ker approached him.
"Harry," he said, "there's something up."
"What is it?" asked Harry, slightly startled
"I don't know, but you'll have to look out.
Murray's been sounding me about all sorts of
things, and last night I heard him tell Jamie-
son that this boat used to be the Bridget B.
Jamieson whistled, and said something about
having to watch the youngsters now, meaning
you and Norman, I suppose."
"Anything else?"
"No —yes. Murray hinted to me this morn-
ing that, in case of a row, it 'ud pay me to
stick to him. I didn't take much notice at
the time, but I thought it funny afterwards."
"It does sound funny. What are these people?
Pirates going to seize the ship (though the
times are past for that), or what? They look
decent enough, too."
"You never know," said Tinker. "Strange
things happen in these islands."
"Without perjuring your soul too much,"
said Harry, "pretend not to be unfavourable
to them; you may do us all a great service."


"Any service I can do old Bob Gilder's
nephew, I will," replied Syd.
Harry discussed the situation with Norman
at the first opportunity, and concluded that
it was just possible Tinker was "imagining
things." However, they would keep watch. If
they arrived at Suva safely, they would pur-
chase a few firearms, just for luck.
Except for an outburst of drunkenness on
the part of Albot, who roared ribald songs at
the seagulls, and became generally the opposite
of what he was when sober, the next few days
passed in quietude, the Ina slipping steadily
along through the blue waters of the tropical
seas into which they had come. Now and
then they passed liftle palm-clad islands, and
wherever the sun • beat down upon the coral
that enclosed most of them, a dazzling radiance
was reflected across the waters.
"This life will do me," thought Norman to
himself, as he languidly reclined against the
after bulwark, trailing a barracoota spinner
behind. He turned to see Harry standing be-
-0
hind him, a look of suppressed excitement in
his eyes.
"Read this," he exclaimed in a low tone,
thrusting a sheet of foolscap into Norman's
hand. "I found it in a hidden drawer under
the cabin table. It's in my uncle's hand-
writing."
Neglecting his barracoota line, Norman read:
"Dear Harry,—As, since your father died,
you are practically the only relative I have,
I am going to leave you the Bridget 8., and
all I've got. You might think that isn't
much, but I am really the possessor of thou-
sands of pounds—out on a Pacific island."
Here Norman whistled.
"Read on," said Harry.
"Only two or three men know of this,
and of the locality of the island where the
pearls—for my wealth consists entirely of
pearls—are hidden. But nobody knows the
exact spot but myself. Jamieson and Albot
were with me when we were blown ashore
on Tofumira five years ago, and they know
that I had the pearls with me, and that
I hid them. They knew I would trust them
ab far as I could see them. And they know
when the old tramp trader picked us up,
that I left the pearls behind, for safety.
They know, and I know, that if they get a
chance they'll be out after those pearls,
if they can find the island again. They
haven't gone yet, because I've kept pretty
well in touch with their movements through
an old friend of mine up Russell Street way.
Now I'm going soon, before my health breaks
up entirely, but in case anything happens
and I can't go, I'll give you full directions
in this letter how to get right on to those
pearls. Jamieson may be clever, and he
thinks because the whole island could be
turned over with a spade in a week "
Here the letter ended, old man Gilder having
apparently been interrupted, or overcome with
weakness before he could finish it.
"Food for thought," commented Norman.
"Much," said Harry. "There's one thing,
we mustn't let Jamieson or Albot have the
slightest inkling we know anything about this."
"It's a darned rum go they chartered this
boat."
"Sheer fluke, of course. If they'd known
that I'm old Bob Gilder's nephew, they'd have
certainly got somebody else. As it is, they
must regard us with great suspicion, for they
have found out this was my uncle's ship."
"What will we do? We can't let them take
your pearls."
"Not if we can help it."
"We'd better run straight home again, or
put them overboard at Suva. Make some plaus-
ible excuse for so doing."
"They'd certainly cause trouble if we did
that, legally and otherwise. Besides, there's
nothing to stop them immediately getting
another boat, and getting ahead of us with that.
For we do not know where that island is, ana
they do. It's jolly hard luck my uncle stopped
writing where he did!"
"There aren't any more pages in the
drawer?"
"No —there was nothing else but a revolver
and a box of cartridges."
"Well, that might come in handy, anyhow."
"That's right, as Sam Tinker would say.
We'll have to tell Sam of this."
"Yes. It looks as if it will be three to
three. But don't you think we could leave
them ashore at Suva? Give them the slip —
the whole three of them. We could work the
boat."
"We could, if we could only navigate it.
That's where we are beat. If we could only
lcb on to somebody trustworthy at Suva, I'll
do that —give them the slip. Otherwise, we'll
have to .stick to the boat, say absolutely
nothing, and trust to luck."
The fickle goddess did not seem to favor
the hopes of the young men, and their scheme
of ridding themselves of their secret enemies
at Suva were doomed to have no chance. For,


two mornings later, Harry awoke to the sound
of an anchor-chain running out, and, putting
his head out of the cabin, he saw that the
Ina had come to rest some three hundred
yards off a small island.
"Is this Suva?" he called out to Murray,
who was letting go the mainsail.
"No," he replied. "This is en route."
"I thought we were calling at Suva first?"
"Well, I found it was a better passage round
this way, and as I thought you were in no
hurry to get to Suva, 1 brought her round here
first." «
"This is Tofumira?
"Yes."
Keeping his thoughts to himself, Harry hur-
riedly dressed, awaking Norman. He slipped
the revolver, loaded, into his hip pocket at a
moment when Jamieslon and Albot had their
backs turned.
While Harry.was on deck, scrutinising the
island through a pair of glasses, Jamieson
came up, and held a whispered conversation
with Murray. The latter then approached
Harry, and said:
"Mr. Jamieson wants me to take him and
Mr. Albot ashore after breakfast. I suppose
you've got no objection?" There was a slight
glint in his eyes as he spoke.
"Can't Tinker row them over?"
"No. I will be able to find the channel
through the reef, while Tinker won't."
"Very good," said Harry, although, as there
was a break in the reef opposite to where the
ketch lay, the finding of a channel did not
seem a difficult matter. But Harry, while look-
ing through the glasses, had overheard a few
words spoken by Murray: "You were camped
on the other side," and he had seen something
that had given him a happy idea.
After the "opposition party," as Norman
called them, had left in the dinghy, Harry
aaid: —
"I think Murraj' must have been the cap-
tain of the trader that took my uncle and the
others off here. They have taken him ashore,
so that we cannot sail awa> without them, I
suppose."
"That's right," said Tinker, who was by now
completely in the confidence of the other two.
"But I don't think they'll get the pearls, an j
In the meantime we'll have a look on our own
account. I've got a bit of a clue."
"But we can't leave the ship; they have the
boat," said Norman.
"Swim?" suggested Harry.
"Too risky; sharks," said Tinker, while
Norman reiterated the latter words.
"When is it low tide?" asked Harry.
"About three this afternoon, I should say/
said Tinker.
"And at about three to-morrow morning.
Well, at that hour, I borrow the dinghy. You
two must watch my interests here. It will be
moonlight, thank goodness!"
Jamieson and his two companions beached
the dinghy, and set out to the other side of
the island, which was net more than half i
mile across. Albot carried a spade and Mur-
ray a pick. All day long they remained
out of sight, and it wasn't till the short tropi-
cal twilight had begun, that the clack of row-
locks announced that the' dinghy was return-
ing.
"Have any luck?" asked Harry, as Jamieson
stepped aboard.
"No," he answered, rather shortly.
"What are you looking for. if it's not a rude
question?"
"Pearls," came the unexpected reply. "My
mate and I buried some pearls here five years
ago, and we're trying to get them again."
"Why didn't you mark the place, if you
buried them?" Harry was prompted to say.
Jamieson growled some answer, then
changed the subject by enquiring if the even-
ing meal was ready.
The "opposition" seemed worn out with
their unaccustomed exertions on the island,
and early in the evening they retired to bunk,
leaving the other three to guard the ship. The
usual watch was considered unnecessary in
such a mooring ground, but, nevertheless,
\
Norman and Syd. stayed awake, while Harry
slept. At three, they awoke him, and silently
he hauled in the dinghy and made off.
The others saw him make for the opening
in the reef, and then he was lost to view amid
the shadows on the waters.
Anxiously they awaited his return.
Several times Norman cautiously approached
the bunks where their rivals lay, to re-assure
himself that they were sleeping soundly.
The moon had paled, the dawn was break-
ing, and Tinker was asleep against the main-
mast when Norman saw the long-sought-for
dinghy approaching through the reef. At the
same time, he heard a slight movement in the
cabin below. He awoke Tinker.
"Get to bed, quick," he whispered. "If the
others find out that we haven't been to bed,
they'll suspect something, and we don't want
to be marooned out here."
So silently the two repaired to their respec-


tive bunks, fearful lest the others should wake
at an inopportune moment.
It seemed almost twenty minutes to Norman
before Harry quietly came down the steps into
the cabin, and lay down, "all standing/' in his
bunk. Apparently he, too, had had great
exertions.
Jamieson was the first to stir. He awoke
Albot, and the two went up on deck. As soon
as they had gone, Norman, who had been
disturbed by their movements, leaned over and
.shook Harry softly.
Harry turned over lazily.
"How did you get on?" whispered the former.
"I've found them!" Harry answered. "It
sounds ridiculous, but I've found them. And
hidden them, too."
Just then Jamieson re-entered for something,
cutting off Norman's half-formed congratula-
tions.
After breakfast, the "opposition" set out for
the shore again, and Harry narrated how he
had come upon the precious little spheres so
■easily.
"I got them halfi-way out on that bit of reef,"
he said, pointing to a line of coral that ran
out from the shore' towards the encircling
reef, and which was now pretty well sub-
merged and scarcely visible. "There is a hint
in the last line of my uncle's letter to the effect
that Jamieson would not find the jewels on
the island, so that, turned my thoughts to other
places, and that seemed the likeliest, seeing
that it is submerged most of the time, and is
on the opposite side of the island to their old
camp. I looked along that reef this moaning
for about two hours, when I found them in a
bit of a pothole covered by a large chunk of
coral. I'll show them to you."
Harry waited till the shore-party was well
out of sight before he produced from the "en-
gine-room" a leather bag, and displayed its
contents —an iridescent mass of beautiful
pearls. The others watched awe-struck.
"By jove, what beauties!" exclaimed Nor-
man.
"They are, indeed," said Harry, "and so far
we've had no trouble to get them. We haven't
even had to maroon anybody."
"Your uncle's legacy turns out all right,
after all," said Norman.
"And our little pleasure trip showed more
profit than we expected. All we've got to do
now is to wait till those beggars are tired of
digging up Tofumira, and then resume our
holiday cruise.
That afternoon, Jamieson and his friends
came down to the beach a little earlier than
before. The sun had still about an hour to
go, but already there were traces of evening
in the air. The light wind had dropped, and
the sea, where the Ina was moored, calm be-
fore, became glass-like, without a ripple. The
gracious beams of the afternoon sun ilooded
the sea with mellow light, and played at light
and shade among the palm trees on the island.
The dinghy was half-way across to the
ketch, when Norman, who was idly watching
the little boat, saw Jamieson, who was sitting
in the stern, suddenly stoop and pick some-
thing up from beneath his feet. He spoke to
the others, who stopped rowing. There was
a hasty examination of what Jamieson held in
his hand, and a hurried consultation. Then the
rowing was resumed, and Norman thought that
he saw the big man loosen something in his
hip pocket.
"Harry!" called Norman. "Get that - revol-
ver. I think we might need it."
"What's up?" called back Harry, from the
cookhouse.
"Dunno. We'll see shortly."
When the dinghy arrived at the Ina's stern,
the three on board the ketch were in readi-
ness for emergencies.
Norman and Tinker stood upon the re'*v
deck, while Harry, with the sole firenrm
amongst them, lay in a point of vantage fn the
"engine-house."
As Albot stood up to cast the painter aboard,
Norman called out:
"Fm not taking that rope till I see what
Mr. Jamieson there has his hand on."
"What's that?" called the big man in the
stern.
"Chuck that revolver away, Jamieson, or
you're not coming here."
"Oh, aren't we?" retorted Jamieson. "Well,
you're not sailing from here till you hand over
those pearls you've got. You shouldn't go
dropping specimens about on the floor of the
dinghy, if you don't want your thievings to be
discovered."
"What pearls?"
"You know what pearls! T might have
known you chaps had something up your
sleeves all the while; you seemed so darned
quiet and innocent. You took things too
easily not to have known something. Albot
reckoned you were all right, but I should have
known better."
"You've still got that revolver."
"Yes, by Gad! And I'll use it in a minute!"


And Jamieson made a threatening movement.
"I'll tell you what," he went on. "We'll
share and share alike, if you like. You can't
get away from here without us, and, though
you've really got no right to those pearls, we'll
forego that."
"If you forego that revolver "
"Ah! there you are, then." There was a
splash, and Jamieson's fireiron disappeared
into the sea.
With his right hand Albot swung the painter,
and, as Tinker caught it, he made a rapid
movement with his left hand.
There was a sudden report from the engine-
house, and the fat man let out a howl of
agony, nearly upsetting the boat as he flung
his arm about. A revolver clattered on to the
floorboards at his feet.
"Chuck that thing overboard," roared Harry,
from his place of concealment. "Quick!"
Murray reached for it, hesitated a fraction
of a second, then dropped it into the water.
"Have you got a gun, too, Murray?" de-
manded Harry, coming out on to the deck.
"No."
"Well, we'll search you first as you come
aboard. But before that we'll tell you our
terms. There's to be no funny business on
your part. Murray, can sail the ship back for
us if he likes. If he doesn't, we'll get out our-
selves somehow. We're going to up anchor
right away, while this fine weather lasts. As
there are too many of you to take chances
with, and as the sea is calm, one of you will
have to ride in the dinghy behind. You can
take turns. I might mention that a very strict
watch will be kept. As for your share of the
pearls, you can have "
"Yes?" queried Jamieson, anxiously.
"What you have got already."
As Jamieson and his party did not relish
the prospect of an island life, now that the
chief charm was removed from Tofumira, they
accepted.
The voyage home proved a very pleasant
one, especially to the three who had possession
of Old Bob Gilder's island treasure (for Harry
had decided to give both Norman Thwaites
and Syd. Tinker a share), and who spent many
a happy hour planning other pleasant voyages.
The Dwarf s Tea Party
THE little dwarf crept out of the ground.
The rocks snapped together behind him,
but the little dwarf pulled his toes in
quickly, so that they did not get pinched. I'm
sure you are glad about that. Then the little
dwarf stretched himself.
"I don't know if it's one hundred o'clock or
one thousand o'clock," he said, "but I've had
long nap."
He took three long leaps, each of which car-
ried him 528,611 inches. The last brought him
so near the edge of the sea that another quar-
ter of an inch would have taken him into the
water. So he sat down on a big rock, and
began to wonder whether he should call his
next meal "supper" or "dinner."
Just then a little golden boat with red silk
sails came around the corner, straight towards
the dwarf. The sailors were big boy dolls in
sailor suits, and on a real golden throne sat a
real live little prince. The prince landed and
stood looking at the dwarf, with his arms
folded, and a frown on his face. The king,
who was the prince's father, looked just that
way when the prince had done something he
shouldn't.
"I've come to tea with you," he said.
"I hadn't invited you," replied the dwarfs
and turned his back.
Wasn't the dwarf rude?
"Teg em emos reppus," said the prince.
The dwarf gave a squeal that sounded some-
thing like a cat when you step on her tail*
and something like a motor car that doesn't
like to work. For you see, if you want to
make a dwarf do anything, tell it to him back-
wards, and he must, must, must do it. And
the prince had found out the secret.
So the dwarf began to run -back and forth
and up and down very fast. First he took a
handful of grains of sand, and threw them up
into the air. They came down a pile of jam
sandwiches. Then he took two pebbles and a
blade of grass and three drops of sea water*
and stirred them together in his hat to make
some cakes.
"Hubble, gubble, rubble, dubble!!" he
shouted.
Then he looked into his hat, and saw a pair
of rubber shoes. He had forgotten the magic
words. In a rage he leaped several times into


the air, each time higher than the last, and
tried again.
"Hoof, goof, roof, doof!!" he cried. Then
he looked into his hat again, and found a
whole family of little china cats.
So he leaped several times more into the
air, and tried again.
"Hicky, licky, micky, sicky!!" he called.
The prince and the sailors were so interested
in all this that they did not notice a big gold
ship, with big red sails, coming around the
corner. And out of that ship got a great
king. When the little prince saw the -big
king, he blushed very pink, and hung his head,
for the little prince had run away from home.
And without even saying good-bye to the dwarf,
he got into his boat, and the big ship and the
little one sailed away together.
When the dwarf had watched the ships sail
out of sight, he looked into his hat and found
a plateful of cakes, each one with a cherry
in the middle. So he sat down and ate them
all up very fast.
"I've come to tea with you," he said.
Billy Turns Detective
K.K.
BILLY MARSDEN went to bed murmur-
ing to herself:
"This time to-morrow night, where'll I
be?
Out of the gates of miser-ee."
It was the last night of the term; to-morrow
was prize-giving day, and then home! Billy
loved her country home, and hated town life
in Christchurch. Leaving home meant leav-
ing Judy, her greatest chum and companion.
Judy wasn't allowed to go to school —not a
town school, at any rate. Billy had raved and
stormed and begged to be sent to a country
school, so that Judy might come too, but Mr.
and Mrs. Marsden were firm, and Judy had to
be left behind.


Billy's parents came up for the prize-giving
next day, and then, instead of going straight
home, Mrs. Marsden and Billy stayed in town
for several days, to do some shopping, while
Mr. Marsden went up to Wellington on busi-
ness.
Little did Billy think that an "adventure"
would have its beginning in a chemist's shop
in Christchurch. Mrs. Marsden was buying
some toilet requisites, while Billy was amusing
herself on the weighing machine at the other
end of the shop. Suddenly she started, her
attention arrested by the words. "Marsden is
up in Wellington and the rest of the family
are away; I've made the cattle medicine the
excuse for getting up to town."
"Who's that talking about us?" Billy thought,
and she crept nearer to the tall case by the
door, from the other side of which she could
hear low voices. Peeping round the corner,
she saw two men with their backs towards her.
"I've got the papers and money stowed in
that old whare in the bit of bush back of the
forty-acre; pretty safe. I think. I'll get the
silver there pretty late to-night, but you be
there early and make a get-away with the lot.
They'll never suspect me. I've arranged tnings
all right, and you see you'll be able to "
Here the speaker seemed about to turn, so
Billy drew back. She had recognised him as
Adams, one of their own station hands!
What was she to do? Her father could
not possibly arrive till next morning (which
would be too late to prevent the burglary),
even though she wired him to come at once.
Her mother was so nervous and delicate that
Billy would not dare say anything for fear of
upsetting her.
Billy had her mind made up by the time
Adams and his friend were away down the
street, and Mrs. Marsden had finished her
purchases.
They returned to the hotel, and while Mrs.
Marsden went to lie down. Billy repaired to
the writing-room. A little later she tiptoed
into their bedroom, pinned her note on the
dressing table, took her purse, put on her hat,
and slipped out again, without waking her
mother.
Half an hour later Mrs. Marsden was read-
ing:—
"Dearest Mum, —I simply can't stand being
away from home any longer, so I'm catching
the next train back. I know it's awfully
naughty, and you'll be furious, but do forgive
me. I knew you wouldn't leave until to-morrow
and I can't stay away from Judy another day.
I'll telephone when I get home, and say I'm
there. Don't you worry. Heaps of love.
Billy."
Mrs. Marsden was cross. "Really, how
naughty of her to go running off like that!
She's fourteen, and anyone would think she
was four," she said. There was no other train
home that day. so she just had to settle down
and make the best of it. "However, I shall
tell her father to give her a severe talking
to." she added.
Arrived at her station. Billy alighted quickly
and slipped into the little waiting-room. Yes,
there was Adams, coming out of a second-class
smoker, and he set off down the road for home
at a brisk walk. Billy gave him time to get
well ahead, and then followed, thinking hard.
It was three miles to Mr. Marsden's station,
and by the time she arrived her plans were
well laid. She rang her mother up as she
had promised, coaxed a substantial tea out
of the cook, and then set to work. First of
all, she collected all the silver out of the
dining-room, and hid it in her bedroom, and
then went into her father's study. There was
the safe in the wall, looking as it always did,
and fast shut when Billy tried it. Probably
Adams had a special key to fit it. She went
to her father's desk, and after opening several
drawers, finally found what she wanted —a re-
volver! It was unloaded, otherwise she would
not have dared to take it; but it would look
well if she met a burglar in the whare and
could flourish it in his face. It was almost
dark, so she slipped out to get Judy; it would
never do to go on an adventure of this sort
without Judy! It didn't take her long to let
her chum know there was some real excite-
ment on, and Judy seemed as eager as herself
to be away. "We must ride, Jude," she said,
"and pretty hard, too."
So very soon they were off, cantering steadily
over the paddocks, picking their way through
the creek, and then up the gully. Presently
the bit of dark bush came into view, and Billy
reined in. Everything was very still, and quite
dark. They approached the bush steadily and
quietly, threading in and out between the strag-
gling trees. Soon the bush became det ser,
so Billy dismounted. "It's no good both of us
going, so I shall leave you here. Judy, and
make for the whare alone; you might make
too much noise." Judy did not demur; in fact,
she was used to being ordered about by Billy,


so with a word of farewell Billy left her and
disappeared among the trees.
It was not a great distance to the whare,
and Billy knew the way. At each step the
sticks underfoot seemed to snap with a report
like thunder, no matter how softly she walked.
Here and there a bird fluttered, as though it
had tumbled off its perch. How still and mys-
terious everything seemed, and how Billy's
heart thumped! By the time she reached the
whare, she felt like turning round and running
all the way back. "Don't be a silly," she told
herself, and listened carefully; not a sound;
so she pushed open the door and stepped in.
Taking out her electric torch from her haver-
sack, she switched it on. She knew the little
hut well; they had often sheltered there on
a rainy day. Billy went straight to the cup-
board and peered inside; nothing but dirty old
tins; but she hopefully looked into them all.
Empty! Then she thought of the fireplace;
under a loose brick, perhaps! Down she went
on her knees and began pulling at the bricks;
something made her look up the chimney, and
she espied a kettle hanging from a piece of
wire. Taking it down, she looked inside. At
last! Bundles of papers and bank notes packed
in carefully! She quickly stuffed them into her
haversack, and then suddenly stood up. Some-
one was coming!
Billy slipped outside and hid behind a big
white pine. Tramp, crash, nearer and nearer!
"Adams' friend, of course," she thought. He
had a torch, and was coming straight for the
hut. 'She watched him go in and shut the door,
and then she started on her journey back to
Judy.
What a noise she made! Snap! That was
a bit of tree she had grabbed hold of, and it
had broken off. The man must have heard,
because the door of the hut creaked.
"That you, Bob?" he said softly.
Billy stood quite still, hoping he would go
inside again; but he moved uneasily, and then
she heard him walking towards her. Sud-
denly he switched on his torch, and she was
right in its light. There was nothing for it
but to run;- she must reach Judy before he
could catch her.
"Hi! Kid. you come along here," he called,
starting to run after her. On Billy fled, stumb-
ling and crashing through the undergrowth,
fear clutching at her heart. She had the empty
revolver in her hand, and as a last resource
would try holding the man up with it. He
was gaining on her rapidly, in spite of her
good start.
"Judy, Judy/' gasped Billy, "quick!" Judy
started as Billy stumbled up to her. Then,
tearing the reins from the little branch to
which she had hung them, she flung herself
into the saddle just as the man arrived. He
made a frantic attempt to grab the bridle, but
she lifted the revolver high and then flung it
with all her force in his face, at the same time
digging her heels into her pony's sides. The
man lost hold, as the pony bounded forward
and galloped down the gully like a mad thing.
Billy never quite knew how they got home;
had it not been for Judy's unerring instinct,
she does not think they would ever have ar-
rived that night.
Once within the walls of her own familiar
room, Billy felt more like herself, and, quickhr
undressing, she tumbled into bed, and was
soon fast asleep.
On waking early, she took the silver back
to the dining-room before it could be missed.
She thought it better to keep her secret until
her father's arrival.
To her surprise, he came that morning, with
her mother, having got down earlier than ex-
pected from Wellington.
Billy was so eager to tell her story that
Mr. Marsden did not even have time to give
her the scolding that was in store for her.
Billy had her "lecture" after it was all over,
but her father was so proud and pleased with
all she had done, that it wasn't a very bad one
after all. "Though, don't you ever do any-
thing like that by yourself again, Beryl; next
time, if Dad isn't there, just tell someone else
about it. You know, things might have turned
out very differently, and then ——" Mr. Mars-
den did not finish, but, instead, gave his brave
little daughter a very big hug.
Well, the end of it all was that Adams was
arrested, tried, and found guilty. He had not
run away, because he thought he was perfectly
safe, and that his absence would only arouse
suspicion. He and his companion, who was
caught later by the police, are now both in
prison, where they are likely to remain for
some time.
The girls at school often make Billy tell
them about her exciting adventure. "But, you
know, Judy did just as much as I did," Billy
will add. "I couldn't have managed without
her."
And Judy? Well, I expect you haven't found
it very hard to guess that Judy was just Billy's
faithful little pony.


Southern Seas Story Competition
THE Southern Seas Story Competition was
open to boj r s and girls attending secon-
dary schools in any part of Australasia.
There was a very good response indeed, entries
being received from every State and from
New Zealand. The successful competitors each
receive a prize of £2/2/- (two guineas). To
each of those placed, a copy of the Southern
Seas Story Book has been sent.
The stories, en the whole, showed a very
high order of merit, and prove that there is
plenty of literary talent in this part of the
w r orld. It is gratifying to note that the schools
themselves took such an interest in the com-
petition, some being represented by three or
four stories each.
The adventure story proved the most popular,
both boys and girls entering for this very
freely. There is no doubt that the young
Australian has great advantages in obtaining
local colour for good adventure stories, and it
is evident that the competitors have used their
powers of observation to a very great extent.
Descriptions of kangaroo hunting, the rounding
•
up of brumbies, bush fires and encounters with
the blacks were given in a very vivid manner.
Perhaps the school stories were not quite
so free and natural as the adventure ones,
the English model being evidently followed to
a great extent. School life in Australia has a
distinct atmosphere of its own, and its tra-
ditions are not always those of older countries.
However, most of the competitors recognised
that it was the essential thing for their charac-
ters to play the game, which shows that, in
that respect at least, the ideal is the same all
the world over, in both boys' and girls' schools.
It is evident that the girls like writing and
reading boys' school stories, as well as their
brothers, for a good many competitors were of
the fair sex.
In judging the competition, the choice fell
on those who showed that they understood
that in short story-writing the interest should
be held throughout by one incident, as if for
a short period an insight was being given
into the moods and actions of a particular
group of characters. Each of those who ob-
tained the first prize rounded off the story in
this manner. Some whose descriptive work
was perhaps better, lacked this essential.
Those who failed to obtain a place must not
be discouraged. There was scarcely one story
that was not interesting in its way, and it must
be remembered that the art of short story-
writing is not acquired in a day. The stories
were all considered first by the Editor of the
Southern Seas Story Book, and the final judg-
ment made by Mr. Henry Stead ("Stead's
Magazine").
The names and addresses of the first four
in each section are given, with the name of
the story:
GIRLS' SCHOOL STORY.
1. Aileen Nolan, St. Mary's Convent High
School, Maryborough, Queensland, "Peggy."
2. Clibbv Hicks. Girton College, High Street.
Fremantle, W.A.. "The Amateur Detectives."
3. Vera Martin, Catholic Ladies' College,
Gipps Street, East Melbourne, Victoria, "The
White Lady."
4. Beryl Temple, Girton College, High Street,
Fremantle, W.A., "The Bravest Girl in the
School."
Elsie Hobbs, Girls' High School, Claremont,
W.A., ran very close with "Peggy Warren's
First Term at School."
BOYS' SCHOOL STORY.
1. George Leo Dethridge, Haileybury College,
Brighton Beach, Victoria, "Piddington's Posi-
tion."
2. William A. G. Diamond, Boys' Grammar
School, Maryborough, Queensland, "The Geof-
frey Cup."
3. R. Paris, c/o Mr. Whitbread, The Wurlie,
Keswick, Adelaide, S.A., "For the School."
4. Bessie Durlacher, Girls' High School,
Claremont, W.A., "Goose Flesh."
ADVENTURE STORY.
1. Allan C. Harris, Prince Alfred College,
Adelaide, S.A., "Guarded Gold."
2. Nina Patten, Church of England Girls'
Grammar School, Elizabeth Street, Launceston,
Tasmania, "McAllisters."
3. William H. Robertson, Oyama, Hunting-
tower Road, Malvern, Melbourne, Victoria,
"Fear Triumphant."
4. Marion Rankin, C.E.G.G.S., Girton, Myrtle
Street, Benaigo, Victoria, "An Australian Bush
Fire."


Boys' School Story —Piddington's Position
George Leo Dethridge.
IT was the last morning lesson at Whitecliff
Grammar School, and very little work was
being done, as everyone seemed too ex-
cited. This state of excitement was due to
the fact that in the afternoon Whitecliff were
to play Culverliouse Grammar School, to de-
cide which was the Premier Football Team of
the Schools* Competition, to which both be-
longed.
It was in the Fifth Form Room that least
work seemed to be done. The lesson was
arithmetic, and the master, Mr. Mansfield, was
having great difficulty in getting attention from
his class. He had given impositions freely,
but as this did not have the desired effect, he
threatened to send the next boy who was
caught fooling to the headmaster. For a few
minutes he received some attention, but, as
he went on working a sum on the blackboard,
the lawless spirit again came over the class.
Balls of paper were thrown across the room,
and paper darts were directed with the truest
aim. Everyone seemed engaged in some kind
of mischief, and the wonder was that such little
noise accompanied their efforts. However, it
was evident that, sooner or later, the master
would detect someone, and that is just what
happened.
Sitting at a desk in the middle of the class-
room was a fair-headed boy named Frank
Piddington. Next to him was his particular
friend, Eric Harvey. Both boys were about
sixteen years of age, and both were taking an
active part in the unruly proceedings of the
class.
While Mr. Mansfield was busy at the black-
board, Piddington picked up a piece of screwed-
up paper from the floor, and, turning to his
friend, whispered, "I say, Eric, watch me hit
youDg Mullins on thfe crust." He then threw
the paper with such force that it hit Mullins —
a small boy who sat in the front row —on the
head, and bouncing off rolled at the feet of
Mr. Mansfield. The latter wheeled round
from the blackboard, and demanded, in an
angry voice. "Who threw this piece of paper?"
No one spoke. None of the other boys, most
of whom were busily engaged doing the same
thing, had noticed what had happened, and
all looked surprised and guilty when this ques-
tion was suddenly fired at them. Mr. Mansfield
again spoke, and this time he asked, "Will the
boy who threw this piece of paper please stand
up?" No one moved, and Piddington looked
straight ahead of him.
He was not dishonest by nature, but lie did
not see why he should own up when all the
other boys had been doing the same thing;
and, combined with this, although perhaps he
did not realise it, was his excitement and his
fear of having to face the headmaster. ''Very
well," said Mr. Mansfield; "as the boy who
did the throwing does not seem to have the
courage to own up, the whole class can do
extra work on Monday, provided that the cul-
prit does not own up beforehand, which I hope
he will."
Perhaps Frank Piddington would have
owned up then, but the bell for dismissal hav-
ing rung, he held back, thinking that he could
confess later, and Mr. Mansfield, with a brief
command to do the sum on the board for home-
work, dismissed the class. As the -class left
the room, there was some talk and speculation
as to who threw the paper, but as some of the
boys were not quite certain where their own
paper balls went, and the rest of the school
were discussing the football match, the sub-
ject was soon dropped.
Frank Piddington was on his" way home,
partly troubled by his conscience, but more
excited about the match, when Eric Harvey
came up with him. His first words to his
friend were, "What are you going to do about
it, Frank?" Frank looked a bit ashamed, and
replied. "Oh. I'll own up before Monday, all
right."
"I thought you would; it was stiff luck get-
ting copped.
"Yes, it was rotten luck," said Frank; "but,
anyway, I would rather report to the Head
after than before the match."
"Do you think we can pull it off?" asked
Harvey.
"I don't see why we shouldn't," replied Pid-
dington. "They say they are a heavy lot, but
what we lose in weight we make up in speed,
and we have a very good captain in Carter."
"Yes, we are fast all right, and if the for-
wards play together, we ought to win the Pre-
miership, as the backs are quite strong."
Frank Piddington and Eric Harvey were both
members of the Whitecliff XVIII., and each was
a reliable forward. Upon parting, eaeh had


During the change of ends Carter approached
Piddington and said: "Look here, Piddington,
those other forwards don't seem to be play-
ing for goal, so instead of passing to them
shoot for goal yourself." "Very well," replied
forgotten the unpleasant affair of the arith-
metic lesson, and the only thought that occu-
pied their minds was: "Can we win?" And
indeed, this was the thought which all the
bigger boys of both schools had been thinking
for the last week. The schools were old rivals
and there was every indication of a great
match, as the teams were decidedly good for
boys' schools and the weather was perfect.
The match was to be played on the White-
•cliff Grammar School Ground, and some time
before the start of the match a large crowd of
boys and their relatives had assembled there.
Culverhouse Grammar School was situated
about five miles from Whitecliff, and their team
and supporters had journeyed across in good
time for the match.
An incident occurred before the match which
tended to remind Frank Piddington of the un-
pleasant task of owning up, which it was his
duty to perform. As he and Eric Harvey
approached the football ground, which lay a
few hundred yards from the school, prior to
the match, they met Mr. Mansfield. He stopped
them and asked if they thought they could win
the premiership. • Eric Harvey replied that he
thought they stood a very fair chance, but Pid-
dington, much to his own surprise, found that
lie could not look his master squarely in the
face, and could only reply, "Yes, sir.". As
he passed on he felt sorry that the matter
had not ended in the morning. But as he
answered greetings from his school-fellows, it
once again took a secondary place in his
thoughts.
When the teams came out on the ground,
they were warmly cheered by their supporters.
The Culverhouse team looked to be the heavier,
if anything, but both sides were in good train-
ing. After Simpson, the captain of Culver-
house, and Carter had tossed for ends, the
.game commenced. From the start it was seen
that there was little difference in the sides,
and that either team might win. The game
was a fast one throughout. It was soon evi-
dent that Simpson, who was playing half back,
was a good player, as he saved rush after rush
by the Whitecliff forwards. The Whitecliff
centre, White, was also playing good football,
but most often his work was frustrated by
the dashing Simpson, who, with long kicks,
transferred the ball to the other half of the
ground. However, both sides scored freely,
and at half-time Culverhouse were leading by
five points.
After half-time it was seen that the player
whom Simpson had been minding had changed
places with Piddington. This change had good
results, as Simpson was not so prominent,
although he still played well, while Piddington
played splendidly. He frequently passed to
the other forwards, but they seemed to make
nothing of their opportunities. During this
quarter Culverhouse played slightly better than
Whitecliff, kicking 2 goals 3 behinds to 1 goal
3 behinds. Thus at the final change Culver-
house were leading by eleven points.
Piddington, and soon after the game recom-
menced.
The spectators had been in a state of great
excitement all through the match, but it
reached its height when the last quarter com-
menced. The Culverhouse supporters were
feeling confident of winning, while those who
favoured Whitecliff were hopeful of catching
up to and beating their rivals.
Soon after the start of the last quarter Pid-
dington scored a goal. This brought Whitecliff
to within five points of their rivals. For a
long time no one scored, and the Whitecliff
boys began to feel anxious, when Piddington
secured the ball from a crush and sent it on
to Harvey. The latter marked, and amid
silence took his shot for goal. Much to the
disappointment of the Whitecliff supporters,
it was only a behind, and Culverhouse were
still four points in the lead. The Culverhouse
full back did a beautiful kick-off. Several
players went up for the mark, but one went
slightly higher than the rest and secured the
mark. It turned out to be Piddington, and
when, with a long kick, he secured a goal, the*
cheers of Whitecliff Grammar School were
deafening, as it put them in the lead by two
points. A few minutes later time was called.
without any more scoring, and the game was
won for Whitecliff.
It had been a great match, and the spectators
realised that it was largely due to the efforts
of Piddington and White, and especially the
former, that the match had been won. Con-
gratulations were offered to them by Carter
and the other members of the team. The
sports master said that Piddington had prac-
tically won the match by his good play, while
Dr. Newton, the headmaster, shook hands with
him and said that he had given "a very good
display."
Frank Piddington was beginning to think it


was worth while having done something to
win the match, when Mr. Mansfield approached
and congratulated him on having "played the
game as it should be played." It was then •
that this other thing broke in on his triumph.
It all came back to him how he had not owned
up in the morning.
As he went home from the match the words
"played the game" came back to his mind, and
it struck him how far he had been from play-
ing the game in arithmetic. He had intended
to own up before, but how could he now, he
reasoned to himself, after being congratulated
personally for practically winning the match
by' the head, to whom he would be sent, and
by Mr. Mansfield, to whom lfe would have to
confess? How their opinions of him would
change; they said he put up a good fight on
the football field, but what would they say of
the cowardly part he had played in not owning
up. No, he could hardly confess now, after
his performance this afternoon. And any way,
the chaps did not know who threw the paper,
and it would not be so very hard doing the
extra work. But what a pity he had thrown
the paper, and what a fool he was not to see
that Mr. Mansfield was in a line with that fool
Mullins!
Thus he reasoned with himself during tea,
while his mother wondered if the football
match had been too much for him. On his
way to school that evening, he was still think-
ing over his awkward position, when suddenly
the words "played the game" came into his
mind again, and like a flash he realised that
to play the game again he must own up at
-once. How foolish he was not to see his w T ay
in that light before, he thought. Of course, it
was the only way out of the difficulty, and
he realised that he would be doing his duty
not to his team, but to his class.
The first tiling he did when he got to school
that evening was to knock at the study door of
Mr. Mansfield. Upon being bidden to "Come
in," he entered and saw Mr. Mansfield reading
at a table. Piddington quickly explained w T hy
he had come. Mr. Mansfield did not reply at
once, but sat thinking. When he spoke he
said: "It may surprise you, Piddington, to know
that I had a very good idea that you were the
boy who threw that piece of paper this morn-
ing. I had a good idea of the direction from
which the paper came, and I think your ap-
pearance then and later, in the afternoon, was
rather guilty. Perhaps you will realise when
you are older that it is not so hard to- find a
guilty person as it looks. How r ever, I think
you have cleared yourself of your mistake this
morning, as the circumstances in which you
confess are quite different. Bring me one hun-
dred lines by Monday—and I hope you will
attend more in the future." Piddington just
managed to stammer "Thank you, sir," and left
the room. To say he was surprised is putting
it lightly, as he fully expected to be sent to
the headmaster after a long, uncomfortable
lecture.
Outside, he met Eric Harvey, who pounced
cn him, and said, "I've been looking for you
everywhere. Come down to the Fifth Form
room quickly. Everyone is down there, kick-
ing up a great shindy. Wasn't it great win-
ning the match?"
"I just feel like kicking up a noise," replied
Frank, "and on the way I will tell you about
that sport, Mansfield. He has just been jolly
decent to me."
Girls School Story Peggy
Aileen Nolan.
RECREATION time at St. Winifred's Col-
lege. The playground was alive with
girls—girls from all parts of Queens-
Land —and happy, girlish laughter rang through
the air. Three girls were sitting under an old
fig tree in a somewhat secluded part of the
grounds.
"She's gone about lialf-an-hour," said Miriam
Walters, uneasily, her sunny face clouded with
anxiety, as she peered up into the tree. "She
should be back now."
"Don't you worry," advised Gracie Berne,
complacently. "Peg will turn up all right.
She always does."
"Oh! but she might he hurt or something,"
murmured Julie Taylor, nervously. "She's so
careless."
There was a faint rustle overhead, and a
gentle shower of leaves fell upon the group.
"Peg!" The exclamation came simultaneously
from all three. For descending the tree was
a girl—a girl with such a piquant, laughing


face, framed with a mass of short brown curls —a
girl with dancing, blue eyes that gleamed
roguishly on the little group.
"(>h! Peg, you took an awful time," began
Miriam, as the newcomer swung easily off a
branch and dropped beside them.
"We didn't know what to think," put in
Julie.
"Peggy! Just look at your skirt!" cried
Grace, in dismay.
Peggy Thornton laughed wickedly. "Pooh !
That's nothing," she replied, demurely, patting
a big rent in her serge skirt.
"Did you get the ball?" Miriam asked,
eagerly.
Peggy chuckled. "I did, me darlint," and
she produced a tennis ball from her pocket.
The girls laughed. "But you must never do
it again. Peg," said Julie, firmly. "Not if you
send fifty balls over the wall into the next door
garden. You might get caught."
"Pooh! There's only a harmless old man lives
there, and it's as easy as easy to climb from
this fig to the one opposite next door. The
branches touch," she replied.
"Nevertheless " began Julie.
"Did you meet anyone, Peg?" put in Grace,
breathlessly.
"Y —Yes. That is, 110, I didn't."
Peggy Thornton crimsoned as she met her
friends' puzzled gaze. But she could not tell
even them, how, after finding the ball she had
been forced to hide behind some hedging to
escape being seen by someone who was coming
her way, and she had recognised that someone
as Alma Leigh, a sixth form girl, not particu-
larly loved by Peggy and her foutrth form
friends. And Alma had stumbled quite close to
Peggy's hiding place. Something had shot out
of her hand —something that flashed in the sun-
light as it fell. Alma had picked it up quickly,
nervously, and hurried 011. Peggy had been
mystified. "How did Alma Leigh get in there,
and what was she doing?" were the questions
that raced through Peggy's brain. And because
she could find 110 answer for them she was
silent. So now she repeated with rather un-
necessary firmness —
"No. I did not meet anyone."
"Anyhow," she soliloquised to herself, "I did
not meet her. I only saw her."
"Look! There's Gladys Wren calling its," ex-
claimed Miriam, pointing to a figure on the
school steps, beckoning vigorously.
Julie sighed resignedly.
"Come 011. We had better go."
They made their way across the grounds.
Miriam had slipped her arm through Peggy's.
"You girls have to go 'to your class room at
once," said Gladys, as they came up.
"The class room!" echoed Miriam. "What
on earth for?"
"I do not exactly know. All the Fourth girls
are wanted," and Gladys looked keenly at the-
four as she spoke. "Some row on, I fancy."
"Is there?" sweetly inquired Peggy. "What
about?"
"You will soon know," was the rather grim
reply.
Four pairs of eyes looked volumes.
"Come 011. We may as well find out," and
Peggy took the lead. But all her self-possession
fled, when, on flinging open the class-room door,
she beheld, on the raised platform, just a few
feet away, the Principal, Miss Burton, and Miss
Brookes, the Fourth Form mistress, in close
confab with a little, old man, whose grey
moustache seemed fairly bristling with rage.
Peggy was still holding the ball. With a quick
movement she slipped it into her pocket —for the
gentleman was no other than the "harmless old
man" who lived next door. Thirty girls were
gazing with suppressed excitement at the group
at the door.
"Margaret Thornton, hand me that article
you have placed in your pocket." Miss Burton
spoke sternly and commandingly.
The hot colour dyed Peggy's cheeks.
"Give it, Peg. Go 011, give it," came in an
agonised whisper from Miriam.
Peggy stepped forward, and slowly and un-
willingly produced the fatal ball.
"A-ah! I thought so." The Principal turned
to the visitor. "Mr. Denton, is this the ball that
fell into your garden?"
"It looks very much like it," replied that
gentleman. "So you are the young woman who
deliberately threw that confounded ball into my
yard, and destroyed two of my prize roses,
nearly breaking the bush as well, eh?" and
he glared at Peggy.
"I beg your pardon," and the clear, girlish
voice rang through the room. "I did not throw
that ball. I was fooling with it and it went
over itself."
There was an awful silence.
" 'Pon my soul!" Mr. Denton ejaculated at
last.
"Margaret Thornton." Miss Burton's stern
voice broke the silence. "If this ball fell into-
Mr. Denton's garden, how did you get it back?"
There was another silence. Then a proud
little head was raised defiantlv.
9
"I went in and got it."


I
* /,<+ "* f
< j* L ' ■*-'•. V . ■- 4 ■ 3 J> iri* Jr ijEttiV )
m
i


SAWING TIMBER
There is no place 011 the land or the sea.
Where the clear, fresh wind blows strong and free.
Like the cleared space hnong the timber tall,
Where the patches of shade and sunlight fall.
Here one of the kings of the forest lies ;
Once his up-flung boughs reached out for the skies '
His roots drew vigor and strength from the earth;
He held his court in the land of his birth.
Xow, though his pride and his triumph are o'er,
And over his fellows he reigns no more.
There's a pleasant duty before him still —
To warm the cottage-folk up 011 the hill.
The breath of autumn has colored the leaves;
The frost king's at work on the old brown eaves;
The bush lad prepares for the winter cold,
And saws into logs the monarch of old.
Boyhood dreamings brood in his sun-tanned face,
This hardy son of a pioneer race:
The strength of the bush-born his muscles know,
And steady's the beat of his pulse's flow.


Mr. Denton starred in amazement.
"How did you get in?" It was he who asked
the question, before Miss Burton regained her
speech.
"I —I climbed the fig in our yard and swung
on to the one that touches it in your garden,"
was the clear reply.
There was an audible gasp from Miss Burton.
"'Pon my soul I" Mr. Denton seemed in-
capable of further speech.
"My dear sir, I am extremely sorry that a
pupil of mine should be guilty of such dis-
graceful conduct." Two red spots were visible
in Miss Burton's cheeks. "I can assure yon
that you will not be subject to such annoyance
again, and I can also assure you that the culprit
will be severely punished."
Mr. Denton felt himself dismissed.
With a muttered, "Yes-, yes, exactly" he
turned in a dazed manner towards the door.
At the door he looked back. Peggy was stand-
ing proudly erect, the blue eyes gazing scorn-
fully at 'the departing figure. He closed the
door hurriedly. " 'Pon my soul!" the maid
heard him mutter as she showed him out.
Twenty minutes later Peggy emerged from
Miss Burton's study. Such a flushed, rebellious
Peggy.
"I won't! I won't! I won't!" she said,
passionately, as she made her way to the dormi-
tory. Then she sobbed. "No more holidays for
the rest of the term. No more tennis: 110 more
cricket; and consider myself lucky I wasn't
packed off home. Ugli!" and she threw herself
down on the bed, and cried. She lay there for
over an hour, hugging the pillow. Then some-
one called her name. It was Miss Brookes.
"Get up, Margaret Thornton," she said gently.
"Miss Burton wants you in her study."
A tear-stained face was lifted to hers.
"Want's me again?"
Miss Brookes nodded. "Hurry up, child,"
she said, still gently. Peggy got up wearily
from the bed, and went. Miss Brookes sighed,
as she watched her go.
Later that evening, the whole school was
agog with excitement. Peggy—Peg Thornton
had stolen a diamond ring from Mr. Denton.
Gracie Berne was trying to comfort the sob-
bing Julie. Miriam's face was very pale.
"Well, it's time the little thief has been
caught." It was Alma Leigh, a tall, dark girl,
a few feet away from Miriam, who was speak-
ing.
"How dare you say that?" Miriam's eyes
flashed fire. "Peg is no thief. She didn't touch
that ring, and all of you know she didn't. You
you cowards!"
"Girls! What does this mean? Has the tea
hell to be rung a second time for your benefit?
Form into line at once!"
Little did Miss Brookes guess of the quarrel
she had so opportunely interrupted—of the hot,
burning words that were crushed back on her
appearance.
But there was very little tea eaten by anyone
that night.
Meanwhile. Peggy was alone. Alone in the
room where she had been sent after the second
interview. Such a forlorn, little figure she
looked, huddled up against the window sill,
gazing up into a clear, starry sky. The blue
eyes, so tired and frightened, were gazing at
the little twinkling lamps. Somehow they
seemed like messengers of hope to the lonely
girl.
"But it's no use," she sobbed despairingly.
"Nobody will believe me, and Alma Leigh won't
say she was there. She must have taken it."
Bitter sobs were shaking her frame now. Once
again she raised her face to the starlit sky.
"I can't tell 011 her. Dear God!" she cried,
wildly, "make Alma Leigh confess," and then,
groping her way to the bed, she sobbed herself
to sleep.
It was late that night when the head mistress,
candle in hand, entered the room and stood by
the bedside of the sleeping Peggy. Miss Burton's
face softened as she gazed at her. It was hard
to imagine Peggy Thornton a thief. If only
there had not been that incriminating bit of
blue serge that Mr. Denton had found caught
in the window catch; and Peggy's dress had
been torn. True, all the girls' dresses were
made of the same cloth, but no other girl would
have dared to leave the school grounds. Yes.
Peggy was -the culprit. But then —and Miss
Burton frowned perplexedly—what had she doni*
with the ring? Threats and pleadings had
failed to produce it. There was a movement
from the bed.
" 'Pon my soul!" Peggy murmured distress-
fully. A ghost of a smile flitted over the still
handsome features of Miss Burton. So Peggy
was given to talking in her sleep. But the smile
died away as she listened to what followed.
Poor Peggy's broken cry rose to her lips even
as she slept.
"Dear God —make —Alma Leigh—confess !"
and then followed incoherent, almost wild talk.
A startled look crept into Miss Burton's face, as
the full sense of the disjointed sentences dawned
on her. Peggy's voice had trailed off into a dry


sob. There was silence. Miss Burton waited,
but Peggy was sleeping quietly now. Softly
the Principal left the room and turned up the
corridor, never stopping until she reached the
door of Alma Leigh's room. Each sixth form
girl had a room to herself. She opened the
door gently. There was* a startled exclamation'
from a figure standing by the window, in the
full glow of the moonlight. Something fell and
rolled on the floor.
"Stay where you are. Alma," commanded Miss
Burton quietly. But the command was un-
necessary. Alma Leigh, pale and trembling, was
too stunned to move. Watching her narrowly,
the headmistress placed the candle on the table,
and felt for the switch. The next moment the
electric light was gleaming mercilessly on a
glittering, round circle in the middle of the
floor. Miss Burton picked it up. Then with
unhesitating steps she walked towards the
wardrobe. She flung open the door. Yes, there
was the other clue she sought —a torn skirt.
There was a pitiful, gasping cry, and Alma
Leigh fell unconscious to the floor.
Two days later, Peggy was standing by the
window of the little room where Miss Burton
had thought best to keep her. She was gazing
up into a blue, cloudless sky, with a look of
deep thankfulness. Everybody was so kind to
her now —so kind. There was a movement at
the door. Peggy glanced round quickly. Alma
Leigh stood on the threshold.
"Peggy!" the voice was tremulous, pleading.
"Peggy, I —l am going away to-day, and I —l
have come to ask your pardon."
A curious, hard look had come over Peggy's
face. She did not speak. The red colour
mounted the elder girl's cheeks.
"I suppose you despise me," she went on,
bitterly, "Well, I was mad to come. Only—
only, I thought you might forgive me."
Still there came no reply.
"You will not speak. And yet, perhaps, if
you knew —you might not be so hard. You
have a mother, Peggy," and the voice softened.
*T saw her once when she came to the school,
and I often thought if I had a mother like that
I —l would have been better. You have known
love," she went on, again bitterly: "I —I have
never known it. 1 never knew either of my
parents, and all my relatives think me a bother,
and do you wonder when I found that path into
the next house, and went inside and saw that
ring—l—l stole it. 1 wanted money. Well, I
am paying the price now," she ended with a
hard laugh. "Good-bye, Peggy. Forgive me if
vou can," and Alma Leigh turned wearily to-
wards the door.
But Peggy stood in front of her. A little,
white hand was stretched towards the elder girl.
The blue eyes were glistening with tears.
"Good-bye. Alma," she said gently. "I am, oh!
so sorrv."
Alma's lips quivered.
"Thank you." she said simply, as she took
the outstretched hand. "Good-bye, Peggy."
The door closed and Alma Leigh had gone.
"Did you ever see such a harum scarum as
that Margaret Thornton," complained Miss
Brookes to the Principal, some time later. "Just
look at her now." Miss Burton did look, and
certainly Peggy seemed an ideal harum scarum.
The curls were running in wild confusion over
her forehead: her blouse showed a decided
tendency to "stick out," while Peggy, herself,
seemed here, there and everywhere. And seeing
all this, Miss Burton only smiled wisely.
"Some day," she said, softly, "we will all
feel very proud of our madcap, Peggy."
Adventure Story: Guarded Gold
Allan C. Harris.
IT was nearing evening, after a hot November
day, in a year of drought. The homestead
on the plain presented a lifeless, deserted
appearance to the eye. Month after month had
passed without a drop of rain, and the cattle
and flocks had starved on the arid plains.
Situated in the far north of South Australia,
and within thirty miles of the Flinders Range,
Bob Ward's station was remote from civilisa-
tion. Bad years had blighted Ward's hopes
and resources, so that now nothing remained to
him but two fine horses. His land was mort-
gaged, and he was on the point of abandoning
everything. His only companion in this desolate
spot was a man of middle-age and doubtful
character, named Larry McShaine, and Ward
was endeavouring to reform him. They were
now preparing for their journey southwards,
which was to begin on the morrow.
"It'll be an awful day in the sun to-morrow,


boss, if to-day is any indication."
"Yes, indeed! I'll go and attend to
the horses," replied Ward. Some moments
later he returned in a hurry. "Larry,
t. *
what is that moving out there in the
west?" he called. Rushing inside for his
field-glasses, McShaine was soon able to declare
that it was a man, bending low in the saddle,
approaching the homestead. In a few moments
Ward was riding away toward the west.
"Well, I never! It's old Ned. the prospector,
and he looks sick, indeed." he exclaimed, as he
approached the rider. It took some time to
bring the sick man back to the station, where
McShaine had prepared a bed and some food.
The old man, whom they had discovered was
an old prospector, who some months previously
had left the station, on a prospecting trip. No
one knew much about him, and he often dis-
appeared for months at a time. By now the
sun was setting over the distant range, not very
far from a reddish-coloured mountain, named
Coppertop.
The sick man had fallen into a state of
delirium, although the only intelligible words
Ward, sitting by his bed, could hear were "gold"
and "beware." In the middle of one of Ned's
outbursts, McShaine entered the room, and over-
hearing these words, the cunning look which
stole over his face bespoke his desire to discover
the old man's secret. Gradually, however, Ned
ceased to rave, and slept more peacefully, to
awake after a night of repose in his right mind.
He tried to speak, but Ward bade him desist
until he was stronger. Soon Ned managed to
convey to Ward that he had something for his
ears alone, so sending McShaine out to attend
to the horses, he approached Ned's bedside,
where he heard Ned's tale.
"After leaving you last. I went off into the
hills some seventy miles north-west of here,
and, after much searching, I came across a
grassy, well-watered valley. The nature of the
country made me think it contained gold, and
after a short time I found gold in* a watercourse
formed by a spring in the valley. I gathered
gold dust and nuggets in large quantity, and
hid it in a cave, in a chest of my own make."
Here he stopped, and gasped for breath. Bob
gave him a drink, and ran outside, calling
McShaine, who very suspiciously slunk round the
corner. "Go for the doctor down at McDonald's,
quickly: Ned is very ill." The fellow went off
to saddle-up. Soon Ward returned to the old
man s side. After a while, Ned, who was look-
ing very weak, continued slowly. "I can't live
much longer, so I will tell you my secret. Here
is the plan of the way to the valley, which eon-
tains the gold. But I have carefully guarded
the chest. Be careful how you approach it. for
it means death Ned stopped abruptly,
and passed away without saying another word.
Quickly shoving the plan in his pocket, Ward
rushed outside to recall McShaine. To his sur-
prise he found he had gone in that short space
of time, as the dust on the plain showed. Was
it worth while to go after him? Ward then
set to work and interred Ned's remains.
Some time later he inspected the plan with
great interest, for here was a chance to recoup
his losses. The main directions were: —"Make
for Mount Coppertop. then proceed in a north-
easterly direction until you again strike the
range, which forms a semi-circle past Mount
Coppertop. In the distance you will see a hill
crested with three gums, though otherwise bare.
This marks the valley." Inset was a map of
the valley, and over the word "cave" was
written, "Lie to open." But there was no indi-
cation of danger, such as Ned had hinted at.
It was still early in the day, and Ward de-
cided to make the search at once. Packing
some food and a rifle, lie set out, and toward
evening reached Mount Coppertop, where he
camped for the night. Tired after his ride, he
soon began to doze. Unnoticed in the gloom
was the shadowy figure of a man, who. as the
fire fell lower, crept slowly towards the recum-
bent Ward. Suddenly he was stunned by a
blow from a cudgel, and the form of a man knelt
over Ward, and drew from his pocket the plan
of the valley. Then he withdrew and quickly
disappeared in the gathering gloom. Hours
later, Ward awoke, to find the light gathering
in the east, and with a throbbing head prepared
to break his fast. Slowly the night's happenings
dawned 011 him. Who was it, he asked him-
self? Had McShane followed him? 01* was it
son*e partner of Ned, the prospector? Luckily,
he remembered all the points of the simple plan.
Off he set as the dawn was breaking, with
the knowledge that his assailant had some hours
start. The sun shone warmly, and his aching
head caused Ward to stop at noon, out on the
plain. In vain he searched for water, and his
thirsty mount was in 110 condition for further
travel that day. The thought of the lead which
the other possessed tormented him. Slowly the
afternoon dragged away, and the lack of water
was beginning to tell 011 Ward. Just as he lay
down for the night, under a shrub, he detected
the twinkle of a fire in the hills some ten miles
distant. Away there in the silence, not far
from his goal, was Ward's assailant.


Ward woke with the coming of the day, and
was soon on his way, though he still felt the
tortures of thirst. Some miles further on he
came upon a dead horse. It was the horse on
which McShaine had supposedly gone for the
doctor. So McShaine was his violent rival.
Examination showed that the horse had broken
its leg. so that the rider was forced to shoot it.
Hurriedly he pushed on, and after an hour or
two he came upon McShaine's camp 011 the hills.
The hot ashes showed that the other, feeling
secure from pursuit, had not long left his camp.
Fortunate, indeed, for Ward that the loss of
McShaine's horse had hindered his progress.
"If I only had water!" he groaned. "Surely
there must be a spring nearby." But no search
revealed the thing he most required. There
was nothing for him to do but push on as best
he could.
Cheered indeed was he, when in the distance
there rose to view the hill crested with three
gums. Clearer and clearer did the hill appear,
when suddenly from behind a bush rose
McShaine, who covered Ward with his revolver.
"You have caught up, I see, boss, ha! ha!
But I'll thank you to dismount right away, and
try Shank's pony. I'm the only one who will
get this gold." Helpless, Ward dismounted, and
to his disgust was left to trudge on, while
McShaine galloped away. Now, Ward was in
a pitiful state, for the other had his rifle and
his food. "The villain," he muttered, "and after
all I have done for him. But he shall not
succeed." The dust thrown up by the horse was
becoming barely noticeable, showing how
desperate was his case. Still he must push 011.
for he knew there was water in the valley, and
there was nought but a waste behind.
Higlier climbed the sun, and the heat which
poured upon him, caused his head to swim, till
he stumbled, only to rise and drag himself
forward. The rider ahead was now out of
sight, and Ward was 011 the point of dropping,
when he caught sight of a small trickle of
water ahead. "At last," he cried, as with a
supreme effort he dragged himself to what
proved to be a tiny spring. Falling flat on his
face, he drank his fill, and rested himself while
he bathed his face and his aching feet. Soon
he rose to his feet, feeling like a new man, with
hope stirring in his breast once more. Quicken-
ing his pace, he pushed forward in the direction
of the hill he was seeking, and now only a few
miles lay before him. Several minutes later
the thing which he feared happened. Slowly
over the hill rode McShaine. appearing like a
spot as he reached the brow of the hill, and
disappeared. "I am afraid that my luck is
right out this trip," he muttered.
Slowly, but surely, the distance decreased,
until barely a mile separated him from his goal.
Ward now advanced more cautiously, taking ad-
vantage of any cover afforded by the low,
stunted scrub. Bang! To his eager ears came
the faint report of a fire-arm. What could it
mean? Was there a third treasure seeker? At
last Ward reached the foot of the hill over
which McShaine had disappeared. Ignorant of
what dangers lay in store for him over the
ridge, Ward crept from rock to rock, and thus
climbed the hill, every moment expecting to be
challenged. But 110 such thing happened, and
he reached the top in safety. Cautiously he
peered around a boulder, when his eyes lighted
011 an oasis in the desert. A fertile valley
stretched away before him, while in the side of
the hill bubbled a spring, and its course was
bordered with green. There was his horse
browsing, but McShane was nowhere to be seen.
Ward scanned the hillside for some time be-
fore discovering the cave containing the gold.
The surprising calm of the place worked 011 his
nerves, so, making a detour round the hill, he
slowly approached the cave. Still there was no
sign of McShaine, and Ward ventured to peer
into the cave. He was almost stunned by the
sight which met his eyes, for there on the floor
of the cave lay McShane lifeless. Entering the
cave, Ward carried him out to the open air,
but he was dead, his corpse being almost cold.
"So that was the result of the shot which I
heard," he exclaimed, as he discovered that a
bullet had passed through McShaine's heart.
But who had fired the shot? There was no sign
of another anywhere! Covering McShaine's
face, he walked into the cave. There in a nook
in the rear, was a chest, made from a hollow
tree trunk. Its lid was lying loose, showing
that it had been tampered with.
Carefully raising the lid, Ward beheld The
precious contents of the chest, wealth such as
he had never dreamed of, in the shape of nuggets
and gold dust. Again he looked, and his look
solved the mystery of McShaine's death. At-
taclied to the under side of the lid, near the
catch, was a large pistol. Ward lowered the
lid until it was almost closed, and found that
the pistol pointed straight at his breast.
Evidently, he surmised, some string had con-
nected the catch of the iid and the trigger, so
that when McShaine, standing in front had
raised the lid, the pistol was fired, with fatal
effect. A broken string showed that he was
correct. Quickly Ward's mind flashed back to


old Ned's bedside, and he remembered the
warning which had been uncompleted. The
words, also, which were written in the plan.
"Lie to open," had now a peculiar significance.
How fortunate, indeed, had been all his set-
backs.
"He who, laughs last, laughs longest,'' he
said to himself, as he turned away to inter
McShaine's corpse. After he had performed this
painful duty, Ward caught his horse and
hobbled it, for the westering sun would not
shine much longer.
Then quickly he worked, until he had trans-
ferred all the gold he could carry to his saddle-
bags and clothing. Taking a short ramble
through the valley, he noted the golden glitter
of the sand in the shallow watercourse. The
night soon closed in, and passed uneventfully.
Next morning Ward rode off with a light
heart towards his station, carrying the means
to repurchase all his land, and with the know-
ledge of a greater store of wealth than.all his
land would produce.
they marched off as fast as they could.
Shaky Knees and the Dragon
Written and Illustrated by C. E. James.
ONCE there were two kings, who lived
on opposite sides of a deep ditch or
gull}. The name of one was King
Fuzzletop, and the other was King Cheerisoul.
For many years neither had crossed the
diuch, because if one attempted to, the other
would send all his soldiers and knights to drive
him back.
Now, very early one Christmas morning, King
Fuzzletop could not sleep, so he climbed to
the top of his tower to get a breath of air.
They had no windows in the tower, for fear
the enemy should get in; only long narrow
slits for the soldiers to shoot their arrows
through, so there was not much fresh air
inside.
W ell, no sooner had King Fuzzletop reached
the top of his tower and begun to sniff the
fresh air, than he cried: "By my beard and
whiskers, I smell Christmas puddings!" Sniff-
Sniff! "Very good ones, too, by my nose and
eyebrows," and down the winding stairs he
clattered as fast as his heavy armour would
let him, and, calling to his chief knight, he
said: "Hark thee, Sir Boolby de Bottlenose,
our enemy hath rich Christmas puddings in his
store. Go thou and bring them hither, for bv
my sword and gauntlet, I must have them."
"Your Majesty surely means by mine," quoth
Sir Boolby de Bottlenose, saluting and bringing
his ankles together so suddenly that the clatter
or his spurs woke all the sleeping soldiers.
" T stai ; ted U P and stood in a row like skittles.
ow '" said King Fuzzletop, "take with you
sufficient men to capture those puddings. Leav*
not one behind in the enemy's storeroom, if
any man dares to return without a pudding,
by my nose and earrings, I shall hare his
head."
"Very good, your Majesty," replied Sirßoolbv
de Bottlenose. "How many puddings did your
Majesty smell?"
King Fuzzletop took off his helmet and
scratched his head, then he put it on verv
carefully again and pulled down the visor in
tront; then in a deep voice he answered: "The
smell of those puddings was so strong there
must have been at least six or eight."
good, your Majesty. Shall I take six
men or eight?" replied Sir Boolby de Bottle-
nose.
' Take eight," said the King, "for if you only
take six you may lose two puddings."
"Just so," returned the Knight, "but if I


\ \ b>_ Jj N 'lijL \j h
They found every one standing, staring at the empty hooks.
take eight and there are only six puddings, two
men will lose their heads."
At this the King again took off his helmet
and scratched his head, and he kept it off
this time, as it was rather hard to put on.
Then he said: "If there be eight puddings and
only six men, we will lose two puddings; take
eight men." So, you see, King Fuzzletop was
rather selfish.
Sir Bcolby de Bottlenose crept off in the
early dawn with eight men. They scrambled
quickly down the ditch and up the other side.
There were no soldiers on guard (I suppose
they were too busy looking at their Christ-
mas presents), and following the smell of the
puddings, they at last reached the storeroom
of their enemy King Cheerisoul. The door had
been left open by accident.
Quoth Sir Boolby de Bottlenose in a loud
whisper: "Our luck is in. Now fetch the pud-
dings out."
In the storeroom were seven sucking pigs
all ready to cook, also seven large turkeys
and seven fine hams. Round the walls on
benches were seven trays of mincemeat pies,
and hanging from hooks in the ceiling were
seven huge plum puddings.
"Let each man seize a pudding and be gone
before the enemy smells a rat," ordered Sir
Boolby de Bottlenose. There was a sudden
dash for the puddings, and they were quickly
cut from their hooks; but as there were only
seven, there was one man over, and his name
was Shaky Knees. And now his knees did
indeed shake. "Alas!" cried he to Sir Boolby
de Bottlenose, "what shall I do? If I go back
with you I must lose my head, and if I stay
here I may lose my life."
"You will certainly lose your head if you
come with us," returned Sir Boolby de Bottle-
nose. "I advise you to stop here and take
your chance when you see it coming. Methinks
I hear the enemy approach. Hide thou behind
yon sack of flour, and for us, we will go dis-
guised as a dragon." And turning to the others,
he said: "Let each man sling his pudding
over his shoulder -and let the second man's
nose touch the first man's pudding, and the
third man's nose touch the second man's pud-
ding, and So on, to form a dragon with sixteen
legs, and I myself, with my flashing sword, will
be the tail."
So they marched off as fast as they could,
and Sir Boolby de Bottlenose himself came
last, walking backwards, and using his bright
sword for the tail of the dragon, which he
twirled so viciously no one would dare ap-
proach. In the dim dawn King Cheerisoul and
his lovely daughter, Princess Brighteyes, saw
this strange beast, and at once took it for a
dragon. "Look! Look!" cried the Princess,
clutching her father by the arm. "A dragon!
Seest thou not its flashing tail?" A shudder
ran through King Cheerisoul from the top or
his head to the soles of his feet, for it wa>
well known in those days that lovely maidens.


"How now!" quoth tb** King. "What is
"Alas!" cried the chiei cook, falling on his
knees before him. "Alas! Woe is me!" #
"Cheer up. Pasty Face," cried the King, "and I
tell me thy trouble." j V
"Many years," sobbed the cook, "many years '
have I served your an served
especially Princesses, were in great danger
from dragons, who, whenever possible, would
carry them off to their caves or caverns, and
there keep them prisoner till some brave war-
rior, at the risk of his life, succeeded in killing
the dragon and rescuing the maiden.
In a flash, all this ran through the mind of
King Cheerisoul. "My lovely child," he cried,
clasping her in his arms, "there is an old pro-
verb that says, 'Prevention is better than cure/
I will seek some brave man now, that he may
destroy the dragon before it carry thee away."
Then, taking the Princess with him (for he
would not let her out of his sight until the
dragon should be destroyed), he went in search
of his soldiers, but not a soul could he find;
no, not a soldier, nor a servant, nor a man,
nor a maid. Whither had they gone? The
King and the Princess went from room to room,
along corridor after corridor, calling loudly,
but not a sound could they hear. They
descended to the kitchens, and finally out to
the storeroom, where they found every one
standing, staring at the empty hooks where
the puddings had hung.
well with gravies and sauces and puddings and
meats, but never before had I prepared so
luscious a feast nor such round and rich pud-
dings, and now, alas! alack! they are gone\ v
"(70//c?" cried the King, now staring in his
turn at the empty hooks. "Gone? Whither
have they gone, and wfro has taken them?"
And he turned a frowning gaze on all his
frightened servants.
''Father," said the trembling Princess, still
clinging to his arm, "thinkest thou it could
have been the dragon?"
"The dragon!" groaned the King, turning as
pale as the seven sucking pigs. "My beautiful
Brighteyes, thou hast the quickest brain of all,,
and here I swear that any man, no matter who
he be —I say any man, who, single-handed, will
overcome the dragon and fetch me his flashing
tail in proof thereof, to him I will give my
daughter in marriage, and also the half of my
kingdom. I swear it."
Ail the soldiers and servants looked at one
another, but no one spoke, for, though they
all loved the Princess, and would gladly have:
"Alas!" cried the Chief Cook, falling on his knees before him. "Alas! Woe is me."


For a moment all were struck dumb.
accepted half the kingdom, none would offer
to attack a dragon single-handed.
Now, all this time poor Shaky Knees still
crouched behind the sack of flour, and when he
heard the silvery tones of the Princess's voice,
his heart gave a great leap.
"Oh!" thought he, "what a heavenly voice!
What would I not do to have the music of that
voice always near me. It gives me strength,
and so much courage, I could almost leap out
from my hiding place and face all my enemies."
While this was running through his mind,
he heard the King saying, "To any man, no
matter who he be, I will give my daughter, if
he but bring me the dragon's flashing tail."
"This," thought Shaky Knees, "is the chance
Sir Boolby de Bottlenose told me to watch
for. I must seize it without delay." So, while
the servants and soldiers looked at each other
to see who would offer to attack the dragon,
suddenly thd sack of flour vas overturned, and
out sprang Shaky Knees and stood before
them.
For a moment, all were struck dumb with
astonishment; but, striding boldly up to the
King, and dropping on one knee, "Noble King,"
said Shaky Knees, "thou hast sworn to give
thy lovely daughter and half thy kingdom to
the man, whoever he be, who brings to thee
the dragon's tail in token that he has over-
come the monster. I offer myself for that
service, and with your Majesty's permission
will go at once."
"Arise, brave youth." cried King Cheeri-
soul, "and tell me thy name and whence comest
thou."
"That, oh, King." replied Shaky Knees, "is
a secret I must guard with my life. Only give
me thy permission to attack the dragon e'er
it be too late, and 1 will be gone."
By this time the others had recovered from
their surprise, and the chief cook, looking with
jealous eyes on Shaky Knees, approached.
"Methinks, your Majesty, that this man hath
stolen the puddings, and only wishes to escape
err fury."
At this all the others crowded round Shaky
Knees, till he began to fear his chance was very
small. But the Princess Brighteyes, who
dearly loved a mystery, whispered to her father:
"Oh, my, father, what matters it, who and
whence he is? Bid the noble youth go and seek
the dragon, and I will watch and pray for his
safe return, for I like well his looks."
Then said the King to the chief cook:
"Foolish man, dost think so slight a youth could
devour seven large puddings in one night?
Begone to thy kitchens, and all of you be
about your business; and as for you, mysterious
stranger," he said to Shaky Knees, "I give thee
leave to go, for I will not have a moment's
rest until I know the dragon is no more."
Shaky Knees bowed low to the King, and,
kissing the hand of the beautiful Princess, with
one long look into her deep blue eyes, he strode
off towards the ditch just as the sun arose
over the mountain tops.
Now, we know that the dragon's tail was
nothing more than the sword of Sir Boolby
de Bottlenose, and. though not as dangerous
as a dragon's tail. Shaky Knees had to pluck
up all his courage to approach the tower of
King Fuzzletop and seek out Sir Boolby de
Bottlenose. So all the way there, and while
he clambered down and up the other side of
the ditch, he wondered how he could manage
to escape the anger of King Fuzzletop for re-
turning without a pudding, and how he could
get the sword of Sir Boolby de Bottlenose.
"If I were only rich," said he to himself,
"I would pay any stnn. Oh! I have it!" he
exclaimed aloud as this thought came to him.
If Sir Boolby de Bottlenose would give him his
sword and promise not to give him up to
King Fuzzletop ro have his head cut off, he
would, when he married the Princess, make
Sir Boolby a Baron, and give him a beautiful
castle to live in.
Having made up his mind to this, be sneaked


He took off his crown and placed it on Shaky Knees' head.
along under the shadow of the wall, and slipped
in the side gate when no one was looking.
W hen Sir Boolby de Bottlenose, who was hav-
ing his breakfast, saw Shaky Knees approach,
he was so surprised that his jaw dropped, and
also his knife and fork; but he quickly re-
covered them, and, springing up, "Hist!" he
whispered loudly, "if King Fuzzletop seest
thee, thy head is gone."
"I know it," said Shaky Knees, also in a
whisper, "but, good Sir Boolby, I have come
for thy sword."
"My sword!" cried Sir Boolby de Bottlenose
loudly* starting back.
"Hush! Hush!" pleaded Shak} r Knees, glanc-
ing fearfully towards the door. "Hush! Good,
dear Sir Boolby, thy sword I must have, or "
"My sword!" cried Sir Boolby again, stamp-
ing his foot. "Are you mad? You pink-nosed
son of a green-eyed platypus, no knight will
pail with his sword, and I will defend my
sword with my life."
"Listen! said Shaky Knees, in 'a sterner
voice, seeing that he must make a bolder stand
if he would gain his end. "Listen, Sir Boolby
de Bottlenose "
"Never!" quoth that Knight, striding up and
down and gulping great mouthfuls of coffee
in between. "Never! you pink-nosed "
But Shaky Knees would not let him finish.
'Hark thee, he,shouted, in such a loud and
commanding tone that Sir Boolby sank into
his chair, overcome by astonishment, and sat
staring at him until he had quite finished tell-
ing him all that had happened to him, and the
plan he had hit upon. Then Sir Boolby blinked
and said: "Er—say it again?"
So he said it again: "I will give thee, Sir
Boolby de Bottlenose, a castle to live in, and
make thee a Baron!"
"A Baron! A Castle!" repeated the Knight
dazedly.
"Yes! Yes!" said Shaky Knees. "Only
haste thee and give me thy sword."
Sir Boolby de Bottlenose rose from his chair,
never taking his eyes from Shaky Knees' face.
He thought: "This must be a dream, but I'll
give it to him and see what happens." So he
gave the sword to Shaky Knees, who said:
I thank thee, Sir Boolby, and, never fear, but
I shall keep my promise, and thou shalt be
(Continued 011 page 43.)


The Saving of Winnebango: An Indian Story
Bv K. X. Jackson.
A LITTLE party of men were seated
around the fire outside Jim Thomson's
tent, yarning after the hard day's work
on the diggings. There were men there who,
although they all belonged to the one great
nationality, had come from nearly every corner
of the earth when the first great news of gold
being discovered in Australia went abroad.
For the most part, their faces lay in shadow,
but now and then, as a flame gleamed up, a
weather-tanned countenance or a bearded
visage shone in the transient light. Away
down the flat, faint shouts and calls came up
trom the direction of a high glare that was
reflected among the white trunks of the distant
creek gums. But elsewhere, all around, the
great silver-specked night had closed down
upon the lonely bush in her blackness and
silence.
Once, when talk died down in the camp and
there was a short period of silence the sounds
from down the creek suddenly burst out louder
and clearer —strange, wild calls, and cries that
surely never came from the throat of man
before.
"The Blacks are holding a fine old corro-
boree to-night!" said a digger who was known
as Sam the Yank, although he was an Eng-
lishman. "It sounds as if they mean business."
"1 don't think they mean much business
as far as we are concerned," growled an v>ld
bushman named Fred Walker. "It might mean
war against the 'possum or the goanna, but
that's about all."
"We are in a lonely spot here," went 011
Sam, "and only the few of us here know about
these diggings. There are probably two or
three hundred Blacks down there."
"Oh, these fellows are all right. Of course,
some of them do go after blood at times, and
they go about it in an effective way, but a
few bottles of whisky and some tobacco would
soon fix these chaps."
"If I heard the natives going on like ihaj
off any of the Mississippi Rivers," said Tom
the Yank, "I'd prepare for an attack. Of
course, I haven't been in the bush long enough
to know natives like you do, Fred, so I guess
I'll sleep quiet to-night on your recommenda-
tion. I could tell you some yarns about those
Indians."
"Tell us one," said Jim Thomson.
"Yes," chimed in Fred Walker, in his gruff
voice.
"Tell us something about those savage In-
dians of yours, and it will make us all kindly
disposed towards these harmless natives of
ours."
"Those of them that are harmless," put in
another.
"Most of thern hereabouts are," said Fred.
"Very well," said Sam, after a pause. "I'll
tell you something the Indians did to me just
before I left the Ohio River, and if your natives
aren't like them, it's up to you to drop a
thanksgiving lot of tobacco things in their camp
in the morning. It was this way."
About fifteen years ago, my partner —Uriah
Bird —and I had established ourselves by the
upper waters of the Ohio River. We built a
fairly substantial log cabin, in a good, defen-
sive position, in case of any unwelcome at-
tentions from the Indians, although at that
time the white folk l\ad been quite at peace
with the red for nearly two years. But ours
was the furthest little settlement out in that
direction, and we only thought it wise to take
• what precautions we could. The nearest white
men to us dwelt in a small village called
Winnebango, which lay nearly twenty miles
away, through the forest, at the junction of
the Ohiac and the Sahkee Rivers.
It was autumn when we came to the Ohiac,
and during the winter that followed we did
very well at hunting and trapping, for bears,
foxes, beavers, and even buffaloes abounded in
those parts. Using our cabin for a temporary
storehouse for the furs we captured, we would
wait until the space therein became too
cramped for our personal comfort, and Then
make a journey, laden with precious peltries, to
Winnebango, where there was an agent of the
Western Fur Company, who was always will-
ing and anxious to do business with hunters.
Se\eral of these profitable journeys we had
made, and it was not until we were returning
from our sixth trip that we had -any notion of
the impending trouble in the land.
Although our log hut was practically on the
banks of the same river that ran down through
Winnebango, the trail we took lay for the most
part pretty far from the stream, which, be-
tween cur headquarters and the settlement,
took a wide sweep to the north. The distance


by river was probably half as far again as that
by land.
The afternoon sun was down among the tree
trunks as we drew near our journey's end. A
couple of miles rom our cabin, there was a
fairly large natural clearing, where we had
previously noticed faint traces of the presence
of the red-men. * As we approached this, Uriah
held up his hand.
, "Listen!" he said.
We drew up our horses, and faintly came
the sounds that we had learned to dread. The
Gawlettees —that was the tribe which traversed
these forests —were holding one of their pre-
war meetings, when weapon-wielding war
dances and other forms of exercises are in-
dulged in. The sounds were unmistakable.
The Gawlettees were on the war-path. Why,
we did not know; for, up to the present, there
had been no sign of discontent.
A tactless settler may have offended them
in some way; there may have been a dozen
reasons for the red-men, the original owners
cf these vast tracts of beautiful country, de-
ciding to attack the usurping whites, as they
called us —that did irot matter to us. The fact
was, we were liable to run into the extremest
danger, and the sooner we got out of it, and
warned others, the better. For these noble
red-men were terrible enemies in war, and,
once their blood-lust was raised, they showed
no mercy to man, woman or child. Many and
horrifying were the tales of tortured victims
that had come to us, but up till then neither
Uriah nor I had had any personal knowledge
of the viciousness of the Indian reprisals.
"We'd better go straight back and warn the
people in Winnebango," I said. "It's not much
use trying to get to our hut now, with these
fellows in between us."
Uriah thought a moment. "What about our
possessions?" he said. "Are we going to sac-
rifice all of them after our hard winter's toil?
We can scarcely expect everything to remain
untouched until this affair is over. It might
last months. And anyhow, by this time to-
morrow I reckon that they will have set fire
to the place, if they've had the chance."
"But surely you're not thinking of holding
our cabin against all the Gawlettees?"
"I inis thinking so. W T e're in a good, strong
position."
"Granted. We have plenty of food. We've
even got a little spring within the pallisade,
where, with luck, we can dash out and catch
water for our needs without being shot from
the trees. But we haven't too much ammuni-
tion, Uriah, and, as you say, this thing might
last for months."
"Oh, they wouldn't waste all their time on
us. We'd find an opportunity of sneaking away
some time. I don't want any blamed Indian
to grab what I've toiled all these months to
acquire."
"Neither do I. But we must use judgment
in these affairs. Besides, we have a duty.
The people of Winnebango must be warned.
There are women and children there, Uriah —
women and children."
Bird paused before replying. He was, in a
way, a typical frontiersman, brave to the point
of recklessness, but unyielding almost to the
extent cf selfishness when there came a ques-
tion of his property or his rights. And he
bore the Gawlettees no love. He would have
sooner died, I verily believe, than let one of
that accursed tribe make off with anything
that was his. But my words had borne home
to him that there were others concerned in
the matter besides himself. Sometimes it was
better to make sacrifices for the sake of others.
"Women and children." he said at last.
"Sam, that was one reason why I was so
anxious not to lose anything of what we had
gained here. There's a girl down in St. Louis
whom I'm going to ask to be my wife when I
have made enough money. And that time had
nearly arrived. But you're right about Winne-
bango. We'll have to warn them somehow."
"The sooner the better. These fellows may
be planning to attack in the early hours to-
morrow morning."
"You ride back," said Bird, "and I'll push
on to the cabin. Afterwards you may join me
if you can; or you can bring help as soon as
it is available."
"No. Uriah. We'll both be needed at Winne-
bango, to help defend the women and children.
We must risk a loss, for their sake."
Bird considered for a few moments, frowning
heavily. Then he said: "We have a good bit
of money at our hut, from the previous sales
cf our skins. I must make an attempt to get
that. The rest doesn't matter so much, as the
season is practically over now, and we won't
get many more decent furs till next year. I'll
go on, and join ycu later at the village. You
go back now."
"Uriah, I don't like letting you do this thing
alone."
"You can come with me or not if you like,
but I'm going on."


He said this with such an air of finality that
I saw it was useless to argue further with him.
"You'd better hide your horse hereabouts,
then," I said, "and do the rest on foot. Other-
wise they'll hear you."
"Yes," he said, "I'll do that."
So he led his mount in among the bushes,
while I took charge of the two pack-horses
upon which we had taken our skins to the vil-
lage. By this time it was nearly dark, and
the shouts and yells from the Indians' practice
grounds had increased, while the light of the
huge fires was visible through the trees.
Presently there was a rustling in the under-
growth that lined the track.
"Well, Uriah," I said, "I hope you've got a
spot that you can pick out again."
But instead of hearing the familiar voice
of my partner in reply, I heard a sharp ex-
clamation, and in the next instant a heavy
missile whizzed past my head. Turning, I
beheld the shadowy forms of two Indians
emerging from the bushes. Instantly, I lashed
my horse into a gallop, at the same time
releasing the pack horses so that I might make
the better progress. This latter was a foolish
action on my part, for before I had gone fifty
yards I heard the sound of horses hoofs behind
me, and realised too late what I had done. The
Indians were using my own horses in their
pursuit of me. Framing a fervent wish that
Uriah had remained undiscovered, I dashed on.
So far, no shot had been fired. Evidently my
pursuers had no firearms, and I had purposely
refrained from using mine, as I did not want
to alarm tour enemies' camp, and thus jeopar-
dise Uriah's chances of reaching safety. The
trail I followed was rough enough to travel in
the daytime, but now, in the gloom, it was
risky in the extreme. Now and then a branch
would almost sweep me from the saddle, and
occasionally the horse would stumble, sending
out a small shower of sparks from the rock-
strewn ground. Mine was a good horse, how-
ever, and it bore up well, while those on
which my enemies were, were partially weary
from their late experience under the rash
saddle. In spite of my advantage, however, I
was never very far in front, and the noise of
pursuit was constantly in my ears.
How long this race in the dark would have
continued, I do not know. I had just resolved
to turn and fire one of my pistols towards my
pursuers, when a dark mass loomed suddenly
before me, and then there was a crash and
millions of stars. My horse, which had hitherto
picked his way through with marvellous ac-
curacy, had run straight into a huge boulder
around the base of which the trail ran. When
I came to myself, which could not have been
very long afterwards, I felt a strange sense
of elevation, and then found that it was on
the small, flat top of this rock that I lay.
Beyond the feeling of dizziness, and a dull pain
in my left shoulder, I seemed to be unaffected;
I appeared to be safe after my hurtle through
the air. I was, perhaps, about twelve feet from
the ground, and the smooth sides of the boulder
—which I now remembered perfectly as quite
a landmark on our journeys to and from the
settlement —offered no foothold whatever for
a person desirous of ascending or descending.
I lay quite still. I could hear the two Indians
searching about below for my body. That of
my horse, presumably, was a mangled heap
beneath. Evidently my pursuers had no ink-
ling of my position, and I did not choose to
let them know of it. It was quite dark in this
spot, and they could not see me, nor I them.
They were obviously puzzled, as I judged
from their muttered conversation, some of
which I understood. They seemd undecided
what to do, as, naturally, I suppose, they did
not want to give me the slightest possible
chance of escape that could be avoided. Pre-
sently, they sat down at the base of my rock
and relapsed into utter silence. They did this,
I judged, in order that, should I be alive and
endeavouring to escape, I might betray myself
by some noise, thinking they had given up the
search.. In this they were disappointed, how-
ever, for I lay as quiet as they, and in about
fifteen minutes' time I had the satisfaction of
hearing them mount the horses —my horses —
and slowly move back towards their camp.
Even then I did not move, but gave them fully
half an hour before I attempted to leave my
elevated position. This presented me with a
little problem. How should I jump from my
perch twelve feet high on to the hard ground
below without running a serious risk of at
least spraining my ankles? For there was no
alternative to jumping. Not the slightest
vestige of any grip was apparent * anywhere
on the surface of my lofty pinnacle. However,
I soon bethought myself of my poor horse
lying there. Judging as well as I could of the
position in which its body would be below me,
I let myself drop, and fell softly on to the
still warm flesh. Gathering myself up, I
hastened as rapidly as I could towards Winne-
bango.
It was nearly two o'clock when I arrived at
the village. The night was moonless, and


pitchy tlack, for clouds had drawn over the
sky and hid the brilliance of the stars. Winne-
bango, wrapped in darkness and silence, was
like a village of the dead.
As I stumbled into the place, however, a
dog barked, and then another. A sleepy voice
hailed me from nowhere, asking my business.
I lost no time in narrating it, and soon the
whole of the place was in a stir of preparation.
The women and children were all taken to a
large, central storehouse which stood in the
middle of the hamlet, and, should the worst
come to the worst, everybody was to fall back
upon this and make the last stand there. The
men of the place, who, I suppose, did not
number more than twenty-five, were posted at
various spots about the rough pallisade that
ran around the village. Everything was ordered
as quietly as possible, so as not to let the
enemy—should any such be about already—
know that preparations were being made to
receive them. It was to .be a surprise visit,
and a surprise reception. One brave young
fellow, named Josh Anderson, volunteered to
ride away to Lambertville, the nearest town
where troops were stationed, in order to raise
the alarm and bring the relief to Winnebango
that we felt might shortly be necessary. Ac-
cordingly, at 3 o'clock, he slipped away, taking
our "God-speeds." His journey would be hazar-
dous, for the road he was to take was some-
what in the nature of a main one, and was
almost sure to be watched along its later stages
by sections of the Indians.
"We also prepared about a dozen messages in
bottles, and threw them into the river at dif-
ferent intervals, in the hope that, should young
Anderson fail in his perilous mission, our plight
might still become known. By the time all
our preparations were made, I was utterly
weary from my long walk and the excitement
before and since. So when old Peter Anderson
(Job's father) persuaded me to lie down and
sleep in the storehouse, I consented, on the
condition that I should be awakened upon the
commencement of hostilities. Up till then,
there had been no sign of Uriah, who should,
if all had gone well, have actually overtaken
me on the trail to the village, and I was feeling
very concerned on his behalf.
However, my weariness was so great that
it overcame all else, and soon I was fast
asleep.
I awoke to the sound of firing—a sound that
had seemed to permeate my dreams for hours
past. 1 leaped to my feet with a feeling that
the fight was at least half over, but I found
later that I had awakened within two minutes
of the discharge of the first shot There was
an anxious murmur behind me among the other
occupants of the storehouse; I remember trying
to say something cheering to them as I left.
Outside, the day was just breaking, and a
faint, wan light pervaded the scene. To the
west, a declining moon made a feeble effort
to pierce a heavy mass of rain cloud. The
would-be invaders seemed to have concentrated
upon the spot where the trail whence they
(and I) had come, entered the clearing around
the village. Dull flashes of flame leapt every
instant from the bordering forest, to be an-
swered only by other tongues of fire that hissed
back defiance. As I, somewhat luckily, gained
the shelter of the pallisade, under cover of
which one section of our gallant little band of
defenders was stationed, cur enemies made a
determined rush against the position. Firing
haphazard into the dark, approaching forms,
we accounted for half a dozen of their number,
judging by the cries and shrieks that arose,
but still the remainder pressed on. A hand-
to-hand fight was imminent, and I did my best
to nerve myself for the struggle. In a few
seconds about a score of panting forms were
tearing at the timbers of the pallisade. Using
what weapons came handiest, we endeavoured
to beat them off. Some of us had cutlasses,
and with these good work was done, others had
bowie knives, sticks, or clubbed muskets. For
twenty minutes the rough and tumble battle
raged in an atmosphere of sweat and profanity.
By that time we had the satisfaction of seeing
our aggressors fall gradually and then rapidly
back and leave us for some time at least. But
at no light cost was our temporary ascendancy
gained, for two of our brave fellows were dead
and Old Man Anderson was seriously wounded,
stabbed in the neck.
It was now much lighter, and our shadowy
-surroundings were becoming more and more
discernabie.
"I don't think they'll trouble us much more
for a bit," panted Dave Pellew, the lumber-
fellow, who had assumed command on the in-
capacitation of Peter Anderson. "They thought
to take us by surprise with a small force, but
failed, thanks to Sam here. Later, they may
bring the rest of the tribe along and make
a more determined attack on us. To-night will
be our danger-period, and if we can hold out
beyond then, the troops ought to have arrived
to save us from further trouble."
Shortly afterwards we were hailed from the
door of the storehouse, and one of the women


(bless her!) announced that-they had prepared
a quantity of hot tea for those that needed
refreshment. That steaming drink and the few
biscuits that accompanied it was one of the
*
most inspiring little meals I have ever tasted.
Meanwhile, there was still no sign of Uriah
Bird, and I had just about given up ail hope
for him. Naturally, 1 felt very uneasy, owing
to the ominous absence of my partner, and in
order to relieve my nervous tension I took a
stroll around the village, taking care to keep
under cover as much as possible to avoid being
"picked off" from the woods. I had completed
half the circuit of the pallisade, and was at a
point opposite to where the fighting had taken
place, when I noticed a curious thing. One
of the slabs which helped to form the rude
barricade was shaking unmistakably. There,
flat on his stomach, was a lusty young savage
loosening the slab, by means of a large knife.
Other slabs showed signs of similar atten-
tion. In a flash the situation dawned on me.
This young blood was preparing a way for a
secret and silent entrance into the enclosure
at a later time. Acting instinctively, 1
scrambled over the barrier, and sought to pin
the Indian to the ground before he could rise.
I had made a fatal mistake, as I soon learned.
With a mighty heave, he cast me from him,
and, half stunning me with a blow from the
massive handle of his knife, before I could
rise he made me his captive.
It was a strange thing that during our brief
struggle I had no thought to cry for help, or
raise the alarm, and at its termination I had
no opportunitj" of doing so, for he clapped his
huge hand over my mouth, and hurried me
into the woods.
By a tortuous route. I was led back to their
main camp, on the other side of the clearing,
and there a sort of council of war was held
over me. At the finish, 1 was tied to a tree,
and left to my own meditations for about
three hours. That these were not pleasant
may easily be imagined. The most unkind
sting of all was the knowledge of the proposed
way of attacking my friends, which I was
unable to impart to them.
Once, a fiendish-looking Gawlettee brought
me a little dried meat and some water, and
before departing ran the point of his razor-
sharp knife around the circle of my scalp, just
breaking the skin here and there. Laughing
wickedly, he left me, with little drops of blood
and perspiration mingling together on my
brow.
The monotony and inactivity of my cap-
tivity was maddening. How I prayed for
something to happen! But nothing happened
until at last another comfab of the chiefs took
place near me, and I guessed, concerning me.
r
Presently I gathered from their gesticulations,
and the little of the language that I knew, that
they had identified me with the man who had
warned Winnebango of their proposed attack.
Thus, I presumed, they would mark me out
for some particularly awful fate. In this I
was not far wrong. Two young braves ap-
proached me, and I was cut away from the
tree. My arms were then bound tightly
around my body, but my legs were given suffi-
cient freedom to permit my walking. I was
then escorted along a winding track, until we
came to the side of the river. Here, there was
a shelving bank of what apparently was hard
sand, but when one of the Indians threw a
large stone upon its surface it slowly sank,
and finally disappeared with a slight sucking
sound.
My fate was now apparent to me. I was to
be placed on this "quick-sand" to be slowly
engulfed into its awful depths. I recoiled in
horror. The Indians grinned hugely. I think
I must have fainted for a bit, for the next
thing I knew, was that my legs were bound
as tightly as my arms. My two savage com-
panions patiently waited until I had fully re-
covered my senses. It would not do for me
to be thrown into the frightful clutches of the
sand while I was at all oblivious to what was
happening to me.
Then came the terrible moment. I was lifted
over the bank, and my legs were pressed as
far through the soft surface as possible, in
order that I might stay upright, and have the
more lingering death. I can never forget the
next few minutes, but I will not harrow you
with their fearsome details. Suffice it to
say that I had given myself up for lost, and
was endeavouring to force myself into uncon-
sciousness, when I heard a sharp crack from
across the water, and my right ear began to
sting considerably. At the same moment,
however, one of my escort, who was gloating
over my position, subsided into a limp heap
on the ground. The other savage leaped to
his feet, only to fall a second later as another
shot rang out. Then I heard a voice—a voice
that I knew well —but had twice given up hope
of ever hearing it again. It was Uriah Bird's.
"Sam, bear up, I'm coming!" And in a few
minutes he had come, in a little birch bank
canoe, from across the water, and not any


itoo soon either. I was nearly down to my
.armpits before he had fastened around me the
rope with which he saved my life.
"Drink this," he said, putting a flask to my
lips when he had dragged me to safety. I
drank; 1 needed it.
"Now tell me all about it."
I told him.
"Now it's your turn," I said.
Briefly, Uriah's story was this
On leaving me, before he had found a suit-
.able spot in which to conceal his horse, in
some manner the animal had suddenly become
nervous and slipped from his light grasp. It
took a few minutes to capture it, and tie it
between two thick bushes, which formed a
splendid hiding-place. On his return to where
he had left me, he found me gone, but at-
tached 110 importance to that, thinking that
1 had merely hastened away. Uriah then set
off lor our cabin, which he reached without
much ditflculty, though several times he ran
pretty close to small parties of the enemy.
He soon had all our money securely packed
about his person, and lie was just locking the
door of our abode, preparatory to leaving, when
.a shot rang out.# He rushed into the trees
on the far side of the clearing, deciding to
trust himself to the woods and the darkness.
About twenty warriors ran out and surrounded
the hut. Meeting with no opposition, they
began to beat in the door. Uriah then left
on his return journey, while the Indians were
thus occupied. But he found the woods be-
tween our place and the Indian camp alive
with warriors, and he had the utmost difficulty
in avoiding detection. For hours he skirted
about, sometimes lying for lengthy periods
concealed in bushes or behind rocks. At
length, he found himself on the river bank.
He sought the edge in order to slake his thirst,
and there, in the waning darkness, he found--
a can.oe! Now he was practically safe. Board-
ing the frail craft, which evidently belonged
to some of the Indians, he pushed out into
the stream. By the time it was broad day-
light, he was well on his way to Winnebango.
"I arrived there safely about half an hour
ago." he concluded, "and was highly pleased
to find that you had saved the place
from massacre, but was terribly cut up when
I learned that you had mysteriously disap-
peared. So I came up the river again to scout
round a bit."
"And you couldn't have come at a better
moment," I said. "Now, if that canoe of
yours —it is yours now, of course —will hold
us both, we'd better return to Winnebango.
We might be needed there again."
"Not very urgently," remarked Uriah, "for
just as I left the troops arrived from Lambert-
ville. Young Anderson met them coming be--
fore he had gone half-way. They had learned
of this impending rebellion before we did, and
had acted with admirable promptitude."
"Still, I think we'll get back. I've had
enough of this part of the river. In fact, when
this little trouble is over, I'll leave the dis-
trict for a bit. I'm thinking of going to Aus-
tralia. Will you come with me?"
"No," replied Uriah Bird; "I'm going to St.
Louis."
There was a silence for a while around the
diggers' fire as Sam, like the Yank, concluded
his story.
"I suppose," said Jim Thomson, slowly, "I
suppose Bird married his girl all right?"
"I suppose he did," answered Sam, medita-
tively. "I came to Australia shortly after-
wards. You see, I knew ' Uriah's girl very
well, too —and, well, perhaps that is why I
came over here."
There was a sympathetic silence.
Then Fred Walker spoke: "I hope you've
forgotten her pretty well, too. Sam?"
"Forgotten her!" laughed Sam. "Easy! And
there's half a dozen others I've forgotten since.
But there's one thing we mustn't forget, boys.
Our little thanksgiving presents to our black
friends down the creek. I shall never forget
my experience with their red brothers out in
Indiana."
The others murmured an easy assent; and
then, with stretching of limbs and knocking
out of pipes, the little company slowly dis-
persed, leaving their smouldering fire to die
alone beneath the silent stars.
SHOULD I READ ALL AGFS "GOLDEN BUCKLES"
The Great Australian Novel by CONRAD H. SAYCE.
• m
Published by Alexander McCubbin. On Sale at all Booksellers.


SOUTHERN SEAS STORY BOOK.
A Private Performance
A Schoolboy Yarn, by "One of Them."
THERE are some chaps at school who are
never satisfied unless there is something
doing. If they are not playing cricket or
football, they are hitting balls up against a
wall, or chasing one another round the garden
paths. When they are inside the big study,
instead of settling down with a detective yarn
inside an exercise book cover, they must be
thumping at the piano and singing songs with
ridiculous choruses. Now, I'm not like that
at all, but then I'm an exception. I can sit on
one chair tipped on its two back legs, with my
feet resting on another, and think of absolutely
nothing in particular for quite a long time.
But Gregson and Huggins and Young Anthony
are always on the move. Restless them-
selves, they won't let anyone else enjoy a bit
of peace. So one night when there was
nothing particular on, they decided to get up
a concert. It was a Saturday, and a lot of the
chaps had gone to the pictures. But about
half a dozen of us had not been allowed to go,
because we had soused one of the masters the
previous evening with some chemicals from
the fire extinguisher. Anyway, we were jug-
gins enough to get caught, and so had to pay
for it.
It was Young Anthony's suggestion about
the concert. His pater is a theatrical mana-
ger, and he seems to have inherited his talent.
It was arranged that we should each choose
what we liked to do for our performance, and
if we could find anything to dress up in, so
much the better. Huggins put himself down
for pianoforte pieces. I told Anthony what-
ever he did not to let him go first, because he's
one of those chaps who once he gets at the
instrument, is exceedingly difficult to remove.
He fixes his eyes on the ceiling, acquires a
dreamy expression, and runs his fingers from
one end of the keyboard to the other. "This
is a fine thing," he will say, and proceed to
vamp, and at the same time hum an air in a
totally different key. The silly ass knows all
the time that it is someone else's turn, and
that the only item each boy enjoys is his
own. A decent chap would make way for the
next, but Huggins is not decent.
I promised to do a whistling solo, and this
news was received with cheers. I have a
tooth out in front owing to an early argument
with the butcher boy, and though it does not
add to my appearance, it certainly lends a
sibilant charm to my whistling.
It took Gregson and Anthony some time to
persuade Robertson to take part in the con-
cert. In fact, it was not until they sat one
on his chest and the other on his feet that
their arguments had any weight with him at all.
When Gregson and Anthony removed themselves
from his anatomy, Robertson said that he
would not perform unless he were permitted to
retire during the other items, and only come
in for his own. The concert-managers had to
be satisfied with this, as they were anxious
for performers, and expected to have a good
laugh at Robertson, who is a big, bulky chap,
rather overgrown for his age.
He told the others that he would be in the
dorm, when his turn came, as he had some
silkworms' eggs under his mattress, and he
thought they might be hatching, and the cater-
pillars get smothered. OX course, it was
against the rules for Robbv to be in the dorm,
at all till bed-time, but that was his look-out.
Saturday night there is very little supervision
at "Ours," and the rest of the building was
pretty deserted and still, those of the masters
who had to be on duty congregating in the
Common Room to smoke and laugh over the
crimes which they had caned the chaps for
during the week. There was usually such a
row in the big study, that a peace-loving master
found good reasons for not appearing there
until bed-time.
Well, the concert proved quite a success.
As each of the audience would in turn be a
performer, the applause each item received
was quite tumultuous. Huggins, as I expected,
retained his seat at the piano until he was
forcibly removed. Young Anthony recited the
"Happy Warrior," and as it was in our text
books we were in a position to be critical and
helpful in the parts he had forgotten. After
my whistling solo, which quite brought the
i
house down, Huggins took possession of the
piano stool again, and started to play "The
Soldiers' March," from Faust, with variations.
This was a very popular item, as the boys
kept time with their feet, and whenever a
familiar part arrived assisted Huggins with
the full strength of their lungs. As this ap-


peared to be going on indefinitely. Anthony
sent me to fetch Robby from the dormitory.
I thought I would give him a scare, and crept
up very quietly, same as Sampson, our house-
master, does when it's lights out time. The
corridor was pretty dark, and I tip-toed along
it to the dormitory door. Robby hadn't the
light on, but I could just see his figure moving
about with the electric torch my pater had
given me before he went away. I hadn't lent
said, in an assumed kind of husky voice.
Really, Robertson had done himself very well,
and, regardless of hovering masters or matron.
I stood where I was and roared with laughter.
He had dressed himself up in such rummy
clothes, quite shabby-looking; he had a blue-
spotted handky knotted round his neck, and
a peaked cap pulled down over his eyes.
must have got some black cork from some-
where; his chin and lip were as dark as any
thing.
"He turned round and pointed something that looked like a toy pistol at me."
it to Robby either, and I felt wild at his cheek
in borrowing it without so much as asking me.
I suppose I must have given him a start,
when he suddenly looked round and caught
sight of me in the doorway, for he straightened
himself up, and pointed something that looked
like a toy pistol at me. "Stop there, kid," he
"By Gad! Robby," I said, "you look just it.
Come on with me, and you'll be the piece-de-
-1 (l'd just learned that, and thought
it a good chance to trot it out.)
Don t you talk about resistance, young
feller, said Robby. "It won't do you no good,
and might do yer some harm."


"Oh. cut it out," I said. "The chaps are
waiting for you in the study. They're full of
Huggins' strumming."
"Waiting for me, are they?"' asked Robby,
in that queer, husky whisper he was putting
on for the occasion. "Wot are they goin' to
do when they get me?"
"Why. listen to your turn," I said, impatiently,
not seeing any sense in Robertson wasting his
perfectly good item on me alone. "The con-
cert's nearly over, and it's time for you to
say your piece. Your beastly silkworms uon t
want any more attention just now."
"Wot do you expect a chap to do at your
concert?" he asked, lowering his toy gun. and
coming a bit nearer. Really, Robertson did
look a bit ferocious, and I pulled out into the
corridor.
"Well, you look jolly like Bill Sykes," I
said. "You'd better give a recitation from
Dickens."
With that he made a rush to get past me, but
I wasn't going to let Robby off so cheap. He'd
gone to a lot of trouble to get himself up; he
mustn't get stage-fright now. So I grabbed at
his coat-tails, and he made quite a vicious jab
at me, and I do believe he would have hurt
me, only Mr. Vickers, the house-master, hear-
ing the scuffle, came along just then.
"What's this row about, boys?" he began.
Robby loosed his hold and slunk back into the
shadow.
"Please, sir. it's Robertson, sir," I said, a
bit out of breath. "He's got himself up like
Bill Sykes, sir, and now he won't come down
to the study and do his turn." A growl from
Robby set me giggling again.
"Really, boys," said Vickers, "the corridor
is not the place for such behaviour. If you
must make a fool of yourself, Robertson, get
along and do it in the study. Will you go, or
shall I take you?"
Robby. looking as if he wanted to sink
through the floor, muttered "I'll go." and so
I got behind him. and ran him down into the
study.
Here the boys were getting impatient, but
when they saw Robby and me. they set up a
shout, for his get-up was Al. They hustled
Robby up on to the platform, and called
"Speech, speech!" There's no doubt he scored
a success before he opened his lips, but he
didn't look a bit pleased. With his cap pulled
down and his collar turned up. you could
hardly have told it was Robby. The disguise
was perfect. But the boys wanted more than
dumb Crambo, so they yelled out at Robby to
begin. He looked as though he would make-
a bolt 01 it, but all at once he made up his
mind to the plunge, sat himself at the piano,
and broke into a comic song. It was oomic,
too. a kind we'd never heard before, but we
understood it all right, and joined in the
chorus ' -
After that he sang another, but though we
yelled for an encore, he wouldn't give in to a
third. Instead he swung round on the stool,
and pulled out his toy pistol again. "Now I've
done my turn," he said, pointing the weapon
at the audience, "you kids stop there while
I git and change my clothes, and as we all
knew Robby's funny ways, we laughed and
clapped and said, "R:ght-oli!" So Robb\
slipped out and up the stairway lie had come.
Naturally the talk all turned on Robby's per-
formance and disguise, and we all agreed that
he was wasting his time at school —the masters
had said so often enough —and ought to be on
the stage. It was some lime before he came
back, and to look at him you wouldn't have
thought he had ever dressed up at all; he
looked just like the old Robby. who never made
a name for himself at anything but loafing.
Of course, we ail congratulated him, and
asked him where he got the duds, but as we
all spoke at once, he didn't get much chance
to answer for a bit. Then he yawned and
said, "I don't know what the dickens you
fellows are talking about. I wasn't going to
make a fool of myself at your beastly concert,
so I sneaked out of bounds, and went for a
walk. What's all the ragging about?"
"That's all right, Robby," I said, "you can't
fool us. Your disguise was jolly good, and
just for a moment up in the dorm. I thought
you really w ere a 'burglar."
Robby dropped his joking tone and became
serious. "What are you talking about?" he
said. "I wasn't in the dorm, at all."
Just for a moment nobody spoke. Then
Huggins said, "Are you pulling our legs,
Robby?"
"On my word," said Robertson, seriously,
"I don't know what you're gassing about," and
you couldn't help but believe him.
"Then who was the chap that was dressed
up like Bill Sykes that Wispy brought down
from the dorm, to do a turn?"
"I haven't an idea," said Robertson, indif-
ferently; "it wasn't me anyway."
All at once a horrible thought came over
me.
"Chaps," I whispered, "it must have been
a rcnl thief."


"Oh!" yelled Anthony. "You juggins, Wispy,
to let him go."
I thought that was pretty good, as they had
done nothing to stop him either. Pretty crest-
fallen, we sought out Mr. Vickers in the
Common Room, and told him our story.
"What a trick," he said, "if it's true. Come
ana have a look at the dorm."
We did, and oh! the scene that met our
gaze when the light was turned up. Drawers
were pulled out —the contents heaped on the
beds —sleeve-links pulled out —the watches had
disappeared, a suit or two, and goodness
knows what else. It was a clean sweep of all
the valuables in the dormitory. Of course, we
saw it all then. The burglar, knowing that
Saturday was a good time for such a job, had
made a raid on the dorm, while everybody
was 'busy elsewhere. Then when I went to
look for Robby, he had covered me with his
pistol, and I took the wind out of his sails by
laughing. He picked up from my babble that
there was a concert on, and that I mistook him
for one of the boys dressed up, and when
Vickers appeared he was forced into playing 'the
part.
How we blamed our stupidity in not seeing
through his game, and how we ragged Robby
for sneaking out of 'bounds, I will leave to your
imagination. But I will tell you one thing.
I get cold chills down my spine whenever I
remember that that was a real pistol.
SHAKY KNEES AND THE
DRAGON
Continued from Page 33
Baron Boolby de Bottle Nasalorgan, and have
the finest castle in my kingdom."
Sir Boolby de Bottlenose, still thinking it
must be a dream, let him out the back way, so
that King Fuzzletop did not see him, and he
made haste to return to the castle of King
Cheerisoul.
He found the King seated on his throne, with
the lovely Princess beside him, and, dropping
on his knee before them, he handed the sword
of Sir Boolby de Bottlenose to the King, say-
ing: "This, sire, is the tail of the dragon. It
became a sword in my hand the moment that
I grasped it —(which was perfectly true)—and
the monster is buried for ever out of sight."
The King was delighted at this news, and,
springing up, he took off his crown, and placed
it 011 Shaky Knees' head, so that he was now
a King and was married immediately to the
Princess Brighteyes.
They lived happily ever after, and though
he kept it a deep secret how he had over-
come the dragon, his great-great-grandchildren
said he had chased it furiously till it fled in
terror to its cave, and just as it was disappear-
ing through the entrance to the cave he grasped
its shining tail, which he twisted off, and it
immediately turned into a sword. Then he
rolled a great rock to the mouth of the cave,
and buried the monster, so that it soon died
from starvation and want of fresh air.
WHY THE FISH WERE NOT
CAUGHT.
When an angler comes home, and success has
been low
(Which is rather a common occurrence, you
know),
He always has plenty of reasons to show
Why fishing's a failure.
First, the weather was wrong;' it was either too
hot,
Or too cold, or too windy, too still, and what-
not.
The weather gets blamed such a horrible lot
When fishing's a failure.
Then t'he stream was at fault; it was either
too high,
Or too swift, or too slow, or too deep, or too
dry.
The river shows often a good reason why
The fishing's a failure.
Then he had the wrong bait, for he should
have used flies,
Spinners, hoppers, worms, crickets or grubs
of such size—
The poor bait must suffer most horrible lies
When the fishing's a failure.
There are other things, too; p'r'aps he caught
on a snag,
P'r'aps his tackle was bad, or his luck was a
•hag.
Oh, there's millions of ways to explain a light
bag
When the fishing's a failure
Though he blames a large number of things
for this ill.
There is one small omission he seems to make
still—
He never appears to consider his skill
H.is to do with the failure.


Motherkins
SHE was by no means a beautiful animal.
She was little and half-starved and lamed
—that I cannot deny—and her coat
\
rivalled Joseph's in its many colours, but her
eyes were two straw topazes for brilliance and
clearness, and she had a character (surely,
animals do have characters as well as human
beings), dog-like in its devotion and faithful-
ness. These attributes are universally denied
to cat-kind, I know, but I have met with them
now and again for all that. As she sat curled
up in my lap, purring happily, every touch of
her little red tongue was cementing a friend-
ship which I, for my part, have never for-
gotten.
Jim and Ben, sons of the pastrycook at the
hotel, stood regarding her.
"She's got two kittens," said Jim.
"She had three, but the Strongs' Rabbie
killed one."
"Why, she's not much more than a kitten
herself," I exclaimed. "Three kittens, and one
of them killed! % Poor little Motherkins! So
that is the reason you are so thin, and why you
look so scared and hunted."
The next morning they beckoned to me
mysteriously from the side verandah, where
they were lying on their stomachs, peering
under the lattice work. I joined them, and
emulated their position of inquiry much to
their delight.
"Look!" fhey whispered. "There they are!"
Two topaz eyes were looking into mine,
proudly, contentedly. "I know I'm no beauty,"
they seemed to say, "but look at my children.
They're pretty enough, aren't they?"
Surely they were. Two fluffy balls lay at
her side lazily boxing each other with tiny
paws. One was a grey-and-white mite, the
other, tiger-striped, with beautiful yellow
mottlings about the ears.
"The one that Rabbie killed was black," said
Ben, in a hushed voice.
"With white feet," explained Jim.
The pastrycook, a worn, thin woman, in a
limp calico skirt and an unbelted blouse, came
out of the kitchen, and joined in the conversa-
tion.
"Yes, Miss," she remarked, "I seen that white
cat prowlin' round here one evenin', and I
thought he was lookin' for scraps. But I woke
up in the night hearin' the greatest mewin' and
spittin' an' screamin' that ever was goin' on
right under the verandah, and in the mornin'.
the little black cat was dead, and the mother
was all scratched up and lame, and I picked
up a big bunch of white fur just outside the
verandah here. I felt real sorry for the
mother. She's ugly, but she's very affectionate,
and the care she takes of them kittens! Well,
Miss, 'twould set some human bein's an
example, only they wouldn't care about fol-
lowin' it, I daresay. When I hear that Living-
«
stone baby crying upstairs with the nursegirl,
while its mother gallivants round in the evenin',
I can't help feelin' she'd better come down here
an' learn a lesson in duty from that poor
stafved-lookin' cat. She left the cool, sweet outside
air for the stifling little kitchen, from whence
the slamming of oven doors told me that she
was engaged in looking after the welfare of
her pastry.
Jim and Ben had organised themselves into
a vigilance committee of two, their object
being to drive back the Strongs' Rabbie with
shouts and yells, stones carefully aimed so as
to just miss hitting the big white cat, wild
gesticulations of arms, accompanied by Indian
war-whoops, and every method tending to keep
the marauder at a distance, that their fertile
brains could invent.
But one morning, in spite of our vigilance,
Rabbie eluded us. I saw him trotting up the
road, evidently bent upon mischief, and I rushed
to the back of the house calling to Ben and Jim
as I went. But Rabbie had disappeared. I
stooped down and looked under the verandah.
There crouched Rabbie, his greeij eyes sparkling
in the half-darkness, his tail lashing from side
to side. Near me, on an old carpet, curled
together into a furry ball, slept little Grey-
and-White and Tiger. Between them and
Rabbie, not half his size, her back arched,
her tail bristling, stood their little mother,
facing the big white cat bravely. Suddenly,
she hurled herself straight for his glowing eyes
and snarling mouth. There was a wild
scramble, a yell of pain from Rabbie, and
then a white cat rushed out from under the
verandah, pursued by a little thin, variegated
fury with vengeful yellow eyes, who, with a
leap in which four paws edged with sharp
claws were spread wide in the air, landed
straight upon Rabbie's back, where she rode
him from the yard in triumph, scratching, and
tearing at his thick, white fur until he was
well round the side of the house. Then she


came back, trembling and weak, her eyes no
longer topazes, but black diamonds* from their
dilated pupils. Straight under the verandah
she went, ancl, lifting little Tiger by the nape
of his neck, carried him to the verandah steps.
Then she went back for little Grey-and-
White and brought her out. Her head well
up, limping and tottering from her burden,
she deposited her by the side of her brother
on the steps, then sank down by their side,
exhausted, lifting languid eyes to mine as
her ever-hungry children, all unknowing the
peril which had threatened them, nestled down
at her side.
From that time on, although Rabbie came
no more, the little nest under the verandah
was abandoned. She had learned the disadvan-
tages of a quarrel in close quarters. All night
long she lay on the steps, with wide-open eyes
and listening ears, alert, watchful, guarding
her children while they slept. She seemed
to grow thinner and smaller day by day, but
her kittens grew big and fat and playful.
Poor little Motherkins! She had yet to learn
that there were other perils threatening her
little ones. The hotel began to fill, and among
the arrivals was a small girl of three, whose
angelic blue eyes and golden curls blinded one
to the fact that there was nothing in the least
degree angelic about her stubborn little mouth
and chin. She shrieked with delight when she
discovered the kittens, and straightway an-
nexed Grev-and-White as her own. Holding the
luckless kitten in her two plump hands, she
would squeeze it with all her might, until the
poor thing's sides fairly came together, and
it . mewed faintly with discomfort. Protests
against such treatment and admonitions to
more gentle methods in handling the poor
little creature were met with an upward glance
of the angelic eyes, a toss of the golden curls,
and a renewed grasping of the kitten.
"I must do it, because I love it so." she
said in explanation, "and, besides, it's mine,
mine, mine! Mamma says I may .take it home
with me when I go."
Poor Grey-and-White! It seemed unlikely
that there would be anything left of her to
take anywhere. Under this strenuous loving,
she grew thin and sickly. The mother-cat
watched her anxiously, following the little
girl round distractedly. But her rights as
mother were always quite overlooked. Grev-
and-White was pulled from her side in the
middle of a much-needed meal and carried off
to be put to bed in some distant hammock,
crushed down and held firmly in place, in spite
of her wrigglings and feeble mews. Ben and
Jim fairly cried with indignation and helpless
wrath at the sufferings of the small animal.
One morning, while dressing, I heard a lively
discussion going on outside my window.
"There! I told you what would happen if
you bothered them so. Now, you see, they're
gone. It's all your fault!"
"It isn't! It isn't!" passionately, from the
small girl. " 'Sides, she was my kitty, any-
how."
"No, she wasn't, neither. She belonged to
her mother, and she's taken her away. I told
you so! And it's all your fault."
Sobs from the small girl, accompanied by
a sound as though she were engaged in slap-
ping Ben with all her might. "It isn't! It
isn't! And she was mine, mine, mine! So!"
I threw open the blinds, and leaned out.
"What's the matter, Ben?" I called.
Ben, one cheek very red, looked up at me.
"The mother-cat and the kittens have all gone
—every one of them. And it's all her fault. I
told her so!" .The angel-eyed girl had dis-
appeared.
Wherever the fault lay, our little friends had
gone. The days slipped by, and nothing was
seen or heard of them, when one morning (
» *
found the mother-eat. She leaped upon me as
a dog might have done, and sprang into mv
arms, purring with delight, licking my hands,
my arms and my face, when I put it down 011
her rough fur caressingly.
For a week after that she appeared and dis-
appeared at intervals, always alone. It was
evident that she intended to keep the where-
abouts of her kittens a secret.
One morning I encountered her alone, over
by the golf links. She ran up to me eagerly,
as was her wont, rubbing against me affection-
ately, and, looking up into my face, began to
mew softly. She was evidently trying to tell
me something.
"What is it. kittums?" I asked, stooping
down and smoothing her. She licked my hand,
mewed piteouslv, and ran away a few paces,
stopped, regarding me earnestly for a moment,
then came back to me with her queer little
halting run and rubbed against me again. When
she had repeated these manoeuvres several
times, it dawned upon my stupid human brain
that she was asking me to go with her.
For a mile I followed her along the dusty
road, till suddenly she sank down in the cool
shadow of an apple tree. She was panting
and exhausted from her long run, but she
looked up at me affectionately, and, stretching


herself out on the cool grass, she uttered that
peculiar, soft little cry with which a mother
calls her kittens.
The farmyard gate stood open. Presently.
from round the gate post, a little grey-and-
white head appeared, followed closely by
another with bright eyes and yellow mottlings
round the short ears, and little Grey-and-White
and Tiger came trotting down the road. They
ran straight for their mother, and, hungry, as
usual, nestled down by her, digging her poor
thin sides with their tiny paws. She welcomed
them with languidly contented eyes.
"See, they're all right," she seemed to say.
"I had to take them away where I could bring
them up in peace. I knew you wouldn't tell
if I showed you."
And I never did.
An Interrupted Flight
Jessica.
YES. I do think she is decidedly queer,"
said Cecily, the "baby" boarder at
Westmeath. She was an important
little person, and had been spoilt by everyone
at the College, from the Principal downwards,
since one dreadful day when she had narrowly
escaped with her life by falling from a tree
which she had climbed strictly against rules.
"And pray, what do you know about the
queerness or otherwise of those who are older
than yourself?" said the dormitory "mother,"
who was looked up to as an example to the
house girls.
Sadie Ross was always the dux of her form,
though there were those in the school who
determined each year that they would outrun
her, but her persistent perseverance, sheer love
of hard work, keen sense of duty, combined
with the very real ability she possessed, kept
the ambitious girls behind her each term. Her
sweet, unselfish nature made her a favourite
with everyone, and she had won the title of
little House Mother, because not only did she
keep the rules herself, but kept her companions
up to the mark too.
"That will do, Wriggles," said Sadie, as the
child persisted in her remarks. "Be off with
you, Mavourneen, and let Sadie read up this
chapter before the bell rings," and she took the
child by the hand and accompanied her to the
school-house close by, where day and house girls
were already assembling for the morning
studies.
The subject of Cecily's question, a lean, tall,
angular girl, about fifteen, strolled along behind
all the other maidens from the house, looking
as if she were not quite sure whether she
should really take her place in the linp or
wauder off somewhere else. "Hurry up, Lena
Pental, you're always where the cow's tail
is," shouted the harsh voice of Miss Burton,
whose duty it was to inspect the toilet results
of the assemblage. As the prim, lady-like head
assistant mistress was fond of remarking, it
was a pity that Miss Burton's sense of refine-
ment was not 011 a par with her undoubted
brilliance as a mathematical mistress. Poor
Lena strove to obey the command to "hurry
up," and in doing so her foot caught in the top
step, and she fell headlong across the verandah
where the classes gathered before going into
morning assembly. "Dear me. some people are
born to .clumsiness"; was hurled from the
unsympathetic mistress: "take a hundred lines,
Lena. Attention, girls!"
A repressed giggle reached the sensitive ears
of the poor girl, but the words had probed very
deeply, and Lena's face was a study. It was
the colour of a red peony, tears were streaming
from her eyes, but the lips were tightly com-
pressed, and with a supreme effort she took
her place beside Mona, a quiet, gentle girl of
about Lena's own age, who sat beside her in
the fourth form.
"Never mind, Lena," Mona managed to
whisper, "I'll help you with the lines," but
Lena's heart was too full to reply, and once
again her reserve was put down to obstinacy.
Lena had come to Westmeath wirli an almost
passionate desire to win love and companion-
ship. It had seemed to her a wonderful and
amost unbelievable thing when her father had
told her that she was to have a few terms there,
and a vision of life as she pictured it at board-
ing school, opened up a new vista for her.
But she had not taken into account the con-
servative nature of girls and their unwilling-
ness to accept any one into their inner circle


in the middle of the year, when friendships had
been formed and all sorts of traditions had been
honoured.
With the unconscious cruelty of youth tliey
put Lena down as uncouth, countrified, and
gauche. Ia truth she was all these things, for
she had grown up with a mother who never lost
an opportunity of letting her know the grudge
she bore her for l>eing a girl. A boy, she was
told, might have been of some use on the selec-
tion which they had taken up, some thirty miles
from the town where Westmeath College stood.
These sarcastic remarks fell on Lena's ears like
blows, and she had needed to make a desperate
effort at self-control not to answer that it was
not her fault, that at least she might be given
credit for the drudgery she performed on the
farm, attending to the poultry, feeding the pigs,
milking the cows, keeping the dairy sweet and
wholesome, baking the bread, to say nothing of
ordinary household duties. She often wondered
if even a boy could have done more. Now she
was at Westmeath amongst other girls who had
enjoyed a happy home life and healthy girlish
enjoyments, she longed to be one of them, to
find some kindred spirit to whom she might
confide all her longings and ambitions. But
her very eagerness made her appear clumsy and
undignified, and they one by one wearied of her
and left her to her own devices. Her one
enjoyment was to sit on the steps of the side
verandah, listening to the beautiful piano in
the drawing room, which Miss Hetherington
loved to play after the busy hours of the day,
to soothe her wearied brain and to find enjoy-
ment in the sweet harmonies of the best masters.
But this lack of response in her companions
aroused in her the same feelings that she had
experienced back 011 the farm, and one day,
unable to restrain her feelings, she shocked the
placid Mona by saying, "I'll do something
desperate some day. I know I will."
"Oh, promise me, Lena, you won't,"
begged Mona; "though I don't know what
you could do in a quiet place like West-
meath. Would you run off to Sydney,
or would you just go home? Lena drew
a deep breath. Home! Mona little
knew what she suggested, and l a shadow of pain
flitted across her face. For a moment she felt
inclined to unburden her soul to her class-mate,
but a feeling of shame prevented her. No girl
at Westmeath should ever know of her unhappy
childhood. Her repression made her more than
usually bitter. "Oh, I know what you're afraid
of Mona," she said; "You think I'll hurt the
dignity of your precious old dormitory four.
You don't care if I get into trouble." Mona
turned away hurt by her words, the more that
she did care very much for the honour of
her dormitory, and she was ever in terror lest
Lena's strange moods would lead her into some
mischief which would upset their chances of
getting highest marks.
There was one bright spot in her days of
discontent, and that dated from the day when
Miss Hetherington had told her, after a music
lesson, that she had a great gift. "Do you
know, child," she had said, "there are times when
I quite forget I am teaching you, you are play-
ing so beautifully. You have real talent and
some day, if you apply yourself to your music,
you may make a name for yourself." It had
been too wonderful to think that she, the girl
who was not wanted by her mother, and was no
use to anybody, might become a great pianist.
She hugged the thought to her secret soul, but
though it was almost too good to be true, she
felt more than ever the need of some human
soul to whom she might convey the great news.
So the year gradually wore on, and things
did not improve much between Lena and the
rest of the girls. Matters seemed to come to
a head one day when Miss Hetherington had
occasion to speak to her about her want of
concentration in her music.
"I am disappointed in you, Lena," she said.
"Y'ou are playing without any animation, and
the faults you make are shocking."
Lena sprang from her seat in a mood that
the other mistresses knew well, but which she
had never shown before to Miss Hetherington,
whom her starved soul regarded with hero-
worship. "I seem to spoil everything I do,"
she raged. "It isn't my fault the music won't
play. I wish I had never come here; nobody
wants me."
This outburst brought deeper feelings into
the Head's mind. This strange girl, so different
from all the other ordinary lassies, was a re-
velation to her. She wished she might probe
the disordered nature and find the key to it,
but just then the bell went and the school
routine must be observed. "Run away, now,"
she said, "and forget your studies for a time in
a good game of tennis, and find an appetite for
tea."
That evening a restlessness which Lena ex-
hibited at preparation class, disturbed more
than her fellow students, for the ever watchful
Miss Burton discovered it.
"What in the name of fortune has come over
you to-night, Lena Pental? Will you either
settle down to your lessons, and let everyone


else do the same, or go to your bed?"
'Til do my lessons," she replied, ungraciously.
Miss Burton seemed to be on the alert that
night to make Lena conscious of her very ap-
parent antipathy to her. . Lena had been unable
to get a game of tennis, and Miss Burton had
overheard her say that some mistresses seemed
to think the court belonged to them. Evidently
she had worn the cap, for she looked at the
girl vindictively. Later on, Miss Burton
bounded suddenly out of her room, as Lena
was approaching the door, and in consequence
the house mistress's pet corn had suffered.
"Lena Pental," she cried, unheeding Lena's
profuse apologies, "your clumsy big feet are
always treading on someone's toes."
Then, at the tea hour, Miss Hetherington not
♦
being present, she determined that Lena should
be made feel mentally some of the pain her
corn had given her physically, and applied pin
pricks in the shape of sarcastic remarks about
the girl's table habits. So by the time all the
girls were seated for preparing the following
day's lessons, there appeared to be a certain
amount of electricity in the air, and this, in
some w r ay, perhaps, accounted for Lena's rest-
lessness.
"1760 yards in a mile, 1760 yards in a mile.
I expect when to-morrow comes I shall think
it is 1780 yards. How I should love to fly, fly
right away up,, up, and up into space, away
from every living person, into the realms of
space, space, air, air, sky and skies, beyond
reach of Burtons, Gruntons, Heth . What
am I thinking? 1780 yards in a mile. Oh, I
can't learn. It's no use for me to try," and the
girl's head sank lower and lower on to her desk,
when suddenly a rasping voice roused her.
"Lena Pental, you seem absolutely devoid of
sense to-night. Just go up to bed and rise an
hour earlier in the morning to prepare that
work."
Lena looked first at Mona, then at Miss
Burton, as if she had not understood.
"Do you hear me, or are you deaf as well as
stupid?" The girl slowly returned to anima-
tion, and just heard the repeated order. "Go
at once!" stormed Miss Burton.
Without looking round, Lena slowly departed.
Her bed was on the balcony, and without going
to her room to undress, she flung herself down
on it, and the pent-up misery of the day over-
whelmed her all at once, and great tearing sobs
rent her bosom. After the storm came a calm.
X T ot one minute longer would she stay at a
place where everyone hated her. Mona's words
came back to her. She would run away. Never
again, perhaps, would such a chance occur. It
would be an hour yet before the others came to
bed. Xo one had gone yet but Cecily, the Baby
Boarder, whom everyone loved, but who had
failed to respond to Lena's clumsy advances.
Xo clear idea entered her confused brain as to
what she would do to support life. She only
knew she must get away. Xot to home, though,
but to some place where no one knew her, and
she could start afresh. She might get a place
as nursemaid even. She would leave no mes-
sage, let them think what they would; nobody
cared. Perhaps when they found she was gone,
they might be sorry. Sobbing pitifully under
her breath, she gathered up a few belongings,
put on her thick coat and a tam-o'-shanter, and
looking round to see that no one was about,
slipped over the railings of the balcony, and was
soon in the shadowed garden. It was very
dark, and the place seemed lifeless. She knew
where there was a gap< in the hedge beyond.
If she could reach that in safety, she would
soon be outside Westmeath. Lena felt nothing
but a thrill of pleasurable excitement that she
had at last found courage to leave the place
where she had been so unhappy. Nothing, no,
nothing would persuade her to go back.
Xow she was through the hole in the hedge,
and out on the shadowed road. She shivered a
little, more with excitement than with cold.
The road—quite a country one, for Westmeath
was a little out of the town—was eerie in its
silence. A little rustling noise on the far side
staitled her. As she looked in the direction of
the movement, a little white shape flitted into
sight, dancing, dancing ever, on and on, up the
road.
Lena's heart stood still for a moment, then
beat painfully in heavy, hurried throbs. What,
oh, what could the little dancing form be?
She stood rooted to the spot as in a nightmare,
when suddenly something struck her as familiar
about the little dancing shape, a little halting in
the tripping step, a slight unsteadiness of gait.
Cecily danced like that, Cecily with her little
lame foot. Could it be she dancing there in her
little white nightgown, out in the dark, shadowed
road, away from the safety of Westmeath.
Suddenly the memory of its security stabbed
Lena with a remorseful pang. The little figure
seemed to suddenly pause, and then all at once
Lena remembered that the child had once before
walked in her sleep. That must be the explana-
tion. All thought of flight had now left Lena's
mind. She must get the Baby Boarder, little
Wriggles, back somehow. She had heard that
sleep walkers must not be wakened suddenly.


LOST Itf THE BUSH.
All the golden afternoon,
Through the waving grasses,
In and out the gums and ferns
Dickie strays and passes.
Wee creeks sing for him their song;
Gleaming fish are glancing;
Jll a'secret playground near,
Bower-birds are dancing.
Nature's beauty all around,
Sunset glory shining;
Dickie does not heed at all-
For his home he's pining.
Just a little hut of bark.
With a chimney crazy ;
Blue smoke rising in a curl,
As if the fire were lazy.
Neath his feet, wee rabbits grey,
Play with white flags flying;
Do not heed our tired Dick,
Notice not his crying.
If Dickie, like a little man,
Lifts his head and listens,
A happy smile will wreath his face,
Though a tear drop glistens.
"Coo-ee," comes his mother's voice;
Soft, yet clear, she's calling,
"Dickie, come and get your tea;
Evening shades are falling.' 1


.. y,
*•' • r "
■* "' W ■"* m- " .2: -■* w.r*'"- TB- .•SnFrw - 1 —» T '"' jr_
wfl twC_ i Q'* "■-*•-5 *-■*•. . - -» m -* C7 "5 Daf • ««*
*»- — - J&t S-i "" " ' XT 3 *->- 'gyV- "ffijSfcjP if m ~~~'.r~ L* , efSsflr
faf~. - •'j? 5« -• "§<5j7 j- • "jT* SS^ 1 * E "~Ik»
- - /• *: .; jr - ' --"\ - /*»_•. v - _-> ~y&w >» . j^F,
«r ' ■—>•" pP L-.i . 3- _ r ■ : •«* 1* t ~ '*z 5t v ■.■> *-'"**• ■ -i • i&i M |
-■:- * A 3* jj*5 » — — 'W-p-jg'. ,-"- *r-- ~t«t »Ji
v J » » y Tr
\L3 sJf '~i jfc J' - i >•-- ', ri .-jfr-jC *"- B 1 ffij ft** *§<§« J
-— ■ *4h| £"'■ ' " — 'T^C*"
— v-lifc -.» "urv .^*.?-^ < i■ 7- r~ [— .■• ■".. •■ *~ . Sp^-"''-S' .. ' "i ■ >*w _" -"; -*£ t
2 * * * ■■ «h* L t."' i.*»i N - ># --T-'
% -m " -' -X *7UBfc >^
■-• rfjfltf R s !i '« »«. . " Ptm -^^ v 5 -at , «.Tw Ift •* s i *■ •"" -.' r- - . , ., «C
V* ; - .,-K r *X 4?* "- *i
'
■ "*> ' - ,_ 'jjj , _-. - v -^7
* x"" t " ? - % \
• "V -_ '» "y •' _£ 7 ""'.*7
9 ' ft- ?s -■ " v t * -C if -V_a *■ " - ' g * "**■ "
- j* # MMc^M - - -
y J y^ t -'
' I
• - - •►'■ * /-jLfc '•IM *!►,-* J \ SHV f —" ■- f ►.-. * V ... 5^-».*''* " i- <4 \*f JJr * y . <r*' *'sf K ■■'*'
" «-i ."iij - j. ~ - - .». .®xjE5fj « 4 * ■<? 1 Bf '." < ' 1 ■- y^gl r **. • Wl ■ 3 5SH* C . fc, » *JR" . Q if* . i
—
I


■ ~A - 1
What should she do?
The little white shape decided for her. She
began to run, with a limping hop, into the
shadowed, unfenced paddock 011 the other side
of the road. Dropping her suit case, and
throwing off her coat, Lena followed her foot-
steps, making no sound 011 the grass. Like a
flash came the memory of the waterhole in the
direction Cicily was taking. She might run into
it at any moment. She must overtake her and
risk the awakening. But Lena was a second too
late; there came a splash, a shrill cry of terror.
Then Lena blessed the fact that she had learned
to swim in the home creek. She was in the
water in a flash, and as the little figure, with its
dripping hair came to the surface, she held it
up, saying soothingly: "Don't be frightened,
Cecily. It's Lena who's got you." Spluttering
and shivering, -the child's arms around her, she
pulled her to the bank. Cecily lay sobbing in
her arms, trying to speak through shivering blue
lips. "Don't talk, darling: Lena will carry you
home." Little wet arms clung round her, and
a soft, cold cheek was laid for a moment against
hers.
"Dear Lena, I do love you," came a tiny
whisper, and a wonderful thrill ran through
Lena at the words. Wet, cold, uncomfortable
Mr. Cockroach (to dwellers by the roadside) : "Yes, we're moving to the country for a while;
those city flats are awfully dangerous during the house-cleaning season."


in her clinging garments, a fugitive from every-
body, Lena yet felt happier than ever in her
life before. She was loved. Wrapping the
child in her coat, she bore her back to the
school, and though her arms ached and her
limbs were hampered, she felt a strange exalta-
tion. As she neared the gate, she saw an
excited group. Cecily and she had been missed,
and mistresses and girls had come in search of
them.
Cecily gave all the explanation that was
necessary for the moment.
"I did sleep walk,, and my Lena did pull me
out of the waterhole."
It took some persuasion to get the little despot
to leave Lena's arms, and only when she was
promised that she should sleep in her bed when
dried and warm, would she consent to be parted
from her. Miss Hetherington would allow no
further talk on the subject that night, and
Lena, after a hot bath and a good draught of
hot milk, crept in beside the drowsy Cecily,
and, folded in each other's arms, they soon
slept.
Later on, Miss Burton sought out the Prin-
cipal, with a suit case in her hand, and an
ominous frown on her forehead.
"This explains much," she said. "The girl
you are making such a fuss about was running
away from school."
Miss Hetherington looked at her with sad-
dened eyes, yet behind them was a divine glow.
"To her who loveth much, much shall be for-
given. Are we quite without blame, Miss
Burton?"
After the event of the night, Lena's popularity
knew no bounds. Cecily, the school pet, had
been in danger of a dreadful death, and Lena
had saved her. The secret of how she had
chanced to be there was between the Principal
and Lena alone, and for some weeks the once
despised girl tasted to the full the joy of being
loved.
A letter from home then brought her life at
Westmeatli to Close. It was from her mother,
telling of the arrival of a baby brother, and
finished with: —
"Can you come home to us, Lena? I never
knew before how much I need you, and long
for you to be with us."
Lena's cup of happiness was full, and though
she felt leaving Westmeath and the girls very
keenly, it was enough for her that her mother
wanted her, and that there was a place there
for her to fill.
Poetic Justice
Lillian M. Pyke.
WHAT school's going to win tomorrow?"
was the question on the lips of every-
one from six to sixty after the first
heats had been rowed at the Head of the River
races 011 the Friday afternoon.
Frank Thornton, wearing the St. Andrew's
colours, had spent the hours on the river bank,
roaring at the top of his voice for his school,
and had the satisfaction of seeing its crew
beat St. Joseph's by a canvas. He was there-
fore highly elated in spirit, though somewhat
exhausted as to lung pow r er, w T hen he was
slapped on the back by Jim Craydon, a fellow-
pupil. "Hallo, Crayfish," he exclaimed, giving
a start. "Where did you hail from? Didn't
we put one over St. Joseph's, eh?"
"Hail from?" laughed Craydon. "From one of
those trees on the river tank. 1 don't know if
there is such a thing as a slippery elm tree,
hut if there is, I w T as on it. I had to grip so
hard with my legs round the trunk, I thought
1
I should be bow r -legged for ever. Where w r ere
you ?"
"Oh, behind the judge's box, in a frightful
crowd. Some of the asses around started push-
ing, and if I hadn't dug my heels into the bank
1 would have gone into the water. As it was,
they shoved against the judge's box, and the
old bird inside put his head out in a frightful
stew. Thought he and his pill box were going
head over turkey into the water, I suppose."
"Big surprise, St. Virgil's only winning by
a foot or two," went on Craydon, falling into
step beside his companion among the crowd
making its w r ay up to the station. "For first
favourites, they didn't put up such a marvel-
lous performance. They started off with a hit
of a splash, and took some time to make it
up."
"Any w r ay, it w r as owing to Harry Bourne
they won their heat. He's a bonzer stroke,"
replied the other. "The Western District
Grammarians will have to fight another day.
That leaves in the Victorian Grammars, St. Vir-
gil's and ourselves."
"Somehow," said Thornton, meditatively, "I


think it will be a go between the last two.
The Victorian Grammars had to row all they
knew against Mervale College, and everyone
knows they were jolly weak this year. St.
Virgil's and St. Andrew's seem likely to be
rivals once more."
"Funny to think how we always seem to
have a strenuous go against one another,"
■commented Craydon. "There's more feeling
between those two schools than any of the
ethers. Strange how the very sight of one of
their caps stirs something even in me, and
I'm usually too lazy to take sides."
"I'm sure the girls think their caps becoming
enough," laughed Thornton. "Look at the com-
petition among them for collecting badges."
"Sometimes I wish the bad old days of cap
snatching were still in existence," said Cray-
don. "There must have been some satisfaction
about clawing the head gear off a chap after
a match or a race. I can understand the In-
dian's joy in scalping. There was something
to show for their win."
"We are fallen upon pussy times," misquoted
Thornton. "Nowadays there are 110 regret-
table incidents, and such things are never
done. Might as well go to a girls' school and
walk out in a crocodile."
"If we lived in the good old mediaeval days,"
went on Craydon, "we could capture Harry
Bourne, the St. Virgil stroke, and lock him
0
up in some secluded place till 5 o'clock to-
morrow."
"By Jingo." said Thornton, "that would cut
out the St. Virgil's chances all right. He holds
the crew together for St. Virgil's."
"Can't you imagine it?" rattled on the other.
"One of us chaps disguised as a female in
distress, enticing Bourne to a lonely spot,
where two or three St. Andrew's fellows, also
disguised, would pounce on him, gag and bind
him, and throw him into a convenient shed."
"Then after the boat race was over," Thorn-
ton took up the tale, "and St. Andrew's was
head of the river, some unknown person would
unbind him and let him out."
"What a subject for the 'Good Old Times
Association,' "• laughed Craydon. "But we are
a few centuries too late. We are taught to
behave like nice little gentlemen, and turn
the other cheek now." Here the dissatisfied St.
Andrewite lifted up his right foot with a howl
and simultaneously let out with his elbow into
the ribs of a St. Virgilian who had accidentally
stepped on his toe in the crush. "Clumsy
bounder," he growled, and but for the fact that
the crowd pressed them apart again, there
is very little doubt but that the veneer of civi-
lisation which Craydon so deprecated would
have been scratched off and the human boy of
all ages have stood revealed in a "ding-dong
go."
Thornton grinned. "Strikes me, Crayfish,
that the amicable relations between the schools
that the Head talks about exist only in his
imagination. Yet for all that, there must be
some quite decent chaps go to other
schools. Look how they hob-nobbed at the
war."
Combined before a common danger,'"
quoted Craydon, who was something of a his-
tory student. "It would have to be something
very out of the way in the danger line to make
me fraternise with a St. Virgilian. Well, here
we are at the station, Prickles. I suppose your
people will pick you up in the car —bloated
aristocrat!"
"You're lucky to live in a suburb where the
trains run," said Thornton. "We'd be cut off
from civilisation if we didn't have the car."
"See you to morrow?" asked Craydon.
Pater's got tickets for a motor boat," re-
plied Thornton. "Good luck, any way. So
long."
"Hooroo," replied the other, and the two
shining lights of St. Andrew's parted for the
night.
The day on which the Head of the River
was to be decided broke bright and frosty. Any
privileged person who knew the old boating
melody, "Glorious April Weather," burst forth
into song at a very early hour in any number
of keys and registers, from the deep bass
of the St. Virgil stroke himself, through all
the varieties of tenor, cracked baritone, and
contralto, to the shrill soprano of preplings
and such unconsidered folk as girls. For there
was hardly a soul in the whole community
who had not seme interest in the boat race.
All the sister, cousin and aunt colleges were,
of course, eager partisans, as was only to be
expected, but the bacillus of infection spread
to the very butcher boys, who supplied the
heroes with steak for their grills, and to the girls
m factories, whose was the honour of knitting
the school sweaters. And even those who were
not so intimately connected as that, yet knew
a cousin of the housekeeper at St. Virgil's
01* Victorian Grammar, based their faith in some
particular crew on such slight grounds as that.
At any rate, whatever the cause, the whole
atmosphere was vibrant with interest in the
Head of the River races, and all Melbourne,
with a good sprinkling from the country dis-


tricts and representatives of all the States,
prepared to go and find a square foot of land
or water whereon they might settle for some
hours to watch an event which occupied not
much over five minutes.
The Thornton household, consisting of Frank,
Dora and Tim, were ready to start in good
time. Frank was to be entrusted with the
car, having recently obtained his licence, and
was to meet Mr. and Mrs. Thornton at a speci-
fied place on the river bank. Tim, a fragile
boy of ten, was all excitement. This was his
first boat race, the first time he had been con-
sidered strong enough to go. He could hardly
wait to finish his dinner before he urged the
others to get ready. "Oh, Dora," he said,
"aren't you glad it's such a lovely day? St.
Andrew's is sure to win. I think I'll die if
they don't. I wish the St. Virgil's crew would
all get measles or something."
Dora, a pretty girl of sixteen, patted him
on the shoulder. "Do it, Tim," she said. "You
barrack your hardest, and St. Andrew's can't
help winning, even without the measles to help
them. Come 011, there's Frank calling."
The motor had been gaily decorated by
Dora that morning, with the flags and ribbons
of St. Andrew's, and presented a very gay
sight as it left the gates. Balioons in the
familiar colours floated out on the breeze,
and badges and hat bands streamed from the
coats of the redoubtable three as the car got
under way.
"What a -sell if we had a breakdown," joked
Dora. "St. Andrew's would never win if we
were net there to sliout, 'Come on, School!'"
Tim's face clouded over. "But we simply
couldn't," he said. "There's no other way
of getting to town from here, is there?"
"Don't worry, old chap," said Frank. "This
old bus will get us there all right. Any way,
we could walk to the tram and get in that
way, but we'd be too late to get any sort of
place: it would take so long to go the round-
about route."
They had not gone very far, when they saw
a motor bike in front them, going at a good
pace. All of a sudden the engine apparently
refused to work, for after emitting a few kicks
and snorts the bike came to a standstill, and
the rider jumped off and began to investigate.
The Thorntons' car rapidly approached, and
soon passed it, going rather slowly, as there
was a steep hill to climb. Frank, intent on
the car, apparently did not notice what had
happened, but Dora, giving a slight gasp, sat
back in her seat, a bright spot on either cheek.
As the car slowly ascended the hill, she looked
back. The cyclist was evidently in distress,
for there was no sign of the engine having
started to work. Suddenly, as if having come
to a decision, she touched Frank's arm.
"Keep still, Dos," he snapped. "You nearly
turned the wheel that time."
"Frank," she said, in an excited tone, "look
round at that stranded motor bike. Do you
know who it is?"
"No, and I don't care," replied Frank. "Let
go my arm. We'll be late."
"That's Harry Bourne, the St. Virgil's stroke!
He lives out our way, you know."
"My godfather!" exclaimed Frank. "Why,
if his bike's out of order, he'll never get to
the sheds."
The top of the hill was reached now, and
Frank pdlled the car to a standstill.
"What's wrong?" asked Tim, anxiously.
"Nothing with us," replied his brother, "but
Harry Bourne's back there in trouble with his
bike."
"What?" cried Tim. "The St. Virgil's stroke?
What a joke! He'll be too late to row in
the crew."
"No, he won't," said Frank, grimly, preparing
to start the car and turning it round to go
down the hill again. "No, he won't, for we'll
take him with us in the car."
"Oh, Frank," almost sobbed the child. "If
he isn't there, St. Andrew's is sure to win."
"You've a lot to learn, kid," replied his
brother, steering carefully. "A chap can't be
such a rotter as that. We've got to take Bourne
in somehow." Dora gave his arm a squeeze;
she knew what iay beneath her brother's words.
It had cost her something to tell him about
Harry Bourne, and she realised the temptation
he had conquered to go 011 and leave the St.
Virgil stroke to his fate.
Harry Bourne looked up as he saw the car
which had passed him returning down the hill
towards him. He was a finely built boy, de-
servedly the most popular and depended upon
member of the St. Virgil's crew.
A worried frown at the present moment
wrinkled his brow as he surveyed his dis-
appointing machine. The car with the rival
colours flaunting at him drew up, and the
driver hailed him.
"Something wrong with the bike?" The sym-
pathetic faces of Frank and Dora and the ill-
concealed impatience of the little fellow caused
him to wonder.


"Bike's gone back on me," he replied. "En-
gine trouble, I'm afraid. Can't get a move
out of her."
"Can you put it somewhere till later on?"
asked Frank. "If so, we can give you a lift
to the sheds. You'll be too late for the race."
"I must get there somehow," said Harry
Bourne. "I'm in the crew."
"I know," replied Frank, quickly. "You're
the St. Virgil's stroke. My sister recognised
you. But let's stop gassing, or you'll be too
late to row at all. Put your bike in that house
and get in as quickly as you can."
Harry gave the brother and sister a grateful
glance. "Well, I must say you're sports," he
said. 'Sorry, kid, to keep you waiting," to
the scowling Tim, and quickly taking Frank's
advice, he was soon back, and, seated in the
car, was whirled along on his way to the
boat sheds.
The Thorntons' car covered the ground to
the river bank in good time. There was very
little said during the journey, Frank's mind
being busy with his conversation with Cray-
don the previous day, and he rather hoped that
truculent young gentleman would not see the
St. Virgil's stroke in his company. It was all
very well to have done what he felt was the
only possible thing, and quite another to have
to listen to Crayfish's comments on it after-
wards.
Arrived on Prince's Bridge, Frank pulled
up the car. Harry Bourne jumped out with a
hurried good-bye and a few words of thanks,
which ill-expressed his real feelings. For he
knew the crew depended upon his leadership,
the emergency who would have taken his place
being quite good in his way, but not of a
temperament to be depended upon in a crisis.
He was received with cheers at the St. Virgil
boat shed.
"Thought you were never coming, Harry,"
said Jim Hopton, who rowed seven.
"Had a breakdown," said Bourne, rapidly
getting himself prepared to take his place in
the boat.
How did \ou get in from that remote suburb
of yours, then?" asked the cox. "Airship?"
"No, sonny; you'll never guess," said Harry.
Who d be the most unlikely person to give
me a lift?"
"A Merry Andrewite," joked the other.
"Right!" said Harry, with a twinkle in his
eye.
The cox collapsed. "This is so sudden," he
said. "T never knew you were a perverter of
the truth. Bourne."
"Dinkum," said the stroke, and the cox. gave
a low whistle of astonishment.
"Decent," muttered one of the others. High
praise, this.
By this time the river bank was a seething
mass of human beings. Mothers, fathers and
all the relations under the sun, city men. agri-
culturists, old beys, present boys and future
boys jostled and pushed to get a glimpse of
the brown stream that flowed between them.
The river itself, with the centre space marked
off for the competitors, was alive with craft
of all descriptions, from the painted canoe
usually only to be seen at the beach, to motor
boats of quite considerable size. On one of
these Frank, Dora and Tim were standing with
their parents. There was plenty to occupy
their attention even before the boats appeared.
Now and again an aeroplane would sail over-
head, piloted by some "old boy" and trailing
the school colours through the air. Seagulls
poised on their white wings, swooped into
the river looking for salvage in the way of
unconsidered biscuit or cake.
But all other interests paled before the
launching of the boats, and the sight of the
crews rowing up to the starting place. Each
one received a cheer as it passed, the eight
lightly clad boys bending to their oars in regu-
lar and unhurried sweep. It was difficult to
tell which was the most popular crew, Victorian
Grammar, St. Virgil's, or St. Andrew's. Each
seemed to have the sympathy of innumerable
supporters. After the last boat load had dis-
appeared from view, there was a settling of
the crowd on the bank, and the craft on the
fiver sneaked as near as they dared to the
floats. Every now and again some humorist
would start, "Here they come," and necks
would be craned to their utmost stretch.
But presently they did appear around the
bend, Victorian Grammar slightly in the rear,
St. Virgil's second, and St. Andrew's just lead-
ing. A mighty, prolonged roar went up from
thousands of throats. Staid matrons climbed
unashamed on rockeries, the trees on the banks
seemed like animate things swaying and rock-
ing with their cheering freight. Even those
who could see nothing but their neighbours'
backs made up in sound what they missed in
sight. Soon the Victorian Grammar fell back
a little, and St. Virgil's crept forward another
foot or two on the leaders. Tim Thornton
on the motor boat was almost frantic with
excitement. "St. Andrew's, St. Andrew's," he
yelled as the boats neared the winning post.
With an almost superhuman effort the St. Vir


(The foregoing title is often given in schools
as a subject for an essay, wherefore our school
poet was moved as follows:—)
Oh, what a time I'd have, be sure!
If I were rich.
I would'nt come to scliool no more,
If I were rich.
I wouldn't come to hear them say,
"Now, Smith, you're late again to-day.
Well, you till half-past four can stay!"—
If I were rich.
•
A lengthy holiday I'd take,
If I were rich,
With Buffalo Bill or Sexton Blake,
If I were rich.
I'd only read what gave delight;
There'd be no home-work any night.
I tell you, things would be all right
If I were rich.
I'd often stand my pals a spread,
If I were rich,
With ginger-beer and ginger-bread,
If 1 were rich.
On tarts, and cake, and fizzoes cool,
I'd let them gorge till they were full—
They'd often be too sick for school
If I were rich.
gil's crew gained again, and the boat measur-
ing its length against St. Andrew's, they shot
home together. Tim's efforts to see all there
was to be seen suddenly came to a disastrous
end before he realised that the crowd was
shouting "A draw, a draw." For a moment
no one realised what had happened as a scream
and a splash arose from the water. But Harry
Bourne, in the St. Virgil's boat, panting from
his exertions, realised that a child had over-
balanced and that a life was in danger. Trained
to act quickly in an emergency, he pulled in
his oar, and springing as lightly as possible,
so as not to endanger the crew's equilibrium,
was almost immediately in the water, swim-
ming for the little dark head which had ap-
peared once above the surface. By this time
the interest in the immediate vicinity was
centred in the new struggle of the St. Virgil
stroke. The sudden immersion after his stre-
nuous rowing had made the task —in other cir-
cumstances an easy one for a boy of his ath-
letic prowess—quite a difficult affair. But
before long he had reached that little strug-
gling figure and putting into practice what he
knew of life-saving, soon had poor, exhausted
Tim in friendly hands. The cheers that had
greeted the finish of the race were as whispers
compared with the sound that went up as Harry
Bourne reached the bank.
Tim, never strong, looked ghastly, but he was
alive. Frank was beside him at once, and the
crowd having withdrawn to make a clear
space, he was attended to by a doctor.
Harry slipped off to the boat shed and was
rubbed down and waited upon by enthusiastic
admirers. The presentation of the Head of
the River Cup had to be delayed until the
St. Virgil's stroke was clothed in dry gar-
ments. A ringing shout went up as the strokes
of St. Virgil's and St. Andrew's stood side by
side to receive the trophy. For the first time
the two schools were to share the Cup, instead
of the race being re-rowed. Destiny had de-
cided that it should be the old rivals who were
the first to make history. When Tim heard
the result and remembered who it was that
had rescued him from a watery grave, he no
longer bore Frank a grudge that he had decided
against the policy of the "good old times," and
had brought the St. Virgil's stroke to the river
bank.
IF I WERE RICH.
I think I'd run a picture show,
If I were rich;
Run only for Bill Hart & Co.,
If I were rich.
I'd start a boys' newspaper, too,
Where any boy could state his view
On what schoolmasters ought to do,
If I were rich.
An aeroplane I'd buy, indeed,
If I were rich,
An' dash through space at furious speed,.
If I were rich.
1 tell you I would make things hum,
I'd buy a dreadnought and (by gum)
Blow Bolsheviks to kingdom come—
If I were rich.
I guess I'd do a lot of things
If I were rich,
And never —there, the school bell rings r
And I'm not rich!
I've got to go to school to-day,
And swot, and sweat and stew away,
And write some fibs for an essay,
"If I were rich."


jjj I?
Jjg 1 r
Miss Owl and Miss Pussy Cat thought they
would open a school in the country for all the
creatures who live in the bush, and so they
wrote 'to Mrs. Kookaburra, who knew all about
everybody, to tell the mothers they would be at
home to see them every afternoon.
Miss Owl bought a new pair of specs., and
Miss Pussy Cat brushed her fur coat and tied
a blue ribbon round her neck, and they sat
waiting for visitors.
Rat-tat-tat, went the door knocker. Polly
Polly Possum Opened the Door.
By Erica.
Possum opened
the door, and in
glided Mrs. Snake,
bringing her little
daughter, Sarah,
with her. "So
glad, you are go-
ing to have a
school, Miss Owl.
Papa said yes-
terday we should
have to take a flat
at the Zoo, so that
Sarah could learn
to wriggle and
writhe in the latest
shapes, but now there will be no need for it,
and Sarah will still be able to have her little
bush playfellows, and she will like that, wont
you, darling?"
"Yes-s-s-s, Ma!" said Sarah, with a pretty
smile, which made her look like a worm in a
fit.
After a little more talk and some refresh-
ment, they went home, and then some more
mothers and fathers came along, till there
were quite a lot of scholars arranged for, and
Polly Possum was so tired with opening the
door and 'bringing in afternoon tea, that she
had to go to bed without curling her hair, and
the two ladies were so excited they could not
sleep.
CHAPTER 11.
Next morning the scholars began to arrive.
The first one to appear was Lizzie Lyre Bird,
who was very shy, and wanted to hide in a
corner of the schoolroom, but Dolly Duck spoke
nicely to her, and persuaded her to sit on a
form with her. Kenneth Kangaroo and Willie
M allaby came hopping along next, and jumped
the fence in one bound. Percy Platypus and


' 2 __ ®
Teddy Bear were the last, and then Miss Owl
appeared, with Miss Pussy Cat following her.
"Good morning, my dears," they said. "We
will sing one of our school songs, and then get
to work. But where is Sarah Snake? We
cannot begin until she is here." Just at that
moment a loud hissing sound was heard, and in
glided Sarah, with her scales all polished, and
her lunch in a neat packet, tied round her
neck. She coiled up on the floor, and Miss
Pussy Cat stood up, with a stick in her paw,
and beat time while they all sang, squeaked,
quacked and barked the well-known school
song:—
Here we are again,
Birds and beasts and fishes;
We sing with might and main,
To welcome our School Misses.
Miss Owl rapped on her desk for silence, but
still the noise went on. Kenneth Kangaroo put
up his hand: "Please, Miss, I think it's Katie
Kookaburra. She said she was going to spoil
our lessons, because her Pa wouldn't let her
come to school. Shall I go and chase her
away?''
"But where is she?" said Miss Owl. All
began to look, when all at once there was a
crack of a whip, and Miss Owl called out:
"Don't beat her like that!" But just at that
moment Sarah called out, "I believe it's Lizzie
Lyre Bird, all the time," and so it was. She
had learned to mimic all the bush sounds, and
thought it would be great fun to show off.
After all this came playtime, and they
trooped into the playground and began to amuse
themselves in many ways. Some of the younger
Here we are again—Birds, Beasts and Fishes.
Then they were divided into classes. Lizzie
and Dolly were together, and Willie and Ken-
neth sat on the same form, while Teddy and
Percy Decided they would like to be with Sarah,
because she had brought her lunch, and they
thought they could smell toasted cheese, of
which they were very fond.
Suddenly, when they were all very busy, they
heard someone laughing: "Ha, ha, ha, ha, hoo,
hoo."
brothers and sisters of Kenneth Kangaroo and
Willie Wallaby were outside the fence, eager
to know what school was like, and they were
invited in to have a game, and so they made up
a team of cricket and started playing.
Ken. was captain of one side and Willie of
the other. Lizzie was wicket-keeper, because
her tail spread out so far, and Sarah was put
right on the boundary, as she could slither so
quickly and bring the balls back. Then the


bowler, Teddy Bear, started off with a ball that
went like the wind. Percy Platypus was bat-
ting, but when he saw the ball coming, he lay
Teddy Bear started off with a ball that went
like the wind.
down and let it go right through the wicket,
and his score was 0.
"That's because he has a duck's bill," said
Dolly, who was inclined to be funny. Ken. then
went in, and hit the ball ever so far, and in
Percy Platypus was batting.
two bounds went from one end of the patch to
the other; but Katie Kookaburra, who was at
the other end, could not hop or fly so quickly,
and said it wasn't fair. They argued the point
so long that the bell rang before they had any
game at all, and Sarah had gone to slaep and
had to be wakened up to go into school again.
The first lesson a,fter recess was geography,
and Miss Owl told them how the earth was
divided into two parts—land and water —and
how some lived in one and some in the other,
but Percy quacked: "Please, Miss, I lire in
both. What am I called?"
"Antibilious," said Teddy Bear.
"Oh, no," said Miss Owl, "you mean am-
phibious—living both in water and on the land."
"But you can't fly," said Katie Kookaburra,
who had crept in behind the others.
"Don't want 'to," said Percy.
"Sour grapes," said Katie.
"Order! Order!" called out Miss Pussy Oat,
who had been setting some arithmetic on the
blackboard. "Katie, what are you doing here?"
"Pa said I could come and see if I liked
lessons, and if I did he'd let me come."
"Very well, sit down and don't talk. Now
what is the earth made of?"
"Mud," called out Dolly. "No; land and
water," said Miss Owl.
"Well, they make mud when they are mixed,
don't they?"
Miss Pussy Cat, seeing the geography lesson
was not getting on very well, called out: "Now,
class, please form for arithmetic."
After some pushing and fluttering, they were
ready. Sarah got on very well at this lesson,
for a great many snakes are adders, and all
have good figures, but Teddy and Kenneth
wanted to do physical culture, and took a lot
of persuading before they would settle down to
their slates.
At last the morning was over, and the bell
rang for dismissal.
CHAPTER 111.
In the afternoon music was the chief item,
both singing classes and orchestral work. Ken.
had the 'cello, Teddy violin, Sarah harp, Lizzie
and Dolly flutes. They wanted to get up a
musical play for the Xmas break-up, and were
going to have a chorus of frogs and little birds
to help them.
Old man Kangaroo taught them to play, and
was very pleased with the way Sarah managed
the harp. She slid up and down the strings,
and the most beautiful sounds came out.
Dizzie occasionally dropped her flute and
warbled a little song, but as it was very pretty,


Old Man Kangaroo didn't mind, and gave a
great deal of attention to Ken. and Willie, who
wouldn't hold their instruments right way up.
Ken. treated his 'cello like a bat„ and stood up
to play, and Willie used his bow as a cane, and
hit everybody within reach. Percy came in for
most of the smacks; he was playing the drum
and triangle. He managed by jumping up and
down on the drum, and beating the triangle
with a stick, which he held in his mouth.
After a little while, however, they dropped
their games and settled down to work, and by
degrees began to do really weli, and at the
end of the afternoon their master told them if
they practised at home they would make quite
a success of their instruments.
CHAPTER IV.
The heads were very glad when the first day
was over, and. while having a cup of tea in their
little sitting room, talked over the events and
planned the programme for the next day's work.
The dancing teachers, Mr. and Mrs. Rabbit,
were coming, and physical culture lessons were
to be given. As these were not an extra, all
the pupils were to learn. Miss Owl thought it
would be a good idea to teach cooking, and
said she would take the class.
In the morning Mr. and Mrs. Rabbit arrived,
bringing two of their youngest children (twins)
with them. The boy was named Bobby and the
girl Rosey. They were very good children, and
walked hand in hand into the schoolroom and
shook paws with Miss Pussy Cat, who made
them very welcome.
The bell rang and all the pupils came in.
As usual, they sang, and then settled down to
physical culture Exercises. First came the
grand march, Ken. leading with Willie, then
Teddy and Percy, followed by Bob and Rosey;
Katie and Dolly came next, and Lizzie and
Sarah were the last, because they both had
tails which rather got in the way.
Miss Pussy played the piano, and Mr. and
Mrs. Rabbit gave directions; but Sarah could
not mark time, and wriggled in and out and
upset all the others, and Ken., who was really
a very naughty boy, hopped over the blackboard,
knocked it over, and nearly squashed Miss Owl
who was standing by. She just escaped by
flying up on the mantelpiece.
The march was stopped, Ken. was put in
the corner, and Sarah tied up to the leg of a
chair. Once more they started, and to the
And shook hands with Miss Pussy Cat.


Performed some wonderful solos.
tune of "The Animals March Out Two by Two,''
they marched round the room. Then all formed
in a line and did arm exercises and touched
toes with finger-tips. Of course Sarah, having
neither, made her head and tail meet. This so
amused Katie that she laughed and had to be
shut up in a cupboard, and Teddy went too far
and stood on his head and stayed there, with
his little legs kicking wildly, till Mr. Rabbit
had to reverse him and stand him on his feet
again.
After an hour of this, all were exhausted
and sat down to cool for ten minutes.
well. The teachers took one each and taught
them the new steps, and by the end of the morn-
ing they were quite tired and glad to go into
the air to rest and eat their lunch.
During the morning, Mrs. Henny had opened
a tuck shop in the play ground, and packets of
grass, fresh lettuce, boiled sweets, and fruit of
all kinds were displayed on a barrow, also
worms and beetles in bottles for the birds, and
nuts and cake. Everybody rushed up and Mrs.
t
Henny did a roaring trade till all her goods
were sold, when she put the money in the
barrow and pushed home in great glee.
Dancing came next, and it was quite a dream
to see Ken. and Sarah waltzing together.
Willie and Rosey Rabbit were partners, and en-
joyed themselves tripping over each other's feet,
and getting in the way generally. Lizzie would
not dance with a partner, but performed some
wonderful solos, Percy playing for her on the
drum. Occasionally, Katie would join in with
a laughing obligate, which really went very
CHAPTER V.
Well, school went on from week to week, and
at last summer-time came, and the Sports Day
drew near. By this time the school had grown
to quite a size. There were classes for the
smaller birds —robins, blue caps, wrens, and
more of the kookaburra family joined, and at
least a dozen frogs.


Anthony Rowley was engaged to teach the
frogs, as they spoke quite a different language,
and the bathroom was given up to them, so
Anthony Rowley was engaged ito teach the frogs.
that they could keep themselves moist, because,
though they can live out of water for a long
time, their brains are more active when the
are wet.
SPORTS.
The pupils were all very busy now, practising
for the sports, which were coming off early in
November. All the boys got up early and
trained, wearing only short pants and sweaters;
the birds practised flying, looping the loop,
double dives and all sorts of fancy stunts.
Dolly and Percy, though not the most graceful
of swimmers, paddled about in the water, and
managed to get quite a lot of fun. Of course
the frogs joined in that game, and dived from
a great height, playing leap-frog and swimming
about 111 great style.
Sarah could swim, too, but the frogs rather
objected to her going in with them, as one day,
after having been in the water together, two
froggies were missing, and Sarah looked rather
plump. So she was put in a small pond near
the schoolhouse, and swam by herself. Ken-
neth was very good at jumping, but the sports
master, Mr. Wombat, said he would have to be
handicapped, on account of the extra length of
his back legs. They were so excited over the
games 'that they could not pay much attention
to their lessons, and the head mistresses said
they would be very glad when the Sports Day
was over and the animals could settle down to
their books again.
Lizzie had been working very busily at her
dancing, and had invented a very pretty fancy
dance for herself and Sarah. It was called the
Writhesome Wriggle and Strutsome Dance,
and consisted of a march down the centre of-
the platform, which was to be decorated with
small trees and ferns, while Sarah Snake slid
up and down the trees and wriggled about after
Laurie on the grass, hiding from her, and then
standing 011 her own tail, and waltzing by
Laurie's side, turning round and round in a
most graceful way. The orchestra played some
pretty music for them, and it was a great
success.
CHAPTER VI.
At last the day arrived. Invitations had
been sent to parents and friends, and by 2 p.m.
the paddock was well filled and looked very
gay with bright-coloured ribbons and flags.
Several raia-mias had been built and afternoon
tea was to be served by the pupils and staff.
First of all, there was a race for all; the handi-
capping had been very difficult, owing to the
different lengths of leg. Teddy Bear and Percy
Platypus were in front, and Kenneth Kangaroo
on scratch. Mr. Rabbit and Mr. Wombat were
in charge of the proceedings, Mr. Rabbit with
a large watch and Mr. Wombat with a small
pistol, of which he seemed very much afraid.
Bang! went the gun, and off the creatures
started. Dolly Duck and Laurie Lyre Bird ran
a few yards and then tried flying. Stop! cried
Pa Rabbit, 110 flying allowed! So they had all
to come back to starting point, and begin again.
This time Teddy began by turning head over
heels, and became so giddy that he had to be
helped off the ground and fanned with
eucalyptus leaves, which soon revived him, but
it was too late for him to get into the race, so-
he sat up 011 the fence and watched the others.
Kenneth Kangaroo was bounding along, passing
everyone. Presently he got near Sarah, and


/ / \ \
1 / \ %
II \ \
II II
1 II
thought he would soon beat her too, but sud-
denly she put on a spurt, and, with two slithery
slides got to the winning post, and with a loud
hiss of satisfaction, won the race. In the mean-
time, Willie Wallaby caught sight of his father.
and in his excitement tripped over a group of
frogs, and so upset them and himself that it
took him all the rest of the time to sort them
out. The little froggies were very angry with
him for spoiling their chances, so it was ar-
ranged that they were to have a race of their
own after the other events were over.
The high jump came next. Kenneth Kangaroo
was not in this, as he was too big, but Willie
Wallaby, Teddy Bear, and the frogs were all
waiting to try. The pole was put up. Teddy
was first, and managed to hop Ift. 3in. Florrie
Frog made one big attempt, Ift. 4in. Then
came Willie Wallaby, who, amid the cheers of
all, with a mighty bound cleared 2ft. 6in. He
rushed off the ground to where his father was
standing, and went into hysterics with excite-
ment.
After some flying races, which Katie Kooka-
burra w T on, and swimming, in which Percy
Platypus came first, the bugle rang for refresh-
ments, and a 'great rush was made for the mia-
mias. The ice cream was delicious, and Sarah
Snake fell into one of the buckets. She stayed
there till she had eaten as much as she could,
and then let the froglets come and lick her
scales clean. Most of the grown-ups had cups
of tea and cakes, and the little pupils were
kept busy running about with trays. When
everyone had finished, the little frogs had their
race. Someone suggested it should be leap frog,
and it was just the funniest thing of the whole
afternoon. They ran and hopped and fell over
each other, till at last there was no one left to
jump, and the prize was given to the froggie
who was left without a partner.
The prizes were given out after this. Sarah
Snake received a necklace of turquoise, which
would go round her neck three times. Willie
Wallaby a silver collar, suitably engraved:
Katie Kookaburra a large picture book: and
the Froglet a silver medal, which showed up
well on his white chest. Percy Platypus re-
ceived a waterproof watch. He was often late
for school, and used to excuse himself by sayiug
he had to swim across a river on his way, and
never knew the time, so they thought this would
keep him up to the mark. Everybody was quite
satisfied, and they all went home, the parents
feeling that the education their children were
getting was quite worth the money, and the
pupils very pleased with prizes and refresh-
ments.
CHAPTER VII.
The next week was given up to revision of all
the work they had been through during the year,
to prepare for exams., which were to come off
the following week. History was the first sub-
ject. One question was: How did the lyre bird
get its name? Xow, there are too ways of spell-
ing the word, and the meanings are very dif-
ferent. Sarah Snake thought it was spelt
"liar," which means an untruther, or person
who cannot speak the truth, and made up the
following story:—
There was a bird whose tail was shaped like
this, which had no proper name, and one day he
Whose fail was shaped like this.
was sent with a message to King Billy, to ask
him who was the best bird in the bush. King
Billy laughed very much, and it sounded like
"Who, who, you, you!" and without waiting
to hear any more, the bird ran away home and
said that the King said he was the best. "Then
you're a liar, bird," said the cockatoo, "for he
knows I am." So ever after that the name
stuck to him !
Of course, the true story is that the tail is
the shape of a lyre—a kind of harp.
Language came next. The chief question
was: Give plurals of possum, cockatoo, Kan-
garoo, wallaby, willie-wagtails? Some answers
to these were—Possum, possible; platypus,
platycats; cockatoo, cockatwice; kangaroo,
kangaroosters ; wallaby, wallabus ; willie-wag-
tail, willie's wagtails. I am sure some of the
naughty little pupils knew better than this, but
wanted to make fun.
Geography was Kenneth Kangaroo's special
subject, and, indeed, he looked very imposing
standing up by the map of the world, pointing
out the oceans and islands with a long stick.
The worst of him was he could never remember
where the east was, until Miss Pussy Cat told


liim to watch the sun rise, and then he would
know, as it always tose in the east. But on
dull days, when he could not see the sun, he
was just as had as ever, and gave it up as a
hopeless task.
However, he was great at remembering the
names of the oceans —'Bantic, Cific, Arctic,
Antarctic, Red Indian and Bass Straits —and
was always top of the class. So he expected to
get the prize for this subject, and scribbled away
on his paper so hard that often his pen went
through, and he got so hot (his Mama hadn't
time to make him a cool frock, and he was still
wearing his winter fur coat) that the perspira-
tion ran all down his face into the desk; but he
The perspiration ran all down his face.
did not care, because he could see all the others
puzzling and worrying over the questions, par-
ticularly over the one which asked, "What is the
cause of the strikes in Australia?" But Ken-
neth knew —he put "This is a Hughes (huge)
question."
Arithmetic, writing and drawing exams, fol-
lowed, and the excitement was very great when,
at last, they were all over, and the pupils were
dismissed in the afternoon and told to come
early next day to the last practice for the con-
cert and little play which they were getting up
for the "Break-up," or Speech Day.
No one was late that morning. 111 fact, before
the head mistresses had finished their breakfast,
they heard a great chattering and shuffling in
the schoolroom, and sent Polly Possum to see
what was doing. She came back to say nearly
all the pupils >vere there, with their fur in curl-
ing pins, and the birds with their feathers all
trimmed and tidied up, waiting for Mr. and
Mrs. Rabbit and the singing teachers, to hear
them go through the musical play which they
had been practising so long. The froggies and
blue wrens were at the sides to do the chorus,
and the orchestra in front. Everything was very
satisfactory, and just as they finished, 'two or
three dray-loads of tree ferns and branches of
gum trees and all sorts of bush shrubs arrived
to decorate the stage and room for the even-
jug. All stayed to lielp with this, and when it
was finished you would have hardly known the-
place.
CHAPTER VIII.
The evening arrived, and, oh my! you should*
have seen the parents and friends, big brothers,
little sisters, grandfathers and aunts, coming in,,
each one in his or her very best suit, the ladies
with their heads beautifully decorated with
wreaths of flowers and grasses: the gentlemen
with their nails polished and feathers and furs
in the pink of condition. All the kangaroos had 1
brought eye-glasses for the occasion, and looked
very wise as they hopped in.
Miss Owl and Miss Pussy Cat received the
guests in the middle of the hall, where a carpet
was spread and several easy chairs placed for
them, also Mr. Emu, who had kindly consented
to give out the prizes. Then the programme
was opened with an overture by the orchestra,
and a display of marching and physical culture.
Ken. Kangaroo headed the march, carrying a
large Australian, flag, and four of his younger
brothers, dressed in khaki, followed, with
smaller flags. They marched round the stage
four times, then formed themselves, with v the
others, into a hollow square, and in another-
minute a small aeroplane came whizzing down
into the middle of the square, and out hopped
four little magpies, all dressed up as airmen.
This scene was clapped and cheered, ami then
the curtains were drawn together, and when
they re-opened, Laurie Lyrebird and Sarah
Snake were seen 011 the stage, bowing and
wriggling. They were going to do a very pretty
fancy dance, which Sarah had invented, and
called the Writliesome Wriggle and Strutsome
*
Dance, and consisted of a march down the centre
of the stage by Laurie, while Sarah Snake slid
up and down the trees and wriggled about after
him, hiding now and again, and then waltzing
by his side, turning round and round in a most
graceful way, while the hand played sweet
music for them. They had to come hack and
bow six times l>efore the visitors would stop
clapping. Then the play followed.
The story was about "The Babes in the
r
►Wood," and the different parts were taken by:
The Father, Willie Wallaby; "Wicked Uncle,
Kenneth Kangaroo: "Wicked Servants, Teddy
Bear and Percy Platypus; The Babes, Two
Froggies: The Robin, all the little birds in the
chorus; while Laurie Lyrebird and the Kooka-
burra family were the grave-diggers, and


scratched and shovelled the graves for the
babes. When Willie brought the babes to the
Wicked Uncle, the audience called out, "Don't
trust him, he looks sly!" but Kenneth stood up
and took out his hankie, and cried real big
tears, so Willie left them with him, and went
away looking very ill and sad. Soon after the
Wicked Uncle said to his servants, "Take these
children away and kill them," but the little
froglets looked so miserable that Teddy and
Percy hadn't the heart to kill them, so just left
them at the edge of the bush, and told them
not to come back that way, and then went home
and said they were dead. But the poor little
things wandered about till they were starved.
Early next morning, when the little birds
woke up, they found them all stiff and cold.
The grave-diggers were called, and scratched
and dug a trench, laid the froglets in, and all
the little birds covered them over with leaves,
singing sad little songs all the time. Then they
all formed into a procession and marched back to
the castle of the Wicked Uncle, singing songs of
revenge and horror, Laurie Lyrebird leading, as
he had a loud voice and knew a lot of things to
say that lie had heard the men in the bush say.
When the Wicked Uncle heard all the noise, he
got frightened and ran away, so when they ar-
rived at the castle there was no one there, and
they burned it down. This was a beautiful
sight, and the visitors were delighted.
But now came the prize-giving, which, after
all, was, to the pupils, the most important part
of the whole evening.
Kangaroo got the geography prize—a beauti-
ful cricket bat.
Teddy for spelling, dictation and writing, got
a fountain pen.
History—Laurie Lyrebird, tennis racquet.
The prizes for the other subjects were all well
distributed, so that nearly everybody got some-
thing, and after the pupils had all been satisfied,
Mr. Emu made a little speech to the principals,
and presented them with a silver travelling
clock, for their own sitting room. Then the
orchestra played "God Save Our Gracious King,"
everybody joined in, and when it was over, Miss
Owl and Miss Pussy Cat were overwhelmed with
good wishes and good-byes. The school doors
were closed, and with thankful hearts and tired
heads our little friends went to bed.
THE FROGS AND THE CRANE
In the heart of the woods there lay a cool,
green pond. The banks of the pond were set
with ranks of tall bullruslies, that waved crisply
in the wind, and in the shallow bays there were
fleets of broad water-lily leaves. Among the
rushes and reeds, and in the quiet water, there
dwelt a large tribe of frogs.
"Kej'rump! Kerrump! I'm chief of this pond !"
croaked a very large bullfrog, sitting in the
shade of a water-lily leaf.
"Kerrump! Kerrump! I'm chief of this pond!"
croaked a hoarse voice from the opposite bank.
"Kerrump! Kerrump! I'm chief of this pond !"
boasted a third old frog from the furthest shore
Now, a long-legged, white crane was standing
near by, well hidden by the coarse grass that
grew at the water's edge.
He was hungry that evening, and when he
heard the deep voice of the first bullfrog, he
stepped briskly up to him. and made a quick
pass under the broad leaf, with his long bill.
The crane almost had him, when something
cold and slimy wound itself about one of his
legs. He drew back for a second, and the frog
got away. But <:hb crane did not lose his dinner
after all, for about his leg was curled a large,
black, water snake, and that made a fair meal.
"Kerrump! Kerrump ! I'm chief of this pond !"
the second frog croaked boast ~ully:
The crane began to be hungry again. He
went round the pond without making any noise,
and pounced upon the second frog, who was
sitting ii}) in plain sight, swelling his chest with
pride, for he really /thought now that he was
the sole chief of the pond.
The crane's head, and most of his long neck,
disappeared under the water, and all over the
pond the little frogs went splash! splash!
Just as he had the frog by one hind leg, the
crane saw something that made him let go, flap
his broad wings, and fly awkwardly away to
the furthest shore. It was a mink, with his
slender, brown body and wicked eyes,
After a long time, the crane got over his
fright. The pond had been still so long that
the frogs were singing their pleasant chorus,
and above them all there boomed the dee})
voice of the third and last bullfrog, saying:
'Kerrump! kerrump! I'm chief of this pond!"
The crane stood not far from the boaster, and
he determined to silence him once for all. The
next time he began to squeak, he had barely
said "Kerrump!" when the crane had him by
the leg. He croaked, and struggled in vain.
But just then a fox crept up behind the
crane and seized him. The crane let go the
frog, and was carried off screaming into the
woods for the fox's supper. So the third frog
got away: but he was badly lamed by the
crane's strong bill, and he never dared to open
his mouth again.
It is not a wise thing to boast too loudly.


The Baker that Baked
ONCE upon a time there was a Baker-
That-Baked-Gingerbread. What kind of
gingerbread? Just plain gingerbread.
But one day there came to town the Fool-Who-
Did-What-He-WasrTold. He, by the way, is
not such a fool as you'd think. And the Fool-
Who-Did-What-He-Was-Told was askingquestions
of everyone he met.
u How does one- walk up the street?" he
asked. And the person whom he asked felt
pleased because he knew just how.
"You pick up your feet, and then you put
them down again," he said. Which, of course,
was perfectly true.
So the Fool walked it by picking up his
feet and putting them down again. And by
and by he got to the Baker's.
"How do I get into the Baker's?" he asKed
of the Man-In-The-Street. Now, the Man-In-
The-Street was cross, and when people are
cross they are never very kind to this particu-
lar Fool.
"How do I know?" said he. "Go through the
window if you like."
So the Fool went through the window. And.
of course, the window broke.
The Baker caught the Fool by the back of
the neck. "Xbw you'll stay and bake ginger-
bread until you've paid for it," said he.
So the Fool stayed and baked gingerbread.
Monday they baked gingerbread, and Tuesday
they baked gingerbread, and Wednesday they
baked gingerbread—always the same ginger-
bread. And when Thursday came, the poor
Fool was nearly crazy. But that day the Baker
had to go out on business.
"What shall I bake to-day?" asked the Fool.
That made the Baker very cross.
"Bake some cats and some camels," he cried,
and then he went out very fast and shut the
door very hard.
Fool was perfectly delighted. He made
all the gingerbread dough up into the dearest
little cats and the funniest camels with very
long legs. But before he could put them in
the window to sell, the Baker came home, and
he was very dreadfully angry (the Fool could
never see why), and he threw away all the
dear little cats and the funny camels, and
made him set to work to bake some more.
But the next day he went out again, and
the Fool asked the Baker's wife what he
should do.
"Bake some pigs and some peacocks," she
said, and she smiled disagreeably. She thought
the Fool would feel very much ashamed. But
the Fool was perfectly delighted. He set to
work and made up all the gingerbread dough
into little fat pigs and peacocks with spreading
tails. Then he put them in the window to sell.
When the Baker's wife saw them she began to
cry tears.
"Oh. who will want to buy pigs and peacocks
to eat?" she sobbed. "Oh, you foolish man,
to spoil the dough! And oh, how angry the
Baker will be."
But when the people in the street saw the
pigs and peacocks in the window they stopped
and looked. And when they had looked for a
while, they came in and bought them. And
before the Baker came home they were all
bought. v
The next day the Fool got up very early in
the morning, and he mixed up the dough
without asking anyone any questions. He made
some ferocious little tigers, and he put them
in the window. He baked and baked until the
window was so full it could not hold any more
—all full of turtles and tigers. And then he
packed his things and ran away very far —
very far indeed.
And when the Baker and his wife got up
there was a long line of people in the street,
waiting to get in to buy tigers and turtles.
And to this very day, if you go to that
Baker's (it is a long way off, but I'll tell you
the address if you write and ask me), you
can buy cats and camels, and pigs and pea-
cocks, and tigers and turtles, all made out of
gingerbread.
But the Fool was not heard from again
or, at least, not for a very long time.


A WINTER'S MORN.
JOYCE PYKE.
Tis winter, yet it seems like spring;
Soft-colored clouds are in the sky;
Gold leaves still to the elm tree cling,
While full-dressed gum trees tower high.
The grass is green and dewy wet;
The hens with joy are clucking loud,
As if to say to Day, "Well met!
We're up the first, and feeling proud."
The farmhouse still lies fast asleep
Beneath the morn's first happy glow;
But soon from doors bright eyes will peep,
And little prattling tongues will flow.
Then through the deep and chilly shade.
To where the sun is shining clear,
Will come the farmer's rosy maid ■
With golden grain to sprinkle near.
And then she'll stand awhile and dream
Of fairy folk and fairy gifts,
And in her fancy see the gleam
Of gems in magic mountain rifts.
When, turning, she will sing out, gay,
"There may be joy in fairy dell;
But on a bracing winter's day
Our dear old earth does just as well."




The Water-Lily Fairy.
One fine day, Nurse took Mary and Billy
for a day at the Gardens, in the middle of
which was a big lake, and growing in this
lake were beautiful water-lilies of every colour
and hue.
"Oh! do let us stay here, Nurse, and gather
some of these pretty water-lilies?" said Mary,
and Billy jumped and clapped his hands for
joy at the thought of gathering these beautiful
blossoms.
Just as the children stretched out their hands
to pick the water-lilies, they heard a tiny voice
like a little silver bell, saying, "Who are you,
and, oh! please don't pull so hard."
Mary and Billy stared at each other, wonder-
ing where the voice had come from, but Billy
said, "It is only the rustling of the leaves in
the trees," so they again began pulling at the
flowers, and again the tiny voice called out:
"Oh! Oh! How can you be so cruel," and, to
their surprise, poised on a large water-lily was
a tiny little fairy. She had a dress made of
the petals of the water-lilies, and on her head
she wore a tiny crown of dewdrops, which glit-
tered and twinkled in the sun, and in her hand
a tiny little wand.
"I am one of the Water-lily Fairies," she said,
"and you have been pulling at our home, and
we would have had no where to live."
Billy, who was the bolder of the two, had
now quite recovered from his surprise, and was
feeling very curious to know all about this
beautiful little Fairy.
"Do you really live in that flower, and have
you any sisters?" said he excitedly. "Yes, I
do," said the Fairy, and again the voice re-
minded Billy of the little silver bells he had
heard ringing on their Christmas tree. "Would
you like to come and see my sisters, and our
lovely Queen?" "Oh! we should love to," said
the children, clapping their hands with delight.
"But how can we come, we are so big?" So
the Fairy waved her little wand over them, and
the children found themselves changed into the
size of the Fairy, with little wings fastened on
to their backs. "But how are we to get across
to the water-lily?" they said; whereupon the
Fairy answered, "Close your eyes and jump
into the air," and this they did, and found
themselves caught up by the wind and carried
over and placed safely beside the Fairy on the
flower.
"Give me your hands/' she said, "and I will
lead you to our Queen."
The Fairy then took them down the flower,
into a beautiful little hall, where fireflies lit it
up like hundreds of tiny lanterns, and a host of
little fairies were dancing to the music made
by the lapping of the water against the flower
home.
"Oh! how beautiful," the children cried,
"and which one is the Queen?" At that moment
the dancing stopped, and from a door came four
little gnomes, bearing on their shoulders a
i
water-lily petal, on which sat a most beautiful
fairy. She wore a dress made of the wings of
butterflies, and her golden hair reached right
down to her feet It looked like a golden cape,
and in front of her head was a li'ttle glittering
star, which must have fallen from the sky.
Mary and Billy could only gasp and stare.
The gnomes set the Queen on her throne, and
every fairy bowed low before her.
When the Queen saw the children, she called
them to her, and asked them if they would like
to stay and have supper with her fairies. They
said they would, so the Queen waved her
wand, and what do you think? —when they looked
round a lovely little supper was all laid out
with mushrooms for chairs. For supper they
had honey from the honeysuckle, pollen from the
flowers; and to drink they had dew in little
rose petals for cups.
After supper, the Queen asked Mary and
Billy if they would ask all the other mortals
not to pluck the water-lilies, because it was
their home, and if they had taken the flowers
the fairies would have all died.
The Fairy then took them back out of the
flower, and asked them to hop in the air, as
she did before, and the wind again carried them
to the bank. Then she waved her wand, and
they were again turned into their proper size,
but when they looked for the Fairy, she had
gone and all they heard was Nurse Crossly
calling them, as it was time to go home.
When they told her about their visit to the
water-lily fairies' palace, she laughed at them,
and said they must have been dreaming, but
they knew better, and never tried again to pick
the beautiful flowers that grow in the gardens,
or on the lake.


The Platypus
QUEER REMARKS OX A QUEER CREATURE.
THERE are many queer creatures in the
world —such as dromedaries, politicians,
and gnats —but the platypus, perhaps,
is the queerest of them all.
The platypus cannot live away from water,
so is unlike the dromedary; it is shy and un-
obtrusive, so is unlike the politician; it does
not weep into its own ears, and so is unlike the
gnat. But beyond these little points of dis-
similarity, the platypus resembles, in some way,
almost every kind of creature —"Fish, flesh,
and fowl" —and has peculiarities of its own as
well.
Now, if you asked a professor or a biologist
what a platypus was, he would probably
answer: —
"Oh, you mean the Ornithorhynchus para-
doxus. It is an aquatic, burrowing, mon-
trematous, egg-laying mammal, indigenous to
the Antipodes; amphibious, primordial,
consanguineous ." Arid so on. The diction-
ary might tell you something the same. If you
did not know better, you would think that an
animal with a name like that would be some
enormous beast, big enough to browse on whole
gum trees as if they were grass blades, and,
when it was thirsty, to empty lakes as quickly
as you would a bottle of "stone ginger" on a
hot day.
Our little friend with this preponderous name
is not much more than a foot in length. It
lives in the water; in fact,, it cannot live out of
it; yet like the whale, must come to the surface
to breathe. Its body is covered with a rich
brown fur, and thus it is like an animal. On
the head is a bill, like that of a duck, and ic
lays eggs, thus it is like a bird; and it swims
and dives like a fish, its little fin-like feet rend-
ering assistance. The three great classes of
beings in the world are thus combined in one.
Everything about the platypus is strange. It
is no relation to the catfish, as you might
imagine by the name. So it does not "me-ow,"
as that fish is reported to do when caught;
but its voice is like the bark of a small dog.
Platypup, then, might be a better name for it.
The platypus loves to make its home in a
quiet pool of some fresh-flowing river, and it is
generally among the mountains and the
sequestered spots that we find it. In the morn-
ings and the evenings, it is generally to be seen,
floating on the surface of the water, like a
piece of bark, but ready to dive at the first hint
of danger.
Its habitation is a large burrow upon tbe
bank, but although the "living rooms" are
above the water line, the entrance is always
beneath the water. It is in these burrows that
they teach the platykittens to bark, possbly so
that the dogfish won't chase them.
Once, a school-teacher was giving a lesson
upon the "platter-pus," as he called it. He
was a cheerful school-teacher, and liked, as a
rule, to make little jokes to amuse his class.
During the lesson one boy seemed a little inat-
tentive.
"Jones," said the master, "I was talking
about the plate cat. What do you know about
the plate cat?"
No answer.
"Doz/t you see, Jones —the plate cat?"
"I saucer," said Jones.
If ever you should catch a platypus—but I
hope you do not, for the little creatures are
rightly "protected" by law —you should beware
of getting "stung." Sometimes these creatures
are caught by anglers on hooks used for ordi-
nary fish, especially at night. Bushmen say
they would sooner risk a snake bite than a
platypus sting, which is supposed to cause a
wound that never heals. It is quite true that
the male platypuses carry a sharp spur on the
rear "foot," and with this they can inflict such
a nasty cut that you would probably never
forget it.
I just now referred to "platypuses." I hope
you do not think I should have said "platypi."
The plural of platypus is not platypi. It is a
word that comes from the Greek language, not
the Latin, as many people seem to think, and,
therefore, the true plural (in the language from
which the word came) would be "platypodes"—
the same as antipodes. But it is sheer affecta-
tion to use such a far-off plural for a word that
is now a "naturalised" English one, so platy-
puses is really the correct way.
There was once a celebrated professor at the
Melbourne University who was giving a lecture
on the platypus. During his speech he used
the term "platypuses" more than once. After-
wards a lady from the audience approached
him and said :
"Oh, Professor, why did you not say platypi,
instead of platypuses?"
. "Because, Madam," he replied, "I did not
wish to show my ignorance in three different
languages at once!"


I
That the strange little creature is a "mixture"
was recognised by even our somewhat slow-
witted aboriginals. They have a little legend
concerning its origin. Put briefly, it is this: —
A long time ago (when all the strange things
happened), the wild duck had a tiff with the
black swan, with whom she was keeping com-
pany. Feeling very lonely, and a little bit
spiteful, perhaps, she went at twilight to the
edge of a lagoon to drink. There she met with
the water rat, who made fierce love to her.
Presently they eloped together to a little island
on the far side of the lagoon, where they
married and set up home. In due time, they
had a little son, and he was the first platypus.
We do not know if this is what actually hap-
pened. But if some evening you wander along
by some quiet pool of the Yarra before it
becomes muddied by its contact with the city,
or of some other clear stream that comes from
the mountains, if you are very quiet, and look
carefully, you may see a platypus swimming
softly about on the surface, or drifting slowly
with the stream. Then you may judge of the
truth of this little story about the wild duck and
the water rat for yourself.
WHEN A BOY GETS
IN A FIGHT, MOTHER
SAYS, "DID YOU GET
HURT?"
BROTHER SAYS,
"DID YOU LICK HIM?"
FATHER SAYS,
"DID YOU SPOIL YOUR
CLOTHES?"


Fear Triumphant
William H. Robertson.
IF anyone had ever asked Dick Cornwallis
if he was afraid in the dark, he would
have invariably answered in the negative,
and when they broached the absurd question
of staying alone in a large house, without fear,
for a few of the darker hours, he would have
treated it with scorn. He prided himself on
many things, but above all his bravery, which
had, as yet, never been put to the test. He
lived with his parents in a quiet street in a
fashionable suburb of Merton. The home of the
Cornwallises was an up-to-date, two-storied
house, surrounded by two acres of ground,
which consisted chiefly of tall, dark pines and
bushes of all descriptions. The Cornwallises,
being in the fashion of the day, were maidless.
Consequently, whenever the family desired an
outing, the house was locked up and left alone
to the gloom of the trees. Dick had never
been left alone in the house after 8 o'clock.
One particular night, however, as he and
his parents sat down to dinner, there came a
ring on the 'phone. Mrs. Cornwallis —expect-
ing a call—rose from her seat and answered it.
In a few minutes she returned.
"Oh, Dick, would you be afraid to stay alone
in the house for a couple of hours? Mrs. Jones
wants father and me to go and meet her son,
who is back from the war on leave."
"No, of course not, mother. I will be rather
glad, because I want to finish an essay for
the school magazine. I will do it better being
alone, too," answered her son. Mrs. Cornwallis
had heard the "No, of course not " and
had hastened out of the room.
Everything was finally settled, and as Mr.
and Mrs. Cornwallis departed for their even-
ing's pleasure the latter called back: "Fill my
hot water bag, and put it in my bed, there's a
good boy, Dick." "Right, mother," he answered,
"I will put it on now." He went straight out
to the kitchen and put on a kettle of water.
He returned to his essay, and, drawing a cosy
chair before the fire, in a few minutes became
interested. Half an hour went by, and his
interest began to lag. He felt tired, but did
not want to go to bed, and so, with his writing
utensils on his lap, he dozed slowly to sleep.
As he slept, he dreamed. He seemed to be in
some far-away land, where dragons lived and
giants bunted them like rabbits, and dwarfs
walked about with knives in their belts. He
was walking down the main road of a weird
town, when six of the latter pounced upon
him and started pricking him with their knives.
Then one took out of his pocket a bottle, and
tipped the contents over his leg. At this par-
ticular moment, Dick woke up. Something
cold was clinging to his leg, and something
was sticking into him above the knee. He
thought of his dream, and glanced down to
ascertain the cause. Something sharp was
driven into him. In a flash the truth dawned
on him. The sharp instrument was his pen,
and the cold feeling was easily explained when
he saw an empty ink bottle lying on the floor.
He looked at the clock, and saw, with a start,
that he had slept two hours. It was half-past
10. As he looked he heard a strange noise
in the kitchen. "I wonder what that was?"
he soliloquised. "No doubt the mice." He
listened, and distinctly heard a crackling noise,
then a sharp crack. "It sounds very much as
though someone was forcing the kitchen win-
dow," he thought. Again he heard the noise.
It was louder. Crack —ss-scrack, click! He
was now thoroughly alarmed. What should
he do? The 'phone! Yes, he would try the
'phone. He walked to the door, and —thud.
Something landed in the hall, opposite his
destination. He could not see what it was,
owing to the darkness, but approach it he
could not. The window! If he should escape
that way, it would look very much as if he-
were afraid. After all his boasting, too, he was.
The noise in the kitchen became more alarm-
ing every minute. He stood still in terror.
Then he remembered his father's gun. It was
in the top drawer of his desk. He stooped over
and took it. It was empty, and nowhere could
he find any cartridges. Never in his sixteen
years had he been so startled. The only thing
left for him to do was to walk out bravely;
but he could not control his feelings sufficiently
to enable him to do this. Unarmed, he was
useless. Hesitating and fearful, he stood.
Crash! Something had fallen. Unable to bear
the suspense any longer, he rushed to the win-
dow —tried to open it —it was locked. The
lock was high up, and an awkward one to
unfasten at any time, let alone in such a con-
dition as Dick was now in. Feverishly he
dragged a chair into the desired position, and
at last was able to unlock the window. He
flung it up and jumped. He landed into one
of the numerous bushes of the garden, and


Tvas extricating himself from their meshes
when something warm touched his hand. This
was the climax. He fled, screaming, down the
drive, and fell at the gate, fainting, into his
father's arms. It took him fully five minutes
to explain the facts.
"Sh —hush, dear boy—sh—it's all right.
What is the matter? Tell me," soothed his
father. Then, in broken sentences, he told
the causes of his fright. His dream, the ink
spilling—the noise in the kitchen—the thud at
the 'phone—the crash, and last of all the warm
touch on his hand.
Mr. Cornwallis, leaving Dick to the care of
his mother, ran to the house, opened the front
door, and rushed in. He switched on the light.
There, lying on the floor was a smashed vase,
and lying curled up on a rug was a cat. "That
accounts for the thud and the crash, most pro-
bably," he mused, and walked into the kitchen.
The gas stove was still alight, and standing
on it were the remains of a kettle. It was
still crackling and wrinkling under the heat.
The bottom had almost been burnt out. "Ha,
ha," laughed Mr. Cornwallis; then he thought
of his son's condition and became graver. Also
there was the final fright to account for. By
this time Dick and his mother were in the
diningroom, and the former was just recovering
sufficiently to feel a perfect fool when he saw
the grin on his father's face. Mr. Cornwallis
then explained to him the causes of his foolish
error, and said if he would go alone into the
garden and find the last mysterious something,
nothing more would be ever said about his
childish cowardice. Dick hesitatingly clinched
the bargain, and, after resting for a few
moments, walked timidly into the night. A
dog's bark came to his ears, and he understood.
No longer afraid, he whistled, and a collie
ran from the trees and jumped around him,
barking furiously. He called his father, who
had heard the canine talk. He came out of
the house, and saw the dog. "Why. this is
the dog that Mr. Jones lost and offered £2
repaid for. Take him along in the morning,
my boy, and claim the reward," he said.
THE LITTLE WAVE'S STORY.
School had just broken up for the 'holidays,
and Alice Martin was staying with her aunt at
the seaside.
One day when she was paddling in the sea,
she wondered why the little waves ran back so
quickly when they had touched her feet. So
feeling very cross, she threw herself on the
sand and watched the big white clouds chasing
one another across the sky.
All of a sudden she heard someone calling
her name: "Alice! Alice! why don't you come
and play with me?"
Alice jumped up and heard the voice say;
"I am the little wave you would not play with."
"But," said Alice, "you would not stay with
me, but ran quickly away, as if I would hurt
you." "Oh! no," said the little wave, "I am
not afraid of you, but I travel such a long way
from home that as soon as I reach the shore my
mother calls me back again." "Who is your
mother, and where does she live?" said Alice.
"She is the big wave, and only comes to shore
when she is angry, and lives away out in the
ocean," said the wave, "and I can hear her call-
ing me now, so I must not loiter, but hurry back
to her," and with these words the little wave
ran quickly back again, making a little lapping
sound, as if it were throwing Alice a kiss.
The next thing Alice knew was that she was
sitting up rubbing her eyes, as she had fallen
asleep, but she was quite happy again, and
was not cross with the little waves for running
away so quickly.
BOYS OF ALL AGES
SHOULD READ
" Forlorn Hope ' f
The Great Story of Persia
ALEXANDER McCUBBIN
152 ELIZABETH ST.
MELBOURNE


The Fox and the Rooster
Then he flew up a tree.
A FOX was one day lurking about near
a farmyard to see if he could capture
one of the fowls and carry it off for his
dinner. Presently he saw a rooster, but the
rooster also saw him, and was careful to keep
at a safe distance. So the fox said: "Don't
be afraid, Mr. Rooster. I want to have a little
friendly chat with you."
"All right," said the rooster, "I don't object
to talking with you if only you don't come any
nearer."
"Your suspicions hurt my feelings," the fox
responded. "However, never mind. I wanted
to ask you how many tricks you could do."
"I can do three tricks." replied the rooster.
"How many can you do yourself?"
"I can do thirteen."
"Can you?" said the rooster. "And what is
the best one of all?"
"It is one my grandfather taught me," an-
swered the fox. "He could shut both eyes and
give a great shout, and I learned to do the same
thing."
"Why, that's nothing; I could do that myself,"
bragged the rooster.
"Do you really think you could?" asked the
fox. "Try it."
So the rooster crowed as loud as he could
and then made himself big and flapped his
wings as though he had done a great thing.
But he only shut one eye, for he wanted to
watch the fox.
"Very pretty," said Reynard. "However, you
didn't shut both eyes; I hardly thought you
could do the trick as well as my grandfather
did."
"But I can," declared the rooster, and, for-
getting the need of caution, he closed both
eyes and crowed once more.
That gave the fox the chance he wanted, and
he leaped forward. By the time the rooster
had his eyes open', the fox had gripped him
by the neck, and started to run off with him.
But the rooster's favourite wife saw what had
happened, and she gave chase, crying out:
"Let go that-rooster! He's mine!"
"Mr. Fox," said the rooster, "my wife can
run very quick, and if you don't want her to
catch up with us and peck you, I advise you
to call back, 'This rooster is not yours. He
is mine!'"
The fox found it slow work lugging along
the heavy rooster, and he did not wish to be
pecked. He thought the plan the rooster sug-
gested was a very good one, and he opened
his mouth to shout back at the hen that the
rooster was his.
But by so doing he let go his grip on the
captive's neck. No sooner did the rooster find
himself free, than he flew up into the tree.
Then he shut both eyes and gave a loud crow;
and that is all there is to this story.


A SCHOOL YARN.
"One of Them.''
THERE'S no doubt about the fact that the
members of the working class are
directly responsible for much. They set
a bad example to another class which should
be a working one, but seldom is. I mean the
class of schoolboys to which I myself belong.
I am a bit of a thinker myself, and I have ideas
on the subject, but as I have suffered from
being compelled to listen to other people's ideas
when J would much sooner have been reading
Deerfoot yarns, I will have mercy and not put
them in just here.
The Adelaide tramway strike caused a good
deal of inconvenience to business people, who
wanted to go and buy shares when they weren't
worth much to the unforeseeing outsider, or to
sell them when apparently they were really gilt-
edged. Also, a good many ladies, who were
accustomed to getting bargains in the shops,
and then spending the money they saved on
morning tea and waffles, were forced to stay
home and mend their husbands' socks. This was
a great drawback to them, but a jolly good job
for the men, for, after all, a fellow does expect
to have his wife keep his clothes in repair. I
know a fellow who bought new socks every
time a hole came in the ones he was wearing,
and saved the lot up till he was married. He
said it kept his wife from worrying about him
when he stopped out at night. I believe she
was surprised at the number and variety of
socks and holes; said she had not reckoned on
marrying a centipede. But this is drifting away
from the subject of strikes, though, after all, it
has something to do with it, as I believe at
last she struck.
School boys, as perhaps you know, are always
more than ready to do their bit during a strike,
and willingly act as conductors on trams,
when the real thing is forbidden by his union to
collect tickets. It isn't that they really bear
the strikers any ill-will, but that any old excuse
for stopping away from school is as good as
another, and a change of occupation is as good
as a rest. I myself even volunteered to do
stoking during the gas strike, until Sniggers, of
the Fifth, told the chaps who came round that
it was only at meal times that I was any good
at the job. That hurt my dignity, so, as I
managed to strain my wrist at the same time,
I got a week off swotting without having to
bung in at coal-heaving.
During the tramway strike I mentioned
before, a lot of the chaps had to walk from the
city to school in the morning, unless we could
cadge a ride in a motor car. Still the walk
wasn't so bad, because it was all through park-
lands and near the river Torrens. It was only
about a mile and a half, but somehow it always
took an hour to go, whereas, in the afternoon, it
was comfortably walked in half the time.
One morning, owing to a rather longer hunt
than usual for my collar stud under the bed,
I was a little late, and met rather a great
chum of mine, by the name of Teddy Leather.
The Public Examinations were being held at
the time in the Exhibition Building. Chaps
from our school did not have to attend school


until their exams, were completed. For this
reason the far-seeing Teddy Leather had put
his name down for Botany, in the Senior Public,
although he had never had a lesson of any
description about it in his life. You will
understand his reason when I tell you that
Botany, being an unimportant exam., came at
the end of the lists, and was about a week later
than the last exam, taken by the average boy,
which meant that Leather had an extra week's
holiday. He certainly had brains, and I never
could understand why he didn't pass Senior
Public. A chap who could think of the things
he did to avoid swotting should have been able
to pass a simple exam.
It was during his last week when he had
come up to town, wondering what to do with
his time, when he met me. I promptly sug-
gested his walking out to school with me, and
then walking back on his own. For a wonder
he agreed to do so, which showed he must have
l>een fairly bored stiff, as though Leather is
quick at thinking out ways to avoid work, he's
not particularly energetic otherwise. So off we
set to pad the hoof. On our way out we passed
the Exhibition Building, where a lot of our un-
forunate friends were going their hardest at
a three-hour exam, paper. Just inside the gates
was a car which we knew belonged to a chap
named Tomkins. also of "Ours."
We both knew the car well by sight, but that
was as far as it went. The sight of it was
quite enough though, and we both had the
same inspiration at the same moment, which
is rather reminiscent of a Greek exercise I was
once kept in for. We knew that once in the
examination room it would be a jolly good hour
before Tompkins could come out.
After trying three or four mixtures of petrol
and air, we at last started the car, but not
until I had torn the sleeve of my coat. Then
the trouble was to get out from behind the
gates. As luck would have it, Leather, who
was driving—or at least trying to drive —had
the car in its reverse gear. So we sailed back-
wards out of the Exhibition, with several police
watching us, in the reverse gear all the time.
Then the next trouble arose. Where were the
other gears? Hunt as we would they were not
to be found. I have never seen such a peculiar
idea for gears on any other car. and for reasons
which, perhaps, I need not state, I never asked
Tomkins to explain their mechanism afterwards.
At last we decided upon what we thought was
a good plan. Turning down a road which runs
from the city through the Park-lands to the
River, we let the car pick up a good speed down
the hill in neutral. We came to the bottom
without finding out any more about the gears,
the only real excitement being that of narrowly
missing several big motor lorries, to say nothing
of avenue trees, which seemed to act as magnets
to the car. So we turned into the Park-lands to
avoid any more motor cars. But' there the
roads wind in and out all the time, and one
can't fiddle around with gears and drive straight
at the same time.' This meant that instead of
turning when we should have, we went straight
ahead into a tree which seemed unable t<7make
up its mind as to whether it should tip us right
over or not. But luck favoured us, and its
decision was in our favour.
Of course, it must not be forgotten that I was
gradually getting out to school. After looking
%
to see what damage was done, we got going
once more, though still in bottom gear. Luckily
for him and me. a little slot jumped into place
without his knowing it, and we found ourselves
in top gear. If this had not happened before
we could stop it, the gears would have stripped,
and everything would have gone right through
to the back axle, which would have cost us
(our fathers) £175. How it happened we don't
quite know even now. They say that Providence
looks after two classes. I know we were not
the one, so we must have been the other. All
we cared for or knew was that we went sailing
along in fine style. We drove around the Park
for a bit, then out to school. I jumped off to
enable Leather to keep the engine in top gear,
and then he drove back to the city and put
the car back where he got it from.
I was in time for school, and Tompkins was
none the wiser. I am afraid this story hasn't
a good moral, as we were neither found out nor
punished, but I will mention, in case our friends
feel anxious about their cars, that neither
Leather or myself is likely to repeat the per-
formance, as we prefer to use, in future, only
those with whose gears we are familiar.


in PI I I III III 11
I
! j
111 II! «ll 31 III III I
1508 01896916


Two Splendid Xmas Books
TWO BRILLIANT YOUNG AUSTRALIANS
"BINKIE THE BOTHER"
BETTY PATERSON
Printed in colour and black and white,
bound with silk cord, size 6 ins. x 5 ins.,
words and pictures by Betty Paterson,
Price 2/6
This hook, which is by a clever young Aus-
tralian artist, is the very thing for you to stock
for your Xmas trade. There are verses and
v
pictures of the amusing adventures of a very
naughty baby called Binkie. It is beautifully prin-
ted on the best art boards; bound together with
a silk ribbon and enveloped in a dainty envelope.
"ME"
A Story of a Flapper's Adventures.
By ESTHER PATERSON
This work is by an equally clever Australian artist.
It is produced in exactly the same style as the
former book, but it deals with a flapper instead ot
a baby. Her flirtations, her various adventures in
school and out of school are all chronicled. The
whole thing is irresistibly clever and funny. It
is also daintily enveloped.
Price 2/6
ALEXANDER McCUBBIN, Publisher
152 ELIZABETH STREET MELBOURNE
MELBOURNE
