

Historical Compilations based upon the Study of Original Documents.
No. 3
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
LAND EXPLORATION
1856 to 1880
BY
BESSIE THREADGILL
TINLINE SCHOLAR, UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE
IN TWO PARTS:
PART 1, TEXT PART 2, MAPS
PART 1, TEXT
WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA AT
THE HASSELL PRESS, ADELAIDE
REGISTERED BY THE POSTMASTER GENERAL FOR TRANSMISSION THROUGH THE POST AS A BOOK
PUBLISHED BY THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF
THE PUBLIC LIBRARY, MUSEUM, AND ART
GALLERY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
ADELAIDE
1922


SOUTH AUSTRALIAN LAND
EXPLORATION
1856 to 1880


Historical Compilations based upon the Study of Original Documents.
No, 3
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
LAND EXPLORATION
1856 to 1880
BY
BESSIE [?]
TINLINE SCHOLAR, UNIVERSITY OF ADELAIDE
TEXT
PUBLISHED BY THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF
THE PUBLIC LIBRARY, MUSEUM, AND ART
GALLERY OF SOUTH AUSTRALIA
ADELAIDE
1922
WHOLLY SET OP AND PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA AT
THE HASSELL PRESS, ADELAIDE
REGISTERED BY THE POSTMASTER GENERAL FOR TRANSMISSION THROUGH THE POST AS A BOOK


PREFACE
This short study of a period of South Australian exploration was
compiled from original material in South Australia, Victoria, and
New South Wales. It is to be regretted that official records con-
stitute the greater part of the available material. Owing to the
scarcity of private papers bearing on the subject, its treatment has
been necessarily limited to a consideration of the work done rather
than of the personalities of the workers.
I wish to thank the Hon. Sir G. J. R. Murray, K.C.M.G., LL.M.,
LL.B., 8.A., the founder of the Tinline Scholarship. I wish also
f to express my indebtedness to the Board of Governors of the Public
Library for assuming the responsibilities of publication; and my
very sincere gratitude to Professor G. C. Henderson, M.A., for his
invaluable assistance in affording me facilities for research, and in
directing the publication of my manuscript. To Mr. Thos. Gill,
C.M.G., 1.5.0., and Mr. B. S. Roach, I am grateful for its revision.
I am particularly indebted to the Rt. Hon. Walter H. Long,
late Secretary of State for the Colonies, Lieut.-Col. Sir H. L.
Galway, K.C.M.G., D. 5.0., late Governor of South Australia, the
Chief Secretary (the Hon. J. G. Bice), the late Commissioner of
Crown Lands (Hon. E. A. Anstey), the Commissioner of Police
(Brig.-Gen. Leane, C. 8., C.M.G., D. 5.0., M.C.), the Clerk
of the Parliaments (Mr. A. Searcy), the late Minister
for Home and Territories (Hon. P. McM. Glynn, K.C.),
the late Commissioner of Crown Lands and Survey, Mel-
bourne (Hon. H. S. W. Lawson), and the late Minister for
Lands, Sydney (Hon. W. G. Ashford), for making available to me
the official records in their possession; and to the officers of the
above departments for affording me facilities for research.
To the Commissioner of Crown Lands (Hon. G. R. Laffer),
the Minister for Home and Territories (Hon. G. F. Pearce), and
the Minister for Lands, Sydney (Hon. W. E. Wearne), I am grate-
ful for providing me with copies of MS. plans in their possession.


I wish also to acknowledge the assistance of Professor Sir
Baldwin Spencer, K.C.M.G., F.R.S., M.A., Professor Ernest Scott,
the late Mr. Henry Gyles Turner, Mr. H. Selkirk, Mrs. H. Cham-
bers, Mrs. Stephen King, Mr. J. E. Warburton, Mr. W. H. Tietkens,
Mr. J. Howitt, and the Librarians and officers of the Public
Libraries in Adelaide, Melbourne, and Sydney, the York Gate
Library, Adelaide, the Parliamentary Library, Adelaide, the
Federal Parliamentary Library, Melbourne, and the Mitchell
Library, Sydney.
[?]
II
PREFACE


CONTENTS
PAGE
Preface -------- v
Abbreviations ------ viii
Introduction ------- 1
Chap. I The Gateway of the Interior - - - 3
II The Western Boundary - - - 31
111 Across the Continent - - - - 42
IV The Northern Territory to 1870 - - 74
V The Overland Telegraph - - 112
VI The Western Desert - - . - - 128
VII East of the Overland Telegraph - - 161
Bibliography - - - - - - - 170
LIST OF MAPS*
MAP NO.
J. McD. Stuart. B. H. Babbage, P. E Warbukton
Map showing explorations, 1858 ------ 1
A. C. Gregory
Route of the Leichhardt Search Expedition, May-June, 1858 - - 2
Stephen Hack
Map of a portion of South Australia north west of Adelaide, 1857 - 3
J. McD. Stuart
Plan of route across the Continent, 1860-62 .... 4
J. McKinlay
Plan of route across the Continent, 1861-62 .... 5
A. C. Gregory
N.W. Australia, showing the route of the North Australian Expedition,
April, 1855-June, 1856 - - • - - 6
F. Litchfield. W. P. Auld, B. T. Finniss
Sketch map of the North Territory country in the vicinity of Adam Bay
.. . showing .. . the tracks of the various explorers of the N.T. - 7
G. G. McLachlan
Map showing exploration from Port Darwin to the Roper River, 1870 - 8
Overland Telegraph
Plan of Overland Telegraph from Port Darwin to Port Augusta - - 9
Ernest Giles
Map showing routes of expeditions, 1872-76 - - - 10
P. E. Warburton
Map showing route from the Centre of the Continent to Roebourne,
W.A., 1874 11
J. W. Lewis
Map showing route in the neighbourhood of Lake Eyre, 1874-75 - - 12
C. WINNECKE
Map showing routes of explorations east of the Overland Telegraph
Line, 1879 ........ 13
*The maps are issued in a separate cover to accompany this volume.


ABBREVIATIONS
C. 5.0.: Chief Secretary’s Office, Adelaide. In-coming correspondence.
5.G.0.: Surveyor-General’s Office, Adelaide. In-coming correspondence.
P.C.0.: Police Commissioner’s Office, Adelaide. In-coming correspondence.
C.L. and I.: Crown Lands and Immigration Office, Adelaide. In-coming
correspondence.
M. of E.: Office of Minister of Education, Adelaide.
H. and T.: Home and Territories Office, Melbourne.
P.P.: South Australian Parliamentary Paper.
Archives: Archives Department of the Public Library Museum and Art
Gallery of S.A.
R. Royal Geographical Society (of Great Britain, except where other-
wise stated).
S. of S.: Secretary of State for the Colonies.
Exec. Coun. Mins.: Minutes of the Executive Council of S.A.


INTRODUCTION
The central period of Australian exploration, especially in its
early stages is more than remarkable. The first youth of the
solitary nation was troubled by many an Alnaschar dream, fleeting
and unsubstantial. Its mind was divided against itself as state was
pitted against state. The lure of gold and the menace of the
emancipist had severed rather than created bonds of union; while
individual interest was smothering the nascent spirit of nationality.
In one field of enterprise, how T ever, divided interest was making
for united aim. The gold digger in Victoria, the pastoralist of the
Moreton Bay district and New South Wales, the outback squatter
in South Australia or Swan River settlement, each depended for a
sphere of future enterprise on a solution of the great problem of
the interior.
By the year 1856 the little band of settlers who clung with such
desperate eagerness and pathetic zeal to the narrow hem of their
incongruously large continent, had done little towards solving the
question which Sturt had two years previously called “the greatest
remaining geographical problem of the day.” 1 The littoral they
knew—within limits; the Murray and Victoria river systems they
knew—on the whole—but of the ultimate fate of those rivers which
were conceived to flow inland from the north, west, and southern
coast ranges they knew nothing. Youth, as Alnaschar, found it
easy to dream dreams; Age perhaps easier to see visions. Many
were the pictured tracts of smiling pasture land miles to the west
of Sturt’s last outpost of desolation. "Many could see the sunny
lands bordering an Australian Caspian, and receiving the waters
of three thousand miles of coastal range; few who did not cherish
fond hopes of fertile patches between Eyre’s salt lakes, swamps,
sandy deserts, and ranges. Gregory, who in 1857 knew more,
1 Address by J. Thompson, Dep. Surv.-Gen. of N.S.W., before the
ydney Phi!. Soc., Dec. 10, 1850. “The Necessity for a further exploration
of the Interior of the Australian Continent.” (Syd. Mag. of Science am!
Art., Vol. i).


INTRODUCTION
perhaps, of the interior than any living man, was of the opinion
that “we have now sufficient data for assuming that the remainder
of the unexplored interior is a desert, or at least unfit for the
habitation of civilized man.” 2 The words cast a chill as Eyre’s had
done, and the chill spread; but hot blood and light pockets knew no
law in the Australia of ’5O. Both stimuli in every state led to
exploration effort being directed towards a solution of the one
great problem, and of that problem South Australia held the master
key. s
2 A. C. Gregory to Hon. J. S. Roe (W.A.), May 30, 1856. (S.A. Reg.,
Dec. 18, 1856).
3 According to Col. Gawler, the “country to the west of Lake Torrens
is the true and practicable line of communication . . . between the south-east
provinces of Australia, the great interior, Stokes’s Victoria River and the
north-western coast in general.” (Address before the Melbourne Institute,
Nov. 25, 1857. See Journ. of Roy. Geog. Soc., 1858, Vol. 28, Address of the
President.)


CHAPTER I
THE GATEWAY OF THE INTERIOR
Central Australia ostensibly was a desert. Sturt had entered
it; Eyre had fallen back from an attack upon its southern outposts;
Leichhardt had perished in it. Gregory in 1855 was cautiously
nibbling at its northern edges; and from the west many attempts
had been made to take it by assault. An elastic public opinion,
however, rebounded easily from the hard fact, and by 1856 was
hazarding more or less intelligent guesses at the nature of that
part of Central Australia which was not a desert. South Australia
was greatly exercised about the matter because its northern pas-
toral districts trenched so closely upon the arid country in question.
It was generally felt that the crossing of Lake Torrens would
mean the opening of the only known gateway into a country as
fraught with difficulty as an uncharted sea. Local speculation,
again more or less intelligent, ran riot. Lake Torrens either did or
had connected the Gulf of Carpentaria with the Great Australian
Bight. 1 Sturt’s conjectures of stony desert and endless sand ridges
extending to the Bight had been entirely disproved by Oakden and
Horrocks. 2 Lake Torrens was a great central receptive basin
hollowed out by surface water. 3 The centre was a huge tableland, 4
or an equally 5 immense river system following the lines of Sturt’s
sand dunes. The central desert patches occurred only along a
depressed line, originally a strait, from Carpentaria to Spencer’s
Gulf, which was connected and continuous with the problematical
lake. 6
1 Mr. W. A. Cawthorne, Adel. Phil. Soc. Procs., Aug. 21, 1855.
(Archives.)
2 Mr. W. A. Cawthorne, Adel. Phil. Soc. Procs., July 24, 1855.
(Archives.)
3 Mr. B. H. Babbage, Adel. Phil. Soc. Procs,, Oct. 23, 1855. (Archives.)
4 Col. Freeling. Report of Sept. 6. 1857, P.P. 174, 193, of 1857-8.
5 J. Thompson, Syd. Phil. Soc., Dec. 10, 1856.
6 S.A. Register, May 20, July 28, 1858.


Interest did not stop with speculation. Practical attempts to
solve the difficulty, however, were actuated by the most diverse
of motives; and methods followed equally the differing trend of
public opinion. The squatter turned longing eyes towards Oakden’s
country, thought of the district which Horrocks might have opened
up, and straightway loaded his pack for the land of wonder and
imagination west of the lake. How much South Australia owes to
the solitary exploring work of her squatters it is impossible to
calculate. They leave no record, save in hearts and minds that
perish. Learned societies, actuated by the laudable motive of ex-
tending geographical knowledge, and supported by a plenitude of
theory, memorialized the Government, obtained funds and sent out
scientifically equipped expeditions for detailed surveys, in entire
ignorance of the fact that unknown country requires a preliminary
system of “hurdle race” exploration. Finally the gold fiends in-
fluenced the efforts both of pastoralist and scientist. Yellow mists
were apt to obscure even the most glowing visions of the milk and
honey in Canaan. 7 .
In August of 1855 the Adelaide Philosophical Society B began
to take into consideration the advisability of exploring the north-
western interior, partly to throw light upon the central desert
theory, but also with the 9 underlying feeling that the discovery of
good land near the western boundary (132° E.) would provide
a very satisfactory reason for its extension to the eastern limit of
West Australia (129° E,). The prominent position of Mr. B. H,
Babbage in the society, and his enthusiastic support of the popular
demand for an effective gold search, led to an association of the
two motives in Babbage’s 10 expedition of July to December, 1856.
The leader was nothing if not enthusiastic. He energetically
cracked stones from Gawler to Mount Serle. 11 He kept the strictest
watch for potentially auriferous rocks, but 12 did little discover if
” See P.P. 187/1855-0.
8 Adel. Phi!. Soc. Procs., Aug. 21, 1855 (Archives). See also P.P.
187/1855-6.
9 Expressed by Babbage. (S.A. Reg., Aug. 21, 1855.)
10 See P.P. 115/1855-0. Memorial of Soc. to Govt, for grant of £3,000.
A £lO,OOO reward for gold discovery was placed at the disposal of its com-
mittee in conjunction with the Govt. See also C.S.O. 2243/1850; Exec.
Coun. Mins., July 12, 1850.
31 Accompanied part of the way by Chas. Bonney.
32 His plenitude of trap and basalt, and absence of gold provoked
criticism and smiles from the contemporary digger.
4
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


potentiality could be transformed into reality. It was indeed hinted
to the popular mind that he, as presiding genius of his three
officers, cook, butler, and footman, “with twice ten thousand men,
went up the hill and then came down again.” He found no gold,
but in an eleven days’ push, ninety miles beyond Mount Serle into
the valley of Lake Torrens, Babbage did more. He located
permanent water in Mac Donnell Creek and Blanchewater. Twenty
miles south of Eyre’s Mount Hopeless he discovered an elevation
which he could conscientiously call 13 Mount Hopeful; and 14 turned
back from a promising country of granitic formation only two
sleeps distance (according to black Pornpey) from the one place
where Lake Torrens permitted man to cross. “This then is the
long sought for highway to Cooper’s Creek.” ls Babbage’s fertile
mind immediately shaped the theory that the Lake Torrens
30 crossing consisted of a narrow bar of granite running north-
wards and making the water shallow and the bottom sound.
17 That Eyre had missed the crossing as he had missed Blanche-
water, and that it was the place to which the tracks observed by
Sturt’s companion were directed, 18 Babbage had no doubt.
In May of the following year, another government official,
following 1 closely in Babbage’s steps, chanced upon a discovery
which seriously perturbed the orthodox geographical theorists of
the day. In the course of his duties as Assistant Surveyor-General,
Mr. G. W. Goyder found it necessary to examine with some detail
the country north of Mount Serle. Proceeding in a north-easterly
direction from Oombaratana, the farthest out station, 19 Mr. Goyder
made his way up the centre of the Lake Torrens horseshoe, noting
13 Christened by Goyder, Mount Babbage.
14 The last 50 miles was performed alone, on foot, bootless, with little
water and no guide.
15 The Victoria of Mitchell.
1(5 It is remarkable in view of Babbage’s future actions that he should
so emphatically discountenance the use of drays as clogs to any exploring
expedition.
3 ‘ Babbage’s reports to the Gold Search Commission are printed in the
S.A. Register of Oct. 20, and Nov. 17, 1850; Jan. .3, 1857. His original reports
are missing,
18 The immediate result of Babbage’s expedition was the establishment
°f a police station at Mount Serle as a “point d’appui” for further ex-
ploration.
19 See P.P. 72/1857-8. Goyder was accompanied by Wm. Rowe and a
settler, Jas. Trebilcock, who, on his return, made application for a lease
°f 80 square miles of Mac Donnell Creek country.
5
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


with great minuteness the character of the country already
traversed by Babbage, and exercising his explorer's privilege by
adding 20 several new names to the map. Eyre’s hopeless desert
and pitiless brine springs appeared less and less probable as he
advanced through the hilly country watered by the Fifteen Mile,
Taylor’s, Yerelina, and Mac Donnell Creeks; and saw the long
reaches of fine permanent water at St. Mary’s Pool and Blanche-
water. From an unnamed hill east of the Yerelina “the Yamba,
Nepowie, and Benbonyatha ranges were visible . . . their elevated
peaks of sandstone fashioned by the atmosphere into fantastic
forms, rearing their pointed summits high into the air; the range
interspersed by wide and deep creeks, collecting the water from
innumerable gullies . . . and trending their tortuous way to the
north under perpendicular cliffs of enormous elevation, and inter-
cepting the narrow valleys with their wide stony beds.” Magni-
ficent country presented itself to his view in every direction. The
Freeling, named by himself, he found lying in quiet security in a
channel sixty to seventy feet deep, cut out of solid rock by the
action of flood waters. Luxuriant foliage, stately gums, and the
even, placid waterfowl he found within a few miles of Eyre’s brine
and desolation. A side track eastward towards Mount Hopeless
led the indefatigable explorer across the courses of five large creeks,
flowing, as he afterwards discovered, into Lake Torrens, and
containing water that was drinkable, though strongly impregnated
with ammonia. The delicious rock springs near Blanchewater he
found to be of a similar nature, encrusting the surrounding soil
with a snowy sediment 21 “so nearly resembling the common salt
as to make it difficult to divest oneself of the idea that the springs
are not really brine.”
Following the course of Mac Donnell Creek to within a few
miles of its outlet in the lake, Goyder, turning to the north-east,
found himself at last in latitude 29° 13 upon its shores. No longer
The Freeling (after the Surveyor-General), Camp Hill, View Hill,
Jacob’s Creek (after a settler of the district), Weathered Hill, Werta Warta,
Duck Pond Creek, Mirage Creek, Mount Freeling, and Mt. Gardner (asso-
ciated with the supposed Mount Distance of Eyre). Mr. Goyder’s original
plan of this expedition is in the Surveyor-General’s Office, Adelaide, R/103.
His original reports are missing. See C.L. and 1., 247/57, which contains
also the plans of the Government for future exploration in the same
neighbourhood; also 5.G.0., 519/1857. Roy. Geog. Soc. Procs., Vol. 2, p. 10.
21 It was afterwards analysed as “salt,” an analysis opposed by the
explorer. S.G.O. out letter 643/1857.
6
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


as to Sturt “blue as indigo and salt as brine,” it stretched from
fifteen to twenty miles to the north-west. To the north a bluff
headland with vegetation was fronted by several perpendicularly
cliffed islands. Protean in its capabilities, it no longer presented
a dismal horrid surface of salt-encrusted mud. Its unmistakably
fresh waters spread to the horizon without any “indication what-
ever of the presence of salt;” while bog and swamp and samphire
had given place to a well defined water’s edge of apparently
constant level. Proceeding west for twenty miles the three com-
panions made their way back to Mount Serle by way of St.
Mary’s Pool, Mount Distance, and Mount Gardner.
Flushed with success, and eager for the opening up of the
“Larissae campus opimae” beyond the hated barrier, Goyder advo-
cated the immediate construction of a series of wells along his
route, and spoke with certainty of boats as a connecting link be-
tween shore and shore—strange news indeed, for those preparing
to traverse countless miles of sand, or vainly trying to find granitic
bottom in a welter of salt and mud. “The official mind was
sufficiently elated at the news to allow itself an unusual degree of
speculative freedom. “As it is now known that there is no con-
siderable outlet south for the waters flowing into the lake from the
numerous valleys crossed by Mr. Goyder, and as he appears to have
good reason for regarding the general flow of water as being in
a north-west direction, it is not improbable that there is a very
considerable permanent inland sea or lake, a portion only of which
was visible to Mr. Goyder, and the outlet of whose waters may be
on the northern shore of the continent.”
23 The public press went further, and hinted that, now the
barrier was broken, not only the 129th meridian, but the 26th
parallel also was galling to South Australian energy and pastoral
enterprise.
The Surveyor-General, Captain A. 11. Freeling, had alreadj'
in his report upon the work of his subordinate, urged the equipr
-- Sir Richard G. Mac Donnell to Rt. Hon. Henry Labouchere. Despatch
No. 172 of July 11, 1837.
23 So unprecendented was the sudden influx of claims for pastoral leases
m the North (4,500,000 acres) as a result of Goyder’s expedition, that the
Torrens ministry was forced to resign through attempting to amend the
Lands regulations to suit the new conditions. (See Despatch No. 185
of Oct. 8, 1857, Sir R. G. Mac Donnell to Rt. Hon. Henry Labouchere; and
C.L. and 1., 268/57. Also C.L. and 1., 268/57.)
7
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


nient of an expedition for further investigation in the same direc-
tion. Considering that the duties of his position necessitated his
acceptance of the leadership, though warned by Mr. Charles
Bonney that its success was “more than problematical,” Captain
Freeling proceeded northward in July of 1857. He was under
instructions to reach the point where Goyder had struck the lake,
launch a boat, and make his way north-west “in hopes of proving
the lake to be a means of easy communication with available
pastoral districts in that direction.”
24 Ariel tricks seemed to have found from the beginning ample
scope for their activity in the vicinity of the “great blind lake,”
whose grim face was dominating the highway of the North. Goy-
der’s reedy and rocky springs near Blanchewater were still where
Goyder had left them, but by the time of Freeling’s arrival a
saline deposit had surrounded them. Lagoons seen by Goyder had
dried up between June and September. The country itself,
seemingly, had been much over-rated, rain being scanty and un-
certain, soil stony and timberless. The “trifling variation of level”
in the water line had increased by a recession of half a mile in the
lake waters. The extensive bays, islands, and bluff headlands
clothed with vegetation, had been but fantastic images wrought by
the witchcraft of the mirage for the destruction of those sons of
men who might hug to themselves delusions of the fatness of the
land. 25 The little party made several attempts to advance on foot
into the lake, which was still fresh, but were hopelessly bogged.
Upon more than one occasion they were only saved by a timely
rest upon a small island, and their complete exhaustion went near
to having fatal results. The flat-bottomed punt they had brought
with much difficulty through the hilly country north of Mount
Serle would not float in a meagre six inches of water; and the
view rivalled that of Sturt in desolation. Nature’s unmistakable
hostility forced the unhappy little party to return with much
chagrin, conjecturing with some asperity that Mr. Goyder’s navig-
able lake must have been the result of the heavy March rains
24 See P.P. 174/1857-8 and 193/1857-8. Capt. Freeling’s original reports
are to be found in C.L. and I. 3614/57; see also C.L. and I. 251, 252/57;
432/57; 403/57; S.G.O. 527, 028, 070/57; S.G.O. out letters 630, G3l, 637,
647, 712/1857; P.C.O. 590/1857; Roy. Geog. Soc. Procs., vol. 2, p. 185.
25 Freeling, Parry (assistant), Geo. Hawker (volunteer), Corpl, Love-
day (engineer), Martin, Young, and a native. Also three settlers, Messrs.
Southon, Smart, and Roberts.
8
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


flooding the Mac Donnell, and that Mr. Goyder himself was not to
be trusted alone in the Australian .desert with a mirage.
The Surveyor-General himself did not escape official censure.
It was generally regretted that he had not ascertained the exact
limits of the lake and the direction of the margin, both west and
east of the spot at which he first visited it. “Beyond the fact
that the waters seen by Mr. Goyder were apparently the result
of a heavy rain, and likely to be completely evaporated by the
summer sun, no addition has been made to our geographical know-
ledge by Captain Freeling’s expedition.” 20 His own opinion that he
had reached a fresh backwater of the real salt lake was quite
feasible, and further exploration, while causing no greater expense,
would have materially assisted the efforts of future explorers.
Mr. Goyder, before the return of the Surveyor-General, had
already addressed to the Government a proposal to 2| conduct a
further twelve months’ exploration in the same neighbourhood. The
excitement caused by his discoveries had led him to fear that
the public might have gained an erroneous impression of the value
of the country for pastoral purposes. Captain Freeling, however,
in reporting on the proposal, highly disapproved, 28 adducing the
same rather hasty conclusions as had caused his own return. The
connection between the eastern and western wings of Lake
Torrens, he thought, was no longer open to conjecture since Eyre
had traced the eastern side of the west wing for fully two hundred
miles to latitude 29° S., and Sturt had traced the outer margin for
twenty miles. There could be no possible doubt that the lake was
in the form of a horseshoe. Moreover, the description given by
Sturt of the desolation north and west of the lake (a description
confirmed by himself and Mr. Jacob, a settler) should be sufficient
to discourage any further efforts in that direction.
The inevitable reaction in public opinion which immediately
followed the publication of Freeling’s reports did not discourage
that exploration by private enterprise which had always been
carried on by the squatting section of the community. They felt
"ith the majority, that Sturt had not seen all.
20 Sir R. G. Mac Donnell to Rt. Hon. Henry Laboucherc. Despatch No.
184, of Oct. (5, 1857.
27 P.P. No. 152/1857-8. The expedition to consist of five men, at a
cost of £(549 (5/4§. For Goyder’s original proposal, see C.L. and I. 370/57
(with Freeling’s report thereon); also S.G.O. out letter 9(51/1857.
28 See S.G.O. out letters 9(52, 1002/1857.
9
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


At the end of July, 1857, a 29 small party of outback settlers
started from Saltia station, near the head of the Gulf, for that
district west of Lake Torrens which later became known as Swin-
den’s country. Following a route which had been personally
examined by Mr. Campbell in the previous January, they forcibly
wrenched forty miles of well-watered pastoral country from the
clutch of the desert which had struck pessimism into the heart
of Freeling. By the discovery of Pernatty they brought before
public consideration a fine stretch of saltbush and grass country
whose water holes, according to Swinden, surpassed any in the
Light, the Wakefield, or the Broughton; and the road to which
needed only a few wells to make it perfectly practicable for stock.
Finally, by the discovery of a well-defined division 30 between the
head of Spencer’s Gulf and the southern extremity of Lake Torrens
the little expedition made known a break “which completely upsets
all the received hypotheses of the origin and characteristics of that
inland sea.” 31
These reports, considered in connection with the continued
application for land in the district for pastoral purposes formed
an unanswerable argument for the prosecution of research further
north. Movements were being set on foot in Victoria and New
South Wales for a 32 large scale trans-continental expedition on
Leichhardt’s plan. The general feeling in South Australia, too, as
manifested in the public press, and in criticism received by the
Government, 33 seems to have been that short, lightly equipped
Mr. D. Thompson, of the Tatiara, Mr. Murdoch Campbell, of Mt.
Remarkable, Mr. Charles Swinden, of the Gilbert, and (part way) Mr. E.
Stocks. See S.A. Register, Aug. 24, 1857. Swinden’s original diary has been
lost. According to the evidence of B. H. Babbage before the Commission
of Enquiry, held in 1859, Swinden made no plan of his route.
•‘*9 Swinden’s crossing.
31 S.A. Register, Aug. 24, 1857. Swinden’s expedition added several
new names to the map, viz., the Yarraberry, Yallatfh, Perrialta, and Mullah
w’aterholes, Elizabeth Creek, Bonney’s Bluff, and Warrior’s Gap. Several
private parties visited the district immediately afterwards, Campbell, by Oct.
12, having pushed 50 miles north of Swinden’s northernmost point, dis-
covering excellent pasture land and an abundance of fresh water. Babbage,
in his evidence before the Commission of Enquiry, refers to expeditions to
Swinden’s country under Burtt, Boord and others in December of 1857.
3- See Procs. of Philosophical Institute of Victoria, Vol. 2, 1857.
33 A proposal was addressed to the Colonial Secretary by C. S. Hare,
Oct. 28, 1857, for a trans-continental expedition to Fitzroy River and the
Gull, at an estimated cost of £(>,002 12/. (C.S.O. 1713/1857.)
10
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


expeditions could not satisfy the growing requirements of State
expansion, as they were able to advance but a short distance be-
yond the settled districts. The South Australian Government,
therefore, placed a sum of £2,000 34 for northern exploring pur-
poses on the estimates for 1858.
Babbage, meanwhile, in October of 1857 offered his services 35
to the Government which had just refused those of Goyder. Placing
no reliance whatever upon Eyre’s reports of country seen from
the tops of distant hills, and discounting Freeling’s pessimism with
a large enthusiasm, he proposed to explore the inside of the
horseshoe from Eyre’s Mount Nor-West as far as Goyder's point,
thence, round the bend eastward to his Mount Hopeful crossing.
On the outer side of the horseshoe he would return westward to
Svvinden’s country. As a consequence of his movement in the
matter Babbage was recommended 36 as suitable leader for an
expedition to start early in January, 1858. A depot was to be
formed at the farthest known fresh water in Swinden’s country 37 in
readiness to commence exploring at the close of the hot weather.
' Babbage made a second proposal (December 8) 33 outlining a
slightly different route which was substantially embodied in the
instructions he received from the Government. The primary
objects of the expedition were to be a “thorough exploration as far
as practicable, of. the country lying between the western shore of
Lake Torrens and the eastern shore of Lake Gairdner, and thence
northwards; the surveying and mapping of the country traversed;
the surveying and mapping of the western shore of Lake Torrens,
so as to remove the doubts at present existing as to the extent,
direction and outline of the Lake; and the surveying of the eastern
shore of Lake Gairdner. Any further effort possible was to be
spent in connecting this country and that of Sturt to the east by
54 Increased by £3,000 in the supplementary Estimates for 1858.
35 p.p. 25/1858; orig., C.L. and I. 420/57.
50 C.S.O. 1804/1857. He was then member for Encounter Bay. (1928/57
of C. 5.0.) Also C.L. and I. 528/57; C.S.O. 1901/57; Exec. Coun. Mins.,
Dec. 31, 1857.
5” Lake Campbell or Pidla VVirra. Governor Mac Donnell approved the
general aim, but deplored the means. “1 think if any enterprising and
competent explorer would undertake (to explore between L. Gairdner and
L. Torrens) with the spirit and pluck of Sturt, it would be much better
worth paying for than any pottering about in the inside of the horseshoe.”
C.L. and I. 420/57.
58 For original proposal, see C.L. and I. 532/57.
11
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


the north shore of Lake Torrens. 39 The expedition, provisioned
for eighteen months, was heavily equipped with drays, a tank cart
for conveying and storing water, elaborate boring and photographic
apparatus, astronomical instruments prepared by the indefatigable
zeal of Mr. Todd, and stills for the condensation of salt water. 40
As an intelligent theorist Babbage excelled. He had provided for
every possible contingency, especially the water difficulty, and had
only to deplore the small number of men at his disposal. 41
Two distinct stages may be noted in the progress of the ex-
pedition—the early detailed survey work, which ended with the
accession to the party of Charles Gregory; and the far northern
exploration, which culminated in the leader’s supersession by
Major Warburton.
The expedition arrived at Port Augusta on February 23, 1858,
and left on March 1 for Thompson’s station, 42 being unable to
negotiate the Port Lincoln crossing place. Babbage left the station
by Burt’s crossing, and near Beda, the next stage on the way to
Swinden’s country, came across the exhausted survivors of an expedi-
tion of three 43 which had been out to examine a run in the new coun-
try. Babbage and Burt immediately instituted a search for the missing
squatter, Coulthard, in the neighbourhood of Pernatty. A thorough
examination of Pernatty Creek effected nothing but a discovery of
the horse killed by the desperate little party, and the two men
returned exhausted to the station. By April 1 the advance camp,
consisting of Babbage, Jones and He'rrgott, had been moved to
Beda, the water supply having been carried in tank carts for
forty miles, and a reserve supply being left halfway at a tank
camp, whither Harris carted stores in intervals of surveying the
eastern shores of the lake. A fairly efficient supply was maintained
by distilling from the lake. The greatest initial difficulties seem to
have been the water supply for teams engaged in carting stores,
3!> P.P. 25/1858.
-*0 Paper read by Babbage before Ad. Phil. Soc., Feb. 2, 1858; also
Despatch from Gov. of S.A. to S. of S. 223 of Feb. 11, 1858.
41 W. G. Harris (surveyor), Th. Warriner (gen, asst.), D. D. Herrgott
(gen. asst, and botanist), J. Dawson (teamster and saddler), S. Thompson
(wheelwright), H. Kornol! and Geo. Nason (teamsters), H. Lewis (cook),
J. Stringer (shepherd). Dawson and Lewis were later replaced by H. Jones
and Th. Pegler.
42 Mr. M. Campbell’s place as guide was taken by Burtt, a settler, as
the expedition was late in starting and he had gone on ahead.
43 Messrs. Scott, Brooks and Coulthard.
12
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


and the transport of heavy drays over rough country with little
feed. All exploring work was carried out on foot.
An examination of Beda ranges resulting in the discovery
of Dutton’s Bluff and a fresh rock spring in the wilderness of salt
and sand, the advance camp was moved thither. On April 20
Babbage and Jones set out for Pernatty for the double purpose
of finding a better road and discovering the body of Coulthard.
Three days' search along Pernatty Creek again proved unsuccessful,
and, as no water was discovered in the neighbourhood, the advance
camp was moved to the end of Beda Arm in preparation for an
advance to Pei natty and the Elizabeth. A further examination of
Swinden's country to the north 44 revealed the fact that the Eliza-
beth had shrunk considerably, 45 and that Smith’s Waterhole would
probably afford a better site for a permanent depot than Lake
Campbell. In the meanwhile the stores w r ere moving in the
direction of Beda. though slowly, because of scarcity of feed. Here
Babbage began to feel the disadvantage of his cumbrous tripartite
system of procedure, which necessitated the maintenance of three
camps, the distance between which was increased by every move.
Unable to advance while provisions were being brought up from
the main camp, Babbage remained practically idle at Pernatty until
June 13, when he set out once more for the district north and
west of Lake Campbell. Striking Pernatty Creek at a different
point, he found quite accidentally the body of the long missing
Coulthard, who had passed the Peera waterhole and died of thirst
a little farther up the creek. The silent sand ridges gave no clue,
and to the eternal stillness of gum, plain, and bushland, they gave
back the body of the man who had sought to make it his home. 46
Proceeding to Smith’s smaller waterhole—Corroberribera —he
noted a disquieting shrinkage in the water supply since his last visit,
and came to the conclusion that the supply was only fresh when
the rainfall had been heavy enough to make it temporarily so.
Making his way through the lake-bound sandhills and scrub of
Swinden’s country, 47 he saw in the distance the glittering white
44 May Bto May 23. West side of Pernatty to Smith's waterhole.
Named Lake Windabout, Mirage Lake, Bamboo Lake (reported 200 feet
above sea level).
4 5 In comparison with account in Swinden’s journal.
■*o His last words were scratched feebly upon his canteen (now in
possession of the S.A. branch of the Royal Geographical Soc.).
47 Naming Island Lake, Rocky Creek, Red Lake (fresh).
13
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


bed of a lake 48 at the foot of lofty white marl cliffs, and im-
mediately concluded that it was either Lake Gairdner or a similar
sheet of water separated from it as Spencer’s Gulf from Lake
Torrens. Until he was able to establish its identity, Babbage gave
it the name of the Great Salt Lake, and returned to his temporary
camp at Smith’s main waterhole (Wirrawaralu) with instructions
for the advance camp to be moved up from the Elizabeth, Harris,
who from July J 1 had been exploring westward towards the
Gawler Ranges, was compelled to suspend his efforts in order to
hasten the transport of stores, having proved to his own satis-
faction, however, that the trend of Lake Gairdner was not easterly.
On July 24 Babbage returned with Jones to the Elizabeth
from another expedition in which he penetrated the western scrub
to lat. 30° 45' S. and long. 135° 41' E,, as far west as the western
shore of Lake Gairdner, and ten miles north of Lake Campbell.
Here at last in a long and detailed search, Babbage, without
realising its significance, laid bare the secret of the gateway of
the North. The key lay hidden in toilsome, impenetrable scrub,
and in the salt of the lake chain which fettered so closely the Lake
Torrens entrance to the interior. The line of cliffs which he had
believed fo be the boundary of one central lake, became, on closer
examination, the margin of several salt lakes 49 stretching north
and west. Connecting the chain with Lake Torrens were Lake
Windabout, Pernatty Lagoon, and Ironstone Lagoon, with Lake
Dutton 50 further south. The chain extended westward with the
Great Salt Lake, 51 of which Island Lake and Red Lake were
portions. This he surveyed to within twenty miles of Lake Gaird-.
ner, of which he believed it was a part. Further still to the north-
west were Lakes Hart, 52 Hanson, Younghusband, and the beautiful
blue waters of Lake Reynolds, all with lofty marl cliffs to the
west, low grass and saltbush to the east. Far to the west lay a level
sea of scrub with wooded rises and mist enshrouded lakes, where
mirage let loose its Circe spells upon the world —a strange land
where water abounded, yet left behind it a glittering whiteness
48 Extending lat. 30 degrees 40 minutes, to 30 degrees 42 minutes.
49 Hulkes claimed to have discovered these lakes with Oakden. See
original correspondence, C.L. and I. 435^/57.
50 Found to lie between 137 degrees and 137 degrees 15 minutes E. long.
51 John and Murdoch Campbell had explored in the same direction a
.year previously, their track being still visible.
52 Todd’s Creek opening into Lake Hart.
14
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


that was death; where rain fell freely, yet left no trace in the
porous sand of creek or waterhole. Babbage left no doubt as to
his opinion of its capabilities as pastoral country. It needed only
wells in sufficient number to make effective the estimated sub-
terranean water supply.
While Babbage was laboriously creeping up the blank map of
South Australia, with a minimum of spectacular result, efforts
from another quarter were being put forward, which were to inter-
fere considerably with his plans. The Government of New South
Wales, in the September of 1857, had approached Augustus Charles
Gregory, asking for a definite scheme for an expedition to ascertain
the fate of Dr. Leichhardt, and to. connect the exploring surveys
of Mitchell and Kennedy with his own. 53 The plan submitted
on September 15 provided for an expedition at an estimated cost
of £4,158, to proceed to Leichhardt’s last camp, thence to the
Victoria River as far as its junction with the Alice, where the
lost explorer had intended to leave letters. 54
The party, 55 under the leadership of Gregory himself, left
Moreton Bay on the 24th of March, 1858, arriving at the Victoria
on April 17, in the full sweep of a drought. After locating one of
Leichhardt’s camps (lat. 24° 35'; long. 36° 6' E.) the party w ? as
driven by the dryness of the season to follow the Victoria down
to its junction with the Thompson, and ascend that river in order
to cut Leichhardt’s probable course. Drought was succeeded by
flood, and again by drought. The cracks of the sun-baked plains
became boggy pitfalls, succeeded by dryness and sterility where
no tree could survive and the clouds were luridly red with the
hideous reflection of the sand. Forced to abandon the first object
of the expedition, Gregory directed his activity towards discovering
53 In the North. Australian Expedition of 1855-6 in which he skirted
the northern border of the central desert (supposed).
54 N.S.W. Pari. Papers, relative to an expedition in search of Dr.
Leichhardt; “Journals of Australian Exploration,” by A. C, Gregory and
F. T. Gregory. The proposal originated at a public meeting in Sydney,
Sept. 11, 1857. See also N.S.W. P.P.'s Sept. 14, 1857, Dec. 13, 1858-9, Aug.
27, 1858.
55 Asst. Comm. C. F. Gregory; Asst. S. Burgoyne; Overseer G. Phibbs;
Stockmen R. Bowman, W. Selby, W. von Wedel, D. Worrell. A. C. Gregory
had himself had a considerable amount of experience in exploratory work
as “Assistant Surveyor” in W.A., as well as in the capacity of leader of the
North Australian Expedition (1855-6).
15
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-60


if the Victoria flowed into Cooper's Creek or the Darling. 56 The
stony desert along its banks gave place, after they had passed the
South Australian boundary and the Victoria had merged into
Cooper’s Creek, to red sand ridges and level mud plains, in which
the river ran itself away. Strzelecki Creek, which Gregory con-
sidered “far the best line of route into the interior which has yet
been discovered,” led them to what he considered the eastern point
of Lake Torrens “and what has hitherto been considered the
eastern arm but now T ascertained to be an independent lake”
(Lakes Blanche and Gregory); thence to Mount Hopeless and
Adelaide.
The significance of their efforts to solve the problem of the
interior may be estimated when it is considered that these words,
the first blow to the horseshoe theory, were framed in August of
1868, while Babbage was still surveying between the lakes. More-
over, in summing up the results achieved, 57 the leader stated
56 Obviously the direction of drainage of the river system would deter-
mine the nature of the interior.
n? Gregory's summary Includes critical notes on the pastoral value of
the country traversed, the best of which lay well within S. Australian
boundaries. The leader’s original plans are in the possession of the Lands
Dept., Sydney, with correspondence bearing on the expedition. His original
reports are missing. His field books are in the custody of the Queensland
branch of the Roy. Geog. Soc. Correspondence relating to the expedition
is to be found in C.S.O. 943/1858; C.L. and I. 761J/1858; P.C.O. 661/1858.
See also Roy Geog. Soc. Procs., Vol. 3, p. 18. Gregory’s examination of
Cooper's Creek led to a long and not wholly amicable consideration upon
the part of the Home and State Govts, concerning the most suitable name
for it. Sturt in Aug., 1845, had named part of it the Cooper in honour of a
leading justice of S.A., without recognizing its identity with Strzelecki
Creek; Mitchell, on Sept. 14, 1845, had called another part of it the Victoria;
Kennedy in 1847 continued the Victoria, with the native “Barcoo” as an
alternative. The N.S.W. Govt., on July 27, 1859, suggested Gregory or
Kennedy, a suggestion strongly opposed by Governor MacDonnel! and the
S.A. Govt. N.S.W. submitted to the name of “Cooper,” until the Duke of
Newcastle intervened. In his despatch of Jan. 21, 1860, to Sir R. G
Mac Donnell, he authorized the name “Barcoo” for the river in its entire
length. The name “Cooper’s Creek” was ordered to be erased from all
plans, and “Barcoo" substituted, on May 21, 1861.
Correspondence on the subject is to be found in:
(a) Despatches from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State for Colonies,
No. 339 of Aug. 17, 1859; 387 of April 18, 1860; 447 of Nov. 15,
1860; and 491 of May 9, 1861.
(b) Despatches from Duke of Newcastle to Sir R. G. Mac Donnell of
Jan. 21, I 860; Feb. 22,1861.
(c) C.S.O. Nos. 1251 and 1705/1859; No. 438/1860. Outgoing letters,
682 of Aug. 17, 1859; 170 of Nov. 25, 1859; and April 26, 1860.
See also Exec. Council Mins., Nov. 1, 1860.
16
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


emphatically that “Lake Torrens is only an expanded continuation
of Cooper's Creek,” and therefore not an obstruction but the broad
entrance to a depressed highway leading through the Victoria
river system, probably to the Gulf. “This peculiar structure of the
interior renders it improbable that any considerable inland lakes
should exist in connection* with the known system of waters.”
Such rapid results were being achieved 58 while report after
report of delay after delay was arriving in Adelaide from Babbage's
eagerly watched expedition. Gregory finally arrived in Adelaide
three short months after leaving Moreton Bay; and Babbage was
still completing half a year's survey of some salt lakes. Public
enthusiasm, which had flamed high on the fuel of false dreams,
began to wane, then flickered, and burst into an angry flare of
resentment. Forgetful of the purport of Babbage's instructions,
remembering only that other states were making uncomfortable
comparisons, and that the explorer was still being crushed between
the upper and nether millstones of bad country and cumbrous
equipage, the Commissioner promptly recalled Harris, 50 and sent
up Charles Gregory as second in command, with a reinforcement
of men 60 and horses to take the place of the unfortunate drays.
At last the great northerly push was to come in sight.
Babbage, unsuspecting and calm in the consciousness of work
well done, had started once more 61 from the Elizabeth with Warri-
ner to survey the lake country he had recently explored. Tracing
the eastern shores of the Great Salt Lake southward, he discovered
another—Lake Macfarlane 62 —and proved to his own satisfaction
that the Great Salt Lake was not connected directly w r ith Lake
Gairdner, whose eastern shore he followed (unhappily southward)
for forty miles to Hack's Separation Camp, 63 Being in want of
water he returned to Port Augusta by way of Lake Gillies and
Coroona Range.
53 S.A. Reg., Aug. 12, 1858.
36 In response to Babbage’s unofficial request of Aug. 14, 1858.
60 Phibbs and Bowman.
61 Aug. 4, 1858.
62 After Th. Macfarlane, whose tracks he saw In the vicinity, and whose
exploring journal, according to Babbage, was published. Babbage located
permanent water here in lat. 31 degrees 36 minutes 24 seconds S., long.
136 degrees 34 minutes E., naming Lakes Finnis and Blyth, and hills after
Oakden’s companion Hulkes.
63 His reason being that the shore line did not agree with Hack’s
survey of it.


Gregory, arriving at Pernatty on August 28 while the leader
was still absent, immediately relieved Harris of his duties, sent
two drays and twelve horses back to Adelaide, and proposed, if
unsuccessful in finding water at Lake Campbell, to abandon the
expedition until the following season. 64 In the Elizabeth camp
to which he advanced, alarm and excitement grew as Babbage’s
absence became more and more prolonged; and Gregory prepared
to institute a search. Babbage, having recovered his men and
equipment from Harris, whom he met at Mount Remarkable on
September 9, made his way back, stung by what he conceived to
be Gregory’s ill-advised usurpation of authority; and fully prepared
to dispense with his services. Personal investigation, however,
showed the responsibility for the game of cross purposes to rest
with a misunderstanding of Harris, and the usurping party started
for home with Babbage’s regrets at losing “two most efficient
and zealous coadjutors, as well as agreeable companions.” 6s
Largely influenced by native accounts of fresh water between
Lake Campbell and Wingelbunna, he determined to start north
with aid for Stuart and Forster, who were exploring privately, 66
and as far as actual circumstances would permit, to have the main
camp moved slowly onwards with the drays.
The Commissioner, seeing little but an expense of over £4,000
for an advance of little more than a hundred miles beyond the
settled districts, and unable to account for an apparent game of
“cache-cache” between Babbage at Port Augusta and Gregory at
the Elizabeth, despatched a stern reprimand. 67 Circumstances
seemed to leave him no option but to recall Babbage for his in-
discretion in venturing south to Hack’s country when he should
be going north; but, keeping the financial situation well in view,
he gave Babbage carte blanche—not to do it again.
The second half of Babbage’s work can only be valued in the
light thrown upon the Lake Torrens problem by an adventurer
of Gregory’s temper, “ever at ease on a track that he knew not,
and restless and lost on a track that he knew.” John McDouall
61 He was anxious to get back to Sydney within his term of leave.
65 Gregory and Phibbs.
66 Thought to be cut off from Streaky Bay by the extent of Lake
Gairdner.
67 So stern “that apparently the letter reads a* though intended to force
Mr. Babbage to resign.” (See Despatch No. 371 of Nov. 11, Governor
Macdonnell to Sec. of State; also 363 of Sept. 11, 1858.)
18
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


Stuart 68 on October 37, 1858, offered the journal and map of a
recent exploration undertaken by him, 69 to the Commissioner of
Crown Lands, in return for a grant of 1,500 square miles of the
country discovered. 70 Starting from Oratunga 71 on May 14, 1858.,
while Babbage was investigating Lake Windabout, Stuart had
pushed northward 72 through Beda, Pernatty, and the Elizabeth,
which, like Babbage and Warburton later, he did not consider
permanent. Andamoka, supplied by springs, proved to be one
of few permanent water holes in the midst of sand and stone,
“parts of which rivalled Sturt’s stony desert with their wave
washed pebbles and gravelly beach.” Wingilpin, the reported water
to which Stuart was making his way, he conjectured from a medley
of native opinions to be Cooper’s Creek. Seeking to get away from
the country which dipped towards Lake Torrens, Stuart travelled
on in a north-westerly direction, finding a long range on the left
of his route which formed a “continuous dividing watershed from
along the western shore of Lake Torrens to lat. 38° and long.
133°.” 73 To the north was promise of milk and honey; to the south,
the abomination of desolation accursed of Babbage and Company.
He finally turned south and made for Fowler’s Bay, 74 through
country worse, he thought, than any Sturt had known, without even
the saving grace of saltbush. It was with regret that he turned away
from Cansftm, where, as he thought, abode Wingilpin. 75 “Would
I had been more amply provided and prepared, so that I might
have carried out my intention. At any rate, if not for myself, I
have cleared a track for others to follow and extend.” Then fol-
lowed a mad rush through a nightmare of scrub, with little food in
68 Sturt’s late draughtsman. According to the MS. account of Stephen
King, he was born at Dysart, Scotland, and arrived in S.A. by the barque
Indus, in 1839. (MS. in poss. of Archives.)
69 Aided solely by Wm. Finke, one of the northern settlers.
TO He was actually granted 1,000 sq. miles. For dispute about location
of grant see P.P. 114/1858; C.S.O. 1488/1858 and 1217/1859; C.L. and I. 23;
33, 575/1859; also S.G.O. out letter 11/1859, and Note 4, p. 22.
71 Chambers’ head station.
72 He was “accompanied by only one white companion (Forster), and
a black, with five months’ supply of provisions, but with a moral courage
and hardihood of the highest description.” (See Despatch No. 271 of Nov.
11, 1858, Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State.)
73 Named by Governor Macdonnell Stuart Range.
7- * Named Mt. Finke on the way.
75 Cooper’s Creek flowing north-west, as he thought. According to
Babbage, his Weeringelbunna.


their packs and less hope in their hearts. A hundred miles on two
meals, eked out by sow thistles, pig face and kangaroo mice,
brought the weary little party to Streaky Bay and Mr. Gibson's
station, where complete prostration followed their return to civi-
lized life. 76
The achievements of the expedition were notable. They had
penetrated nearly 240 miles north-west of Babbage's camp and
had encircled the operations of the painstaking theorist in one great
sweep. They had made available for pastoral purposes 12,000 to
18,000 square miles (Stuart’s country), by the “exertion of a
courage, energy, and judgment scarcely paralleled in the previous
history of Australian exploration," 77 an achievement accomplished,
moreover, with the aid only of a compass and dead reckoning. To
Sir Richard Macdonnell it stood as “a great monument of what
can be achieved by the indomitable pluck of one man endowed
with a thorough spirit of self reliance." 78 The official mind in '56,
however, did much by comparison, and an over sense of relativity
in judgment often destroys its sanity. The panegyric accorded to
Stuart gave the coup de grace to Babbage’s distressful pilgrimage.
By September 24, 1858 (Stuart was at Mount Arden on the
11th), the reprimand was replaced by instructions to Major War-
burton to 79 supersede Babbage in command. Babbage, hovrever,
would not be superseded. It may be that, catching desperately at
his explorer’s laurels just as, mirage like, they began to fade before
his eyes, he fled incontinent before an irate Police Commissioner
could snatch them from him. It may be, and perhaps we may take
TO On his return on Sept. 13 and 14, he lent his plan and journal to
Babbage at Mt. Arden. For information relative to this expedition see also
Roy. Geog. Soc. Jour., 1859, Vol. 29; P.P. 119, 148/1858; and Goyder’s
report of Sept., 1860, embodied in P.P. 177/1860; C.L, and 1., 709, 749/1838;
23, 33, 575, 610, 652/1859; out letters. 617, 632, 657, 691/58; 712/59. The
original journal of the expedition is missing. The copy forwarded by
Stuart to the S.A. Govt, is to be found in C.L. and I. 703/1858. His original
plan is in the strong room of the S.A. House of Assembly.
77 Despatch No. 271 of Governor Macdonnell.
TO Officialdom is too often blind to the work of subordinates. The prin-
cipal work of the explorer in country such as that in the vicinity of Lake
Torrens is the location .of permanent fresh water springs. Stuart dis-
covered the Priscilla, the Elizabeth, and the Jersey, all small. (See report
of Goyder in 1860.) The most important of his watercourses is the Stuart’s
Creek of Babbage, now known as Chambers’ Creek.
79 For Major Warburton’s instructions, etc., see P.C.O. 537, 840/1858;
C.S.O. 1226^/1858.


his word for it, that in pushing northward he knew nothing of the
direction of the official breeze in Adelaide, and was only carrying
out the plan he had formulated before reaching Port Augusta.
However his motives may be construed, October 3 saw the con-
scientious little theorist, bereft of his beloved tanks and drays, flit-
ting across the continent with a disorganized party at the rate of
twenty miles a day, 80 while his successor at the Elizabeth 81 was
ransacking his stock of experience and the British language to dis-
pose of that “half of Hindley Street” which Babbage had left be-
hind him. 82
Proceeding by Emu Springs and Lake Campbell to Arkoona,
where he found a permanent water supply, Babbage, momentarily
beyond the reach of curse and Commissioner, pushed forward
across alternate sand ridges, scrub and bamboo swamp, past
Maerty, Curdlawidry, to Wonnomulla, a fine waterhole a mile in
length. The same country led him to Weelpiderunna and Weerin-
gelbunna, and finally, much against the will of his black friends,
to Hermit Range and the head of Stuart’s Creek. 83 This he ex-
amined as far as its entrance in Lake Gregory, 84 discovering
nothing but rainwater holes. His report of the 21st of November 85
expresses his confidence that, as far as he could see from Mount
Hermit, Lake Torrens must be a collection of salt lakes, as it did
not extend so far north as that latitude (29° 37'), or if it did, must
be reduced to a mere inconsiderable channel and might be readily
crossed. Passing the Emerald Spring, 86 which was bubbling at
80 He had left on Sept. 28, with Warriner, Herrgott, Jones, Pegler and
Ooinbatta, a Weeleroo black.
81 Accompanied by Gregory, Phibbs, Sgt. Major Hall, Mr. Baker, and
Police Trooper Coward.
82 The apparatus of tanks, drays, stills, and boring appliances were
scrapped, the sheep sold to Mr. Forster, and the provisions planted.
8S According to Babbage, Stuart placed this creek 29 miles too far
north, as he did not possess the necessary instruments.
84 Now Lake Eyre. Governor Mac Donnell (see despatch No. 296 of
Jan. 21, 1859) first altered the name Gregory, given to it by Babbage, to
Torrens, that given by its original discoverer, Eyre. (Exec. Coun, Mins.,
Jan. 20, 1859.)
85 He was surprised by Warburton on Nov. 5.
86 Evidently one of the mound springs noted by Dr. Howitt and, in
more recent years, by Professor Spencer, as the most remarkable feature
in a remarkable country. The springs are fresh and form a mound shaped
deposit of limestone round their source, the mound being crowned with
vegetation. They only become salt by flowing through the surrounding
21
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


the rate of 175,000 gallons a day, he discovered a north-eastern
arm of Lake Gregory corresponding to Eyre's north-western point
of Lake Torrens. It was here that Wayburton found him.
The Police Commissioner had found himself with only two
courses to pursue—either to fit out a special expedition capable of
tracking Babbage, or to await quietly the return of Warriner and
Pegler, who were expected back to conduct Babbage's main camp
to its summer depot. Either was dangerous because of the rapid
drying up of water in the vicinity. Until October 17 Warburton,
refusing to “throw good lives after bad" by following his predeces-
sor, raged helplessly against Babbage’s “insane proceedings,” con-
demning in unmeasured terms hfs accumulation of “useless rub-
bish," his “erratic movements,” his “ignorance, indifference, and
rashness” in the conduct of an expedition from which he was de-
termined not to be recalled. He finally broke up the camp, and
set out for Stuart’s Creek. Fully assured that there was no barrier
between that creek and the north, he explored 87 partly along
Stuart’s route, as far as Davenport Range BB (lat. 28°20long.
135° 45/) and retired with much grace when the good country ran
out. 89 He was convinced that Babbage’s plan of establishing a
summer depot was both unnecessary and subversive of public con-
fidence by inviting disaster. On the return journey he cut
Babbage’s tracks near Stuart’s Creek, pounced upon him, embayed
between two arms of the salt lake, delivered his ultimatum, and
prepared to make an attempt at crossing Lake Torrens. Babbage's
proposed examination in that direction he refused to allow on the
ground that the idea had not occurred to his predecessor until
mentioned by himself. Superseded just when his efforts were
meeting with success, Babbage with the bitter plaint that he had
salt-impregnated soil. Goyder observed in 1860, that the Emerald (Durra-
durrina) had shrunk to 20,023 gallons a day after a drought year.
ST 1,000 sq. miles in three days, "as much country as can be stocked
within a twelvemonth.”
88 Not 900 miles in a direct line from north of the Victoria River, and
only 550 from the spot where Gregory traced the termination of Sturt's
Creek in the interior. (Despatch No. 276 of Dec. 8, 1858.)
89 Named the Margaret (at Baker’s request); the Hamilton, after Geo.
Hamilton, Esq.; Paisley Ponds, after the Private Secretary of Governor
Mac Donnell; Beresford Hills, after G. W. Beresford; Strangway’s Springs,
after Hon. H. B. T. Strangways; Douglas Creek, after Bloomfield Douglas;
Davenport Ra., after Hon. (later Sir) S. Davenport; Coward’s Springs. A
claim was laid by Alexander Tolmer to the discovery of Davenport Ra. in
1842. See Reminiscences of Alex. Tolmer and S.A. Reg., Aug. 13, 1857.
22
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


"no alternative but to’leave the fruits of his labours to others/'
returned to the Elizabeth.
Warburton, in attempting the crossing, had in view the dis-
covery of a stock route from Mount Serle district to Stuart's
country, which would be less precarious than that by the Elizabeth
already traversed. To co-operate with him, he had in September
sent Corporal Burtt from Angepina to the district between Mount
Nor-West and the new country, 90 hoping to meet him on the return
journey. The parties failed to meet, but both found dry land where
the damp salt side of the horseshoe, by all canons of criticism,
should have been. 91 Warburton's journey past Gregory Creek and
the Finniss Springs 92 back to the settlements, convinced him that
the horseshoe was a myth, and that the way to the far north, as
he had conjectured, lay clear and open across his route and across
Lake Torrens.
It was officially regretted that Major Warburton had chosen
to return without pushing his discoveries further, especially as the
cost of the expedition had already amounted to more than £5,000.
In view of his undoubtedly valuable services, however, Governor
Macdonnell attributed his failure in this respect to an error of
judgment. “I think Major Warburton appears to have discharged
his various duties in a manner which reflects much credit to his
energy and conduct." 93 The Government, while deploring his
00 Parry’s country.
01 Burtt’s report to Geo. Hamilton. P.P. 151/1858; Roy. Geog. Soc.
Procs., Vol. 3.
02 Named by himself. For criticism of Govt, upon Warburton’s action,
see P.C.0., 1009/58.
o‘i See P.P. 37/1859, and despatch No. 281 of Dec. 11, 1858 (Gov, MacD.
to S.S.) Reports of Babbage and Warburton, with correspondence relating
to their expeditions are to be found in P.P. 25, 25*, 36, 127, 151, 154, 159,
166/1858; 20, 21, 37/1859. The originals of these reports are to be found
in records of C.L. and I. Office. For original reports and all correspondence
relating to the expeditions of Babbage and Warburton see C.L. and 1., 543,
544/1857; 14, 18 J, 26, 43, 45, 61, 90, 11J, 199, 200, 227, 251, 307, 411, 413, 436,
444£, 479, 552, 619, 620, 621, 646, 784, 785, 798, 812, 829/1858; 3, 145, 155, 228,
256, 312, 375, 484, 627, 725, 764/1859. C.L. and I. out letters 74, 184, 449, 569,
584/1857; 26, 42, 46, 79, 81, 89, 92, 123, 148, 176, 199, 248, 249, 250, 273, 432, 433,
435, 505, 513, 535, 685, 696, 699, 703, 708, 722/1858; 4a, 22, 151/1859. Many
of the out letters of the C.L. and I. Office are almost undecipherable, the
letter books being much impaired by damp. S.G.O. 588/1859. S.G.O. out
letters 389, 1354/1857; 32, 1321, 1398/1858; 713/1859. P.C.O. 9, 52/1859.
C.S.O. 115/1858, 166/1858, 1069/58, 1137, 1194, 1487/1858; 449, 700, 709/59;
see also Roy. Geog. Soc. Procs., Vol. 3. Further information concerning
Babbage’s expedition in:


attitude towards his predecessor, granted him a gratuity of £lOO
out of the exploration funds.
Loudly as he had thundered his denunciation of Babbage’s plan
of campaign, Warburton, in summing up the advantages of the
new country they had both traversed, approximated very closely to
his predecessor’s estimate. The water supply which in irritation
he had condemned as insufficient for the small flocks of Forster and
Macdonald, upon cool consideration became large enough for per-
manent stock. All other requirements for pastoral country were
present in abundance. Large as was the Hive in the official bonnet
of the Police Commissioner, and loud though the sound of it, it
was but sound and fury, signifying nothing. Hushed before the
silent immensity of a beautifully terrible land, where scrub and sand
dune might stretch to eternity, the storm was stilled. “Truth and
thankfulness alike require me to acknowledge that I have not
travelled thus far in safety and in health by my own forethought,
prudence, or skill, but by the merciful guidance and protection of
Providence.” 04
The mighty schemes of officialdom were not to pass unknelled,
Babbage, smarting under a rightful sense of injustice petitioned for
an enquiry, which was granted. Governor Mac Donnell rightly
estimated its value 05 as a “truth extracting instrument” for con-
temporary benefit, when he prophesied that such a retrospective
proceeding would only cause “the distribution amongst all parties
of some censure that mav not be merited and the withholding of
much praise which may be well deserved.” The points at issue
seem to resolve themselves into two—Babbage’s personal leader-
(a) Despatches of Gov. MacD. to S. of S. Nos. 223, 263, 271, 281 of
1858; 296, 323/1859; 432/1860.
(b) C.S.O. 1864, 1901, 1928/1857; 115, 136, 166, 1069, 1137, 1194, 1226 J/
1858; 449, 700, 709/1859. Outgoing letter of Dec. 15, 1857.
(c) Memo among Burke and Wills corres. in Public Library, Mel-
bourne. fr. CL. and 1., Adelaide, Feb. 25, 1858.
Two of Babbage’s original plans are in the 5.G.0., Adel., R/78 (com-
prising two) and R/221. Also one of W. shore of L. Torrens, evidently by
Harris, R/78.
61 Information relative to Warburton’s exploration:
(a) Despatches of Gov. MacD. to S. of S. Nos. 263, 276, 281/1858;
296/1859.
(b) C.S.O. outgoing letter 980 of Sept. 24, 1858.
Also general information relative to both explorers in Roy. Geog. Soc.
Journal for 1858 (Vol. 28), 1859 (Vol. 29). Addresses of the President.
95 Gov.’s despatch No. 281 of Dec. 11, 1858.


ship as called into question by the Commissioner and by War-
burton ; and (the greatest casus belli) the elucidation of Jhe Lake
Torrens myth, in which it was questionable whether Warburton or
himself had the prior claim. 96
The substantial reasons for Babbage’s recall were, that he was
losing valuable time; that he was not carrying out instructions;
that he did not interpret his discretionary powers reasonably in
returning to Port Augusta when he should be progressing north-
ward, and that he did not personally supervise the work of his men
at a time when he believed Harris to be disorganizing the party.
A consideration of the question involves much adverse criticism
of official intervention. Babbage’s instructions were definite, and
he carried them out. Nothing can controvert the fact that, having
been told to survey the country between Lakes Torrens and Gaird-
ner, and also the shores of those lakes, he did so and did it
well. Nothing can controvert the fact that, being under orders to
spend any remaining time in exploring northward, he did so, con-
siderably to the advancement of geographical knowledge, and was
recalled with a third of his allotted time to run. He may have
burdened himself with apparatus more cumbersome than necessary,
but even the Commissioner absolved him for not being omniscient.
He may have taken a roundabout way of returning from Lake
Gairdner to the Elizabeth, by including Port Augusta in his route;
but his explanation that no other was available was far too clear
and convincing to reach the penetralia of the Commissioner’s
consciousness. He may not have personally superintended Harris’s
conveyance of stores; but that duty was scarcely compatible with
the excellent and well worn official dictum that the leader should
maintain himself well in advance of his party.
Moreover, the gravest suspicion cannot fail to attach to
ministerial evidence such as that of Francis Dutton. The in-
structions outlined by him were seemingly incapable of mis-
construction. Yet he misconstrued them. In his evidence of
December 14, those instructions before him, he states with a peculiar
lack of perception that “common sense should have told him not to
waste time in useless Swinden’s country. . . Accurately, laying
down salt lakes is of no benefit to anybody.” On July 30 he had
written privately, “Don’t let it annoy vou if you hear any remarks
96 Minutes of Evidence taken by the Select Committee. See P.P.
21/1859.


have been made about the slowness of your progress; we fully
appreciate your labours and the difficulties you have to contend
with.” On September 9, no further cause given, he despatched his
letter of censure.
In February he had indited the instructions —an eighteen
months’ expedition to explore as far northwards as possible after
the detailed surveys were completed. In July he was "a little
frightened” at the great expense. In August, he would gladly see
it ended before the summer, as he had never cherished hopes of
fine country and fresh water in that direction, 97 believing with the
elder Gregory, that the expedition would soon be pulled up by
some desert or salt lake.
The volte face is explicable, but inexcusable. Officialdom had
gathered its pence together, and disbursed them on the products of
Hindley Street with the haziest of ideas about the primary objects
of the expedition. Babbage understood his main purpose to be the
extension of geographical knowledge by detailed surveys. 98 The
Government and the public, whatever they might have felt inclined
to state in cold words, craved the discovery with great eclat of bits
of Canaan for pastoral purposes. While the official scapegoat was
conscientiously pursuing his course, and the Commissioner, his
largest eye on the public, was patiently awaiting the fruits of one
quite different, Gregory appeared. The public suddenly discovered
that heavy exploration had gone to its grave with Mitchell, and
that a hurried scamper across the continent was now de rigueur.
The public showing noisily that it was not getting enough eclat
for its money, the Commissioner barked in chorus, and Governor
Macdonnell thought fit to adopt the same attitude as ‘‘there was but
a very small result of so costly and protracted an expedition.” 99
Despatch of Aug. 14, 1858.
98 Expressed from the opposite point of view by Gov. Mac Donnell.
Desp. 271: “The public viewed it as intended mainly for purposes of dis-
covery. Mr. Babbage seemed rather to regard it as a permanent institution
of the country.”
99 The Governor himself, however, showed the clearest perception of the
general misunderstanding. Referring to Babbage’s recall: “Thus one more in-
consistency was added to those which had preceded it, all originating, no
doubt, in a solicitude to follow the apparent movements of public feeling,
which naturally took a fresh direction as each new item of intelligence from
the North was received.” (Despatch No. 271.) “The attempt to combine
thus the more tedious and minute operations of accurate surveying with


Slain were the Philistines! “And Samson said: With the jaw-
bone of an ass, heaps upon heaps, with the jaw of an ass have I
slain a thousand men.” 100
Warburton’s "j'accuse” finds a simpler explanation, given in
all integrity in his own evidence. Finding himself helpless at the
Elizabeth, he chafed at the inaction. Girding himself fiercely to
slay the Philistine, he found no Philistine to slay. Sword and
buckler were there; strike he must. So he struck in an official
despatch. Not foreseeing publication, he allowed expressions to
escape him which calmer reflection and the ultimate success of his
plans led him to regret.
The second question at issue, the responsibility for the final
rout of the horseshoe theorists, has generally been decided in favor
of Major Warburton. 101 A problem which can be attacked from so
many directions, however, is not resolved with such simplicity. The
supposed Lake Torrens could be crossed anywhere between its com-
ponent salt lakes, and the man who first found any one of these
crossing places cannot ipso facto carry off the palm for routing
a pessimist army. It may be quite satisfactorily proved, as Dr.
Howitt has done, that Warburton, in November, 1858, found a dry
passage across the lake which Babbage had allowed to escape his
notice, at a time when that explorer had no thought of any crossing
except the one he had approached in 1856. But his work would
be deprived of much of its value were it separated from the previous
discoveries of Babbage and Gregory. Warburton discovered the
first effective crossing for stock; but it was Babbage, in August
among the southern salt lakes, and with fuller vision in October
at Lake Gregory, who saw before him signs of the disintegration
of one lake into many. Moreover it was Gregory who, approaching
from the north in August of the same year, saw quite clearly that
the supposed eastern arm was an independent sheet of water.
Considered in conjunction with these discoveries, Major War-
burton's exploit may be regarded as the final link in a long chain
the rapid movements of mere exploration led ... to great and needless
expense, as well as dissatisfaction.” (Ibid.)
100 Mr. Strangways so condemned the conduct of the Government that
his resolution in the House of Assembly resulted in the formation of a
new ministry. Desp. 323/1859.
101 Summing up by Dr. A. W. Howitt, C.M.G., D.Sc., F.G.S., in his
inaugural address to the Aust. Assoc, for the Adv. of Science in 1907.


of evidence forged with difficulty and labour by his predecessors
to prove the fallacy of a most dismal doctrine. 102
The initial work of the pioneer explorers throughout the late
fifties, was supplemented by the painstaking but less conspicuous
efforts of men who, in more restricted areas, were filling in the
details of the maps their forerunners had but sketched. Govern-
ment Surveyor Parry, 103 with four men, 101 in July and August of
1858, made a detailed examination within the supposed horseshoe
of Lake Torrens, starting westward from Angepina for the country
which now bears his name. His farthest north was only 28° 50',
but his short journey of eighteen days demonstrated the valuable
nature of the country traversed. His main claim to exploring
remembrance consists in his discovery of permanent sources of
water supply along the stock route northward which, a few months
later, was to be opened up by Warburton. St. Francis’ Ponds,
Rivers Creek, Rivers Water, St. Stephen’s Pond, and St. a’Becket’s
Pond formed easy stages through pastoral country which he con-
sidered as fine as any he had seen in the north. 105 Parry’s
narrative §hows picturesquely the lack of continuity in the physical
characteristics of some parts of Australia. A short span of twenty-
four hours found him in a “horrible region” like a “Turkish ceme-
tery without its noble cypresses”; and then, in camp by Shamrock
Pool. 106 Within two days he was walking through sandstone cut-
tings like “streets in a city of the dead” and interviewing natives in
a luxuriance of shrubs, wildflowers, and native clover. The low
boom of the mateless emu spread through country desolate as well
as beautiful; and the devout surveyor’s most enlightening criticism
It is interesting to compare the practical results of the expeditions
(see P.P. 161/1860).
Leases acq. Expl. N. of Adel. Cost.
Babbage 900 sq. m. 402 miles £4,681 5/-
Warburton 1,387 sq. m. 450 miles £250 18/5
103 p.p. 25/1858. Parry’s original report is in S.G.O. 782/1858. Several
enlightening paragraphs are missing from the P.P., Parry having marked
them unofficial. His original plan is in 5.G.0., Adelaide, but is not
sufficiently accurate for reference. For further information relating to his
work see S.G.O. 139, 323, 324, 370, 418, 419, 420/1859; C.L. and I. 524, 696/
1858; Roy. Geog. Soc. Procs., Vol. 3.
104 Parry mentions only Henning and Morris.
105 Named also R. Clayton, Gypsum Mound, Mt. Delusion (“which, like
Addison’s Cato, will be appropriate, if success or failure await me.”) Mt.
Attraction, Decoy Hill, Alluring Hill, Illusion Plain.
106 Shamrock Pool was discovered by Mr. MacFarlane.
28
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


of the land was an unofficial one. “Our fathers Abraham, Isaac,
and Joseph . . . did not condemn a very rich country because
water flowed not on its surface . . . they digged wells." 107
In the last months of 1859 Governor Mac Donnell traversed the
same district as far as the Strangways and Loddon Springs. loB
On October 10 of the same year, Mr. Goyder received in-
structions from the Surveyor-General to continue the triangulation
of the north into the country discovered by Stuart and War-
burton, exploring and well sinking at the same time. 109 The work
done by Mr. Goyder between that date and September 17, 1860,
was rather supplementary to, and critical of, that done by his
predecessors, than a distinct exploratory performance of his own.
It is the more valuable as a criticism, from the fact that the Assistant
Surveyor-General had realized his mistake of June, 1857, and had
already rectified its cause—his own inexperience. llo The Lake
Eyre and Torrens district, he considered a stockholder’s Paradise,
in winter. In summer it was still to be proved. A belt of country
fifty miles wide, was found to separate the two lakes, and another
between Lake Torrens north of Blanchewater and the eastern sheet
of water, now Lake Frome. The extent of Lake Eyre, stretching
unbroken to the north-eastern horizon, he could only dimly imagine.
lot A gratuity- of £5O was awarded to Parry by the Govt. (S.G.O.
1038/1858 and C.S.O. 1396/1858.) According to the Surveyor-Genera!, his
work had “enabled Major Warburton, who discovered the western crossing
of Lake Torrens to make with confidence by that crossing to Mt. Serle,
and ... by bridging the hitherto unknown Gulf between Mt. Serle and
Lake Torrens, it enabled Mr. Stewart and others to follow up Major War-
burton’s discoveries.” (S.G.O. out letter 1289/1859; see also 484, 545, 906,
1007/1858.)
108 Despatches of Gov. Mac Donnell Nos. 357, 359/1859, and 360/1860.
Roy. Geog. Soc. Procs., Vol. 5, p. 104; C.S.O. 24/1860.
109 P.P. 41, 55/1860 and 177/1360. Original in 5.G.0., 1314/1859. Goy-
der’s original reports, S.G.O. 62, 196/1860. His original plan is in S.G.O.
R/34. Reported by Gov. Mac Donnell as the first to illustrate the break in
the supposed horseshoe and to define accurately the shores of the two main
lakes. Lake Eyre now definitely received its present name at the hands
of the Governoi, who retracted that of Lake Torrens. (Despatch 432 of 1860.
Compare with 296/1859.)
11° Springs discovered by Goyder—the McLachlan, Fred’s, Gosse,
Smith’s, Murray’s, and Brackish. He also visited those discovered by Bab-
bage (Walgarina, the Emerald), and by Warburton (Strangways, Blanche
Cup, Finniss, Warburton, Coward, and Afina). Correspondence relating to
the expedition, see S.G.O. 1244, 1255/1859. Out letter 1511/1859. The
scheme was originally planned by Parry, and undertaken by Goyder after
the latter’s departure from the colony.


The portion already explored, which he shrewflly suspected to be
a mere bay in comparison with the whole, was, like Lake Torrens,
"a vast bed of dry loam encrusted with salt and surrounded by a
muddy margin/' After a general rain it became transformed into
“a vast bay of salt water . . . with hundreds of pelican, swans,
ducks, and other aquatic birds on the surface of the water which
rippled into miniature waves with every passing breeze."
With fuller knowledge such as this, came confidence. Hence-
forward throughout Australia men’s minds, no longer cramped
within limits half understood, leapt forward through the new-flung
portals into the desert and beyond. 111 Nor did they stay till straining
inward vision caught bright gleams of the northern Ocean.
11* A syndicate was formed in Melbourne in 1857 to acquire a tract of
the promised land for 20,060 head of cattle. Dr. Howitt undertook the
leadership. Following upon Tolmer’s unsuccessful trans-continental expe-
dition .they found themselves too closely in contact with drought and the
wind-driven dust-columns of the desert for Victorian taste. They returned
without accomplishing anything. (C.S.O. 1280, 1364, 1572/1859.)


CHAPTER II
THE WESTERN BOUNDARY
South Australian enterprise during these early years, however,
was not wholly confined to proving the errors or limitations of the
work of Captain Sturt. A collateral line of effort was creeping
tentatively westward along the ways of Eyre—attempting to cut
through the foundations of that dauntless old pioneer’s pessimism.
Death lurked too closely in the overland track to tempt many.
There were none to follow in his footsteps all the way. But those
who loved the juggle with Fate’s black and red were tempted sore
to stake high, while governmental policy was changing its colour
with the drift of years.
Governor Young, in 1861, had consigned the development of
South Australia’s pastoral resources to individual jugglery with
Fate, “stimulated as it now is by the privileges conferred on the
first discoverers.” 1 Development westward, struck by the convict
curse, he deprecated. “The more isolated we continue to be from
a penal settlement the better.” When the transportation spectre
walked no more, his successors began to see with saner eyes—eyes
moreover which dwelt lingeringly and regretfully on a scrap of
Terra Australis beyond their reach. The eastern boundary of
Western Australia had been fixed by Captain Stirling’s Commission
in 1831 at 129 degrees east longitude. The western boundary of
South Australia by Letters Patent of 1836 was 132 degrees east
longitude. The intervening three degrees extending to the
northern ocean, and being practically uninhabited, were left
formally under the jurisdiction of New South Wales. With the
extension westward of South Australian exploration and settle-
ment, the efficacy of that jurisdiction was to be seriously called
in question. 2
1 Minute by Gov. Young on proposed exploring expedition by Mr.
Sinnett. C. 5.0., one of miscell. papers, Sept. 18, 1851.
2 Exec. Coun. Mins., Nov. 7, 1856.


On April 24, 1857, Stephen Hack accepted the leadership of a
party organized by the South Australian Government 3 to explore
the north-western interior of the province. 4 Streaky Bay was
selected as a convenient point d’appui, whence operations were to
be directed for six months northwards as far as the boundary of
the province. The trend of official consideration is evident in view
of the instructions which advised divergence rather to the west
than the east of the due north line. Moreover, in the event of
country outside the boundary presenting a more favourable line of
route, or the general natural characteristics proving to be very
much superior to those within the province, the leader was allowed
full justification for crossing the border.
The party arrived at Streaky Bay, overland from Port Lincoln,
on June 1, and found that the expedition stores had been safely
landed by the Government vessel Yatala some days before.
Awaiting them from ten to fourteen sleeps from Fowler's Bay (ac-
cording to black romance), were the animal, neither horse nor cow,
which bore on its back like a chimney an enormous hump, and the
sleeping lizard with a big man’s girth—sure signs of good country
both, to native eyes. 5 Curiosity aroused, the party 6 "ventured ia
search. Packhorses filled all their needs and the dray was for-
tunately left behind.
The end of the month found them at Parla, the Gawler Ranges
ahead, with a chain of salt lakes at their base. Hack, Harris, and Billy
Grant formed a light party to examine the range, and discovered
a large stretch of well watered grassy country—Hope Downs —
intersected by narrow belts of rnallee. The granitic range itself
possessed water in plenty, Mount Granite and Mount Centre both
3 P.P. 156/1857-8, and C.S.O. 683J/57. The draft of Hack’s instructions
is to be found among miscell. C.S.O. dockets unnumbered. See also C.L,
and I. out letter 212=1/1857.
4 The plan was originally proposed by the Adel. Phil. Soc. Exploration
Committee in 1855. See trans. for that year; also the Third Annual Report
containing report of the Exploration Committee, recommending an expe-
dition to start from Fowler’s Bay—the cost to be defrayed by £3,000 un-
expended balance of the exploration vote for 1854 (Jan., 1856).
5 This rumor was the basis of many future assumptions concerning the
possibility of crossing the continent from north to south.
6S. Hack, W. G. Harris (surveyor), F. Miller (overseer of Price,
Maurice's station, a volunteer), T. J. Clarke, R. Lynch, C. Hurley, Braund,
Connor and Billy Grant (native). (C.L. and I. 184/57.) Harris was ap-
pointed because of the non-appearance of Stuart to perform the surveying:
duties. S.G.O. out letter 432/1857.


being amply supplied by springs. The return to Parla was followed
by a longer and more detailed examination by the whole party,
delayed several days, however, by the illness and return of Grant.
Pushing on past Warroona, Toondulya, Kondoolca, to Yarlbinda,
they found the country very similar—all good, all with a plentiful
water supply. Faced with scrub beyond Yarlbinda, Hack deter-
mined, in opposition to his instructions, and in response to the
advice of a native guide, to turn eastward first, towards the
reported salt lakes, rather than tempt an apparently bad stretch
of country leading directly to the north-west.
His route to Warrea, Moonaree, and Murnea, though by w r ay
of discouraging scrub and second-rate saltbush country, led him to
Major Warburton’s tracks and a great salt la’ke, stretching like an
immense snow covered plain beyond sight. 7 Hoping to reach the
north-west by rounding the south end, Hack crossed some good
saltbush country stretching back to Warroona, and verified by
native information the position, north-east of Kundery, of those
lakes whose names had been given to him by the Commissioner —
the “big one water” where “big one swan and duck sit down.” His
examination of the Gawler Range revealed the existence of still
further supplies of apparently permanent w'ater, Yardea, Pondanna,
Kodondo, Cockatoo Springs, Polturkana and Paney, all subserving
country with valuable pastoral and agricultural possibilities. The
encroachment of scrub marked the country to the south of Prospect
Valley, as it had faced his advance from Yarlbinda and Warrea, but
a route to the east and north-east opened up further promising
patches centreing round Kolay—a potential head station—and
Mount Double. The western shore of the lake led the party again
northward to the 400 square miles of open country round the Hill
of the Plain, and forced them south to the first-class water of
Spring Hill and Rocky Springs, thence on to Mount Ive whence
they named the Freeling Range, ten or twelve miles to the south-
-7 Hack wished to name the Lake after Governor Mac Donnell, but re-
frained, thinking that it might already have been named by the first dis-
coverer. Warburton states (P.C.O. 61/57) that Mr. Darke was the first
European to visit the Lake, and that his own party was next in order.
His suggestion, “Lake Darke” (C.L. and I, 373/1857) came too late (Sept.
28, 1857), for the Governor had already named it Lake Gairdner, “after the
gentleman whose long and faithful services in the Australian Department
of the Colonial Office, justly entitle him to some such tribute of remem-
brance from here.” (See Despatch No. 203, of Nov. 30, 1857; account of
Warburton’s work on p. 41. Also S.G.O. out letter 692/1857; P.C.O. 464/57.)


ward. Miller left for Streaky Bay when the party arrived at
Rockwell Creek, and they found in Clarke’s and Pagan's Creeks the
last permanent water before the ranges ran out. A gap of sixty-
five or seventy miles west of Baxter's Range and along the poten-
tial stock route from the settled districts, was thus left without
any known summer water. The formal work of the expedition
came to an end at Mount Separation with the departure of Harris *
for a more detailed examination of the Freeling Range on his way
back to Cooeyana. It did not end, however, for lack of working
material, for to the northward, between Lakes Torrens and
Gairdner stretched good country seemingly without end. only
awaiting the touch of man to be brought within the circle of civi-
lization. With exhausted provisions and footsore horses Hack
hesitated between the two courses which lay open to him—either
to go at full speed two hundred miles back to Cooeyana, or to
connect the country he had already discovered with Port Augusta
by finding a practicable stock route. Keeping in view the broad
seas of scrub which had prevented the north and westerly advance
prescribed in his instructions, Hack decided that the opening up of
available country within the province would be of more practical
value than a forced and hurried attempt to examine that north-
west interior which he had hitherto found impracticable. He deter-
mined upon the second course, and returned fully convinced that
the way to the interior lay between Lake Torrens and Lake
Gairdner. Harris found his proposed examination impossible owing
to the lameness of the horses, and arrived at Cooeyana on Septem-
ber 28.
Although forced by the northern scrub to depart almost en-
tirely from the course laid down in his instructions, and though
he felt constrained, on his return, to issue a public vindication of
his actions, 9 Hack did not remain unrecognized nor was his work
unvalued. The great fish lizard and buffalo had always remained
some sleeps ahead, but Lake Gairdner was an actuality which
leapt into sudden and picturesque fame. “Its size and remarkable
cliffs projecting into a vast expanse of dazzling salt, here and there
8 Whatever judgment may be passed upon Harris’s conduct daring Bab-
bage’s expedition, it must always be taken into consideration that according
to Hack, "he did not know the meaning of the word trouble where any
surveying was in question.”
0 S.A. Reg., Feb. 3, 1858.


studded with islands, render it one of the most striking pbjects
hitherto met with in Australian scenery.” 10 In leisurely travelling
over the country Hack had “discovered and described many springs
of permanent water,” and had made available for pastoral purposes
4,000 square miles of country. 10 In October of the same year, he
expressed his opinions of the north country by forwarding to the
Government a proposal for a future expedition under his own
leadership, which was ultimately to form the basis of instructions
given to Babbage in ISSB. 11 Above all did he make glad the
hearts of the annexationists, with whose sentiments Sir Richard
Mac Donnell was fully in sympathy. The existence of pastoral
country west of the 132nd meridian seemed a corollary to its
existence east of that line. “It will therefore be soon necessary to
take steps for ensuring the protection of the law to settlers in that
remote district, and as New South Wales . . . cannot be expected to
undertake that duty, especially as the harbours for shipping produce
are all in South Australia, the extension of the western boundary
of this province to Western Australia will probably be found the
easiest solution of the difficulty.” 12
In November of the same year F. Miller, overseer at Price
Maurice’s station, and W. Dutton reported through W. G. Harris 13
a rapid exploration of the country adjacent to Denial and Fowler’s
Bays, reaching as far as Belemah, which they named as an admir-
able site for a large scale exploring depot. Of the valuable nature
of the grassy country traversed they expressed no doubt, had it
been watered by anything more permanent than rainwater pools in
the rocks. Eyre’s Spring, Walyanibbe and the country behind
Mount Brown alone offered some relief in the general dry dis-
appointment.
In face of this information, the Legislative Council and
Desp. of Gov. Mac Donnell, No. 203 of Nov. 30, 1857.
11 C.S.O. 1459/57. He recommended the country between Lakes
Torrens and Gairdner as the scene of operations, and Babbage's scheme may
. have originated in a suggestion contained in Hack’s proposition. His
v estimate of £1,898 was a modest one, however. Original reports and
correspondence relating to Hack’s expedition see: C.L. and I. 212 J, 362, 369,
377, 378, 394/1857; 466i/1858. Out letters 170, 171, 581, 604/1857; 11, 45/
1858. S.G.O. 950/1857. P.C.O. 172/57. Also P.P. 189/1857-8; Roy Geog.
Soc. Procs., Vol 2, p. 185.
Desp. No. 203 of Nov. 30, 1857.
13 P.P. 192/1857-58. C.S.O. 3 724/57. C.L. and I. 407/1857; 84, 155,
1.78/1858; out letter 90/1858.


Assembly early in 1858, took the matter into their own hands and
petitioned the Governor to take measures for the annexation of the
coveted territory. 14 The Secretary of State, Lord Stanley, in
considering the difficulty, deemed it necessary to consult the New
South Wales Government. 15 In the meanwhile, Governor
MacDonnell 16 announced his intention of accompanying the vessel
Yatala on its official voyage of marine survey to the western
boundary, intending to return from Streaky Bay overland by Lake
Gairdner and Port Augusta. His journey to Parla, 17 and thence
south to Port Lincoln convinced him that scrub was not the only
feature of the Bight country, and that it was, capable not only of
maintaining more than double the stock then pastured there, but
of supporting an export trade in wool centreing at Streaky Bay. “I
may observe that the information I acquired during my recent trip
makes me regard an early settlement of the (annexation) question
most desirable.”
While private enterprise and official solicitude were alike
hammering at the physical and legal barriers to development in
No Man's Land, an attack was being - made upon them from another
quarter. The Commissioner of Police, Major Warburton, in the
course of his duties, had made himself fairly well acquainted with
the district between the Gawler Ranges and Streaky Bay. In
March of 1857 he expressed the opinion that this area was capable
of carrying 500,000 sheep, and that, if native hostility could be
overcome, the police might perform some very effective work by
making their way overland from Streaky Bay to Port Augusta, and
settlement might proceed more vigorously. 18 Hack cleared up any
doubts about the practicability of that particular route, but before
the inception of his expedition the Government had already found it
desirable to utilize police effort in searching for any existing con-
nection between Lake Torrens and the head of Spencer’s Gulf. 10
Police service in the more western districts was not called upon
14 Desp. No. 237 of Mar. 11, 1858. Also P.P. 27/1838. C.S.O. 1915/57.
15 Desp. of May 25, 1858, from Sec. of State to Gov. of S.A.
1 6 Desp. No. 229 of Mar. 22, 185 S, and 233 of May 11, 1858.
IT March 23, to April 20, 1858.
18 P.C.O. 195i/57. CL. and I. 118/57.
19 P.C.O. 367/57. Report of Win. Joliffe, Police Trooper, May 24, that
there was no stream flowing from the Lake into the Gulf, but that the Gulf
itself extended eight miles beyond Port Augusta and joined a small channel
with a difficult crossing place.


until May of 1858, when the Government found it necessary to
question the truth of the statements made by Miller and Dutton,
Police Constable James Geharty was requisitioned to spend five or
six weeks exploring in the district north-west of Streaky Bay, re-
turning eastward by the western termination of the Gawler Ranges,
but not venturing east of a line due north of Parla. He was
particularly required to corroborate or otherwise Harris’s report of
the expedition under consideration, concerning the truth of which
Major Warburton had expressed grave doubts. 20 The Police
Commissioner, also, was preparing to investigate the western
shore of Lake Gairdner hoping to communicate with Geharty to
the west, or Babbage to the east.
Geharty’s bap»tism into the brotherhood of explorers was a
rough one. 21 A week’s travelling found him and his companions
battling against the barriers of the west with sodden and depleted
provision packs, soaked by the uncertain June rains. Heavy
travelling with little water and no game to eke out their meagre
provisions, brought them to Yarlbinda, where dense scrub and sand-
hills seemed to have taken the place of the grassy plains reported
by' Hack, and all was dry. To the north he could not go, twin
sentinels barred his way. Scrub and many miles of salt lake forced
him for several day’s journey far to the westward till he came to
the district described by Miller. With little prospect of good
country ahead he turned southward, until the smell of the sea leapt
across the mallee to greet him. He made the coast at the back of
Point Bell, and advanced towards Fowler’s Bay, where torrential
rains atoned in some sort for the dreary scrub behind him. The
lake at the back of Fowler’s Bay. which he named after His Excel-
lency, led triumphantly to grassy country which in all optimism
he could see stretching to the boundary of the province. The coast
line led Geharty back along Miller’s tracks to Denial Bay and
Gooeyana, which ne reached on July 10. On the w-hole the country
bordering his line of route he had found good, in spite of its mallee
belts, but it lacked permanent water. Again it would seem that
future settlers must adopt the energetic methods of the patriarchs
20 P.C.O. 511/1858. C.S.O. 053/58, and 803/58. C.S.O. out letter 490
of May 25, 1858. C.L. and I. out letter 252/1858.
21 P.P. 35/1858. He was joined by Messrs. Symes and Swan, in search
of runs, and accompanied by Mr. F. Ives, Police Trooper Mudge, and Min-
nilta. See also C.L. ami I. 441/1853. S.G.O. out letter 774/1858.


and despair not if they found no water on the surface of the rich
land that was theirs.
Miller and Dutton he reported as having been absent only
seven days and consequently unable to perform the journey as
represented on the map. He had seen none of their tracks inland,
and concluded that their trip was for all practical purposes merely
a coastal one. The permanent water described by them he found
useless, and their information he contradicted as false. 22
The results of the expedition were welcomed by the Govern-
ment who granted the leader a gratuity of £5O in recognition of
his services. 23
These winter months of 1858, meanwhile, were giving Major
Warburton an opportunity to bring personally before public con-
sideration his theories concerning the possible exploratory services
of the police force. His tour of inspection in the north-west
district during June and July was especially organized with the
idea of obtaining information about the country and its inhabitants
in immediate advance of that part of the Colony lately offered by
the Government for pastoral purposes. 24 The route had been
planned to cover the country from Port Augusta to Streaky Bay by
way of Port Lincoln. From June 17 to 29, the Commissioner had
the company of the Hon. S. Davenport, who struck west from
Kangaroo Flat, while Warburton continued north-west. His route
through the Gawler Ranges covered almost the same ground as
that of Hack, but the view from Daddy’s Hill 25 tempted him further
into the unknown north. Westward lay an unknown and un-
charted lake, while the apparent cessation of the western course
of Lake Gairdner left free passage towards a northern range whose
unexpected lure spread temptingly before him. The Commissioner’s
indomitable energy and curiosity battled with fifteen miles of “vile
red sand scrub,” drove him round a north north-west arm of Lake
Gairdner and camped him on what he speculated to be “the only
spot by which (he) could pass between it and the other lake.”
Twenty-five miles farther on his course found him with water
22 Miller publicly justified his report against the assertions of Geharty.
See S.A. Reg., Dec. 7, 1858.
23 P.C.O. 804/58 in 511/58. Also C.S.O. 1273/58. Out letter of Oct. 14,
1858. C.L. and I. out letter CO2/1353. Geharty’s original report is missing,
his original plan is in S.G.O. R/236.
24RP. 35/58 and P.C.O. 97, 516/58.
25 Named by Mr. Davenport.


“lazily stretching itself out in passive obstructiveness” on every
side except that by which he had come. The new lake was the
old one, and the delectable range an inaccessible group of island
hills —all of which extracted from the Commissioner much philo-
sophy concerning the deceptive nature of distant views and the
impossibility of believing what one sees in an Australian hinterland.
Extricating himself from a disappointing position Warburton
managed to trace the western margin of the Lake as far as latitude
3l»°, longitude 134° 25', and turned back only through lack of
supplies and the unpromising nature of the country ahead. The
little paity reached Belemah, in Denial Bay on July 19, after a
toilsome journey over heavy sandhills and mallee country. 26 The
Commissioner's report, especially of the Gawler Range country,
while not unfavorable to western settlement, deprecated an early
start. The Range itself, according to his report, was partly granitic,
partly porphyritic. The water supply, strangely unlike that of the
mound springs of Lake Torrens district, had its source solely in
rock waterholes, crannied reservoirs whose precious contents
vanished with the heated breath of summer. Even these were few.
The water which would “tumble down” in winter and supply
twenty to thirty natives visiting it once a year, would leave a
hundred head of cattle dry. Even with wells, Warburton could
see little hope for many years to come, in a salt-encrusted, salt-
soaked land of brine, until the soil should lose its insatiable thirst
and cease to be a sponge. 27 To Hack’s 4,500 square miles of
pastoral country he gave at most 5,000 sheep as a hazardous under-
taking for even expert hands. Yarlbinda and its neighbourhood,
marked into runs as a result of Hack’s information, he delivered to
the service and habitation of the rock wallaby who alone might
benefit from the drainage which trickled prettily through the
gullies after a heavy rain.
Of the value of the coastal country he was equally sceptical.
From Belemah to Streaky Bay he found scrub far predominating
over open country; the water supply could not be trusted except
during the rainy season; and any unfortunate traveller, he con-
-26 Davenport traced Lake Gairdner north-west sixty miles beyond the
point at which it was seen by Hack. Its width he described as thirty to
thirty-five miles. (See S.A. Reg. July 27, 1858.)
27 The prevailing dryness, even in the Gawler Ranges, enabled War-
burton to locate the tracks of Eyre and Baxter.


ceived, would have to hug the coast and dig for water in the sand-
hills. The future casus belli of the States, that portion of unex-
plored territory between the 139th and 132nd meridians, impressed
him little. He boldly prophesied it to be, for twenty to twenty-five
miles inland, 28 alternate scrub and plain with a little surface water.
Beyond that belt he imagined worse and still worse.
The conflicting nature of reports such as those of Warburton
and Hack, added to the dreary story of Stuart's first journey in the
same neighbourhood, aroused much public discussion. It lessened
not one whit, however, the determination of the Government to
have and to hold their three degrees. The necessity for such
annexation had been anticipated in the framing of the New South
Wales Constitution Act; 29 but 30 Lord Stanley’s reference of the
matter to the Legislature of that State resulted in a refusal, 31 based
seemingly upon the assertion that all Australian soil was pledged
for the public debt of the mother colony. 32 In June, 1859, the
Executive Council recommended a further application to the Im-
perial authorities; and Sir Richard Mac Donnell, on the ground that
delay might “prevent a productive pastoral country from becoming
available to the inhabitants of either colony,” forwarded another
appeal from the Legislature in favour of the only colony “able to
establish material and protective connection with that territory.” 33
The appeal received no response.
The years 1859 and 1800 were eventful in exploratory history.
Major Warburton, indeed, failed to penetrate north-west of
Fowler’s Bay and was driven back by heavy scrub 34 ; but the early
28 The best starting point for future operations in that direction he con-
sidered to be either Fowler’s Bay or the most northerly crossing place of
Lake Torrens.
29 Section 46.
3° Despatch, Lord Stanley to Gov. Mac Donnell, May 25, 1858.
31 New South Wales P.P. of Feb. 28, 1860. (Proposed annexation of a
portion of N.S.W. to S.A.)
32 The statement left a large loophole for ironical criticism, and the
S.A. press wondered wrathfully if the commercial ciedil of their uncom-
promising neighbour should not become the responsibility of the “porpoises,
that flounder upon the coast, the alligators that bask on the hot shores
of the Gulf of Carpentaria, and even the apocryphal bunyip that haunts the
mysterious interior.” (Reg., Nov. 10, 1858.)
33 Desp. No. 324 of June 6, 1859. (See also Exec. Coun. Mins. Aug.
18, 1858; June 11, 1859.)
34 Warburton’s report, C.S.O. 1246/1860. Out letter of Jan. 9, 1861;
Roy. Geog. Soc. Procs., Vol. 5, p. 124; Roy. Geog. Soc. of Aust., S.A. Branch,
1917-18. See also Desp. 470 of Dec. 26, 1860, Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State.
40
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


successes of John McDouall Stuart in pushing northward towards
the Indian Ocean opened up a wider prospect for grasp and achieve-
ment. Plans for trans-continental roads, railways, tramways and
telegraphs, absorbed much public attention and official pigeon hole
space. Infected with the recurrent extension fever, Governor
Mac Donnell, in October, 1860, reverted to the old annexation ques-
tion, still unsettled. But now' he asked more. 35 “As the track
opened by Stuart across the interior is almost certain to be much
frequented ,even if the telegraph to India be not eventually taken by
that route, I suggest that whenever any Letters Patent may be
issued constituting the territory in question a portion of South
Australia, it might be desirable to carry the then western and
present eastern boundaries of this colony to the north coast,” until
a separate settlement be established at the Victoria River.
That was a matter, however, which could only be settled by
reference to all the colonies, though, as the Duke of Newcastle
stated, it did not prevent the ultimate expansion of South Australia
northward. 36 It seemed impossible to the Colonial Office that any
colony on the north coast should be governed from Adelaide, from
which it would be separated by the whole breadth of the Continent,
“and by districts of which all that can be said is that they are
proved not to be impassable.”
At the date of his despatch, a bill was being prepared to effect
a transference of the disputed territory in the west, and on July 22.
1.861, the Act 37 finally allowed that "so much of the colony of
New South Wales being to the South of the twenty-sixth degree of
South latitude as lies between the western boundary of South
Australia and the one hundred and twenty-ninth degree of east
longitude ... is hereby detached from the colony of New South
Wales and annexed to the colon}' of South Australia.”
35 Desp. No. 438 of Oct. 26, 1860.
36 Desp. from Duke of Newcastle to Sir R. MacDonr.ell, Feb. 26, 1861.
37 24 and 25 Viet. cap. 44. See Desp. from Sec. of State, Aug. 26, 1861,
and P.P. 180/1861.


CHAPTER III
ACROSS THE CONTINENT
By 1859 South Australia was in a unique position among the
colonies. Her last northern barrier broken, the supposed central
desert lay close. A blazed trail in the west country, and a boundary
wider flung, left her free to determine, not as heretofore, whether
she should venture, but from what point she should venture. The
boldest of her pioneer leaders might well hesitate. Pain and horror
they knew as co-mates in a rumored wilderness of sepulchre and
flame, terrestrial City of Dis. But the purgatory had its paradise;
beyond it lay the Ocean, and beyond Ocean, the old World, civi-
lization, markets, trade, wealth. “Sturt. Eyre, Kennedy, Mitchell,
and Gregon^, 1 have been each nibbling at the great sub-tropical
desert from the respective inland boundaries of the four Australian
colonies, but none of them have been able to strike across it.” Dr.
Mueller summed up the thoughts and hopes of the majority when
he stated his inference that “the deserts observed by these explorers
at such distant points of the interior . . . are contiguous” but that
they are “broken occasionally by oases destined in future to afford
the means of communication throughout the Continent.” 2 The way
to the sea, from East to West, or South to North, was the problem
of the early sixties.
Incentives were not wanting. The curiosity which was
tempting Livingstone through Africa pulled hard at the heart and
purse-strings of young Australia. The simple need for an extension
1 Melb. Age, reported in S.A. Reg., July 29, 1858. We may add Leich-
hardt.
2 Transactions of Phil. Institute of Victoria, 1857 “Historical Review
of the Exploration of Australia,” by Ferdinand Mueller. He stated a similar
view in reporting on the botanical collection of Babbage’s expedition of
1858. The transit to the flora of Arnheim’s Land he considered would be
gradual, and the absence of heavy scrub obstructions most probable. See
Victorian P.P. 1/1859-00 and compare this hypothesis with the actual
experience of Stuart in 1802.


of geographical knowledge meant much to the scientific section of
the community. Economists viewed hardly the distance between
the colonies and the outer world. The needs of the Indian Remount
Service were pressing, and political wires were at high tension in an
endeavour to establish a market in that country for Australian
products, while racial ethics shrank from a fancied Chinese inun-
dation of unoccupied British territory. The strongest appeal, how-
ever, was one that was universally felt. The projects of the
Mediterranean Electric Telegraph Company, as early as 1855, had
done much to link up Great Britain telegraphically with the near
East. By 1859 the line had crept to India and a scheme was on foot
to bring Australia within the electric circuit. 8 The need was un-
questioned. The temporary Russian invasion scare, and the native
mutiny in India rendered it advisable, strategically. Attempts to
establish a European settlement at Melville Island and Raffles Bay.
on the north coast, had been so disastrous, that any attempt to
bring such isolated districts within easv communicating distance
would be welcomed. The commercial and economic advantages
were obvious. Individual interest, however, could not brook such
remarkable unanimity among the States; and the question of route
caused woeful dissension. The immediate result was a determined
effort on the part of at least two of the colonies, Victoria and
South Australia, to make that route a land one and their own.
Proposals for a trans-continental expedition from both sources,
and temporarily from New South Wales, were not wanting during
the years 1857 to 1859, at a time when methods were in the melting
pot. In December of 1856 the Deputy Surveyor-General of New
South Wales preferred before the Sydney Philosophical Society a
suggestion which savoured of militarism, Mitchell, and the ex
ploratory age gone by. 4 A large expedition, fifty to a hundred men,
with pack horses and drays, were to explore along the inner side
of the northern coast ranges, driving before them thousands of
sheep and cattle, and trusting for safety to natives, organized as an
armed police force. Five miles a day for two years would carry
3 A tentative scheme had been formulated in 1856 and actually
predicted, according to the Sydney Morning Herald, three years previously,,
when it had been condemned as visionary and unpractical. (Syd. Morn.
Her., Jan. 4, 1856.)
4 Procs. of Syd. Philosoph. Soc. (Syd. Mag. of Science and Art), 1857.
Address by Mr. J. Thompson on “The necessity for a further exploration,
of the interior of the Australian Continent,” Dec. 10, 1856.
43
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


them from one end of the Continent to the other. Other suggestions
from the same society limited themselves entirely to the realms of
theory. Three expeditions were proposed, a week’s distance apart,
the first to explore, the second to examine in detail, the third to
survey. Expense was no object. Even the use of balloons did not
escape discussion. The partial success of Gregory in 1856 and 1857
concluded the part taken by the Government of the mother colony
in trans-continental exploration.
Victoria’s reputation for exploratory enterprise at this time
rested largely upon the unfailing suggestions of Dr. Mueller, who
had vindicated his theory by the practical way in which he had
served Gregory in the North Australian Expedition. Nor was it
until an anonymous donor led the way that Victoria saw herself
in a losing race, and initiated the expedition under Burke and Wills,
Hers was the contribution of science.
In South Australia, both science and statesmanship yielded to
private enterprise. Government intervention was singularly small
and singularly unfortunate. When the route taken by Hack’s ex-
pedition was first suggested by the Adelaide Philosophical Society
in 1855, 5 it was hinted in the press that he might effect a junction
with Gregory, then working southwards from the River Victoria;
but Hack, against Government instructions, succeeded elsewhere.
At the end of 1858, when Governor Mac Donnell felt constrained
to shelve the question of telegraphic communication with England
until further exploration had proved, or otherwise, the feasibility
of the overland route, he did not let the responsibility for that
■exploration rest upon official shoulders. He was unable to obtain
"“the requisite unity of action amongst the various colonies.” 0 The
storms of the Babbage-Warburton controversy were followed by a
dead calm in officialdom, a lull spent mainly in counting the cost,
and refusing to be drawn into further speculative whirlwinds. The
greater risks, meanwhile, were being assumed by John McDouall
Stuart, who in 1859 began the work which was to reach its con-
summation at the shores of the Indian Ocean.
His first two expeditions in the neighborhood of Lake Torrens
5 Third Annual Report, Jan., 1856. The special exploratory committee
recommended an expedition from Fowler’s Bay because of the failure of
Dr. Browne's expedition W. of L. Torrens. (Correspondence re work of
the Committee, in Archives.)
6 Despatch No. 276 of Dec. 8, 1858.
44
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


were preparatory in nature, and directed towards amplifying the
knowledge obtained by his predecessors, rather than opening up
new fields for speculation. Financially dependent upon Mr. Finke and
Mr. James Chambers, Stuart seems to have considered as his main
object the surveying of the land for future runs, and the discovery
of sufficient permanent water to supply large heads of cattle. In
both he was singularly successful. His first four months’ expedition
from April to July, 1859, 7 covered and went slightly beyond the
tracks of Parry and Warburton. Following the last explorer’s route
by way of Finniss Springs and Gregory Creek, Stuart planned a
route north-west of Chambers Creek, along Warburton’s old track
to the Davenport Range and slightly beyond. The way was not
new, but new and fascinating was the picture of it which Stuart
managed to bring back with him. Parrv’s descriptions, it is true,,
he modified somewhat. Shamrock Pool he did not think permanent.
“The country around St. Francis’ Ponds is as Mr. Parry describes
it, with the exception of the water, which is gone.” St. Stephen’s
Ponds had but the pond bed left; but a greater than St. Stephen’s
Ponds was there. Within three miles, twelve of Central Australia’s
übiquitous mound springs bubbled unceasingly. The discovery was
Herrgott’s, and his name became theirs. Stuart was quick to grasp
their value, but laconic in recording it. “I am very glad he has
found them. There will now be no difficulty in taking stock to
Chambers’ Creek.” Strange as he thought them, fresh, yet coming
from salt, forming salt creeks, draining into a salt lake, and creating
for themselves a snowy shroud of soda and saltpetre, he was to see
stranger. Several days were spent surveying from a temporary
depot on the broad reaches of Chambers’ Creek, and the party then
started northward. Group after group of strongly running springs
stood sentinel, and saviour, by the way. The Hamilton, Hugh,
Beresford, Coward, and Paisley Ponds had diminshed nothing.
Better runs were not in the colony, the farthest distance from
water in the driest summer not exceeding five miles. Stuart’s own
Elizabeth Springs poured down from a height above the plain
7 “The Journals of John McDouall Stuart,” by Wm. Hardman. The
MS. of this expedition, which was evidently handed over to Mr. Jas.
Chambers, is missing. Stuart’s original plan, if any was made, is also
missing. Stuart mentions as his companions, Herrgott, the artist; Miller,
the botanist, and Campbell, the stockman. Herrgott’s sketches of the
expedition are in the Mitchell Library, Sydney. See also Journal of Roy.
Geog. Soc., Vol. 31, 1861.
45
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


enough water to drive a flour mill. The surveys were completed in
March, and a messenger despatched with them to the Chambers
head station. 8 Stuart’s lust for discovery, the fever which pours
maddeningly through the veins of one with pastoral treasure trove
before him, was not to be assuaged by one new spring or two. It
led him on “to see what the Davenport Range is.” After more
than a month’s examination, with many retreats for want of water,
he turned back from Hanson Range only because he had not suffi-
cient men to examine thoroughly the splendid country he had met
with. The line of springs he found continuing throughout the
ranges, with enough water at places like Davenport Creek and
Freeling Springs to serve the largest station in the colony, “a
wonderful country, scarcely to be believed.” 0
Stuart’s penetration through ninety miles of gradually im-
proving pasture land directly to the north-west of Warburton's
farthest point was hailed as “another decided step in advance
through available country towards the Victoria River, 10 a passage
which the Governor considered would shortly be accomplished.
The detailed information of Stuart's maps and journal were at first
made available neither to the public nor to the Government. 11 The
general results, however, were conceived to be sufficiently impor-
tant to delay any consideration of a coastal telegraph system until
the Continent should be crossed or its passage proved impractic-
able.
In the meanwhile Mr. Chambers was equipping Stuart for a
8 Stuart, during this journey, named: Davenport Ck. (Hon. Mr. Daven-
port, M.L.C.), Spring of Hope, Hawker Spgs. (G. C. Hawker), the Blyth
(Hon. Arthur Blyth), Hanson Ra. (Hon. R. D. Hanson), Mt. Younghusband
(Hon. Wm. Younghusband), Mt. Kingston (Hon. G. S. Kingston, Speaker
of House of Ass.), Freeling Spgs., Barrow Spgs. (J. H. Barrow), Peake Ck.
(E. J. Peake), Mt. Harvey (J. Harvey), Mt. Dutton (Hon. F. S. Dutton),
Mt. O’Halloran (Hon. Major O’Halloran), the Neales (J. B. Neales), Mt.
Browne (J. H. Browne of Sturt’s expedition), Parry Hills, Louden Spgs.
° In S.A. Reg. of July 2G, 1859, is a short account by Ed. Giles, sur-
veyor, of his exploratory expedition in the vicinity of Lake Torrens, mainly
confirmatory of the information given by Stuart. He especially mentions
the district as having the appearance of a region of eternal winter, because
of ks whiteness.
10 Desp. No. 334 of July 18, 1859.
11 According to Hardman, confirmed by Gov. Mac Donnell’s Desp. to
Sec of State, No. 338, Aug. 17, 1859, they wore retained by Mr. Chambers.
•C.L. and I. 610/59 is the covering letter enclosing the journal as handed to
the Commissioner of Crown Lands. The journal itself is missing.


more extensive trip to terminate only at Cambridge Gulf. 12 His
offer to the Government of the explorer’s services in return for the
cost of the expedition and a liberal reward upon his arrival at the
north coast, was referred to the other colonies for their co-
operation. The Governor expressed officially his approval of the
plan, as it would “settle for ever the practicability of carrying the
wire, as well as of sending horses, by that route ... I strongly
recommend immediate action.” 13 The hesitation of New r South
Wales, 14 however, provoked a withdrawal of the proposal. 15 All
that remained for the South Australian Government was to offer a
reward of £2,000 to any person crossing the Continent within cer-
tain limits of longitude. 16 an offer made in the hope that at least
Victoria might wish to increase the sum by a proportionate con-
tribution. That colony, unfortunately, had plans of its own, which
were not yet mature, 17 and the offer succeeded in giving a finer
edge to an already keen emulation between the States.
Its immediate result was a freshened epidemic of theory and
a little ineffectual practice. The Clerk of the Executive Council,
Arthur Kinloch, was willing to undertake the enterprise, should the
Government meet his pecuniary requirements, which were many. 18
The Government did not. A suggestion was received from A. J.
Murray that the work should be carried out as part of a survey
contract along a specified line, and paid for mile by mile, 19 a pro-
posal which was not endorsed by the Surveyor-General. Alexander
Tolmer, who had a year previously wished to be a member of
Babbage’s expedition, 20 collected laboriously by public subscription
sufficient to equip a party for the north. 21 His efforts were not
J 2 Mr. Chambers’ motive may have been the development of Stuart’s
reputed gold discovery or the formation of cattle runs
*3. C.S.O. 1136/59, Gov. in Chief to Mr. Yonnghusband, July 19.
14 C.S.O. 16b2/59; Exec. Coun. Mins., July 25, Aug. 15, 1859.
15 Desp. No. 338 of Aug. 17, 1859. S.A. Reg., Aug. 4, 1859.
10 C.S.O. 1141/59; Desp. No. 338.
17 Burke and Wills Expedition. Gregory, who refused the command of
the trans-continental expedition, planned by the Phil. Institute of Vic.,
offered interesting advice as to the best route. He considered the junction
of Cooper’s and Strzelecki Cks. the best place for a depot, the route to
he between that spot and the Victoria River. (See Pjocs. of the Society,
April 20, 1859.)
18 C.S.O. 1172/59. Outgoing letter of July 26.
19 P.P. 153/59.
20 C.S.O. 136/58.
21 C.S.O. 1280, 1364, 1572/59. C.L. and I. 611, 626, 648, 705, 766, 809, 904,


happy. E, A. Delisser. partner in the project, resigned on a question
of leadership at the outset. The actual party consisted of Joseph
L. B. Brown, David Herrgott, Benjamin Varley, Richard Trigger,
Bernard Shaw, and Frederick Litchfield, the last three "to make
themselves generally useful, but no one to have any particular
defined duty.” They were to traverse the "island of Australia” by
way of Mount Serle 22 ; but took the shortest and hardest cut by
Beda Hill, lost their horses and were unable to proceed. Although
supported by a government decision to send a relieving vessel to
the north-west coast, and though working on a strictly communistic
basis, the members of the expedition were compelled to part com-
pany in Central Australia, owing to the disquieting evaporation of
their resources. In spite of the leader’s efforts in the following
year to obtain both private and official assistance, the expedition
never revived. Thomas Burr offered his services to the Govern-
ment in a similar capacity, having negotiated with the Victorian
exploratory authorities for the same purpose. 23 The Government,
however, would grant no help beyond the monetary reward.
In Melbourne, meanwhile, camels were being awaited from
India with remarkable interest, both Australia and the motherland
concerning themselves overmuch with exploratory technique. The
South Australian press voiced unnoticed one of the greatest
problems, one which, strangely, neither Government nor scientific
societ} r was preparing definitely to combat. "We believe that the
chief difficulty in the way of extending the journey last proposed
by Mr. Stuart... would arise from the interference of the natives.” 24
It was a problem with a solution, and quite untheoreticalty Stuart
was to solve it.
Starting from Chambers Creek in November, 1859, 25 he trekked
952, 953, 934/59; 61, 1040/60; 294/61; 1211/62. See also S.A. Reg., Sept. 8,
Nov. 5, Nov. 29, of 1859. C.L. and I. out letters, 704, 769, 870, 951, 1009/1859.
22 The Secretary of the Roy. Geog. Soc. (London) was at this time
making detailed suggestions relative to a system of supporting and exploring
parties, a suggestion handed on to Tolmer during the progress of his
expedition.
23 C.S.O. 1399/1859.
24 S.A. Reg., Aug. 13, 1859.
25 He mentions Kekwick, Muller, Smith and Humphreys as belonging
to the party. The original journal in the Mitchell Library, Sydney, states
that he was accompanied by five men, equipped for three months. This
diary begins on Oct.. 4, 1859, compared with which P.P. 65/61 has many
omissions of detail, and begins only in March, 1860. His original plan is
missing. See also P.P. 219/62.
48
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


towards his most northerly point as quickly as illness and im-
paired eyesight would permit. The preparatory part of the journey
was valuable in that the discovery of the William Springs 26 ensured
future journeys without a night’s lack of water. Tortured un-
availingly by the sun glare on the quartz of Mount Anna, whose
whiteness he at first attributed to soda springs, Stuart continued
his surveys along his previous course towards the Neales. 27 Spring
after spring rewarded his search, both within the boundaries of his
runs and without, most of them elevated, some like the Primrose
Springs, hot. 28 Fresh spring and salt creek were in strange com-
panionship; but at the headwaters of the Neales, whose course they
traced to Lake Eyre, the salt was supreme. They were salter than
the sea, or “the strongest brine that ever was made.” The
remainder of his time was occupied in surveying minutely the
Hanson Range country already traversed, and in digging unsuc-
cessfully for gold in the neighbourhood of Freeling Springs.
Stuart returned in January, 1860, to Chambers Creek, having ex-
hausted his provisions, health, and confidence in his men. One had
deserted during the early progress of the expedition. The others,
with the exception of Kekwick, he stigmatized as slovenly, lazy, and
richly deserving of punishment. Success seems little recompense for
the torture of semi-blindness which accompanied him all the way.
Imperious, and impatient of opposition as he shows himself at all
times in exploratory work, 29 Stuart found little in Central Australia
to assuage his natural heat of temper. The indolence and incom-
petence he oftimes encountered seem to have loomed mountainously
to him in a mirage created by physical pain.
Stuart waited at Chambers’ Creek from the end of January
until the beginning of March, while Kekwick was procuring assis-
tance from the northern stations to replace the men dismissed. On
March 2. with his favorite companion and Benjamin Head, he
26 After the youngest son of James Chambers.
27 He named also the George Ck. (after George Davenport, Esq.), Mt.
Arthur, Kekwick Springs.
28 Stuart states in the original entry in his journal for Oct. 24, that
Emerald Spring was marked too far west on his map,, an error due to
Hcrrgott’s misstatement that Babbage had taken his observations at the
camp instead of the Spring.
29 Stuart’s quick temperament is best understood b 5 reference to bis
original journal, in such a case, for example, as that of the men tampering
with his plan case.
49
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


started northward for the third time. The daily story of this
meagrely equipped expedition which first quickened the dead heart
of Australia, is a remarkable record. It flaunts the Union Jack, a
scrap of paper, and cairn of stones only, in sign of its achievement.
It had no hand of Ludwig Becker to picture its lonely progress. It
is impossible to see now the little group of men and horses breasting
eternal sun-scorched scrub, as we see Burke's sinuous camel train
spurning the desert in the gleaming ghost light of a thousand
stars. Flood, marsh, and precipice are the pictures of an unskilled
pen, laconically, monotonously set down in history. The personal
element is mainly suppressed. An expression of pain, of pity,
vexation or gratitude is all of the sentiment of Stuart that is
there. In it is nothing of the descriptive fullness, the clash of
jarring mind and temper, which gives a hectic colour to the records
of Burke and Wills. The details are surely “as modestly told as
the journey they describe was gallantly effected.”
As far as the Neales 30 Fortune provided them with a disastrous
plenitude of water. Floods deprived them of a horse and rations,
and seriously injured the records of the journey. The Neales itself
took them five hours to cross; yet within a day’s journey after
leaving good country near its boggy banks they were camping
without water in the midst of red sand and dead mulga, scrub which
tore to pieces all available packs and bags. The country right
through to the Centre and beyond was comparatively uniform in
nature, no story here of endless desert tracts and stony wastes.
Stuart records instead a continuous succession of watercourses,
patches of thick mulga—his most formidable barrier —ranges with
stony and scrubby bases, spinifex and open scrub land with plentiful
grass and saltbush. The only noticeable difference revealed itself
in the nature of the creeks. Some had water, and some did not.
Such was the country which led the party to the Hamilton and
Stevenson, where Stuart first began to feel the effect of long months
of surveying. His right eye became useless for taking observations.
30 Stuart named Mt. Beddome- (S. Beddome, Esq.), Mt. Daniel (D.
Kckwick), the Finke (Wm. Finke, Esq.), Chambers’ Pillar (Jas. Chambers),
the Hugh, James Ra., Crawford Ra. (F. J. Crawford, named Water-
house Ra. in Hardman), Brinkley Bluff (Capt. Brinkley), Hanson Bluff
(Hon. R. D. Hanson), Mt. Hamilton (since called Mt. Hay, after Commiss.
of Crown Lands), Mt. Hawker (since called Stiangway Ra. .after the
Attorney-General), Mt. Sir Charles (Sir C. Cooper), Mt. Freeling, Reynolds
Ra. (the Treasurer), Anna’s Reservoir.
50
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


The Finke River country presented a view of beautiful red
plains clothed abundantly with grass, plains of which the leader
stated that he had not passed through such splendid country since
he had been in the colony. Yet within a few miles he again reached a
land of heights and hills like the ruined castles of an extinct civiliza-
tion, where the hundred and fifty feet of Chambers Pillar stood pre-
cipitous and supreme. Again grass plain succeeded as far as the
James and its brother ranges, on whose dense scrub branches they
left the greater portion of their clothing and saddlebags. Still the
great desert remained co}', retiring ever before the open stretches
of deep grass, the palms, pines, india-rubber and cork trees
sheltering the “only real range" Stuart had met with since leaving
the Flinders. It was here that the party felt the first dreaded
signs of scurvy. Limitless ranges stretched ahead, rising before a
luminous haze, peak beyond peak, gorge following precipice and
precipice gorge, “as fine a pastoral hill country as man could wish
to possess.” Until they camped in the Centre of Australia, Stuart’s
party had to suffer not so much from lack of water as from loss of
clothing. On Central Mount Sturt, 31 two and a half miles
to the north-north-east of the true Centre he raised a cairn of
stones, whose bottled message beneath and Union Jack above first
spoke of ordered humanity to the all solitary sand and scrub. The
hill itself, scrub, sandstone and spinifex, he named after “the Father
of Australian Exploration,” “as a mark of gratitude for the great
kindness I received from him.” The range he named Kingston. 32
To Stuart the greatness of the day lay in its promise, “the dawn of
liberty, civilization, and Christianity” to heathenesse.
Once more turning his face to the unknown, Stuart advanced
from range to range, each with plentiful water supplies in natural
reservoirs. The highest he named Mount Denison and Mount
31 See the note left by Stuart under the cone of stones on Central Mt.
Sturt, April 23. The name was changed almost immediately after his return,
to Central Mt. Stuart, in his honour. He himself calls it Mt. Stuart in the
original diary of his next expedition, 1860-61. In official records since that
date “Stuart” is generally used, though in at least one instance (C.C.L.
memo, of 1872) “Sturt” is substituted. For correspondence relative to the
recent adoption of Stuart’s own nomenclature sec S.G.O. 4149/1915. The
Secretary of the S.A. branch of the Roy Geog. Soc. here states that “the
name came up for identification before the Co>mci! . . . some years ago.
Their wish is for the correct nomenclature of the spot.” The alteration
was adopted by the Surveyor-General.
32 Since altered to John Range, after John Chambers, Esq.
51
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


Barkly. From the Fisher onwards, however, he allowed himself to
be lured along a north-west course without striking water, and
finally found himself with exhausted horses in the middle of a dry
gum and spinifex plain from which he retreated precipitately. The
party were saved only by the steady cheerfulness of both leader
and men, and their unceasing care for the needs of the overstrained
animals. A sleepless night spent in watering the horses with a
quart pot in a bitterly cold wind produced “not a single word of
dissatisfaction” from either of the men. Chafed by the delay
Stuart, on May 12, set out to try his luck in another direction, east
by north, but was forced to return to the Centre suffering severely
from scurvy and the results of a kick from his horse. Tortured,
and longing for the relief of death, with blackened pain tortured
muscles and weakened will, the leader yet resolved to hurl all of
his last strength at the barrier shutting him from the north. The
Hanson Creek led them in a more easterly direction than before,
along the course of the Stirling past range after range, but slowly,
with the gait of weary disease-stricken men. It was “killing work”
at last, through plains of desert country where the rain was ab-
sorbed as it fell, even in the ranges. Struggles with the scrub,
with rock, ravine, and precipice, with dryness and barren height
glorified by occasional oases of beautiful plain, at last brought
Stuart beyond Sturt Range indeed, but face to face with terrible
scrub ahead, no water at hand, and animals crazed with the priva-
tion of a hundred and one hours without water. “Thus,” he says,
“ends my last attempt at present, to make the Victoria River.”
A week’s rest at Bishop’s Creek, however, restored them
sufficiently to make one more effort, towards the north-east.
Managing to avoid the scrub they reached Kekwick Ponds for a
bivouac. The next stage was the last. A fierce attack of the
natives, whom hitherto they had found so friendly, forced the
three solitary travellers, finally and with bitter regret, to abandon
the attempt to make the Gulf of Carpentaria. 33 “It seems that lam
33 The nomenclature of Stuart's original journal (in the Mitchell
Library) differs considerably from that of printed versions of the expedition.
During the course of the expedition he named Mt. Esther (after the maker
of the flag erected at the Centre), Hanson Creek, Mt. Leichhardt, Mt.
Denison, The Fisher (Sir James Hurtle Fisher), Mt. Turnbull (G. Turn-
bull, Indian Army Surgeon), Mt. Rennie, Mt. Peake (E. J. Peake,
Esq.), Mt. Browne (Dr. J. Browne), Stirling Ck. (Hon. Ed. Stirling), Mt.
Gwynne (Justice Gwynne), Mt. Mann (late Commr. of Insolvency), Mt.


destined to be disappointed; man proposes but the Almighty dis-
poses, and His will must be obeyed/’ Even on the return journey
Stuart did not give up hope of turning again, until scurvy and
shortage of provisions forced him to throw down the cards and
give the game to Fate. The return journey was a terrible one.
"My men have now lost all their former energy and activity and
move about as if they were a hundred years old.” One man’s
theft left the others hungry, Kekwick was ill and they dared not
stay for him to rest. The weary journey dragged itself out until
the Ist September, 1860, when they reached Chambers’ Creek and
home.
The expedition had actually penetrated a hundred miles further
north (lat. 18°, long. 134°) than Gregory, in his North Australian
Expedition, to the south, effecting for all practical purposes the
crossing of the Continent. It was officially so considered, and
the report forwarded to the Secretary of State spoke of the work
done with high commendation. "The courage, energy and judg-
ment of Mr. Stuart in accomplishing such an arduous undertaking
with such inadequate means seems to me unrivalled in the history
of exploration on this Continent.” 34 The Government immediately
voted £2,500 to provide an escort for Stuart, who had resolved to
Strzelecki (Count Paul de Strzelecki), Mt. Morphett (Hon. J. Morphett),
Forster Ra. (Hon. A. Forster), Alilne Ra. (changed to Crawford), Younghus-
band Ra. (changed to Davenport), Bonney Ck.. the McLaren (late Dep. Sur.-
Gen.), Murchison Ranges, Mt. Blyth (changed to Mt. Figg), Goodiar’s Ck.,
Mt. Samuel (his brother), McDouall Ras. (Col. McD. of Wigtonshire),
Tennant Ck. (J. Tennant, of Port Lincoln), Mt. Woodcock, Mt. Sinclair,
Short Ra., Goyder Ra. (since called Sturt Ra.), Phillips Ck. (J. Phillips,
of Kanyaka), Kekwick Ponds, Hayward Ck., Gilbert Ck. (after late Col.
Storekeeper), Baker Ck. (Hon. J. Baker), Barker’s Ck., Barrow Ck. (J. H.
Barrow, Esq.), Anderson’s Ck. (Jas. Anderson, Pt. Lincoln), Mt. Goyder
(Mt. Freeling in Hardman), Mt. Warburton (Mt. Hugh in Hardman),
Smith’s Ra. (H. J. Smith, Pt. Lincoln, called Bagot Ra. in Hardman),
Compare also P.P. 65/1861. A complaint was made by the Governor (see
C.S.O. 1464/60) that in the map being lithographed to accompany Stuart’s
journals, the names of places visited and named by himself had not been
retained. His Mt. Denison, for example, had been changed to Young-
husband, Wahamp(?) Hills to Mt. Stevenson, Dawson(?) Hills to Mt.
Hugh. A footnote was added to the map to indicate the change. (See also
Desp. of Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State No. 484, of April 25, 1861; S. of S. to
Gov. of S.A., July 17, 1861. Stuart’s original plan is missing. Gov.
Mac Donnell reported it in Oct., 1860, to be in possession of the Govt,
sealed. See also Desp. to Sec. of State No. 469 of Dec. 26, iB6O. Roy.
Geog, Soc. Jour., Vol. 31, 1861, Procs., Vol. 5, p. 55.)
34 Despatch No. 436 of Oct. 26, 1860.


start again in November with a larger party to complete his work. It
is regrettable that, owing to the resistance of the organizer of the
expedition, Mr. Chambers, and in opposition to official suggestion,
no scientist was included among the members of the expedition.
Stuart's efforts had by this time enlisted the deepest interest and
heartiest co-operation of all classes of the community. The Police
received orders to give their services wholeheartedly, where neces-
sary;3s and an offer came from F. J. Gregory, then in Albany on
his way from England, to convey any useful stores or equipment
to the north-west coast, to await Stuart's arrival, and to co-operate
with him there. 36
According to a confidential official statement made to Gregory,
Stuart had decided to strike north-west from the Bonney for the
Victoria River. He was accompanied by a larger party for defence,
and arrived at Louden Spa on the Bth of January, 1861, where his
numbers were reduced to ten. The expedition began with disaster,
the horses suffering severely from unaccustomed conditions. Stuart
followed closely his former track, departing from the blazed trail
only to examine more minutely for signs of permanent water.
The whole of the route bore evidence of a dry season, the water
having retreated several feet below the sandy surface. Progress
was slow when it was found necessary, as it generally was, to dig
for a supply for so many horses. The Finke country presented
them with the first examples of native artistry they had yet seen
in Central Australia, crude representations of shields drawn on the
bark of trees. In the course of the Finke, too, Polly’s Springs,
named then, perpetuate still the memory of the favoured
and faithful little mare that had gallantly accompanied
Stuart on all his expeditions and remained still with
him. The poisoning of some of the horses, and the ad-
vent of heavy rains were the onty happenings of moment,
until they reached unexplored territory at the Bonney in the middle
of April. Disappointed in his hopes that the Bonney and McLaren
Creeks would lead him to the Victoria, 37 Stuart followed his
former tracks to the sinister neighbourhood of Attack Creek, and
thence across Whitington Range to Morphett and Tomkinson’s
35 C.S.O. 1194, 1231/1860. C.L, and I. 1247, 1270, 1283*, 1287, 1288, 1313,
1402, 1505, 4556/1860; 623/1861.
36 C.S.O. 32/1861. Out letter, Feb. 11, 1861.
37 This fact is stated in the original journal only.


Creeks. From this base Stuart spent his time in fruitless en-
deavours to. break the northern scrub barrier, venturing in every
direction and succeeding in none. The Carrutheps and Hunter led
him north-west to the Ashburton Range and Plains of Sturtia,
which on May 4 he endeavoured to cross. The rotten sun-
cracked soil clothed high with grass, lured the horses into unseen
pitfalls; and they finally returned from what Stuart considered to
be the one-time bed of a fresh water lake, waterless. A second
attempt was baulked by heavy scrub which the horses would not
face, and in which they were lost at a distance of two or three
yards. On May 17 Stuart determined to attack the scrub
belt from the north-east and north-west sides, but fearful at heart.
"From here I fear it is a hopeless case either to reach the Victoria
or the Gulf. The plains and forest are as great a barrier as if there
had been an inland sea or a wall built round.” The easterly effort
failed in two days. Nowhere was anything to be seen but rotten .
alluvial soil, in which the horses sank to their knees, and grass
stretching eternally to every horizon. The next attempt was
rewarded at the end of fourteen miles travelling with a view, of the
"gem of Sturt Plains.” a splendid sheet of water, 150 yards wide,
stretching beyond sight, haunt of the pelican, crane and ibis in
the midst of desolation where no bird could live. The main party
were rapidly brought up and the discovery acclaimed as Glandfield
Lagoon, 38 in honour of the Mayor of Adelaide. It was examined
for nine miles and found to be seventeen feet deep in the centre
and permanent. Using the lagoon as a base, Stuart pushed on
northwards across Sturt Plains, successfully avoiding an encounter
with the natives. A day’s waterless journey forced him to return
and try a more westerly route, which ended in thirsty impenetrable
scrub. In attempting another, more westerly still, heavy rainfall
prevented all movement by reducing the rotten soil to the consis-
tency of cream. On the 10th of June he started once more for a four-
teen days’ reconnaissance which ended again in scrub, the thickest
he had yet encountered. "The horses would not face it; when
forced they made a rush through, tearing everything we had on,
and wounding us severely by running against the dead timber . . .
and through the branches.” The water had sunk through the
38 Newcastle Water in the P.P. and in Hardman.
55
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


porous soil and was nowhere available. “Thus ends my hopes of
reaching the Victoria in this latitude.”
Stuart's next effort was directed towards crossing the ever-
lasting plain ’ eastward towards the Gulf. They returned within
two days, with thirsty exhausted horses and legs skinned from knee
to ankle. Still undaunted he turned south, intending to round in
that direction the serried scrub which faced him like a hostile army.
Again he returned waterless. “There is no hope of making the
river now; it must be done from Newcastle Water (Glandfield
Lagoon) with wells.” In spite of conviction he made two last
feverish efforts and failed. Men, horses, rations, and - saddlebags
were failing too, and the party turned homewards nearly naked,
reaching Chambers Creek on September 7th, 1861. Disappointing
as Stuart’s work had been, and monotonously unsuccessful as were
his efforts, he had made, while on Sturt Plains, one most valuable
assumption, “For a telegraphic communication I should think that
three or four wells would overcome this difficulty . . . and the
forest could be penetrated by cutting a line through and burning
it.” 39
Stuart was no longer a prophet only in his own country. His
tales of “most disastrous chances” had won him world-wide recog-
nition and admiration. In May, 1861, the Duke of Newcastle
reported having received, on his behalf, the gold medal of the
Royal Geographical Society; the gold watch he had already won in
39 See P.P. 169/1861, and Hardman. Stuart's original journal is in the
possession of the S.A. branch of the Roy. Geog. Soc. There are numerous
variations in nomenclature between the original journal and the printed
versions of the expedition. A large number of the names bestowed by
Stuart seem to have been altered after his return. This is particularly
regrettable where names of Govt, officials entirely unconcerned with ex-
ploratory work have been substituted for those of the actual members of
the expedition. Lindsay's Ck. was named by Stuart Peter’s Ck; The Coglin,
Thring’s Ck.; Anderson Ra., Wall Ra.; Grundy Ra., Master’s Ra.; The
Goyder, Thompson’s Ck.; Mt. Townshend, Mt. Woodforde; Mt. Santo, Mt.
Lawrence; Owen Springs, Ewart Springs; Mt. Harris, Mt. Sullivan; The
Ashburton, The Carruthers; Sturt Plains, Plains of Sturtia; Newcastle
Water, Glandfield Lagoon; McKinlay’s Ck., Hanson’s Ck. Printed versions
omit: (a) Stuart’s many commendations of the personal behaviour of his
men; (b) Account received from Goyder's party of the wells met with on
Jan. 4, which they found incorrect; (c) Statement that Stuart considered
Sturt Plains a continuation of the Plains of Promise (Jan. 1, 1861); (d)
Stuart’s almost complete loss of eyesight. Stuart’s original plan is missing.
See also Jour, of Roy. Geog. Soc., Vol. 32, 1862; Procs., Vol. 6., p. 8.


1859. 40 But his work was not done. Burke's expedition had long
been in the field when he returned, and the State race to the
Ocean was not to be lost without an effort. When he waited on the
Governor to report his return on the 23rd of September, Sir
Richard did not hesitate to suggest the immediate resumption of
his labours, and the propriety of making one more attempt before
the present party with horses and equipment were broken up. 41
Stuart himself was ready. Glandfield Lagoon (Newcastle Water)
being only 120 miles from Gregory’s camp on the Camfield, 42 he
was thoroughly convinced that a passage could be effected by
means of wells and a larger stock of provisions. At only one
point did public and private interests clash. It was felt by the
Government that the expedition should be accompanied by a
properly qualified scientific officer, a suggestion which had always
been, and was still vigorously opposed by Stuart’s patron. The
opposition wrung hard words from Governor Mac Donnell against
those “who seem to believe that they are promoting his fame by pre-
venting others from sharing in the discoveries he may make.” 4:5 He
even suggested as a last resource placing the expedition under the
leadership of Warburton or McKinlay, in order to effect the wish
of the Government. The proposal was an unworthy one. Whether
the intentions of Stuart and Chambers were “perfectly straight-
forward” or not, the services they had already rendered in the
noontide were not to be exploited with credit by an inept Govern-
ment when the heat and danger and difficulty of the day were
done. Mr. F. G. Waterhouse was ultimately included as naturalist
to the expedition, which started in December, 1861. 44
io Desp. of Sec. of State to Gov. of S.A., May 27, 1861; Sept. 10. 1859.
41 Desp. from Gov. of S.A. to Sec .of State, No. 523 of Sept. 27, 1861.
See also No. 513 of Aug. 26, 1861.
42 A tributary of the Victoria.
43 Desp. from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State, No. 523 of Sept. 27,1861, and
0.5.0. 951J/1861. According ito official records the opposition of Mr!
Chambers was based upon personal motives. He had promised to hand
Stuart’s journal and plan to the Govt, in 1860, but failed to do so, offering
information to the Executive Council, but refusing it to the Governor.
(Exec. Coun. Mins., Nov. 1, 1860, Dec. 3, 1860.)
44 The expedition was organized by the Government, but the men were
engaged by Mr. Chambers, Stuart and Kekwick being paid by him. (See
King Papers, Archives.) It consisted of W. D. Kekwick (2nd officer), F. W.
Thring (3rd officer), W. P. Auld (asst.), Stephen King, John Billiatt, James
Frew, Heath Nash, John McGorrery, F. G. Waterhouse, and two men who
absconded almost immediately. (C.L. and I out letters 1513, 1514, 1736/61.
C. 1.. and 1., 1894, 1936/1861; also C.S.O. 465/1861.)


Stuart was under instructions 45 to attempt a crossing towards
the Victoria rather than farther east, in order to avoid the ground
already traversed by Burke and Wills. Although the track had
already been cleared, his initiatory difficulties were discouraging
if not actually alarming. Two of the men found themselves tem-
peramentally unsuited for an explorer’s life, and left the expedition,
taking some of its equipment with them. The horses, always
Stuart’s greatest trouble, found conditions hard and needed con-
tinual nursing; and the natives, losing their previous awe of the
white man, proved a continual obstruction with their guerilla
methods of warfare. The native aspect of exploratory work,
especially in Australia, is infinitely pathetic—children as they were,
stretching out frail hands to stay the flood tide. At Marchants’
Springs, on February 17, they showed themselves actively hostile,
harassing the party with fire and spear and boomerang. Had its
numbers been as small as in 1860 the expedition must inevitably
have ceased to be. The continued weakening of the horses, which
gave in rapidly with little privation, exposed them to further attack,
nearly developing into a serious affray at Mount Hay. From here
to Newcastle Water, where true exploratory work began, they
were left unmolested.
A short scouting expedition from the north end of the lagoon
discovered water in Frew’s and Howell’s Ponds. A second, north-
ward from the last water found, was turned back by impassable
scrub. A third zig-zagged helplessly for a few miles across Sturt
Plains, changing its direction to avoid each new belt of scrub as it
sprang bristling to block their path, and then returned to the main
camp at Howell's Ponds, with equipment torn to pieces. The
following day, May 1, Stuart started once more, patiently working
his way round the everlasting scrub belts until he came to a fine
chain of waterholes named in honour of Stephen King. Thence
an easy passage through the encircling forest discovered itself for
a few miles, until the scrub closed in and compelled retreat once
more to Howell’s Ponds, which they r reached enveloped in sheets
of flame and smoke from native fires.
A day's rest prepared them for another attempt in the same
direction, Kekwick remaining as before in charge of the main
4r ‘ See Minute of Executive Council, C.L. and 1., 1993/1861; also out
letters 1577/1861.


camp. The discovery of Nash’s Springs gave them hope to press
on, mainly to the north-west; but all the world was scrub, with no
sound of living thing to break the “gloomy silence of the dark,
dismal forest.” A mile an hour was express speed and that pace
killed one of the horses. Depressed at the view of waterless, feed-
less country, whose very tree tops were blackened by native fires,
Stuart moved the camp to King’s Ponds. His next trial was more
successful, leading to Auld’s and McGorrery's Ponds and Daly
Waters, to which Kekwick and the camp were moved once more.
From another reconnaissance ending in rotten plains,
Stuart returned, shaken by the continual falls of his
horses. Both men and animals by this time felt their
powers of endurance rapidly failing. The worst of
the scrub was over, but still they could find no water
ahead, till they struck Purdie’s Ponds in more open country, and
moved the camp thither. The winding course of the Strangways 46
led them into a new land—Gregory’s country—a land of sandstone
gorge and precipice and grassy plain clothed with an unfamiliar
vegetation, and covered with tall timber—where the grass was
thick enough to hide one section of the party entirely from the
other and to provide an everlasting bonfire for the native inhabi-
tants.
The Strangways led to the Roper, north now of Gregory’s
tracks (lat. 14° s'), where was the best country Stuart had
seen in Australia. The party were now suffering from scurvy, and
the horses, ill-nourished by dry grass, drooped pitifully. The loss
of one at the Roper crossing made a welcome addition of fresh
meat to the week’s severe rations, and the expedition rapidly
advanced to a Roper branch river which Stuart called the
Chambers. 47
The new tropical country was full of charm —a land to excite
the imagination and stir impulses of curiosity and adventure. Its
children were babies, acquisitive babies, who laughed at the
animals that ate grass, and longed with a great longing for fish-
hooks. Its sandstone ranges and deep hewn gorges piled with the
rocks of antiquity contrasted majestically with the Plains of
Sturtia. Its valleys and slopes were bright with the verdure of
After the Commissioner of Crown Lands.
47 “After my late lamented friend, James Chambers, whose zeal in
the cause of Australian exploration is well known.”


cabbage palm and fern mass, and scarlet with the blossom of the
bean tree.
From the Roper and the Chambers Stuart followed where the
creeks led to the north-west, direct for the sources of the Adelaide.
From Kekwick Springs he entered a tableland country still more
picturesque—-land of the giant palm and pine and stringy bark,
which forced even into his laconic narrative, admission of appre-
ciation and wonder. It was surely “very beautiful,” but by the time
he had passed through it from sandstone to basalt and basalt to
granite, the expedition had lost a horse and the horses their shoes. 48
On July 17, following the Adelaide, they arrived at what
Stuart supposed to be the plain running to the sea coast, alluvial,
heavily grassed, and intersected by bamboo creeks where mos-
quitoes made horrid both night and day. Its vegetation was
a perpetual delight, especially it seems to Kekwick who was vigilant
in finding new specimens; and even their eyes, satiated, with the
variety of an entire continent’s width made high festival over a
marsh of lilies, tulip shaped with the hue of a rose. Leaving the
Adelaide River, they followed Thring’s Creek across luxuriant
grass and round spongy marshes to the blue mud shore of Ocean,
which they greeted on July 24 with right British orthodoxy. In-
tending to erect his flag at the Adelaide mouth, Stuart cut his
initials on a tree in the creek valley. 49 but the route across Charles
Creek was too marshy and the sea beach too muddy for him to
carry out his intention. The flag was erected on a tree close to
the beach, and a message buried at a foot’s distance. After naming
the spot Chambers' Bay, 50 the party prepared to return, exactly
48 In the last lap of his journey Stuart named: Mt. Shillinglaw, The
Waterhouse, Mt. Helpman, Mt. Levi, Mt. Watts, Williams Ck., Billiatt
Spgs. (in token of approbation of his thoughtful, generous and unselfish
conduct throughout the expedition), Priscilla Ck., Ellen’s Ck., Daly Ra. and
Mt., Mt. Goyder, Anna’s Ck., Thring’s Ck., Charles Ck.
49 According to S.G.O. 494/1913, “owing to uncertainty of longitude,
the site of the tree svas not identified by any members of Finniss’ or
Goyder’s parties.” On Dec. 10, 1883, Mr. G. McMinn telegraphed to the
Minister of Education that the tree had been located about two miles
inland, the letters being clearly visible. Subsequently it was seen by David
Lindsay, later by C. J. Dashwood and S. T. Brown. In 1902 Mr. Price
Maurice informed the Govt. Resident that it had been burnt down in a
bush fire. He therefore proceeded thither with a party and erected a pole
in the ashes of the stump. This was subsequently replaced by a piece of
railway iron. (See also Transactions of S.A. branch of the Roy. Geog, Soc.,
1902-3, p. 31.)
59 After Miss Chambers, who presented the flag.


nine months to the day since they had left North Adelaide. “Thus
have I through the instrumentality of Divine Providence been led
to accomplish the great object of the expedition . . . through one
of the finest countries man would wish to pass—good to the coast
and with a stream of running water within half a mile of the sea.
From Newcastle Water to the sea beach, the main body of horses
were only one night without water.”
The return trip was not uneventful, though Stuart’s party
followed the same track as before. Horse after horse gave way,
and the loads were perforced lightened by a general disburdening-
of clothing. The route was lined with smoke and flame—the
natives' last endeavour to burn out their invader—and finally
Stuart himself gave way. His feverish efforts to reach the Ocean
had come before all thought of personal well-being. The mental
tension was now relaxed and that artificial strength which he had
known to be failing some months before, now entirely deserted
him. August 14 found him completely paralysed and the party
were forced to make an unexpected halt until he was partially re-
covered. By the 21st he was totally blind after sunset and the
ravages of scurvy left him scarcely able to eat. Their distress
was increased by the drying up of many of the waters they had
depended upon during the outward journey. By the end of
October Stuart was being carried on a litter, 51 helpless and almost
lifeless. The night of the 27th he thought would be his last,
keeping only two men by him while the party went on. The
following day he was speechless. The approach of the party into
green, grassy country marked the beginning of Stuart's improve-
ment, which continued with a few relapses until their arrival at
Mr. Jarvis’ station, Milne Springs, on November 26, 1862. 52
51 Sketched, among other incidents of the expedition, by Stephen King.
(See Archives Dept.)
52 Information relative to the expedition obtainable from Stuart's
original journal (Archives), which, however, is incomplete, beginning only
on July 2, 1862. The complete journal (also in the Archives), was evidently
written up by himself after his return. See also P.P. 21/1863, and Hardman.
The original journal differs in several respects from Stuart’s own complete
version and those of printed copies.
(a) Place names differ, e.g., Mt. Shillinglaw, the Waterhouse, the
Fann>, the Katherine, Kekwick Spgs., the Mary, seem to have
been named later, being absent from the original.
(b) The passages indicating his illness are condensed and altered in
the later versions.
61
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


Stuart’s achievement was, and is, a very great one. Its
material side is too obvious for stress. 53 A new stock route,
telegraph track, infinite pastoral and agricultural areas, potential
new industries and a new colony to be, all place Stuart by the
side of Sturt, on a lofty pinnacle in history. “In no time or country
has any geographical pioneer more directly advanced the material
interests of a Colony than Mr. McDouall Stuart has done those
of South Australia; whilst as geographer we specially recognize the
value of the numerous astronomical observations he made under
the severest privation, by which the true features of large portions
both of the interior and of the north coast have been for the first
time determined.” 54 His untiring effort, skilful organization, and
human care can never be over-rated. But he had not won the
fiattle alone. Ample is his own testimony to the unfailing courage,
interest and resource of Kekwick, especially in dealing with the
natives; to the kindness and sympathy of Billiatt, a young English-
man, during his illness; to the cheerfulness and industry of every-
one, especially King, in the care of horses and provisions. To them
he owed his life. Beyond material achievement, however, Stuart
had made the wilderness he trod a part of South Australia ever-
lastingly. Torrent and gorge and plain “had been dyed by the
deep colours of human endurance, valour, and virtue; and the
crests of the sable hills that rose against the evening sky received
(c) The original has no concluding general remarks.
(d) The original contains notes concerning the conduct of members
of the expedition, which have been deleted from all other ver-
sions. His reflections upon Waterhouse for insubordination and
idleness were evidently written in the heat of the moment and
omitted on calmer reflection.
(e) Two loose pages of the original are included in the journal of
1860-61. One is merely descriptive, the other contains a particular
mention of Stephen King, part of which is unfortunately missing.
See also C.L. and I. 1894, 1936/1861, and S.G.O. out letter 3/1863. Stuart
Insisted in a general order to his men that no journals or records of any
kind were to be kept during the progress of the expedition. But for this
restriction. King would have written day by day that which he was forced
to recall after his return. (See King Papers, Archives.) For MS. map
compiled in S.G.O. from Stuart’s plan and journal see Archives. See also
•C.S.O. 25, 75, 218/1863; Jpurna! of Roy. Geog. Soc., Vol. 33, 1863; Procs.
■of Roy. Geog. Soc., Vol. 7, p, 82.
53 Desp. of Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State No. 73 of Dec. 23, 1862.
54 Sir Roderick Murchison to Mr. Cardwell, Jan. 18, 1865. Enclosed in
Despatch from See. of State to Gov. of S.A., Tan. 26, 1865.
62
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


a deeper worship" because of the suffering which brought them
first within the fold of human thought. 65
Although Stuart did not win the race, his were the greater
honours. The Burke and Wills expedition, by reaching the Gulf in
February, 1861, won for Victoria the more formal distinction; but
her efforts were a strange repetition of South Australian history.
That state had learnt early and to its cost that Government control
associated with scientific theory was not the most successful basis
for effective exploration. Victoria was learning it now at greater
cost. The remarkable facility with which the Royal Society’s
Expedition crossed the Continent contrasts strongly with the
w eary toil of Stuart; yet their route was not the one chosen for
the Overland Telegraph. Voluminous and careful as were the
scientific records of Wills, their information proved of less imme-
diate and practical value than the quick approximate descriptions
of Stuart. The country opened up by their endeavours—Burke's
country—became a source of revenue not to Victoria, but to
Queensland, and even then largely as a result of the work of
McKinlay.
The Exploration Committee of the Royal Society of Victoria
had on the 18th of August, 1860, instructed Robert O’Hara Burke
to proceed to Cooper’s Creek on his way across the Continent. so
His main object was to be the exploration of the country between
that creek and Leichhardt’s track south of the Gulf. If unable to
discover a route other than that of Sturt on the west or Gregory
on the east, he was to turn westward from Eyre’s Creek and
connect Sturt’s farthest north with Gregory’s farthest south. 57
65 Stuart’s monetary reward was £2,000; Kekwick received £500; Thring
£2OO, Auld £2OO, Waterhouse, King, Billiatt, Frew, Nash, McGorrery, £lOO
each; (C.S.O. 218/1863). According to Desp. No. 35 of 21st of June, 1865,
£ 1,000 in addition was voted to Stuart by the Govt., to be invested by trus-
tees for his benefit. £l,BOO of his previous £2,000 was also in the hands of
trustees. The Governor’s personal opinion was that a pension of £4OO or
£5OO p.a. would have been a more suitable arrangement in his peculiar
case. See Desp. of Duke of Newcastle, Jan. 26, 1865, forwarding an appeal
of the Roy. Geog. Soc. that S.A. would intervene on Stuart's behalf because,
owing to loss of eyesight and an impaired constitution, he was unable to
obtain a living as a surveyor. (See CL. and I. out letters 1863, p. 612, and
Exec. Coun. Mins., Mar. 22, 1865.)
«0 MS. Instructions to the leader from John Macadam, Sec. to the
Exploration Committee. (See Burke and Wills Papers, No. 2, in Public
Library, Melbourne.)
57 See account of Gregory’s N. Aust. Exped. in Chap. 4.


If unsuccessful there to strike out for Shark’s Bay or the River
Murchison. On December 16 four of the party left Cooper’s Creek
for Carpentaria. 58 According to Burke’s statement before leaving
the depot, he had determined to establish a northerly route more to
the west than east because of the difficult earthy plains in that
direction. His intention was to proceed towards Eyre's Creek
and thence northwards, returning within three months at the
latest. 5 ® That was the last information received by the Explora-
tion Committee, when in July, 1861, after much delay they decided
to send out a relief party. The advice of A. C. Gregory was sought,
as it had been sought, and disregarded, at the inception of the
expedition, and in accordance with his suggestion, 60 Cooper’s
Creek was made a relief base from which A. W. Howitt was the
first to start in search—a course of procedure which would have
turned out excellently well had it been adopted while the unfor-
tunate explorers were still alive. In the meanwhile, the South
Australian Government decided to send an expedition from
Adelaide, remembering that 61 Gregory had- advised the route
from that city to Cooper’s Creek as the most expeditious.
John McKinlay had already advised Sir William Stawell, 62
President of the Royal Society of Victoria, as to the best means of
co-operating with Howitt’s expedition by sea, and had offered his
own services—those of a bushman of twenty years’ experience, 63
to Professor Neumayer for his proposed expedition from Port
Denison. He was now accepted as leader of the South Australian
relief party, 64 to which Dr. Wills had offered his services as sur-
-58 Wills' Field Books, Burke and Wills Papers, No. 35.
59 Burke’s Despatch of Dec, 13, 1860, Burke and Wills Papers, No. 20.
60 See Burke and Wills Papers, memo. No. 44, July 23, 1861; also
Macadam to Commissioner of Crown Lands, S.A., April 15, 1862.
61 See also memo, of John Bagot to Dr. Macadam, July 9, 1861; Wm.
Campbell to Dr. Macadam, July 17, 1863; Burke and Wills Papers.
63 An interesting biographical sketch of McKinlay is contained in a
paper, read before the Cowal Society by Duncan Whyte, Oct. 28, 1878.
Federal Pari. Library, Melbourne.
62 Burke and Wills Papers, Exploration Letters, July 4 and 11, 1861.
64 Burke and Wills Papers—plan of operations proposed by sub-
committee of the Exploratory Committee, in which it was considered
necessary to keep a line of communication between Cooper’s Creek and the
settled districts of S.A. Also C.L. and I. 1410, 1462/1861.
64
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


geon.'® The party consisting of the leader, five men, 66 twenty-two
horses and 67 four camels, was 68 authorized to proceed to the south-
west channel of the Barcoo by Stuckey's crossing of Lake Torrens,
and Lake Hope. In co-operation with Howitt he was to ascertain
if Burke had returned to the creek and then to follow his tracks,
proceeding if unsuccessful to Eyre’s Creek, and exploring thence
to Mount Humphries or Central Mount Sturt. The Government
was not blind to the benefits likely to accrue to its own State
from McKinlay's expedition. 69 They advised him that a knowledge
of the country between Eyre's Creek and Central Mount Sturt,
and also of the western shores of Lake Eyre, would be most accept-
able, and provided him with a separate letter of instructions
relating thereto. 70 A supply of provisions was left afthe Finniss
Springs for his return, when he was expected to carry out an
examination of the country west of that discovered by Stuart,
linking it with Fowler's Bay.
The party, equipped with camels, sheep, and a bullock dray,
were well on their way from Blanchewater by September 25, 1861.
The Lake Torrens crossing was accomplished without difficulty,
and, accompanied by Messrs. Elder, Giles, and Stuckey, they pro-
ceeded to Lake Hope (Pando). 71 There they received the first
rumours of Burke’s perilous existence in the interior, rumours
65 Wills afterwards withdrew. See Burke and Wills Papers Nos. 47 and
48, for S.A. despatches on the subject to the Exploration Committee.
66 W. D. Hodgkinson (draftsman), Thomas Middleton and John Davis
(in charge of camels), Wm. Bell and Paul Wylde (in charge of horses),
Robt. Pool, Edward Palmer (bullock driver), James Kirby (cook and
shepherd), and two natives. See also C.L. and I. 1521, 1830/1861.
67 See Cadell’s correspondence relative to the camels received from the
Victorian Exploratory Expedition, Burke and Wills Papers (Exploration
Letters 1861).
68 See Instructions from Commissioner of Crown Lands, Aug. 13, 1861.
Out Letter Book 1117/61, and P.P. 147/61. See also letter of Dec. 5, 1861
(supp. instructions), p. 1801.
69 Gov. Mac Donnell had suggested a different route on the ground that
the scope of the S.A. and Viet, expeditions would be the same. His proposal
was that McKinlay should proceed N. from the Denison Ra. by a course
between that range and the W. shore of Lake Eyre, as far as the lat, of
Central Mt. Sturt, in order to intercept Burke’s tracks in the event of his
having tried to pass from Eyre’s Ck. to Stuart’s track on W. (Desp. 512,
Aug. 24, 1861.)
70 P.P. 218/62. McKinlay was desired to search for gold and precious*
stones west of Lake Eyre (lat. 27° 28', long 136° 37').
71 See Report from Lake Hope, P.P. 185/61. C.L. and I. 1881/61. Also
Desp, from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State, 522 of Sept. 27, 1861.


which McKinlay, in spite of his own distrust and the extreme dry-
ness of the season, thought best to follow up for the satisfaction
of public opinion. At Lake Appodir, due north, Peter and Sambo,
the native adjuncts of the party, true to the customs of the race,
absconded with several shirts and some necessary equipment.
From Perigundi Lake 72 McKinlay determined to look.for*a depot
whence they could reconnoitre in safety for information of the lost
explorers. Lake Cudye-Cudyena, though apparently deficient in
surface water and a centre of temporary native settlement, served
the purpose sufficiently well, and the Wantula Depot was formally
established, to be moved to the lake proper a few days later. 73
The expedition, even so far, had not found its work monotonous.
As practical pioneers in South Australia of camel exploration, they
soon discovere'd that horse and camel were not the most congenial
of comrades; and that the new pack beast had a foot as well as
a hump to be reckoned with. Moreover, even with the most
exemplary of bullock drivers, which admittedly they had,
possessing the liveliest capabilities of verbal persuasion, the
greatest good temper, the most inspiring recklessness, the bullock
dray still attacked Australian distances with the most leisurely
insouciance. 74 Early in the progress of the expedition they found
that the stores were not equal to expectation, and when McKinlay
first left the depot he also left 200 pounds of sausages hanging on
lines in the sunshine in an impossible endeavour to recuperate. 75
On October 18 McKinlay started for the interior with
Hodgkinson, Middleton and a native, leaving Bell and Davis in
charge of the depot. Their north-west route to Lakes Canna canta-
jandide (McKinlay) and Moolion-dhurunnie, presented a view of
typical saltbush and sandhill country, dreary in the extreme. The
natives assembled at the waters gave no cheerful account of the
fate of “white fellow that sit down along water,” and when they
reached Lake Kadhi-baerri, a beautifully clovered swamp, the
presence of a white man’s grave seemed to give ample cause for
72 Or Siva, after an obstreperous camel.
73 Named after Mr. Buchanan, of Anlaby, from whom the expedition
had received much kindness.
74 The trouble with the camels and dray is clearly described by
Hodgkinson, the second in command. (See original journal. Archives.)
75 “We boiled them and fried them, and tried them in rolls, but they
were too bad, so we put them in a hole by the side of the lake.” (Davis:
Tracks of McKinlay across Australia.)


fear. Further investigation revealed the skeleton of a European,
the head severed from the body and marked by two prominent
sabre-cuts. Another grave was near by, empty; and both were
reported by the natives to be those of white men killed in an affray
and subsequently eaten. At the instigation of their chief informant,
who had been permanently lamed by a well-directed European
bullet, the natives attacked McKinlay's party with another feast
in view. The explorers stayed only long enough to bury a written
statement for future searchers, collect a few relics of the murdered
men and beat off the worst of the attack. From Kadhi-baerri (Lake
Massacre) they took the most direct course for the depot, crossing
all the way flat plain country of heavy grass and clover. On their
arrival Hodgkinson was sent back to Blanchewater for provisions,
taking with him the report of their supposed success. 76
McKinlay, in forwarding his conclusions concerning the fate
of the Victorian expedition, stated that according to his evidence
Burke’s party had been murdered on their way back from Carpen-
taria. The graves he considered to be those of Burke, Wills, and
Gray or King. 77 During Hodgkinson’s absence the time of the
depot party was occupied in trying to discover water eastward to-
wards Cooper’s Creek, their next.destination; but as a result of
continual illness in the camp and the constant presence of a large
body of natives, the diminished party could do little. They would
76 See Hodgkinson's report of Nov. 10, 1861, from Parallana (Archives),
and C.L. and I. 2179/61.
77 McKinlay's assumptions were based upon the discovery of one skele-
ton, remains of different coloured hair, a pannikin, canteen and pistol, traces
of camels at the camp, the horse-hair stuffing of a saddle, supplemented
by the report of the native Keri-Keri in dumb show. Dr. A. W. Howitt, in
a paper before the Aust. Assoc, for the Adv. of Science, examined the
question in detail, and concluded that no affray had occurred, but that the
remains were those of Gray. Hodgkinson (see orig, journal) concluded
as McKinlay had done, that the camp was one of Burke’s. He stated,
however, that the body found was not that of either Wills of Gray, because
of the colour of the hair. He inclined to the view that it was King’s, and
that the other members of the expedition had been killed and eaten. The
Governor of S.A. expressed the opinion that the discovery had nothing to
do with the Victorian expedition and that it could only be considered a
mystery. Desp. No. 534 of Nov. 23, 1861).
A comparison of McKinlay’s original plans (S.G.O. R/16) with the map
prepared by the Lands Dept., Melbourne, from Wills’ notes (the original
is missing) shows that such an assumption as that of McKinlay was founded
on a possibility, rather than probability. The lat. of Lake Massacre may
correspond with that of the camp at which Grey died, the return route of
the Burke and Wills expedition at that point not being shown.
67
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


have done less had it not been for McKinlay’s cheerful ingenuity in
devising means for the banishment of “blue devils.” He himself,
white haired and Scotch bonneted, dispensed delight (in bead neck-
laces) to the native population. Hodgkinson returned on the 29th'
with the tidings of Howitt’s success in discovering the fate of
the Victorian expedition. Undecided about the significance of his
own discovery at Kadhi-baerri, but believing now that the body he
had found was that of Gray, McKinlay determined to reconnoitre
east and west and then proceed northward to examine the country
in that direction. His first step was to discover whether the rain-
fall of that year had affected the waters of Cooper's Creek. On
December 6 he arrived at Wills' grave, the following day at the
last resting place of Burke, where he left a record of his arrival and
proposed plans, and then returned to camp. 78
The Buchanan depot was finally broken up on December 17,
and with it went “the awful monotony of the same humdrum life,
same niggers, same trees, same pelicans.” Their northerly progress
was most effectively hampered by the slowness and unreliability of
the dray, one of the bullocks being lost as a result of the heat,
and all proving very susceptible to unusual atmospheric con-
ditions. Although they were travelling in the height of a dry
summer, water was not scarce. They were able to enjoy a swim
once, and on the Christmas Day spent at Lake Jeannie 79 McKinlay,
at least, had no lingering thoughts of civilization left behind. Lake
Hodgkinson (Watti-Widdulo), reached three days later, was so
abundantly provided with feed and water, and proved so popular
a tribal meeting place that it was open to wonder how Sturt could
have missed either water or the aborigines. Moreover, although
the season was dry, and the neighourhood on the fringe of Sturt's
Stony Desert, McKinlay was unable to pick one sheep from the
flock in a sufficiently bad condition to “jerk.”
The last days of the old year were occupied by a short scouting
march eastward, a triumphal progress from creek to lake and lake
to creek, never waterless. Browne Creek, Lakes Blanche and Sir
Richard, 80 and Sturt’s Ponds all attested the caprice of Australian
nature and the misfortune of Sturt. A similar examination west
and south of the depot bore similar fruit. To the north were stony
78 Second expedition with Middleton, Poole, and two natives.
79 Called by the men Lake Christmas.
80 Separated by New Year’s Straits.


desert and dry lake basins, the only water being in Ellar Lake and
Creek (Goonalcarrae). Twelve days' journey further still to the
«ast led them across burning plains in “infernal sickly heat” to a
point beyond Mount Wylde, whence they beat a hasty retreat by
way of Lake Deception to the depot. The water there had shrunk
alarmingly and become quite bitter by evaporation, so much so that
the party had to find a fresh camp at Heyward's Creek. There
they stayed impatiently waiting for “arimitha” (flood-waters) to
make clear their path into the desert. Until February 8 they
waited, weakened by the mineral impregnated water, constantly on
the alert for native depredations, and in the “devil's own country
for flies,” but cheerful and ready with true Australian fervour to
pledge their souls or their wages for a dinner hour's diversion.
On the 19th the main transcontinental work of the expedition
was begun, and the Stony Desert entered, with Eyre's Creek as an
objective. It was still as it had been to Sturt —little that was
green, eternal sand ridges, bronzed stony surfaces, or exhausting
plain, as if ploughed, harrowed, and rolled. The bullocks gave
way, the native guides took French leave, and sickness struck the
camp. Provisions were short and creeks were many, but no water
and still no water. The discovery of one of Burke’s camps pro-
voked a little interest in the eternal sameness; and their lethargy
was broken by the necessity of abandoning the cart and its con-
tents because of the gullies of the creeks. On the 24th Hodgkinson
resigned his position as second in command and draughtsman and
joined the ranks. 81 Two days later the first effects of the rains
were seen in a few green grassy creek beds and bright sprinklings
of verdure on the stony slopes. The rains recommenced, creeks
rose, and flats became lakes. The party would have been deprived
of its commissariat had not the camels presented their backs bravely
to the flood; and of its very existence had the rains come a day
earlier when they were travelling in the creek bed.
When all was clear the desert shone transformed, with the
song of a thousand birds, the scent of lilies in the valleys, life and
81 According to Hodgkinson’s own journal (MS. in Archives, S.G.O.
2055/61), “from the impossibility of co-operating with McKinlay in the
discharge of (his) duties.” See also C.L. and I. 2018/62, relating to the “dis-
similarity” between himself and his leader, a difference in temperament
which cost him his bonus on the return of the expedition. (C.L. and I. out
letter 1863, p. 145.)
69
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


verdure and beauty where had been death and desolation. “In
two or three months time from this date one could with little
difficulty . . . start with any description of stock from the northern
settled parts of South Australia, and go right across the Continent
to whatever point he might think fit." Past the desert the face of
whimsical Nature changed again, and the magnificent pastures of
the Downs of Plenty spread with insolent opulence before their
feet. 82
From Scott's Ranges and Emu Plains 83 the level land stretched
on, menacing in its flower strewn loveliness. Morasses barred the
way to its creeks; and its even surface showed no rise where the
unwary traveller could escape from the jealous sweep of sudden
flood tide-tide which had already torn into ragged strips the land
it quickened to momentary life. From the garden of
Jeannie Lagoon the party were without flour, depending on native
vegetables, “mahogany shavings” (jerked beef), and the small
amount of euro they could kill in the ranges now lining their path.
Just before arriving at the Daly on April 4 the expedition
entered a more elevated, stonier district with heavier timber and
creeks of the size of the Middleton 84 and Cadell. Making for the
Albert River and the Gulf, 85 McKinlay on April 17 struck the
watershed and found the creeks flowing northward. The expedition
though hungry, was cheerful, and did its best while there was
“devilish little in the grub locker” to make the native orange fill
up vacant places. The temporary loss of Kirby with the sheep pro-
duced general consternation, both on behalf of the unfortunate man
and the future of the party —muttonless. The strays were not long
in making their way back, however, and the party proceeded with
added vigour towards the Gulf, through a land now of no momen-
tary richness, but of permanent tropical wealth. By following the
black, they arrived within a few miles of the Gulf on the 13th
82 Named on the way Burke’s Creek, Wills’ Ranges and Elliot’s Knob.
83 Thence Brown’s Ck. (Chas. Brown, of Melbourne), Davenport Ck.,
Hamilton Ra. (Inspector of Police), Hunter Is., Mary’s Is., Goyder’s Table
Tops, Euro Hill, Daly Ck., Mt. Mueller, the Manserg, the Robinson (J.
Robinson, of Hume R.), the Fletcher (G. B. Fletcher, of Darling R.).
84 Called after one of the party “who at ail times has rendered most
material services, and who, had I lost him during his late severe illness, I
should scarcely be able to get along without.”
85 McKinlay named the Hamilton, the Warburton, Crozier's Ra. (John
Crozier, of Murray River), Williams’ Ra., Kirby's Ra., McKinlay Ck. and
Ras., the Marchant (W. Marchant, of Mananarie), the Williams, the Elder.


course of the Leichhardt through richly grassed country burnt
of May, 86 and were forced to turn their backs from the first glimpse
of salt water because of the swampy nature of the approach. 87 On
the 31st they began the return journey to Port Denison, “civili-
zation, home and beauty, good grub and bottled ale.” 88
McKinlay did not succeed in carrying out the primary object
of his expedition. He did not examine with any great minuteness
the country between Lake Eyre and Central Mount Sturt, nor did
he ever make his way, as suggested, towards Fowler’s Bay. His
work, however, was a valuable supplement to that of Stuart and
the Victorian Exploring Expedition. 89 They had united the north
and south coasts of Australia geographically; McKinlay united
them commercially. “To him belongs the credit of having
demonstrated the practicability of driving sheep and horned cattle
across the Continent.” 90
By 1862 Central Australia had been investigated in its entire
width, in three parts of its length, and under every possible climatic
condition that could be presented by the varying seasons. As far
as actual travelling facilities were concerned, camels had proved
themselves almost indispensable for work in the interior. For
shifting sandhill country they were essential; in the stony districts
they fared almost as well as the horses; their height was a great
advantage in keeping stores from injury when it was necessary to
swim against a heavy flood; and their unerring instinct in locating
water proved of inestimable value. 91 Burke and Wills did find
86 Within the influence of the sea.
87 They were too late to meet the steam sloop “Victoria,” which had
been sent to the R. Albert, under Capt. Norman ,to co-operate with the
Queensland relief parties.
88 Report of arrival in Melbourne with resume of journey, C.L. and I.
1836/1862, in which date of dep. from Gulf is given as May 31. McKinlay’s
published journal (P.P. 12/1862) gives May 21. McKinlay’s MS. journal of
this expedition is missing. See also Despatches from Gov. of S.A. to Sec.
of State No. 45 of Sept. 25, 1862; No. 63 of Nov. 24, 1862, C. 5.0., 10701/1862.
Roy. Geog. Soc. Journal, Vol. 32, 1862 (President’s Address); Roy. Geog.
Soc. Procs., Vol. 7, pp. 6 and 84.
80 The,S.A. Govt, voted McKinlay £I,OOO and six months’ pay to
each man who accompanied him, subject to a favourable report. Hodgkin-
son was omitted because of the circumstances of his resignation. See Desp.
of Gov. to Sec. of State No. 61 of Oct. 26, 1862, and C.L. and I. 21081/1862;
C.S.O. 1069/1862. McKinlay also received the Gold Watch of the R.G.S.
9° Desp. of Gov. to Sec. of State No. 61 of Oct. 26, 1862.
91 See incident related in Hodgkinson’s journal, in which his life was
saved by his trusting to the camel’s direction.


them a source of difficulty, but only when travelling through the
more swampy and flooded parts of the Northern Territory. 92 To
McKinlay they were invaluable. The Burke Relief Expedition
discovered by uncomfortable experience, and demonstrated finally,
a fact which they might have gathered from the work of Babbage
and Hack—the impossibility of using a dray in country intersected
by deep hewn creeks. More valuable, however, than anything in
Australian travelling experience was McKinlay’s use of sheep in
crossing the Continent. They were excellent as a food supply,
absolutely hardy in overcoming the difficulties of desert, gorge and
flood; and suffered little if at all, in physical condition.
The natural characteristics of Central Australia were essen-
tially not those of a desert. The description given by all the
explorers is a picture of patches. 93 It has little continuity. Desert
they saw, and garden they saw, never in long stretches, and often
side by side. From the neighbourhood of Herrgott Springs to
about latitude 27° consisted mainly of poor clay plain country,
useless if cattle had not decided to eat saltbush, and with little
water except that obtained from the springs termed by Water-
house volcanic. Even these became bitter and undrinkable after
considerable evaporation. Northward to Sturt Plains sandy and
stony patches alternated with many ranges—the land of Sturt’s
stony desert, of Wills’ red earthy sun-cracked plains, land of
drifting wind-blown sandhills and league-long wastes of close
wedged stones, where spinifex 94 flourished in isolation and grass
grew only in the creek beds. There evaporation was greater than
rainfall; yet the heavy sweep of monsoonal flood tore gaping
gorges through the ranges, and left in its wake a wilderness of
savage life and bloom. Yet here, in 1862, there were “but few
places in which water (could) with any degree of certainty, be
relied on as permanent.” Just as the spring country gradually
merged near Hanson’s Gap into sandhill and stony plain, so they
in their turn were replaced near Sturt Plains, by the tropical scrub
and grass plain of the Northern Territory. 9s
92 See Wills’ Field Books, Burke and Wills Papers. The last of these
is in the possession of the Federal Pari. Library, Melb.
93 The account of Wills must be read as the description of a particularly
good season.
94 Stuart’s spinifex. Called by different explorers “porcupine grass” or
“triodia.”
95 See P.P. 125/1863: Report of F. G. Waterhouse on the physical
72
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


Burke and Wills, Stuart, and McKinlay, in breaking through
the fastnesses of Australia’s land of mystery had made straight the
pathway of the pioneer. They have been compared. One saw the
full waters of Ocean; the others did not. Two returned with
the comrades who went out; the others did not. But the measure
of their achievement is greater. “It is the far sight, the quiet and
confident patience, that, above all other attributes, separate man
from man . . . and there is no action nor art whose majesty we
may not measure by this test.”
features of the country traversed by Stuart. The original report, C.L, and
I. 1130/1863. The sources of water in the clay pan country met with in
Central Australia, are well described by Giles: “A clay pan is a small area
of ground, whose top soil has been washed or blown away, leaving the hard
clay exposed; and upon this surface, one, two, three or (scarcely) more
inches of rain water may remain for some days after rain: the longer it
remains the thicker it gets, until at last it dries in cakes, which shine like
tiles; these at length crumble away, and the clay pan is swept by winds clean
and ready for the next shower.”
73
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


CHAPTER IV
THE NORTHERN TERRITORY TO 1870
The shortening of the vast spaces between north and south
coasts, and the possibility of establishing a stock route across the
interior, led to an immediate consideration of two questions, the
advisability of establishing a northern settlement, and the extension
northwards of the South Australian boundary to include that settle-
ment. The first was by no means new, and the nature of the ter-
ritory now brought within the scope of European administration
had been the subject of dispute for years.
Until 1856 the only considerable contribution to existing know-
ledge of it was that provided by Leichhardt. Flinders, King, and
Stokes had necessarily limited their activities to marine examina-
tion, which, while locating the estuaries and general direction of
such waterways as the Victoria, the Adelaide, the Alligator, the
Albert, left their commercial and industrial possibilities to con-
jecture. The prevailing ignorance had a disastrous effect upon
the young colonies at Melville Island, Raffles Bay, and Port Essing-
ton. These first settlers in the Northern Territory failed very
largely, it seems, because as sentinels of a fortified outpost of
Empire they knew practically nothing of the land to whose fringe
they clung so precariously, and found it little within the scope of
their duty to repair the gaps in their knowledge.
Leichhardt's journey from the Moreton Bay settlements to the
existing military station at Port Essington, Victoria, in 1844-45,
while failing to gain much practical information about the North
Australian hinterland and its relation to Sturt’s central desert, did
make clear the deplorable ignorance of the ill-starred settlers and
of the authority which sent them forth. His course round the Gulf
followed the coastline too nearly for him to estimate the com-
mercial or agricultural value of the Gulf rivers—a course, however,
not determined by choice. After rounding the head of Carpentaria,


Leichhardt found it necessary to travel north-west, because “when-
ever I kept a westerly course I had almost always to follow creeks
down to the northward to obtain water, and notwithstanding a
north-west course had on previous occasions brought us to salt
water.” Gregory, in 1856, found the same course forced upon him
by the encroaching fringe of desert. While convinced of the pas-
toral value of the Gulf country, Leichhardt could say little of that
between the Nicholson and the Roper, where his encounters with
saltwater rivers, sandstone ranges, stringybark forest, and teatree
scrub kept him well to the northward. Of animation he found
drearily little. “For the greater part the bright moonlight is shed
over a dead country and the brilliant stars twinkling through the
clear and dry atmosphere look for miles on nothing but box flats
and anthills or on teatree scrub or ... . plain.” The Roper, as the
only fresh water river found on the west coast of the Gulf, found
favour, pastorally, in his eyes; but Arnheim’s Land was too wildly
torn and scarred with range and gorge to offer inducement to his
lingering, and the near approach of the rainy season impelled the
expedition towards “Balanda” with unseemly haste. The last part
of the journey was very unfruitful, geographically, and uncom-
fortable to the explorers personally. The omens of the land were
not propitious. Whirlwind Plains drew them into a “tummelplatz
of those pillars of dust which walked about and followed each other
as if they intended to give us a great corroberi”; and all was not
well with the men themselves. Their open discontent and dislike
of the leader were well matched by Leichhardt’s moody taciturnity;
and more than one within the tents could find it in his heart to
echo his leader’s supplication that “the Lord may grant me an
expeditious termination of my journey.” Providence being more
propitious than the Peninsula, Leichhardt received from Captain
MacArthur an early welcome to Victoria. 1
1 For information relative to this expedition of Leichhardt see:
(a) MS. journal of an Overland Expedition in Australia from More-
ton Bay to Port Essington, 1844-45, by Ludwig Leichhardt.
(Mitchell Library, Sydney.) Much has been deleted from the
original journal for purposes of publication.
(b) Report of the expedition of Ludwig Leichhardt from Moreton
Bay to Port Essington, (the original MS. from which a small
pamphlet or resume of the expedition was printed). (Mitchell
Library, Sydney.)
(c) Ludwig Leichhardt’s MS. log from the Abel Tasman to Port
Essington. (Mitchell Library.) [Note continued over page.


Even as a military settlement he considered the locality of
Port Essington unfavourable. Its climate was malarious, and the
scarcity of food in a dry season tended to scatter the stock south-
ward. Commercially it was valueless. A lonely, solitary place, its
only communication with the mainland was “an occasional tremb-
ling Myall blackfellow”; with lands beyond the sea, an uncertain
supply ship calling from half-year to half-year. The needs of the
community were too small to attract trade and the harbour too tor-
tuous to facilitate it. Yet behind it, and well within its reach, lay
country where stock fattened, and at its very gates were the bound-
less agricultural resources of the Alligator and Roper valleys. For
true settlement and colonization Leichhardt recommended the main-
land; and his plan for an east-west trans-continental expedition, in
which he should cross the head waters of the Albert, Nicholson,
Van Alphen, Abel Tasman, Robinson, and Mac Arthur, indicated a
firm faith in the capabilities of the Northern Territory interior.
It was generally felt that Leichhardt’s route followed the coast-
line too nearly to be of any real advantage to those interested in
the northern watershed and the central desert, just penetrated on
its southern side by Sturt. In 1853 the necessity for a more com-
plete inland exploration of north Australia west of the 138th meri-
dian was considered seriously by the Royal Geographical Society of
Great Britain, and suggested as a practical proposition to the Im-
perial Government. 2 An expedition under Ernest Hang was to
examine the courses of the Victoria and Albert Rivers, and the
country between, with the co-operation of a vessel acting as a
movable depot. Stokes, Sturt, and Evre gave the benefit of their
experience to the promoters, adducing as an ample raison d'etre
for the expedition the necessity for a fuller knowledge of the Gulf
rivers crossed by Leichhardt, the sources of the Victoria and the
(d) Journal of Leichhardt’s expedition to Port Essington (revised by
the explorer and copied with his sanction at the offices of the
Australian Journal), 1846. The only copy in existence. (Mitchell
Library.)
(e) Lectures delivered by Ludwig Leichhardt at the Sydney School
of Arts, 18 and 25 Aug., 1846. (Mitchell Library.)
(f) MS. Journal of Wm. Phillips, a member of the expedition.
(Mitchell Library.)
2 Despatch from the Duke of Newcastle to the Governor of S.A., of
Aug. 31, 1854, including correspondence with the Royal Geog. Soc., and with
Stokes and Sturt. Also Roy. Geog. Soc. Journal, President’s Address, 1856,
1857.


northern limit of the desert, and fixing the Victoria itself as the
western limit of operations. Captain Sturt was particularly in-
terested, as he himself stated, in discovering the nature of the
country beyond his own farthest point (long. 138°, lat. 24° 49'), two
hundred miles of which he conjectured to be desert. 3 Moreover, he
expressed himself as more than sanguine about the discovery of a
central drainage basin, and a stock route from Moreton Bay to the
north-west, less circuitous than that pursued by Leichhardt. The
valuable commercial position of Arnheim’s Land itself, in relation
to possible markets in India and the islands, had no small share in
determining the actual line of route.
Such were the primary objects of the expedition as set forward
in Sturt’s suggested instructions of April, 1854. The utmost im-
portance was attached to the undertaking by the Imperial authori-
ties, who felt that the establishment of a colony in north Australia,
connected by an overland route with the older settlements, would
strengthen the powerful position already held by the Mother
Country in the East. 4 Whether, in the interests of the other colo-
nies, that settlement should be a penal one, was left for future de-
cision. The unsettled state of British politics “necessarily directed
the time and thoughts .... of many of those whose professional
knowledge and experience might have been of the greatest assis-
tance in another direction”; and the desirability of taking imme-
diate advantage of the autumn of 1855 led to the appointment in
August 1854, of A. C. Gregory, Assistant Surveyor in Western Aus-
tralia, as leader of the North Australian Expedition. The Colonial
Office was very unwilling to take into its own hands the conduct
of an expedition which should “have been concerted by Her
Majesty’s Government with the several local governments of the
Australian colonies,” but did so ostensibly to avoid the delay of
protracted correspondence. 5
3 For evidence relating to the central desert theory see Roy. Geog. Soc.
Procs. for 1868. Notes on the probable condition of the Interior of Aus-
tralia, by H. Landor (Vol 1, p. 31).
4 This view was shared by the City merchants, one of whom, Mr..
Matthew Uzielli, placed £lO,OOO at the disposal of the Roy. Geog. Soc., ta
be used in the event of the Government refusing to finance the undertaking.
As a protection to the East Indian colonies he considered the settlement
would be invaluable. See Roy. Geog, Soc. Procs., President’s address, May
26, 1856; and Stokes’ remarks on Gregory’s letter of June 14.
5 Despatches from Sec. of State to the Gov. of S.A., Feb. 5, 1855, and
Aug. 31, 1854.


In supplementing his instructions, 6 Sturt advised the Victoria
River as a starting point, the route to follow the course of that
river to its watershed and beyond, along any water-course dis-
covered flowing southward into the supposed desert. If, as he
hoped, Gregory would be fortunate enough to strike a creek which,
leading south-eastward to his own farthest point, would merge into
Eyre’s Creek, his last journey would not have been made in vain.
Once the connection formed, it would be easy to link it with
Mitchell’s last camp on his Victoria (Cooper’s Creek, lat. 24°, long.
145°), and thus bring the markets of southern Asia within accessible
distance of the Australian stockowner. Any future settlement
formed on the north coast would be saved the necessity of exclusive
communication by sea, and the Swan River settlement might even
hope to be rescued from its isolation and brought within the fold.
Gregory’s aims were thus twofold —the exploration of the central
interior west of approximately the 138th meridian, and the crossing
of Arnheim’s Land from the Victoria River to the Albert and the
eastern settlements. The object of the first was the penetration of
Sturt’s desert; of the second, the discovery of a stock route to the
east.
The expedition 7 was amply furnished with all necessary equip-
-6 In his official instructions Gregory was directed to note especially
any promising sites for townships at the mouths of the Gulf rivers.
7 The party consisted of A. C. Gregory (comm.), H. C. Gregory (asst.
Comm,), J. S. Wilson (geologist), T. Baines (artist), J. R. Elsey (surgeon
and naturalist), F. Mueller (botanist), J. Flood (collector), G. Phibbs (over-
seer), C. Humphrey (do.), R. Bowman (farrier), C. Dean (harness maker),
J. Melville, W. Dawson, W. Shewell, W. Selby, S. MacDonald, H. Richards,
J. Fahey (stockmen). For information relating to the expedition see:
(1) Despatches from the Sec. of State to the Gov. of S.A., Aug. 31,
1854, (3), enclosing correspondence of the Col. Office with the
Roy. Geog. Soc. of Gt. Brit., Capt. Stokes and Capt. Sturt; Oct.
10, 1854; Feb. 5, 1855, enclosing correspondence with Capt,
Sturt.
(2) "Papers relating to an expedition recently undertaken for the
purpose of exploring the northern portion of Australia.” (P.P.
of Gt. Brit.) 1857. Gregory’s original reports were forwarded to
Col. Office. Sir. Wm. Denison retained his plans in Sydney, the
originals still being in the Lands Dept
(3) MS. Journal kept at the main camp, Victoria R., by J. S. Wil-
son and J. R. Elsey. (Mitchell Library.)
(4) MS. Journal of J. S. Wilson, Jan, 31 to May 28, 1856. (Mitchell
Library).
(5) MS. Journal kept by T. Baines, 1856-7, of the detachment re-
maining at Depot Creek. (Mitchell Library.)
[Note continued on next page.
78
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


ment, and provided with officers of practical ability and scientific
skill. Gregory’s “spare and active person, quiet and reserved man-
ner and firm command” seem to have inspired general confidence,
and all the members of the expedition were well fitted to endure
privation. To the theory of Dr./Mueller indeed was added the
experience of a three days’ seat in a gum-tree awaiting the subsi-
dence of a flood, to reinforce his natural stock of fortitude.
The party shipped their stores and equipment on board the
schooner “Tom Tough” at Sydney on July 18, 1855. With the aid
of the “Monarch” they collected fifty horses and two hundred
sheep at Moreton Bay ,and completed the voyage safely as far as
Port Patterson, where the “Monarch” grounded on a reef. She
was compelled to remain ashore for eight days, to the injury of the
horses, and with a dangerously heavy consumption of water and
forage. The stock were landed with some loss and difficulty at
Treachery Bay, and the “Monarch” left for Singapore on Septem-
ber 24. The party then broke up into two portions. Wilson
took the sheep up the Victoria in the “Tom Tough” to form a
river camp, whilst the remainder prepared to take the horses over-
land in the same direction. Only thirty-eight arrived at the Vic-
toria, twelve having succumbed to the difficulties of landing,
fatigue, or poison. The actual journey from Point Pearce by the
Macadam Range, the Fitzmaurice, Sea Range, and Shaw’s Creek
proved difficult only where the ranges proved precipitous, and
they were compelled to make descents by filling up chasms and
removing rocks. Water and grass were abundant. The other party
were less fortunate. The “Tom Tough” grounded on a mud-bank
below Mosquito Flat, and many of the sheep were lost as a result
of misjudgment in procuring a water supply. When they were
finally settled at the depot camp at the end of October, only twenty-
(6) “On the capabilities of North Australia," by J. S. Wilson. MS.
(Mitchell Library.)
(7) Journal of the Roy. Geog. Soc. of Gt. Brit., Vol. 28, 1858, con-
taining Gregory’s Journal with Elsey’s report and notes on the
phys. geog. of N.W. Austr., by J. S. Wilson.
(8) P.P.'s of New South Wales, June 14, 1856, and Jan. 7, 1857.
(9) Procs. of the Roy. Geog. Soc. of Gt. Brit., Vol. 1, pp. 5, 10, 32,
33, 49, 183, 225, 255, 324, 341, 490; Vol. 2, pp. 3, 210, 378; Vol. 3, pp.
152, 333; Vol. 5, p. 2.
(10) MS. field books, journals, diaries, correspondence and note books
of astronomical memoranda, which have not been seen, are in the
possession of Mr. Wm. Dixson, of N.S.W.


six survived. The horses, under the superintendence of H. Gregory,
were pastured on the burnt grass of Whirlwind Plains, and re-
covered but slowly from the effects of the voyage.
A preliminary examination of the river itself proved ineffectual,
as the reaches were not connected by running water and the india-
rubber boat succumbed to the heat. The repairing of the “Tom
Tough” provided an opportunity for a short reconnaissance along
the course of the Victoria, whose valley quickly narrowed to an
immense sandstone ravine, half a mile wide and 600 feet deep.
Where the river branched sharply to the south the party turned
back to the principal camp. Baines Creek, 8 to the west, had already
been discovered and examined, and by the end of December a fort-
night’s heavy rain gave promise of possible explorations early in
the New Year.
The party which left the depot on January 3, 1856, to carry
out the first portion of Gregory’s instructions was an attenuated
one. Nine of the officers and men were equipped for five months.
The drays and all the sheep were left behind, the first because of
the steep sandstone ranges; the second, owing to the obstructions
presented by high grass and reeds. The rapid change in the nature
of the country as they proceeded up the valley of the Victoria was
remarkable. During the first part of the journey they followedi the
western branch of the river until the difficult nature of the country
forced them south-east to the main valley, where, on Roe Downs,
a temporary depot was formed in charge of Baines. With his
brother, Dr. Mueller, and Dean, the leader followed the river itself,
and then a southern tributary until he reached the watershed and
saw before him a long slope to the south. The ground covered was
alternately difficult and encouraging—difficult where the sandstone
ranges closed in on the river valley, forming deep impassable gorges,
and the heat and moisture made progress slow; encouraging where
the valley itself widened into splendid basaltic plains, 9 grassy and
“well adapted for feeding stock, being well watered by numerous
creeks and very open.” From latitude 18° 12’ the long southern
slope stretched out its weary length in low desert undulations to the
horizon. Though on the north slope the Victoria was still run-
ning, the creeks on the southern side were dry. The continued
8 The name was disputed by Wilson, who wished to substitute that of
Norton Shaw. (See Wilson’s MS. Diary.)
9 Of such a nature were Denison Plains and Roe Downs.
80
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


course of the expedition led to endless, hopeless, and waterless
ridges of red sand, whose glowing colour was but thinly veiled with
a meagre covering of triodia —the desert. Checked in that direc-
tion, and noticing that the tributaries of the Victoria came from
the west, Gregory skirted the northern boundary of the desert west-
ward until he struck Sturt’s Creek, which, in latitude 17° 52' led him
unexpectedly to the south-west. “There was now every reason to
hope that we had at length reached a watercourse which would en-
able ils to advance into the interior.” Sturt’s Creek they traced
through grassy flats till it became part of the level plain, and the
continuing channel met the same fate,’deciding finally the explorer’s
doubt as to its possible outlet on the west coast. The sandy desert
at last closed in on both sides in long straight lines of red drift
sand, lonely with the loneliness of ocean. Still they followed a
creek channel, encouraged by the signs of past thunderstorms. But
the clouds were purple with the sand glare, water and soil became
impregnated with salt, and the channel ran out west of Mt. Wilson
into the dry bed of a salt lake with no outlet. Gregory was now
730 miles from Sturt’s position on the 24th parallel and 138th
meridian. “It was thus evident that we had reached one of those
centres of depression for which Australia is so remarkable, where
the waters of the surrounding country collecting in wet seasons,
are so rapidly evaporated in the long intervals which usually inter-
vene that they do not. .. form permanent sheets of water but alter-
nately assume the character of shallow lakes and dry mud plains.”
Though he had advanced from the north into a portion of the
desert which Sturt had penetrated from the south, Gregory was still
far from solving the problem of Australia’s inland water system.
“The result of his exploration only tends to prove that the country
at the north west angle of the Continent so closely resembles the
more southern and central parts of it as to be at once recognized as
portions of one and the same great feature of it —its desert,” a
desert with no definite margin to the north, but which “runs up to
the very summit of the tableland that intervenes between it and the
coast.” lo The knowledge he did obtain, however, Sturt was able to
use conjecturally, as supplementary to his own. The direction of
the northern sand dunes seemed to confirm his opinion that central
Australia had once contained a vast bay whose gradually receding
10 Letter from Capt. Sturt to the Under Sec. of State, Jan. 19, 1858.
81
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


shores were lined with wind blown sand. Moreover, he assumed
their continuance through the unexplored country to the Great
Australian Bight, “behind whose massive walls, if anywhere, the
basin of the inland waters may yet be found.” The fact that
Gregory had not reached the lowest portion of the interior he
considered sufficient evidence to indicate the possible existence of a
central watercourse in continuation of Sturt's Creek.
Having located the northern fringe of desert, Gregory’s
only course was to return to the Victoria. The temporary depot
he found safe though harassed by continued native attacks.
Keeping in mind the necessities of his next expedition to the Gulf,
he spent some time before his return in searching for a large
tributary from the east or south-east which he could use as a
starting point. He succeeded in connecting his route with that of
the previous December, finding on the whole fine pastoral country,
in spite of its stony nature, but discovered no tributary of useful
size. Where basalt existed, and it existed abundantly, there was
grass in plenty. Water was nowhere difficult to find. “The
principal defect of this fine country was the almost total absence of
timber, there being no trees of any size except on the immediate
banks or in the beds of creeks, and even there it is usually small
and crooked.”
Fixing for a future starting point the only eastern tributary
which joined the Victoria, Gregory left there his surplus provisions
and ammunition and returned to the main camp on the 9th May.
Captain Gourlay had personally hastened the repairs of the
schooner, in spite of the death of his only carpenter; and native
hostility, though disturbing, had not been sufficiently alarming to
prevent scouting excursions up the main and west branches of the
Victoria.
Taking advantage of the cool season Gregory immediately
instituted preparations for carrying out the second portion of his
work. Unable now to form depots as before, and foreseeing a
certain risk in the proposed co-operation of the “Tom Tough” at
the Albert River, the leader did his best to render the small party
of seven independent of any but the supplies they carried with
them.
Baines, taking charge of those left behind, was instructed to
replenish the Tom Tough’s provisions at Timor, and then proceed


to the Albert River to meet the exploring party. The two Gregorys
on the final journey eastward, with Mueller, Elsey, Bowman, Dean,
and Melville, arrived at their cache on the Victoria on June 35. It
was well understood that they were to avoid, if at all possible,
Leichhardt’s mistake of crossing the Gulf rivers near the coast only.
While keeping this in view Gregory found it impossible to choose a
more southerly route than he did because of the known absence of
easterly tributaries to the Victoria. The creek he did elect to follow
led him along the skirt of the desert into the fine basaltic country
where it had its source. The party then wandered in a tedious
search for water still further north and finally followed the Elsey
Creek down to its junction with the Roper in latitude 14° 58', longi-
tude 133° 35'. The river itself was running strongly, in spite of an
absence of surface water everywhere else. Its valley varied from
grassy plains to reedy inundated flats clothed with the lily of
Stuart fame.
In leaving the Roper and following approximately the Gulf
coast line to the south east, they left basaltic country for sandstone.
Barren worthless country, clothed miserably with stunted eucalypti
and triodia (spinifex), forced them in desperation to camp along
the edge of the sandy tableland, clinging to the broken land which
sheltered the little grass and water they could find in an inhospitable
wild. The Limmen Bight River was practically non-existent; The
McArthur was a channel only with apparent traces of occasional
floods which had rent the valley into obstructing ravines. In
approaching the Tasman they found that basalt, and consequently
grass land recurred; but until they had passed the Nicholson and
the future boundary of South Australian territory the expedition
was never free from a toilsome country of sudden and great
elevations and as sudden depressions, of rock and range, where even
die plains were poor in everything but spinifex.
Gregory reached the Albert River on August 30, and found
evidence in large letters cut on one of the trees that Lieut. Chimmo,
of the steamer “Torch,” had landed in the neighbourhood. In the
absence of any further information he concluded that the visit had
no connection with his own expedition. Lieut. Chimmo had in
reality been commissioned by the Secretary of State in February,
1856, to lead a search party, as apprehension was felt for the safety
of the expedition. He had examined the Albert as far as its source.


and afterwards proceeded to the Victoria, where he found Gregory's
deserted depot six miles below Steep Head, “looking like an English
farmyard” with its oven and forge, its thatched houses, huts, sheep
pens and horse sheds.
Of the “Tom Tough” Gregory found no sign whatever. The
situation forced him to choose between two courses of action. By
waiting at the Albert for the supplies expected from Timor he would
render the party unable to proceed far, should those supplies not
arrive. By proceeding immediately with the provisions in hand, he
would be able to reach the settled districts of New South Wales,
but must forego a detailed examination of the country south of the
Gulf. “On mature consideration of these points I decided on pro-
ceeding without delay by the most direct route to the settled dis-
tricts of New South Wales; for however desirable in a geographical
point of view it might be to take a more southerly course, and
attempt to reach the Victoria River of Sir J. Mitchell, 11 by adopting
the most direct practicable route the result of the journey would
be decidedly of more practical utility, as it would tend to open the
communication between the southern colonies and the shores of the
Gulf of Carpentaria, a point which has hitherto been considered of
vast import with reference to the supply of the Indian market with
horses.” 12 Leaving word for Baines, Gregory led his party south-
eastward across the disappointing Plains of Promise to the Leich-
hardt, the Flinders, Gilbert, Lynd, and Burdekin, thence to the
Dawson River and land of settlement. They arrived in Brisbane at
the end of a 2,000 mile journey, and after an absence of 16 months.
The “Tom Tough” in the meanwhile had arrived at Coepang on
July 25, and proceeded to Sourabaya for repairs. This would have
necessitated such delay that the schooner was discharged and the
party in charge of Baines left for the Albert in the “Messenger.”
In the neighbourhood of Port Essington Baines, to effect a more
speedy communication with the land party, left.the “Messenger”
and made his way towards the rendezvous in the long boat. The
“Messenger,” however, arrived first (Nov. 11) and having received
11 Sir T. Mitchell.
12 A decision which was subjected to some criticism by members of
the Roy. Geog. Soc. after his return because it meant the practical failure of
the second part of the expedition. See Procs. of the Society, 1857, Jan. 13.
*3 The ponies taken on board at Timor for the service’ of the expedition
had to be shot, the water supply being insufficient for them. The “Tom
Tough” was finally sold for 13,000 rupees to some Arabs.


Gregory's letters the whole party returned to Java and finally
reached Sydney on April 1.
“Perhaps no expedition has yet been undertaken in Australia
in which the elements of both success and failure have been so
largely combined . . . the long voyage through a sea remarkable
for its dangers, and the extensive combination necessary in the
arrangements, added to the ordinary liabilities attending exposure
to the vicissitudes of a tropical climate, hostile natives, and desert
country, present such an array of difficulties that I feel our utmost
endeavours could not have availed had it not been for the protection
of that Providence without which we are powerless." 14
The work of the expedition received high commendation from
the Imperial authorities, and the “skill, intelligence and firmness”
of the leader, due meed of praise. The actual value of the informa-
tion obtained was, on the whole, unequal. By far the most
important of Gregory's discoveries were those made west of the
138th meridian, that is to say, in future South Australian territory.
From the time he left the Roper River in his final progress east-
ward, his track was too close to that of Leichhardt for him to
depart materially from the views of that explorer in his information.
The actual physical structure of north-west Australia, as
Gregory saw it, was not promising. By far the greatest portion
consisted of ferruginous sandstone plateau, often covered with the
ironstone pebbles noted by every explorer of that locality, and
sloping gently 300 miles to the sea from a height of 1,600 to 1,700
feet. Where its surface had been worn to a fine red dust the
tableland was only redeemed from desert by the torrential excava-
tion of gorge and valley and river bed. The combined experience of
King, Stokes, Leichhardt and Gregory seemed to indicate that the
northern slope was uniform in nature, and that the north-west
corner was the most happy portion of Australia in its endowment of
waterways. Outcroppings of limestone characterized the Victoria
valley, and basalt the grassed plains of the upper Victoria, Sturt’s
Creek and the Roper. The actual line of division between the
horth and south waters Gregory located at the 18th parallel, the
influence of regular tropical rainfall not being felt south of that
line.
14 “Papers relating to an expedition recently undertaken for the pur-
pose of exploring the northern portion of Australia.” (P.P. of Gt. Brit.,
1857.)


The prospects for settlement were not on the surface alluring,
even in the valley of the Victoria. The whole of the north-west was
essentially and perhaps uniquely a country of grass only. The
navigation of its greatest river was seriously impeded by tidal
current and shoals; and its valley lapsed alarmingly from pastoral
virtue. The river banks Gregory often found barren and rocky.
Whirlwind Plains were cultivable but thirsty. From Beagle
Valley to the Wickham, rock and grass alternated, but water was
still shy. Only in the basaltic plains of Roe Downs did he find
satisfactory pasture, though not agricultural land, “the finest portion
of the whole country” comprising one million acres of available
land. From Hooker's Creek to Sturt’s Creek and eastward to the
Roper, grass was good and soil good, but water failed. During
the first part of the journey, at least, the party, though making an
extensive botanical collection, found no vegetable productions,
except grass, which could be rendered practically useful. The
country on the western Gulf shore he dismissed summarily as
barren in the extreme.
Climatic conditions, however /were unexpectedly favourable.
Even during the worst season, which was the first they experienced,
the uniformly dry atmospheric conditions kept the exploring party
in excellent health. The absence of ordinary tropical humidity was
observable both in the dryness of the vegetation and the health of
the men. August to November, the hot season, was enervating but
tolerable; the rains had ceased by the end of January; and March
to July was a period of “bright cloudless days and clear cold
nights,” keen with the breath of autumn. “The climate of North
Australia is much more regular than hitherto settled districts in
extra tropical parts of the Continent which have no fixed seasons.”
The explorer's conclusion, as a general assumption, was a
generous one—“the country is well suited to meet the rapidly in-
creasing demand for pastoral land in Australia.” One of the
greatest drawbacks he considered to be the scarcity of timber
where trees were small, crooked, and centrally decayed. As a site
for a penal settlement in place of Western Australia he considered
it ideal.
After due consideration of the reports made by the members
of the expedition and by Lieut. Chimmo, the Royal Geographical
Society remained divided in opinion as to the suitability of the


North-West for European settlement. One suggestion of a practical
nature, however, was made shortly after the return of the expedition
by its geologist, J. S. Wilson. 15 His proposal was for the settlement
of the lately explored territory by the establishment of a North
Australian Company. Its aims were to be the acquisition of land
for sale from Her Majesty’s Government, and the establishment of
ports on the north coast with a view to the settlement of the
country, the facilitation of English commerce with the adjacent
islands, whose nearest English port at that time was Singapore,
and an increase in the supply of raw materials for home manufac-
ture. Cotton was especially needed for the necessitous Lancashire
industry, and there seemed no doubt of the natural capabilities of
the territory for the production of wool and the rearing of cattle
and horses. Asiatic labour, moreover, was plentiful, and an
American monopoly of inter-insular trade showed signs of
threatening British interests in the East. The failure of Port
Essington seemed to be largely due to a commercial inhibition
which the opening up of the North Australian interior would render
no longer necessary; while the hoped-for establishment of tele-
graphic communcation with Europe would necessitate a settlement
of some kind on the north coast.
The question of the actual site for settlement could not be
determined in such general terms. Port Essington had proved
unfavorable because of its land-locked harbour and poor soil; the
Albert River was 400 miles out of the direct line of navigation be-
tween the Pacific and Indian Oceans; the Victoria River was shoal
infested and far out of the regular commercial track. Wilson's
proposition offered a solution of the difficulty by suggesting the
Liverpool River of Captain King. As the most northerly river in
Australia its estuary was well within the line of commerce; it
possessed the necessary harbourage, soil, fresh water; and in the
eyes of the promoter, its valley constituted the greater portion of
the best country in north and north-west Australia. The proposal,
however, seems not to have been taken into official consideration.
' Stuart's early successes, as we have seen, led to a request from
15 "Draft of Preliminary Proposals for a North Australian Company,”
June 7, 1858 (MS. in the Mitchell Library). Also MS. account of the
capabilities of N. Australia by J. S. Wilson. (Mitchell The ques-
tion of settlement on the north coast was vigorously supported by the
Roy. Geog. Soc. See Journal, Vols. 4,5, 31, 33, 34, 36 (President’s address).


the Governor of South Australia for an extension of its northern
boundary which did not meet with the approbation of the British
Government. Individual suggestions for a northern settlement
were undoubtedly advanced from time to time, 16 but the temper of
British politics was definitely set against the extension of Imperial
responsibility. The Governor of South Australia, indeed, in refusing
to consider one such suggestion, 17 adduced as full justification “the
Duke of Newcastle’s opposition at present to the forwarding of any
settlement on the North coast."
The descriptions of Stuart and McKinlay, however, were
sufficiently favourable to induce a reconsideration of the question.
The one had reported fully in 1862 upon the unlimited pastoral
capabilities of the new territory—a country which, “if settled, will
be one of the first Colonies under the Crown suitable for the growth
of any and everything." The other, writing in March, 1862, was of
the opinion that two or three months later in the year it would be
possible to “start with a herd of any kind of stock from the northern
settled parts of South Australia and go right across the Continent
to any point thought fit by that route."
It was the realized possibility of a commercial and geographical
union between the northern and southern parts of Australia, which
led immediately to a consideration of the settlement of the new
territory and its annexation by one or other 'of the existing
colonies. 18 Sir Charles Nicholson placed the matter before the
Duke of Newcastle in July, 1862. 19 Because of its geographical
position, the immediate likelihood of its being occupied by
squatters, and the necessity for an established authority there other
than that of New South Wales, he suggested, either that a new
colony be established by an Imperial loan, or that the district of
North Australia 20 be annexed to Queensland. Newcastle, sub-
-16 See the proposals of Bloomfield Douglas, Dec. 19, 1862; J. B. Bur-
stall (Sandhurst), Dec. 29, 1862; j. Johnston (Vic.), July 4, 1863; Th. Cham-
pion, Melb., Aug. 21, 1863. (C.S.O. 1266/1862; 12, 1010, 646, 802/1863; Out
letters, Jan. 3, 1862.)
17 Made by Wm. Wilson, Castlemaine, Dec. 16, 1861, on behalf of 30
old colonists with their families, who proposed to settle on the north coast
for commercial and missionary purposes. (C.S.O. 282/61.) They appealed
to S.A., because of the selfishness of Victorian politics—an appeal which
was justly stigmatized as a wild speculation.
18 from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State, No. 73, of Dec. 23, 1862.
19 Desp. from Sec. of State to Gov. of S.A., Sept. 21,1862.
20 North of lat. 26° S., and between the 129th and 138th meridians.


mitting the matter to the Colonial Land and Emigration Commis-
sioners, expressed the opinion that a new settlement would be
premature, and advised an annexation to Queensland of the
territory north of the tropic, and to South Australia of the
remainder —a suggestion in which the Commissioners fully con-
curred.
There was a general feeling in South Australia, however, that
the exploratory work of McKinlay and Stuart entitled that colony
to a larger measure of consideration than could be claimed by
Queensland on the ground of her squatting extension, 21 especially
as McKinlay believed that “the migration must come chiefly from
the settled parts of the north of this Colony (S.A.) or from the
same latitudes of New South Wales, the Queensland frontier being
barely practicable to cross stock from that province with safety.”
Immediately after Stuart’s return, the Governor referred to him
the question of the respective merits of Queensland and South Aus-
tralia as promoters of a settlement near the Adelaide River. The
accessibility of South Australia in point of distance and the absence
of physical difficulties on the overland route determined him in
favour of his own colony. The route he had himself taken could
be made nearly a straight line for telegraphic purposes, and there
were no obstacles to the overland transport of stock. “I beg to
add,” he stated, “that I am of opinion that by temporarily annexing
the country alluded to to South Australia it would be rendered
available for colonization in the shortest time and at the least
expense.” 22
The Executive Council advised a longitudinal rather than
latitudinal division of the territory to be annexed. 23 As stated by
the Emigration Commissioners, the centres of settlement in North
Australia would undoubtedly be the Victoria and Albert Rivers,
700 miles apart. If settlement were to proceed contemporaneously
21 Desp. of Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State, No. 68, of Nov. 26, 1862.
(Stuart was then still in the field). Exec, Coun. Mins., Nov. 25, 1862.
22 C.L. and I. 2574/62.
23 Executive Council Minute, Nov. 25, 1862. This view was adopted
also by the S.A. Pastoral Association, Nov. 19, 1862 (C.S.O. 1157/62). After
the annexation had been effected, however, stockowners complained that
the Queensland restrictions on the introduction of sheep on its S. and W.
borders prevented them from taking full advantage of the trans-continental
stock route discovered by McKinlay. The clause which gave the Albert
to Queensland caused much dissatisfaction. P.P. 61, 64, 111, 149/1864.


at both, the first district should belong to South Australia, the
second only to Queensland. They urged, moreover, that by
keeping a clear tract of country across the continent in South
Australian hands, intermediate settlements would facilitate the
speedy establishment of telegraphic communication with Europe.
The return of Stuart in December, 1863, confirmed these views, and
a further appeal on behalf of South Australia was accompanied
by the first application for land in the new country. 24
The wishes of the South Australian Government were con-
sidered favourably by the Imperial authorities and a supplementary
Commission was forwarded in July, 1863, annexing the territory
in question to South Australia. 25 This was speedily followed by the
Northern Territory Act.
Applications for land purchases and leases were received both
in Great Britain and Australia during March, 1864, and on April 14
Col. Boyle Travers Finniss 26 was appointed first Government
Resident of the Northern Territory of South Australia, and charged
with the exploratory and survey work necessary for the establish-
ment of the new colony.
The first Northern Territory Expedition was from its nature,
devoted partly to exploration, partly to survey work, and partly to
colonization. Finniss’ immediate aim was the settlement of his
party at the site best suited for a capital and port. The expedition
had been directed to land at the south-western corner of Adam Bay,
the estuary of the Adelaide River, in Clarence Strait. 27 Finniss'
choice of a port, however, was to be decided by its suitability as a
port of call for vessels trading to Malaysia and India. The capital
was to be as close to the port as the supply of fresh water and
timber would allow, “having regard to the health of the site and
the means of communication with those parts of the interior from
which produce may be expected to arrive.” In the event of Adam
24 Desp. from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State, No. 73, of Dec. 23, 1802,
and No. 5, of Jan. 20, 1863, enclosing applications of Messrs. Watts and
Levi for land on the Roe Downs and near the Shaw.
23 Desp. from Sec. of State to Gov. of S.A., May 26, 1863, and July 16,
1863; from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State No. 50, of Sept. 22, 1863. P.P.’s
37, 70, 113, 122, 127/1863. The territory annexed was north of the 26th
parallel, and between the 129th and 138th meridians. (See also Exec. Coun.
Mins. Sept. 9, 1863, and Sept. 16, 1863.)
26 Executive Council minute (C.S.O. 281/1864).
27 Instructions to Finniss and party, see C.S.O. out letter of April 16,
1864, and P.P.’s 36 and 36a/1864.


Bay proving unsuitable, Finniss’ instructions directed him generally
to examine southwards at Port Darwin, Port Patterson, and the
Victoria River; and as a last resort to Van Diemen Gulf and east-
ward to the Roper River, avoiding Port Essington and Raffles Bay.
To help him in such a contingency, the Government schooner
“Yatala” and the surveying ship ‘‘Beatrice” were added to the
expedition. The schooner was expected to be of particular service
in forming a depot in the event of any lengthy search becoming
necessary, and minute instructions were provided to ensure the
proper care of stock and provisions and a just treatment of the
aborigines. The services of Commander Hutchison, of the
“Beatrice,” were to be utilized in a preliminary examination of the
Adelaide River and in the transport of the expeditionary stores and
despatches. 28
The preliminary work of King, Stokes, and Gregory provided
a quantity of information relative to the possible and probable sites
for a port and capital, the main choice lying between the estuaries
of the Adelaide and the Victoria. 29 The most immediate require-
ments of the chief port of the province were health, security for
shipping, convenience of situation in the track of trading vessels,
wharf facilities, and accessibility to the productive districts of the
interior.
The position of the Adelaide estuary in such a consideration
was strong. Its harbour was well sheltered from the prevailing
winds, especially those from the south-west and south-east. It was
reported deep, with a rise of 18 feet, and a comparatively clear
approach through Dundas Strait and Van Diemen Gulf. It was
not landlocked, and so escaped the malarial unhealthiness which
38 Desp. from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State No. 51, of Sept. 23, 1863,
and 6 of Feb. 24, 1864; from Sec. of State to Gov. of S.A., Dec. 10, 1863.
29 For further information relating to the question of a suitable site
and the preliminaries of the expedition see:
ta) C.S.O. 2654, 379, 289, 291, 306, 316, 317, 318, 348, 361, 366, 372,
382, 384, 391, 394, 402, 4274, 453, 471, 485, 498, 500, 524, 5294, 539,
540, 536, 585, 5854, 6114, 612, 1006/1864. Out letters of March 17,
19, 31; April 5, 13, 16, 1864.
(b) C.L. and I. 2052/1861; 2574/1862.
(c) Despatches from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State—No. 10 of March
26, 1864; No. 20, of April 25, 1864.
td) Exec. Conn. Mins., Mar. 4, Mar. 10; April 5, 14, of 1864.
30 p.p. 36/1864 (appendix) and C.S.O. 2654/1864 —memo, by G. W. Earl
on the best site for settlement.


had caused the failure of Port Essington; while its temperature was
lower than that prevailing on the north coast. 31 “I do not think
there is any spot upon the north or north-west coast where the
circulation of air is more free than here.” 32 It was well within the
Torres Strait route; was “conveniently situated for communication
by means of boats and barges with the head of navigation of the
Adelaide and Alligator rivers”; and occupied a central position for
receiving the products of the Victoria and Roper valleys. Stuart
himself had formed a very high opinion of its value. “I have no
hesitation in saying that the country that I have discovered on and
around the banks of the Adelaide River is more favourable than any
other part of the continent for the formation of a new colony.” 33
This opinion was confirmed by the written description of Lieut.
Helpman. 34
The Victoria, on the other hand, had suffered much in prestige
because Gregory had been unable to effect an insurance on the
'‘Monarch” for the time during which she would be in the Victoria
estuary. Helpman, himself, had described it as dangerous of
approach, filled with enormous sand banks, and its shores as un-
approachable. Nor could the efforts of Gregory’s party be
considered successful in navigating it.
The “Henry Ellis,” 35 chartered for the transport of the
expedition, 3B arrived at Adam Bay on June Zl, 1864, and with the
31 Lieut, Pasco suggested the C. Hotham Penin. See his account of
the discovery of the Adelaide River (C.S.O. 537/1864).
32 Geo. Windsor Earl (C.S.O. 265*/1864).
33 "The Journals of John McDouall Stuart”—Hardman. Stuart sug-
gested the naming of the whole N.T. “Alexandra Land.” A certain extent
of it was so named and proclaimed. See Desp. from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of
State No. 30 of April 26, 1865; Sec. of State to Gov, of SA., July 20, 1865;
Procs. of Roy. Geog. Soc., Vol. 0, p. 21; Exec. Coun. Mins., Mar. 30, 1865,
April 26, 1865.
34 See Helpman’s description of the discovery of the Adelaide River.
<C.L. and I. 2052/1861.)
36 Charter Party, C.S.O. 361/1864.
36 The party consisted of B. T. Finniss (Govt. Res.), J. T. Manton (en-
gineer and surveyor), F. E. Goldsmith (surgeon and Protector of
Aborigines), E. Ward (clerk, accountant, and postmaster), W. Pearson
(surveyor), S. King (storekeeper and supt. of stock), J. Davis (asst, store-
keeper), R. Watson (draughtsman), J. W. O. Bennett (draughtsman), J.
Wadham, A. R. Hamilton, W. Mac Minn, F. J. Packard, J. R. Atkinson, D. B.
Wiltshire, F. R. Finniss, C. W. Machell, M. E. Fitch, W. Read, W. Moor-
head, J. A. Howe, T. Braman, B. Boucaut, J. Gilbert, R. J. Ware, J. F.
Roberts, W. S. Murray, C. Hake, F. H. Litchfield, W. P. Auld, S. Baker,
92
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


help of Commander Hutchison, who had already partially
navigated the Adelaide, the stock were landed some distance up the
river, where a first encampment was made. 37 During a preliminary
excursion 3B the Government Resident managed to find good pastoral
country near the Daly Range; but the intervening country being
marshy and inaccessible for drays, he fixed upon Escape Cliffs as
the most suitable depot for the duration of the rainy season. 3 ®
In the meanwhile Patrick Auld was instructed to search for
Stuart's tracks 40 in the neighbourhood of the Adelaide, and to
follow the high land supposed to exist between that river and the
Alligator for the purpose of finding a dray road practicable in wet
weather. Individual enterprise in exploration was very promptly
discouraged, the Government Resident conceiving it as his mission
“to select a site for settlement and survey it as soon as possible,"
not to seek laurels as an explorer. The actual settlement of a
capital site was deferred until the arrival of Hutchison from Timor
with fresh provisions. It was immediately evident that there would
be a difficulty in locating town and harbour in close proximity, and
Finniss expressed early a preference for Escape Cliffs and Adam
Bay. His mind seemed already more than half closed to the claims
of any other locality, retaining only a slight partiality for Bynoe
Harbour, “which, I am sure, is the only place that can compete
with this, if it can even be put in comparison."
The exploratory work of the expedition was not to proceed
smoothly. Very early in its history the leader had departed far
from the ways of his officers, whose superabundance he deplored.
Both Ward and Pearson he had found it necessary to reprove for
unsanctioned exploring energy; and an unfortunate affray with the
natives at the surveyors’ river camp, on August 9, precipitated his
A. Ward, F. Edwards, H. T. Styles, H. Baumgartcl, J. Bohm, T. King, J.
Cowic, W. Smith, J. Dyer, S. Chandler. For application for appointments
in the expedition see C.S.O. incoming correspondence for 1863 and 1864.
37 Report of B. T. Finniss, Aug. 10 (C.S.O, 1700, 1701, 1702/1864);
Ward's official journal (C.S.O. 1710/1864); Report of Comm. Hutchison
(C.S.O. 1719/1864); Desp. from Gov. of S.A. to See. of State No. 10 of Mar.
26, 1864; No. 20 of April 25; No. 52 of Oct. 25.
38 With F. R. Finniss, Auld, Packard, Litchfield and Wadham.
39 For the suitability of Escape Cliffs sec Extracts from the Remark
Book of the “Beatrice” (C.S.O. 19J/1865).
40 It was doubtful for a long time whether Stuart had really struck the
Adelaide. Sec the testimony of Helpman (C.L. and I. 2558/62) and Goyder
(C.L. and I. 2574/62) who identified it with Stuart’s “Mary.”
93
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


hostility to the clerk of the expedition and its doctor. The sus-
pension of Ebenezer Ward in September did little to establish
loving kindness in the party or authority in its leader; and the
opposition of Dr. Goldsmith to Finniss’ choice of a site and methods
of retaliation against the natives provoked greater bitterness, if not
greater efficiency. Captain Humbert of the “Yatala” was dismissed
for disobedience in October, and the expedition was deprived of
the valuable services of Commander Hutchison by his relinquish-
ment of the marine survey through ill-health. At the beginning of
that month Finniss was still thinking of viewing other harbours
before finally deciding upon a site; surveying was still held up; and
the party was still unprotected from the winter rains. By the 12th
Ports Darwin and Patterson had been rejected and Escape Cliffs
finally named as the site of the capital, Palmerston, with Port Daly
as its port.
Reinforcements arrived by the “South Australian” on Dec. 5,
bringing R. H. Edmunds and H. D. Packard as surveyors, Clement
Young to replace Ebenezer Ward, and Jefferson Stow, representing
the interests of two hundred preliminary land order holders. It
soon became evident, even while Edmunds was proceeding with the
survey of the double capital, that the Government Resident’s choice
of a site was not wholly popular, and that the Government Resident
himself was still less so. The disapproval, as voiced by Jefferson
Stow, centred round the unfortunate Escape Cliffs. Its land was
barren, its communication with the interior dangerous in flood time,
its surroundings swampy. The two parts of the double city were
six miles apart and not easily accessible in the wet season. It was
permanently lacking in open country, pastoral land, elevation,
agricultural and commercial possibilities, surface water, timber and
building materials. By January 20 of the following year (1865). a
meeting of land order holders in Adelaide had expressed general
condemnation of the site, and dissatisfaction had crystallized into
definite criticism of Finniss’ personal conduct of the expedition. He
had failed to carry out his instructions in the most important
particulars—the securing of a healthy site near a harbour in close
proximity to fresh water and timber; and, his own choice being pre-
eminently unsatisfactory, he had neglected to explore further than
the Alligator and Port Patterson, leaving the Victoria as read. 41
41 According to Finniss’ own vindication (C.S.O. 1200/65), he had
chosen the site after “a careful study of the narrative and plans of Stokes,


“No surveyor and no one whose name is sufficiently well known
to be accepted as a guarantee for (the) correctness of (his) state-
ment or the soundness of his opinion has been employed on any
exploring expedition.” His chosen explorers were labourers
favoured, in defiance of the hated officers, for their ability to bring
back good reports of the Adelaide River district. By April the
difficulties were emphasized by the advent of the rains. North
and South Palmerston (the Cliffs and the Narrows) seemed hope-
lessly separated by swamp; while the Government Resident was
accused-of persistently preventing exploration and “endeavouring
to his utmost to keep the public in ignorance of the character of
the country.” 42
In April he made an effort to satisfy the peremptory demands
of his critics by taking a short cruise to Port Darwin in the
“Beatrice,” and sending Auld with three men and nine horses in
the same direction overland. 43 His own conclusions, based upon
an examination of two creeks flowing into the port from the Daly
Ranges, was relatively unfavourable. In spite of its magnificent
anchorage, its easy communication with the interior, its good grass
land, he found it as a site for settlement “greatly inferior to Escape
Cliffs,” his principal objection being the land-locked harbour. Auld
found the country too wet for proper exploration, June to December
being the correct period, and returned from Darwin without coming
to any conclusion at all.
The question of site now rested almost exclusively between
the Adelaide and the Victoria, and in spite of Finniss' formidable
array of evidence culled from the experiences of Stokes, Helpman,
Windsor Earl, and Gregory, for the damnation of the Victoria, he
at last found it incumbent upon him to add thereto some experience
of his own. The members of the expedition were beginning to
evince a general restlessness and desire to follow the dismissed
officers to Adelaide at the first opportunity; and, in spite of the
Gregory, Stuart, Leichhardt, King, and Helpman, a consideration of Mel-
ville Is. and Port Essington, and a personal examination of the back
country up the Adelaide for 60 miles, and of the coast to Quail Is., and
east to the Alligator.” See also his own journal (C.S.O. 14/65) for trifling
expeditions mainly to Chambers’ Bay on Oct. 14, Nov. 3, Nov. 8-12.
42 Stow’s accusations concluded with serious allegations against the
Govt. Res. for “gross selfishness, inhumanity, scurrilous and abusive con-
duct,” deliberate falsehood and suppression of fact.
42 Instructions and report see C.S.O. 1201/1865.


Government Resident’s belated determination to explore the coast
as far as the Victoria, since “no one would be satisfied until (he
had) done so,” three of the men set out in a boat for the Camden
settlement and Swan River. 44
In the meanwhile the Government Resident instructed
Frederick Litchfield to conduct a small party of five, for the purpose
of examining the Chambers’ Bay country east of the Adelaide,
returning by Fred’s Pass in the Daly Ranges, he himself arranging
to accompany the “Beatrice” up the river. Litchfield's “pleasure
trip” was undoubtedly undertaken in a spirit of optimism,
heightened by the “cultivated meadow” appearance of the Adelaide
valley after the heavy seasonal rains. From Chambers’ Bay, which
they left on May 13, they crossed happily long tracks of splendidly
grassed cattle country, well timbered and watered to latitude 13° 1'
S. (Rocket Creek), thence to the River Finniss, naming Mounts
Bennett and Farrington on the way. There being no apparent
diminution of the good country and the horses knocking up, Litch-
field returned on his tracks. From Fred’s Pass he made for the
Cliffs with the utmost despatch in order to obtain medical assistance
for King, who was suffering from an acute attack of fever and
could not be taken beyond the ranges. 4s
Fimjiss, in the meanwhile, had ascended the Adelaide to
latitude 12° 56' 15”, reporting very favourably upon the pastoral
capabilities of the surrounding country, but deprecating the
possibility of establishing the capital far up the river, because of
the unfavourable climate. Even so the Resident’s faith was
shaking; and although surveys of Escape Cliffs and the Narrows
were proceeding apace, they were “not now (June 19) to be laid
out as a capital, but as towns of lesser dimensions,” to allow for
the Government changing its mind. 46
Continued hostile relations with the natives, resulting from the
unfortunate punitive efforts of the previous year, now culminated in
the murder of Alaric Ward, a shepherd, and the temporary
44 Described as “a very perilous voyage undertaken under feelings of
irritation at the absence of sufficient progress in the affairs of the new
settlement.” (Desp. from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State No. 61 of Sept. 26,
1865.)
45 For Litchfield’s report see C.S.O. 1890/1865. In estimating the value
of his exuberantly optimistic report it is necessary to take into consideration
the status of the leader in the personnel of the expedition.
46 Finniss’ report see C.S.O. 1890/1865.


cessation of exploring activity. On August 12, however, Finniss
left Escape Cliffs for his long promised examination of the coast to
the Victoria, 47 having previously instructed Litchfield to explore in
the same direction overland from the good country at the foot of
the Daly Ranges. The Government Resident, in his coastal
progress assured himself that the River Finniss of Litchfield did
not find its outlet in Fog Bay as he surmised. Anson Bay, how-
ever, he found to be the estuary of a river, the Daly, only second in
size to the Adelaide, and of sufficient commercial importance to
warrant the supposition that it might become the site of a secondary
city in the new territory. Port Keats was a blind estuary; and his
investigations of the Victoria satisfied his utmost expectations of it
as “one of the worst and most unsafe rivers for navigable purposes
oh the coast” The “Julia” could not pass beyond Black Point, and
as far as Whirlwind Plains there was nothing attractive or valuable
in the rugged, barren hills that lined its banks. Beyond that point
the ranges fell back “like a great sea wall,” and disclosed long,
level, lightly timbered flats of no mean richness, fit for all purposes
of settlement and every variety of cultivation.
Finniss had left Escape Cliffs under the influence of a very
strong conviction. Whether he was determined not to alter that
opinion it is impossible now to say; but when he finally left the
Victoria he did so with those convictions strengthened a hundred-
fold. There was no river to compete with the Adelaide. Port
Darwin, next in importance, though admittedly possessing a
capacious harbour, would only subserve a limited extent of country,
and would possibly fail to supply constant fresh water and good
health. The Daly, an admirable river, lacked harbour accom-
modation at all tides, and the Victoria had none of these things—
having stated which conclusion the Government Resident of the
Northern Territory proceeded to Timor in all serenity and the
“Beatrice” for supplies and roofing materials.
Litchfield, with a party of four, in accordance with instructions,
had reached Fred’s Pass 48 on September 16, and had struck the
Finniss at the gorge of Mt. Bennett five days later. Following
the river through promising alluvial gold country he traced it until
it ran out in the fresh water marshes behind Bynoe Harbour. The
47 Finniss’ report see C.S.O. 1904/1865.
48 Report see C.S.O. 79/1866.


Reynolds, to the south-west, did the same. The Daly he followed
for 30 miles, turning back only when compelled by reduced
provisions. On his way back he called at Man ton’s surveying camp,
and found a deplorable condition of depression and discontent. A
feeling which the commander of the “Beatrice” had attributed to
despondence at the fate of Alaric Ward, Finniss interpreted, rightly,
on his return from Timor, as a general spirit of dissatisfaction. He
went further, however. He had never worked well either with
officers or men. He now found room for censure on the ground
that being townsmen, they had a rooted objection to leaving head-
quarters ; and as disappointed men they persistently refused to find
in either plain or hillside anything fit for survey. On November 5,
when dejection was at its height, and supplies at their lowest, the
barque “Ellen Lewis” arrived at Escape Clift's with an exploratory
party under John McKinlay. In addition instructions arrived for
the Government Resident to return to Adelaide, and for J. T.
Manton to take his place.
The Government had, early in the year (I 860) expressed its
dissatisfaction with the progress and management of the expedition;
and public feeling was definitely set against the choice of Escape
Clift's, without further exploration, as the site for the principal
city of the new settlement. By June reports of approaching disas-
ter had spread beyond the Continent, and George Windsor Earl
was earnestly soliciting permission to send a relief expedition from
the Straits Settlements. 49 In July the Agent General in London
was writing 50 that “the absence of all communication with the
Northern Territory has damped all the spirits and ardour of the
persons connected with the Land Sale, and the Territory begins to
be forgotten.”
At the same time Finniss was serenely conscious of a certain
passive rectitude in the attitude he had adopted. “My mission was
not to look for sheep and cattle unis, but to find a proper site for
the capital and for the rural surveys in the vicinity of sheep and
49 Letter from G. W. Earl to Sir Dominick Daly, Province Wellesley,
June 6, 1805 (Archives). His suggestion was for a town to be surveyed
on the upper Adelaide, in order to keep open communication with S.A.
“The only item of intelligence from the Adelaide that gave me unalloyed
satisfaction .. . was the erection of the 60 ft. palm tree as a flagstaff. The
entire strength of the party would be required to set up such a tree on
end, so they must have all pulled together for once at least.”
80 CL. and I. 2352/1865.


cattle runs. This I did .... any further exploration might sub-
serve private interests, but it must have stood in the way of the
Government/' 51 The Government, however, was quite prepared to
suffer such obstructions, and land selection was delayed until the
results of McKinlay’s expedition should be known.
The official sins of the Government Resident as leader of an
exploratory expedition were scarlet. His lack of management
had disorganized the party and wasted its funds; he had failed to
carry out instructions; his retaliatory measures against the natives
had gone near to bringing the policy of the British Government
into disrepute; he had deserted the expedition to go to Timor;
and finally, “without previous examination of the country, and
contrary to the opinion expressed by the Government, and in oppo-
sition to the views of his surveying staff, as well as to those of
the agents of the preliminary land order holders .... he ordered
the surveys to be made and continued in localities where the
lands for the purposes of settlement were utterly worthless.”
The report of the Commission of Enquiry did not leave the
Government blameless. Finniss had had the wrong men to deal
with from the beginning, but at the same time he was the wrong
man to deal with them in age, experience, and temperament. He
was not young, nor a bushman, nor even a tactful man. Contem-
porary portraits show him as egotistical, petty, pompous, by no
means fearless, apathetic, selfish, and cruel. Of the validity of
the first four charges there was little question. In his exploring
capacity Finniss could, and did, find loophole for a misunder-
standing of official intention. Not being furnished with the means
of making extended examinations, he claimed that his twelve
horses in comparison with McKinlay’s thirty-two were sufficient
to prove that “settlement in some suitable place and not explora-
tion of the whole territory was originally contemplated by the
Government.” His actual choice of site was finally condemned;
the ‘Adelaide valley approved. All available evidence seems to
indicate that the Government Resident had located his capital
site with a strong presupposition in its favour, and that, being too
apathetic or too fearful to prosecute further discoveries until com-
pelled by the strength of public opinion, he was then too deeply
51 Confidential letter to Sir Dominick Daly, May 5, 1865. (Miscel-
laneous C.S.O. papers. Archives.)
99
LAND EXPLORATION. 1856-80


involved to change his own. He had indeed “faithfully carried out
his instructions’' as far as Escape Cliffs was concerned. 52
For correspondence between the Govt, of S.A. and the Govt. Res.
of the N.T., and between the Govt. Res. and Jefferson Stow, Ebenezer Ward,
Dr. Goldsmith, etc.; official reports and general orders of the Govt. Res.,
reports of the Commander of the ‘‘Beatrice,” exploring reports and journals,
relating to the N.T. Survey expedition, reports of the Commission of En-
quiry, see;
(a) Despatches from the Governor of S.A. to Sec. of State—No. 51
of Sept. 23, 1863; 76, of Nov. 26, 1863; 6 of Feb. 24, 1864; 10 of
March 26, 1864; 20 of April 25, 1864; 52 of Oct. 25, 1864; 69 of
Nov. 26, 1864; 74 of Dec. 23, 1864; 75 of Dec. 23, 1864; 1 of Jan.
23, 1865; 6 of Jan. 26, 1865; 10 of Feb. 21, 1865; 32 of May 16,
1865; 33 of May 18, 1865; 56 of Aug. 25, 1865; 61 of Sept. 26, 1865;
78 of Dec. 26, 1865; 7 of Jan. 27, 1866; 10 of Feb. 23, 1866.
(b) Despatches from the Secretary of State to the Gov. of S.A. Dec.
10, 1863, Jan. 12, 1865; Mar. 13, 1865; Mar. 17. 1865.
(bl) Exec. Coun. Mins., March 1, May 23, 1866; Dec, 22, 1864.
(c) C.S.O. 1864/1324, 1327, 1328, 1503, 1700. 1701, 1702, 1704, 1709,
1710, 1711, 1719, 1720, 1733, 1741, 1743, 1744, 1744*, 1745, 1746,
1747, 1748, 1749, 1750, 1751, 1753, 1754, 1771; 1865/24, 6,7, 8,9, 11,
12, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19*. 35, 55, 595, 73, 175, 193, 240, 346, 1025, 1110,
1118, 1142, 1157, 1200, 1201, 1204, 1205, 1206, 1210, 1214, 1216,
1217, 1229, 1238, 1276, 1313, 1354, 1416, 1418, 1458, 1484, 1573, 1735,
1890, 1891, 1893, 1896, 1897, 1898, 1900, 1903, 1904, 1914, 1977; 1866/
79, 82, 83, 2284, 243, 245, 252, 354, 261, 274, 303, 386, 414, 418, 457*,
878, 890, 903.
(d) C.S.O. out letters—lB64/March 17, 19, 31; April 5, 13, 10; Oct.
27, 28; 1865/Jan. 12, 16, 24; Feb. 10, 19; March 2,3; Sept. 6, 13, 14,
20, 21.
(e) C.L. and I. 6414/1864; 2352/1865.
(f) Finniss Papers (Archives):
(1) Annotated Parliamentary Papers.
(2) Corresp. with Dr. Goldsmith.
(3) History of the start of the expedition.
(4) Journal of the expedition.
(5) Notes on the voyage in the “Beatrice.”
(6) Rough journal kept at the Victoria River.
(7) Borrow Papers.
(8) Miscell. Papers relating to the Commission of Enquiry
(g) MS. diary of R. H. Edmunds (Archives).
(h) P.P.’s 1864/163; 1865/89; 1865-66/15, 83, 134, 145; 1866-67/17, 55,
80, 81, 128, 133, 203.
(5) Plans in Home and Territories Office, Melbourne:
(a) Eye sketch of Adelaide R. with tracks of exploring par-
ties.
(b) Tracing of sketch of Adel. R. from explorations of Fin-
niss and Litchfield.
(c) Plan of camp at Escape Cliffs.
(d) Plan for a township.
(e) Manton’s survey.
[Note continued on next page.


In the meanwhile McKinlay had been instructed to convey
stock in the “Ellen Lewis” to the Northern Territory, and then to
fit out an exploratory party to examine the country east of the
Adelaide towards the Liverpool and south to the Roper, return-
ing - by a different route in order to cover as much country as pos-
sible north of 15° south latitude. His main object was to be the
location of a capital site in the best position for future settlement,
and in effecting this he was to co-operate with Commander
Howard of the “Beatrice.” A hope was expressed by the Govern-
ment that McKinlay’s efforts would be successful in opening up
an extent of pastoral country leading to the introduction of stock
and the rapid allotment of land to those purchasers who would
have been in possession had the original scheme been energetically
carried out.
The loss of nearly half the sheep during the voyage and several
of the horses after landing, combined with the absence of the
“Beatrice,” delayed the expedition considerably. McKinlay, not
understanding the climate or the significance of a rapidly approach-
ing wet season, lingered until January 14, 1866. He then set out
for the Liverpool, arrangements having been made with Comm.
Howard to convey the stores to that river and subsequently to the
Roper.
McKinlay followed the course of the Adelaide by water
southward to its fork in lat. 13° 54' 53", where he stayed to find
a crossing place and to await the arrival of an overland party with
sheep and horses, under the second in command and surveyor,
Edmunds. The country for the greater part of the way was
heavily flooded, and the leader’s choice of the easier boat passage
for himself did not escape the criticism of his men. When they
did arrive, the absence of one of the party caused further delay.
He had lost the track and was finally rescued from imaginary
troops of Malays whom, in a state of bewildered insanity, he was
trying to repel with a useless revolver. The party made a final
start on February 5. The first part of the journey eastward was
over alternate bog and stony ridges, where they found themselves
at last marooned on an island between creeks, waiting for the
water to subside. The horses were badly injured by bogging,
• (f) Original township plan of Palmerston.
(g) Tracing of Litchfield’s route.
(h) Route of Litchfield in vicinity of Adam Bay.
101
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


requiring to be many times unpacked, dug out, and packed again,
and in the absence of game the part)' were forced to have recourse
for food to their miserable and meagre sheep.
For more than a month—until March 29 —they remained im-
prisoned, with supplies every day becoming “beautifully less,”
horses dying and stock tormented with grass seeds, sand flies, and
mosquitoes. Stock perforce rapidly became stew, and the expe-
dition, having viewed the carcases, were unanimous in the opinion
that stew was a luxury not to be lightly indulged in. Enforced
idleness gave McKinlay time to watch the natives more closely
than he otherwise would, and by a general system of exchange to
win them to peaceful communication. The country surrounding
their prison likewise attracted his attention as a potential stock-
raising district abundantly supplied with building materials.
With fifty forlorn sheared sheep in his flock, and a devout
hope in his heart that the “Beatrice” would remain at the Liverpool
a month later than she had intended, McKinlay prepared to com-
plete his proposed investigation. The only way out of a wilder-
ness of swamps, creeks, and flooded flats lay westward and south-
ward, through intricate mazes of precipitous hills and endless
labyrinths of swamps luxuriant with grass. At the rate of ten
miles in the wrong direction to one in the right, hampered by
spiritless horses and hoggings “too often occurring to particu-
larize,” the expedition crept south, then south-east, and w’ere
finally able in the middle of April to steer directly east. It was
indeed “a great country for water.” Their course was still punc-
tuated by halts for the killing of the horses as they dropped one
by one; and all rations being exhausted the party was reduced
to sheep that obstinately refused to fatten on the most abundant
feed, to iguanas, hawks, pigeons, and the tops of corkscrew palms.
Accepting the gifts of the gods, they asked the cook no questions.
In considering the position at this time Edmunds came to the con-
clusion that “our expedition is a failure caused in the first place
through the Government sending McKinlay up so late in the sea-
son, and secondly McKinlay’s procrastination at the settlement.
It is now absolutely impossible to carry it out as originally in-
tended.”
By the beginning of May they were cutting through wild,
picturesque, but comfortless country, north-eastward towards the


Liverpool. Granite changed to sandstone, becoming more rugged
and romantic, but always with an abundance of water and timber.
The most extensive tracts of available land McKinlay found on ap-
proaching the East Alligator. The party was then reduced to “25
horses, 9 sheep, 2 dogs, and 15 of ourselves, all well, but weak and
remarkably thin and feeble about the legs.” On May 29 the leader,
after viewing the country ahead, gave up all hope and determined
to break up the expedition so that each could fend for himself. An
insane and disastrous sauve qui peut was only prevented by the
forceful insistence of Edmunds, and the expedition went on hope-
lessly until it came to the banks of a large stream, estimated as
equal to, if not larger than, the Murray. McKinlay, thinking it
to be a new T river, washed to name it the Alexandrina. Edmunds
hazarded the opinion that it was the East Alligator.
Hoping that it would bring them to the coast whence they could
reach the Liverpool rendezvous, McKinlay decided to follow' it
down by water. The horses w’ere ruthlessly slaughtered and a
raft constructed with small poles covered with the skins and an
old tent. Their temporary camp, wLich was a sheer trap by the
river side, came near to being exterminated by the natives; and
w'hen they finally embarked it was as a ragged, weary crew% pro-
vided with 850 pounds of jerked horse to be eaten raw.
Not until they came within view of the ocean did McKinlay
accept the opinion of his second in command that the salt stream
they were following was the East Alligator and no unknown water-
course. The journey along the coast was accomplished with the
aid of an improvised sail, which did not prevent the raft wriggling
and twisting like a basket at the river mouths. The party arrived
at Escape Cliffs by water on July 5, suffering from thirst, the
strain of steering over unknown reefs in a shark-infested sea, and
the evil odour of their skin conveyance, which fell to pieces as soon
as beached.
On July 27 McKinlay again left the settlement in the Govern-
ment boat “Julia,” to examine the ports to the westward. He
ascended the Daly, but reported nothing of value. The “Beatrice”
in the meanwhile had arrived at the Liverpool and returned to
Adam Bay on the 25th of June. Hearing from a native source
that McKinlay had gone down to the mouth of the East Alligator,
Howard proceeded thither, and, failing to strike the party, returned
103
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


to Adam Bay, where instructions awaited him to convey McKin-
lay and three of his party to Adelaide.
McKinlay’s work had been dismally unprofitable and disas-
trously expensive to an already overburdened little settlement. He
had discovered nothing new. His only advice, forced by the exi-
gencies of the situation from an insufficiently informed mind, was
to the effect that Escape Cliffs was useless; that Port Darwin had
no fresh water, a fact which was known before; that the West
Alligator, which he had not examined at all, might prove to be
the best site; and that Cliff Head, Anson Bay, had it more eleva-
tion, would be by far the best place in the Northern Territory S a
The personal attitude of Man ton, the acting Government Resi-
dent, towards the vexed question of a capital site, was on the
whole passive. At the time of Finniss’ departure the surveying
of the township was almost completed, and over 14,000 acres had
been marked into rural sections at the head of the Adelaide River.
The new Government Resident concurred in the general opinion
that, consisting mainly of mud flats, swamps, sand ridges, and
53 For McKinlay’s original journal see C.S.O. 1647 J, 1658/1860. His
original plan is missing. For instructions, correspondence, reports of the
acting Govt. Res., etc., see:
(a) Despatches from the Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State—No. 61 of
Sept. 26, 1865; 10 of Feb. 33, 1860; 45 of Sept. 27, 1860.
(b) C.S.O. 1866/264, 1562, 1575, 1580, 1582, 1594, 1598, 1599, 1647*,
1601, 1007, 1058, 1724, 1736, 1801.
(c) C.S.O. out letters, Sept. 20, 21, of 1865; Feb. 18, 1867.
(d) P R’s 131/1865-66; 79, 82, 82a/1866-67.
(e) MS. diary of R. H. Edmunds (Archives).
It is difficult, in view of McKinlay’s previous exploratory work, to account
for this, “one of the greatest failures ever recorded in the annals of explora-
tion.” The essential causes of failure, as stated by Edmunds, differ
materially from those given in the leader’s official journal; the diary of the
former, however, must always be read in the light of the writer’s own state-
ment, that he was very dissatisfied with the recognition accorded him for
his services.
McKinlay had certainly failed to work harmoniously with his previous
second in command (Hodgkinson), but he had never evinced the lack of
bush craft or common sense with which he is charged by Edmunds. It is
impossible to escape from the fact that his inexplicable delay condemned
the expedition from the outset. But if the testimony of Edmunds is to
be accepted, even as a slightly exaggerated account, McKinlay stands con-
victed of a forgetfulness, crass stupidity, unscientific outlook, cruelty, vindic-
tiveness, ignorance and criminal cowardice, which is entirely absent from
the records of his previous explorations.


scrub, they had not been worth surveying. s4 McKinlay’s report
of native treachery on the East Alligator provided him with suf-
ficient reason for inaction, in that it was inadvisable to weaken
the expedition for exploration purposes in face of a possible joint
attack. 53 In September, John Davis, storekeeper and late mem-
ber of the Burke Relief Expedition, spent three days (without
leave) trying to clear up the generally existing doubt as to whether
Stuart ever struck the ocean or reached the Adelaide at all, doubts
which had received apparent confirmation by Finniss’ failure to
find his tracks or his flag. In the course of his searches Davis
discovered a new river, which he named the Wildman, but failed
in his general aim. s6
Man ton, in October, 1866, led a party of ten in the “Julia” for
the same purpose, the destination of the expedition being the Wild-
man and the three Alligator rivers. s7 The Wildman he found
marshy and its valley impracticable; the East 58 and West Alliga-
tors the same. The South Alligator he considered an excellent
site for a township, judging from the nature of the harbour and
the navigability of the river itself. Of Stuart’s tracks he saw
nothing.
A short trip up the Adelaide in December 59 convinced him of
the excellent pastoral and agricultural capabilities of its upper val-
ley and the uselessness of selecting a capital site there. In the
same month he visited Port Darwin 60 and reported enthusias-
tically upon the unique harbourage facilities and the suitability of
Point Emery for a capital city. The East Arm he considered
would form a valuable means of communication with the producing
districts near the Adelaide, roads from which could be constructed
54 Manton’s report to Agent-General, London (C.S.O. 1598/66), and out
letter of April 27, 1866.
55 Manton’s general report of July 21 (C.S.O. 1599/66). His policy
laid him open to the attack of cowardice by McKinlay.
56 Enclosure to D 134 (Miscell. C.S.O. Papers, Archives) for Davis’
original report. Edmunds had hazarded the opinion that Stuart never
struck the Adelaide at all, but some river roach.'ng the sea east of Cape
Hotham seen by McKinlay on April 23, 1866, and thought by him to be the
source of the West Alligator. See also note 40.
57 Manton’s report C.S.O. 204/1867.
58 He observed that Leichhardt had placed the East Alligatoi* about 10
miles too far west, a fact also observed by Edmunds.
59 C.S.O. 205/1867.
69 C.S.O. 206/1867.


to the head of the Daly over Litchfield’s track, and thence to
Whirlwind Plains and the Victoria. Anson Bay he condemned
entirely.
Manton undertook no further exploratory work during his
term of office as the survey party was left with only seven horses,
and he considered there was no fit land for survey within fifty
miles of Escape Cliffs. 61 On December 22, 1866, he received in-
structions per S.S. “Eagle” to withdraw the whole party from the
Northern Territory 62 leaving huts and buildings standing, and
abandoning all stores and stock not required. This decision of the
Government was mainly due to the disappointing results of Mc-
Kinlay’s exploration; and it was felt that all efforts to establish a
settlement in the ill-fated country must be abandoned. The claims
of the original land order holders, however, had still to be disposed
of. The Legislative Council and House of Assembly were divided
upon the question of refunding the money or making another
effort at settlement. The last suggestion, as supported by the
lower House, was adopted, and with laudable persistence it was
decided to despatch Capt. Cadell, of Murray fame, to fix upon a
proper site for the survey of 300,000 acres of land, and to determine
why Escape Cliffs was an improper one. 63
Cadell was supported in his search by the personal opinion of
A. C. Gregory, who viewed the Northern Territory crisis hope-
fully in the light of his own exploring experience. Feeling that
the safest plan would be for the S.A. Government to repay the
land purchase money, he yet considered it might be expedient,
politically, for them to carry out their engagements by reorganisa-
tion. “As to attempting to establish the settlement at Adam Bay,
it is worse than useless, for if an}' settlers ever go there they will
remove to the Victoria as soon as practicable, as it is the only
place on the coast where healthy pasture is accessible.” That it
might be made continuous with the West Australian settlements
increased its value in his eyes. 64
C.S.O. 218/1867.
62 C.S.O. outgoing letter of Nov. 6, 1866. Despatches from Gov. of
S.A. to Sec. of State, No. 45 of Sept. 27, 1866; 49 of Oct. 24, 1866; 8 of Feb.
23, 1867.
63 Despatch from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State No. 8 of Feb. 23, 1867.
C.S.O. out letters (instructions), of Feb. 19, 22, 26/1867; C.S.O. 1867/236,
261, 347, 367, 379, 548, 5524, 553.
64 C.L. and I. 156/1867. Letter from Gregory to W. B. T. Andrews,
Dec. 31, 1866. Contains an interesting comment on the reasons for the-


The accessibility of both capital and port to good pastoral
country he considered more important than either the agricultural
capabilities of the neighbourhood or the possession of a first-class
anchorage. Arnheim’s Land being a level sandstone tableland
covered with scrubby forest had no such advantages, and the rivers
from the Adelaide to Port Essington were thus rendered useless.
“The Victoria River is the only known point where available
country is accessible.” The best site for a port he located at Blun-
der Bay or Holdfast Reach, and the capital he placed 110 miles up
the river at the depot of the North Australian Expedition—the
upper limit of Whirlwind Plains.
Cadell left by the S.S. “Eagle” in February, 1867, with a party
of seven men, and landed at the Liverpool on May 7. That river
he considered from the beginning to be an excellent site for a
healthy capital city, possessing large tracts of cattle country in
its valley, a commanding coastal situation, good estuary, with an
abundance of wood, water, and building stone. His examination
of the country east and west of the Liverpool led him to place the
Roper and Adam Bay next in value to that river for purposes
of settlement; and the Victoria beneath consideration as a perfect
“Terra del Fuego.” His special recommendation of north Arn-
heim’s Land was due to its lying within the direct influence of the
monsoon, and thus obtaining a more certain rainfall than the Vic-
toria country which Gregory had found so dry. A block “em-
bracing the mouths of three such rivers as the Liverpool, Blyth,
and King” would “stamp with a permanent value the property of
original purchasers of Northern Territory land orders.”
Cadell’s work was vigorous and thorough. The tragedy of ex-
ploration touched him little; its comedy, much. In native honesty
he found much to commend, discovering some at least of the abo-
rigines proof against the lure of iron, in their economy the pur-
chaser of war, wealth, and women. The idiosyncracy of the in-
dividual native who rigidly respected the hunting grounds of his
failure of Camden Harbour, and includes a lengthy memo, on the best
site for settlement in the N.T. He concludes, "Viewing the question as a
financial one, the Government of S.A. will never find the Northern Territory
pay as there never is any surplus revenue in Australian colonies, and as
soon as the northern country is established as a settlement they will have
separation . . . and there will be the greater reason for ‘cutting the painter'
because the new colony will be in debt to the present one.” The N.T.,
however, he considered not adapted for European labour.


neighbour, and refused to break the barriers at a white man’s
bidding, was perhaps the greatest misfortune, as it was the most
exasperating feature of most Australian exploratory work. On
the other hand, Cadell’s Tommy, mauvais sujet as he was. and in-
corrigible swimmer of the alligatordnfested rivers that brought
him freedom, has no mean place in the record of his master’s
achievements; and Calilly, strutting the northern tablelands and
creek beds with an incomparable mimicry and a tall white hat,
his only tribute to civilization, is the brightest of lights and the
sturdiest of pillars to a necessarily sane and sombre expedition. 05
The stamp of ineffectiveness seems to attach to *the
work of Cadell as to that of all his predecessors in
the Northern Territory. Not that the efforts of any of
them had been fruitless or ill-considered. His own ex-
pedition was even hailed by the British press as the
beginning of the “history of another grand Anglo-Saxon nation in
the Austral world.” Much careful exploratory and survey work
had been carried out since Gregory set foot in the Victoria valley;
existing knowledge of the country and its resources had been won-
derfully increased; yet for all practical purposes of settlement that
knowledge seemed to point no whither. The Liverpool, Roper, Alli-
gator, Adelaide, Victoria. Anson Bay, Port Darwin, and Adam Bay
had each been cited with much show of authority as the only possible
situation for a capital; Adam Bay (or its settlers) had been tried
and found deplorably wanting; and the South Australian Govern-
ment was in a dilemma, with near half a score of horns.
Outside suggestions, as always, were not wanting; and, as
always, were not taken. The Northern Act was finally
amended in order to grant to leaseholders an increased average
number of acres, and to extend the term for a period of five years.
To enable the Government to fulfil the contract the Surveyor-
General, Mr. Goyder, was despatched to the Northern Territory “to
05 For information relating to Cadell’s expedition, correspondence and
original reports, see:
(a) Despatches from the Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State, No. 11 of
March 2, 1808; No. 44 of Sept. 11, 1808.
(b) C.S.O. 1807/913, 1053, 1770, 1771; 1808/105, 298, 402, 004, 1140.
(c) P.P.’s 1807/178; 1808-9/24, 79, 79a; Procs. Roy. Geog. Soc., Vol.
12, p. 201. *
(d) Plans—Country west of the Liverpool River; country cast of the
Liverpool River. (Originals in Home and Territories Office,
Melbourne.)


survey an extent sufficient to place the land or lease holders in
possession of their land with the least possible delay.” Mr. Goy-
der himself, in presenting his preliminary report, stated that from
the records of the various explorations that had been made, and
from information afforded by the officers of the “Beatrice,” the
surveys would probably commence in the neighbourhood of Port
Darwin, and extend in a south-easterly direction to the better lands
on the side of the upper Adelaide; and thence westerly and
southerly towards Anson Bay and the head of the Victoria River.
The Surveyor-General and party sailed on December 27. 1868,
in the “Moonta,” and anchored in Port Darwin on February 5.
A preliminary examination of the interior, after stores and stock
had been accommodated, convinced him of the richness of its soil
and the luxuriance of its vegetation. He at once proceeded to the
heads of navigation of the various estuaries to examine the country
above tidal influence, and was agreeably surprised to find that, as
boats could always ascend to where the high land adjoined the
creeks, he was already in possession of several good sites for small
townships, with natural roads into the interior. One was to be
established at Fort Point, one up the East Arm, and a third near
the Tumbling Waters at the head of navigation of the South Arm,
Goyder then took steps to ensure a safe means of communica-
tion between Fort Point and Fred’s Pass in the Daly Ranges. A.
J. Mitchell, one of the senior surveyors, discovered a route free
from the impassable creeks and swamps which characterize the
country between the Adelaide and Port Darwin, a route, moreover,
which opened up well grassed and timbered country amply sup-
plied with water. By the time the Surveyor-General’s first pro-
gress report was ready, it was possible for land order holders to
select town lots in the principal city. “South Australia has no
reason to fear the result of her connection with this place. Sooner
or later it must turn out well.” 60 By June of the same year (1869)
the Government were considering the withdrawal of the party on
the approaching completion of its work, and the appointment once
more of a Government Resident and permanent staff.
By the end of August the survey of 665,866 acres was com-
pleted. It extended south and south-west from Fort Point, avoid-
ing the Adelaide Plains because of their swampy nature. Of ne-
-66 G. W. Goyder.


•cessity Goyder found himself in conflict with the territorial rights
of the aborigines. The land surveyed embraced the native dis-
tricts of Woolner, Woolner-Larakeeyah. Larakeeyah, and War-
nunga, which were yielded, in spite of the Surveyor-General’s con-
ciliatory policy, only with bitter hatred and merciless outrage.
When Goyder finally left, there seemed very definite hopes that the
Northern Territory would become a thriving settlement. The
stock were multiplying and thriving, agriculture was proceeding
apace, and in Litchfield’s theories concerning the gold producing
capabilities of the territory, Goyder had at least a temporary
faith. 67 An examination of the Pdackmore, Darwin, and Finniss
valleys, however, in July to September. 1869, gave very little
ground for hopes such as these. 68 The hopes persisted, neverthe-
-07 For correspondence, official reports, etc., relating to preliminary pro-
posals for the settlement of the Northern Territory, and Goyder’s Survey
.expedition see:
(a) Despatches from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State —No. .50 of Dec.
4, 1868; 51 of Dec. 9, 1868; 1 of Jan. 5, 1869; 14 of April 26, 1869; 27
of June 19, 1869; 59 of Dec. 8, 1869; 3 of Jan. 5, 1870.
(b) C.S.O. 1868/577, 621. Out letters, 1869/May 22, Dec. 6; 1870/
Jan. 5, 6.
(c) S.G.O. 1869/43, 90.
(d) N.T. correspondence in the Home and Territories Office, Mel-
bourne. (This correspondence, with the plans in the same office,
was forwarded from the S.G.O. in 1912, when the N.T. was
removed from S.A. administration, 5.G.0.236/1912. It is very in-
complete and a small portion still remains among the S.G.O.
correspondence in the Archives, Adelaide.) General corresp. of
1868/Nov. 21, 27, 30; Dec. 1,2, 10, 14, 15, 17, 18, 21; 1869/April 24,
June 21, Dec. 22, Instructions N.T.20/1868. First progress
report, March 2, with Mitchell’s instructions (Feb. 9) and report
(Feb. 22). Second progress report, May 3. Third progress report,
Sept. 27. Correspondence of Dr. Peel, Alexander Ringwood, and
J. Brooks, of March 1. Reports of*May 4, 28; June 7. Burton’s
gold search expedition, instructions and report. N.T.59/1869.
Report on natives of N.T., N.T.68/1869.
(e) N.T. out letter books of the Surveyor-General (Archives).
(f) Confidential out letter books of the Surveyor-General relating to
the N.T. (Archives).
(g) N.T. correspondence, 1869-77 (Archives).
(h) Plans in H. and T. Office. (See also accompanying plans).
Original plan of main camp, Port Darwin. General plan of area
surveyed by the respective field parties in N.T. during March to
September.
(i) Roy. Geog. Soc. Procs., Vol. 14, p. 190. P.P.’s 1868-9/101, 175,
193; 1869-70/31, 157, 161, 204, 201; 1870-71/32, 46; 1872/89.
68 N.T. corresp. (H. and T. office, Melb.), 59/1869. (Burton’s report
and Goyder’s instructions.)
110
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


less, and in 1876 the residents and traders of Port Darwin peti-
tioned that the country round the Daly and Katherine Rivers
should be examined for gold. The suggestion was supported by
the Government Resident, and a party was despatched on Sep-
tember 16, under G. R. McMinn, with Messrs. Saunders, Sergison,
and three men. They returned early in November, having traced
the Katherine from the Telegraph Station until it merged into the
Daly, 42 miles from the line. The country to the south and west
of the river was fine pastorally, but gave no definite signs of being
auriferous. 69
In the meanwhile, so successful had been the efforts of the
Surveyor-General, 7o that public confidence in the plans of the
South Australian Government was restored, not only within the
Continent, but in Great Britain. One proposal, at least, was re-
ceived 71 for the sale of over a million acres of the Northern Terri-
tory to a London company, and the first months of 1870 saw the
arrival of Dr. Millner at Port Darwin as Acting Government Resi-
dent, to be succeeded in June by Bloomfield Douglas and a per-
manent official staff.
60 N.T. correspondence. Petition of June 21, 1876; Govt. Res. reports,
Sept. 14, Sept. 16, Nov. 4, 1876. McMinn’s report, Jan. 19, 1877. Saunders’
report, Nov. 14, 1876. See also report of Ferguson’s exped. in same neigh-
bourhood, Nov. 9, 1877. Gov. Res. report, Oct. 18, 1877. S.G.O. out letter
of Jan. 19, 1877. The work of Alex. Forrest in 1879 (De Grey River to
Port Darwin) was purely confirmatory of previous exploration.
70 Letter of congratulation N.T. 971/69; C.S.O. out letter Dec. 6, 1869;
Jan. 5,6, 1870. Despatch from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State No. 59 of
Dec. 8, 1869.
71 From Neville Blyth and John Hart, N.T. corresp., Nov. 24, 1869.
111
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


CHAPTER V
THE OVERLAND TELEGRAPH
The establishment of telegraphic communication between Eng-
land and Australia was intimately associated with the progress of
exploration in that continent, and very largely dependent upon it.
Schemes had been put forward from time to time as the work of
connecting Great Britain and India became more complete, and
as Australia found herself more and more liable to panic on the
score of foreign invasion. In view of the absence of north coast
settlements it was natural that such early plans should provide
for a submarine cable for the whole length of route from the East
Indies to the greater Australian centres. South Australia, at least,
had other views, for the practicability of which, however, she was
for many years unable to vouch.
The discoveries of Babbage and Warburton in 1858 fostered
hopes of the early establishment of an overland route from Ade-
laide which might settle the telegraphic problem. “The most dis-
couraging factor is the difficulty of obtaining the requisite unity of
action amongst the various colonies.” 1 Sir Richard Mac Donnell
in January of 1859 expressed clearly the views of the Government
in commenting upon a proposal to unite Australia, either with
Singapore by Batavia and the east coast, or with Ceylon by Kee-
ling’s Island and King George’s Sound. “I am opposed to any
scheme of a line of telegraph to be brought round, the Continent
by the west or by the east coast, till it be first ascertained whether
it could not be taken across the Continent in a direct line from
Adelaide to the Cambridge Gulf.” 2
The proposal of Mr. Gisborne to the Colonial Secretary on
behalf of the Red Sea and India Telegraph’ Co., in March, 1858, re-
ceived more lengthy consideration, with the same result. His plan
to connect Moreton Bay by submarine cable with Singapore, with
1 Despatch from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State No. 276 of Dec. 8, 1858.
2 Minute to C.S.O. 1521/1858.


the aid of the Dutch Government, was based upon the assumption
that the Indian Government would be willing to fill in the exist-
ing gap between Singapore and Rangoon; and that the Aus-
tralian colonies would co-operate for their own benefit and that of
the Empire. The Court of Directors of the East India Company,
while the European line still remained unconnected with their own
country, found constructive difficulties which they showed little
haste to surmount; and the Australian colonies found opinions of
their own—“a most discouraging factor, even to themselves.”
Both New South Wales and South Australia were consider-
ing the advisability of a land line from Gladstone to the Gulf or a
line by sea from King George's Sound to Java; and Mr. Todd,
Superintendent of Telegraphs in South Australia, in reporting upon
Gisborne’s plan at the end of 1859, named unhesitatingly as a pos-
sible alternative the route from Adelaide to the north-west coast.
The recent discoveries of both Babbage and Warburton led the
South Australian Government to concur whole-heartedly in this
opinion. The absence of any definite information on the point,
however, and the difficulty of reconciling the views of colonial
legislatures, led to the question being temporarily shelved. “It
is not advisable until steps shall have been taken to ascertain by
exploration the practicability of connecting this province by elec-
tric telegraph with the mouth of the Victoria River or some point
on the north coast of Australia near Cambridge Gulf or even west-
ward thereof, to decide on supporting any line of telegraph intended
to connect Australia with India and Europe.” 3
Stuart’s discoveries of 1859 brought the matter again under
practical consideration. According to the estimate of the Superin-
tendent of Telegraphs an overland line could be constructed at
little more than half the initial cost of the marine line, and main-
tained at an average annual expenditure of £B,OOO less. It was a
gilded scheme in many ways. It suggested the establishment of a
camel post across the interior, the existence of a prosperous com-
munity near Cambridge Gulf, and the development of trade with
India, in opposition to a lonely line along a lonely coast through
coral-infested seas* and islands unpeopled. Stuart’s steady push
northwards during 1859-61 gave to the gold a steady glitter. But
3 Resolution of Executive Council. Despatch from Gov. of S.A, to Sec.
of State No. 296 of Jan. 21, 1859.


so long as West Australian interests were bound up with a line
from Ceylon to the western settlements, and those of New South
Wales with one along the east coast, it glittered for South Aus-
tralians alone. The Home Government, with due regard to its
sorely stressed taxpayers, now called upon to pay half the cost of
the Australian scheme, whether by land or sea, resolutely refused
to associate glitter with gold.
In October, 1862, the question was again opened, by the Anglo-
Australia and China Telegraph Co., the Indian Government having
finally decided to complete its connection with Great Britain, and
the Government of the Netherlands being similarly disposed with
regard to Australia. The South Australian Government, however,
was of the same mind as before. In December Stuart returned
from his final expedition with very decided opinions about the feasi-
bility of employing his route for a future telegraph track. The
necessary timber was everywhere available at a distance of never
more than ten miles. As far as Chambers’ Creek he had found
plenty in the ranges. In the spring country, as far as Hanson’s
Gap, it was “scarce in some places” only. The Mac Donnell Ranges
provided plenty at a distance of seven miles, in the valley of the
Hugh. From there to the Roper he found some places where
only stunted gums grew and the cartage distance might be ten
miles. From lat. 16° 3O' to the coast there were no difficulties
whatever. His own route, he considered, “could be made nearly
a straight line for telegraphic purposes.”
During 1863 the necessity for telegraphic communication with
the old w’orld began to force itself upon the Imperial Government,
still faced with Gisborne’s outstanding proposition. The Agent-
General for South Australia strongly urged the determination of
his State to establish a land line communicating with Java by cable,
adducing in favour of his argument the fact that the colonists of
South Australia “know not only how to discover, but how to oc-
cupy.” The Lords Commissioners of the Treasury were “unable
to arrive clearly at any conclusion as to what in the collective
opinion of the Australian colonies would be the best scheme or
whether they were justified in granting aid out of Imperial funds.” 4
Taking refuge in advisabilities and expediencies, they “decided to
4 Enclosure to Despatch from Sec. of State to Gov. of S.A., July 10,
1863.


adopt the suggestion of a meeting of representatives,” which seems
never to have effectively met.
The Northern Territory was not assigned to South Australia
without an underlying recognition of the overland route as a poten-
tial factor in its development; but the curse of the ineffective brooded
long over its northern shores. Finniss, McKinlay, Manton, and
Goyder were too fully occupied with satisfying the literally crying
needs of the Northern Territory land order holders to give any
serious attention to a possible telegraph route. The success of the
Atlantic cable in 1866“ did rouse the Home Government to promise
all possible aid and encouragement (except of a financial kind) to
any reasonable scheme brought forward; and Cadell did give some
little consideration to the matter in 1868, but only in connection
with a possible line from Townsville to the Roper and the Alliga-
tor. The report of the Superintendent of Telegraphs for that year
despaired of any definite settlement, owing to the existing apathy
and lack of co-operation among the States.
By 1869 schemes w r ere abundant, showing little variation, how-
ever, from the two main alternatives provided by the east and
west coasts. In the midst of a continued conflict of opinion the
South Australian Government did its best to maintain the tradition
of its predecessors. In the words of Governor Fergusson: “It
seems to me that it will be very important, should the settlement of
the Northern Territory be accomplished, that the landing place of
the marine cable should be arranged so as to pass through the place
selected as the capital.” 5 By June, 1869, this became “an essen-
tial feature in any proposal for telegraphic communication with
Europe via Java.” 6
The overland route itself was by no means popular. It
seemed to be generally considered that the carriage of timber
would prove laborious; that protective stations 100 miles apart
would be financially burdensome; and that settlement along the
proposed route was not sufficiently far advanced. The aborigines,
the necessity for frequent repairs, electrical disturbances in the
interior, were all adduced as good and sufficient objections; but
the most disturbing influence was the feeling that one State and
one capital would gather to themselves everything of advantage
5 C.S.O. 830/1869.
o C.S.O. 859/1869.


and prestige in its construction and maintenance. By the middle
of 1870, however, the South Australian Government had finally
contracted with the Telegraph Construction and Maintenance Co.,
itself pledged to the British Australian Telegraph Co., to have
ready the land line to Port Darwin by January 1, 1872, Queens-
land being allowed to join the line at or near the Roper.
The decisive action of South Australia was not taken with-
out friction. The original scheme put forward by Sherard Osborn,
of the Company in question, was to connect Singapore, by way of
Port Darwin, with the Queensland telegraphic terminus at Burke-
town. Goyder had already indicated the practicability of such a
route, in view of the recent exploratory work completed in the
Territory. 7 It would be possible, he considered, to carry the line
from Port Darwin along the surveyed road to the township near
Fred’s Pass; thence by Mount Charles over the plains at the head
of the Adelaide to the sources of the Roper, Wickham, and Nichol-
son. The line was to reach Burketown by the Plains of Promise.
In considering Osborn’s scheme in March, 1870, the South
Australian Government stated clearly its preference for a direct
overland line to meet that of Osborn at Port Darwin, and their
intention to legislate for its construction under a Government
guarantee, if Osborn would waive his original plans. South Aus-
tralian motives in the matter were not unmixed. “I would observe
that it is next to impossible for more favourable terms to be offered
to us; and if we fail to accept them we must be prepared to leave
to Queensland the exclusive honour of having through her unaided
enterprise and energy afforded to the Australian colonies the im-
mense advantages of telegraphic communication with the whole
civilized world. Our geographical position and our intelligence
alike prohibit this.” 8
7 See plan of N.T. prepared by G. W. Goyder (1870) showing proposed
route of O.T. line (Strong Room of House of Assembly, Adelaide).
8 Report of the Supt. of Telegraphs, April 18, 1870. Queensland’s
feelings in the matter were amply expressed in her violent denunciation of
both the route for the line and the methods chosen for its construction.
(See annual report of the Supt. of Telegraphs for Qu., 1870). The S.A.-
Queensland controversy illustrates the undecided nature of all existing in-
formation about the Australian interior. Even in 1871 the reports of Stuart,
whose track was to form in all essential particulars the route for the Over-
land telegraph, were open to more than one construction, e.g. the Supt.
of Telegraphs for Queensland stated (Letter to P.M.G. June 15, 1871, C.S.O.
[Note continued on next page.


Preparations were immediately set on foot, both in Adelaide
and Port Darwin, for investigating in detail and clearing the line
of route. From the northern end of the proposed line Government
Resident Douglas instituted an effective series of expeditions for
that purpose.
In July, 1870, he issued instructions to Senior Surveyor Mc-
Lachlan, one of Goyder’s original survey party, to undertake the
leadership of an expedition towards Leichhardt’s crossing of the
Roper with a view to future telegraphic extension. McLachlan
was given the services of Alexander Ringwood as second in com-
mand, accompanied by Messrs. Wells, Deane, Mason, and Rix. for
892/1871) that “The country this line will traverse between Lake Torrens
and Newcastle Water extending over 14* of latitude is described as scarcely
better than a desert, where little or no timber can be obtained for construc-
tion purposes; and during dry seasons, is for the most part devoid of
permanent surface water; and feed for cattle cannot be obtained. In wet
seasons many localities on the route are evidently subject to inundations
and the country generally may be considered difficult for transport of
material and stores required for construction and maintenance purposes.”
For official correspondence, etc., relating to the O.T. line previous to con-
struction see:
(a) Despatches from the Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State: 27G of Dec. 8,
1858; 296 of Jan. 21, 1859; 39 of Aug. 12, 1869; 22 of March 30,
1870; 27 of April 25, 1870; 46 of June 17, 1870; 49 of June 30,
1870; 69 of Sept. 10, 1870.
(b) Despatches from Sec. of State to Gov. of S.A.: Feb. 10, 1853;
May 29, 1858; July 27, 1858; May 2, 1859; Feb. 17, I 860; Feb. 12,
1861; July 16, 1863. Report from Select Committee on E. India
Communications with the procs. of the Committee (July 20, 1866).
British Treasury minute of Jan. 10, 1867, enclosed in desp. from
Treasury to Sec. of State, May 8, 1867. Capt. Osborn to Earl
Granville, Jan. 25, 1870. Viscount Monck to Earl Granville, Jan.
26, 1870. Sec. of State to Viscount Monck, March 16, 1870. Lord
Monck to Earl Granville, March 31, 1870. '
(c) C.S.O. 1858/1521; 1859/503, 1061, 1644, 1691, 1774; 1860/193, 757;
1862/1103, 1264; 1865/1724; 1867/1111, 1693, 1854; 1869/820, 859,
1328,' 1333, 1604, 1609, 1877; 1870/236, 404, 545, 674, 726, 7281, 732,
811, 1080.
(d) C.S.O. out letters Nov. 17, 1859; June 28, 1860; Oct. 25, 1862; Dec.
5, 1865; June 19, 1869.
(e) P.P.’s 1859/127; 1860/18; 1861/47; 1862/229, 236; 1867/54; 1868-9/
Annual Report of Supt. of Telegraphs; 1869-70/41a, 42, 118, 118 a,
156.
(f) P.P.’s of New South Wales: 1858-9, 1859-60, 1861.
(g) The willingness of Mr. Todd to consider the feasibility of the
Overland Route, on its first suggestion, has been called in ques-
tion. See copy of letter on the subject by H. B. T. Strangways
(Archives).
(h) Exec. Council Mins., Oct. 12, 1870; June 19, 1871.


an expedition of about 100 days duration. The main route was
outlined to Mount Daly and Billiatt Springs and towards lat.
14° 10' south, long. 133° 13' east, the principal consideration in
choice of direction being the existence of a supply of timber
suitable for poles, easy gradients, good water and feed for stock,
and the avoidance of marshy country liable fb inundation, rivers
subject to torrents, and sudden precipitous rises.
The party left Fort Point on July 23, 1870, and traversed sur-
veyed land as far as Mount Charles in the Daly Range. Thence
a general south-easterly course brought them across well-timbered
hilly country to the Mary River of McKinlay. On the same course
they crossed and followed the river to its headwaters in a high
tableland, precipitous and rugged, whose jumble of detached hills
and ranges presented a formidable barrier to further progress.
They w r ere fortunate in finding a narrow ascent, and crossed the
900 ft. plateau, w'hich was w r ell supplied with fine specimens of
ironbark and stringybark, tall and straight. The descent w r as easy
to the Kekwick Springs of Stuart, and thence to the Katherine, the
timbers becoming smaller and more crooked as they proceeded to
the Margaret basin. A continued south-east course finally led them
to the Waterhouse, where three of the party w r ere detached to re-
main in camp, while the remainder explored towards the Roper.
They reached the Chambers and started homew r ard on August 20,
In the hope that a better line for telegraphic purposes would reveal
itself a little to the southward of their outward route. The hope
was realized in part, as they approached Stuart’s camp on the Fanny
by way of Mount Shillinglaw, but the character of the country
was generally unequal.
They managed to find a suitable ascent to the tableland, but
had far greater difficulty in the descent on the western side; and
finally reached the pale of settlement by a zig-zag course on each
side of the outward track.
McLachlan’s report was on the whole favourable. He had
reached the position stated in his instructions, and had located a
practicable telegraph route through country well timbered, pro-
vided with permanent water in any quantity and at easy stages,
and admirably suited for pastoral occupation. He had, in addition,
by verifying the positions of two of Stuart’s camps, made it at last
possible to lay down that explorer’s tracks and the spot where he


reached the north coast with far greater accuracy than had as yet
been deemed possible. His latitude agreed with that of the earlier
explorer, but his longitude placed Stuart's track about two miles
further east —a mistake which, if carried out in Stuart’s journey
north, might have accounted for previous failures to find his tracks
near Cape Hotham, to the east of the old settlement at Escape
Cliffs. 9
During McLachlan’s absence the Government Resident had
been occupied in an examination of Fog Bay, undertaken to deter-
mine the position of the mouth of the Finniss, That river, which
might have been of great value to the pastoral lands of the Roper
to be subserved by the telegraph, was found to lose itself in low
swamps, and to possess no outlet except that provided by numerous
small creeks. 10
In October, in accordance with his instructions, Douglas de-
spatched McLachlan in the "Gulnare” for the sounding of the
Roper entrance and general survey of its channel, it being con-
sidered "essential that the contractors .... should be placed in
possession of the result of this examination .... as early as pos-
sible.” With the assistance of the "Gulnare” the surveys were
completed by Christmas Day, but much subsequent time was lost
between Sweers’ Island and Norraanton, and the party did not
reach Darwin until March 18 of the following year (1871). The
river was reported navigable to lat. 14° 44' S., long 134° 41' 23" E.,
and its banks easily accessible anywhere on the upper 40 miles, a
factor of considerable importance not only in the landing of the
wire and stores for construction and exploration parties., but also
in the future settlement and development of the country in that
neighbourhood. 11
In the meanwhile the Government were proceeding with the
work of active construction, which was to take place simul-
taneously from both ends of the line. The northern portion from
Darwin to the Roper, and thence south to about lat. 19° 30', was to
be carried out under contract by Messrs. Darwent and Dalwood;
9 N.T. correspondence (Home and Territories Office, Melbourne); July-
-13, 16, 1870 (Instructions); Aug, 16, Oct. 30, 1870; June 6, 1871 (Journal).
10 N.T. correspondence (Home and Territories Office, Melbourne) Aug.
16, 1870 (Report of the Govt. Res.).
11 N.T. correspondence: Oct. 20, 1870; Oct. 29, 1870 (Instructions); Jan.
9, Feb. 13, 14, March 18, 19, 21/1871 (Reports of McLachlan and Capt.
Sweet); Oct. 22, 1870; April 13, 1871 (Dcsp. of Govt. Res.).


and the remainder of the route was divided into A, B, C, D, and
E sections for construction purposes, each under the superinten-
dence of a surveyor and overseer. In July, 1870, William Me Minn
and R. C. Burton were appointed overseers on the northern sec-
tion, which, in spite of the hesitating and hostile attitude of
Queensland, was to be completed towards the Roper as originally
suggested. 12
The instructions forwarded to McMinn required him, imme-
diately upon his arrival in the Northern Territory, to organize a
party to make the necessary exploration as far as the Strangways
junction with the Roper. From Southport, the starting point of
the contract, the best route was to be selected across the tableland
towards that river, avoiding low land liable to inundation and
selecting the narrow crossing places of creeks and rivers. He was
then to return to Darwin to superintend the construction work. 13
John Ross, who had been appointed official explorer in ad-
vance of the southern construction parties, was directed, in the
course of his examinations of the more southerly portions of the
province, to proceed northwards to meet McMinn at the Roper
at the end of March or beginning of April, 1871. The appointed
meeting place was in lat 14° 50' S., long. 133°30' E., where Ross
was to supply all necessary information about the nature of the
country and the direction to be followed in order to effect a junc-
tion wdth the line from Port Augusta. McMinn, keeping himself
well in advance of the northern construction parties, and with a
watchful eye for suitable sites for stations, was to utilize the ser-
vices of Ross in any further examination found necessary south of
the Roper. In order to facilitate the transport of stores to the
Roper Junction, the Government Resident was directed to despatch
the “Gulnare” to that river in order to ascertain to what extent it
was navigable. McLachlan’s report, as we have seen, was favour-
able, and by the end of September, 1870, the work at both ends had
begun..
12 Proposals to carry out the preliminary exploratory work were re-
ceived from Michael Green (N.T. correspondence 39/1870) and John McKin-
lay (P.P. 36/1870-71).
13 There seems to be no record of this journey of McMinn, except a
telegram sent to Govt. Res. Douglas from Depot Ck., Feb. 18, 1871, and
Govt. Res.’s report of Sept. 17, 1870 (N.T. correspondence, Home and Ter-
ritories Office, Melbourne). See also O.T. 58/1870 (House of Assembly,
Adelaide).


While the northern survey and construction work was steadily
approaching the Roper depot, considerable progress was being
made from the’ other end, a progress facilitated by the copious
rains of the season. The starting point of the five construction
parties was fixed at Mount Margaret, which was also to be the
exploratory headquarters of Ross. His instructions of July, 1870,
directed him to examine the country north of that station with a
view to determining the best route for the line of telegraph. His
special consideration was directed towards the necessity for a
plentiful supply of 20 foot rough gum saplings for poles, and the
desirability, both of avoiding land liable to inufidation, and seeking
a line of country with the necessary facilities for cartage and the
sinking of poles. Stuart’s track north of the Centre towards New-
castle Waters and the Roper at 134° E. longitude, was laid down
as his general direction; and as the advanced construction parties
were expected to arrive at Mount Margaret by the end o'f Septem-
ber or the middle of October, Ross was directed to return in time
to meet them there.
The party of leader, surveyor and three men left Umbum on
August 14, and made towards Neales River and the Treuer, where
timber seemed plentiful. The course of the last river they followed
up northwards on a line east of Stuart’s track, finding generally
good pastoral country. In lat. 28° 14', long. 134° 50' Ross located
the Stevenson of his predecessor, only to discover a few days later
that he was on the Wall, at its junction with the Coglin and
Duffield. Its valley he found amply supplied with heavy white
gum timber, suitable, if spliced, for poles, but more than amply
supplied with stones. As they approached the valley of the Finke,
•the timber became larger. By the beginning of September, hoping
to cut the Goyder, they were pushing well into the waterless sand
and scrub country, where the very ranges were sand covered
almost to their summits, and had no creeks. A forced retreat
brought them back to the Duffield and a plentiful supply of poles,
sufficient, with those on the Coglin. to furnish a hundred miles
of line. When at last Ross did penetrate the sandhill country in
the vicinity of the Hugh, in the hope of reaching lat. 22° 30' before
returning to the construction party, he found plenty of would-be
pastoral country perfectly useless for stock owing to want of
water.


At the mouth of the gorge through which the Hugh emerged,
they left the sign of the “Port Darwin Telegraph Expedition" to
mark the site of the best timber supply they had seen ; 14 and having
examined the creek’s many tributaries camped there before leaving
it finally to follow the Finke on their homeward course. “I cannot
help admiring the beautiful gum timber of the creek. Trees can
be had in any quantity of all sizes and fit for any use. The country
outside the gorge is splendidly grassed; the only disadvantage is
the scarcity of water.” It was this disadvantage which led Ross to
the conclusion that it would be impossible to drive sheep from
Adelaide to the Northern Territory. Any existing supply, he con-
jectured from the direction of the drainage, to be farther east.
From the gorge Ross’s party turned homeward on a slightly
more westerly course, hoping to solve the difficulty of the identity
of the Hugh, upon which the leader and Harvey were at issue, the
second in command being firmly convinced that that river lay
more to the west. They were hampered more and more by lack of
water, watching with amazement and some chagrin the flocks of
pigeons and crows which seemed to find sustenance in a thirsty
wilderness where they met nothing but denial. The non-appearance
of any other creek which he might construe to be the Hugh con-
vinced Ross of the soundness of his own opinion; and he kept a
southward course to the Finke where pole timber was plentiful.
Thence a due west course failed to discern Harvey’s supposed
Hugh and the party made for Chambers Pillar. Of the Finke
country Ross spoke well. Its ample supplies of building stone and
timber, and its fitness for stock of any kind immediately suggested
its suitability as a site for a telegraph station.
Their arrival at Chambers Pillar settled in the leader's favour
the problem of which stream they were following. From the
junction of the Hugh and Finke, remarked as unnoticed by Stuart,
Ross followed the Hugh for a short distance, delighted with its
superiority in the matter of fresh watey and timber. “The Hugh
I consider far before the Finke as the best course for the line of
telegraph.”
The timber supply on their homeward track was far less en-
couraging. There was little but firewood, and a very scanty water
14 Ross identified the gorge with the Lawrence Gorge of Stuart. Har-
vey, second in command, maintained that they were still east of the Hugh.
122
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


supply. The Hamilton and Neales brought little better fortune
as far as poles were concerned, and when the party arrived at the
Peake on October 19, they brought no favourable impression of
the latter portion of their journey.
Ross, leaving his three men at the Peake, continued with
Harvey to Strangways Springs, where he met Todd, Babbage,
Woods and the survey parties. After a consultation on the best
route for the line, Ross accompanied them to Umbum and the
Peake, where he received instructions to make his way with the
same party as before to the junction of Alice Creek with the Hugh.
Thence he was required to explore the country northward between
the Strangways and Ferguson Ranges, as far as Mounts Mann
and Gwynne. The unfavourable nature of. the country along
Stuart’s track suggested the advisability of constructing the line
as near as possible to the Ferguson Range where Ross had already
found good timber, and his attention was to be directed particularly
to that locality and to the flooded flats of the Goyder—Finke
junction. His return was to be made on Stuart’s track for the
purpose of more detailed examination, and a hope was expressed
by Mr. Todd that he would succeed in meeting the road selection
party under Mr. Woods, and the construction parties, near the
Alice Creek junction. The best route was then to be selected
in consultation with Messrs. Woods, Beckwith, and Harvey.
Having succeeded so far, Ross was under instructions to proceed
northward to the Roper in order to meet McMinn at the end of
April.
Ross left the Peake on November 16, and made his way north-
ward by the Treuer and Hamilton, the course of the first creek
providing the best telegraph route he had yet found. From that
river to the Finke, however, he met disappointment, little timber
and less water. “I find the best the construction parties can do
is to keep on to the westward of my track where water is to be
found in the creeks as they leave the hills to the westward.” The
Finke itself, though boasting an amplitude of timber, showed no
sign of water, a bad omen for the working stock of the construction
parties; and, until he reached the Hugh, Ross had serious doubts
whether the diminished supply would hold good. A heavy tract
of waterless range country separated him from the next permanent
water in Phillipson’s Creek, where he would have directed the line


had there been any sign of an intermediate water supply. From a
large branch of the Todd in the Ferguson Ranges Ross pushed
into country unknown to him, his horses depressed by many water-
less nights and days. The range country to Mount Georgina
supplied him with water but no timber; and where a horse party
could only proceed seven miles a day with a sliding gait, carting
was impossible. From this “most extraordinary jumble of range,”
from which he prophesied gold, Ross followed the Waite River
through bogs considerably to the eastward of the future telegraph
track. As a practical proposition he suggested that the construction
parties should leave the Hugh at the junction of the Alice, ana
make for Phillipson’s Creek, the Todd, and its tributary Giles
Creek, thence to the splendidly timbered Waite and northwards,
thus avoiding the heavy Ferguson Range, which both Stuart and
himself had found difficult. 15
From the latitude of Mounts Mann and Gwynne. near the
Centre, Ross had a dismal vista of heavy scrub before him, scrub
so low that it had no place in the calculations of the telegraphic
service. On January 2 they turned homewards, hearts chilled
with the dark prospect, bodies with the piercing cold of Central
Australian nights, staved off with a “nobbier of rum, being Christ-
mas.” Ross ascended Central Mount Sturt, locating the small
bottle left there by its discoverer, who had tied it carefully in a
copy of the Adelaide “Observer.” He removed it from Stuart’s
stone picket and kept it intact for transmission to the Super-
intendent of Telegraphs.
As the party left the Stirling and followed the course of the
Hanson southward, both water and timber improved considerably,
the creek forming a fairly clear passage way, with an ample supply
of poles between the encroaching scrub land.
Cutting the Reynolds Range, which the Overland Telegraph
was to avoid by a more easterly route, Ross followed the Wick-
steed towards the Mac Donnell Ranges. Crossing with weakened,
footsore horses that drank much and ate little, he made his way
back to the Hugh, by a rough, rocky course, impossible for
telegraphic purposes, arriving at the Hugh and Alice junction on
January 24, 1871. His stores w r ere almost depleted, and to his great
15 The actual line as constructed followed Stuart's route more nearly,
slightly to the west of Ross’s track. Compare the plans of the two ex-
plorers with the official plan of the O.T.
124
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


disappointment the construction parties had not arrived, the delay
necessitating a further push to the junction of the Hugh and Finke.
Ross’s final journey to the Roper telegraph depot followed
closely in Stuart’s track; and the actual route of the line itself to
that point varied little from his. When he arrived at the Roper
rendezvous at the end of May, he found that McMinn had gone.
He had left the construction party at the Katherine, 86 miles dis-
tant, and reached the north bank of the Roper on the 4th April,
1871. Not finding Ross there he had buried a supply of provisions
for him and started back on the 27th, in order to hasten the already
delayed work of the contractors on the northern sections. Ross,
in consequence, continued his journey northward to Depot No. 2.
In July, telegraphic construction in the Northern Territory
received a check owing to the failure of the contractors to execute
their undertaking for the northern sections. McMinn terminated
the contract and returned to Adelaide, 400 miles of line still re-
maining to be completed by the end of the year. Work was
resinned at the end of August, on the arrival of Surveyor R. C.
Patterson in command of a telegraph expedition, and the portions
of the line in the Northern Territory were divided into four sections
for purposes of poling and wiring, the presence of the Super-
intendent himself hastening the later stages of construction. The
main exploratory work connected with the construction was now at
an end; but of detailed work there was still much to be done.
Each party, even when covering ground already so thoroughly
explored as that between the Katherine and the end of the central
section (lat. 19° 30’) maintained a surveyor in advance to select
the route and explore for a water supply.
The difficulties of these men in making straight the pathway
of inter-continental communication are only barely hinted at. In
spite of the work of Stuart and Ross, the constructive efforts of
Burton and McLachlan were rendered incredibly difficult by the
existence of the 25 miles of desert country south of the Katherine;
and the*fact that Birdum Creek (the Elsey of Ross) had given its
water supply to the earth and the four winds bade fair to render
Ross’s exploratory work in that direction nugatory. Both delay
and difficulty might have been saved had the work been conducted
from the Roper base as surveyed by McLachlan, instead of from
the far away capital on Port Darwin.


“Conclusive evidence of a determined spirit to overcome all
obstacles and encounter all risks for the sake of the service in
which he was engaged/’ is the attempt of Surveyor R. R. Knuckey
to select a route from Attack Creek to the Roper during the last
months of construction. December of 1871 had already ushered
in the north Australian rainy season; and after leaving Newcastle
Water, Knuckey began to find the soft soil of Sturt Plains impass-
able. His progress was a zig-zag, punctuated with continual halts.
Rations were quickly exhausted, dray tracks were covered with
four or five feet of water, the creeks were running bank high, and
the Bay of Biscay flats were bogs. 'He found the Elsey 500 yards
wide and crossed on a raft. “The continual bog, day after day . . .
had reduced the whole of (the horses) to a very low condition.
If they had not been of first-class quality I should never have got
through.” The Roper had overflowed and joined the Strangways,
three horses were lost in trying to cross, and on the road from
Little’s Bluff for five miles the water was never low r er than the
horses’ shoulders. After the expenditure of an infinite amount of
toil and energy, Knuckey was able to reach the Roper depot and
send in his recommendation for the direction of the line between
Attack Creek and Daly Waters; with the result that Burton was
commissioned to explore the same country “in order to select a
route which will prevent the line being subject to inundations, and
allow of its being speedily traversed during the wet season.” 16
For information relating to the construction of the Overland Tele-
graph line see:
(a) Despatches from the Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State: 33 of June 19,
1871; 36 of July 17, 1871; 1 of Jan. 3, 1872; 16 of Feb. 9, 1872; 26
of March 23, 1872; 49 of July 16, 1872 ; 54 of Sept. 2, 1872; 56 of
Sept. 2, 1872; 64 of Oct. 31, 1872; 2 of Jan. 29, 1873.
(b) C. 5.0.: 1870/1133, 1430; 1871/576, 692, 823/ 838, 892, 1032, 1138,
1352, 1537, 1621; 1872/ 77, 789, 887, 979, 1000, 10475, 1052, 1065,
1139, 1190, 1200$, 1203, 1247, 1281, 1289, 1615, 1767; 1873/5.
(c) C.S.O. out letters: 1870/Sept. 28, 30, Oct. 21, 28; 1871/March 28,
April 23, May 19, June 18, July 14; 1872/Jan. 3, 24, Aug. 8.
(cl) P.P.’s; 1870-71/24, 24a, 36. 38, 63 (appendix), 97, 131; 1871/25, 26,
60, 78; 1872/83, 156; 1873/28, 29; 1874/180; 1876/31, 90.
(e) Ross Papers (Archives) including McMinn’s instructions, and _
correspondence with Ross (original).
(f) Original journal of Ross’s first expeditions. The account of his
journey to the Roper is missing.
(g) N. T. correspondence (Home and Territories Office, Melbourne);
1870/Oct. 29 (Instructions to McLachlan); 1871/Feb. 18 (Tele-
gram from McMinn); 1871/Oct. 14 (Despatch of Govt. Res.):
1872/Sept. 15 (Despatch of Gov. Res.).
[Note continued on next page


The latter months of line constructions were constantly hin-
dered by the unusual wetness of the season. It was not until
August, 1872, that the trans-continental line was completely avail-
able for communication with the older world; and that Charles
Todd was able to receive the congratulations of the other states
on the completion of “a very plucky undertaking.”
(h) B. H. Babbage to C. Todd, reporting on progress of O.T.
(Archives).
(i) Correspondence of B. T. Finniss relating to establishment of Port
Darwin as a cable station (Archives).
(j) Out letter book of B. T. Finniss, as agent at Port Darwin of the
Brit. Aust. Tel. Co. (Archives).
(k) Report of Surveyor Harvey on sections E. and F. of O.T. (Ar-
chives).
(l) Report of R. R. Knuckey on section A. of O.T. (Archives).
(m) Report by Surveyor Wells on section C. of O.T. (Archives).
(n) Letters of congratulation to C. Todd (Archives).
(o) Todd Papers (Archives), including note books, correspondence,
etc.
(p) Letter books of C. Todd, kept during the construction of the
O.T. (Archives).
(q) Instructions to the officers of Messrs. Darwent and Dalwood.
(r) Miscellaneous official correspondence of C. Todd in the House
of Assembly strong room, Adelaide. (Messages from Gov. of S.A.
to House of Assembly: 5 of June 8, 1870; 2 of 1872; 85 of Nov.
30, 1872. Dalwood Papers, Select Committee, 1877. Memo, from
C. Todd, Dec. 1, 1870.)
(s) The original correspondence of the Post and Telegraph Dept, for
1870-72 is not available.
127
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


CHAPTER VI
THE WESTERN DESERT
“It would appear that the great desert cannot have a less
breadth than from 1,000 to 1,100 miles, or a length from east to
west of less than 1,200. . . It would be difficult to determine from
what point any attempt to survey it should be made, should such
an attempt be considered necessary, for I believe the desert extends
with unvarying sameness to the south coast, and that any
anticipation of good from an exploration of it would end in dis-
appointment. The only point of ingress that offers the slightest
prospect of success is the River Glenelg of Captain Sir George
Grey. . . The changes in . . . physical structure, however, are so
sudden and so unexpected that it would be unwise to hazard an
opinion as to what might or might not be the result of a further
exploration of it . . . and although a country sufficiently fertile
for occupation may yet be found in the unexplored regions of
Australia, we cannot, I fear, hope that it will be of any great
extent.” 1
Such was the opinion of Captain Sturt, after successive
attempts by himself from the south-east, by Gregory from the
north, and by the West Australian explorers from the west, had
failed to penetrate the great unknown —and seemingly unknowable
—country between the Bight and the Indian Ocean.
Gregory had finally determined the limits of the western desert
on its north side, in 1856. It remained to set the boundary line
of occupation on the south side from the Bight itself, on the east
from the line of Stuart, and on the west from the headwaters of
the Murchison, Gascoyne, and Fitzroy. The Bight country, from
the fact oi South Australian pastoral enterprise extending rapidly
westward from Fowler’s Bay, was the first to receive practical
attention. Squatting interests rendered it urgent to make clear,
1 See “Papers relating to an Expedition for exploring the Northern
Portion of Australia.”


in the first place, how far available country might extend towards
the West Australian settlements; and in the second, to what extent
the encroachments of the desert might prevent the establishment
of a stock route between the Powder’s Bay district and the central
South Australian runs near Lakes Torrens and Eyre.
In July of 1861 the necessity for a more detailed knowledge of
the country north of the Bight, was placed before the South
Australian Government by the Chamber of Commerce, 2 who
stressed the desirability of making some attempt to explore the
700 miles betwen Fowler’s Bay and Cape Arid, hitherto untouched
except by Eyre. Warburton’s failure the previous year to penetrate
far inland from the coast, was an added reason for the request. 3
The Government was sympathetic, but did not consider the
time propitious. Their opportunity came at the end of the same
year when the Surveyor-General, Mr. Goyder, thought fit to
advocate the exploration of the strip of country recently annexed
to South Australian territory. 4 In face of the fact that the coastal
region was unprovided with fresh water, and over provided With
scrub, to a width of sixty or seventy miles, the Surveyor-General
recommended a line of examination from the interior, which would
connect Fowler’s Bay with the good country already opened up
to the north and west of Lake Gairdner. The recommendation
was embodied in the instructions issued to the Burke Relief Ex-
pedition, but McKinlay was unable to put its value practically to
the test. 5
In 1864 Major Warburton, while suggesting to the Commis-
sioner of Crown Lands the desirability of exploring to the north-
west of Mount Margaret, 6 kept before him the needs of the west
coast settlers by providing for a course which, country permitting,
would lead in a southerly direction towards the head of the Bight.
His expedition, however, was unable to effect anything until two
years later, and then it did not leave the Lake Eyre district.
By that time others .were in the field. Early in 1866 the
services of surveyors A. and E. A. Delisser were accepted by the
Government to survey the country between the western boundary
2 C.L. and I. 1433/1861.
3 See Chapter 3,
4 C.L. and I. 3166/1861.
5 See Chapter 3. Instructions C.L. and I. out letter 1117/61.
6 C.L. and I. 3483/1864.


and the west end of the Gawler Ranges, for which a certain amount
of preliminary work, unrecorded, had been carried out by private
people interested in the opening up of the district.
The Surveyor-General, in reporting upon the work in July,
seemed to realize that the information gained might prove of ser-
vice in an attack upon the interior from a coast line hitherto
impregnable. The surveyors, he stated, “had made known to the
Government an available harbour on a coast so inhospitable and
dangerous that up to Mr; Delisser’s discovery of Eucla, it was
thought to be inaccessible from the sea.” 7
Their offer to extend operations in the direction of Mount
Margaret received no encouragement, and during the remainder of
1867 and the early part of 1868 their energies were restricted to
the Bight, the head of which formed the westerly limit of their
examination. The Nullarbor Plains they found extending without
interruption round the- Bight, almost to Fowler’s Bay, and
separated from the coast, by a belt of scrub and occasional grassy
plains. Its saltbush and bluebush might very conceivably be the
outposts of the suspected desert interior. Hemmings and Hamilton
covered similar ground privately in 1868, their survey having rather
a “negative value in showing what country to avoid/’ 8
The discovery of a roadstead at Eucla, breaking the long line
of impenetrable cliffs along the Bight, encouraged the western
settlement to attempt the establishment of land communication
with South Australia. John Forrest was entrusted with the task of
making his way overland from Perth to Adelaide by a coastal route,
depending for supplies upon the ship “Adur,” with which he was
expected to communicate at Esperance Bay, Israelite Bay, and
Eucla.
He left Perth on March 30, 1870, and by July had reached
Eucla, certainly finding one permanent water only in 300 miles,
but traversing, on the whole, country well supplied with feed and
yielding sufficient water in rock holes and sandhills to carry the
7 For original correspondence, reports, etc., relating to the Delisser
surveys see C.L. and I.: 1866/169, 482; 1867/39, 496; 1871/269; out letter 297/
1871; 5.G.0.; 1866/26, 627, 528, 613, 725, 948, 1186, 1249; 1867/117, 266, 391,
480, 522, 540, 645, 848; 1868/255, 278; out letters; 25/1866; 637/1867. See also
P.P. 137/1867; Roy. Geog. Soc. Procs., Vol. 10, p. 129; S.A. branch of Roy.
Geog. Soc. Transactions, 1917-18, p. 119.
8 See S.G.O. 519/1869, with minute of S.G. and Plan of Hemmings in
S.G.O.


party through without great danger. Only once had Forrest to
fear for the safety of his men and horses. Upon the only occasion
when he was able to reconnoitre for any distance inland, the
country beyond the border belt of scrub showed vast plains of
grass and saltbush, untimbered, and stretching to the horizon.
Inland from Eucla itself was waterless and impenetrable, and
thence to the head of the Bight, where he was within settled ter-
ritory, he was forced to travel for 135 miles without water. “On our
route we passed over many millions of acres of grassy country, but,
I am sorry to say, I believe entirely destitute of permanent water.”
The most valuable country discovered, north of Hampton Range,
fell within the boundary of Western Australia.
If Forrest’s expedition provided comparatively little scope for
pastoral enterprise, it did strike out a track by means of which
Western Australia at last became united to the other colonies, and
to the world, by telegraph. 9
The disappointing results of investigations in this direction
seemed to point to the uselessness of expending public funds upon
further search, and Delisser’s offer in 1871 to explore, in a more
detailed way, to the north of Eucla, met with no financial en-
couragement from the Government. By that time, also, the dis-
coveries of Stuart and the construction of the overland telegraph
were providing a means of attacking the desert from a less hope-
less direction —the east.
• The. practical question of examining the unknown territory
trans-continentally, had been taken up by the Royal Geographical
Society of Great Britain in 1868, upon 'a detailed suggestion by
Dr. Neumayer, late Director of the Observatory for the Advance-
ment of Physical Science in Melbourne. The essential features of
his proposal, as placed before the Secretary of State for the
Colonies, were the complete east-west examination of the conti-
nent between Port Denison and Swan River. A party of 25 men
under Dr. Neumayer himself, and including seven professional men,
was to be equipped with 60 horses and 10 camels. In the proposed
plan of action there was nothing new T and much that was theo-
retical, the establishment of successive depots being expected to
See: Desp. from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State No. 68 of Sept. 9, 1870;
C.S.O. 1870/795; C.S.O. out letter, Aug. 11, 1870; “Explorations in Aus-
tralia,” by John Forrest, F.R.G.S.; Journal of Roy. Geog. Soc., Vol. 41, 1871;
Procs. of Roy. Geog. Soc., Vol. 14, p. 190.


prolong progress for three and a half years. The Council of the
Society, while acknowledging the many efforts already made by
the Australian colonies to settle the question, were of the opinion
that they “had been made without system and rarely lead to scien-
tific results.” The Colonial Governments, • however, were ex-
pected to provide for the expedition under consideration at a cost
of £21,535; and the proposition was forwarded “in the hope that
the Colonies will favour the project.” The South Australian
Government, at least, seems to have left the proposal without com-
ment. 10
The bridging of the western desert was brought within the
realms of a far more practical consideration after the construction
of the overland telegraph had provided a base line for operations.
The line was scarcely complete when the Hon. Thomas Elder
suggested taking advantage of equipment already in the field to
push westward. His own camel team, which was assisting the last
few miles of line construction, he proposed to make available for
future exploration. The suggestion was welcomed by the Superin-
tendent of Telegraphs, who outlined a plan for an expedition to
start from Alice Springs shortly after the summer rains, when the
camels were refreshed, and to strike out into the supposed desert
by the south side of Mac Donnell Ranges. The position of leader
he offered to A. T. Woods, surveyor and overseer of the five central
sections, as a “gratifying consummation of (his) labours on (the)
work in which (he had) shown so much intelligence and zeal.’^
The Chief Secretary, unfortunately, considered that Central
Mount Sturt, a more conspicuous feature to the public eye, would
therefore be a more desirable starting point for exploration; and
that the summer rains might be considered negligible, so long as
public interest was not allowed to flag by an enforced wait until
March. “I cannot understand that there will be any difficulty in
preceding with the exploration at once.” The ill-considered inter-
vention had its effect. Ernest Giles was already preparing to set
out from the same neighbourhood, and Woods, favouring the
“heavy artillery” of exploration, suggested postponement for a
year, in order to equip a larger expedition with scientific aid. 11
10 Desp. from Sec. of State to Gov. of S.A., June 24, 1868. R.G.S.
Procs, Vol. 12, p. 286.
n See copies of correspondence and memoranda between C. Todd, Hon.
Th. Elder, A. T. Woods, and H. Ayers (Ch. Sec.); Todd Papers, Aug. 10-
18, 1872 (Archives).


The first steps towards making the overland base line prac-
tically useful were taken as a result of the generous and enthusias-
tic intervention of Baron von Mueller, who had followed with con-
tinued interest the progress of South Australian expansion, and
who had done his utmost to contribute towards it, both in money
and practical service in the field. In 1872, with the help of Mr.
G. D. Gill and Mr. E. Giles, he fitted out an expedition to push
across the continent from the overland line to the western settle-
ments. The leadership was given to Giles, who was already well
acquainted with the difficulties of travel in the interior, from ex-
perience gained as leader of private parties in search of pasture.
Giles was joined by Samuel Carmichael, from Melbourne, and a
black boy, in whose company he made his way up the overland
road from Port Augusta to the Peake (Mount Margaret). Here
he engaged the services of Alec. Robinson and a Scotch terrier.
On August 12, 1872, the four left Charlotte Waters for Cham-
bers Pillar, which was to be their starting point for the western
land of “large waters, high mountains, and plenty plenty wild
blackfellow.” The deep, quivering quicksands of Central
Australia's solitary waterway—the Finke—they followed to the
north-west, across a uniform country of red sandhill, irritatingly
wrapt in “that abominable vegetable production," spinifex. John-
stone’s Range they left to the south, continuing through a cold
eerie wilderness, where the night silence was broken by the voice
of beings never seen, and the night shadows by the vivid flame
of northern grass fires.
Chandler’s Range and Christopher’s Pinnacle marked the be-
ginning of continuous ranges to the westward, through whose
sandstone slopes, rough hewn into cavern and torrent and vividly
green with spinifex, the Finke River wound its way in a palm-
strewn glen. The continuous sound of trickling water and the
scent of innumerable flowers accompanied them through the tor-
tuous windings of the stony, rock-strewn gully into the heart of the
range, whose romantic picturesqueness was its only compensation
for the difficulties it offered to the horses.
After a hundred miles of sinuous travelling through this, ap-
parently the only pass through the Krichauff Ranges, the party
emerged on a plain south of the Mac Donnell Range, in whose
intricacies the Finke seemed to lose itself beyond hope of pursuit.


Unable to follow it further, Giles decided to strike westward along
the course of a tributary (Rudall’s Creek), which brought them to
the foot of a range, isolated, barren, and waterless. Where the
creek turned north they again broke away and followed Car-
michael’s Creek through a gap until it soaked itself away upon a
clay-pan plain, bounded by mountains and fringed by scrub.
Another attempt to pass the northern mountain barrier in
search of their old travelling companion, the Finke, was frustrated
by hopeless ridges and precipices; and the expedition was forced
to content itself with skirting the southern slopes, a lonely “deso-
late region—over which there seem(ed) to brood an unutterable
stillness and a dread repose.” Though thunderstorms were fre-
quent, water was practically non-existent, and the thirst of the
sandy soil was never assuaged. Stones left the horses with ten-
der feet; spinifex, with raw and bleeding flesh; and when they
plunged into the übiquitous mulga scrub for relief, both men and
horses emerged without packs and with ripped clothes and skins.
At one time hours were spent in searching for horses that had
strayed in the heavy scrub not twenty yards. The southern range
slopes offered .them neither water nor prospect of water, and they
retreated, limping up the “wretched, rocky, vile, scrubby, almost
impenetrable” gullies, to a small reserve store in a rocky basin,
Mount Udor, which they had found on the way. Even there, to
water the horses they were compelled to lever away huge boulders,
and for a camp to cut down the acacia scrub and remove the spini-
fex. Giles himself pushed on again west to the F.hrenberg Ranges,
but was again forced to return.
A westward course being impossible in this dry, stony, scrubby
region, the party turned south from Mount Udor, leaving the wil-
derness ungrudgingly to its native proprietors. Stones gave place
to sandhills as they proceeded south-east, and they found the
quandong, a native peach, their only substitute for water, until
Giles, in an endeavour to strike back on his track, stumbled upon
a tiny glen set with a mountain tarn. Close by was a sandstone
cave, blazoned with the white serpentine devices and charcoal
scratchings of numberless generations of natives, who had found
a temporary home within its walls.
At the Tarn of Auber, Glen Edith, Giles formed a temporary
depot. Its littleness in a world of austere greatness, the green of


its “real green trees” and cypress slopes, the freshness of its water
and the sweetness of its fruits, were unction to the arid souls of
the weary and wayworn. Several days' detour to the south-west,
where native fires were scorching the little life from a waterless
country, sent the leader speedily back to his oasis, which the party
did not leave finally until October 15, when they again set out
southward. The Vale of Tempe, another aboriginal camping-
place, yielded water after much slow digging, and, making it a rest-
ing-place, with Robinson in charge, Giles determined to push fur-
ther still to the south. He had obtained clear view of a lonely
mountain in the distance, giving promise of a change of country;
while the gradual slope in that direction indicated the existence of
an inland drainage basin. 12 His optimism, however, was suddenly
drowned in “the bottomless bed of (an) infernal lake” of mud and
brine, which stretched its length miserably before him wherever
he turned. Crossing was impossible, for both men and horses
sank through the brittle, glassy crust into a quagmire of hot, blue,
salt mud.
They skirted the triodia-clad sandhills of its shore to the west-
ward, but the horses were almost dead and the heat unendurable.
Mount Olga, the height before him, seemed never so attractive as
when unapproachable, and the party turned back from the lake in
despair. Camp at Glen Thirsty offered little comfort. Half the
day was absorbed in watering the horses, as the moisture trickled
through the sand of their temporary tank; they were overrun by
ants, pestered by flies, and partially suffocated by the haze of smoke
and flame from hunting fires. Another journey westward along the
lake shore only presented a view of a tempting mountain, Mount
Unapproachable, completely cut off from access by a salt arm and
a range on the southern shore, so that they retreated baffled, thank-
ful for having carried away their lives from “the lone unhallowed
shore of this pernicious sea.”
The party had penetrated westward to the same longitude as
the point of their more northerly retreat, the Ehrenberg Ranges,
being baffled in its attempt to reach the west coast, in the first
12 Lake Amadeus and Mt. Olga, named “in honour of two enlightened
royal patrons of science.” Giles wished to give the name of Baron von
Mueller to these two outstanding natural features, but the patron of the
expedition substituted those which they now bear. Other features left un-
named by Giles, Mueller left to the discretion of the S.A. Government.
(C.S.O. 103/1873; S.G.O. 220/1873.)


place by scrub, in the second by salt. More time had been occu-
pied than they had anticipated, and in order to conserve provisions
Giles determined to send Robinson, never an enthusiastic member
of the party, back to the settled districts. In order to place him
on a reliable creek flowing east, the party proceeded in that direc-
tion for the Vale of Tempe, along the well-watered southern slopes
of George Gill’s Range, whose “springs, glens, gorges, ferns,
Zamias, and flowers would charm the eyes and hearts of toil-worn
men who are accustomed to live and die in crowded towns.” By
following that route, Giles had hopes of finding a way round the
eastern end of Lake Amadeus to Mount Olga, whose mystery
seemed now to shroud the secret of an unimpeded path to the west.
All his plans, however, sank miserably as soon as thej' had soared.
Carmichael refused to continue longer in the field, and the party
were soon in full and silent retreat for the telegraph line.
The return was not uneventful. The natives were persistent
and harassing, and Giles at least went near to leaving his life in
the narrow defile of Escape Glen. The Petermann and Palmer
Creeks led them without difficulty to the Finke, and they finally
reached the telegraph line at the Finke-Hugh junction, a'fter twelve
weeks on the march.
Giles’ efforts were disappointing, but by no means valueless.
He had, at least, made clear a track for future expeditions, and, as
officially reported, it was considered that “the result must be as
satisfactory to that gentleman as it is A'aluable to the country.” 13
Of the accuracy of his charts the Surveyor-General spoke with
especial commendation. 14
Neither the South Australian Government nor the Hon.
Thomas Elder had abandoned the original project of discovering
Report of the Surveyor-General, C.L. and I. 255/1873. Out letter of
Feb. 26, 1873.
14 For information relating to Giles' expedition see:
(a) “Australia Twice Traversed,” by Ernest Giles.
(b) Desp. from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State, 36 of Sept. 8, 1875.
(c) C.S.O. 1873/103, 106.
(d) C.L. and I. 1872/1814; 1873/101, 200, 255.
(e) P.P. 21/1875.
(f) Giles’ original journal and sketch map were forwarded by the
explorer to Baron von Mueller, who handed them to the S.A.
Govt. Journal was received in the S.G.O. and returned to C.L.
and 1. Office, but is now missing. (C.L. and I. 1873/101, 200;
S.G.O. 220/73.)


a route to Western Australia. An expedition had been arranged
in August of 1872, with their joint authority, and Major Warbur-
ton was instructed to leave Central Mount Sturt for Perth in
order to ascertain the nature of the country and the practicability
of a route from the interior to shipping ports on the west coast.
To avoid covering Forrest's track from Perth to lat. 28° 45', long.
122° 55', he had the alternative of branching off from that point to
Lake Rowe, and making his way from there to Eucla and Strang-
ways Springs. Although the span of unexplored territory was
sufficiently broad to accommodate any number of parties, the
official plan did seem to trench somewhat closely upon the line of
route marked out by Giles; and von Mueller’s hopes for the suc-
cess of his party suffered temporary eclipse. "Kindly remember,”
he wrote, "that poor Giles has set his all in the world on his own
enterprise, and that this, undertaken at my original suggestion,
seems to have led to that proposed by the Hon. Thomas Elder. In
the interest of the poor man, who is without camels and most slen-
derly equipped, I trust that any new expedition from your colony
will not adopt the same line as that of Giles and his companions.”
Nothing came of the arrangements, for "when the Government
assumed the responsibility apart from the pecuniary cost, they
claimed a greater share in the personal appointments than Mr.
Elder was prepared to concede, and he finally resolved to carry out
his original purpose single-handed, while the Government did not
abandon their interest in the important object suggested by him.” 15
The work was finally undertaken by two separate parties, the one
under Warburton’s leadership, financed by Mr. Elder and Mr. W.
W. Hughes, originally intended to start from Central Mount Sturt;
the other, under William Christie Gosse, organized by the South
Australian Government, from Alice Springs.
The first was fully equipped with 17 camels for a six months’
journey. The leader's son, Richard Egerton Warburton, was
second in command, J. W. Lewis assistant. Two Afghan camel
drivers, a cook (Dennis White), and a native boy completed the
15 See Desp. from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State, No. 62 of Oct. 5, 1872
also: (a) Orig. instructions issued to Warburton as leader of the proposed
joint expedition (C.L. and I. 1016/1872); (b) Miscell. papers (C.L. and I.)
relating to the Gosse-Warburton expeditions, 1872, including memoranda of
the S.G., draft instructions, correspondence with G. R. McMinn (who was
first offered the command by the Govt.), Chas. Todd, Hon. Thomas Elder,
von Mueller, and various members of the expeditions.


personnel of the expedition, which left Alice Springs on April 15,
1873. In long and single file, each man perched, it seemed, on the
very croup of his bne-humped camel, the cavalcade proceeded up
the telegraph route to Burt Creek, and then south-westward to-
wards the Mac Donnell Ranges. Skirting the northern fringe of
hilly country, they found early and to their cost that well-grassed
plains alone do not make cattle runs, and that rivers may con-
ceivably, and disastrously, be “depressions over which water would
flow when it could not go anywhere else."
Having satisfied himself that the Finke did not penetrate the
Ranges, Warburton made his way in a north-westerly direction to
Central Mount Wedge, near which the party found water and a
camping-place, where two picturesque glens lay deep in the rocky
heart of the hills. The deep, sunless, never-failing pool of Glen
Edith and the springs of Glen Hughes grimly guarded by wall and
pillar of basalt, were inexpressibly welcome to minds and bodies
preparing for a final venture into the wilderness of porcupine and
scrub. Waste and sand and spinifex ushered them north-westwards
to the Treuer Range country, whose waterless scrub turned them
southwards to the Eva Springs, the source of the Waite. Re-
connoitring south-westwards, Warburton found a complete lack of
water, and experienced nothing of greater moment than a camel
bolt, and the ludicrous spectacle of three men perched precariously
on the hind seat of their one-hump saddles, “rushing wildly through
the bush on runaway camels which they dared not try to pull up
for fear of breaking the nose ropes."
A second reconnaissance due west into Western Australia dis-
covered little but spongy, thirsty sand, eternally unslaked; and the
party started to return on its tracks. An eighty-mile trip due north
from the track found interminable spinifex, which forced them once
more back, until a chance encounter with some natives discovered
to them the Waterloo native wells, “an abundant supply of deli-
cious water," to which the depot was removed. From here War-
burton examined north-west for a possible route, but could find no
water even by digging. After an enforced wait for the recovery
of Sahleh, one of the camel men, who was suffering from a severe
attack of scurvy, they started again, this time north-north-west,
for a spot where Lewis had found that water was procurable by
digging. At Mary Springs, “the nearest permanent water on the


boundary/’ the supply was abundant and easily accessible. “This
is the third time we have crossed into West Australia; I hope our
footing there is at last*secure.”
Being now in the salt lake country, and camels and salt bogs
failing to agree, they made all haste out of it, through sheer desert
whose little water was salt, whose vegetation only camels could
eat, and from whose burnt surface the wind blew clouds of sand
and ashes. Warburton was now within a very few miles of Mount
Wilson, Gregory’s farthest south in 1856. He was quite unable,
however, to locate either Sturt Creek or Gregory’s lake, being
driven back by storms of dust and ashes. Their continued westerly
course vindicated the claims of Central Australia to caprice in its
physical conformation by Lewis’ discovery, in the midst of waste
and wilderness, of Bishop’s Glen, a beautiful clump of large gum
trees, growing in a swamp at the bottom of a small creek. The
creek was hemmed in by a large sandhill, and ran through a rocky
ridge in which there were fine, clear, deep waterholes, 100 feet
in circumference. Two large fresh-water lakes close by, with
beautifully clear water on pebbly beds, supplied them with a wel-
come stock of game and a notable prize—a young native woman.
Hoping for information and guidance, they kept her a close
prisoner; but she gnawed through the rope which secured her to
a tree and escaped. Her successor, “a howling, hideous old hag,”
resentful of the halter which kept her neck bound to a tree during
the night, led them until they were exhausted across the heavy
sandhills, in every direction where water was not.
Abandoning native assistance, Warburton pushed steadily
westward, as nearly as possible in the course of the sandhills, to
avoid the heavy crossing. But rations began to fail, the heat forced
them to travel by night only, the sandhills began to trend north-
wards, necessitating laborious travelling to cut across their course,
and the camels, struck by the night wind, began to give way. The
master bull and lord of the herd, without which the others were
an undisciplined rabble, was poisoned, and three of the riding
camels were reduced to the commissariat. By the end of Sep-
tember they were facing the prospect of starvation, pestered by
ants, bees, 16 and flies, unable to move by day and crippled in their
search for water by lack of camels. “When we move we can’t
],i Australian bee or honey fly.


see; when we stop we can’t search.” They still pushed on, slowly,
and more and more feebly, tantalized by the meagreness of water
in the scattered native wells, which were now their only resource,
and at last finding they could walk more quickly than they could
ride. The camel men “always attribute unlimited power to their
animals till those powers are called into exercise, and then when
they break down the failure is attributed to Providence.” The
sore-backed camels were doomed, if not eaten, to a living death
from flies; and for the sick there was no hope of rest or cure. Game
was eaten whole to avoid waste, and of other food, by the end of
October, there was practically none. The omnipresent ant made
rest by night or day impossible, except on burning sand, where
even its energy failed to persist.
By November 4 Warburton had determined to make a despair-
ing rush for the Oakover, taking his chance of finding a little water
in the 150 miles of intervening desert. The courageous action of
Charley, in following up a party of natives to their well, after a
killing night march, and bringing back a small supply to his com-
rades at the risk of his own life, saved the whole party at the out-
set. “To the energy and courage of this untutored native may,
under the guidance of the Almighty, be attributed the salvation of
the party.”
It was but temporary, however. The desert did not change,
and by the 12th the leader had lost both strength and hope. An
advance party in search of water had failed, and further progress
seemed impossible. “My party at least are now in that state that
unless it please God to save us we cannot live more than twenty-
four hours. We are at our last drop of water, and the smallest bit
of dried meat chokes me . . . God have mercy upon us, for we are
brought very low, and by the time death reaches us we shall not re-
gret exchanging our present miserj' for that state in which the
weary are at rest. . . . The country is terrible.” It was Charley
again who came to the rescue, again nearly at the cost of his life.
He located a well and brought back water to the exhausted men,
but at the price of severe spear wounds and a waddy cut on the
skull; and as the expedition had consumed all its. medicines holus
bolus some time previously, to save carrying them further, the
accident cost the lad dear.
With slightly renewed energy, Warburton and his party, with


five camels only, made a last effort to reach the Oakover. Lewis,
the strongest member of the expedition, by scouting ahead, suc-
ceeded in reaching the higher sources of the river, towards which
the party began to creep with painful persistence, only too glad to
leave the well whose water was their only compensation for lack
of rest, food, firewood, and the companionship of animal life. When
they finally arrived at a tributary of the Oakover, the leader was
tied full length on his camel, helpless and almost lifeless; and the
second in command was a cripple. When they arrived at the river
itself only three camels remained, two of which were taken by
Lewis in an advance search for the nearest station. He carried a
written appeal for help. 17 “We are in great distress from want of
provisions and means of moving. We have lost everything but
our lives, and have only two camels (for seven men) out of seven-
teen we started with .... We are for the most part so reduced
by famine we can scarcely crawl 100 yards.”
The men left behind, nearly naked, soaked with the rains which
had refused to bless them when they were waterless, eked out a
precarious existence on. the little they were strong enough to catch.
Christmas Day they spent eating the last camel. It was not until
the 29th that Charley, searching for honey up a tree, caught first
sight of the relief party. By the end of January they were in Roe-
bourne, and by Easter, 1874, thanks to the kindly assistance of the
squatters and the West Australian Government, were home.
Warburton’s effort had been noteworthy in its exhibition of
sheer pluck, persistence, and endurance; 18 and of more than ordi-
nary value in its demonstration of the extent of desert country be-
tween Western Australia and the eastern settlements. The posi-
tive information gained, however, was of a very doubtful nature.
All that he could show, that any man could show, was that in the
particular latitude of his route Central Australia was untraversable
with safety. Efforts north and south of that line might yet reveal
some capricious favour from a most capricious land. 19
17 C.S.O. 368/1874.
18 In recognition of his services Warburton received the Gold Medal
of the Roy, Geog. Soc., the dignity of C.M.G., and £I,OOO from the Govt,
of S.A.
19 For information relating to the expedition see:
(a) “Journey across the Western Interior of Australia,” by Col. Peter
Egerton Warburton (orig. journal in Archives).
[Note continued on next page.


The rival expedition had not fared so well. Gosse had left
Alice Springs on April 23, 1873, with a party of four whites, Edwin
S. Berry as second in command; Henry Gosse, collector; Henry
Winnall and Patrick Nilen, three Afghans, and blackboy Moses.
The leader was particularly impressed by the Government with the
fact that the Central and Western Exploring Expedition had a
distinct existence, apart from that of Warburton, and that he must
act without reference to that explorer’s choice of route.
Proceeding along the telegraph route to the Woodforde, Gosse
left his second officer there in charge of the party, and started with
his brother for the Reynolds Range, the highest point of which he
named Mount Thomas. The country was so dry that he returned
to camp in order to make a more detailed search for permanent
water, an almost negligible quantity for more than 100 miles north
of Alice Springs. Making a depot on the Lander, discovered on
his previous journey, he started from the most westerly point in
the Reynolds Range, travelling through heavily-scrubbed country
to Giles Range and Cockatoo Creek. The journey ended in the
loss of a horse and their precipitate return for water. A second
trip extending south-westward to the foot of Stuart’s Bluff Range
was more successful. The Afghans had succeeded in tracing the
course of the Lander for a considerable distance, and the depot
was moved to the west of Mount Gardiner, whence the leader set
out once more. The Bluff itself, on which they found Warburton’s
cairn of stones, gave them a clear view to the Mac Donnell Range
and provided a site for a third depot. A route to Giles’ Mount
Liebig led across spinifex sandhills, an immense ploughed field,
better to look at than travel over, with thirty miles of salt lagoon
stretching to the west.
To the west and south was still more spinifex and still less
water, and it was not until they reached the neighbourhood of
(b) MS. copy of Col. Warburton's journal, forwarded to the S.A.
Govt, by Messrs. Elder and Hughes. (C.L. and I. 337/75.)
(c) Despatches from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State: 62 of Oct. 5, 1872;
6 of Feb. 26, 1874 ; 36 of Sept. 8, 1875.
(d) Despatch from Sec. of State to Gov. of S.A., Feb. 24, 1875.
(e) C.S.O. 1874/186, 286, 368, 412, 836, 1313, 1328.
(f) C.L. and I. 1872/799, 807, 815, 872, 884, 907, 931, 1016; 1875/337.
(g) Message from Gov. of S.A. to House of Assembly, No. 5 of May
19, 1874 (Parlt. House, Adel.).
(h) P.P. 28/1875.
(i) Roy. Geog. Soc. Procs., Vol. 18, p. 183; Vol. 19, p. 41.


Mount Palmer that the horses could satisfy their needs. From
the fifth depot at Berry’s Pass Gosse explored southward to Lake
Amadeus for water, and, advancing into Giles’ country, moved
camp to his Glen F.dith. In spite of the energy of Kamran in
providing the party with kangaroo flesh, jaded palates lusted after
bullock, and fresh cattle tracks led them irresistibly along a side
track eastward to water in Halcomb’s Creek. Gosse examined
carefully the neighbourhood of Glen Edith, still finding endless
spinifex sandhills, with only occasional relief of fresh pasture.
From the King’s Creek depot he continued southward across
miserable spinifex sandhills, where the camels were little better
than knocked-up cart colts, towards a peculiar hill which came into
view east of Mount Olga. As the party approached it, the sand-
hills receded and revealed a short stretch of good country, with one
sheer rock in the centre rising abruptly 1,100 feet from the plain.
The upper part was perforated with water-worn caverns, and from
its centre poured a strong spring (Maggie's Spring), tumbling pic-
turesquely down steep gullies to a deep hole at the foot.
On ascending the rock, which he named after Sir Henry Ayers,
Gosse and Kamran found the caves to be favourite aboriginal
camping-places, irregularly broken, and arched by the heat of their
fires, and covered with cleverly-executed native devices. The view
from the summit showed Mount Olga to the west, a portion of
Lake Amadeus to the north, and a range to the south-east which
they named after Governor Musgrave, the highest point being
called Mount Woodroffe. Returning to the depot, they crossed
the lake and located a good well (Kamran’s Well) with sufficient
water to enable the whole party to reach the Rock in safety.
Twenty-eight miles further south revealing nothing but sandhills
and lack of water, they remained at Ayers’ Rock for a few days,
preparing for a journey eastward, and enjoying the magnificence
of its waterfalls, which had been reinforced by several days' rain.
From Mount Olga to Stevenson’s Peak the country improved.
Sandhills were left behind, while blossoming mulga and quandongs
loaded with ripe red fruit took the place of spinifex. Thence south
to the Mann Ranges there was sand indeed, but sand clothed with
grass, vetch, and wild geranium—“the gay appearance of a flower
garden”; and Mount Charles ushered in the finest country Gosse
had seen since leaving the rich districts within 200 miles of Ade


laide. The granite ranges themselves were well grassed and
watered throughout their entire length to Frew’s Gap; but sand-
hills recurred thence to the Tomkinson Ranges. From Nilen’s
Gully they crossed pleasantly picturesque Hats and grassy slopes,
and by September 3 had reached the western boundary of the pro
vince. From Boundary Peak west to the Cavenagh Ranges the
prospect.was less inviting, and after an exhaustive examination in
the neighbourhood of Mount Squires and the 1 Townshend Ridges,
Gosse decided that the safety of the party would necessitate an
immediate return. By the end of September the expedition was
well on its way home.
Gosse made straight for the Musgravc Ranges on his return
route, endeavouring on the way to gather fuller information about
the nature of the water supply in the Mann Ranges, which he now
found partially dry. The Musgraves embraced some tracts of
splendid pastoral land and alluvial flats, the discovery of which cost
the party a hazardous ride through burning mulga scrub. In order
to avoid the country already traversed by Giles, he made for the
northern slopes of the Musgrave Ranges, finding plenty of water
until Mount Everard signaled the break-up of the ranges to the
east. There the Marryat and the more southerly Agnes united
to form the Alberga, whose generally stony and scrubby course
they followed in intense heat, with little hope of water in a country
where the surface supply was either salt or impregnated with a
native preparation used to stupefy the emu. From the Appatinna
waterhole Gosse, unfavourably impressed with native accounts of
the water* supply along the Alberga towards the “whitefellow
wheelbarrow curteyabba” (telegraph line), struck north-east for
the Hamilton and Sturt’s waterhole. The last lap was not a happy
one. Horses were knocking up, waterbags leaking, and the ground
so hot that even the natives walked in the grass and bushes to
avoid burning their feet. They struck the Line at Hamilton Cross-
ing on December 14, 1873, and Charlotte Waters five days later. 20
20 For information relating to Gosse’s expedition see:
(a) Despatches from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State: 62 of Oct. 5, 1872;
6 of Feb. 26, 1874; 36 of Sept. 10, 1874.
(b) C.S.O. 1872/1427*, 1502; 1874/245, 800.
(c) C.S.O. out letters Jan. 30, May 8/1873.
(d) C.L. and I. 1872/924, 927 (Instructions); 1873/187.
(e) Miscell. Papers connected with the expeditions of Gosse and War-
burton (C.L. and I.).
[Note continued on next page.


During the absence of Gosse and Warburton, Giles, with the
financial aid of his former patron, was making a second attempt to
push beyond the barrier of Lake Amadeus, by working along a
line south of the lake, instead of north, as he had done before. 21
His intention was to strike the Mount Olga he had previously
seen across an obstructing expanse of salt, and trust to its leading
him westward into fair travelling country. The route he adopted
in August, 1873, from Ross’s waterhole on the Alberga, 22 zigzagged
north and south of the Northern Territory boundary line (26° S.),
and proved unexpectedly pleasant and hospitable. Though the ;
spaces between, the ranges were heavy with scrub, the ranges
themselves, Anthony’s, Ayers’, and the Musgrave, showed Aus-
tralian nature in a mood of unusual generosity. In the midst of
‘bare rocks of red colour heaped into the most fantastically-tossed
mounds imaginable” were grassed and timbered plains, rich with
the song of birds and the scent of flowers. The red ridges of Ayers’
Range were “clad in a garment of grass whose skirts were fringed
with flowers to their feet”; its long seas of verdure and quiet
grassy glades bathed the red slopes of riven rock with beauty, and
the scented exhalations of its trees were fragrance and balm in-
effable. Surface water, however, was by no means abundant, and
the awkward funnel-shaped native wells afforded a very precarious
supply.
The discovery of Tietkens’ Birthday Creek heralded their ap-
proach into a country which seemed to have no fault, that of the
Musgrave Ranges. “Everything was of the best kind here—
timber, water, grass, and mountains. In all my wanderings, over
(f) S.G.O. 1872/2296, 2259, 2353, 2619, 2620, 2621, 2622, 2628, 2806, 3002,
3007, 3017; 1873/37, 129, 220, 269, 382, 419, 459, 520, 599, 619, 833,
834, 835, 944, 989, 1024, 1158, 1190, 1201, 1283, 3748, 3751, 3756,
3765; 1874/162, 178, 184, 310, 693.
(g) S.G.O. out letters, 1872/Sept. 21; 1873, page 331.
(h) P.P. 48/1874.
(i) Roy. Geog. Soc. Procs, Vol. 19, p. 51.
21 On his return Giles had offered his services to the S.A. Govt, as
leader of a contingent party to help Gosse (see C.L. and I. 101/1873) but
was not accepted. On the recommendation of the Surveyor-General, he
was granted £250 to assist him in further exploration on condition that he
should raise £350 by private subscription, and forward his journal and map
to the Govt, at the end of the expedition. (C.L. and I. 1873/200, 286, 322,
375.)
22 His party was composed of W. H. Tietkens (second in command),
A. Gibson, J. Andrews, 24 horses and two dogs.


thousands of miles in Australia, I never saw a more delightful and
fanciful region than this, and one indeed where a white man might
live and be happy.*'
Its original inhabitants had their own views on the subject,
and defended them vigorously at point of spear, succeeding in
making the neighbourhood completely untenable. The entire
route through the range from Glen Ferdinand was marked by a
succession of creeks and springs, and by country of most wonder-
ful beauty; and by the time the expedition had emerged from the
hill country they were in sight of Mount Olga. Their north-west
course to the Mount led out of the range country into the sand-
hills, where water was far less plentiful than before. The Mount
itself, a fitting companion for Ayers' Rock close by, was “com-
posed of untold masses of rounded stones of all kinds and sizes,
mixed like plums in a pudding and set in vast and rounded shapes
upon the ground,” Like its fellow it was provided with springs.
Unwilling to linger, Giles returned in the wake of Gosse to
the latitude of his previous route, reaching the hill country once
more in the Mann and Tomkinson Ranges, which he traversed
westward along a slightly different line from that of his prede-
cessor. Of water there was no lack, in spring and creek, lake and
waterhole; and the Champ de Mars, a beautiful plain, “level as a
billiard table and green as an emerald,” was sufficient evidence of
the existence of feed. Giles was now well within Western Aus-
tralian territory, and its welcome was not of the most hospitable.
After reaching Fort Mueller in the Cavenagh Range, which bore
the tracks of Gosse's returning drays, the country became more
scrubby, the ranges volcanic and less abundantly watered. He
was forced to make many efforts in different directions to avoid
impassable scrub and torturing “porcupine, triodia, spinifex,
Festuca irritans, and everything else abominable grass”; much
of the water was bitter, and the little they found in the rock holes
(the Cups) they had to snatch forcibly from a band of irritated
natives. “In such a region as this we must be prepared to lay
down our lives at any moment in our attempts to procure water,
and we must take it when we find it, as life and water are synony-
mous.”
Continuous encounters with miserable dry ridges, spinifex,
sandhills, scrub, and ants kept the tormented little party as near to


a state of perpetual motion as human beings could well be. It
was impossible to push further west, even at a northerly or
southerly angle. Giles attempted it alone, but found only inter-
minable gravelly plains, whose entire water supply, as far as he
could discover, was indescribably putrid, and effectually put his
horse out of action. The whole party commenced a general retreat
towards Fort Mueller, encircling the surrounding country for
water, but finding only ants and scrub. When they arrived, packs
and clothing were ripped and two of the party ill. Even at Fort
Mueller their troubles were not over. The water supply was fairly
sure, if erratic, the stream flowing at night and ceasing during
the day. Violent earth-shocks continually shook the depot, which
was confined by the “frowning battlemented fortress-like walls of
black and broken hills, where the natives swarmed, driving away
the horses and attacking the camp itself.” Here the party spent
Christmas Day.
Perceiving signs of ranges some distance to the northward,
Giles and Tietkens made several attempts to reach them, and
finally succeeded, across difficult country, in striking Alice Falls,
whose “rocks rise almost perpendicularly from a charming little
basin, into which the stream from above and the spring from below
mingled with a most melodious sound." They then returned, and
brought up the remainder of the party from the depot, after a sharp
encounter with the natives. Fort Mueller they left behind with
both gladness and regret. It had been a home for many days, if
a dangerous and dreadful one, and its little garden was just begin-
ning to flourish with constant care and attention. “It was really
the most astonishing place it has ever been my fortune to visit.
Occasionally one would hear the metallic sounding clang of some
falling rock, smashing into the glen below, toppled from its emi-
nence by some subterranean tremor or earthquake shock ....
I had many strange, almost superstitious feelings with regard to
this singular spot, for there was always a strange depression upon
my spirits whilst here, arising partly, perhaps, from the constant
dread of attacks from the hostile natives, and partly from the phy-
sical peculiarities of the region itself .... where the water flowed
in the night, where the earthquake and the dry thunderstorm oc-
curred every day.”
Further examination of the northerly range (the Rawlinson)


discovered ample supplies of water in the glens, so much so that
swimming became the order of the day; and Giles was able to
push on westwards to the Gorge of Tarns, where a halt was called
for the repairing of garb already motley and .packbags long suf-
fering. The end of the Rawlinson Range, isolated, surrounded by
desert, “the monarch of those regions where the unvisited moun-
tains stand,” left them faced with the red sandhills, waterless,
where “if Noah’s deluge visited (the place) it could be conveniently
stowed away and put out of sight in a quarter of an hour.” They
made a side track northwards to Mount Destruction, found no
water, and were compelled to return to the gorge—a trip which
cost the expedition four of its horses. A glimpse of ranges to the
south-west tempted them upon -a similar search in that direction,
equally dangerous and equally fruitless. There was no other eleva-
tion anywhere within sight; they had no camels to penetrate the
surrounding desert further, and the thin-spun life Of a horse was
only too easily snapped in the height of an Australian summer; so
they returned to a rock water on their route, to heat, ants, and
misery, “Inferno, the lowest circle of Hell, the City of Dis,” but
to water, and thence back to the Rawlinson Range.
Continuing to retreat eastward, against a species of guerilla
warfare waged by the natives, Giles and Tietkens traversed the
length of the Peterman Range, which sloped northward into Lake
Amadeus, until they were once more in sight of Mount Olga. From
the west it seemed more than ever grotesque, “like five or six enor-
mous pink haystacks leaning for support against one another, with
open cracks or fissures between, which came only about half-way
down its face”; like “the backs of several monstrous kneeling pink
elephants”; or “a gigantic pink damper.” Here the two men were
forced to turn tail ignominiously upon the enraged owners of the
land and make their way once more to the west.
Fort McKellar, a few miles east of the Gorge of Tarns, was
established as a depot for the whole party; and the Circus, a large
rocky tarn discovered on the previous trip, as the most westerly
water in the range, they noted as a dependable supply to fall back
upon. On the 20th of April Giles and Gibson left Fort McKellar
for the western desert beyond the ranges. As the triodia sandhills
began to give way to gravelly plain the two men saw that their
supplies of food and water would not be sufficient in time of stress


for the four horses and themselves, so they turned loose two of
the animals to find their way back to the Circus alone, and made
a plant of some water-kegs in a tree. Just as a line of promising
hilly country began to appear on the horizon, 23 Gibson's horse gave
in. As it was now impossible to bridge the thirty miles ahead,
they turned back, alternately walking and riding on the one horse
left. Finally Gibson was entrusted, with the Fair Maid of Perth
to make his way back to the depot for help, while Giles proceeded
in the same direction as best he could on foot. Gibson managed
to reach the water plant in safety, but made a fatal mistake in fol-
lowing the bianch tracks east-south-east of the horses they had
turned loose, instead of the main tracks running east and west.
He was never seen again.
Giles arrived at the kegs exhausted for want of food, and con-
tinued his march through spinifex as tall as himself, with a 35-lb.
water-keg on his back, travelling in the moonlight, and lapsing into
unconsciousness during the day. Twenty miles from the Circus
his water was gone, and he was creeping faintly along the track
with arms, legs, and thighs punctured and pustulated with spines.
On reaching the Circus he found that Gibson had not been there.
His only source of strength for the last lap was a small deserted
wallaby, which he pounced on and ate “living, raw, dying—fur,
skin, bones, skull, and all.” He reached the depot on the first of
May, to find that Gibson had never returned. The catastrophe
was felt deeply by the whole party, and exploration was at an end.
All efforts were made to trace his course, but he had gone
hopelessly southwards into the interminable desert, instead of east,
and the loss of their own lives would have been the sure price of
the recovery of his body. The Fair Maid “had carried him only
too well, and had been literally ridden to death, having carried her
rider too far from water ever to return, even if he had known where
it lay.” The only hope of the expedition reaching the far-west
range seen by Giles was rain, and no rain came. On the 21st of
May they finally left Fort McKellar for home. An easterly track
took them past Mount Olga and Ayers’ Rock. They crossed Lake
Amadeus by Gosse’s crossing, and made their way to the Finke
and Charlotte Waters, which they reached on July 13, 1874. 24
23 Alfred and Marie Range. For reasons of Giles’ nomenclature see
letter from F. von. Mueller to S.A. Govt. (S.G.O. 2442/1874 and 2306/74.)
24 For information relating to Giles’ second expedition see:
[Note continued on next page.
149
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


Giles had done much in bringing before public notice the
double chain of mountainous oases which stretched far, within
South Australian boundaries at least, into the dreaded desert. Nor
had he failed because the oases had ceased. The Alfred and Marie
Range showed ample promise of available country in patches, pos-
sibly, he thought, extending to the sources of the Murchison. He
had not gone forward in desperate haste, turning neither to the
right hand nor to the left. His zigzag track across the map left
little of first importance to be discovered about the country within
reach of his extensive detours. Whether the desert-bound oases
could ever be of practical value to a pastoral and agricultural com-
munity was a question not to be settled either quickly or easily.
Officially, at least, it had a favourable answer, there being no rea-
son, it seemed, “why many portions should not prove as available
for settlement as some excellent wheat-growing districts, which
were formerly declared to be useless to the agriculturist, and which
have certainly not acquired their fertility from the skilfully-directed
exertions of those who occupy them."
v
A few months before the return of Giles to the settled dis-
tricts, John Forrest started from Champion Bay with the same
object as that of his South Australian competitors. The expedi-
tion had been delayed by the West Australian Government until
the results of Gosse’s expedition were known. Those of Warbur-
ton, though successful, did not interfere with the plans of the
neighbouring colony, as his route was too far to the north, too dan-
gerous and sterile to be of any practical value. The news of
Gosse’s failure to span the desert was the signal for Forrest’s de-
parture. The plan was his own, that of bridging the desert from
the watershed of the Murchison in the hope of striking a large river
running inland from that point; his objective, the neighbourhood
of the Overland Telegraph Line.
Forrest left Perth with his brother Alexander, two men, two
(a) “Australia Twice Traversed/' by Ernest Giles.
(b) Despatch from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State, 36 of Sept. 8, 1875.
(c) C.S.O. 1615/1874.
(d) C.L. and I. 1873/322, 375; 1874/237, 323, 456, 900, 1072, 2442.
(e) S.G.O. 3183/1874 (one page of journal only remains).
(f) P.P. 215/1874.
(g) Roy. Geog. Soc. Procs., Vol. 19, p. 53.
(h) Reminiscences of W. H. Tietkens (Archives), and Ro>. Aust.
Hist. Soc. Journal, 1919.


natives, and horses only, on March 18, 1874. He followed the
Murchison to its watershed and struck east into the spinifex
country. From Weld Springs was a “most fearful country,”
miserably grassless; and only the hope of reaching Gosse’s farthest
west kept them in active search for the water which an unusually
dry season had rendered practically non-existent. On reaching
the country which had driven back both Gosse and Giles he was
almost forced to return, though 1,000 miles from the settled dis-
tricts of West Australia. The discovery of the Baker Range
saved the situation, and ushered in a more practicable country,
slightly watered where the friendly granite rocks supplied
reservoirs, and beautifully grassed—the Warburton Range of
Giles. Henceforward the party were in known country. So
difficult was Forrest’s position, however, as a result of the warm
season and his poor horses, that on reaching the boundary he was
forced to abandon a proposed attempt to strike south towards Eucla,
and to make for the Telegraph Line as nearly as possible along
Gosse’s tracks. He found it impossible to rely entirely upon the
waters shown by his predecessor, owing to the dryness of the
season. The track he struck out for himself, however, was marked
by springs which had escaped Gosse’s observations, and from the
Cavenagh Ranges to the Alberga, they experienced no great
difficulty in locating water. The Peake Station welcomed them
royally on September 30, with roast beef and plum pudding.
The value of Forrest’s work was largely negative. He has
the honour of being the first “who succeeded in travelling overland
between this province (S.A.) and West Australia, southward of
the central parallel of the Continent, about lat 25° S.” But his
success brought only convincing proof of Central Australia’s
sterility. “From the head of the Murchison to the 129th meridian,
the boundary of our colony, I do not think will ever be settled.
Of course there are many grassy patches such as at Windich
Springs, the Weld Springs . . . but they are so isolated and of
such extent that it could never pay to stock them. The general
character of this immense tract is a gently undulating spinifex
desert.”
It is noteworthy that Forrest, though much to his regret, was
unprovided with camels, now considered the unum necessarium
for Australian exploration. Horses he found but a poor substitute.


His greatest resource was in himself and the loyalty of his com-
rades. If Tommy Pierre spoke truly, they “got a capital gaffer
that leaded us through.” 25
On the day on which Forrest left Perth an expedition with
the same object left the Neales River, a little south of Mount
O’Halloran, under the leadership of John Ross. 26 Its accomplish-
ments were unfortunately small, resolving themselves into a suc-
cession of searches for water which on nearly every occasion
proved fruitless. In pushing westward Ross did his best to follow
the various branch creeks of the Neales but was forced back
upon his tracks by a barrier of sandhill and mulga scrub. The
course on which he penetrated farthest west, between the 29th and
30th parallels to the boundary, had an equally negative value. The
only water was salt, and he could find no country that could be
considered of any pastoral value. 27
By 1875 the general nature of the territory between South
Australia and the western settlements was known. Forrest had
traversed it in two different latitudes; Warburton in another. The
country within the South Australian border stretching westward
from that portion of the Overland Telegraph lying between the
Mac Donnell Ranges and the Alberga, had received full and
sufficient attention from Gosse, Giles and Ross. It remained to
fill in any prominent gaps which might show the slightest likeli-
hood of pastoral capabilities. One which had occupied much
official consideration was the district between the Telegraph Line
and Fowler’s Bay. It was generally felt that that port and Eucla
might subserve a larger area of squatting country than was then
possible, and also that the west coast runs should not be isolated
25 See:
(a) “Explorations in Australia,” by John Forrest, F.R.G.S.
(b) Despatch from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State, 39 of Oct. 8. 1874.
(c) C.S.O. 1874/585, 1899; out letter of Oct. 9, 1874.'
(d) P.P. 234/1874.
(e) Journal of Roy. Geog. Soc., Vol. 45, 1875; Procs., Vol lit, pp. 57,
316, 481.
26 He had been originally commissioned by Hon. T. Elder to lead a
party in search of Warburton. (Roy. Geog. Soc. Journal, Vol. 41, 1871;
Procs., Vol. 19, p. 56). Ross had already carried out a certain amount of
exploratory work north of Lake Eyre. (Roy. Geog. Soc. Journal, Vol. 41,
1871.)
27 See Ross’s original journal, C.L, and I. 691/1875, and P.P. 67/75.
Ross’s original plan is in S.G.O.


from the.central settlements of S.A. by the lack of a communicating
stock route. 28 McKinlay had been instructed to explore in that
direction in 1862; Forrest had intended to do so in 1874. That
which they were unable to do was carried out unwittingly by the
Hon. Thomas Elder in sending Giles to Fowler’s Bay and Eucla
for survey purposes, and requesting his return overland to Beltana,
in order to prepare for a journey to the West Australian capital.
Giles left Fowler’s Bay 29 with horses and camels on March
13, 1875, making for Youldeh depot to the northward, across a salt
lagoon which “black romance” interpreted as the spoor of a
gigantic reptile that once haunted the plains between the Mus-
grave Ranges and the coast. Youldeh was intended as a depot
for the proposed expedition to Perth. Tt was surrounded by red
sandhills from which the heat poured down into the well as in a
funnel. Hearing from his guide, old Jimmy, that to the east were
several good waters “mukka close up only long way,” which being
interpreted might be 120 miles, Giles despatched all his party
except Nicholls and Jimmy back to Fowler's Bay. He then made
his way eastward across the spinifex sandhills, continually
hampered by the enmity of his horses and camels, and by the
guidance of old Jimmy, who insisted on bringing the party to
camp where water ought to have been but was not. A peculiar
example of native constructive industry—a large clay dam —was a
valuable discovery for one night, situated as it was in a beautifully
grassed oasis in the mulga scrub. Old Jimmy’s most promised water
supplies, however, were not up to standard. Even Wynbring, a
mountain, waterhole, lake, spring, and well in one, “micro-
scopicated itself down to a mere rock hole whose dimensions were
not very great.” Wynbring being the ultima thule of Jimmy,
application for information was made to a native of the district and
his three wives. A formal embrace of each lady at last extracted
the news that to the south-east (Mount Finke) were “big fellow
Poonta and mucka carpee,” hills but no water.
No other course being available Giles proceeded thither. As
he expected there was no water, and the succeeding heavy sand-
hill country completely exhausted the animals. The nearest known
28 The intervening Gawler Range country had been explored in 1862
by Josiah Bonnin. (See Procs. of S.A. branch of Roy. Geog. Soc. 1907-8, p. 67.)
29 With Mr. Roberts (second in command), Thos. Richards, George
Murray, Peter Nicholls (cook) and three natives.


water was 350 miles away, at Finniss Springs. All they had was
carried by the camels and used to suppty the horses, that could do
nothing. It was now a matter of life and death. Both horses died,
only the camels were left to carry the party to safety, and the
men were too exhausted even to talk. On the eighth day after
leaving Wynbring, they struck a small claypan full, and from there
to the Finniss Springs found no difficulty, either with the country,
the water supply, or the climate. They were welcomed to the
Finniss by Mr. Coulthard. son of the lost explorer, and thence made
their way to Beltana, 700 miles from Fowler’s Bay.
Giles had covered the blank space on the map which might
have brought the west coast ports into the circle of South
Australian commercial activity, but to little purpose. That which
the little part}' had been able to do with camels was impossible
for any other animal, and both Bay and Bight were compelled to
maintain their most unwilling aloofness from the remainder of
pastoral Australia.
On May 6th of the same year, with his old field companion
Tietkens, J. Young, Alex. Ross, Peter Nicholls, old Jimmy, and
Saleh, an Afghan camel driver, Giles started from Beltana for
Perth. At Port Augusta he picked up the stores and equipment
supplied by Mr. Elder, and a black boy, Tommy Oldham. The
party left the Port with fifteen baggage and seven riding camels,
proceeding up the western side of Lake Torrens to the Elizabeth,
where they received information from an intending squatter of
the existence of a well and claypan near the north end of Lake
Gairdner, a welcome break in the long journey to Wynbring.
Mount Finke, released from the presence of the intense summer
glow which had rendered it stifling earlier in the year showed
itself reasonably comfortable as a halting place; and had it not
been for the poisoning of two of the camels in the neighbourhood,
there would have been no cause for the anxiety felt on the previous
trip. After leaving the pretty oasis of Wynbring, now “a fertile
little gem in a desolate waste,” old Jimmy once more proudly took
the lead along a course somewhat more to the north than that of
the previous expedition. His catalogue contained the names of
several waters, all of which were found to be rock hollows in a
wilderness of scrub, like antediluvian cisterns full of soil and debris.
It being “next to impossible to make an old fool of a blackfellow


understand the value of the economy of time,” they generally struck
water during the day and camped thirsty at night.
At Youldeh, as arranged previously, Giles formed a depot
where the red sandhills* which had parched and burnt them with
a fiery glow a few months before, were now encrusted with a
glittering coat of frost. Old Jimmy was returned gratefully to his
family, and Giles made a short trip to Fowler’s Bay, while the
other members of the party were scouting northwards towards the
28th parallel for further signs of water. Their discovery of Oolda-
binna, some native wells, a dam, and claypans, induced the whole
party to follow in their tracks. From Ooldabinna, Tietkens and
Young searched northwards in the hope of connecting the route
with the Musgrave Ranges, while Giles, foreseeing a water
difficulty to the west, himself pushed out in that direction with
Saleh and Ross in order to make a plant of water on the way.
As he expected they met nothing but scrub, spinifex, sandhill, and
salt lake; and where the dull greenness of samphire lent beauty to
the wild, it was “the weird, hideous, and demoniacal beauty of
absolute sterility.” There was no trace of human or animal life,
“the only sound the ear could catch, as hour after hour we slowly
glided on, was the passage of our noiseless treading and spongy
footed ‘ships’ as they forced their way through the live and dead
timber of the hideous scrubs.”
One hundred and fifty-six miles from Ooldabinna Ross dis-
covered the first signs of water in a native clay dam, yellow and
rapidly evaporating. Forty miles beyond there was still no
promise of better things so Giles decided to return by a more
southerly route, hoping to determine the limits of the plains which
he knew stretched northwards from Eucla. This lie succeeded in
doing and returned to camp. Tietkens and Young had approached,
they thought, within 100 miles of the Musgraves, but the country
and its owners both being unfriendly, they had returned to the
rapidly diminishing well.
Casting the dice desperately in the face of Fate, Giles deter-
mined to take the whole party on to his dam, on the hundredth
chance that rain might have fallen there during his absence. It
had; and the reservoir was overflowing. The Boundary Dam was
his depot for a week, while the party were preparing for what they
feared to be waterless desert. Six hundred miles westward was


Gregory’s Mount Churchman, where water might possibly be
found. Having fully resolved to get to Perth, Giles communicated
to his officers his decision to push on blindly, either to strike any
existing intermediate waters, or die in the scrub. “I had set my
own and all my companions’ lives upon a cast, and will stand the
hazard of the die, and I may add that each one displayed at
starting into the new unknown the greatest desire and eagerness
for our attempt.” The scrub on their line of march gradually
gave way to open plains, waterless and endlessly undulating. After
ten days they were in a dead, lifeless region, “utterly unknown to
man and as utterly forsaken by God,” then again scrub, mallee,
casuarina, desert sandal wood, quandong and spinifex. Two hun-
dred and forty-two miles from the Boundary Dam the last water,
eighty gallons was divided among the camels. At 323 miles, when
all were more or less philosophically facing the prospect of death,
Tommy, who had been sent to the top of a little white sandhill,
burst back through the scrub at full gallop and yelled out: “Water,
water! plenty water here! Come on! Come on! This way! This
way! Come on, Mr. Giles! Mine been find ’em plenty water.” The
water was a miniature lake draining from the sandhill into a clay
hollow situated in the centre of a grassy flat and surrounded by
pines. “No fear shovel, that fellow water sit down meself (itself)
along a ground, camel he drink ’em meself.” Tommy had been
led there by the tracks of an emu, and so completely was it hidden
in the scrub that only the veriest chance prevented them from
passing it by wearily and unseeingly.
Queen Victoria’s Spring in the Great Victoria Desert was a
welcome week’s depot. At the end of that time Giles made a water
plant 25 miles ahead and prepared for his last 390 miles. The
second day’s march brought them to the first signs of the western
coast line formation, a small granite hill, the first elevation in
their long 800 miles from Mount Finke. Granitic ridges continued
on their course, but otherwise the monotony of scrub, sand, and salt
bog was undisturbed until after 302 miles they struck a natural
well, Ularring.
“While here we enjoyed delightful weather, gentle breezes
and shady trees, quiet inoffensive aboriginals, with pretty children
in the midst of a peaceful and happy camp, situated in charming
scenery amidst fantastic rocks, with beautiful herbage and fine


water for our almighty beasts.” On the evening of the day on
which Giles made this entry in his journal the whole party were
attacked while at supper by a well drilled and disciplined native
force, 100 strong. Two unarmed natives and a charming little
native girl had been the decoys. The child had done her best
to give warning, but could not make herself understood, so getting
the best out of a difficult situation, she cheered on the enemies of
her tribe, like a white shirted crow, with delighted squeaks and
shoulder claps, until the attacking force became a routed army.
Then she returned home, to appear next day accompanied by her
two comrades in diplomacy, exhibiting the utmost sangfroid and a
hunger which only two of the enemies’ meals could appease.
The party left Ularring on October 18, entering more difficult
scrub than ever. Six days later, from the densest, most hideous of
scrubs they sighted Mount Churchman. From there to the nearest
out station was a short journey, and the progress of the party
from the outposts of settlement to Perth was a series of triumphal
receptions.
Giles’ efforts had discovered two most notable waters in the
centre of the desert now proved to exist between west and east;
but they were isolated and so useless. The desert which was
unbridgeable commercially between 22° and 23® south latitude,
in the latitude of the Musgraves, and along the coast of the Bight,
was equally so in latitude 29° to 30°. Giles had been forced to'
traverse greater distances than hitherto, without water, and would
inevitably have stopped for ever half way had he been unprovided
with camels. For stock, the western desert north of the latitude
of Hampton Plains, had no sustenance; for horses, it was certain
death. Giles’ work, however, was not finished with his arrival
in Perth. Being anxious to complete the line of route which he
had been forced to relinquish in Gibson’s desert, during his second
expedition, he made plans to return to South Australia in that
latitude. Tietkens and Young returned by sea; otherwise the
party remained the same. As far as Geraldton their triumphal
progress continued unbroken. By the 10th April they had left
civilization once more, keeping to the north-east along the water-
shed until they arrived at the Ashburton. The Grand Junction
Depot on its upper waters was their home for thirteen weary, hot,
fly-infested days, during which an attempt was made to explore


north-eastward along the range. Heat and blindness compelled
the leader to desist, and they retired in spite of a plenitude of water
in the glens and gullies. They were now on the ridge of the high
land separating the west coast rivers from Gibson’s Desert, to-
wards which, it seemed, no friendly watercourse, made its way.
Hoping to keep in the country of rock springs as far as possible,
he followed the Ashburton to its head, 450 miles from the nearest
known water in the Rawlinson Range.
The desert edge and the western watershed was a 2,000 ft.
plateau; the eastern horizon a line of low ridges, barren, naked and
miserable. The early days of July brought the first waves of the
dreaded sandhills, and at the outset the party was threatened with
the loss of its camels by poisoning; and by the time it was well
advanced in the desert they were weak, gaunt, hollow-eyed and
wretched. One was left, after travelling for 230 miles without water
at Buzoe’s Grave, “the centre of silence and solitude.” Four days
later they came within sight of the Alfred and Marie Range, and
water; within three more days the Rawlinson. Old memories and
the story of a disastrous retreat were revived as they visited again
the scene of Gibson’s death. Their old track led back to the
Ferdinand, which Giles decided to follow towards the Everard
Range, expecting from native reports, to find it terminating in
Lake Eyre. It soon exhausted itself, however, and the expedition
made direct for the Telegraph Line at Mount O’Halloran, fol-
lowing it southwards to Beltana and home. 30
The western desert was now no longer a boundless encroach-
ment upon civilization. Its limits were known and the worst of its
terrors gauged. The northern margin fixed by Gregory was un-
altered; Forrest had made clear its southern boundary; Giles and
Warburton had found its western border coincident with the
30 See:
(a) “Australia Twice Traversed,” by Ernest Giles.
(b) Desp. from Gov. of S.A. to Sec. of State, 28 of Sept. 6, 1876.
(c) Desp. from Sec. of State to Gov. of S.A., Nov. 5, 1874; June 27,
1876.
(d) C.S.O. 640/1877, 645/1878; out letter, Oct. 9, 1876.
(e) Journal of Roy. Geog. Soc., Vol. 46, 1876.
(f) P.P. 18/1876; 22/1877.
Giles’ application to the South Australian Govt, for a land lease as a
reward for his exploratory work, was not granted, as it would have involved
an infringement of the regulations then in force. (P.P. 114/1877. S.G.O.
out letter, Oct. 23, 1876.) '


western watershed; and the more detailed work of Giles, Gosse,
and Ross in the neighbourhood of. the Overland Telegraph had
pushed the possible areas of settlement on its eastern side as far
as seemed either profitable or safe. The Colonial Office was
sufficiently impressed with the work carried out by these explorers
in the neighbourhood of Alice Springs, Charlotte Waters and the
Peake, to recommend the establishment of several townships at
these stations to be connected by a cattle tramway.
By far the most important, if less spectacular, work of Giles
was that of his earlier expeditions near Lake Amadeus. His
discovery and examination of a line of well watered country
extending far west of the Overland Telegraph into the desert was
accomplished by private subscription in the face of much com-
petition, with comparatively little equipment and no camels. His
patron’s greatest fear at the time was that he should not receive
due credit for his work, Forrest, Gosse, and Ross having all chosen
a similar line of route to that marked out for himself, when it
seemed to him that plenty of others were available. His two
expeditions across the desert, more dangerous, more fully equipped,
and more spectacular, were confirmatory only of public opinion,
and inferences drawn from previous exploratory work.
His work, however, with that of his contemporaries in the
same field, represents a triumphant vindication of a much dis-
trusted method of exploring. Until the Hon. Thomas Elder took
the field camels were not generally popular as travelling com-
panions. Burke and McKinlay, while recognizing their value in
the undulating sandhill country of Central Australia, had both
found them a source of difficulty—the one in inundated country,
the other in company with horses. Baron von Mueller deprecated
their use as early as 1857 on account of the prevalence of stony
country in Central Australia, a criticism which both Warburton
and Giles were to find only too well founded. Surveyor G. R.
McMinn, in considering the proposal of the Government to place
him in command of the expedition which ultimately went out under
Gosse, stated definitely that camels were not suited to the primary
work of exploring, being only fit to carry the heavy baggage.
The prejudice yielded very quickly, however, before the test
of practical experience. Warburton would never have reached
Roebourne with horses, whose slender lives were only too ready


a sacrifice to the rolling sandhills where there was no water.
Forrest knew the value of camels sufficiently to deplore his own
early methods. “Horses are the noblest and most useful animals
in the world but they must have food and water regularly. The
camel, on the other hand, is physically formed to travel over these
desolate regions, and in Australia has been known to go 12 or 14
days without water, carrying 300 lb. and sometimes 400 lb. weight."
Giles needed no convincing. His own camels had taken him where
horses were useless, carrying for the frailer animals the water
which they themselves were not allowed to drink. Nor was it
only in the desert sandhills that he had proved their worth. In
heavy scrub, the camels, taller, and travelling in file, ran their loads
against the less resisting upper branches of the trees, while the
lower ones, instead of tearing their legs, simply took off all the
hair and left them “bright and shining as a newly polished boot."
The result was, that while the legs of the horses were punctured
and suppurating, those of the camels were “hard as steel and
bright as bayonets." Only in bogs and stony ranges was it im-
possible for an explorer to make use of them effectively.
In 1870 camels for Australian exploration were exotics, worth
travelling many miles to see, and not always recognized when
seen. In 1876, they were more indispensable than damper, bully
beef or blackfellow.


CHAPTER VII
EAST OF THE OVERLAND TELEGRAPH
Much less protracted effort was necessary to connect the
known pastoral country of South Australia with that of Queens-
land, than was required in the case of Western Australia. Settle-
ment in the Northern Territory, and the overflow'of the squatting
fraternity into the country north of Alice Springs, strengthened the
already existing desire of Queensland to bridge the gap to the
Telegraph Line; while South Australia supplemented her efforts
mainly by a system of surveys in the territory she had explored.
As far as South Australia herself was concerned, a certain amount
of exploration east of the Overland Telegraph proceeded simul-
taneously with that to the west, its starting point being the
neighbourhood of Lake Eyre.
In August, 1864, 1 the South Australian Government made
efforts to initiate an examination of the district east of Mount
Margaret. The leadership of the proposed expedition, for which
McKinlay was suggested, 2 ultimately devolved upon Major War-
burton, who proposed making a preliminary examination of the
waters flowing into the north end of Lake Eyre. A zig-zag course
to the north-west would, he thought, lead to the origin of those
streams, and might possibly open up a line of route leading towards
the head of the Bight or the west coast. 3 The protracted drought
of 1864, however, effectually prevented the Commissioner of Police
from reaching even his starting point. The route west of Lake
Torrens he found absolutely impracticable, Andamoka being in a
most miserable state, and Pernatty putrid. The horses’ “strength
is not as the strength of stones, neither is their flesh brass.” By
1 C.L. and I. 2483/1864.
2 C.L. and I. 1864/2409, 2722, 2941, 3071.
3 See Chapter VI.


November 8, he had received authority to return to Adelaide. 4
In June, 1866, Major Warburton made a second effort, 6
deviating somewhat from his instructions by proceeding eastward
instead of westward from Mount Margaret. In his first aim, the
fixing of the northern limit of Lake Eyre, he was successful; but
the lake itself was a forbidden land, “dry, terrible in its death-like
stillness, and the vast expanse of its unbroken sterility; the weary
wanderer, who. when in want of water, should unexpectedly reach
its shores, might turn away with a shudder from a scene which
shut out all hope—he could hide his head in the sandhills and
meet his fate with calmness and resignation, but to set his foot on
Lake Eyre would be like cutting himself off from the common lot
of human beings.”
Warburton’s further intention was to trace upwards a river
falling into the Lake, which, he was convinced, was the Barcoo.
He managed to complete an examination of it to lat. 27°, long.
140° 20', where it ran out in the plains. He had discovered one
fresh water, Lake Howitt, but the general dryness of the country
ahead forced him to retreat. A tributary, the O'Halloran, he
traced to its junction, where, however, it was dry, discovering large
tracts of excellent well watered pasture land, suffering rather from
excess than lack of rainfall. 6
The river itself he concluded wrongly to be the Barcoo. He
had followed it eastward until it ran out temporarily in the plain,
which he supposed to be identical with the one to which Sturt
had followed his river, on a westerly course. The O'Halloran, he
concluded to be the creek referred to by Sturt as terminating in a
pool.
The work initiated by Warburton was carried on by the
South Australian Government in 1874, with the aid of the Hon.
Thomas Elder. 7 In the interests of the pastoral industry, and for
4 Others were prepared to carry out the work at the same time. The
Hon. T. Elder asked assistance (C.L. and I. 3023/64) for a similar expedition
he was sending out under Ball and Kekwick, but was refused. Several
private applications were made, after Warburton's first failure, to carry on
his work. (C.L. and I. 1864/3096, 3147.)
5 C.L. and I. 1451/1866. P.P. 130/1864.
6 For reports see C.L. and I. 1866/1989, 2348, 2652; P.P. 195/1864, 177/
1866-7.
7 The country north of Lake Eyre had already been examined by John
Ross while in the service of the Hon. T. Elder. He reported the existence
of at least 300 miles of navigable waterway*(creek and lake) in the neigh


the development of the Lake Eyre district, there was urgent
need for the navigability of the lake to be ascertained and
for the country lying to the north and north-east to be explored
and accurately surveyed. The work was placed in the hands of
J. W. Lewis, late second in command of Warburton’s trans-
continental expedition; and resolved itself into an examination of
the depth and bottom of the Lake, followed by the exploration and
survey of the country “adjoining and within a hundred miles of
that portion of Lake Eyre lying to the north of the 29th parallel
and east of longitude 137°”
Lewis with his party 8 and camel equipment 9 arrived at Mount
Margaret, on the XJmbum Creek, on November 14, 1874; and by
the 25th had traced the creek down to Lake Eyre—his first full
view of “a broad, unbroken white horizon eastward, quite destitute
of water, with samphire bushes growing out for two and three
miles from the shore.” After overcoming the ludicrous propensity
of his leaderless camels to follow one another round in circles,
Lewis made his way northward across inferior country until he
struck the Neales. Beresford and Tolmer surveyed the river to
its lake mouth, while the leader mapped the shore from the mouth
of the Umbum, The lake bed itself he was quite unable to sound.
A brittle three inch crust of salt and gravelly clay covered an
unknown depth of black mud. like thick paint which would not
suffer examination without absorbing the examiner.
Following up a Neales tributary, he found himself on the
head waters of Koorakarinna Creek, which he followed through
profusely grassed country such “as it has rarely been my fortune
to see.” He then struck north again across the Frew, and reached
the Macumba (Treuer) where, as at all other places in the salt
soaked soil near Lake Eyre, fresh water was only to be obtained
by sinking in the sand. Here Lewis formed a depot, leaving his
party to examine the river to its mouth in the Lake w'hile he
made hi« way with a black boy, up the river to the Telegraph
Line, for a supply of rations. He was prevented from carrying
bourhood. (See letters from Hon. T. Elder, Journal of Roy. Geog. Soc.,
Vol. 41, 1871; Procs. of R.G.S., Vol. 15, p. 96.)
8 A. G. D. Beresford (second in command), F. W. Andrews (collector
and naturalist), G. W. Tolmer (assistant), J. Davis (cook), and three
Afghan camel drivers.
9 Supplied by the Hon. Thomas Elder.


out his intention by the wretchedness of the country, the "inborn
inclination of the Australian black” to lead him out of his way to
useless waters, and the lameness of his camels. On his return to
the depot he found that Beresford had been prevented from
reaching the I.ake by a salt creek, which at its junction with the
Mucumba formed an impassable salt marsh penetrating the sand
hills in all directions.
Unable to examine the lake shore southward, as he had in-
tended, Lewis returned to the Neales mouth across the same
endless samphire flats and sandhills, interspersed with scraps of
fair grazing country, commencing the shore survey northwards
from there. The thermometer was registering 141° in the shade,
and a gale from the lake was blowing thick clouds of salt dust,
intensely painful to the eyes, and so dense that it was impossible
to see twenty yards. "Even a camel must get very thirsty during
a hot dusty day as this was.” The shore itself was not inviting—
high gypsum cliffs, "the white lake south, and high barren sand-
hills north, with nothing on them but dead cane bush and sam-
phire.” They were finally brought to a halt by the salt marshes
at the mouth of the Macumba, which they were forced to round
across almost perpendicular sand mountains, before they could
reach the remainder of the party. Christmas Waters in the
Macumba supplied them with ample fresh water, but showed little
promise to the stock raiser, being in the centre of absolutely
worthless sandhills. Tommy’s Well on the Kallakoopah, a
Macumba tributary, was made a temporary depot during the
examination of the creek itself, but the country along its banks
was “simply frightful”—bog, sandhill, canebush, samphire and pig’s
face. “Tommy’s Well is undoubtedly permanent and fresh, but
the country around it is abominable; to take a view from any
slight elevation of the bare sandhills, sand cliffs, and utter want of
vegetation, is sufficient to create thirst, without having to travel
over it.”
On the 3rd January, 3875, the party commenced their examin-
ation of the north-eastern tributary of the Macumba, at whose
junction was the salt marsh barrier they had met so many times
in attempting to reach the outlet in Lake Eyre. The tributary had
been mistaken Warburton in 1866 for the more southerly
Barcoo; and was named by the Surveyor-General after its dis


coverer. From the first springs on the Warburton Lewis went
back with a black boy to examine the salt marsh junction. He
succeeded in making his way down the Macumba, and for half a
'mile into the lake bed, but was caught in a salt dust storm which
the camels would not face. "What colour I was I am unable to
say, but the black boy was nearly w'hite with furrows down his
cheeks, where the tears ran down from his eyes, caused by the salt
nature of the dust.*’ After his return to the Warburton depot,
Lewis carried out a short survey of the Lake shore from the
Warburton mouth, and then proceeded up the river through very
fair country with good water supplies. From the Yellow Water-
hole he made a northerly reconnaissance and struck his old friend,
the Kallakoopah, which had performed a broad curve since he had
had last left it at Tommy’s Well. Finding no water, he returned,
Beresford and Tolmer having made a similar journey to the south-
east, through splendid country to Chandler’s Waterhole. A similar
journey led to the discovery of Mount Hogarth in the midst of
excellent country.
Pushing on up the course of the Warburton until it ran out,
the expedition encountered a spell of wet weather which nearly
inundated the whole party, and continued until they reached Goy-
der's Lagoon. Tolmer had been left at the Fish Waterhole in
charge of Andrews, who was ill, and a blind camel, while Lewis,
Beresford, Halleem, and a black boy went on to the Gerty, Eleanor,
and Everard, across comparatively uniform country, sandhills and
flats alternating, some barren, some with patches well grassed.
The Everard valley itself was a splendid park-like plain, and the
river, a "broad unbroken sheet of water fully 80 yards wide and
lined with enormous white gums—forming one of those charming
prospects seldom seen, and over which people love to linger.”
By February 18 they were across the Queensland border, and,
breaking away from the course of the river in the direction of
Louey’s Hill, found that they were only able with difficulty to get
back, as the intervening flats were heavily flooded. When the
delay was beginning to be serious and their suppers,, which had
been reduced to pigweed and duck, became just pigweed, they
succeeded in striking the Everard. Following its course due south
through very fair country, they found that it ran out in a swamp,
and made their way back to Goyder’s Lagoon. Returning with


slight variations from their outward track Lewis discovered "the
finest saltbush plain I ever saw, extending as far west as we
could see with the aid of powerful glasses, studded with sufficient
number of gum and acacia trees to afford a nice shade for stock,
and forming such a valuable piece of grazing country as is rarely
seen.” By March 3he was back at the depot. Here the party lost
a good duck catcher in Tommy, who absconded shamefully, with a
blanket and tomahawk. Lewis folowed the Warburton down to
Wadlarkaninna, filling in details, and then branched south to
Kopperamanna where the party was received at the Mission
Station suffering severely from semi-blindness. The survey was
completed at Gerty’s Hill.
From Kopperamanna the party, deprived of its camel drivers,
who had returned to Beltana, made their way to the Barcoo and
followed it to its mouth in Lake Eyre. Examining the shore-line
northwards they reached the Warburton once more and returned
to Kopperamanna. Lewis again visited the Lake, this time south
of the Barcoo, and thus completed the survey of the east shore,
connecting his work with that done by the Surveyor-General in
1860. ‘Tt (the lake) is useless in every respect and the very sight
of it creates thirst in man and beast.” North of 29° south latitude
it was destitute of water except below the surface, and its depth
in many places it was impossible to find.
Until June 6th Lewis was occupied with a detailed examination
of the course of the Barcoo as far as Innamincka. Tolmer, in con-
necting Lake Appodare with the Mount Hogarth of their previous
trip discovered that, as a stock route to the Warburton, it was
inferior to the route the party had already taken from Wadlar-
kaninna to Kopperamanna. Lewis finally reached Beltana on July
12, 1875. 10
Queensland squatting interests were as closely bound up in
the question of the availability of these eastern pastoral districts,
as were those of South Australia; and it was largely due to the
10 For correspondence, reports, etc., relating to Lewis’ expedition, see:
(a) C.L. and I. 1875/242, 777, 799.
(b) S.G.O. 1874/2680, 2756, 2757, 2796, 2844, 2845, 2850, 2949, 3076,
3125, 3213, 3220, 3224, 3239, 3240, 3250, 3293, 3302, 3402, 3407, 3453,
3471, 3511, 3572; 1875/800, 841, 998, 1103, 1216, 1217, 1735, 1737,
1860, 1935, 1980, 2144, 2209, 2774.
(c) S.G.O. out letters, 1874/Sept. 8, 12.
cd) P.P.’s 246/1874; 114/1875; 19/1876.


enterprise of that colony that the difficult country between the
border and the Overland Telegraph was finally bridged. By 1878,
Queensland survey work had extended as far as the border. In
January of that year Jopp was surveying the Herbert River, where
out stations were already established: and Nathaniel Buchanan,
in making his way from the Queensland border to Tennant’s
Creek, was fortunate enough to discover a waterway, Buchanan’s
Creek, which would very effectively facilitate the crossing of stock,
and which was to prove the mainstay of the survey work carried
out by South Australia between 1878 and 1880.
Frank Scarr, in making an attempt to complete the crossing
south of Buchanan’s track, ran into a belt of waterless country
which completely hampered his progress, and arrived at Tennant’s
Creek without discovering anything of value. 11
Ernest Favenc, as leader of the expedition organized by the
proprietor of the “Queenslander,” to open up a suitable railway
route from Blackall to Port Darwin, intended to subserve squatting
interests, was more successful. The richly grassed down country
which he traversed north of the Buchanan, and between Corella
Lagoon, Cresswell Creek and the Overland Telegraph at Powell’s
Creek, was sufficiently promising to kindle afresh the hopes of the
Queensland squatters who were looking to the Northern Territory
for a more convenient outlet for stock than could be supplied
by their own colony. 12
South Australian contribution to the knowledge of the border
country was that provided rather by detailed survey than by ex-
ploration. An expedition was despatched early in 1878 for detailed
survey in the direction of the Herbert. Its leader, H. Vere Barclay,
working in collaboration with Charles Winnecke, who was sur-
veying in the Alice Springs district, left that station on January 31.
He followed the Telegraph Line to the Burt, which he left on a
general north-easterly route. Searching for water on the north-
east side of the Strangways Range, Barclay discovered and followed
the Mueller until turned back for want of water. In spite of heavy
11 Account of Scarr’s route (M. of E. 214/80, Home and Territories
Office, Melbourne) is now missing. See correspondence relative to this
docket, May and June, 1915, Home and Territories Office.
12 See Favenc’s “History of Australian Exploration.” Also "Queens-
lander,” 1878/Jan. 26, June 22, 29, July 6, 13. 20, 27, Sept. 28, Oct. 19, 26, Nov.
2,9, 16, Dec. 7, 14.


rains to the west, he was unable to push north-eastward, and had
perforce to return to the Burt, with a loss of several horses. At
Alice Springs he obtained fresh stores and pack horses, and set
out along his previous course through the Strangways Ranges and
across the Waite. The party was hindered seriously by the con-
tinued illness of the leader and two of its members; and reliable
water was not obtainable until they discovered the Plenty, and
there only by digging and constructing a well. The creek valley
consisted of well timbered and grassed country with only
occasional patches of red sand and spinifex. The travelling, how-
ever, was very difficult for the express waggon, and when the
creek finally turned in a southerly direction, Barclay left it in order
to continue his easterly course along its tributary, the Marshall.
That, too, turned south, and the country due east to the boundary
being apparently waterless, the party turned north, with the Jer-
vois Ranges to the west. On reaching a point slightly north of
latitude 22° Barclay found that it was impossible to proceed
further towards surveying the Herbert with his small stock of
provisions, by far the greatest extent of country consisting of red
sandhill and spinifex, interspersed only with patches of good
pasture land. 13
Winneckc in the meanwhile had completed his Alice Springs
survey, and at the beginning of August took charge of the
expedition. 14 Until November he was examining eastward along
the Plenty and Waite Creeks, and north-east of Burke Creek, but
could find little water. In February, 1879, he started east with a
plenitude of it from a more northerly point on the Telegraph
Line—Tennant’s Creek. From there he continued in known
country, crossing the characteristic Australian succession of blue
bush flats, grass plains, desert, and rotten plains, to the Buchanan.
Thence he followed the Rankine, James, and Herbert, south-east
across the border to Rocklands Station, on Mary Lake. His survey
work included the detailed tracing of the Herbert, and the dis-
covery of several waters in its vicinity. He had succeeded in
connecting his own route with that completed by Barclay to the
13 See Barclay Papers (Mitchell Library); P.P. 209/1878; C.L. and I.
1171/1877 (Instructions).
14 See P.P. 121/1882. Barclay was incapacitated permanently by a fall
from his horse. C.L. and I, 1877/1015, 1073; 1878/768, 1476; 5.G.0., 1879/
73, 138, 158, 380, 914, 985, 1465; 1880/1594.


south in 1878, when he was forced by the ravages of scurvy to
return to Tennant’s Creek along his old track, rather than risk a
shorter but unknown route to the Telegraph at Alice Springs.
By 1880 Australian exploration, and the romance of it, was
nearly at an end. The luxury and. the thrill of lavish speculative
theory were gone for ever from the land. It had no great sea,
and no interior waterways of value; it did possess a desert. Other-
wise—the sameness of an everlasting alternation. Australia had
no longer need for the services of the man who, among his many
qualifications, must “be able to make a pie, shoe himself or his
horse, jerk a doggerel verse or two, not for himself, but simply for
the benefit or annoyance of others, and not necessarily for pub-
lication, nor as a guarantee of good faith; ... to take and make an
observation now and again, mend a watch, kill or cure a horse, . . .
make a packsaddle, and understand something of astronomy, sur-
veying, geography, geology, and mineralogy.”
Australia had lost its mystery, but never its caprice. Trigono-
metrical stations might take the place of the explorer’s solitary
cairn of stones; the survey camp, his marked tree. Cattle might
pasture on the downs and grass land he had so hardly rescued
from a scrubby wilderness; telegraph and railroad track might span
his creek bed or rotten alluvial plain, but Australia’s whimsical
changefulness remained. The history of its exploration is a record
of misinterpretations, due to seasonal differences of temperature and
rainful; and to each newcomer the interior will show a different
face, scorching the lives of some in angry sacrifice to its im-
placability, beckoning others smilingly through its most favoured
glens and pastures to an eternal Wingilpin.


BIBLIOGRAPHY
MS. SOURCES
Government House, Adelaide.
Despatches from the Governor of South Australia to the Secretary
of State for the Colonies, 1856-80.
Despatches from the Secretary of State for the Colonies to the
Governor of South Australia, 1856-80.
Archives Department of the Public Library, Adelaide.
Chief Secretary’s Office, Adelaide.
(a) In-coming correspondence, 1856-80.
(b) Out-going correspondence, 1856-80.
[1856-70 only in the Archives Department.]
Surveyor-General’s Office, Adelaide.
(a) In-coming correspondence, 1856-80.
(b) Out-going correspondence, 1856-80.
[1856-70 only in the Archives Department.]
Crown Lands and Immigration Office, Adelaide.
(a) In-coming correspondence, 1856-80.
(b) Out-going correspondence, 1856-80.
[1856-71 only in the Archives Department.]
Minutes of the Executive Council of South Australia, 1856-73.
Journals of J. McD. Stuart’s Expedition, 186D62.
Journal of F, G. Waterhouse, 1861-62.
Papers of Stephen King.
Miscellaneous Stuart Papers.
Correspondence of the Adelaide Philosophical Society relative to a
proposed expedition from Fowler's Bay to the interior, 1855.
Diary of Dr. Robert Peel, 1869-70.
Diary of Ebenezer Ward, 1864-65.
Diary of F. Litchfield, 1865.
Diary of R. H. Edmunds, 1864-66.


Finniss Papers.
Journal of W. D. Hodgkinson. (Burke Relief Expedition.)
Northern Territory Survey Expedition, 1868-69 —Letter books of
G. W. Goyder.
Todd Papers—Correspondence, letter books, note books, diaries,
etc.
Diary of J. Ross —Overland Telegraph Survey Expedition, 1870.
Overland Telegraph Survey Expedition—Letters of instruction to
J. Ross and G. R. McMinn.
Reminiscences of W. H. Tietkens, 1859-87.
Diary of P. E. Warburton, 1872-73.
Parliament House, Adelaide.
Miscellaneous messages from the Governor to the House of As-
sembly.
Police Commissioner’s Office, Adelaide.
Miscellaneous letters received, 1857, 1858.
Mitchell Library, Sydney.
Diaries of A. W. Howitt’s Burke Relief Expedition.
Journal of J. McD. Stuart’s Expedition, 1860-61.
Journal of Leichhardt’s Expedition from Moreton Bay to Port Es-
sington, 1844-45; with other papers relative to the same
expedition.
Journal of William Phillips (Leichhardt’s Expedition).
Revised Journal of Leichhardt’s Expedition to Port Essington.
Draft of preliminary proposals for a North Australian Co., by J. S.
Wilson.
On the capabilities of North Australia, by J. S. Wilson,
Gregory’s North Australian Expedition—Journal kept at the main
camp by J. S. Wilson and J. R. Elsey, 1856.
Gregory's • North Australian Expedition—Journals kept by J. S.
Wilson and Thomas Baines, 1856.
Barclay papers on exploration and settlement.
Journal of the Victorian Contingent Exploration Party, by E. J.
Welch.
Despatches from the Governor of New South Wales to the Secre-
tary of State for the Colonies, 1824, 1827.


Public Library, Melbourne.
Papers relating to the Burke and Wills Expedition.
Federal Parliamentary Library.
Field book kept by W. J. Wills.
Home and Territories Office, Melbourne.
Northern Territory Correspondence, 1868-80.
PRINTED SOURCES
South Australian Parliamentary Papers, 1856-80.
New South Wales Parliamentary Papers.
Royal Geographical Society. Journals, 1856-80.
Royal Geographical Society. Proceedings, 1856-80.
Royal Geographical Society of Australasia (S.A. Branch). Pro-
ceedings.
Adelaide Philosophical Society. Transactions.
Philosophical Institute of Victoria. Transactions.
Royal Society of New South Wales. Transactions.
Australasian Association for the Advancement of Science. Reports.
Royal Australian Historical Society. Journal and Proceedings.
Davis, J. Tracks of McKinlay and Party.
Howitt, A. W. History of Discovery in Australia.
Woods, Rev. j. E. T. History of the Discovery and Exploration
of Australia.
Eden, C. H. Australia’s Heroes.
Favenc, E. History of Australian Exploration from 1788 to 1888.
Calvert, A. F. Exploration of Australia from 1844 to 1896.
Favenc, E. Explorers of Australia.
Howitt, A. W. Personal Reminiscences of Central Australia and
the Burke and Wills Expedition.
Gregory, A. C, and Gregory, F. T. Journals of Australian Ex-
plorations.
Gregory, A. C. Papers relating to an expedition . . . for . . .
exploring the northern portion of Australia, 3855-57.
Jackson, A. Robert O’Hara Burke and the Australian Exploring
Expedition of 1860.
Wills, W. J. Successful Exploration through the Interior of Aus-
tralia.
172
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


Stuart, J. McD. Explorations in Australia . . . 1858-62.
McKinlay, J. McKinlay’s Journal of Exploration in the Interior
of Australia, 1861-63.
Forrest, J. F., Baron. Explorations in Australia, 1869-74.
Giles, E. Australia Twice Traversed, 1872-76.
Warburton, P. E. Journey Across the Western Interior of Aus-
tralia, 1872-74.
Forrest, A. Journal of Expedition from the De Grey to Port
Darwin.
Leichhardt, L.’ Journal of an Overland Expedition in Australia
from Moreton Bay to Port Essington.
Burke and Wills Expedition. Royal Society of Victoria. Progress
reports and final report of the Exploration Committee.
Burke and Wills Expedition. Burke and Wills Commission. Re-
port upon the circumstances connected with the sufferings and
death of Robert O’Hara Burke and William John Wills.
Locke, J. Remarkable Discoveries in Central Australia. Paper
read before the Royal Dublin Society, Mar. 18, 1861.
Sergison, A. W. The Northern Territory and Its Pastoral Capa-
bilities, 1878.
Mann, J. F. Eight Months with Dr. Leichhardt, 1888.
Gill, T. Bibliography of South Australia.
Gill, T. Bibliography of the Northern Territory.
The S.A. Register.
The Advertiser.
The Queenslander.
MAPS CONSULTED
B. H. Babbage.
Sketch of the country north of the Gawler Ranges, showing
explorations of Babbage and Warburton. (P.P. 25/1858.)
1 Map of the country north of Mt. Serle explored by B. H.
Babbage, Oct., Nov., 1856. (Orig. S.G.O. R/222. Litho.
P.P. 151/1858.)
1 Plan of the country explored by Mr. Babbage and party be-
tween Sept. 27 and Nov. 13, 1858. (Orig. S.G.O. R/78.)
J Plan of survey of the western shore of Lake Torrens, 1858.
(Orig. 5.G.0.)
1 Indicates that MS. copies are to be found in the Archives, Adelaide.


1 Plan of survey of the eastern shore of Lake Gairdner, 1858.
(Grig, S.G.O. R/221.)
(See also J. McD. Stuart.)
P. E. Warburton.
Rough sketch of country recently explored by Major Warbur-
ton, 1858. (P.P. 151/1858.)
Sketch of the country north of the Gawler Ranges showing
explorations of Babbage and Warburton, (P.P. 25/1858.)
Rough sketch showing the track taken by Corpl. Burt to the
west and north of Mt. Nor’-West, 1868. (P.P. 151/1858.)
Rough sketch of the route followed by Major Warburton in
his exploration of the country lying between long. 134°
and 141° E., lat. 26° 50' and 28° 30' S., 1866. (P.P.
177/1866-7.)
*Map showing route of exploring party under command of Col.
P. Egerton Warburton from the centre of the Continent to
Roeburne, W.A. (Copied from Col. Warburton’s plan in
the S.G.O. by Arthur de la Poer Beresford, July, 1874.)
(Home and Territories Office, Melbourne.)
(See also J. McD. Stuart.)
G. W. Goyder.
Sketch of ‘ the country north of Mt. Remarkable, showing
routes of Goyder and Freeling, 1857. (P.P. 153/1857-8.)
Sketch accompanying report relative to triangulation of dis-
trict north of Mt. Serle, examined by G. W. Goyder, June,
1857. (Orig. S.G.O. R/103.) (P.P. 72/1857-8.)
1 Country in the vicinity of Port Darwin examined during the
month of February, 1869. (Orig. in Home and Territories
Office, Melbourne.)
1 Plan of surveys in the Northern Territory, May, 1869. (Orig.
in Home and Territories Office, Melbourne.)
Plan of main camp, Port Darwin, 1869. (Orig. in Home and
Territories Office, Melbourne.)
A. C. Gregory.
1 Route of the Leichhardt Search Expedition. (Orig. in Lands
Dept., Sydney.)
1 N.W. Australia showing the route of the North Australian Ex-
pedition, 1855-6. (Orig. in Lands Dept, Sydney.)
1 Indicates that MS. copies are to be found in the Archives, Adelaide.


J. McDouall Stuart.
Plan of discovery . . . showing his route across and fixing the
Centre of the Continent of Australia. (P.P. 65/1861,
169/1861.)
Plan of exploration north-west of Port Augusta, 1858. (Orig.
among records of House of Assembly, Adelaide.)
Plan of discovery . . . showing his route across, and fixing the
Centre of the Continent of Australia —northern sheet.
(Orig. in Archives, Adelaide.)
1 Sketch showing relative positions of Stuart’s marked tree and
buried papers in flask. With tracing showing the position
of Stuart’s marked tree, N.T. (Compiled from Stuart’s
map and journal in the S.G.O. D.R. 494/13.)
Map of Stuart's discoveries in the Continent of Australia, from
1868 to 1862, with MS. notes by Stephen King. (Litho.
in Archives, Adelaide.)
Map showing the discoveries of J. McD. Stuart, B. H. Babbage,
and P. E. Warburton, 1857-8. (Compiled in the S.G.O.
R/221.)
S. Parry.
Sketch of the country north of Termination Hill discovered by
Mr. Parry. (P.P. 25/1858.)
Stephen Hack.
Map of a portion of S.A. north-west of Adelaide explored by a
party under Stephen Hack, 1857. (Orig. S.G.O. R/221.)
(Litho. P.P. 156/1857-8.)
F. Miller.
Map of the country north-east of Fowler’s Bay, Oct., 1857.
P.P. 192/1857-8.)
James Geharty.
1 Sketch of a portion of S.A. north-west of Port. Blanche, 1858.
(Orig. S.G.O. R/236.)
John McKinlay.
1 Plans of the Burke Relief Expedition. (Orig. S.G.O. R/16.)
Plan of McKinlay’s route across the Continent of Australia
from Stuckey's Crossing to the Gulf of Carpentaria. (P.P.
12/1862.)
l Indicates that MS. copies are to be found in the Archives, Adelaide.
175
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


Plan of McKinlay’s route from Adam Bay to the East Alli-
gator. (P.P. 82A/1866-7.)
Burke and Wills.
2 Map of Burke and Wills' route from Cooper’s Creek to Car-
pentaria. Copied from the map prepared by Wills. Litho-
graphed in the Office of Lands and Survey, Melbourne,
Nov. 25, 1861.
Northern Territory Survey Expedition, 1864-66.
Map of the N.T. showing recent surveys by Commander Hut-
chinson, R.N., and explorations by B. T, Finniss and
Capt. Cadell, July, 1868. (Litho. in Home and Territories
Office, Melbourne.)
Sketch map of the North Territory country in the vicinity of
Adam bay . . . showing . . . the tracks of the various ex-
plorers of the Northern Territory. (Litho. in Archives.)
Eye sketch ... of the Adelaide River ... by Commander
Hutchinson, R.N., June, 1864, to which has been added
tracks of exploring parties. (Orig. in Archives, Adelaide.)
Rough eye sketch of the head of the Adelaide River and ad-
joining country from the explorations of the Hon. B. T.
Finniss, Govt. Res., and Mr. F. H. Litchfield. (Orig. in
Archives, Adelaide.)
Plan of camp at Escape Cliffs. (Orig. in Home and Terri-
tories Office, Melbourne.)
Plan of camp at Escape Cliffs. (Orig. in Archives, Adelaide.)
Plan of proposed sites of townships at Escape Cliffs and the
Narrows. (Home and Territories Office, Melbourne.)
Tracing of the route taken by Frederick Litchfield. (Home
and Territories Office, Melbourne.)
Plan of Litchfield’s route in the vicinity of Adam Bay. (Home
and Territories Office, Melbourne.)
Captain Cadell
Map of the country west of the Liverpool River. (Orig. in
Home and Territories Office, Melbourne.)
Map of exploration east of the Liverpool River. (Orig. in
Home and Territories Office, Melbourne.)
1 Indicates that MS. copies are to be found in the Archives, Adelaide.
2 Lithograph in the Archives, Adelaide.


Map of the Northern Territory showing recent surveys. (P.P.
24/1868-9.)
G. R. McMinn.
1 Plan of expedition to the River Katherine, 1877. (Orig, N.T.
R/85, Home and Territories Office, Melbourne.)
G. G. McLachlan.
1 Tracing of Mr. McLachlan's tracks from Port Darwin to lat.
14° 10' S., long. 133® 30' E.. 1870. By R. E. Gardiner.
(Orig. in N.T. correspondence 142/1871, Home and Terri-
tories Office, Melbourne.)
John Ross.
1 Rough sketch of route travelled by Mr. Ross under direction
of Charles Todd. (Litho. in Home and Territories Office,
Melbourne.)
Plan of explorations by Mr. J. Ross, 1874. (P.P. 67/1875.)
Overland Telegraph.
Plan of Overland Telegraph from Port Darwin to Port
Augusta. Compiled and drawn in the Office of the Post-
master-General and Superintendent of Telegraphs by
Alexander Ringwood, 1873. (Litho. in Home and Terri-
tories Office, Melbourne.)
Sketch showing dray track to the Roper landing, by R. R.
Knuckey,TB72. (Orig. in Archives, Adelaide.)
Plan of Northern Territory annexed to South Australia . . .
showing routes of explorations, with MS. notes on the
Overland Telegraph line. (Litho. in Archives, Adelaide.)
Ernest Giles.
Map showing the routes travelled and discoveries made by the
exploring expedition equipped by the Hon. Thomas Elder
and under the command of Ernest Giles between the years
1872-76. Compiled by order of the Surveyor-General
from Mr. Giles’ original plans. (S.G.O. R/242.)
Map of Giles’ explorations from Port Augusta to Perth. Copied
from Giles’ plans in the Surveyor-General’s Office, Ade-
laide. (S.G.O. R/252.)
Map of the third expedition under the command of Ernest
Giles, 1875. (Litho. in the Surveyor-General’s Office, Ade-
laide.)
1 Indicates that MS. copies are to be found in the Archives, Adelaide.


Map of the country west of the Telegraph Line in the interior
of Australia explored by Mr. E. Giles. 1874. (P.P.
215/1874.)
W. C. Gosse.
Map of route travelled and discoveries made by the South
Australian Government Central and Western Exploring
Expedition .. . 1873. (Litho. P.P. 48/1874; a portion of
the original in S.G.O. R/241. See also S.G.O. R/242.)
J. W. Lewis.
Sketch showing route traversed by exploration party com-
manded by J. W. Lewis, Esq., 1874-5. (Orig. in S.G.O.
R/244. See also P.P. 57 and 114/1875.)
Charles Winneche.
x Plan of explorations from Tennant's Creek to the Queensland
boundary, 1879. (Orig. in Home and Territories Office,
Melbourne.)
1 Sketch map showing the natural features of the country north-
east of Alice Springs, 1879. (Orig. in Home and Terri-
tories Office, Melbourne.)
Copy of rough plan showing explorations by Mr. Winnecke.
Compiled 1882. (P.P. 121/1882.)
Ernest Favenc.
Sketch map showing explorations made by Ernest Favenc
during 1878-9, 1882, and 1883. (Litho. in Home and Ter-
ritories Office, Melbourne.)
Frank Scarr.
2 Map showing explorations west of the Herbert River and
Queensland boundary, 1878. (Tracing in Home and Ter-
ritories Office, Melbourne.)
Henry Vere Barclay.
Plan showing explorations between Alice Springs and the
eastern boundary of the Province, 1878. (P.P. 209/1878.)
Western Boundary.
Map of Australia showing the present and proposed boundaries
of the respective Colonies. (Enclosure No. 2 in Despatch
No. 79 of Sept. 30, 1860, Sir G. E. Bowen to S. of S. In
Miscellaneous C.S.O. correspondence, Archives, Adelaide.)
l Indicates that MS. copies are to be found in the Archives, Adelaide.


—. Hemmings,
Map of explorations along the Great Australian Bight. (Grig.
S.G.O. R/201.)
Capt. Freeling.
(See G. W. Goyder.)
R. R. Knuckey,
(See Overland Telegraph.)
F. Litchfield.
(See Northern Territory Survey Expedition.)


INDEX
Aborigines, 107, 108, 139, 140, 153,
154, 164, 166.
Aborigines, Camping Places, 134,
135, 143.
Aborigines, Hostility of, 48, 52, 55,
58, 61, 67, 94, 96, 99, 105, 110,
136, 140, 146, 147, 148.
Adam Bay, 90, 91, 93, 106, 107.
Adelaide Philosophical Society, 4,
32 (note 4).
Adelaide River, 91, 92, 95, 96, 97,
105.
Alberga Creek, 144.
Albert, River, 76, 87, 89 (and note
23), 90.
Alexandra Land, 92 (note 33).
Alexandrina, River, 103.
Alfred and Marie Range, 149 (note
23), 150.
Alice Falls, 147.
Alice Springs, 159.
Alligator River— See East Alliga-
tor, River; South Alligator,
River; West Alligator, River.
Amadeus, Lake, 135 (and note 12),
143, 145.
Andamoka, 19, 161.
Andrews, J., 145 (note 22).
Anglo-Australia and China Tele-
graph Co., 114.
Anson Bay, 97, 104, 106.
Anthony’s Range, 145.
Arnheim’s Land, 75, 77, 107.
Auld, W. P., 57 (note 44), 63 (note
55), 92 (note 36), 93, 95, Map 7.
Ayers’ Range, 145.
Ayers’ Rock, 143, 146.
Babbage's Expedition, 1856, 4-5.
Babbage’s Expedition, 1858, 11-15,
17, 18, 20-27, 112, 113, Map No.
1.
Baines, T., 78 (note 7), 80, 82, 83,
84.
Baines’ Creek, 80.
Barclay, H. V., 168 (note 14).
Barclay’s Expedition, 1878, 167-168.
Barcoo, 16 (and note 57).
Beatrice, 91, 95, 96, 97, 101, 102, 103,
104.
Beresford, A. G. D., 163 (and note
8), 164, 165.
Berry, E. S., 142.
Billiatt, J., 57 (note 44), 60 (note
48), 62, 63 (note 55).
Birdum Creek, 125, 126.
Bishop’s Glen, 139.
Blanchewater, 5,6, 8.
Blunder Bay, 107.
Bonnin, J., 153 (note 28).
Boundary, Western, Chap. 2, ami
p. 4.
Boundary Dam, 155.
British Australian Telegraph Co.,
116.
Buchanan, N., 167.
Buchanan’s Creek, 167.
Burke and Wills’ Expedition, 44, 47
(note 17), 63, 68, 71, 72, 159.
Burke Relief Expedition, 1861-62,
64-72, 88, 89 (and note 23), 129,
153, 159, Map 5.
Burr, T., 48.
Burstall, J. 8., 88 (note 16).
Burton, R. C, 120, 125, 126.
Burtt, Corpl., 23.
Bynoe Harbour, 93.
Cadell’s Expedition, 1867, 106, 107,
108, 115.
Camels, 48, 66, 69, 71, 72, 132, 137,
138, 139, 140, 143, 151, 153, 154,
155, 159, 160, 163.
Campbell, M., 10 (and note 29), 12
(note 42), 14 (note 51).
Carmichael, S., 133, 136.
Cavenagh Range, 146.
Central and Western Exploring
Expedition, 1873, 142-144, 150.
Central Australia, Chap. 3.
Central Mount Stuart, 51, 124, 132.
Central Mount Sturt, 51, 124, 132.
Centre of the Continent, 51.
Chamber of Commerce, 129.
Chambers, J., 45, 46, 47 (and note
12), 54, 57 (and note 44).
Chambers’ Bay, 60 (and note 50).
Chambers’ Creek, 20 (note 78), 45.
Chambers' River, 60.
Champ de Mars, 146.
Champion, T., 88 (note 16).
Charlotte Waters, 159.
Chimmo, Lieut., 83, 86.
Christmas Waters, 164.
Circus, 148.
Clay Pans, 72 (note 95).
Colonial Land and Emigration
Commissioners, 89.
Cooper’s Creek, 16 (and note 57).


Coulthard, —., 12 (and note 43), 13
(and note 46).
Cudye-Cudyena, Lake, 66.
Daly, River, 97, 103, 111.
Daly Range, 93.
Darwent and Dalwood, 119, 125.
Davenport, Sir S., 38, 39 (note 26).
Davis, J., 65 (note 66), 92 (note
36), 105.
Delisser, A., 129, 130.
Delisser, E. A., 48, 129, 130, 131.
Denison Plains, 80 (note 9).
Desert, Western, 76, 77, 78, 80, 81,
82, Chap. 6.
Douglas, 8.,. 88 (note 16), ill, 117,
119.
Dutton, F. (Commissioner of
Crown Lands), 17, 18, 25, 26.
Dutton, W., 35, 37, 38.
Eagle , 106, 107.
Earl, G. W., 92 (and note 32), 98
(and note 49).
East Alligator, River, 103, 105.
East India Company, 113.
Edith, Glen (Giles’), 134, 135, 143.
Edith, Glen (Warburton’s), 138.
Edmunds, R. H., 94, 101, 102, 103,
104 (note 53).
Ehrenberg Ranges, 134, 135.
Elder, Hon. T., 132, 136, 137, 152
(note 26), 153, 159, 162 (and
notes 4 and 7).
Elizabeth Springs, 45, 46.
Ellen Lewis, 98.
Elsey, J. R., 78 (note 7), 83.
Elscy Creek, 125, 126.
Emerald Spring, 21 (and note 86),
49 (note 28).
Emery, Point, 105.
Escape Cliffs, 93, 94. 96, 98, 99, 104,
106.
Eucla, 130, 152.
Everard, River, 165.
Eyre, Lake, 21 (note 84), 29 (and
note 109), 30, 161-166.
Favenc, E., 167.
Fergusson, Sir J., 115.
Finke, Mount, 154.
Finke, W., 45.
Finke River, 51, 121, 122, 123, 133,
134, 138.
Finniss. B T. —See Northern Ter-
ritory Survey Expedition, 1864-
1866.
Finniss, River, 97, 119.
Flood, J., 78 (note 7).
Forrest, A., 11l (note 69), 150.
Forrest, J., 160.
Forrest’s Expedition, 1870, 130, 131.
Forrest's Expedition, 1874, 150-152.
Fort McKellar, 148.
Fort Mueller, 146, 147.
Fort Point, 109.
Fowler’s Bay, 152.
Freeling, A. H., 9.
Freeling, Creek, 6.
Freeling’s Expedition, 1857, 7-9.
Frew, J., 57 (note 44), 63 (note 55).
Gairdner, Lake, 11, 14, 17, 33 (and
note 7), 34, 35, 37-39 (and note
26).
Gawler, Colonel G., 2 (note).
Gawler Ranges, 32, 33, 38, 39, 153
(note 28).
Geharty’s Expedition, 1858, 37, 38.
George Gill’s Range, 136.
Gibson, A., 145 (note 22), 148, 149.
Gibson’s Desert, 148, 149, 157, 158.
Giles, Edward, 46 (note 9).
Giles, Ernest, 72 (note 95), 133, 145
(note 21), 158 (and note 30),
159, 160.
Giles’ Expedition, 1872, 133-137,
Map 10.
Giles’ Expedition, 1873-1874, 145-
150, Map 10.
Giles’ Expedition, 1875-1876, 153-
158, Map 10.
Gill, G. D., 133.
Gisborne, L., 112.
Glandfield Lagoon, 55 (note 38), 56,
57.
Glen Edith (Giles’), 134, 135, 143.
Glen Edith (Warburton’s), 138.
Glen Hughes, 138.
Glen Thirsty, 135.
Goldsmith, Dr. F. E., 92 (note 36),
94.
Gosse, H., 142.
Gosse’s Expedition, 1873, 142-144,
150.
Gourlay, Capt., 82.
Goyder, G. W., 9, 129, 130. See
also Northern Territory Sur-
vey Expedition, 1868-69.
Goyder's Expedition, 1857, 5-7.
Goyder’s Expedition, 1859, 29, 30.
Great Salt Lake, 14, 17.
Great Victoria Desert, 156.
Green, M., 120 (note 12).
Gregory, A. C, I', 2, 47 (note 17),
64, 79, 106 (and note 64). See
also Gregory’s Expedition,
1858, etc.
Gregory, C. F., 15 (note 55), 17, 18.
Gregory, F. J., 54.
Gregory, H. C, 78 (note 7), 80, 83.
Gregory, Lake, 21 (and note 84),
22.
Gregory’s Expedition, 1858, 15-17,
27, Map No. 2.
Gregory’s North Australian Expe-
dition, 1855-56, 44, 75, 77-86, 92.
128. Map 6.
Gulnare, 119, 120.
181
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


Hack’s Expedition, 1857, 32-35, 36,
44. Map 3.
Hang, Ernest, 76.
Hanson, Creek, 124.
Harris, W. G., 12 (and note 41), 14,
17, 18, 25, 32 (and note 6), 34
(and note 8), 37.
Harvey, —., 122 (and note 14), 123.
Head, 8., 49.
Helpman, Lieut., 92.
Hemmings, —., 130.
Henry Ellis, 92.
Herrgott, D. D., 12 (and note 41),
21 (note 80), 45 (and note 7),
48.
Hodgkinson, Lake, 68.
Hodgkinson, W. D., 65 (note 66),
66, 67, 68, 69.
Holdfast Reach, 107.
Hope Downs, 32.
Howard, Commander, 101, 103, 104.
Howitt, Dr., 30 (note 111), 67 (note
77).
Howitt’s Expedition, 1861-62, 64,
65, 68.
Hugh, River, 122.
Hughes, Glen, 138.
Hughes, W. W., 137.
Humbert, Capt., 94.
Hutchison, J., 91, 93, 94.
Johnston, J., 88 (note 16).
Jopp, —., 167.
Julia, 103.
Kadhi-baerri, Lake, 66, 67.
Kamran’s Well, 143.
Katherine River, 111.
Kekwick, W. D., 48 (note 25), 49,
53, 57 (note 44), 58, 59, 60, 62.
King, S., 57 (note 44), 61 (note 52),
62, 63 (note 55), 92 (note 36).
Kinloch, A., 47.
Kirby, J., 65 (note 66), 70.
Knuckey, R. R., 126.
Landor, H., 77 (note 3).
Leichhardt Search Expedition,
1858, 15-17, 27.
Leichhardt’s Expedition, 1844-45,
74-76, 105 (note 58).
Lewis, J. W., 137, 138, 139, 141.
Lewis’ Expedition, 1874-75, 163-166,
Map 12.
Litchfield, F., 48, 92 (note 36), 96,
97, 98, 110. Map 7.
Liverpool River, 87, 107.
Mac Donnell, Sir R. G., 11 (note
37), 18 (note 67), 20, 23, 24, 26
(and note 99), 29, 35, 36, 40, 41,
44, 46, 47, 53, 57, 63 (note 55),
65 (note 69), IJ2.
McGorrery, J., 57 (note 44), 63
(note 55).
McKellar, Fort, 148.
McKinlay, John, 63, 89, 104 {note
53), 120 (note 12).
McKinlay’s Expedition, 1861-62,
64-72, 88, 89 (and note 23), 129,
153, 159. Map 5.
McKinlay’s Expedition, 1865-66,
98, 101-104, 106, 115.
McLachlan, G. G., 125.
McLachlan’s Expedition, 1870,
117-119. Map 8.
McMinn, G. R., 111, 137 (note 15),
159.
McMinn, W., 120, 123, 125.
Macumba, River, 123, 163, 164.
Mann Ranges, 143, 146.
Manton, J. T., 92 (note 36), 98, 104,
105 (and note 55), 106, 115.
Mary Springs, 138.
Melville Island, 74.
Middleton, T., 65 (note 66), 66, 70
(note 84).
Miller, F.. 32 (note 6), 34, 35, 37, 38
(and note 22).
Millner, Dr., 111.
Mitchell, A. J., 109.
Monarch, 79, 92.
Moon to, 109.
Mound Springs, 21 (note 86), 45.
Mueller, Baron von, 42 (and note
2), 44, 78 (note 7), 79, 80, 83,
133, 135 (note 12), 136 (note
14), 145, 159.
Mueller, Fort, 146, 147.
Murchison, Sir R., 62.
Murray, A. J., 47.
Musgrave Ranges, 144, 145, 146.
Narrows, 95, 96.
Nash, H., 57 (note 44), 63 (note
55).
Natives —See Aborigines.
Neales, Creek, 46 (note 8), 49, 50.
Neumayer, Dr., 131, 132.
Newcastle, Duke of, 88, 89.
Newcastle Water, 55 (note 38), 56,
57.
Nicholson, Sir C., 88.
No Man’s Land —See Western
Boundary of South Australia.
Norman, Capt., 71 (note 87).
North Australian Company, 87.
Northern Territory, Chap. 4 anti
p. 115.
Northern Territory, Capital Site,
Chap. 4.
Northern Territory, Proposed An-
nexation, 40, 41, 74, 88-90.
Northern Territory Act, 1863, 90,
108.
Northern Territory Survey Expe-
dition, 1864-66, 90-100, 104-106,
115. Map 7. .
182
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN


Northern Territory Survey Expe-
dition, 1868-69, 108-111, 115, 116.
Nullarbor Plains, 130.
O’Halloran Creek, 162.
Olga, Mount, 135 (and note 12),
136, 143, 145, 146, 148.
Ooldabinna, 155.
Ooldea, 153, 155.
Osborn, Sherard, 116.
Overland Telegraph, 41, 43, 44, 47,
56, 89, 90, 132. And Chap. 5.
Map 9.
Overland Telegraph Controversy
between S.A. and Queensland,
116 (and note 8), 120.
Palmerston, 94, 95. See also Es-
cape Cliffs.
Parry, S., 8 (note 25).
Parry's Expedition, 1858, 28-29, 45.
Pasco, Lieut., 92 (note 31).
Patterson, R. C, 125.
Peake, 159.
Pearson, W., 92 (note 36), 93.
Pernatty, Lake, 10.
Phillips, W., 75 (note 1).
Plains of Sturtia, 55, 56 (and note
39), 126.
Police, Exploration by, 36-38.
Port Daly, 94.
Port Darwin, 91, 94, 95, 97, 104,
105, 108, 109.
Port Darwin Telegraph Expedi-
tion, 1870-71, 120-125. Map 9.
Port Essington, 74, 76, 87, 91.
Port Keats, 97.
Port Patterson, 91, 94.
Queen Victoria’s Spring, 156.
Raffles Bay, 74, 91.
Rawlinson Range, 147, 148.
Red Sea and India Telegraph Co.,
112, 113.
Robinson, A., 133, 135, 136.
Roe Downs, 80 (and note 9), 86.
Roper River, 60, 75, 83, 85, ’9l, 107,
115, 119, 120.
Ross, J., 152 (note 26), 162 (note
7).
Ross’s Expedition, 1870-71, 120-125,
Map 9.
Ross’s Expedition, 1874, 152.
Royal Geographical Society, 77
(and note 4), 86, 87 (and note
15), 131.
Royal Society of Victoria, 63.
St. Francis’ Ponds, 45.
St. Mary’s Pool, 6.
St. Stephen’s Ponds, 45.
Scarr, F., 167.
Sergison’s Expedition, 1877, ill
(note 69).
Serle, Mount, 5 (note 18).
Shamrock Pool, 45.
South Alligator, River, 105.
South Australian Pastoral Asso-
ciation, 89 (note 23).
Stow, J., 94, 95 (note 42).
Strzelecki, Creek, 16.
Stuart, J. McD., 18, 19 (note 68),
32 (note 6), 41, 49, 89, 92 (and
note 33). See also Stuart’s
Expedition, 1838, 1859, etc.
Stuart Range, 19 (and note 73).
Stuart’s Creek, 20 (note 78), 21
(and note 83).
Stuart’s Expedition, 1858, 18-20.
Map No. 1.
Stuart’s Expedition, 1859, 44-46,
113.
Stuart’s Expedition, 1859-60, 46-49,
113.
Stuart’s Expedition, 1860, 49-53,
113, 124. Map 4.
Stuart’s Expedition, 1860-61, 54-56,
114. Map 4.
Stuart’s Expedition, 1861-62, 57-63,
88, 90, 105, 114, 118, 119. Map
4.
Stuart's Tree, 60 (and note 49).
Sturt, Capt., 76, 77, 78, 81, 82, 128.
Sturt Plains, 55, 56 (and note 39),
126.
Sturt’s Creek, 81, 82, 85.
Swinden’s Country, 10.
Swinden’s Expedition, 1857, 10.
Tarn of Auber, 134.
Telegraph Construction and Main-
tenance Co., 116.
Tempe, Vale of, 135.
Thirsty, Glen, 135.
Thompson, J., 43, 44.
Thring, F. W„ 57 (note 44), 63
(note 55).
Tietkens, W. H., 145 (note 22),
154, 155, 157.
Todd, Sir C, 113, 115, 116 (and
note 8), 123, 125, 127, 132.
Tolmer, G. W., 163 (and note 8),
165.
Tolmer’s Expedition, 1859-60, 47,
48.
Tomkinson Ranges, 144, 146.
Tommy’s Well, 164.
Tom Tough, 79, 80, 82, 84 (and
note 13).
Torch, 83.
Torrens, Lake, Chap. 1.
Transcontinental * Exploration,
Chap. 3.
Treuer, River—See Macumba.
Tumbling Waters, Port Darwin,
109.
Udo r , Mount, 134.
Ularring, 156.
183
LAND EXPLORATION, 1856-80


Unapproachable, Mount, 135.
Uzielli, M., 77 (note 4).
Vale of Tempe, 135.
Victoria, 71 (note 87).
Victoria River, 76-81, 83, 85, 86, 87,
89, 91, 92, 94, 95, 97, 106, 107.
Warburton, P. E., 36, 37, 129, 137,
159. See also Warburton’s
Expedition, 1860, etc.
Warburton, R. E., 137.
Warburton, River, 164.
Warburton Range, 151.
Warburton’s Expedition, 1860, 40,
129.
Warburton’s Expedition, 1864, 161.
Warburton’s Expedition, 1866, 162.
Warburton's Expedition, 1872-74,
137-141, 150. Map il.
Warburton’s Northern Expedition,
1858, 20-24, 27, 28, 112, 113.
Map No. 1.
Warburton’s Western Expedition,
1858, 38-40.
Ward, A., 92 (note 36), 96.
Ward, E., 92 (note 36), 93, 94.
Waterhouse, F. G., 57, 61 (note
52), 63 (note 55).
Waterloo Wells, 138.
Weld Springs, 1514
West Alligator, River, 104, 105
(and note 56).
Western Boundary of South Aus-
tralia, Chap. 2, and p. 4.
Western Desert, 76, 77, 78, 80, 81,
82, Chap. 6.
Whirlwind Plains, 75, 80, 80, 97,
107.
Wildman, River, 105.
William Springs, 49.
Wilson, J. S., 78 (note 7), 79, 80
(note 8), 87.
Wilson, Mount, 81.
Wilson, W., 88 (note 17).
Windich Springs, 151.
Wingilpin, 19.
Winnecke, C., 167.
Winnecke’s Expedition, 1878-9,
168, 169. Map 13.
Wonnomulla, 21.
Woods, A. T., 123, 132.
Wynbring, 153, 154.
Vatala, 32, 36, 91.
Youldeh, 153, 155.
Young, Clement, 94.
Young, Sir H. E. F., 31.
Young, J., 154, 155, 157.
THE HASSELL PRESS
184
SOUTH AUSTRALIAN
