

SOUTH SEA ISLAND
IMMIGRATION
FOR
COTTON CULTURE.
A LETTER
TO
THE HON. THE COLONIAL SECRETARY
OF
QUEENSLAND:
By R. TOWNS, M.L.C., SYDNEY.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY READING AND WELLBANK,
BRIDGE STREET.




TO THE
HONORABLE R. G. W. HERBERT, ESQ.,
COLONIAL SECRETARY, QUEENSLAND.
Sir,
My attention has been called to the report of
certain proceedings in the Assembly, in reference to the intro-
duction of a number of Natives from the South Sea Islands, by
the schooner “Don Juan,” for special service at my cotton
plantation on the Logan.
The remarks in some of the Newspapers to which this
matter has given rise, I would, as I usually do, have treated
Avith the silent contempt they merit; but the proceedings in
this case, in which you have been called upon in your official
place in Parliament to ans Aver questions on a subject in Avhich I
am alone responsible, seem to me to be out of the ordinary
course, and compel me in justice to you, as Avell as to myself, to
state clearly the principle on which I have acted.
It may be in your recollection that at the time Avhen so
much anxiety prevailed for the growth of Cotton in Queensland
Avith the vieAV to the development of a neAV industrial resource
in the Colony, as Avell as to supply the Avant of raw material
under Avhich the Lancashire operatives were suffering so much,
I applied for, and took up a maximum grant of cotton land—upon
this speculation I have spent upAvards of six thousand pounds
Avithout, as yet, any return.
It is true that the season has been much against the
experiment, but the question of labor has had much more to do


"with this result, and has induced me to embark in the present
South Sea Island Immigration.
In the meanwhile I had engaged the services of a number
of Germans, imported under the regulations and at the expense
of the Colony. These men, led away by the bad advice of their
countrymen and others, who, on their arrival, persuaded them
that they were working for wages below the current rates,
became so discontented that they either bolted, or rendered
their services almost worse than useless, so that my Agent was
glad to give up all claim to the fellows, whose laziness
combined with their large ration consuming and useless family,
(for your laws do not seem to reach the wives and children,)
would have soon ruined the whole cnterprize.
Observing that others similarly engaged in the Cotton
experiment were, like myself, suffering from the effects of
European labor, I came to the conclusion that Cotton growing
upon a large scale either must be abandoned in Queensland,
or be carried out by cheaper labor.
It will be in your recollection that the Legislature took
the necessary steps to encourage Coolie labor from India; availing
of this, I despatched a ship to Madras and Calcutta, to carry it
out, but the scheme failed from the unwillingness of the Indian
Government to extend the facilities for drawing away the, labor
from the vast public works now being carried on in that Empire,
—such at least was allegedas the reason, though,possibly, jealousy
of our entering the lists as competitors with them in Cotton
growing was not without its influence.
Thus baffled in the proposed Indian Coolie Immigration,
I turned my attention to a class of people, to whom I am
no stranger —the South Sea Islanders.
I have for many years been engaged in trade amongst
these so called “ savages,” and have had many hundreds of them
in my employ, both on shore and on board ship, and found
them an industrious, tractable, and inoffensive race. I have


always placed confidence in them, and they have, I believe, the
greatest confidence in me and in my fulfilling the engagements
I make with them, spending as I do many thousands annually
amongst them in their own islands.
For the greater part of the work on a Cotton plantation, I
believe these Islanders will be found well suited; and instead of
being attacked and branded in the way I .have been, I think I
deserve the thanks of the community for the introduction
of that kind of labor which is suited to our wants, and which
may save us from the inhumanity of driving to the exposed
labor of field work, the less tropically hardy European women
and children, for I suppose the most thorough advocate for
European labor will admit, that in cotton clearing and picking,
they, as well as the men, must take part in the labor.
Apart from the outburst of angry feeling and the senseless
howl with which the “ Don Juan's ” arrival has been greeted, I
feel confident I have the good wishes of the employers of labor by
substituting this native labor, for the generous (!) pale faces
who have been brought out at the expense of the country, who
delight in scheming about rather than in honest working,
and who feel insulted if you offer them for a days work that which
they have been accustomed to receive at home for a week's labor.
It is these drones in the hive of industry, whom I call the
“ breeches pocket Patriots,'' who first drove me to the employ-
ment of native labor, and it is these men, or others pandering
to their feelings and passions, who after putting the Colony to
so much expense for their own passage, and having' done little
or nothing to repay it, now seek to raise an outcry against
those who cost the Colony nothing for their passage, and who,
I venture to predict, will leave a lasting benefit behind them.
The question of any species of Slavery or Kidnapping of
these natives, is at once confuted by the instructions to the
Captain of the vessel and the Interpreter, and my letter to the*
Missionaries, which I append hereto.


The men thoroughly understand the nature of their con-
tract, both as to their treatment and wages here, and as to my
returning them to their own country when their time (which
you will observe is only for one year) shall have expired.
It is my intention to persevere in the attempt to grow
Cotton with this kind of labor, on short agreements; and if the
men like the work and country, to try to persuade them to
bring their wives with them.
As to the danger expressed by some of the newspaper
scribblers, lest the Government be put to enormous expense in
the additional police requisite to keep these "barbarians” in
order, I venture to predict that there will be less crime amongst
them, if not interfered with by these agitators, than amongst an
equal number of European laborers from whatever country they
may have been drawn at the public expense.
I have the honor to be,.
Sir,
Your obedient Servant,
R. TOWNS.
Sydney , August 31s£, 1863.


APPENDIX.
Instructions to the Master and Interpreter.
Captain Ghuebeh, Sydney, May 29th, 1863,
“ Don Juan.”
Dead Sra,
Your vessel now ready and victualled with supplies sufficient
for the voyage and return with natives, you will at once proceed to sea, and
make the host of your way to the Isle of Leefoo, or such other island
as you may first make, for the purpose of procuring natives for the Cotton
Field, with which you will return to Moreton Bay with all possible despatch,
whore I will in all probability be to receive and direct you; the above is an
outline of your intended voyage.
I will now proceed more in detail to instruct you for your future
guidance.
The nature of your voyage is, as before stated, to proceed to the several
Islands of Leefoo, Ware, Sandwich, and any other Islands you may find it
necessary to proceed to, for the purpose of selecting the natives; and, with a
view to collect a useful class of men, lads and active boys, I have engaged Mr.
Kosslewin, who speaks the native language, and is well known amongst the
Islands ; he is shipped as second mate, and will do the needful in engaging
the men, whom I promise to return to their native land within 12 months
from the time they leave; you must endeavour to convince the friends of the
people as well as themselves (those you engage) of the honesty of our inten-
tions, and if there should be any legal authority, give them guarantee to the
same effect, that the people will be returned in accordance with their agree-
ments.
And as the natives may not be conversant with our language, I wish you
to be present when these arrangements are made through the Interpreter ; I
have sketched out a memorandum for Mr. Rosslewin, to explain to the natives
in your presence, the terms of their engagement, and the work they have to
do ; also the rations they will receive, at the same time assuring them of
every protection the British laws will afford them—in this you will please to
observe we wish you to act as our agent, and not allow any advantage to be
taken of the natives, even to our interest.
Amd when engaged, I look to your seeing that they are properly cared for,
that they have proper food and attention, and that they are made to keep the
place in which they live thoroughly clean.
I have put on Board two suits of shirts and trowsers for 100 natives,
you will please serve out one suit when they first embark, keeping one for


their landing, if you can procure 100 natives in all, you may do so, but half
the number •will do, if you find much difficulty in getting them on no account
attempt force , or take the people against their own free will and consent.
If you find any Missionaries at the Islands make their acquaintance, and
tell them from me, what your object is in engaging the natives to leave the
Island they belong to, —and engage for a short season to serve me in cultiva-
ting Cotton, the labor will be light in weeding and cleaning and picking
cotton, and I will engage to provide them comfortable huts; and regular
rations of rice, meat, pumpkins, potatoes, and yams if they will grow, and
return them to their homes within the 12 months.
And you may also explain to the Missionaries that it is my intention to
bring over their wives with them next year, if they like the place and answer
my purpose to do so.
I will make their*wages for the best men, equal to 10s. per month, with
others in proportion, these natives will have every protection equal to
Europeans in Queensland, which is a climate as warm as the land they leave.
You may tell the Missionaries if they can find a reader or interpreter, I will
gladly receive him and pay him for what he may be worth over and above his
food and lodging, which I suppose will be little, but he will learn civilisation.
I mean to exchange these people every six or twelve months, and bring
over their wives and families with them when they get accustomed to the
country and the work.
I have now shadowed forth my views and intentions and leave you to
carry them out, and in conclusion, I will again repeat, on no account allow the
natives to be ill used , they are a poor, timid, unoffending race, and require all
the kindness you can shew them, you may lead them to. any thing, and I
will not allow them to be driven.
If you find it difficult to procure the natives through Mr. Eosslowin, you
had better run over to Erromanga, to Mr. Henry’s station, and he may be
able to assist you, should such be necessary; but, it will be a disappointment
to me if you cannot procure from 50 to 100 natives for the purpose required.
In reporting your ship inward from the Islands to Moreton Bay, be
particular and state the number, names, and ages you have on board as
passengers for Mr. Towns’ Cotton plantation, let every thing be quite clear
in your proceedings. Mr. Palmer, my Agent in Brisbane, will have my
instructions respecting you if I am not in Queensland, to which you will
please to attend.
Your’s truly,
E. TOWS.
Mr. Eosslewin, Sydney, 29th May, 1863.
Sir,
Eeferring to our verbal agreement for your present employment on
the intended expedition of the “Don Juan,” for a number of natives, to be
employed on my Cotton-fields, in Queensland: —


I now give you my written instructions for your guidance, and as I
understand that you are no scholar, Captain Grueber will read them for you
and explain what is required of you.
First.—You will proceed to call at such Islands as you are known to the
natives, and then explain to them what your object is,—namely to engage for
me from 50 to 100 natives, (all males on the present voyage, until they are
better known in the district and Colony.)
I will prefer chiefly young lads from 14, 15, to 18, in preference to older
men, you must have some old hands amongst the lot, to induce the young
ones to enlist.
In engaging or persuading these people, you must tell them exactly
what they will have to do ; that is, their chief work will be in the Cotton-
fields, and that they will have good huts to live in, a kind master to protect
them, and that you will take them back within twelve months, perhaps in
six months, and that you will be on the Station to explain and interpret for
them, and that they will be paid at the rate of 10s. (ten shillings) per month,
(over and above their rations,) for the able men and others, according to
their worth and value.
I presume you will call at Leefoo or Ware first, and then to Sandwich.
I leave this for you and Captain Grueber to arrange, and while I am on this
I must here remind you, that while you are on board the ship, you are to
act and do the duty of second mate, for which service you have to sign
the Articles of the vessel, and in which capacity you will be paid at and after
the rate of £5 (Five Pounds) per month, which pay will be continued you on
the Station so long as you remain, or other agreements are made.
In conclusion, I must remind you of my earnest desire that the natives
are treated with the greatest kindness, on no account allow them to bo
ill used by the crew or any person on board; if such is offered to them, it is
your duty to report the same to the Captain. I will be satisfied with 50
good men and boys if you can get them, but will be better pleased with 100
if the vessel can bring so many comfortably, but on no account over crowd
them, or delay the vessel for the purpose.
You must endeavour all you can to keep the natives in good humour
and friendly, and on good terms with each other; on no account allow them
to quarrel or have any of their national disputes on board ;' keep all such
quarrelling from them; if you find such unfortunately to take place, at once
separate them and put up bulkheads between them; take care none of the
old beach Coombers (European sailors) smuggle themselves on board with
the natives.
I think I have now said all I have to mention, and hope you may have
a successful voyage.
I am, faithfully,
K. TOWNS.


To any Missionary into whose hands this may come.
Sydney, 29th May, 1863.
Rev. Sin,
Should this meet the eye of any gentleman in that sacred calling, I
beg to explain the nature of the voyage on which I am about to despatch the
bearer, Capt. Grueber with the schooner “Don Juan.”
If I now address an old resident among the Islands, my name will be
familiar and justify a belief in the sincerity of my mission to which I am
about to explain, and solicit your friendly aid; if, on the other hand the
reader has not heard of the writer, I must refer him to Capt. Grueber, or any
man connected with these Islands for the last 20 years.
Suffice to say, I have embarked considerable capital in Queensland, in
the cultivation of Cotton, and as so much depends on the rate of Labour in the
ultimate success of this important enterprise, I am endeavouring to try our
natives from the immediate adjacent Islands, whose habits, although not
strictly industrious, may be rendered most serviceable in the light work of
tho field labour, in weeding and picking Cotton, as the seasons may require.
Such being my views on the subject I have sent this my Pioneer Vessel to
enlist a supply, and will be much obliged if you will kindly assist us in this
our worldly mission, and, as I have told your worthy Brotherhood, Messrs.
Inglis and Geddcs, that I with my Cotton Emigration (returning them every 6
or 12 months) will do more towards civilizing the natives in one year than you
can possibly in ten—they will see what civilization is and aim to follow it—
and if you can supply me with a native Teacher or Reader, as they may bo
termed, it will very much hasten tho object, at all events if you cannot assist
mo in this particular, you may be able to point out to the poor unsuspecting
natives that they have nothing to fear, as I will bind myself to return them
within twelve months from the time they may leave, and more likely in six
months.
If my scheme prospers it is my intention to bx-ing over the wives and
families of these poor fellows —as a superior race to the ordinary Coolie from
India, about whom we hear so much—and for the light work of Cotton
picking they are well calculated.
I send an interpreter, a man who says he can speak the language, this
is very important to make the poor fellows understand.
Trusting to your kind assitance
I remain,
Very sincerely yours,
R. TOWNS.
Reading and Wellbank, Printers, Bridge-street, Sydney.


