

Pern f*nn
SOUTH AUSTRALIA
FIELD FOR EMIGRATION.
A SERIES OF QUESTIONS
iml gke^zbust.
RELATIVE TO THE ABOVE, REPLIED TO BY THE
COMMITTEE OF THE CHAMBER OF MANUFACTURES.
JpLMaxb*:
Printed at the Advertiser Office, King William Street.
1876.




SOUTH AUSTRALIA AS A FIELD POE
EMIGRATION.
Office of tlie Chamber of Manufactures,
Adelaide, 20th October, 1876
Ta the Public,
In September last a Swiss gentleman (M. Frank Grein) who had
been commissioned by his Government to attend the Centennial Exhibition
at Philadelphia, and who afterwards determined upon visiting the Australian
colonies with a view to report upon them as a field for the emigration of
Swiss people, attended meetings of the Royal Agricultural and Horticultural
Society, and the Chamber of Manufactures, in Adelaide, the capital of South
Australia, to confer with those bodies on the object of his visit. Subse-
quently he addressed to the Chamber of Manufactures a series of questions,
which are published herein, together with the replies thereto, which were
drawn up by the Committee of the Chamber. It is thought that the informa-
tion here given may be of use and interest to persons who may contemplate
emigrating to South Australia, and with this object it is published in this
form for general use.
I am,
Your obedient servant.
Jno. Fairfax Conigrave, Secretary.




SOUTH AUSTRALIA AS A FIELD FOR EMIGRATION.
1. What class of emigrants is most wanted ?
—Men who have some small amount of capital*
who understand farming, and are not afraid of
hard work. Their wives should be thoroughly
acquainted with the work of the dairy and
management of poultry. If the wife and
children had some knowledge of sericulture and
fruit-drying, it would be a great advantage to
them. Masons, bricklayers, carpenters, black-
smiths, wheelwrights, and navvies will find
good employment. Single female domestic
servants are in great demand, and they have a
house provided for them, to which they are
taken from the ship, and protected there until
they obtain respectable employment.
2. Would free passage be granted from
England?—At present free emigration from
London is proceeding vigorously, but the stream
of emigration is regulated by the circumstances
of the Colony. It will therefore be wise for
M. Grein to communicate with the Agent-
General, Mr. Dutton, on his return to Europe,
from whom he will be able to obtain every
information with regard to the regulations,
class of labor wanted at the time, &c.
3. If not engaged at once, what becomes of
a new comer ?—This question suggests a great
omission in our Immigration system, as no pro-
vision is made for the reception or shelter of
immigrants sufficiently long to protect them
from some privations, of however short dura-
tion. We would recommend that any emi-
grants from Switzerland should be provided
with means to support themselves for at least
30 days after their arrival, over and above the
capital they would wish to put into farming
operations ; or what would be more advisable
would be that they should appoint some one
in the colony to make arrangements for
them beforehand. It is very important that
Foreign emigrants should, if possible, obtain
on the voyage a knowledge of the English
language, as it will greatly assist them in ob-
taining employment in the colony.
4. What is the minimum rate of wages for
farm laborers? —About 4s. 6d. per day, or
more frequently 3s. per day, with cottage and
wood and water. Herewith is forwarded a
copy of Mr. Kemp Tenney’s latest labor
report; but it must be pointed out that the
rate of wages ruling is subject to fluctuations.
5. Is there work to be had the whole year
round ? —The busiest seasons in the colony are
ploughing and harvesting ; but in the intervals
farm laborers may have to find other employ-
ment, such as sheep-shearing, fencing, &c.
Railways and other public works to a large
extent have been sanctioned by Parliament,
and are likely to give employment to laborers
when employment in private hands may be
scarce.
6. What class of female servants is wanted,
or, rather, what could the wife of an emigrant
do? —The wife’s duties in attending to her
home and family is considered sufficient occu-
pation for her. A man with his wife, and
perhaps a son or a daughter, may be fortunate
enough to obtain employment under one
employer—the man, say as gardener or farm
servant; the wife as laundress, cook, or general
servant ; and the son or daughter assisting
about the place. In such a case it would be at
wages for the man and wife at 355. per week,
and the boy about 10s. to 15s. per week, with-
out board ; if boarded, about 20s. per week for
man and wife, and from Bs. to 12s. for the boy.
A girl as nurse would get about ss. to Bs. per
week.
7. What is the emigrant’s part in the assisted
passage?—The Immigration Regulations, which
are procurable from the South Australian
Government or from their Agent-General (F.
S. Dutton, Esq., C.M.G., of 8, Victoria-Cham-
bers, Westminster, S.W., London), give full
information upon the point.
8. Is there yet some arable land, within good
distance of a port, for sale?—Extensive tracts at
prices ranging from about 20s. to 140 s. per acre,
according to the competition at auction. Be-
sides the land in close proximity to a port, many
lines of railway in various parts of the province
will put farmers in easy communication with
the seaboard.
9. If a man wants to buy a piece of un-
surveyed land, can he have it put to auction,
or has he to wait until the Government choose
to do it ?—lt is usual for the Government to
keep large tracts of land on the market, open
for immediate purchase at auction, and if a
number of persons make a requisition to the
Surveyor-General to have a district of land
surveyed and opened for selection on payment
of the cost of survey, the request may be com-
plied with. It has not however been the usual
course, and would probably take at least six
months before the district would be in the
market. No one can request a small block to
be surveyed and sold.


10 How many men are required on a obtain these objects, an area of not less-
luare mile to work the land as usual ?—lt is square mile—64o acres—for each farmer is
Square mile to Worn me lamias uHuaa.i-iK «
usual for a man not to employ more than two
men on a square mile, but the whole of the land
is not generally cultivated at one time. A good
deal however, depends upon the amount of
means possessed by the farmer.
11. Is scrub land to be had at £l?—Scrub
lands are open to be leased at a rental of 10s.
per section of not less than 80 acres, and
generally more, per annum for a term of 21
years, with a right of purchase at £1 per acre
at any time during of the lease.
12. How much scrub land can a man clear
per week ? —About half an acre on the average.
13. Would it be advisable now to buy good
scrub land and have it cleared and- sown with
wheat ? Would the work be repaid in the long
run ? —The scrub lands in most localities make
some of the best farms for cereals, but -Owing
to the general scarcity of water it is not
capable of carrying much stock, which must be
considered a detriment, as no well-ordered farm
should be devoid of a fair proportion of stock,
i.e., cattle and sheep. It is usual to clear the
scrub lands during the winter and spring
months, in time to get a small portion under
crop the first season, and then clearing is con-
tinued on through the summer. The land as it
is cleared is fallowed, and. in the late autumn
or early winter months is sown with wheat,
which in many cases has produced from 15 to
18 bushels of wheat per acre. There have been
many more scrub farms taken up of late, owing
to a grubbing machine having been lately
invented, which is very easy and cheap to work,
and does very large quantities in much less
time than by hand labor. The machine costs
about £l2 10s.
14. What sum at least ought two young
fellows to have in order to start a little farm ?
—About 255. an acre capital after the land has
been paid for. This would be a safe position,
but a large number of our farmers have not
more than this amount of capital, and pay for
the land out of it.
15. How many acres ought two men to take,
at least to make it pay, and what would be the
result of their work on an average ? —lt is
scarcely possible to give a definite reply to this
question. The returns of the farm depend so
much upon the character of the season and the
market price of produce for the time being,
that the Committee do not feel justified in
stating any figures to represent what the general
returns would be. They can only say,- however,
that many men of small means have in a short
time obtained comparative competence, and
men with industry and frugality may gener-
ally secure a good return for their-labor and
enterprise. As to the area required it is very
desirable that the acreage taken up should be
such as to permit the combination of agricul-
tural operations with grazing pursuits, and to
requisite.
16. At the present state of things, would it
be really advisable to plant vines to any extent?'
—The production of wine at present in South
Australia is' greatly in excess of the demand
for consumption in the Colony ; and an export
trade in this article is not yet established.
There is a very extensive market open, both
here and in the neighbouring colonies for
raisins and currants, and the vines producing
these bear most abundantly in proper localities.
Fifty pounds sterling per acre is a moderate
estimate of the value of dried raisins from the
muscatel grape, and in some localities this may
be greatly exceeded.
If. Can mulberries' (young shoots) be had in
the colony? —Yes, in considerable quantities.
18. Is brickmaking an advantageous pursuit?
—This is a remunerative industry, but is only
applicable to a few localities where the clay is
procurable.
19. Would potatoes grow sufficiently well to
be a moderately good pursuit out of the Mount
(lambier District ? —Ho; except in very favored
localities, which are limited.
20. Is hop a successful culture here?—The
hop is successfully grown in one or two favored
localities, but at present the industry is not
sufficiently developed to warrant definite in-
formation. Drying and the general manage-
ment of the kiln- seem t© be the principal
difficulties experienced.
21. Is there any good unsold scrub land
within a reasonable distance from Adelaide, and
what would be its price?—Yes; see reply
Ho. 11.
22. What would be the value of cleared scrub
land, or, better, would clearing augment the value
of the land so as to virtually represent the cost of
the work ? —Scrub land when cleared, and not
worn out, will fetch about £4 an acre, including
all improvements —fences, houses, &c. —which
would represent about 30s. as the increased
value of the land after clearing.
23. Would it be advisable to consult the
local Government about free passage to Swiss
workmen, or is the London Agent equally at
liberty to decide the question?—Any eligible
persons if recommended to the Commis-
sioner can receive free passages to the colony,
and free passages are also granted by the
Emigration Agent in England through the
Continental Agents of this Government.
24. What is the ordinary cost of clearing'
scrub land per acre ? —£3 per acre on an average.
25. Is there a season when labor is cheaper,
and how does it affect the ordinary value of
wages?—See reply Ho. 5.


26. What could be recommended as being a 28. Does beetroot grow well?—Yes, where
■good thing to grow now in South Australia the soil is deep.
beside the usual wheat and vine ?—The climate
has been proved to be very suitable to the olive,
mulberry, flax, and other like productions.
The olives in the colony are some of the best
varieties, the . plants of which are easily
procurable. Mulberry cuttings are also easily
obtainable ; and silkworm “ grain ” of the best
description has been propagated with success.
The colony has the best varieties of vine for the
production of wine and fruit; and two-year-old
plants can be obtained at about 15s. per 100.
Flax has also been grown successfully. In
some localities English barley is grown with
success.
27. What sum would be required for two
young men to cultivate 200 acres with wheat?
—See reply 80. 14.
In replying to these questions the Committee
have been cautious not to encourage the intro-
troduction into this Province of Foreign
laborers without means, as the difficulty of not
speaking the English language would be a great
detriment to them for some time. The Com-
mittee, however, think that if Swiss people of
small capital were introduced or encouraged to
emigrate, it might be a very advantageous thing,
and the success which such immigrants as these
Would in all probability achieve here, would
be likely ultimately to lead to the introduction
of many others who would be attracted hither by
their prosperity.
Printed at the Advertiser Office, Adelaide.


