





fnm h
Xoatberq
As a S ite for
K of J<eclepated :j Z^astralia.
-$d uudQ'T iWo, ou€> / of ihv cßomboia u-wd Q-fodwo-i
/s£ Afay, /poo.
F. W. Niven and Co., Printers, Bookbinders, &c., Ballarat and Melbourne.




TWOFOLD BAY




TOE FE.DESTO CITY.
AND THE
(ZIaiDQS of Moj^apo.
\ fOW that the Federation of the Australian Colonies, so long a visionary hope of a
JM few thoughtful men, is within measurable distance, it becomes necessary to
J * look around for a spot suitable for a worthy site for the Capital of our
new-born Nation.
By the agreement of the Premiers, made at the Melbourne Conference, it was
decided that this site should be selected in New South Wales, and at a distance from
Sydney of not less than 100 miles.
It will be evident to everyone that there are certain conditions which any
locality putting forth a claim for consideration as a Federal Capital site must
possess.




KEKKY AND CO., PHOTO
BOMB A L A




The Federal City, and the Claims of Southern Monaro.
First and, perhaps, foremost, it must have a temperate and equable climate,
with the dry, bracing air of the western plains, without the fierce summer heat that
makes life there a burden, and the difference between the maximum summer
temperature and that of the minimum winter should not be too great, whilst the
rainfall —sufficient for the requirements of water supply and vegetation —should
not be excessive. And closely connected with this question of climate is that of
general salubrity and lowness of death rate.
Next, and this matter in our arid climate is, too, of utmost importance, there
should be a plentiful and never-failing supply of pure water. Then, all materials
needed for the building of a city—good stone, clay for bricks, lime, sand, timber,
and materials for making roads —should be abundant and easily obtainable.
As the City would become a fashionable place of residence for the wealthy
classes, and one which would receive the attention of many visitors, it should
be central, accessible by land or sea, and be surrounded by picturesque scenery.
The general situation of the place should be such as would easily lend itself to good
building sites. The soil should be sufficiently fertile to produce fruits, vegetables,
and other foods needed to supply the wants of a large city.
It is most desirable, too, that our Federal Capital should not be dependent
on Melbourne or Sydney, or indeed on any non-federal seaport, but that it should
have its own port, which should also be federal territory. And, although the capital
should be within reasonable distance of its port, it should not be so close as to render




KERRY AND CO., PHOTO
3PYRIGH
BOMB A L A




The Federal City, and the Claims of Southern Monaro.
it liable to capture by an enemy who may have gained a landing on the coast.
Between it and the seaboard should lie country capable of being fortified, and easily
defended against a hostile force.
Where, it may be asked, shall we find a spot so abundantly endowed with
all these requisites for our Australian Capital —although there may be localities
possessing some of these gifts of nature, yet only one district of the parent colony
can claim to have all the advantages mentioned above. That district is Southern
Monaro, the principal town and centre of which is Bombala ; and it is thought
that its claims to these advantages can be fully made good in the succeeding pages.
Southern Monaro lies nearly due south 819 miles from Sydney, in lat. 87 S.,
Jong. 149 E. Its situation is on a tableland, bounded on the east by the coast range,
and the west by the Kosciusko group of the Australian Alps, and Bombala, towards
the southern extremity of the plateau, is about 50 miles from Eden, its natural
outlet on the coast, and 20 miles from the Victorian border.
From Sydney, the distance to Cooma by rail is 205 miles, and Bombala is at
present reached from thence by coach, over 54 miles of good road, through picturesque
and rich country. The elevation of the plateau on which Bombala stands averages
about 8000 feet.
Although this district has been most favourably known for seventy years as
one of the most fertile areas of New South Wales, whether from the retiring modesty




KERRY AND CO., PHOTO
COPYRIGHT.
BOMBALA RIVER




The Federal City, and the Claims of Southern Monaro.
of its inhabitants and their representatives in Parliament, or from some other cause,
it has never received the consideration at the hands of the Government that might
reasonably have been expected. And, while large sums of money have been expended
in all other directions on railways and other public works, the extreme south of the
colony has been almost entirely neglected.
When the Southern Railway was constructed from Goulburn, it was, for some
unexplained reason, allowed to stop short at Cooma, which is quite on the northern
extremity of the fertile area. But it is becoming increasingly evident that before long
the line must be continued through Southern Monaro and Eastern Gippsland, to
join that already laid down from Melbourne to Bairnsdale. The existing line to
Cooma was originally planned on the supposition that it would be continued to the
border, there to meet the Victorian railways, and on that basis statistics were
founded Until the continuation is effected the Cooma line can never be worked to
its fullest advantage. The Victorian authorities have always expressed themselves
willing to continue the Bairnsdale line to the border, as soon as the New South
Wales Government should extend the Cooma line to connect with it.
The total length of railway to be constructed would be about 180 miles —80
from Cooma to the border, and a further 100 miles from there to Bairnsdale. It
is admitted that the present line from Sydney to Melbourne is becoming quite
inadequate to carry its increasing traffic, and one of two courses open must very
shortly be adopted. Either the present line must he duplicated, or the Cooma line




KKKKY AND CO., PHOTO.
COPYRIGHT.
FEDERAL TERRITORY




The Federal City, and the Claims of Southern Monaro.
continued to Bairnsdale; and as the cost of the first alternative would be
enormously greater than the cost of construction of the 180 miles of new line, and,
moreover, would not serve to open up a single additional acre of new country, there
can he no doubt as to the proper plan to adopt, especially as the Cooma-Bairnsdale
line would throw open some of the best agricultural and pastoral land in the continent,
including the far-famed East Gfippsland district, besides some extremely valuable
mineral areas. The engineering difficulties in building this line are considered by
experts to be easily surmountable, and the cost per mile would not he nearly so
great as that of many existing lines. A branch line to Eden has already been
surveyed, and could he constructed at a very moderate expense. As a matter of
national policy, such a line must, both for strategic and business purposes, be
constructed- A wise and foreseeing people will not wait until the enemy is at our
gates before having a railway by which troops may be conveyed to any point on
the coast where danger threatens.
As the result of a visit to Bombala during March this year of the Minister
of Public Works, the Cooma-Bombala-Yictorian border line is to be placed before
the Cabinet, and included in the railway policy of the colony. When these lines are
completed—and in any case they must be before long—a glance at the map of
Australia will show Bombala to be without a rival for convenience of accessibility
from all the southern colonies, and, with the exception of the New England tableland,
it is quite as convenient for Queensland as any other part of the colony.




KERRY AND CO., PHOTO.
COPYRIGHT
SNOWY RIVER, MONARO




From Eden by sea to Sydney ...
... 210 miles
,, „ ,, Melbourne
... 3(57 „
,, ,, ,, Hobart ...
... 360 „
,, ,, ,, Adelaide ...
... 870 .,
,, ,, ,, Perth
... 1793 „
„ ,, ,, Wellington
... 1260 .,
,, ,, ,, Brisbane ...
770 ,,
,, Bombala by rail to Sydney
... 325 „
,, ,, ,, Melbourne
... 330 „
,, ,, Adelaide
... 804 „
.. .. Brisbane
... 1048 „
The Federal City, and the Claims of Southern Monaro.
Passengers from Melbourne, Adelaide, and Hobart could be landed at Eden,
within 60 miles by rail of the Federal Capital ; and as it is to be hoped that, in the
not far distant future, Western Australia and, perhaps, New Zealand may be included
in the Federation, the same remark will apply to travellers from the ports of those
colonies. Those South Australians and Victorians who prefer travelling overland
may be comfortably conveyed by express trains and saloon carriages to their destination.
Approximate distances are as follows :
Thus it can at once be seen that the proposed territory would be most
accessible by rail from all the capital cities of Australia, occupying, as it would, a
central position, with Adelaide on the one hand and Brisbane on the other. As
such a centre, it would serve a population of about 1,500,000 on the south, and
1,600,000 on the north.




sA\i>?7/IXTi\J/)fi\J/)VA\i7i\'J/)fi\''/)^/J-\yA\^>yJ-,iM^
COPYRIGHT
KERRY AND CO., PHOTO.
MAFFRA LAKE, MONARO




The Federal City, and the Claims of Southern Monaro.
Southern Monaro contrasts most favorably with any district in New South
Wales, in having an absolutely unfailing and unlimited supply of the purest water,
and can never suffer from a water famine, even in periods when other parts of the
colonies are enduring the most devastating droughts. A large tract round Bombala
is the natural catchment area for the watersheds of some twenty or more streams,
most of which are absolutely unfailing.
The total number of square miles of catchment area is (>9O. There are many
most suitable spots for making reservoirs for the conservation of the water supply,
equal to the utmost demands of the largest city. The streams of the neighbourhood
are fresh, clear and pure, the chief of which (all permanent) are the Bombala,
Delegate, Little Plains, Coolumhooka, Undowah, Cambalong, and Maharatta Rivers,
&c., all of which how into the Snowy River, which itself is fed from the perennial
snow-fields of the Australian Alps, and is within ten miles of the site.
Excellent building stones, varying from the hardest trachyte, giastite, and
slate, to easily worked freestone, are found to an unlimited extent in the neighbourhood,
and can he obtained at small cost. Clay, from which bricks of very good quality
can be made, is abundant. The same may be said of sand and lime. Road metal
and gravel equal to any in the colony are to be had. On the coast ranges and just
over the Victorian border are forests of timber admirably adapted for building
purposes, and some varieties only require to be better known to give rise to a highly
profitable and staple industry.




eAf) OAD (2A5 eAS QAS) QAD lA* A
CfYc) GYc) GYr) GYc) GTYc) GYc3 CLA9
KERRY AND CO., PHOTO.
COPYRIGHT.
QUEDONG RIVER, MONARO




The Federal City, and the Claims of Southern Monaro.
Monaro has long been known as one of the beauty spots of New South Wales.
Whilst perhaps lacking the grandeur of the Blue Mountains, it has an undeniable
charm all its own. It has a rich wealth of spreading trees and flowing streams,
and for the greater part of the year is clad with a mantle of soft verdure and wild
flowers. The surface of the country is park-like, and pleasantly diversified with
alternating hill and dale. On every hand lovely views and hits of scenery unfold
themselves to gladden the heart of poet, painter, photographer, and every lover of
nature For those who are attracted by scenery of wilder and grander character,
the snowclad summits of the Australian Alps, and the celebrated Yarrangobilly Caves
(worthy rivals of those of Jenolan), are within easy distance. The trip down the coast
ranges', and the beauty of the coast itself, from Eden northwards to Tathra, and
south to Cape Howe, form further attractions. The pretty lakes bordering the sea,
Mallacoota, Ac., and the still better known Gippsland lakes, are worthy of notice.
Indeed it is not going too far to say that no part of our island continent offers to
visitors a greater variety of scenic charms.
Near the town of Bombala can be found sites admirably fitted for the
laying out of the Federal City. The natural drainage system of the proposed
city site cannot he surpassed, the whole country being undulating and gently sloping
towards the various rivers, and the soil being firm, dry, and porous would readily
absorb and deodorise surface drainage. A complete and modern system of drainage
and sanitation could without difficulty be established at a moderate cost.




COPYRIGHT.
KERRY AND CO., PHOTO.
A MONARO HOMESTEAD




The Federal City, and the Claims of Southern Monaro.
The fertility of the Monaro district is proverbial throughout New South
Wales. Much of its soil, especially around Bombala, is composed of rich black
and chocolate volcanic loam, of great depth, and capable of producing heavy crops
of all kinds, cereal and root. Vegetables and fruits natural to a cool climate are
cultivated with great success ; and as a producing district, Bega, at the foot of the
eastern slope of the Coast Range, is second to none. All European trees grow
remarkably well, and have been already largely planted, adding greatly to the
beauty of the district. The nourishing properties of the natural grasses are so
great that sheep and cattle fatten with extraordinary rapidity, and as fattening
country the station properties in the neighbourhood have an enviable reputation in
the colonies, as the high prices realised by Monaro fat stock in the metropolitan
markets prove. Monaro horses are famous, as all horse lovers know.
Sport is abundant; ducks, quail, snipe, and other wild fowl abound ; hares
are plentiful ; and the fisherman may enjoy his favorite pastime with gratifying
success in the many streams, which abound in brown trout of unusual size.
In the most important matter of climate, Southern Monaro easily holds its own
against all rivals. Lying as it does on the western side of the Coast Ranges bounding
the tableland on the east, it enjoys the tempering effect of the sea breeze, but the
steamy depressing heat which dwellers in Sydney and along the eastern sea-board
find so enervating in summer is entirely unknown, and the fiery “ brickfielder,”
which more than seldom makes a temporary inferno of Melbourne and Adelaide,
is never experienced.




KRRRY AND CO., PHOTO.
COPYRIGHT.
SNOWY RIVER, MONARO




The Federal City, and the Claims of Southern Monaro.
The summer months may be said to embrace November to February
inclusive. The thermometer, even on the hottest days, very rarely indeed reaches
90 deg. Fah. in the shade, probably not oftener than three or four times during
the season, and even then the dryness of the air makes that temperature easily
bearable, and out-door exercise practicable and endurable. The nights are almost
always sufficiently cool to render a blanket necessary. Mosquitoes and other insect
pests are remarkable for their absence Those who know the south of England will
find a Monaro summer no more trying than Bournemouth, Bath, or Ilfracombe,
and Tasmanians and New Zealanders will experience a climate similar to their
own. Spring and autumn furnish the absolute perfection of weather, and April,
May, September, and October usually provide a succession of delightful days, the
like of which are not to be excelled in any part of the world. In July and August
sharp frosts are common during the nights and early mornings, and an occasional
fall of snow gives a new and beautiful feature to the landscape. The snow, however,
except on the hill-tops, generally vanishes before the genial sunshine of midday,
and rarely lies on the ground the whole day long. But the same dryness of
atmosphere which renders the hot days of summer bearable and even pleasant,
simply causes the sharp, frosty weather of winter to be exhilarating and not
depressing. As a health resort, and as an agreeable change from the wearing
heat of the large cities and the arid back country, Southern Monaro must take a
very high place. No more suitable spot for the residence of the Governor-General,
his staff, the Legislature, the Commander-in-Chief and military officers, the




KERRY AND CO,, PHOTO.
COPYRIGHT.
SNOWDRIFTS: SPRING ON THE AUSTRALIAN ALPS




The Federal City, and the Claims of Southern Monaro.
permanent, legal, and Government officials, and the fashionable society, naturally
gravitating towards a capital city and seat of Government, can he imagined.
Zymotic and pulmonary diseases and serious epidemics are almost unknown,
the death-rate, averaging about nine per thousand for some years past, bearing
eloquent testimony to the health-giving properties and climate of the district. For
the benefit of dyspeptic and rheumatic subjects, several springs—the waters of
which are impregnated with sulphur, soda, lithia, magnesia, iron and other mineral
salts, naturally effervescent, and having valuable medicinal qualities— exist.
The average rainfall at Bombala for the past fifteen years is 29 inches. The
mean average temperatures for a similar period are as under, and are from
information furnished by the Government Astronomer :
Mean Maximum Temperature ... ... ... 68 degrees.
~ Minimum ~ ... ••• ••• 408 ~
~ Record for Hottest Month ... ... ... 811
„ ~ .. Coldest ~ ... . ••• 29-5
Average Temperature for Spring ... ... ... 55■ 0
Summer ... ... ... 66-1
Autumn ... ... ... 56-1
„ ~ Winter ... ... ... 4345
Average Night Temperature for Summer ... ... 50’3
Winter ... ... 31.4




The Federal City, and the Claims of Southern Monaro.
It must be conceded that a most valuable adjunct to the Federal City
would be a safe and commodious sea-port at a convenient distance, and one which
might be included within Federal Territory. Bombala has such a port. And it
is most important to note that no other candidate for the Federal Capital can make
a similar claim. At about 50 miles in a direct line, or about 00 miles by road from
Bombala lies the magnificent haven of Twofold Bay. From Cape York to Cape Howe
it is, with the single exception, perhaps, of Port Jackson, the only harbour capable of
floating a great number of large vessels, having deep water right alongside its
shores, admitting ships of the greatest tonnage to enter with perfect safety at any
hour of the day or night, or at any state of the tide ; and where, when once inside,
ships can ride in perfect security. It is equal to Port Lincoln or Auckland, and is
not excelled by any port in Australia, with the single exception of Sydney Harbour.
There are no expensive fore-shores or private wharves to buy up, and convenient sites
are plentiful for the erection of warehouses and quays, and every requisite of a first-
class sea-port. It may perhaps be a matter of surprise that such a splendid harbour
has so long been left in cold neglect, but it must be remembered that this south-
eastern corner of the colony has always been the Cinderella of New South Wales, and
the absence of a railway has severely militated against its progress. But there can
be no question that once put into easy communication with the splendid area of
fertile soil for which it is the natural outlet, Twofold Bay must take its deserved
rank as one of the foremost Australian ports. And such a port the Federal Government
ought to possess, and there is every reason why it should be the headquarters of the




KERRY AND CO., PHOTO.
SNOWY RIVER, MONARO




The Federal City, and the Claims of Southern Monaro.
Federal and Imperial Navies. It is capable of being strongly fortified at an expense
not excessive. It is worthy of notice, too, that Eden enjoys, perhaps, the most equable
climate in Australia, the difference between the extremes of summer and winter
temperature being less than that of any other station, so far as is known, in the
colonies ; and this fact, coupled with its delightful scenery, makes it an ideal
holiday resort. As has been said, the country between it and Bombala presents
few engineering difficulties, and a railway between the two could be economically
constructed. There are two or three passes through the mountains, and through
which any road or railway between the Federal City and the coast must go, which
could easily be rendered as impregnable against an invading force as the far-famed
passes through the Drakensberg Range between Natal and the Transvaal.
To briefly summarise, then, the overwhelming advantages possessed by
Southern Monaro as a site for the Australian Capital :
First. — It is most accessible and central, nearly equidistant from Melbourne and Sydney, both by
rail and sea, as also from Adelaide and Brisbane, and most conveniently situated for Hobart,
New Zealand, and Perth.
Second. —The best alternative railway route between Melbourne and Sydney passes through it.
Third.— lt has an unlimited and unfailing water supply.
Fourth.— Rich stores of building stone of every description and of excellent quality, and all other
road-making and building materials and timber necessary for a large city, are found close at
hand.
Fifth. —There is a wealth of beautiful scenery of every description, including the grandeur of the
Snowy River and the Australian Alps.




COPYRIGHT.
KERRY AND CO., PHOTO
FEDERAL TERRITORY




The Federal City, and the Claims of Southern Monaro.
Sixth.— Sites suitable for the erection of a city Australia may be proud of are available.
Seventh. — The soil is extremely fertile ; cereals, vegetables, and the fruits natural to a temperate
climate grow luxuriantly, and sport is abundant.
Eighth.— lts climate is unsurpassed. Extreme heat is unknown in summer, and its winters are
bracing, and not injurious to the most delicate, and it has a good and not excessive rainfall.
Ninth.— ln Twofold Bay it has a splendid natural harbour.
Tenth.— The Federal City can very easily be rendered impregnable against foreign invasion.
Since the decision of the Premiers to place the capital in New South Wales
was arrived at, many public men have had their attention turned to Southern Monaro
as a suitable site, and those who have visited it are unanimous in affirming that no
other district can present such a strong array of claims for consideration as this.
It is hoped that those politicians and others in the other colonies who have not
perhaps hitherto been aware of the many advantages possessed by Southern Monaro,
and are anxious that the very best possible site should be chosen as a worthy spot
for the Capital City of Federated Australia, which should be beautiful to behold,
pleasant and healthy to live in, and easy to reach, will carefully study and take
pains to verify the statements made in this little pamphlet.
F. W. Niven and Co., Printers, Ballarat and Melbourne.




TWOFOLD BAY








N
V
“■' ' - ' r,: v'ft'' • '',ft.V ft. ft---',, i-'.
'.V
.■ "v‘
■■.'• ,- - - ' ■ \ at- > £,:• • ■ , ■ >./ SS ' " -V A • ■ ■.-••' .• :,-
•■ ''i‘ ■ 0 A A'A > ,W vA- a : ■ V ■■ ■ ; ■' ' -& '•
■
■■ v s . >: a-a v -A' - ,-v- v . - ■ A,: - ■>; : ■■ 'V-vv
'
- A k&& > ' vX*. V - h : '■' •■■ fraEß|| : ' ; *d&3*» u . •
.
aa-v ■•; :-%N \ ■> Hf;: a : \-5: .
.
:••: ''• aa\ ■:* ■ ■ v A' aa ■' v a ava ; »:' '. aa -vi* ■■ :■' -•. * .
-A V s&V is a-;,:- ■# .■• ft.; ft -■■; A- ft -ft :-/-: r-:fjs- ft - A ASs|; ■ '
■■■ ? ■ :- ■,-, . %S'* -■. :>.:«as >:.M#- % js»* % Mfrss-Aa'-•» :
• . ■ . : .'.ft- A ;
‘ft,ft vft -ft m- &AvA H- ft.:--:ft ,s ft- ft aIAA# AA •
>ft'ft‘ • v\. -' ■ 5 5 ' ..ft" ■B®■ •. ■ r.'-A aa-' ->'-v > .
-■-•■• ft A ;•'>•-■• ‘\A :X ' ; .■ <•. . ■ - ’■•'■ ft ft-- v ftVjH-.- ' A >.\ -ft -> -‘ -\ '■'
-% $ - ■ -', - ; . a-A A;- ft :*« S-. >-, ft.-ft V- ,'■ >\sSfc ft : ;■ ' -ft-: -. >-:
-V ft -ft"..-.,: ' J’'■'■' v - '■ r -;V '-■ '> ft' - . -■;-
'ft ft > M'
n': ' -■ ;


