



Souvenir ‘Programme of
Qala ‘Performance
ANNA PAVLOVA
("THE IMMORTAL SWAN")
AT THE
REGAL CINEMA
MARBLE ARCH
23rd January, 1936, at 8.45 p.m.
PRESIDENTS :
H.I.H. The Grand Duchess Xenia of Russia
The Duchess of Marlborough
The Viscountess Wimeorne
Lady Cunard
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE :
Chairman : Captain R.
C. H. Jenkinson
L. Haskell, Esq.
Vice-Chairman : Arnold
The Viscountess Hambleden
Miss Penelope Maffey
The Hon. Mrs. E. F. Lawson
Miss Antonia Snagge
The Hon. Anthony Asquith
lan E. Black, Esq.
The Hon. W. V/. Astor. M.P.
Victor Dandre. Esq.
PATRONS :
H.E. The: German Ambassador. Mrs. Oswald Biklev.
H.F. The Italian Ambassador. Princess Otto von Bismarck.
H.E. The American Ambassador. Mrs. Edgar Brassev.
H.E. The Spanish Ambassador. The Duchess of Buccleuch.
H.E. The Portuguese Ambassador. Mrs. Humphrey Butler.
H.E. The Belgian Ambassador. Sir Alfred Butt, Bart., M.P.
H.E. The Turkish Ambassador.
H.E. The Polish Ambassador. The Lady Camrosk.
Almina, Countess of Carnarvon.
The Austrian Minister. Mr. Sydney Carroll.
The Bolivian Minister. The Viscountess Castlerosse.
The Czechoslovak Minister. Captain Victor Cazaiet. M.P.
The Danish Ministlk. The Baroness Cederstrom.
The Greek Minister. The Lord Ivor Churchill.
The Nepalese Ministf.r. H.E. Sir George Clerk ( British
The Norwegian Minister. Ambassador in Paris).
The Swiss Minister. Mr. Charles B. Cochran.
The High Commissioner for The Lady Diana Cooper.
Canada. M r - Noel Coward.
The High Commissioner for Viscountess Cowdray.
Australia. The Countess of Cromfh.
The High Commissioner for New The Hon. Mrs. Roland Cubttt.
Zealand,
The High Commissioner for the The Viscountess D'Abernok.
Union of South Africa. Lady Dashwood.
The High Commissioner for India. Mr. Basil Dean.
The High Commissioner for The Lady Derwent.
Southern Rhodesia. Mr. Anton Doi.in.
The Trade Commissioner for Mrs. Ashley Dukes.
Newfoundland. The Lady Mary Dunn.
The Lady Aberconway.
Mr. Bronson Alberv.
The Lady Alington.
Mr. Frederick Ashton.
Mrs. Simon Hlwes.
Mrs. Gabrielle Enthoven,
Baron Frederic d’Erlanger.
Mrs. Robin d’Erlanger.
The Hon. Lady Assheton-Smitm.
Mme. Adila Facihri.
Thu: Hon. Maurice Baring. The Rt. Hon. The Lord Fairhaven.
Mrs. Edward Baron. Mu, J. O. P. Fane.
Mr. C. A. Bakkand, Mrs. James Field.
Colonel W. de Basil. Sir John Fitz Gerald.
Miss Lilian Bavlis. Major A. W. Foster,
Mr. Cecil Beaton.
Mrs. Claude Beddington. Mrs. Edward Gage.
Miss Phyllis Bedells. Mrs. Lionel Gibbs.
Mr. Sidney Beer. Mr. John Gielgud.
Sir Alfred Beit, Bart., M.P. The I.ady Mary Gilmour.
Lady Beit.
The Hon. Esmj : : Glyn.
Mr. Hubert Griffith.
Princess Antoine Bibesco.
Miss Raphael.
Mrs. Cecil Harcourt.
Sir Cedric Hardwicke. ' The Lady Rennell.
The Hon. Esmond Harmsworth. Mr. P. J. S. Richardson.
The Lady Edward Hay. Miss Ft.ora Robson.
Miss Ft.ora Robson.
The Marchioness of Headfort. The Hon. Mrs. Simon Rodney.
The Lady Mary Herbert. The Countess of Rosebery.
The Countess of Rosebery.
The Lady Hillingdon. Mrs. Anthony de Rothschild.
Mr. E. Hoi.land-Martin. Mrs. Lionel de Rothschild.
Captain The Hon. Arthur Hope,
Miss Victoria Hopper. M.P. m. Michel Smnt-Denis.
Mrs. Michael Hornby. Dr. Malcolm Sargent.
The Lady Howard de Walden. Mr. Victor Saville.
Mr. Gordon Selfridge.
The Countess of Ilchester. Mrs. I. M. Sieff,
Mme. Adeline Genfe-Isitt. Captain Osbeut Sitwell.
Mrs, Sacheverell Sitwell.
Mr. Douglas Kennedy. The Lady Ei eanor Smith.
Mrs.Chari.es Kerr. The Hon. James Smith.
Mrs. Gerard Koch de Goorevnd. Mme. Lydia Sokolova.
Mr. Alexander Korda. The Lady Somers.
The Lady Somers.
Tup. Lady Stanley,
Captain Lancaster. Mrs. F. C. Stern.
Mr. Philip de Laszi.o. Mrs. J. B. Stevenson
Sir John Lavery. Mr. R. r. Stokes.
The Lady Leconfield, Sir Oswald Stoil.
Lt.-Col. The Hon. Piers Legh. Mrs. N. V. Stopforu Sackville.
The Marchioness of Linlithgow, The Lady Strathcona and
The I.ady Ludlow. Mount Royal,
Miss Olga Lynn. The Lady Stkatheden and
The Lady Stkatheden and
Campbell.
The Hon. Mrs. Macdonai.d-
Buchanan. Mr. Xigel Tangve.
Mrs. David Marcesson. ' * ’ Miss Marie Tempest.
Mme. Markova. ' Col. Sir Courtauld Thomson
Mr. Edward Marsh. Dame Sybil Thorndike.
Miss Elizabeth McLaren. Mrs, Rudolph de Irafford.
M*. Ouvbh Messei.. ' SIR. Roxalo Tiee, JI.P.
The Marchioness of Milford The Ki. Hon. The Lord Ivrrell.
The Lady Moyne. Haven
Miss Ninette de Valois.
Mr. W. A. Saxton Noble. Captain Eric Villiers.
Mrs. Bruce Ottlev.
The Countess of Oxford and Mrs. Euan Wallace.
Asquith. Mr. William Walton.
Mrs. Dudi.fv Ward.
The Lady Bridget Parsons. Lady WGrrender.
Professor Dr. J. Plesch, The Countess ok Westmorland.
The Lady Piunket.
Mme, Anna Pruzina.
The Hon. Anne Wood.
Mrs. Howard Wvndham.




“TU. teas onlv one tit ore is no other and
never wt II L.
(Andr£ Levinson.)
A WELL-KNOWN art critic, after having seen Pavlova dance on the stage
of the Theatre des Champs-Elysees in Paris, spoke in the following terms to
a number of young artists who had mustered around him ;
“Study that woman closely, young men. She is not a mere woman ; she is
an art gallery, a vast gallery of attitudes, of lines, of ideas plastically expressed ;
she is the soul of gesture and movement. Each one of her movements deserves to
be embodied in a drawing, or in a modelling, and perpetuated as a teaching for future
generations.”
The eminent Russian writer and art critic, Valerian Svetloff, in his remarkable
monograph “ Anna Pavlova ” wrote in 1922:
“ A study of the many forms under which the genius of Pavlova reveals itself
will supply future generations with a wealth of artistic material, and more especially
so, if one day cinematography is able to complete the documentation. But it would
mean that cinematography must have at its disposal other means than those it has
to-day, it would have to be rhythmic filming, so as to blend in one continuous harmony
the movement of the dance and the musical phrase. Unfortunately it is to be feared
that such an invention will long be awaited."
We see now that the dream of Valerian Svetloff has been realised far sooner than he
expected. The invention of the sound film and the technical improvements achieved
have made it possible to arrive at a perfect synchronisation of movement with music,
so that the two are clossly and harmoniously bound together; and so to-day, for the
first time in the history of choregraphy, the film will present, five years after her death,
the dances of the great artist.
Some of these dances were fixed on the screen before filming had reached its present-
day technical perfection, but I have nevertheless included them with the others, in
order to complete, as far as possible, this unique document, of such immense value in
preserving the beauty of the art of Anna Pavlova, not only for the joy of those who saw
her dance, but as a source of inspiration for future generations.
Many books have been written around Pavlova. Writers and critics of all countries
have attempted to analyse her incomparable gifts. Analysis is defeated. One has to
accept her as representing a blending of mysterious phenomena into which reasoning
and logic cannot penetrate and which elude our understanding. The divine fire which
was the life of her dances was the true source of her genius.
Let us mention further the impressions of two Russian critics.
Andre Levinson, after the death of Anna Pavlova, wrote :
“ Twenty, thirty times 1 spoke of her when she was alive. And always at the
moment when I thought I had captured the miracle of her art and the mystery of her


personality, words failed me. Technique can be analysed with perfect calm, talent
can be examined from every angle, but before the revelation of genius the manifestation
of the divine in a human being, one is left in a state of bewildered delight.”
And another Russian writer, Piotr Pilsky, said of Pavlova :
“ There was magic in the beauty of her pure classicism, in her acting with which
were combined such a depth of wisdom and lightness of spirit, such artistry and quiet
simplicity, where all was illumined, enveloped by tenderness, and touching lyricism.
One may discuss and weigh, estimate and define, but what has never been, and never
can be done is to solve the mystery of the spell with which she held her audience.
This secret slipped away, not to be caught by definition, by a flood of the most beautiful
words or their mathematical precision. A breath of the holy spirit, embodied in the
earthly forms of the highest art, hovered over the audience, gently finding a way into
the soul and ever remaining in the memory of a perturbed but grateful heart. But no
formula could be found, not one of the spectators or of the critics ever succeeded in
commemorating the miracle that appeared to him, the sacrament that passed before
his eyes of that loveliest of the dreams of art.”
Any attempt to find a scientific explanation of the talent of Pavlova is doomed to
failure, one can only look for it in the realm of the imagination and on a more spiritual
plane. Or else one must express it symbolically in the language of fairy tales, as has
done the Russian writer Siegfried, in the beautiful little story he dedicated to Pavlova,
called “ The Queen of the Dance.”
“ One day, a humble family was celebrating the christening of a baby girl. From
another world fairies came to her cradle, bringing the wonderful gifts which they had
prepared for her. The first gave her beauty ; the second, intelligence ; the third, the
qualities that uplift the soul; the fourth, will-power. And the fifth, in whose pale
winsome face shone large dark eyes, stooped over the cradle and said ; ‘ I bring thee
the best gift that can be granted to a mortal: the gift to realise the harmony of the
universe, the harmony which is everywhere to be found. Thou shalt hear it in
the ripple of the brook, in the song of the birds, in the barely perceptible rustle of the
grass, in the howl of storm and wind. Thou shalt discover it in the sweetness of the
moonlight, in the shadow of the mountains, in the uproar of the cities of men. . . .
It is the sweetest and the loftiest music : thou shalt learn to understand it, and thus
become a poet. Indeed, I bring the power to understand the harmony of the whole
universe. This harmony thou wilt embody in the poetry of thy limbs, in the rhythm
of thy motions. Upon inaccessible peaks, aglow with golden light, thou shalt build
the mystery of thy palace ; and all peoples of the earth shall bow to thee in ecstasy.”
Years elapsed, the child grew, and what the fairies had foretold happened. For
she became the queen and poet of dancing; and the whole world, enraptured,
acknowledged the “ Beauty which she came to reveal.”
“Whatever Pavlova touched she turned to Beauty.”—(Alan Parsons.)




s, vlova llte (immortal
Arnold L. Haskell.
SOME time ago I visited with a young dancer the Pavlova exhibition at the Archives
Internationales de la Danse in Paris. One corner of the hall was arranged as her
dressing-room, with the dressing table exactly as it had been during her life-
time, her slippers and the Swan dress waiting to be put on. It was so living
that at any moment she might have entered and begun her make-up, and yet, because
we knew, it was as lifeless as only an empty theatre can seem.
I was deeply moved, remembering the unique thrill that this matchless artist had
always given me. I was grateful for the number of times I had seen her, angry with
myself for the performances I had missed. All that is left, 1 thought, is this
lonely dressing-room and memories that in a few years will gradually become dimmed and
distorted. I turned to my companion, but I could see that her reactions were entirely
different from mine. Her imagination, too, was stirred, but she was happy.
“This isn’t all that remains. Pavlova isn’t immortal just because her name is
remembered. She lives to-day in every classroom and in every performance.”
She was right. She was a dancer and she knew. I thought then of her own story.
She had been taken as a child of four to see Pavlova in Shanghai and from that
moment nothing else mattered. She was able to convince her parents, and her career
had begun. Four years later she made her debut, appropriately at a gala performance
in which Pavlova appeared.
She was just one among the many hundreds the world over to whom Pavlova had
conveyed an irresistible message that bade them overcome every difficulty, make every
sacrifice until they danced ; and now this child and those nameless others had something
of Pavlova in them, which they in their turn would carry through the world.
Pavlova herself may be dead, but every dancer of the generations following carries
on to the stage something that was hers. She lives not merely as an inspiration, but also
in a sense that is far more tangible. Yet the inspiration of Pavlova alone has altered
the whole history of the dance.
Diaghileff himself was strengthened in his resolve to show Western Europe the
wonders of Russian Ballet because of Anna Pavlova, the new romanticism was largely
dictated by her physique and temperament, and where Diaghileff conquered the big
cities in his triumphant progress westwards, Pavlova conquered both cities and hamlets
in every corner of the globe. To millions Pavlova and ballet are synonymous.
Camargo, Taglioni, Zucchi, Pavlova were great and are still living because they
have added something positive to the dance, technically and spiritually.


Without such pioneer spirits ballet would long have become a museum art, all that
remained would have been the sad and rapidly fading memories stimulated by that
empty dressing room
Now the film has come to convey another type of immortality. If on the screen the
magic of her personality is less vivid, we can analyse each movement with a precision that .
would have been impossible in life. How did Taglioni dance ? We cannot tell, but to
future generations many questions about Pavlova will be clear. The film, The Immortal
Swan, should be available to all dancers, an indispensable part of their education, spiritual
and technical.
This film and the proposed monument in Regent’s Park honour not only Pavlova, but
the great art that she served with such whole hearted devotion, and to which, it is true
to say, she finally sacrificed her life.
THE PAVLOVA MEMORIAL IN REGENT’S PARK
Project of a Fountain by carl milles, drawn from his sketches by M. Doboujinsky


ANNA PAVLOVA AS FENELLA IN THE FILM “ DUMB GIRL OF PORTICI "


anna pavlova’s favourite corner in the garden of ivy house, her London home


PORCELAIN STATUETTE BY ANNA PAVLOVA


<CL S>a v lov a Qfl emor t a I
Honorary President :
HER IMPERIAL HIGHNESS THE GRAND DUCHESS XENIA.
Sir Edwin Lutyens.
Sir Eric Maclagan.
The Marchioness of Londonderry.
La Comtesse Marie de Bilant.
Violet Lady Melchett.
Sir William Rothenstein.
La Vicomtesse J. Poulpiquet du Halgouet. Dr. Lee de Forest.
Lady Zia Wernher.
Mme. Adila Fachiri.
Mr. John Maxwell.
Miss Jelly d’Aranyi.
Mr. Edward Hudson.
Mr. Sigismund Goetze
Mr. J. M. Keynes.
M. Eugene Sabline.
Baron Palmstierna, the Swedish Minister. M. V. Dandr£.
Lord Conway of Allington.
It is proposed to erect a memorial to Anna Pavlova in the Rose Garden in Regent’s
Park. His Majesty the King has graciously given his approval to the scheme, which
will be carried out under the supervision of the Office of Works.
This memorial is to take the form of a fountain surrounded by dancing figures and
the work has been entrusted to Milles.
Nothing could be more appropriate than a permanent work of art in a prominent
position in London, Pavlova’s second home, dedicated to the memory of one who has
given visions of beauty and happiness to so many thousands.
During her lifetime Anna Pavlova devoted so much of her time and money to various
charities that she would certainly have wished King George’s Jubilee Fund to benefit
by a donation from the receipts of this performance.


0424-
On Anna Pavlova
“ Mademoiselle Pavlova est a la danse ce qu’un Racine est a la
poesie, un Poussin a la peinture, un Gluck a la musique.”
J. L. Vaudoyer.
“ We have in our midst the greatest dancer of all times, or, to be more
exact, of all the historical periods of dancing which admit of analysis.
All that we know of Camargo, Salle, Fanny Elssler, Grisi, or any of the
marvellous angels of the heavens of illusion, does not make any one of
them the equal of Pavlova.”
“ Pavlova is an exceptional, perhaps unique, manifestation of the
Russian spirit.”
Andre Levinson.
“ Her person embodies certain lines that are the poetry of motion, the
melody of the hands, the harmony of the body, all create in us the vision of
a great tragic actress. She appears, and within a few instants, so great a
wealth of turmoil and rhythm arise that we can but admire and wonder,
realising the treasures of silent music and plastic beauty which lie concealed
in her.”
Oscar Bie.
* *
“ L’art de la danse nous delivre de notre propre nature ; et c’est le
sentiment de cette delivrance qui nous procure de la joie, cette joie
distribute par Anna Pavlova a une grande partie de notre planete,”
Heinrich Mann.
* * *
“To define the process and laws through which the genius of that
most extraordinary dancer of our time asserts itself, to make clear the actual
mechanism of her achievements—all that is hardly within the pale of
critical analysis.”
Valerian Svetloff.
* *
“ Anna Pavlova has always been the great exception to every carefully
laid down artistic principle, the individual who triumphed over the theory,
the genius who could make the museum piece into a living moving drama.
With her death how many ballets, too, are dead.”
Arnold L. Haskell,


20lh February, 1936
‘Programme of
IN MEMORY OF
ANNA PAVLOVA
CONCERT La Societe des
INSTRUMENTS ANCIENS (de Paris)
Fondee en 1901 par
HENRI-CASADESUS
PROGRAMME
1. Le Jardin des Amours Musique de Mouret
Pavane, Gaillarde, Menuet Tendre, Canarie.
LA SOCIETE DES INSTRUMENTS ANCIENS.
2. Partita „ Ayrton
Allagramente, Sicilienne, Toccata.
Pour clavecin: Mme. REGINA PATORNI-CASADESUS
3. (a) Adagio Musique deAriosti
(b) Rondo Sacchini
Pour quintan : MARIUS-CASADESUS
PAUSE.
4. Divertissement Musique de Asioli
Polacca, Menuetto. Largo, Rondo.
Pour vide d’amour: HENRI-CASADESUS
5. Les Recreations de la Campagne Musique de Ch. F. Climent
Sentier fleuri, Colin Maillard, Menuet galant, le Cabaret.
LA SOCIETE DES INSTRUMENTS ANCIENS.
Clavecin Pleyel Paris.
INTERVAL.


ANNA PAVLOVA
“THE IMMORTAL SWAN”
(A FILM OF HER ART AND LIFE.)
FILM
PART I
Polonaise Music by Chopin
THE ORCHESTRA.
Preludes. Opus 27. No. 18 ~ Chopin
From the Ballet “ Chopiniana.”
Arranged by Ivan Clustine.
Revived by H. Algeranoff.
Danced by former members of Anna Pavlova’s Company.
Miles.: Beatrice Burke, Eileen Anderson, Kathleen
Crofton, Eileen Dolomore, Juliet Jervis, Nancy
Hanley, Mollie Lake, Christine Rosslyn, Mary
Skeaping, Joan Ward and Sylvia White.
Narrative by Aubrey Hitchins.
Anna Pavlova’s Childhood ; the Imperial Ballet School
Early Career; her D6but in London; at Home at
Ivy House.
PART II
Her travels: Egypt, India, Java, Australia, South
America and Holland.
PART 111
Anna Pavlova in her favourite Dances.
1. Fragment from the Ballet “ Invitation to the Dance ”
Music by Weber
ANNA PAVLOVA’S COMPANY.


2. Rondo (from the Grand Sonata, Opus 39) Music by Weber
ANNA PAVLOVA.
Tschaikowsky
3. Californian Poppy
ANNA PAVLOVA.
4. La Nuit
Rubinstein
ANNA PAVLOVA.
Minkus
5. Adagio (from the Ballet “ Don Quixote,” Act II) ..
Arranged by L- Novikoff.
ANNA PAVLOVA. PIERRE VLADIMIROFF.
RUTH FRENCH and the Company.
6. Fragment (from the Ballet “ Dionysus ”)
Tcherepnine
ANNA PAVLOVA.
7. Variation Classique Music by Kadletz
ANNA PAVLOVA.
8. Adagio (from the Ballet “Giselle,” Act II)
ANNA PAVLOVA.
PIERRE VLADIMIROFF and the Company,
Kreisler
9. Dragon Fly
ANNA PAVLOVA,
10. Excerpt of Rondino Music by Beethoven-Kreisler
(a) In original tempo.
(b) In slow motion.
ANNA PAVLOVA.
Madame Pavlova with her favourite Swans at Ivy House :
A Sound Record of her Voice.
11. The Swan Music by St. Saens
Arranged by M. Fokine,
ANNA PAVLOVA.
12. Homage to Anna Pavlova.
BALLET COMPANY, CHOIR and ORCHESTRA.
Note: Nos. 2,4, 5, 7 and 11. Choreography by Anna Pavlova.
(" The Immortal Swan" has been edited and directed by Edward Nachimoff.)


THE PROGRAMME SELLERS
These programmes are sold by the following members of the
“Vlc-Wells” ballet, wearing the “Sylphldes” costumes from the film:
Mesdemoiselles Beatrice Appleyard, June Bear, Mollie Brown,
Margot Fonteyn, Jill Gregory, Mary Honer, Gwyneth Mathews,
Pamela May, Peggy Mellis, Elizabeth Miller, Joy Newton.
{The committee wishes to take this opportunity of thanking these ladies and their
management for their help.)


Oh Earth, weigh gently upon me, I trod
so lightly upon thee.
Greek Epitaph.
Printed by
Burrup, Mathieson & Co,, Ltd.,
U 4, Southwark Street, London, S.E.I.
