

SUPPLEMENT
TO THE
SOUVENIR
PROGRAMME
N ganmu VoC» Investiture
C elcbration
RUATORIA
OCTOBER 6th, 1943
HERALD




SUPPLEMENT
TO THE
SOUVENIR
PROGRAMME
LIEUT. TE MOANA NGARIMU, V.C.
N gammon VoOo Investifore
ip
programme


(b) ACTION SONG by Maori School Children.
“Hitarau wahahuka.”
1. Hitara waha huka, upoko maro,
He tangata tohetohe kite riri, e!
Hinga atu, hinga tnai i runga o Ruhia,
Ka wheru ona mahi!. Hei! Aue! Aue! Aue!
Ch. Tuhikitia ra! Tuhapainga ra!
Te rau o taku patu ki runga kite upoko!
Ho atu, e tama, karia te kauae o
Te kauramokai o Hitara, e.
2. Kua rongo a Mahurini, kua tata tonu mai
A te Hokowhitu Toa ki Roma, e.
Hiki nuku, hiki rangi! Kore rawa he rerenga,
Ka wiri ona papa i te mataku, e.
(C). SONG IN HONOUR OF MOANA NGARIMU.
(Words by Mrs. Black, Te Araroa Native School.)
1. Let us do honour to Moana Ngarimu,
A soldier so brave and true, who died for you and me.
2. Not long ago he was a boy at school, like you and me;
And now he has earned the V.C., how proud we all ought to be.
3. We honour to the other lads, whom we love so well;
And hope we may worthy be of this our liberty.
7 (a) Following the Speech by a Whanau a Apanui Elder.
(a) HAKA OF WELCOME by Women of the
Whanau a Apanui Tribe.
S. Takatakahia! Takatakahia!
Turi whatiia! Ka mate koe, oi!
S. Whakakau he topua! Whakakau he taniwha!
U nga iwi ki hea?
CH. Uki te Tairawhiti, pakia!
S. Puhikura, puhikura, puhikaka, puhireia!
Ch. Ka eke nei hoki kei te umauma, pakia!
S. Kaore nei hoki e te tukituki kei taku manawa!
No teko, na teko te konunutanga
O tona pinanauhea meromero.
0 tona pinanauhea meromero
1 whiua kite taha waitaia takoto titaha
I kei whea ia ra o kupu te homai ai?
Ch. Hei tuki ake mo taku poho—
S. A, i aha tera, e
Ch. I motu te puehu tukawa ka nana nei,
S. Karariwha nei, ka tae ki ! Hanea nei!
Ch. Me tuku kite wai whinau,
Mai tona hua ka pango nei. Hei! Hei! Hei aue!
(b) Men of the Whanau a Apanui moving into position in front of the
retiring Women perform this HAKA of defiance to Hitler.
S. Ko te whakaariki! Ko te whakaariki!
Ch. Tukua mai kia piri! Tukua mai kia tata!
Kia eke bai ki runga kite Tairawhiti e tau nea! I aue!


COMMENTS
NOTE.
The texts of items proposed to be given at the Investiture Ceremony
were obtained too late for inclusion in the main Souvenir Programme.
They are therefore published here for reference, when the items are
performed in their order. The numbers relate them to their respective
places in the Souvenir Programme.
3 (b) “HITLER. THE FROTHY-MOUTHED.”
Hitler, the frothy-mouthed, hard-headed man,
Obstinately determined to fight,
Defeated repeatedly on Russian’s soil,
He was given the works. Hei, aue, aue!
Ch. Raise it aloft! Lift it on high!
So that my weapon shall break on his head.
Strike then, my son, and bash in the jaw of
That thrice accursed slave, Hitler!
Musso has heard of that fiery ball
Down from under threatening Rome;
Swift be the onset, lest he escape.
Lo! he is shivering with dastardly fear.
(This item has been selected, because of its wide vogue among the
children of the Native Schools. Report has it that the song originated
at Nuhaka. The commentator heard it at Rotorua and it should by now
be well on its way north. The theme has inspired many contemporary
writers, including the author of “The Great Dictator.” The piece is
reminiscent of the cursing song or kaioraora, and the children render it
with the vigour and gusto of their forefathers. The Maori text suits
the action, although it adopts foreign expressions often heard in the
highest Pakeha society.)
(C.) Mrs. Black has picked on an air, which was often heard in
many Maori settlements during the last war. Sixteen years ago Princess
Te Puea’s concert party made a great hit with it during a tour of the
East Coast.
’v’ (gY This item should follow the singing of the song “Tu tonu ko te
/ \ f rae!” It is something of a medley. Embedded in it are archaic
expressions extremely difficult to render in English. The transition of
ideas is very difficult. The following is a very free version;—
S. Stamp with your feet! Stamp with your feet!
Bending the knees! Ah! You are suffering.
S. Breasting the waves as the sea-monsters do,
Where have the peoples made their haven?
Ch. Here on the shores of the Eastern Sea! Strike!
S. Red feathers, parrot feathers, ornaments gay—
Ch. Odorning their persons in splendour! Strike!
S. Trembling, my heart is palpitating!
Strutting and grimacing the impudent fellow
Bold as the figurehead at the canoe’s prow,
Bends his little body now towards the east,
Then he reclines lying on his side.
Where are the words you would utter to me?
Ch. That I may clasp them unto my breast.
S. What shall we say now?
Ch. The garment is cut loose; the reef resounds.
S. Here is the glistening paua shell, here at ’Hanea.
Ch. Dip it into the trough! of whinau water,
So that its milt may be jet black.
Hei! Hei! Aue.


S. Ko te iwi Maori e ngunguru nei! Ch. Au! Au! Aue ha!
S. Ko te iwi Maori e ngunguru nei! Ch. Au! Au! Aue ha!
S. A ha ha! Ch. Ka tu te ihiihi, ka tu te wanawana,
Ki runga kite rangi, e tu iho nei, i aue!
(Taparahi); , .
S. E Tama, e Kingi Hori! Tenei to reo powhin
Tukituki ana i te Rawhiti! Ch: A ha ha!
S. Takahia rawatia te moana nui a Kiwa e takoto nei,
Whakaheke kau taku haere ki Ihipa, tenei huakina!
Ch. Huakina! S. Tena i wherahia!
Ch. Wherahia! Aha ha!
Tauhinga ko te ra, i haere ai a Porou e ha!
E tata te kawenga atu ki Ihipa, ki a Hitarari!
A ha ha! Ko te kainga ra tena
I kikia ai te patamu e Nui Tireni,
Pokokohua! Kauramokai! Hei!
S. A ha ha!
Ch. Kei te kumekume noa a Porou,
Kei te ronarona noa a Apanui
I te Wikitoria, i herea nei kite Tairawhiti,
Me he tete waka! Me he tete waka!
Me he pitau whakareia, hei!
9 (a) ACTION SONGS by WOMEN of Whanau a Rua
taupare, Tokomaru Bay, assisted by tbeir Men.
(These were favourite items with C Company of the Maori Battalion)
(a) “TE HOKOWHITU TOA.”
Te Hokowhitu Toa! Mauria atu ra
Te pueru o o koutou tipuna, e!
Te mana me te wehi, e!
Hei hoa ki Tawhitinui,
Ki Tawhiti pamamao.
Aue, aue! te aroha,
E ngau kino nei;
Otira i tenei wa, haere ra!
Ma te Kingi o nga Kingi
Koutou e manaaki, e!
Ko te tangi tenei a te ngakau, e!
(b) “AROHAINA MAI, E TE KINGI NUI.”
Arohaina mai, e te Kingi nui,
Manaakitia ra o tamariki, e!
Horahia mai rate marie nui
Ki te Hokowhitu a Tu toa!
Nga mamaetanga me nga pouri nui
Pehia rawatia ki raro ra, e;
Me anga atu, ka karanga ki
Te Matua, Aue!. Aroha mai.
Nga hapu katoa o Aotearoa, e,
Tauawhitia iho ko toku rongo
Kia mau te Tihe Mauriora a
Nga tipuna, he tohu wehi, e!
(c) “TE MOANA NUI A KIWA!”
Haere mai ra, e nga iwi! Ki te hui aroha nei
O te Moana nui a Kiwa, e;
Ringihia mai nga roimata ki runga i te marae
O te Moana nui a Kiwa, e!


COMMENTS
7 f a ) (b.) This is an adaptation of an old East Coast haka, which was
J 7 performed on the occasions when East Coast parties visited other
districts.
(.Approach):
S. The exalted, distinguished ones come!
Ch. Let them draw near, let them come close.
So that they may enter upon the Tairawhiti!
(The Rising):
Ch. Au, au, au e ha!
S. It is the Maori people growling here!
Ch. Au, au, au e ha!
S. A ha ha!
Ch. Shuddering and bristling high to heaven,
Standing above! Standing above!
(Taparahi)
S. Your Majesty, the King! Here is your call,
Reverberating through these eastern lands.
Ch. A ha ha!
S. Voyaging across the great sea of Kiwa,
Lo! I am approaching the shores of Egypt!
Open its gates! Ch: Open!
S. Spread them wide! Ch: Spread them wide! Aha ha!
Porou has arrived with the setting of the sun,
Even unto Egypt, to Adolf Hitler.
A ha ha! That is the land.
Where New Zealand kicked your posterior,
Thou boiled head! Thou accursed slave! Hei!
S. A ha ha!
Ch. Here is Porou drawing in one way.
There is Apanui drav/ing it another,
This Cross of Valour, Tairawhiti’s honour,
Adorning as with a figurehead the bow of their canoe!
9 (a) The words of the action songs of the WOMEN’S PARTY from
Te Whanau and Ruataupare of Tokomaru Bay were composed by Miss
Tweenie Ngawai, a talented lady, who contributed many fine songs during
the days of Maori Hockey tournaments.
(a). “TE HOKOWHITU TOA.” A favourite with C Company of the
Maori Battalion, and rendered by them at an unforgettable concert in
Palmerston North prior to the Battalion going overseas (May, 1940).
Here is an English rendering:—
“THE BRAVE BAND OF TU.”
Ye Warriors of Tu! Take with you
The mantle of your ancestors,
The power and the majesty also,
To be with you at great Tawhiti,
Even unto remote Tawhiti.
Alas, alas! the longing,
That gnaws at., my heart.
For this present, farewell!
May the King of Kings
Have you in His Keeping,
That is the cry of this my heart.
(b). “GREAT KING! BESTOW THY LOVE!”
This is in the form of an invocation to the Father of all to guard the
men of the Maori Battalion and to bestow on them His gracious blessing.
Great King! Bestow Thy love upon them all;
Thy children take into Thy loving care;
Spread wide for them Thy mantle of good will;
Thy blessing on this Warrior Band of Tu.


Ch. Miharo ko te ngakau ite honore nth,
Tenei ra nga mihi, e tama.
Kua ngaro te tint, kua hinga te mano:
Te Moana nui a Kiwa, e.
Kei runga i a koe te Iwi, e tama e,
Te Moana nui a Kiwa!
Hoki wairua mai ki au, kite Tairawhiti nei,
Ch. E kore e mutu mai
He mamae, e tama, e
Te Moana nui a Kiwa, e
9 Texts of ACTION SONGS by the WOMEN of
TURANGANUI.
(a) “RUKUHIA.”
Rukuhia Ngarimu te moana,
Mauria te mana o te motu.
Te tangi a te Iwi Maori
Me aroha te ao katoa.
I hinga koe ki Tunihia;
I reira te riri mutunga.
Kua mutu to rongo i te, haruru
Mai o te mura o te ahi.
(b) “NGARIMU.”
Haere mai ra, e nga morehu.
Aue te aroha, te mamae!
Mauria mai nga tini honore
O te Hokowhitu toa, e.
Te Moana nui a Kiwa Ngarimu!
Maranga mai ra, e te tau!
Arahina mai ra nga morehu nei
Ki runga nga marae nei.
Tenei te iwi nui e tangi nei
Mo nga tini hoa kua wehe nei.
Titiro kau noa ra, e tama ma,
Kei whea koutou e ngaro nei.
(c) “TE MOANA NUI A KIWA.” (Words by Pita Kaua)
E te Ope Tuatahi. Hoki mai.
Nga mate o te wa kua tangihia
Hui mai tatau kite whakanui
I o koutau hoa, kua riri kei te po.
I runga i nga tini marae, e,
0 tenei pakanga tino nui,
1 puta ai te rongo nui, e.
Mo tatau mo te iwi Maori, e.
Whakatika ake ra, Aotearoa!
Tenei rate Kawana kua eke mai
Ki te mau mai i te Tohu nui
Ki a taua kite iwi Maori, e.
Nahau ra, Moana nui a Kiwa,
I roro mai ai tenei taonga nui,
Titiro mai, e tama, i Tunihia
Ki te iwi, e mihi atu nei.


COMMENT,
“TE MOANA NUI A KIWA.”
Welcome unto all ye peoples!
Honour with your presence here,
Honour Moana nui a Kiwa.
Display your sorrow here and shed
Your tears upon the marae
Of Te Moana nui a Kiwa.
Ch. Greatly wond’ring does my heart
Acclaim this honour great.
Here are our many tributes, brave son!
Scion of the thousands dead and gone,
Te Moana nui a Kiwa!
Upon your fame we rest
Your peoples all. brave son,
Te Moana nui a Kiwa.
•TE MOANA NUI A KIWA.”
Members of the Maori Battalion,
We greet you with joy and sorrow
All together let us pay tribute
To your comrades who have fallen
On the various battlefronts
Of this great and bitter war,
Where you and they have gained
Honour and glory for the Maori race.
Be on the alert, everybody,
The Governor-General is here
To bestow the Victoria Cross
Upon the Maori people.
It was you, Moananui-a-Kiwa
Who made the supreme sacrifice
And won it in far off Tunisia;
Hence this memorable scene.
Our pain and sorrow great and all they be
Subdue with patience, though with straining hearts.
Turn in our deep distress and call unto
The Father, ‘God bestow Thy gracious care!”
Ye many tribes of Aotearoa
Cling to the fame, that we have gained in war;
Shout, as your fathers did in olden days,
“Away with evil,! Hail, and all is well.”
GISBORNE HERALD


I V63£££oo SOSI 0




