

SOUVENIR
11TH FLD AMB
FRANCE
1916
TO
1918




SOUVENIR


FLANDERS 1917


SOUVENIR
BEING AN UNOFFICIAL RÉSUMÉ OF THE
HISTORY OF THE THE AUSTRALIAN
FIELD AMBULANCE
ELEVENTH AUSTRALIAN FIELD AMBULANCE
MARCH • 1919


©ebtcafcb
TO THE LADIES
OF THE
11th FIELD AMBULANCE
SEWING CIRCLE
ADELAIDE
S. AUSTRALIA


CONTENTS
‘ PAGE
FOREWORD. By Lieutenant-Colonel H. B. Lewers, 0.8. E 6
EDITORIAL 7
DOUVE VALLEY, MESSINES. By R. E. E. Dobson 8
FRANCE. By E. 0 8
EDDIES OF WAR. By P. E. N 9
PARIS. By X. Y. Z 10
SHELL ’OLE BILL. By C. C. C n
HISTORICAL SKETCH OF UNIT (PART I.) 12
WHAT WAS THAT ? By De Reszke 15
LITERARY AND DEBATING SOCIETY 17
HIS COUNTRY. By Mile End 18
IMPRESSIONS *9
INTERVIEWS, 21
THE HAPPY BAND. By Lance-Corporal W. G. Ward 22
OUR NEW TASK 2 3
AS OTHERS SEE US... 24
SPORTS MEETINGS 25
HISTORICAL SKETCH OF UNIT (PART II.) 27
EDUCATION SCHEME 29
RE DIVERS DAMSELS. By Lance-Corporal Lothario Jones 30
HARRY’S VICTORY. By Sandy Stew 31
VALEDICTORY 31
ADVERTISEMENTS 32


FOREWORD
THE Editors having asked me to
write a Foreword, I think that a
brief summary of the raison d'etre
of the Magazine is fitting. It was
conceived first as a Christmas 1918
production, but growing too large
we decided to make it an unofficial
resume , so far as is possible, of the
Unit’s history.
The Committee has worked hard
and unremittingly with this object in
view, and, thanks to them, the Unit
has a real and living souvenir which
will remind all of us ever more
forcibly of the association and com-
pensations we enjoyed when soldier-
ing with the 11th Field Ambulance.
And I would further use this
occasion to acknowledge and thank
most heartily those ladies of South
Australia to whose unremitting efforts
much of the comforts that the men
have enjoyed, when circumstances
permitted, has been due.
LIEUT.-COL. H. B. LEWERS, O.B. E.
H. B. LEWERS, Lt.-Col.
C.O. 11th Aust. Field Ambulance.


EDITORIAL
IN presenting this Magazine with its title page
‘‘ Souvenir ” to members past and. present, to
their friends and relatives, and to that loyal
band of workers in Australia whose unselfish
zeal has been boundless, we do so with a twofold
purpose.
Now that the flags of strife are about to
be furled, the time seems opportune to place
on record some tangible me-
mento of our work in the Field,
and at the - same time we
hope to cement those ties of
comradeship and brotherhood
ithe solrlier’s religion), on
which the whole co-operative
spirit of the A.I.F. has been
built. Through stress and
strain, through light and
shade, through times care-free
and happy, we have learned
to appreciate that intimacy
formed in tense and memor-
able days when friendship and
comradeship proved an unfail-
ing bulwark against depres-
sion.
And in later days, when
recollection has, perhaps,
grown dim, these pages will
awaken memories and conjure
up scenes enacted during our
life abroad, a life which has
had so many reactions, both
physical and moral. In many
ways we have expanded, in
others we have merely marked
time ; some phases we would
fain forget ; others (symbolic
of all that is best) must of
necessity survive. Of all the
influences which have operated in the moulding of our
manhood, and in calling into play those finer quali-
ties. we count first and foremost the opportunity of
meeting and living daily with men of all shades
of thought and opinion. We have been fortunate,
too, in our Commanding Officers —Colonel Downey,
Colonel Chambers, and Colonel Lewers—all have
left their personal imprint on the life history of
the Unit, and on the men who came under their
jurisdiction.
During the past few months with war drums
silent we have had time to turn over in our minds all
the events of the more recent past, and have come
to realise how much we have depended, and how
much we shall depend in the future, on friendships
made in the field.
No better, then, can we perpetuate the memory
of the Ambulance with all its associations than
by giving our hearty support and co-operation
to the nth Field Ambulance Club, which shall
foster the spirit of past achievement and bind
more closely those ties we have learned to hold
most dear.
T. R.
THE prospect of coming return to civilian life
naturally turns our thoughts to Life as it was,
Life as it is, and Life as it will be.
We look back to pre-war days with pleasure, but
not without a pang of regret for lost opportunities,
for petty differences, jealousies and factions —
now that we are able to look with vision broadened
by wider knowledge of men and things. In the
light of our present existence
it is a life we love, yet it is one
that few desire to return to
unchanged.
On entry into the military
sphere much of the affectation
and frill of former life was cut
away ; down came much top-
hamper ; preconceived ideas
of necessities went by the
board. We got nearer to Na-
ture, much of the garb of con-
ventionality was torn off and
that of simplicity donned in
its place.
We have chafed under mili-
tary constraint, but found a
new pleasure in temporary
freedom ; our spirit of inde-
pendence has rebelled at being
part of a machine, but we
found that freedom from care
drew the sting from obedi-
ence ; we have shrunk from
unwonted tasks, but found
them easier when there was no
choice; we have suffered from
hardship, but found a new
and unaccustomed joy in the
warm feel of wool, in the taste
of bread, in the simple quench-
ing of thirst, in rest from
labour ; we have been exposed to danger, but found
a new peace on regaining a place of saiety.
In spite of the squalor, the blood, the anguish of
war, there has been great joy in the comradeship of
men whom we admired, whose unselfishness was
not bounded even by the supreme sacrifice—to
enjoy the friendship of these, perhaps, has been the
greatest recompense of all.
We have beheld new and strange men, new
places, new things, and have learned new ideas.
We have travelled a rough, perilous and ever-
changing road and are now reaching its end ; some
are scarred —few have passed along unscathed.
We have learnt to appreciate one another as
never before, many have found more good in their
fellows than they knew of. We have tasted the
joy of delivery from the bondage of material things.
We are at the cross-roads and are about to begin
our return journey along a smoother road —yet
there is a vague idea that it will not be back to a
life quite the same as we left ; there is a general
belief that there will be a change of some kind ;
there is an indefinite longing for better things.
R. B. N.
Is it that a new day is dawning ?
COL. M. H. DOWNEY, D.S.O.


DOUVE VALLEY, MESSINES
(From a Water Colour Sketch by R. E. E. Dobson)
FRANCE
THOU land renowned, beloved by all
Who nursed the sons that made thee great,
Thine is the land, where free from thrall
Exists no trace of racial hate.
The land that nurtured Bonaparte
Upon the scroll of fame is writ,
Or Joan of Arc, the country maid
On honour’s throne must truly sit.
Thou art the sweetheart of the world,
And yeomen raised thee to that height;
In each French heart there beats the love
Of country, freedom, honour’s might.
Midst Revolution’s thunderbolt,
Three watchwords fed the sacred flame ;
King, Courtiers, Queen were sacrificed
To keep that spirit clear of stain :
But when a nation flees all rule,
And terror for a time holds sway,
Though peace and order may return
That nation still must rue the day.
A climate treacherous, full of snare.
Fog, wind, and frost, and rain, and snow,
And yet thou art not wholly bare
Of autumn tints and summer’s glow.
Mill, meadow, dale chant their sweet song,
And twittering birds and tall slim trees,
The forest glades the lazy streams,
The unfenced fields’ corn waving free,
And every hamlet high or low
That peeps from out each leafy vale,
Raising its sombre spire to Heaven,
The church, symbol of unseen trail.
Oft have we wandered o’er the fields,
With war’s alarms circling us round,
Felt for the widows, orphans, all,
The ruined homes and towns despoiled ;
To think that when the Hun flung o’er
His millions, thou didst not unbend.
We rise to grasp the hand that dared
The weak, and honoiir’s cause, defend.
And we who hail from warmer shores
We claim thee greater than we speak,
For ’neath thy sod there lie the bones
Of those who saved us both from death.


EDDIES OF WAR
I.
A SPOTLESS farmhouse kitchen—the brick
floor glowing red and ruddy in the light of the
fire in the stove set in the big open fireplace. The
woodwork snowy from much scrubbing, windows
curtained with spotless white, and everything that
speaks of the thrifty housewife. Through an inner
door a glimpse of a big bed, the crucifix upon the
wall, the souvenir of the first
communion and the portrait of
a smiling poilu. Within the bed
a wasted slip of a girl, listless,
big-eyed, coughing, always
coughing, and crying weakly
when red drops of blood fleck
the whiteness of her handker-
chief. Madame, all motherly
solicitude, bustles in with milk
and eggs to tempt her appetite.
Over all there hangs the dread
certainty of death and defeated
youth.
So since the spring of 1918,
when the smiling poilu, the
adored fiance, fell on the field
of honour. As from Amiens
way they heard continually by
night and day the sound of
cannon the girl lost all her youth
and happiness, and sat cowering,
shivering with the sound of thie
cannon, and coughing, always
coughing. So month by month
her strength waned, and as the
fatal lassitude grew, more red
drops of blood flecked her hand-
kerchief.
War —and the glory and the
romance, the heroism and the
valour of it all—and a little girl cowering over the
stove, shivering with the sound of the cannon, and
coughing, always coughing, crying weakly when
red drops of blood fleck the whiteness of her
handkerchief.
11.
A timid knock at the Aid-Post door, and there
sidled in with the cringing movements of a whipped
cur the quaintest and most nondescript of youths.
Hatless, he wore a tattered old khaki tunic, trousers
long past repair and a pair of ancient slippers, the
ragged soles held together by odd bits of string.
In size and stature he was a youth of about seventeen,
but his face was the face of an old man who has
battled with this world’s storms for his allotted
span. Across his temple ran a vivid red wheal and
on his cheek was stamped the blue and purple of
a huge bruise.
In a quaint patois of French and broken English
he told us his condensed story of a four years’ hell.
A boy of fourteen in a French frontier town, he had
been carried off in 1914 to work on a Belgian farm.
There he laboured with French and with some
English soldiers, sharing their blows and the refuse
that served as food.
With the Armistice the soldiers were liberated,
but he was held, and for a fortnight the Boche
vented on him the spite of their brutality. Opening
his torn shirt, he showed us the
flesh of his young body, bruised
literally from head to foot with
boot marks, and here and there
the heavy brand of a Boche
rifle butt. He took our proffered
sympathy with the strange shy-
ness of a whipped dog, but there
was something heroic and some-
thing of the spirit with which
France has borne her Calvary
as he shrugged his poor bruised,
narrow shoulders with a philo-
sophic “ C’est la guerre.”
111.
It was an unsavoury par 1
where we had wandered with
the cure, who was showing us
historic places in the old French
town—a neighbourhood of ill
repute, dark lanes, narrow wind-
ing streets and houses that
seemed to hold hidden mysteries
behind closed doors and shut-
tered windows.
From a doorway, like a ray
of sunshine on a gloomy day,
there ran out a girl, dainty, chic
and wholly charming. To her
bright “ bonjour ” the cure re-
turned a smile that was in itself a benediction
and the compassionate blessing of an understanding
father towards an erring child.
Half-amused, we turned towards the cure.
Almost as though to himself, arguing against a
misunderstanding world torn twixt flesh and devil,
he told us her story. “ She is as you see of the
underworld, but let him who is guiltless cast the
first stone. Since the Marne she has two brothers
prisoners of the Boche, and asking food and clothing
past the modest wages of any girl in a magasin.
Wherefore, what are other things compared
with hunger of brothers, soldiers of France,
beaten and starved by a brutal enemy ? Surely
there is room amongst the saints for such erring
ones as she.”
And before the story and the simple faith
of the old cure, we, being men of men’s
passions and of little faith, were glad of the gloom
of the streets.
P. E. N.
LT.-COL. R. W. CHAMBERS, D.S.O.


PARIS
“ Le paradis de petites femmes,
Le purgatorie des hommes,
L’enfer des chevaux.”
IF you have not been to Paris you have missed a
vital part of your education, just as if you have
never visited Moonta, Woolloomooloo or Sydney
Harbour out in weird Australia.
My first sight of Paris was in the fading twilight
of an autumn evening, with just enough light to
see whether I was brushing against a military
policeman or a dainty bundle of charms.
After having given my name, colour of eyes,
moustache and pedigree to the Headquarters of the
Parisian Front and listened to a lecture divided
'twixt morality and the progress of medical science,
the mantle of darkness had spread itself over the
gay city. So I decided to nerve myself for an
ordeal and inflict my French upon some innocent
owner of an hotel for board and lodging for ten
days. Fate was with me, as by the aid of my
hybrid French and Madame’s camouflaged English,
coupled with gymnastics and facial contortions, I
succeeded in securing a room and doorkey.
Mindful of previous experiences of being lost in
strange cities, I decided to retire to my couch early
that evening and obtain a decent slumber that
would fortify me for the ensuing days.
What a bed ! What a sleep ! The beautiful
softness of the capoc underneath, and the lightness
and warmth of the eiderdown above ! I turned
innumerable times into innumerable positions to
allow every part of the luxury of an elastic under-
ground—as compensation for the adamantine slabs
that had been my lot for many weary months.
I was awakened next morning by the opening of
my door and the floating in of an immaculate
chambermaid. As my eyes fully extended and
pierced her with that powerful penetration charac-
teristic of all Australians she blushed a perfect and
matchless crimson, and inquired in dulcet accents,
“ Dejeuner, monsieur ? ” Not knowing what she
meant, I replied in the affirmative (when in doubt
you always do), whereupon she floated out again ;
I cursed myself immediately after, nevertheless.
It may have been an order for a bath, a taxi or an
interview with Clemenceau —and here was the girl
gone off to execute my wishes. However, all doubts
were set aside as she reappeared with 4 cup of
chocolate and some slices of buttered bread, which
was “ dejeuner,” or in our language, " breakfast.”
I tipped her ; she bowed, and then departed.
I greeted the boulevards as fresh as a morn in
spring, uniform spotless (every button done up),
boots shining as well as in Kiwi’s advertisements,
and my face as smooth as on a ceremonial parade ;
service chevrons were as blue as the Seine, while
my hat was cocked at the right angle, showing the
Australian badge to perfection and proclaiming to
Paris —a Digger on leave.
I commenced my sight-seeing, primed with
guides to tourists, almanacs, note books and picture
post cards ; gazed in wonder at Nap.’s tomb and
the reverential crowd that was gathered about,
and wondered why the h—l they made such a
meal of his memory after a hundred years had
passed since he last saw Marie Antoinette.
I encircled, enveloped and traversed the pre-
cincts of the Arc de Triomphe and the Trocadero
Gardens, and mentally made note of the latter as
an ideal spot for a two-up ring ora 9.30 a.m. Muster
Parade. My neck was strained to reach the top
of the Eiffel Tower. I had read volumes and
encyclopaedias about this wonderful construction,
but must confess to disappointment. The tower
looked monotonous, and was made of nothing but
ironwork surrounded by barbed wire entanglements,
and appeared to be guarded by soldiers of the 1870
class.
It would take half a dozen souvenir magazines
to tell you of all the places of interest ; from the
Printemps with its universal collection of goods
ranging from pearl necklaces to Turkey twill ; of
the Siene, the waters of which Parisians will assure
you are unlike all other fluid in the world.
And the cafe and restaurant life ! ’Tis a dream
elysian from the moment you enter the swinging
glass portals until you float out on ether after the
completion of a delicious repast. You are bowed
to a delightful tete-a-tete table by an obsequious
waiter, bowed into a chair by this same aforesaid
automaton, who thereafter takes an infinite pleasure
in this physical exercise each time his weather eye
succeeds in drawing your attraction. Dishes are
universal in their assortment, and on cleaning up
his dessert, one can safely write in his diary that he
has been through an evolution of cookery, in which
everything from snails to frogs has been sacrificed
to the science of cuisine.
And let me in conclusion pay homage to La
Parisienne, the epitome of all that is chic, dainty
and fashionable.
What a field for a digger on leave ! The gay,
immaculately dressed butterflies who flit hither and
thither in the Folies Bergeres, the Alhambra, and
other theatres, and whose subtle cajolery entraps
the unwary into the purchase of roses or champagne ;
the fashion plates that well-nigh produce tachycardis
in the heart of the awkward Billjimasthey “ prome-
nade ” on a Sunday morning ; and lastly, that
pretty, about-town demoiselle that one continually
meets on the boulevards. Never, as long as
memory lasts, shall I forget the perfect execution
of her “ made in Paris ” smile, or that scintillating
glance that pierced me even to the phosgenepatch
on my right lung.
Paris is indeed the Paradise of the women : and if
in turn it is purgatory for the man, what a delightful
rest area to occupy before proceeding onward !
For my part, I shall be content to wait there
until Gabriel sounds the loud clarion for general
X. Y. Z.
mobilisation.


OFFICERS. NOVEMBER 1918.
SHELL ’OLE BILL
OLD Bill."
In after years, when memories of old
companions are fading into oblivion, few of us will
forget Old Bill. With his long legs, short body,
long arms, aquiline nose and stubby moustache, he
will be easily recalled as being one of the best-
known characters in the Ambulance.
Of course there, are many details about his
appearance, such as his hat that was always tilted
at the left instead of the right side of his head, and
his enormous feet—but the chief characteristic of
Old Bill was the size of his hands. Dinkum, to
see Bill’s hands was to see a sight never to be for-
gotten. Someone likened them to a railway signal,
and really, when old Bill raised his hand to demand
silence, it certainly was impressive.
Well, Bill, like all men, had his good points. He
was big-hearted and a battler for his men, as his
old section know full well. Well I remember the
rag-time parades at Vieil Moutier, when, in calling
the roll, Old Bill, after many gymnastic evolutions
with his hands and his roll book, would call the names
of half the men and mark the rest down as “ special
duties,” whereas he knew the lazy absentees were
probably sleeping in. Of course, to thank him
for doing one such a favour was courting disaster,
as Old Bill would instantly regard the offender as
being inclined to come the “ kid stakes,” and he
was the last man to allow anyone to bluff him.
Bill came to us at Nieppe in Flanders, and being a
critical unit we voiced many opinions as to his
character, but few of them proved as apt as that
of old Harry, ” the Speechless One,” who confined
his remarks to “ Struth ! ” “Blimey!”—for Bill
was certainly an enigma.
His fearlessness soon became apparent, and one
often recalls the sight of Old Bill up the line. With
his gas mask at the alert and his muffler cap under
his wobbling steel hat, he seldom increased his
awkward gait whether his path was shell-swept or
quiet. Mentioning his gait, I think the simile “as
awkward as an issue mule ” is an exact description.
Bill’s method of giving an order in its mysterious
vagueness always filled one with foreboding. In
the dead of night his head, enveloped in the in-
evitable woollen cap, would appear at the billet
door, and when he had successfully wakened every-
body, he would point with his enormous finger at
each one of those who were unlucky enough to
come within his gaze, saying, “ You ! You ! and
You ! Get up straight away.” He would be in


HISTORICAL SKETCH OF UNIT
PART I.
IN the following article it is intended to give a
brief sketch of the Unit from time of forma-
tion to the first really prolonged rest period (in
France) in March, 1918 (which, however, was so
rudely terminated by the March offensive).
The sketch will in no way be exhaustive, but will
portray the outstanding events that occurred during
the above-mentioned period.
On the Ist of March, 1916, the nth Field Ambu-
lance was officially formed at Mitcham, South
Australia, and became an integral part of the Third
Australian Division, also at that time in process of
formation.
Colonel M. Downey, D.S.O. (then Lieut .-Col.),
was appointed Commanding Officer, much to the
satisfaction of the men, who were concentrated at
the A.M.C. Base awaiting the formation of the
Ambulance.
The necessary instruction of the men was com-
menced immediately after formation and carried on
assiduously until embarkation. Field manoeuvres
in connection with the evacuation of wounded
formed an interesting and practical way of conveying
to all ranks some idea of what would be required of
them in the distant fields of France and Flanders.
The hilly country to the south of Mitcham proved,
as after experience showed, a striking similarity of
contour to that met with under actual battle
conditions.
The unit did not embark for Overseas service
as a whole, but was divided into four parties. The
main body, including transport, left in the Suevic
on the 31st May, 1916 ; “ A ” Section Bearers were
allotted to the Berrimu, which sailed from Mel-
bourne on the 30th June, 1916 ; another party
were attached to the Wandilo ; while Captain Love
and 35 other ranks embarked in the Afric on
9th June, 1916.
All parties had a pleasant voyage, although a
certain amount of sickness was prevalent on all
boats. The Suevic reached England on the 21st
July, 1916, and the Ambulance disembarked at Ply-
mouth, proceeding to Salisbury Plain (Lark Hill
Camp) by rail.
Four months were spent in training here, and this
period was one of the most pleasant ever experi-
enced in the history of the Unit. Leave was
liberally granted, and most members visited
various parts of England, Ireland, and Scotland.
The surrounding country was picturesque and
green; meadow and field, tree and shrub were
clothed in all their midsummer glory. It was rural
England at its best.
On 24th November the Ambulance embarked at
Southampton and proceeded to France to take up
the work that constituted its raison d’Slre. Instruc-
tion, drill and physical training had made all ranks
as fit as possible for the arduous and venturesome
task that was now about to begin.
Le Havre was reached early on the morning of
the 25th, a cold, wet and depressing day. After
resting here for a day, we were entrained for the
forward zone on the afternoon of the 26th. After
three days’ travelling in horse boxes, we arrived
at Bailleul on the night of the 28th, and here the
Unit disentrained. It was a miserably cold night
and the place was knee deep in mud. Through
some misunderstanding our billets were occupied,
and we put in the night under the shelter of a
friendly haystack, with the thermometer in the
vicinity of o c . After two and a half days of route
marching in triangular directions (marches which
have become familiar in song and jest in the Unit)
we eventually took over a Divisional Rest Station
at Steenwerck. This station has become
historic in the annals of the Ambulance, as it was
the first station that we administered in France;
secondly on account of the amount of pioneering
work that was accomplished to make the place
worthy of its name; thirdly it was here we spent
our first two Christmases in France.
Our next important move was to Armentieres,
where we took over all the medical posts and stations
of the sector running from Houplines to the junction
of the Chapelle-ArmentUres-L’Epinnette sectors.
This was the first time that the Ambulance was
responsible for the medical administration of the
Divisional Front.
Night raiding by the infantry was frequent while
here, and the Unit was kept busy the whole of the
time.
From Armentieres we moved around to the left on
the Le Bizet sector, where we again took control of
the forward area work. Our first casualties
occurred here, when the advanced dressing station
was shelled by the enemy. Two cooks were badly
wounded, one succumbing to his wounds a few days
later. Upon relief in this sector, the Ambulance
moved to Pont d’Achelles, in preparation for the
Messines offensive.
From arrival in France until this relief (the end of
May) may be termed as a period of intensive train-
ing that was to fit us in every way for the great battle
that was to result in the capture of the Messines
Ridge. At Pont d’Achelles extensive preparations
were made for the reception and evacuation of
wounded. Advanced dressing stations and regi-
mental aid posts were taken over on the 29th May.
We administered this area (Ploegsteert sector) until
the day prior to the attack, when the 10th Field
Ambulance (plus the bearer divisions of the 9th
and nth Ambulances) assumed control of the
evacuation of wounded from the regimental aid
posts to the advanced station at Charing Cross,
whence we cleared to Pont d’Achelles. All avenues
of evacuation that led to Charing Cross were through
Ploegsteert Wood —then a beautiful wood of
luxuriant tree growth and foliage.
The battle commenced early on the morning of


the 7th fune with the explosion of the mines laid
under the ridge. Casualties were numerous, and
the bearers had a very strenuous task evacuating
from the various posts.
The enemy on the night previous to the battle
launched a tremendous gas bombardment, espe-
cially from the supports backwards. This back area
comprised for a large part dense tree foliage stretch-
ing down from Hill 63 as far as the main Ploegsteert-
Messines road. Gas shells were poured in from
7 o’clock in the evening until 2 o’clock the following
morning. The very stillness of the night and the
tree foliage made possible a higher concentration,
especially in the lower ground behind Hill 63.
By xi o’clock the conditions under which the
wounded had to be evacuated were hellish and well-
nigh unbearable. The bearers were compelled to
carry with gas masks on from the regimental aid
posts to the advanced dressing station, tormented
and harried by poisonous shells, which also did their
best (in vain) to prevent the infantry from reaching
the assembly-place. Conditions were as bad at
Charing Cross, where doctors and personnel were
also compelled to work with gas masks on. How-
ever, despite all obstacles, the battle was a grand
success for the fighting ranks, as also was the rapid
and orderly evacuation of casualties from the field.
Our casualties were 3 men killed and 34 wounded,
or 30 per cent, of personnel employed between the
advanced station and the regimental aid posts.
Following upon a week’s rest after Messines, the
Division was ordered back to the left of its previous
sector—on the ridge itself—to consolidate the
ground won on June 7th.
This period was one of the most trying times, as
it is one of the brightest pages, in the history of the
young Division. Rain had fallen heavily, roads
were broken and treacherous, while the terrain from
within two miles of the front line resembled a quag-
mire, with shell holes dotted as ireely as pebbles on
the beach. The task set the infantry was Homeric
in its magnitude, and in no less a way was the task
of evacuation of casualties. No carry was under
two miles, over ground shell-churned and trackless,
while the roads along which the ambulances
travelled were broken and dangerous and at all
times subjected to heavy shelling. Both advanced
and main dressing stations were subjected to bom-
bardment, several casualties were sustained, and all
cars more or less put temporarily out of action.
Following upon this, momentous period came a
quieter existence at the divisional rest station at
Westof Farm, near Neuve Eglise. This was a very
pleasant time, occasion being taken of the fine
weather to organise athletic sports, cricket and
football matches.
More good times followed, as after a month at
Westof Farm we entrained for a rest area behind
St. Omer, miles away from the scene of conflict.
The three weeks spent in this area, Ecuire and
Ouve Wirquin (Pas de Calais) were pleasant and
happy days. The country resembled a mighty
carpet of green ; meadow and field, tree and shrub
vied with each other in wealth of colour. The
surrounding villages near by were pretty and clean,
and the roads thereto picturesque and dry. Sport
formed a prominent part of the curriculum of
training, and inter-unit matches were frequently
played, and aroused great interest. Rivulets
meandered through the villages and gave excellent
opportunities for swimming or bathing. At the
end of the third week, thoroughly refreshed and
recuperated, other fields, less picturesque and less
inviting, called, and the last day« of September saw
us on the road, marching to Ypres.
In the ensuing battles, that commenced on the
4th October with the battle of Broodseinde Ridge
and culminated with the battle of Passchendaele
on the 12th October, the gth Field Ambulances took
charge of the forward area, and we were placed in
charge of the corps’ main dressing station at Red
Farm, situated on the Poperinghe-Ypres road close
to Brandhoek. We were assisted by a detachment
of New Zealanders and English troops. The bearer
divisions were attached to the 9th Field Ambu-
lance from the 4th of October until relief by the
Canadians towards the end of the month.
During the whole of the time the weather was
cruel —cold and continuously wet. The mud, climatic
conditions, hostile shelling eclipsed any previous
engagement. The wounded suffered terribly from
the weather, and the unavoidable delay in evacua-
tion owing to the congestion on the roads. Our
losses in killed were heavy, and amongst them were
some of the finest and best. Captain Kerr was
killed outside his dug-out, and Major Meehan and
Captain Dunstan were both badly wounded. Our
losses were 10 killed and 11 wounded.
It was with mixed feelings that we turned our
backs upon Ypres and the Flanders Ridges. The
Division was weak, woefully and pitifully weak, and
it was a grim, set-faced lot of infantry and component
parts of the Oval Formation that wended their way
from the scenes of that titanic struggle—scenes the
memories of which were pregnant of sadness for
gallant comrades who would forever stay behind.
Our consolation was that they fell true as steel—
victims of sacrifice in the most sanguinary and
ferocious of world battles
On leaving Flanders the Ambulance moved back
to the same area as it occupied in September
behind St. Omer. The autumn had changed to
winter, and with it the rain had set in early. Despite
adverse climatic conditions, a most enjoyable
time was spent. Sports were indulged in whenever
possible, opportunities of sight-seeing were many,
and leave was granted liberally and as far as was
practicable.
From November to February, 1918, the Unit was
stationed at different periods on quiet sectors, like
the Le Bizet and Ploegsteert fronts ;or adminis-
tering divisional rest stations at Bailleul, Westof
Farm and Steenwerke.
In these rest stations as many as 300 sick and
slightly wounded men were accommodated and
treated. At Westof Farm Nissen huts and marquee


tents were used for accommodation purposes, but
at both Bailleul and Steenwerke large buildings
were made available. It was in places like these
that the worth of a field ambulance was felt, inas-
much as all cases treated and cured were discharged
to their various units, and thus prevented consider-
able wastage to the Division.
Towards the end of February we relieved the
2nd Australian Division in the Devres-Boulogne
area for a period of rest. A most enjoyable and
care-free time was spent here. Leave to Boulogne
was granted, and fully availed of ; sport was a fore-
front item, and never lacked participants, whether
football, hockey or athletics.
It was a very fit and healthy body of men who were
summoned on parade in the early morning of the
22nd of March, when the news of the German
offensive was made known, with the added informa-
tion that the Division was to be sent,” somewhere ”
to help “ someone.”
SHELL ’OLE BILL {continued from page 11).
vulnerable to the multitude of questions and
imprecations hurled at him. Then would follow
a groping around until the destination was reached,
and with a curt “ Now you remain at this post,”
he would leave the unfortunate ones to vent what
wrath was left upon the cold night air.
Bill was labelled with more than one epithet, two
of the best being “ Shell ’Ole Bill ” and “ Souvenir
Bill.” He was the originator of that peculiar move-
ment known to the bearers as “ Shell formation.”
But the day came when the real worth of Old
Bill was lauded far beyond the personal opinions
of his own section. Fritz suddenly decided to
shell Bonnay, and Old Bill worked ceaselessly for
hours under intense shell, fire bringing in and
dressing wounded.
He soon after broke down in health and left for Aus-
tralia, proudly wearing the Queen’s Medal awarded
in South Africa—and the Military Medal, earned in
C. C. C.
France for bravery in the field.
OFFICERS AND SERGEANTS


WHAT WAS THAT?
IT was some dinner all right.
They called it a “ Section ” dinner, I think.
Anyhow, it was all there.
The trouble was I began to disintegrate, as it
were, early in the evening.
The last thing I remember was the C.O. falling
in a platoon of corks.
He was roaring at them to form fours.
My impression was that they were doing it
perfectly.
I tried to compliment him.
' My effort sounded to me like the song of an
approaching 5-9 —-—-and then the crump came.
* ♦ * *
I sprang from my bed and landed nimbly on my
feet. Glancing at my watch I found I had arisen
early. I always do. Is not the morning the best
part of the day ?
It is not.
With my right hand I threw down an imaginary
jug of water and followed it up with an imaginary
biscuit.
Then I pressed an imaginary bell, for I was going
on leave and needed practice in these things. Not
being entirely satisfied with my rehearsal I walked
three times round the room pressing bells and
calling " waiter ” and “ taxi,” chucking in an
occasional “ portah,” don’t you know, in case
possible eavesdroppers might think I never used
these excellent people.
That is not the case.
My admiration for the utility of a carefully
selected flock of porters is supreme.
Carelessly loosening a cord round my waist my
robes fell, and I stood before my mirror throwing
admiring glances as I contracted my gluteal muscles.
How they sprang to it !
Were they not going on leave, too ?
Then I dressed hurriedly.
In spite of a curtailed toilet, which left behind'
a fringe of hairs round my neck, and soap in my
ears, my whole being responded, and as I hurried
hither and hither I burst into a warm glow. I
thrust the few tools I knew to be necessary for my
toilet en route into a pack. These I followed up
with a Fritz helmet, a 9-2 shell case, a couple of
revolvers and a charming little Hun dixie—all of
which I had purchased most reasonably from the
Souvenir King of the Unit.
A slight correction is needed here, for I had
salved the quaint little dixie during a particularly
bloody stunt from a filthy German dug-out.
Then I cantered across to the cookhouse. On my
way I saluted the C. 0., 2nd, 3rd, 4th in command,
all of whom ignored my compliments on a point of
order.
However, I was in no mood to take offence at
such things and commenced throwing down fluid
and substance in reality.
This finished, I handed it over to my digestive
outfit and started to “ proceed on leave.”
Everything was lovely—the birds screamed in
the trees, and even the little insects tittered as they
hopped from grass to grass.
As the mud squidged under my boots I whistled
popular airs, and sang popular songs.
Surely this was no ordinary mud.
Its powerful aroma rose, intoxicated my senses,
and filled me with ecstasy.
A luxurious four-wheeled vehicle, bearing the
word “ Foden ” on its dainty radiator, flashed past
covering me with the same fluid, and overpowered
by the potent narcotic I sank senseless by the way.
Then things happened.
Four bearers from the nth Field Ambulance
rushed up, deftly handling what appeared to be the
under carriage of a perambulator.
“ Are you the man for leave ? ” they cried.
“ Yes—Yes,” I cried excitedly.
“ Hop on, Digger,” they cried ; “ you’re Jake.”
Now that was one of the things I had always
wanted to be.
‘‘ Jake.”
How the word rang in my ears !
I had promised my people before I left Australia
I should never return until I was Jake ; and here
was my chance.
I hopped on.
Five, ten, twenty, forty miles an hour. Gee !
These were some bearers. I tried to speak, but the
air filled my mouth and lungs and I could not.
Presently the railhead hove in sight, and a
moment later we pulled up beside a train bearing in
large letters the word LEAVE.
An officer carrying a blue band on his hat, and
the letters R.T.O. on his arm, rushed up.
“Are you the man for leave this month ?” he cried.
“ I am,” I replied proudly.
“ This is your train, sir,” he said.
“ What will you have ? ”
I modestly demanded a whiskey.
He rushed off, and presently returned, followed
by an N.C.O. and two others, bearing victuals.
“You will reach the port of embarkation within
an hour,” he said. “You will be shown to the
boat on arrival.” He then excused himself saying
he had to make arrangements for the man for the
following month.
Everything was as he said.
An hour later I was endeavouring to count the
kilo pegs, but the pace was terrific.
It was impossible.
I thought of a number. Twenty-one. I had
always been fond of twenty-one. As a number it
seemed far superior to all other numbers.
Possibly because it took three sevens to make it.
No, it couldn’t be that.
I multiplied it by five and divided by eight.
“ 13J miles to go,” I cried.


I was wrong.
At that moment the engine-driver applied the
brakes and I was hurled heavily from the carriage
on my ear.
I was picked up by an R.T.O. and whisked on the
boat.
As we passed, the people murmured. “ That,”
they said, “ is the man for leave.”
I was shown into the captain's cabin.
A moment later the captain presented himself at
the door.
I was busy. I had never been busy before.
Two months of the A.I.F. Educational Scheme had
worked wonders. I compreed French now, thought
and spoke logically, disagreed with Darwin, and
upheld Marcus Aurelius, and was some guy at
salesmanship. I had acquired the busy habit.
Do it now. That was my motto.
It had become a drain on my system.
Even as I stood there, selling the captain’s toilet
articles to the wardrobe for fabulous prices, my
brain reeled. Couldn’t someone take us back to the
war, where we could get rest ?
The captain stood there, clicking his heels. I
looked round.
“ Give the word, sir, and we’ll start.”
I gave the word, and we started.
As we approached mid-channel U-boats rose in
hosts about us, and torpedoes darted hither and
thither. How pretty they looked as they flitted
to and fro, leaving a chain of bubbles behind them.
One by one they rose to the surface, turned lazily
over and sank to their last resting place.
“ Another 200 quid gone,” I murmured, as each
one met its watery grave.
And then suddenly realising the presence' of
danger, I stepped on to the bridge. Striking a pose,
I flung out the order —‘ ‘ Save the women and children
first.” The wind caught it and bore it to the blunt
end of the ship where it was caught in the roar of
the propeller, and so to its untimely end.
Then, realising that there were no women and
children, I redoubled my efforts.
“ SAVE THE WOMEN AND CHILDREN,”
I roared.
Hearing me this time, the Captain came to my
side.
“ There are no women and children,” he said.
“ Right,” I said, obviously relieved. “Carry on,
Captain.”
The bullets hissed about our heads.
I can see them now.
Softly I sang, “ This is the Life.”
That was not the song at all.
Neither was it “ Asleep in the Deep.”
I had yet to learn my third song.
That was where the Educational Scheme had
failed. There were no singing classes. One could
learn to keep books and bees, build houses and
hypotheses, but one could not sing.
No, there was no doubt one could not sing.
Thoroughly enraged at the thought I rushed to
my pack and drew two revolvers.
Months as a stretcher-bearer had taught me
what distance was.
Six thousand yards—l drew a bead.
The air was filled with cries, as one by one the
U-boats disappeared, broken in a thousand pieces
by my deadly fire.
The sight sickened me.
I could shoot no more.
Cutting out the rough stuff, I went to my cabin
and lay down.
I fell into a sort of torpor.
Presently the Captain presented himself at the
door again.
He was making a hobby of presenting himself at
the door, I thought.
It annoyed me.
“ Hullo, Fred,” he remarked.
“Be careful ! ” I warned him ; “my name is
Frederick, and I shall stand no trifling with it.”
“ Well, Frederick,” he said smoothly, in his
affable manner, “ land is in sight.”
This man was alcoholic, I felt sure. Possibly
he drank Eau-de-Cologne as a child.
He filled me with repugnance.
“ Well, I didn’t put it there,” I retorted hotly.
“ It has been there all the time.”
“ Do you know to whom you are speaking ? ” he
roared, flashing his eyes disgustingly, 1 thought,
for a Master Mariner.
“ No,” I said, looking at my watch to show him
how little I cared. “ Don’t you know anyone that
can tell you ? ”
Then he did what I thought was a very rude
thing. He walked up and torpedoed me between
the eyes. That was against the rules of the game.
* * * *
I woke up.
Sitting up, the cold air of France smote me on the
nipples.
I flung out my arms.
One hit the billet, and the other the friendly face
of the next ahead.
DE RESZKE
Oh'! Hell !


“A” SECTION
THE AMBULANCE LITERARY AND DEBATING SOCIETY
EARLY in October, after we had left the war
behind us and concluded what proved to be
our last stunt, we embarked upon that long promised
and sorely-needed rest, which was to restore us
from the effects of the arduous campaigning period,
beginning in March and lasting throughout the
whole of the summer. As this rest had possibilities
of being a prolonged one. schemes were at once
launched for providing plenty of facilities for
recreation and diversion as well as education, and
one outcome of the wave of enthusiasm was the
forming of the Ambulance Literary and Debating
Society.
The object of the Society is twofold, namely, the
educational benefits resulting from popular dis-
cussion and debate and the diversion and entertain-
ment usually to be extracted from the congenial
and at times keen atmosphere of its meetings,
Regarding the former, there are several very obvious
features, the value of which, from an educational
point of view, can be readily attested to by anyone
who has ever been associated with a similar institu-
tion in civilian life. Ventilating and threshing out
popular questions or matters affecting our interests
and welfare necessitates a good deal of thought and
preparation on the part of those participating.
Enlightenment does not stop with the actual
debate—it continues. Men go away with food for
thought and often the informal discussions following
are quite as illuminating as the original one.
Apart from these considerations, an important
factor is the training in public speaking afforded
by the Society. It improves those who have
already found their feet in this direction, and new
men are given the opportunity to overcome their
initial trepidation under the most favourable
circumstances. What has contributed in no small
measure to the success of our gatherings is the
co-operation between officers and men. The
colonel has supported us with a hearty interest and
consistent attendance, while the splendid audiences
and their readiness to take part testifies to the
enthusiasm manifested by all.
A review of the work done up to the present
shows that we have been quite ambitious in our
choice of subjects and the manner of treating them.
The former embraces such questions as our return
home, social and commercial reforms, race hygiene,
and the great political issues of the war. To vary
the proceedings as much as possible in order to


preserve interest and give scope for the individual
abilities of all, we have dealt with these matters in
debates, discussions, lectures, impromptu speeches
and model parliaments. The last proved our most
successful “ stunt ” and never failed to ensure a
crowded house. In deciding the issue of a debate
we have introduced a new method —instead of
deciding by popular vote we elect a quorum to
adjudicate.
The following has been our programme to date ;
October igth. —lmpromptu speeches.
October 26 th. —Debate ; “ Should the Medical
Profession be Nationalised ?
November 2nd. —Essay competition : “ Will the
World be the Better for the War ?
November gth. —Debate : “ Should Woman Com-
pete with Man in Public and Commercial Life ? ”
November 16 th. —Model Parliament. Introduc-
tion of a Bill for the nationalisation of certain
sports and amusements.
November 23 rd. —Lecture by Major Meyers ;
“ Some Aspects of Health in Australia After the
War.”
November 30 th. —Model Parliament.
December 7th. —Discussion ; " Demobilisation and
Repatriation.”
December 14th. —Question Box.
December 21st. —Lecture, Captain Stump : " Prob-
lems of Labour and Capital.”
January 4th. —Citizenship.
The Society recently became incorporated with
the Education Scheme and is now under the
direction of the committee which administers all
work of this nature. In a measure, perhaps, this
is a testimony of its achievement, but at the same
time it is an incentive to co-operate advantageously
with other classes, thus making the Society a field
for practical work that has been learned elsewhere.
When it comes to an analysis of the actual
speaking performances, it must be conceded that
a good deal of progress has been made, for whereas
at the beginning there existed a certain amount of
timidity, and the speakers lacked in coherence and
directness, reserve has now been broken down and
a decided improvement effected in individual
powers of argument, arrangement of matter, and
in delivery. Also there is greater co-ordination in
regard to team work. However, we have by no
means reached any standard of excellence where
further advancement would be undesirable or
impossible. A few follow the practice of reading
much of their speeches, which detracts considerably
from their effectiveness. Until they acquire the
art of thinking on their feet a good plan is to
memorise the matter and then deliver it, aided by
notes, if necessary. One of the best methods in
preparing is to set out properly the chief points,
think sufficiently about each one and their relation-
ship and then, when speaking, keep those notes
ready for reference.
Speaking generally, the work of the Society
could be made more effective and better results
obtained if we established a study circle to furnish
new material for debate, and also equip us with
more data ; and secondly, by working hand in hand
more with the other classes of the Educational
Scheme. By such a co-operation, not only would
our Society benefit in the manner indicated, but
the other classes would receive a greater stimulus- —
that of working towards some immediate end.
There can be no doubt that in conjunction with
the rest of the educational schemes the activities
of our own Literary and Debating Society are
playing their part in transforming us from the
temporary status of soldiers to that of civilians
once more, for by bringing our minds to bear on
questions of ordinary life we are cultivating that
more responsible “ civilian ” outlook so much
commended to us at this time by the Demobilisation
Authorities. When we get home, too, we shall
not forget that “ soldier’s ” opinion on many things
which we have been consolidating, however un-
consciously, in our discussions here.
HIS COUNTRY
IT was during the armistice celebrations in Paris.
Everyone was delightfully, deliciously mad with
the joy of the moment. Patriotism had reached
its starry zenith and was perfervid in its visible
appearances. Soldiers of every nationality, frcm
the übiquitous American to the pig-tailed " Con-
tinentalised Chinois,” received their quota of
laudation from the frenzied populace. The sight
of a flag (spotlessly clean or mud-bedraggled) raised
deafening cheers that nigh cracked the wireless
apparatus of the Eiffel Tower, and let loose the
tongues of Babylon.
It was, in fact, a flag incident that caused this
paragraph.
I and one other rank had squeezed ourselves out
of the seething multitude from the opera, and edged,
cajoled and pushed our way into the Boulevards,
escorted on either side by a couple of Frenchmen,
a Tommy and, of course, a Digger.
Suddenly, from a lorry shipwrecked midway in
the Boulevard des Italiens, up went the multitudi-
nous flags of our thousand-and-one Allies to the
accompaniment of cheers, exclamations and hand
gymnastics. The effect upon our escort, already
unnaturally jubilant, was electrical.
“ Vive la France,” came from the Poilus.
“ Vive I’Angleterre,” yelled Tommy.
" Vive les pommes-de-terres,” came the Digger’s
salutation.
“MILE END.”


IMPRESSIONS
THE choice of a word for the title page of our
Magazine has been a happy one. There may
have been a time when many of us had no knowledge
of its French origin, but now this word, above all
others, will stand as a link between the life we have
lived for many a month in this land of France, and
our future life in Australia.
Thus there will be called forth recollections of
occasions pleasant and sad, of scenes of stirring
action, scenes of quiet pastoral life, scenes of
French communal life in city town and village,
and all those other scenes appearing in our minds
as a series of swiftly-moving, kaleidoscopic views,
which, though their clarity may be obscured, will
leave a lasting impression destined to influence
all our future thoughts and deeds.
In our future life in Australia, perhaps when
gathered round the family circle on some winter
night, or sitting out in the glorious moonlight of
our southern hemisphere, or at some convivial
gathering of “ Returned Soldiers’ Club,” a sports
meeting or just a chance meeting of old companions,
much of our talk will be in the " Do you remember? ”
strain.
Then this pleasant word “ souvenir ” will be
sure to rise in our conversation. Its very sound
will strike for some of us harmonious chords, bringing
vividly to mind incidents daily associated with
our brave French compatriots. For others of us
“ souvenir ” will stand for something more concrete,
and with such thoughts uppermost at a time when
we have taken up this little volume of souvenir we
shall people the scenes with long columns of German
prisoners. How many are the scenes memory will
enable us to live again ?
Do you remember those long main roads so even
and well made stretching away to the horizon
with their double row of sentinel poplars, planted
long years ago by some far-seeing statesman who,
at that time, little thought to what a pitch of
perfection the art of camouflage might reach.
And here and there those clumsy cobble stones,
whose convex surface seemed ever to resent the
footfall of the dog-tired digger, plodding along and
swearing inwardly the while under the weight of a
heavy pack, partially filled with souvenirs. And
that never-to-be-forgotten silhouette effect, still
present in our day-dreams, of a long string of
“B” SECTION


wagons and limbers stretching in sinuous line on
the crest of some distant rise and winding its way
at dusk towards the firing-line with food supplies
and ammunition. Haven’t we all witnessed such
a scene and watched that sleepy convoy galvanise
into action by the accurate registering on favourite
points along the road of some shrewd German
gunners ? And those French peasants, old men
and women for the most part, working tirelessly
in the fields all day long, whose absorption in their
toil made them a very object of wonderment to us
nurtured as we are in a wholesome policy of eight
hours’ work per day. Shall we ever forget the
usage of the dogs and horses as they turned grinding-
wheel, chaffcutter or water-wheel in all apparent
patience ? That typical village with its narrow,
badly-planned streets, ankle deep in mud, through
which some village maiden, with unbraided hair,
ploughed her heavy ill-fitting boots to the com-
munal village pump ; or maybe she of maturer
years (not so pleasant, perhaps, to the eye, as her
sisters in other villages that we remember) clad in
the shawl so characteristic of this land. Or the
village duck pond in the centre of the town, mostly
frequented by a crowd of children, who never
failed to hail the passing Anzac with “ Bon
jour, Monsieur,” or “ Souvenir ” —having that
liberal supply of cheek common to children of all
countries.
How changed the appearance of those same folk
as we saw them emerging from the church at B —-—■
during Christmas, ’l7, their pious look, their neat
costumes, neat ankle boots and well-groomed
appearance, in all a pleasing sight, which caused
many a flutter in the heart of the home-sick digger
fortunate enough to be billeted in one of their
houses.
How well shall we remember the chateau, orna-
ment of.almost every country village, massive and
picturesque, a great contrast to the other buildings
which comprise the hamlet. Those acres of land
adjoining, rich in tree and shrub, owned by some
absent country squire—ideal grounds for partridge,
deer or grouse. Here were found shady walks and
pleasant drives covered in with trees and leading
in all directions. That well-remembered lawn in
front with just one or two Cyprus pines or cedar
trees to relieve the bareness. Shall we ever forget
the colour of those autumn tints at L’Arbre a
Mouches, the green, the yellow, the russet ; then
the fall of the leaf as the tree prepared for its winter
slumber ?
What a number of us will be for ever mindful of
that “ cushy little possie ” in some old Fritz dug-out
at a Relay Post or an R.A.P. The friendly shelter
of those concrete walls, which saved us so often
when the dreaded 5’9 landed close in our vicinity.
Some of us remember only too vividly those tense
periods of waiting for each shell to “ lob ” during
a bombardment. Suddenly one hits the roof of
our prison ! We regain our composure, although
shaking and trembling, but glad to be alive. In
these confined homes we lived, cooked (by the aid
of a smoky stove), slept, played cards or wrote
home letters. What yarns were told to wile away
the time. Conversation was about our homes,
our rations, shells or when the long-expected
divisional relief was coming.
Some will remember the novelty of a piano,
fortunately discovered in a ruined village near by
and transferred under cover of darkness by willing
workers to our dug-out home.
Do you remember the journey down from Belgium
to the Somme when the Division was thrown in to
stop the onward rush of the Hun ? How vivid
that journey will remain to many of us—-the
marches along the locks in the moonlight of an
early spring ; the train journey in horse boxes
barely cleared of manure, and the mad rush in cars
into the darkness, illuminated by Very light or
star shell all round the horizon where some Hun
fired his night lights—and whose exact position
no one seemed precisely to know.
Do you remember our arrival at Doullens—the
terrified populace all standing at the doors of their
houses and many weeping intensely ? With what
mixed feelings were we received ! Some of those
inhabitants, refugees no doubt from the scene of
the Hun atrocities, cried out, “ Too late, Austra-
lians ” ; others, on seeing the Antipodeans,
exclaimed, “ Les chapeaux sont arrivees ! ” Their
hopes were not destined to disappointment. Then
came the final march to the positions on the Somme.
What a piteous sight it was to see the scores of
refugees along the road, old men, women and
children, and among them the ill and the infirm,
all carrying away with them what few possessions
they could in any sort of vehicle, from a perambu-
lator to a cow-drawn cart. We remember the
sorrow our fellows felt for these poor people and
the righteous feeling of homicidal hate against the
Hun. Shall we ever forget the contrast that met
our gaze on arrival down south ? The north, with
its windmills and flat, monotonous tableland, was
left behind.
Do you remember the intervals of rest we spent
during those numerous holdings of the line ?
How we enjoyed the pleasant summer weather
and our oppQrtunities for bathing in the nume-
rous streams. How glorious were the poppies,
the blue cornflowers in the fields of corn,
the rich verdure, and with every here and there
a tall church spire peeping out, evidencing the
presence of a village behind the wood, the
whole landscape dominated by the noble cathedral
of Amiens.
Shall we ever forget with what dramatic sudden-
ness the fighting ceased in November ? To us who
had just come from the fighting zone it seemed
almost incredible.
How one and all await the sight of a eucatyptus
gum, a kookaburra or a -jveeping willow !
SHALL WE EVER FORGET ?


“C” SECTION
INTERVIEWS
HAVING been requested by the Editor to
interview some of the more distinguished
leaders of the Unit’s activities, I was strolling
quietly along meditating upon the profound task
set me. I realised it would be no easy task to be
received by them, let alone to induce them to
expand and expound themselves. Thus musing I
was attracted by the clack-clack of a typewriter.
Investigating, I found this to be emanating from
the orderly room, and as we were in a rest area I
knew there could be no work in progress there, so
timidly tapped on the door. Entering, I was faced
with a polite, adequate-looking and prematurely
aged sage, who proceeded to remark that there was
no Paris leave allotment and as far as he knew there
never was likely to be any, and, in any case, ninety-
nine per cent, of the Unit had already applied for
the first vacancy. I here intruded upon his
monotone, for it seemed as if he was reciting a
poem, and explained my reasons for the intrusion.
He heard me patiently, as I am led to believe is
his wont, and with a strained look in his eye, a
faint smile flickered and died. Said he, “ I thought
we had seen and heard every sort of imbecility
here, but this is certainly new.”
I was startled by some movement amongst what.
in the half light, I had taken to be furniture. 1
found that they were acolytes appertaining to the
sage and were waging the war on paper. One was
evidently very intelligent, for he was a lance-
corporal. Asked concerning his activities, he
informed me he and his staff were all things to all
men and at all hours of the day and night. Thank-
ing him I withdrew, to be hastily summoned back
by the sergeant, who questioned me anxiously as
to whether anything could be done through the
magazine to prevent the C.O. smoking all cigarettes
found in the orderly room.
My wanderings thus fairly started, and feeling
indeed that I was tapping the right wisdom of the
Unit, I continued my stroll and presently noticed
a striving mass apparently all trying to enter at the
one time a small and unattractive-looking room.
Above the clamour rose an insistent cry of “ No
sauce, no cigarettes, no chocolate. Try the
brilliantine and safety razors.” I waited until the
throng melted and I was able to approach the
hero, who wore one stripe and a quiet smile of
victory, and who was also scratching his head. I
caught his repeated remarks to a fellow-survivor,
that it was all due to a lack of co-operation. I
gathered that his job was to demonstrate how to


avoid industrial conflicts, and as practical example
he ran a canteen at much personal loss and incon-
venience. He assured me the canteen business
had suffered greatly owing to the war. I en-
deavoured to extract from him some details for
readers of the magazine, but all that he vouchsafed
was “ Wait until the next debate.”
I felt, however, I was penetrating into the home
life of the Unit, and in this uplifted frame of mind
decided to essay the Repatriation Department, and
I wended my way thither. Whilst ascending the
stairs a violent argument reached my ears, evidently
issuing from the very department. One heated
voice repeated ; ‘‘lf you think the Education and
Repatriation Department is a place to come and
be funny in you’ve gutzered.” Second voice
sounded : “ I understand why they don’t add
intelligence department,” and when 1 arrived the
combatants had been separated. I ascertained
that the enquirer had called to find out when he
was to leave for Australia and had finally asked
why the department included Repatriation, as it
seemed unlikely ever to do any of it. Personally,
I found the sergeant to be a quiet and well preserved
enthusiast. He informed me that such an incident
was unusual. I next sauntered through the gate
and came to the chateau, over the main entrance
of which was the sign “ Receiving Room.” A
motor ambulance had just driven up and there
were quite a number of men standing round about
it. Presently there alighted one of substantial
frame and mddy countenance and rubbed his
hands together with evident satisfaction, beaming
benignly on the assembled multitude. It was soon
evident that he was on very friendly terms with
all and sundry, as they addressed him by the
appellation so frequently given to the custodians
of the civil law. The repartee indulged in was
amusing to an onlooker and I gathered that he had
been on a visit to B , where he had some interests
at a certain hospital. As he, good-naturedly, flung
a parting retort to some wag in the crowd I pro-
ceeded to follow him, thinking that I would get
much of the information I sought from such a
popular personage. I overtook him and explained
my object to him. He looked at me quizzically ;
then appeared a twinkle in his eye, and a captivating
smile spread over his honest features.
“ Well, sir,” he said, in rich Gaelic accent, “ I
don’t know that I have achieved any success of
the nature you refer to. Of course,” he hastened
to add, “ you must not take any notice of the boys
back there. I was down at B purely on
official business and attended only to things of that
nature.” He then went on to speak of various
matters, and finallyleft me well pleased with the world
in general, but on second thoughts I found that I had
not obtained the information that I was seeking.
THE HAPPY BAND
(To the tune of " There is a happy land. Far, far away.”)
THERE is a happy band,
Somewhere in France—
Come from a sunny land,
Station, farm and ranch.
Clerks, shopmen, railwaymen,
Miners, drivers, Trammies, then
Preachers, teachers, they’re all in
Our Ambulance.
Our Divy came to France,
Two years ago ;
Wilhelm paled and cried “ Mein Gott !
What a fearful blow ! ”
Little Willie wrung his hands,
Ludenorff got Vitus Dance,
Hindenburg said “ We’ve no chance
'Gainst Monash and Co.”
Officers, N.C.O.'s and men
(As a G.O.C. would say).
The fight is o’er, but you’ll remain
While some get away.
When you’re back to civvy days.
Memories of Maconachies,
Cheese and rice and figs,
Will fade and die.
When Fritzie made his push
In March this year.
Who went to stop his rush ?
Why, just listen here :
Starkey, Markwell, Max Dumas,
Went the Paris road to bar ;
Civvies shouted “ Hoo-la-la,
We’ve nought to fear.”
Old soldiers we’ve returned —
They were too old.
Dinkum oil has now been burned
At home, so we are told.
Who was it that showed Bill Wade
How the Army stew was made ?
Who at Passchendaele had laid
In shell holes cold.
L/CPL. W. G. WARD.


OUR NEW TASK
TO us, as soldiers, the war represents a great
task that is done, something to which we
have given a part of our life, our mind and interest,
our concentrated attention and energy—and now
we have reached the consummation of our effort.
Necessarily we require rest and recuperation
before we turn to new activities. We sometimes
feel that in these few years we have lived for and
accomplished a life work, and the thought of going
back and applying ourselves to another great
purpose does not at once appeal to us.
When, however, we have recuperated (and here
we must hope that the intervening period is not
too prolonged, lest we dissipate our restored energies)
and go home, there will be a new task for us, a
cause to fight for ; one for which we must have an
especial interest and undoubted qualifications.
This task is to build up and definitely establish
an.'i maintain those ideals for which we have fought,
the great task of reconstructing our national and
international life on the foundation and along those
lines which we have come to regard as essential for
freedom of development and the determination of
that development. We have fought for a better
world, now we must see that it becomes an accom-
plished fact and that we do not drift back to the
old conditions. As citizens, because of our experi-
ences, we shall have a wider vision, a greater
knowledge, a surer sympathy and universal interests;
therefore, by our individual propaganda and united
action, we must be a regenerating force in all
our spheres of life, “ a leaven that leaveneth the
whole.”
Having been so long away we have come to
regard as inevitable the changes for betterment;
they have been so much talked about that we
expect to see them perhaps already existing in
their entirety ; and we shall certainly not reconcile
ourselves to any intolerable and hide-bound
systems of the past. Who, for instance, after
seeing the results of it in Europe will be content
to see surviving in our own deihocratic land any
off-shoot of that pernicious system of privilege and
heredity that has been the ban of progress for so
long ?
In our Army life we have more fully developed
the better social instinct—we appraise men at their
worth and not according to the old criterions of
birth and affluence. It is eminently desirable that
this should survive and permeate our new citizenship
to a larger extent than hitherto ; and to this end
we can be a very potent factor indeed. In religious
realms also we shall endeavour to preserve the
truer conceptions of the real essentials that this
war has helped us to gain. At bottom we all have
a religious nature, but this will never be satisfied
by dogmatic teaching : we must have a broader
interpretation. On the field we recognised that he
who did his bit was worthy of the highest reward ;
so in the future one must judge a man by his good
works and not by his acceptance of this or that
doctrine. Our work over here has helped us to
realise that we are co-partners in our nation and
that as such we shall participate in its prosperity.
To guarantee this we need to adjust our industrial
relationships in one or two important respects ;
and to make good the loss of the war we must
accelerate production.
Being detached for such a length of time from
our ordinary walks of life has assisted us towards
a more impartial perception of the flaws in our
commercial organisation. We realise that there
has been a tendency to foster secondary industry
at the expense of the primary ; that, while we have
the most ideal labour conditions in the world,
there have been an enormous number of strikes
even during the war ; and further, we have tolerated
too much the old agitator’s idea of doing as little
as possible individually so as to leave plenty of
work to go all round.' This latter policy is false
and suicidal as it retards production, therefore there
is no growth and consequently less wealth with,
eventually, more unemployment. We must eradi-
cate this idea, also establish a better balance
between first essential and secondary interests,
and finally purge our industries of any hint of
monopoly, which, once established, stifles all new
and young development.
And what of our politics in Australia ? How
can we help to elevate them to represent more truly
the national voice of a young nation ? As a
democratic country we need to thoroughly grip
this principle of government so ably enunciated
by President Wilson ; “ The beauty of democracy
is that when you are reckless you destroy your own
established conditions of life : when you are
vindictive you wreak vengeance upon yourself :
the whole stability of democratic polity rests upon
the fact that every interest is every man’s interest.”
During the past we have not always realised this
in our legislation. Who has not, for instance, been
nauseated at times with the reckless experimenters
or obstructing reactionaries that aimed only at
class enactments ? We, with our political sense
already developed and trained by the exercise of
all the duties and privileges of full citizenship such
as we enjoy in our own land, with that sense more
amplified and made critical lay our knowledge and
study of conditions in European countries, must
imbue our politics with that wider outlook, that
national comprehension of true statesmanship that
aims at progress in every part. Our universal
interests (for this was humanity’s war) demand that
democratic control extend the world over. We
want not self-nominated guardianship of freedom,
national or international ; we want representative
co-operation to preserve the peace and security of
the world.


AS OTHERS SEE US
Scene i.—Officers’ Mess. Time, 9.30 p.m.
(Officers sitting round a fire, just lit, some playing
bridge. Waiter clearing away debris, fag-ends,
lemonade bottles, etc.)
Captain Lob : By Jove ! Brum, Old Thing, that
bully beef for dinner was top-hole ; just fine, don’t
you think ?
Brum (Scotch Mess Secretary) (comfortably en-
sconced in an arm-chair by the fire, but at the moment
bending down to adjust the last two rolls of an ever
wayward puttee) ; Well, yes ; but not as nutritious
as the fish we had for breakfast and lunch. Besides,
there’s no need to use sauce with fish.
Major M. (a reformer) : I consider the men
should be supplied with fish eight days a week.
Major South ( playing bridge) : What are
trumps ? Did you say hearts ? Well, perhaps
next time they won’t be. By the way, I hear on
good authority—in fact, the information is most
reliable—that we are going to Nice, shortly.
Captain Lob ; Oh ! how passionate ! {Does a
hand balance on a chair.)
Monsieur V. {a linguist) (the idea offish appealing
to his (esthetic taste) ; You come to Parie, Mayshor.
We have ze most beautiful feesh
Captain Fidele : Ah ! Go on, you old Froggie.
The French can’t cook fish.
Monsieur V. (growing excited, gesticulating wildly
and throwing down his cards) : O Hell ! . . .
Captain Fidele : Look at the old Republican
doing his block. That’s the spirit that settled the
aristocrats.
Monsieur V. : By Jove ! if you were a Lance-
Corporal, Capitaine
(Major M. commences singing the “ Marsalaisse.”
All join in, to the evident delight of Monsieur.)
(Major South sings “ Make No Purchases,” with
Grand Opera variations, and finally bursts into peals
of uncontrolled laughter. The Mess gradually settles
down to normal.)
Brum ( with Scotch caution) ; What’s your
authority for this trip to Nice, South ?
(Enter Captain K., a dog fancier, fondling a
puppy.)
Captain K. : Hallaoh ! Digger ! Digger ! De-
lightful little doggie.
Major South ( interrupting the endearment) : My
authority is really good. I have a friend in
D.O.R.A. whose most intimate acquaintance is a
Private on Headquarters.
Captain Mack Alum (a freak—the only M.O. ever
known to have risen from the ranks) : More oil, eh ?
(Enter the Colonel, with pencil and paper in hand.
Takes a chair at the table and begins to write.)
Captain Mac Lure ( a digger) : Busy, Colonel ?
Colonel : Not very. Just have a couple of
notes to write before the Orderly Room finishes for
the night. The Foden Lorry has just reported and
I must write a note to the Orderly Officer to tell
the Warrant Officer to instruct an N.C.O. to detail
a fatigue party to roll blankets in bundles of ten.
Captain Mack Alum : Did 1 hear you say,
Colonel, that you were rolling your notes in bundles
of ten ? That’s what President Wilson did.
Captain Fidele ( looking up from his Deadwood-
dick) : I feel a bit peckish. 1 wonder what’s for
supper. A sausage roll would be tasty.
All (in chorus) : Yes, what about something
decent for supper, Max ?
The Quarter Bloke (a genial Irishman) : When
I was a W/O at Harefield we had everything you
could desire for supper. This country is ruined for
the want of an Irish King.
Mac Lure ; Wish I was a digger, I’d
Colonel ( finishing his writing) : Waiter, take
this to the Orderly Room, and ask them to type me
a dozen copies, please.
Couple of Voices : Haven’t you any bread,
waiter ?
More Voices : Or a hammer ?
A Whisper : Or some fish ?
A Lowkr Whisper : Or some sausage rolls ?
(Waiter finally departs looking confused and angry.
Closes the door with a bang.)
“ This ain’t a Mess. It’s a blinking restaurant.”
Scene 2. — The Same.
(The pangs of hunger being assuaged all draw around
the fire. For awhile silence.)
Colonel : I say, Lob, can you tell us anything
about this League of Nations ? See any stone ends
yet ?
Lob (the light of intelligence illuminating his
countenance) : Well, Colonel
Major South (interrupting) : The action of these
aristocrats reveals the grossest mismanagement I
have ever witnessed. This carrying on by the
heads of Departments proves the whole thing to be
a tissue of lies. When I was in the 22nd Field
Ambulance, we did
Captain Lob (breaking out of a reverie) : Yes, 1
am heartily in accord with this concept of a League
of Nations
Captain K. (interrupting) : A League of Nations
is an utter impossibility, ain’t it, Digger ?
Colonel (judicially) : Yes, yes, perhaps you are
right; but, on the other hand, perhaps you are
not. Education may bridge the gulf
Captain Lob (his eye glaring fire, and shaking the
forefinger of his right hand) : What I say, Colonel,
is at this stage in the evolution of social heredity
I see in this League the only sociological escape for
the seething masses, striving blindly in their crass
ignorance towards that industrial goal of organisa-
tion.
The Quarter Bloke (growing excited and inter-
rupting) : What we want to do is to put the world
on a sound commercial basis and then we will all
be happy.


Captain K. (still unconcernedly nursing the poodle):
Yes, that’s right, Max ; isn’t it, Digger ?
(At this stage Brum wanders away into a corner
and becomes engrossed in a note-book of Mess accounts.
Major South and others leave the circle and start to
wander about the room.)
Captain Lob (continuing) : As I was saying, to
the industrial goal to which the proletariat is
tending. To ray mind this League of Nations is
indissolubly bound up with the emancipation of
women. Let us have women
Major M. (bursting into a love song) : That’s the
thing, old Bean, plenty of girls to cheer us up. . . .
Colonel ( rising) : W T ell, good-night, gentlemen.
All ( rising) : Good-night, sir. . . .
(Mess Orderlies’ slumbers are disturbed by echoes
of“ Only cut his blooming head off,” and the rollicking
chorus of “ Bullocky Bill the Sailor.”)
11TH AUSTRALIAN FIELD AMBULANCE SPORTS
MEETINGS
SPORTS meetings on the Blighty front were
few and far between. “ Life was real, life was
earnest ” in those parts ! However, the Division
did manage one meeting at Lark Hill, and the
Unit scored well. Memorable cricket and football
matches were played against the nth Field
Ambulance.
Sports in France ! Surely an impossibility !
Never in our wildest dreams of war conditions did
Sport. Date. Place.
Unit Sports ... July, ’l7 ... Westhof Farm ...
Nov., T 8 ... Tailly
Cricket ... July, ’l7 ... Westhof Farm ...
July,’l7 ... Westhof Farm ...
July,’l7 ... Westhof Farm ...
March to AUonville W00d...
July, T 8 Tank Wood
Tank Wood
Tank Wood
Nov., T 8 ... Tailly
Tailly
Football ... Feb., T 8 ... Viel-Moutier
Viel-Moutier
Nov., T 8 ... Tailly
Hockey ... Nov., ’iBto Tailly
Jan., 'l9
Biencourt
Swimming ... Aug., 'lB ... Daours ...
Tennis ... Aug., ’l7 ... Westhof Farm ...
July, T 8 ... Tank Wood
Aug., T 8 ... Daours ...
Nov., T 8 ... Tailly
wft imagine even the possibility of inter-section or
inter-unit competitions.
The home folk would have been saved much
needless anxiety could they have pictured our
sports field near Westhof, the delightful surround-
ings of AUonville Wood, or the ideal grounds at
Tailly.
The happy memories of our sporting days in
France will ever continue with us.
Opponents. Results.
‘ B,” “ A,” "C.”
" a,”"B,”"C.”
Xlf Field Ambulance ... ... Win.
VI Field Ambulance ... ... Win.
11l Pioneer Battalion ... ... Win.
(2 matches)
A.S.C Win.
Bth Brigade Training School ... 3 wins.
X Field Ambulance ... ... 2 wins.
A.S.C. ... ... ... ... 1 win.
1 draw.
X Field Ambulance ... ... Draw.
Inter-section ... ... ... “ A,”" C,” “ B,”
Inter-section ... ... ... “ C,” “ A,” “ B.”
43rd Battalion ... ... ... Lose.
Inter-section ... ... ... “ A,”" C,” “ B.”
Divisional Competition :
First Round ... ... ... Won 6, lost 2.
Second Round ... ... Won 1, lost 1.
Inter-section ... ... ... " A,” “ C.” ”B ’
M.G.C Win.
41st Battalion ... ... ... Win.
3rd A.G.H. ... ... ... Lose.
Somme Carnival ... ...
XII Field Ambulance ... ... Lose.
Tournaments ... ... ...
Tournaments ... ... ...
Tournaments ... ... ...


SOMME 1918


HISTORICAL SKETCH OF UNIT
PART 11.
THE dark and momentous news that greeted
us on that fateful day of March set rumour
flying. Where we were going ? To Flanders or
to the Somme ? The following days did not
enlighten us much, for two days after leaving the
Devres area we found ourselves deposited at
Steenvoorde, in Flanders, but with no prospect of
a further move in mind. However, on the 24th
inst. we proceeded to Ecke and from thence to
Blaringhem by motor ’bus, at which place we were
informed that at last the much-heckled baby
division was to be sent to the Somme to help stem
the German avalanche.
The Somme campaign of 1918 and the Australian
Corps are now synonyms, and the military results
and phases of the period from March to October
are outside the sphere of this article.
The Unit proceeded from Blaringhem to Doullens
by train, whence from the latter place we were
embussed to Franvillers on March 27th, arriving
there minus horse and motor transport, which had
to travel by road.
The roads were crowded with refugees—men,
women and children, hurriedly making for rearward
areas. In Franvillers itself (that day about six
kilometres distant from the approaching enemy)
many people were still clinging to their homes,
half hesitatingly, in the hope that the menace
would be averted.
One section of the Ambulance followed the
infantry and opened up avenues of evacuation
(there were no posts to relieve or personnel to take
over from) and established relay posts and an
advanced station. Evacuation, when possible,
was by hand carriage until the ambulance cars
arrived that evening. During the afternoon
communication was established between battalion
medical officers and the ambulance, and when the
horse transport arrived, medical stores and com-
forts were forwarded to battalions. That evening
the 10th Field Ambulance arrived and took over
the forward posts, while the Ambulance, less the
bearer divisions, proceeded to Querrieu and opened
a main dressing station to deal with wounded from
the forward area and to evacuate them further
back. Up to this time everything had worked
without hitch and delay. Posts had been estab-
lished, communication established and maintained
with regimental medical officers and routes of
evacuation opened up—all on the first day of our
arrival.
But difficulties arose at Querrieu in the evacuation
of wounded to the casualty clearing stations, which
were miles away, none being within a radius of
30 kilometres. Our own cars were working forward
and repeated wires to the British motor ambulance
convoys succeeded in obtaining only six cars on
the morning of the 29th inst. Wounded accumu-
lated, of whom a large proportion were serious
cases. This state of affairs lasted for several hours
until motor lorries were secured to take the cases
to Doullens, miles away. Needless to say the
wounded suffered severely on this rough and long
journey. Such, then, was the work of the Unit
during a crowded week, from the move at Devres
until March 29th at Querrieu, on the Somme ;
work that we hope materially assisted that thin
line of khaki infantry who, from the moment they
came in contact with the enemy, never looked back,
but pushed steadily forward, crowning with glory
their military prestige in the brightest epoch of
their history.
We remained as a main dressing station until
early in May, when we took over the forward areas
on the Villers Brettoneux sector from the ambu-
lances of the Fourth Australian Division.
The weather all this time had remained beautiful
and fine, and early in May summer warmth began
to be appreciated.
The forward dressing station was situated on
the main Amiens-Villers Brettoneux road in an
open field, tents and marquees being used. The
site and surrounding country was extremely
picturesque and green ; snug little villages, hidden
almost from view by stately trees, the distant view
of Corbie away to the north-east, or the solitary
appearance of Amiens Cathedral to the rear—all
seemed to breathe an air of quietude and serenity
that seemed weird and unnatural in that tragic
valley of the Somme.
This period comprised the ordinary routine of
trench warfare, varied occasionally by spasmodic
bombardments on the part of the enemy, or snap
minor actions on the part of our vigilant infantry.
Casualties were very light.
On May 25-26 the Germans launched a terrific
gas bombardment on the Villers Brettoneux sector,
especially in the woody parts. Our transport
facilities were taxed to the utmost during the day
in evacuation of the wounded, but by aid of motor
’buses we were able to clear all cases before mid-
night. Thirty-four of our men were gassed and
evacuated.
The Unit took part in the Hamel stunt on
July 4th, working in conjunction with the 4th and
13th Field Ambulances.
Following upon this came a pleasant month,
administering a divisional collecting station for
slightly sick or wounded men at Allonville. The
weather was beautiful and fine and admirable for
sport. Cricket pitches and tennis courts were
made and soon became fit to play on. Several
contests in both sports were arranged and played.
The beginning of August saw the Ambulance
moving to Daours in preparation for the big
surprise battle of August Bth, the success of which
" bade fair to bring the war to a successful and
early determination.”
Our role in these operations was twofold. We
were to carry out the functions of a main dressing
station until the first objectives had been won,


when another field ambulance would immediately
open further forward, whereupon we would come
into reserve, ready to move after a further advance.
One field ambulance remained in charge of forward
evacuations. This system was maintained from
this date until our final participation and proved
simple, quick and effective.
Up to the end of August we followed in the wake
of the advance opening dressing stations at Hamel,
Sailly Laurette, Bray-sur-Somme and Suzanne.
Then came the enforced retreat of the German
armies from near Peronne to the Hindenburg Line,
and the rapid following up of our infantry. The
Ambulance was detailed to evacuate the casualties
of the advanced guard. Bearers were attached to
the various battalions and acted under the super-
vision of the regimental medical officers. Our
movements were fairly rapid, conforming to the
advance of the infantry, as we opened a dressing
station at Balle on the evening of September sth,
and at 11 a.m. on the following morning established
another post at Doingt, about six kilometres
further forward. Casualties were few and slight,
and after the ground near the Bois de Bacquets had
been cleared, routes of evacuation were com-
paratively unmolested by shell fire.
From Doingt we moved on to the Bois de Buire,
close to Tincourt, to a selected spot and prepared''
to open a new station. However, the site had to
be abandoned owing to shelling, and another about
400 yards distant was decided upon. This was our
last post in the retreat, as the Ist Australian
Division took up the chase and the Third Division
moved back to the vicinity of Peronne for a few
days’ spell. During the period of rest we ad-
ministered a brigade hospital in Doingt Wood, just
out of Peronne. The weather here was beautiful
and warm and sports were held frequently. Brigade
held an athletic sports meeting, in which we
successfully participated. Night bombing was
constant and severe during the period of moonlight
nights, but no casualties occurred.
On September 27th we moved to St. Emilie to
take part in the final act of the drama, as far as
the Division was concerned—the breaching of the
Hindenburg Line between Vendhuile and Bellicourt.
Upon arrival at St. Emilie we found the Americans
installed, and for the first time worked in con-
junction with an American unit, although detach-
ments had previously been with us for purposes of
experience and training.
The battle was finally a great success, as is well
known, but the influx ’ of wounded, especially
American, recalled the days of Ypres and Passchen-
daele. We took charge of the dressing station on
the second day of the battle, and were ably and
cordially assisted by the American personnel
until their withdrawal a day or so later. By mid-
day of October Ist casualties had been evacuated
to the different casualty clearing stations, and
things remained normal until relief by the English
troops on October 4th.
This was the last effort of the Division, a fitting
climax to its work on the Somme since the dark
but glorious days of March, to have assisted so
materially in the breaching of the much vaunted
and last stronghold of German ambition.
Hopes were high as we marched back towards
Peronne, but even the most optimistic little
dreamed that our backs were turned on the line
and its gnm associations for ever.
We were entrained at Peronne and taken for
that long promised “ Corps rest," at last amongst
quieter scenes and new country, miles from the
scene of conflict.
And here, in this quiet and sequestered area,
midst russet autumn tints, midst scenes of peace
and simple peasant life, came the welcome news
that the enemy had yielded to the inevitable, and
accepted the terms of the armistice.
S’ ' * * *
f I 'HEY were diggers and very much out of
X breath, as they had run as fast as ever any
Hun, so as to catch the passenger train at A .
But fate seemed against them, as, just as the
station was reached, the train steamed out.
“ Streuth ! Jim, we’re stiff enough to be cut
up for a shirt front.”
“ Sinferiann, Bill, there may be another soon.
Let’s go and ask the old Madame. You can ask
her as you’re pretty decent on the parley-vooying
stakes.”
With this both made their way to the wooden
box that served as a ticket office, parcel depot,
enquiry bureau and eating-house for the station
mistress.
“ Bon jower,” says Bill. “ Train pour Longpre,
soon.”
“ Non, monsieur,” says Madame, with her mouth
half full of bread and boiled turnip.
But Bill was not denied. “ Peut-etre mange
train, comprez mange train ? ”
“ Non, monsieur.”
" Goods train, comprez goods train ? ”
“ Non, monsieur.”
“ Cattal train ? ”
" Non, monsieur.”
Bill’s vocabulary was finished. He turned
disgustedly to Jim. “ Come on, it’s no good ; the
faggot doesn’t understand her own lingo.”
“MILE END.”


THE UNIT EDUCATIONAL SCHEME
IT was a happy idea which sought to blend the
task of demobilising the Army with that of
education. Whatever we may derive of lasting
benefit from Army life, all must confess that it calls
forth neither the maximum of intellectual effort nor
the expression of many of the higher moral qualities.
At the outset it was seen that old ideas could not
stand the light shed on them by the dawning of a
new era ; if men were to be asked to think as
civilians, to study, and prepare themselves for
civilian occupations and citizenship a change of
plan would be necessary.
A transformation has been witnessed. The
first consideration of the authorities has been to
study the case of individual men, and to equip all,
as far as possible, for their future life after discharge.
The initial difficulties confronting a unit in the
field, such as this, can fairly easily be imagined.
The majority of men have been concentrating their
full energies each in his particlur sphere in the art
of war; education and self-development, which
should be the aim of education, was to them
perhaps a memory only.
This was, then, a difficult matter, to convince
men of all shades of opinion that the Educational
Scheme had something to offer each individual.
Many men had the opinion that education consisted
in the recitation of formula or that it was merely
the acquisition of isolated facts so connected to
form a branch of art or science, without realising
the relation of the particular subject so formed
to other branches of study and its application to
humanitarian activities as a whole.
In dealing with the education of the Unit it was
found that we had to frame a scheme for men
coming under the following categories : —Land
occupations, 22 per cent, of Unit ; trades and
crafts, 40 per cent. ; commercial subjects, 29 per
cent. ; elementary and preparatory, 6 per cent. ;
professional courses, 3 per cent.
A unit in the field is greatly handicapped,
especially in the matter of giving instruction and
experience to tradesmen and men engaged in
commercial pursuits. Our first task was the
preparation of the curriculum which would embrace
as much as possible those subjects most helpful to
the greatest number. The difficulty of giving
instruction in technical subjects has been observed
but on the other hand we have been fortunate in
having capable men within the Unit to deal with
students desiring more academic courses. The
brightest spots in our Unit scheme have been those
where most practical work was possible. In the
Literary and Debating Society men have been
THE EDUCATION COMMITTEE


given practice in public speaking, free discussion
on topics of the day, and an opportunity of hearing
some of the best lecturers the Brigade possess.
The work in this department has been more fully
dealt with in a special article. The motor mechanics
class is proving instrumental in assisting many men
who knew little or nothing about motors and
combustion engines to gain useful knowledge ;
while to those more skilled the fact of going more
fully into the theoretical side of the question has,
as it were, crystallised and clarified many of our
previous ideas on the practical working of motor
engines. The farmers in the Unit formed themselves
into a society and read and discussed many papers
of general interest. Arrangements were made by
the Brigade for specialists in various departments
of agriculture to give lectures to the society.
Other useful subjects included have been book-
keeping, principles of logical thinking and speaking,
salesmanship, arithmetic, letter writing and compo-
sition, French, anatomy, English, algebra, geometry
and shorthand. Two men are studying mechanical
dentistry under the able guidance of the officer in
charge of the department.
Meanwhile, we have sought to work in co-
operation with Brigade and Divisional schemes.
Here we have been assisted in allotting men to
schools and courses of instruction in other units,
where not obtainable in this one. Some flaws are
bound to occur in such an undertaking. Some of
the men chosen for these schools were experienced
workmen and found awaiting them a course for
apprentices and learners ; others have been
deterred through fear that the courses in question
would not be all they profess ; some have found
these same courses most useful. Three of our
number are looking forward to a three months’
course at the Corps’ Central School to do advanced
academic courses.
The extreme restlessness prevailing in all quarters
of the A.I.F. was a factor that had to be considered,
and a difficulty to be overcome. It may be claimed
in this direction that our efforts have not been
without success.
RE DIVERS DAMSELS
(For your information, please.)
I AM a cosmopolitan. Not, mark you, that
mongrel monstrosity nor that hybrid nonenity
who, in the immortal words of Ellen Wilcox Wheeler,
“ Never to himself hath said, this is my own, my
native land." But in my amours I am more than
cosmopolitan, embracing more than catholic, and
to use a word beloved of Ruskin, wholly omnament.
Albeit, favoured by heredity and blessed by the
Graces, I possess facial lineaments which are by no
means classic. In my youth my nose was fractured,
and mis-set by a young surgeon’s miscalculations
in his application of a “ Thomas.” My eyes are
negative and my ears are aggressive to an em-
barrassing extent. But, herewith take note and
inwardly digest (for herein lies the secret of my
success), I have the manner, a charming courtesy
flavoured with a soupijon of simplicity and rendered
piquant by a hint of gallantry.
In those far off days, before Mars let loose the
dogs of war across a happy world, my desires were
continental.' Perchance, Mary charmed me at
Manly or Daisy touched my heart at Sandy Bay.
At other times, Dolly from Subiaco or Muriel (not
one hundred miles from Moonta) left me in. ecstasy.
But first and always foremost came my delight in
Madge, a pebble—l speak figuratively—a glittering
little gem from Brighton Beach. She was petite
and entrancing and her auburn locks matched
perfectly a mole (a family heirloom) which I bear,
half-left at two o’clock, upon my manly chest.
Alas ! but my martial spirit tore me from Madge,
and in Egypt I worshipped at the shrine of Yvette,
sweetest and fairest of the flowers of Cairo.
England ! Ye Gods ! But am I a mere calcu-
lating machine, a cypher juggling instrument, that
I should enumerate them ? Polly, the delightful
little under-housemaid at Inky Stephens (via
Parkhouse), Florrie of Fovant, Hurdcott Hazel or
the blonde Waac at Tidworth. The A.W.L.
Circuit of those days was limited, but, blime, what
assortment !
London, West End, East End, Town or suburbs,
’bus, tube, cab or taxi, I was invincible. Even yet
I have delight when I recall the flutter I caused
in the pigeon lofts around Leicester Square and the
pluming of the feathers amongst Mother Grundy’s
chickens on their Piccadilly perch. Edinburgh,
Bath and Bournemouth will bear witness to my
powers.
But, memory lingers longer round the ways
and by-ways scattered twixt Havre and Amiens,
Boulogne and Paris, where chic little demoiselles
have wandered. Around my inmost heart they
have entwined themselves, their inimitable little
ways, the pert roguery of their smiles and the
perfect delight of their kisses.
Yet sometimes I seek the quiet solace of some
estaminet, where, with the soothing fragrance of
cafe cognac, I conjure up dreams of the dawning
era of demobilisation, when one, perchance, will
seek out pastures new and find maiden hearts as
yet untrodden by the feet of man. So Alexander
in his zenith yearned for other fields to conquer.
But as the philosopher so pithily has put it,
" Post actum, reactum est,” and in my cups I see
myself fast passing towards a ripe old age —a blase
misogynist, unwed, unhonoured and unstrung.
L/CPL. LOTHARIO JONES.


HARRY’S VICTORY
YES, it was the Aussie mail that was to blame
in the first place ; we had expected it for days.
Then, on this particular day, there had been false
alarms and every one was kind of out of temper,
and many a cruel word was uttered against post
offices in general and in particular our own. It
must have been eight o’clock when the corporal
yelled, “ Fall in for your Aussie mail.’’ A rush—•
and as each got his share, he retired to read his
letters. Everybody had finished their reading and
were reaching the sleepy state when two search-
lights proclaimed the presence of Jerry.
I said all had finished. Wrong. Old Harry,
well noted for being last in everything, was again
the exception. When everyone was in bed thinking
of Adelaide, Melbourne, and the girls there, Old
Harry was just starting on his bunch.
Suddenly, upon the still night air, three blasts of
the whistle sounded, more searchlights went up,
and down went all lights in the billets—except that
of Harry’s.
" Put that light out. Put that light out.
Give the boys a go, Harry.”
" Struth ! Blimey ! you chaps have got the
wind up,” and Harry goes on reading.
Threats, kind words—all were in vain.
Someone mentioned the word barrage—-everyone
made ready.
The light guns opened—books, papers, socks—no
result.
Candle still burned.
Heavies opened—boots, leggings, lumps of dirt,
Anzac wafers, bully beef—still no result.
Then one brave spirit crawled on all fours across
No Man’s Land. The onlookers held their breath.
Nearer and nearer he got—a quick dash and the
candle was ours. Victory for the right.
No, another candle.
Again a lightning-like spring—victory again.
(Cheers.)
Another candle comes to light, and again the
attack was carried out with the same results.
This went on until 13 candles were in our posses-
sion, rich booty, indeed. Surely old Harry had no
more in reserve.
Everyone turned in.
Ten minutes went by, and Fritz was still up, but
no candle burned. Fifteen minutes—yes, all was
right. A scratch, and up went another candle.
Weary, exhausted and beaten, we buried our
heads in the blankets.
" Ump. Beat the lot of you,” says Harry,
going on with his letters.
SANDY STEW.
VALEDICTORY
THE following letter was received from Mr.
A. L. Veyssie (interpreter to the Ambulance
for over two years) on his departure from the Unit :
“ To officers, N.C.O.’s and men.
"On the eve of my departure from the nth
Australian Field Ambulance, I wish to convey my
most sincere thanks for the great consideration you
all have shown for me.
“ After two and a half years, passed in one of the
best divisions of the French Army, I was detailed
as interpreter to the 3rd Australian Division. It
has been the greatest honour possible to have been
among such noble and brave fighters.
" During the 19 months since I have been among
you I have not ceased to feel more and more a
profound admiration for you all, and being a humble
representative of France I am able to say that we
had great need of your help—so much appreciated
by all Frenchmen. Thank you, gentlemen, for
the charming manner in which you have received
me among you ; in truth, I have considered myself
as one of yourselves, as if I had been in a second
home.
" My every best wish will follow you back to
your homes, right back to that beautitul Australia,
which I love without having seen.
" Good-bye to you all, colonel, officers and
diggers. Three most hearty cheers for the Aussies.
“A VEYSSIE.”
THANKS
THE Editors wish to thank all contributors,
and others who have helped in the publication
of this book. We regret that much valuable copy
has not been included, chiefly because we have been
limited by the size of the production. Our aim has
been to produce a souvenir of general interest,
keeping an even balance of the many and various
activities within the unit. We regret that this
aim has not been carried out entirely to our satis-
faction. We wished, for example, to have been
able to publish the photo of the original unit taken
at Lark Hill in 1916, and to have given more space
to the Bearer Sub-divisions. Despite these, and
other faults, we trust the Souvenir will be of
permanent interest.
T. RICE.
F. H. JENKIN.
February 26th, 1919.


M en ! DIGGERS! COBBERS!
JOIN OUR SOCIETY—THE STRONGEST IN
THE ARMY.
Freemasons outdone. Buffaloes take the count.
“ THE LOYAL LEAGUE OF LANCE JACKS.”
No Fatigues. No Jobs. Early chance of pro-
motion. Temptations avoided. No extra pay.
r i
All our Medical Officers are Lance Jacks.
K< ? j| •
All'our great Generals and Admirals are Lance Jacks.
''
Nap. was a Lance Jack.
Shell ’Ole Bill was a Lance Jack.
Starkey never was.
Note. — Only one man in this Unit known to
abdicate.
jyjEN OF THE JJNIT !
DO YOU WANT LEAVE 3
IF SO, COME TO US.
Fiancees found at short notice. Engagements not
Guaranteed.
Aged Parents, Sick Sisters, Diseased Aunts, found
for any country.
Brothers supplied in all countries and in all Units.
Telegrams sent to all Battalions and Ambulances.
Reduced rates to A.P.M.
For further particulars apply to —
GROUTER LEAVE COY.,
MONUMENT HILL, EDINBURGH, SCOTLAND.
gOLDIERS !
MILITARY POLICE!
QUACKS!
JOIN OUR EDUCATIONAL SCHEME AND
REALISE ITS DISADVANTAGES TO THE
FULL.
Learn the truth of the proverb—
“ Where ignorance is bliss
’Tis folly to be wise.”
All subjects catered for.
Specialities made of the following—
LEADSWINGING.
THE DOUBLE HEADER AND ITS USES
FURPHIES AND THEIR ORIGIN.
PLAIN SPEAKING (forbidden to Scotchmen).
Only teachers who have failed to obtain degrees
and others fully unqualified are allowed to inflict
their ignorance upon students.
Bear in mind you have the inestimable advantage
of knowing more than your teacher. Thereby you
save time and argument.
Classes at all hours. Sleeping chairs provided.
Testimonials.
“ 3 Lance Jacks have already reverted to the
ranks.”
“ 2 Stretcher-Bearers have been promoted to
Q.M. Store.”
“ i Groom has been transferred to the Orderly
Room.”
Full particulars apply to—Room An—E.
gICK PARADES.
WHY GO TO A DOCTOR ?
THEY ARE PAID TO CURE YOU.
Come to us who sympathise with you.
We will keep you out of the line.
Look at some of our prescriptions—
FAT HEAD..
DEBILITY ..
PLEURISY ..
FRACTURED LEG.
SHELL SHOCK ..
3 days no duty,
xo days’ leave to Paris.
Medicine and duty.
Paint with iodine ; soda sal.
Strait jacket and padded
cell.
SCABIES .. .. Immediate return to Aus-
tralia.
Further details upon application to—
M.O.S. ORDERLY COY.,
LAST AID CORNER,
EUROPE.
Please don't mention this paper when writing to advertisers.
