

SOUVENIR
Book of Quotations
St. Mark’s C. of E.,
Northbridge.
1931.
Price:
Contributed by the Parishioners and Friends
of the Parish of St. Mark’s, Northbridge.
"The wisdom of the wise, and the experience
of ages, may be preserved by quotations.”
— Disraeli.


PREFACE
In launching this “Souvenir” Booklet, as I trust, on the wave
of prosperity, I am sure it will serve to bind us together as
J
fellow Christians, and help us to feel that as our individual
quotations being bound together make one book, “so we, being
many, are one body in Christ, and every one members one of
another.” I have no philosophy to give you, only, “laughter and
tears,” but I do give you my most grateful appreciation, and
thank all those who have so freely subscribed to this collection
of “Gems” culled from many beautiful thoughts from many
bountiful minds. No words of mine are required to stress their
value. “Great thoughts, like great deeds, need no trumpet.”
And I think this Booklet will prove a living and a loving tribute
to the honour of St. Mark’s, Northbridge.
C. H. TOMLINSON, Rector.
“Thanks, and thanks, and ever thanks.” —Shakespeare
(“Twelfth Night,” Act 111, Scene 111.) .
¥
Rev. C. H. TOMLINSON St. Mark’s Rectory, Northbridge.
The Cross.
There, and there only (though the deist rave,
And atheist, if earth bears so base a slave) ;
There and there only, is the power to save.
— Cowper.
TYHWKLLS PTY, LTD.
to* - e** **or#s jrrnEßT,
»»dn s r.


The Most Rev. His Grace the LORD ARCHBISHOP OF SYDNEY
By the peace among Our peoples let men know we Serve the Lord!— Kipling.
The Right Rev. G. A. D’Arcy-Irvine, CO-ADJUTOR BISHOP OF SYDNEY
Very truly Christianity is Christ. An old Indian converted from his simple
worship to the faith of Christ was asked to explain the change. “I stretched
out my hand in the dark,” said he, “and I could find nothing to lay hold of: now
I stretch out my hand and lay hold of Him, and it makes all the difference.” That
is our experience, and again to you and me it makes all the difference.— Bishop of
Chelmsford.
The Right Rev. BISHOP WILTON Mosman, N.S.W.
Man finds progress, man’s distinctive mark alone,
Not God’s, and not the beasts’; God is, they are,
Man partly is, and wholly hopes to be.
— Browning.
*
The Very Rev. the DEAN OF SYDNEY
O well for him whose will is strong!
He suffers, but he will not suffer long;
He suffers, but he cannot suffer wrong.
—T ennyson.
*
The Venerable Archdeacon CHARLTON Sydney.
My life is but a weaving between my God and me:
I may but choose the colours, He weaveth steadily.
Full oft He weaveth sorrow, and I, in foolish pride—
Forget He sees the upper, and I the nether, side.
*
The Venerable Archdeacon KIRKBY Sydney.
Reputation is what men think you to be;
Character is what God knows you to be.
M
Rev. L. N. SUTTOR Precentor of St. Andrew’s Cathedral, Sydney.
Is life worth living? Yes, so long
As there is wrong to right,
Wail of the weak against the strong,
A tyranny to fight.
—Alfred Austin.
Mr. C. R. WALSH Registrar, Diocese of Sydney.
Above all, we may be quite sure that we are much safer if we do our duty
than if we neglect it.
*
Miss CHARYS E. BEGBIE, o.b.e. St. Marks own Missionary.
He healeth the broken in heart ... He telleth the number of the
stars. —Ps. 147 : 3, 4.
This text is exquisitely illustrated in Jesus. Through Him God made the
world; and by His pierced hands tears have been wiped and stifling sobs silenced
all through the ages. Is your heart bleeding? He knows, He cares, He loves,
He bends over and heals with exquisite sensitiveness and skill. Yea, the stars
may fall from heaven as untimely figs; the sun burn out as an extinct volcano;
but He will never cease to tend and comfort His own. — F. B. Meyer.
M
Rev. ERNEST CAMERON (first Rector of Northbridge) Hornsby.
Put God first, and all other things fall into their rightful place.


The Rt. Hon. W. M. HUGHES, p.c., k.c., m.p. Lindfield.
There is nothing either good, or bad, but thinking makes it so.— Hamlet.
-k
Dame MARY HUGHES, d.b.e. Lindfield.
O world; as God has made it! All is beauty;
And knowing this, is love; and love is duty.
—Robert Browning.
-K
Mr. E. L. SANDERS, m.l.a. Roseville.
Our Ideal.
Therefore when we build, let us think we build forever. Let it not be for
present delight, nor for present use alone. Let it be such work as our descendants
will thank us for, and let us think as we lay stone on stone that a time is to come
when men will say, as they look upon the labour, and wrought substance of them:
“See this our fathers did for us.”— Ruskin.
Mrs. E. L. SANDERS Lindfield.
Laugh and the world laughs with you,
Weep and you weep alone,
For this sad old earth must borrow her mirth,
She has troubles enough of her own.
— Wilcox.
-k
Rev. G. MASHMAN North Sydney.
Why things we longed for most of all
Elude so oft our eager hand;
Why hopes are crushed and castles fall,
Up there some time we’ll understand.
-k
Rev. LEO. CHARLTON ICillara.
This world’s no blot for us, nor blank;
It means intensely and means good—
To find its meaning is my meat and drink.
— Browning.
Rev. JOAN M. HORE Speirs’ Pt. and Islington, Newcastle.
In the beauty of the lilies
Christ was born across the sea,
With a glory in His bosom
That transfigures you and me;
As He died to make men holy,
Let us live to make them free,
While God is marching on.
—Julia Ward Howe.
M
Rev. T. HUGHES Wallerawang.
The appealing beauty of the garden, and the profit derived from it, largely
depend upon the care, attention, and the work put into it; so, also, the garden of
the mind in which are Divinely planted a variety of possibilities. But°each and
all require care and attention. The beauty of character and usefulness of life
largely depend upon the attention to develop seed.— T.H.
Alderman JOS. BALES Mayor of Willoughby.
Stay not until you are told of opportunities to do good; inquire after them
as a man.— Webster.
*
Mrs. J. BALES Mayoress of Willoughby.
He is never without dignity who avoids hurting the dignity of others.—
Lord Lytton.


Ist NORTHBRIDGE (St. Mark’s) COMPANY OF GIRL GUIDES
We are able.
*
Ist NORTHBRIDGE (St. Mark’s) BROWNIE PACK
Whenever a child says, “I don’t believe in fairies,” there’s a little fairy
somewhere that falls right down dead.—/. M. Barrie.
*
Ist NORTHBRIDGE CREW OF ROVER SCOUTS
Hump your own pack.
-K
Ist NORTHBRIDGE TROOP OF BOY SCOUTS
Who has smelt wood smoke at twilight, who has heard the birch-bark burning,
Who is swift to read the noises of the night—
Let him follow with the others, where the young men’s feet are turning,
To the camps of known desire and proved delight.
— Kipling.
*
Ist NORTHBRIDGE PACK OF WOLF CUBS
The Cub gives in to the old Wolf;
The Cub does not give in to himself.
—The Law of the Pack.
Mr. E. W. ALFONSO 36 Harden Av., Northbridge.
Hope on, hope ever, for the finger of hope points onward, and the future
may reveal something which will excel your most sanguine expectations.
*
Mrs. I. V. ALFONSO 36 Harden Av., Northbridge.
We sow a thought and reap an action,
We sow an action and reap a habit,
We sow a habit and reap a character,
We sow a character and reap eternity.
*
Miss E. ALFONSO 12 Strathallen Av., Northbridge.
If in any way I have helped a soul,
Or given a spirit pleasure,
Then my cup of joy, I shall think is full
With an overflowing measure.
—Ella Wheeler Wilcox.
*
Mrs. A. E. ALFONSO 12 Strathallen Av., Northbridge.
Just because we do not see Him, has He gone away?
Just because we cannot hear Him, shall we cease to pray?
If He ask for faith undaunted, hope through every day—
If He ask for love undying, shall we say Him nay?
*
Mrs. M. M. AICKIN 94 Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
We speak of hardships, but the true hardship is to be a dull fool, and be
permitted to mismanage life in our own dull and foolish fashion.— R. L. Stevenson.
*
Mr. C. A. ALLEN 153 Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
There grows not happiness; if vain our toil,
We ought to blame the culture, not the soil;
Fixed to no spot is happiness sincere,
’Tis nowhere to be found, or everywhere;
’Tis never to be bought, but always free,
And fled from monarchs dwells my friend with thee.
— Pope.


Miss HILDA ASHWORTH Narooma Rd., Northbridge.
Smile, and the world smiles with you;
Kick, and you kick alone;
For a bit of a grin will let you in
Where the kicker is never known.
— Parody.
*
Mrs. A. ASHWORTH Narooma Rd., Northbridge.
Friendship is the green hill along life’s dusty road.
Mrs. NAOMI P. ANDERSON 19 Tunks St., Northbridge.
Beauty is truth, truth, beauty—that is all
Ye know on earth and all ye need to know.
— Keats.
*
Mrs. J. C. S. ADAMS 32 Euroka St., Northbridge.
O, wind,
If Winter comes, can Spring be far behind?
— Shelley.
Mr. G. ANDREWS Narooma Rd., Northbridge.
Good is not good enough,
The best is none too good.
*
Mrs. G. ANDREWS Narooma Rd., Northbridge.
God is Love.
M
Mrs. C. H. ASPINALL Namoi Rd., Northbridge.
If any little word of mine can make a life the brighter,
If any little song of mine can make a heart the lighter,
God help me speak the little word, and take my lot of singing
And drop it in some lonely vale, to set the echoes ringing.
—Adelaide A. Proctor.
M
Mr. C. A. BAILEY 106 Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
If an erring Brother must be condemned, he must also be deeply pitied. God
pities him; Christ died for him; Heaven waits to welcome him back with joy.
He has done himself a far deeper injury than he has done anyone else. In pity
and prayer and pain let our hearts beat in harmony with all the powers God is
using for his recovery. “There remaineth Faith, Hope and Charity; but the
greatest of these is Charity.”
, M
Mr. S. G. BAKER “Highbury,” Manly Vale.
The greatest pleasure of life is work, the ability to do it, and the rest from
daily toil.— S.G.B.
*
Mr. L. BAMFIELD 27 Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
Do good, do good, there is ever a way,
There’s a way if there’s ever a will,
Don’t wait till to-morrow but do it to-day,
And to-day when to-morrow comes still.
*
Mr. A. BANNERMAN 29 Dalmeny Rd., Northbridge.
Be inspired with the belief that life is a great and noble calling; not a mean
grovelling thing that we are to shuffle through as we can, but an elevated and
lofty destiny.— Gladstone.


Mr. A. J. BROWN Tunks St., Northbridge.
A Smile.
“A smile costs nothing, but gives much. It enriches those who receive,
without making poorer those who give. It takes but a moment, but the memory
of it sometimes lasts forever. No one is so rich or so mighty that, he can get
along without it, and no one so poor that he cannot be made rich by it. A smile
creates happiness in the home, fosters goodwill in friendship. It brings rest to
the weary, cheer to the discouraged, sunshine to the sad, and is Nature’s best
antidote for trouble. Yet it cannot be bought, begged, borrowed, or stolen, for
it is something that is of no value to anyone until it is given away. Some people
are too tired to give you a smile. Give them one of yours, as no one needs a
smile so much as he who has no more to give.”
*
Mrs. A. J. BROWN 5 Tunks St., Northbridge.
Be in charity with all,
Have communion with one,
Speak evil of none.
*
Mr. J. BERNER 7 Weetawaa Rd., Northbridge.
To give, to beg, or to get one’s own,
It’s the very worst world that is ever known.
M
Mrs. BATE 9 Narani Cres., Northbridge.
God looks down well pleased to mark
In earth’s dusk each rosy spark,
Lights of home and lights of love,
And the child the heart thereof.
—Katharine Tynan.
¥
Mrs. F. I. BENHAM “Thirnby,” Northbridge.
Our joy is like a narrow raft afloat upon the hungry sea;
Hereon is but a little space, and all men eager for a place,
Do thrust his brother in the sea.
Our life is like a curious play. Where each man hideth from himself
Let us be open as the day, one mask doth to the other say,
That he may deeper hide himself.
And so our life is wan with fears, and so the sea is salt with tears;
Ah well, it is thou art asleep.
¥
Mrs. G. BENNETT Tunks St., Northbridge.
It is a good thing to be rich, and a good thing to be strong, but it is better
to be beloved bv many friends.
¥
Mr. M. E. BURKINSHAW, B.A. Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
If you can talk with crowds and keep your virtue,
Or walk with kings—nor lose the common touch,
If neither foes nor loving friends can hurt you,
If all men count with you, but none too much;
If you can fill the unforgiving minute
With sixty seconds’ worth of distance run,
Yours is the earth and everything that’s in it,
And—which is more—you’ll be a man, my son.
— Kipling.
¥
Mrs. N. E. BURKINSHAW Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge
Full many a gem of purest ray serene,
The dark, unfathom’d caves of ocean bear:
Full many a flower is born to blush unseen,
And waste its sweetness on the desert air.
— Gray.


Mrs. BENNELL 16 Euroka St., Northbridge.
The inner side of every cloud is bright and shining;
So therefore turn your clouds about
And always wear them inside out
To show the silver lining.
— Fowler.
M
Mr. F. B. BLAKEMAN 1 Bligh St., Northbridge.
Better to strive and climb,
And never reach the goal,
Than to drift along with time —
An aimless, worthless soul.
Aye, better to climb and fall,
Or sow, though the yield be small,
Than to throw away day after day,
And never strive at all.
M
Mrs. W. BLAKEMAN 5 Bligh St., Northbridge.
Time that is past, thou never canst recall,
Of time to come, thou art not sure at all,
Time present, only, is within thy power,
And therefore, now improve the present hour.
— Byron.
Mrs. J. BORTON 85 Kameruka Rd., Northbridge.
For 10, the winter is passed,
The rain is over and gone;
The flowers appear on the earth;
The time of the singing of birds is come,
And the voice of the turtle
Is heard in our land.
—Song of Solomon.
*
Mrs. A. BOWLES 11 Bligh St., Northbridge.
There is no office in this needful world but dignifies the doer if well done.
*
Dr. G. BRADLEY 169 Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
I shall pass through this world but once. Any good thing, therefore, that
I can do, or any kindness that I can show to any human being, let me do it now.
Let me not defer it nor neglect it, for I shall not pass this way again.
*
Mrs. G. BRADLEY 169 Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
What silences we keep year after year
With those who are most near to us and dear!
We live beside each other day by day
And speak of myriad things, but seldom say
The full sweet word that lies within our reach,
Beneath the common ground of common speech.
Then out of sight and out of reach they go,
These dear familiar friends who loved us so,
And, sitting in the shadow they have left,
Alone with loneliness, and sore bereft,
We think with vain regret of some kind word
That once we might have said, and they have heard.
—James Russell Lowell.
■*
Mr. A. BARNES Weetalibah Rd., Northbridge.
More things are wrought by prayer than this world dreams of.— Tennyson.


Mr. A. E. BRADSHAW 40 Second Av., Willoughby.
Duty stands by in a peaceful abode of life as well as in dangers. No man
is exempt from duty. He is ever under obligation to carry on with duty at all
times and under all circumstances and conditions. He that is faithful to his duty
will always rank with the world’s truest and greatest in the sight of The Great
Architect of the Universe. — Anon.
*
Mr. J. F. BRIGDEN Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
The Lord is my Shepherd, I shall not want. . . . Psalm 23.
*
Mrs. CLARICE BRIGDEN 59 Baringa Rd. ( Northbridge.
Nane ever feared that the truth should be heard,
But those whom the truth wad indite.
— Burns.
*
Mrs. M. BROWN 71 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
Friends are like books,
However they are dressed;
New ones are good,
But old ones are the best.
*
Mrs. R. BRUCE 31 Harden Av., Northbridge.
Man and his littleness perish,
Erased like an error and cancelled;
Man and his greatness survive,
Lost in the greatness of God.
— Thos. Watson.
*
Mrs. A. E. BULLOCK 4 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
Come wealth or want, come good or ill,
Let young and old accept their part,
And bow before the awful will,
And bear it with an honest heart.
— Thackeray.
*
Mr. G. W. BURROUGH 3 Narani Cres., Northbridge.
Lives of great men all remind us
We must make our lives sublime,
And, departing, leave behind us
Footprints on the sands of time.
— Longfellow.
*
Mrs. AGNESS E. BURROUGH 3 Narani Cres., Northbridge.
Let not sloth delay your progress;
Let not error dim your sight;
Let not sneers at your endeavours
Turn you from the path of right.
— Longfellow.
*
Mrs. M. BARBER 2 Clafton Av., Northbridge.
A book of verses underneath the bough,
A jug of wine, a loaf of bread —and thou
Beside me singing in the wilderness—
Oh, wilderness were Paradise enow!
—Omar Khayyam.
M
Mr. B. H. BAMFIELD 22 Mulgarra St., Northbridge.
Who steals my purse steals trash,
’Tis something, nothing; was mine, *tis his,
And has been slave to thousands.
But he who filches from me my good name,
Robs me of that which not enriches him,
But makes me poor indeed.
— Shakespeare.


Mr. MORTON BURRELL 5 Eric St., Northbridge.
If you have anything to do, do it thoroughly.
¥
Mrs. E. CASHIN 25 Tunks St., Northbridge.
Quiet, patient work often brings startling results. The heart is melted at
last and the conscience touched.— Bishop Walsham How.
¥
Mr. A. R. CAMPLING 5 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
Man’s life is like unto a summer’s day;
Some break their fast and so away;
Others stay dinner, then depart full fed;
The longest age but sups and goes to bed:
O reader, then, behold and see:
As we are now, so must you be.
—Attributed to Jos. Henshaw, Bishop of Peterborough (d. 1678).
*
Mrs. C. T. CHAPMAN 116 Kameruka Rd., Northbridge.
The years have taught some sweet, some bitter lessons —none wiser than this:
to spend in all things else, but of old friends to be most miserly.— Lowell.
¥
Alderman OLIVER CLAFTON Narooma Rd., Northbridge.
Time and tide wait for no man.
M
Mrs. V. M. CLAFTON Narooma Rd., Northbridge.
A stitch in time saves nine.
Doctor A. E. CLARK Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
Self-distrust is the cause of the most of our failures. In the assurance of
strength there is strength, and they are the weakest, however strong, who have
no faith in themselves or their powers.— Bonee.
¥
SELBY M. COOK 33 Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
Flow beautiful is all this fair, free world under God’s open sky!— Felicia
Hemans.
As he thinketh in his heart, so is he.— Proverbs xxHi, 7.
*
Mr. RONALD COOK 33 Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
A gentle lie turneth away enquiry.
*
Mr. R. H. CARTER, M.P.S. 165 Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
There is an essence of goodness in the worst of men,
Would we but understandingly distil it out.
—R.H.C.
¥
Miss E. M. COOK 21 Narani Cres., Northbridge.
Give to a gracious message a host of tongues, but let ill-tidings tell themselves.
— Shakespeare.
¥
Mr. L. COPPIN 21 Euroka St., Northbridge.
We must treat each man on his worth and merits as a man. We must see
that each is given a square deal, because he is entitled to no more and should
receive no less.— Roosevelt.
¥
Mrs. MARCIA CUMMINGS 22 Woonona Rd., Northbridge.
It’s good to have money and the things that money can buy, but it is good,
too, to check up once in a while and make sure you haven’t lost the things that
money cannot buy.— H.E.
¥
Mr. K. M. CURTIS 7 Bligh St., Northbridge.
Live for to-day, for to-morrow’s light
To-morrow’s cares will bring to sight;
Go sleep like closing flowers at night
And God thy morn will bless.
— Kible.


Miss NITA COLLESS 8 Euroka Street, Northbridge.
We must share if we would keep
That good thing from above;
Ceasing to give, we cease to have—
Such is the law of love.
— R. C. Trench.
¥
Mr. J. CALDER Sailor Bay Road, Northbridge.
It’s an owercome sooth fo’ age an’ youth,
An’ it brooks wi’ nae denial,
That the dearest friends are the auldest friends,
An’ the young are just on trial.
— R. L. Stevenson.
¥
Mr. B. E. DERHAM Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
Some hae meat and canna eat
And some wad eat that want it,
But we hae meat and we can eat
And so the Lord be thankit.
— Burns.
¥
Mrs. ENID F. DERHAM Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
Let your life be as pure as the snowfields, where your footsteps leave a
mark, but not a stain.— Anon.
¥
Mr. A. E. DENT Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
If thou shalt find anything in this mortal life better than righteousness,
than truth, temperance, fortitude, and in general better than a mind contented
both with those things which according to right and reason she doth, and in those
which, without her will and knowledge, happen unto thee by the providence; if,
I say, thou canst find out anything better than this, apply thyself unto it with thy
whole heart, and that which is best, wheresoever thou dost find it, enjoy freely.—
Marcus Aurelius.
¥
Mrs. E. B. DENT Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
How much better is it to get wisdom than gold; and to get understanding
rather to be chosen than silver.— Proverbs xvi.
¥
Mrs. D. E. DEVEREUX 31 Euroka St., Northbridge.
Some lives are set in narrow ways
By love’s wise tenderness.
They seem to suffer all their days
Life’s direst storm and stress;
But God shall raise them up at length—
His purposes are sure —
He for their weakness shall give strength
For every ill a cure.
¥
Mrs. DEWEY 35 Harden Av., Northbridge
Breathes there a man with soul so dead
Who never to himself hath said,
“This is my own, my native land.”—Scott.
¥
Mrs. EDITH DEWHURST Harden Av., Northbridge.
He prayeth best who loveth best
All things, both great and small,
For the dear Lord Who loveth us,
He made and loveth all.
— Coleridge.
¥
Mr. A. DICKISON Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
The crest and crowning of all good,
Life’s final star, is Brotherhood.
— Markham.


Mrs. DOUGLAS 18 Eric St., Northbridge.
There’s a divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough hew them how we will.
— Shakespeare.
M
Miss LESBIA DOBSON Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
The quality of mercy is not strain’d,
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath; it is twice blest;
It blesseth him that gives and him that takes.
— Shakespeare.
Mr. RALPH DOBSON Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
The heights by great men reached and kept
Were not attained by sudden flight,
But they, while their companions slept,
Toiled ever onward through the night.
— Longfellow.
*
Mrs. E. DOYLE 2 Harden Av., Northbridge.
He that is thy friend indeed,
He will help thee in thy need;
If thou sorrow, he will weep;
If thou wake, he cannot sleep;
Thus, of every grief in heart,
He with thee doth bear a part.
These are certain signs to know
Faithful friend from flattering foe.
— Shakespeare.
M
Mr. C. DUNSTER Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
She was a form of life and light
That, seen, became a part of sight,
And rose, where’er I turn’d mine eye,
The morning-star of Memory!
— Byron.
Mrs. C. DAVIS 1 Weetawaa Rd., Northbridge.
True happiness is to no spot confined.
If you preserve a firm and constant mind,
’Tis here, ’tis everywhere.
— J. H. Wynne.
Mr. J. W. EDWARDS Wahroonga.
Keep thy heart with all diligence, for out of it comes the issues of life.
*
Mr. E. H. EASTON 28 Courallie Rd., Northbridge.
Life is mostly froth and bubble;
Two things stand like stone:
Kindness in another’s trouble,
Courage in your own.
—Adam Lindsay Gordon.
Mrs. A. A. EDWARDS 116 Kameruka Rd., Northbridge.
The smallest effort is not lost;
Each wavelet on the ocean tossed
Aids in the ebb-tide or the flow;
Each raindrop makes some flow’ret blow;
Each struggle lessens human woe.
— Chas. Mackay.
Master WILLIAM STEPHEN EGLON 17 Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
He wears the rose of youth upon him.— Shakespeare.


Mr. L. A. EVANS 79 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
But the cure for this ill
Is not to sit still
Or frowst with a book by the fire,
But take up a hoe
And a shovel also
And dig till you gently perspire.
— Kipling.
M
Mr. A. W. FALLA 18 Bligh St., Northbridge.
It is a great thing to have brotherly help in life.
We all need each other.
Not one of us could get on without others to share his burdens.— Rev. J. R.
Miller.
*
Mrs. JOHN FYFE Narooma Rd., Northbridge.
No one is useless in this world who lightens the burden of another.
*
Mr. JOHN FYFE Narooma Rd., Northbridge.
Oh, wad some power the giftie gie us
To see oorsel’s as ithers see us:
It wad frae mony a fancy free us
And foolish notion.
— Burns.
Mrs. FLYNN Kameruka Rd., Northbridge.
Could we forbear dispute, and practise love,
We should agree as angels do above.
—Edmund Waller.
M
Mrs. F. GREY 25 Narani Cres., Northbridge.
God hath set thy nature to a certain key:
Do thou work out its melody.
— Shakespeare.
M
Mr. W. A. B. GRAINGER 70 Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
Teach me to feel another’s woe,
To hide the fault I see;
That mercy I to others show,
That mercy show to me.
— Pope.
*
Mr. A. GRAY 81 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
Whatever is worth doing at all is worth doing well.
*
Mr. J. W. GEORGESON 13 Eric St., Northbridge.
Though we called your friend from his bed this night,
He could not speak for you,
For the race is run by one and one
And never by two and two.
— Kipling.
*
Mr. A. W. GRIFFITHS 99 Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
The King of France went up the hill
With twenty thousand men;
The King of France came down the hill
And ne’er went up again.
— Anon.
*
Mrs. A. W. GRIFFITHS 99 Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
The power to recognise and follow truth cannot be conferred by academic
degrees.— Paracelsus.


Mrs. M. GIBSON 15 Bligh St., Northbridge.
Make use of time, let not advantage slip.— Shakespeare.
M
Mrs. D. W. GRAVENOR 81 Kameruka Rd., Northbridge.
She is coming, my own, my sweet;
Were it ever so airy a tread,
My heart would hear her and beat.
Were it earth in an earthy bed;
My dust would hear her and beat,
Had I lain for a century dead;
Would start and tremble under her feet,
And blossom in purple red.
—T ennyson.
*
Mrs. C. GROSS 14 Eric St., Northbridge.
Weep not, deare friends, since I
For both have wept when all
My tears were bloud, the while you slept:
Your tears for your own fortunes should be kept;
Was ever grief like mine?
— Herbert.
*
Mrs. N. GARDYNE 122 Kameruka Rd., Northbridge.
We live by Admiration, Hope and Love;
And, even as these are well and wisely fixed,
In dignity of being we ascend.
— Wordsworth.
*
Mrs. F. H. HAMLIN 88 Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
How far that little candle throws its beams!
So shines a good deed in a naughty world.
— Shakespeare.
Mrs. ANNE HANNA 9 Tenilba Rd., Northbridge.
Thou, while thy babes around thee cling,
Shalt show us how divine a thing
A woman may be made.
—W ordsworth.
M
Mrs. H. HARLE 95 Kameruka Rd., Northbridge.
So much is wrong, there is such pain—such sinning.
Yet look again—behold how much is right!
And He Who formed the world from the beginning
Knows how to guide it upward to the light.
Your task, O man, is not to carp and cavil
At God’s achievements, but with purpose strong
To cling to good, and turn away from evil—
That is the way to help the world along.
—E.W.W.
Mrs. F. N. HAYES 14 Tenilba Rd., Northbridge.
Of all the thoughts of God that are
Borne inward into souls afar,
Along the Psalmist’s music deep,
Now tell me if that any is,
For gift or grace surpassing this—
“He giveth his beloved sleep!”
— Browning.
Mrs. W. L. HOWARD Tunks St., Northbridge.
He is rich and poor according to what he is, not according to what he has.
*
Mrs. V. E. HINTON 32 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
Cowards die many times before their death.


Mr. F. M. HEARN Courallie Rd., Northbridge.
Conscience is but a word that cowards use,
Devised at first to keep the strong in awe:
Our strong arms be our conscience, swords our law.
— Shakespeare.
Mrs. JEAN HEARN Courallie Rd., Northbridge.
The worthiness of praise disdains his worth,
If that the praised himself bring the praise forth:
But what the repining enemy commends,
That breath fame blows; that praise, soul pure, transcends.
— Shakespeare.
M
Mrs. E. HAMILTON Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
The man who has nothing to boast of but his illustrious ancestry is like a
potato—the only good belonging to him is underground.— Sir T. Overbury.
*
Mr. W. HARDING Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
Never bear more than one trouble at a time. Some people carry three: all
they ever had, all they have now, and all they expect to have.
*
Mrs. E. S. HANCOCK Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
Have a heart that never hardens, a temper that never tries, and a touch
that never hurts.— Charles Dickens.
*
Mr. A. C. HALFORD Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
The consciousness of well-doing is its own reward.
M
Mrs. A. C. HALFORD Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
The glory of life is to love, not to be loved; to give, not to get; to serve,
not to be served; to be a strong hand in the dark to another ir< the time of need;
to be a cup of strength to any soul in a crisis of weakness. — H. Black.
M
Mr. JOHN HUNT Strathallen Avenue, Northbridge.
Such is the patriot’s boast, where’er we roam,
His first best country ever is at home.
— Goldsmith.
*
Mr. F. M. HOCKING 369 Sailor Bay Road, Northbridge.
Honour and shame from no condition rise;
Act well your part, there all the honour lies.
— Pope.
¥
Mrs. CLARE HOCKING 369 Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
He is happy whose circumstances suit his temper; but he is more excellent
who can suit his temper to any circumstances.
M
Mr. EDGAR HOSKINS Harden Av., Northbridge.
Good name in man and woman, dear my lord,
Is the immediate jewel of their souls.
— Shakespeare.
’Tis the bright day that brings the adder forth.— Shakespeare.
We are such stuff
As dreams are made of, and our little life
Is rounded with a sleep.
— Shakespeare.


Mrs. HANNAH E. HOSKINS Harden Av., Northbridge.
’Tis beauty that doth oft make women proud;
’Tis virtue that doth make them most admired;
’Tis modesty that makes them seem desired!
— Shakespeare.
She who ne’er answers—till a husband cools,
Or, if she rule him—never shows she rules;
Charms by accepting—by submitting sways,
Yet has her humour most —when she obeys.
—Ben Jonson.
Mrs. S. E. HEIDER 42 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
The tumult and the shouting dies—
The captains and the kings depart—
Still stands thine ancient sacrifice,
An humble and a contrite heart.
Lord God of Hosts, be with us yet,
Lest we forget, lest we forget.
— Kipling.
Mrs. H. R. HELLYER 27 Strathallen Av., Northbridge.
I dream’d in a dream, I saw a city invincible to the attacks of the whole of the
rest of the earth;
I dream’d that was the new City of Friends;
Nothing was greater there than the quality of robust love—it led the rest;
It was seen every hour in the actions of the men of that city,
And in all their looks and words.
—Walt Whitman.
*
Mr. A. L. HENDERSON 12 Euroka St., Northbridge.
The veil which covers the face of futurity is woven by the hand of mercy.—
Bulwer Lytton.
Mrs. A. L. HENDERSON 12 Euroka St., Northbridge.
I never did repent for doing good,
Nor shall not now.
— Shakespeare.
*
Mrs. W. HI SLOP 12 Harden Av., Northbridge.
One can but hope that good will fall at last, far off, at last to all, and every
winter change to spring.— Tennyson.
, M
Mrs. HOLLAND 14 Harden Av., Northbridge.
Be yourself—simple, honest and unpretending—and you will enjoy through
life the respect and love of friends.— Sherman.
*
Mr. HOLLAND 14 Harden Av., Northbridge.
In meeting men, in many places, I have found that the happiest people are
those who do most for others; the most miserable are those who do the least.
— B. T. Washington.
*
Mrs. HONNIBAL 21 Narooma Rd., Northbridge.
Just the art of being kind
Is all this sad world needs.
—Ella Wheeler Wilcox.
Mr. M. A. E. HUGHES 8 Eric St., Northbridge.
For men must work, and women must weep,
And there’s little to earn, and many to keep,
Though the harbour bar be moaning.
— Kingsley.


C. J. HUNT, M.A. 25 Euroka St., Northbridge.
Not everyone that saith unto me Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom
of heaven. —Matthew vii.
¥
Mrs. E. INGAMELLS Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
Let us try to be happy: we may, if we will,
Find some pleasure in life to o’erbalance the ill;
There was never an evil, if well understood,
But what, rightly managed, would turn to a good.
If we were but as ready to look to the light
As we are to sit moping, because it is night,
We should own to a truth, both in word and in deed,
That who tries to be happy is sure to succeed.
¥
Miss E. INGLIS Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
When the days are dark
And your friends are few,
Then remember the friends
Who have remembered you.
¥
Mr. J. A. IRVINE 11 Dalkeith St., Northbridge
Not enjoyment and not sorrow
Is our destined end or way,
But to act, that each to-morrow
Finds us farther than to-day.
— Longfellow.
¥
Mr. CHRISTY G. JOHNSON 39 Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
Go, sell all thou hast and give to the poor
If you would in heaven lay up a great store,
Spake the Lord to the sinner, no less and no more;
This do in remembrance of Me.
The meek and the humble possess riches untold,
The rich are the poorer in spite of their gold;
Yet all are invited to come into the fold;
This do in remembrance of Me.
¥
Mr. GRAHAM V. JOHNSON 39 Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
Be angry, but sin not; let not the sun go down upon your wrath.
¥
Mr. A. J. JEFFERY Bank of New South Wales, Northbridge.
This above all—to thine own self be true,
And it must follow, as the night the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man.
— Shakespeare.
¥
Mrs. M. JEFFERY Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
An honest darn is better than debt.
¥
Mr. C. A. JOHNSON 135 Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
If you’ve a tender message,
Or a loving word to say,
Don’t wait till you forget it,
But whisper it to-day.
Who knows what bitter memories
May haunt you if you wait,
So make your loved one happy
Before it is too late.


Mrs. G. JENNINGS 3 Harden Avenue, Northbridge.
0, wad some power the gif tie gi’e us
To see oorsel’s as ithers see us.
— Burns.
*
Mr. J. ERNEST JOSEPH 1 Kiola Rd., Northbridge.
Bear and forbear —a dogma true
As human wisdom ever drew;
If you could lighten every care,
And every sorrow learn to bear,
To be secure from vile disgrace,
Look frowning Fortune in the face.
— Dr. Syntax.
Mr. S. L. KING 54 Strathallen Av., Northbridge.
Our God is a household God, as well as a heavenly one.
He has an altar in every man’s dwelling.
Let men look to it when thy rend it lightly and pour out its ashes.— Ruskin.
M
Mrs. S. L. KING 54 Strathallen Av., Northbridge.
So many gods, so many creeds,
So many paths that wind and wind,
While just the art of being kind
Is all this sad world needs.
—Ella Wheeler Wilcox.
*
Mrs. KIRK 22 Kiola Rd., Northbridge.
The best part of a good man’s life,
The little unremembered acts of kindness and of love.
*
Mrs. M. S. KASEHAGEN 14 Euroka St., Northbridge.
Oft expectation fails, and most oft there
Where most it promises; and oft it hits
Where hope is coldest, and despair most sits.
— Shakespeare.
*
Mrs. S. KILLINGSWORTH 7 Narani Cres., Northbridge.
But pleasures are like poppies spread:
You seize the flower—its bloom is shed;
Or like the snowfalls in the river:
A moment white, then gone for ever;
Or like the Borealis race,
That flit ere you can point their place;
Or like the rainbow’s lovely form,
Vanishing amid the storm.
—Robert Burns.
Mrs. M. E. LA TROBE 16 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
And with the morn those angel faces smile,
Which I have loved long since, and lost awhile.
M
Mrs. LANE 63 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
Speak to Him, thou, for He hears,
And spirit with spirit can meet.
Closer is He than breathing,
And nearer than hands and feet.
*
Mrs. J. G. LAMB 7 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
Virtue is its own reward.— Prior.


Mrs. BERTHA LAWSON 49 Baroona Rd., Northbridgc.
A sense of humour helps one over the stiles of life.
If there is no corn in Egypt,
Surely Africa has some;
Keep your smile in working order
For the better days to come.
—Henry Lawson.
Mrs. JUDITH LAWSON Baringa Rd., Northbndge.
Who steals my purse steals trash; ’tis something, nothing;
’Twas mine, ’tis his, and has been slave to thousands;
But he that filches from me ray good name
Robs me of that which not enriches him,
And makes me poor indeed.
— Shakespeare.
*
Mr. F. L. LAWSON Baringa Rd., Northbndge.
Wanted, men:
Not systems fit and wise,
Not faiths with rigid eyes,
Not wealth in mountain piles,
Not power with gracious smiles,
Not even the potent pen:
Wanted—men!
M
Mrs. EDITH LILJA 4 Euroka St., Northbndge.
To me the meanest flower that blows can give
Thoughts that do often lie too deep for tears.
— Wordsworth.
Mrs. M. E. LIETKE 2 Kiola Rdi., Northbndge.
Myself when young did eagerly frequent
Doctor and saint, and heard great argument
About it and about; but evermore
Came out by the same door as in I went.
—Omar Khayyam.
*
Mr. HARRY ALCOCK LEONARD Eric St., Northbndge.
Judge with candour, admonish with friendship and reprehend with mercy.
*
Mrs. S. A. LIZIERI 23 Narani Cres., Northbridge.
’Tis education forms the common mind;
Just as the twig is bent, the tree’s inclined.
— Pope.
*
Miss I. LOVATT Tunks St., Northbridge.
Be merciful, be patient, and, erelong,
Thou shalt have more.
— Longfellow.
*
Mrs. N. LOVATT Tunks St., Northbridge.
Hope on, hope ever,
Though to-day be dark,
The sweet sunburst may
Smile on the to-morrow.
—Gerald Massey.
M
Mr. R. LAWRY 7 Tenilba Road, Northbridge.
One is nearer God’s heart in a garden
Than anywhere else on earth.
— D. F. Gurney.


Miss JEAN MASSEY 54 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
Willows whiten, aspens quiver,
Little breezes dusk and shiver
Thro’ the wave that runs for ever
By the island in the river,
Flowing down to Camelot.
Four grey walls and four grey towers,
Overlook a space of flowers,
And the silent isle embowers
The Lady of Shalott.
—T ennyson.
*
Mrs. H. J. MASSEY 54 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
One road leads to London,
One road runs to Wales,
My road leads me seawards
To the white dipping sails.
One road leads to the river
As it goes singing slow;
My road leads to shipping,
Where the bronzed sailors go.
— Masefield.
*
Mrs. F. E. MAHONEY 89 Kameruka Rd., Northbridge
We cannot change yesterday—that is quite clear,
Or begin on to-morrow until it is here:
So all that remains, both for you and for me,
Is to make each to-day just as sweet as can be.
Take what is; trust what may be:
That’s life’s lesson.
— Browning.
Mrs. MEDINA 10 Bellambi St., Northbridge.
True happiness consists not in a multitude of friends,
But in their worth and choice.
—Ben Jonson.
M
Mrs. LEILA MERRILEES Euroka St., Northbridge.
Full many a shaft at random sent
Finds mark the archer little meant,
And many a word at random spoken
May soothe or wound a heart that’s broken.
— Longfellow.
Mr. J. C. M. MERRILEES Euroka St., Northbridge.
Striving to do better, oft we mar what’s well.— Shakespeare.
.r *
Mrs. J. MOORE 13 Weetalibah Rd., Northbridge.
I asked as I paused on the brow of life’s hill
Which way leads to scenes of beauty?
And the answer came back—l hear it still—
They are reached by the path of duty.
*
Mrs. P. A. MANDLEY 24 Narani Cres., Northbridge.
What is home without a mother?
-K
Mr. J. B. MAY 34 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
To think a thing possible is to make it so.
Mrs. F. MARTIN 84 Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
To-morrow to fresh woods and pastures new.— Milton.


Mr. A. G. MITCHELL “Korimul,” Northbridge.
la.
Though blessings may reach us through a variety of channels, the source of
every good and perfect gift is God. — R.C.N.’s “Passing Thoughts,” 1930.
lb.
Grant me fervently to desire, wisely to search out, and perfectly to fulfil
all that is well-pleasing unto Thee.— Thomas Aquinas’ Ren. “Prayer,” 1 3th C.
Ila,
God reveals His power in earthquake, tempest and fire; but speaks to the soul
in “a still, small voice.”— R.C.N.’s “Passing Thoughts,” 1930.
lib.
Pour upon us Thy spirit of meekness and love. Annihilate selfhood in us.
Be Thou all our life.— William Blake, Ren. “Prayer,” 18 th C.
Ilia.
If you would grow in grace, the garden of your soul must be kept weeded
and watered.— R.C.N.’s “Passing Thoughts,” 1930.
Illb.
In Thee would we lose ourselves utterly; do in us what Thou wilt.— Jacob
Boehme, Ren., “Prayer,” 17th C.
*
Miss E. McCAGHERN Kirribilli.
On the strength of each link in the cable
Dependeth the might of the chain;
Who knows when thou may’st be tested?
So live that thou bearest the strain.
*
Miss EDNA McGREGOR Bulli.
When true friends meet in adverse hour,
’Tis like a sunbeam through a shower;
A watery ray an instant seen,
The darkly closing clouds between.
— Scott.
*
Mr. J. McNICOL Kameruka Rd., Northbridge.
As yesterday is history, and to-morrow may never come, I have decided that
to-day I will do all the business I can honestly, have all the fun I can reasonably,
do all the good I can willingly, and aid my digestion by thinking pleasantly.—
Stevenson.
*
Mrs. J. McNICOL 120 Kameruka Road, Northbridge.
Who does the best that circumstance allows,
Does well, acts nobly; angels could no more.
—Y oung.
*
Mr. A. S. MARTIN 60 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
A bunch of keys is mine;
To make each day with gladness shine,
On a golden ring these keys I’ll bind;
This is its motto: be ye kind.
*
Mrs. I. E. MARTIN 60 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
A noble soul is like a ship at sea,
That sleeps at anchor when the ocean’s calm;
But when she rages and the wind blows high,
He cuts his way with skill and majesty.
*
“UNCLE MAC” Sailor Bay Road, Northbridge.
Judge not lest you be judged; we are what we are.


Miss A. A. E. MONTI 73 Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
When thy heart is weary,
When thy heart is sad,
When there’s nought to cheer thee,
Nought to make thee glad;
When, beneath some sorrows,
Burdens hard to bear,
Thou art sad and sickened,
Talk with Christ in prayer.
Hope! when all things seem hopeless!
Hope and thou shalt see
That Hope shall be triumphant
And bring all good to thee.
Mrs. H. A. MORTON Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
It’s easy enough to be pleasant
When life flows along like a song,
But the man worth while is the one who will smile
When everything goes dead wrong.
*
Mrs. B. G. MILLS 81 Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
Little deeds of kindness,
Little words of love,
Make our earth an Eden,
Like the heaven above.
— F. S. Osgood.
¥
Mrs. D. R. MURRAY 16 Bligh St., Northbridge.
There is a tide in the affairs of men which, taken at the flood, leads on to
fortune.— Shakespeare.
*
Mrs. R. K. MACKENZIE Warragul St., Turramurra.
I shall pass through this world but once, therefore any good deed I can
do, let me do it now, for I may not pass this way again. — Adapted front a Chinese
Proverb.
*
Mr. W. A. McNEILL Sailor Bay Road, Northbridge.
Don’t look for the flaws as you go through life;
And even if you find them,
It is wise and kind to be somewhat blind,
And look for the virtue behind them.
, *
Mrs. W. A. McNEILL Sailor Bay Road, Northbridge.
There’s so much good in the worst of us,
And so much bad in the best of us,
That it ill behoves any of us
To talk about the rest of us.
—R.L.S.
*
CAVELL and EDELINE NORRIE Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
As I climb the hill of prosperity,
May I never meet a friend—coming down.
*
Mrs. V. NORRIE Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
The most precious things are the commonest, and these are to be gained,
not by large fortunes, but by large souls.
, M
Mrs ; NEWBY 42 Eric St., Northbridge.
Write it in your heart that every day is the best day of the year. — Emerson.


Mrs. OAKE 4 Strathallen Av., Northbridge.
Live for something, have a purpose,
And that purpose keep in view;
Drifting like a helpless vessel,
Thou canst ne’er to life be true;
Half the wrecks that strew life’s ocean,
If some star had been their guide,
Might have long been riding safely—
But they drifted with the tide.
—Robert Whitaker.
¥
Mrs. MARGARET O’GRADY Tunks St., Northbridge.
Live in the brightness
And take this to heart:
The world would be brighter
If you’ll do your part.
M
Miss V. O’DONNELL Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
Make the best of everything,
Think the best of everybody,
Hope the best for yourself.
M
Mrs. F. B. OUBRIDGE Narooma Rd., Northbridge.
May all those poor people born on this earth
Receive all the wages their talents are worth;
If they be rich or ever so poor,
May the hand of poverty ne’er knock at their door.
*
Mr. W. POOLE 228 Sailor Bay Road, Northbridge.
Good name, in man and woman, is the immediate jewel of their soul. —
Shakespeare.
¥
Mrs. L. M. PRINGLE 8 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
All unknown the future lies,
Let it rest.
God Who veils it from our eyes,
He knows best.
¥
Mrs. L. POOLE Minnamurra Rd., Northbridge.
They gave me vinegar mingled with gall,
But more with malice: yet, when they did call,
With manna, angels’ food, I fed them all:
Was ever grief like mine?
— Herbert.
¥
Mrs. WINIFRED PROCTOR 22 Bellambi St., Northbridge.
Oh, I have a reserve of strength and joy,
A secret sweet escape from every mood—
My cottage garden! There do I employ
My mother-instinct as a woman will,
For hers it is to nourish life, and still
To care for young and tender things, dawn-dewed,
To nurture and create and guard from ill;
So daily to my younglings many-hued
To mother them, so trusting, frail, and small—
Aye, and to talk to them, my pretty brood!
And, oh, the rich reward of that dear thrall,
Oh, the response in their so childlike ways.
The smell of teeming earth, mother of all!
To God for His sweet flowers be grateful praise!
So I return to old routine renewed,
Braced for the petty cares of humdrum days.
—Phyllis Letchmere.


Mrs. T. A. POWELL 74 Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
He that soweth little shall reap little; and he that soweth plenteously shall
reap plenteously. Let every man do according as he is disposed in his heart. —
2 Cor. 9.
*
Mrs. H. QUAKEN 9 Harden Av., Northbridge.
When thou hast thanked thy God for every blessing sent,
What time will there remain for murmurs or lament?
— French.
*
Mrs. J. RANKIN 26 Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
Patience is a flower that grows not in everyone’s garden.
*
Mr. E. J. RAPLEY Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
He who happiness would win must share it;
Happiness was born a twin.
*
Mrs. E. J. RAPLEY 150 Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
Have you had a kindness shown ?
Pass it on.
’Twas not given for you alone—
Pass it on.
Let it travel down the years,
Let it wipe another’s tears,
Till in heaven the deed appears—
Pass it on.
*
Mrs. J. B. RAPLEY 150 Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
Let every man be occupied, and occupied in the highest employment of which
his nature is capable, and die with the consciousness that he has done his best.
, *
Mrs. EVA ROBB Queen St., Arncliffe.
Every good gift, and every perfect gift, is from above.— James, c. 1, v. 17.
Mr. H. G. ROBB Queen St., Arncliffe.
To travel hopefully is a better thing than to arrive, and the true success
is to labour. —Robert Louis Stevenson.
*
Miss NANCY ROBB Glen Innes, N.S.W.
A thing of beauty is a joy forever. — Keats.
*
Mr. R. G. ROBERTSON 23 Tunks St., Northbridge.
If I should die, think only this of me:
That there’s some corner of a foreign field
That is forever England. There shall be
In that rich earth a richer dust concealed;
A dust whom England bore, shaped, made aware,
Gave, once, her flowers to love, her ways to roam,
A body of England’s, breathing English air,
Washed by the rivers, blest by scenes of home.
—Rupert Brooke.
M
Miss JUDITH ANN ROBERTSON 23 Tunks St., Northbridge.
I live for those that love me,
For those that love me true;
For the heaven that shines above me.
And awaits my coming, too;
For the wrong that needs resistance,
For the cause that needs assistance,
For the future in the distance,
And the good that I can do.


Mrs. NELLY ROBERTSON 23 Tunks St., Northbridgc.
They shall not grow old as we who are left grow old;
Age shall not weary them, or the years condemn
At the going down of the sun—
And in the morning we shall remember them.
*
Mrs. S. ROGERS Narani Cres., Northbridge.
No soul is ever desolate so long as there is a human being for whom it can
feel trust and reverence.
*
Miss E. RIACH St. Mark’s School, Northbridge
The world is a comedy to those who think; a tragedy to those who feel.
— Walpole.
¥
Miss NONI N. ROBB Chatswood-
Have you had a kindness shown?
Pass it on;
’Twas not given for thee alone,
Pass it on;
Let it travel down the years,
Let it wipe another’s tears,
’Til in heaven the deed appears—
Pass it on.
— Rev. Henry Burton.
¥
Mrs. H. SEYMOUR 26 Bligh Street, Northbridge.
Friendship! mysterious cement of the soul,
Sweet’ner of life, and solder of society.
— Blair.
¥
Mrs. W. SCUTT 87 Sailor Bay Road, Northbridge.
There are such joys of heart and mind
Upon this grey old earth,
The treasures are not hard to find,
The things of greater worth.
The world has laughter, love and song,
Yes, more of these than strife,
And, brother, as you pass along,
Get something out of life.
*
Mrs. W. SAGE 8 Harden Av., Northbridge.
Think a little less of your sorrows and more of your joys; for the joys will
make you grateful, and gratitude is, in itself, one of the most beautiful pleasures
of the soul. —Stopford Brooke.
¥
Mrs. J. STANTON 32 Bellambi St., Northbridge.
Do a good turn when you can, and keep on being kind.
¥
Mrs. IRVINE SCOTT Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
The Eternal God is thy refuge, and underneath are the everlasting arms. —
Dent, c. 33, v. 27.
¥
Mr. A. SCOTT 34 Eric St., Northbridge.
Never was isle so little, never was sea so lone,
But over the sand and the palm-trees an English flag was flown.
— Kipling.
Mr. R. E. P. SEEARS 25 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his
friend.— John, 15, 13.


Mrs. SHEAVES Marana Road, Northbridge.
Many of us are very near now to the great unknown destiny to which all
human roads diverge. In but a little time we may have passed away and the
scenes of this life will know us no more. Out upon the great sea of Death we
will go with shining sails and hopeful eyes, and many who are on this earth
to-day will wish they had been kinder to them when they were present in the
flesh. — E.S.
Oh, be not the first to discover a blot
On the fame of a friend,
A flaw in the faith of a lover,
Whose love may prove true in the end,
For none of us knows one another,
And oft into error we fall;
Then let us speak well of each other,
Or better to speak not at all.
—.E.S.
*
Mr. CHESTER SMITH 57 Baringa Rd., Northbridge:
There is one God, the Father of all men.
The Holy Bible is the Great Light in life,
And the Rule and Guide for faith and practice.
Man is immortal.
Character determines destiny.
Love of man is, next to love of God,
Man’s first duty.
Prayer, communion of man with God, is vital.
M
Mrs. MADELINE E. SMITH 57 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
The common problem, yours, mine, everyone’s,
Is not to fancy what were fair in life,
Provided it could be—but, finding first
What may be, then find how to make it fair,
Up to our means—a very different thing.
— Browning.
M
Mrs. R. C. SIMONDS 34 Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
Oh all ye, who passe by, whose eyes and minde
To worldly things are sharp, but to me blinde;
To me, who took eyes that I might you finde:
Was ever grief like mine?
— Herbert.
Mr. E. W. SMITH 7 Eric St., Northbridge.
But sometimes God on His great white throne
Looks down from heaven above,
And lays in the hands that are empty
The tremendous star of love.
Mrs. E. W. SMITH 7 Eric St., Northbridge.
Are you standing at “Wits’ End Corner,” Christian, with troubled brow?
Are you thinking of what is before you, and all you are bearing now?
Does all the world seem against you, and you in the battle alone?
Remember, at “Wits’ End Corner” is just where God’s power is shown.
Are you standing at “Wits’ End Corner”? Then you’re just in the very spot
To learn the wondrous resources of Him Who faileth not:
No doubt to a brighter pathway, your footsteps will soon be moved,
But only at “Wits’ End Corner” is the “God Who is able” proved.
—Antoinette Wilson.
*
Miss E. SMITH 7 Eric St., Northbridge
Consecration, or surrender to God, is the greatest privilege offered to any
soul in this life; and to say “Thy will be done” is one of the most delightful
things human lips are allowed to utter.— Mrs. Pearsall Smith.


Mr. and Mrs. REGINALD SMITH 25 Tunks St., Northbridge.
Daily prayers are the best remedy for daily cares.— G. Hamilton.
*
Mrs. SOLOMON 17 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
He is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by
Him.— Heb., 7, 25.
*
Mr. FREDK. J. STONE 3 Tunks St., Northbridge.
A Sabbath well spent brings a wealth of content,
And health for the toils of the morrow;
But a Sabbath profaned, what e’er may be gained,
Is a certain forerunner of sorrow.
*
Mrs. E. O. SI ONE 3 Tunks St., Northbridge.
Now is the bush all foaming full
Of flowers we love and long to pull;
The sweet boronia, pink and white,
And crimson bottle brushes bright.
*
Master P. N. STONE 3 Tunks St., Northbridge.
It is a sin to steal a pin ;
Much more to steal a greater thing.
M
Mrs. S. SPENCER 38 Strathallen Av., Northbridge.
Hope for the best; get ready for the worst; and then take what God
sends.— Henry.
M
Mr. S. SPENCER 38 Strathallen Av., Northbridge.
One moment in annihilation’s waste,
One moment of the well of life to taste —
The stars are setting and the caravan
Starts for the dawn of nothing—oh, make haste!
—Omar Khayyam.
•^ r - W. H. SPENCER 22 Euroka St., Northbridge.
A man who loses his conscience hath nothing else worth keeping.
-K
Mrs. R. T. STEEL 14 Bellambi St., Northbridge.
Man’s inhumanity to man makes countless thousands mourn.— Burns.
Mr. ARTHUR STOCKLEY Amherst St., Northbridge.
O! God! that men could see a little clearer,
Or judge less harshly where they cannot see.
O! God! that men would draw a little closer
To one another; they’d be nearer Thee,
— Bracken.
Mrs. DOROTHY SUMMERS Tenilba Rd., Northbridge.
More things are wrought by prayer than this world dreams of:
Wherefore, let thy voice rise like a fountain for me night and day.
— Tennyson.
Miss JEAN SMITH Tunks St., Northbridge.
This world is full of beauty,
As other worlds above,
And if we do our duty
It might be as full of love.
—Gerald Massey.
Mrs. SHEEN Narani Cres., Northbridge.
Faith and unfaith can ne’er be equal powers;
Un faith in aught is want of faith in all.
— Tennyson.


Mrs. L. V. TINDALE Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
Old friends are best. King Janies used to call for his old shoes, they were
easiest for his feet. — Selden.
Miss A. E. TAYLOR Euroka St., Northbridge.
Words are easy, like the wind;
Faithful friends are hard to find,
Every man will be thy friend,
Whilst thou hast wherewith to spend.
— Barnefield.
Mrs. M. E. THORPE 47 Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
Two things that count in life:
“Kindness in another’s troubles;
Courage in your own.”
*
Mr. ALEX THOMPSON 22 Tunks St., Northbridge.
Man with his burning soul
Has but an hour of breath
To build a ship of truth,
In which his soul may sail—
Sail on the sea of death.
For death takes toll
Of beauty, courage, youth,
Of all but truth.
—John Masefield.
Mrs. HELEN THOMPSON Tunks St., Northbridge.
But once I pass this way,
And then—no more.
But once—and then, the Silent Door
Swings on its hinges—
Opens—closes;
And no more I pass this way.
So while I may with all my might
I will essay sweet comfort and delight
To all I meet upon the Pilgrim Way,
For no man travels twice the Great Highway
That climbs through darkness up to light—
Through night—to day.
Mr. W. S. THOMSON 121 Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
You’re building a Temple to-day,
Just what will this building be?
Are you building it just for to-day,
Or will it stand through eternity?
*
Mrs. F. H. THORNTON 49 Strathallen Av., Northbridge.
Judge me not by my relations; but rather by my friends; for my relations
are thrust upon me, whereas my friends, like my clothes, are of my own choosing.
Mrs. A. TRICKETT Narooma Rd., Northbridge.
Whatever you are, be that—
Whatever you say be true:
Be honest in fact,
Straightforwardly act,
Be nobody else but you.
*
Mr. W. H. TUCKWELL Strathallen Av., Northbridge.
To live in hearts we leave behind is not to die.


Miss HELEN M. TOMLINSON St. Mark’s Rectory, Northbridge.
Happy as a robin, gentle as a dove;
That’s the sort of little child everyone will love.
*
Master GEORGE ALEXANDER TOMLINSON St. Mark’s Rectory,
Northbridge.
Higher still and higher, from the earth thou springest,
Like a cloud of fire; The blue deep thou windest,
And singing still dost soar, and soaring ever singest.
* -SHeney.
Miss ENID M. TOMLINSON St. Mark’s Rectory, Northbridge.
A man of words, and not of deeds, is like a garden full of weeds.
*
Mrs. R. M. E. TOMLINSON St. Mark’s Rectory, Northbridge.
I would rather have the affectionate regard of my fellowman than I would
have heaps and mines of gold.— Dickens.
*
Miss MOLLY TOMLINSON Yelarbon, Q.
Think truly, and thy thoughts
Shall the world’s famine feed.
Speak truly, and each word of thine
Shall be a fruitful seed.
Live truly, and thy life shall be
A great and noble creed.
—Horatius Bonar.
Mrs. A. E. WHITELAW 18 Courallie Rd., Northbridge.
In things essential, unity; in things doubtful, liberty; in all things, charity
Rupertus Meldenius.
Mrs. WHITWORTH, Senr. 8 Bega Rd., Northbridge.
... all who joy would win
Must share it—Happiness was born a twin.
— Byron.
Mr. PERCY E. WILTSHIRE 58 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
It’s struggling on with the will to win,
But taking loss with a cheerful grin;
It’s sharing sorrow, and work, and mirth,
And making better this good old earth;
It’s serving, striving through strain and stress,
It’s doing your Noblest—that’s Success.
—Berton Braley.
Mr. GEORGE WAITE Northbridge.
The World is my country; mankind my brethren; to do good, is my religion.
*
Mrs. C. C. WOOD Clafton Av., Northbridge.
A merry heart goes all the day,
A sad one but a mile.
*
Miss WAINWRIGHT 17 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
With God all things are possible.


Mr. H. WEBB 385 Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
Creator Spirit, by whose aid
The world’s foundations first were laid,
Come, visit every, pious mind;
Come, pour Thy joys on human kind;
From sin and sorrow set us free,
And make Thy temples worthy Thee.
Make us eternal truths receive,
And practise all that we believe;
Give us Thyself, that we may see
The Father and the Son by Thee.
¥
Miss MURIEL C. WALSH 47 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
Behind me is infinite power;
Before me is endless possibility;
Around me is boundless opportunity.
¥
Mr T L. WARREN 8 Weetawaa Rd., Northbridge.
Man is like a pebble thrown into the pool of life— a splash, and he is gone.
But the ripples of his influence go on widening and ever widening until they reach
the farthest bank .—Jeffery Farnol.
¥
Mrs. D. D. WARREN 8 Weetawaa Rd., Northbridge.
Aim at perfection in everything, though in most things it is unattainable.
However, they who aim at it and persevere, will come much nearer to it, than
those whose laziness and despondency make them give it up as unattainable
Chesterfield.
Mr T. WARREN 361 Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
If we cannot get what we like, let us try to like what we can get.
¥
Mrs E. C. WARREN 361 Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
Gentle' words, quiet words, are, after all, the most powerful words. They
are more convincing, more compelling, more prevailing.—lF. Gladden.
¥
Miss LESLEY WAITE Ernest St. North Sydney.
For “up an’ down an’ round,” said ’e, “goes all appointed things,
“An’ losses on the roundabouts means profits on the swings!”
— Masefield.
¥
Mr. A. T. M. WHYTE 13 Namoi Rd., Northbridge.
And all I ask is a merry tale from a laughing fellow-rover;
A sweet dream and a quiet sleep when the long trick’s over.
— Chapman.
¥
Mrs. M. S. WHYTE 13 Namoi Rd., Northbridge.
The moving finger writes, and having writ
Moves on. Not all thy piety nor wit
Can call it back to cancel half a line,
Nor all thy tears wash out a word of it.
—Omar Khayyam.
¥
Mrs. FLORENCE E. WAIT 17 Weldon St., Burwood.
It is much easier to be critical than to be correct. — Disraeli.
¥
Mr. STANLEY J. P. WAIT 17 Weldon St., Burwood.
No life is a failure which brightens, however faintly, the lives of others. — Anon.
¥
Mrs. WHATSON Dalmeny Rd., Northbridge.
The Lord loveth a cheerful giver.


Mr. R. W. L. WOOLRIDGE Harden Av., Northbridge,
The Beauty of the house is Order;
The Blessing of the house is Contentment;
The Glory of the house is Hospitality.
*
Mrs. R. W. L. WOOLRIDGE Harden Av., Northbridge.
The secret of success in life is to be on the right spot at the right moment,
and to be ready. —Robert Hart.
*
Miss O. WALSH 47 Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
What the child admired, the youth endeavoured and the man acquired.—/. Dryden.
*
Mr. H. A. J. WALSH Baringa Rd., Northbridge.
Nil desperandum.
, *
Mrs. HUGH WALTON 90 Baroona Rd., Northbridge.
Know this, if thou hast a trusty friend, go and see him often; because a
road which is seldom trod gets choked with brambles and high grass. —The
Haramal.
M
Mrs. MINNIE WATSON 28 Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
Man is the only animal that blushes—or needs to.
Mrs. T. WHITE 26 Courallie Rd., Northbridge.
Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and keep His
Commandments; for this is the whole duty of man. —Old Testament.
M
Mrs. S. WILLIAMS 23 Narani Cres., Northbridge.
The love of praise, howe’er conceal’d by art,
Reigns, more or less, and glows in every heart.
— Young.
Mrs. R. R. WOOD 3 Bellambi St., Northbridge.
Build on resolve, and not upon regret,
The structure of thy future.
Do not grope among the shadows of old sins,
But let thine own soul’s light shine on the path of hope.
— E. W. Wilcox.
M
Mrs. R. H. WOODBRIDGE Narooma Rd., Northbridge.
Do unto others as you would be done unto thyself.
Mr. ZOCCHI 5 Harden Av., Northbridge.
As a man thinketh in his heart, so is he. If you will daily contemplate upon
humanity s perfect Ideal, which is God, you will grow toward that perfect Ideal
yourself for “the path of the righteous is as the dawning light, that shineth
more and more unto the perfect Day.— Prov., 4, 18.
We acknowledge subscriptions, without quotations, from the following:—
Rev. CANON BEGBIE, Chatswood.
Rev. F. J. G. OLDS, Willoughby.
Mr. W. LOW, 161 Sailor Bay Rd., Northbridge.
Mr. B. M. SHERVEY, 49 Dalmcny Rd., Northbridge.
and several subscribers who desire to remain anonymous.


