

VOYAGE
SOUVENIR.


o Souvenir of the Voyage o
Being an interesting account
of the Second Voyage of
the TS.S. “ Pericles ” from
London to. Australia, via
Plymouth, Teneriffe, and
Cape Town
November, 1908 to January, 1909.


SHIP'S OFFICERS.
Commander, A. Simpson
Chief OJicer, Percy J. Collins
Second , E. Legge
Third, E. D. Matheson
Fourth, O- File
Fifth, G. Thruston
Chief Engineer, JV. Lyall Robertson
Steward-in- Charge, S. Acker matt
First Steward, A. R. Greaves
Surgeon, G. L. Perry


The Voyage
When the S.S. “Pericles” left the mother country
many were the wishes from fathers and mothers, brothers
and sisters, sweethearts and friends, for bon voyage that
accompanied the good ship, on this, her second voyage
to the island continent of the southern seas. Now that
the voyage is over, who will gainsay that those wishes
have not been amply realised.
The outward journey has been accomplished in a
successful, if not altogether pleasant, manner. The
passage has on the whole been smooth, fine weather
prevailing du.ing the greater part.
Notv iths tan ding the large number of passengers,
there has been an absence of serious sickness. ■ To the
majority, to leave the dull, darksome and dreary Novem-
ber fogs behind, to escape the cold and ice of England's
winter, to travel over the restless seas, to witness Decem-
ber ushered in with the sun soaring resplendemly in the
Heavens’ delicious blue, and to gaze across the watery
expanse at night, whilst the moon streaked its troubled
surface with rays of amber light or wnpped the rolling
wave in curtains of golden hue, is indeed a delightfully
new experience.
Of course, there were days when one felt “ a wee bit
queer,” to the joy of the denizens of the deep. These,
however, soon passed, and then came days of peace
“within” and joy “without,” and w r e all felt that it was


good to be here; in fact, those accustomed to the
hustling life of London's streets, the smoke and glare of
the furnnce, the dust an;] blackness of the colliery, or
evep the sweet aroma of the hay and clover, might, say
“So wondrous.wild t?;e whole might seem
The scenery of a fairy dream.
Unfortunately there have been unpleasant incidents,
the remembrance of which 'Lime alone will eliminate;
that is, as regards the persons concerned. Hut has
it not been ; ever thus? The willow and the palm; the
good and the bad intermingling in the stream of life.
On the other hand, hap; y lours have been s:cn;,
new friends and associations made which in- the years
to come will be the source of many ■. an enjoyable
retrospect.
And now we shall soon be in Australia •. strangers
in a strange land (that is to the majority of us).
The old has been left for,the new. Why? Is it
because the old. has ceased to be dear to us, no longer
contained anything or anyone endearing to our hearts ?
No !
We have left England, Scotland, Ireland or Wales
as the case may be, but we shall nevertheless Love th rse
distant realms of our birth with an unswcrvable love.
Shall we not ?
As we enter the new land, our th nights will
naturally revert to the homesteads, now far away ;


hoaiesteads which were, are and will be dear to us, and
w hen (as is m >re probable than i.uprobable) numbers
will be located in the bush or on the ranch, away from
be iten tracks of habitation, there will come moments
when “ Home, Sweet Home ’ will spring up as it were,
and the mind will be filled with visions of England,
Home and Beauty. Such reflections are g )od.
A few remarks in conclusion about the land we are
going to. Whichever' it be, Australia or New Zealand,
the choice has been for better or worse.
What the future has in keeping for us we kn >w n >t.
H >pe is a prominent factor in all things. It springeth
eternal in the human breast, and it is with gladness we
have oi >served that among the “ Pericles passengers
Hope is the predominant feature.
Pessimism, that monster which dissipates the energy
and cultivates half-heartedness, has been put aside ; shall
it be said for ever ? That depends upon the man.
In his stead reigns Optimism. We are a boatload of
optimists bound for a land that, figuratively speaking, is
flowing with milk and honey ; that is, to the person who
is willing to work, to display spirit and enterprise, to
exhioit an aptitude for whatever comes his way.
Australia and New Zealand, for the man of grit and-
determination, are realms <>f boundless possibilities, but
the thriftless, the sluggard and the give-me-something-easy
sort of man will hardly succeed, fer the motto of he who
labours under the Southern Cross must be: “-W hatsoever
thy hand findeth to do, do it vith ail thy might.”


SUNDAY SERVICES.
Eve y Sunday, Divine Services were held either in
the Saloon or on the boat deck, according to the
weather, and were well attended. (. aj tain v im; son
officiated.
These meetings were most impressive. In the
centre was a table covered with an Uni' n jack, on
which rested a Bible, or as our beloved late Queen
Victoria put it: “ T’lre secret of England s greatness.”
11 Around were the passengers, strangers (me to
mother, yet united in rtndeiing thanks to the Cod of
both lan 1 an I sea, whilst encircling all were the vast
and mighty waters.
captain Simpsen.
Captain Aiexawder Simpson, the ( ommodore of
the Aberdeen White Star i ine, England-Australia,
possesses a record umivalled in the history of the
British Merchrntile Marine.
He iias been connected with the Aberdeen Line
for forty-three years, completed seventy-eight voyages
between London and Australia, and travelled nearly
two an 1 a half million miles. A proud feature in his
career is, he has never sustained a serious ac< ident


He began his apprenticeship in and in 1882
was appointed Chief Officer on the steamship Aberdeen.
The same year saw him in command of the Australasian,
from the decks of which Fronde viewed his
I ist to Fronde s description of him :
“ Add the handsome Captain, some 32 years old,
with bine, merry eyes, gracious, pleasant. A skilful
seaman, willing to talk to us about his business, making
us welcome to his chart room at all fitting seasons,
ready t > explain the mysteries of great circle sailing;
besides this a true-hearted, brave, energetic, and really
admirable man.”
Just as he is t -day, is it not ? He is also an expert
in meteorology, having devoted twenty years to the study
of ocean currents, in connection with which he has
supplied valuable information to the Meteorological
Conn il.
His present command, the S.S. “ Pericles,” has a
displacement of 21,000 tons, is fitted with quadruple
expansion engines and submarine signalling apparatus.
Electricity is installed throughout. Her average speed
is 14-91 knots, and this, her second voyage, has proved
her to be a remarkable vessel in every respect.
The Saloon accommodation leaves nothing to be
desired, whilst that of the Third Class embraces all, if
not more than, the comforts offered by other Shipping
Companies.


PORTS OF CALL
There were three breaks in the long journey of
12,000 miles Plymouth. TcneritTe and Cape Town.
The famous Devonshire town, from which Drake
went to defeat the Spanish Armada, was reached on the
second day’s run.
The “ Pe ic'es ” anchored in the Soun 1 and a few
passengers only were allowed ashore. The town how-
ever presented a pretty spectacle from where the ship
lay, but interest was chiefly focussed on the work of
embarking new passengers.
Good-bye Plymouth—likewise England —was said
on the evening of N rvember 26th.
Teneriffe, that beauty spot in the South Atlantic,
was reached on December rst. The Peak of Teneriffe,
with its 12,000 feet of majestic grandeur was discernible
at 9.30 a.m., though the ship was then fifty miles off
the Island
The rugged beauty of the eastern coast was
responsible for numerous exclamations of delight from
those who viewed it for the first time.
Hut beautiful as the coastline was, it was incom-
parable with the lovely scene thr t grew before the eye
as Santa Cruz was approached. It was an entrancing
picture, reflecting all the colours of the Spectrum, its
natural framework adding lustre to the scene.


The cup would have been full had all passengers
been allowed ashore. As it was the greater part had to
content themselves by simply gazing on the charming
pan );ama from the sea.
Meanwhile, the natives put off from the shore, their
tiny craft, laden with luscious fruit, being watched in
joyful anticipation of what was to come, as each stroke
of the oar brought them nearer their object.
Once aboard, excitement reigned supreme. The
deck suddenly became a busy market place, the
Spaniards plying the products of their sunny clime, and
the passengers not a few of whom were armed with
pillow-slips -struggle 1 good-humouredly in their eager-
ness to obtain the juicy fruits.
'The sun had far advanced Westward Ho when
our short yet pleasant stay terminate 1. 'The anchor
was weighed at 5 p.m., (Jape Town being the next
stopping place.
(Jape Verde was passed at 7 a m. on December 4th,
and the Equator crossed at 2.15 p.m. on December 7th
two shots being fired to notify the passengers of the
latter event.
At 11.45 p.m. on December 15th, the ship anchored
off (Jape down, d'he myriads of electric lights stretching
along the sea front for miles gave to the town a
picturesque effect, whilst looming in the background was


the famous Tabic Mountain, iis massive blackness
seeming to add grandeur to the grand.
Passengers were early astir next morning in readi-
ness to procee 1 ashore. Alas, it was raining
To those aboard the “ Pericles ” this seemed ‘ the
unkindest cut of all.” To Cape Co’onists it was a
bountiful act of Providence; they were glad of the rain,
for none had fallen for a considerable period, and the
ground was parched and thirsting for the precious fluid.
It was our misfortune if it may be designated such, that
such was the morning that saw us at this southern port.
However, rain or no rain, the passengers were bent
on going ashore, and by nine o’clock the ship was practi
rally deserted.
It is useless attempting to relate the exploits of all
when once on terra firma; suffice it to say that some
went here and others there and all enjoyed themselves.
My 3.30 the ship was once again under way. As
the vessel proceeded out of the bay, the sun broke
through the clouds
“'That all day long had hung their garnered fullness down.”
'The mist on Tabic Mountain gradually lifted,
exhibiting a noble example of Nature’s architecture that
will bring pleasant recollections of our final moments at
< ape down after the mists had rolled away.


CHRISTMAS AT SEA.
There seems to be a touch of romance ah' ut
( hiistmas at sea. Vet it brings the same joyful message,
“ I'eace on eaith, goodwill toward men.”
The Festive Season to those aboard the “ Pericles ”
was a hap] y. happy time. Peace and concord reigned
supreme, the passengers and officers leaving no effort
undone to make it the happiest period of the voyage.
The festivities commenced on t hristmas Eve and
extended to New Year's Day.
'l'he central object, of course, was a < hristmas tree.
It was loaded with a variety of dainty presents for the
children, and was prettily decorated with coloured electric
lights. Captain Simpson, generous as ever, kindly
opened the proceeding and introduced Father t hristmas,
wh >, assisted by Mrs. Petrie, distributed the gifts to the
childien, to their great delight.
( hiistmas day passed off as only < hristmas days do
and the height of fun was reached by the introduction of
snapdragon. I >ancing made boxing Day enjoyable. A
really delightful an I entertaining effort by the children on
Monday was followed on the next evening by a benefit
concert arranged on behalf of Mr. Glover in appreciation
of his services as accompanist during the voyage.
Old Joe's Minstrel Troupe succeeded in pleasing
everyone, whilst the concerts by the Steele-Payne bell
Ringers were both musical and unit pie.


Sports and Pastimes
It is a pleasant task, to write a few words in
praise of the Committees entrusted with the work of
providing recreation in the way of sports, g lines, con-
certs, etc., and also of the artistes who so generously
responded to their appeals.
I hey ■ annot I e thanked too much, for evenings
that otherwise might have been wearisome, if anything
passed too quickly, as the result of their gratuitous
efforts.
Naturally, much assistance was rendered by the
officers of the ship, particularly Chief Officer Collins,
who never seems so happy as when creating pleasure
for other folk.
Much enthusiasm was evinced by both young and
old in the .--ports, the tug-of-war proving the greatest
attract! <n. Representatives of the Leek and the Rose
were early vanquished, and the final tussle saw the
Shamrock defeat the Thistle.
I’revision was made for the children (there were
about 190 on the ship) who entered into the contests
with all the earnestness of their childhood nature.
Musically, the passengers were well seived, the
excellent series of Concerts producing a vaiiety of
talent.
The audiences highly apj rcc isted the sweet melo ies
of the singers, the healthy, humoic us s! etches, ; nd also


the efforts of the instrumentalists, especially Mr. S.
Aderman (Steward in-Charge), and Mr. Glovers con-
tributions.
On land a Fancy Dress Ball is enshrouded in an
atmosphere of mysteripusness ; but when held at sea, how
much more is the halo intensified. Still, this does not
detract, but adds to the pleasantness of these affairs.
Those held on the “ Pericles ” proved both amusing
and interesting. The ladies 1 >oked charming in their
fancy attire, and when dancing progressed the scene was
one in which “ beauty hid everywhere. ’’
Intellectual recreation was found in the debating
class started by Messrs. Jackson and Pi. by, and many
interesting subjects were discussed.
The Children’s .Sunday Services instituted by Mr.
and Mrs. Eyre, of South Africa, were essentially good
for all, and were well attended.
A number of very useful prizes were presented to
those successful in the various competitions. We hope
they will prove a reminder of a pleasant voyage.
First-Class Saloon
Committee: Messrs. S. W. Christie, W. E. Hold-
ship, A. A. Blackball, A. Mac Gill, W. D. Campbell,
P. F. Spence, E. A- Petherick, P, M. Stewart, R. Steele,
and Dr. Macdonald.


The following are the successful competitors up to
the time of going to press -
Deck Quoits • J/isses Jury and Bi.-sett. J/essrs.
Anderson and Rogers
Peg Quoits * Mr. Pearson and Miss Mate
Bucket Quoits. Mr. Pearson and Mrs.
Deck Golf* Miss Irelan 1 and Mr. Thompson
Bull Board; Mr. Jury and Miss Jury
Bridge Tournament: Messrs. Holdship and ( ollins
Whist Tournament: Mrs. Brady and Mr. I'e.rson
Giibbage: Mr. Anderson
Chess : Mr. Brady
Draughts : Mrs. Christie
Whist Drive : Messrs Malpage and Petherick, Mrs.
Holdship
Third-Class Saloon
(lommittee —’ Messrs. Shields, Drake, Thoms <n,
( larkson, Wheatley, Gravest >n, Tunnoine. Anderson,
Stutters, Allan Commons. Gullick and Old Joe, Misses
Jones and Thomson, Mesdamcs Tuotcl and Sn.ith
The following is a list of successful competitors -
Cock Fight. Messrs. Hewitt and Atkins
Bar and Bolster: Messrs Crawford, Gulbick, Hewkt
and Trimmer


Threading Needle and Cigarette Race • Messrs. G.
Bolton, Downs, Jennings and Miss Chalmers
Whistling Race. Messrs. Harris and Waldron
Quoits - Messrs. H. and E. Travaskies, A. Stutters
and J. Anderson
Potato Race - Miss Southall
Whist Tournament: Messrs. Hutley and Tubb
Slinging the Monkey Messrs Haile and Bolton
'Tilting the Bucket. Messrs. A. Thomas, Biedirelon,
Crawford and Harris
Sack Race. J. Harris and T. Anderson
Deck Billiards; Messrs. Julian, Travaskis, Southwell
and Haile
Tug of-War • Mr. McGowan’s Team and Mrs.
Lydie's Team
CHILDREN
Skipping: Daisy Craig, Ruth Jean, May Braun and
Laura Jean
Chalking Big’s Eye : Rose Braun, James Lithgoose
and William Metiers
Boot Race: Lydie Metiers, J. Gilmour and Norah
Waldron
Bun and Treacle: Grace Metiers, Rose Braun and
William Scott
Thread Needle Race: William Metiers, Rose Braun
James Robb, E. Jean, Jack Champion and F. Trimmer
Apple I Mning: William Brewer, William Metiers
and lames Robb


DISTANCE TABLE.
The following are the distances between various
Pmts touched by the T.S.S. “Pericles”: -
Knots
Dover to Plymouth ... ... 226
Plymouth to Teneriffe ... ... ... r >435
Teneriffe to Cape Town... ... ... 4,444
Cape Town to Melbourne ... ... 51789
Melbourne to Sydney ... ... ... 572
Sydney to Brisbane (Cape Morton) ... 443
Melbourne to Freemantle ... ... 1,630
Freemantle to Port Natal ... ... 4,355
Port Natal to ('ape Town ... ... 805
