

Saturday, August 19, 1899.
pOf a Visit
'F \S_
SYDNEY, -A j* jt
xrt r p ,'
6.0 6 1
/ £ i2>




SOUVENIR ..
Of a Visit to the Eastern & Australian Steamship Co.'s ss." Eastern.”
My Dear Little Friends,
Did you know that ever since the year 1873 the Eastern and Australian Steamship
Company have been sending steamers from Australia to China and Japan ? During all these
twenty-six years they have had continually to add larger and better boats to their fleet as more and more
people wished to travel in them, and now they have just received fresh from the hands of the clever
shipbuilders in England the largest and most beautiful of all, the Eastern. She is 352 feet long, and
can carry 3,600 tons of cargo, as well as a very large number of passengers. She cost a great deal of
money to build, and is like a small city floating on the sea, with her army of officers,
stewards, and sailors, her busy untiring engines, her fine electric-lighted staterooms, saloons, and
promenade decks, and last, but by no means least, her large refrigerating rooms full of fresh food,
vegetables, and fruit, and with a plentiful supply of something you would value very highly if you went
with her through the tropics, namely, ice.


The E. and A Steamship “EASTERN” leaving Circular Quay, Sydney, N.S.W. , for China and Japan.


When she hauls out from the wharf in Sydney and passes through the Heads, she turns to the
north, and, steaming along the coast, calls at Brisbane, Townsville, Cairns, Cooktown, and Port Darwin.
Here she says good-bye to the Australian Continent, and passes through the Arafura and Banda Seas,
and the Straits of Manila until the Celebes Islands are reached. Many strange and beautiful sights are
seen before she casts anchor at Hong Kong.
This place, you will remember, although inhabited largely by Chinese, now belong to England.
From here the steamer goes on to her first Japanese port of call, Nagasaki, and then enters the famous
Inland Sea of Japan. This is a stretch of water 240 miles long and varying in width from Bto 40 miles.
It is studded with thousands of islands of all shapes and sizes, thronged with all sorts of queer and
picturesque fishing boats, and being as smooth as a mill-pond, and usually full of brilliant sunshine, you
can easily understand that it is a most delightful sight. And as this is but an introduction, as it were, to
the many beauties of Japan, we need not wonder that travellers who have visited this extraordinary country
are so full of its praises.
Japan, as no doubt you know, is a very ancient country, but for centuries the people were very
jealous of foreigners, and would allow none of them to enter their towns. All that is changed now, and
the Japanese not only encourage the visits of foreigners, but have themselves travelled over the world
and learned as much as ever they could from other nations, and are catching up as quickly as possible
to modern civilization. Still they keep many of their own national customs, some of which seem to us
very queer. For example, on entering a house you must remove, not your hat, but your shoes ; and
the number of the guests inside may be estimated, not by the hats and umbrellas in the hall, but by the
number of shoes. The best rooms are always at the back of the house, the servants’ offices in front.
People of low degree seat themselves in the presence of their superior, and servants wait at table sitting.
Public demonstrations of loyalty are not considered proper ; when a royal procession is passing through


Japanese Ladies


the streets, a silent, perfectly motionless attitude on the part of the spectator is considered most
respectful. The most cheerful sight in Japan is a funeral. Enormous banners of brilliant flowers,
sometimes six or eight feet high, the offering of sympathising friends, are carried in the procession.
The coffin, in a pretty white carved wooden case, with gay curtains of bright blue silk, is borne on men’s
shoulders ; instead of black trappings and feathers, the undertakers supply gigantic models of flowers
and plants made of gold and silver and coloured papier-mache; the mourners are dressed in white, and
the priests are resplendent in gorgeous robes of gold and coloured brocade, while at the grave the pretty
Buddhist ceremony of releasing caged birds is performed.
In building a house the Japanese begin with the roof, and the rooms are built and measured to
fit the mats, not the mats measured to fit the rooms.
Books begin at what we consider the end, the pages are always double, and the letters go down
the page instead of across as ours do. Writing is done with a brush held vertically. On an envelope
the name is the last portion of the address to be written, and the name and address of the sender is
written in full upon the reverse side.
At a dinner party it is considered good manners to put a portion of your food away in your
sleeve, and if you wish to pay your host a delicate compliment, and convince him that you are
thoroughly enjoying his good cheer, you must masticate your food and swallow your fluids as noisily as
possible.
Cherry trees are cultivated for their flowers, not their fruit, and great festivals are held when the
orchards are in full bloom.
Japanese umbrellas have their ribs outside, and pillows used by ladies are made of wood instead
of feathers.


Jinexkishas, Japan.


It is good form in Japan to smile cheerfully when you impart bad news. The hands of the clock
stand still while the face moves, and bells have their clappers outside.
If, my dear little friends, you wish, as we expect you will, to find out more about these strange
countries, China and Japan, as well as full particulars of the islands and ports which the Eastern passes
on her voyage, you should go to Dymock’s Arcade and procure a copy of “The Eastern and Australian
Steamship Company’s Tourist Guide.” It contains facts about your own country of Australia which will
be sure to interest you, and has very many pictures as well as a large number of maps, charts, and plans,
which will be very useful to you when, by and bye, school being done with, you pack up your trunks
.and take a trip yourselves on board the Eastern to China and Japan.
With kind regards,
We are,
Yours sincerely,
THE EASTERN AND AUSTRALIAN STEAMSHIP CO., LTD
Gibbs Bright & Co.,
Managing Agents,
37 Pitt Street.


