





'J' HE j3RIDGE.
This bridge is the largest of its kind in the southern hemisphere, and, as regards its foundations,
one of the most remarkable in the world.
The bridge crosses the Hawkesbury River at a point 36 miles north of Sydney, and 10 miles
from the sea. The bridge is the last link in the continuous all-rail connection between the principal
cities of the four Colonies—South Australia, Victoria, New South Wales, and Queensland. The
distance by rail between Brisbane and Adelaide will be slightly over 1,800 miles.
The successful tenderers for the work, which included the design, were the Union Bridge
Company of New York, and they commenced operations about October, 1886.
The design, which is given above, showed seven spans of 416 feet from centre to centre
of the piers, which were to be built upon foundation caissons of a novel description, the only
parallel to which is to be found in the almost contemporaneous works of the Poughkeepsie Bridge
over the Hudson River, in the United States, and the Jubilee Bridge over the Hooghly, in Bengal.
The caisson for each pier is rectangular in form with rounded ends, 48 feet by 20 feet,
splaying out 2 feet wider all round at the bottom. The main outer skin is |-inch steel; inside








this are three wrought-iron dredging tubes, arranged on the longitudinal centre line of the caisson
and connected with it by angle and T steel strutting.
The dredging tubes splay out in a trumpet mouth at the bottom, meeting the outer skin and each
other in strong steel cutting edges.
The top of the caisson as built is open, and exhibits the holes for dredging as described, which
are 8 feet in diameter, and 14 feet apart from centre to centre. The spaces between them and the
outer skin were filled with concrete, as the mud in the tubes was removed by dredging, thus causing the
whole to descend through the deep mud of the bed of the river, until the caisson rested on the firm
bottom beneath. The wells or tubes were then also filled with concrete, making a solid mass entirely
below water, on which the masonry piers were erected.
The first section or ring of the caisson was, in each case, built up on shore, and towed out to
position, and sunk to the bottom of the water, when dredging was begun, and successive rings added as
the descent proceeded.
The dates of these operations as regards the different caissons, and the depth below high water
level to which they were sunk is shown in the following table :
No. Launched. Bottomed. Depth in feet.
I 9 Aug., 1887 3 Nov., 1887 101
2 4 Oct., „ 3° Jan., 1888 155
3 29 Nov., „ 16 Feb., „ 146
4 8 Mar., „ 29 June, 1887 147
5 9 Dec., 1886 9 Oct., 1888 144
6 9 May, 1887 11 May, 1888 162
(The last being the deepest bridge foundation in the world.)




1! S P
B m BBKQByi
* !! . v •:.
'iSV- >'-*
»;*ff f : ' i d? '
."*-' ■& -W - • - ,3* *v* 4£r ;- --:- ;--*--7 : - .
V -~- ' :-Vg: - :£-g




The masonry of the piers, of which the plinth is hard trachyte from Bowral, and the upper part
local sandstone, was commenced in each case as soon as the foundation was ready for it.
The abutments are entirely of sandstone. The south abutment was started in March, 1887, and
the north abutment in May, 1888, and were ready for superstructure in April, 1888, and September, 1888,
respectively.
The superstructure is of a not unusual American type, each span being composed of two girders,
and carrying a double line of railway. The upper “boom” or compression member and the vertical
members connecting it with the lower chord or tension member are formed of built-up steel-riveted plates.
The lower chord and the diagonals are formed of solid steel eye-bars in groups. The whole forms what
is known as a “ Whipple-truss,” and the members are connected by steel pins. One end of each span is
fixed to a pedestal bolted down to the pier or abutment, on which it rests, and the other end rests on
expansion rollers, to allow of movement under varying temperatures.
The main girders are 410 feet in length from centre to centre of bearings. The height of the
main girder is 58 feet, reckoned from the centre of the pins of the lower boom to the centre of the top
boom ; the width apart is 25 feet inches in the clear, to allow of a double line of railway. The girders
are divided into thirteen panels of about 31 feet 6 inches each; cross girders 4 feet 11 inches in depth
are fixed between the main girders at each joint. Four rows of longitudinal girders 3 feet deep are fixed
to them to carry the rails. Between these rail-bearers and the rails timber transoms 9 inches x 8 inches
are placed across the bridge on 16-inch centres.
The permanent-way consists of lb. flat-bottomed rails of the usual type used in this Colony,
fixed to the transoms with screws; and guard-rails of the same description are fixed parallel to them,
and extend throughout the bridge.








The length of the bridge between the abutments was, according to the original design, 2,896
feet; but in consequence of the caisson of pier No. 6 getting out of position the length of span
No. 6 was increased 4 feet 3 inches, thus making the actual length of the bridge between abutments
2,900 feet 3 inches.
The method adopted by the contractors for putting these large spans in place is shown in
the second of the accompanying illustrations, and was as follows :
A large pontoon, 335 feet in length by 61 feet wide and 10 feet deep, was constructed, with
a staging upon it sufficiently high to enable the girders to command the piers when the pontoon was
floated out at high tide.
The girders, being 410 feet long, overhung the pontoon, the length of which had to be
regulated by the minimum water space at the abutment spans.
When the pontoon, which was provided with forty-four water-tight compartments, was complete
with its staging, it was towed over a gridiron of piles and sills, in shallow sheltered water, and sunk, the
exterior and interior valves of the compartments being all left open so that the water ran freely in and
out at all tides.
The complete span was then put together on the top of the staging. This operation of erecting
each span is shown on the first of the accompanying illustrations. The roadway girders, and all but the
sleepers and rails, were placed in position, except on the overhanging portion, which was lightened and
temporarily strengthened.
This done, at low water of spring tide, weather being favourable, the valves were closed, and as
the tide rose the pontoon floated, and was conveyed by 6-inch hawser extending from Dangar Island
(where the pontoon lay) to the bridge, and running over a winding engine on the pontoon ; this being








aided by a steam-tug and the flowing tide. This operation of floating a span in position is shown in the
second illustration.
When the pontoon had reached the proper position it was moored between the piers, and allowed
to fall with the tide, leaving the girders in place on the piers ; the pontoon was then brought back and
placed on the gridiron, at the next high tide, and the same cycle of operations was repeated.
This operation was carried out with varying but ultimately successful issues in all cases; spans
Nos. i, 6, and 7 having been from adverse weather the most troublesome.
The dates of launching the spans were as under: —
No. 1. —12 July, 1888.
„ 2. — 8 September, 1888.
„ 3. —16 August, 1888.
„ 4.-25 May, 1888.
„ 5. —29 January, 1889.
„ 6. 1 March, 1889.
7. — 6 October, 1888.
The roadway was completed on April 23rd, 1889, and the bridge was tested on April 24th by two
trains, making up a total weight of 910 tons, one being placed on each road on each span in succession.
The deflection of the main girder in every case was 2\ in.
The bridge was formally opened for traffic May Ist, 1889.


