

Congregational Church
East Melbourne.
E. W. Grawford
Souvenir
of
Diamond Jubilee
1862-1922.


MR. W. N. PRATT
Chairman Congregational Union 1921-22.
EAST MELBOURNE CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH


HISTORY OF EAST MELBOURNE
CONGREGATIONAL CHURCH.
The work of compiling an historical state-
ment of the Church has not been a simple
matter, owing to the lack of complete record'
and historical documents.
We have been greatly helped in the work
of compilation, however, by information
given by Mrs. Meadowcroft and the mem-
bers of her family. We are also greatly-
in debted to Mrs. Kamsden, Miss Ivey. Mrs.
.Martin, Mr. Hubert and others' tor their
ready and invaluable assistance.
To all of them we tender our sincere
thanks.
From what we believe to be an authentic
source, we learn that on the resignation of
the Rev. W. I). Landells, of Oxford-street
Church, a division occurred over the selec-
tion of a successor, with the result that a
section of the deacons and several of the
members left the Church and commenced
services under the ministry of the Rev.
Joseph Beer in a small stone building on
the corner of Victoria-parade and Islington-
street, Collingwood.
From the earliest records of the Church's
history we glean the following:—
"I he Rev. Joseph Beer, late of Dunolly,
commenced his work in connection with
the Pastorate on 29th September, 1861. A
Church fellowship was formed by the Rev.
J. Ik Sunderland, of Richmond, on Novem-
ber sth, 1861. At the same meeting a cor-
dial and unanimous invitation was given
to the Rey. Joseph Beer to become Pastor,
which he accepted, and for seven years
laboured with varvinsr sikwsc- "


The present Church building was erected
in September, 1862, and was freed from debt
in 1865— a splendid achievement.
On January 21st. 1868, a call to the Pastor-
ate was accepted by the Kev. Thomas Ed-
wards.
From Church records, we learn that he car-
ried on an aggressive ministry, and was in-
strumental in having a lecture hall erected.
His ministry closed in July, 1874.
The Kev. J. G. Perrin became Pastor of
the Church in January, 1875. The attend-
ances. which had become very small, began
to increase rapidly and much good work was
accomplished.


In April of the same year a communica-
tion was received from the Wellington-street
Church, suggesting amalgamation. A month
later the offer was accepted, and the Kev. I).
Meadowcroft and his congregation joined in
worship at the East Melbourne, Church.
Then commenced a ministry unique for its
length and ability.
Mr. Meadowcroft was a fine linguist, speak-
ing no less than 13 different languages. He
was also a capable musician, and prior to
coming to Victoria from Western Australia
condui Uni a large choir of efficient singers.
Mr. Meadowcroft was a methodical man.
nothing of a slipshod nature being counten-
anced.
Visitation was carried out, and, aided by
the hearty co-operation of Mrs. Meadowcroft
mid family, everything was done to the end
of making the Church successful.
During periods when the finances of the
Church were low, Mr. Meadowcroft under-
took private tuition. This accomplished a
dual purpose, not only assisting the Pastm-
mid his family from a financial standpoint,
but bringing many young people under such
influences for good that they were well
equipped for the business of life.
Our present Pastor testifies’ to the effect
that during visitation from door to door he
has come in contact with many who speak of
the late Mr. Meadowcroft in very tender
terms', expressing thankfulness that they were*
privileged to have had fellowship with him
and his family.
He completed a long and faithful ministry
5n April, 1907, and passed to the Eternal
Best in March, 1914.


Mrs. Meadt vein it, we are thankful to say,
is still with but enfeebled health prevents
her taking part in our activities.
In 1908 the Rev. W. N. Gunson commenced
his ministry. It was his first charge, and he
put into his work such enthusiasm and ability
that a marked change was soon realised in the
life of the 1
The attendance and membership increased,
financial conditions improved, and the hearts
of young and old alike rejoiced to see the re-
newed vitality and growth of the Church.
_ It was a severe loss when Mr. Gunson re-
signed his charge, after two years of work,
fraught with much blessing.


The Rev. K. Morrison Bowles was called to
the Pastorate in 1911, and for three years he
and Mrs, Bowles laboured incessantly for the
extension of Christ’s Kingdom. Amidst great
discouragement they held on to their task in
all faithfulness, sympathetically and carefully
watching all branches of the Church’s activi-
ties. Mr. Bowles resigned in 1914.
Following on Mr. Bowles’ resignation, the
pulpit was supplied by Students from the
College, principally Messrs. W. Albiston and
J. Trewella. Good work was accomplished
and interest maintained.
The Rev. J. Mayo became Pastor in 1914,
and remained for five years.
During this period the Church passed
through very trying times, and finally was
closed in October, 1919.. A month later,
however, it was re-opened.
Mr. G. M. Scandrett became Student-Pas-
tor, and quite a revival of interest was ex-
perienced and continued throughout the term
of his ministry.
NOTABLE WORKERS AMONGST THE
LAYMEN.
_ There was a noble band of laymen asso-
ciated with the Church from its inception.
Such names as John Ivey, John Speechley
Gotch and Samuel Ramsden are not soon for-
gotten.
John Ivey came to Victoria from Bristol,
England, where lie had been a preacher of
the Gospel, deacon,. Sunday school superinten-
dent and Bible class leader.


He was one of the first deacons and, also
treasurer of the East Melbourne Church; but
on joining the City Mission as one of its
preachers he resigned office at East Melbourne.
He was Cut ME-ionary for 35 yeans in Col-
li ngwood and, surrounding districts, and
'worked untiringly and unselfishly through-
out, taking at the same time as large a share
in the work of the Church as was po-dble.
In all his work he was lovingly assisted by
his devoted wife.
Mr. Samuel Ram-den was one of the origi-
nal members, of the Church.
When it became to erect a new
building he was most liberal with time and
money. His loan of £5OO free of interest en-
couraged the deacons in building the present
Church.


Mr. Ramsden took great interest in the
musical portion of the services, and, in con-
junction with his son, Mr. G. Ramsden, placed
the present organ in the Church.
His interest in the Sunday School was great.
Liberality marked all his efforts in connec-
tion with Christ’s Kingdom.
John Speechley Goteh. —Tins name occurs
first as Trustee, then as Auditor, and finally
as Treasurer.
Whatever the office he held, he did his duty
nobly and well.
Judging from the Church records, he was' a
man of action rather than words, for many
references are made to his generosity. He
gave a tenth of his income to Church and
charitable organisations.
At the amalgamation of the two churches,
he wiped out the liabilities on the East Mel-
bourne Church.
He was the minister’s true friend, providing
him with the necessary holidays, and ever
ready to assist in whatever way desired.
During the illness of Mr. Meadowcroft, Mr.
Goteh visited him, little thinking that it was
to be their last meeting together on earth.
Prior to his departure he laid his hand on
Mr. Meadowcroft and said, “The longer I live,
and the more I see, the more I am determined
to let all ‘isms’ go and cling to the ‘Rock of
Ages’ through everything.”
He returned to his home, and passed away
during the night.
Special mention might also be made of the
work of Messrs- Hayes, Bangs, Dickens and
Rnrinoheld.


Mrs. Gotch has been often termed “A mother
in Israel.” Her memory is fragrant to-day.
because of her deeds of love. She and her
husband were indeed co-workers with the Pas-
tor and his family.
So close was Mrs. Gotch associated with the
Church that it became known as “‘Mrs. Gotch's
Church.” Besides her regular contributions,
she arranged an effort nearly every year to
wipe off any debts which may hare been con
traded.
Xo worthy appeal was unheeded by her, and
her house was well known to the poor and
distressed.
Liberal help was given as requested.
She passed away in 1914.
SUNDAY SCHOOL.
We deeply regret that no records are avail-
able concerning the Sunday School; but this
we know, however, that for the past 60 years,
devoted men and women have carried on the
work of training the young people in the
knowledge of the Kingdom of God and His
Son Jesus Christ.
The earnestness manifested by a small but
loyal band of Teachers and Officers at the
present time is bearing fruit. The future is
bright before us. In God’s name we go for-
ward


lii January, 1922, the Rev. James Tonkin
was called upon to undertake the task of
building up the Church.
The people rallied heartily to the support
of their new Pastor.
The Deacons (Messrs. Lovie, W. Edwards,
S. Clough. L. Bird) and the Secretary (Mr.
E. V. Jones), together with the organist
(Mr. J. Larkin), the Ladies’ Committee, Sun-
day School Teachers and Officers, have been
zealous in good works.
The school hall and church have been reno-
vated, and the windows repaired, a tennis
court laid out. new chairs provided, and the
property put in good order.
The work is by no means easy, but in the
strength of God we go forward in all con-
fidence. Relying; on the Great Head of the Church
whose promise is “Lo, I am with you alway, even
unto the end ”
