

Souvenir
Programme
CITIZENS’ FAREWELL TO
His Excellency, the Governor,
Colonel, the Rgt. Honourable
SIR LESLIE ORME WILSON
P.C., G.C.5.1., G.C.M.G., G.C.1.E., D.S.O.
LADY WILSON
ROYAL NATIONAL SHOWGROUNDS
Saturday, April 6 th, 1946




Souvenir Programme
CITIZENS’ FAREWELL
TO
His Excellency the Governor,
Colonel, The Right Honourable
SIR LESLIE ORME WILSON
P.C., G.C.5.1., G.C.M.G., G.C.1.E., D.S.O.
AND
LADY WILSON
ROYAL NATIONAL SHOWGROUNDS
SATURDAY, 6th APRIL
1946


His Excellency the Governor, Sir Leslie Orme Wilson
P.C., G.C.5.1., G.C.M.G., G.C.1.E., D.S.O.
Page Two


Lady Wilson
Page Three


The Governors Distinguished
T^ecord
AMONG the many distinguished representatives who have
_ represented His Majesty the King in Queensland, none has
been more popular than Sir Leslie Orme Wilson, P.C., G.C.5.1.,
G.C.M.G., G.C.1.E., D. 5.0., Governor of the State for the last
14 years.
Originally appointed for a period of five years, Sir Leslie had
the unique distinction of having his period extended on four other
occasions, to make 14 years in all—a record for a Governor of any
Australian State, and believed to be a record for any British
Dominion.
His Excellency’s charm of manner and devotion to duty, his
leadership, and wise counsel endeared him to the people of
Queensland. He has travelled widely throughout the State and
there are few, if any cities and townships that he has not visited
and often revisited during his long term of office. Few people
have such an intimate knowledge of Queensland as that gained by
Sir Leslie on his personal tours in the north-west, the coastal
districts, or the far south-west.
Sir Leslie arrived in Brisbane in 1932 when the State was
suffering from a severe economic depression. He was happy at his
appointment and when chosen for the position, and before leaving
London, said: “I have never looked forward to any post with
greater pleasure and keener anticipation than that of the Governor-
ship of Queensland.”
As a soldier with a distinguishded record who fought along-
side the Australians at Gallipoli, he naturally had a warm regard
for the Australian Digger and he was always a popular visitor at
regimental reunions; while his interest in the welfare of returned
men was an inspiring example. One of His Excellency’s sons,
Major David Wilson, of the Rifle Brigade, was killed in action in
the Middle East in November, 1941.
In the activities of the Red Cross and other Patriotic organiza-
tions he showed tremendous enthusiasm and energy, and as
Chairman of the Appeals Committee of the former, and Patron of
the Queensland Patriotic and Australian Comforts Funds, he had
the pleasure of seeing the public cheerfully subscribe and attain
each year whatever financial goal was sought.
Page Four


In the field of sport His Excellency’s interests covered a very
wide field and, in addition to being a playing member of the
Wanderers’ Cricket Club, he was an enthusiastic golfer and a
keen bowler; while he also found time to encourage amateur
boxing, swimming, and other manly sports. His interest in
children’s affairs was exemplified by his work for the Bush
Children’s Health Scheme and the Crippled Children’s Home at
Montrose. Rotary and its motto found in him a ready supporter,
and, as a prominent Freemason, he occupied the high office of
Grand Master in Queensland for 12 years.
Sir Leslie’s distinguished career before coming to Queensland
embraced service in the South African and Great Wars, from
each of which he received decorations and was mentioned in
dispatches. A long period as Parliamentary member in the House
of Commons preceded his appointment as Governor of Bombay
before he came to Queensland.
Lady Wilson
Ilf IKE her husband, Lady Wilson has taken a very keen interest
Jll , in many public organizations during her stay in Queensland.
She was the first Australian wife of a State Governor to be
appointed from England. Before her marriage she had travelled
considerably in China, Japan, and other Eastern countries, and
became engaged to Sir Leslie when he was A.D.C. to the Governor
of New South Wales, but they were not married till 1909 in
England.
During the whole of the war years she held office as President
of the Red Cross Society in Queensland, where her active personal
interest and her counsel were greatly appreciated.
She was also Patroness of the National Council of Women,
President of the Victoria League in Queensland, and also closely
associated with many other organizations in which she not
only held high office but also took a keen personal interest in
their activities.
Lady Wilson is also a keen gardener and the blooms at
Government House always won the admiration of visitors, while
during the war years many bunches of flowers were sent by her
to the Red Cross Cafe.
Page Five


lllili The PROGRAMME
From 7.30 p.m. to 8 p.m. the massed bands and the Pipe
bands will provide a musical programme.
In the arena more than 2,000 Boy Scouts and Girl Guides,
massed, will form an outline map of Queensland.
On their arrival at the grounds, His Excellency and Lady
Wilson will be piped from the entrance gates to the official
enclosure, and as they step from their car the massed bands will
play the National Anthem.
His Excellency will subsequently inspect the Mounted Police
escort.
The Right Honourable the Lord Mayor and the' Lady
Mayoress (Aid. J. B. Chandler, M.L.A., and Mrs. Chandler) will
then officially receive the Vice-Regal guests .
The programme will then proceed as follows:—-
“The Heavens are Telling” (from “The Creation”), by the
Combined Choir of 700 voices.
Oval March by Massed Pipe Bands.
Address by The Honourable the Premier (Hon. E. M.
Hanlon, M.L.A.).
Selection, “Home, Sweet Home,” by Massed Bands
Address by the Right Honourable the Lord Mayor, and
presentation of Farewell Address.
Reply by His Excellency the Governor.
“God Be With You Till We Meet Again,” Combined Choir
and Bands.
Oval March by Massed Bands.
Page Six


“Waltzing Matilda” (two verses), by Combined Choir, led
by the Lines of Communication Band.
(The audience is requested to join in the singing of the chorus.)
Once a jolly swagman camped by a billabong,
Under the shade of a coolibah tree,
And he sang as he watched and waited till his billy boiled
You’ll come a-waltzing, Matilda, with me.
CHORUS: Waltzing Matilda, Waltzing Matilda,
You’ll come a-waltzing, Matilda, with me,
And he sang as he watched and waited till his billy boiled,
You’ll come a-waltzing, Matilda, with me.
Down came a jumbuck to drink at the billabong,
Up jumped the swagman and grabbed him with glee,
And he sang as he watched and waited till his billy boiled,
You’ll come a-waltzing, Matilda, with me.
CHORUS: (Repeat.)
GRAND FIREWORKS DISPLAY
Choir, Bands, and Public will render two verses of “Auld
Lang Syne.”
Should auld acquaintance be forgot,
And never brought to min’ ?
Should auld acquaintance be forgot,
And days o’ lang syne ?
For auld lang syne, my dear,
For auld lang syne,
We’ll tak’ a cup o’ kindness yet,
For auld lang syne.
And there’s a hand, my trusty frien’,
And gie’s a hand o’ thine,
And we’ll tak’ a right gude willy-waught
For auld lang syne.
CHORUS: (Repeat.)
“GOD SAVE THE KING”
Choir of 700 voices from the State and Municipal Choir, Brisbane Eisteddfod
Choir, Curlew Choir, the Apollo Club, the Handel Society, and the Meister
Singers Ladies’ Choir, under the conductorship of Mr. J. P. Wallis of the
Australian Broadcasting Commission.
Bands participating are the Lines of Communication, Brisbane Municipal
Concert, Brisbane Citizens, Brisbane Excelsior, South Brisbane Federal, East
Brisbane Juvenile, and Wynnum, as well as the massed Pipe Bands.
Page Seven


The Farewell Address, handsomely hound in leather a
presented to His Excellency, the Governor by the
on behalf of the Cit.


i placed in an ornate cabinet of Queensland Woods,
Lord Mayor, Alderman J. B. Chandler, M.L.A.,
zens of Brisbane.


“HIS TERM WILL REMAIN MEMORABLE
Representative Queens-
land organizations, with
which His Excellency
and Lady Wilson have
been associated during
their stay in Queensland,
were invited to forward
short messages of fare-
well for publication. This
is what they wrote :
THE ROYAL SOCIETY OF ST.
GEORGE.—Members record their
deep appreciation of His Excellency
and Lady Wilson and their gratitude
for the Interest taken in the Society.
We express sorrow at their departure,
but look forward to their visiting
Queensland from time to time. We
wish them every happiness in the
future, and all are pleased to have
another Ambassador for Queensland
in England.
AUSTRALIAN NATIVES’
ASSOCIATION.—We wish to express
our sincere regret at His Excellency
and Lady Wilson leaving this State
for which they have done so much.
Queenslanders will long remember
the part they have played in the
development of this State and the
fortitude with which they endowed
the people during the troublous
years just passed. Our Association
is indebted to Sir Leslie and to Lady
Wilson for the advancement of the
great national spirit which the
Australian Natives’ Association has
endeavoured to foster for many
years. '
CALEDONIAN SOCIETY AND
BURNS’ CLUB.—The distinction
achieved by Sir Leslie Wilson before
Page Ten
coming to Queensland justified the
expectation that the highest
traditions, of Governorship would be
observed. That expectation has been
amply fulfilled. No Governor has
more deservedly won the esteem of
all sections of the people, and by
none more highly than Caledonian
Society members. To Sir Leslie and
Lady Wilson we would say, “Adieu!
a heart-warm, fond Adieu!”
QUEENSLAND IRISH
ASSOCIATION.—Members of this
Association join with their fellow
citizens in saying farewell to His
Excellency, Sir Leslie Orme Wilson,
who during his record term of 14
years as Governor of Queensland,
has carried out the duties of his high
office with honour and dignity and
has endeared himself to the people.
May he enjoy health and happiness
in the years to come.
ST. DAVID’S SOCIETY.—The
St. David’s Societies of Queensland
desire to pay their tribute and to
offer their gratitude to His Excellency
the Governor and Lady Wilson for
the sympathy they have shown with
Welsh efforts, ideals, and aspirations
in this State of Queensland. Devotion
to duty, and calm, capable leader-
ship, particularly during the greatest
crisis of our history have gained for
Sir Leslie and Lady Wilson the
admiration and affection of Welsh
people as well as of other sections
of the community.
RETURNED SAILORS,
SOLDIERS. AND AIRMEN’S
IMPERIAL LEAGUE (Q’LAND.
BRANCH). —The League joins with
the people of Queensland in their
expressions of regret at the departure
from this State, of His Excellency,
Sir Leslie Orme Wilson and Lady


IN THE ANNALS OF QUEENSLAND”
Wilson. The keen and active interest
of His Excellency and Lady Wilson
in the welfare of this Returned
Servicemen’s League, and of ex-
servicemen and women during the
fourteen years His Excellency has
been Governor of Queensland, has
been an inspiration to the members
of this Association.
THE UNITED GRAND LODGE
OF MASONS.—The Members of the
United Grand Lodge of Queensland
in bidding farewell to His Excellency
and Lady Wilson desire to record
their grateful acknowledgment of the
unbounded sacrifices made by His
Excellency as their Grand Master
during his twelve years of office.
His wise counsel, guidance and
enthusiasm will ever remain a lasting
inspiration to the Freemasons of
this State.
ROTARY CLUB OF BRISBANE.
Our sorrow at losing His Excel-
lency and Lady Wilson is softened
by the knowledge that they are,
after all, homeward bound. We
remember with appreciation how
they have so often graced our
assemblies and assisted in our various
activities. To think of His Excellency
as a Rotarian calls to mind how
well he exemplified, during his stay
in Queensland, the Rotary principle
of “Service Above Self.”
ARCHBISHOP HALSE.—Speak-
ing on behalf of the Church of Eng-
land in Queensland, we shall bid
farewell to His Excellency and Lady
Wilson with the utmost regret. We
are grateful for all they have done
for the welfare of the community,
for the personal interest they have
taken in so many good causes, and
not least for their consistent attend-
ance at Divine Worship.
ARCHBISHOP DUHIG. It is
with the greatest pleasure, tinged
with sorrow at the prospect of his
departure, that I express my ad-
miration, and the esteem of those
whom I represent, for His Excellency
the Governor, and convey our best
wishes for the happiness of himself
and Lady Wilson. On account of the
interest which His Excellency dis-
played in the general prosperity of
the State and in the welfare and
happiness of every section of the
people, and above all, because of his
extraordinary devotion to duty and
the confidence which he inspired in
all of us during the whole period of
the war, the long term of office of
Sir Leslie Orme Wilson as Governor
will remain memorable in the annals
of Queensland.
REV. H. M. WHELLER.—The
members of the Council of Churches
gladly join with their fellow citizens
in expressing to our Governor and
Lady Wilson, appreciation of their
distinguished services to our State
whereby the sentiments which unite
us to the Throne and Empire have
been enriched. We have rejoiced in
the warm support given to so many
enterprises of a benevolent character
and for the Initiation of movements
destined to be of abiding value to
those who dwell in the open spaces
of our land. We desire to assure Sir
Leslie and Lady Wilson of our warm
regard and our prayers that the
blessing of God may attend them
throughout the days of their pil-
grimage.
AUSTRALIAN COMFORTS
FUND (Queensland Division). —We
desire to pay sincere tribute to His
Excellency and to Lady Wilson as
Patroness of the Fund, for the splendid
support and keen interest displayed
in the work of this Organization
since its inception.
Page Eleven


MORE TRIBUTES FROM
RED CROSS SOCIETY (Queens-
land Division). —In bidding farewell
to His Excellency the Governor and
to Lady Wilson, we will always
remember them both with gratitude
for their active interest in every
phase of Red Cross work and service.
Lady Wilson is President of the
Division and His Excellency was
Chairman of the Red Cross Appeal
Committee during the war years.
Their enthusiasm was a splendid in-
centive for voluntary service by
members and liberal support by a
generous public to Red Cross funds.
The Division has been honoured by
their acceptance of Honorary Life
Membership, the two first appointees
in Queensland.
QUEENSLAND PATRIOTIC
FUND.—Throughout the war years
Sir Leslie and Lady Wilson, by their
own personal efforts gave an inspiring
lead to the people of Queensland
in all patriotic endeavour. For their
patriotic works alone, they have won
a place in the hearts of all Queens-
landers and carry with them every
good wish for their future health
and happiness.
ROYAL NATIONAL ASSOCI-
ATION.—We value greatly the
splendid work and influence of our
Governor and Patron, Sir Leslie
Orme Wilson. His friendship and
interest have forged lasting links
among the best Queenslanders
engaged in the pastoral, agricultural,
manufacturing and commercial
interests of the State and these are
the interests that this Association
delights to serve. For all his good
work in this regard Queensland owes
him a millionfold thanks and, for
his loyal representation in the service
of the King, we bless him.
QUEENSLAND BUSH CHILD-
REN’S HEALTH SCHEME
(Incorporated).—The scheme was
Page Twelve
founded on 6th December, 1935. by
His Excellency who has retained
office as President during the whole
of the period since its inception. He
has taken a very active part in the
administration of the scheme, and
the fact that the work Is so well
known throughout the whole of the
State, is due largely to the personal
interest he has always shown in the
welfare of the children of Queensland.
QUEENSLAND COUNTRY
WOMEN’S ASSOCIATION (South
Coast Division). —We desire to ex-
press £ur deep appreciation of the
interest His Excellency and Lady
Wilson have shown in all spheres of
our Association’s activities during
their residence in Queensland. We
pray that their return to the Mother-
land will bring quiet rest and
happiness.
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF
WOMEN OF QUEENSLAND.
We would like to express apprecia-
tion to His Excellency, and to our
Patroness (Lady Wilson), for ' their
kindly interest in the National
Council of Women and the 72
women’s organizations affiliated with
us. Their co-operation has been much
appreciated and we know there are
ties that will bind them ever to us.
We wish them, in their well-earned
retirement, many still useful, happy
and contented hours. God speed
them both.
THE VICTORIA LEAGUE IN
QUEENSLAND. We appreciate
the assistance that has been given
by His Excellency and Lady Wilson
(our President), for the constant
efforts towards the Empire’s interests.
By their return to England we feel
this will be strengthened. We regret-
fully say Farewell and wish them
God-speed, trusting that some day
they may both return.


MANY ORGANIZATIONS
QUEENSLAND SOCIETY FOR
CRIPPLED CHILDREN (Montrose
Home—Corinda). Montrose Home
and the Board which directs its
affairs desire to pay tribute to Sir
Leslie Wilson—our Patron for the
years of his Queensland residence.
Not many may know but whenever
he found an afternoon off he quietly
made his way to Montrose and
coming away left behind his good
cheer and inspiration and a know-
ledge within all who met him on
those days that Sir Leslie was the
King’s Representative and friend of
Crippled Children—we owe him much.
FLYING DOCTOR SERVICE OF
AUSTRALIA (Queensland Section).
—The Council of the Flying Doctor
Service farewells Its Patron with
sincere regret and extends to Sir
Leslie and to Lady Wilson grateful
thanks for the warm-hearted support
so freely given. We deeply appreciate
their kindly actions for the better-
ment of the amenities for our people
living in the far-distant portions of
our State. Our best wishes for a
happy future go with them.
QUEENSLAND TURF CLUB.—
The Committee and other Members
of the Queensland Turf Club express
keen regret that His Excellency and
Lady Wilson will shortly be leaving
Queensland for England after 14
years’ sojourn here. In leaving they
will take with them our warmest
affections and good wishes for their
future. The courtesies extended at
all times by both to the Club have
been greatly appreciated.
QUEENSLAND CRICKET
ASSOCIATION.—It was with great
regret that the members of the
various cricketing bodies in this
State learned that His Excellency and
Lady Wilson would be leaving so
soon for England. Ever since they
arrived in Queensland Llis Excellency
has had such intimate association
with the game here—as playing
member of the “Wanderers” C.C..
and as Patron of the Q.C.A. —that
he will always be remembered as our
Cricketing Governor.
QUEENSLAND AMATEUR
BOXING AND WRESTLING
UNION.—With the departure of His
Excellency for England, the Queens-
land Amateur Boxing and Wrestling
Union is losing one of its most ardent
supporters. During Sir Leslie’s
occupancy of the position of Governor
he has been a frequent visitor to all
tournaments staged by the Amateur
Boxing and Wrestling Union, and
has given practical as well as moral
support to the sport. We shall always
remember him for his kindness to
amateur boxing and wrestling in this
State, and wish him and Lady Wilson
the blessing of good health and
happiness In the future.
THE BOY SCOUTS ASSOCI-
ATION.—In saying farewell to His
Excellency and to Lady Wilson, the
Boy Scouts Association desires to
pay tribute to the sterling work
which His Excellency has performed
for the Movement. Queensland Boy
Scouts and Wolf Cubs, in whose
welfare His Excellency has always
taken a very keen interest, join in
wishing both Sir Leslie and Lady
Wilson bon voyage and a happy
reunion with their family and friends.
THE GIRL GUIDES ASSOCI-
ATION.—The Girl Guides Associ-
ation bids a regretful farewell to His
Excellency and Lady Wilson, who
in their many years of residence in
this State, have taken a keen interest
in our young people. As President of
this Branch of the Movement, one
of the largest Youth Organizations
in Queensland, Lady Wilson has
performed a service of value to
Guides everywhere.
Page Thirteen


His Excellency talks to Sir
at the Medical School in
The Duke and Duchess of Gloucester welcomed by
the Governor at Archerfield, June 1945.
PICTORIAL GLIMPSES
Raphael Cilento
March, 1941.
f I I ft 4
■ f J %
-
-' •* Ar *■ «* ? 'tJL ’A*.< I Iff *A
A pre-war shot. The Governor takes the
in Brisbane,
The Governor cuts a rivet at the
works of Evans Deakin, July 1935.
OF HIS EXCELL


mmm 9 \
i -Jmi.
® • i|Pi • IB*.
■
k. \ ... > I ■ * V* ' 5
salute from the Military and Naval Reserve
June 1938.
Inspecting progress with Dr. Bradfield
at the Story Bridge, 1938.
An inspection at Gatton College in 1935.
At the Anzao Memorial, Armistice Day, 1945.
NCY’S ACTIVITIES IN QUEENSLAND
(“Courier-Mail” Photos.)


•k-1
<3
■
. Vo
<3
<3
txo
S
•
<3
b/3
'§
O
*->
S
o
V
*XO
-s;
•+-i
o
<3
-SJ
Vj
t-i
<b
CO


His magic was not far to seek,
He was so human. Whether strong or weak,
far from his kind he neither sank nor soared,
But sat an equal guest at every hoard:
No heggar ever felt him condescend
No jinnee presume; for still himself he bore
A.t Nlanhood s simjile level, and where er
He met a stranger he left a friend.
■—Russell Lowell


