

1
cr
N
r
w
CNi
go
|o» f.
r
C 3
rz I




A few months ago just an address.
To-day the number disappears and
in its stead has risen the new Metro
Theatre which to current and coming
generations will stand as a syn-
onym for the best in screen
entertainment.
a history so remarkable that
if scenarised by the fictionist
would provide material as rich in virile enter-
tainment for the talking screen as it reads to-day
In retrospect. 181 Albert Street possesses an
association with the erstwhile gaiety of Brisbane as
does no other landmark in the city’s romantic
and colorful history.
rPHE SITE upon which the Metro Theatre now
1 stands was, during the hectic and virile pion-
eering days of our staunch colonists, both the
terminal and commencement of the rumbling
coaches which served the sparsely populated
State. To this grassy slope on the edge of a
trickling stream, coaches transported their human
freight from all points outside the settlement then
known as Moreton Bay. It was the focal point
for dust-begrimed travellers, gold-miners with
their muddy accoutrements, lovely ladies with
billowing bustles, state officials hide-bound with
red tape. . . . All were planted here in the
fledgling community by a rickety coach which
creaked its way into town to the accompaniment
of much celebration. The arrival of almost every
coach was the signal for an impromptu _ enter-
tainment in which the passengers willingly joined.
Over the camp fire tales of lucky strikes were
told, of conquest, of holdups and sometimes of
killings. Always a mug of ale to lend zest to the
occasion . . . always a song or two to pass the
time away. I
The new modern City Hall with its impos-
ing clock tower provides vivid contrast to the
old building in Queen Street, this photo of
which was taken in 1865,
.'j '■
came the first definite steps
to progression and cul-
tured prosperity. The new
settlement was given a
voice in the councils of the
country; the lever which,
by common consent, ad-
mittedly moves the world
the Press began to
move the wheels of hide-
bound, red-taped legisla-
ture! The “Courier”
made its first appearance
on June 20, 1846, and
thenceforward, the change
was marked and more
rapid.
In the main, the principal reason for most of
these travellers was to seek the wealth and
romantic adventure that every new colony in-
variably offers. Strangely coincidental it is, then,
that on this identical site the same wealth of
romantic adventure is still to be found . . .
but with much more comfortable and speedy
means of transport and within the modem con-
fines of a palatial theatre.
ST the outset, Brisbane was, in common with
other parts of Australia, a penal settlement.
Sydney was getting either too respectable or too
populous, and the opportunity afforded by
Lieutenant Oxley’s discovery to get rid of so-
ciety’s cast-offs was eagerly embraced by Gov-
ernor Brisbane, after whom our city was named.
The road to emancipation from, this broad-
arrow era was a rocky one, and was not even
complete after the removal of some of the con-
victs, After this was done, however, land sales
were held and speculators made and lost huge
sums of money.
It is of .particular interest to know that
one block of land fronting Queen Street,
only a few hundred yards from the new
Metro Theatre, measuring nearly half an
acre, was knocked down for £26 to a man
who thought the price exorbitant !
With private landowners
No need to dodge speeding cars or electric trains in
Queen Street in 1884, when this picture was taken. Com- <
parison with the picture of the same location to-day
provides a splendid illustration of the city's progress.
Story of Brisbane’s Progress


Beads like Epic Film Romance!
It was in the early fifties, however, that
Brisbane very nearly went right out of
existence. The finding of gold in outlandish
districts had done much to depopulate the
town. The city was at a standstill.
The auctioneer’s bell was the most regular
thing about it; but its ringing was labour in vain—
seldom could a buyer be found, because all were
sellers, eager to get out with a fossicking dish,
thus to earn big money in a short time. The posi-
tion was desperate for Brisbane, with the result
that a local gold discovery reward fund was sub-
scribed. This did much to stem the ebb tide of a
rapidly vanishing population, but the ardor of
those who had the interests of the town at heart
was considerably dampened by the number of
fake claims made upon the Gold Committee.
■DRISBANE’S one immediate hope lay in the dis-
covery of a payable field, and its more worthy
citizens were not of the type that constitutes
despair. A reward of £3,000 was offered by the
Government for a genuine “ find ” which might
be no nearer than 20 miles from an existing
field, and must be able to support for six months
a population of no less than 3,000 persons.
The reward did not go begging for long. A
man named Nash hit untold riches at what is now
Gympiel His successful fossicking and what it
meant to the progress of Brisbane is now familiar
history; Queensland boomed, with Brisbane as
the focal point, in a most healthy fashion.
And whilst rich finds were continually
reported, people were kept on tip toe for
months, for if every week did not bring
new and more weighty nuggets, there were
records in the newspapers of sensational
hold-ups and coach robbing episodes.
the future. Electricity was A
introduced by the
“ Courier ” Proprietary,
who about the same time
added to their publications
the first eight-page paper
ever published in the col-
ony the 1 ‘ Evening Ob-
server.” Its issuance was
the symbol of Brisbane’s
growth and recognition of £»
its responsibility as the
capital of a huge State in a
rapidly advancing Com- >
monwealth ... a State
comprised of 668,497 square miles, with a coast
line of 2,250 miles, and embracing a few dozen
provincial centres of tremendous importance
to our industries.
To-day, Brisbane is numbered among the most
progressive cities of the world, a thriving busy
commercial centre, the hub of the fastest growing
State in the Commonwealth. Its primary and
secondary industries gain world recognition;
its beauty spots are legion; the hospitality of
its rapidly-growing population is a by-word!
New buildings are constantly replacing old!
Modern buildings designed for artistry as well
as solidity, add enormously to the already
remarkable progress of Queensland’s capital.
Of typical beauty is the new Metro, regarded
by town planners as one of the most notable
examples of modern architecture.
CO ! . . . Just as the original site of 181 Albert
Street breathed the very spirit of romance and


/, * * V\y \
1 IXI t
AN IDEAL has found fulfilment in a symmet-
rical poem of steel, bricks and mortar!
am im wMb* jar mtr mm b mr wbbb | am m w bWB *i, * ma bibb mi b
To-day . . . the Metro Theatre is a glorious
a wuajr ■ ■ ■ me mcuw iiiuauc 10 a
reality!
To you who love the finer things of life, who
respond with warm eagerness to the appeal of
beauty, will come a thrill of pride and deep
enjoyment when first you step across the thres-
hold of this new Metro Theatre. Into your life
this new institution of entertainment will bring
moments of joy, hours of delight, long afternoons
of pleasure and evenings of splendid adventure
in the land of make-believe.
With all modesty, we feel that the new Metro
more than satisfies the demands of the most
blase I Luxurious air-cooled seating will
provide comfort for 1,411 persons; 900 being
in the stalls and 511 in the circle. Many modern
innovations for the comfort, pleasure and enter-
tainment of patrons have been incorporated
in this the most modern theatre in the Southern
Hemisphere.
Seasons are banned forever from the confines
of the Metro by reason of the introduction of an
air-conditioning plant which will maintain an
even temperature the whole year round.
Specially constructed fountains will provide
ice-cool water free to patrons while hygienic
paper cups will also be freely available. Two
: of these fountains are incorporated in the circle
and stall lounges.
■„ J
Guide to Illustrations (above)
Artist’s impression of The ..
Proscenium ; (at right) Corner /*
of Grand Foyer. /
The lounges themselves are spacious, and
tastefully furnished and decorated.
The plan of the auditorium is of particular
interest, inasmuch as the floor is of parabolic
contour both upstairs and down. The last few
rows of seats in both sections are raised
slightly, ensuring perfect vision from any
angle or location.
rpHE whole design of the interior goes to
■‘■make for accoustical perfection. The pro-
jection booth is a model of its type, completely
fireproof and extending across the entire
width of the theatre frontage.
The exterior of the theatre is particularly
impressive, both from the point of view of
architecture, lighting effects, and general
displays. These are forceful, yet completely
in keeping with the tasteful motif of the entire
construction. The cream concrete facade is
embellished with a hanging neon sign 42 feet
in height and just on eight feet from the building
line. The biggest sign of its kind in Queens-
land, it emblazons the word "Metro” for
all to see.
Indeed, this sign, replete with the intricate
plan for flood lighting the entire facade at
night, absorbs sufficient electrical power to
illuminate a small town, according to engineers
who were engaged on the job. Strong
beams of amber and blue light, when asso-
ciated with the huge hanging sign, make a
beautiful and impressive effect, fully in accor-
dance with Brisbane’s need for a brighter
and cheerier face to show after sunset.
I
; [
■. :
ij // / /m B B A Vtl
7 jf/ XM_ JL ill


Ila* Materialised!
rpHE Metro’s Box-offices are situated on either
side of the wide entrance lobby. The grand
foyer extends the full width of the building,
with four sets of folding doors leading to the
aisles and stalls, Foyer walls are treated with
Queensland panelling as is, indeed, the whole
edifice. Two marble staircases, thickly carpeted,
lead to the mezzanine lounge and circle.
The Metro is definitely fire-proof. In ad-
dition to the usual safety devices, the whole
construction is of concrete and structural steel.
Even the roof is of concrete, whilst the floors,
also of concrete, are covered with underfelt
and carpet. No basic support whatsoever is of
wood, everything of primary importance being
of cement and structural steel. In this regard
the building is unique, as it is claimed that no
other similar construction in Australia is built
with this advantage. Ample exit facilities are
provided while an emergency lighting plant
is in readiness should the ordinary source of
power fail.
Comfort and convenience for patrons is
evidenced by a special cosmetic room as well
as rest rooms for lady patrons. There is also a
special smoking room for the mere male.
Telephones for public use are installed in lower
and mezzanine lounges.
In those details that meet the eye, only beauty
has been served; in those unseen but infinitely
more potent qualities sensed only by a deeper
faculty, a personality of enduring charm has
been created.
melt into a common consciousness of harmony
within these walls .... Anxiety and care slip
from the mind like a garment that is laid aside,
when once the smiling atmosphere of the Metro
Theatre enfolds the guest.
There is no corner of the Metro Theatre
bereft of beauty; an inspired gift for interpreting
charm seems to have guided the fingers of the
artisans who laboured here . ... an inviting
nook .... a beckoning alcove .... surely of
such delights are bright dreams fashioned ....
It is in these glimpses of appealing charm that
the soul of the artist smiles through.
The artist’s conception of the main lounge,
with its rich carpet and cosy furnishings.


10 N LITE PTV.(flld-) LTD.


The building on the right bearing the flagpole was formerly on the site now
occupied by the new Metro Theatre. Inset is the old shop which was
formerly on the left of the present entrance.
Not a picture of Venice but another scene during the 1893 flood showing
how the Elizabeth Street corner looked in chose days. The building at the
right next Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer offices was the same 44 years ago as it is
to-day !
Compare this picture of Albert Street taken a few weeks before the
completion of the theatre, with the one opposite showing the same location
during the flood of 1893.
IS HISTORIC!
5 GLANCE at the early history of Brisbane
- ri reveals that Albert Street has played a
most exciting and interesting part. Not the
least thrilling was the disastrous flood of 1893
when it was no uncommon sight to see row
boats of all sizes and shapes manned by anxious
men and eager youngsters, carrying on as
much of the business life of the city as circum-
stances would permit,
In selecting illustrations for this souvenir
programme the Metro Theatre management
obtained these studies of Brisbane To-day and
in 1893 in order that we may appreciate the
changes which have occurred during the past
44 years. 1
We are indebted to the Brisbane “ Telegraph ’ ’
for the courtesy of the historical pictures adorning
this and other pages,
To-day modern cars speed up and down this thriving thoroughfare, but in
1893 canoes would have been more serviceable. The site of the Metro
Theatre is seen in the bottom left-hand corner.
METRO SITE


“No Visitors Allowed.”
COHERE it is, in bold black letters, right
over the magic portals which lead to
adventure, romance, glamour! . . . Metro-
Goldwyn-Mayer’s giant studios at Culver
City, Cal. Only the very privileged can
get past the sturdy gate-men whose job it
is to guard those doors which so many
screenstruck people have tried so hard to
enter! Only those with very special dis-
pensation can gaze at will upon the million
wonders which lie within.
Come with me on the Magic Carpet of
Hollywood, to peek into the intimacies of
movie-making. Listen in while we talk to
the stars who have provided so many
pleasant hours of exciting relaxation for
you and me.
Firstly, let's enter this huge concrete
building, in which Garbo is dancing with
handsome Robert Taylor. It's the
“ Camille ” set, costing many thousands
of pounds, and one of M-G-M's most
important productions. There’s the two
stars now . . . and how they can emote for
the all-seeing eye of the camera. ' 1 That's
all, cut," shouts director George Cukor.
And the two dancing, smiling stars whirl
behind the cameras, brush against my
arm, and sit down at a table to play pin-
ochle until they're next wanted.
What’s Bill Powell thinking about ?
He doesn’t often look as serious as he
appears to be here ! And, at right,
Robert Taylor and W. S. Van Dyke, direc-
tor of so many of the screen's biggest hits,
talk with a lucky visitor to the M-G-M
production chief of the
studios.
Let’s now cross the concrete boulevard Hold on to your hat when you enter
to Set No. 6, where Joan Crawford, Clark Sound Stage No. 10 .. . that's where the
Gable and Franchot Tone are having madly merry Marx Bros, with Maimeen
grand fun making " Love on the Run." O’Sullivan and Allan Jones are busy on
We’ll be just in time to see the last-named '' A Day at the Races," ~ . and when I say
gentleman, looking anything but a digni- busy, I mean just exactly that! Just try
fied movie-star, tied to a chair and shout- riding a horse through the operating
ing his head off, whilst Clark and Joan are theatre of a hospital, whilst a patient is on
laughing their heads off! But then, that’s the table and see if it doesn’t keep you
the spirit of " Love on the Run "... it’s hopping! But maybe we’ll wait a little
grand nonsense from start to finish. But while, to hear Allan Jones singing ” To-
what struck me as really funny was, after morrow is Another Day" to lovely
heavy love-making with Clark Gable, Maureen. It’ll soon be one of the nation’s
Joan grabbed hubby Franchot Tone by song-hits, together with the other two
the arm and said, "Hurry up, dear, tunes from ‘‘ A Day at the Races, ”
we've got the Montgomery’s coming to But perhaps the greatest thrill of all is
tea." But that’s movies for you ! watching Jeanette Macdonald and Nelson
studios.


Eddy do three scenes from " Maytime.'' written for Eddy by Herbert Stothart,
Imagine, if you can, the most sumptuous M-G-M musical director, whom you will see
interior set ever created, with nearly a conducting the huge symphony orchestra
thousand gorgeously gowned women; which always accompanies the two sing-
and handsome men in knee breeches and ing stars,
scarlet coats, grouped around a huge , , „ „ , ,
, , . . .■ i T And now, a stroll of about three hundred
marble staircase .. . upon which Jeanette, , , _ ,
, , . , ... ~ , yards along a lawn-flanked pathway. We
the incomparable, stands with Nelson 1 „ ~ , ; . ' .
, . . , . - pass William Powell and Luise Rainer,
Eddy, singing a glorious ana, * ’
, r ~, . .... , both dressed for their parts in " The
At the conclusion of this rendition, not „ , _ ,
. „ . . , Emperor s Candlestick ; Robert Mont-
only the extras but the off-stage tech- 1 , , .
nicians break into spontaneous applause. S ol ™*?’ lookm( ? as debonair as ever
We wait for a little while, whilst Nelson after , his dlfferent role in " Ni 9 ht Must
changes his clothes . . . and next we see to diess suits for "The Last
and hear him singing to Herman Bing, rs - Cheyney ; and Wally Beery,
that funny little man who is responsible leading Carol Ann, his little daughter, by
for just as many laughs off-stage as he is the hand. We join our guide in nodding
before the cameras. The song is “ Vir- affably, and receive a charming smile in
ginia Ham and Eggs," and it was specially return. But , . .
Here's Sound Stage No. 14. The red
light over the entrance door is burning
brightly, so we enter like mice! Sure
enough, there’s Freddie Bartholomew.
Spencer Tracy and Lionel Barrymore . . .
cutting up fish! They're making " Cap-
tains Courageous," that stirring saga
from the pen of Rudyard Kipling. All
three look bronzed and fit! Reason:
they've just returned from a six weeks' sea
voyage aboard a fishing smack on location
for the outdoor scenes of the film.
Judging by the amount of preliminary
work done on " Captains Courageous,"
together with the enthusiasm held for it by
the entire cast and all those others asso-
ciated in its making, it will be something
right out of the box.
And so, on our way! At every turn will
you see those people who mean so much
in the lives of each and every one of us
. . . people who, by their artistry, can
bring tears to your eyes, or laughter to
your lips. And yet, with it all, they’re
human beings, every one ever ready and
willing to be nice to the likes of you and I
who, for one brief day, are permitted to
encroach upon their sacred precincts and
steal an all-too-brief glimpse at the vast
production organisation which, in itself,
provides the greatest romance of all , . .
the Romance of Celluloid!
And, at left, those braces of Wallace
Beery’s don’t seem to be as dangerous as
Nelson Eddy thinks ! It’s ail good fun,
anyhow !
• i


__ . arapnea in iriioo~vuiux ifcrvuiiiuuxui. jbbb i"■k /i 77
«• , ' Nick Charles ... .William Powell Aunt Katherine .... Jessie Ralph JBBB * mmm nJJ*'
■ t > <- 6. “ Sports OH Ice ” Nora Hyrna Loy Robert Alan Marshall mg j
„ f '■s Pete Smith brings the world’s fastest sport. David James Stewart Casper Teddy Hart mKj Wm 4
I f J. I • m which appears Sonja Heme. a S^7wV,V.Vjos MM 'it V »l\
I * ' ' / / 1 - \
/ I ‘ Service Information : Sessions at the Metro Theatre wiil , / j j | ICI 4IX- } \ \ \ JbMBM 7-, I A
17 be Continuous from 10 a.m. to I I p.m. with the De luxe //// L L/jSL \ A \ h The Metro Theatre Is Air-Conditioned by the most & \g \/l
|7 Evening Session commencing at 7.45. Plans for all per- ,\\\\\y //// /MiTTnTi \ \\ \ /// // modern equipment of its kind in the world. f T A
is *, formances for which bookings may be made are available at v V\Vyk v\ //if fd=4 H L iilJ ■ ii.il).} ! ‘ 1. 1 j \ \\ V/7 /// // , . VI
II i\ „ Theatre only (‘Phone BO 222). There is no extra charge for X\\\Wv / / // h~/\ * / \\ Fy V///7 7 ice-cool water for the thirsty Is provided in the * 71
|/| booking \WVv\\ / L // f \V_j : j/J\f J \\ j* ////// // lounges at the drinking fountains, /J
11 W * ' v h Bmilwl 7/ - at «
\V K - \\ \ HHgi nji Wmjf // 4 *' Jj
■ **. v v "f V * .*v
X a . wfrtw /V,
tfkssSk


The FILTHS set
the FASHIONS!
The screen is no longer a mirror of fashions, it is a creator of them.
Those who design the wardrobes of your favourite stars are not
merely dressing a picture, they are setting a vogue. It is their
job to be at least six months ahead of the changing trend in fashions,
to be able to forecast whether frocks will be longer or shorter,
whether hats will be staid or eccentric, or whether bows or trills
will be the chief decorative trend.
such accessories as bags, jewels and
handkerchiefs.
A peep into the books yields some
T TN QUESTIONABLY the outstanding amazing figures. Nearly 3,000 dresses a
d genius in this work at the moment is year are made by 80 seamstresses ;
Adrian, whose designing office has prob- 30,000 yards of cloth of 150 varieties and
ably admitted more famous people than 52 colours are required to make these
any other office can boast. Norma Shearer, costumes, 450,000 yards or nearly 250
Joan Crawford, Greta Garbo, Luise miles of silk and cotton thread and 10,000
Rainer, Jeanette Macdonald and innumer- buttons are the minimum needs for a
able others respect his judgment, together year’s supply.
with world-famous fashion editors, It is little wonder, then, that our glamor-
writers, interior decorators and leaders ous feminine stars are always so perfectly
in the fashion field. gowned. It is essential that they feel just as
The department where costumes are much at home in the clothes they wear in
actually made is a huge one—in fact it pictures as they would feel in something
suggests a huge department store. Here from their own wardrobe. Anything with
are enormous offices for designers, a a sloppy finish would be fatal,
tailoring department, a handwork depart- You wonder what happens to all these
ment, fitting rooms, a millinery depart- gowns. Many a pqpr woman is uncon-
ment—and even a section given over to scious of the fact that she is wearing a gar-
the exclusive care and manufacture of ment that was once worn by a famous star.


> i
“ After the Thin Han ” is a particularly
happy choice as the inaugural attraction of the
Metro inasmuch as it brings back those popu-
lar favourites William Powell, Myrna toy and
Asta, the comical pup. They’re together again
in a grand story teeming with laughs, drama
and thrills.


WUNDERLICH
ARTISTRY IN METAL
in the new
Metro Theatre
rjIHE architects for the new Metro Theatre, Brisbane, wisely
selected Wunderlich Ltd. to fabricate the extruded
Aluminium Alloy Metalwork that enhances the modern
design and beauty of this theatre.
Wunderlich craftsmanship is examplified in the satin-finished Aluminium
doors (complete with handles and kick plates) to the Main Entrance and
Foyer Entrance . . . the grilles to the ticket boxes and cashiers’ office
. . . the Aluminium ceiling light fittings over Main Entrance and Milk
Bar . . . the Aluminium ceilings to shop entrances . . .the metal letters
to executive building and the shops, etc.
Wunderlich's also supplied and fixed the Stainless Steel shop fronts.
ALUMINIUM ALLOYS
because of their resistance to corrosion and their adaptability to
architectural requirements play an increasing part in modern building
decoration and construction.
Your enquiries regarding Wunderlich metal work and metal
lettering, plaques, etc., will be welcomed. Call and inspect
the range of Building Material exhibits at our Showrooms.
WUNDERLICH LIMITED
Manufacturers of Building Materials of Quality
Showroom and Offices:
AMELIA STREET - VALLEY - BRISBANE
SYDNEY, MELBOURNE, ADELAIDE, PERTH, HOBART


“The Good
Earth”
A Truly Great Film
TWT-G-M’s “ The Good Earth ”
is regarded by the world at
large as one of Hollywood’s
major miracles. Not only does
it co-star Luise Rainer and Paul
Muni, both of whom won the
Academy Award for acting, but
also does it incorporate some
really astonishing feats of motion
picture production.
rpo make “ The Good Earth," every
Chinese in California was hired by
M-G-M Studios to appear in its many
outdoor sequences. In fact, the first
move towards production was made
way back in 1933, when Pearl S. Buck’s
novel of China was purchased and a
company of technicians and writers
were assigned to drafting it for the
screen.
The fields where Wang Lung (Paul
Muni) had his farm required eight
months to grow. On them were built
houses, and the many necessary farming
implements to lend realism.
Wang brings home a wife from the Great
House and finds her good to look upon (Paul
Muni and Luise Rainer in M-G-M’s “ The Good
Earth,” which is the next Metro attraction).
In the New Metro Theatre
BRETT’S FLUSH
PLYWOOD PANELLING
adds both beauty and dignity
Bretts were also privileged to
supply the bulk of the
TIMBER
used in the construction of the new
Metro Theatre. Entrust all your
timber requirements to Bretts.
Bretts are proud to have been associated with the construction of this
magnificent theatre, the most modern in the State, which typifies all
that is best in modern architectural design.
That Bretts’ modern flush plywood panelling should have been
chosen is a splendid compliment to the quality of this exquisite
Queensland-made material.
Bretts are recognised as Queensland’s leading plywood manufacturers,
operating the State’s best equipped and most modern plymills. They
are well qualified to advise you on all plywood matters.
BRETT & CO. PTY LTD.
Timber, Joinery, Hardware Specialists
PARBURY HOUSE EAGLE ST. BRISBANE ’Phone B 1201
Hardware Showrooms : Grey St., South Brisbane.


CARRIER’AIJSTRALASIA LTD. offers
its sincere felicitations to Metro-Goldwyn-
Mayer Ltd. on the opening of the new Metro
Theatre in Brisbane, and extends best wishes
for its complete success.
... As is the case with 95 per cent, of other
air conditioned buildings in Australia, this
magnificent theatre is equipped with Carrier
Air Conditioning.
THE CARRIER SYSTEM installed in


IL' ,
CHUBB’S
AUSTRALIAN CO. LTD.
who where privileged
to supply the
STRONGROOM DOOR
for this Modem Theatre
congratulate
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
Limited
You've never fully realised the comedy
talent of Joan, Clark, or Franchot until you
see them in M-G-M's Love on the Rum”
Clark, Joan, Franchot
on their enterprise
In Modern Comedy
“ Love On the Run ” is a sparkling modern
comedy-romance that will delight audiences from,
first scene to last, and is especially distinguished
by its very popular cast. Joan Crawford, Clark
Gable, and Franchot Tone as the boisterous fel-
low who gets in the hair of both of them.
Then, too, there are Reginald Owen and Mona
Barrie (one of Australia’s outstanding gifts to
Hollywood) in important roles, and little Donald
Meek in one of the most hilarious bits of tom-
foolery ever seen on the screen—as the Palace
Caretaker with the imaginary dog.
‘ ‘ Love On the Run ” clips along at an exhilarat-
ing pace primarily because the man behind the
camera was W. S, Van Dyke 11., the director
whose films (" San Francisco,” 11 Rose Marie.”
*' Naughty Marietta ”) always contain the stimu-
lating punch characteristic of his work.
The whole of the
Electrical Installation
in, this theatre was carried out
The fact that the M-G-M
Norman Bell
Studios invariably offer more
than good measure in enter-
tainment is proved in no in-
stance better than in " A Day at
the Races. ’ ’ Designed primarily
to be a comedy vehicle for the
mad mania, of the Marx Brothers,
& Coy. (Pty.) Ltd.
403 Adelaide St eet
Brisbane
this highly delightful film really
contains much more. Besides
the music played by Chico on
Allan Jones woos the P 1 ™ 0 and b Y HafpO Oil tfl6
Maureen O’Sullivan. harp, there 316 pOpMaX H6W
songs sung by Allan Jones in his
romantic interludes with Maureen O’Sullivan,
several brilliant musical numbers in scintillating
settings featuring dozens of Hollywood’s most
gorgeous dancing girls, and still more; Vivien
Fay) whose sensational ballet dancing will cap-
ture your enthusiastic favor; and the stimulating
harmonies of the Crinoline Choir.
Established 30 Years
Engineers


Theatre Seats with Air-Cooled Comfort as installed in
the Metro Theatre supplied only by
: cushSwncP
Theatre chairs that are air-cooled sounds almost impossible. However, this
statement is perfectly true. The leading theatres the world over have already
installed chairs with Dunlopillo Cushioning. They realise that their patrons
appreciate real comfort of ventilated, air-cooled scats.
Dunlopillo is made from Latex. This new material is made up of millions
of tiny buoyant cells, each opening freely into the others. These, yielding
with infinite softness to the slightest pressure and movement, breathe in and
out constantly, maintaining an even temperature and providing a cushion
extremely sensitive to weight and pressure variations.
Another important feature of Dunlopillo Cushioning is the fact that it is
completely germ, moth and vermin resisting.
For further particulars please write or ’phone MW 2641.
LATEX PRODUCTS
PTY. LTD.
{lncorporating A. N. Thomson & Co. Ltd.)
THE CRESCENT, ANNANDALE, SYDNEY.
Telegraph and Cable Address, “ Thomsonsco,” Sydney.
Head Office ; roB Flinders St., Melbourne, C.i.
Branches ; Brisbane, Adelaide, Perth.


‘Camille,’ ‘Maytime,’ ‘Captains Courageous,’
‘Last of Mrs Cheyney’... B,g F,,ms soon
The romantic team for which the world has waited —Greta
Garbo and Robert Taylor together—are in M-G-M-’s picturisa-
tion of the immortal Dumas love storv, " Camille.” They
fulfil and even surpass every expectation. The tender
reality and warm beauty of their love
üßj scenes must be seen, with Garbo re-
vealed as a gay, happy, laughing girl of
jmMjjta' VjM new personality, and with, Taylor a
Br 11 ” 1 " ' * dramatic actor of the topmost category.
The co-stars boast the support of an
; outstanding cast in 1 ‘ Camille, ’ ’ including
jd Lionel Barrymore, Elizabeth Allen, Jessie
am Ralph, Henry Daniell, Lenore Ulric,
? Laura Hope Crews, in bringing to
vW %\mm. vibrant life the poignantly lovely story
B *. tW|| of love among the joyous Parisians.
pj'ljr 1 For many years and in many films
Robert Taylor loves Greta u Ga *o has been recognised
Garbo in “ Camille " throughout the world as the screen s
—a rare thrill ! most glamorous actress, and by sheer
ability and beauty she has maintained
and increased her popularity. Robert Taylor's talents are so
obviously attractive that in a phenomenally short time he has
achieved a meteoric leap into screen fame and favor, To-
gether these two form a romantic couple of more significance
than any ever seen together before on the screen.
'■ Camille," as with all other M-G-M attractions to be
screened at the Metro, will be supplemented by popular
featurettes from Pete Smith, Robert Benchley, traveltaiks in
color from James A. Fitzpatrick, Happy Harmony cartoons,
M-G-M musical miniatures and Color Musical presentations,
'• Crime Does Not Pay" series of two-act melodramas and
regular issues ot the Metrotone Air Mail News. The Metro
Theatre will undoubtedly bring a new era of motion picture
entertainment to Brisbane.
A year or so ago picture-goers and music-lovers were
delighted beyond description by the introduction on the
screen of two singing sweethearts who seemed to have been
born to sing and make love to each other—Jeanette MacDonald
and Nelson Eddy in ‘' Naughty Marietta,' 1
Earlier this year this magnificent
couple returned to delight us in “ Rose
Marie,' ’
Soon you will surrender completely
to the spell of exquisite sight and sound
provided m their greatest picture—
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer's ' 1 Maytime,”
based on the operetta by Sigmund
Romberg and Herbert Stothart.
This glorious musical film has been jJnjfwi '
showing for several months in Sydney’s 'vfK
famous Liberty Theatre, and without , V»T[J' ‘
question will continue to remain for * *
several months more, audiences clamor-
ing to see it again and again and again. Jeanette Nelson
=? zi born to co-star.
uiu lg> occ it aucim caiu. acjcui-t aim ctucu-u. ,
born to co-star.
So we are preparing for a similar
reception for ” Maytime ” when it reaches the new Metro
screen. We truly hope that you, too, will be prepared, for
you’ll not want to miss it, Jeanette MacDonald and Nelson
Eddy head a cast which includes also John Barrymore, Herman
Bing, Tom Brown, Lynne Carver,
The Parade of M-G-M Hits will continue with '' The Last of
Mrs, Cheyney,” Frederick Lonsdale’s witty romantic farce
which has been thrillingly transferred to the screen with such
favourites as Joan Crawford, William Powell, Robert Mont-
gomery, Frank Morgan and a host of others. Then comes the
spectacular filmisation of Rudyard Kipling's ” Captains
Courageous,” in which Freddie Bartholomew plays the
spoiled youth who finds manhood in a world of men. Spencer
Tracy, Lionel Barrymore, Melvyn Douglas and Mickey
Rooney are the other big stars in this lavish production.
OF COURSE
It had to be the BEST
Naturally
Watson Bros. Pty. Ltd.
Supplied the whole of the
SANITARY WARE
for the new Metro Theatre
including
EXCELSIOR FIRECLAY WARE
ARMITAGE PORCELAIN WARE
Experience Count, . . . |U«|WA||llg|||o
85 Years’ Leadership in the Plumbing mHk Hj BBHI Hj| gBIMBi
Field stands to the Credit of the SB *jjg mSSsSaS* SB BS
MFtßoToinwvN WW MARGARET ST BRISBANE UKUUI
The B.„ in Pic.ures 127H33 THE MODERN PLUMBERS. OUR B;th YEAR.
WATSON BROS.
SANITARY ENGINEER?, DOMESTIC PLUMBERS,
nim.nF.Bs* suppliers, hardware merchants
The Best in Sanitation


c i
c i
r i
Appreciaticm
We desire to tender our appreciation and heart-
felt thanks to the legion of Australian artisans,
craftsmen and workmen who contributed so
largely in bringing The Metro Theatre to
magnificent fruition. Especially is that thanks
tendered to :—•


