

Souvenir
OF THE
Ascot Vale
Congregational Church
Jubilee
(1883 to 1933)
"Work, Witness, Worship"
For Christ and the Church


Ministers of the Ascot Vale
Congregational Church
Rev. J. Burchett - 1885-1896
Rev. S. Bryant - 1896-1897
Rev. A. B. Rofe - 1898-1904
Rev. W. H. King - 1905-1913
Rev. A. C. Newbury 1914-1921
Rev. H. L. Parker - 1921-1924
Rev. W. S. Pearse - 1925-
Rev. W. S. Pearse, B.A., B.D.
Present Office-Bearers
Pastor —Rev. W. S. Pearse, 8.A., B.D.
Deacons —Messrs. F. Davenport, A. W. Cardwell, W. G. Holden,
J. Upham, Leonard Pearse, and John Hanna (Life Deacon); Miss
McLennan.
Committee —Misses I. V. Seward and M. B. Rendle; Messrs. A. H.
Venman, W. C. Peacock, E. Glanville, and I. Kelly.
Secretary —Miss M. McLennan, 45 Bloomfield Road, Ascot Vale.
Treasurer —Mr. J. Upham, 249 Ascot Vale Road, Ascot Vale.
Deaconesses —Mesdames Price Williams, Stone, and Hanna (Life
Deaconesses), Windmill, Davenport, Cowan, A. W. Cardwell,
P. Danaher, and W. G. Holden.
Organist —Mrs. J. H. Hewitt.
Choir Conductor —Mr. P. A. Brudenell.
Independent Correspondent —Miss M. Rendle.
Press Correspondent —Mrs. A. W. Cardwell.
.^rhcial
Superintendent —Mr. W. G. Holden.
Secretary —Mr. B. Tregear.
Treasurer —Miss M. McLennan.
Organist —Mr. R. Wilkins.
©ljnstian (Bnbfahoitr i^onrttfs
Leaders — Senior, Miss E. Loader; Intermediate, Mr. T. Piet2,sch;
Junior, Miss E. Omerod.


Ascot Vale Congregational Church
/|j\ N the interesting and important occasion of the Jubilee of the
Vi!/ Ascot Vale Congregational Church, we desire to render to
Almighty God our humble thanks for the goodness and mercy
which have followed us through all the years. Amidst many changes,
we still retain many striking evidences of God’s favour to our
Church. Many have been won for the Kingdom of our Lord.
Hundreds have been quickened in their spiritual life as they served
in the work of the Church and Sunday School. Many are now
workers in other parts of God’s vineyard.
We give thanks to God for the memory of those who, through
the years, have entered upon their eternal reward. We look for'
ward to that glorious reunion, when we shall he one family in Him.
On the 4th November, 1883, the first service was held in the
Town Hall, Ascot Vale; Revs. J. J. Halley, E. T. Miles, and Thomas
Jones officiating. The Sunday School was opened by Miss Strong'
man, who gathered a few children together at her home in Ascot
Vale Road, next to the present Church, until they grew in numbers,
and transferred to the old Town Hall, opposite the corner of Mt.
Alexander Road and Moonee Street, Ascot Vale.
On May 4th, 1884, the Lord’s Supper was celebrated. There
were fourteen communicants. On 15th July in the same year, the
first Public Meeting was called, and on 25th August land was
purchased.


On 15th January, 1885, the Congregational Union and Mission
of Victoria wrote to the people at Ascot Vale, advising them to
form a duly-constituted Congregational Church. At the Church
Meeting at Collins Street held on 2nd April, the Pastor —the Rev.
D. Jones Hamer —addressed fourteen members being dismissed to the
new Church at Ascot Vale, reminding them of the great importance
and solemnity of the occasion in this work of Church extension,
without which no Church could prosper. He then called upon the
Rev. Jas. Burchett to address the meeting. Mr. Haydon, one of
those about to leave, also spoke. Messrs. Vale, Thwaites, and
Abrahams, deacons of Collins Street, and Mr. Kitson, Superintendent
of the Sunday School, spoke, and offered prayers commending those
fourteen going out to Ascot Vale to the Great Master, that He
would guide them in their new work which He had given them to
do. The Hymn of dismissal having been sung, the meeting was
closed by the Pastor with a prayer for a blessing on the Church,
and those whom they were sending forth as laborers into other fields.
The fourteen members sent from Collins Street were: Mr. and Mrs.
John Roberts, Mr. and Mrs. John Haydon, Mr. and Mrs. R. J.
Tymns, Mr. and Mrs. and three Misses Spencer, Mr. and Mrs.
'Dallimore, and Mrs. Magee. Mrs. A. B. Rofe (then Miss Flora
Johnson) came out with seventeen others from Collins Street to the
laying of the foundation stone, and wrote the above notice in the
“Independent” of January, 1885.
On 12th March, a bazaar was held in the Moonee Ponds Town
Hall to obtain funds to build. On 13th June, 1885, the foundation
stone of the new Church was laid at 4 o’clock by the Rev. D.
Jones Hamer. There was a large gathering of friends, numbering
about 150, including several ministers, amongst whom were the Revs.
W. Allen, J. King, E. T. Miles (Chairman of the Congregational
Union of Victoria), J. Thompson (Presbyterian), L. Fison, M.A.
(Wesleyan), and a number of ladies and prominent laymen from
the various Churches. The proceedings commenced by singing the
779th hymn (230 in Hymnal, “Oh Thou to Whom in Ancient
Time”), after which the Rev. Wm. Allen offered prayer. The Rev.
James Burchett gave his statement, giving an epitome of the starting
of the Church in the neighbourhood, which had prospered sufficiently
to induce the friends to build a new Church. After thanking those
who helped, the Pastor called upon the Rev. D. Jones Hamer to
lay the stone. A collection amounting to £l3/8/- was laid on the
stone. The Church was opened on 23rd August. The attendances
were large on each occasion. The Rev. James Burchett preached in
the morning from the words; “He loveth our nation, and He hath
built us a synagogue” (Luke 7; 5). Rev. Burchett preached again
in the afternoon to the young people upon the “Piety of the Youth-
ful King Josiah” (Chron. 34: 27). At the evening service, the Rev.
A. Gosman delivered a striking and able sermon upon the con-
version of St. Paul (Gal. 1: 24). The Tea Meeting was held on


the following Tuesday, when 360 people sat down to the tables,
bountifully and tastefully provided by the ladies of the congregation.
The large attendance, comprising friends from city and suburban
Churches, as well as from other denominations, though it somewhat
taxed the resources of the ladies, was most encouraging to everyone
concerned.
■ Addresses followed by the Revs. J. J. Halley, J. Caton (C. of E.),
W.-H. Lawrence, J. Thompson (Presbyterian), E. T. Miles (Chair'
man of Congregational Union). The Revs. J. King and Edward
Puckle prayed. Mr. Puckle was the first minister in the district.
The collection was £36/2/9, and total collections amounted to £7O.
•Thanks were due to the architect (Mr. John Little, of Mel-
bourne), Messrs. Haydon and Price Williams (who superintended
the erection of the Church), and the many ladies and gentlemen
who had worked untiringly in its behalf, and the numerous friends
who had presented valuable articles for the use of the Church, as well
as money gifts. The contract was let to Mr. James Rawsthorn, of
Kensington, for £869.
At the first anniversary, on 22nd August, 1886, the preachers
at the three services were Revs. J. G. Millard (Wesleyan, South
Melbourne), John Vale, and W. Allen. The Tea Meeting, held
on the following Tuesday, was presided over by the Hon. W. M. K.
Vale, 250 persons being present. Reports were given from the Band
of Hope, Literary Society, and the Ladies’ Working Society. The
Choir rendered efficient solos and anthems under the conductorship
of Mr. Adamson. Addresses were given by Revs. J. J. Halley, J. W.
Crisp, and J. E. Harrison.
Another big and successful Industrial Bazaar was held on
3rd February, 1887, which was opened by Dr. L. D. Bevan.
Another memorable occasion was when Dr. Bevan and his musical
family came to our Ninth Anniversary, on 15th October, 1894, held
in the Town Hall. The Reverend Doctor* preached to an over-
flowing congregation, and was ably supported in the musical part of
the service by members of his family.
The Church was well filled with members and their families in
the family pews in those days. We cannot forget the good work
done by these earnest Christian workers and their families, which
was carried on for many years, until they passed to their eternal
rest, or left our district for other fields of labour. Members of the
Seward family have been active in Church .work through all these
years. Mr. George Seward, Senior, and three sons have been deacons
and Sunday School superintendents, and seven daughters have assisted


in the Sunday School and Choir, and held office in various organisa'
tions. Miss I. V. Seward is at present on the Church Committee,
President of the Ladies’ Guild, and a member of the Choir. To
recognise the long and faithful services of the Seward family, the
Church donated a communion table and chair to the memory of Mr.
and Mrs. Seward. We also look back with appreciation on the work
done by Mr. and Mrs. Hemmingway and their family. • It was the
families of active workers such as the Sewards, Hemmingways,
Spencers, Pattersons, Reeves, Lonies, Ramsays, Hannas, Davenports,
Rendles, and Cardwells who have done so much to sustain the work
of the Church.
Our oldest member, Mrs. Price Williams—92 years of age—
was, with her husband, one of our first members, and still occasion-
ally attends the services. Mrs. H. Stone (nee Caroline Davenport)
also one of the first members, was the first lady married in the
Church, and is still with us in our services. She retains the pre-
sentation Bible which the Rev. James Burchett gave to her on the
occasion of her wedding. Alfred Haydon was the first baby christened
in the Church. Mr. Windmill, one of the most untiring workers
in the Church and School for many years, Mrs. Windmill, and
Mr. Frank Davenport attended services in the old Town Hall.
Rev. James Burchett left the Church in 1896, after which the
Rev. Samuel Bryant filled the vacancy as interim pastor for about
six months before he left for a trip to England. The Rev. A. B.
Rofe came to us in 1898 from Bendigo. Much progress was made
during this period. The Church was enlarged, and the vestries built
at the rear instead of in, the front, where they had previously been,
and were opened on 18th January, 1902. Services were held in
the Masonic Hall while these alterations were being carried out. In
1904 the Rev. A. B. Rofe left for Tasmania, and the Rev. W. H.
King and his wife and family who followed endeared themselves in
the hearts of all. This was shown by the demonstrations of affection
and esteem displayed on the occasion of Mr. and Mrs. King’s Golden
Wedding Anniversary.
The Church had grown so considerably that the men felt a
larger hall and school room were needed. A working bee was
organised, in which the Rev. King took a prominent part, although
over 70 years of age, and so the hall was built. The Rev. W. H.
King was with us for eight years, and we cannot forget the work
his family did, especially Miss Winnie King, who gave herself up
unsparingly to the work of the Church and sick folk. She was our
ministering angel.
The Pleasant Sunday Afternoon was formed during this period
by Mr. A. Dalgleish, and meetings were held every Sunday afternoon
in the Masonic Hall. Many members of Parliament and public men


of note spoke on our platform. We had our own orchestra and
good soloists. These meetings were very popular, and the hall was
well filled.
Upon the retirement of the Rev. W. H. King, a call was extended
to the Rev. A. C. Newbury, who came to us from Bendigo in 1914.
It was a great blow to the Church when Mrs. Newbury died
suddenly one Sunday morning, having been at the Welfare Home
the night before with many of us. She left a daughter May and
baby Charles, who is now studying for the ministry. This was a very
difficult period, as the Great War broke out just after Mr. Newbury
came to us. Fifty-one splendid young men enlisted from the Church,
twelve of whom never returned, and we mourn their loss. A hand-
some Honour Roll Board has been erected in the Church in their
memory. In spite of the difficulties of this period, the Church
flourished, and was always crowded. There was an excellent Choir,
which, under the able conductorship of Mr. A. J. Kelly, won the
Hewitt Shield (which now hangs on the Church wall) at a com-
petition of Choirs held in the Town Hall in 1922.
The Rev. A. C. Newbury left us in 1921 to accept a call from
Camberwell. We then called the Rev. H. L. Parker from Adelaide,
who was with us for three years. The Kindergarten had grown to
sixty-six members, and the Mothers’ Association (which is still
a helpful organisation in the Church) was formed at this time.
Mrs. Parker was an able chairwoman, and helped greatly. Mr.
Parker returned to Adelaide in 1924, and on 11th February, 1925,
we extended a call to the Rev. W. S. Pearse, who came to us from
the Gardiner Church, and is still with us after a very hard and
strenuous time, and a more earnest and enthusiastic worker we could
not have. It was a very sad time for the Church when our beloved
Mrs. Pearse, our Minister’s wife, was suddenly called to her higher
reward on 2nd February, 1930. She was a wonderful mother,
wife, and friend, and a splendid organiser and worker. The Mothers’
Association installed radiators, and her family gave four communion
chairs to her memory. The Mothers also give an annual subscription
to the Church funds called the “Alice Pearse Memorial.”
In 1930 the Church suffered another sad loss in the death of their
enthusiastic Choir Conductor, Mr. A. J. Kelly. A shield has been
erected to his memory. The Choir kept together well without a
conductor, and with the able assistance of Miss I. V. Spward, who
took charge. It is now under Mr. Alan Brudenell. The erection
of the Choir platform was the work of the late Mr. Rees. This
bears a plate presented as a token of esteem by the Church. We
pay a tribute to the devoted service of our present organist, Mrs. J. H.
Hewitt, who has completed twenty-five years as organist. During this
long period she has always been punctual, and very rarely absent
unless prevented by sickness, when she has always provided a sub-
stitute. This is a wonderful record, which we greatly appreciate.


During our fifty years there have been many organisations formed.
We cannot forget our Band of Hope meetings formed by Mr. William
Patterson in July, 1890, and in existence for seven years. We have
had literary societies, ladies’ work meetings, men’s gymnastics, Minis-
tering Children’s League (formed by the late Miss Ethel Seward).
This was changed later into the Junior Christian Endeavour Society,
and is still being carried on by Miss E. Loader (Junior National
Superintendent) and helpers. During Mr. Rofe’s time we also formed
a Senior Society, and now have an Intermediate Society as well. We
have had from time to time Boys’ and Girls’ Clubs, and the Girls’
Club at present in existence is doing good work. The Girls’ Guild
has been carried on, from its formation twenty-five years ago, under
the same foundation Secretary, Miss M. E. Browne. There are still
with us to-day some of the foundation members associated with the
Guild. On their twenty-fifth birthday, held on the 19th June, this
year, the Hall was packed. Many past members were present, and a
very enjoyable evening was spent.
The Congregational Men’s Institute was formed in the Rev. A. C.
Newbury’s time by the late Mr. H. H. Phillips, Mr. Harold Clarke
being the first Secretary. A Memorial Board has been erected to the
memory of Mr. Phillips. They have held many good entertainments
and educational evenings under learned and able leaders, and it is one
of our most successful organisations.
It was a severe loss to the Church when Mr. H. H. Phillips re-
moved to Surrey Hills, and in his family we lost five active members,
all office-bearers. A few years later Mr. J. T. Tinker and his family
removed to Williamstown, and this, too, was a big loss to the Church.
Mr. and Mrs. Tinker filled many offic.es in our Church, and their
work has been greatly appreciated.
Our sympathy goes out to the Hanna family and Mrs. Hanna in
her present illness. Mrs. Hanna was L.M.S. Secretary for twenty-
two years.
We cannot omit from this record the very valuable work of the
Sunday School, which has been of very great benefit to the Church.
The first Superintendent was Mr. Evans, and since then the following
have occupied that position for varying periods:—Messrs. J. Roberts,
John Haydon, G. Seward, W. Purdue, Heath, Cooper Cardwell,
John Ramsay, Enos Lowther, George,S£ward, jnr., H. Allen, Norman
Seward, Arthur King, J. Hanna, and W. G. Holden (who has occu-
pied the position for fifteen years, as well as being Secretary of the
Church for a considerable time), and we must express our gratitude
for their fine Christian service. During the fifty years many children
have passed through the School. Quite a number have joined the
Church membership and are active members. Some have given them


selves to God’s work. Robert Matthews has been a missionary in
China for many years, and is now a lecturer in Shanghai University
as Professor of Languages. Mr. Theo. Lowther went to China also,
and is now an ordained minister at Lake Rowan. The Rev. D. E.
Reeves attended our Church in his youth. Mr. Leonard Pearse, our
Pastor’s son, will complete his college course next year. He is at
present the senior student of the Congregational College.
The Rev. W. S. Pearse has had the honour of being Chairman of
the Congregational Union of Victoria, President of the Council of
Churches of Victoria, and Chairman of the local Ministers’ Fraternal
during his ministry in Ascot Vale. ' '
With gratitude to God for all the way He has led us and blessed
us during these fifty years, we would, as a Church, face the future
with hope and confidence, believing that the Great Head of' the
Church has still much service for us to render for His Glory and the
blessing of men.
Present Serdices and Acerbities
Church Services - - - - Sunday, 11 a.m. and 7 p.m.
Wednesday, 8 p.m.
Communion First Sunday in the month.
Sunday School - - - - Sunday, 3 p.m.
Christian Endeavour - - Sunday, 10.15 a.m.
Girls’ Guild ----- Monday, 8 p.m.
Girls’ Club Wednesday, 8 p.m.
Men’s Institute - - - - Tuesday, 8 p.m.
Choir Thursday, 8 p.m.
Mothers’ Club - - - - Second Tuesday, 2.30 p.m.
Women’s Guild - - - - First Monday, 2.45 p.m.
HEWITTS, 447-9 LT. BOURKE ST. MELBOURNE




