

SOUVENIR
of
G. J. COLES & COY LTD
NEW ARCADE STORE.
BOURKE TO LT. COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE


q-'HE opening of our new “Arcade Store”
marks a definite step in the progress of
our Cortyany,
In itself an achievement , this mighty store
stands as a monument to the
idea and as a stepping stone to future pro^^ss*
To all those Companies and Tradesmen
so successfully helped to construct this modern
building, we extend our sincere appreciation
of their co-operation and workmanship, and
we wish them all future success and prosperity .
G. J. COLES & COY. LIMITED.
MELBOURNE, AUSTRALIA
March 21st, 1930


More Goods for your Money
P IGHTEEN years ago G. J. Coles opened
his first store in Smith Street, Collingwood.
It was a small store, employing a staff of six,
and it sold goods at 3d., 6d., and 1/-.
$ * * * *
It was hard work at first to get the people
into this store, but gradually the idea succeeded
—the idea that goods bought in large quantities
could be sold cheaply, and, later, a second and
larger store was opened selling goods from -|d.
to 2/6.
G. J. Coles First Store
From this small beginning eighteen years ago, G. J. Coles & Co. Ltd. has grown
to a chain of stores, employing a staff of over 1300 people.
* * * $ $
This growth is the natural result of the recognition by the people of the good
values offered in Coles’ Stores—a tremendous organisation devoting every effort
to supplying the finest goods direct from the
markets of the world.
A HUMAN ORGANISATION
SERVES YOU!
G. J. Coles has built more than just stores.
He has built an organisation of employees, each
of whom has had to start at the very bottom.
An organisation of employees carefully selected
and trained to know the merchandise you buy,
and each one endeavoring at all times to give you
courteous and attentive service.
A Typical Coles Store Today


On a Historic Site is Coles New
Arcade Store
~pHERE is more than the usual interest of a
new building in “Coles Arcade Store.” This
noble edifice to commerce is erected on one of
Melbourne’s most historic sites. For it was here
that the welhknown “Cole’s Book Arcade,” with
its familiar Rainbow Sign, was situated—and so,
now, where the largest stock of books and
novelties were sold for many years, you will
find goods of every type classified into many
departments, with over 3000 items to choose
from.
Cole’s Book Arcade
Strange as it may seem, there is no connection between the old firm of “Cole’s
Book Arcade” and the business of G. J. Coles 6? Co. Ltd.
The new Coles Store has two large sales floors—Ground Floor and Basement—
both of which extend from Bourke Street to
Little Collins Street, while the Mezzanine Floor
contains a QuickTunch Counter, Soda Fountain,
and Cake Store, and the whole of the First
Floor is devoted to Australia’s “Most Modem
Cafeteria!”
❖ %
Practically everything is brought to Coles’
counters direct from the source of manufacture
—whether it be here or abroad —thus assuring
fresh merchandise, and the greatest possible
value for your money —and, of course, at
“Nothing over 2/6.”
Quick Lunch Counter


A Trip Through “Coles New Arcade Store”
AS you enter this store from Bourke Street you will be greeted by the spacious Ground Floor,
unbroken by columns, with its wide aisles and rows of counters stocked with attractive
merchandise.
This is Australia’s largest Variety Store!
Just inside on your right you will find the confectionery counter. Coles’ sweets are known
for their purity and freshness, because, each month, the public buys thousands of pounds of
sweets in Coles’ Stores. They are received fresh daily.
*****
Turning from the confectionery counter you come upon the jewellery, with its hundreds
of individual selections. You cannot help but marvel at the glittering array that awaits you.
It is hard to realise that nothing in this department is priced over half-a-crown.
* * * * *
.... And so on, past the toilet goods counter, with its jars of all the famous beauty pre-
parations, and well-known brands of perfumes, powders, cold creams, etc.
* * * - *
You see endless aisles of merchandise! The men’s wear counter, where you can purchase
ties, socks, collars, underwear, and braces.
* * * * *
The hair goods counter, with its brushes, combs, mirrors, slides, and curlers,
.... And stationery, too! You see the display of writing paper, envelopes, pens, pencils,
and hundreds of everyday articles- -all displayed for easy selection and quick service.
COLES BUY FROM ALL THE MARKETS OF THE WORLD TO SUPPLY
YOUR NEEDS.
But, let us pass on through the Store. How many
useful and beautiful things you want to buy, and who
ever heard of such values! Phonograph records with all
the latest numbers, novels, school books, shopping and
lunch cases —all are catered for; and last, but not the
least, seeds, seedlings, and bulbs for your garden.
*****
Spacious stairways take you conveniently from one
part of the Store to another, and, strolling through the
wide aisles, you will find the air fresh and free from
“stuffiness,” due to a new type of ventilating system,
which removes used air at the rate of thousands of cubic
A Corner of the Cafeteria


feet per minute, and replaces it with clean, invigorating, outdoor air, cooled when necessary,
and which causes no draught.
* • • ♦ •
The Mezzanine Floor, towards the Little Collins Street end of the building, is devoted to
refreshments for the busy shopper. Here, you will find a modern, quick-lunch counter, with
a delightful soda fountain and a cake store, with just the assortment you require.
*****
In the large Basement another vista of counters and aisles awaits you. Here, you will find
the FJousehold Department —hardware, crockery, glassware —everything for the kitchen and
the home.
You should resolve, here and now, never to look elsewhere before coming to Coles’ Base-
ment for your home necessities. Here, also, you will find toys for the kiddies, household tools,
cutlery, bathroom fittings, and hosiery, handkerchiefs, and aprons of every style and color.
*****
Counter after counter —a veritable bazaar of values. Nothing priced above 2/6, and
“SERVICE,” you will learn, is the keynote of Coles’ Stores success.
*****
Now, let us visit the First Floor, which contains Australia’s most modern Cafeteria.
Truly a sight worth seeing, with its beautifully colored tiled walls and artistic ceilings—a
triumph for Australian materials and craftsmanship. All the most modern, up-to-the-minute
equipments to serve you quickly and economically. Here, you may obtain light refreshments,
morning or afternoon tea, or luncheon with hot or cold meats. Nothing has been spared to make
your visit to this Cafeteria pleasant and comfortable, and all at prices almost unheard of before.
Coles’ Cafeterias buy their requirements fresh every day—nothing is carried over. This is why
you will always find the dishes so appetising. The savings in buying and handling are passed
on to the customers.
COLES ALWAYS GIVE PREFERENCE TO AUSTRALIAN MADE GOODS
There are many other interesting things for our customers in this wonderful New Store.
Here and there you will find information desks for the purpose of giving change or restoring
lost property, while experienced floormen will direct or
help you with your purchases.
On the Second Floor, just above the Cafeteria, at
the Little Collins Street end, is a Ladies’ Lounge and
Rest Room.
Electric clocks placed conveniently on every floor
will tell you the correct time.
Employes, too, are well looked after in this New
Store, with Lunch and Rest Rooms, and even a Staff
Gymnasium for their use. But these and other wonder-
ful features of this building are more fully explained
in the pages of this booklet to follow.
Coles Cake Counter


Shopper’s Guide to Coles Arcade Store
For your convenience we publish the
following plans showing just where
you can find the goods you require.
Ground Floor Plan
Basement Plan
Two Interior Glimpses of the Building
Marble Staircase and Vestibule
Little Collins Street
Managing Director's Office
3rd. Floor


Some Architectural Details of the
Building.
OEFORE finalising the plans of this New Store, Mr. H. A. Norris, the Company’s architect,
made a special trip abroad to learn from actual inspection the latest development in chain
store lay-out and building construction. On his return, it was decided to adopt the modernistic
type of architectural treatment, both internally and externally, as the most important buildings
of recent years, both in United States and Europe, have been erected in this style.
The first problem was how to construct the building with a clear floor space, so as to give
the maximum shopping area, and this was overcome by the engineers designing structural steel
plated girders, each having a span of 40 feet.
$ $ * * I*
Another problem was excavating for the Basement, and also for the Sub-Basement, the floor
of which is 33 feet below the level of Bourke Street, and it contains the mechanical equipment
of the building. An outstanding feature of this mechanical workshop, as this Sub-Basement
may be called, is the fact that it houses an emergency electric light plant, which automatically
operates, should the Council’s supply fail. Alongside this ingenious plant are large boilers—
automatically oil fed—which supply hot water and heating to the whole building—mot to mention
the fact that they are also used as incinerators for all surplus rubbish. This refuse is carried to
the incinerators down a vertical concrete chute, situated in the centre of the building, adjoining
the centre staircase, where hoppers are provided at each floor.
*****
The exterior of this building is finished in the latest architectural terra-cotta textured treat-
ment. This terra-cotta is in blocks of 5 inches in thickness, which are bolted, wired, and
cemented on to the concrete face.
Cantilever verandahs are provided to both street frontages, and these are also in modern-
istic detail, the stamped steel work being specially made to match the general finish of the
building.
$ sH ♦ £ ♦
The actual height between the ground floor and the first floor is 23 feet, but the ceiling
height is 18 feet. This extra 5 feet houses the ventilation ducts, and numerous pipes,
including sprinkler pipes, electrical conducts, gas, water, and sewer pipes. This not only hides
these more or less unsightly essentials of a building, but provides that clear, unbroken ceiling
which makes the ground floor of this building such a fine sight.


The shop fronts, both to Bourke and Little Collins Streets, have emerald-pearl granite bases
and rounded plate glass entrances, two entrances, 8 feet in width, being provided to each street
frontage.
Opening from Little Collins Street frontage is a spacious vestibule, with marble stairs lead'
ing to the Basement and Ground Floor. This vestibule is finished with marble walls and floors,
with a decorative ceiling and six wall mirrors. Both the Ground Floor and the Basement have
enriched ceilings, with pierced decorative grilles to the ventilation ducts. This ventilation
system gives a complete change of air every ten minutes, and the air is cleaned and cooled
during the summer, and heated during the winter, thus giving a uniform temperature.
• • • « «
Close to Little Collins Street entrance, a wide marble staircase leads to the Quick-Lunch Service
and Soda Fountain on the Mezzanine Floor, and from there to the Cafeteria on the First Floor.
A Mezzanine Floor is also provided off the marble staircase at the Bourke Street end. This con-
tains the Manager’s Offices; and a further stairway leads you to the Cafeteria.
* * • • •
All the staircases in this “Arcade Store” have specially detailed futuristic wrought-iron
balustrades, with chromium-plated hand-rails. The balustrades to the Mezzanine Floor are also
of modernistic design, based on the French style. The whole of the First Floor is given over to
the Cafeteria, in addition to the Quick-Lunch Service on the Mezzanine Floor. This Cafeteria
seats 1000 persons, and has been completed regardless of cost.
The marble staircases give entrances from three streets, and direct access is given from
each point to a service counter. The walls are tiled 6 feet over the floor level, the color
schemes of the tiles being a light blue-grey background, with inserts of dark-blue, tangerine,
block-purple, and gold; over the dado the walls are textured in color.
The whole of the floor is mosaic tile in various colors. The ceiling, with the ventilation
and pipe installation, is the only one of its kind in the Southern Hemisphere, and is a
first-class example of the very latest and most modern type of architectural decorative treatment.
Two subveyors —the first of their kind in thi s city—take the dishes from the Cafeteria to
the kitchen on the Second Floor, where trays and dishes are automatically taken from the
subveyors on to conveyor belts, and again from the belts to the dish-washers. The main dish-
washer, when in commission, weighs 2 tons. Mechanically operated, this machine handles 10,000
dishes (including cups, saucers, plates, etc.) per hour. From the dish-washer, the dishes return
by another subveyor to the servery in the Cafeteria below.


Apart from the great saving of time and labor, automatic dish'washing also sterilises the
dishes. Hand-washing cleans, but does not sterilise. Investigation has proved that the number
of bacteria found on hand-washed dishes was from 20 to 30 times greater than where the same
dishes were washed by machines. All dishes on this machine pass through three lots of water,
which are constantly renewed and maintained at the correct temperature.
The Second Floor contains the Staff Lockers and Dining-room and the Cafeteria Kitchen,
The Kitchen is 64 feet long by 32 feet wide, and has its own independent ventilation system.
The walls are tiled and the floor is finished in Terrazzo. In fact, everything has been done
to ensure the most hygienic conditions,
4 * $ * $
The Staff Dining-rooms are placed each end of the Kitchen, and the dishes from these rooms
arc taken by belt conveyors direct to the washing machines,
* * # $ *
The Staff Locker-room is run on similar lines to a Cloakroom at a modern theatre, with
an attendant in charge, axd each employe is allotted a separate number,
* # $ $ $
The Third, Fourth, and Fifth Floors contain the general offices and headquarters for Coles'
Chain of Stores, while, on the Top Floor, facing Bourke Street, is provided a staff gymnasium,
approximately 100 feet x 40 feet, with dressing-rooms, showers, and a balcony for onlookers,
* • • * *
The General Offices have a separate entrance from Little Collins Street, with two high-
speed elevators —one dual controlled, and one fitted with two-speed doors. The walls and floors
in this entrance are finished in Victorian marble, and the walls in colored texture. The staircase
leading to the office section is also in white marble, with two colored Buchan marble dados.
• « 4> * *
*
The offices are designed in modernistic style, the framing being in Queensland maple, with
pinhead and rubbed glass panels. The walls are textured in color, and the floors are carpeted
throughout from wall to wall. The carpet color scheme of the Managing-Director’s Office is
grey and light green in plain panels, the furniture being of grey sycamore with black insets.


Builders’ Roof ing ® Trading Co.
LIMITED
Manufacturers of Terra Cotta Roofing Tiles in all colours,
Terra Cotta Verandah columns in many sizes and designs,
Terra Cotta Lumber in any size
Also, Cement Roofing Tiles and Paving Slabs. Estimates
submitted. Write or phone for our Representative to call.
Builders’ Roofing ® T rading €o. Limited
MANUFACTURERS’ BUILDINGS
312 Flinders Street, Melbourne, C.l. Telephone Central 3246
HiliitiiiicsitiiliiiiiiiaiiiiiicsiiiliililiJicsiliiiiiiiiiiniJliiiiiitileallifliiiliilUiiliiiiitiiicsiiliiiiiiiiicafitiiiiiiiiicitiiiiiiiiiiiMitiiEiiiiiiiiiaiiiiiiitiiimiliiiiitiiliUliftiiiiiiiicaiiimiiiiiicsilitiiiiiinc
I*ll2l
urn*
Tile Designs that Appeal! |
We are designers and manufacturers, of the largest 5
selection of tiles in the world, and everywhere, as in a
G J. Coles Arcade Store, you see the result of our 1
achievements. g
Designs submitted. Our organization
your command.
at
The AUSTRALIAN TESSALATED I
TILE CO. PTY. LTD. I
Head Office & Works MITCHAM, VICTORIA, Box Hill 453 g
Showrooms, Queen Street, Melbourne, C 2369., and at Sydney S
Tile Work at Plaza Theatre
SB
iiiiniiniliiilliiiliniiliiiilifiicsililiiliiiiinliiliinliiicaiiiliiiliinnniilliiiliiniiiiiifiiliintiiiiiiiliiicsililiiiliiiiniiiiiiiliiilninifiiiiifiliiliiiliilinHiliiiliiimniiimiimiiiiminiiiliimm
ANOTHER EXAMPLE
of Oliver J. Nilsen s Electrical Work
THE big 26 ft. switchboard, the hundreds of lights, the special
l\[ilsen “drawndn” wiring system, the big generator and small
motors at G. J. Coles’ new store in Bour\e Street are all
typical of the high'dass wor\ done by Oliver J. Co.’s
engineers.
Other notable examples of this class of wor\ are: Myers, the
T. & G., Taxation Office, etc.
Jio job is too big for Tfilsens’, and none too small. Each is
given the same attention and care to the last detail. Quotations are
given with pleasure.
OLIVER J. NILSEN, 45-47 Bourke St,, Melb. C. 572


BUILDERS ROOFING & TRADING CO. LTD. 312 Flinders St. Melb
The work of this firm is in connection with
the partition walls and linings, which are
built of Terra Cotta Lumber or Hollow
Bricks. The product of the above company
was chosen for use in this “Arcade Store” on
account of its lightness, strength, and dura-
bility, and the fact that it is capable of having
nails driven into it for fixing purposes —and
also for the fact that the Terra Cotta Lumber
manufactured by this company is extremely
light in weight, which means that much lighter
steel structure was required to carry same.
An outstanding feature of interest to the
Architect, Builder, or Property Owner is the
fact that it is soundproof, and helps to keep
the building cool.
AUSTRALIAN TESSALATED TILE CO. Ply. Ltd. Mitcham, Victoria
Again, this one of Australia’s most pro-
gressive firms has attained another achieve-
ment in the wonderful tile effects attained in
the Cafeteria, and other parts of “Coles
Arcade Store.”
It is indeed difficult to describe in anywhere
near accurate terms the wonderful effects, and
so we will have to leave much to the reader
to judge for himself by inspection.
The floor is the largest Ceramic floor ever
executed in Australia, and it contains the
astounding number of over two million one
hundred thousand tiles —all of which were
laid by this company’s expert fixers.
The floor indeed reflects good credit on the
designers, who have adopted a Ceramic mosaic
color for color blend. There are also excellent
color schemes and effects obtained in the dado
of this immense Cafeteria, not to mention the
novel counter of the Quick Luncheon Ser-
vice on the Mezzanine floor. However, such
details as these are discussed in other parts
of this booklet.
This enterprising Australian company
manufactures a greater variety of tiles than
any other firm in the world, not even except-
ing works situated in such well-known tile-
making countries as Holland, England, France,
and America. In the course of production
the A.T.T. Co. has 5000 colors at its
command.
Many other jobs of note that this firm has
executed are: Tile work at the “Plaza”
Theatre, swimming pool in Spanish design at
the Athenaeum Club; while 95 per cent, of
hotel work in Australia has been executed
by them, and over 74 bathrooms are at present
being treated in the products of this firm.
Though the Australian Tesselated Tile
Co. is well known to the builders and archi-
tects of Australia, we feel that this is an
opportunity to tell the home owner that we
execute every class of tile work, no matter
how small the work may be; while, also, we
have a very complete range of bathroom
fittings.
OLIVER J. NILSEN & CO. - - Bourke Street, Melbourne, C.l
The electrical work represented one of the
biggest installations in Melbourne for some
time, and it was fitting that Oliver J. Nilsen
& Co., electrical and radio engineers, of 45-47
Bourke Street, should have charge of this
work.
Some idea of the gigantic task connected
with the electrical contract alone may be
gauged from the fact that the switchboard is
26 feet long and 7 feet 6 inches high, being
made up at Nilsen’s Marion Street Factory.
A feature is the provision for automatic
switching-in of a number of lights throughout
the building, fed from a battery plant of 32
volts, in the event of outside current failure.
Over 40 miles of wire is used throughout
the building, it being done on Nilsen’s special
“draw-in” system, which provides for the
conduit being laid in the concrete during
building operations.
The electrical work extended to many other
directions, such as the 100 b.h.p. auxiliary
Fetters atomic Diesel stand-by engine, direct
coupled to a 75 kilowatt generator, which will
give 460 volts, and, within a minute of out-
side transmission failure, restore complete
electric supply throughout.
Then there was the wiring of the hot-water
system, which is electrically controlled; also
seven motors supplying power for the ventila-
tion system throughout, in addition to the
electrical equipment and installation of the
subveyors to the kitchen, and the electrical
dish and glass washers, potato peelers, etc.,
in the kitchen.
The huge switch board already referred to
has a capacity on the main switch of 1500
amperes, while another big feature is the panel
which controls the power for the five lifts in
various portions of the building.
11


ELEVATORS
New Building of Messrs . Q. J. Coles & Co . Ltd.
equipped with
FIVE ELEVATORS
by
Maj or, Stevens Sc Coates
LIMITED
SYDNEY :: MELBOURNE :: BRISBANE
FANS
Low Pressure
Applications
FANS
High Pressure
Applications
Manufacturers :
D. Richardson
& Sons Pty. Ltd.
Footscray, Vic.
DESIGNED & MADE IN AUSTRALIA
I
Multivane Fan Impeller
Forced Draft for
Boilers, Furnaces,
Cupolas, Industrial
Furnaces, Forg «*
Fires, Oil and Gas*
Burners, Cement
Kilns. Boosters for
Gas Mains. Exhaust-
ing from Woodwork-
ing Machines, Wool
and Spinning
Machines, Smiths’
Hearths, Industrial
Furnaces, Polishing
M o p s. Grinding
Wheels, Hotel Kit-
chens.
Selling Organisation :
Crossle, & Duff
Pty. Ltd.
Collins House, Melb.
’phone. Cent. 3557


MAJOR STEVENS & COATES LTD., Collins Street, Melbourne, C.L
The building is equipped with five elec'
trically driven Elevators, two of these being
located near the entrance facing Little Collins
Street.
Each of the Passenger Elevators is capable
of carrying a load of 16 persons, and the
whole of the equipment is of the most up-to-
date design, being fitted with all maximum
degree of reliability.
«
The Elevator cages are of a unique design,
and the whole of the Enclosure Work, facing
the stairway, is finished off in marble around
the Elevator doors, which are of the latest
type, consisting of hollow section steel metal
doors, arranged in the case of these Passenger
Elevators so as to permit of quick ingress and
egress of the passengers. The doors are also
equipped with a door controller, enabling
them to be quickly and silently operated by
the lift attendant.
The winding engines, controllers, and
appurtenances are of Australian production,
specially constructed with British-made
elevator motors.
The third Passenger Elevator provides for
the staff, and is equipped on similar lines to
the two Passenger Elevators above referred to.
In addition, there is provided a very large
Goods Elevator capable of carrying two tons,
and fitted with special fireproof enclosure
doors; and there is also a further Goods
Elevator, having a capacity of one ton,
equipped in a similar manner.
The whole of this very fine Elevator in-
stallation has been carried out by Messrs.
Major Stevens & Coates Ltd., of Melbourne
and Sydney. The enclosure doors are Dahl-
strom Manufacture, being supplied under a
sub-contract by Messrs. Molden, Weber, 6?
Co. Ltd.; and the fireproof Peelle-type doors
being supplied under a sub-contract by Messrs.
Charles Marshall Pty. Ltd.
CROSSLE & DUFF PTY. LTD. ■■ - Collins Street, Melbourne, C.l.
The Ground Floor, Basement, and First Floor
of the building are provided with a system
of mechanical ventilation which continually
changes the air within the building.
Some idea of the extent of this installation
may be gathered from the fact that each of
the large fans installed for delivering the air
into the building has a capacity of 50,000
cubic feet of air per minute, and, as there are
two of these fans, a total of 100,000 cubic feet
of air per minute is delivered into the build'
mg, and withdrawn from the building by the
exhaust fans, which are of similar output.
Each of the large fans provided is driven
by means of a 20 h.p. motor, so arranged that
the quantity of air passed through the build'
ing can be varied to any desired amount by
the operator. In addition, the air is heated in
the winter by passing over a special type of
heating coil so that the temperature within
the area being ventilated is always sufficiently
high to give comfortable conditions during
cold weather. In addition to the large fans
provided, several smaller installations take care
of the local ventilation of other parts of the
building, a special type of exhaust fan draw-
ing all the heated air away from the kitchen,
and maintaining the atmosphere within this
portion of the building at a similar standard
to the rest of the building, and thus providing
comfortable working conditions for the staff
working therein.
The provision of a proper system of mechani-
cal ventilation enables the boiler plant neces-
sary to be located in the sub-basement, and,
in this way, considerably economising in space,
which is so important a factor in the modern
buildings of this kind.
The equipment of the Boiler House is very
extensive, consisting of three large boilers,
each of which is capable of giving approxi-
mately 1,500,000 heat units per hour.
These boilers are fitted with oil-firing,
which is automatically controlled, so that the
steam supply is kept constant, independent of
the operator.
The a team supply is taken from these boilers
to the large air-heating unit provided in the
mechanical ventilation system, and to the
kitchen, where it is utilised in the automatic
cooking appliances provided, and also in a
large automatic dish-washing machine, and in
many other appliances provided in this mast
up-to-date kitchen.
The steam is also taken to large water
heaters, which provide a system of hot water
service throughout the building, and also pro-
vide hot water for the radiators furnished on
the upper floors of the building, each of these
floors being furnished with sufficient radiation
to maintain the temperature at comfort con-
ditions throughout the cold weather.
13


Fibrous Plaster Experts
Drawings and Estimates executed at shortest
notice
CHURCH WINDOWS A SPECIALTY
Figure and all other architectural decorating
in cement and imitation stone
S. Mlllsom & Sons Pty. Ltd.
GRANT & JOHN STREETS, CLIFTON HILL
Phone JW 1006
E. A. WATTS, Builders, Temple Court, Melbourne.
The contract for the construction of the
building for G. J. Coles 6s? Coy. Ltd., having
been let to Mr. E. A. Watts, of Temple
Court, Melbourne, the old building was
handed over for demolition on January 7th,
1929, in order to make way for the “New
Arcade Store.”
Following upon this operation, the excava
tion of 13,500 cub. yards of earth to make
provision for the basement and sub-basement
of this great building was carried on, together
with the intricate work of underpinning of
the adjoining buildings, owing to the con-
siderable depth of the new foundations below
theirs.
The huge foundations to carry the building
were taken out and concreted, and erection
of the structural steel frame was commenced
during the first week in April. Three weeks
later, owing to the timber strike, operations
ceased, and were not re-started until June
26th.
By the end of 1929 the constructional work
was finished, and 1300 tons of structural steel,
300 tons of reinforcing steel, and 7000 cub.
yards of concrete were placed in 33 weeks.
In order to attain the schedule time, the
speeding up of the work was accomplished
by the use of the most modern and efficient
plant, comprising three electric cranes,
two heavy duty concrete mixers, two electric
hoists, and two air compressors.
Despite the strike and the loss of nine weeks
working time, the building, which was to be
completed by May 17th, 1930, was finished
eight weeks before that date. Among other
recent contracts carried out by Mr. E. A.
Watts, are new galleries and re-modelling at
Public Library, “Cavendish House,” Druids’
Building, Richmond Cinema Theatre,
S. MILLSOM & SONS, PTY. LTD. Grant & John Sts. Clifton Hill
This firm was responsible for the modelled
fibrous plaster ceilings, pillasters, consols,
walls, and ventilating panels, to the Ground
Floor and the Basement, not to mention the
Cafeteria.
The modern character of design executed
by these people in “Coles New Arcade Store”
has certainly created an atmosphere which is
most appropriate to this type of building. The
lighting effects of the Cafeteria have also been
made possible by the fine standard of plaster
features, which are suspended from the
ceiling.


MODCRNC
GLAZING
BROOKS ROBINSON&C9L™
W
w
BROOKS, ROBINSON & CO. LTD. Maffra Street, South Melbourne
This firm was responsible for the manufac-
ture and fixing in “Coles Arcade Store” of
shop fronts: Luxfer glazing in screens, en-
trance doors, and lift doors; pavement lights
at both entrances; maple screens to Office
Floor, blackwood screens to Mezzanine Floor;
under the supervision of the architect. Tel.:
M 3131.
H. A. NORRIS, Architect, - - 37 Swanston Street, Melbourne, C.l.
There is, perhaps, no architect who has,
in such a short period, risen to prominence as
Mr. H. A. Norris, the architect for “Coles
Arcade Store.”
Unlike many, he realised that, to gain the
knowledge to create and design buildings of
modern design, it was necessary to extensively
tour and study abroad. And it is through
the determination and the desire to create
that which is different that Mr. Norris, at
the age of 42, can, without doubt, be looked
upon as a leader in the profession of archi-
tecture.
Apart from the crowning achievement of
“G. J. Coles New Arcade Store,” there are to
the credit of Mr. Norris many imposing city
buildings, which include: Tattersalls Club,
Swanston Street; Dever House, Bourke Street
(existing premises of G. J. Coles & Coy.
Ltd.); Duncan & Frazer Ltd., Adelaide;
Nicholas Building, c/r Swanston Street and
Flinders Lane; Kellow-Falkiner Pty, Ltd., St.
Kilda Road; Majorca Building,
ALBERT KELPE, Shop &. Office Fitter, 424 Brunswick St., Fitzroy, N. 6.
The whole of the counters and shelving in
this huge store was carried out most satis-
factorily by Messrs. A. Kelpe, who have
introduced individuality into their workman-
ship and design, as well as completing the
work within the short space of time at their
disposal


AN ACHIEVEMENT
IN THE ART OF PREPARING
AND SERVING FOOD
Coles’ Wonderful Cafeteria!
THE complete equipment of the several Cafeterias, with their
attendant Kitchens comprising Steam and Gas Heated Boiling
Pans -- Dish Washing Equipment -- Pie Heating Cabinets--
Refrigerating and Ice Plants Monel Metal Food Preparation Tables,
were all designed and installed by us.
The design and workmanship are of high standard and entirely
Australian, throughout.
Write for any information on Hot Water Installations,including the
“Hot-O-Mat,” the latest and most efficient Electric Water Heater of
today, particularly designed for the modern home.
OUEEM
Ce/?i/Q/.3290.


WRIGHT ft WRIGHT, ; INTERS, MELBOURNE
