

CFfv-8 P
Si o
SOUVENIR
SiSit
OF THE
CEREMONY OF UNVEILING
Lawrence Hargrave Memorial
BALD HILL, STANWELL PARK, N.S.W.
His Excellency the Governor of New South Wales
THE RT. HON. LORD WAKEHURST, K.C.M.G.
SATURDAY, 3rd AUGUST, 1940


LAWRENCE HARGRAVE
1850 - 1915
Lawrence Hargrave was born at Greenwich, England, on
January 29th, 1850; second son of the late Mr. Justice (J. F.)
Hargrave, of the Supreme Court of N.S.W., was educated at
Queen Elizabeth Grammar School, Kirkby Lonsdale, Westmore-
land, England, and came to Sydney in 1866.
He was early interested in the sea, and between the years
1872 and 1877 made several voyages (including the ill-fated
''Maria'' voyage of 1872 and Macleay's scientific expedition
in the "Chevert" of 1875) to New Guinea and the Torres
Straits regions. Rejecting the traditional family leaning to law,
he adopted engineering as a profession, and received practical
training (there was then no Engineering Faculty at Sydney
University) in Sydney workshops, including that of the Aus-
tralian Steam Navigation Company—later the A.U.S.N. Coy.


From 1879 to 1884 he was employed at Sydney Obser-
vatory as Extra Astronomical Observer, and was occupied
largely in observing and measuring double stars, discovering
many new ''doubles'' during those years. He retired from the
public service and devoted himself to, particularly, aerodynamic
research; and to his fellow-members of the Royal Society of
New South Wales he gave numerous papers on this and other
subjects.
Beginning from an original study of natural motion, he
later built many monoplanes propelled by clockwork, india-
rubber and compressed air, with which he achieved flights up
to 368 feet (1890). Most of these were ornithopters, i.e., flapping-
wing machines. In the course of his varied researches he, in
1889, invented the rotary engine, a type which (as, in perhaps
its best-known example, the "Gnome”) was some twenty years
afterwards extensively used in aeroplanes. In 1891/2 he turned
his attention to the supporting surfaces for aeroplanes, and
evolved the "cellular” or "box" kite.
From August, 1893, to February, 1899, Lawrence Hargrave
lived at Stanwell Park, in the house "Hillcrest," just below the
present railway station. At Stanwell Park he carried out much
of that work on kites with which his name is indissolubly linked
in aeronautical history, and it was from Stanwell Park beach
that, on November 12th, 1894, he was lifted sixteen feet into the
air by a series of four of his "box” kites, an event which led,
through the use of Hargrave kites in meteorology, to the suc-
cessful early flights of Santos Dumont, Farman and Delagrange
in France.
In the later years of his life, Hargrave worked on the
"reverse Curve" in aerofoils, in his search for an aeroplane
of complete inherent stability; and experimented with various
devices in particular connection with sea-craft.
He died in Sydney on July 6th, 1915.
BULLI SHIRE COUNCIL
Crs. J. Clowes
A. H. Fackender
A. F. Morrison
G. E. Sheppard
T. Gibson
C. Quilkey
L. B. Kelly
E. J. Ryan
R. Thompson, President
LAWRENCE HARGRAVE MEMORIAL COMMITTEE
Cr. J. Clowes (Chairman); Crs. A. F. Morrison, E. J. Ryan, R. Thompson; Messrs.
H. D. Arnott, H. F. Halloran, T. C. Roughley, C. W. Salier; Professor O. U.
Vonwiller; Mr. W. H. Mitchell (Hon. Secretary and Shire Clerk).


STANWELL PA!
"■ '■' ■' ;■ ' :
iiSiliS ' - ' ■ ,v . :
'From the little park and resting spot that it is planned sh
overlook an Australian land and seascape of unchallenge
worked, for a time, Lawrence Hargrave, our Australian pi
years ago, he made that brief kite ascent which was indir
of man's dream through the ages—-Flight."


:K and BEACH
[ld Hill
ill surround the Memorial, visitors will be able not only to
ible beauty, but also the historic ground where lived and
ineer in aerodynamics, and the beach, whence, nearly 50
ctly one of the great steps towards the final achievement
—CECIL W SAUER, in "Australian Quarterly," March, 1940


LOOKING TOWARDS BALD HILL
STANWELL PARK
Nestling in a peaceful curve of the mountain range, below
Bald Hill, like a jewel set in the sparkling arc of a fiara, lies fhe
village of Stanwell Park.
The smooth, green sward of the park is surrounded by an
expanse of virgin bushland, broken only by fhe mountain
creeks and a few winding roads.
Ifs natural inhabitants still abound in this sanctuary, and
the voice of the lyre bird can occasionally be heard, while the
bower bird still dances around its colourful nest.
The surrounding mountain range encloses this haven of
peace and beauty like a mighty wall, covered with Nature's
mantle of green frees, palms and profusely-growing ferns.
The curving bay, bordered by its golden, sandy beach, on
which the waters of fhe great Pacific roll up in ceaseless curling
breakers, is the beating heart of this beautiful spot.
Towards fhe east, from which beauty comes with the rising
of the sun, lies the vast expanse of fhe ocean, its colours ever
changing from blue to gold, and from gold to blue, as fhe
powerful swell of fhe ocean sweeps the golden glint of sun-
light in broken ripples across its blue surface.
Nowhere else, within an hour's travelling time from
Sydney, can be found such a glorious combination of the best
of Nature's handiwork.


Travellers by train find Stanwell Park the gateway of the
beautiful Illawarra district, as, emerging from the darkness of
the mountain tunnel, there flashes suddenly into view the
glorious expanse of blue water, green fields and towering hills.
Even constant use cannot destroy the feeling of exhilaration
which fills the senses as the train roars, with dazzling sud-
deness, from darkness to colourful light.
At the top of Bald Hill, the high spot immediately to the
north of Stanwell Park, a monument has been erected to the
memory of Lawrence Hargrave, and a little rest park is being
planned to surround the memorial. Lawrence Hargrave lived
for many years at Stanwell Park, and, surrounded by such
beauty, is it any wonder that he felt, stirring in his soul, the
urge to fly!
The project of erecting a memorial was introduced by the
Bulli Shire Council in 1936, and land for the proposed monu-
ment was purchased by the Council. Deputations to the State
Government were arranged, and in these the Council was sup-
ported by the Royal Historical Society, the Royal Aero Club,
the Royal Society, the Town Planning Association, and the
N.R.M.A.; also by Mr. T. C. Roughley, whose booklet, "The
Aeronautical Work of Lawrence Hargrave," provided the
Council with valuable information. Great impetus was given
to the project by the Hon. Roy Vincent, Minister for Mines, who
received the deputation, and who, for many years, had been
interested in the work of Lawrence Hargrave.
A "Lawrence Hargrave Memorial Committee" was formed,
and, with monetary assistance from the Commonwealth and
State Governments, the plans of the Council are consummated
to-day, August 3rd, 1940, in the unveiling of the Hargrave
Memorial by His Excellency The Rt. Hon. Lord Wakehurst,
K.C.M.G., Governor of New South Wales.
LADY CARRINGTON DRIVE
The extension of Lady Carrington Drive, to be officially
opened by Lady Wakehurst to-day, provides a wonderful new
scenic road, extending from National Park to Bald Hill. The
work was carried out by the State Government at the request
of the Bulli Shire Council, and Council is indebted to Mr. E. S.
Spooner, then Minister for Works and Local Government, for
his assistance.
The Lawrence Hargrave Memorial faces the new road,
near its junction with the South Coast Road at the top of Bald
Hill.


PROGRAMME
3rd AUGUST, 1940
3.00 p.m
-Inspection of R.A.A.F. Guard of Honour by His
Excellency the Governor.
Cr. R. Thompson, Shire President, invites His Excel-
lency the Governor to unveil the Memorial.
3.15 p.m
His Excellency The Rt. Hon. Lord Wakehurst,
K.C.M.G., Governor of New South Wales,
unveils the Memorial and dedicates it
to the memory of Australia's Pioneer in
aeronautics, Lawrence Hargrave.
R.A.A.F. Band will play.
Cr. E. J. Ryan invites Lady Wakehurst to open the
new Lady Carrington Drive.
3.50 p.m
Lady Wakehurst officially opens the new
Lady Carrington Drive.
Official party adjourns to Stanwell Park for after-
noon tea.
Toast —■ His Majesty the King.
Mr. T. C. Roughley will give a brief outline of
Lawrence Hargrave's work.
Cr. J. Clowes, Chairman of Lawrence Hargrave
Committee, will extend thanks to His Excellency
the Governor.
Mrs. R. Thompson will thank Lady Wakehurst.
God Save the King.
