

Pto
U t
ST U RT
1844-1944-


( Z/7i£ oj tflE lScf.Cf'4^
Eix.jis.cii.tion
CAPTAIN STURT, leader
JAMES POOLE, assistant
Dr. JOHN HARRIS BROWNE, surgeon
JOHN McDOUALL STUART, draftsman
LOUISE PI ESSE, storekeeper
DANIEL BROCK, collector and in charge of sheep
GEORGE DAVENPORT, servant
JOSEPH COWLEY, servant
ROBERT FLOOD, stockman
DAVID MORGAN, in charge of horses
JOHN KIRBY, to assist with the sheep
HUGH FOULKES, bullock driver
JOHN JONES, bullock driver
A. TURPIN, bullock driver
JAMES LEWIS, mariner and bullock driver
JOHN MACK, bullock driver
R. SULLIVAN, to assist with the sheep
NATIVES WHO ASSISTED STURT
TOPAR
CAMBOLI
NADBUCK
TOONDA




STURT PEA


jSoLLUEnix
cf the
| or me
| STURT CENTENARY
COMMEMORATED AT BROKEN HiLL
I AUGUST, 1944
r—~ - -- a “ ... 11
Published by
THE STURT MEMORIAL COMMITTEE
of the
BARRIER FIELD NATURALISTS' CLUB




foreword
It is our privilege to present to the public these articles of individual
research and interesting sidelights on the life and work of Charles Sturt.
If this bock arouses your interest in Sturt, or creates a greater admira-
tion for our pioneers and explorers, or is of assistance to research students —
then the efforts of many of our members will not have been in vain.
We are indebted to our late President, E. B. Dow, for the inspiration
the Club received from his periodical summaries of his research on Sturt,
and his findings as he traversed much of the actual route covered in the
journey to the interior.
In a recent letter from England, Sturt’s grand-daughter writes of her
mother, Mrs. Napier G. Sturt—“How wonderfully fortunate it was that so
great a man as Charles Sturt should have had a daughter-in-law who was
inspired to write such an excellent biography of her unknown father-in-law.
For they never met, Charles Sturt having died before his eldest son, Napier,
married. But Mrs. Sturt was seized with enthusiasm for the whole story of
Sturt’s life and exploration, and she attacked her great task from sheer
inspiration and love, writing from her whole mind and heart in such a way
that Charles Sturt lives again for us through her pen.”
We, too, have been inspired to write of Sturt, and those who seek
knowledge of the man frcm his writings are enthralled by his personality
and filled with admiration for his achievements.
We present this book in the hope that others will continue the work
of investigation and that, in the not far distant future, Sturt will take his
rightful place in the literature, art, and drama of our land.
To those who contributed such fine articles, and those who assisted
the publication in other ways, wei convey our grateful thanks—without their
fine co-operation this book could not have been published.
THE STURT MEMORIAL COMMITTEE
of the Barrier Field Naturalists’ Club


tu.f't the *ffjan
The more I have read of Sturt the greater has grown my admiration
until I have at length come to place him among my heroes—Pasteur, Scott,
Oates and Lister. “Quot homines tot sententiae”; no two would give the
same list of their heroes.
“The Life of Charles Sturt,” by Mrs. Napier George Sturt (his daughter-
in-law) ends with an epilogue. This is a summary of Sturt’s character. Let
us quote from it and let us analyse her eulogies one by one so that we may
not be able to accuse her of family bias.
“Decidedly good looking. Those who knew him dwell on his rare charm
and sweetness of expression and on his distinguished bearing.” (1).
Mrs. Young had written in 1800 hoping “Charles would not grow up so
monstrous handsome as he now promises; it never does a man any good.” (2).
“His height (5 feet 11 inches) was enhanced by an erect and well
proportioned figure.” (3). In my museum at Narrandera I have an enlarged
photograph of Sturt taken from a portrait in Mrs. Sturt’s “Life of Sturt.’
This was painted by Crossland when Sturt was about 54. He looks a
thoroughbred and one can well understand, on looking at the expression in
this photograph, that this man had a “blameless record.” (4).
“This fine nature reveals no weakness.” (5). Examples of his bravery
are met with on many occasions throughout his life. Born in India in 1795,
he went to Harrow in 1810. “He was fag to the Duke of Dorset. This youth
sent Charles to the top of a high tree for rooks’ eggs, and thrashed him
because one broke in his mouth as he came down. Sturt retaliated by throwing
a brick bat at the bully.” (6).
“As soon as I thought the savage had sufficiently recovered from his
alarm, I went up to him with a tomahawk, the use of which he immediately
guessed.” (a).
“I took his spears and tomahawk, and walked across the plain, unattended,
into the wood.” These spears had been left behind by one of several natives
who had, the night before, tried to rob the boat. Harris had fired between
them.
T had not entred it more than SO yards when I saw a group of four
natives, sitting round a small fire. One of them, as I approached, rose up
and met me, and in him I recognised the man for whom I was seeking.
When near enough I stuck the spears upright into the ground.
“The poor man stood thunderstruck .... his manner indicated shame and
surprise.” (b).
These are only a few of many stories of bravery shown by this Captain
of the 39th. “I never set a value on life for living’s sake, and I can say with
truth that I never feared death,” says Sturt. (7).
“Throughout life, his conscientious care for others contrasts markedly with
his disregard for self.” (8).
Writing of his overland trip from Sydney to Adelaide in 1838, Sturt says,
“I cannot close this report without bestowing my meed of praise on the
gentlemen who preceded me.” (9).
Eyre writes, “He was one of nature’s noblemen, generous and unselfish
to a degree; always kind and considerate —always sympathising and ready
to oblige or help others in every way he possibly could.” (10),


Sir Roderick Murchison, President of the Royal Geographical Society,
at a meeting of that Society on May 23, 1870, said, “Calm and collected,
this brave man never failed to inspire perfect confidence in his followers,
while he secured their love and respect by his unvarying courtesy and
consideration.” (11).
Sir Roderick Murchison called Sturt, “One of the most distinguished
explorers and geographers of our age.” (12).
His devotion to duty was extreme and one can gather innumerable
instances from his diaries. In 1833 he was in England and, although a sick
man and almost blind, he completed his “Two Expeditions into the Interior
of Southern Australia.”
“During these expeditions,” he says, “my health had suffered, so much
that I was unable to bear up against the effects of exposure, bodily labour,
poverty of diet, and anxiety of mind .... after a succession of attacks I
became totally blind, and am still unable to read what I pen, or to venture
abroad without an attendant .... The reflection that I have been
unassisted in this work in any one particular will, I hope, partly excuse its
imperfections. A wish to contribute to the public good led me to undertake
those journeys which have cost me so much. The same feeling actuates me in
recording these results.” (13).
After returning from his expedition down the Murrumbidgee and Murray,
Sturt, “instead of yielding to grave symptoms and taking the rest he sorely
needed, threw himself with fresh ardour into regimental work, and was put
in command of a detachment for Norfolk Island.” (14).
Sturt as Scientist. “While his brother officers pined in durance vile,
Sturt rambled and boated amid the delightful scenery, rejoicing in treasures
of bird and plant life.” (15).
When I read Sturt’s Diaries I am amazed at the wide knowledge of this
man. Plis accuracy in describing fossils, his observations in the migration
of birds, his notes on climate, on soils, on the geology of the lands he
explored are of a very high order. In his expedition with Gawler, when in
desperate need of water, Sturt probably saved at least some of the party
by bleeding a horse and making them all drink the blood.
Occasionally a man rises above narrow tradition to blaze a new trail
in science, as someone will save the shipwrecked in days to come by letting
them drink salt water.
On May 29, 1840, Sturt at the opening of the Mechanic’s Institute in
Adelaide gave an interesting lecture on “Geology and Geography.” If one
could read this in the archives of the South Australian Register one would
probably be impressed with his extraordinary versatility of brain. Not for
nothing is the gold medal of the Royal Geographical Society given. Lord
Colchester in his speech ended thus: “For these services in the cause of
geographical discovery, for the energy, and courage displayed in confronting
no ordinary difficulties, for the prudence with which further advance was
abandoned when it would only have risked the loss of those entrusted to
his charge, for the conciliatory conduct to the natives, which not only
avoided conflict, but rendered them willing to assist the expedition .... the
Council have awarded the medal of the founder.” (16).
Sturt was an Englishman. Anyone who doubts it should read Page 109,.
Volume 11, of his “Two Expeditions.” Having moved up from the Murray
a short distance into the Darling, “an irresistible conviction impressed me
that we were now sailing on the bosom of that very stream from whose
banks I had been twice forced to retire. I directed the Union Jack to be
hoisted, and giving way to our satisfaction, we all stood up in the boat and
gave three distinct cheers. It was an English feeling, an ebullition, an
overflow which I am ready to admit that our circumstances and situation will


alone excuse. The eye of every native had been fixed upon that noble flag,
at all times a beautiful object and to them a novel one, as it wavd over us
in the heart of a desert. They had, until that moment been particularly
loquacious, but the sight of that flag and the sound of our voices hushed
the tumult and while they were still lost in astonishment, the boat’s head
was speedily turned,.the sail was sheeted home, both wind and current were
in our favour, and we vanished from them . . . .” (c).
I wonder whether any corroboree exists portraying this remarkable
scene.
Sturt was romantic. “Some sea-gulls flew over our heads, at which Fraser
was about to shoot, had I not prevented him, for I hailed them as the
messengers of glad tidings, and thought they ill deserved such a fate.” (d).
On leaving the barracks, Sydney, on his expedition down the Murrumbidgee,
“Although the chance of misfortune flashed across my mind, I was never
lighter at heart, or more joyous in spirits.” (e).
Sturt shared with most great men a love of animals. His care of the
horses in his expedition was never failing. “Sturt gave his brother Evelyn
a cat. This cat came back 600 miles to Charles.”
“Sturt, when clearing weeds from under a pink one day, pulled forth a
deaf adder, but, remarking that ‘the poor thing hadn’t hurt him,’ quickly
let it go.” (18).
Sturt was a devout man. “I have felt the comfort of prayer,” he writes,
“and in many a scene of danger, of difficulty, of sorrow, have risen from
my knees calm and confident.” (19).
I only know of one instance of dislike to a fellow human shown by this
great man. In a letter which I have, written on December 5, 1843, to Captain
(afterwards Admiral) King, Sturt says, “It is to be regretted that they did
not refer to you and to Mr. Hume for better information than they would
probably obtain from Sir Thomas Mitchell, whose opinion I assure you I
hold in the most sovereign contempt.” (A).
This was a private letter. Sturt would not have written publicly in this
strain.
Mitchell was a smaller man in every way and had goaded Sturt. Sturt
had given Mitchell a courteous recognition of his (Mitchell’s) explorations.
Mitchell on the other hand poured forth petty jealouses against this great
man that serve only to belittle the author.
On reading Sturt’s letters and diaries we are inevitably brought to
certain conclusions: —
(1) The style of these narratives is pure, romantic and delightful just
to read.
(2) The daily events are described in a way that makes the whole
picture unfold clearly before our eyes.
(3) His observations on the flora and fauna on soils, fossils, climate,
rivers, etc., enhance markedly the interest of these narratives,
whilst at the same time proving that the author w r as a scientist in
his outlook on life.
(4) His dealings with the natives was superb. “I was happy,” he says,
“in having such an opportunity of showing the natives of the
interior that I came among them with a determination to maintain
justice in my communication with them, and to impress them, at
the same time with a sense of our love of it in them.” (f).
“To the end of life Sturt would mention as his chief source of satisfaction
that, of the many hundred natives he had met, not one had through him
suffered an hour’s uneasiness.” (20).


(5) The tributes of men who knew him; of great men, of workmen, of
convicts, all prove that Sturt was a truly great man; a brave, loveable man,-
a very gallant gentleman.
‘What is it to be a gentleman?” Is it to be honest, to be gentle, to be
brave, to be wise, and possessing all these qualities, to exercise them in the
most graceful outward manner? Ought a gentleman be a loyal son, a true
husband, an honest father? Ought his life to be decent, his bills to be payed,
his task to be high and elegant, his aims in life lofty and noble? A gentleman
is a rarer thing than some of us think for.
Which of us can point out how many such in his circle —men whose aims
are generous whose truth is constant and elevated; who can look the world
honestly in the face, with an equal manly sympathy for the great and the
small. We all know a hundred whose coats are well made, and a score
who have excellent manners; but of gentlemen, how many? Let us take a
little scrap of paper and each make out his list. (B).
Sturt would be among the first on that list,
H. O. LETHBRIDGE.
REFERENCES
“Life of Charles Sturt,” by Mrs. Napier Sturt. (1 to 20)
“Two Expeditions Into the Interior of Southern Australia,” by Charles
Sturt, (a) Vol. 1, page 92; (b) Vol. 2, page 212; (c) Vol. 2, page 109.
(d) Vol. 2, page 149; (e) Vol. 2, page 8; (f) Vol. 1-, page 142.
(A) Two original letters from Captain Sturt to Captain King, held by
Dr. H. O. Lethbridge.
(B) Thackeray.
H, O. LETHBRIDGE.
He braved the unknown desert drear,
Of him the native had no fear,
A leader, wise and brave and strong,
His courage helped men carry on.
The inland sea was but a dream,
As were all hopes of mountain stream,
For ranges rough and sandhills far,
And stony ridges the way did bar.
Although his goal he failed to reach,
Patience and courage he doth teach
To us who honour him this day,
Our praise to Sturt who showed the way.
SIXTH CLASS,
Burke Ward Girls’ School.


tvid’s -J^ome
rancjc
After his Central Expedition we see Sturt at home, “a boy among his
boys,” delighting in his familiar plants and animals. Grange was a happy
home indeed —a home from which even Sturt’s cat refused to be parted for
long. Thomas proved no mean explorer. After being taken away by Sturt’s
brother Evelyn, this handsome cat returned home from Mt. Gambler. Mr.
Bonwick observed that Captain Sturt was so loveable as to secure the love
even of a cat. Certainly cats and dogs had their places at Grange. It was
a beautiful retriever that had raised the alarm at Varroville when the eldest
child had fallen into the pond, and Sturt was grateful to the animal. When
the family was on the way to Adelaide this dog was washed overboard in
their height of a storm and Sturt could barely be restrained from diving into
the boiling waters to attempt a rescue.
Wild creatures made their homes at Grange, and it was said that “the
kangaroo lay down with the dog and the cockatiel with the household cat.”
Snakes were the bane of the poultry and dogs; but the Sturt children, from
long acquaintance, did .not fear them. In fact Sturt, one day, caught an adder
and let it go, saying it had not hurt him.
Sturt was the real home lover and Grange had noble trees that cast
leafy shade. The carefully tended soil yielded choice fruits, vegetables and
flowers. The boys seemed always at Sturt’s heels, and shared his labours
and pride in the growing things. The family was interested in the habits
of the cattle, bees, poultry, and the horses of the Central Expedition roamed
the grounds, enjoying their well-earned rest. Often Sturt worked late into
the night, carrying out by lamplight the work of the large dairy. The boys
made grand sport of pig killing, bacon curing and rounding up stray cattle
by moonlight. Many a prank was played by these high-spirited lads on
unwary guest or servant. After the son Napier had gone to Rugby Sturt’s
letters were full of the garden news —of the grand show of pears, grapes
and plums and of the fly that got into the apple blossom and spoilt the
crop—of the animals, “The iron grey has grown a beautiful creature. Our
dairy now consists of fourteen quiet cows, which yield a good supply of butter;
but really the annoyance of the servants may drive us to give up the pleasure
of looking after these animals.”
Mrs. Sturt was very musical and arranged a small orchestra among her
friends. Open air performances among the lovely trees and flowers w T ere
featured in the unpretending hospitality of Grange. Once a party of friends
arrived on the wrong evening. Captain Sturt held the fort by entertaining
the guests while Mrs. Sturt carried out rapid operations in the rear of the
house. The dinner, though late, was a success, and the evening was spent in
an impromptu dance, the callers quite unaware of their mistake.
Sturt cared little for worldly possessions; but he would have purchased
Branksea, the small island in Poole Harbour, where he had spent so many
happy days with his cousin as a youth. On revisiting Branksea, which had
passed from the Sturts and had fallen into disrepair, he wandered over the
ruined castle and among the fine oaks, beech and chestnut trees and moaning
firs. He wrote to his eldest son, “I am and ever have been as fond of
Branksea as of Grange, and if fortune had smiled on me would gladly spend
my days there, but that cannot be . . . .” To Mr. Peake, his friend, he
unfolded the desire of his life, “I never regretted anything so much as my
inability to purchase it. There I could live and die and feel rewarded for
many other disappointments.”


a ariotte ~S>turt
The Wife.
1844 found Sturt again leaving the wife and three boys whom he loved
so grapple with that great mystery—the Centre—on which no white man had
set foot. “Nothing but desert for my beloved to toil through, and no water
to ease his labours,” wrote Mrs. Sturt.
After long, weary months letters came from the desert like messages
from the dead. Mrs. Sturt and her companion sat late into the night reading
again and again the awful perils of the journey. The companion retired,
expecting Mrs. Sturt to do the same. In the morning she found the wife had
not stirred, but throughout the night had read and re-read each letter,
pondering every word, and her changed appearance showed that she had
suffered intensely for her husband.
The Mother.
It would be hard to leave such a family circle as the Sturts’, and when,
in the Spring of 1852, the eldest boy had to depart for Rugby, Sturt describes
the parting as terrible. After heart rending scenes at home the boy, looking
back, saw a dishevelled flying figure racing over the rough country. It was
his mother, who had found a way to snatch one more look.
MAY HARDING.
turVs
ranae
This was your home brave Sturt.
These verdant dunes were once a-vibrant with your restless tread.
These flagstones, worn, on the wide verandah ample as your dreams, once
knew your eager questing feet burning with wanderlust; and again were
cumbered with the weight of homing sandburnt soles.
Tired and half blind you groped amid these storied walls, soul-sick with
chagrin.
With desert-withered hand you turned the quaint old lock upon that massive
door; seeking the boon of sanctuary to hide the ache of your frustrations
o’er the vanished vision of the phantom central sea.
That arch of old grey bricks was once the sacred soil of England.
That ruddied glass through which the glowing sunsets of a century poured,
as they dip’t in west’ring seas, their golden light-shafts, was gendered of a
poet-craftsman’s passion long since dead.
Gone are the giant gums that graced a grove of silence by a shore, as yet all
unconcerned with burgeoning of Mother Adelaide.
A plough lies buried in the sand, forged from the furnaces of long forgotten
firms in your dear homeland.
Your “Grange” still stands proudly remote from all the hiving mass of
“modern” masonry that sprawls along the shore.
This is your shrine, O sturdy son of England, who gave your sight and all
the splendour of your visioned soul for our Australia.
E. B. WICHERT.


\e J^mmortal
-jS turfi Übhcovery oj' the IflfjiAi/'rcuj siuer, / 829-30
In the summer of 1828-29 Sturt had solved one great problem, the
western rivers Macquarie, Bogan, Darling River, which flowed south. The
following summer he set out to solve the problem of the Lachlan and Mur-
rumbidgee Rivers. He had built in Sydney a boat made in sections and
transported on a dray. The party left Sydney in November, 1829, and moved
along the Murrumbidgee till the depth of the river justified Sturt in making
a depot, putting the boat together, splitting up his party, and setting off
down the river into the unknown. There were Sturt, young red-haired
George MacLeay, Sturt’s old soldier servant, John Harris, and convicts—
in all eight souls. It was good going down stream with the current. Sturt
sat in the stern with paper and compass, marking every bend, noting the
soil, the trees and the natives. Always Sturt treated the natives in the
right way. They were seeing white men and the white men’s boat for the
first time. Would that all white men had treated them as Sturt did!
Success was with Sturt again. A river joined on the right bank—that
must be the Lachlan. A few days later they literally shot forward as a broad
stream joined them on the left flank. This stream Sturt named the Murray.
One again he made friends with the new native tribe and much to his
advantage. A few days later round a bend Sturt’s party saw a different
group of natives on a sand spit at the mouth of yet another tributary,
coming from the north. It was a delicate situation—the natives menacing the
eight white men, Sturt reluctantly bringing his rifle to bear upon them,
not wantng to fire. A yell behind him and into the river plunged the chief
of the Murray tribe. He soon reached the Darling River natives and
pacified them. The white men were now free to speculate about the identity
of the new river, Sturt prophesying it was the Darling.
With excitement mounting every day, the party rowed on. Then came
a right angle bend and the river instead of flowing west, turned south. It
must reach the sea! It did but in how disappointing a manner. The river
emptied into a lake, which Sturt named Alexandria; high sand dunes cut
it off from the sea. They pulled over to the dunes, climbed them to look at
the sea. Encounter Bay, where Flinders had met the French explorer Baudin.
So well hidden behind the surf and the dunes, it was no wonder Flinders
had missed the mouth of what has proved to be Australia’s greatest river
system.
What were the feelings of Sturt, of the “Immortal Eight,” as they looked at
the sea? Exhiliarated by their success, yes; but every moment they realised
that the ship sent from Sydney would never find them and they could not
take their boat through the surf, out to sea and round to the Gulfs of South
Australia. No, they must go back the way they had come. It was February
11, 1830; they turned round to pull upstream in an Australian summer, and
on iron rations—l lb. of flour a day, i lb. tea a week!
It is in adversity that a man’s powers are tested. Surely the “Immortal
Eight” passed the test with honours. They now reaped the reward of their
leader’s careful work. He had marked his charts so accurately that he was
able to hearten them as they pulled. “We must get to the next bend,” he
would say, “to equal our progress on the down journey.” And the wearj


men pulled when it seemed an impossibilitjo But they did it! And the food?
You will say, “Catch the fish.” They had eaten so many, they could eat no
more. One lucky day one man shot a duck. Did they enjoy it?
By March 23 they were back at the depot, but there were no men
there! That meant pulling the boat for another 17 days. The weary men
could do no more. One went temporarily insane, while Sturt was temporarily
blind. But the “Immortal Eight” had all returned. They had solved the
problem of the rivers. The total cost in money was £265/19/41! Their reward
is that, so long as we are capable of appreciating their work, they are assured
of immortality.
DONELLA BURRELL.
If you count a home not complete without a cat, if ever a tail has wagged
a welcome and dog-eyes grown brighter at your approach, if ever your
presence has inspired a whinny of delight, then Sturt steps right into your
circle of intimates.
Long ago the ancient keep at Branksea, an island lying in the entrance
of Poole Harbour, was presided over by a lady who loved animals so much
that every couch and chair was apt to be occupied by a cat or a dog. Busy-
bodies, at the time, insisted, with sniffs and head shakes, that she gave more
affection to her animals than to her fifteen children. Time, however, has
dealt kindly with her for most of the fifteen children who ran wild among the
plantations and pines at Branksea, competing for affection with the cats and
dogs, survived and grew into men and women noted for their good looks and
gentle manners. The ninth child of this large family was known as Napier
Sturt and became the father of Charles.
So we are not surprised to find Sturt’s home, Grange, peopled with cats
and fine dogs, as well as kangaroos and wild birds, whilst the dairy and
poultry yards supplied interest for the whole family.
It is not with Sturt’s animals at home (endearing as they are) that we
are concerned, but with those faithful creatures who meant life or death
to the explorer.
Sturt, the wise leader, selected every man with the utmost care and
gave him due respect—each animal seems to be a personality too.
On his first trip Sturt writes feelingly of the loss of “Sailor,” the finer
of the two dogs that had shared every danger and privation.
When, on the Murray, Mr. Flood’s dog was killed by a steer, Sturt said,
“Such a loss cannot be made up to a man. He feels as if he has lost a
friend, and on such occasions sympathy is the only doctor.”
Eighteen hundred and forty-three!
Sturt, like Columbus, is urged on by fate. With his eyes turned to
that veiled mystery—the interior—he frets at the long delays. Darling urged
that “Captain Sturt should, without any control, be allowed to select the men
and animals for his Central expedition . . . .”
At last things were under way. The happy choice of personnel is well-
known, the men were long tried and trusted; but the lives of the men depended
on the horses. Sturt does not for get that. He says, “My own horse was
a grey—for which reason I called him Dunca. I rode him during the whole
period of my wanderings, nor did 1 ever see an animal that could endure
more or that suffered less from want of water. He was aged; and he was a


living proof that to brutes as well as to man years give a certain stamina
that youth does not possess. This animal knew me well, as indeed did all the
horses. Browne’s horse, a little animal, was also one of great endurance.
Poole’s hunter we called the Roan. Punch, a recent purchase, was one of the
best horses —strong, powerful and in good condition. Of the four pack-
horses the most notable was Bawley, a strong, compact little animal with a
blaze on his forehead and a shiny coat. Having been a pet he was upto ah
sorts of tricks and was everybody’s favourite, so likeable was Bawley. ’
And throughout that long, adventurous journey Sturt’s sympathy is
always with his beasts of burden. After forced night marches, nearing Rocky
Glen on January 2, 1845, he writes, “In all, the bullocks had completed a task
of about 170 miles in eight days. Their sufferings from heat in the close
scrub were dreadful; they vainly pawer the heated ground to get a cool
bottom. The men’s shoes were burnt as if by fire, and their backs blistered.
The dogs lost the skin of their feet; poor Fingal, one of the best, perished
on the way.”
The Stony Desert. “Other deserts there are,” said Sturt, “but they
present not the steel-shod surface of this desperate region . . . .” We feel
the stony desert through the hoofs of the long-suffering horses. “It was
really painful to ride the horses over such terrible ground, unshod as they
were. The hoofs were almost to a level with the quick, and they limped
at every step .... splinters from one to two inches flew from their hoofs
as they struck them against the fragments of rocks they could not avoid,”
wrote the leader.
Again, retreating in desperation on October 21, fifty miles beyond
known water, Sturt relates, “At the first waterless halt the horses would
not eat, but collected about me, my favourite grey pulling the hat off my
head to claim attention.”
The horse Traveller fell dead and Sturt’s concern was all for the failing
colt. The party toiled on all night and at eleven next day reached the
waterhole to find it empty. There seemed no way of saving the horses. The
colt had fallen and was a mile behind; but he yet lived. Suddenly a pigeon
appeared, the first sign of life. It passed like lightning and dipped a
moment on the plain about a quarter of a mile away. It could have but
wetted its bill; but there was WATER. Stuart marked the spot, and “I was
able to save the colt,” said Sturt.
The race for life went on. The horses now could hardly drag one foot
after the other —Roan and the colt fell again; but were saved by scant water
taken back to them.
The Roan, Poole’s horse, was left behind in weakened condition to fend
for himself. His story is a happy one for he was found 15 years later, and
in good condition, by Howitt. He gives his name to Roan’s Plains.
On the 11th November a terrific hot wind blew with dreadful effect.
Sturt does not speak in terms of human suffering, but says, “The horses stood
with back to the wind and their noses to the ground without the muscular
strength to raise their heads; the birds were mute; the leaves fell like a
snow storm. I wonder the very grass did not take fire.”
This dried every drop of water in the trench and the party rode on in
fierce heat till moon rise. Poor little Bawley, whom Sturt had hoped to
purchase as a gift to his wife after the trip—the willing, tricksome Bawley—
fell at midnight, but was relieved of his saddle and struggled on. A mile
farther he fell, and a sip of water revived him; but in an hour he was down
for the last time —fairly worn out. The instant scant water was reached it
was taken back to Bawley; but the errand of mercy was not necessary. After
the death of his pet Sturt says with bitter feelings, “I could calmly have laid
my head upon that desert never to raise it again.”
MAY HARDING.


~Storuoi
Nothing better illustrates the nobleness of Sturt’s character than the
story of Davenport. We so like to forget our convict origin, a very big
mistake. Nothing shows our progress in civilisaton so well as the changes
in our criminal laws. In the early nineteenth century, the English Penal Laws
were extremely severe; yet so bad were conditions in England that the
severity of the punishment did not stop crime. Thus, when the hapless
convicts reached New South Wales their guilt was taken for granted. But
Sturt was one of those rare people who form their own conclusions. He
met the convict Davenport, heard his story and believed him. It was after
Sturt’s first two expeditions that Governor Darling sent him to Norfolk
Island to quell a mutiny among the convicts. Detailed to act as cook for
Sturt was a convict, George Davenport. He told his story to Sturt.
We turn back the pages of history to 1814. Napoleon has been exiled
to Elba; he escapes. The Great Powers get ready for the final conflict, and
one sickly British youth finds himself confronting the military authorities.
He tells them he is subject to epileptic fits. Nevertheless he is made into a
soldier and given the colours of his regiment to carry. Next scene in this
drama is the eve of Waterloo. Great noise and confusion. The greatest
battle of the century is to be fought and Davenport feels he is about to have
an epileptic fit. He puts the regiment’s colours in his pocket and knows no
more. Next scene is after the battle. Men are searching for fallen com-
rades. Davenport is discovered, uninjured. He is promptly court-martialled
and charged with being a deserter. He tells his tale but who believes him?
To add to his misfortunes he possesses about the ugliest face anyone has
ever seen, let alone the officers conducting the trial. But, as we have won
Waterloo, Davenport does not face death but transportation to New South
Wales. And now, when his fortunes have reached their lowest ebb, comes
a turn. The gallant Captain Sturt believes Davenport’s story. That is enough
to make Davenport his slave for ever.
Let us return to Norfolk Island. There is great shouting one night. A
storm has driven a ship on to the rocks. Sturt musters willing helpers, among
them Davenport. For his gallant conduct that night Davenport receives his
freedom. He returns to New South Wales meanwhile.
Later, when Sturt marries, Davenport forms parts of the household,
despite the tearful protests of the bride that she cannot bear the sight of
the ugly man. But Davenport remains.
Time passes; a baby is to be born to the Sturts, and Davenport is beside
himself with anxiety. When the son is born, Davenport is the first to hold
him in his arms. He now has three people to love. Later when he has,
following Sturt’s advice, made money, he wants to make Sturt’s son his
heir, but is not allowed.
It is 1844, and Sturt is leaving for the interior of Australia. Davenport
hears of the enterprise, hurries after the party and catches them up on the
Murray River. Sturt records how glad he was to see his faithful servant
once more. So Davenport looked after his master during the eventful journey
to Central Australia, and we can feel sure helped to lighten Sturt’s burden.
DONELLA BURRELL.


Cji/erianclina
attle
When Charles Sturt made his third noteworthy land journey he combined
business with geographical research. Thanks in no small measure to Sturt’s
previous work, the colony of South Australia had been founded in 1836 —
an event which led several parties of settlers to begin overlanding cattle and
sheep from New South Wales to their selections in the new colony. Sturt’s
expedition of 1838, though not the earliest, is the most famous of the over-
landing trips.
On May 22, the explorer, accompanied by a dozen or more men, left
Fowler’s station on the Hume, or Murray River, intending to take a herd
of 300 cattle and 30 sheep down the stream and across to the outskirts of
settlement at Adelaide, and at the same time to prove that the river which
Hume had discovered and named near Albury in 1824, was the same river
as that which Sturt had encountered at its junction with the Murrumbidgee
in 1830.
Till June 9 the party followed the northern bank of the stream, but then
were obliged to cross to what would now be called the Victorian side in
■order to avoid the difficult crossing of the Delangen. A few days later,
after crossing the Goulburn, Sturt noticed two trees in the bark of which were
carvey the names of Bonney and Hawdon—two overlanders who had made
the journey a few months before. Not long after the Lodden had been left
behind, Sturt suffered the loss of all his sheep through the attacks of wild
dogs.
July 10 was an important day, for it was then that the party could see the
Murrumbidgee flowing into the river from the north. There was now no
doubt that the Hume River was identical with the Murray. In passing, let
it be noticed that Sturt intended the name Murray, which he bestowed in
1830, to apply only to that part of the stream which lies below the mouth
of the Murrumbidgee; he wished the upper part to continue to be known by
the name of its discoverer, Hume.
The junction of the Darling with the Murray was next passed, and in
July 28 the party crossed to the right bank of the main stream, hurrying to
race the expected flood water, yet hindered by the necessity to intercept the
cattle.
The great bend in the river, near the site of Morgan, was left behind
on August 17, and ten days later Sturt established his cattle and their over-
seers at a station near the foot of Mt. Barker, and about 25 miles from
Adelaide.
“Thus,” wrote the explorer in his diary, “our journey has terminated—a
journey which to me has been more fatiguing than either of my earlier
expeditions.”
R. P. WHITEHOUSE.


Q !
"U i
'o :
c
I o
--E
S.
T-s X
LU
o
s I
o
3 a:
A
LLocy>er's 4
"V^CZais. 3 A/o vernier /895
, \T3yZ. ;
N < I J\> I/3 r&orcuy/-y /1 945
\ l { @oeens/dnaf
& \ Sor-c/er\


HTtt kids, to tfiE J2aU £. 18. 2W
The passing of Edmund Burnett Dow (otherwise known as Tom Dow
among his many friends) leaves a gap hard to fill in the field of research in
the travels of Charles Sturt through the western district of hew bourn
3 To Mr. Dow we owe much for the preservation and re-construction of
the many landmarks that remind us of the trail of Sturt and his companions
through this district. His untiring efforts covered a number of years in the
endeavour to assure for all time the historical landmarks in theii respective
settings Men and women of all spheres of life were interviewed and called
upon to assist in this difficult task. Even the “Mounted Policemen’’ did not
escape, and one in particular rendered valuable assistance, along with the
station hands. This incident was a standing joke in his reminiscences, for
it entailed much adventure before the task was finally completed. Mail
drivers did much appreciated work in delivering materials and directing
location. Our friend, who usually attended to all despatch work himself, did
not forget them in his praise of their services.
Among Mr. Dow’s willing band of workers were the senior Boy Scouts
—of whom the deceased was their District Commissioner for a number of
years—and also members of the local Y.M.C.A. His influence among these
young folk won for him great respect and admiration. They made many
excursions with “Uncle Tom” to build these fallen landmarks.
Perhaps one of the main reasons for our friend’s interest in the natural
history of the western district was his association rvith the late Dr. R. H.
Pulleine, of Adelaide, and Dr. W. D. K. MacGillivray, of Broken Hill.
These two men travelled the central and northern district, studying the life
of the aborigines, and the flora at the same time.
Mr Dow was also interested in field naturalist activities, which brought
him into close touch with the late Albert Morris, a naturalist highly respected.
As a result of this team work, Mr. Dow found sympathetic assistance and
all the inspiration necessary to urge him on to his heart’s ambition. Each
excursion undertaken would bring new “grist to the mill” to be investigated;
and carefully checked over. It was after much careful research work that
Mr. Dow discovered that “Piesse’s Knob” was wrongly located. After much
reasoning, coupled with his quiet consistency, he was able to induce respon-
sible authorities to make this correction, and this with some public opinon
against him. For this one act alone, Mr. Dow deserves all credit.
That he followed very carefully—as far as possible—the trail of Sturt,
cannot be denied. Each time he lectured on Sturt’s travels it w T ould be
evidenced with more accurate detail. We now have his life’s work on the
subject, written just before he died, a fitting tribute to his name and memory,
and a valuable asset to the history of Australia.
On one occasion when being commended for his untiring efforts in the
work nearest to his heart, he was heard to remark, “If the bit I have done
is of any use to the advancement of Australia, and the honour of her pioneers,
and if it will retain at least to some extent to the aborigines their birthright,
I consider I am well paid.”
This was the spirit of a man whose moral and spiritual influence has left
the community in which he laboured the richer for his presence, and has at
the same time revived the spirit and courage of Australia’s greatest explorer—
Charles Sturt —and his faithful companions.
A. H. WIGGINS.


La PJ„oixxYL£Xj oj' zSiuxi
Preface
*THHS story has been compiled at the request of the Barrier Field
1 Naturalists’ Club, of Broken Hill, of which I was a, member for
several years.
It was due to the inspiration of the first president of that club, the
late W. D. K. Macgillivray, M. 8., 8.5., “Physician and Naturalist,” that the
work of tracing Sturt’s journey was commenced. At that time the search
only extended around the environs of the Broken Hill district, but the sub-
ject proved so full of interest that my researches were extended to the limit
of my resources in time and transport, and the following record covers his
journey from Adelaide to Pinaroo on Lake Prome, in the extreme north-
west corner of New South Wales.
At several points the paucity of Sturt’s descriptions when referring
to topographical features, which to him, were relatively unimportant, may
be the cause of several gaps and errors in this record, and the vast changes
brought about by sand drift and erosion in the last 100 years make it diffi-
cult to identify certain places, but these are unimportant to the whole
story and must be overlooked. Sand drift has been intensified since the
first pastoral settlement in 1866, altering the courses of creeks and blotting
out many of the waterholes that existed in the years gone by. Generally
speaking, however, the whole of the journey has been traced with reason-
able accuracy between the two points mentioned. Many of the localities
in the Cooper’s Creek and Diamentina regions have been traversed by the
writer, but the immense change in the flood plains of these two rivers,
caused mainly by sand drift, have obliterated many of the features referred
to in the Narrative, just as buildings and homesteads have been obliterated
and lost in the last forty years and less.
It is hoped that these notes may serve to reveal more clearly in this
centenary period of 1944-5-6, the amazing feat of this pioneer explorer, who
led his expedition safely into the unknown, and out again, in the face of
tremendous difficulties, both topographical and climatic.
Even today, with our knowledge of the country, with our experience
of Colonial conditions, and with our modern transport equipment, this
journey would be no mean effort.
By modern equipment is meant, the usual type of motor transport
available before the war period. The type of vehicle developed by war
conditions would make much easier work of such a trip.


Foreword
|>EFORE attempting to follow in this explorer’s footsteps, his published
“Narrative”* was first studied, read and re-read. This story, giving
a daily description of his travels, was of the greatest importance, as his
vivid power of description left no doubt, in most cases, as to which par-
ticular feature he was referring. His wanderings in the locality of Broken
Hill were first studied and followed, and it was found that when one had
mastered his somewhat peculiar phrasing, it became increasingly easy to
interpret his descriptions and follow along the line of route.
It appears that when Sturt made his final departure for England
from his South Australian home at Henley, he gave instructions for the
destruction of a lot of his papers, and this was carried out so thoroughly,
that it is believed many valuable papers connected with this and other
explorations were totally destroyed.
Among the material destined to be burned, and from the ashes of
the fire, two very important documents were rescued. One of these was a
manuscript copy, in an unknown hand, of Sturt’s Diary from the start of
his journey on August 10, 1844, to March 31, 1845. This book was com-
plete and undamaged.
The second volume rescued was a diary in Sturt’s own hand-writing
covering the period from April 9, 1845, to November 10, 1845. This volume
was scorched and several pages had evidently been torn off the front and
burnt.
It will thus be seen that the records for the first week in April are
missing, and also for the final stage of his journey from November 10, 1845.
At this period he was on his way home, reaching Adelaide on January 19,
1846, so that very few essential details are missing, and these are covered
by his Narrative.
These two historic diaries, covering practically the complete period
of his journey are now in the safe custody of the Archives Department of
the South Australian Public Library. These original records were freely
studied and were invaluable in giving additional details in some instances,
and also proved useful in checking compass bearings, some of wTrich seemed
to have got twisted during publication.
With the exception of a few private letters wiiich have no bearing
on the present work, these are the only records in existence, of this journey,
and full use w r as made of them to ensure the accuracy of these notes.
of an expedition into Central Australia, 1844-5-6 by Captain
Charles Sturt, F.L.S., F.R.G.S., Surveyor General of South Australia,
2 Vols., London 1849.


Introduction
/'kN May 25, 1827, Charles Sturt arrived in Sydney as captain of a detaeh-
ment of the 39th Regiment who were in charge of a ship load of
convicts.
He thus arrived in the very early days of the Settlement, and soon
took his pmce in the administrative life of the Colony of New South Wales,
for it was in the following year that he was despatched on an exploratory
expedition, the first of a series he was to make in Australia.
FoLowing the crossing of the Blue Mountains in 1813 by Blaxland,
Wentworth and Lawson, it was noticed that the western rivers, viz., Bogan,
Macquarie. Castlereagh and others, all trended in a northerly direction,
this giving rise to the theory that they all discharged their waters into a.
huge lake basin in the interior. Later, however, it was found that all these
rivers discharged into a larger river running westerly, and to determine the
course and nature of this river, Sturt was despatched in 1828 under instruc-
tions from the Governor, Sir Ralph Darling, to explore and report on this
unknown stream.
He traversed down the Macquarie, but being blocked by a series of
swamps and marshes —“The Overflow” —he was forced west, and found a
big river “flowing to the south in majestic loneliness.” He was in the
vicinity of the present town of Bourke, and named the river the Darling
after his sponsor.
During his residence in the Colony, and w r hile on this journey, he
noticed that the line of migration of the birds was on a north-west and
south-east course, and this engendered the belief that the Darling would
eventually turn west or north-west and discharge into a large lake or sea
in the interior, which would provide good grass country for the migrating
birds.
This theory was not by any means new; it was mentioned by Pliny,
A.D. 77, in his “Historia Naturalis,” where he refers to a great island south
of the Equator, the central parts of which were occupied by an inland sea.
The year 1829 found Sturt on his famous trip down the Lachlan,
Murrumbidgee, and Murray rivers, to the Murray Mouth on Lake Alexan-
dria in South Australia. His passing of the present site of Mildura is
now marked by a handsome monument on the bank of the river at the.
Mildura Rowing Club’s sheds, recording that —
Captain Charles Sturt
Passed This Spot
About 22nd January, 1830.
A little further on Sturt noticed a large tributary joining in from the'
north, at the present site of Wentworth, which he decided was the Barling
which had been named by him the previous year. The well known and
monotonous similarity of the Darling at all points along its tortuous course
no doubt assisted Sturt to this decision in recognising the stream at its
junction with the Murray. In doing this he was quite content to sacrifice
his inland sea theory, but his judgment was hardly believed by many
geographers in Sydney, among them being Sir Thomas Mitchell, the Surveyor
General of the Colony.
This trip by Sturt and his kindly attitude to the natives is still re-
membered by the present tribes who, one hundred years afterwards caused
to be erected by the residents of the Point MacLeay Mission Station an
imposing cairn with a bronze plate reading:
Charles Sturt, 1830,
Erected by Descendants
of the Lower Murray Tribes, 1930.


Several years passed before any action was taken by the officials in
Sydney to confirm the course of the Darling, and it was not till 1835, that
Sir Thomas (Major) Mitchell was sent out to explore its course and decide,
as Sturt affirmed, it joined the Murray, or bore away to the west or north
west into the interior.
Memorial to Sturt, Point M., Murray Mouth
Mitchell started near the point where first the river was struck by
Sturt, and after an eventual trip along the east bank, punctuated with
constantly recurring trouble with the natives, he reached a point just below
the present Menindee and discovered that here the river, which had been
pursuing a south-westerly course, took a very definite southerly turn.
Major Mitchell was a strong believer in the inland sea theory; he was also
a little jealous of his brother officer Sturt: and this decided turn of the river
made Sturt look right and himself wrong. Instead of continuing down the
Darling and settle the vexed question by proving tlfat it joined the Murray,
he grudgingly admitted that Sturt was right, but took the easier and weaker
course and returned home. Thus he left the question undecided, for there
was still an unexplored gap of 150 miles from which the river may have
turned in any direction, either east or west.
While at his camp near Menindee. Mitchell reported seeing a range
ot hills to the north-west (later to be named Stanley’s Barrier Range, by
Sturt), and a mountain stream, Williorara Creek, entering the Darling
opposite his camp. In his “Narrative’’ Volume 1, under the date July 11,
1835, Mitchell States:
“I ascertained that a small stream joined the Darling from the
west and that a range of hills was visible in the same direction beyond
it. I discontinued the preparations I had been making for exploring
the river further with pack animals, and determined to return. The
identity of the river with that which had been seen to enter the
Murray, now admitted of little doubt and the continuation of the survey
to that point was scarcely an object worth the peril likely to attend it.”


So the next clay he started up the river and the worst peril he tyould
have encountered down the river would be due to his own bad treatment
of the blacks, with whom he had frequent clashes, as he did not hesitate to
use his guns against them on the slightest pretext. It was during the early
stages of this trip that his botanist, Dick Cunningham, was killed by blacks
at Bebenda on the Bogan.
In the following year, 1836, Mitchell made a trip down the Murray
and was forced to admit that Sturt’s tributary was actually the Darling.
On this occasion he travelled up the river for about eight miles and again
had the opportunity to settle the question beyond all doubt, by journeying
up to connect with his Menindee terminal, but this was not done and the
problem was still unsolved.
Coming now to 1844, we find that Charles Sturt was occupying the
position of Surveyor General in the new Colony of South Australia, and
while here he noticed that the flight of the birds wms on a north-south line.
He argued from this that at the point of intersection of this direction with
that previously noted in New South Wales, there should exist some good
country and possibly an inland sea or lake.
He therefore sought permission from Lord Stanley, Secretary of State
for the Colonies, in London, to equip an expedition to travel into the interior.
Permission was granted and to give it an official status, he was to
■‘ascertain the existence and character of a supposed chain of mountains
trending down from north-east to south-west and forming a great
naturai division of the continent.”
At the same time, of course he would be able to prove or disprove the
existence of this inland sea which was causing so much discussion.
Some years previous to this, viz., 1839, Edward John Eyre of Adelaide,
had attempted a trip north from Adelaide towards the interior, but had been
blocked and baffled by the horseshoe shaped lake called Torrens which he
seemed to strike in whatever direction he attempt©' 1 to cross it. In later
years it was discovered that the horseshoe was nut continuous but was
made up of Lakes Torrens, Eyre, Gregory, Blanche, Callabonna and Frome.
And these were the events leading up to the start of this expedition
■of Sturt which left Adelaide on August 14, 1844.


Stage I—Adelaide1 —Adelaide to Menindee
/CAPTAIN STURT'S Central Australian expedition left the recently-formed
settlement of Adelaide on August 14, 1844, amid the cheers and good
wishes of the citizens.
Sturt had chosen his team carefully, and subsequent events proved
that his choice had been a wise one in every case; and his own leadership
and the loyalty of his men, combined to make a success of a hazardous
crip into an entirely unknown country.
He chose James Poole as his first assistant; John Harris Browne as
surgeon; John McDouall Stuart, surveyor and draftsman; and Louis Piesse,
with his peculiar hat, as storekeeper or quartermaster as he would be
called today. To these were added 12 men, stockmen, shepherds, bullock
drivers, and general hands, making a total of 17 persons.
The equipment consisted of: 11 horses, 1 horse dray, 1 spring cart,
JO bullocks. 3 drays, 1 boat on carriage, 200 sheep, 2 sheep dogs, 4 kangaroo
dogs.
This well-equipped and important looking procession wound its way
out of the town and along the North Road towards Gawler, and after a
short spell in that town, at Gallon's Hotel, where they refreshed them-
selves, they turned east and proceeded on their way to Moorundi (now
Blanchetown), the residence on the Murray River of Mr. Edward John
Eyre, who had already had some experience of the northern districts of
the Colony.
A stone monument now stands near the Blanchetown weir in honor
of Charles Sturt and his party, as this was the real starting point of the
expedition.
At this place final adjustments were made to the loading, duties were
again allotted, final letters written home, then under the guidance of Mr.
Eyre, the now reorganised party made their departure tor the unknown
on August 21. Not altogether unknown, however, for some time previously
Mr. Eyre had taken a trip along the Murray and Darling as far as the
Williorara Creek of Major Mitchell, in a search for fresh pastoral country.
For a while the party followed the Overland Track between Sydney
and Adelaide, and passing North-West Bend (Morgan), reached Lake
Bonney. named after Charles Bonney, the first Overlander from Sydney.
The creek feeding the lake was called Hawker’s Creek by Sturt, after a
meal settler who had assisted him in making a survey of the locality. The
numerous lakes and billabongs in the vicinity of our present Renmark and
Chaffey caused them some trouble in negotiating, and then they noted
he high cliffs where the overland track touched the river. These “Tareena
Cliffs” are a well-known feature and landmark on the road from Went-
worth to Morgan, which still follows the original overland track at some
stages.
Lake Victoria, which got its name during his 1829 trip, and its feeder
creek, being flooded, the party was forced around the northern end of
this lake, of which a survey was made. The feeder creek was named the
'‘Rufus,” after the well-known red-headed overlander of that period, George
MacLeay.
It is at this stage of the journey that the Narrative gives us the first
reference to the leader’s health, for he mentions his failing eyesight, which
he was to lose almost entirely due to the rigors of this journey. A few
days later, after a peaceful settlement of some trouble with the natives,
who were in force along the Murray, Sturt says:
“I have never yet had occasion to fire a hostile shot on these people
and I sincerely hope I never may.”
That statement laid down his policy for the journey, which also was
the policy of the party, and it was the means of steering them through


Sturt mentions the stores were buried here before the retreat, but,
Mitchell himself makes no mention of this in his narrative. Thus: “1835.
July 9th. Final Camp down Darling.
“Slightly rising ground nearly free from trees, surrounded by
polygnum flats, and only half a mile from a river.”
This was a typical Mitchell camp, on a rise and well in the open,
so that the party would be ready for any surprise attack by the natives.
This position is easily recognised today, but now, of course, all signs have
been obliterated by stock and weather. It is on the highest point of
a low sandhill close to the road from the old punt crossing at Menindee
to Appin Homestead, and the Lands Department have a record of its
latitude and longtitude, but this may be Mitchell’s own observations.
Williorara Creek
As the river continued to rise and the party and their equipment
were unable to cross the deep channel of Williorara Creek, camp was
struck and the creek was followed back as far as Lake Cawndilla,
where they were able to cross in ftont of the advancing waters. Williorara
Creek meanders through Lake Menindee bed. and passing out of this
lake is known as Cawndilla Creek until it reaches the lake of that name.
The creek channel first fills ana with a continuous rising river it
overflows its banks and floods Lake Menindee,
They established a new camp on the western or north-western
side of Williorara Creek, as it is mentioned that they had the creek
between tnem and the Darling natives. There had been slight trouble
with the natives here, and on inquiry from a friendly native named
Nadbuck, who had been sent along as a guide by Mr. Eyre, it was
found to be due to the shape of Dr. Browne’s hat. He was wearing
a hat similar to that favored by Mitchell nine years previously, and
they got the idea that Browne and Mitchell belonged to the same
tribe of whites. Their treatment by Mitchell and his party still raised
unpleasant memories in their minds, and hence the hostility. However,
the natives were appeased and peace restored by Browne throwing
away the offending headgear and digging another out of his luggage.
The Cawndilla camp was occupied for eight or nine days at this
period, and later on became a base camp for fresh stores that were
Drought up from Adelaide, and old residents of the locality say that at
one time the site was quite recognisable, but frequent floodings have
now entirely washed out all signs of occupation, and a search for the
sire failed to reveal any definite evidence.


several incidents which, under a different policy, may have turned out
very dangerous and serious.
Due to a rise in the Murray the water was backing up in the Ana-
Branch of the Darling when they reached that point, and the party had
to travel 11 miles up that stream before being able to cross to the main
channel. Crossing east to the Darling they found this stream very low
and were able to observe a bar of “ferruginous sandstone’’ crossing the bed
of the river. Rocky bars are few and far between in this river, and this
particular one is now known as “Burtundy Rocks.”
A day or two later a sudden “fresh” came down the river, and Sturt
fondly hoped that this was due to a flood in Williorara Creek which he
intended to follow to its source, in the hills to the north-west.
He was a bit surprised by the big bend which the river makes to
the enst, but followed the channel all the way, and the next point of interest
was the crossing of the bed of Yartello Lake (now Yartla Lake), which
cue natives said was the starting of the Ana Branch. As usual the
natives were right.
The Narrative then records that on October 10, they were travel-
ling along “a hard, sandy ridge parallel to the river from which they
could see hills to the north-west.” and then suddenly found themselves
in the bed of Minandichi Lake, and a little further on the banks of
Williorara Creek were reached.
There is no mistaking their position at this time. When one crossed
che “Second Bridge” below Menindee, which spans the Williorara Creek,
a low sandhill is seen to start just across the bridge, forming the bank
of the lake bed and trending southerly for a mile or two. Prom a little
way along this ridge the Barrier Ranges can be seen over the timber
fringing Menindee Lake, and it was on this ridge that the first base-line
was laid down by Surveyor Stuart. These first white men to tramp over
this sand hill must have disturbed the silence, for many sleeping
blackfellows, for judging by the number of skulls and skeletons which
once decorated this hill, it had been a popular burying ground of the
natives for vary irany years.
On reaching Williorara Creek Sturt found that the water, instead of
running in a norma! manner into the Darling, was flowing in the op-
posite direction, and backing up into Minandichi or Menindee Lake.
He was utterly confounded and disappointed, for he now realised that this
was not a “mountain stream” as Mitchell had described it, but merely
a feeder into the lake, such as he had seen at Lakes Bonney and
Victoria. Mitchell had apparently reached a spoi on the east bank
of the river when it was falling, with the waters of Lake Menindee dis-
charging into it, thus giving it the characteristics of a normal tributary
stream.
About here the tracks of Eyre’s horses were seen, and it was con-
cluded that the creek must have been dry when he was there, and
recognised ac Williorara Creek, as Eyre had made no mention
of it whatever to Sturt before leaving Moorundi.
On the return of the party to this spot twelve months later, it is
recorded that a tree was marked with a certain inscription a quarter of
a mile below the junction of the creek with the river. For very many
years there have been no trees for about half a mile below the bridge,
and an intensive search among these trees failed to reveal any marked
tree, and as the Lands Department officials can find no record in the
notes of their surveyors of this tree having ever been noticed, it must
be presumed lost by flood, fire, storm, or axe.
While camped here Dr. Browne crossed the river in a native canoe
end visited the site of Mitchell’s terminal camp of 1835, nine years earlier.
‘‘lt was about a mile from the river to the eastwards on some rising
ground. The dray tracks and fireplaces were still visible. .... Prom
this point the ranges were not visible, only the sandhills of the basin
of Cawndilla.”


Stage 2 —Menindee To Broken Hill
The fact that Williorara Creek was only a backwater from the
river, and not a stream fed from the ranges to the north-west, a stream
that could be followed up with a certainty of plentiful water, upset
Sturt’s plans considerably, so that he ana the others were now un-
certain of what lay ahead, and he was wise enough not to travel until
his water supplies were assured. So he decided to send out a scouting
party before venturing with his whole outfit into the unknown.
.Poole and Stuart had already journeyed about 36 miles to the north,
to Scrope’s Range (not Scope, as now spelt), and from there these
men had reported two large lake basins to the south of the camp
(probably Tandora and Nettlegoe), and also “an appearance of water
“between the ranges to the north-west.’’ How that “appearance of
water” was to lure on many a traveller in the years that followed,
in this new country with its peculiar features and conditions.
So Sturt, Stuart, Poole and Browne, with three others, started off
on a definite north-west bearing to a prominent hill in the ranges, called
Coonbaralba by Topar, another native guide, and later referred to as
Mount Gipps. Sturt Avas determined now to follow this north-west course
that he had set for himself from the river, and he held to it until con-
ditions and circumstances forced him to try a different course.
Allowing for the changes in the variation of the magnetic needle at
that time and now, his course can be plotted and easily followed.
Starting from Cawndilla Camp, “at 26 miles we ascended a small
sandhill (opposite Quondong Hotel and bridge) descended it and crossed
broad dry creek with a gravelly bed, and as our course lay parallel to it
we kept in the shade of the gum trees along its banks.” The small
sandhill is definitely the one on the east side of Quondong bridge, and
the “broad dry creek” he named Stephens Creek after Sir Alfred Stephens,
Chief Justice of New South Wales at that period.
At four miles from the crossing they reached a native well called
Murnco Murnco (now Munka Munka), and keeping on the south side
of the creek crossed plains thickly studded with white quartz fragments.
(This will be recognised as “Quartz Reef Selectic of the present time).
Owing to the silting up of the creek in this region, several of the
water-holes and well mentioned cannot now be identified. Old residents
in this locality tell of splendid deep holes that existed in the early days
of selection, before sand drift and silting began to make itself felt and
ruined them, but it seems certain that Sturt would find good water at
the junction of the present Nine Mile Creek that comes in from the
north, and at Wild Dog Creek coming from the south. Probably this
“Curnapaga’’ was Nine Mile Creek, a good spot for native camps and
still a permanent watering place.
Finding that travelling along the south bank was very rough (be-
tween the present Avondale and The Gorge), the party was forced into
the bed of the creek, and they eventually reached a “long and beautiful
pond, serpentine in shape, and more than 80 yards long,” which the
natives called Parnari.
“Parnari” is the rocky water-hole immediately below the bridge,
where the railway to Sydney crosses Stephens Creek before reaching the
Gorge siding. Although badly silted it cannot be mistaken, for the ser-
pentine course of its banks make its identification easy.
Here, in later years, on the high ground to the west and close to
this good water-hole, “The Gorge” Station buildings were erected some time
in the early “seventies.” It was an out-station of Kinchega homestead on
the Darling River, 70 miles distant, and now only a few battered and rusty
tins and some old iron mark the site of this once prosperous building.
At that time the old road from Silverton to Wilcannia and Menindee


crossed the creek at this point, and one can imagine the old “four-in-
hand” or five-horse coaches swinging down into the rocky bed and
pulling up jerkily to water the horses at the old well. This old road
from Silverton entered the hills at “The Acacia,” crossed Nine Mile
Creek near the six-mile gate on the Purnamoota road, where once
stood a boardinghouse, or perhaps a “shanty,” and then leached the plain
ox McCulloch Park.
It then made for the original Mount Gipps Station buildings, estab-
lished in 1866, at the foot of Edwards Lookout, and passed between that
hill and the creek. Then into the present reservoir site, through the
rveir, and crossed to the north side of the creek, calling at ‘German
Charley’s” hotel, whose ruins can still be seen, thence roughly following
the creek to its crossing at Parnari. This road is still traceable from
The Acacia to Parnari and always brings up visions of coaching days of
the past. The old timbered well ana the stone tank and troughing
at Parnari are said to have been built for station use by William Henry
Lake, of Lake Brothers, stonemasons. Bill Lake was no “jerry builder,”
as a look at this tank and many another in the district will testify.
Coonbaralba, or Mount Gipps, named after Sir George Gipps,
Governor of the Colony from 1838 to 1845, the point to which they had
been making from Cawndilla, was not visible from Parnari, but from
a small rise to the east of the water-hole, and between the bridge and
the siding, they laid a course to a prominent hill in the ranges. Crossing
a small creek (Mulga Springs) above its confluence with Stephens Creek,
a small ridge was ascended between this creek and Ironblow Creek.
The eastern branch of Ironblow was crossed, but the road to the summit
of their objective was blocked by a deep “ravine,” as it is called in the
records, and up which the cart could not be taken. So they turned
westerly and attained another point of about equal height, on the same
ridge and a little further to the south. From this summit the course of
Stephens Creek through the gorge below the reservoir could be seen,
and Coonbaralba or Mount Gipps lay between them and the creek,
but it was impossible to get across to that summit so they turned and
retraced their steps to Parnari Camp.
It was in these hills that Sturt recorded that he saw “Clianthus Dam-
pieri” growing and flowering in profusion. This striking bloom had been
observed and named by Dampier, when that adventurer and buccaneer had
struck the north-west coast of Australia about the year 1698, and Sturt had
recognised it by Dampier’s specimens in the British Museum. Although
not the discoverer of this flower Sturt’s name has stuck to it by common
consent, and it is known everywhere as Sturt’s Desert Pea, its correct name
now being “Clianthus Speciosa.”
Again the party set out from Parnari and proceeded along the creek,
passing a small creek coming in from the west, which would be Mount
Darling Creek. At 7 miles from Parnari they entered “The Gap or Pass”
through which the main creek flowed after crossing the big basin in which
McCulloch is situated. They found themselves “on the edge of an extensive
plain,” and intended to follow the creek still further, but as there was no
water to be seen, Topar, the native guide told them he knew of a large body
of water, big enough for a swim, so they followed his directions. Turning
north from the weir the track led them along the western foot of the line
of hills and along the valley of Lindsay’s Creek.
“At about three miles they ascended a small isolated hill of very
remarkable appearance—the basis of this hill was a slaty ferruginous
rock and protruding above the ground along the spine of the hill there
was a line of the finest hepatic iron I ever saw; it was in blocks of
various sizes and of many tons weight, piled one upon the other, with-
out a particle of earth, either in their faces or between them.”
The ironstone of this hill caused a deviation in the compass needle, and on
account of its peculiar shape and a fanciful resemblance to the special hat
favored by the storekeeper, it was named Piesse’s Knob. This hill is
locally known as The Razorback.


Pressing on past the present “Springs” selections, they reached a
short gorge in Yalcowinna Creek which Sturt named the “Glen of Yan-
cowinna. (The “1” and “n” in native dialects are usually interchangeable,
so that either spelling in permissible.)
This name is now shortened to, and officially recognised as “Yanco
Glen,' but this is several miles below the hotel of that name, and the hotel
has no connection or association whatever with this expedition of Sturt’s.
Topar’s “swimmin’ ’ole” turned out tc be a myth, and only a small
supply of muddy water was found. Topar came in for some severe criticism
from Sturt for his deceit and false information, but this was undeserved as
he had not been in this country for some years, and as this particular year
was a dry one following a succession of dry periods, his mistake is excus-
able. Yanco Glen in ordinary seasons may always be depended on to hold
a lot of water, and may be described as a permanent water hole; it is a
favorite bathing place in good seasons, and was chosen on several occasions
as a site i >r a supplementary water supply for the city of Broken Hill.
Camp was pitched that night on the bank of the creek at a small flat
just above the entrance to the gorge, and on the next morning the party
travelled through the gorge to its eastern end and made a direct journey
to the base camp at Cawndilla.
Having thus made a survey of the track as far as Piesse’s Knob and
Y’anco Glen, it was thought safe to move the whole outfit forward, and in a
day or two they were established at Parnarl.
From November 1, to November 5, Sturt and his companions were
engaged in exploring and surveying the surrounding country, and it was
during this period that the three cairns, mentioned by him later, were con-
structed. For the first time the hills about here were referred to as Stanley’s
Barrier Range, Lord Stanley being the Secretary of State for the Colonies,
in London.
The only reference, and an indirect one, to the actual Broken Hill
lode is given in a short statement when he was writing about The Razor-
back. or Piesse’s Knob as he called it. In reference to this he says:
“The veins of the metal run north and south, as did a similar crop at the
S.F. base of the ranges.”
The map of his journey, published in his narrative, shows his route appar-
ently completely encircling the approximate position of the line of lode, and
his reference above seems to indicate that he rode around and observed the
hard, black, forbidding-looking outcrop of the lode. However, he makes
no mention of it other than the above, and we must assume that he passed
it by. as did many other men in the years that followed, without recognising
its value.
What vast wealth lay beneath the feet of these first white men to see
this black, hog-backed outcrop of Wilyu Wilyu Yong, now Wilywilyong.
Its riches lay hidden for almost 40 years, till Charlie Rasp, in 1883, took a
long shot and pegged out the first lease in September of that year, and it
was not till enarly two years later, viz., January, 1885, that Chlorides of
Silver were discovered by Philip Charley, and the now world-famous hill
began to yield up its secret riches.
Another interesting statement about this locality is to the effec* that
they were plagued by myriads o- flies, which only goes to prove that gar-
bage tins and manure heaps can not be held wholly responsible for the flies
that are still a feature of the Silver City at certain seasons
During their sojourn at Parnari it was discovered that a small but
good waterhole existed just through the Pass, which had been missed in the
excitement of listening to Topar’s story of the “big fella waterhole” at
Yanco Glen, so Parnari camp was struck and the whole party moved up and
estabished a new camp at the Pass. This would be in close proximity to
the site of the present weir at Stephens Creek Reservoir. A monument has
been erected here in the garden of the pumping station to commemorate
this spot, which was also used as a camp on their return from Depot Glen.


three cairns erected by the expedition in this locality are situated
reading from south to north, at Mount Darling, Coonbaralba or Mount
Gipps, and Mount Bourke. This last is now officially named Mount Vulcan,
but is called locally, Porcupine Hill, on account of the prolific growth of
tussocks of porcupine grass that crowns it.
The cairn on Mount Darling is very substantially built, and being
easily accessible and the nearest to the city, is fairly well known to most
of my readers.
The Mount Gipps cairn is on the highest, but not the first crest, of
the hill immediately to the north of the reservoir. It was partially in ruins
when first found by the writer; an attempt was made to rebuild it, but time
did not permit of the completion of the job. and it still needs the attention
of a male. Saturday hiking party. It was probably broken down by some
Inquisitive and treasure seeking boundary rider or stockman, but be must
fiave been sadly disappointed when his efforts yielded nothing but the hard
work.
Mount Vulcan is on the “Springs’’ Selection, being well removed from
the track of the vandal, and although the smallest of the three, is still in
perfect condition.
These cairns, in addition to being afforded protection as survey marks,
have a great historic interest and value, and it is hoped they may always
remain outside the orbit of the thoughtless tourist.
The Barrier Ranges having failed to be the supply point for the
waters of Williorara Creek, as Sturt had expected, turned out to be as dry
and as barren as the country already passed over, so he decided to stick
to his policy of scouting the country for water before going forward with
his stock and equipment. In this way he could choose the best watered
route for his men As mentioned before be had set his heart on going
north-west till he reached his goal; in fact he had a north-w r est complex, as
we would call it today. He had mapped this course from the Darling, and
so far had been able to adhere to it. He now set a similar course from the
camp at “The Pass,’’ and all went well across the flats to the north of
Stephens Creek, but when they reached the rocky hills to the north and
north-west of “old Mount Gipps” Station, travelling became very difficult
and almost impossible for horses and carts. They had now reached a line
of hills parallel to the line they had followed north to Yanco Glen, and on
looking southwards the gum-line of Stephens Creek was seen, with another
line of gums denoting a creek coming in from the south. They travelled
south along the base of the hills to this point (which is the junction of the
Nine Mile Creek), and here found that Stephens Creek took a definite turn
northwards into the hills, a course it was decided to follow. (Parnell Creek,
though not named as such was noticed and recorded as joining the main
creek at this point from the west.) The present “seven-mile well” was
passed and again the main creek took a definite turn, this time to the west.
The men were instructed to follow f he north-west course from the
bend, while Sturt and Browne went east to the summit of a hill about three
miles distant, which Lewis had climbed earlier in the day. This hill he
named Lewis’ Hill, and from its top could be seen Coonbaralba, the hill
above the base camp at the Pass. The hill climbed has a rounded, bold
capping of pegmatite and is easily approached from “Rockley” selection by
a short walk along the fence, but it must not be confused with Lewis Point
of the maps, in the vicinity of Campbells Creek, and some miles to the
north. This latter hill was not named nor mentioned by Sturt, although
tie probably was on the summit as he mentions the glacial beds to be seen
there.
Sturt and Browne descended from LewTs’ Hill, followed the tracks
of the rest of the party and were soon on the northern fall into the valley
of Gum or Purnamoota Creek, but in attempting to keep on their course
were blocked by deep gullies and rocky hills to the west of the present
Purnamoota homestead. After trying several ways out, they were eventu-
ally forced into a small creek running north-east which led them again


into the sandy bed of Purnamoota Creek. Following down along this creek
it was found to turn abruptly into the hills on the west, and at this bend
we find now a well named Gum well, formerly Brewery Well. This was used
to supply water to the brewery in the thriving but short-lived town of
Purnamoota, in 1885. The town had a mushroom growth, and j Ist as
rapidly died owing to the lack of permanent mining activities, although
the ruins of the buildings show that a long life was expected of it. Since
that time the brewery well has turned salty for some obscure reason, and
many other wells in the West Darling are affected similarly. This is a
serious problem for the scientist to tackle, as no satisfactory explanation
has yet been put forward to account for the change.
JpROCEEDING through the detile down the creek, camp was made at a
small pool of water under the cliffs, which they named “Rocky Glen.”
In times past this has often been contused with the glen of Yancowinna
creek, which has been called Rocky Glen by some, but it will now he
plain that the two places are quite distinct, both in name and position.
They are widely separated and there are several such pools at the foot
of the cliffs, hereabouts, hut it is impossible to identify definitely the
one at which the camp was situated.
A short distance below this spot the country rock changes from
“trap’’ to pegmatite, and the bed of the creek becomes strewn with
boulders of this material, which soon present such a jumbled mass that
even travelling on foot is difficult and the passage of a cart is impossible.
Before the Purnamoota Creek joins Campbell’s Creek, Sturt was forced to
desist in his attempt to follow the creek bed, and was forced up on the
hills. On reaching the top ridge, Sturt got his ttrst view of the Fault
escarpment, with the Mundi Mundi Plains starting from his feet and
dissolving in the western horizon.
“One might have imagined an ocean washed their hase,” was his
comment as he stood on the ridge and viewed this impressive sight of
seemingly, limitless plains, only relieved by the Island ot Boolcoomatta
Hills to the south-west.
It was the following day before a negotiable track was discovered to
the plains below them, but at last, “they descended by a long and leading
spur to the Cis-Darling ‘interior’."
This spur must have led them close to the present Soapstone Creek
and Soakage, and travelling north along the foot of the Scarp they found
a good supply of water at the Gorge of the Glen, i.e. where Campbell’s
Creek disgorged on to the plains. Sturt is quaintly picturesque in his
language when he describes these somewhat barren and rocky creeks
as “glens.” To most people the word conjures up visions of running
water and ferns, but he evidently used the term in its earlier sense of
a “narrow valley,” so we must give that meaning to the word wherever
he uses it for our rugged but grassless valleys.
On November 10 a course was set for a small hill that was standing
out of the plains and visible from here, called Mount Woowoolahra on
the maps, and passing through our present Kantappa country, reached a
creek which they had seen from the ridge, issuing from the hills to the
north. Alberta Creek also runs west from the hills, hut evidently it lost
itself before getting far enough west on the plains, as it is not mentioned.
The larger creek was named Morphett’s Creek by Sturt, and sometimes
Horse Cart Creek, as they had to abandon one of the carts, which got
bogged here. A good soakage was found in the creek and they then
pushed on for a small hill, now known as Mount Bull. Still keeping on
the N.-W. compass course, the sandy pine ridges of our “Avenal” Holding
were met with and crossed for a considerable distance, after which they
retraced their steps to Morphett’s Creek with a hot gale blowing and
the temperature at 117 degrees.


A further 26 miles brought them to Campbell’s Creek, then the climb
over the hills was safely negotiated to Rocky Clen, and in another 38
miles the Pass was reached on November 17 or 18.
As this had been rather a disappointing trip as regards the supply
of water, Sturt decided to send a scouting party out to find if Lake
Torrens, or any other body of water, was within reasonable reach, and
could be used to advantage.
Parnani
“There can. be no doubt but that the Australian aboriginal is strongly
susceptible of kindness, as has been abundantly proved to me, and to the
influence of such feeling I undoubtedly owe my life ; and when I assure
the reader that I have traversed the country in every direction, meeting
numerous tribes of natives, with two men only, and with horses so jaded
that it would have been impossible to have escaped, he will believe that I
speak my real sentiments.”
—Charles Sturt


Stage 3-Broken Hill to Depot Glen
JXAVING established the fact that water was available as tar north as
Morphett’s Creek, it was decided to carry the whole outfit to that
point, so while Poole and Browne set out on their westerly trip, Sturt
and the rest of the party proceeded from water-hole to water-hole, instruct-
ing Poole to meet the main party at Morphett’s Creek, where they would
await his return.
On November 20, 1544, when Poole and Browne set off from the Pass
it started to rain, and on the following day, for the first time in history,
Stephens Creea was reported to be running. How eagerly has such an-
other report been awaited by the citizens of Broken Hill in the years
that nave followed that first flood?
Before starting off Sturt made another trip to Piesse’s Knob to make
a sketch of this peculiar hill (see Narrative Vol 11., Page 127), and on his
return the expedition moved up along the valley of the creek from the
Pass. He reported that he climbed an isolated hill close to the creek,
from which he collected specimens of Tourmaline. This is the small hill
close to the creek now known as Edwards Lookout, so named because in
later years, Mr. A. F. Edwards, a well known solicitor, used to ride there
from the City and admire the view from its summit. The hill is not high,
but the view from the top is rather fine, especially in the late afternoon
when the westering sun glints on the waters of the reservoir, packed and
hemmed in by the hills. The visitor is well repaid tor his short climb.
Progress along the bank of the creek was very slow and difficult
after the rain, as can be appreciated by Barrier folks, and only seven
miles were covered that day. Their camping place would then be in the
vicinity of McCulloch Park, and it is certain that these men did not
visualise this spot as becoming a picnic ground for the inhabitants of
the second city in the colony.
Continuing up the creek they soon met their old tracks, which were
followed to the good water-hole at the gorge of Campbell’s Creek, at the
edge of the plains. On the way, Sturt climbed again to Lewis’ Hill, and
the adjacent flat-topped hill, from which he took bearings to the three-
cairns on Mounts Darling, Gipps and Vulcan. He also climbed to the
top of the “Black Hill or Mount Robe,” as he called it, out the cairn
here was not erected by him. It was built much iater as a survey “trig.”
The exact track of the expedition from Brewery Well to the Mundi Mundi
Plains at the Soapstone, has not been ascertained, but by which ever
way he went, he must have had a most difficult trip. It has been said
that the crossing has been negotiated by horse and sulky in late years,
but it is certainly a tough proposition by hoy method of travel, and to-
get across safely with bullock drays, waggons, and all the paraphenalia
of this expedition w'-s a most remarkable feat and almost beyond belief.
But it certainly was accomplished by this party, and without any special
song about it, and the act is a tribute to the stubborn and dogged leader-
ship of this man, who simply wined difficulties out of his path, and pressed
on and on to his objective.
Morphett’s Creek soakage was reached on November 29, and a wait
of several days was necessary until Poole and Browne returned from
their westerly trip.
These two men had followed their previous track past Woowoolahra
and Mount Bull, through the Avenal Pine ridges until they sighted a hill
far to the west, which they thought might by Mount Serle, a peak reported
by earlier explorers from Adelaide to the north. Turning west, a channel


between two lake basins was encountered, which, they took to be Lake
Torrens. It actually was the Lake Torrens ot their day and knowledge,
but from the position recorded we know that they were on the connecting
channel between Lakes Callabonna and Frome. As there was no fresh
water available, they returned on their tracks and reached Morphett’s
Creek on December 2.
This trip proved that the westerly course was closed to the expedition,
and Sturt was forced to try a northerly direction for a time. Flood scouted
out and found water in a creek 40 miles to the north, which was later
named Flood’s Creek. The party then moved from the present camp, after
abandoning a dray which got hopelesslj bogged in Morphett’s Creek,
and camped at the newly found Flood’s Creek. In a letter to the writer,
the late W. H. Tietkens stated that when in that district in 1860, he was
told of the remains of the dray having been seen.
Camp was made at this Creek at a good water-hole some little way up
the creek from where they first met it, and this would probably be at the
spot where the “Tindara” Homestead now stands. A stay ot a week was
made at this spot, while various parties went out each day on a water
quest. Sturt, Stuart, and Flood crossed the Coko Ranges to the east, noted
another range further to the east (probably Nuntherungie Range), and
returned to Flood’s Creek camp on Christmas Day of 1844. Poole, Browne,
and Mack had gone northerly, and journeyed well across the site of the
Queensland border, and they also returned to camp on Christmas Day.
Their journey had been a success, in that they had mapped a route where
water was available, but owing to the continued hot and dry weather, Sturt
was worried about the supplies drying up behind him and cutting off his
retreat.
Striking camp on December 28, Sturt rode east to the Pinnacle, the
last outpost of tne Barrier Ranges, and the view from this peak was
such that lie described himself as being in “:he centre ot barrenness.’'
The main party had to struggle through more sandy pine ridges and
found a dry salt lagoon. (Probably this is Lake Pinpira, on Packsaddle
Creek.) Then another creek and lagoon was met with (probably Lake
Bullea), for from here Mount Arrowsmith is visited, camp was pitched
at 10 p.m. on a creek falling eastward, which would probably be identified
at Tarlta Creek, draining eastward into Lake Bullea, in opposition to all
the creeks they had passed previously which were draining westerly into
the huge lake depression of South Australia. (It is regrettable that the
official name of Bullea has been changed to Boullia by local station people,
thus confusing it with a place of the same name in Southern Queensland).
The magnetic hill to the west was again visited and named Mount
Arrowsmith, after Sturt’s cartographer in London.
At 12 miles from Tarlta Creek another watercourse was crossed, which
is probably Canilta or Mount Browne Creek, draining easterly into Cobham
Lakes, “where one 3 a garden smiled,” but where desolation now reigns
due to drifting sand having overwhelmed all that once existed. The year
1845 was ushered in with intense heat, with temperatures well over the
century, while there was no change in the monotony of this dry and
desolate country.
From Mount Browne Creek they moved eastwards and camped on
what we now call Evelyn Creek, just above the site of Milparinka. Another
search party went out under the leadership of Sturt himself, and a tribu-
tary was noticed coming in from the west. (This was later calle». Preserva-
tion Creek.) Still keeping northwards with the “Red Hill,” later Mount
Poole, on their left, they again crossed the Queensland border, and the
Desert Sandstone hills of the Grey Range are noted. On this occasion the
flood plains of the Warri Warn and Wilson Rivers were traversed, but
as there was no water tc be found they returned to the Evelyn Creek


camp. "Virile the;'- had been away the other members of the party had
discovered good water in the western tributary, Preservation Creek, so
camp was moved to that hole.
Travelling up this creek at seven miles, they “arrive at the entrance
to a little rocky glen through which the creek passes,” but the ground
being sandy, was declared unfit for camping, so they turned down the
creek to a “long sheet ot water,” noted on the way up.
“We find ourselves about a quarter ot a mile trom a romantic rocky
glen ot basalt, in which there is an ample supply of water for 12 months yet.”
It was alongside this “long sheet ot water” that they camped, “little
imagining that we were destined to remain at that lonely spot for six
weary months. We were not then aware that our advance and our retreat
were alike cut off. ’
This was “Depot Glen,” a long water nole, two miles above the junction
with the main creek, the Evelyn. He also says:—“We are about one quarter
of a mile from a rocky glen through which the creek runs in deep holes ot
considerable depth. It is the only romantic spot we have seen and in
some places is exceedingly pretty. The rock formation is slate or porphy-
ritic slate. It is split into the thinnest laminae, and stand perpendicular,
I might say, columnar on its edges, whilst large slabs ot beauiful color
lit- in the bed of the creek. This formation is traversed by veins of quartz
and large masses of basalt occur in it, which together with its columnar
appearance, makes one rank it rather a porphyritic slate than a common
slate.”
This is a description of a spot just above Depot Glen, a spot famous
in the annals of Australian exploration, and a name which years ago, thrilled
many Australians, for here Sturt and his companions were pinned down in
solitude and desolation for many months.
Depot Glen


Stage 4—Depot Glen
was on the first of February, 1845, that 3amp was pitched alongside
the gum-fringed banks of Preservation Creek, about eight miles from
the present town of Milparinka. Here was a pool of precious water, and
Red Hill, or Mount Poole, could be seen 3J miles to the north or N.N.W.,
with Black Hill or Mount Browne 10 miles to the S.S.E. of Mount Poole.
Temperatures were recorded as between 100 degrees and 117 degrees,
while most of the party were suffering from the symptoms of scurvy. An
underground room was constructed close to the bank of the creek so that
relief could be obtained from the heat of the days, and mainly for the
benefit of Mr. Poole, who shortly after arrival at this place was reported ill.
In spite of these troubles and difficulties, Sturt could not remain
inactive while there was work to be done, so with three mates he started
off north again, following his track of mid-December. On that occasion
he had reached the flood plains of the Warri Warri, but did not recognise
it as a flood plain, and was under the impression that he was approaching
an inland sea. On this trip he attained a position west of the junction
of the Warri Warri and Wilson Rivers, but found no water and described
the locality as “one of the most gloomy regions that man ever traversed.”
On the return journey they bore to the westward and meeting a
creek flowing in that direction, followed it down to where the channel dis-
charged into Pinaroo Lake. The creek is now known as as Fromes Creek.
The outlook at the lake was so favorable that Sturt bestowed the name
of “The Park” on it. Later this park was named Fort Grey, after Earl
Grey, the Governor of South Australia, and is now officially named on the
maps as Fort Grey Basin or Pinaroo Lake.
From here the party returned to Depot Glen, and a few days after
their arrival Sturt records that the birds that had congregated around
these water-holes all disappeared as if by magic in a single day. Such
isolated water-holes are usually the meeting place for all the birds and
animals in the district, and galahs and cockatoos seem to stay longer than
the rest and make the air ring with their screeching and screaming. Their
sudden departure was an ominous sign for the camp, and warned them that
their valuable water would soon be drying up.
Sturt did not sit down and ruminate on the precarious position
into which he seemed to be drifting, but was off again on an easterly trip
with Browne, Flood, and another. They travelled for about 100 miles to
the east, and got as far as Yantara Lakes and the vicinity of Salisbui’y
Downs, but had to return unsuccessful and disappointed in the search for
water supplies.
The days and weeks passed, and by the end of March, Sturt admitted
that both he and Browne could feel the onset of the dreaded scurvy, as this
expedition took place before the days of de-hydrated vegetables and fruits
and the provision of the necessary foods was impossible.
March 31 is the last entry in the manuscript copy of his diary, and
his original writing starts on April 9, a few pages of this volume having
been torn off and burnt. The few days’ gap, however, is filled in in the
narrative.
Under the date April 14, 1845, the following entry is recorded:
“The mean temperatures for December, January, and February were
101, 104, and 101 degrees. Under its effects every screw in our boxes had
been drawn and the horn handles of our instruments, as well as our combs,
were split into fine laminae. The lead dropped out of our pencils, our
signal rockets were entirely spoiled. Our hair, as well as the wool on
the sheep, ceased to grow, and our nails had become as brittle as glass.”
Vol. 1, p. 305.


Despite the fact that this was a description of conditions at a place
200 miles north of Broken Hill, Mr. E. C. Andrews, in his book on the
“Geology of Broken Hill,” uses this quotation, and gives one the impression
that these remarks apply to the city and its immediate environs. This book
on the geology of the Broken Hill lode has been distributed almost world-
wide, and thus a very unfair and inaccurate description of the place has
been attached to the Silver City, which has only added extra weight to the
other false propaganda with which the city is already burdened. For in-
stance, it is a general impression that dust-storms rage almost daily over
the city, obliterating everything in their vile path, and if any red dust is
seen in the sky in any part of Australia, Broken Hill is always looked on as
its source.
Although Andrews must be blamed for quoting this in its wrong
place, no blame can be attributed to Sturt for writing thus. His eyesight
was failing; he felt the dread scurvy attacking him; he had the lives of
1(1 of his fellow men in his keeping; and he was stranded and imprisoned at
Depot Glen, unable to go forward, and almost afraid to go back. In his
loneliness and depression of spirit, living under entirely new and different
conditions to those to which he had been accustomed, he allowed the
anxiety and the heat lead him into a certain amount of exaggeration, of
which he could not be accused either before or after this occasion.
It is certain that the screws would have worked loose from any box
that had bumped about m a bullock wagon for more than six mouths,
over rough and roadless country, during a good dry Australian summer.
No wonder the lead pencils split; they have a habit of splitting under
much milder conditions than those just described. And if the wool on the
sheep ceased to grow at that time, it has been growing ever since on
millions of their breed, who are forced to spend, not one summer, but their
whole lives, under these harsh climatic conditions. No. We can’t blame
Charles Sturt. The heat got him down.
During the long days of waiting at Depot Glen, and to relieve the
monotony of camp life, Sturt gave his men the job of erecting a huge
cairn or pyramid on the summit of Mount Poole, or the Red Hill, about 3J
miles to the N.W. of the camp. The pyramid was to be 21 feet square
at the base and 18 feet high, and of it Sturt says:
“I little thought when I was engaged in that work that I was erect-
ing Mr. Poole’s monument, but so it was, that rude structure looks over his
lonely grave, and will stand for ages as a record of all we suffered in the
dreary region to which we were so long confined.’’
Cairn at Depot Glen


This must have been a long time job. To walk 3J miles every day
and then carry bricks for the pyramid and return to camp, was certainly
a relief from the monotony of camp life.
In January, 1936, the writer climbed the Red Hill and viewed the
country from the top of this enduring pyramid. Conditions must have been
very similar to those that existed in the time of Sturt, a dry year in a
succession of dry years, and one was able to feel and understand the lone-
liness of Sturt as be gazed around on this truly inhospitable country. To
the south, the line of gums, denoting Depot Glen, stood out as a welcome
relief among the bare, brown, undulating hills, studded with white quartz
gibbers. In every other direction the gibber-strewn and sandy wastes
seemed to melt away in the horizon; an occasional thin green line of gums,
depicting a water course, snaked across the apparently illimitable plains,
and the only sign of human occupation was the station buildings of “Mount
Sturt” nestling among the creek gums a few miles to the north-west.
Since its erection, Poole’s monument has been used by surveyors as
a handy mark or “trig,” and now from north, east, and west, a line of
fencing creeps from the horizon to one’s feet, like the radii of a vast spider’s
web, marking the boundaries of adjacent holdings.
Little wonder that Sturt wrote as he did at this time, in such pessi-
mistic terms. He had been hemmed in for months; he had waited and
watched while his precious store of water in the creek dwindled day by day;
he w r as unable to go forward for lack of water; and he was afraid w T hen he
thought of those waterholes of his forward journey. They had been water-
holes, now they would be only mud-holes, without a sufficient supply for
man and beast. No doubt he was in “the centre of barrenness,” and about
this time he wrote;
“Having therefore failed in discovering any change of country or
the means of penetrating further into it, I sat down quietly at my post, de-
termined to abide the result and trust to goodness of Providence to release
me from prison when he thought best.’’
An incident happened about this time which must have helped to a
limited extent, to relieve Sturt’s anxiety and depression. An old man
blackfellow drifted in from nowhere, and although these were the first
white men he had seen, he made himself quite at home with the party.
He evidently recognised the boat and the use to which it could be put, and
excitedly pointed in a north-westerly direction. Sturt, with his usual
optimism, saw in this a verification of his own theories that there might
be a resting place for his boat somewhere in that direction. Of course,
Lake Eyre and other bodies of water lay in a general westerly direction
from Depot Glen, and the native had probably seen these depressions
full of water on several occasions, Sturt, however, only saw him pointing
along his pet N.W. course, on which his mind had been set from the very
start.
After about a week the old native drifted off again into the unknown
as silently as he had come, but he was a human being and relieved the
terrible loneliness that was having its bad effects on every member of
the expedition, it seems strange that so few natives were encountered
on this occasion; the dry seasons may have driven them to the rivers,
or they may have made themselves scarce at the first sight of these strange
men and animals, and the combination of them, whose like they had
never seen before. Such an experience would not be unique, for others
have travelled through native territory without having seen an inhabitant,
although the country w r as thick with them. In 1860, Mr. W. H. Tietkens re-
ported that in that year, when he travelled most of the West Darling in the
search for pastoral country, it was “quivering with blacks.”
In spite of the heat and scurvy, small scouting parties were sent
out from time to time, exploring and searching for water, and a sur-


veyed line was chained for a distance of 30 miles on a bearing of
305 degrees.
As Mr. Poole was now seriously ill, it was decided to send him back
to Adelaide, and on June 15, 1845, it is reported that preparations were put
in hand for the long journey. Rain was expected and earnestly hoped for
every day, so everything was got ready for an immediate start when the
chance came. A swing bed was rigged in a cart for the sufferer, and
Sturt wrote to the Government in Adelaide asking that fresh provisions be-
despatched on receipt of the letter as far as Williorara. He himself,,
though also suffering, had no thought of giving up or returning, for he
wrote in his diary:
“I would rather that my bones had been left to bleach in the desert
than have yielded an inch of the ground I had gained at so much expense
and trouble.”
Summer had passed and winter was on again, and on July 12 it
was found necessary to remove Poole to the underground room on account
of the cold. A gentle misty rain started to fall while they were trans-
porting him; it kept on all night and the next day. The long wished-for
opportunity had come at last, and the south-bound party, with Poole in his
dray, and five men as his nurses and bodyguard, started on their arduous
journey, and on this day, July 14, 1845, the rocky pool at the head of the
creek was flooded and the creek opposite the camp commenced to run.
On July 16, 1845, after an occupation of six months less eleven days.
Depot Glen camp was struck, and the remainder of the party, under Sturt’s
leadership, moved north-west along the line that had been surveyed a short
time previously. They had only travelled four miles when a messenger
from the south-bound party caught them up and reported the sad news that
The Marked Tree
James Poole, the second in command, had died at 3 /o’clock that day. Both
parties then returned to Depot Glen, and James Poole was buried beneath a


beefwood tree, close to tlie underground room, on July 17, 1845, and the
tree was marked
J. P.
This beefwood, or “Grevillea.” was still alive at the beginning of 1936
having weathered the storms for 92 years, but old age was beginning to tell
and it was looking weak and decrepit. The inscription is quite decipher-
able, and apparently the bark has not advanced over the “blaze” to any
appreciable extent.
A small area was later fenced around the tree, to be used as a bury-
ing ground for local station people at Mount Poole homestead, pioneers
and their children who have given up the unequal struggle against the
harsh natural conditions of this country.
Many years ago Mr. Alexander Gang, who succeeded Mr. Duncan
Mcßride as owner or manager of Mount Poole property, prepared a cement
pillar, suitably engraved, and erected it close to Poole’s tree, and should
storms destroy the old tree, this monument will remain through the ages
to mark this lonely grave. But as Sturt himself said, the solidly built
pyramid on the summit of Mount Poole “looks over his lonely grave and
will stand for ages ’’
'lire old tree and its surroundings are of great national and historical
Interest to all Australians, and it is a great pity that successive govern-
ments have failed to recognise this and have the spot proclaimed a “national
monument” for all time.
It is about half a mile from the “Mount Poole” homestead, which is
now amalgamated with the “Yandama” holding, and eight miles from Mil
parinka, on the main North Road Being off the main read is rather for-
tunate, as it is removed from the track of visitors, some of whom have a
habit of souveniring pieces of bark and twigs from such places. Poole’s tree
has suffered little from this during the years gone by, and it is hoped that
something will be done soon to remove temptation from the path of tourists
and other thoughtless travellers. To the local people the little cemetery
is “holy ground,” and is under their self-imposed protection, or as much
of it as the scattered settlement can manage to bestow. Australia’s thanks
are due to these local residents, who have done much to protect this tree
and its surroundings.
It has been suggested that the section of the tree bearing the in-
scription should be removed and placed in safe custody, say, in the Museum
of Adelaide, and that would preserve it from destruction by fire, lightning,
or vandals
Outside the fence, an oblong depression was. visible at the time of
my visit, and without doubt this represented the site of the underground
room. Caving and floods had filled it in many years ago, but there are
probably relics of the expedition buried there still.
A one-shilling piece, dated 1835, was found there in recent years and
handed to the writer. From the date and the position in which it was
found there is little doubt that it had been lost by one of the members
of this expedition, A flood in the creek in 1937 overflowed the banks of
the creek, and poured more silt into the depression, so that the spot is
being gradually obliterated as the years pass, and the site will eventually
be lost to human ken.
And so we leave this hallowed and historic spot in its isolation. Not
so far away are the ruins of the once prosperous town of Milparinka, solidly
built of stone, and each building with its underground room of stone. The
police station and one or two others are still occupied and remain to record
the attempts of others to make a living in this land discovered by Sturt.
It still keeps its place on the map, but seems doomed to a similar fate as
Sturt’s camp, and Milparinka will soon be represented only by a pile of
stones along the road, which the coach driver will point out to inquisitive
travellers.


Memorial to Poole
The Beefivood Tree Beside,
Poole’s Meviorial


Stage 5-Depot Glen to Simpson Desert
A FTER the burial of James Poole, and when the southern party had again
started for Menindee, Sturt and his party took the track and followed
the surveyed line for 30 miles. They extended this to 61 miles, from which
point they branched off to'“The Park,’’ on Lake Pinaroo, only a few miles
distant. Camp was established here, and Stun, returned to the 61 mile
peg and travelled westerly till he attained a position of 115 miles from
Depot Glen, on a bearing of N. 75 W. This brought him to a creek channel
joining two large basins or depressions of “blue brine.” They again re-
cord this as Lake Torrens, but today we know it to be a point very close
to the junction of Strzelecki Creek, with the connecting channel between
Lakes Dlanche and Callabonna. Boiling point observations showed them
to be below sea level.
Returning to the Park, a small party was equipped to go nor-west
again, so a yard was constructed for the stock, with a stockade for the
men, as a protection against roving blacks, and the boat was painted and
made ready for use. What a man! What faith!
The camp at the Park, or Fort Grey, or The Stockade, is described in
these terms:
“I had established the camp on a small, sandy rise. This spot was
at the northern extremity of the Park, but a little advanced into it. Imme-
diately in front of the tents there was a broad sheet of water shaded by
gum trees, and the low land between this and the sandhills was also chequered
with them. The open, grassy field, or plain, stood full in view.”
Wind erosion and other ravages of time have laid their cruel hands
on this delightful spct, and identification is difficult. There is a tree here
marked with Sturt’s name, but I am very doubtful of the authenticity of this
carving. It was not his habit to thus record his name on the annals of
lame. If he did, this is the one and only time recorded.
Then Sturt, accompanied by Browne, Lewis, Flood, and Cowley, carry-
ing tucker for 15 weeks, started out on a north-westerly course. At 86
miles they crossed a creek channel, with pools of water, and running south
when it did flow. This was subsequently named by him Strzelecki Creek.
After crossing miles of flood plains, another channel was reached, which
he named O’Hallorans Creek, and later was decided to be Coopers Creek.
From Coopers Creek 20 miles of sandb’lls was encountered, followed by
50 miles of Gibber Plain. This strip of Gibber Plain, running between the
Cooper and Diamentina, is now known as Sturt’s Stony Desert. (This
country was crossed by the writer in 1901, and the difficulties of travel can
be appreciated; even a camel doesn’t like it.
Then they got into sandhills again, parallel to the previous ridges,
“as straight as an arrow lying on the ground without a break in them for
more than 90 miles at a stretch.’’
Their position now was 250 miles from Depot Glen, and over 400
miles from Broken Hill, yet Andrews in his “Georgy” uses -his quotation
as describing the Broken Hill district. Poor old Broken Hill. Nothing is
too bad to tack on to its already unsavory reputation.
About this period, September, Sturt was beginning to get doubtful
■of the existence of this elusive inland sea, but, with his usual persistence,
he pushed on and crossed another large creek channel. This would be our
Diamentina, in the vicinity of Goyder’s Lagoon. Then there were sun-
cracked plains (probably the bed of the and more and more sand-
hills, until another good channel was met with coming from the north.
Both these creeks, though showing abundant signs of flooding through well
-defined channels, were almost entirely devoid of water at this period.
It was decided to follow up this last creek, which he named Eyre’s


Creek, and he remarked that although his latitude suggested it. he saw no
signs of tropical conditions as known elsewhere, it was found that Eyre’s
Creek was hemmed in on each side hy sand hills, and a salt lagoon was
found at Die junction of this creek with one coming in from the westerly
or north-westerly direction. This they called the Mulligan. There seems
to have been some confusion in recognising these two creeks in later
years, for now all official maps call the main channel the Mulligan, and.
the namt of Eyre Creek is confined to the eastern branch. This is con-
trary to Sturt’s nomenclature, but now must be accepted as official and;
final.
From the junction, Eyre Creek was followed up for some
but conditions became so severe that they crossed west again to the Mulli-
gan, and in an endeavor to find a favorable track, they travelled 34 miles
to the west of this channel. But they found nothing but red sandhills and'
spinifex, and he decided that as there was no water for man or beast, they
would fall back to the creek.
“I was at that moment scarcely a degree from the tropic and within
150 miles of the centre of the continent. If I had gained that spot my task
would have been performed, my most earnest wish would have been grati-
fied. but for some wise purpose this was denied to me; yet I may truly
say that 1 should not thus have abandoned my position, if it had not been
a measure of urgent and imperative necessity.’’
This Avas the most northerly point reached by the expedition, and
the dale was September 7, 1845.
They were preparing to retrace their steps when a flight of birds
was noticed, travelling directly for the north, and Sturt says; “We had
followed the line of migration with unerring precision.”
Wether or not this Avas so, it again raised his hopes and he decided
to make another attempt to get past the interminable sandhills, but from
every direction they were forced back by lack of water and the difficulties
of travel. They crossed IS sandhills before noon on this particular day.
September 13 found them oack at Eyre Creek, and he wrote: —“The
13th thus found us beaten back by difficulties such as were not to be
overcome by human perseverance.”
From this position at this stage we find that he as well within the
eastern fringe of the Simpson Desert, so that it is no wonder we failed to
penetrate into that inhospitable area. Even to this day it is almost a
closed territory, and Sturt can be excused from turning back from its,
clutches.
The Simpson Desert is a tract of country shunned even by the natives,,
and only after specially favorable seasons is it possible to cross it at certain,
parts. Dr. C. T. Madigan, of the Adelaide University, made a crossing in;
1938, and this is what he has to say about the place in the Proceedings,
of the Royal Society of N.S.W., Yol. LXXI.
“Actually, no man, white or black, has crossed the middle of it, but
several good men known to me have tried and failed. The distances are
not excessive as dry stages for camels, but the trouble lies in the never-
ending sequence of high sandridges, such as few men have ever seen, and
of the difficulties of which none may speak till they have faced them all
the Aveary day and the succession of days.”
Charles Winnecke, years before, in 1883, said of it:
“The country is a perfect desert and I am afraid will never be of
much use to the squatter. I am almost certain that this country has never
been visited by natives.”
The Simpson Desert lies across the intended route of Leichardt,
on his journey to the Avest, and it has been suggested by many competent
authorities that this area may hold the secret of his disappearance. It has
not been thoroughly examined for traces of that expedition, for reasons
just enumerated, and as there are no blacks frequenting it, there have been


no rumors or legends respecting the mysterious disappearance of that ex-
tensively equipped party.
So like many a good man after him, Sturt was beaten back by these
waterless and interminable sandhills; his central sea theory was for ever
dissipated; but he had completed part of his task in that he set at rest
the question that there was “a chain of hills trending from N.E. to S.W.
and forming a great natural division of the continent.”
On September 14, 31 days after starting out, they commenced their
retreat to the Stockade, naming this dry creek Byre’s Creek, after Mr. E.
J. Eyre, of Adelaide, and as mentioned previously, this was the most northerly
point reached by Sturt. O’Halloran’s Creek was crossed 10 days later,
then Strzelecki Creek, with the Stockade 85 miles distant, which was
reached on October 2, after 800 miles in the saddles over a period of seven
weeks. All the men at the camp were weak and ill with dysentery and
scurvy, and Dr. Browne was so bad that Sturt made up his mind to send
him to Adelaide. There had been no rain for 11 months, except for the
three days in July, when they managed to get away from Depot Glen, and
even now, in the early summer, the temperatures were climbing over the
century, so that conditions in this dry interior can be imagined. Hence
Sturt’s decision to send Browne home. But when the subject was men-
tioned Browne refused to entertain the idea, and when he exercised his
prerogative as leader of the expedition, and ordered him to go, that gallant
surgeon still refused to leave,! and Sturt had to desist in his efforts to get
rid of him. As there was no suitable tree handy, he couldn’t be hanged
for mutiny, but the incident shows the loyalty to the leader that was given,
not only by Browne, but by every member of the party, through all the
hardships. Sturt records no complaints during the whole of the trip, and
they evidently went through their privations together, as happily as such
a party could, under all the circumstances.
No time was lost at the Stockade in sitting still and moaning, for on
October 4, two days after returning, arrangements were in hand for a further
trip north, and on October 9. with another team, viz., Stuart, Morgan, and
Mack, and with 10 weeks’ tucker in the saddle bags, Sturt sets off into the
north country once more.
Reaching the Strzelecki at the former crossing, they turned north and
followed the creek to its junction with another large creek running from the
N.E. to S.W. This was not recognised as O’Halloran’s Creek, which was
crossed further down on the previous trip, and Sturt was inclined to trace
it up, but a sharp thunderstorm with rain, which he knew would provide
surface water for some days, decided him to keep to his northerly course.
He was at this time at the junction of the Strzelecki and Cooper, where
Innamincka now stands, or should it be, where that place once stood.
For 36 miles they struggled over the flood plains, channels, billabongs,
and lakes to the north of the Cooper (in the Coongi district), crossed more
spinifex and sandhills, and emerged suddenly on their old friend, or enemy,
the Cibber plains, these being the N.E. continuation of the same Stony
Desert they had crossed some 80 miles to the west, a few weeks before.
The monotony of these Gibber plains is at times appalling, especially in a
dry season. The surface is covered as with a carpet, by millions of round,
flat, highly polished stones, the residuals of the hills of desert sandstone.
No grass grows between the stones, which are of a reddish-brown color,
and so close that there is hardly room for a camel to place his large
“pad.” Sturt’s horses must have worn their hooves down and suffered
greatly on these plains.
Leaving the Stony Desert behind, they pushed on till October 19,
when the latitude given in the Narrative placed them in the vicinity of the
present Birdsville. As there seemed to be nothing to lead them further, they
retraced their steps, travelling sometimes by night to avoid the heat and


Hies. On this trip, Traveller, the old horse, died in the vicinity of our
Clifton Hills Station, but continuing on, Coopers Creek was reached on
October 28. The creek looked very enticing, as many waterholes existed
along the channel, with abundance of green feed for the horses. His men
were all ill and tired, but Sturt, evidently born with itchy feet, decided
to explore it to the eastward.
“Flies swarmed in hundreds of thousands,” and the old roan horse
got so bad in the feet that, on November 2, 1845, he was “left behind to
wander at large along the sunny banks of the finest watercourse we had
discovered.”
It is extremely interesting to record that in 1861, 15 years later, the
old roan was found by A. W. Howitt, who passed that way in his search for
the remnants of the Bourke and Wills party. The old roan was still
“wandering at large,” fat and well, and enjoying a well-earned rest in the
eventide of his life.
The party continued east and reached the big bend where the Cooper
turns northward, and then started the return journey. They saw plenty of
natives along this fine creek, turned up a little tributary from the north
(the Ballera), and it was at this point that the creek was given the name
Cooper for the first time, after Judge Cooper, of South Australia. Arriving
back at the junction of the Strzelecki, they turned south, and on November
10, in a withering hot gale, the thermometer, which was graduated to 127
degrees, rose to its limit and burst.
Surely this would dampen the ardor of anyone, but this extraordinary
man still plugged on, even travelling at night by the light of a lantern, to
reduce the time and avoid the heat of the day. The men all ill, the horses
lit to drop, a burst thermometer, heat, flies, another horse dead, and all the
discomforts that could lay in wait, were followed by this crowning dis-
appointment, that on reaching the Stockade on November 13, it was found
to be deserted. A note told him that the men had fallen back to Depot Glen,
due to the diminishing water supply and an epidemic of dysentery. Sturt
must have had that experience that we have all felt at times on climbing
a mountain, we reach the supposed summit to find that the real top is
further on and higher up. Depot Glen was still 62 miles away.
The next day, when looking round the deserted camp, they noticed
the crows scratching up something, and on investigation this proved to be
scraps of suet and bacon, probably buried by the dogs. These scraps were
avidly eaten and relished by Sturt and his companions, so great had been
their privations. They had been absent for 34 days, and there was still
another stage to negotiate before meeting their friends. Depot Glen, 62
miles distant, was reached after 20 hours on horseback, and Sturt, worn
out after months of ceaseless travelling, and suffering greatly from scurvy,
collapsed on dismounting from his horse.


Stage 6 DEPOT GLEN to MENINDEE
When Depot Glen was reached on November 17, 1845, on the return
from the Stockade, it was found that "the long waterhole” which had sus-
tained the party for so many months, had dried up and the camp had been
shifted about two miles down the Creek. This would place the site of the
new camp close to the junction of Preservation Creek with Evelyn Creek.
The position of the party was now critical; there had been no rain
since July and now it was late in November. Temperatures were ranging
from 110 to 123 degrees, and it seemed certain that the waters of the for-
ward trip from the Darling would now be dried up, thus cutting off their
retreat to the River. Scouting parties were therefore sent out southwards,
reporting on return that Mount Browne Creek at 16 miles, and Burr Creek
at 40 miles, were both dry. Thus there was a possible stage of 118 miles
to Floods Creek before being in any way hopeful of obtaining a supply.
Every day meant less water in these holes, so preparations were hurried
ahead for the retreat to Cawndilla Camp on the Darling, an estimated dis-
tance of 270 or 293 miles, the lesser distance meaning that every known
and possible short cut would be availed of.
To ensure supplies of water for the first stage, a bullock was killed,
skinned, and the hide sewn up into a giant waterbag. This was loaded on
to a dray and filled, and deposited at a point 32 miles away, by Browne and
Flood. Probably the load was so awkward and unruly that the drivers
■dare not risk going any further with it in case of accident and loss. Browne
then rode ahead to Floods Creek, and reported water there, but very little
of it.
So three more bullocks were killed, the wet and greasy hides were
tilled with the precious fluid for emergencies and cached along the track.
This water might have been all right for the stock, but to the men it must
Rave been nauseous.
The Narrative then records that on November 28, 1845, “The boat was
launched upon the creek, which I had vainly hoped would nave ploughed
the waters of an inland sea.’’
With what bitter disappointment this boat was sacrificed, we can
only conjecture, but it must have been a big blow to this man who had
set his heart on launching the boat on the sea of his dreams. This was
the only article of Government property to be jettisoned during the whole
of the journey. One would have thought that at this critical juncture
equipment would have been lightened to the very minimum for the hazard-
ous trip south, but as noted before Sturt was not the ordinary type of man.
Certain equipment had been entrusted to him and it was his duty to return
it, if this was humanly possible.
In later years the wreckage of the boat was salvaged from the creek
hy the first settlers in this country, and for many years this could be seen
on the verandah of Mount Poole homestead. Pieces were souvenired, both
lawfully and otherwise, and now nothing remains of this historic relic.
The author is the proud possessor of a small painted chip (obtained law-
fully).
A 5 p.m. on December 6, 1845, the retreat started, much of the travelling
heing done by night to avoid the excessive heat of the day. Sturt estimated
that he could reach the Darling in 270 miles; it was a long road to safety
but he never complained nor flinched. He, himself, was unable to walk and
was accommodated in a cart, from which undignified position he directed
operations.


Travelling from sunset to moonset the Muddy Lagoon (Lake Bullea)
was passed, and at midnight on December 9 they arrived at Floods Creek,,
covering the 118 miles in three days and three nights, without the loss of a
single animal. The bullocks must have wondered who the new driver was,
who camped by day and urged them on through the night at such an unusual
speed. A slight misty rain and a cool change had, fortunately, eased the-
conditions for travel.
The next known waterhole was at Campbell’s Creek, 49 miles ahead,,
and if that hole turned out to be dry, they would be faced with a distance
of 100 miles to the Darling.
Browne and Flood again go forward and luckily find w r ater at Tielta..
Creek at IS miles, so after a full day’s rest, the party resumed the journey
and arrived at that creek at 3 a.m., then Morphett’s Creek, 12 miles further'
on at 12.30 p.m. next day, finally arriving at Campbell’s Creek at 3 a.m.
on December 14.
At this time Sturt was almost helpless, and had to be assisted in and
out of the dray. It was here that Dr. Browne observed the natives collecting
and eating the bright red and yellow berries of “Enkylina tomatosa,” so he
collected and cadged some from the natives and fed them to Sturt, and to
this vegetable diet he attributes his more speedy recovery of his health.
/ \N December 15, the ascent of the ranges from the Mundi Mundi plains
began, and passing Rocky Glen the whole party arrived at the ’‘Pass.’’
on the site of the present reservoir, on December 17, this camp being 38
miles from Rocky Glen and 69 miles from Cawndilla Camp on the Darling.
Two full days rest were taken at this old base camp, and on this occasion
there were plenty of natives about who showed friendship to all the mem-
bers of the party.
The importance of this camp in the story of the expedition prompted
the members of the Barrier Field Naturalists’ Club to erect a memorial
here, and In conjunction with, and with the assistance of members of the
local Y.M.C.a., a handsome stone cairn with a suitable bronze tablet was
set up as a memorial to Sturt and his heroic companions. The tablet is
inscribed thus:
“The Pass”
Captain Charles Sturt
Camped Here
Oct. 24, 1844
Nov. 4-22, 1844
Dec. 17-18, 1845
and the cairn stands in the gardens of the pumping station.
The final stage was started at 7.30 a.m., December 19, and Cawndilla
was reached by the entire party, travelling through the night, at noon on
December 20. There was very little water here, but camp was made for
the night, and they continued on to the River next day.
Taking the total distance from Depot Glen to the Darling at the very
conservative estimate of 250 miles, the time since leaving the northern-
base was only 13 days and 19 hours, giving them a speed of 18 miles per
24 hours, a truly remarkable feat with a sick man, sheep and bullocks in
drays.
The actual travelling time, i.e., excluding rests and stoppages, was 8
days and 21 hours, making their rate of travel at the almost unbelievable
figure of 28 miles per day, an exploit before which all droving records
claimed in later years are made to look like a crawl. Certain it was
that his stock of sheep and bullocks were far from being in a marketable
condition, but this was a feat that will live for ever in the history of out-
back exploits. Not a single animal was lost as they raced down this first
stock route of the West Darling.


December 21 saw the entire party again camped at the junction
of the Wiiliorara with the Darling, where they enjoyed a few days rest in
peace and security, and although the lakes were dry and the river low,
there was an abundance of running water and shady trees.
The extra stores for which Sturt had written had been brought
from Adelaide by Piesse, who arrived about a fortnight before the weary
party had come in hungering and thirsting for food and news.
Christmas Day, 1845, was spent at this spot, and double rations
were issued to celebrate the day and their safe return.
“The Pass,” Memorial at Stephen’s Creek


STAGE VU.-MENINDEE to ADELAIDE
Boxing Day, 1845, saw the commencement of the final stage of the
home journey, and although Sturt was showing an improvement in health,
he still had to be carried out to his cart.
With what light hearts they must have started off on this last
lap of the epic journey ? Louis Piesse had brought the mails from Ade-
laide, letters from home and news from far countries; water was as-
sured, and their homes and dear ones were almost in sight. Their
task had been accomplished in so far as it was within their combined
powers of endurance to do so. Only one life had been lost, and that
through scurvy, and not by any, perhaps, avoidable means; their beloved
and respected leader had suffered with them, but was now well on
the way to recovery; so there was a lot for which they could be thank-
ful. They had been where never before white man had trod, and had
opened up a strange and new country, and now they were on the last
stage along the old gum-lined Darling. The thoughts of every member
of the party must have turned gratefully to that great Providence, who
had guided them through good times and bad during the last 18 months.
After an uneventful journey down the Darling and Murray they
arrived at Moorundi on January 15, 1846, where they enjoyed the hos-
pitality of Mr. E. J. Eyre for a few days, but being eager to get on
their w r ay made a start on January 17. Sturt was able to mount his
horse for the first time since November, thanks to the red berry cure. He
did not have to ride far, for friends from Adelaide met him with a buggy
and escorted him home.
And on January 19, 1846, after an absence of 17 months, this sun-
burned, battle-stained, but victorious procession, again marched through
the main streets of Adelaide, bullocks and all, with a small flock of well-
trained sheep trailing docilely along in their accustomed place at the
tail of a dray. In spite of all the heat and lack of water, Sturt records
that apart from animals killed for food and water bags, the only casualty
was one sheep from sun-stroke, another remarkable feature of this extra-
ordinary droving exploit.
The final entry in Sturt’s narrative reads ;
“I reached my home at midnight on the 19th of January,
1846, and on crossing its threshold, raised my wife from
the floor on which she had fallen and heard the carriage of
my considerate friends roll rapidly away.’’
Charles Sturt blew no trumpet about his own exploits and ac-
complishments, of his hardships and privations, through which he and
his companions had passed, and the final entry in his diary and nar-
rative is expressed in delightfully simple and humble words.


STAGE VIII—CONCLUSION
And so ends the story in a somewhat more modern dressing, of
this remarkable attempt to reach the interior of the continent, at a time
when that interior was *an entirely unknown quantity.
Charles Sturt and his party were the first white men to penetrate
into the country beyond Menindee; they had no knowledge of what lay
ahead; were practically new chums to this country; and had to adjust
themselves to conditions that were at once strange and even abnormal.
Yet in spite of almost insurmountable difficulties they struggled on to
achieve their purpose. Of such stuff are heroes made.
The successful conclusion to this exploration was a tribute to the
magnificent leadership of Charles Sturt, who commanded the respect and
loyalty of the members of his team by his unflagging zeal and untiring
devotion to duty; and although suffering for months from partial blindness
and scurvy—that scourge of our early outback days—he kept on trying to
conceal his sufferings from his wearied men.
This heavily equipped party performed feats that even today would
make a back-country contractor think twice before tackling. The transpot
of bullock waggons, drays, and their accompanying gear over many places
that are now opened up and known, was a tremendous achievement. As
far as a knowledge of expected conditions would permit, all the details
of the trip must have been worked out with special care; hence the success
of the trip and the fact that no member of his party lost his life through
avoidable sickness or accident
The well-ordered and record-breaking retreat from Depot Glen under
the very worst conditions of an Australian inland summer must for ever
rank as an epic, and so in this year of his Centenary, we honor this humble
soldier, pioneer and explorer, who did so much to open up and impart to
liis contemporaries the knowledge of this unknown continent.
He has written his name for ever in letters of gold in the stories
•of Australian explorations.


ADDENDUM
The frontispiece to Volume 11. of Sturt’s Narrative is a sketch by
him, named “View From Stanley Range.” A photograph was taken by Mr.
A. B. Black, of Broken Hill.
It has always been assumed that this represents a view from some
point along the “Line of Lode,” looking towards, and depicting the Pin-
nacles, a group of three distinctive, conical hills, about 10 miles to the
south of the city.
In his book “From Silver to Steel,” by Roy Bridges, who deals in
part with the early history of Broken Hill, which, of course, is bound up
with the history of the B.H.P, Co., the following reference is made about
this picture.
In 1889, Mr. William Jamieson, the first manager of the B.H.P. at
Broken Hill, was travelling by boat to Colombo, on holidays, and found a
shipmate who turned out to be Dr. Harris Browne, the surgeon to the
Sturt expeditic„ of 1884-5-6. In course of conversation about these matters
this sketch by Sturt was mentioned, and Browne stated that it was a
view of the Pinnacles made from the Line of Lode. Jamieson, on returning
to Broken Hill, confirmed Browne’s statement and said it was made from
the vicinity of Jamieson’s Bluff, on Block 11 of the B.H.P. Co’s. mine.
Prom flu above it is apparent that even as early as 1889 there was
some doubt as to what part of the country the sketch was supposed to
represent. As there is no record that Browne had visited the district since
1845, or even that Sturt had crossed the Line of Lode, it seems to me that
Browne would have some difficulty in bringing his mind back to this par-
ticular locality, so that in spite of his statement and Jamieson’s confirma-
tion, I feel certain that the sketch does not represent the Pinnacles and
was not made from any point on the Line of Lode. But this is far as
I can go, for I have not found any other locality that will fit the picture or
into which the picture will fit.
While admitting that an artist is allowed a certain amount of
latitude —he calls it licence —in regard to his drawings and sketches, here
is a case, if we assume this to be the Pinnacles, where so much licence is
displayed as to make the picture totally untrue to nature, and Sturt seems
to have over-stepped himself on this occasion.
Assuming this does represent the Pinnacles, there is only one position
on the “Lode” from which it could be ma'de.
An examination of the sketch shows the observer looking down a
gully, and the only existing gully is that in which the Central Extended Shaft
is situated, and the artist must have stood on the outcrop at a point between
the Block 10 shaft and the Central Mine, or somewhere to the north of this
near Jamieson’s Bluff, on Block 11, which has now been removed by mining
operations.
Let us examine the picture critically:
1. The artist depicts the strata as lying almost horizontal, with a
slight dip to the east —the view would be looking south —and it is well known
that the strata along the lode are nearly vertical, with a dip to the west.
2. It is an established fact that in 1883, and presumably in 1845 alsc,
the outcrop and adjacent flats were thickly timbered with mulga scrub,
through which survey lines had to be cleared to delineate the lease boun-


claries. In this sketch only one tree is shown, and that definitely is not a
mulga. Surely he would not have omitted this forest growth. This is to j
much licence.
3. Only two Pinnacles are shown, and there are three peaks visible
from the lode. The South Pinnacle is the smallest of the group, and may
have seemed too insignificant to the artist, but the North and South Pinnacles
are so prominent that there would be no excuse for omitting them, even mi
the sake of “balancing” the picture.
I leave it there but am far from being convinced that the sketch is
cue of the Pinnacles, but perhaps some future observer may be able to inter-
pret it to better advantage. I await some decision with much interest, and
will be glad to hear of a solution.
Sturt was an artist of no mean ability; Mitchell was able to recognise
the Darling-Murray junction from his sketch, and other sketches in his book
ol features in the Broken Hill district are true to nature, and essential de-
tails have not been omitted or altered. It wms from his sketch of Piesse’s
Knob that the writer was able to affirm to the authorities that it depicted the
Kazorback, and not the hill to the immediate south of the Stephens Creek
pumping station, which for many years had borne the name of Piesse’s Knob.
In May, 1936, it was officially accepted by the Department of Lands that
Piesse’s Knob was the name bestowed by Sturt on the Razorback.
It therefore seems unlikely that Sturt would depart so far from nature
in this other case, and I will look forward to some student and obseiwer
correcting me in regard to the Pinnacles sketch, after having found the
correct piece of landscape to fit into the picture.
THE END.


\e turfs J/oumey
Photo by courtesy of Dr. C. T. Madigan.
Margin of the Simpson Desert —Goyder's Lagoon in background
Aerial view from 3,000 feet
This photograph shows the sand ridges of the south-eastern margin of
the Simpson Desert. Sturt’s route was parallel to the sand ridges and
diagonally across this picture. He proceeded another hundred miles and
then turned back. He wrote at the turning point, in country exactly similar
to that shown, “We had penetrated to a point at which water and feed had
both failed. Spinifex and a new species of Mesembryanthemum were the
only plants growing in that wilderness, if I except a few withered acacia trees
about four feet high. The spinifex was close and matted, and the horses
were obliged to lift their feet straight up to avoid its sharp points. From the
summit of a sandy undulation close upon our right, we saw that the ridges
extended northwards in parallel lines beyond the range of vision, and appeared
as if interminable. To the eastward and westward they succeeded each other
like the waves of the sea. The sand was of a deep red colour, and a bright
narrow line of it marked the top of each ridge, amidst sickly pink and
glaucous-coloured vegetation around.”
C. T. MADIGAN.


turfy l^oute
{jincf
ouer
Notes on the appearance from the air of the route covered by Capt.
Sturt —from a map “by John Arrowsmith, 1849.”
From Adelaide up the Murray to the point where this river is joined
by the Darling, the picture is a winding watercourse lined by gum trees, and
passing through country which is at times wooded with Murray Pines and
otherwise treeless, but covered with scrub. Morgan, Renmark, Wentworth,
are seen on the banks, and as the Darling is sighted at this last town,
Mildura stands out a dozen miles away on account of the greenery everywhere
—trees, natural and planted, grape vines in orderly rows, citrus orchards,
with channels of irrigation water between them.
The Darling is then followed upstream, and the picture changes to a
narrower but even more tortuous river showing water of a different colour —
usually the Murray water appears clear, but that of its long tributary varies
between a brown muddy colour to the dirty green of a duck egg. Here again
we see large gum trees along the banks, which are flanked by narrow river
flats, but only a few yards away the country usually appears brown, flat, and
monotonous.
Between Pooncarie and Menindee our route leaves the river, making
for Broken Hill, and here we see perfectly flat country with one big, and
a few small lakes, usually dry, and also several creeks, which from now on
to the end of the route look like winding rows of trees, prominent in the
otherwise bare or sparsely treed landscape.
Broken Hill appears among the first hill sighted, actually the southern-
most end of the Grey Ranges—the city appears as a closely-packed collection
of buildings divided into two by a “ridge,” the so-called “line of lode,” formed
by the mines and their dumps.
Our map for the next 100 miles due north shows wanderings amongst the
hills—the Grey Ranges, which look like a collection of low hills about 10-20
miles wide, intersected by creeks running east to the Darling, and west to
the lakes of South Australia,
Continuing northward, the picture again changes to a flat, monotonous
country, with an occasional creek and few lakes—Bancannia, Pimpara,
Boullia—then some lonely hills —Mt. Poole, Mt. Shannon, Mt. Browne, and
Alt. Sturt—with the little “ghost town” of Alilparinka nearby. A little
further on there is a surprise, the township of Tibooburra nestling in a
group of low hills, but not the usual kind of hills—the hills are actually heaps
of stones with no earth between, gibber hills, but composed of large rounded
grey stones. For a thousand miles around there are no such features; some
freak of Nature evidently this group of stony heaps, and all contained in an
area three miles across.
We now break off slightly west of north until we fly over the Corner,
where the three States meet, thence 100 miles north over monotonous feature-
less tracts, with but a few “claypans” and long stretches of ground “ribbed”
by endless sandhills, long thin lines of sand running roughly north and
south.
We can make out the Queensland-South Australian boundary fence
running alongside us on our right—visible because of the fact that the ground


has been cleared for a few yards on each side of it—cleared of saltbush and
spinifex which has grown again, but the effect is still there. This fence,
according to the geography books, starts at the Corner, but, actually it com-
mences about 25 miles east of there, so that there is a huge tract of land which
belongs to Queensland but appears to be part of South Australia—nor does
the fence run straight; it bends, though not sharply, right and left until it
comes to the one and only watercourse which crosses it, the mighty Cooper’s
Creek.
This river flows south-westward along the border of a range of low hills,
which terminate at Innamincka, a tiny township at the point where the
Cooper is joined by the Strzlecki Creek. The Cooper usually appears at this
spot as a fairly straight stream with the usual big gums, and its water
looks yellow (muddy), but sometimes there is only a dry watercourse con-
necting a series of huge deep waterholes, some of which have never been
known to dry up.
The little town is famous for the part it played in the last days of Burke
and Wills —Burke’s Tree, where the famous leader died, and the “Dig Tree,”
are nearby.
Sturt crossed similar country in the next stretch, 150 miles to the
Diamentina River and Birdsville —but this stretch contains several large
lakes, usually dry, but glorious expanses of glittering water after these two
rivers have flooded, as they do every three or four years —the Coongie Lakes
all have unpronouncable aboriginal names, which sound very pretty but they
are so long that they are hard to say and impossible to remember.
The Diamentina River also runs south-west here, and our route crosses
it—it is about 10 miles wide because it is composed of a series of narrow
channels.
Sturt’s track ends at a point which I judge to be some hundred miles
north-west of Birdsville.
The Cooper runs through what is still known as Sturt’s Stony Desert—-
what does this look like from the air? Just a series of brown parallel ridges*
stretching roughly north and south, with darker areas between, sandhills
enclosing gibber plains; sometimes after rain—in fact at the present time—
there is a tinge of green where grass has sprung up around the edges of the
sandhills and between the gibbers, but as a rule the dominant colour is
brown.
So ends Sturt’s remarkable journey, which can so easily be accomplished
now by air in a single da\ r .
THE FLYING DOCTOR (Dr. Woods).


J)~n tLe footsteps Sturt
In the footsteps of the explorers came the pioneers and those who
penetrated Australia’s inland, and settled there, have written a chapter in
history, notable for its spirit of courage and endurance.
Many, in recent years, have written of these inlanders, with admira-
tion and understanding and have focussed the attention of city-folk on these
heroic people dwelling “on the frontiers of the nation.” But one there was,
a padre, patrolling on his camel, the vast, empty spaces, who dreamed a
dream—that of banishing the isolation which added so much of privation and
danger to the lot of scattered people of the interior. His aim was to bring
medical attention within the reach of all inlanders and, with the formation,
of the Australian Inland Mission, the first part of John Flynn’s dream
materialised and a Nursing Home was opened at Oodnadatta.
And so the scheme developed ; nursing homes were established in
isolated centres—Hott’s Creek, Birdsville and Marranboy. So much was
achieved, but not yet had “a mantle of safety” been spread over the remoter
parts of the inland. A flying doctor service, called upon as occasion required
by the use of the wireless transmitting sets of the Inlanders, was the answer
to the needs of these people. In 1928, the Aerial Medical Service was in-
augurated, Cloncurry being the first flying doctor’s base, and so another
dream came true.
Today we read, with keen interest, paragraphs relating to the worth
of the flying doctor operating from Broken Hill, of lives saved and suffering
lessened by this humane service. Frequently the plane takes a northerly course,
over Sturt’s route to Innamincka where an A. I. M. Hostel serves the lonely
region along the South Australian—Queensland border. Innamincka, on
Cooper’s Creek is fraught with memories of the tragic journey of Burke and
Wills, but it is reminiscent too, of Sturt, who first penetrated into this
area and whose route to the centre lay west of Innamincka.
Margaret Copley
turtite
The mineral Sturtite was discovered in 1929 and was described in records
of the Australian Museum Volume XVII, No. 9, of the 27th June, 1930. It
was found in the Zinc Corporation mine and has since been found to occur
in the other Broken Hill mines. It is a mineral, jet black in colour, amorphous
sub-conchoidal to uneven fracture, brittle and friable, vitreous to greasy
lustre, specific gravity is 2.054. In thin section under microscope it is
transparent, a pale brown in colour and isotropic. There is no sign of
crystallization. The chemical composition is a hydrous silicate of iron,
manganese and calcium oxides. It is believed to be derived from the decom-
postion of primary manganese-bearing silicate minerals.
M. A. E. MAWBY.


broken^hillJ
V v Vt)¥
Sturt in the Broken Hill District.
tacei in. idr alien Jlill cJocatibj named
!ij Sturt
“PARNARI” is the aboriginal name that Sturt gave to a rocky water-
hole near which he camped at the beginning of November, 1844. Train
travellers can see the place at the creek crossing a few hundred yards on
the Broken Hill side of Gorge railway platform.
The Governor of New South Wales in 1844 was Sir George Gipps, after
whom Sturt name MOUNT GIPPS.
A former Governor was Sir Ralph Darling, whose name the explorer
gave to the near-by MOUNT DARLING.


The cairns which Sturt erected on these two mountains fell into disrepair,
lbut were recently restored by the late E. B. Dow. These two peaks can be
seen clearly from the highest parts of Broken Hill.
In front of the pumping station at STEPHENS CREEK reservoir there
can be seen a plaque bearing the following inscription:—
“The Pass”
Captain Charles Sturt
Camped Here
Oct. 24, 1844
Nov. 4-22, 1844
Dec. 17-18, 1845
A little to the east of north of the Pass is PIESSE’S KNOB, so named
By Sturt because this hill’s peculiar shape reminded him of the remarkable
Eat that was worn by his storekeeper, Louis Piesse.
Feeling confident of encountering an extensive inland sea, Sturt had
Brought with him a boat and a sailor to navigate it. The name of this
mariner was given to LEWIS’ HILL, which Sturt ascended on November
7, 1844. Mr. Essington Lewis, of the 8.H.P., is proud to recall that this
member of the expedition was his grandfather.
The range of mountains in which Broken Hill is situated was named by
Sturt “STANLEY’S BARRIER RANGE,” after Lord Stanley, a British
statesman who had the oversight of Britain’s colonies.
It is probable that the famous explorer visited the site of Broken Hill
and walked round the line of lode, though he little knew what wealth lay
beneath his feet. His book contains a drawing of what appears to be the
North Pinnacle as seen from some height overlooking South Broken Hill.
R. P. WHITEHOUSE.
Uroken J 4
■xpeiltion the
Yjodk -western Wilis
Dr. Macgillivray, of Broken Hill, and Dr. Chenery, of Wentworth, have
just completed an ornithological and botanical expedition in the region of
Lake Callabonna, which is situated about 325 miles north-west of Broken
Hill. Dr. Macgillivray had with him his son, and Mr. and Mrs. W. E.
Heywood were also of the party, as they were anxious to make the trip
to see the spots in _ this district made historic by Sturt and his fellow-
explorers, and also view the spot at Lake Callabonna from where the fossil
remains of the prehistoric animal, the diprotodon Australis, which are now
resting in the Adelaide Museum, were found.
The party left Broken Hill on August 13, and first called at Fowler’s Gap,
and then passed on through Bancannia, Iduna Park, Cobham, and past Cob-
ham Lake. At Milparinka they went west ofif the main northern road and
visited Mount Poole. At Mount Poole the party visited Sturt’s Depot Glen.
This was the place where Sturt was camped for six months because of


drought. Poole, the surveyor, died there, and his grave was pointed out on
the side of the creek. The original marking to denote the grave was made
on a beefwood tree, and the initials and date (1845) were discerned by the
travellers. A memorial stone has been erected by the station people. In
the vicinity are other graves, probably those of blacks. Dr. Macgillivray
says that some years ago a concrete dam was erected in the Glen with the
idea of conserving water, but that it had the opposite effect because of
the rapid silting. The Glen in its natural state had always held about nine
months’ water, but now, at the most, it holds only about three months’
supply. Some cathedral rocks mentioned by the late Captain Sturt in his
journal were much admired by the party. When the visitors called the only
occupants of the Glen were a couple of wood ducks. Some of the timbers
used by Sturt in his camp were pointed out to the party. A blackfellow
living in the vicinity informed the members of the party that he had a clear
recollection of Sturt because he had on many occasions look after his horse.
This statement the party doubted because the man looked too young. It
is 76 years since Sturt was there.
At Yandama Station the party borrowed a black with the high-sounding
name of “Sit Down Jimmy,” and for the rest of the trip he acted as guide.
According to the doctor, however, he lived up to his name. Tilcha Bore was
a sight appreciated by the travellers. The water comes out of the bore
and runs down between two sandhills for a distance of about 20 miles.
The water is considered to be good for stock. The party eventually reached
Callabonna Station, a place which has long since fallen into a state of
disrepair. The party went on to Lake Callabonna fully expecting to see
the fossil remains of some of the extinct animals. The guide led them
to a number of spots where he said it was certain the bones would be
found. Every search was futile, and in the end “Sit Down Jimmy” informed?
Dr. Macgillivray that the bones were on the other side of the lake, which
was fully 100 miles round. Some fossil bones of the diprotodon were first
found about IS years ago by an expedition which was sent into the country
from the Adelaide Museum. The diprotodon is considered to be of the
wombat type, but as large as an elephant. At the same spot
the museum people found the fossil remains of the thylacoleo, a large but
now extinct carnivorous kangaroo. The members of that expedition man-
aged to get a full skeleton of the diprotodon. This, to Dr. Macgillivray’s
knowledge, is the only complete specimen ever obtained. The bones were
found in the saline mud. They had to be taken out in blocks of mud, boxed
and conveyed to Farino on camels, and thence to Adelaide by train. The bones
of the diprotodon have also been found on the Darling Downs and in other
parts of Australia.
In this country the doctors were also anxious to get a specimen of
a scarlet-crested grass parrot which up till three years ago had been
considered extinct. Prior to Mr. M’Gilpin, of Moolawatna Station, seeing
them on this occasion, no specimen had been obtained for over 45 years.
While the doctors were absent from the cars Mrs. Heywood claims to have
seen the birds sought for. It was just at this time that the guide was
leading the doctors another dance by claiming that he could locate a certain
fossil bone patch. Dr. Macgillivray said that the man led them about
six miles, and then told them that the bones must be in the middle of the
lake. On returning to the cars Dr. Macgillivray learned that he had missed
a sight of the parrots. Dr. Macgillivray is of the opinion that the party
visited the right spot at the lake, but that the bones had been covered by
the drift sand.
Speaking generally of the blacks, Dr. Macgillivray said that they were
a clever lot and spoke good English. They know the name of every plant,,
and were very much amused at some of the party who tried to pronounce
the aboriginal names given them. Many allied kites were noticed on the
trip. They are distinguished from all other hawks by their dark brown


plumage and forked tail. Some letter-winged kites were also keen. These
are considered the most beautiful of the hawk tribe, 4 hey are almost puie
white with a broad black mark running down the centre of each wing
from near the tip to the body. When the wings are folded the letter W is
formed—hence the name. This bird mostly inhabits the dryer parts ot
West Queensland, and has very seldom been seen so far south. The
members of the party considered this the most beautiful bird they had ever
seen. In the same country a spotted harrier was stirred. This is another
bird of the interior. It is a large grey hawk, with long legs, and usually
flies slowly, at no great distance from the ground. Its food consists of
insects and small birds.
On returning to Tilcha Bore the party inspected a good growth of the
green sandhill pea, which is a bush about 2 ft. high, and flowers very
much like the Sturt Pea. As many as 12 to 14 flowers can be picked off
the one stem. Its botanical name is Crotolaria Cunninghami. Another pea
(the Glycine clandestina) also grows in the sand country. It also flowers
beautifully, and Dr. Macgillivray considers that it would repay anyone
to cultivate the plant. He pointed out that the result should be good,
when it is considered that the sweet pea is really developed from a little
wild purple pea. Dr. Macgillivray pointed out that Dr. Moulden had
already started on an extensive scale to cultivate the Sturt Pea.
The Senecio Gregorii is another flower which grows prolifically on the
sand dunes. It is a large flowering daisy.
Right throughout the trip birds were numerous. Cockatoos were nesting
in all available hollows, and the same could be said of the galahs, minor
birds, greenie (white-plumed honey eaters), willy wagtails, graylinas, and
owlet nightjars. Hawk nests were numerous, and hawks of all descriptions
were seen. Of the rarer birds, Dr. Macgillivray saw a pair of grey falcons
which had just completed a nest. The falcon is a fine and active bird. There
are four knids of falcons in the country, but the black and grey species
are the most rare.
Falcon Fights Raven.
A little later the party had their attention directed to the nest of a
black falcon which was busily engaged in a fight with a raven. The falcons
do not believe in building nests for themselves, but seem content to com-
mandeer the nest of any other bird. In a grey falcon’s nest four eggs
were found, and in the nest of a black falcon two young birds were seen.
The eggs of the grey falcon are very rare, and are much prized by
collectors. Even Dr. Macgillivray did not have any in his collection. Crows
were numerous. Dr. Macgillivray explained that there seemed to be a mis-
understanding concerning these birds. There are really two crows in the
district. They are distinct in size, caw, and habits. The raven is the
larger bird. It has a larger bill, and is distinguished by the down under
the feathers, which is a sooty color. The other bird is smaller, has a smaller
bill, and the down is white. The caw is also much shorter. There is also
a rare crow known as the hazel eye, but it is very rarely seen in the district.
It mostly takes up its abode in the coastal districts.
Cinnamon thrushes, which were first discovered by Sturt at Depot Glen
in 1845, were in abundance. On the return journey the party called at Fort
Grey, wdiich was Sturt’s base depot. Plenty of mulga was growing in this
country, and in addition there was an abundance of dodonea bushes. Some
distance from Fort Grey is Lake Stuart, which was named after the member
of Sturt’s party who later became famous by his trips into the interior
of South Australia. Some fine herds of cattle were watering at the
place, and the doctors consider them to be a very fine specimen of shorthorn.
Many skeletons were also about—ample evidence of the severity of the recent


■drought. In the Lake Stuart district spoonbills, white-necked herons, white-
fronted herons (commonly known as blue cranes), and a pair of brolgas
(our only Australian crane) were noticed. To use the doctor’s words “they
spread out their white wings and glided away.” The tree at Fort Grey
marked by Sturt was discovered. The marks are nearly overgrown with
bark, but the letters J.S. backwards, a Government arrow, and the date are
still ’discernible. It is understood that the tree was re-marked by the
Government. The tree is in a good state of preservation. Round the spot
the party found aborigines grinding stones and other curios. Drs. Macgilliv-
ray and Chenery also visited the 800100 flood waters in search of nesting
water birds, of which they had heard glowing accounts. The trip was,
however, without result, the birds having left a month prior.
A Forest of Gidgee.
What took the eye of the doctors was a fine forest of gidgee between
Milparinka and Tibooburra. Some of the trees are from 18 in. to 2 ft. in
diameter and up to a height of 40 ft. Dr. Macgillivray said that it is
splendid brown wood, hard, and like mahogony. He says that it would take
a polish, and has a smell akin to violets. He is of the opinion that it would
make valuable furniture wood. There is seven or eight miles of the
forests, and many more frees growing on the hills. At Connulpie Station
the party obtained a half sandstone sphere which had been used by the
blacks for sharpening their spears. They also obtained a fossilised tree
fern from Mount Wood. At Wyalla Lake, just out of Bancannia, the
party saw an unusual sight. A swan was travelling overland with seven
young birds, taking them from a fast-drying swamp to Bullocky Swamp,
which still contains a quantity of water. The distance between the swamps
is fully a mile.
Since Monday week Drs. Macgillivray and Chenery have visited Cawndilla
and Menindie lakes for the purpose of studying the water birds. The doctor
says that both lakes now contain fine sheets of water, with Cawndilla the
more open. Lake Cawndilla has an expanse of 35,000 acres, while Menindie
Lake has an expanse of 76,000 acres. The doctor pointed out that the
original name for Menindie Lake was “Mininditchi,” but that the people
had departed from the real name. He expressed the view that Cawndilla
would soon lose its name and be called “Candillea,” a name now given it
by many people. The doctors had every opportunity to view the birds in
their wild state. He said that the breeding ducks were very tame, and
allowed the approach of the party.
Dr. Macgillivray expressed regret at the action of some recent visitors
to the lakes, who had obtained about 400 eggs, many half-incubated, and
brought them into Broken Hill and sold them to a pastry cook. He expressed
the view that the game laws should be strictly enforced, so that the birds
would get a proper chance to breed. The last two seasons —mainly because
of the floods —had been good for the birds. The waters had kept away from
the birds men who claimed to be sports. Dr. Macgillivray said that he
wished it to be clearly understood that he was not out for the destruction
of birds. His object is to protect them from a scientific point of view.
Throughout the trips the doctors added to their already fine collections
of specimens in animal, bird, and plant life. The doctor expressed delight
at a fine paddock of Sturt peas which Mr. R. C. Allison, of Kars Station,
had shown him while returning from the lake. In reply to a question, Dr.
Macgillivray said that the Sturt desert pea had not grown so prolifically
for many years, and that this season plants had been found in certain
paddocks for the first time for 25 years. He attributes the extraordinary
growth to the splendid autumn rains more than anything else.
Reprinted from “The Barrier Miner,” September 8, 1821. (Dr. Macgilliv-
ray was first President of the Barrier Field Naturalists’ Club.)


C^elebralions aloncj,
tart s i^ovite
onte
The Secretary of the Historical Memorials Committee of the
Royal Geographical Society has supplied the following details of
the programme of celebrations along Sturt's route ;
ADELAIDE
On Sunday, August 13, a plague will be unveiled in
King William Street at the spot from which Sturt’s
Expedition set out.
GAWLER
August 26, Unveiling of Sturt plaque.
DAVEYSTON, LIGHT PASS and NURIOOTPA
September 15.
TRURO and ANGASTON
September 16.
KOORINGA and MORGAN
September 17.
BARMERA
September 18.
RENMARK
September 19.
WENTWORTH
Arrangements have been made to fence in the Sturt
Trees at the junction of the Darling and Murray
Rivers.
INNAMINCKA
A bronze plaque is to be placed on a cairn in the
grounds of the Australian Inland Mission.
The interesting inscription on the plaque is :
CAPTAIN CHARLES STURT
DISCOVERED COOPER CREEK ABOUT FIFTEEN
MILES WEST OF THIS PLACE ON 13 OCTOBER
1845 IN HIS ATTEMPT TO REACH THE CENTRE
OF AUSTRALIA HIS WORK PROMPTED FURTHER
EXPLORATION RESULTING IN THE PASTORAL
OCCUPATION OF THIS LOCALITY AND WEST-
ERN QUEENSLAND. ERECTED 1944


BIRDSVILLE. The plaque to be erected reads :
CENTRAL AUSTRALIAN EXPLORING EXPEDITION
CAPTAIN CHARLES STURT
TWICE ENTERED THE BIRDSVILLE REGION
IN SEPTEMBER AND OCTOBER, 1845
HIS DISCOVERIES OPENED THE WAY TO THE NORTH
FOR LATER EXPLORERS AND RESULTED IN THE
PASTORAL OCCUPATION OF WESTERN QUEENSLAND
ERECTED 1944
BROKEN HILL
At Broken Hill preparations have been crystallising for eighteen months.
Several articles and three serial accounts of Sturt’s work have appeared
in the local newspapers and many “Getting to Know Sturt” broadcasts have
already been given over Station 2BH.
On Saturday, August 19, a Nature Show and Historical Exhibition is
being opened at the Technical College, and a bronze head of Sturt, modelled
by Dr. Fleischmann, is being unveiled.
On Sunday afternoon, Central Reserve will be named Sturt Park and
a plaque will be itnveiled.
The Memorial Gates of the Albert Morris Plantation, at the Zinc
Corporation, will be unveiled on Monday afternoon.
The ceremony of unveiling the Sturt Monument —a Sun-dial —will take
place on Tuesday afternoon.
The social function will include an old-time dance with period costumes
a social gathering of pioneers, early settlers and residents, and a card evening
at which the famous game of euchre, for a share in the Broken Hill
Proprietary Company will be enacted.
Trips are being arranged to places of historic interest in the locality.
The School Activities’ Committee intends to make the occasion a
memorable one for the children of the city, and have made plans for—
A procession and pageant (followed by a concert at night),
centring on Sturt, symbolic of the development of the Barrier
Range and indicating local flora and fauna, have been arranged
to coincide with the unveiling of the Sun-dial. The tableaux of
birds and animals presented by the Infants’ School promises to be
very colorful.
Monday, Schools’ Day, is being devoted to special projects
including tree planting; opening cf a bird bath, a sound projector
and a library; debates, play-acting songs, poetry, essay competitions;
group formation of a map; visit to Old Folks’ Home, presentation of
a cheque to the Red Cross, etc.
“Eight to Eighty” broadcasts have been arranged in which
scholars of the various schools interview pioneers.
The Sturt Memorial Committee wishes to express its sincere
appreciation of the co-operation of the Social Committee and the
Children’s Activities’ Committee in making a success of the Sturt
Centenary.


ants named after
turt
Six plants are named after Charles Sturt —five by science, one by the
people. Great names are woven into Australia’s flora and fauna which
provide living memorials to those courageous explorers and naturalists who
ventured into the unknown. Sturt’s plants have special features which fit
them to commemorate our great inland explorer.
The commons, regeneration areas and unsettled parts of Broken Hill
yield more than two hundred and fifty species of plants. Two hundred and
fifty different kinds of plants! Such variety is not always present, for the
observer soon learns that, disregarding the floral structure (on which plants
are classified) local plant life consists of three distinct types. This is the
outlook of ecology, for the plant must be considered in regard to its enrivon-
ment.
After good rains our countryside becomes a green carpet and soon there
is a blaze of golden everlastings, yellow billy-buttons, white milkmaids (Blen-
nodia), blue geraniums and so on, all of which blossom for a few short
months, produce abundant seeds and quickly disappear. These plants are
the therophytes or annuals, and about sixty per cent, of the plants of this
district belong to this epheneral type. Sturt did not see them. They would
have lightened his step, for he could write of the joy of riding over a
“nature’s luxuriant carpet studded with gems of every colour and every form.”
For him, as in his centenary year, drought prevailed. Sturt’s plants are not
among the visitants of the fair seasons. No! Looking to north-west from the
summit of the Coonbaralba (Broken Hill Range) on October 22nd„ 1844,
Sturt was forced to say, “Nothing cheering. Everything below was dark
and dreary.”
The vegetation that persists over the years is of two types. The salt
bush comprises about twenty per cent, of the total plant life and is adapted
chemically and structurally to absorb moisture from the air. Sturt was
inclined to dismiss the salt bush. Though he noticed that his sheep became
fat and some of the horses were in unexpectedly good condition, he did not
arrive at the cause. His interest never flagged, though, and many years
later Harris-Browne wrote to him, “When we saw that country the value
of salt bush was not generally known,” and commented that country in
which the salt bush, grasses and mixed bushes grew as on the plain west of
the Barrier Range, was considered first-class for sheep runs. So Sturt’s
plants do not belong to this group. The remaining type is composed of
small trees (as the mulga), shrubs and dwarf shrubs, which are fitted in
many ways to withstand long dry periods and also the occasional heavy rains.
It is among these xerophytes—plants of the dry regions—that Sturt’s plants
are found. He understood them. On the eleventh of November, 1845, when
his thermometer burst and a fierce wind raged all day, drying the scant water
in the trench that had been dug, it seemed that man, beast and even plant had
reached the limit of endurance. “The leaves of the trees fell around like a
snow shower,” said Sturt. It seems that this drastic reduction of the
transpiring suiface is a final adaptation of these plants to conserve what
water remains. Scanty leaved plants are familiar enough to us; sometimes
only stumps and bare branches remain. With rain comes new leaves flowers
and seeds.


Most appropriate, then, to commemorate Sturt is the Eremophila.
Eremophila means loving the desert or solitude, and this laige genus, con-
sisting of many beautiful shrubs and trees with attractive flowers of the
honey-suckle or bell-shaped variety, is confined to inland Australia. Found
by Sturt on the Darling, Eremophila Sturtii, is a local plant and noteworthy,
even in the distinguished company of Western Australian flowers, to which
State it extends, "a large shrub with slender, sometimes drooping branches
and glossy green “varnished” leaves, it is aromatic and atti active at all times.
In late Spring it becomes a “lavender shower” with a profusion of small
bell-shaped flowers, and when the petals have fallen the white sepals enlaige
and the tree is dotted for many months with fruits that look like little starry
flowers.
Sturt’s Rose (Gossypium Sturtii) resembles the cotton flower, which he
was anxious to introduce; and the large lavender flower with its heait-
shaped, black dotted bracts would make Sturt’s Rose almost as popular as
the Sturt Pea if it were better known. Sturt found this plant, which is a
small shrub with leaves something like the English lilac, “in beds of the
creeks on the Barrier Range”; but unfortunately it became rare in this
district, and the nearest plant seemed to be at Mt. Poole Station. The late
Albert Morris propagated it and now it is a favourite plant in many gardens.
Hibiscus Sturtii, an under shrub, is closely related to Sturt's_ Rose, and
though it is quite common in and around Broken Hill it, too, is not well
known. Because its pinkish flowers seem to be fugitive the whole plant is
apt to be passed by; but plant lovers soon learn to identify it from its
velvety leaves and silky capsules and credit it with being a useful plant in
a climate where every long lived plant is an asset.
Cassias are among the most successful plants that are becoming estab-
lished in the Broken' Mill regeneration areas, and among these soft, grey,
rounded shrubs, Cassia Sturtii is well represented. It is found in all areas
and on the hills throughout the district. Sturt found it m sandy brushes
of the western interior.”
On June 12th, 1856, Gregory wrote to Sturt in England, Dr. Mueller,
our botanist, who was in Adelaide when you were there, desires his best
respect of you. He has raised several plants from the seeds you brought
from the interior, and many have turned out exceedingly well. He had much
pleasure in naming a new Solanum in your honour. ’ This is our Solatium
Sturtianum which, too, is established in all the regeneration areas as well as
in and around the town. Its purple star-shaped flowers and berries ranging
in colour from green to yellow and black, are really quite atti active, though,
unfortunately, the plant is usually condemned as “deadly nightshade, to
which family it belongs.
But the plant that is always associated with Sturt is the Sturt Pea,
the plant that thrills the layman and botanist. Dampier found it and his
specimen is in the herbarium at Oxford University. Popular opinion, however,
has voted it to the inland explorer. “The ornament of the Desert” was the
name (latinized) Robert Brown, the distinguished botanist, considered giving
it when he thought it was a new genus. However, no one will quarrel with
the present .name, Clianthus speciosus—for Clianthus means gloiy flower,
and the specific name means “splendid.”
In the Sturt Pea art can only follow nature in spectacular display for
the soft blue green leaves provide the perfect foil for the shiny vermilion
flowers with black centres. A well grown plant in its native setting, spreading
like a soft carpet with flowers held gallantly aloft, glistening in the sun, is a
sight not to be forgotten.


Sturt records it in the Barrier Range in November, 1844, where he saw
the magnificent blossoms trailing on the gravelly bed of a creek, “a situation,”
said Sturt, “where I did not expect to find that splendid creeper growing.”
In fact, it continues to surprise. The very size of the flowers, in a climate
where the successful plants are noted for the insignificance of their flowers
{how many people have seen the salt bush flowers?), where reduction in
size of the whole plant is characteristic, even to the extremity of a curious
group of Composites, is a cause of wonder. Then again, the plant does not
belong to any of the types enumerated. It certainly flourishes after good
rains; but it is a bienniel, and though the long branches die back with the dry
season the plant continues to grow and may flower during unfavourable
seasons. Happily, though it had become practically non-existent close to
Broken Hill, it is now established in all the regeneration areas. Here it will
produce seeds undisturbed and become, again, a proud feature of the district.
The list of Sturt’s plants is not long; but it is a distinguished one. Robert
Brown, commenting on Sturt’s collection of plants from the interior, said that
in addition to the hundred identified species, many plants, mostly trees,
could not be identified through the incompleteness of the specimens—the lack
of flowering specimens is understandable in view of the extreme dryness of
those years.
MAY HARDING.
FLOWERS IN THE PLATE
EREMOPHILA STURTH—the small lavender bell-shaped flowers.
GOSSYPIUM STURTH (Sturts Rose) —the large flowers in the centre.
HIBISCUS STURTH —small flower in lower right-hand corner.
CASSIA STURTH—the small yellow flowers.
SOLANUM STURTIANUM—the purple star-shaped flower.
CLIANTHUS SPECIOSUS (Sturt Pea).
Barrier Daily Truth Print


Painting by May Harding
STURT'S FLOWERS




'\monal
hurt
-Jt the -Siluer (Litu
With judgement and courage ad a man he Lad tLe
tenderness and sympathy of a woman, the honour and
pi.ety oj- a Cdhristian, native had ever Suffered
harm from him, or any of those under his command.


