

Souvenir
KELLEMS RICHARDS
MISSION.


ARRIVAL OF PARTY AT ADELAIDE RAILWAY STATION.


jhk
DR. JESSE R. KELLEMS
CHARLES H. RICHARDS


Adelaide, October 28th, 1923
If it be a sin to covet the joy of seeing souls won,
then were there many sinners in our churches in Ade-
laide during the great mission at the Olympia in Mel-
bourne? How many times the prayer went up that the
way might be opened for these “fishers of men” to be
brought to Adelaide! Then, when the opportunity
seemed finally lost, it came again. Who is not glad that
it was seized ?
If there were scales that could weigh the burdens
of a human heart; if all the burdens removed by the
great mission in the Exhibition Building could be piled
in a great heap and weighed and then dissipated visibly
before our eyes; and if the removal of these burdens could
be valued at so much per ton, what a fortune it would
represent!
There are mothers and fathers who were worried
about that boy who was entering on the great adventure
of manhood without the guiding ideal of the Christ set
before him; that girl just launching out into the world
and without the anchor of faith for a time of crisis.
There were homes that were divided on the most vital
of all issues—that of religion, with a consequent strain
upon the bonds of affection. There were men and women
who were losing their grip upon themselves, or had lost
it, and others whose zest in life was going, or gone. But
the boy and girl have laid hold on Christ; the divided
home has been united in Him; the weakening character
and the world-weary soul have taken a new grip upon
life’s realities; have found life’s most real joy in the new
life born within them. At the feet of the crucified
Christ the burdens have rolled away.
What an inspiration it has been to the churches to
see that great hall thronged with people—men and
women, boys and girls—all there to hear the gospel
preached and sung. For it was the gospel that brought
them there. The hymns were simple gospel hymns; the
preacher’s messages were simple gospel messages—careful
gospel teaching, earnest gospel pleading. There was no
sensationalism ; no harrowing of the emotions. The aim
of the missioners seemed always first to make their


hearers think, and thinking to understand and believe
the essentials of Christian truth, then to appeal to their
better natures, their wisdom, their self-respect, their sense
of honour and of duty and of fairness, their love of
others, their highest ideals, their love of Christ, to secure
that decision for Him which was sealed in a baptismal
service so beautifully conducted that, in itself, it became
one of the most powerful appeals of the mission to con-
secration and obedience.
This mission, we believe, will inaugurate a new for-
ward movement among our churches in this State.
Thousands have heard our teaching, who did not know
what we stood for before; thousands have come to respect
our brotherhood, who were inclined to despise it before.
But, above all, we ourselves have learned anew the power
of the preached word and the convincing logic of our
plea. It should waken in our hearts a great new faith
in evangelism, and a determination to spend and be spent
that we may give to the people of this State the truth
that makes men free.
What we owe to these folks, who have come to us
from across the water, we cannot estimate yet, for only
gradually will the full fruits of their labour be revealed.
But they have earned a tremendous admiration for what
we already know they have done, and all who have had
the privilege of coming into personal touch with them
have learned to love them for their jolly, genial selves.
We are glad they came. We are glad they have promised
to come back again. There will be a mighty welcome
awaiting them when they return to these southern shores.
A. C. GARNETT


A conviction has grown upon me with each mission
in our present campaign in Australia. That conviction
is the certainty that in your great Commonwealth of
Australia, we, as a people, have an opportunity as
great as that which faced us in the early days of the
American nation. Never are people more responsive to
the appeal of the truth than they are here. If we do not
win Australia it will be our fault. It will not be due
to the weakness of the message, for that message is power.
If we fail it will be because we have not worked. There
are people by the thousand all around us who are just
waiting for the kind word of invitation. Will we speak
it? It is my sincere hope that the present campaign will
mean the beginning of great things in an evangelistic way
in this fair land.
What a happy time we have had in your midst!
Never will we forget it. The singing of the mighty
choir, the beautiful baptismal scenes, the hundreds com-
ing to the front to confess their Saviour, the earnest per-
sonal work, the gracious hospitality—all these things will
make us long again and again to come back to the sunny
land of South Australia. God bless you all as you
continue to serve Him who loved us and purchased us
with His own precious blood.
JESSE R. KELLEMS.


UNITED COMMUNION SERVICE, EXHIBTION BUILDING


Incidents of the Mission
Many things have taken place during this wonderful
season of soul winning. Most of them we shall never
know, but some of them should be given prominence in
this souvenir. The great crowds attending each night at
the central meetings were not the only ones reached. Very
successful lunch-hour meetings at some qf the great in-
dustrial works enabled Dr. Kellems to bring to men,
who labor and who appreciate straight talk, the story
of Jesus, and the challenge to live for Him.
Each week a lecture on some phase of evangelism,
and the modern mind, was delivered in the Y.M.C.A.
to preachers and church workers. These lectures were
presided over by prominent men of the city, and were
attended by representatives of the various religious
bodies. They were a source of great enjoyment and en-
couragement.
The Sunday afternoon meetings attracted large
audiences. A meeting for men was held in the Exhibi-
tion Building, addressed by Dr. Kellems, when over a
thousand men heard the wonderful story. At the same
hour a meeting for women was held in the Town Hall,
over thirteen hundred listening to an eloquent appeal from
Mrs. Kellems. The following Sunday a United Com-
munion Service was held, when over 2,500 joined to-
gether in remembering the dying of the Lord Jesus. This
service was led by Dr. Kellems, whose address on “The
Lord’s Supper” was one of the most memorable of the
Mission. Not an invitation was given during the mission
at which someone did not come to confess their faith in
Jesus as the Son of God and their personal Saviour, and
almost every night large numbers wqre immersed into
Christ;. Among the candidates for baptism was a lady
“three-score years and seventeen,” children of tender
years, and a young girl who was lifted from an invalid
chair, and carried into the water, where she was with
hundreds of others “united with Christ in the likeness
of his death.” . :
The singing of the Choir and the Glee Club will
live for ever in our memory. Bro. Richards so ably sup-
ported by Mrs. Richards, and the assisting pianists, de-
serve our greatest thanks, for they have given us a fresh
appreciation of the ministry in song. Mention must be
made of the radio services. For the first time in the his-
tory of Australian wireless, the whole of the service on
two occasions was broadcasted throughout the Common-
wealth. What an opportunity! Dr. Kellems told the
story of the conversion of the Ethiopian as recorded in
Acts 8.
The singing, the sermon, the appeal, the great con-
fession made by a number who had responded to the ap-
peal, were heard in Tasmania, over seven hundred miles
distant. Only eternity will reveal the fruits of such a
service, and of the great mission now drawing to a close.
Ira A. Paternoster, Mission Press Correspondent.


COMMITTEE OF MANAGEMENT.
Front Row-Miss Magarey, H. J. Horsell, Dr. Kellems, Mrs. Kellems, E. J Paternoster, Mrs. Richards, C. H. Richards, W, Beiler.
Second Row-A. J. Gard, S. P. Weir, W. Morrow, W.C. Brooker, Ira A. Patermoster, A. C. Garnett, Jas. E. Webb, Burford.
Back Row-B. W. Manning, S. J. Southgate, F. Collins, W. Magarey, G. D. Wright, E. A. Riches, C. Verco.


WELCOME TO PARTY ON ARRIVAL.


EXHIBITION BUILDING AND BAPTISTRY.
TRAIN ARRIVING, ADELAIDE STATION.


I have had a wonderfully happy time in Australia,
and my visit is coming to a close with an exceptional joy
in the conducting of this great Adelaide choir. They
have been so faithful and have worked so hard in order
to make the mission a great success. One of the leading
teachers of singing in Adelaide, after hearing them one
evening, said, “It is the greatest choir for singing hymns
that I have ever heard in our city.” Many similar com-
ments may be heard in the audience every night. We
all must realise what a great part they have had in the
winning of hundreds of souls during the mission.
I know the faces of nearly all of the singers now,
and will know them all by the close of the mission. It is
my sincere hope that I may some day return to Adelaide
and lead them through another campaign for our King.
CHARLES H. RICHARDS.


MISSION GHOIR AND GLEE GLUB


I am very happy to extend my own personal greeting
to all the friends who have done so much to make our
stay in Adelaide one long delight. We shall never forget
the good times or the good friends we have made. I
feel that I must especially remember those who made the
great meeting for women in the Town Hall such a
success. The sight of that sea of eager, happy faces will
live with me always. It is a wonderful thing to work
for our Lord and Master. May the splendid Christian
women of our churches in South Australia continue as
they have so nobly begun in their service for our King
of Glory. During the years that are to come we will
think of you all in far away America and pray for you
often. May our Father bless and keep you in His love.
VERA EDWARDS KELLEMS.


Words fail to adequately express my appreciation of
the many kindnesses which I have received during my
stay in this fair city. I have heard much of your warm-
hearted hospitality and genial fellowship, but my personal
experience has exceeded my highest expectation. I have
greatly every moment of my stay in your midst,
the remembrance of which will ever remain a happy
recollection.
VIOLET F. RICHARDS.


The Gospel of Christ, preached by Dr. Jesse R.
Kellems and Charles H. Richards, has met the wants of
the human soul. Clear in logic, simple in phrase, rich in
sympathy, were the messages delivered in love. What an
example of zeal, earnestness of devotion to duty, that
none dare grow lazy again without rebuke. God bless
these men and women, and their message.
E. J. PATERNOSTER.
President of Mission Committee.
Though many and varied the duties in connection
with the campaign, it has been a great joy and a rich
experience to be associated with our missioners in this,
wonderful mission.
WILL BEILER,
Secretary of Mission Committee-


THE MEMBERS OF THE PARTY


LUNCH-HOUR AT ISLINGTON RAILWAY SHOPS


Brief Impressions of the Mission
IVhat a privilege has been ours! Delightful fellowship,
powerful preaching, wonderful singing, glorious results.
Jas. E. Webb,
Unley.
Clear thinking, deep earnestness and the sheer joy of God-
liness make their work what it is. A. C. Garnett,
Grote Street.
“Workers together with God." This has been our joyful
experience. October 2ith, 1923, will not soon he forgotten.
Ira A. Paternoster,
Norwood.
T he clear and masterly presentation of the gospel of Dr.
Kellems, and his sane and dignified methods, is most commend-
able. The magnificent singing of the choir, under the general
leadership of Mr. Richards, was a feature of every service. This
successful mission should result in every Christian giving more
practical support to our lI.M. Committee in evangelising our
beloved country. H J. Horsell,
Mission Treasurer.
These men are great! I love them for themselves and for
their unswerving loyalty to the restoration plea.
S. J. Southgate,
Cottonville.
Two men with a great message, sane methods, wonderful
results, true to the Old 800k —a happy Godfearing Mission
Party. W. C. Brooker,
Queenstown.
Dr. Kellems—a great preacher. Charles IT Richards—an
excellent leader in song. E. G. Warren,
Wallaroo.
Hundreds have confessed Christ. We rejoice in the victory,
and pray that Dr. Kellems may lead the people of God to
greater victories, F. Collins,
Maylands,
The bigness of the Mission! Dr. Kellems and Brother
Richards; their great faith in God and His Son, Jesus Christ;
their great messages in song and story impressed us.
W. G. Oram,
Moonta.
It was a delight to hear the Book expounded in such a clear
and concise way by Dr. Kellems; and the singing, under the
magnificent leadership of Bro. Richards, must long remain in
the memory of all who heard it. Garfield Rootes,
Kadina.
It is the greatest experience the churches have had, and
plainly demonstrates that opportunity awaits enterprise and en-
terprise awaits us. Ross Graham,
Henley Beach.
The Mission is a powerful exposition of the Gospel in song
and story. A. E. Forbes,
Croydon.
The Mission has been one of most blessed experiences. It
has been soul-inspiring and soul-saving. F. Hollams,
Forestville.
In the words of an experienced Christian, “Better than
anything Adelaide has ever had." Roy Raymond,
Gawler.
Dr. Kellems deals with the fundamental truths that people
need to know. A. C. Killmier,
York.
It has been a time of great power and blessing. Souls
have been saved and God glorified. G. McKie,
Semaphore.
Passion in the praying, soul in the singing, power in the
preaching, love in the meetings, Christ through it all.
B. W. Manning,
Mile End.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA


«Vinrr»1»c.p tnfers-T *»’ v Street. Ade’.aii ?.
