

SOUVENIR HANDBOOK
OF THE
METHODIST CHURCH
WARRNAMBOOL
Printers:
KAYE & SON, Warrnambool
1940




WARRNAMBOOL METHODIST CHURCH,
SUNDAY SCHOOL HALL
and KINDERGARTEN.
Opened 1st April, 1939.
ARCHITECTS :
A. S. & R. A. EGGLESTON, F. & A.R.A.I.A,
BUILDERS :
J. D. E. & T. WALTER


HISTORICAL
THE OLD CHURCH, BUILT 1857-8.
The first Christian service in Warr-
nambool was conducted by a Methodist
local preacher, Mr. William Witton, of
Port Fairy. This service was held in a
room at the back of an hotel in Timor
Street, called “ The Rising Sun.” With
great insight Mr. Witton chose a text
which characterised the very genius of
Methodism, “ The Law of the Lord is
perfect, converting the soul ; the testi-
mony of the Lord is sure, making wise
the simple.”
So well did the work prosper that
within two or three years there were suf-
ficient Methodists in Warrnambool to
justify the building of a Church. A site
of about two acres had already been se-
lected facing Liebig and Koroit Streets,
and on a section of this land a stone
church was erected. At that time the
total population of Warrnambool num-
bered 259, and there were only 53 houses
on town blocks-
Two faults soon revealed themselves
in the building—the foundations were in-
secure because of wombat holes, and
the material of which the church was
erected was not a success. These facts,
together with the more important one
that the congregations soon overcrowded
the church led the trustees to plan a new
and larger building. The new church was
erected around the old one, and services
were continued in the old church until
within a week or two of the opening of
the new one.
That church, illustrated above, con-
tinued to serve tbe Methodist flock for
81 years, until the present church was
opened.
The first ordained minister to be ap-
pointed was the Rev. Wm. Lightbody, and
at that time there were only four other
Methodist ministers in Victoria. Mr.
Lightbody’s circuit comprised the whole
of the Western District, and he had to
travel many hundreds of miles on horse-
back to minister to the early settlers-
To-day there are twelve mnisters at work


in the same area, and the Warrnambool
cause is most vigorous.
The need for a suite of new buildings
has been felt for some years, and the first
step in this direction was made when Dr.
H. I. Holmes presented a spacious block
of land to the trustees. Another import-
ant step was taken when the trustees
proceeded to erect a number of shops on
the unused land around the old church.
It is largely because of this asset that the
new buildings have been made possible.
The following are the most important
dates and events—
-1847 —First service held in Warrnam-
bool by Mr. William Witton.
1850— First Methodist Church built,
facing Liebig Street.
1851 — First ordained minister appoint-
ed—Rev. Wm. Lightbody.
1857 Second Church built.
1858— 23rd May—Church opened.
1859 — First Parsonage built.
1872—First Methodist School-room er-
ected.
1903—Two-storey Parsonage built.
1937—Present Parsonage bought and
modernised.
1939—15 t April—New Church and
School opened.
SYMBOLICAL
INTERIOR, SHOWING CHANCEL AND SANCTUARY.
It is impossible to estimate how much
we owe to the use of symbols. Our edu-
cation is dependent on them- The letters
of the alphabet symbolise sounds, numer-
als symbolise numbers, notes symbolise
music, and without the aid of these out-
ward signs we should never learn to read,
or add, or play.
Every society founded by man makes
use of symbols, and fellowship of every
kind is nurtured and matured by aid of
outward signs. No Christian maid would
think that she was properly married un-
less her groom gave her a ring as a “ sign
and pledge of the vow and covenant be-
tween them made.”
Similarly, in his attempts to under-
stand and appreciate God and the spiritual
and moral truths of the universe, man has
made wide use of many kinds of symbols.
Not least significant among these are the
symbols wrapped up in the buildings 'vye
call churches. Methodism has not made
as full a use of symbolic architecture, fur-


NORTH WINDOW AND WEST AISLE
niture, and ceremony as many other
churches have, and because of this our
worship has been impoverished, In our
emphasis upon the simplicities of the faith
we have tended to lose the sense of won-
der and mystery and reverence.
Warrnambol Methodists are now fa-
foured in having a building which does
speak to them of the most important ele-
ments in the Christian faith, and the most
casual visitor receives a word-less sermon
preached to him in stone and wood and
form.
All that can be done here is to give
in bare outline the meaning of the most
important features.
1. The Tower.
Many of the most valuable things
have their use in silent witness rather
than in practical work. It is so with a
church tower. Cutting the skyline far
above the roofs of surrounding buildings
the tower carries our thoughts upward to-
wards God, and speaks to us of His tran-
scendence or sovereignty.
Having on each side a three-fold win-
dow, it declares the Christian faith in the
Triune God—Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit.
The foundations of the tower are na-
turally the deepest and most solid of any
part of the buildings, thus teaching us
that the same God Who is the Supreme
Ruler is also here with us in our earthly
lives. The Tower is also joined to the
Church, and indeed, provides through its
porchway, one of the main entrances to
the Church- This suggests to us that
God, who is “ above” us, and “ around”
us, also wishes to meet “ with” us.
2. The Narthex or Main Porch.
Furnished with table and chairs
this “ ante-room ” has a three-fold pur-
pose, and suggests three necessities of our
approach to God in worship. Ist, it is a
place for Resting, where folk who have
been buffeted by the weather, or tired by
their journey, may compose themselves
before entering the Church.
2nd, it is a place for Waiting. It is un-
seemly to enter Church during prayers,
and if a worshipper arrives late, the Porch
provides a suitable place for waiting.
3rd, it is a place for Preparing. We
should prepare ourselves, in body, mind
and spirit for audience with our Divine
Lord.
3. The Doors.
There are doors on each side of
the Church as well as to the porch at the
front. Silently they echo the words of
the Master—“ Come unto Me all ye that
labour and are heavy laden.” They offer
entrance to all, and speak of welcome
for all.


NORTH WINDOW AND EAST AISLE
4. Aisles, Pillars and Arches.
Partly separated from the Church
proper by arched pillars there is on
either side an aisle or “ wing.” Whilst
they are used to-day almost exclusively
as a means of approach to the seats in
the nave, such aisles originally were used
for private devotions, catechism classes,
and other week-day meetings-
Like the porches they suggest care-
ful preparation for worship. The pillars
and flying buttresses are used to support
the walls and roof, while the arches link
all parts, including porches, aisles, tran-
septs, chancel and nave. Thus it is seen
that, whilst there are many parts, there
is only One Church.
5- The Vestries.
There are two vestries, one for the
use of the minister and the other for the
choir. In these rooms all necessary pre-
parations are made for the proper and
efficient conduct of the worship of the
Church and the preaching of the Word.
6. The. Church—it’s Pattern, Parts
and Furniture.
The interior of the Church is laid
out on the “ Cruciform” plan, that is, in
the shape of a Cross. The Nave repre-
sents the upright beam, the Transepts the
arms, and the Sanctuary the head of the
Cross.
There are three main sections of
the Church, the Nave, the Chancel, and
the Sanctuary.
The Nave is the meeting-place for the
congregation. It is therefore furnished
with comfortable pews. Here the people
meet tor preparation, praise, prayer and
public worship. Here they listen to the
reading of the Scriptures and to the
preaching of the Gospel.
The Chancel is the area between the
Nave and the Communion Rail, and con-
tains—the Lectern, for the reading of
God’s Word, the Pulpit, for the preaching
of God’s Truth, the Choir stalls, for the
singing of God’s praise, the Font, for the
baptising of God’s children, and the
Kneeling-rail, for the receiving of God’s
Grace-
The Sanctuary is the Holy Place, situ-
ated beyond the Communion Rail. In this
space stands the Communion Table and
Chairs. Here the Sacrament of the Lord’s
Supper is administered and lovers of
Jesus renew their vows of allegiance. The
Communion Table is the central feature
of furniture in the Church and stands
for the Remembrance of Christ, the Ad-
ministration of Divine Grace, and the
Promise of Eternal Life.


PULPIT AND BAPTISMAL FONT
7. The Pulpit.
Special significance attaches to the
Pulpit because of the carving around the
top. That the Pulpit is for preaching and
teaching and evangelism is indicated by
the Text which stands out in bold relief—
“We preach not ourselves, but Christ
Jesus as Lord.” That the Message of the
Pulpit is found in the New Testament is
suggested by the symbols carved out as
a background for the text. There are
four symbolic figures representing the
Four Evangelists.
Ist, the Winged Man represents St.
Matthew because in his Gospel he dwells
particularly on the human nature of our
Lord.
2nd, the Winged Lion depicts St. Mark
because he sets out the dignity of Jesus
as Messiah, the Lion of the Tribe of Judah.
3rd, the Winged Ox is the symbol of
St. Luke because his Gospel deals especi-
ally with the sacrificial work of Christ.
4th, the Winged Eagle represents St.
John because he shows us our Lord as the
Divine Son of God-
Together, these four represent the
Gospel of our Lord and Savious Jesus
Christ.
There are many other symbols in this
beautiful carving, including The Vine,
signifying Union with Christ ; Grapes,
signifying the Sacrarpent of His Body
and Blood ; The Pomegranate, suggest-
ing Fulness of Fruit ; The Lily, repre-
senting the Beauty, Purity and Sweet-
ness of the Christian life ; the Olive,
meaning Peace ; Wheat, suggesting the
Missionary Harvest of the Church.
8. The Windows.
There are two Windows in the
Church which are worthy of special note.
Over the Sanctuary is a Three-fold win-
dow symbolic of the Blessed Trinity,
whilst at the other end is a very large
window having for its central feature a
massive Latin Cross. This Cross is sym-
bolic of suffering, but, because it is
empty of the Figure of the Saviour, it
also points to the fact that He is risen.
This feature is seen from outside the
Church Am a very great distance, and no
one can enter the building without being
conscious of its message and influence.
Why should not Methodists have the
suggestive help of this central symbol of
the Christian faith ? No doubt at various
times in the future members of the Church


SANCTUARY AND CHOIR TRANSEPT
will make it possible to replace the pre-
sent Amber Lights with beautiful Stained
Glass Windows.
9. The Carpets.
Even the carpets have their contri-
bution to make to the worshipful mind.
They are in deep blue with the Fleur de
lys in a lighter blue. The Fleur de lys
represents the Flower of the Lily, and
suggests Purity, Humility and Chivalry.
10. The General Scheme.
The general lay-out of the suite of
buildings is highly symbolic- On the
lowest level is the Kindergarten, where
the “ tiny tots” are welcomed and given
their first lessons about Jesus and His
love.
On the next level is the main Sunday
School Hall, with its provisions for Junior
and Intermediate classes. Higher still are
Class Rooms for the use of the Senior
Department and for week night classes
for fellowship and instruction. All three
departments are linked together by arched
cloisters, and the whole is then joined
to the Church at the Tower Porch. Thus
is the idea conveyed that no part is iso-
lated and that the natural development
of the religious life moves on from very
simple beginnings in the “ Kinder” to a
complete surrender of life to the worship
and service of God in and through His
Church,
The buildings do really comprise a
plant suited to the many needs of modern
Church work, educational, social, devo-
tional, evangelical, practical and inspira-
tional, and as all the parts of the build-
ing are joined together in one complete
whole, so are all the various activities
among the men, women and children
linked together with the golden purpose
expressed in John Wesley’s, words—
“ You have nothing to do but to save
souls.”


List of Officers
SUNDAY SCHOOL HALL, Showing Class Screens And 2 Class Rooms.
at the time of the Opening of the New Church, April 1, 1939
MINISTER: Rev. A. Norman Kemp
TRUSTEES: Henry Huntingdon Smith, Robert Preston Christian,
Edgar Percival Smith, Horace lies Holmes, Arthur Wilton
Knee, Cecil Tomkins, Samuel Cameron, Benjamin Abbey,
William Wright, William Reed, Edward Read McDowell,
Herbert Henry Castles, Joseph Leslie Carter, Ernest Arthur
Wright, William Huffer, George Hartwell Newnham, James
D. E. Walter.
ORGANIST : Mr. Albert E. Hagley.
CHOIR CONDUCTOR ; Mr. Henry C. Taylor.
SUNDAY SCHOOL - SUPERINTENDENT: Mr. E. A. Oakley.
SECRETARY : Mr. David Beardsley.




