

A GONINAN & CO LTD
NEWCASILE N.S.W.


Souvenir
Visit of
Mining and Metallurgical Engineers
to the Works of
A. Goninan & Coy. Limited f-
Broadmeadow,
N.S.W.
May, 1926


The doors are ever open,
whether you come with a
pressing problem for solution
or with a machine to he
built to your specification


'A. OONIN'AN, M.5.W.1.E., A.M.I.E, Aost.
r ■ ,
'A. Gontnan is Company limited.


A GONINAN


A GREAT
ENGINEERING
CONCERN
SOME NOTES ON ITS GROWTH.
PRODUCTS AND SERVICE. WITH
PHOTOGRAVURES
A. GONINAN & CO. Ltd.
BROADMEADOW,
NEWCASTLE, N.S.W,


The Rise and Growth of
A. GONINAN & CO. LTD.
1899 to 1926
JN the year 1899 the Founder, Mr. A. Goninan, arrived in Newcastle, and at once
recognised the large field for Engineering enterprise, and saw the potential
prospects of Newcastle —a city small enough indeed, but destined to become one of the
greatest manufacturing centres in the Southern Hemisphere.
Away in the distance he saw the immense coal fields being opened, and with the
coal, steel, and all other sundry industries which would follow in their train.
On the 29th May, of the same year, 5J acres of Leasehold Land was secured at
Wickham, a suburb of Newcastle, and the firm of A. GONINAN & CO. was formed and
works started with a capital of £lO,OOO. To-day the nominal capital is £500,000, with a
paid up capital of £300,000. In those early daysi the work undertaken was necessarily
small, but the energy displayed by the Founder, Mr. A. Goninan, soon began to make
itself felt in the Engineering world of Newcastle.
Shortly afterwards, Mr. R. W. Goninan (a brother of the Founder), joined the
young firm, and the combination has been a happy and successful one, so that the name
“GONINAN’S,” Newcastle, has become a familiar and a household word in the
Engineering world, more especially in Australia.
If one word more than another can be used to describe the Firm, it is “Progress,”
and the mention in conversation of the letters “A.G.,” by which the Founder is
familiarly known, is at once synonymous of a healthy, robust optimism which is a
distinct characteristic of the Directorate.
Owing to the rapid expansion of business, and being unable to obtain additional
ground adjoining the Works, at Wickham, to extend, the directorate found it necessary,
in the year 1918, to obtain freehold land at Broadmeadow, the site of the old E. & A.
Copper Company.
Some 20 years ago, at Wickham, the Firm had 30,000 square feet of floor space.
To-day it occupies 15 modern buildings, located on a site of 29 acres, encircled with a
fence nearly one mile long, and has an actual working floor space of 154,000 square feet.
As a result of these 27 years of activity the Firm has become the leader in the
manufacture of all kinds of Mining Equipment, Machine Tools and other Plants.
During this time the Works has filled the wants of those who have looked for equip-
ments of the highest type and on most fully developed lines. They have organised for
production, specialised for efficiency, and paid a premium for handicraft. These three
predominating features have imprinted a seal of superiority that has commanded thq
admiration of clients, and made the products the standard of excellence.


Located in the very heart of Industrial Australia, with access to raw material
unhindered, facilities for distribution unsurpassed, the Plant is the logical source of
supply.
In addition to Engineering Works the Firm established the Engineers’ and
Colliery Supplies Co. Ltd., situated at Hunter Street West, Newcastle, in the year 1910.
This branch of our business supplies all Engineering and Colliery requisites, Tools of
Trade, Raw Materials, etc.
The Directorate is influential and progressive, being composed of men who are
in intimate touch with the various and everclianging commercial aspects of the
Engineering Industry.
The visitors to these Works will realise that no other monument is needed to
perpetuate the memory and work of the Goninan Brothers and the Directorate.
Head Office,


BOARD OF DIRECTORS
A. Goninan & Company Limited.
(Chairman:
A. GONINAN, M.5.W.1.E., A.M.I.E. Aust.
S. G. Pearse. R. W. Goninan.
A. E. Taylor. J. Taylor.
ilanagtng Simlnra:
A. GONINAN, M.5.W.1.E., A.M.I.E. Aust.
R. W. GONINAN,
#mrtarg:
H. A. Oates.
(flljirf firanghtamatu Eitgtnrrr:
J. T. Cowan, A.M.I.E. Aust. W. D. Wallace, M.I.E. Aust., M.l. Min. E.
Awiittnr:
L. E. Thompson, F.C.P.A.
REGISTERED and HEAD OFFICE and WORKS;
BROADMEADOW,
NEWCASTLE, N.S.W.
TELEPHONES: CABLE ADDRESS:
Hamilton, 699-700. “Platinum.”


R. W. GONINAN
Managjng Director
A. Goninan ii Company Limited.


R W GONINAN


Goninan’s Workshops
and their Organisation
Entrance to Works.
IgNTERING the front gate, the visitors’ attention is directed, on the right hand, to
the Head Office, a brick building, 141 feet long with an easterly aspect, the second
largest administrative building in the Newcastle District. The building contains 16
rooms, with three strong rooms, drawing office, 39 feet x 21 feet, extending towards the
back.
Near the entrance can be seen the Power House, 73 feet 6 inches long x 44 feet
wide, fabricated and erected by the Firm. The building is divided into three rooms.
The first is leased by the Newcastle Council for a Transformer Room. The current, at
11,000 volts, is transformed down to 2,200 volts and then distributed to the various
works in the district.
The current for these Works is obtained at 2,200 volts A.C., and changed by
means of two synchronous motor generators to 480 volts D.C., this being the voltage
generally used throughout for driving the machinery and cranes.
The third room is used as an Electrical Workshop and Compressor Room, and
contains a 14 x 12 Air Compressor.
Further on from the Power House the Store is situated, a building 121 feet
long x ,49 feet wide, laid out with the usual store fittings and elevated so that goods
can be taken from and loaded direct into Railway trucks.


Plan of Works—Broadmeadow.
can be seen, the Shops are arranged and railway lines laid throughout to facilitate
the handling of the raw material and products. There are two miles of railway
connecting up with the Northern Line, between Hamilton and Waratah. The Yard
Equipment consists of a 5-ton Locomotive Jib Crane, two Timber Derrick Cranes,
and one all steel Electrically driven Derrick Crane, with a 70ft. jib. to lift five tons.


View showing Boiler Shop and Foundry.
I'X the above photo, the first boiler manufactured at Broadineadow. for the Ciisllemaine
1 Brewery, is shown leaving the Works.
1 be' shop is 200 ’ 1 , feet wide,
o o i > Here can 1 ■ 1 . >*- i i I’ i i i in almost
e - 1 ■ the plates n ’ > 1 > shell ami
ft
The Shop is served in the .M" ; ~ ” '■ ’ '> ()I]e 400 on
and one 15-ton capacity. In the 1 1 ’ > 1 t j seen the
Hydraulic Rivetting Plant and the s from the
ground, so that a Boiler, ,‘loft. (fin. 1 c > ' i hydrauli-
cally. In the opposite side hay can ~1. ■ ’ 1 ' ■ ■ ' 1 p Flanging
Equipment. f 1 1 1 .... 1 e . 0 '1 Rolls and
Horizontal Dr 0 - . 1 ' • . b 1 in , I'm n.„ . Finn has
not lost sight some clients, and
tore in a posit i
In addition to Boiler Building. Fabricating Steel Structures is a special feature
of the work, and till sorts of Constrnctural Steelwork is constantly passing through
this Department.
A special feature in this Department is the Electric Wo!dim- If clients favour
welding instead of rivetting, this t ntly, and steel
members can be seen in almndan 1 and welding
substituted. The machine tools in -n and enables
the work to be performed economh . H , , ,i boiler Shop cap
ho seen the drawing down loft building. 1,10


Kiln Shell. Weight, 104 tons. Diameters, 10ft. Oin. and 9ft. Oin., 180 ft. 6in. long.
Manufactured for F. L. Smidth & Co. Ltd.
Interior view of Boiler Shop.


Hammer Block. Weight, 41 tons.
rjpHE Foundry is of the same design and size as the Boiler Shop and is served, if
necessary, with two 15-ton and one 40-ton Overhead Cranes, with a 5-ton Crane
in the side bay. At the far away end of the Shop is situated the Core Stoves, one 24ft.
by 24ft. and the other 24ft. by 15ft. Outside, at the end' of the Foundry, a Road Crane
is provided for handling and stacking the core boxes, etc. There are two Cupolas with
receivers, one of 50-tons capacity and one of 30-tons. The two are necessary, as we
are often called upon to produce heavy castings.
Recently a casting of 41 tons weight was produced—shown on above photograph.
Not only are all castings produced for our own Works, but we supply the trade
in the near neighbourhood.
Adjoining the building is a Brass Foundry, capable of producing any weight of
Gunmetal or Phosphur Bronze Castings required.
From the Cupolo side of the Foundry can be seen the Pattern Shop and Store,
each building 110 ft. by 40ft., with the usual Pattern Shop equipment installed.


jyjACHINE SHOP.-'This Shop is GOO feel long by sit feel wide, with a leanto on each
side of 25 feet. The building is made entirely of steel and covered by galvanised
sheets. It is served with two 15-ton Cranes in main bay and a 5-ton Crane in side bay.
The shop was fabricated and erected, and the Cranes manufactured by the Firm,
The Machine Tools contained in the building are the most modern and efficient
that can be produced. Here can be seen machines that are almost small enough for
the manufacture of clocks, and others which can handle MO tons, or even more. A walk
through the building and a comparison with the machines of even ten years ago is
quite a revelation. Space forbids a description of the several machine tools, but the
small precision tools, together with the large machines, gives one some idea of the
large range of work that can be undertaken.
The Firm has recently purchased an expensive Gear (Tilting Machine Equipment,
which can cut wheels double helical or others lo 11 feet in diameter and two feet wide,
or sufficient to transmit 70b to 1.000 horse-power.
Helical Gear Cutting Machine.
This Machine is shown cutting' a Spur Gear Wheel, 9ft . 1 5/16in. iliam.. with
80 teeth. 4-8/1 (iin. circular pitch, and 14in. face.
The Gear (hitting Section itself is quite an interesting study, for here can bo
seen a small Helical Gear Cutting Machine, Fellows’ Gear Planer. Worm Wheel
Generator, and a Bevel Wheel Planer, and other machines all doing their woik
silently and precisely.


12ft. Oin. Richard’s Mill, in Machine Shop.
This Mill can machine the rims of wheels 12ft. Oin. diameter, and 6ft. Oin. wide.
View of Gear Cutting Section in Machine Shop.


fjpHE BLACKSMITHS’ SHOP consists of three hays, each 42 feel wide by Me feet. long.
In the first bay can be seen four 5-cwt. and one 10-cwt. Steam Hammers
(A. (loninan &. Co’s manufacture! for general light work. In the second bay, at the
end, there are one 25-cwt. and one Ifecwt. Steam Hammers, arranged so that large
work taken from the Furnace can be Forged at either Hammer. The gases from this
furnace are used to generate steam in a 7ft. (Jin. x 16ft. bin. Multilobular Boiler,
sillisted outside at the end of the shop. The steam from this Boiler is used in addition
to that from a Bft. din. x 20ft. bin, Lancashire Boiler to drive the Steam Hammers.
Jn the third bay the Drop Hammer Equipment is installed, ami consists of a battery
of 25, 16, and 7-cwt, Massey Drop Hammers, with the necessary Clipping Press and
Furnace.
Drop Forgings.
50-Ton Crane Hook Forgings.
Weights:
Hook 6 rwl,
(Tosshead II cwl.
Nut 1 cwt,
.Municipal Council of Sydney.
No. 2 Engine. R. Crane,
The adjacent photograph will give the
reader some idea of the wide range of
Forgings manufactured under the Drop
Hammer.


Drop Hammer Section.
5-cwt. Steam Hammers.
25 and 15 cwt.
Steam Hammers


Interior View of Wagon Shop,
The Wagon Shop is 240 feet long, with three bays, the centre bay being 50 feet
span and the side ones 35 feet 6 inches wide. In the centre bay is installed a 5-ton
Overhead Crane, one of A. Goninan & Co.’s products. The shop is laid out for the rapid
production of Coal Hopper Wagons and Skips.
Side Tipping Wagon. Capacity, 232 cub. feet.
Twelve manufactured for the Commonwealth Portland Cement Co.


Products and Service.
JN the field of Mining and Mechanical Engineering the record of A. GONINAN & CO.
LTD., is one of continual service, and the products as manufactured to-day embody
the very latest and best practice. All work entrusted to their care is of the very best,
and nothing but Australian material is used when same is procurable.
The service has been a varied and general one, as you will see from the following
selection of some of the products.
BILLET SHEARS. —One was manufactured for the Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd.
and one for Hoskin’s Iron and Steel Works. They are driven direct by 80 h.p. motors,
and are designed to cut 41n. square high carbon steel or Sin. square mild steel. The
weight of the shears without the motor is 40 tons.
GIBSON RING ROLLING DOWN MACHINE, for the Vickers-Commonwealth
Steel Products Ltd.
DROP HAMMERS. —We have manufactured a battery of 16 and 7-cwt. Drop
Hammers, also Overhead Driving Gear for 25 and 7-cwt. Drop Hammers, for Messrs.
Evans, Deakln & Co. Ltd., Brisbane, and also the necessary Clipping Presses for the
Plants.
BRIDGES. —The Bridge over the River Torrens, Adelaide and Terowie Line, was
fabricated for the South Australian Government Railways. It is 112 ft span, and the
weight was 175 tons. We have now on order two Bridges of the plated type, 66ft. span,
total weight 112 tons, for the N.S.W. Government Railways.
GAS PLANT. —West's Gas Improvement Co. Ltd., entrusted us with the fabrica-
tion of the structural parts of the addition to the Newcastle Gas Co.’s Plant, and also
for the gas plant at Footscray.
STEAM HAMMERS. —5-cwt. and 10-cwt. sizes have been manufactured, and can
be seen at work in our own Blacksmiths’ Shop.
TEN OIL TANKS AND CARS are now in the course of manufacture, in the shops
for the Vacuum Oil Coy., 5,000 gallons capacity.
TIPPLERS, of the rotary, semi-rotary and end kick-up type have been manu-
factured. The rings of the rotary type may either be of cast iron or cast steel, suitable
for flat faced rollers, or can be made of mild steel with tapered edges.
SCREENS & PICKING BELTS have been supplied to the various collieries,
complete with driving gears. The screen may either be single balanced or of the
Marcus type. We supplied the whole of the Marcus Screen Gear for Hebburn No. 2
Colliery.


We have fabricated the following;
Cement Plant Building—Sulphide Corporation Ltd.
Tramway Sheds, Mortdale —N.S.W. Government Railways.
Three Transformer Structures, Brisbane —Australian General Electric Co.
Sydney Railway Station —N.S.W. Government Railways.
Masts for carrying Cables for the Electrification of Suburban Lines
N.S.W. Government Railways.
And we have on order Coal Handling Plant, Port Osborne, for the South
Australian Harbours Board.
We also manufacture:--
Winding Engines Cradle Engines.
Log Haulers Angle Ring Benders
Air Receivers Worm Reductions.
Dough Brakes Cages
Sinking Buckets Riders
Kibbles. Bailing Tanks
and also Gearing of all descriptions has been supplied to clients all over the country.
Goninan’s Works, Wickham, in 1905.


Plate Shears. Weight, 30 tons.
To cut gin, Plate, 6ft 6in. long in one cut.
Manufacnired for Hoskins’ lron & Steel Works.
Multiple Plate Punching Machine.
Manufactured for the Cockatoo Dockyard. Sydney.


Four 19-ton Brake Vans.
Manufactured for the South Maitland Railways.
Coal Loader for Open Cut.
Manufactured and erected for State Electricity Commission, at
Yallaurn. Victoria.


Wagons and Skips.
I'WRING the years of A. GONINAN & Co.’s activities, 9.000 Goal Hopper Wagons,
10-ton capacity, 1,000 of 124 tons capacity, and 20,000 Coal Skips of various sizes
and types have been supplied to the various Collieries.
The following inns are amongst our customers
Caledonian Collieries Ltd.
Hebburn Collieries Ltd.
Aberniaiii-Seaham Collieries Ltd.
East Greta Coal Mining Co. Ltd.
Gretamain Collieries Ltd.
Sydney and Newcastle Finance Co.
Hetton-Bellbircl Collieries Ltd.
Bellambi Collieries Ltd.
Rhondda Colliery.
Overton Collieries Ltd.
West Australian Government Railways.
Kenibla Colliery.
Ilothbury Colliery.
All Wagons built in the future to run on the N.S.W. Government Railways are to
he of 124 ton capacity and to be fitted with four-wheeled brakes. To meet with the
demand for this class of wagon we have lately designed and built a wagon with a steel
underframe, timber hopper, 124 tons capacity, and with patent four-wheeled brake
gear. This sample wagon will be on view during the visit and can be inspected by those;
interested.
Coal Hopper Wagon—Steel Underframe. 1212 tons Capacity.
This is the latest type of Wagon, with four-wheeled patent brake gear.
We have also supplied end- and side tipping trucks, flat top ballast wagons to
the Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd., and N.S.W. Government Railways and many railway
contractors, also Traction Wagons for the various Shire Councils,


Coal Hopper Wagon, 12½-ton capacity.
Wooden Underframe and Hopper.
Coal Skip — State Coal Mine.


Haulages Manufactured .
HAULAGES—MAIN & TAIL.
25 h.p. 2ft. 6in. Drums—Stanford Merthyr Colliery.
30 h.p. 2ft. 6in. Drums —Newcastle-Wallsend Coal Mining Co.
500 h.p. 6ft. 6in. Drums —Bast Greta Coal Mining Co.
HAULAGES—ENDLESS ROPE.
200 h.p. 7ft. Oin. C. Wheels—Abermain Colliery.
50 h.p. sft. Oin. C. Wheels —Northern Extended Colliery.
50 h.p. sft. Oin. C. Wheels —Wallarah Colliery.
60 h.p, sft. Oin. C. Wheels —Bulli Colliery.
25 h.p. 4ft. Oin. C. Wheels —Caledonian Collieries Lid.
60 h.p. 6ft. Oin. C. Wheels—Mt. Kenibla Colliery.
10 h.p. 3ft. 6in. ('. Wheels —Neath Colliery.
80 h.p. sft. 6in. C. Wheels —South Clifton Colliery.
150 h.p. Bft. Oin. O. Wheels —Wallarah Colliery.
200 h.p. 6ft. Oin. C. Wheels—Bulli Colliery.
100 h.p. 6ft. Oin. C. Wheels —Lymington Colliery.
50 h.p. sft. Oin. C. Wheels —Hetton Colliery.
150 h.p. 6ft. Oin. C. Wheels—Hebburn No. 2 Colliery.
75 h.p. 6ft. Oin. C. Wheels —Hebburn No. 2 Colliery.
350 h.p. Bft, Oin. C. Wheels —State Coal Mine.
75 h.p. 6ft. Oin. C. Wheels —Blair Athol.
75 h.p. Endless Rope Haulage.
Manufactured for Hebburn Limited.


HAULAGES—UNDERGROUND TYPE,
■I C. Wheels (1 @ 7fl, Oin., and 3 @ 6ft, Oin.) Aberuiain Xo, 3 Colliery
3 sft. Oin. (’. Wheels -Heblmrn Colliery.
3 (iff.. Oin. C. Wheels llehhurn Collie.r.v.
Underground Endless Rope Haulage.
One 7ft. and three 6ft. C. Wheels.
Manufactured tor Abermain No. 3 Colliery.
HAULAGES—SINGLE DIAM.
150 h.p. 6ft. Oin. diameter Drum. Stanford Merthyr Colliery.
30 h.p. 2ft. 2in. diameter Drum. South Greta Colliery.
150 h.p. 7ft. Oin. diameter Drum. —State Electricity Commission of Victoria.
150 h.p. Single Diameter Haulage.
Manufactured for the Victorian Electricity Commission.


150 h.p. Rope Haulage.
Manufactured for the Caledonian Collieries Ltd.
150 h.p. Endless Rope Haulage.
Manufactured for the Wallarah Colliery.


Cranes.
W E have manufactured Cranes of all types, more especially Overhead Travelling
Cranes of the best class.
The drums are of cast iron, grooved right and left hand to take the ropes, and
all the gearing is of cast steel machine cut. Where specified, to prevent lowering the
load at an excessive speed, a mechanical brake is fitted on the hoist gear shafting,
either of the Weston or Coil Spring Type. The track wheels are either all cast steel or
with east steel rim treads, on cast iron centres, with self lubricating bearings.
Standard 15-ton Overhead Crane, 50ft. span.
Main Hoist 15 h.p. Motor, 15 tons at 10ft. per minute.
Aux, Hoist, 15 h.p. Motor, 5 tons at 30ft. per minute.
Cross Travel, 3 h.p. Motor, 60ft. per minute.
Bridge Travel, 10 h.p. Motor, 235 ft. per minute.
The Mechanical Brake is of the coil spring type.
Four of these can be seen at work in our own Shops.
We have manufactured one 5-ton Crane, 50ft. span, for the Vickers-Common wealth
Steel Products Ltd., and one for our own Wagon Shop, the particulars are as follows:--
Main Hoist 16| h.p. Motor, 5 tons at 37.5 ft. per minute.
Cross Travel Si h.p. Motor, at 148 ft. per minute.
Bridge Travel 5 h.p. Motor, at 350 ft. per minute.
Also we have lately delivered one 15-ton 70ft. span Overhead Crane, with a
separate 5-ton Auxiliary Hoist, for the Broken Hill Proprietary Coy. Ltd. The-
Main Holst, 55 h.p. Motor, 15 tons at 35ft. per minute.
Auxiliary Hoist, 25 h.p. Motor, 5 tons, at 50ft. per minute.
Cross Travel, 7i h.p. Motor, at 150 ft. per minute.
Bridge Travel, 30 h.p. Motor, at 250 ft. per minute.
The Mechanical Brake is of the Weston Type.
We are at present manufacturing one 5-ton, 56ft. 2in. span Overhead Crane, for
the N.SW. Government Railways, Eveleigh Workshops:- -
Main Hoist, 10 h.p. Motor, 5 tons at 20ft. per minute.
Cross Travel, 10 h.p. Motor, at 80ft. per minute.
Bridge Travel, 2| h.p. Motor, at 250 ft. per minute.
The Mechanical Brake is of the Weston Type.


Pumps .
5in. x 8in. Vertical Ram Pump.
VERTICAL TRIPLEX RAM PUMPS.
gin. x Sin. -5,050 Gallons/h. 600 ft. Head.—Caledonian Colliery.
New Burwood Extended Colliery.
sin. x Sin. —3,500 .. 250 ft. Head. — Newcastle-Wallsend Collieries.
—Abattoirs, Newcastle.
—Castlemalne Brewery,
Tin. x 9in. —7,000 ~ 275 ft. Head. — Wallarah Colliery,
fin. x 6in. —2,230 „ 350 ft. Head. —Coal Cliff Colliery.
Sin. x lOin. —8,800 .. 500 ft. Head. —East Greta Colliery.
Sin. x lOin. —8,800 350 ft. Head- Lymington Colliery.
HORIZONTAL TRIPLEX RAM PUMPS.
Sin. x 12in. —11,000 Gal./h 800 ft. Head. — South Greta Colliery.
4in. x 7in. — 1,500 900 ft. Head. —Balmain Colliery.
Sin. x Sin.— 3,500 ~ 350 ft. Head.- South Greta Colliery.
Sin. x 15in. — 8,500 750 ft. Head.-—Stockton Borehole Colliery.
DIP TRIPLEX RAM PUMP.
sin. x Sin. — 3,500 Gal./h 250 ft. Head.- Caledonian Collieries Ltd.
GRAVEL PUMPS.
lOin. Diameter, Supplied to: —Brown Bros.
E. Cox, Tingha.
F. Gaukrogers, Tingha.
Emmaville Tin Co.
Stautliorpes' Tin Co.


Rope Wheels.
■jyi'ANY Rope Wheels and Jig Wheels, from 2ft. diameter up io 20ft. diameter, on
treads, have been manufactured and supplied to the various collieries.
These Wheels have cast iron rims and bosses, and mild steel spokes. Brass
lined bearings of the deadeye type, with mild steel spindles, are supplied, suitable for
either horizontal or vertical running wheels.
The horizontal running wheels have a footstep bearing, with round ended
spindle. The Jig Wheels are often supplied with brake gear complete, either of the
post or band type, and many wheels are supplied in halves, bolted together at the rim
and the boss, and, when specified, bearings of the adjustable or oil ring type are fitted.
Large wheels with machined grooved rims of standard shape, suitable for cotton rope
driving, can be manufactured.
Many sizes are kept in stock and can be supplied at a day's notice.
Rope Wheel.
18ft. diameter on tread, 29ft. 2in. overall diameter. Weight. 8 tons.
Manufactured for the Caledonian Collieries Ltd.


Boilers.
Boilers, dished or flat ended, Cornish, Multitubular, Colonial, Vertical
and Locomotive types of boilers have been manufactured.
In the Lancashire Boilers the shell consists of parallel belts of plating, each
belt formed of one plate, made perfectly cylindrical throughout the entire length in
vertical rolls, the steel being boiler quality, 28 to 32 tons, with an elongation of 20 to
25 per cent, in a length of 10 inches. The flues are made from special quality ductile
steel, 24 to 28 tons, with an elongation of 20 to 25 per cent, in a length of 10 inches.
Each tube is connected together by anti-collapsive joints, having a solid caulking ring
between the two flanges. The longitudinal joints are welded under special hammer,
and the flue flanging is done by special machine, each ring being flanged at one heat,
and each flue will contain, if desired, one corrugated section. These will give increased
heating surface and materially assist taking up the severe expansion and contraction
strains which are set up in all internally fired boilers. The rivetting, wherever practic-
able, is done by hydraulic and pneumatic machine. A special machine is used for the
rivetting of the flues to the front end plate, and all joints and seams are caulked.
All the usual boiler mountings and furnace fittings are supplied with each boiler.
We have lately supplied, from Broadmeadow, the following Lancashire Boilers:
Four Bft. 6in. x 30ft. Oin. x 160 lbs. W.P. D.E. Lancashire, to Paxton Colliery.
Three Bft. 6in. x 30ft. Oin. x 160 lbs. W.P. D.E. Lancashire, to Scottish Aust. Mining
Co. Ltd.
One Bft.. 6in. x 30ft. Oin. x 160 lbs. W.P. D.E. Lancashire, to Abermain Colliery.
One Bft. Oin. x 30ft. Oin. x 150 lbs. W.P. D.E. Lancashire, to Castlemaine Brewery.
One Bft. Oin. x 30ft. Oin. x 150 lbs. W.P. D.E. Lancashire, to Seaham No. 1 Colliery,
One Bft. 3in. x 30ft. Oin. x 150 lbs. W.P. P.E. Lancashire, to Castlemaine Brewery,
One Bft. 3in. x 30ft. Oin. x 150 lbs. W.P. F.E. Lancashire, to Jas. Edwards & Sons.
One Bft. Sin. x 30ft. Oin. x 150 lbs. W.P. F.E, Lancashire, to A. Goninan & Co. Ltd.
In course of manufacture are:
One Bft. 3in. x 30ft. Oin. x 160 lbs. W.P. D.E. Lancashire, for Invincible Colliery.
Three Bft. 6in. x 30ft. Oin. x 120 lbs. W.P. D.E. Lancashire, for Seaham No. 1 Colliery.
Three Bft. 6in. x 30ft. Oin. x 160 lbs. W.P. D.E. Lancashire, for Stock.
We have also supplied:
One 6ft. Oin. x 24ft. Oin. Cornish Boiler, to Cessnock Hospital.
One 6ft. Oin. x 12ft. Oin. Multitubular Boiler, to James Bros. & Evans.
Four 6ft. 6in. x 16ft. Oin. Multitubular Boiler, to Mourlyian.
Two 6ft. 6in. x 16ft. Oin. Locomotive Boiler, to South Maitland Railways,
One Locomotive Boiler, to Sulphide Corporation.
One Locomotive Boiler, to Mt. Kembla Colliery,


Lancashire Boiler (Dished Ends).
8ft. Oin. diameter x 30ft. Oin. x 150 1bs. W.P.
Locomotive Boiler.
Manufactured for the South Maitland Railways Ltd.


60 horse-power Electric Winders.
17 mamnufaetured for the Metropolitan Water & Sewerage Board, Sydney.
Bridge over River Torrens, Adelaide and Terowie Line.
112ft. span. Weight, 175 tons.


Headgear Frames.
Headgear Frame.
Height, 86ft. Fabricated and erected tor the
Coal Cliff Colliery.
Headgear Frame.
Paxton Colliery.
Headgear Frames have been
Fabricated for: —■
Aberdare Colliery.
Coal Cliff Colliery.
Elrington Colliery.
Paxton Colliery.
Headgear Frame.
Aberdare Colliery.


Notes.
