

PREFERENCE TO AUSTRALIAN-MADE
BY THIS RESOLVE WE BUILD A NATION
SOUVENIR of THE
AUSTRALIAN MADE PREFERENCE LEAGUE
And the GREAT WHITE EXHIBITION TRAIN
PRICE: ONE SHILLING.


5 /■? Kh H yv-)A£ -pousL. nfs
M/I'fOOWZ/?
“AUSTRALIAN-MADE” PREFERENCE LEAGUE
Official Souvenir
THE amazing success of the “ Great White ” Exhibi •
; tion Touring Train has prompted the “ Australian-
Made ” Preference League to publish this Official
Souvenir. It is intended to tell two stories, both worth
telling—the story of the “Australian-Made” Preference
League and the story of the “ Great White ” Train.
Exhibition projects of various kinds have been promoted
from time to time, but the “ Great White ” Train is by
far the most unique and interesting effort yet attempted.
It is a practical Exhibition on wheels. It is accomplishing
three outstanding things. Firstly, it is teaching Aus-
tralians the great variety and excellence of “ Australian-
Made,” and the national significance of giving them
preference. Secondly, it is proving itself to be a practical
producer of increased sales. Thirdly, it is providing an
advertising medium of great power and effect.
Expressions of opinion have been general at each town
visited, that the Tour of the Train should be made an
Annual Event. This suggestion is receiving consider-
ation.
On November nth, 1925, at 3.30 p.m. the Exhibition
left Darling Island, Sydney on its historic Tour, and
returned on May 24th, 1926, having travelled 2,100 miles
and visited 60 representative towns.
A Second Tour, commencing towards the end of August
will embrace 30 towns, involving 2,000 miles,. covering:
the North and South Coasts and the Cooma-Bombala.
Line.
The Board of Management of the League is extremely
proud of the success of the Great White Train, not merely
because of its intrinsic results from a trade-promotion
point of view, but because of the great national good that
must ensue. It is the first practical Ambassador of
Nationhood —it has well and truly planted the seed of a
national sentiment that will yield its harvest in the progress,,
prosperity, and security of Australia.
Published by the “ Australian-Made ” Preference League.


Australia’s Favourite
Super
Quality
EACH
f
m
§ a S
E E
E
«s?
I ' and pear
I Guaranteed
noire Genuine
without the
Brand - - •
Made
High
Quality
25 /■
EACH
E E 0
Obtainable all over Australia at all leading Mercers


“AUSTRALIAN-MADE" PREFERENCE LEAGUE
OFFICERS, 1926
Patron:
His Excellency Sir DUDLEY DE CHAIR,
K.C.8., M.V.O.
GOVERNOR OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Vice-Patrons:
E. P. SIMPSON, Esq.
J. NANGLE, Esq.
Board of Management:
FRED. R. BURLEY, Esq.
L. NAPIER THOMSON, Esq.
W. AINSWORTH, Esq.
J. A. YOUNG, Esq.
C. V. POTTS, Esq.
President:
PETER BOARD, Esq., C.M.G.
Auditor ;
C. Le MAISTRE WALKER, Esq., 0.8. E.
Director : W. R. BAGNALL, Esq., M.L.A.
OFFICES : No. 1 FOURTH FLOOR, BULL’S CHAMBERS, 28 MARTIN PLACE, SYDNEY


/
'he
e
mi
ia.
BELLS /,
t PEALS
Australian Metals worked up by Australian Artisans are the fine metal
of Industrial Prospeirty and National Safety.
Since 1859 Danks’ have been manufacturers and invite inquiries for;—
“Daspyl” Plumbers, and Engineers’ Brassware.
Sheet Lead, Lead Pipe, Lead Products.
“ Billabong ” Windmills and Pumps.
“Billabong” Troughing (Cattle, Sheep, Pigs).
Bells and Bells in Peals.
Hospital Steel Furniture and Antiseptic Fittings.
Sanitary Street Fountains, etc.
Warehouses at
SYDNEY & MELBOURNE.
Cable Address:
“BRASS," SYDNEY.
Factories at
SYDNEY & MELBOURNE.
DANKS’
SiYDNEY
LEADMILL
""il.lkii.lilt
• f-
£s#
7k
324350 Pitt St. Sydney'
391*403Bourke StMelbourne -:i
Page Four.
/
*1
PLUMBERS 6
ENGINEERS
BRASSWARE
1
HOSPI
APPARATUS
w


CONTENTS
Page.
Foreword - - - - -- -- 1
Officers of the “ Australian-Made ” Preference
League, 1926 - - - - - - • 3
The Story of the “ Australian-Made ” Preference
League ------ 15,16,17,18,19
Activities of the League - - - - - - 22
The National Significance of Preference to “ Aus-
tralian-Made ” - - - . - 23,25,27,29
The Story of the “ Great White ” Train - 39,41,43,
45, 47, 49, 5L 53, 55
Industrial Progress of Australia - - 69, 88, 89, 95,97
Objects of the League 102,.
Ten Points for Good Australians - 106
“ Australian-Made ” Preference Shopping Week
Shield for Best Dressed Window - - - 107
“ Song of Australia ” - - - - - - 108
Page.
Itinerary of Historic First Tour of the “ Great
White ” Train - - - - - - - 111
Itinerary of Second Tour of the “ Great White ”
Train ' - - - - - - - - 113
“ Australian-Made ” Preference Shopping Weeks
and Civic Receptions - 114-115
Wireless Station 2XT on the “ Great White
Train - . - - - - - - 116
Everywhere Enthusiasm Greeted the “ Great
White’’Train - - - - - - 117
An Impression of the “ Great White ” Train - - 118
The “ Australian-Made ” Preference League Ten-
dered a Banquet to Representative Citizens' in
Sixty Towns - - - - - - - 119
The Song of the Train - - - - - -120
Over one hundred thousand School Children re-
ceived the League’s Message - - - - 121
Advertisers’ Index - - - - - - -151


Banking History-THE COMMONWEALTH BANK OF AUSTRALIA
IT is difficult to trace the actual be-
ginning of banking. The interchange
of goods between the people, even
from pre-historic times, has gradually
led up to the present highly efficient
systems of banking in vogue throughout
the world. The generally accepted deri-
vation of the word “ bank ” is from the
Italian word “ banco—a bench,” from the
fact that the Jews of Lombardy used
benches in the market places for the
exchange of money and bills.
However interesting the history of the
evolution of banking may be, one con-
clusion is undoubted—that the present
day system is most highly efficient and
comprehensive, yet even in these days of intense organisation, it is
rarely indeed that you will find a bank which so efficiently and comprehen-
sively combines every phase of banking, general or savings, as Australia’s
own national bank, the Commonwealth Bank of Australia.
There is an element of the unusual about the meteoric rise of this bank to a
position in Australia of great power and prestige. Established under the
Commonwealth Bank Act on December 22nd, 1911, its first Governor, was
the late Sir Denison Miller —then Mr. D. S. K. Miller, metropolitan inspector
of the Bank of New South Wales. He took up the reins of Government
from June, 1912.
Mr. James Kell, six months later, was appointed Deputy Governor, and the
nucleus of a staff engaged. To-day that staff, with temporary assistants
and others, numbers well over 2,000, and is scattered throughout the length
and breadth of the great continent of Australia, the Pacific Islands, and at
London, where the service has two branches, around which much military
business centred during war years.
The Commonwealth Bank of Australia was to be a national institution
outside political control. Twenty-three other banks were operating, with
an aggregate capital of over £28,000,000. Mr. Denison Miller was charged
with the responsibility of building a state-wide banking service that must
have a greater influence in the financial sphere than any other bank —in
fact it was to be the bank of bankers 1 Virtually he started with the Common-
wealth of Australia as his capital; actually he borrowed £lO,OOO from the
Treasury, and started the first state-owned bank of its kind, and moreover a
unique service in Australia, and probably in the whole Empire, because its
functions included both a general and a savings bank service.
The borrowed capital was speedily paid back, and to-day the accumulated
profits are well over £5,000,000. All this accomplished in some fourteen
years, during which a great national disaster in the shape of the World War
intervened, and added mightily to the problems of the new young bank just
finding its financial feet. Great tribute has been paid this bank by all
Australia, and its Governor, as the result of his financial genius at this
critical period, received a knighthood in recognition of services rendered to
the Empire during war years. This well merited honor gave intense
pleasure to the thousands who came into contact with the great
banker.
With the sudden death of the Governor, a day or two after he had completed
eleven years’ service with the bank, the then Deputy Governor, Mr. James
Kell, took over the position, which he has held ever since. In October,
1924, a Board of Directors was appointed and the members of this Board
represented Australia’s primary producers, financiers and industrialists.
Here we have a unique position ; a huge State Bank successfully operating
without antagonism from its associate banks, and dividing its profits
up equally into two parts —one 'to go to a reserve fund, and the other
to a national debt sinking fund.
Fees are paid to the Board of Directors. There is no long list of share-
holders to be considered, no dividend to be declared, and no melon to
be split; all profits go back to the bank’s
own reserve fund and to the fund that
is ultimately to help in the redemption
of Australia’s national debt!
Throughout the Commonwealth all
classes of people have benefited by the
establishment of the service. It has
always stood for modern progress and
high efficiency, for the elimination of
delay and “ red tape,” and the intelligent
application of new systems that are labor-
saving, speedy, thorough and tend to
reduce the margin allowable for error.
The Bank performed a great service for
Australia when it raised over £428,000,000
for War, Peace and State Loans over a
period of 12 years, and in a country of
something less than six million people.
This is a notable achievement for a
young country, sparsely populated.
Si
am
If
EL
*


mm*.Wm . ’
' t i- -■
; '><**?! i V
'• - * V ’ ,< n < '*A/*skk-&l
4» " j ?• ' rv
:t*n
►' #-
fj
THE CYCLE OF
CIVILISATION
Production.—There is dignity in the production of
the things that sustain the lives and provide the
pleasures of the peoples of the world.
Manufacture.—There is the thrill of achievement
in the modern manufacture that goes so far to improve
the civilisation of the age while supplying its needs.
Commerce.—-There is the pride of nation building
in commerce—the transport of merchandise between
peoples and places—romance, too, and power.
And all of these are interdependent each upon the
other and the factor that binds them together, that is
the medium of adjustment and literally “ makes the
wheels go round,” is Finance.
Whatever your part in the never-ending cycle of
production and consumption, you will look for the
highest degree of efficiency and security in the Banking
Service you use.
This is provided for you from any and every point in
Australia by your own Bank, the . . .
Commonwealth lank of Australia.
Cjuaxanieect by the Comnwnwealthfyo^emrnent.
Head Office,MartmPlace.
SYDNEY
\#U
\'Mm u
MWr
Vc?:
te


HADFIELDS (Australia) LIMITED
Head Offices , Main Foundries, Forge and Engineering Works;
MITCHELL ROAD, ALEXANDRIA :: SYDNEY, N.S.W.
Branch Works —BASSENDEAN, PERTH, W.A. Branch Offices at MELBOURNE, Vic. and BRISBANE, Q.
Hadfields Steel Industry established in Australia in recent years has proved
of immense value to the economical and efficient development of Australian
Industries. The commanding position which it holds to-day is based on a
rare combination of practical and scientific experience applied with energy
to the production of Steels of the highest quality, and in numerous
varieties, which throughout Australasia have proved equal in every
respect to similar products made in Sheffield (the home of high quality
steels), and other parts of the world.
Hadfields (Australia) Limited ate the first to produce in Australia
the full range of special and Alloy Steels so widely used in our in-
dustries to-day, such as Tyre an I Axle Steels, Hadfields Manganese
Steel, Chrome, Chrome-Vanadium, Chrome-Nickel, Vanadium, Acid-
Resisting Steels, etc.
Hadfields (Australia) Limited have the benefit of the accumulated
knowledge of 40 years’ intense research work in the development
of Alloy Steels carried out in the Sheffield laboratories of Hadfields
Limited, and all steel made by Hadfields (Australia) Limited is pro-
duced under strict laboratory control, and in accordance with the
forme lae and methods of Hadfields Ltd., Sheffield.
The main Works of Hadfields (Australia) Limited are situated in
Mitchell Road, Alexandria, Sydney, and comprise the largest and
most modern Steel Foundry in the Commonwealth. It is equipped
with 3 Electric Furnaces, and all the latest devices and mechanical appli-
ances for the manufacture of High-grade Steel Products.
An extensive Engineering Shop also forms part of the establishment-
This is fitted up with all types of modern machine tools, which embrace
several of the largest machines of their kind in the Commonwealth.
In this Department a varied range of Engineering Work is undertaken
for Railways, Tramways, Collieries, Mines, Quarries, Sugar Mills, Paper
Mills, Cement Works, Chemical Works, and other Industrial Under-
takings.
A large Smithy and Forge Shop is also in operation. 1 his is provided
with Targe Steam-Hydraulic Forging Press, Powerful Steam and Pneu-
matic Hammers, also a modern Drop Forging Equipment.
The Company has also established a Branch Works at Bassendean,
Perth, in Western Australia, which is an indication of the expansion of
business which has taken place.
During recent years the Company has supplied over 30,000 tons of special
steel products to important industries throughout Australia and New
Zealand.
w
-if
1
*-'V
tV'-
V ;
Cutting Teeth in Gears up to 8 ft. 6 ins. diam. by 15 ins. face in Fladfields Sydney Works.


HADFIELDS (Australia) LIMITED
Head Office, Main Foundries, Forge and Engineering Works :: :: MITCHKLL ROAD, ALEXANDRIA, SYDNEY, N.S.W.
Branch Works — BASSENDEAN, PERTH, W.A. Branch Offices at MELBOURNE, Vic. and BRISBANE, Q.
u
A Poire/fu! loathe in Hadfie/ds Sydney Workshops, Turning Shafts weighing five tons
adfields Specialise in :
‘ ERA” MANGANESE AND OTHER SPECIAL ALLOY STEELS.
STEEL CASTINGS, up to ten tons in weight.
STEEL FORGINGS, up to five tons in weight.
DROP FORGINGS, up to 401bs. in weight.
HEAVY STEEL GEARS, all Types and Sizes.
CRUSHING PLANTS, Stationary and Portable.
JAW, DISC AND GYRATORY CRUSHERS, all sizes.
TRUCK WHEELS AND AXLES, all sizes and weights.
WHEELS, AXLES AND MOUNTINGS, for Railway and Tramway
Rolling Sto.-k.
WEA INC PAI.TS, for all Industrial Plant and Machinery.
PLANT AND MACHINERY for Mines, Collieries, Cement Works,
Fertilizer Works, 1 aper Mills, &c.
9*
4*
1
3^
11
A large Drill at work in Hadfieids Sydney Works.


FROM ACORNS BIG OAKS DO GROW!
A few years ago a young Australian, W. H. Plumb, with a little capital and a
stout heart, laid the foundation of what is recognised at the present
day as the most modemly equipped and efficient tool making factory in the
Southern Hemisphere.
To such men as Mr. Plumb Australia owes as much for the Pioneer effort in
her secondary industries as
she does to men like John Mc-
Arthur, who pioneered her
primary industries.
The future of Australia depends
largely on the men who hate
the initiative, power and de-
termination to pioneer her
secondary industries.
The excellent slogan “ Plumb’s
Tools Always Plumb ” has
been advertised throughout
New South Wales mainly
by the exhibit on board the
“ Great White ” Train.
Illustrating the result of this
and other advertising, is the
increase in staff and plant to
meet the immediate demands
made for these splendid pro-
ductions. In addition to the
actual increase in business,
brought about by the White
Train Tour, considerable ad-
vice, technical and otherwise,
was tendered by and to Shire
Engineers and others who
use the “Fern Brand” tools and
are satisfied with their quality.
The big feature of “ Fern ” Brand tools is that they are made entirely from
the very best materials and finished to meet the climatic conditions of the
country. Customers are helped considerably by the advantages derived
directly from being in touch with the manufacturer.
From the manufacturing side, there is only 5 per cent, of overseas material
used, and that is highest grade tool steel imported from Sheffield.
As an example, take the “ Fern Brand ” soldering irons, produced bv the
thousand. The steel in the shank is from Lithgow and Newcastle, the copper
used in the head being produced at Port Kembla, Therefore Plumb’s
“ Fern Brand ” tools made by Australian workmen, operating under ideal
conditions, should commend themselves to all patriotic Australians.
As there is a slight possible chance of a misunderstanding occurring,
and a connection being made
between the giant American
firm of the same name, we
take this opportunity of telling
the Australian public that there
has not, neither will there ever
be, a connection between these
two firms.
As the trade mark of the
“ Fern ” is symbolic of our
guarantee as to quality and
workmanship of our products,
we recommend tradesmen when
making their purchases to
identify the name of Plumb
by the Trade Mark.
The general public has our
guarantee that we shall not
sacrifice quality for price, be-
lieving that the time old adage,
“ The sweetness of low price
never exceeds the bitterness of
poor quality,” applies to every
article of manufacture. In the
face of strong opposition.
Plumb’s tools have grown into
their own big niche of popu-
larity by their quality alone, and
when this field is protected by
a Tariff wall, greater production
will be assured. Increased production ensures bigger plants, and larger
plants in turn mean more employment and reduced prices in tools.
In conclusion, we would advise you to be loyal to yourselves, loyal to the
future generations of Australians and loyal to this wonderful, great, and
glorious land of Australia, by insisting first, last and all the time on
Australian-Made goods.
W.fI.pLIIMB
OLPIGNEBEp
ofI'heAuSTRALIAK
Toolmaking-
Industr/o.


*
«MaiMiiaiiaiiMiaiiMiaiiMiiiaiMi*MiMiitaV
i sft? 11
=j:::::;::::::::::::::::;:::;:;::::::::::;::: ii
II il
i\ Exceptional ii
ii Quality, ||
SI !•
ii First-Class ii
ii . ii
|i Workmanship, ii
li and il
ii ii
Ei above all il
AUSTRALIAN
MADE
»aaiaaaaiiaaaaiiiaaaaiiiiaaiiiaaiaiiaiaaiiiaaai
CONTRACTORS TO H.M. GOVERNMENTS
355
\
REMEMBER!
ji PLUMB’S ij
ii Australian-Made ii
Ii FERN II
SI
II BRAND
:!
ii TOOLS
are
fully guaranteed.
•aiaaiaaaaaiaaßaaaiaaßaaaaißiaiiiaaaaaaßßßaaaiaaa
PORTION OF EXHIBIT OF “ FERN BRAND” TOOLS BY W. H. PLUMB ON THE GREAT WHITE TRAIN.


The United Nail & Wire Netting Go. Ltd.
THE Company was incorporated in 1906 with
works situated in George Street West,
Sydney. At that time the manufacture of
such lines as produced by the Company was
practically negligible in N.S.W. Owing to the
high quality of the products it was not long be-
fore the original works and plant became in-
sufficient to cope with the business that was
offering. Therefore in 1907 a site was purchased
at Jones Street, Pyrmont and extensive factories
built thereon. In 1916 this property was resumed
for railway extension and in 1919 the works were
removed to the present location where, with view
to future extension an area of 5 acres had been se-
cured.
The Nail Works, which have the largest output
in the Commonwealth, under the well known
“ Holdfast ” brand turns out the following lead-
ing lines comprising
Wire Nails
Galvanized Nails
Copper Nails
Brads
Panel Pins
Bright Clouts
Galvanised Clouts
Rivets
Tram Nails
Wire,
Brass Sheathing Nails
Brass Boot Rivets
Stee Boot Rivets
Gutter Spikes
Deck Spikes
Special Trade Nails
Bright Staples .
Galvanized Staples
Galvanized Barbed Wire
etc., etc
From raw material to manufactured product the
lines covered by the “ Holdfast ” Brand are al-
most entirely Australian and made by a purely
Australian company.
GEORGE, ALLEN & McEVOY STREETS :: :: :: WATERLOO, SYDNEY


The United Nail & Wire Netting Co. Ltd.
GEORGE, ALLEN and McEVOY STREETS :: WATERLOO, SYDNEY
NSu
M
s»
E
m
n
BS
S
111
m
tS
m
mm
'S-'v
mm:.
THE LARGEST NAIL WORKS IN THE SOUTHERN HEMISPHERE


“UNION” CEMENT
For Strength and Beauty
SIC
m
■ ;
A"
.
A FINE EXAMPLE OF
BEAUTIFICATION :
Concrete Road, Footpath
and Sea Wall
ROSE BAY, SYDNEY
MADE WITH
“UNION” Cement
COXSTHECTED BY THE
WOOLLAHRA COUNCIL.
L. J. Lindsay, 8.C.E., Engineer.
F. Farr, Overseer.
Zb e • Commonwealth • Iportlanb * Cement • Company • Xlnriteb
Works: PORTLAND, N.S.W. Office: 4 O’CONNELL STREET, SYDNEY.


The Story of the “Australian-Made” Preference League
BY WALLACE NELSON
EVERY movement worthy of the
name is founded on an idea,
bom of a sentiment.
It might also be said that human
progress is but the translation of the
visions of earth’s great dreamers
into the realities of human life.
The dream of to-day becomes the
reality of to-morrow.
The “ Australian-Made ” Pref-
erence League grew out of an idea,
or to be more correct, an idea com-
bined with a sentiment.
For many years people had been
talking in Australia of Imperial
Preference. Leading men like Mr.
Deakin, Mr. Hughes, and Mr. Bruce
had, in season and out of season,
proclaimed the wisdom of the people
of the Empire giving preference to
Empire productions.
The gospel is a worthy one.
But to some Australians here and
there, it appeared to overlook an
important fact, namely, that while
it is good for us to work for the
welfare of the Empire, perhaps the
best way to do that effectively is
to work for the welfare of a special
His Excellency Sir Dudley de Chair, K.C.B.,
Governor , New South Wales .
part of it which happens to be under
our control. And so men began to
say : “ Preference for the Empire
is all right, but what is wrong with
preference for Australia first ? After
all, Australia is wofully undeveloped
and unpopulated, and insecure. Our
secondary industries have been sadly
neglected. We produce the finest
wool in the world, and yet we import
nearly all of our woollen textiles.
Would it not pay us, and pay the
Empire, if we devoted a little more
attention to the development of our
industrial potentialities ? May not
the greatest service we can render to
our great Empire be to make Aus-
tralia prosperous and progressive ?
After all, our power to control the
Empire is small. Certainly it is not
nearly as great as our power to control
Australia. The greatest help we can
render the Empire is to make Aus-
tralia strong, and the surest way of
doing that is to multiply and extend
its industries. And is there a better
way of doing that than by giving a
definite preference to “ Australian-
Made ” goods and products ?


Mr. Fred R. Burley,
Founder and First President of the “ Australian-Made”
Preference League
The first definite enunciation of
the principles of the League was
contained in an article written'by its
virtual founder, Mr. Fred Burley,
about two years ago, entitled “ Pref-
erence to Australia.” Shortly after
the publication of this article, Mr.
Burley invited a few friends to meet
him at “ Berlei House ” to discuss
the wisdom of starting an association
to propagate preference for “ Aus-
tralian-Made ” goods.
Mr. Bagnall, M.L.A., was ap-
pointed Director, and ably assisted
by his staff, he has carried on a
splendid campaign of publicity with
the result that the League has be-
come recognised as one of the most
vital movements in Australia.
A series of visits to factories—
headed by His Excellency the
Governor —and the “ Great W hite ”
Train have contributed very materi-
ally to bring the League and its ideals
prominently before the people of
Australia.
The League must stand or fall’by
its principles—-by the thought, or
ideal, or aspiration, of which it is but
the organised embodiment. WTiat, ‘
then, are the principles of the League ?
First of all, let it be said that the
League is based on a sane and prac-
tical patriotism—not the patriotism
that hates or detracts other countries.
Mr. Peter Board, C.M.G.,
President “ Australian-Made” Preference
League.


but the patriotism that works for the good of its own.
The League has come into existence, not to wave flags,
but to accomplish a purpose, not to say things, but
to do them. It holds that if all of us in Australia
exercised a little practical patriotism in our daily purchases
and gave a definite preference to “ Australian-Made ”
goods, the inevitable result would be augmented industry
and general prosperity.
In a recent speech. Air.
Pratten, the Minister for
Customs, declared that
the following three things
were necessary for the com-
plete development of
Australia :
1. Protect your own
industries.
2. Buy your own
goods.
3. Provide your own
public credit.
The policy of local manu-
facture is in the highest
Mr. Wallace Nelson,
Poet, Orator , and Journalist , Officia.
Lecturer on the "Great White" Train,
also one of the Founders of the “Aus-
tralian-Made” Preference League.
degree beneficial to the farmer. For it provides him with
the best of all markets—the local market. An overseas
market is in more ways than one an unsatisfactory market.
In the first place, it is unreliable. Again, it is utterly
uncontrollable. There is no power on earth to control
the world market. And when it falls Australia, in so far
as she is dependent on it, falls also. Again, Australia’s
geographical position makes the world market the worst
market of all for her, because she is furthest from it. For
the year 1922-23 the value of Australia’s agricultural pro-
duction was £122,425,000. Of this total only £24,000,000
was exported. So by far her largest market, as well as her
best market, is the home market. What our farmers need
most of all is to increase their home market, and the way to
do that is to build more factories and more workshops and
employ more artisans. For example, if only 20 per
cent, of the sum of £ 160,000,000 spent abroad
yearly were spent in Australia, our population would
increase by hundreds of thousands year by year, and the
home markets for our
farmers would increase in
exactly the same' pro-
portion. Let us have
more factories and we will
have more farms, just as,
in time, having more
farms will mean having
more factories. _, . The
League favours both —at
the same time and all the
time. For they are but two
sides of the same thing,
two aspects of the same
fact, two forms of the same
industrial activity on which
depends, and must ever
Mr. H. Daniell
one of the First Members of the Board of
Management “Australian - Made ”
Preference League.
depend, the wealth, the security, the happiness, and the
greatness of the nation.
It is an absurd error to imagine that the League is in
any way hostile to primary production because it seeks to
promote the secondary industries. It recognises that the
development of both are necessary to the permanent in-
dustrial progress of Australia. If it lays greater stress, or
appears to lay greater stress, on the promotion of the
secondarv industries, that is because hitherto these have
been most neglected by the Australian people. For many
years Australia concentrated on the primary industries.


Indeed, in the early stages
of her history it was the
highest economic wisdom
to do so. It was good
business to use her vast
pastoral lands for the rais-
ing of stock, and to ex-
change her primary pro-
ducts for secondary pro-
ducts. As a matter of his-
torical fact the great pas-
toralists of the past by
pursuing this wise policy
laid the foundation of Aus-
tralia. But a foundation,
however admirable, how-
ever great, is not in itself
enough. It is not an end ;
Mr. L. Napier Thomson,
Member of the Board of Management of the
“ Australian-Made ” Preference League.
Mr. W. Ainsworth,
Member of the Board of Management of the
“ Australian-Made” Preference League.
Mr. C. V. Potts,
Member of the Board of Management of the
“ Australian-Made ” Preference League.
it is a beginning. And just as it was the glory of the man
of the past to lay the foundation, it should be the pride of
the men of the present to rear on that foundation the com-
pleted structure of industrial nationhood.
Just as the “ Australian - Made ” Preference League
knows no creed and no party, so it does not favour
any one industry as against another, or any one branch
of industry as against another. Its aims are national; it
seeks the industrial welfare of Australia, and the industrial
welfare of Australia can only be attained by the wisely
co-ordinated activities of all useful industries, whether
they be called primary or secondary, whether they are
carried on in the country or in the town. The League
does not aim at establishing factories in the place of farms,
but at establishing factories in addition to farms, and it
seeks to do this, not by legislation, not by compulsion,
but by the free agency of
free men and women.
Not only is the League
not hostile to the country ;
it is strongly of opinion
that the time has come
when something should be
done to enable our country
places to play a larger part
in the industrial life of
the nation and to share in
larger measure the ad-
vantages of modern in-
dustrial progress. It
favours a policy of de-
centralisation. It would
do for Australia in this
respect what is being done
Mr. J. A. Young,
Member of the Board of Management, of the
“ Australian-Made ” Preference League.


i| “AUSTRALIAN-MADE” 11
jj MEANS BETTER TRADE ||
jj AND LE'VDS THE WAY jj
jj TO BETTER PAY I!
|| ™ Australian e Sy y I!
for Europe and America. There mighty changes are
taking place. In an arresting article on “ Factories and
Farms ” by Mr. Lancelot Lawton in the “ Fortnightly
Review,” we read :
“ In America, leading engineers, supported by the authority
o£ Mr. Hoover, are advocating a vast scheme of
super-power highways destined to spread electrical
energy to the remotest village. Numerous factories
are being removed from the town to the country,
and industrial communities established in rural
surroundings, the idea being that farm life shall
blend with town life, and that industrial workers
shall become small landowners. In Germany, too,
far-seeing plans are being carried out.
In almost every part of rural France networks
of transmission lines have been erected or plans
for their erection are contemplated. And the
same story has to be related of almost every Euro-
pean country.”
Why should not Australia join in this
great new movement which may end in
science and invention, during the next
hundred years, doing as much for the farm
as, during the last hundred years, they did
for the factory ?
In all probability countries in the future
will be more self-dependent and self-con-
tained than they are at present. After
all, the industrial developments of the
last 100 years or so have been of an
abnormal nature. England, for ex-
ample, is not likely to continue to be
a great workshop for other countries.
She will depend in the future less and
less on foreign markets and more and
more on home markets. And other
countries will do the same. The ships
of commerce are not likely to be swept
from the seas, but in all human proba-
Mr. W. R. M.L.A.,
Director of the “Australian - Made”
Preference League and Organiser and Di-
rector of the “ Great White ” Train.
bility international commerce will play a smaller part in the
life of nations. And just as there will be less centralization
in the world as a whole, so there will be less in all the
individual countries of the world, including Australia.
All the nations of the world in the future are likely to
become more self-contained.
It is needless to say that self-dependence
increases national safety, particularly in the
case of a country like Australia, whose
overseas shipping must of necessity cover a
wide expanse of ocean. If Australia can
produce within her borders practically all
that is necessary to sustain life and ensure
adequate defence in event of attack, she
will be guaranteed a measure of safety and a
degree of peace in the future which few
nations have ever enjoyed in the past.
The policy of the League, which is good
for all classes of the community, because
it advances the interests of all, has been
summed up in these lines :
“ He who buys £ Australian-Made ’
Helps to build Australian trade,
Calls forth the skill and enterprise,
From which great industries arise.
With factory workers who demand
More and more products of the land,
Causing millions more to toil
On the ever-yielding soil—
Millions who in turn must buy
The things the factories supply.
Till farms and factories far and wide
Grow and flourish side by side.
Thus shall our country one day be
Rich and powerful, great and free.”


r
1
::
ii
ii
GOVERNMENT SAVINGS BANK
9s? 4*
SAVINGS BANK
DEPT.
Personal, Joint and Trust
Accounts opened; also
Accounts for Children
of any age.
4 % interest paid up to
£5OO, and 3|% on
excess to £l,OOO.
1,130,876 Depositors with
balances Totalling
£61,566,226.
ds6 ds6 ass dss 6|s.^
of N.S.W. and RURAL BANK.
$
*4:
h
m
RURAL BANK
DEPT.
Cheque Accounts Opened
for Individuals, Firms,
Companies, or
Institutions.
Fixed Deposits
Accepted.
Deposits Lent only to Agri-
cultural and Pastoral
Primary Producers.
■ Nev> Head Office (n course of construction.
! Head Office : 19-23 MARTIN PLAGE, SYDNEY. 171 Branches and 553 Agencies. No Agencies at Post Offices.


The Governor, accompanied by Lady de Chair and Miss de Chair and representative party from the “Australian-Made” Preference
League, visits Arnott’s Biscuit Factory. Mr. Arnott welcoming His Excellency.


X
BE A GOOD AUSTRALIAN!
ENROL as an ASSOCIATE MEMBER
;»
ACTIVITIES OF THE LEAGUE
“ AUSTRALIAN-MADE ” PREFERENCE
LEAGUE.
“ It is truly a national movement, without party
or sectional aims. It only asks Australians to
be true to themselves, and they will surely bring
prosperity to all. ”
—Sir Dudley de Chair on the occasion of the official
launching of the “ Australian-Made ” Preference
League.
[Extract from the Sydney Morning Herald, nth
July, 1924.]
OBJECTIVE OF THE “AUSTRALIAN-MADE”
PREFERENCE LEAGUE.
/ T i HE objective of the “ Australian-Made ” Preference
League is to produce in the minds of the Australian
people a fixed desire and determination to support Aus-
tralian industries by giving a definite preference to Aus-
tralia’s products and manufactures. The League holds
that the consumer is the great Atlas who bears on his
broad shoulders the industries of the world. It matters
not how high our tariff wall; it matters not how splendidly
equipped our factories and workshops ; it matters not
how expert and efficient our workmen; if the consumer
does not support them—if he prefers the imported article
to the Australian article—our industries must languish and
even perish. The “ Australian-Made ” Preference League is
out to conquer the consumer —to persuade him that it is at once
good patriotism and good business to support the industries of his
country.
The League seeks to effect its purpose in the following ways :
(x) By constantly impressing upon the Commonwealth
and State Governments, Shires, and Municipalities,
the supreme need of supplying all their requirements
with “ Australian-made.”
(2) By propaganda on platform, through the press, and
popular publications, in town and country.
(3) By organising and helping others to organise de-
monstrations, processions, and other functions
calculated to impress on the minds of the people
the wisdom of buying “ Australian-made ” goods
(4) By delivering addresses with the object of securing
the active sympathy and co-operation of all sections
of the community.
LEAGUE PLEDGE.
I believe Australia can become self-reliant and prosperous
through the development of primary and secondary in-
dustries ; to assist that end, I pledge myself to give pre-
ference at all times to “ Australian-made ” goods and
products, all things being equal, and never to make a
purchase without stating “ Australian-made preferred.”


The National Significance of Preference to “Australian-Made
BY W. R. BAGNALL, M.L.A., Director, The “Australian-Made ” Preference League
COMPETENT observers who have visited Australia from time
to time have been greatly impressed with the remarkable evi-
dence of prosperity and development on every hand, when
they remember the small population occupying our vast territory of
three million square miles.
Until comparatively recently primary production
has been responsible for this but the development
during the past ten years has been greater than any
previous thirty years. This is due almost wholly to the
tremendous strides taken by our secondary industries,
which received their first real impetus during the
war. During that period they received a protection
that amounted almost to prohibition because of the
shipping difficulties of that time. The Common-
wealth Parliament also did its part by providing more
effective tariff duties, the result of which has been to
send the industries ahead by leaps and bounds.
Quite apart from the purely economic advantages
accruing from progressive secondary industries there
is a vital aspect which is paramount. Australia, the
richest undeveloped continent in the world, with a
mere handful of population, is practically alone in the
Pacific, far distant from kindred peoples in the event
of international strife in these waters. Owing to
the danger of sea communication being interrupted
it is imperative that we should have the ability to
produce all the essentials for the defence of our
country as well as for peaceful industry. As Admiral Jellicoe indicated
in his report on the defence of these shores, effective Australian safe-
guards cannot be secured until the country has been industrialised.
Increased population is our greatest need; secondary industries
provide the only practical medium whereby we can hope to absorb
with ease that new population. Instead of, as we are to-day, with
difficulty absorbing a mere handful of newcomers, if the national sig-
nificance of secondary industries was understood by all Australians we
should without difficulty easily absorb each year hundreds of thousands
of our own kith and kin who are only too anxious to come here once
they are assured of profitable opportunities.
It is interesting to make some comparisons as a guide to the effec-
William Charles Wentworth,
Father of the Australian Constitution.
tiveness of secondary industries in increasing population. Prior to
the Federation, New South Wales was a free trade State, while Victoria
was strictly protectionist. The result was that Victoria made rapid
strides towards freeing herself from dependence upon outside pro-
ductions and at the same time was, in spite of her
substantially smaller territory, rapidly overtaking
New South Wales in general progress, prosperity,
and population. The coming of Federation, of
course, at once instituted a tariff protective wall
over all Australia, and the trade of New South
Wales at once began to feel its effect. Industries
have developed with great rapidity, and, in conse-
quence, to-day she has completely regained the
status of the primary State. Apart from prosperity
and progress, the most noticeable increase, particu-
larly in Sydney and suburbs, has been in population.
The same may be said of Australia as a whole.
To-day there are nearly 25,000 factories employing
directly over 400,000 work people. During recent
years secondary industries have superseded primary
industries in the number of employees engaged and
the value of production.
It is truly remarkable the degree of apathy that
exists in the minds of the vast majority of the people
on the question of Australia’s national security.
Up to the present, she has enjoyed immunity from
invasion solely owing to the might and prestige of the
British Navy. Recent developments cause competent observers to
view the future with some trepidation. It is recognised that since the
war the centre of international gravity has changed to the Pacific and that
the British Navy, owing to the huge war debt borne by Britain, has been
substantially reduced. These factors, combined with the almost com-
plete absence of docking facilities in Australasian waters, compel
those who have Australia’s future at heart to wonder whether we are
living in a fool’s paradise. No man knows how soon we may be
confronted with a situation that will find us dependent upon our own
resources for the preservation of our national integrity.
The primary industries are, perhaps, justly described as the back-
bone of a country, but secondary industries may also be described


SSS
'J, r
sa
B ...... .
m
m
S
-»•
**Stt
4*
let
m :
wm
mmmm
PIONEER HEELS LTD., Alexandria, SYDNEY, N.S.W
THE MAKING OF A WOODEN HEEL FOR MY LADY'S SHOE.
It will surprise many to know that the Wooden Heel of
a Ladv’s Shoe is comprised of twenty-two operations.
Expensive and accurate Machinery is required for
these operations.
The wood is the most important material, and it has
to be selected, seasoning takes from twelve to
eighteen months, being the best Tasmanian Mvrtlc.
The covering of Celluloid to give the Black or Colored
Patent finish, is done by hand, and it takes a long time
before a girl becomes expert in this work.
This industry is comparatively new to Australia, but
such progress has been accomplished, that the finished
article is now equal to any produced in other parts ot
the world.
The whole of the materials used are produced in
Australia, with the exception of the Celluloid.
a
ill
B
mi
:
I
s
iLM
P 5
4\
m
£2
cSSEES
a


as the heart and sinews. No country that is wholly devoted to
primary production ever developed national strength or long remained
uninvaded by a stronger power.
Secondary industries made the British Empire what it is. They
provide a vast range of skilled activities which bring into play the
highest cultural genius.
America is the most impressive illustration, perhaps, of a people
consciously grasping these truths and setting about
deliberately the task of creating a great self-reliant
nation. For many years prior to the outbreak of
war, she easily absorbed over a million newcomers,
people who went to that great land of opportunity
of their own accord, simply because they knew there
was ample scope for their skill and energies.
To-day Australia is unquestionably at the cross-
roads of her destiny. Nurtured in the security
provided by the might of the British Navy, she has
reached national adolescence; the virile qualities of
her people were disclosed in the heroism of her
soldiers in the Great World struggle. Whether her
population will continue to enjoy the serenity of peace
and prosperity depends upon the actions taken by her
statesmen and her people at the present time. Con-
tinued apathy and unorganised objective will surely
produce penalties, perhaps at no very distant date.
The opportunity to build a new Britain in the southern
seas, safe from invasion, perhaps the new heart of
the great British Empire in time to come, is a dazzling
objective that should appeal to every thoughtful
Australian. It can be done only if the problems involved are thor-
oughly understood and, being understood, the action involved
taken.
Apart from the paramount importance of national security, there
are, of course, many other advantageous consequences arising from
the multiplication of industries. Perhaps the greatest economic
benefit would be secured by the producers, whose greatest disad-
vantage to-day is that they are dependent upon the vagaries of overseas
markets. It is an accepted truism that the home market is the best
market. By building up our population through the medium of
secondary industries we are multiplying the home market for the
primary producer and so hastening the day when the primary producer
will be freed from the precarious position obtaining at present.
Having admitted the general proposition that the development of
secondary industries is Australia’s most vital need to-day, there are
subsidiary aspects which call for consideration. One of the most
noticeable developments of the past ten years, synchronising with the
tremendous increase in secondary production, has been the marked
tendency on the part of country dwellers to move to the cities, to the
detriment of primary industries. It is, therefore, urgent that Gov-
ernments, both Federal and State, should provide facilities that will
enable secondary industries to be established in
country centres. The progress of Australia has
been mainly along “ catch as catch can ” lines, just
as George Street was, in the beginning, a natural
bullock track, and our cities and towns laid out on
haphazard lines. Modern conceptions have pro-
duced a town planning organisation to correct these
failures. So the time is opportune for a convention
of qualified representatives of the interests involved
for a national stocktaking, and to lay down, scien-
tifically, plans that will produce co-ordinated effort.
Unfortunately the Parliaments of the Common-
wealth are too heavily weighed down with the dead-
weight of party strife to be able to grapple with the
task. There is overwhelming evidence all over the
world that Parliamentary Government is appallingly
inefficient as a machine for solving national problems.
Each year that passes sees them more handicapped in
that respect. The mass of the people has only vague
intuitions on national problems. It is mostly con-
cerned about and appreciative of everyday “ hand
to mouth ” problems, with the result that political
- —— if —--- ————
parties, to maintain their popularity, become politically waterlogged
as useful instruments on vital questions.
There is no reason why Australia should not have many large
cities in country centres. Hydro-electric power can be produced
and the Ford principle of combining both primary production and
secondary production in industry is shown to be entirely practicable.
In various country centres the Ford Company has established plants
where the employees are part of their time working on their farms
and the remainder working in the factory. He has taken the factory
to the farmer and is using the farmer’s spare time for their mutual
advantage. Perhaps the most effective local illustration of the great
possibilities in this connection is to be found at Maryborough, Vic-
toria. Prior to seven or eight years ago this town was what is known
as “ dead.” Half the houses were empty, those that were occupied
Sir Henry Parkes, Father of Federation.


jag::::;::;:::;::::::;;::;:::;::::::;:;;:;;;
McDonald's
Super-Diesel Oil Driven Road Rollers
'T i HE big Engineering Works of
A. H. McDonald & Co.
Pty. Ltd., which occupy a site of
5 acres, at Richmond, Melbourne,
Victoria, are another striking ex-
ample of Australian advancement
in manufacturing. They emphasise
most emphatically the benefits to
be obtained by giving support to
Australian made products, and
they prove most conclusively that
with this support, Australians can
produce goods equal, and often
superior, to those of any country
in the world.
©
provided for Australians, and
money is circulated throughout the
Commonwealth. The works are
the largest in Australia devoted to
the construction of Internal Com-
bustion Engines.
The success of McDonald’s Imper-
ial Super-Diesel Road Rollers is
due to recognition of certain dis-
tinguishing features and qualities,
and to an appreciation of the fact
that they are made in Australia.
McDonald’s Imperial Super-Diesel
Oil Driven Road Rollers have
met the keenest competition of
the imported. They have been
subjected to the most gruelling
tests in order to demonstrate
their efficiency.
Municipalities, etc, guided by
theE Engineers, had for many
years accepted the Imported Roller
as a matter of course, but to-day,
a transformation has taken place,
and the McDonald Imperial Super-
Diesel Oil Driven Road Roller has
won a decided preference over imported Road Rollers, as evidenced by the fact
that more McDonald Imperial Super-Diesel Road Rollers are sold in Australia
annually than any other make. This means that regular employment is
In addition to Road Rollers,
Messrs. A. H. McDonald & Co.
Pty. Ltd., of course, manufacture
the famous Imperial Super-Diesel
Oil Engines.
The most prominent points of
superiority being the saving in time
over imported Steam Rollers, in
that no time is wasted in getting
up steam; and the exceptionally
low running cost, due to the fact
that crude oil only is used.
In these respects the McDonald
Imperial Super-Diesel Road Roller
does 30 more work at 40 less
cost than imported Steam Rollers.
Last year n repeat orders were received in 16 weeks. Over 45 Rollers
were supplied during 1925. To-day over 100 municipalities are using
McDonald Imperial Super-Diesel Road Rollers.
The following details of sales for Road Construction Work in the S Stales of the Comma wealth are certainly convincing,
Queensland Main Roads Board have Purchased 10 South Australian Local Roads Govt. Dept. Purchased
Victorian Country Roads Board ~ ~ 8 Green Mounts Roads Board, W.A, ~
New South Wales Main Roads Board ~ 6
In addition. Municipalities all over Australia are using McDonald Safer-Diesel Road Rollers:
Messrs. A. H. McDonald & Co. Pty. Ltd. have on hand a number of testimonials which indicate that the Rollers are
giving absolute satisfaction. Another line recently manufactured is the McDonald Imperial Super-Diesel Footpath
Roller, which fills a big need, and is undoubtedly popular with the Councils everywhere.
Full
Particulars from
a. h. McDonald & co.
25 CLARENCE STREET, SYDNEY.
Vic. Address (Showrooms & Works) 570-4 Bridge Road, Richmond
S.A. Address, 134 Waymouth Street, Adelaide.


were in the main housing the parents of children who had gone to
the cities for their livelihood. At this stage Mr. Fred Cuttle visited
the town and selected it to establish a secondary industry. At the
same time, when laying down his plant, he provided that it should
supply power and lighting for the town as well. To-day over 600
employees enjoy well-paid employment. The young men and
women have returned to their homes, and a hive of industry has
jff as
I
\ , ~
taken the place of dying inactivity. Small farmers
find it profitable to produce for the increased popu-
lation and every week something like £3OOO is dis-
tributed in wages. Other industries are being es-
tablished, and, with proper encouragement, Mary-
borough is destined to have a big future. This re-
sult can be reproduced all over Australia. The es-
tablishment of woollen mills at Goulburn and Albury
mark the dawn of a new era in New South Wales,
but rapid progress cannot be made without the co-
operation of the Railway Commissioners and Govern-
ments.
If a national stock-taking were made and all these
aspects taken into consideration, the people would be
educated to realise the national path that we must
tread and Governments would be compelled, through
force of public opinion, to take the necessary steps,
both legislatively and administratively, to bring the
schemes to fruition.
We have been in the habit of describing only out-
standing primary producers as pioneers. We are now
in a position to contemplate the names of secondary
producers who have played a pioneering part also in
the development of Australia. Men like the late Charles Hoskins, H. V.
M’Kay, O. C. Beale, and George Bond naturally occur to the mind as
typical of the men who have pioneered the way for Australians who
seek to advance Australia, while the name of enterprises which come
tripping off the tongue are, Bergers, McMurtries, Lever Bros., Wun-
derlich’s, Stedman-Henderson, Berlei, J. C. Ludowici, Lustre Hosiery,
and the Cumberland Paper Board Mills. .
One of the greatest obstacles Australian manufacturers have to
contend against is the widespread prejudice that exists against “ Aus-
tralian-made.” In the days when America, under the leadership of
Abraham Lincoln, decided to build up secondary industries, the
practical sympathy of the people was so strong that they preferred to
pay more for an inferior article rather than buy the imported. This
Right Hon. S. M. Bruce,
P.C., M.H.R.,
Prime Minister of the Commonwealth.
determination set in motion the machinery which subsequently re-
sulted in such increased demand for “ American-made ” that the
locally-made article rapidly improved. The same principle applies in
Australia. In the early days of Australian manufacturing, it was un-
avoidable that there was inferiority, but increased support has produced
increased turn over, enabling better machinery, more skilled workers,
and more competent management. These factors in combination.
allied with competition, have resulted in the “ Aus-
tralian-made ” being able to more than hold its own
with the imported—value for value—in most cases.
The Australian-made Preference League, during
the past two years, has opened the eyes of large
numbers of representative citizens to the great variety
and excellence of Australian manufactures. With the
co-operation of His Excellency the Governor, large
parties have been shown through a large number of
our leading industries. These visits have had a pro-
found influence in wakening the public to these
facts. The press has reported their investigations,
and the speeches made at the various functions, and
there is no question that Australian manufacturers
are to-day striving to the utmost of their ability to
reach perfection in the lines they are producing.
There is overwhelming evidence that there is now
no longer need for apology. The prejudice that exists
to-day is largely the result of a definite propaganda
carried on by importing interests. Day after day angry
diatribes appear in various journals from interested and
prejudiced parties endeavouring to stir up public an-
tagonism against local manufacturing. The authors
of these attacks suffer from an incapacity to appreciate the true per-
spective of Australian nationhood. They cannot grasp the fact that
the era of perpetual peace among mankind has not yet dawned ; that
Australia is as precariously placed as any nation in the matter of
security; that no form of defence is possible without all the rami-
fications of industry being fully developed. To-day we are little
more than a rich prize, helpless, and almost naked to our possible
enemies. The point made earlier, that the British Navy is not now
maintained at a standard capable of rendering us assistance and, even
if it were, that we have not the docking and repairing facilities in
Australasia, makes it incumbent upon us to view the question of
development of secondary industries quite apart from the sectional
or prejudiced angle.


PROTEX SAFE AND LOCK COMPANY LIMITED
Manufacturer of SAFES, STRONGROOM DOORS, GRILLES WALL SAFES, SECURITY LOCKERS and all classes of Security Work.
»•
i
II
■4
’ ,
II
“ Protex” Patent Interlocking Door n ith l..ohhy and Grille.
BANKERS’ ENGINEERS
Head Office & Works:
McEvoy St., Waterloo, Sydney
Showroom:
3 Barrack Street - - Sydney
Cable Address :
PROTEX SYDNEY
Telegrams :
PROTEX WATERLOO SYDNEY
Telephone : REDFERN 953
“PROTEX" SECURITY
PRODUCTS are manufac-
tured by a purely Australian
Company and offer a protection
against burglary thatis unexcelled
as indicated by the fact that they
are installed by the Leading
Banks, Trustees, Insurance Com-
panies, Jewellers and commercial
houses.
The PROTEX PATENT
ANTI - EXPLOSIVE LOCK
affords unparallelled security
against burglary per medium of
explosives.
‘ u.
“ Protex " Drill-Proof Safe.


j| MULTIPLY EMPLOYMENT I!
jj BUY n
I “ AUSTRALIAN - MADE ” |
A paramount truth is that it is imperative that we shall equip
ourselves with this vital weapon for our national defence as rapidly as
possible, and that we shall recognise that those Australians who,
whether for personal reasons or through ignorance, oppose action,
must be classified as disloyal to our national well-being. There is no
use mincing words. The issue is too serious. It is time for those
who recognise the true situation to come out in the open and tell those
who would thwart the action that must be taken
that they are bad Australians—more than that, they
are disloyal Australians.
The Australian-Made Preference League has
been doing its best during the past two years to
awaken Australians to realise the part they can play.
The League consists of all sections who are united
in the view that secondary industries are essential if
we would populate Australia as rapidly as our
national interests require. The League lays it down
that if we would build Australian trade we must
buy “ Australian-Made ; ” that, only by giving a
continuous preference will we provide the stimulus
that will multiply employment, prosperity, popula-
tion, and national security. It has endeavoured
to educate the public to appreciate the national
significance of at all times giving preference to
Australian-Made goods and products whenever
making a purchase. The various activities of
the League bave attracted considerable attention,
and there is overwhelming evidence that the public
are responding to our appeal. The passing of
the “ Great White ” Exhibition Train through the
country was an overwhelming success. It visited some sixty towns
over a period of twenty-eight weeks. 300,000 people visited the
exhibition, and at every town all classes combined together to show
their appreciation of the aims and ob-
jects of the League,
Let us contemplate for a moment the
sequence of events when Australians at
all times in every way give preference
to “ Australian-Made ”; when the shop-
piers say to the shop-keepers who offer
them imported articles, “ no thanks, we
want 1 Australian-Made.’ ”
Right Hon. W. M. Hughes, P.C., M.H.R.,
Ex-Prime Minister of the Commonwealth.
The direct result will be the shop-keepers must apply to Australian
manufacturers for more supplies. The Australian manufacturers
will find they have not the plant requisite to enable them to cope
with the greatly increased demand. They therefore must call into
action bank managers, architects, manufacturers of machinery,
builders, and all classes of workers to enable them to meet the public
requirements. '
The economic effect will be shown in increased
business activities in every direction, and elimina-
tion of unemployment. Capital will be readily
made available for industrial enterprises, but the
difficulty will be to find sufficient skilled opera-
tives. This predicament will soon be known
abroad, and all classes who find the economic
conditions of the Old Land bearing hardly upon
them will take steps to transfer themselves to this
new land of opportunity.
There will be no need for Governments to spend
large sums in maintaining elaborate immigration
agencies. People will flock here of their own accord.
The thin trickle of new-comers, absorbed with
difficulty to-day, will rapidly grow into a torrent of
new population eagerly welcomed. The State
Treasurer will be able to reduce taxation, because he
will have more people—prosperous people—to pay it.
The farmer will say that primary production is
profitable because he will have a sound home market.
And last but not least the Minister for Defence will
be able to tell the nation that our national integrity is
secure because of ample man-power and prosperity
to finance effective defence.
This, then, is the chain of events, the first link of which is that he
Australian people shall have confidence in themselves ; that they shall
learn to be as proud of their industries
and artisans as they are of their heroes of
sport; that the best form of patriotism
is to remember that “ Where our
money goes, trade goes,” that we
should “ Keep both in our own coun-
try,” and that we can do this only as we
remember to at all times, in every way,
buy “ Australian-Made.”


m
THE AUSTRALIAN BANK OF COMMERCE LIMITED
AUTHORISED CAPITAL
PAID-UP CAPITAL and RESERVES -
TOTAL ASSETS (as at 30th June, 1926) -
Directors:
SIR MARK SHELDON, K.8.E., Chairman
(of Dalton Bros, of Sydney, Ltd., Merchants).
FRANK N. YARWOOD
(of Yarwood, Vane & Coy., with G. Mason
Allard, Public Accountants, Sydney).
GEORGE J. SLY, LL.D.
(of Sly and Russell, Solicitors, Sydney).
HERBERT R. LYSAGHT, 0.8. E.
(of John Lysaght, Ltd., Ironmasters, England
and Sydney and Newcastle, N.S.W.).
DUNCAN CARSON
(Managing Director of Winchcombe Carson
Ltd., Woolbrokers, Sydney and Brisbane).
Lieut. Col. T. L. F. RUTLEDGE, Grazier.
Head Office ; Cr. George dr King Sts., Sydney
Cable Address : “ Austere,” Sydney.
m
mm
m
m
£2,000,000
£2,685,303
£16,<89,590
C. M. C. SHANNON
General Manager.
W. G. HULL
Chief Inspector for New South Wales.
LONDON OFFICE:
37 Threadneedle Street,
LONDON, E.C. 2.
A. F. JENKINS, Manager.
The BANK has Established Branches in the Principal Centres of AUSTRALlA — including :
SYDNEY - with 150 Branches and Receiving Offices in New South Wales,
BRISBANE - . with 26 Branches and Receiving Offices in Queensland,
MELBOURNE - 325 Collins Street, Melbourne (M. B. Finney, Manager),
ADELAIDE - - 33 Rundle Street, Adelaide (R. T. Moodie, Manager),
PERTH - - -73 St. George’s Terrace, Perth (A. C. Dibdin, Manager),
With complete Agency facilities throughout Australia and New Zealand, where not represented by a Branch.
Letters of Credit, Drafts and Telegraphic Payments effected by HEAD OFFICE and BRANCHES direct with
AGENTS and CORRESPONDENTS at all Chief Cities THROUGHOUT THE WORLD.
EVERY DESCRIPTION OF BANKING BUSINESS TRANSACTED


Prominent Railway Personalities whose co-operation made possible the “ Great White” Train
No better evidence could be afforded of the efficiency
of the New South Wales Government Railway Department
than the skill and expedition with which the “Great White”
Train was prepared for the road. Throughout the whole of
the tour, moreover, capable organisation and an expert staff
guaranteed the maximum of efficiency in running, and in the
catering for the personnel aboard. The “ Australian-Made ”
Preference League realises that a large measure of the success
that attended the project was due to the whole-hearted co-
operation of the New South Wales Government Railways.


Australian Glass Manufacturers Co. Limited
s
THIS COMPANY, the Capital of which is
£2,000,000, has factories in Melbourne,
Sydney, Adelaide, Brisbane, and Auckland. It
was founded in 1872 and like many other large
concerns of to-day, had rather a humble beginning
and for years struggled to compete with over-
seas importations, however, by hard work and per-
severance the industry was built up, and to-day it ranks
as one of the most important in the Commonwealth.
Four years ago the Company was re-constructed and
since then has made rapid progress. The various
works which employ over 2000 hands have been ex-
tended to supply practically the whole of the Com-
monwealth’s requirements of Bottles, Jars, etc. Con-
solidation of the industry has been accompanied by
increased efficiency and economy. Obsolete manu-
facturing methods that were features of some of the
older works have been replaced by the most modern
mechanical practice, and new labour-saving and effi-
ciency appliances are constantly being introduced,
with the assistance of the Company’s own well-
equipped Engineering Works.
Last year the Company purchased the Rights of the
most up-to-date annealing methods, and one of the
Company’s officers went to America to study same.
The result is, that a number of these Annealing Lehrs
are now being made in the Company’s own Engineer-
ing Works. The cost of material, wages, etc., for
making the lehrs required for the whole of the Works
will cost, at least, £lOO,OOO.
Apart from the Bottle and Jar end of the industry,
plans are now well in hand for the erection of a
factory to make the Commonwealth’s requirements of
Sheet Glass. Up to the present practically all the
sheet glass required has been imported from Europe,
and smaller quantities from Great Britain, but it is
the Company’s intention to erect a most modern
plant and take care of all local requirements.
New works have been started during the last twelve
months making Pressed Glassware, Lamps, Lamp
Chimneys, etc. The field in this direction is large,
and with the Company’s well - known progressive
policy, Australians generally can look forward to the
time when the whole of their requirements will be
supplied from local manufacture. The quality of the
Company’s output is first-class and it is the intention
to extend the works and make a large variety of this
class of ware.


tr 'r
i
11
&
"XoF THE
. v^t
AUSTRALIAN GLASS
MANUFACTURERS CO. LTD.
>
JARSU
CvS=>^?ed-^>
DOWLING STREET, WATERLOO
SYDNEY
T/fe rtfew? tffrw/ photo pives a good idea of the si%e of the Sydney Works of the Australian Glass Manufacturers Co. Ltd.—it actually covers
21 1 acres — and contains the most up to date machinery procurable for the making of bottles, jars, etc.


m
Telephones —8W1214. 8W1215
Codes : Bentley’s A.8.C., sth Ai Private
Cables and Telegrams : “ Amatex
ms.
3
hr
dLmd
<7
albury
WOOLLEN MILLS
THE -METROPOLITAN■."BUILDING? \f
HUNTER. STREET, SYDNEY. ISLSW. Ip
Board of Directors ;
Fredk. W. Tietyens, Chairman.
W. R. Campbell, J. B. Cramsie, M. F. Dalton, T. J. A. Fitzpatrick, S. C. Jones, L. Mac Smith, F. E. Whitehead.
Authorised Capital £1,000,000
WOOL COMBERS, SPINNERS and MANUFACTURERS
‘ From Pure Australian Merino Fleece to Fabric.”
0;;;:;;;;;:;
ALL DYES GUARANTEED FAST
A GREAT step in solving the problem of decentralisation and the development of
important country secondary industries is evidenced by the successful establishment
of the Company’s first two New South Wales Mills situated at Albury and Orange
respectively and all loyal Australians are invited to extend their unqualified support to the
Company in its efforts to continue this national development by at all times demanding
to be supplied with Australian Made Goods.
All particulars from
AMALGAMATED TEXTILES (AUSTRALIA) LTD.
The Metropolitan Building, Hunter Street, Sydney, N.S.W.
C. G HANNAM. General Manager W. ANDERSON, A.1.C.A., Secretary.
Highest Quality
Fancy Suitings,
Serges,
Overcoatings,
Woollens, Tweeds,
Blankets, Rugs,
Flannels
and Velours.
0
Wool Top's, Noils,
Waste and Shoddies.
:;a
m
orange
WOOLLEN MILLS
m


wmsk W n
mmimrn. m
mSF*
IM
■ > V T II
n \
m
m
m
»i3S I
■-£
%f 4
»??!
K
t,m
i
mi
£
■9^
SSSS
mmm
imi
7fX‘Tl r*
’W‘¥
Wl4
>\3
r»r»^i
71'!»
r».i*
m*
¥B
Tin
/Tl
IM
isariaj.s
Bl*
■MI
*
m
it
Vi
%
w
%
*
m
>\
41
V
**v
IPS*
'“•«lfcnr
LVS*
*
Ira*
’ail
SS
A4*
£V
Vft
«w
’A
w*
AMALGAMATED TEXTILES ( AUSTRALIA ) LIMITED.
A Section of one of the Company’s Spinning Hants.


Lincoln Knitting Mills ltd:
Manufacturers of
HOSIERY AND UNDERWEAR (for Men, Women and Children)
BLANKETS, FLANNEL, RUGS AND KNITTING WOOL
Head Office and Mills:
COBURG,
Victoria.
JSrancb : othfr Branches ;
Brisbane Adelaide
“Grace House,” 279 Clarence Street Perth Hobart
TT will be remembered that our Knitting Mills v,ere completely destroyed by fire seme months ago. Since then every effort
has been made to rebuild our Mill on the most modern lines. The most up-to-date machinery is being installed, and it
will not be long before our NEW MILL is one of the most up-to-date in existence. Portion of our new plant, in fact, is al-
ready in operation, and we would welcome the opportunity of submitting our new lines to you. These include an excellent range of
Fancy Half Hose Plain Half Hose “Silketta” Hosiery
Ladies’ and Children’s Vests Men’s Underwear
(For Winter and Summer) (For Winter and Summer)
Bathing Costumes
The above lines will be added to from time to time, and we feel sure it will be to your-interest to keep
in touch with our future activities.
OURT SPINNING PLANT was undamaged in the fire, and our well-known lines of BLANKETS, DRESS FLANNELS,
RUGS and KNITTING WOOLS are still available.
YOUR INSPECTION IS CORDIALLY INVITED.
[incolnMills
AUSTRALIAN PRODUCTS


Distinction
irvDesion.
DURABILITY
ih SERVICE.
/
%
(OMFORT
AND
N
&
&
lincoln Mills
Australian Products
LINCOLN KNITTING MILLS PIT LT5>„ GAFFNEY ST, COBURG, VIC.


MARY GOLD PROPRIETARY LTD.
ih
W
w*
W:
MEDAL AND CERTIFICATE OF HONOUR
WEMBLEY EXHIBITION. 1924-25
The vital point for the house-wife in her choice
of Essences is to obtain a brand that is reliable
for its even strength and purity combined with
that delicacy of flavour that so appeals to the
palate. Mary Gold Essences are in keeping with
this objective. They contain all that is healthful,
the raw material being of the purest and best.
It is necessary to point out that perfect Essences
are un-worhable without the aid of pure white
spirit which acts as a disseminator and preser-
vative, spreading an even character to the dainties
that are being handled, the result then being
most satisfactory in the art of cooking.
Manufacturers and Packers of
Medicinal and Toilet Prepara-
tions, Food Condiments, Etc.
VANILt
LEMON
THE
THE
<?Y
CQ
*
BRASS
p ?ce/ ?
(pt?
Ce pTPATED
For Puddinqs
„ Soups (ccsEbc
puarrES.
VANI tIU
Contents I Fuji
The Mary GcUP!
PURE ESS.
LEMON
Content* 1 Fluid Ounce
The Mary Cold JVopy Sydney
s;
MEDAL AND CERTIFICATE OF HONOUR
WEMBLEY EXHIBITION. 1924-25
Many inferior concoctions are being offered the
public that might well be avoided, particularly
where substitutes have been used in manufacture
such as glycerine in place of white spirit. Sticky
compounds of this nature are not alone unsatis-
factory but proved a miserable failure.
It is to public interest that only flavourings
made with white spirit should be used and that a
reputable brand such as Mary Golds should be
asked for. Practical approval of this brand is
observable by the demand that exists for it in
all parts of the Commonwealth.
128-130 GEORGE STREET NORTH :: SYDNEY Agencies throughout the Commonwealth.


Parkinson Electric Motors
-.v
f
i
m
protected type squirrel cage Motor.
Thousands of Parkinson Motors
are installed throughout Australia
in a great variety of industries, and
are operating satisfactorily under
all kinds of conditions.
Made in Australia
A
m
A section of the Works of Parkinson ( Australia ) Ltd.,
Five Dock, Sydney
DISTRIBUTORS >
NOYES BROS. (Sydney) LTD.


Ohc
S$iilitiori Oouvmg Oraui is
COMING!
THE GREAT
WHITE TRAIN
THf
u^AT : V(t*,r
*
WONDERFUL DISPLAY
HULLING SEARCHLIGHTS-WIRELESS -FILMS
j/frrives
Advance Poster for the “ Great White” Train.
The Story of the “Great White"
Train
BY WALLACE NELSON
THE idea of the “ Great White ” Train, as it is popularly
called, and which was suggested to the League by
Mr. M. V. Reilly, is not new. A similar train on a
much smaller scale was sent from Perth into the country
districts of Western Australia some years ago. At the present
time in Victoria an agricultural train, carrying lecturers and
experts to teach the farmers scientific agriculture, has become
a fixed institution and is accomplishing splendid results.
But the “ Great White ” Train differs from anything of the
kind ever attempted in that it is on a far more colossal scale.
It comprises twenty vehicles, including a dining car and
kitchen car, a brake-van, two sleepers of the Pullman
type, and 15 exhibition coaches. It exceeds a thousand
feet in length, and is perhaps the longest train ever seen in
Australia. It carries its own electrical equipment, its own
petrol engines and dynamos, its own batteries for lighting
purposes and to supply power to working models, and, to
crown all, its own broadcasting set, made at the Sydney
works of Amalgamated Wireless, and used for broadcasting
daily the principles of the League.
The primary object of the train is to teach by example—
to supply the people of Australia with actual proof that
Australian workshops and factories are turning out high-
grade goods, and that nothing is needed to make Australia
a great manufacturing country but a fixed determin-
ation on the part of the Australian people to buy “ Aus-
tralian-Made ” goods - combined, of course, with an
equalls fixed determination on the part of Australian manu-
facturers to make goods worth buying.


r
s
Ex-Alderman Howard,
who succeeded Mr. Cornish as
First Advance Agent.
AS*
*
70
%
C 7
Q
<*-
f
The Teague Badge.
Mr. Charles Callow,
Second Advance Agent.
Alderman H. P. Cornish
{Mayor of Newcastle),
First Advance Agent for the
“ Great White ” Train.
The advance work of the
“ Great White ” Train was in the
capable hands of Messrs. Cornish,
Howard and Callow. Alderman
Cornish ("Mayor of Newcastle)
severed his connection with the
League to occupy the important
post of Mayor of the northern
Capital, when his place was taken
by Mr. W. A. Howard. Every
town showered hospitality on the
League’s representatives, who, on
their part, by their fine Aus-
tralianism and good citizenship,
won friends and co-workers all
along the route. The work of
preparation was most efficiently
carried out by these men, backed
by the organisation of the League’s
Head Office.
GIVE THE
KIDDIES
ACHANCE
r
Make Every Week
MadE
Australian
The Hon. R. B. Orchard,
0.8. E.
who managed the “ Great White ’
Train for a portion of its Tour.
‘ Australian-Made ” Preference Shopping Week Poster.
The Hon. R. B. Orchard,
0.8. E., at the pressing invitation
of the Director of the League, was
for some months Manager of the
“ Great White ” Train, being
ultimately obliged, through pres-
sure of personal business, to
vacate the post. In the towns he
visited—between Armidale and
Forbes—he had the opportunity
of renewing many old friendships
and of making many new ones for
the “ Australian-Made ” Preference
League. His great popularity
proved to be a splendid asset.
I::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::::;:::::::;:::::::::::: s


The following is a list of
exhibitors and exhibits on the
Train :
Alston Soap & Candle Co., Ltd., Abattoir
St., Rozellc (Candles, Soap, Shaving
Cream, Meat Products).
Australian Products, Ltd., i i Castlereagh
St., Sydney (Australian Forest Products).
Angus & Robertson, Ltd., Castlereagh St.,
Sydney (Books and Australian Publi-
cations).
Amalgamated Wireless (Aust.), Ltd.,
Clarence St., Sydney (Wireless and
Electrical Equipment).
Australian Linoleum Co., Ltd. (Lino-
leums).
mmm
M
¥
Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd., O’Connell St.,
Sydney, and Newcastle (Iron and Steel
and Iron and Steel Subsidiary Products).
Good Sports : Their Excellencies Sir Dudley and Tady de Chair mount the
latest monster “ Australian-Made ” engine , which hauled on its way the
“Great White ” Train.
“ Eagley ” Pty., Ltd., York St., Sydney
(Underwear and Knitted Goods).
Jusfrute Products, Ltd., 25 O’Conncll-st.,
Sydney (Fruit Cordials).
Mangrovite Belting, Ltd., York St.,
Sydney (Leather Belting, etc.).
Nestle’s Anglo-Swiss Condensed Milk
Co., Ltd. (Confectionery, Chocolate,
Condensed Milk).
Newlands Bros., Ltd., Riley St., Sydney
(Sleeping Equipment).
Plumb, W. H., Kendall St., Woollahra
(Tools).
Queensland Insurance Co., 52 Pitt St.,
Sydney (Insurance).
Stedman-Henderson, Ltd., Rosebery (Con-
fectionery, Chocolates, etc.).
Berlei, Ltd., Regent St., Sydney (Corsets and
Brassieres).
Beale & Co., Ltd., Trafalgar St., Annandale
(Pianos, Player-Pianos, etc.).
Berger, Lewis, & Sons. (Aust.), Ltd., Rhodes
(Paints, Varnishes, White Lead, etc.).
Bebarfald’s, Ltd., George St., Sydney (Sewing
Machines).
Bond, Geo. A., & Co., Ltd., Mallett St.,
Camperdown (Hosiery, Towelling, Sheeting,
etc.).
Caldwell’s Wines, Ltd., Bridge Rd., Camperdown
(Wines and Allied Products).
Clifford Love & Co., Ltd., 77 Clarence St.,
Sydney (Grocers’ Sundries).
Clinton, Williams, Ltd., 3 5 Clarence St., Church
Hill (“ Jellex ” Jelly Crystals).
Gartrell, White, Ltd., 458 King St., Newtown
(Self-Raising Flour and Baking Powder).
Henderson, R. C., Ltd.; Randle St., Sydney
(Ladies’ Millinery).
Hunter, John, & Co., Ltd., Castlereagh St.,
Redfern (Boots and Shoes).
Irrigation Commission, George St., Sydney
(Products of Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area).
Tooth & Co., Ltd., George St., West, Sydney
(Ale, Stout, etc.).
Tucker & Co., Ltd., 333 Kent St., Sydney
(Brandy, Whisky, Gin).
Vicars, John, & Co., Ltd., Victoria Rd.,
Marrickville (Woollens, Rugs, Worsteds,
etc.).
Williams, Sidney, Ltd., Constitution St.,
Dulwich Hill (Windmills, Steel Buildings,
Water Supply Machinery).
Wills, W. D. & H. 0., Castlereagh St., Sydney
(Tobacco, Cigars, Cigarettes).


The “ Great White ” Train.
On November nth at 3.30 p.m. the Train set off on its
journey, the patron of the League, His Excellency the
Governor, Sir Dudley De Chair, blowing the gold presen-
tation whistle which sent it on its long journey of 2,100
miles.
It is no exaggeration to say that the Train has proved a
dazzling success. At Gosford, Newcastle, West Maitland,
Cessnock, Singleton, Muswellbrook, Scone, Murrurundi,
and the fifty other towns on the route great crowds
flocked to see the Train and inspect its exhibits, and
everywhere expressed satisfaction, even delight. Some of
the exhibits are very striking, and all of them are interesting.
In the ensemble they certainly give emphatic refutation
to the childish lie that Australia is incapable of producing
high-grade goods. But equally arresting are the industrial
pictures thrown every night upon the screen. These
pictures are of high excellence. They reveal Australia’s
remarkable industrial development, showing at a glance,
not only the expert labour of her artisans, but also the
splendid plant and machinery of her up-to-date workshops
and factories. The intricate and highly technical processes
of manufacture are made plain to the simplest minds, and
all who attend the exhibition go away with a clearer idea,
not only of modern industry in Australia, but of modern
industry everywhere in the industrial world.
It should here be pointed out that, while the “ Australian-
Made ” Preference League is in favour of multiplying
industries in Australia, it is by no means committed to the
present system of confining factories and workshops almost
exclusively to crowded towns. It does not view with dis-
favour the growth of great cities, so long as they are
spacious, wholesome, and beautiful. After all, the world


PARKE, DAVIS & COMPANY
MANUFACTURING CHEMISTS -• SYDNEY
iiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiiuiitiiiimi
»
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
RTM?rrsff«i3l
mm.
m
m
iiiiiiiiiimiiiiiiiiimim
The Australasian Laboratories of Parke, Davis dr Co ,, Rosebery, Sydney, N.S.W.
Chief Office and Laboratories Detroit, Michigan, U.S.A. Established in Sydney since
1902, and we now have one of the largest laboratories in Australasia as shown in the
accompanying illustration. All Parke, Davis & Co. products consumed in Australia
are manufactured in Australia.
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
to
$
to
&
to
to
$
to
to
to
Sydney Office and Warehouse
125 YORK STREET


His Excellency the Governor sends the “ Great White ” Train on its historic journey .
owes much to its great centres of culture, enlightenment,
and progress. But the League is persuaded, especially
since its Train has visited the country districts of New
South Wales, that cities can be too large and that centralis-
ation can be too great. The League favours a process of
decentralisation by which our cities would gain some of
the spaciousness of the country and the country a larger
measure of the conveniences and refinements of the cities.
There is a trend in this direction in Europe and America,
and the League would like to see a similar trend in Aus-
tralia.
Many of the country towns visited by the “ Great
White ” Train are peculiarly suited for the establishment of
factories. They are situated in districts rich in mineral


“ AUSTRALIAN- MADE ”
•SK?
KW
V 9
r
Makers and Sole Distributors
Home Recreations Id
in which is incorporated the business of
HE I RON & S MITH.
556 George St Sydneys w
tiR-ANCHES THROUGHOUT AUSTRALASIA
20 TIMES I
HIGHER than I
the G.PO.
If all the Salonolas sold tills year
were combined in one huge machine
it would tower into the sky 20 times
higher than the G.R O.
Truth is stranger thanfiction-
READ THESE ASTOUNDING FACTS-
A little more than five years ago the S ALONOLA was intro-
. duced to Australian music-lovers. \\
By virtue of its unique reproducing qualities and comparatively low • •
price, the SALON OLA leaped into such tremendous popularity • •
that its sales soon exceeded those of any other phonograph. The ••
amazing and almost incredible result is that to-day SALONOLA \\
sales represent an increase of more than ::
3,000 per cent, in 5 years !
The Makers and Distributors of The obvious conclusion to be \\
the SALONOLA, in placing drawn from even a casual glance ::
before the public, these substan- at the above facts is that the ::
tial arguments in support of their SalonolamUSt, ill II
product’s superiority, do so with , •» r tft t
full regard for the part played by every UCtdlJ, FUllll the ::
the thousands of Salonola buyers expectations and de- II
who, in the wisdom of their choice r j r i i ;i
have helped to make this Aus* m3ndS Ol the phono- ::
tralian made instrument world graph-buying public.
Also Manufacturers of
HEIRON & SMITH
BILLIARD TABLES


His Excellency the Governor blows the Gold Presentation Guard's Whistle .
Air. James Fraser , Chief Kailway Commissioner , gives the project bis blessing.
The President (Mr. Board ) delivers his final message.
The Director , Mr. Bagnall, explains the object of the ft "Great White ” Train.
as well as in agricultural wealth, and, with factories and
workshops to absorb the labour of the growing local
population, the abnormal migration to our over-crowded
towns would be greatly moderated. As Mr. Hughes
accurately pointed out in a recent speech, the right way to
populate our country may be, not to put immigrants on


&
m
is
t.
I
1
M
9!
I
«*■?
i
«
fl
II
ai
Head Office of The Commercial Banking Company of Sydney Limited
The picture on this page is that of the Head Office of
THE COMMERCIAL BANKING
COMPANY OF SYDNEY LIMITED
an Australian-made institution that has had no mean share in assisting
in the development of Australia, particularly Queensland and
New South Wales, in which States it has numerous Branches.
Founded in the early thirties of last century it has grown steadily,
and under able, conservative management it fully maintains its position
as one of the leading Australian Banks.
Figures taken from the last published Balance Sheet give some indica-
The Flead Office of the Bank is situated at 343 George Street, Sydney,
facing Martin Place, and so is located in the very centre of the City.
It is to be noted that in the construction of this handsome building
Australian materials and workmanship have been used to the fullest
extent possible.
A special feature of the new building here shown is the SAFE DE-
POSIT, situated in the basement, in which there are safes of various
convenient sizes, available to the public at a small annual charge.
The value of a facility of this kind to those who have important docu-
ments, jewellery, etc., which they desire to lodge in a place secure from
flood, fire and theft does not need any emphasising.
The General Manager extends a most cordial invitation to country
residents, whether clients of the Bank or not, on a visit to Sydney
to call and inspect the Safe Deposit.
m


the land, but to put them in workshops and factories, for
two men in a factory or workshop might compel at least
one man to go on the land to provide them with food. Be
that as it may, the “ Australian-Made ” Preference League
believes in the establishment of factories in suitable country
places, a policy which has been ably advocated by one
successful manufacturer, George F. Cuttle.
Every modern nation depends for its existence on both
farms and factories. Unfortunately, so far as Australia is
concerned, the factories, for the most part, have been on
the other side of the world and the farms on this. This is
bad economy, for it involves the transportation of goods
over enormous distances at enormous cost, thus vastly
increasing the price of commodities.
There is no reason why the factories and the farms should
not be in the same country, and, indeed, sometimes in
the same district.
It is a pleasure to be able to state that the Train has been a
Distinguished visitors and members of the Board of Management present at the send-off of the “ Great White” Train on its
historic first tour. Beading from left to right: Mr. J. A. Young, Hon. T. R. Bavin (Leader of Opposition), Mr. Fred.
R. Burley, Mr. Peter Board, C.M.G. (President “Australian-Made” Preference League), Mr. James Fraser (Chief Commissioner
for Railways), Mr. E. E. Salmon, Mr. W. Ainsworth, Mr. W. R. Bagnall, M.L.A. (Director “Australian-Made ”
Preference League), Mr. Wallace Nelson.


An Important Australian Industry.-Of Benefit to all Citizens of Our Bright Commonwealth.
Build Australia with Australian Machinery
a
»
13Qr
A-H ” PATENT HOT MIXING PLANT
. V
ARMSTRONG-
HOLLAND”
at;
*
Construction
Equipment
%
A-H •* Pile Driving winch.
A-h High Speed no. 10 mixer.
A
M
Sc/p
rA*'
The Famous " Champion mixer with
Patent Loader and hoist.
Products of ARMSTRONG-HOLLAND LTD. :: Sydney, Melbourne, Newcastle


remarkable success from a purely business point of view.
The holders of space in the coaches have been amply
rewarded for their enterprise and courage, for orders have
been extensively booked. But from
the standpoint of propaganda the
success of the Train has been
overwhelming. Tens of thousands
have passed through the exhibtion
and have expressed delight in what
they have seen. The remark heard
on all hands is, “ Well, after that,
who can say that Australia cannot
manufacture things ? ” But the
League is not content to let the
Train tell its own story. It seeks
to improve the occasion by telling
it in many different ways. Wher-
ever the Train goes it circulates
literature written for the express
purpose of driving home the gospel
of “ Australian - Made.” At every
country town visited the leading
citizens are entertained at a dinner
on the Train, and speeches are made
telling of the wisdom of the policy
of the League. These speeches are
largely reported in the local papers,
and the subject becomes the uni-
versal topic of conversation. Every
afternoon and evening the official
lecturer broadcasts by wireless the
gospel of “ Australian-Made.” Nor is the propaganda
confined to adults. The school children are specially
invited to visit the Train, and in each town prizes are
offered for the best essay on the Exhibition. Besides,
the official lecturer visits all the schools in each
The Hon. J. T. Lang. M.L.A.,
Premier of New South Wales.
country town, making short, bright speeches suitable to
the age of the pupils. The Train, therefore, is much more
than a Train, much more than an Exhibition; it is
an organised effort to impress on
the minds of the people of Australia
the supreme importance of self-
reliance and self government, not
in politics only, but also, and above
all, in industry. For industry is
greater than politics. It is the very
life-blood of a nation. When a
country’s industries languish the
country languishes. No nation can
be permanently great, or prosperous,
or safe, or free, unless it has great
industries conducted on right lines—
unless, that is to say, it devotes all its
energies, all its brains, and all its
heart, to the development and
utilisation of all its resources.
An article on the “ Great White ”
Train would be incomplete and in-
adequate if it did not contain some
reference to the splendid co-oper-
ation extended to the project by the
people of the country. In each of
the country towns visited a local
committee composed of leading citi-
zens worked with splendid zeal to
promote the success of the Ex-
hibition and to make the visit of the
Train an event of first-rate public importance. Many of
the members of the Committee gave the whole of their
time during the visit of the Train to this valuable service.
Nor was that all. Public and private citizens vied with
each other in extending hospitality to the officers of the


Challenge Brand Australian-Made Goods
/ T i HE object lesson gained by the N.S.W. Public vertisement
during the recent tour of “ The Great White experienced
Train ” of the efficiency, of Australian
Manufacturers in producing certain
goods to equal any imported article,
was so successfully shown that this
wonderful lesson will be lost if you
do not insist, when making your pur-
chases, on being supplied with such ■
“ AUSTRALIAN-MADE ” GOODS.
This leaves only one question to be
decided upon which is the BEST
AUSTRALIAN? The proprietors of
the well - known CHALLENGE The. Brand that challenges
T _ , . i-i - all competition both in
BRAND have not written this ad- ‘-.quality and price.
TRADE MARK
for those thousands who have already
satisfaction by the purchase of
CHALLENGE BRAND goods, but
to those who have not, no matter
where living, City or Country, insisted
on being supplied with CHALLENGE
BRAND GOODS. Space will not
permit the mention of all goods made
under; this brand, but for example,
in the making of CHALLENGE
BLANKETS, FLANNELS, SWEAT-
ERS and BATHERS such a high
standard has been set in their manu-
facture that these goods rank second
to none in the world.
Be Sure and ask for CHALLENGE PRODUCTS


Train. Almost every Sunday during the tour
the members of the railway staff, the League
staff, and the manufacturers’ representatives
were motored to the leading points of interest
in the district. Friendships were formed
which may last as long as life. It is indeed
Mr. E. McMillan,
Chief of Staff on the “ Great
White ” Train.
no exaggeration to say that through the
medium of the “ Great White ” Train the
town and the country were brought into
closer touch with each other than had
ever before been possible in the history of
Australia.
Official Staff of the “Great White” Train.
The “ Great White” Train at Night Presented a Brilliant Spectacle.


THE ROYAL BANK OF AUSTRALIA Ltd.
Capital Authorised, £2,400,000. Capital Subscribed, £1,560,000.
CAPITAL Paid Up (270,000 Shares paid up to £1; 120,000 Shares fully paid up, to £4), £750,000.
RESERVE Fund (used in the business of the Bank) £650,000.
HEAD OFFICE : No. 293 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE
BRANCHES IN VICTORIA, ALSO AT SYDNEY, PERTH AND LONDON.,
AGENTS IN ALL AUSTRALIAN STATES AND NEW ZEALAND.
CORRESPONDENTS IN ALL PARTS OF THE WORLD. ‘


(1) Mr. R. Broderick (Nestle Anglo-Swiss Condensed Milk Co. Ltd.) ; (2) Mr. A. Roberts (Clinton Williams Ltd.) ; (3) Mr. R. Lawther (W. D. & H. O. Wills (Aust.)
Ltd.) ; (4) Mr. J. Quinn (Water Conservation & Irrigation Commission) ; (5) Mr. Pascoe Pearce (Australian Forests Ltd.); (6) Mr. Caldwell-Smith (Amalgamated Wireless
(Aust.) Ltd); (7) Mr. W. Woollett (G. A. Bond & Co. Ltd.) ; (8) Mr. W. Weston (Caldwell’s Wines Ltd.).
(9) Mr. E. Hearne (Judge of Windows for League’s Shield) ; (10) Mr. H. Park (Empire Educational Films) ; (11) Mr. P. Biddle (Angus & Robertson Ltd.) ; (12) Mr. M.
Perrson (Fred. Ball Ltd.) ; (13) Mr. T. Roberts (G. A. Bond & Co. Ltd.) ; (14) Mr. W. Crick (W. H. Plumb) ; (15) Mr. Webb (Stedman-Henderson Ltd.).
(16) Mr. G. Parr (Australian Forests Ltd.) ; (17) Mr. R. Davis (Beale & Co. Ltd.) ; (18) Mr. Kelly (Gartrell White Ltd.) ; (19) Mr. Clements (Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd.) ;
(20) Mr. Husband (Australian Forests Ltd.) ; (21) Mr. F. Ludowici (Mangrovite Belting Ltd.) ; (22) Mr. G. Wild (Jusfrute Ltd.).
Exhihitors’ Representatives who travelled with the Train
Throughout the whole of the Tour the League received
the whole-hearted co-operation of the Manufacturers
and their representatives on the Train. At each of the
functions in the different towns —Civic Receptions, Din-
ners, etc. —one of the representatives was spokesman for
the Exhibitors aboard, when he took the opportunity of
pointing out the part played by the manufacturers in the
great project.
Keen, alert, and staunch champions of “ Australian-
Made,” these men were welcomed by the storekeepers
of every centre visited, and were instrumental in greatly
increasing the sales of the Australian article.


Australian Tesselated Tile Co. Pty. Limited
Story of an Interesting Development.
—===o===
The story of the growth and development of the Australian Tesselated Tile
Co. Pty. Ltd. is of absorbing interest to those who take a pride in the manu-
facturing progress of their country. The story, in fact, may be regarded as
one of Australia’s industrial romances, for the company started at the very
bottom rung of the ladder and, by dogged perscvercnce allied to expert
craftsmanship, has reached the highest heights in the manufacture of their
specialty lines, particularly glazed wall and floor tiles, the quality, design,
and finish of which compared more than favourably with similar lines pro-
duced in any part of the world.
The value to Australia of such an industry will be readily appreciated by
those who have made a study of economics, and by all loyal Australians who
are justly proud of the fact that their country is able to produce articles of so
high a standard, and thereby deserve to take a worthy place among the great
manufacturing nations of to-day.
The company, which is strictly Australian, was established in 1886 at Mitcham,
Victoria, for the purpose of manufacturing bricks and pipes for building
purposes, but it was not long before the demands of trade led to the making
of kindred lines, such as roofing-shingles, ridgings, and paving bricks, etc.
Later, at a period coinciding with the now historic land boom, a further
section was added for the manufacture of floor tiles, which line, at this
particular time, was exceedingly costly to import. The placing of this
company’s tiles on the market had the immediate effect of reducing by at
least 50 per cent, the market rates then quoted for the imported article.
The financial position at this period of Australia’s history became difficult
for the whole business community, but, in spite of adverse conditions, the
firm of Australian Tesselated Tile Co. Pty. Ltd. was still able to carry on,
and, even when the boom period collapsed, by sheer determination and the
rigid cutting down of expenses, it was enabled to keep the machinery
moving.
Years of poor trading and financial troubles were the order of the day for
many years, but the storm was eventually weathered by adapting the business
to meet changing conditions, and by engaging in the production of other
kindred lines, chiefly glazed wall tiles.
Scientific experiment had brought to light the fact that certain local clays
were eminently suitable for the manufacture of these and other classes of
ware and, in order to enable a glazed tile of suitable quality to be placed on the
market, years of testing followed. There were no other makers in Australia
to whom an appeal could be made for assistance, nor from whose experience
pit-falls could be avoided, and some of the earlier tiles of this class were not
of as high a standard as were at the time being produced by overseas makers.
Careful tests and a scientific attention to detail ultimately, however, had the
desired effect and the results achieved were of a highly satisfactory character.
At the present time a department is set aside for dealing exclusively with the
production of these glazed wall tiles, and the standard of quality of the
company’s ware now stands as high as that of any imported article. In fact,
taking into consideration certain recent importations, it can reasonably be
claimed that the quality of the Australian article is superior.
It is not generally conceded to the Australian manufacturer that one of his
most serious handicaps is the limited market at his disposal. He is usually
expected to produce articles of every design and type, for some of which
there is but a small demand, while he must still compete with factories that
have the worid for a market and whose quantity of output makes possible
specialisation and mass-production. The Australian manufacturer has,
however, in spite of these difficulties, made a brave showing, and by the
constant improvement of his product has earned the right to the patronage
of the Australian people.
The production in Australia of these high-quality goods is the result of
years’ patient investigation and endeavour and, in the interests of the manu-
facturing progress of Australia it is greatly to be desired that “ Australian-
Made ” wall tiles, floor tiles, ceramics, faience, roofing shingles, paving
bricks, etc., receive the practical backing and support of the Australian
people.


I
|W-
m
\CA
>K
SOS
IS’ll
3
*
gitfj
yj ■ « 3fj
*;afi
a
i
sa
w:-
m.
• *
£§££££
tsfe'h
?gsiif
?
it
fine display of Vicars’ excellent suitings and rugs.


Wireless Leadership !
TO DEVELOP every phase of the wireless industry in Australia ” was the purpose
aimed at by the incorporation of Amalgamated Wireless (Australasia) Ltd. in 1915.
During the intervening period the Company has pioneered every department of wireless
until to-day it operates wireless telegraphic services on practically the whole of the ships of
the Australasian Mercantile Marine, owns and controls the Coastal Radio Stations throughout
Australia, New Guinea and the Pacific Islands, operates engineering works for the production
of wireless telegraph and wireless telephone apparatus, Broadcasting Transmitters, Electronic
Valves and Radiolas for listening-in.
The Wireless Transmitting Equipment on the Great White Train, 2XT, together with the
Transmitting Apparatus at Broadcasting Stations, aFC Sydney, 3LO Melbourne, 4QG Brisbane,
SCL Adelaide and 6WF Perth, was also designed and manufactured by the Company’s
engineers at the Radio Electric Works.
The Company is also engaged in opening up between Australia and England and Australia and
Canada, the greatest Trans-Ocean Beam Wireless Service in the world.
In the Company’s Research Laboratories, every new device in the field of radio is examined,
tried and tested and every new development that might improve wireless is painstakingly
analysed and worked out for any possible beneficial application.
This, in brief, is the story of the pioneering efforts, enterprise and consistent development
that is behind Amalgamated Wireless (Australasia) Limited —the second largest wire
less organisation in the British Empire and wholly controlled and staffed by Australians.
Wireless
(A us t rotas ia)J}d.


Amalgamated Wireless Co.’s interesting Exhibit.


The Reward of Merit!
In the Australian Varnish and Enamel Industry there is one name which
stands pre-eminent in public favour and day after day thousands of discrim-
inating buyers with surfaces to protect and beautify, demand the products
bearing that name, for it is accepted as a guarantee of quality. Such is the
enviable position of Wm. Docker Ltd. associated with Robt. Ingham Clark
& Cc. (A’asia) Ltd. makers of “ Sun ” and “ Britannia ” Brands of Varnishes,
Enamels, Japans, Stainers in oil, etc. This
firm’s leadership in their field is no matter of
chance, cither, but the logical outcome of years
devoted to the perfection of their finishes and
the maintenance of their renowned excellence.
In every town in every State of the Common-
wealth “Sun” and “Britannia” Varnishes,
Enamels, etc., arc known and used to impart
longer life and greater beauty to countless articles
of wood, metal, plaster and cement.
You will find them on the many “ Australian-
made ” articles you use. You will also sec them
on Homes and Buildings, Motor Cars, Tram Cars,
Railway Carriages, Boats, Yachts, and the hun-
dreds of surfaces which meet your eyes repeatedly.
“ Sun ” and “ Britannia ” Varnishes and En-
amels arc used so extensively for three reasons :
1. They are beautiful in appearance.
2. They give wonderful protection against
weather , wear, and time.
3. They are “Australian-Made” and equal
to the World’s best.
Amongst the many “ Sun ” and “ Britannia ”
Products arc numerous Varnishes each specially made for a particular pur-
pose. They include Varnishes for Motor Cars, Carriages, Homes, Buildings,
and in fact for every product of wood, metal, paper, leather or composition
“ Pearline ” White Enamel, a “ Britannia ” product, is undoubtedly the
finest Australian made White Enamel. It is pure white, dries with a smooth
porcelain like finish, and remains white and glossy indefinitely in spite of
weather or regular soap and water washings. No wonder then that Pearlinc
Great Australian Varnish Works still extending
to meet increasing public demand for its products.
is increasing in popularity for the finishing of fine homes. Hospitals, Theatres,
Schools, Motor Boats, Yachts and wherever a long life sanitary finish is
required.
Here are some of the famous Docker products :
O.V.S. a hard wearing Varnish Stain for floors, furniture and interior
woodwork, made in nine wood shades.
Perena Household Enamels, for decorating, all
wood or metal articles in the home. Made in
twenty-four shades and a Special White for Baths.
Stove Black Lacquer. Dense and brilliant
for Stoves, Grates and Ironwork; prevents
rust, and “ wont burn off.”
Aluminium Enamel. A silver like finish for
all metal work everywhere. Will not rust,
can be washed, and stands great heat.
Waterproof Finish. A damp resisting finish
for Oilskin Coats, Tarpaulins and all Canvas
goods. Made in Black, Tan and Clear.
Lino-Varnish. Preserves the pattern and
lengthens the life of linoleum. Very brilliant
and saves wax polishing.
Strawdi. Makes old straw hats new, also
renovates Cane and Wicker work and sea grass
mats. Made in twenty shades.
“Nukote”Hood & Seat Dressing. Unequalled
for renewing old Car Hoods, Scats and leather
work. Made in black and clear.
Whatever you manufacture or whatever you have
that is looking shabby a “ Sun” or “Britannia”
Product will not only make it look better but will give it longer life.
Write the Wm. Docker Ltd. Service Dept, about your problem. This De-
partment has been established to give practical advice on all matters pertain-
ing to Paint, Varnish or Enamel. Take advantage of this free helpful service.
Another thing—should anyone wish to visit the “ Sun ” and “ Britannia ”
works to sec the different processes in the manufacture of Varnishes and
Enamels, an appointment will be gladly made.
&
Efi
!Ht*5SL
View of the “ Sun ” and “ Britannia ” Varnish
and Enamel Works, McCauley Street
Alexandria , Sydney.
REMEMBER ! When buying anything, ask and demand that it be “ Australian-made” —make this resolution your contribution to the building of a nation.
Robt. Ingham Clark & Co. (A’sia) Limited ASS ™ A ™ U William Docker Limited
“THE WORLD’S LARGEST VARNISH INDUSTRY”
Head Office and Works: McCAULEY STREET, ALEXANDRIA.
Telephones: REDFERN 587 &. 1280


a.'/,
teiri
■CJ*-, ' fi > , _
*
x.,/„ -• :-^
.....
V- W
I “’'
wowitojorasMii
’ ;|9 W® 1 ® wwnw uus»
*180**131 s”»u*
IKerS /„ rii
DRIED FRUIT Sll
i 4
K%S t£g
t '•?:'■« ‘ ■ ; --• .*T '\T'i *T "*
> ** *»n»i »**"»*»*•* J« i r j‘ v V'
»•» 5 »Vj|;V.Si i i*• I VC* *«.0^,%
w ’*gJlMLa5.ifg% iv-. ? , * ? * *t ;s * „ a^-ISSb
■yfk'-A
Hr
»t«o
•22&I
Jf.
V '«S" T ,-J
; V*1
>
.$. ■
■ ,»l-r mfjl
*<%.: "A*
The Irrigation Commission’s fine Display.


\
•V
V* . :T
m
Queensland Insurance Co.’s Exhibit.
*L
5
iil
Caldwell’s Winer Exhibit,
I
'i
/
■HI
m
m
111
i
M
rrru;
CLAfilTfty
CAN3LFS
fig
Alston Soap &• Candle Co.’s Exhibit.
m
sc
mi
Australian Forests Etd.’s Exhibit.


m
mmm
Uliiißll
K*l
OATS
n «m
< J t
Pi
&
Ift
V
**
mt
%
It
-
EXHIBIT ON THE “GREAT WHITE” TRAIN BY CLIFFORD LOVE & CO. LTD., SYDNEY.


m
\.>»
Viv
H 2
flflt
#i
w
w
«
IMP
111
m
IIIK
HI
111
111
i
I
NEWLANDS BROTHERS LIMITED
MANUFACTURERS OF
ALL STEEL BEDSTEADS
Lawn Hammocks Davenports
“LISTER” HOSPITAL BEDS
Mattresses :: :: Cushions
All Classes of
Bedding
Cable Address:
"NEWLANDBED ”
Sydney.
TTitHirs^j
This metal label is
fixed to every New-
lands Bed and Spring
Awarded Aledal and
Certificate of Honour,
British Empire Ex-
hibition, Eon don, 1924.
SHIPS’ ALL STEEL BERTHS
Cabinet Beds ;; Bassinettes
STEELITE-DE-LUXE SPRINGS
Garden Seats :: Stretchers
Motor Stools and
Deck Chairs
TeUphoms:
(F 2156 (Three Lines)
Head Office and Works: RILEY STREET, SYDNEY, N.S.W. (’
WHOLESALER
ONLY. )
This blue and gold label
is sewn on every genuine
** Morning Glory ”
m-
m


1
"St-
J
"f
«-
SM
tfe
1
IK-.V."
11l
'w
WM
It
m
li
TO
I
Nt-
sa
r-v
%
*
/W
W£Bi
NT
V-M
Beautijul Morning-Glorj Bedding and Beds by Newlands & Co. Ltd., displayed on the “ Great White ” Train.


ROMANTIC STORY of PAINT INDUSTRY
■a
BERGER’S SUCCESS.
To relate the annals of the early history of the House of Berger it is necessary
to go back to the year 1760, when, in a humble building on the banks of the
Thames, near London, Lewis Berger set up in business as a maker of Dry
Colours. So faithfully did the young Berger work that the quality of his
dry colours soon earned for him an international fame, and the business
rapidly expanded.
With the early days of the House of Berger was associated an historical
event of no small importance to Australia —the building and equipping of
Captain Cook’s “ Endeavour.” This work was carried out on the opposite
bank of the Thames to where young Berger toiled, and perhaps he never
dreamed that in after years the harvest of his labours would include the
establishment of a model factory in one of the strange lands to which the old
“ Endeavour ” was to carry her freight of pioneers.
FOUR GENERATIONS.
From the initial enterprise of Lewis Berger in 1760 to the culmination of the
present Berger organisation in Australia is too far a call for this short article,
suffice it to say that the management of the firm passed uninterruptedly
from father to son for four generations, and that so great was the demand for
the Berger Products that in 1879 more capital was deemed necessary to
cope with the business, and so a Limited Company was formed.
BERGER IN AUSTRALIA.
Shortly afterwards the first representative was sent to Australia, in 1907 a
warehouse was opened in Sydney and in 1911 a separate company was
formed to assume control of the Australasian business. Under the new
management the business increased to such an extent that in 1916 it was
decided to establish a complete factory to supply Australasian needs.
A tract of land ni acres in extent was secured at Rhodes, 10 miles by rail
from Sydney, and on this land was built one of the finest plants in the world
for the manufacture of White Lead, Paints, Varnishes, Enamels, and allied
products. Such an accomplishment during wartime, despite rapidly
increasing costs and the great difficulties in the way of transporting heavy
machinery, is a wonderful tribute to the dauntless spirit of Australian
Industry.
COMPLETE PLANT.
The plant itself comprises several groups of distinct buildings—the Corroding
Stacks where the lead ingots from Broken Hill arc treated, the Lead Mill
where the corroded lead is separated, ground, screened, and finally mixed with
oil, the Paint Mills where Paste and Liquid Paints, Coach Colours, Enamels,
etc., are produced in large quantities, the Varnish Works, Oil Refinery,
Warehouse, Transforming House and Office Building. In addition there
is a complete Test Laboratory housing what is possibly the only Ultra Violet
Ray Machine in Australia.
As may well be imagined, in a business of such magnitude, the consumption
of raw materials is enormous, and wheverer possible the materials used are of
Australian origin.
Your support of Berger Products in Australia gives employment to a staff
of over four hundred Australians, who have succeeded in producing white
lead, paints, and varnishes equal in every way to those which for years have
been imported from Great Britain, Europe, and the U.S.A.
HYGIENIC CONDITIONS.
Throughout the works the utmost care is paid to hygiene and the comfort
and well being of the employees. All workmen arc provided with overalls
by the Company and arc allowed ample time for careful washing before meals
and before leaving the factory. Hot and cold water, showers, plunge baths
and clean towels are provided. A spacious dining hall for employees is a
notable feature of the plant, while recreation is provided for in the shape of a
football and cricket field, and two fine grass tennis courts.
A large number of the employees are returned soldiers, and quite recently a
very live social body —“ The Berger Returned Sailors and Soldiers’ Club ”
has sprung into being. There are in addition several other well supported
social and sporting associations within the organisation, and the management
boast proudly of the fact that there had not been one single instance of in-
dustrial trouble of any kind since the day on which the works started.
Truly this is a wonderful tribute to the workmen of Australia !
The Great White Train was painted throughout with Berger
Products 1


- -1
0*
It* 0
tty
i K
Mi
eel
«■
3k
tTprri
p m,n
¥
*r~
♦
i
*
**>«*
m
B--*
m
M
\ m *v. ta .- 4
>k J
H
t
%
Xfi
S.
■%
i
s
An impressive display of Berger’s Paints and Varnishes.


“EAGLEY” Hosiery and Underwear
This is part of an already well-
established Australian Industry,
namely that of woollen manu-
facture, in which an army of
technical experts and trained
operatives is engaged in the
treatment of our own good
Australian wool.
A very large amount of capital
has been invested in the purchase
and erection of the intricate
machinery necessary for the
cleaning, spinning, weaving,
knitting, bleaching, dyeing and
finishing processes, and Austra-
lia is to be congratulated that
such an important secondary
industry has been so well
established—an industry which
is yearly using large quantities of our staple
raw material. The intelligent expansion of manu-
facturing activities which require our own natural
produce is surely the right sort of progress.
“ Eagley ” underwear and hosiery have been sold in
Australia for over 25 years and
the name and quality of the
goods are well known in every
State of the Commonwealth.
Thousands of families buy
“ Eagley ” year in and year out
and hundreds of stores carry
supplies. “ Eagley ” goods have
made their way not just because
they are made in Australia, but
because of their intrinsic merits
and because they meet a general
need. They are not made in a
large variety of fanciful styles,
but with a view to utility, com-
fort, and value for money spent.
Pure Wool Underwear is still
the safest to wear and you
are recommended to ask for
“ Eagley ” when next buying.
You can get “Eagley” in half hose, underwear and
coat sweaters for men, in hose, underwear and ribbed
vests for women, and in sox, f hose, underwear and
sweaters for children, and in bathing and swimming
costumes for men, women and children.
Remember the name “ EAGLEY ’
and the Trade-Mark
v K
SK
4JS


Industrial Progress of Australia
This Souvenir is in itself a striking testimony to the fact that
Australia as an industrial nation has already arrived. For as
the reader turns over its pages he cannot fail to be struck with
Ltd. which has won a high reputation for copper, tubing and
allied products, the British Standard Machinery Co. Ltd. (machinery),
Babcock and Wilcox Ltd. (boilers, machinery, etc.), Hadfields
The Eagley Tty.’s Exhibit.
the vast variety of the output of the factories and work-shops
of Australia. The range of products is very wide and covers
an extensive industrial field. In the great and fundamental en-
gineering industry, for example, we have the Austral Bronze Co.
(Aust.) Ltd., whose steel castings and steel products generally are
held in high esteem by the trade, Hoskins Iron & Steel Co. Ltd.,
steel products, including rails, etc., one of Australia’s most
famous firms, John Lysaght (Aust.) Ltd., whose corrugated iron
(Continued on page 88).


JUSFRUTE CORDIALS
Made at Gosford, N.S. W. Australia.
’ | ' HE EXHIBITION of these cordials on the Great White Train of 1925-6 marks an
I epoch not only in the cordial trade, but in the great citrus-growing industry of Australia.
Those who taste Jusfrute Cordials for the first time notice immediately the difference
between the drinks and any other so-called ‘‘soft drinks ” which they have ever tasted.
There is a richness and a mellowness, a fullness and yet a delicacy of flavour about Jusfrute
which surprises everyone. The reason is not far to seek. Jusfrute Cordials are not merely
flavoured with a little oil from the skin of the fruit. They are made from the whole fruit.
A Task
Jusfrute Cordials were evolved after long and exceedingly delicate scientific experiments
which had in view the production of real cordials which would contain the goodness and
healthfulness of fresh fruit. To achieve this it was, of course, necessary to include the
juice of the fruit, and, in order not to impair any of the delicate health properties such as the
salts and vitamins in which citrus fruits are so rich, it was necessary carefully to avoid any
process which would require excessive heat. It was also desirable, if possible, to avoid
the necessity for the addition of any preservative matter.
A Triumph
The task, it is obvious, was one of considerable magnitude. But it has been accomplished.
Jusfrute Cordials, with the exception of cane sugar and a minute quantity of colouring
matter, contain nothing whatever not present in the fresh fruit. They contain no artificial
preservative matter, yet they will keep indefinitely even after unsealing.
This is indeed a triumph. It means that there is now available to the people of Australia, and will
shortly be available to the people of the whole world, a most delightful drink, equally beneficial
either hot or cold, which makes available the health benefits of real fresh fruit right throughout the
year. A drink of this sort, it will at once be recognised, is priceless. As a matter of fact it costs
about 1 |d. per half pint. What this means to children and families parents will need no telling.
The Industry
The factory is situatedin the heart of the greatest citrus growing area of Australia. The fresh fruit
comes straight to the factory, and J usfrute never sees the dirt and germ-ridden atmosphere of the
city until it is safely corked up in a bottle. The fruit is handled under ideal conditions in the clean,
fresh country air, by a plant specially designed for the purpose, having as its chief object the pre-
servation in all Jusfrute products of the maximum amount of health value and‘‘naturalness.”
Jusfrute Limited also produce many other lines, such as essential oils, fruit juices for the
cordial trade, citrus peels, etc., and wherever the name “ Jusfrute” is seen upon any article
the purchaser may rest assured that the same delicate care has been bestowed upon its pro-
duction as goes to the manufacture of Jusfrute Cordials.
The situation of the Company’s factory in the midst of the orchards assures the freshness of
the fruit and obviates expensive transport of bulky raw materials. This, together with the
policy adopted of combining the interests of the citrus growers with those of the Company,
gives the purchasers of Jusfrute products maximum quality at minimum price.
It may be of interest to note that, during the Company’s last financial year Dec. 1925-1926, the
second year in which Jusfrute drinks had been on the market, Jusfrute Limited used 31,871
bushels of citrus fruit, or between 12 per cent, and 13 per cent, of the total crop of New South
Wales.
HOW YOU BUY JUSFRUTE —Jusfrute is available in two forms: —
1. As a syrup Cordial bottled by Jusfrute Limited as shown above, which you may obtain through your
grocer. The syrup is ready for mixing with plain water or soda. It is very highly concentrated,
and only requires about a tablcspoonful of syrup to an ordinary tumbler of water.
2. As a ready mixed aerated drink, in which form it is bottled under license from the Company by
the local aerated water manufacturer in most of the large towns of Australia and New Zealand. Over
230 firms arc now bottling Jusfrute in this form.
Enquiries to THE MANAGER, Jusfrute Limited, Gosford N.S ,\V. (Capt. G. I. Adcock, F.R.H.S., A.A.1.M.M.,
Membre Socletie Linaenne de Lyon, &c.)
Or to W. M. FLEMING & Son, 26 O’Connell Street, Sydney.


ft
/
o
/
»«TM
i
no r t
em
c©:s
3
*s*
"4*
JUSFR.UTE LIMITED - COSFOFLD N.S.W.


5
S
'"
1
SCI
XM/tt
I
aff*9.
Jbvf
(fS/Si
S*
m
&
•Sgs
a
tt
8C
•Cf
'Vi
£■
NJ
li
»ks
s
Nestle & Anglo Swiss Condensed Milk Co.’s fine Exhibit.


<3 a*>
M
s
fws«
ss
■«
sas
vXoHcc
Coffer
I
fkMan
=fi*
y.*vg+
CiO?!®’
M
Sort
UNMCi
ftafcr
N
txwmfiimnewiaß.
Cfc*
C</f.
Sift
fla*--
Qa r*
I
f%ew»
jru»
ti
%
r
«*•
W
W
M
*a
mi
CJjf
/!
if
■sm
it
Stedman-Henderson’'s Striking Exhibit.


MADE IN AUSTRALIA
Carpeting the way to Australia’s Prosperity
* i
m
;UTEX Carpets pioneer a new Australian Industry. Durability
is their big feature — durability, plus the further attributes of
smartness, value, and utility. 5 Jutex provides the ideal economical
floor covering for office, home, or hotel—everywhere I The patterns
are reversible, thus the carpet may be turned from time to time.
Pattern No. 103.
Attractive designs may be obtained
in Rugs, Runners or Mats.
m
Pattern No. 102 —Specimen of Doormat.
REMEMBER / They are Australians made to suit Australian conditions , and manufactured in
The Only Carpet Factory in Australia.
Manufactured by :
v~ .
PaUern No. 104
GATTINO AND COMPANY LIMITED
Factories :
Amelia St., Waterloo.
Offices and S/mr rooms :
39-41 York St., Sydney.


jans
u m
?ASfi
\
tS
mm
mm.
si
m
a
«
is
*
a
5«««
c
H PARK f:
£gS
NOTON
*
ss
feri,?.
Ll22t
$*
m
n
l\
gp
‘a,\
\^.
S&
IV. D. & H. 0. Wills’ Attractive Exhibit.


The BROKEN HILL PROPRIETARY Co. Ltd.
Iron and Steel Manufacturers
NEWCASTLE, New South Wales
THE NEWCASTLE IRON AND STEEL WORKS which are owned
and controlled by THE BROKEN HILL PROPRIETARY COMPANY
LIMITED are situated at Port Waratah, a portion of Newcastle (New
South Wales) Harbour, distant a little over two miles from the city.
The daily average of men
employed at the Steel Works
approximates 5,000, and the
wages bill amounts to £27,750
per week, or £1,430,000 annu-
ally. There are 26 miles of
railways inside the works, in con-
nection with which eighteen loco-
motives are regularly employed.
The B.H.P. owns and keeps in
constant commission five stea-
mers, with an aggregate dead-
weight carrying capacity of
30.000 tons. It consumes
weekly 16,500 tons of coal, or
858.000 tons annually. To
slake its almost insatiate thirst
8.250.000 of gallons of fresh
water and 280,000,000 of gallons
of seawater are provided weekly.
Nine millions of cubic feet of
timber, represented by over
'20,000 piles, have been sunk
into the earth to provide founda-
tions and wharfage. In the last
five years 44,250,000 firebricks
have been used in the construction
and maintenance of furnaces, etc.
Between the date of the industry’s inauguration and May 51st, 1925,
there were produced :
Steel .. .. .. .. 1,794,620 tons.
Pig Iron .. .. .. .. .. .. .. 1,827,362 tons.
Sulphate of Ammonia
Tar
Benzol
Solvent Naphtha
24,768 tons.
18,845,833 galls.
1,839,699 galls.
145,512 galls.
K"
View of Three Blast ¥urnaces y Newcastle.
The principal raw materials
forming the basis of this industry
are iron ore, limestone and coal.
The Iron ore is found at Iron
Knob, in South Australia, where
the Company has deposits of
high - grade ores aggregating
over a hundred million tons.
The breaking out of the ore is
done by modern methods which
almost eliminate manual handling.
Transportation of the ore to the
sea coast is effected over thirty-
four miles of railway, built,
owned and operated by the Com-
pany, and at the port of ship-
ment, Whyalla, it is crushed and
mechanically delivered into stea-
mers for shipment to Newcastle.
The loading rate is about 1,000
tons per hour. The output of
iron ore varies from 10,000 to
15,000 tons weekly.
The principal source of lime-
stone for fluxing purposes is
where the Company has a modern quarrying
Melrose, Tasmania,
and crushing plant.
The Blast Furnaces, three in number, are capable of producing 1,400
tons of pig iron per day. During the last year they turned out a total


of nearly 560,000 tons. In addition to these three Blast Furnaces, one small one week. This, it is claimed, is a world’s record fora plant of that size.
Blast Furnace with a capacity of 600 tons per week, is held in reserve for the Parallel to the Open Hearth, and about too yards away, is the Blooming
production of ferro manganese, or special grade foundry iron. Mill. Its business is to roll ingots down to within an eighth of an inch or
''■psr
i-.
-4-
m
m
llPtl
gs. ■■■ :
•
View of the Steel Works , Newcastle , from the air.
The Open Hearth Department, where the refining process takes place—
the refining process which transforms iron into steel-—comprises nine fur-
naces. Each furnace has a producing capacity of about seventy tons of steel
per heat. Seven of the furnaces have turned out a total of 10,420 tons in
so of any required size. So an ingot, five feet six inches long and 20 inches
square, may be rolled out until it is seventy feet long by four inches square,
or it may be any size in between.
The zB-inch Alill is situated end on to the Bloom Mill, and is designed to


x
General View of Rod Mill , Newcastle.
produce the larger sized rails, shapes, sections, etc. Its annual output
approximates 200,000 tons.
Not far away is the 18-inch Mill, wherein are rolled rails and sections of
intermediate size. The annual production is in the neighbourhood of
78,000 tons. Of this total some 36,000 tons were made up of feed for
the smaller mills and orders from outside buyers.
The 12-inch and 8-inch Mills, which are housed under the one roof, roll
the smallest lines in shapes and sections which the works produce. Their
output last year was about 60,000 tons.
The Rod Mill, wherein billets of steel arc rolled out into wire rods, last
year produced approximately 75,000 tons. In this mill a billet of steel
30 feet long by one inch and three-quarters square, is rolled out into a coil of
wire, technically known as wire-rod, 300 yards long.
The Coke Ovens carbonise annually about 5 5 3,000 tons of coal, producing
in the process (round figures) 358,500 tons of coke, 3,700,000 gallons of tar,
1,024,000 gallons of benzol, 92,600 gallons of solvent naphtha, 5,000 tons of
sulphate of ammonia, and 6,000,000,000 cubic feet of gas. For these by-
products a ready market is available, as also is there for blast furnace slag,
a road-making material which is giving excellent results.
The capital invested in the Steel Works is something over £6,000,000.
In showing how important is the Steel Industry to the security of a nation,
it might be mentioned that the Steel Works at Newcastle rolled 7,000 tons of
rails, which were shipped to and used in France in connection with the
prosecution of the war. The soldiers of the allied forces were carried into
the line over B.H.P. rolled rails, and further, they fought with munitions
also provided by the same great concern, for 18,000 tons of munition steel
were contributed by the B.H.P.
..
m
i
m
r
%
SS&s
Ulooming Mill, Newcastle.


- -p»»
i®
r •
loci
GC
ji:
pO&s|
a##
w. m*
m \
t+i
a
t\
Ts
.. A
y-
A??
ml
*v
f>'
?frtf*CTS
A
i
t
-
;* s V'
fllu ZLc
£
£
■
m
m
SS!
g£- V ’..
:v. /
i*v-
Remarkable Exhibit by the Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd. showing in the foreground a beautiful model of the largest type of engine
made by railway workshop apprentices.


«NSW‘ C?
; (h\ A
l e-r> L t ■?
w ' , iD v R |E
i IIBi Jll |f4|P||i^^
S&
I The hom®
PPPP
MM* F"
it? B
i n
Australians should Wear
Australian Footwear—!
BECAUSE—
(I) They are cheaper than the imported
article, most of the material being
produced locally, thus saving expense
involved in customs duties and
freight charges.
(2) Australian leathers are particularly
suitable to local conditions, which
improve the wearing quality.
(3) Australian sole leather is regarded as
the finest in the world.
(4) The designs and styles are at least
equal to the imported article.
THE HOME OF MACM UR AND COO-EE FOOTWEAR.
0:
A £60,000 Plant is housed in this fine building, and over 500 Australians are em-
ployed therein. The output is 12,000 Pairs of Footwear Weekly, and Australian
Leather is practically solely used in their manufacture. This firm has been
Established 62 Years, and makes the following well-known brands of footwear:—
“MACMUR ” (Men’s and Boys’ Light Footwear).
“ COO-EE” (Lad ies’ and Girls’ Light Footwear).
McMURTRIE & COMPANY
LIMITED
76 <& 78 CLARENCE STREET,
SYDNEY, N.S.W.
Factories - - REDFERN.
“ McMURTRIE’S” ) m u J
——( Bluchers and
“THE GREAT SOUTHERN BOOT FACTORY ” i Heavyßoots '
Branches and Agencies throughout
the Commonwealth.


A
r-ftrSa
Hi
fiti *5
sa
0
i
i
m
w
IS
n
i
s
S 3
m
m
m
i
i
i
i
m
sr*
m
«YS
I
m
R
iffii
ST”
/ Hosiery Mill ,
If// i'/. frontage.
va
~ \i
Helping to solve Australia’s population problem—the remarkable achievements of
GEO. A. BOND & CO. LIMITED.
BRAHAM LINCOLN’S ADVICE TO AMERICA
“ Fill your factories and your farms will fill them-
selves ” —can be used with equal or greater force to
Australia to-day.
Every new industry established in this country by increasing employ-
ment increases the outlet for primary products. Every factory
besides employing operatives needs subsidiary industries to cater for its
wants, and increases the sum total of the wealth of the community.
The firm of Geo. A. Bond & Co., which commenced the manufacture
of hosiery and underwear 10 years ago, employs to-day
2300 workers, produces over 1} million pounds worth
of goods and pays over £360,000 in wages annually.
q -o-b'
u
HOSIER!
NuS
Q
BOND
□ ED But.
Bond’s new Hosiery Mill, Hay ton St.,
Camperdown, N.S. W.


0[
PR#
lOs
l4Dfi
b m
11
/*$
i
I
f *
w
•s
iJS
■a
.j
sg»
>.vj»
ny
J
O*
vtw
CMC*
■■• N
Portion of Geo. A. Bond’s Plosiery Exhibit.


The optimism and broad vision of the Company are typified
by an utterance of Mr. Geo. Bond, the Managing Director:—
“We consider that we are, as manufacturers, only in our
infancy. We are looking for greater achievements. The goal
we are after is that of the extension of Australian manufactures,
the employment of thousands of Australian men and women,
and the using of Australian grown products.”
The manufacturing of cotton, pioneered in this country by Geo.
A. Bond & Co. Ltd., has every promise of becoming one of
Australia’s greatest industries. Two years ago cotton spinning
mills were erected at a cost of fz 5 0,000, and to-day
sheeting, calico, towels and tent cloth of the finest
quality are being produced, and are in keen demand
throughout the Commonwealth. To-day, Bond’s
Hosiery, under-wear and cotton tweeds are widely-
known throughout Australia and their popularity is growing
tremendously. And not only in this country are Bond’s
products in demand. They enjoy public favour in New
Zealand and South Africa, and their sales in those countries
are increasing rapidly.
t
I -
"If
/■
IK
9
Wo
9 'll
h
5?
u
Head Office and Warehouse ,
Camperdown.
iMS|srrweAVSS|
TfrnrTCDTTDN
cTduce a bond
msm
mMvtj
Cotton Spinning and Weaving Plant.


0
r Hr
boads LADy-HPTT^Sap
Bo
No
8
\ r M
AtPHOSE
sfe |
BOflpß HAir cui
Jkoemm
TOOtSf
" »
X
S¥
HI !l|
i
•tm*
I
s
Mi
m
I
yB
k
■-'C
1
A- 1 -
J|
/
tv
0
ss
■I
•;>-
N
Showing Working Exhibits of Geo. A. Bond <& Co. Ltd. manufacturing Cotton Tweeds and Towelling.


r.Ak
V
A
&
e s
m
House
Berlei
■*«£***>
BERLEI HOUSE
SYDNEY.
S£
t
v
s*
N,
v
C(
“fl-H^tl
SZ^SSI
552SSESS555S
The Home of the Berlei Corset


Jkrkt Ikals
1
ERLEI Ideals are to Design, Manufacture and sell in Australia, Corsets and Brassieres,
of such perfect Fit, Quality and Workmanship, as will bring pleasure and profit to
all concerned, while at the same time rendering such excellent service to our clients
and. consumers as will merit their permanent patronage.
It has always been our ideal and ambition to give the Trade, not only, a quality line
that can be guaranteed, but also a line that will lead all other sales.
To accomplish this we make our Service commence when the retailer entrusts us
with his order, and believe it does not end until our goods are sold from his shelves at
a profit, and are being worn by satisfied customers.
BERLEI LIMITED
BERLEI HOUSE, 39-47 REGENT ST., SYDNEY.
Berlei Ltd.
Commerce House,
Adelaide.
Berlei Ltd.
Degraves Buildings,
Degraves Street, Melbourne.
Berlei Ltd.,
78,80 Eagle Street,
Brisbane.
F. W. Heritage & Co., Ltd.,
Hobart, Tasmania.
A. C. Haig,
Perth Representative.
Hollis, Hopkins & Co., Ltd.
Townsville,
North Queensland.


Artistic Display of Berlei Corsets and Brassieres by Berlei Ltd. on the “ Great White ” Train.


products have a reputation as wide as the Com-
monwealth, Lysaght Bros. & Co. Ltd., wire
netting, equally renowned, Noyes Bros, whose
skill in the manufacture of electric motors and
copper rods, etc., is universally recognised, the
United Nail & Wire Netting Co. Ltd. (nails,
wire-netting), and last and most important of all,
Broken Hill Pty. Ltd. whose works at Newcastle
are at one and the same time a credit to Australia
and a monument to the ability and enterprise
of the founders.
In the Textile section are to be found many firms
whose names have become a household word in
Australia. John Vicars & Co. Ltd. (rugs,
worsted, serges, etc.), is one of the oldest woollen
industries in Australia. This firm turns out
work of the highest class, high grade in quality
and workmanship and in finish. Berlei Ltd.
(corsets and brassieres), although a comparatively
young firm, has achieved an assured success.
Its products are sought for all over the Com-
monwealth, indeed all over Australasia. The
qualitv is high and the artistic taste which the
products reveal has completely captured the
market. Amalgamated Textiles (Aust.) Ltd.
(worsted goods, etc.), Eagley Co. Pty. Ltd.
(woollen underwear, sox, etc.), Lincoln Knitting
Co. Ltd. (woollen underwear, sox, etc.), D. &
W. Murray Ltd. (woollen rugs, blankets, etc.), are
all well established, highly reputable firms, while
Geo. A. Bond & Co. Ltd. (silk hose, towelling,
sheeting, etc.), is one of the most enterprising
Examples of Effective League Slogans
Industrial Progress — continued.


firms in the Australian Commonwealth, and the first and only firm
in Australia to grow its own cotton, spin its own yarn and weave
its own cotton textiles. The wonderful success this firm has
achieved in a comparatively few years is a splendid testimony to the
consummate ability of its management.
Ltd., and yet, after six months’ exposure to all kinds of weather, the
paint was practically unaffected. A splendid testimony to its high
durability'!
The Davis Gelatine Co. (Aust.) Ltd. deserves a paragraph to itself.
This company is literally transforming waste into wealth, and is one
Tooth & Co.’s Exhibit.
Paints, varnishes, etc., are manufactured by Robt. Ingham Clark,
Lewis Berger & Sons (Aust.) Ltd., Taubmans Ltd., “ Wadadjerie ”
Silicate Paint Co., all firms with an established reputation turning out
products of the highest excellence. It should be mentioned that the
paint for the Great White Train was supplied by Lewis Berger & Sons
of the most remarkable industrial successes in the Australian Com-
monwealth.
Beale & Co. Ltd. stands alone as a manufacturer of pianos. In
many respects it is the most remarkable industrial organisation
in Australia, It is the largest piano factory in the British Empire,


'D
£
U
SOMETHING MORE THAN A BREWERY !
When a business develops to such an extent that it
absolutely dominates its particular field of industry—
when its operations become so great that it can be
said to directly influence the welfare of thousands
of work-people—when its ramifications reach the
point where a score of other industries, primary
and secondary, arc to a degree dependent upon
it for their prosperity—then it may be truthfully
said that that business has become an institution
of national importance. So it is with the brewing
business of Tooth & Coy. Ltd., the largest of its
kind in the Southern Hemisphere, and one of the
greatest commercial enterprises in Australia.
Tooth’s Brewery was established in 1835.
The Authorised Capital of the Company is £4,000,000.
Tooth’s give direct employment to over 1800 men in
such a wide variety of occupations that they are
covered by over 30 Federal and State Arbitration
Court Awards.
Tooth’s consistently give preference to Australian
raw materials and machinery.
Millions of dozen bottles and half a million casks, all
Australian made, are handled annually.
Coopers, bottle makers, sugar farmers, are largely
dependent upon the breweries; while hop-growers,
barley growers, and maltsters depend entirely upon
the prosperity of the industry.
o 9


TOOTH’S IS A NATIONAL INSTITUTION!
The greater proportion of the Company’s malt
requirements is made at their own extensive Mailings
at Mittagong, which arc the finest in Australia.
Tooth’s guarantee to buy from X.S. Wales farmers,
at highest market prices, all the barley grown
which is suitable for malting purposes.
Well over three quarters of a million pounds of hops
per year are used by N.S. Wales breweries. 85%
of these hops are Tasmanian grown.
The whole of the enormous amount of sugar used is
grown and refined In Australia.
cm
Tens of thousands of tons of coal and millions of
units of electricity are required annually to provide
tile power necessary to work this huge industry
(amongst the largest in Australia).
Tooth’s regularly use over 100 horse and 50 motor
vehicles to deliver their products.
All the motor bodies and the whole of the horse
waggons are built locally.
The whole of the horse feed for their 150 horses is
locally grown.
During recent years the Company has installed a
number of boiling vessels —among the largest in
Australia—huge pasteurisers, a 150 ton refrigerating
plant, cask washing machinery, etc., etc., all of
which have been manufactured locally.
ro
o


"Extension of an important Queens-
land business to New South Wiles
SIDNEY WILLIAMS
AND COMPANY LIMITED
General View of the Works of Sidney Williams Co. t Ltd. f Dulwich Hill, Sydney .
~ -rn-
'7S?"
#ii
ti:
Recognising the need for reliable supplies of water in the
pastoral and agricultural industries of Australia, Mr. Sidney
Williams, in 1879, established at Rockhampton a business to
meet this demand.
High grade windmills soon became a feature of the products
of Sidney Williams & Co. Ltd. By incorporating improve-
ments which were developed as a result of most careful atten-
ticn to the pastoralists’ requirements, the importance and
great benefit of the windmill was established, and the demand
increased. The Rockhampton Factory to-day covers about
one and a half acres, and branch offices in Townsville and
Brisbane gave a combined area of about half an acre.
The well known “ Comet ” Windmill was designed some
16 years ago, and it soon came in for popular demand. An
extension of the business to Sydney was necessary, and a large
factory was erected at Dulwich Hill in the year 1920. The area
of the Sydney Factory now covers over 2 acres, indicating
the rapid progress of ihe business.
The “ Comet ” Windmill. Without doubt the “ Comet ”
mill has superior features to other windmills. Many of these
are expensive to incorporate, but as the manufacturing is
carried out under the most modern methods with special
machinery, the actual production cost of the mill is reduced
to a minimum. The “ Comet ” purchaser, therefore, gets the
« Comet » Mill with 3 5//. wheel at Milton Park. benefit of much S reater value '
Bowral, NSW.
54^
m
w
30//. “ Comet” at Kawlinna , S.A., y on the
Trans-Continental Kailway.


zzs
■ws*
"A:
-- ~~ l'---.",
“ Comet " Steel Frame Garage.
Since the extension of the operations of the firm of
Sidney Williams & Co. Ltd. to Sydney, numerous
agencies have been established throughout the
various States, and the demand for the “ Comet ”
Mill is ever on the increase. During the month
of January, 1926, the output of “ Comet ” Mills
was a record. This record, however, was soon
to be broken by the output in February, and
again the March output constituted still another
record.
Besides the manufacture of windmills, the firm
also makes high grade pumps, troughing, trough
fittings, etc. In fact, they were the first to make
large corrugated iron tanks capable of holding
up to 60,000 gallons of water. They were also
the originators of the now popular type of trough
clip and band. Other “ Comet ” Products include
steel tank stands, special irrigation pumps, pump
rods, saw benches, winches, well ladders, steel
frame buildings, etc.
“Comet” Steel Frame Buildings, Recently
the introduction by Sidney Williams & Co. Ltd.
of their patented sectional steel frame building
unit has met with great success. A large number
of orders have been received, and the Building
Department is taxed to its utmost capacity. In
fact, extensions are already in progress. These
buildings are used for garages, petrol stores, huts,
week-end cottages, woolsheds, shearers’ quarters, meat houses, portable tool sheds, engine sheds,electric
light plant sheds. The Sydney Metropolitan Water Board and Electric Light Dept, have about three
dozen in use as shelter sheds for their various gangs.
The simple rectangular unit of Australian steel has only to be bolted together in the correct position to
form the various sizes of rooms or sheds. Being completely standardised, they are made in large quan-
tities, and the production cost is at a minimum. The result is, that although the actual cost of the material
for the steel frame for any definite building may be higher than the cost of the necessary timber material
for such a frame, as there is so much cutting, fitting, and punching work already done in the steel
members, that they are cheaper to erect, having merely to be bolted together according to the plans
submitted. Skilled labour is not, therefore, necessary. The buildings are safe against fire and white
ants, and they are semi-portable also, in that they can be dismantled and re-erected on another site.
As has been pointed out, two principles have been responsible for the deserved success of Sidney Williams
& Co. Ltd. They are, that the buyer comes first and must be studied so as to get his requirements
exactly right; and standardisation, which has enabled them to turn out the finished productions at ex-
tremely moderate prices.
The interesting exhibit which Messrs. Sidney Williams & Co. Ltd., placed on the “ Great White ” Train,
consisted mainly of a model of a complete “ Comet ” Windmill pumping plant. A scale model of a wind-
mill revolved by the breeze from a small electric fan, operated a model pump which delivered the water
into a tank on a “ Comet ”
steel tank stand. From thence,
the water flowed through the
“ Comet ” float valve into a
length of sheep troughing.
The simplicity of the windmill,
and its extreme sensitiveness
were two most remarkable
features. A panel showing
the simple working parts of the
“ Comet ” and their excellent
finish made it quite easy to
understand the working prin-
ciple of the mill.
Other models exhibited were
the “ Comet ” patented sec-
tional steel frame building,
showing the method of con-
struction by the use of the
standardised steel sections, and
also a “Comet” sheep dip. The
models were specially made for
the “White Train” by Sidney
Williams & Co. Ltd. A full page Part of the beautiful gardens made possible with a 16 ft. “ Comet " Mill.
illustration of the Exhibit Plant on the estate of the late J.H, Kitchen, Lilli Pilli,
appears on another page. Port Hacking, N.S.W.
*?8
m
m


Le adi Nc £| ll
’awe
comet s
ALL
£OM£J
HIGH fiiMCC POMPS
MADE.
%
rtlt
f.
* V - *■
< 'A*'/
/
r OW y
-•T-S4
h**- wf ,
I Kr
iC*-
/£
**s
-r~»*
4Jte
i
*
»
Mf*
Working Model of a “ Comet Windmill. Comprehensive Exhibit by Sidney Williams C~ Co. Ijtf.


and the high quality of the pianos produced is vouched for by the fact that
British Royalty is the possessor of one of Beale’s famous instruments.
Representing the manufacture of soaps, toilet requisites, etc., we
have the Palmolive Co. (Aust.) Ltd., and Parke Davis & Co. Ltd., both
turning out products highly popular throughout the Commonwealth.
Tesselated Tile Co., glass by the Australian Glass Manufg, Co.,
electricity meters by the Electricity Meter Mfg. Co. Ltd., cement by
the Kandos Cement Co. Ltd. and by the Commonwealth Portland
Cement Co. Ltd., Electric Signs by the Scanlan Electric Co., the firm
which provided the “ Great White ” Train with electric power, motor
Bebarfald-Vickers’ Sewing Machine Exhibit.
The road-making machinery industry is well represented by Arm-
strong Holland Ltd., A. H. McDonald & Co. and the British Standard
Machinery Co., Ltd., while windmills and station supplies may be
safely entrusted to the well-known firms of Sidney Williams Ltd. and
John Danks & Co. Ltd.
Carpets are provided by A. Gattino & Co., tiles by the Australian
bodies, etc., by John McGrath, linseed oil by Meggitts Ltd., gramo-
phones and billiard tables by the Home Recreations Ltd. and fruit
cordials by Jusfrute Ltd., a firm which has won a great reputation
for the purity of its products.
The well known firm of W. H. Plumb manufactures tools of all
kinds, and is rapidly building up a reputation for the high quality of
Industrial Progress — continued.


Mass Production Gives Jellex Desserts Superlative Quality
Excelling Imported Brands
*5
One of the high-speed automatic machines which completely packs the Jellex, as it was exhibited
to housewives who visited the Great White Train
The manufacturers of Jellex take exceptional
pride in the extraordinary high proportion of
purely Australian raw materials and labour
which form the components of their product.
Jellex quick gelatine desserts have in three
years become celebrated throughout the length
and breadth of Australia for their superlative
quality, and the makers have pone to unusual
efforts to prove to the Austialian public that
their product not only compares favourably with
imported goods—but in point of actual fact, it
excels the products of overseas manufacturers,
both in quality and in packing.
Jellex depends for its raw materials on the
finest quality Queensland cane sugar —likewise
the highest possible grade of Australian-made
gelatine, which is used to the exclusion of any
imported gelatine. The only ingredients ob-
tained abroad constitute a very small percentage
indeed of the total production cost. Even the
pulp and ink for the Australian-made carton
and special liner bag are primarily of Australian
production.
A model food factory is now being erected
at Rosebery for Messrs. Clinton Williams Ltd.
to house the Jellex plant consisting of a
complete battery of high-speed, automatic
packaging machines, capable of producing nearly
50,000 packages of Jellex per day to meet the
fast growing demand. This factory will be
notable for its high standard of efficiency and cleanliness, and will of course,
include the most interesting scientific testing equipment and other special
processing plants which Clinton Williams Ltd. utilize in maintaining the
uniform, high quality of their product.
The jelly crystal or jelly powder industry in Australia is surprisingly large
and the activities of Clinton Williams Ltd. constitute a striking example of what
Australian enterprise can accomplish in the efficient and economical production
of quality goods—in the face of prejudice in favour of imported goods.


their products right throughout the Australian continent. New-
lands Bros. Ltd. is a firm with a long established reputation for
the high quality and artistic design of its beds and bedding, and
the Mangrovite Belting Ltd. has achieved an equally high reputation
Henderson Ltd., hats for ladies, Mary Gold Essence Co. Ltd., essences
too numerous to mention, Caldwell’s Wines Ltd., wines in infinite
variety, the Water Conservation & Irrigation Commission, New
South Wales, canned fruit, etc., McMurtrie & Co. Ltd., boots and
Angus & Robertson’s Exhibit.
for its leather belting and other leather goods. The Pioneer Heel
Co. specializes in leather heels, while Jellex Ltd. have won a repu-
tation for the purity of its jellies.
The reader must be impressed with the variety of “ Australian-
Made ” products when he is reminded that Amalgamated Wireless
(Aust.) Ltd. supplies wireless apparatus, Clifford Love & Co. Ltd.,
groceries of every description, A. P. Stewart Ltd., hats for men, R. C.
shoes. Tooth & Co. Ltd., ales and stout, Protex Safe & Lock Co. Ltd.,
safes and strong rooms.
The Banking institutions are represented by the Australian
Bank of Commerce Ltd., Commercial Banking Co. of Sydney Ltd.,
Commonwealth Bank of Aust. Ltd., Royal Bank of Aust. Ltd.,
Government Savings Bank of N.S.W.


If millions use it why
_ _ A /" ILLIONS, quite literally, millions of women
1/1 iIT 'yi/IIM (f [\/| use PALMOLIVE in order to keep the
• %/ m/m/ • -i-V JL skin dear and lovely. Here is incontro-
vertible proof of its extreme excellence.
For three thousand years the world has known the immense emollient value of palm and olive oils.
Perfection in toilet soap demands more, however, than the natural goodness of ingredients. It calls
for supreme skill in the manner of their blending.
The lovely Cleopatra used the oils of the palm and the olive crudely mixed by slaves. In PALMOLIVE science offers
modern women something more than the rudimentary blend of other days.
The PALMOLIVE method of blending palm and olive oils in the exact proportions upon which their efficacy depends
is a beauty secret beyond price. It is this secret blend that helps millions to keep that schoolgirl complexion.
For the whole world knows what PALMOLIVE does for beauty. Knows and profits by the knowledge. Every day more
women everywhere buy and use PALMOLIVE SOAP. Every day more clear complexions prove its unexampled worth.
Palmolive Soap is unique both in its methods of manufacture and
in its marvellous effects. That is why millions use it. That is whv
The clear green colour of Palmolive, its refreshing odour, arc
entirely natural. No foreign colouring matter, no manufactured
scent, is permitted to upset the principle that natural means are best
for making and preserving good complexions. Palm and olive oils,
nothing else, give Palmolive its green colour, its exhilarating aroma.
Not what you read but what you sec will convince you that
Palmolive is the world’s greatest beautifying cleanser. Begin to use
it now. In a very short time the improved texture of your skin, the
clear pure colour, will show you what Palmolive docs for lovely
women everywhere it is doing for you.
you should begin to use it to-day.
“Keep that schoolgirl complexion”
THE PALMOLIVE COMPANY (AUSTRALASIA) LTD.,
SYDNEY
Palmolive Soap is untouched by human hands until you break the wrapper—it is never
sold unwrapped.
- per
cake
4
$


m
SB*
S'.
7.
n
rs
K
M
m
n-KB
ft
M
m
M:
&
r
, >yy<£
ft
V
w
s»
S
i/
The Dining Saloon on the “ Great White ” Train.


Made in Australia and suitable
for Australia's climatic
conditions.
Satisfaction Assured.
Sim
m Crncf B;/3/
Made in Australia and suitable
for Australia's climatic
conditions.
Satisfaction Assured.
MANUFACTURERS OF
1. Wadadjerie Silicate Paint
IN LINSEED OIL
ALL COLOURS AND WHITE
(Contains no Lead)
For interior and exterior decoration; for making a water
and acid-proof hard and tight surface on concrete,
cement plaster, cement sheeting, stucco work,
brick, stone, timber, galvanized and plain iron.
Resists the salt sea air and other acids.
When applied to superficially dry cement guaranteed
not to be affected by the alkali in the cement.
Special White and Cement Shades.
2. Wadadjerie Flat Sanitary Paint
(Contains no Lead)
A washable interior wall finish with a velvety effect.
Specially recommended for hospitals, schools, etc.
Artistic on plastered surfaces, wood-work, and
metal ceilings.
For plaster and cement walls WADADJERIE SILI-
CATE PAINT is applied to seal the walls, finishing
with one coat of SANITARY FLAT to desired effect.
Can be applied as an undercoat for high-grade enamels.
Spreading capacity approximately 500 square feet per
gallon. Delicate Shades and White.
Highly recommended to Architects, Engineers, and the
Building Trade.
j 3. Opaque White Paste (ZTli'.u.) |
Wadadjerie Silicate Paint Co. Ltd.


Sleeping Quarters of the Staff.


Objects of the “Australian-Made” Preference League
No. 1. —To educate public opinion to appreciate the wisdom of
giving preference to Australian-made primary, secondary
and artistic products, to secure—
(a) Self-Reliance, by making Australia more self-con-
tained.
(b) Prosperity, by keeping finance in Australia to build
up new industries and develop the nation.
(c) Security, by promoting these activities, enabling
Australia to increase her man-power and provide
finance for effective defence.
No. 2. —To banish unemployment and provide for the rapid and
easy absorption of new population by—
(a) Securing public appreciation of the excellence and
variety of Australian products.
(b) Encouraging the production in Australia of the highest
grade articles and commodities.
(c) Attracting to Australia individuals with capital to
invest and thus secure the establishment of new in-
dustries.
No. 3. —To advance the interests of primary producers by—
(a) Developing a stable and greatly extended home market.
(b) Assisting the establishment of appropriate industries
with modern plants and equipment in country centres.
(c) Developing new markets overseas for all forms of
commodities manufactured at the point of production.
No. 4 To assist the consumer by—
(a) Discountenancing inferior productions and unreason-
able prices.
(b) Increasing the demand for Australian-Made articles,
and therefore the output, enabling manufacturers to
produce and sell at a lower cost.
No. 5 To enrol members of the public, pledged to give preference
in all purchases to Australian production.
No. 6 To secure the above-mentioned Objects by conducting a
Publicity Campaign in all its phases throughout Australia.
No. 7 To raise funds by subscriptions, contributions and any
other revenue-producing method that will enable the League
to further its objects.


A Typical Australian Country Scene.
A Flock of Australia's Beautiful Merino Sheep.


Australian Mutual Provident Society
ESTABLISHED 1849
Accumulated Funds:
£60,000,000
Annual Income:
£9,000,000
DISTRIBUTES A CASH BONUS
EVERY YEAR
Cash Bonus allotted for
1925:
£2,578,220
Total Bonuses Distributed:
£36,232,577
HEAD OFFICE ; 87 PITT STREET. SYDNEY.
THE LEADING LIFE OFFICE
IN AUSTRALASIA.
Directors:
The Hon. Sir Alfred W. Meeks,
K.8.E., M.L.C.
Chairman:
The Hon. R. J. Black,
m.l.c.
Deputy Chairman:
Sir Samuel Hordern.
Richard Teece, Esq.
Sir Alexander MacCormick,
M.D.
Alex. Jobson, Esq.
Walter M. Vindin, Esq.
m
93
*
1
The Society transacts every class of Ordinary and Industrial Assurance Business. Policies may be effected to
cover payment of State and Federal Probate Duties. Write or call at once for-full information —
H. W. APPERLY, F.S.S., General Manager.


Granville School Children waiting their turn to see the Exhibition.


Ten Points for GOOD Australians
(1) NEVER FORGET THAN IN ENCOURAGING
AUSTRALIAN INDUSTRY YOU ARE HELP-
ING YOURSELF, for you are helping to increase
prosperity, and prosperity, like sunshine, radiates
everywhere.
(2) WHEN you purchase from abroad you send as much
wealth out of the country as you bring into it. But
when you purchase at home both the goods and the
purchase-money remain in the country.
(5) IN these days, when a war means piracy on the high
seas, no country is secure which depends for subsis-
tence on overseas trade. ONLY THE SELF-
SUPPORTING COUNTRIES ARE SAFE.
(4) THE MAN WHO IS ASHAMED TO WEAR AUS-
TRALIAN BOOTS, OR AN AUSTRALIAN
HAT, OR AN AUSTRALIAN SUIT OF
CLOTTIES MADE OF AUSTRALIAN CLOTH,
IS REALLY ASHAMED OF AUSTRALIA.
And the country which cannot supply its own needs,
with its own labour, with all the raw material at
hand, is a country for which one has reason to blush.
(5) In supporting Australian industry the Australian is
only doing for his country what other people all
over the world are doing for theirs. He is not doimj
a wrong ; HE IS MERELY PERFORMING A
DUTY, and exercising a right.
(6) NO country can reach the highest degree of develop-
ment and utilise all its talents if its industrial activities
are confined to a few primary industries. COM-
PLETE NATIONAL DEVELOPMENT IS IM-
POSSIBLE WITHOUT VARIETY OF EMPLOY-
MENT, and variety of employment implies that a
nation is striving as far as possible to supply its own
needs with its own labour.
(7) A MAN CAN SERVE HIS COUNTRY IN MAN) '
WAYS. He can serve it by singing songs about it;
or by making speeches about it. Some people seem
to think that there is no other way. He can serve it
by dying for it. He can also serve it by living for it.
But in the long run he can render it no greater service
than by assisting it to earn its own living —BY
BUYING ITS GOODS AND BACKING ITS
ENTERPRISES.
(8) AUSTRALIA COULD EASILY BECOME A
SELF-SUPPORTING COUNTRY. It has the raw
material. It has the labour. It chiefly wants the de-
mand —and that every man and woman of us can help
to provide.
(9) TFIE manufacturer in Australia has a special claim
to support. He is to a great extent a pioneer. He is
a man of courage. He has faith in his country and
his people, and EVERY AUSTRALIAN SHOULD
TRY TO PROVE TO HIM TFIAT HIS FAITH
IS JUSTIFIED.
(10) EVERY Australian ought to remember that Aus-
tralia, like every other country, depends for its
support and protection on its own people. Nobody
will care for Australia if Australians do not care for it.
NOBODY WILL SAVE IT UNLESS AUS-
TRALIANS SAVE IT. AND EVERY AUS-
TRALIAN WHO IS NOT HELPING TO SAVE
IT IS HELPING TO DAMN IT.


“ Australian-Made” Preference Shopping Week Shield —
Preseted by “ Australian-Made” Preference League for
the Best Dressed Shop Window.
In every one of the sixty towns visited by the “ Great
White ” Train an “ Australian-Made ” Preference Shopping
Week was organised, the League awarding a handsome oak
and silver Shield for the best-dressed window featuring
“ Australian-Made.” The illustrations on this and sub-
sequent pages give an idea of the whole-hearted manner
in which the function was taken up by the country shop-
keepers. Every town, without exception, decked its
windows with Australian goods, and so brought promi-
The Window which won the League Shield for J. J. Alam, Storekeeper, Dubbo.
nently under the notice of the people the superior qualities
of “ Australian-Made.” The window-dressing reached a
remarkably high standard, a friendly spirit of rivalry
actuating the competitors for the Shield. The displays of
“ Australian-Made,” with the League’s coloured slogans,
miniature maps of Australia, and the typically Australian
boomerangs sounded a note of patriotism that struck a
respondent chord in the hearts of the country people of
New South Wales.
“Australian-Made” Preference Shopping Week.


Song of Australia.
BY WALLACE NELSON.
Land of the fearless free
Girt by the silver sea.
What land compares with thee
Australia ?
Child of a newer line,
No mighty past is thine ;
Then let thy future shine,
Australia.
By work of hand and brain,
Gather power to maintain,
Right to thine own domain,
Australia.
Yet let old quarrels cease.
Earth’s store of good increase,
Thy ways be ways of peace,
Australia.
Then upright, strong and pure,
In all men’s love secure,
Thou shalt for aye endure,
Australia.
Land of the fearless free,
Girt by the silver sea,
We give our hearts to thee,
Australia.


This splendid Window Display won the League Shield for W. Curtis , Armidale.


Beale's Pianos, in a well appointed window, helped Maples of Albury to win the League Shield.


This excellent display of Newlands’ Bedsteads won the League Shield for Maples, Wzgga.
Itinerary of Historic First Tour of the “Great White” Train
Gosford, Newcastle, West Maitland, Cessnock, Singleton,
Muswellbrook, Scone, Murrurundi, Quirindi, Werris
Creek, Tamworth, Armidale, Binnaway, Merrygoen,
Dunedoo, Gulgong, Mudgee, Rylstone, Lithgow, Bathurst,
Blayney, Lyndhurst, Cowra, Orange, Wellington, Dubbo,
Narromine, Peak Hill, Parkes, Forbes, Stockinbingal,
Temora, Ariah Park, Ardlethan, Barellan, Griffith, Leeton,
Yanco, Narrandera, Ganmain, Coolamon, Junee, Wagga,
Henty, Culcairn, Albury, Walla Walla, Brocklesby, Corowa,
The Rock, Cootamundra, Wallendbeen, Young, Harden,
Yass, Gunning, Goulburn, Moss Vale, Bowral, Mittagong,
Liverpool, Granville, Sydney.


Typical Window Displays of “ Australian-Made ”
The window decorations, supplied by the League were largely availed of by the shopkeepers in connection with the
“ Australian-Made ” Preference Shopping Week.


Itinerary of Second Tour oj "Great White" Train.
NORTH & SOUTH COASTS & COOMA-BOMBALA TOUR.
Depart from Darling Island 3.50 p.m. Tubs. Aug. 24TH.
Newcastle, East Maitland, Dungog, Gloucester, Wing-
ham, Taree, Kendall, Kempsev, Macksville, Coff’s Harbour,
Glenreagh, South Grafton, Grafton, Rappville, Casino,
Kyogle Lismore, Byron Bay, Mullumbimby, Murwillum-
bah, Thirroul, Wollongong, Nowra, Tarago, Michelago,
Cooma, Nimmitabel, Bombala, Canberra, Queanbeyan,
Bungendore
Thence probably to Hornsby for two days, completing
the tour with a two weeks’ session in Sydney, from Novem-
ber Ist to 13th.


“Australian-Made” Preference Shopping Weep Processions and Civic deceptions
THE. hand of welcome was
extended to the “ Great
White” Train by the Mayor
—or Shire President—at every
centre visited. This took the form
of a Civic Reception on the
morning of arrival, and was at-
tended by the representative citi-
zens of the town. In the larger
centres the people turned up in
thousands—as the photograph on
the opposite page bears witness.
This illustration shows a section
of the crowd at the Goulburn
Reception. At the function in
each town a welcome was accorded
to the League representatives, who
in replying to the address of wel-
come, took the opportunity of
explaining the objectives of the
League and the mission of the
Train.
Processions featuring effective
displays of “ Australian - Made ”
are regularly organised by the
League as the opening function of
“ Australian - Alade ” Preference
Shopping Weeks. The picture on
this page shows a section of the
Goulburn festivities in connection with which the streets
were gaily decked with bunting. In the Sydney Eight-
Hour Day Procession in 1924 and 1925 the League members
organised some of the most spectacular displays that have
ever been seen on the city streets, while the processions
in connection with the Paddington, Newtown, Burwood
“ Australian-Made ”, Preference Week Procession at Goulburn.
and other suburban “ Australian-Made ” Preference Weeks
have been witnessed by tens of thousands. The public
interest aroused in the Civic Reception and in the
“Australian-Made ” Processions give an idea of the
eagerness with which the public receives the League’s
message.


Civic Reception at Goulburn. Typical of the remarkable enthusiasm displayed at every centre visited by the Train.


The Wireless Mast of Broadcasting Station 2XT
on the “ Great White ” Train.
Wireless Station 2XT
on the “Great White” Train
Wireless Station 2XT on the “ Great
White ” Train was “ on the air ” every
afternoon and evening throughout the
whole of the six months’ tour. The
official lecturer aboard broadcasted the
League’s message of Preference, told the
story of Australia’s industrial develop-
ment, entertained the kiddies with Bed-
time Stories, and announced items of
general and local interest. At every
centre the Mayor—or other leading
citizen —was invited by the League to
tell the story of his individual town and
district. Much invaluable possibility was
thereby given to every town visited, and
the opportunity to let the world know the
potentialities of the different centres was
turned to excellent account, the speeches
throughout being of a very high order.
The set runs on a wave-length of 850
metres and the best combination of coils
is a 75 turn coil on the primary, 100 or
150 on the secondary and 75 or too on the
re-action. The power of the set is 1-2
kilowatt.
The Mayor of Newcastle (Alderman Light) officially opens the
Exhibition.


A great crowd of Newcasile enthusiasts waiting to see
the “ Great White ” Train.
Everywhere
Enthusiasm
Greeted the
“Great White"
Train
Interest and enthusiasm centred
round the arrival of the “ Great
White ” Train at each and every
centre. Long queues waiting to go
through, eager young Australians
A Close-up of the “ Great White" Train.
waiting their turn, and cars parked
alongside the railway were the
gladsome sights which characterised
the Train’s stay at its sixty stopping
places.
School Children who came 10 miles to see the “ Great White” Train at Griffith.


An Impression of the “Great White” Train
BY THE HON. R. B. ORCHARD, 0.B.E.
WHEN the “ Australian-Made ” Preference League
first submitted to various manufacturing firms the
unique proposition of their displaying products on a
Train, comparatively few of the principals seriously
considered it a great advertising medium ; but more in the
spirit of desiring to demonstrate to the people of the
country districts the high stage of efficiency that has now
been reached by the workmen of Australia thirty-two
enterprising firms agreed to exhibit.
This, combined with the fact that the Premier, Mr.
Lang, considered the project of sufficient importance to
warrant the Government contributing £5,000, made it
possible for the “ Great White ” Train to cover a distance
of more than 2,000 miles.
To the lot of Mr. W. R. Bagnall, M.L.A., Director of
the League, fell the task of organising and directing the
project, and its amazing success is a tribute to him.
The business people in the various towns were induced
to arrange a Shopping Week, commencing with the
arrival of the Train, and to feature “ Australian-Made ”
goods in their windows, a Shield and Cup being given for
the best displays. In some of the towns, displays that
rival the best city firms were arranged.
School children passed through the Train, and were
keen to compete for the prizes given for the best essay.
Official lecturers visited the schools and impressed upon
the children the lesson of the Train.
In the evening, leading store-keepers and residents were
invited to dinner on the Train in the car used for this
purpose by the Prince of Wales during his visit.
At night the Train was beautifully illuminated, the search-
lights playing round the district and a broadcasting station
conveying its message to distant Australians. After the
visitors had passed through the Train they were entertained
with moving pictures, showing the process employed in
the various industries.
Nearly 2,000 have passed through the turnstiles to date,
but I am convinced that no effort of the League could
create this extraordinary interest if the Train was not ex-
pressing what has been in the hearts and minds of the
people, namely, that the time has arrived when Australians
must give preference to the goods made in their own work-
The Manager’s Office on the “ Great White ” Train.
shops ; and there is ample evidence in some districts that
the man on the land is doing this.
In one railway yard I counted 24 farming implements.
Only two were imported, all the rest being “ Australian-
Made ” —a highly gratifying sign.
The League is teaching the people of this State to have
faith in their country. In every town that it visits it is
leaving behind converts to its doctrine, inspiring them
with the necessity for making Australia more self-reliant
and self-supporting.


Banquet tendered to representative public men and citizens by the “ Australian-Made ” Preference League at the Granville Town Hall.
The “Australian-Made” Preference League tendered a Banquet to Representative Citizens in 60 Towns
In order to repay the hospitality extended to the Train,
the League, at each of the towns, gave a banquet in the
Dining Car to thirty representative citizens. In some of
the larger centres the chief hall was chosen for the holding
of the function, over a hundred influential public and busi-
ness men participating. Opportunity was taken at each
and every one of the gatherings to spread the League’s
propaganda, to point out the importance of supporting
the secondary, as well as the primary, industries of the
country, and so lay the foundations of national greatness
and security. After the loyal toast came “ Advance
Australia and the ‘ Australian-Made ’ Preference League ”
which was proposed by the Mayor or other leading
citizens nominated bv the Hon. Committee, the re-
sponse being in the hands of the lecturer, who was
the official spokesman of the League at all public
functions. The League here desires to pay a lasting
tribute to its Hon. Secretary in every town, realising
as it does that without Iris enthusiastic co-operation,
backed by that of every member of the Hon. Committee,
the measure of success achieved would not have been
possible.


The Song of the Train.
BY WALLACE NELSON.
Onward, ever onward
Goes the Great White Train
Onward, ever onward,
Over hill and plain.
Sometimes in the darkness
Sometimes in the day,
And this, in simple language
Is what it tries to say :
“ Good people of the country,
Our compliments to you,
Come and see the wonders
Our artisans can do.
We know that you are working—
But we are working too —
To build a mighty nation,
Strong, and straight and true.
“Yet bear this in remembrance,
Imprint it on the brain,
Repeat it to your children
Again and yet again.
Who buys imported products
From old lands or from new.
Sends jobs to other countries
For other men to do.
“ But those —in town or country —
Who buy “ Australian-Made,”
Give jobs to good Australians,
And build Australian trade.
So speak it from the housetops
And shout it from the steeple ;
‘ Who buys the things Australia makes
Employs Australia’s people.’ ”


Granville School Children assembled to hear the Story of the “ White Trains."
Over 100,000 School Children received the League's Message
No section of the community evinced a keener interest
in the “ Great White ” Train than did the children of the
sixty towns included in the itinerary. Special arrangements
were made for the children to visit the Exhibition, the
Education Department arranging that they be allowed to
do so, under the escort of their teachers, during school
hours. Every, school in every town was, in addition,
visited by the official lecturer, who in simple language,
inspired a spirit of patriotism among his youthful hearers,
telling them why they should love their native land and of
the part they can play in its growth and development.
Upwards of 100,000 children received the League’s message,
and the interest they displayed in the Train itself, in the
address of the lecturer, and in the essay competition run by
the League, leaves no possible doubt as to the impression
made on “Young Australia ” by the “ Great White ” Train.


THE
DAVIS
GELATINE INDUSTRY
u*
gssStZl**:
3
P<«
LAfc-i
S&IBtS*
CjAm»cV} __ _ „
# T f2i-^ : tS*. ;
VIEIP' OE BOTANY ITVRKS, DAVIS GELATINE (AUST.) LTD.
Australian industries so often have to bear the brunt of a deplorable lack of
confidence of the Australian people in the products of their own land. Fur-
ther there is a woeful disregard of the ability of the Australian to create some-
thing of pre-eminence on the world’s market.
Four miles beyond the metropolis proper of Sydney, stand the greatest
gelatine works in the world. Grown to such magnitude in less than a decade,
what the industry will expand to in even another ten years is a project too vast
to be visualised.
The beginnings of the industry arc indeed wrapped in romance. The
years of war clearly demonstrated the crippled struggle of a country with its
primary and secondary industries undeveloped. Australia has always
depended upon other countries for the supplies of gelatine, but the sub-
stance being of inestimable value, the governments of all the belligerent
countries commandeered the sources of supply. Australia in her geographi-
cal isolation was left stranded ; those industries requiring gelatine suffered
cruelly and consequently the commercial life of the country was dealt a serious
blow. The opportunity was waiting for anyone with the foresight and in-
itiative to realise its vast possibilities. In 1917 the Davis Gelatine Company,
then operating in New Zealand, decided to step into the breach.
The many abattoirs and slaughter houses of Australia, were drying and salting
the hides of the animals slaughtered, but were trimming those skins of the
fleshy inner layer, and the extremities commonly known as splits, leg pieces,
too ragged or too small to be of any use to the tanner. These then, were
discarded as waste, and were destroyed by burning, burying or otherwise
disposing of in the cheapest and easiest possible way. In Great Britain, Ger-
many, France, Belgium, Austria and America, similar waste was eagerly sought
and utilised commercially, at a profit that made many enterprises worth while.
At the same time Australia was literally burning money, indeed in the
past had burnt not thousands of pounds or even hundreds of thousands, but
millions, and was importing hundreds of tons of gelatine and glue representing
the profitable investment of material of like nature in other countries.
The awful waste stopped with the advent of the industry in Australia, and the
systematic marshalling of raw material from all possbile sources of supply
began. There was much to be done. The suppliers had to be enlightened and
educated to the preparation and classification of the material. There was the
great difficulty of high costs of transportation from the remote quarters of


the continent. Fortunately a sympathetic government promised protection
when the industry came into being. Such assurance justified the huge outlay
of capital that was entailed.
It is impossible to produce a first grade gelatine unless the best materials
are available, and unless the machinery for manufacturing is absolutely
up-to-date. The attention to such factors has been largely responsible for
the excellence of the Davis product, and so there is a tremendous factory,
pleasantly situated, equipped with the best and most improved mechanical
facilities, a laboratory with a battery of chemists ever researching and
testing so that standards of uniformity are maintained.
A visit to the works at Botany is full of interest. First one is taken to the
raw material stores, where huge bales of dried and salted material stands
tier upon tier piled up to the roof. This material comes from all over Aus-
tralia, and since the suppliers here are not sufficient, a great deal has to be
brought from abroad.
The material is first subjected to a very thorough washing process ; following
which it is sent on to the lime pits, and under the continuous action of lime
and water, the material softens and swells, allowing the lime to permeate
the pieces and act as a sterilising agent. It must be remembered that gelatine
is a food product and from the outset a close scrutiny is maintained to prevent
any possibility of even one piece of impure material getting through. When
the material has reached a definite stage of “ plumping” or softening, it is
taken by the series of elevators to the “ washing room,” so called for the rea-
son that upward of 200 wooden vats with revolving beaters are brought
into action to give it a further washing, firstly in pure water, then in a solution
that clarifies, and further ensures the process of sterilisation. The material
is now ready for the next stage in manufacture.
One enters the boiling room, where stands a series of wooden vats, in which
are steam heated coils. Here the material is subjected to boiling—the first
really definite stage in the extraction of gelatine. Any fat substance that
may have been adhering to the material rises to the surface and is carefully
removed. The gelatine in the solution is run off to enter the evaporation
stage. Huge aluminium lined evaporators loom up before one, and every-
thing but the gelatine is evaporated. Then follows the filtration after which
the gelatine is run off into the cooling rooms, to set, in much the same way
as the jelly sets in the ice-chest. When the gelatine congeals, it is cut into
good sized blocks which are conveyed to the cutting room and each passed
through the knifing machine. From this machine the gelatine comes in
soft pliable sheets to be placed on frames of aluminium wire for conveying
to the drying tunnels. Here great fans constructed on the aeroplane propel-
ler principle, roar in their endeavours to drive a definite volume of air neces-
sary in the drying out of the gelatine.
Next the dried gelatine is stripped off the frames in glistening, transparent
sheets. In the great majority of instances gelatine is wanted in powder form;
for this the sheets of gelatine are fed into the grinders and it comes out in
granulated form.
In the packing room scores of nimble fingers manipulate the machines that
place the gelatine in the neat blue packets that are now familiar to the house-
wives of the Empire. At other tables the girls are arranging endless rows of
little packets of gelatine lozenges.
The store and despatch room are the next stage. The size and volume of the
shipments arc amazing, and their destinations arc truly a revelation. The
output of the factory more than fulfils the requirements of Australasia and
the adjacent islands. The Company has opened branches abroad with the
result that Davis gelatine has a world wide distribution—a great tribute
to its quality. Kobe (Japan), Los Angeles (U.S.A.), Canada, Valparaiso
(South America), Calcutta in India, Cape Town and Durban (South Africa),
were some of the ports marked upon the cases.
The splendidly equipped laboratory has been mentioned; from here the pro-
gress of every batch of gelatine is watched from the moment the material
is first washed. Nothing is left to chance, for the life history of every batch
in process has its manufacturing life recorded on a card, its whole history
is there, the class of material at the commencement, its number of hours at
every change in making, its temperatures, its viscosity, its jelly strength and
general analysis. These are all factors which require constant care to pro-
duce a gelatine as the Davis Company make it.
All this has happened since 191-7; one would not be surprised if Mr. G. F.
Davis, the impulse behind this great concern, decided to sit back and survey
his achievement with ease, but not so. The moving finger is writing a still
greater future for the progressive Davis Company. Mr. Davis is a young
man yet, and one confidently expects still bigger things with his untiring
energy, penetrating foresight, cheery optimism and unswerving faith in the
ability of Australia to produce the best in the world.
Gelatine plays a part over vast fields ; in confectionary, for example; over
300 tons of gelatine are used in preparing dainties for the sweet tooth of this
country alone. Again, in the manufacture of jelly crystals, several hundred
tons of gelatine are utilised. This is one example of the many industries
that sprang up from the establishment of the gelatine industry in Australia,
for practically the whole of the jelly crystals consumed in Australia were
imported from overseas. Further, the Australian jelly crystals utilise many
thousand tons of Australian sugar, which would be imported if the jelly
crystals were not manufactured in this country.
Ths use of gelatine may be grouped under three headings—foods, medicinal,
and technical purposes. The manufacture of gelatine on a grand scale
necessitated the organisation of a vigorous campaign to promote and de-
velop every channel where gelatine might be used. This ranged from the
technical users to its development as an aid in cookery generally-, and the
best reflection of the company’s success is seen in the fact that the users and
consumption of gelatine over the past six years have increased from 2.26 per
cent to 4.64 per cent per head of population. For a product to have doubled
itself in demand must be gratifying to those who took the initial risk in
establishing the industry, and a practical reply to those who would prefer the
country’s doors be opened to foreign made goods.
What value does such an industry represent to the country ? This cannot
be rightly assessed on the net value of its output alone, but plus its broad
influence over the vast field of other industries which its own birth has in-
fluenced and promoted. It has been conservatively estimated that its value
is worth over a million sterling a year to Australia, which might otherwise
have gone into the coffers of foreign manufacturers overseas.


The Scanlan Electric Company
=- - ■ ■ ■ LIMITED - - -
45 Reservoir Street
SHiiminating engineers
electric islanufacturcrs
• • SYDNEY • •
One of Our Triumphs in Illuminated Advertising
THE • GREAT • WHITE • TRAIN
H Electrically equipped throughout by this Company.
U The Portable Power Station being one of the most interesting
exhibits on the Train.
We specialize in the Design and Manufacture of Illuminated
Advertising of all kinds, and maintain a staff and plant capable
of erecting Electric Signs
IN ANY POSITION—ANYWHERE.


»=
*4
SCANLAN ELECTRIC SIGNS
‘Known Australia Wide ”
"AUSTRALIAN-MADE* PREFERENCE LEAGUE
of the many
letters received
from our clients.
SALS’
M
KENT SREW'eRV
«a#r«l ifuuger.
i rounTH n.oon
•ULLS CHAM9C*S
2* WAWTIN WLAC<
27th HOVamber-j S.
The Managing Director.
Scanlon Electric Signs,
45 Reservoir Street,
SYTTTEY.
Dear Sir,
In connection »ith tr.e Electrlo Sky Signs
recently erected by you on'our Brewery Chlaaey Steak*
at Sydney and Newcastle we have to express oar complete
satisfaction in the way both these contracts have been
carried out,
The manner 1 D which toe frame-worts bare been
designed and hitched to the Stacks reflects each credit
on year engineering stair, and from an advertising point
of view the signs ere, we consider, one hundred per
cent efficient. *
Tours faithfully,
TOOTH & CO. Limited,
Mr. Scanlan,
The Scanlan Electric Co.,
Reservoir St.,
SYDNEY.
Dear Mr. Scanlan,
I as taking this
opportunity of expressing my vary keen
appreciation ot the successful wanner in
•hlch your Company has handled the ta»k of
equipping the Australian-Made" Preference
league's "Great White" Exhibition Touring
Train, with Electric power end lighting.
The sensational
success of the venture la In no ecall
degree duo to the brilliant effect of the
Ug-.tlng scheme and the searchlight display
To-day, fifteen days
after the Train'a departure from Sydney,
no less than 45,000 people have visited
the Exhibition.
The Tour of the
Exhibition is In the nature of a Triumphant
Progress, and the "Australian-Made"
Preference League feels confident It will
prove to be the greatest ambassador of
Australian Trade
with beat wishes.
Youra faithfully,
"AUSTRALIAN-MADE" PPEFEP.LNCE LEAGUE,
The Scanlan Electric Co. Ltd.
Electric Sign Manufacturers
and Illuminating Engineers
45 RESERVOIR STREET, SYDNEY
I::::::::::::::::::::::::::®
(i
3


LYSAGHT BROS. & COMPANY LIMITED
MANUFACTURERS
AUSTRALIAN MADE
Our Products are entirely AUSTRALIAN, from the production of the ORE to the finished article and all our
machinery is also made in Australia.
Our old established and well known NAME is sufficient warranty for quality.
All the leading merchants, storekeepers and agents supply our manufactures.
Head Office :: :: :: 39 PITT STREET, SYDNEY


Lysaght Brothers & Company Limited
■ ESTABLISHED 1884
VIM
Bros
LOmp
LTd
0%.
WORKS
K*s?m
Ssg?
?x
JOB
ssifrS-s.- .zt£z*: -a
£3SKaSs!S&
--=C
ZJ2sr£sz
Sr
General \'im of Works—’Parramatta Paver frontage.
THE FOLLOWING APPPOXIMATE FIGURES GIVE AN IDEA OF PRESENT OPERATIONS :
TURNOVER PER ANNUM £1,500,000 | WIRE OUTPUT PER ANNUM
WAGES PAID 300,000 j NETTING
EMPLOYEES (Directly employed at Factory) 1,500 | BARB WIRE „ „
WIRE NAILS OUTPUT PER ANNUM . . .. 4.000 Tons
.. 40,000 Tons
.. 25,000 Miles
. . 4,000 Tons
Head Office ;; :: :: :: :: 39 PITT STREET, SYDNEY


TAUBMANS PRODUCTS
TAUBMANS PRODUCTS, chosen after exhaustive tests made in competition with the best known imported
lines, are supplied under contract to various Government Departments in Australia. Special Paints, Varnishes and
\ Enamels made expressly to meet their requirements are supplied to leading Australian Industrial Undertakings.
\
The painting and decorating trade is comprehensively catered for and Householders are offered products
that are simple to apply so that the most inexperienced can use them to perfection and obtain the
! utmost in protective and decorative value.
v;
. qV-#, .
TAUBMANS PRODUCTS have proved their quality and endurance under all climatic
conditions and have, by ri£ht of merit been granted leadership • the better paint
and varnish products of the world.
Absolute uniformity of quality is ensured by the scientific control of all the
various processes of manufacture. A staff of experienced industrial chemists
\ analyses each batch of Raw Material and checks them against established
; standards checks and rechecks throughout each process,,
■
"t
T*: z -
mv
ff v ■
! f (: r. ..
i r
i-T,. I >i r pn . ' ■' )
Research work in our laboratories has resulted in products
that- are unique in the Paint, and Varnish Industry.
The name TAUBMANS is thus a positive
guarantee of quality and
satisfaction.
11 u
•£a*
<1 o
%
I
ciS t
JJ* fu
i- .. .
■


TRULY AUSTRALIAN
TAUBMANS SERVICE PAINT —NON POISONOUS. Of unvarying quality of the highest standard. Proof against sea-
moist atmosphere and exposure under all extremes of climatic conditions. Retains its lustre and will not chalk, or crack.
SOLPAH WEATHER-PROOF OIL. A hi&h-lustre oil finish that imparts an elastic water-proof film to all surfaces. Imper-
vious to extreme exposure or immersion in salt or fresh water. Practically colourless, it is unequalled as a paint reviver.
SOLPAH ROOF AND STRUCTURAL PAINT. Anti-corrosive and non-poisonous for the protection against rust
and decay of all iron and steel structures, particularly galvanised iron roofs. Will not contaminate tank water.
SOLPAH PAVING PAINT. Gives a lasting, colourful finish to Cement paths and floors. Weather
and traffic resisting. Prevents the “dusting” of the surface and is easily cleaned.
STAYWHITE (Millwhite). A pure dense white in paste to be thinned with water. A sanitary
economical finish for all surfaces, inside or outside. Will not flake or ruh off.
FLOOR VARNISH STAINS. Walk-proof, scratchless and unaffected by hot or cold water.
Stains and varnishes simultaneously. Also an ideal renovator for furniture, etc. In ten
natural wood tones.
-3
JAUB
SERV
TiVi'.A ■'
r -.if
flu-
-5m
rest/
SILVAFROS. The " Frosted Silver ” enamel of unlimited uses. Prevents
rust, defies heat and lasts indefinitely. For every surface where a
permanent, bright, silvery finish is desired.
HOME GLOSS ENAMELS. Specially suited for
all home uses. Durable, lustrous and
easy flowing.


m
KANDOS PORTLAND CEMENT
Made Entirely in Australia :: :: Capital All Subscribed Locally :: :: A Truly Decentralised Business
I
mjt
Vies’ of Kandos Works showing spray.
The greatest difficulty with which New South Wales has to contend to-day is the dis-
proportionate percentage of its population in Sydney and Newcastle. It is interesting
to note the effect of the establishment and progressive management of an industrial
undertaking in the bush in 1915. The construction of the works now owned and
operated by the Kandos Cement Co.
Ltd., was commenced in 1915 on a site
covered by bush timber. •
A subdivision of land was made by the
company in August, 1915, on a well-
considered town-planning scheme. Other
owners’ subdivisions quickly followed,
resulting in the town becoming too
scattered to permit of early installation
of complete reticulation schemes for
water, electric light, and sewerage, which
was the objective when the original
town-planning scheme was prepared.
To-day, eleven years after the first sub-
division, the population of the town is
over 3,000, and the public school en-
rolment 400 children, in addition to 250
children at the local convent school.
Electric light is reticulated through the
principal streets, and the ratepayers
recently voted in favour of the extension
of the mains throughout the town.
Water pumped by the Kandos Cement
Company from its large storage in the
Cudgegong River is available in the main
street. Consideration has been given
by the shire council to a complete water
reticulation scheme, but it is hampered
m


nnn
Pf
Eli
ICO
A
5
Kemhla Buildings , Sydney. Constructed in Keinforced
Concrete using only Kandos Portland Cement.
by the township having become scattered
beyond the area originally planned.
The town of Kandos is solely supported
by the operations of the Kandos Cement
Company Limited, which directly em-
ploys a staff of 450 and the Kandos Col-
lieries Limited which employ too. The
whole of the output of the Kandos Col-
lieries Limited is bought by the Kandos
Cement Company Limited. Of these
employees a majority are used on con-
struction work in' connection with exten-
sions of plant which have been
actively carried on since the
Company first commenced pro-
duction.
The capacity of the Kandos
Company’s plant is the largest
in Australia, and is the first
link in the process of moving
the mountain of limestone for
re-erection of other monuments
for the development of Australia.
Among these are the enormous
grain silos at Darling Island,
the piers and retaining walls to
support the North Shore Bridge,
the Sydney underground rail-
way, many concrete roads,
bridges and large buildings
m
gp j.-.. <
3
The Great Surge Tank at Nynboida
Hydro-Electric loner Scheme.
Exclusively Kandos.
A
»s
Pavilion at the Agricultir I Shonground. Kandos Portland
Cement rras used throughout.
throughout the States of New South Wales,
Queensland and Victoria. The stock carried by
this company is enormous ; fifteen thousand tons
each of finished cement, limestone and coal, fifteen
thousand tons of clinker-cement ready for its final
grinding and fifteen hundred tons of gypsum.
Something over 4,000 tons of cement are produced
weekly, which is equal to 3,600,000 bags annually.
KANDOS CEMENT CO. Ltd.
64 PITT STREET :: :: :: SYDNEY


HOSKINS IRON & STEEL CO. LIMITED
s
The establishment of the Iron and Steel Industry in Australia has involved
most of the early pioneers in financial loss. The high standard of living in
Australia with its high wages and short hours together with the comparatively
small population spread over such a great country has tended to make the
firm establishment of this industry very difficult indeed. If Australia is to
progress and the high standard of living now enjoyed by her citizens is to
be maintained, then this can be done only by a greater consumption by
Australians of Australian made goods and by reasonable protection against
the cheap foreign made article.
It is a well known fact that the ability to produce Iron and Steel cheaply and
in large quantities is essential to any nation that wishes to be ranked as a
first-rate Power, as the production of these materials is the very basis of any
nation’s strength either in attack or defence. As far as Australia is con-
cerned, isolated as it is, with such a great Territory to hold and such a great
prize for any nation strong enough to wrest it from the British Empire, the
question of Iron and Steel in the matter of defence becomes one of the
utmost national importance.
One of the largest Australian businesses to-day is that of Hoskins Iron &
Steel Co. Ltd. of Lithgow, which has succeeded in establishing the Iron and
Steel Industry on a sound footing. The first blast furnace operated in
Australia was erected at Mittagong in 1848 for the smelting of ores in that
locality, and it was demonstrated that Pig Iron of good quality could be
produced but not at a price to compete with the imported article, and after
attempts by various ironmasters the works were finally closed down in 1886.
In 1875 the first blast furnace at Lithgow was blown in and continued to
produce pig iron until 1882 when operations ceased as far as production
of pig iron was concerned. In 1886 portion of the works was rc-opcncd
and continued the production of bars from scrap iron and imported material,
but owing to the inability to compete with the imported, the works were
again closed down in 1907, and the future of Lithgow and the Iron Industry
looked very dismal indeed.
At this juncture the then Minister for Works, the Hon. C. A. Lee, approached
G. & C. Hoskins who had a wide knowledge of iron and steel and a general
engineering experience and was successful in inducing the Hoskins Brothers
to become actively interested in the production of Iron and Steel. Thus was
opened an entirely new chapter in the Company’s operations and in the
history of the Australian Iron and Steel Industry.
In 1875 G. J. Hoskins started business in a small way in Sydney being joined
later by his brother C. H. Hoskins. They started to manufacture engines
and machinery of various kinds, but owing to the inadequacy of the customs
tariff on machinery, they commenced the manufacture of steel boilers,
pipes of all descriptions and waterworks requirements.
As a result, by 1908 the Company had gradually grown to considerable pro-
portions and owned several pipe-making plants, foundries, boilershops, etc.
The Firm was able to execute contracts of the largest dimensions as evidenced
by the contract for the supply of rivetless steel pipes for the Coolgardie
Water Supply Scheme. Tenders were called throughout the world for
350 miles of riveted and welded steel pipes of 30m. diameter by 28 feet long.
Out of the 16 tenders that of Messrs. Hoskins was lowest at £ 1,060,000,
after which additional work was carried out, bringing the total to £2,500,000.
Another work of considerable magnitude was the construction of two large
water mains 6 feet in diameter and approximately 18 miles in length, to supply
the city of Sydney with water.
Having taken over the Lithgow undertaking in January', 1908, G. & C.
Hoskins Limited started in to develop the industry, and at once decided to
concentrate on the production of steel, ceasing altogether the manufacture of
wrought iron, and they considerably increased the capacity of the plant until
to-day the Industry-, with its attendant sources of raw materials, covers a
wide field.
At that time the plant for the production of steel consisted of two small
four-ton furnaces and one of fifteen-tons capacity, all of which were old
fashioned and of a very inefficient type, in consequence of which practically
every item of Plant—Steel Furnaces, Ironmaking Furnaces and Rolling Mills
—had to be torn down and replaced with modern plant. Hand in hand with
this development of the Iron and Steel Works, the Company acquired a


(rrs
r=i
m
rifts
i
teg* |
—rf mi la »I
, , * m es.
x^trY* 7 *
A
■w
saFiiiß*
rSr-
ft
m
g
'll
m
l 7 0/ B/<zj7 Furnace Ptani , Fithgow.


number of iron ore deposits at Cadia, Tallawang, Gregra, Parkes, Jerrawa,
Crookwell, Breadalbanc and other places in New South Wales, and in
addition considerable areas of iron ore in Tasmania. Great limestone
deposits have been acquired at Marulan and Excelsior. Three additional
coal properties have been acquired, two on the western coalfield at Lithgow,
and one on the southern coalfield at Wongawilli near Dapto. Coke-making
plants have also been installed at Lithgow and Wongawilli.
There have also been built another blast furnace with a capacity of 2,000 tons
of iron per week, three modern steel furnaces, a 28-inch rail and billet mill,
a modern 10-inch bar mill for rolling small bars and many extensions to the
engineering plant, foundries, power plant, etc. Also, additional iron pipe
plants at Sydney and Rhodes, and a locking bar pipe plant at Brisbane have
been constructed and are operating most successfully; these pipe plants
' being easily the most modern of their type south of the line.
Where it is necessary to convey water over long distances and at high pres-
sures, engineers sometimes decide to use steel pipe in place of cast iron on
account of its lightness and cheapness as compared with the latter. In
1924 this Company, having received a contract to supply the city of Brisbane
with steel mains of 36-inch and 42-inch diameter, purchased a section of
18 acres of land in the city of Brisbane, fronting the Brisbane River. On this
site has been erected a very efficient plant for making steel locking bar pipes,
in diameters from 12 to 48 inches. This shop is 450 feet long and 50 feet
wide in the main bay, which with other bays, make up a total width of 120
feet, equipped with three 3-ton overhead electric cranes and many large,
modern machines to handle plates up to 28 feet in length for rolling into
pipes.
Since 1924 three contracts for steel mains have been completed, totalling
approximately 30 miles in length ; the whole of these contracts were carried
out to the complete satisfaction of the various water supply authorities.
The latest addition is the purchase of approximately 400 acres of land border-
ing on the water front at Port Kembla, 56 miles south of Sydney, in a most
suitable situation for additional iron and steel making plant, and steps have
been taken to commence the erection of works there.
From a humble beginning as outlined the Company has now grown until it
employs in its various works between 2,300 and 3,000 emploj’ees.
The main business of the Company, situated as it is at Lithgow 96 miles west
of Sydney and drawing most of its supplies from still further west, is one of
the very few examples in New South Wales of industry being carried on away
from the seaboard. This naturally helps to aid considerably in the decen-
tralisation of our population from the city of Sydney, so badly needed in this
State, and at the same time, this industry provides very great tonnages to be
handled by the Government railways. Owing to its inland position, with
much greater freedom from attack, the situation of the works may well prove
of considerable national importance in time of war.
To give some ideacf the increase in the magnitude of the operations of the
Firm, the railway freight paid to the New South Wales Government by the
Lithgow works alone has increased
From - - £28,699/12/6 in 1908
To - - - £224,318/14/8 in 1925
All the products of the Company are used in Australia. Pig iron and steel
are supplied to manufacturers who in turn convert these raw materials into
iron and steel castings, etc.
During the past ten years the rapid development made in the use of rein-
forced concrete work has been one of the outstanding features in the building
trade of New South Wales, and evidences of it are to be seen in the many fine
buildings erected in Sydney and elsewhere in which reinforcement steel has
been used in the construction. A large quantity of the reinforcement steel
so used has been supplied by this Company. . ' V ‘.
This progress in the use of reinforced concrete and the remarkable increase
in the use of the locally manufactured reinforcing bar would not be possible
unless the manufactured steel, the quality of the local cements, and the work
executed by our local designers and contractors, were of the highest standard.
The high values in city property and the numerous recent advances in the
cost of brickwork and fabricated structural steel building frames have been:
responsible for various changes in the design and methods of construction of
the large modern city buildings. • - _
Architects, structural engineers and contractors have each contributed to the
rapid development of the “ Reinforced Concrete Frame ” type of construc-
tion to partially offset some of the post-war increases in the cost of con-'
struction. This type of building, being fireproof and carrying a low rate of ;■
insurance, is a sound investment. It can be erected quickly at the minimum ■
cost, and the external architectural treatment can be executed in stone,.
brick, terra-cotta or concrete. ;
Such a vast undertaking, employing so many Australians and directly sup- ‘
porting a far larger number of Australians deserves every assistance and
support from all true Australians.


m
•h-v:.-
?
V *
W s'-
r>V
ir
**-C
2l££
;**JV
v v r»' «»■ »*-»•
'«-..r.
khj
*&mko l
Vfc
T-^
a
rtr»~
J^J
General View of Steel Works , Litheow.
m


BABCOCK AND WILCOX LIMITED
Head Offices and Works; LONDON & RENFREW, SCOTLAND :: Australian Works and Head Office : REGENTS PARK N.S.W.
Manufacturers of the World-renowned Wafer-Tube 'Boilers and Accessories.
13
rm
ri
1
r
if
m mi
r*
m
Sir
tr
m
*44
&
n
rss
<><&* ~.4
: *x-» .
imasi
sacr-rssss
yy
:ia
»GT,
XX*
The unanimous decision of all eminent Engineers in Australia
to install the World famous Babcock & Wilcox Safety Water-
tube Boiler in the various Steam Power Installations with which
they were connected made it apparent to the then Common-
wealth Authorities that this Company should establish its own
Works in Australia, so as to provide locally for the demand for
this boiler, which, up to then, had been manufactured in Scotland
and some 7,000,000 Horse Power of Boilers exported to Australia.


The Prime Minister represented to the Directors of the Company
in London that if Works were established in Australia, the
whole of the necessary manufacturing plant would be admitted
duty free, and that any parts of the Boiler which could not be com-
mercially made in Australia would also be admitted duty free.
With these promises, and the big local demand, it was decided to
acquire a suitable site and establish an up-to-date Pattern Shop,
Foundry, Machine Shop, Structural and Boiler Shops, and this
has been done on a site of 20 acres adjoining the Regents Park
Railway Station, N.S.W.
These Works were officially opened by the then Prime Minister
of Australia (The Right Hon. W. M. Hughes) on 25th Jany.,
1923, The site at Regents Park is ideal. It is in close proximity
to Railway facilities. A main Railway siding, with seven branch
lines serving the various shops and yards, connects the Works
with Regents Park Station, and as Regents Park Station is close
to the Marshalling Yards of the N.S.W. Railways, expeditious
railway despatch can be relied upon.
The change of Commonwealth Government has been somewhat
unfortunate for the Company, inasmuch as the promises that were
made to induce the Company to start operations in Australia
were not ratified and adopted by Mr. Hughes’ successors. These
promises were reasonable and wise from the Government point
of view, as it is certainly folly to endeavour to force Manufac-
turers to make in Australia any lines which cannot be commerci-
ally manufactured in the Commonwealth, owing to the enormous
cost of the Plant required to produce them, and the compara-
tively limited market for the product.
The High Pressure Parts of the Company’s Boilers will, therefore,
have to be imported from Scotland for many years to come, and,
as a high rate of duty has to be paid on these parts and the wages
in Australia are more than double those paid in Scotland, the com-
pleted locally made Boiler is more expensive to produce than the
imported one plus freight and duty. Strong inducement, there-
fore, exists to send the orders to Scotland instead of to the Aus-
tralian Works at Regents Park, so the alleged principle of encour-
aging legitimate local industries goes by the board.
As it is, Australian Engineers are anxious to recommend B. & W.
Boilers and the Government, and Municipalities are generally
willing to pay the extra cost of local manufacture, so that the local
Works are kept fairly busy. They consist of a foundry measur-
ing 200 ft., x6O ft., 29 ft. to the crane girders. Since that
Foundry was erected three years ago, it has been nearly doubled
in area. A Babcock & Wilcox Electric Overhead Travelling
Crane of 10-tons capacity is in constant use in the Foundry,
where all the Mechanical Stokers and other Castings in connec-
tion with the Firm’s specialities are manufactured, in addition to
many other castings required for other classes of work.
The Main Machine Shop is 25 o ft. long x 60 ft. Crane girders 3 4 ft.
from the floor level, on which operates a Babcock & Wilcox
10-ton Crane.
Adjoining this Shop is the Structural Shop, of the same dimen-
sions, with special tools for all structural steel work, especially
Crane Girders and the like, and, adjoining this again, is the Boiler
Shop, also of the same dimensions.
The photograph shown is a general view of the Works and
Offices at Regents Park Station.
At present, in addition to their regular lines, including the local
manufacture of Boilers, Stokers, Chimneys, etc., for White Bay
Power House, also for the large new Power House for Brisbane
Electric Supply Company, also the Caledonian Collieries Limited,
etc. etc. and innumerable smaller orders, the Company is busy
with two large Gas Holders, each of a capacity of 4,000,000
cub. ft. for the Australian Gas Light Co.
During the Company’s three years’ experience in Australia they
have never had any suggestion of labour troubles, and the work
turned out is equal to the best work done in the Old Country


Sa
H
•I
II
in
ssfef
iftKß*
fes
»*V
grC^uuatv*."
aim
■ik
a
■■
!!
taw w»
M
* ~1
J « M
K
s
am
g
rtf.
•*»
rtses*
Another battery of presses.
Storage tanks for special refined mis.
carts
[iwounfl
k^\yAv^:^ l
A First
Australian
Industry.
IN the manufacture of Linseed Oils,
Meggitt Limited use only the best
quality seed which is thoroughly cleaned
before being treated, thus ensuring absolute
freedom from foreign matter and a conse-
quent 100% purity.
The Linseed, after being crushed and heated,
is pressed by hydraulic presses which expel
a percentage of the Raw Linseed Oil
contained in the seed. This is conveyed to
various departments for filtration and
maturing.
The Linseed Oil produced by Meggitt
Limited is guaranteed to be toot: pure,
thoroughly matured and carefully filtered.
It is also guaranteed to be equal in every
respect to the best brand of imported oil
and at the same time it is invariably cheaper
in price.
The Linseed Oil Cakes which result after
pressing the seed, form the most valuable
food procurable for all classes of stock.
This food carries a remarkably high per-
centage of digestible protein and also a high
content of Linseed Oil which is of the greatest
use in producing condition in animals.
The Linseed Oil Cakes are ground into the
well-known Meggitt’s Linseed Meal or


broken into walnut sized pieces familiar to
pastoralists as Meggitt’s Linseed Sheep Nuts.
In the stock-food plant various grains arc
prepared and incorporated with Linseed Oil
Meal into concentrate foods for Horses,
Dairy Cattle, Pigs, and Poultry, each food
being “ balanced ” according to the nutritive
requirements of the animal for which it is
prepared.
Meggitt Limited are directly responsible for
the maintenance each year of literally mil-
lions of sheep and large numbers of other
stock throughout Australia. During dry
times, the stock-owner often depends entirely
on these foods so that the work of supplying
such a demand is one of national impor-
tance. The supply of Linseed Oil Cake
depends on the output of Linseed Oil, and
in consequence, every 8 gallon case of
Meggitt’s Linseed Oil used in Australia,
makes available a supply of food which is
sufficient to maintain i, 500 sheep for one day.
The buyer of Meggitt’s Linseed Oil in
preference to imported oil is, therefore,
benefiting bimself by obtaining a product
which is of the highest quality, he is saving
his money by cheaper buying and he is
helping primary industries, by making
available a food which is the means, and
often the sole means, of keeping alive large
numbers of valuable sheep and other stock,
the well-being of which is essential to the
prosperity of the Commonwealth.
MEGGITT LIMITED
MANUFACTURERS OF
Linseed Oils, Linseed Oil Meal, Meggitt’s
Sheep Nuts, Stock Foods and
Poultry Foods.
tfc
,®v:
tea
Si
II
m.
U
>*£
■ll
III!
y
iX
tii
'Linseed oil cake ready to be ground into the
well known Meggitt’s .linseed meal or
broken into Meggitt’s Sheep nuts.
A section of plant used in mixing balanced
foods for all classes of stock.
n
S
J»V>>
»*>
tin
ini
£ED
MEAL
•V
■J
mCZi
4
■7*l
r
fU-
w
A section of toe laboratory where alt linseed
oils and foods are analysed and tested.
A general view of the works showing two linseed
silos of a capacity of 5,000 tons.


Austral Bronze Company Limited
O’RIORDAN STREET, ALEXANDRIA, SYDNEY
Established 1915
8
*
8
8
8
*
8
Manufacturers of
Copper Sheets, Circles and Segments, plain and
tinned; Copper Rods and Bars; Busbars for Elec-
trical Work; Manganese Bronze Rods, Bars and
Ingots ; Extruded Brass and Muntz Metal, in Round,
Square, Hexagon and Special Sections, Antifriction
and Type Metals,
HOT BRASS STAMPINGS.
!)
Above Manufactured from “All Australian” Metals.
*
8
&
tH
*
*
&
K
£
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
«
X
X
K
X
X
X
Selling Agents
Noyes Bros. (Sydney) Ltd.
ii 5 Clarence Street, Sydney.
Brisbane and Newcastle,
Selling Agents —
Jj. 'Noyes Bros. (Melbourne) Pty. Ltd.
I 495-501 Bourke Street : Melbourne.
Hobart ; Adelaide : Perth.


AUSTRAL BRONZE COMPANY LIMITED
O’RIORDAN STREET, ALEXANDRIA, SYDNEY, N.S.W.
Established 1915
■P%
VJZS3*-
t? T^&SisSSar^.
Aerial View of Works.
Selling Agents:
NOYES BROS. (Sydney) Ltd.
115 Clarence Street, Sydney
The Company specialises in the manufacture of non-
ferrous metals and the whole of output of their works
is produced from “ all Australian ” Metals.
The products include Copper Sheets, Strips, Circles
and Washing Copper Segments, Roi.led and Drawn
Copper & Brass Rods & Bars, Copper Busbars
for electrical work. Extruded Brass in Round, Square,
Hexagon and Special Sections, Anti-Friction
and Type Metals and Rolled Copper Anodes for
Electro plating.
The Company’s Copper Rods are supplied in electro-
lytic quality and to the British Standard Specifications
for the Australian Railways for Locomotive Firebox
Stays, Rivets and other uses, while Copper Busbars
are supplied for electrical work together with Hot
Stampings in Brass for various local industries.
r /
1
Rod and Bar Rolling Mill.
Selling Agents :
NOYES BROS. (Melbourne) Pty., Ltd.
495-501 Bourke Street, Melbourne
BRISBANE and NEWCASTLE
*
Brass Rods are supplied for the manufacture of Screws,
Bolts, Nuts and Special Extruded Sections for Motor
Car Screens, Electrical Fittings, Piano Construction,
Water Meters, Turbine Blading, and numerous details
necessary for Australian manufactures.
Copper Sheets, Strips and Circles are supplied in Hot
and Cold Rolled finish and used extensively throughout
the Commonwealth for the manufacture of Bath
Heaters, Washing Coppers, Calorifiers, dairy, brewery
and aerated water plant and utensils as well as for
general engineering work. The Company’s Copper
Sheets are particularly suitable for deep stamping,
spinning, seaming and general coppersmith’s work.
HOBART, ADELAIDE, PERTH
1
acf
m
Copper Sheet Kolling Mill.
Telephones : Mascot 465 and 466
Extrusion Press.


Australian Industry —Making Radio Goods in Australia
Activities of Electricity Meter Manufacturing Company Limited.
The future prosperity of Australia as a nation lies in the encouragement and
fostering of Australian industries. Such phrases as “ Keep the Money in
Your Own Country',” and “ Wherever you Trade, Buy Australian Made,”
carry a message of far greater significance than appears on the surface. The
principle of supporting local industry and of creating employment for Aus-
tralian workers was never more vital than it is at the present time when
Australia, standing hesi-
tatingly on the brink of
nationhood, is reaching out
for her rightful share of
the world’s trade and strug-
gling to cast off the finan-
cial burden which has
resulted from too long an
adherence to the policy
of relying upon the over-
seas manufacturer for prac-
tically everything but the
actual necessities of life.
Millions of pounds annu-
ally go out of this country
to manufacturers abroad
in payment for goods which
could and should be manu-
factured in Australia. We
have the engineering brains,
the primary products, the
workers, and the capital,
plus the initiative and per-
severance of men who have
broad vision and whose
commercial ability is
strongly interwoven with
the ideals of Australian
progress. The outlook of
these men is reflected in the factories and enterprises which give employ-
ment to thousands of Australians and which are slowly but surely laying the
foundation stone of that greater and lasting prosperity which can only be built
up by the establishment and progress of Australian industries. Bigger Austra-
lian industries mean more employment for Australians, greater national pros-
perity, and the ulti i ate consummation of the ideal of a self supporting nation.
A striking example of the policy of “ Australian made for Australians ” is
the Electricity Meter Manufacturing Company Limited, a Company formed
in March 1921 to take over the business of Messrs. Schartl and Schulz who,
with Mr. Bryden Brown, became directors of the new concern. Three fur-
ther directors were recently added to the Board. '
From a comparatively small building situated in Burton Street, Darlinghurst,
the Headquarters of Electricity Meter Manufacturing Company Limited were
removed to Australia Street, off Parramatta Road, Camperdown, and it was
this spacious, perfectly lighted building with a floor space of 36,000 square
feet, which was formally opened by the State Governor, his Excellency Sir
Dudley de Chair, on July 14, 1924. Due to a progressive, tenacious policy,
the Company to-day gives direct and constant employment to nearly 500
Australians whose environment is one of unlimited natural light and fresh air.
To demonstrate that the policy of developing Australian Industries brings
prosperity in its wake, no better instance could be afforded than that in 1921
the wage sheet of Electricity Meter Manufacturing Company Limited was
about £lOO per week, while to-day it is near!y£2,ooo per week or £lOO,OOO
per annum. These wages are actually higher than those paid in similar
enterprises, in order to secure the very best craftsmen.
Since its inception, the Company has been engaged in the production of
electricity meters under conditions of mass production. , During the second
year, the production soared to 50,000 and the present output touches the
colossal figure of 2,500 per week which, at the rate of 130,000 per annum,
represents one meter every 70 seconds, a unique record in the annals of Aus-
tralian engineering enterprise. The works are entirely self contained, every
tool, every piece of apparatus, down to the most minute unit used in the
meter —even the paint with which the finished article is coated being
manufactured in the building. Seventy-five per cent of the material used in
the meters is produced in Australia, but where it is necessary to go abroad for
LOWATT- HOURS
s
mi
"BETA" WATT HOUR METER.


“LATIMER ”
VISIBLE
PETROL
PUMP.
certain materials, the Company adheres to the policy of
keeping up the balance of trade within the Empire, by ob-
taining such materials from Great Britian. Thousands
of meters manufactured at the Works at Camperdown,
have beeninstalled by the Sydney, Melbourne, Perth, and
Brisbane City Councils, the Adelaide Electric Light Com-
pany, the Hydro-electric Department, Hobart,and over one
hundred electrical undertakings throughout Australia.
The manufacture of electricity meters is but one phase
of the Company’s activities, for there is a constant
production of the Australian invented Latimer Petrol
pump measure, a familiar sight to motorists. The
efficiency of this machine is proved by the large orders
placed by the biggest oil companies operating in Australia.
What promises however to be the largest industry of
its kind in Australia is the manufacture of a complete
range of radio apparatus which, already well known
under the name of Emmco, is slowly but surely supplant-
ing many of the brands imported into the Common-
wealth. Modern machinery, a considerable portion
of which was made in Australia, enabled the Company
to commence the production of transformers for radio
work in 1924, when the first delivery was made. To
date 40,000 of these efficient and beautifully finished
“ Signal ” transformers have been placed on the Austra-
l ; an market through United Distributors. A new trans-
former is now in the course of manufacture and will be
marketed under the name of Emmco in conformity with
the policy of standardizing a name that the public may al-
ways recognize as synonymous with perfect workmanship.
Following closely upon transformers came the manufacture of Bakelite coil
plugs, of which the enormous total of 100,000 has been produced to date and
itis more than interesting to note that the company has, so far as is known,
the only Bakelite moulding plant in Australia. Subsequently, the factory
plant was enlarged to enable the manufacture of other radio accessories, so that
to-day, the factory is turning out practically a complete range of component
parts and intends in the near , future, additional accessories such as Emmco
headphones of 4000 ohms, “A” battery chargers, and “ B’’battery elimi-
nators will be placed on the market.
To ensure that no article goes out that does not measure up to the high
standard set for all of the Emmco products, the final test is conducted by
one of the leading radio engineers in Sydney, so that the purchaser has
the absolute assurance of efficiency in every Emmco product. A significant
and vastly important feature of the
Emmco radio accessories is that mass
production methods, skilled work-
men, and modern machinery, have
enabled Electricity Meter Manu-
facturing Company Limited to
place within reach of the radio
public, products which in many
cases are actually lower priced than
inferior imported articles. In 1924
Australia imported radio apparatus
to the value of over £lOO,OOO from
Great Britian and of an even larger
figure from the United States, last
year’s figures being even higher.
It needs but little imagination
to picture the uplift to the radio
industry, were these huge sums of
money kept in the country instead
of being sent abroad to swell
the profits and concerns whose
only interest in Australia and her
future is a purely commer-
cial one.
Local industries, employing Australians, catering for Australians, must
merit local support and the slogan “ Buy Emmco Radio Products ”
possesses a far deeper meaning than the mere words imply; it
embraces the broad ideal which should be the objective of every
Australian citizen, whether it is applied to radio or any other industry—
Buy “Australian-Made.”
•EMMCO” CONDENSER.
electricity meter manufacturing company limited


MURRUMBIDGEE IRRIGATION SCHEME
Water for the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area is
supplied from the famous Burrinjuck Dam, which
when completed will have a maximum height of 240
feet with a base 160 feet thick tapering to 18 feet in
width at top. It will throw back water into a lake
having an area of 12,740 acres. The volume of water
to be stored is estimated at 33,612,571,000 cubic feet,
or 771,640 acre feet, or, in other words, sufficient
water to cover that number of acres to a depth of a
foot.
The catchment above the dam site is 3,000 square
miles in extent, varying from elevations of 3,000 feet,
which are snow-covered every winter, and have an
average rainfall of 60 to 70 inches, to lower plateaux
of not more than 2,000 feet in height, where the
average rainfall does not exceed 20 inches. The water
flows down the natural channel of the river until it
reaches the Berembed Diversion Weir, a distance of
about 240 miles, where it is diverted from the river
into the Main Canal which off takes at this place and
supplies the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area. The length
of the Main Canal will eventually be approximately 120
miles, of which about 95 miles are already constructed.
The Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area is situated on the
northern side of the Murrumbidgee River, where it is
anticipated there will be ultimately upwards of 200,000
acres under irrigation.
The first farms were made available on the Murrum-
bidgee Irrigation Area in July, 1912. Blocks suitable
for dairying pursuits and horticulture are made
available from time to time. Subdivisions, known as
Yanco and Mirrool, have been made forming two
separate sections T of the Area.
Leeton, the leading township on the Yanco sub-
division, is distant 378 miles from Sydney and 286
miles from Melbourne. Griffith, the main town on the
Mirrool subdivision, is distant 395 miles from Sydney,


MURRUMBIDGEE IRRIGATION SCHEME
(Continued)
A railway connecting the two towns (30 miles) has
been completed and runs through the Irrigation Area.
In the Yanco Area 837 farms are occupied, and in the
Mirrool Area 1,133 up to 50th June, 1926, and the
total area under occupation for irrigation at that date
was 111,890 acres. This represents approximately
three-fifths of the area which, it is estimated, will
eventually be supplied with water under this great
scheme.
It is estimated that the population of the area now
aggregates 12,000 people where previously there were
only a few persons engaged in sheep farming.
The more important products on the horticultural
side are Apricots, Peaches, Nectarines, Pears, Prunes,
Oranges, Mandarins, and Lemons, of the choicest
varieties. The canning fruits are already well known
under the “ Ibis ” and “ Melba ” labels.
“ Ibis ” and “ Melba ” Canned Fruits are packed at
Leeton, on the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area, at the
factory situated right amongst the orchards, thus
retaining the delicious natural flavour of the fruits.
The Canning Factory was established at Leeton by the
Water Conservation and Irrigation Commission in
1918, and is one of the largest fruit canning factories
within Australia.
“ Ibis ” and “ Melba ” Canned Fruits have already
established a high reputation on the world’s markets
for their uniformly excellent quality and grading.
Reports unsolicited from the main markets of the
world commend in the highest terms the quality and
grading of “ Ibis ” and “ Melba ” Canned Fruits.
Fruits of many varieties for Canning, Drying, and
Fresh Fruit market requirements are grown to per-
fection on the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area, which
possesses the requisite natural advantages of soils and
climate combined with all that a modern Irrigation
Settlement can provide.


a;
r;
o
R
Made in Australia
Galvanized Corrugated Iron, Galvanized
Plain Iron and C.R.C.A. Black Sheets
All users of Galvanized Iron should specify
LYSAGHT’S
Australian-made Galvanized Sheets
Manufactured at Newcastle, New South Wales,
and equal to the best imported.
John Lysaght (Australia) Limited
SYDNEY, MELBOURNE, BRISBANE, ADELAIDE AND PERTH.


Australia’s Preference
K.
Jbr Economical Transportation
M
CHEVROLET
Standard Model
THE fact that Chevrolets are over 70%
Australian is not generally known. 5 The
past six months’ deliveries of Chevrolet vehicles
represent a sales value of over £1,000,000 per
annum. 5 The remarkable sales figures represent
a total distribution in Australia of over £700,000
per year, made up by amounts spent in : Wages
to Australian Workmen, Selling and other
expenses, Custom Duties, Australian Body
Building, Australian Rubber, and many other
minor Australian industries. 5 Therefore, when
you purchase a Chevrolet, you are helping to
support a great Australian industry. Remember,
the greater the extent of your Australian
made purchases, the greater the assistance
you are giving to the progress of the country.
Therefore—DEMAND AUSTRALIAN MADE.
£2OB
EASY TERMS ARRANGED.
HB V R
Write, ’phone or call for full particulars:
John McGrath Ltd.
181 ELIZABETH STREET
SYDNEY.
’Phones: M 2041 (6 lines).
OL E T
AUSTRALIA’S PREFERENCE.


THE FAMOUS
“ BRITSTAND” Road and Contracting Equipment
Most representatives of Local Government Bodies, Government Departments, Road and Dam Sinking' Contractors, are familiar
with the famous “ Britstand ” line of Road Making and Earth Moving Equipment, manufactured by the British Standard
Machinery Company. Having a unique experience in the design, manufacture and use of this class of equipment, the principals
of the Company have, in conjunction with many well known road authorities, developed a line of road making and earth moving
equipment specially suited for Australian conditions. Unexcelled for strength, ease of operation and efficiency.
m
m
JfcSS
m
‘Britstand” Road Grader {2, j or 4 horse type).
:
j&ss
Baby Grader (2 horse type).
Although only two sizes of “ Britstand ” Road Grading Machines are herein depicted, they are manufactured in six different sizes
to suit varying conditions of work with various sized teams or tractors. Illustrated Catalogues and detailed particulars may be
secured from the manufacturers.
BRITISH STANDARD MACHINERY CO. :: 6 WynyardSt., Sydney; <& 516 Collins St, Melbourne.


“ BRITSTAND ”
Equipment * for * Road • Making, • Dam * Sinking * and * all * Earth * Contracting
vm
Model No. 66 “ Britstand ” Steel Beam Plough,
App. weight 250 lbs. for 2 to 8 horses.
Britstand ” Buck or Fresno Scraper.
No. 67 “ Britstand ” Special Rooter Plough.
App. weight 250 !hs.,for z to 8 horses.
No. 69 “ Britstand ” Steel Beam Plough.
App. weight 315 lbs.
“Britstand” Ploughs arc somewhat similar in design to the American type of Wiard Plow, in fact, the shares are interchangeable. The special steel
beams, however, arc unbreakable, whilst the balance and set of ploughs show great improvement. Thousands of these ploughs are in use and users express
the utmost satisfaction.
BRITISH STANDARD MACHINERY CO. :: 6 WynyardSt., Sydney; 516 Collins St., Melbourne.


THE “MANGROVITE” COMPANY
AND ITS ACTIVITIES
A recent article in a weekly contemporary on the early struggles and final
triumphs of what it refers to as “ Sydney’s Heroes of Industry,” mentions
the name of Mr. Charles Ludowici, as the representative of the Leather and
Belting Trade, and undoubtedly the history of the “ Mangrovitc ” Company
is one of interest to all Austra-
lians.
It was in the year 1913 that
Mr. Charles Ludowici started
the business under his own
name, after having had over
30 years practical experience,
using the word “ Mangrovitc ”
as his registered trade mark.
The aim he kept steadily before
him was to manufacture a
better class belting than any
other on the market, both
in the Vegetable Tanned Var-
iety and the Raw Hide, which
is, of course. Mineral Tanned.
Indomitable perseverance
and the high quality of his
product enabled Mr. Ludowici
to succeed in his objective,
and in spite of the fiercest
opposition and consistent cut-
ting of prices by competitors
he has now established his
product as the finest Belting
in Australia. In 1917 he decided to form the business into a Limited Liabil-
ity Company to be known as Mangrovitc Belting Limited. Two years
later the capital of the Company stood at £66,230, to-day it is over £lOO,OOO.
Enormous demand now exists in all States for the Company’s manufac-
tures and its advice is freely sought as to the best Belting for drives of all
kinds. As a matter of fact, some of the leading Consulting Engineers keep
in close touch with the Company, and confer on Belting problems when
called upon to advise.
When a difficult drive needs
some special method of solu-
tion, an expert Engineer from
the Company is sent to study
the situation and supply a
report to Mr. Charles Ludo-
wici who is usually able to
design a belt that will meet the
situation. This absolutely per-
sonal supervision of all matters
by theManagingDircctor is one
of the features of the Company’s
activities and in great measure
responsible for its outstanding
success.
The Company’s competence
to advise on all Belting matters
is widely known, and it is a
frequent occurrence for their
Engineers to be called to the
country districts and the inter-
state metropolitan centres to
study problems and gives ex-
pert advice.
Expert supervision attends
every phase of the Company’s
activities, from the purchase of suitable hides, and treatment according to
the purpose intended. Right down to the final sale of the Belting itself is a
watchful technical care to ensure service and satisfaction to the user of the
Company’s Products.
-Jr
&
*****
TANNERY&FACTORY 0/MANGROVITE BELTING LTD., Lane Core .
Office at 49 York St., Wynyard Square , Sydney


INDEX TO ADVERTISERS
PAGE.
Akubra Hats - - '- - - - - 2
Amalgamated Textiles (Aust.) Ltd. - - - -34 -3 5
Amalgamated Wireless (Aust.) Ltd. - - - 5 8
Armstrong Holland Ltd, - - - - - - 50
Austral Bronze Co. Ltd. ----- 140-141
Australian Bank of Commerce Ltd. - - - - 30
Australian Glass Mfgrs. Co. Ltd. - - - - -32-33
Australian Mutual Provident Society - - - -104
Australian Tesselated Tile Pty. Ltd. - - - - 5 6
Babcock & Wilcox Ltd. ----- 136-137
Berger, Lewis & Sons (Aust) Ltd. - - - - 66
Berlei Ltd. ------- -85-86
Bond, Geo. A. & Co. Ltd. - - - - - 781-83
British Standard Machinery Co. Ltd. - 148-149
Broken Hill Pty. Co. Ltd. ----- -76 -78
“ Challenge ” Products - - - - - - 52
Clark, Robt. Ingham & Co. (A’sia) Ltd. - - - 60
Clifford Love & Co. Ltd. - - - - - - 65
Clinton Williams Ltd. -------96
Commercial Banking Co. of Sydney Ltd. - - - 48
Commonwealth Bank of Australia Ltd. - - - -6-7
Commonwealth Portland Cement Co. Ltd. - - 14
Danks, John & Sons Pty. Ltd. - - - - - 4
Davis Gelatine (Aust.) Ltd. - - - - - 122-125
Eagley Co. Pty. Ltd. ------ 68
Electricity Meter Mfg. Co. Ltd. - 142-143
Gattino & Co. Ltd. - -- -- --74
Government Savings Bank of N.S. Wales - - - 20
Hadfields (Aust.) Ltd. - - - - - - -8-9
Home Recreations Ltd. ------ 46
PAGE.
Hoskins Iron & Steel Co. Ltd. - - - - 132-135
Jusfrute Ltd. ------- -70-71
Kandos Cement Co. Ltd. - - - - - - 130-131
Lincoln Knitting Mills Pty. Ltd. - -36-37
Lysaght Bros. & Co. Ltd. - - - - - 126-127
Lysaght, John (Aust.) Ltd. - - - - - - 146
Mangrovite Belting Ltd. - - - - - - 15 o
Mary Gold Pty. Ltd. - - - - - - - 38
McDonald, A. H. & Co. ------ 26
McGrath, John Ltd. - - - - - - -147
McMurtrie & Co. Ltd. ------ 80
Meggitt Ltd. - - - - - - - 138-159
Newlands Bros. Ltd. ------- 64
Noyes Bros. (Sydney) Ltd. - - - - - - 42
Palmolive Co. (A’sia) Ltd. ------ 98
Parke Davis & Co. ------- 44
Pioneer Heels Ltd. ------- 24
Plumb, W. H. - - - - - ■ - - -10-11
Protex Safe & Lock Co. Ltd. ----- 28
Royal Bank of Australia Ltd. - - - - - 5 4
Scanlan Electric Co. Ltd. ----- 124-125
Taubmans Ltd. - - - - - - - 128-129
Tooth & Co. Ltd. ------ -90-91
United Nail & Wire Netting Co. Ltd. - - - -12-13
“ Wadadjerie ” Silicate Paint Co. Ltd. - 100
Water Conservation & Irrigation Co. Ltd. - - 144-145
Williams, Sidney & Co. Ltd. - - - - -92 -93


hi
a^i
“AUSTRALIAN -MADE" PREFERENCE LEAGU E
,tR£Vr
ftUAl*
BY THIS RESOLVE WE BUILD A NATION
BUY 6 ‘AUSTRALIAN-MADE 55
“AUSTRALIAN- M ADE ”
MEANS BETTER TRADE
AND LEADS THE WAY
TO BETTER PAY
™f “AUSTRALIAN”
WHOLLY SET UP AND PRINTED IN AUSTRALIA BY SIMMONS LIMITED, HARRIS STREET, SYDNEY


PREFERENCE TO
AUSTRALIAN-MADE
BY THIS RESOLVE WE BUILD A ATION
SOUVENIR of THE
AUSTRALIAN MADE PREFERENCE LEAGUE
And the GREAT WHITE EXHIBITION TRAIN
