

SOUVENIR
OF THE 112th ANNIVERSARY OF THE ARRIVAL IN AUSTRALIA IN 1815
FREDERICK AND ELIZABETH GARLING,
COMMEMORATED BY
A FOREGATHERING OF THEIR DESCENDANTS, HELD AT THE HOME
OF ONE OF THE GREAT-GRANDSONS, PERCIVAL STUART GARLING,
« WANGANUI,” LUCRETIA AV., LONGUEVILLE, SATURDAY, AUG. 6, 1927




FREDERICK GARLING: 1775—1848
ELIZABETH GARLING (nee SPRATT): 1776-1828


FREDERICK CARLING (1775-1848)
BORN in 1775, Frederick Carling was the son of Nicholas Carling,
a London architect. He became a solicitor, and was practising
at 13 New North Street, Red Lion Square, London, when he
was appointed first Crown Solicitor of New South Wales.
Learning of the proposal to establish a Supreme Court of Civil
Jurisdiction in Sydney, attracted by reports of New South Wales at
that time reaching the Mother Country, and prompted by the pioneer-
ing spirit, he wrote to Henry Goulburn, then Under-Secretary of State
for the Colonies, seeking appointment as Crown Solicitor. Jeffery
Hart Bent, a London barrister, who was selected as first Chief Justice
of the newly-constituted Court, recommended Frederick Carling
for the position and, in doing so, wrote to Under-Secretary Goulburn,
saying ; —“ He has been some years admitted an Attorney in the
Court of King’s Bench, and a Solicitor in the Court of Chancery ;
and has been Managing Clerk in the office of Mr. Winter, the Solicitor
to the Bank. If he should be approved of I should recommend him
to be named as the first of the two Solicitors ; he is a married man
and I consider him as likely to be of considerable use in the Colony.”
The appointment was duly made, and in a dispatch of February 13th,
1814, Earl Bathurst wrote to Governor Lachlan Macquarie as follows :
“ I have, at the Recommendation of Mr. Bent, selected two
Solicitors. [The solicitors referred to were Frederick Carling
and William Henry Moore] of highly-respectable Characters to
proceed by an early Opportunity to the Colony. The Salaries,
which I have led them to expect, are £3OO per annum, as under
that amount I find it impossible to obtain the Services of any
Persons of Respectability and Knowledge. These Salaries must,
under present Circumstances, become a Charge upon the Colony,
and you are hereby authorised to defray these Payments out of
the Police fund, dating their commencement from the Ist Feb-
ruary, 1814.”
If quest of adventure actuated Frederick Carling to seek the ap-
pointment in New South Wales, he certainly was not disappointed
so far as the voyage out was concerned, for the “ Francis and Eliza,”
the ship on which he, his wife and five children embarked on October
20th, 1814, was captured and plundered by an American privateer,
“ The Warrior,” off the Island of Madeira. Some of the crew
mutinied and joined the pirates, and the subsequent crew of the
“ Francis and Eliza ” was partly composed of prisoners.
Arrival at Sydney was delayed till August Bth, 1815, after touch-
ing at the Island of Teneriff and at Sierra Leone, where Captain
Brown, Commander of the “Ulysses,” man-of-war, for the greater
security of the “ Francis and Eliza,” ordered a detachment of the
Royal African Corps from that station to be put on board. The
“ Francis and Eliza ” brought out fifty-two male and sixty-five
female convicts, the only free passenger on the boat, in addition to the
Carlings, being a pioneer settler named Richard Lewis. In conse-
quence of the loyal way in which the convicts on board acquitted
themselves during the capture of the “ Francis and Eliza ” by the
American privateer, the Commander and Surgeon of the ship and
Frederick Carling urged Governor Macquarie to grant them con-
ditional pardons. The Governor received the recommendation
favourably, and in a dispatch dated March 18 th, 1816, he asked for
authority to grant the pardons; but the Home Officials declined to
accede to the request.
The belated arrival in Sydney of Frederick Carling led to an
acrimonious dispute (only one of many) between Governor Mac-
quarie and Chief Justice Bent, the latter declining to assemble the
Supreme Court of Civil Judicature because there was only one
solicitor in the colony (Mr. Moore having reached here by the
“Marquis of Wellington”) entitled to appear before the Court.


Macquarie urged that some ex-convict solicitors should be allowed to
practice in the New Court, as they had already been allowed in the
Governor’s Court; but Bent was adamant in his antagonism to
“ emancipist ” lawyers, a prolonged deadlock occurred, and some
heated dispatches were penned by the Governor to Earl Bathurst on
the subject. The wrangle was, however, ended by Carling’s arrival
in Sydney on August 8 th, 1815, as Bent now had two “ free ’ solicitors
to conduct cases before him.
But it was not long before another bitter feud occurred between
the Governor and Chief Justice Bent. On November 10th, 1815,
Mr. Ellis Bent, Judge Advocate, died, and the Chief Justice sought
appointment to the position rendered vacant by his brother’s death.
Governor Macquarie de lined to accede to Justice Bent’s request,
and on December 9th, 1815, appointed Frederick Carling Deputy-
Judge Advocate, at a salary of £ffoo per annum, with a rent allowance
of £lOO per annum. As the position of Chief Justice carried a
remuneration of only £#oo, Bent’s disappointment and fury can well
be imagined. Having obtained possession of the Court Statutes and
records held by his late brother, he point blank refused to hand them
over to Deputy Judge Advocate Carling when requested to do so
by the Governor.
Prior to the death of Judge Advocate Bent, dispatches from him,
from Chief Justice Bent and from Governor Macquarie, relating to
their multitudinous disputes, had reached the home authorities;
the latter decided to recall the two Bents, and they appointed John
Wylde Judge Advocate in succession to Ellis Bent. Earl Bathurst’s
dispatch announcing Wylde’s appointment crossed in transit with
that of Governor Macquarie announcing his appointment of Frederick
Garling as Deput}?-Judge Advocate, and strongly urging that he
be given permanent appointment. Garling held office till October
sth, 1816, on which date John Wylde arrived in Sydney and assumed
duties forthwith. Garling reverted to the post of Crown Solicitor,
in addition to which he enjoyed private practice, and his name figures
prominently in records of trials of the period, the most famous
being that in which he defended John Thomas Campbell, Colonial
Secretary, in the criminal and civil libel actions instituted against him
by Rev. Samuel Marsden. These were the first libel actions in the
colony. From a legal standpoint (concerning as it did the functions
of the magistracy of the colony and the rights of certain colonists),
the most important case in which he was engaged was that of Burn v.
Howe and Fletcher. Anyone interested may find these cases fully
reported in “ Historical Records of Australia,” Series 1., Vol. X.
Mrs. Carling’s diary of the voyage out is preserved in the
Mitchell Library, where there are also a number of paintings by her
son, Frederick Carling, junr.
In this brochure space does not permit of details of Frederick
Carling’s many activities. Suffice to say, he was a man of public
spirit and of charitable disposition, his name appearing as a sub-
scriber to the humane organisations of his period.
On February 17th, 1816, he was appointed auditor of the Police
Fund.
On January 29th, 1817, he was one of the Committee of Sub-
scribers (he holding four £5O shares) who signed the rules and regu-
lations of the Bank of New South Wales, the charter of which was
proclaimed by Governor Macquarie on February 12th, 1817, but was
declared invalid in a dispatch from Earl Bathurst on October 29th,
1818.
At a meeting held at the General Hospital, Sydney, on June 5 th,
1819 (Governor Macquarie in the chair) to form an institution called
the Savings Bank of New South Wales, Frederick Garling was ap-
pointed one of the Committee of Management.
On August 31st, 1819, he was made a grant of 1,200 acres of land
at Prospect.
On July 24th, 1820, he was one of the signatories to the Proclama-
tion of Accession to the Throne of H.M. King George IV.
On September 2nd, 1822, he was one of the signatories to a peti-
tion protesting against the Commissariat paying for Government
supplies in Spanish dollars.
On June 9th, 1824, he was appointed Commissioner of the Court
of Requests.
On September 16th, 1819, Miss Elizabeth Garling (a sister of
Frederick) was granted permission by Earl Bathurst to proceed from
England to New South Wales as a settler.


HIS MARRIAGES, FAMILY, DEATH, ETC.
Frederick Garling was married twice. His first wife was Elizabeth
Spratt, to whom he was married at Bloomsbury Church, Holborn,
England, on April 14th, 1801. She died on June 9th, 1828, aged
5 2 years. By this marriage there were five children, all born in Eng-
land, viz., Frederick (who became landing Surveyor in the Customs
Department, and was a noted artist of marine subjects) ; Nicholas
(who was drowned at Bay of Islands while on a whaling expedition);
Sophia (who married Frederick D’Arcy) ; Elizabeth (who married
George Denning Stuart) ; and lane, of whose marriage I have no
record. Descendants to the generation of their families are rep-
resented in to-day’s foregathering. His second marriage took place
on September 15th, 1835, at the Church of England, Windsor, to
Sarah Wilkinson, third daughter of Thomas White Wilkinson, of the
Ordinance Department, and formerly of the Fourth or King’s Own
Regiment, By this marriage there was no issue.
Frederick Garling died at his home in Elizabeth Street, Sydney, on
May 2nd, 1848, aged 73 years, and was buried two days afterwards
in the Devonshire Street Cemetery. Of his grandchildren the only
survivor at the time of writing this brochure is Mr. W. M. N.
Garling, of Veret Street, Hunter’s Hill, and his age is eighty-six years.
Only two of his granddaughters-in-law now survive, they being
the widow of the late C. W. H. Garling, of Spencer Street, Cremorne;
and Mrs. W. M. N. Garling, of Hunter’s Hill.
Great and great-great-grandchildren are legion. Those whose
addresses I have been able to ascertain have been asked to join in this
foregathering of Frederick Carling’s descendants ; to those whom I
have been unable to invite I express my regret that the time at my
disposal has prevented me from getting in touch with them. My
hope is that associations renewed, and for the first time made to-
day, shall prove pleasant and enduring.
P. S. G.
Longueville,
July 23rd, 1927.






GARLING FAMILY,
■ U ♦ ■ V. •\ ]
112 YEARS IN AUSTRALIA.
GATHERING OF DESCENDANTS.
A gathering unique among the pioneer fami-
lies of Australia took place on Saturday, when
Mr. Percival S. Garling and Mrs. Garling
entertained at their residence at Longueville
about 120 descendants of Frederick and Eliza-
beth Garling, who arrived in Sydney on Au-
gust 8, 1815. There were present grandchil-
dren, and, in some instances, great-great-
great-grandchildren, of the original members
of the family to come to Australia, and it was
remarked during the afternoon that very few
indeed of the descendants of Frederick and
Elizabeth Garling had left Australia.
Frederick Garling was born in London in
1775, and was appointed the first Crown Solici-
tor of New South Wales, He died at his
home in Elizabeth-street, Sydney, on May 2,
1848, at the age of 73 years, and was buried
ift the old Devonshire-street Cemetery.
At Saturday’s gathering many members of
the family renewed acquaintance after many
years, while others had not met before. The
reunion was a happy one in every respect, and
a feature of the gathering was the appear-
ance of some of the members of the family
in the dress of the period of their ancestor.
At luncheon, which was served in a marquee
erected on the lawn, Mr. H. C. M. Garling
proposed the toast of “The Day we Cele-
brate.” He said that Mr. W. M. N. Garling,
who was 8S years of age, and was unable
to be present, was the only surviving grand-
son of their common ancestor. He, in his
early childhood, saw and knew Frederick Gar-
ling. Governor Macquarie had permitted
solicitors sentenced for such crimes as forg-
ery, perjury, and the like to practice their
profession as solicitors amongst the civil
population, and even to appear before the
Courts of the day. On the establishment
of the first Supreme Court the first Judge
(Jeffery Hart Bent) objected to such men
appearing before the Courts, and ultimately
the Home Government agreed to two at-
torneys being sent from England, Frederick
Garling was the first of these, and the other
was a Mr. Moore. Frederick Garling was
the senior, and was, therefore, the first Crown
Solicitor. “We may honour our ancestor
as pioneer of an important and honourable
profession. said Mr. Garling, “and if there
s wanted a monument to Frederick Garling
t 18 only necessary to look at the gather-
ing to-day.
Mr. Percival Garling, Responding to the
toast, said that they should keep alive the
best traditions of those who had gone be-
Time and circumstance” ,md
resulted in many of the family drifting apart
but he hoped that the reunion would serve
* r „ len(i ?hiP oi . tbe various branches of the
family. h rederick Garling had had a dis
farv on t ?hfi Ud | e B ! nt ’ but the best commen-
taiy on that dispute was the fact that their
WaS
%sss
Chief Stipendiary <torraeWy


DESCENDANTS OF FREDERICK AND ELIZABITH CARLING WHO ARRIVED IN SYDNEY ON AUGUST 8, 1815.
Om . o « _ , i .
REUNION AT THE RESIDENCE OF MR. P. S. GARLING, AT LONGUEVILLE, Otf SATURDAY. FREDERICK GARLING WAS THE FIRST CROWN SOLICITOR OF NEW SOUTH WALES.
INSET ARE PICTURES 01 FREDERICK AND ELIZABETH GARLING.
