

South Africa^^^
EXAMINER PRINT., LAUNCESTON:
* mmm ♦
■ e>
J- W. MOIR,
CHEMIST,
ndiQFIMT.
Casmaniar)
Contingents


Deeds tb&t wop tbe Victoria. Cro^s.
Fame Won
THE following stirring account of how the
Victoria Cross was won by five heroes gives
yet another instance of the bravery of British
soldiers:—The Boers were holding a commanding
and doubly entrenched hill and Colonel LONG of
the Royal Artillery was ordered into action. He
had 110 sooner done so than the detachments serv-
ing the guns were all either killed, wounded, or
driven from their guns by infantry fire at close
range and the batteries were deserted. •• No troops
could live in the open by the guns," said General
BUTLER. Five hundred yards to the rear was a
donga in which were sheltered the few survivors
from among those who had served the guns. In
this donga were Captain CONGREVE of the Prince
Consorts Own; Lieutenant ROBERTS, son of
4 * BOBS and Corporal NURSE. These three
gritted their teeth, and calling for volunteers set
out to recover the guns and earn the V.C. They
dashed out across the 500 yards ot bare ground,
which was swept from end to end by tiie gun fire
and deadly Mauser fire from pits only 300 yards dis-
tant. The Boers seeing thegallant effort concentrated
their whole energies upon decimating the brave
little band. With his own hands Captain CONGREVE
assisted to limber up one of the guns. Some idea of
the nature of the fire may be gathered from the fact
that Captain CONGREVE was shot through the leg,
South Africa.
through the toe off his boot, and on the elbow and
shoulder. The gum was safely dragged across that
field of death, amd Captain CONGREVE gasping,
worn and looked back at the remaining
guns where the Mlauser hailstorm from the Boer
trenches fell. Thee first thing that he saw was that
the bravest of his ceomrades, Lieutenant ROBERTS,
had fallen, and lay/ there in what was called 41 that
gilt-edged hell," wounded. The Captain
forgot his wounds*, and sought no help from any,
but rushed out agaiin into the zone of fire, stooped
for one moment ower the fallen Lieutenant raised
his helpless form amd staggered back to the donga
amid a hail of bulllets. He reached the donga in
safety and there dleposited his burden. That he
was a hero none willl deny. And now that readers
have finished this stirring story, they should re-
member that MOIIR S Sticky Fly Papers in their
destruction of flites are worse than Mauser
bullets. Their destructive qualities have gained for
Mr. J. W. MOIR, (Chemist, of Liverpool Street,
Hobart, a notoriety among Tasmanians that has
stood him in real stead. Those of our resi-
dents who have tbeen subjected to torture and
irritation by flies aire asked to give MOIR S Sticky
Fly Papers a trial, amd they will never regret having
done so. They are sold at id. each, and 9d. per
dozen.


gpf ingi
■ : _ :
First Contingent 011 Parade.
Q)\Q
QJ(9


First Contingent Crossing Victoria Bridge, Launceston,


Presentation of Bugle and Colours, First Contingent, City Park, Lauinceston.


First Contingent—Arrival at Wharf, Launceston, for Embarkation.


... ...... 4 v
t
,
Second Contingent Crossing Victoria Bridge, Launceston.


M- -7 V ii: ' : ' : ■ ' : : ;
t— * : 3 , .
Colonel Wallack, in charge of Bushmen's Contingent.


(jpf
I
Bushmen's Contingent on Parade at Hobart.
Qjys


M
- j
Bushmen's Contingent in Barracks.


;
4 : K"
Bushmen's Contingent falling in.


Bushmen's Contingent passing through Elizabeth Street, Hobart.


*•
Crowd watching Bushmen's Procession at liobart.


The Bushmen's Contingent passing along Murray Street, Hobart.


Embarking the Horses on Troopship " Atlantia.i," Hobart,


The Embarkation of the Bushmen's Contingent, Hobart.


** #
Imperial Bushmen's Contingent on parade, Hobart.


i
Imperial Bushmen's Contingent on board Troopship "Manhattan" at Hobart Wharf.


Departure of Troopship " Manhattan" from Hobart Wharf.


, ■ :■ - ' v/ ™" ~ '
. m »jil|l llliiSi®!!' ' 1
Major Cyril St. C. Cameron
7\ N


—.—
k :
m/Kf w v J
> •. ...**• ° ' : .|
0 > ■ * • ' . . 4 .f
■ ■ ■ '.. ■ ■' ,; ' . v
Lord Kitchener of Khartoum.
Field=Marshal Lord Roberts, K.C.M.G.


I * .. • 1
•'
1 ; . :
\ . ' J
Lieutenant=General Baden=Powell.
Captain R. C. Lewis.


S R
Aootber Victoria Cros? Hero.
A Gallant Medico Rides
IN a donga near Colenso in South Africa there lay,
surrounded by Boers, a number of British soldiers,
many done to death ; others, seriously injured, who
had shown the enemy what brave men could do
Their wounds were causing them untold agony,
rendered more so from the absence of one who
was able to give them that medical treatment they
so much needed. But a doctor was working in the
rear, when a message reached him telling him of
unattended agony in the donga, which heroism on
the one side and deadly markmanship on the other,
was fast coverting into a shambles. Major BABTIK
did not wait to discuss the ways and means of get-
ting there, but, turning, with his pockets crammed
with the utensils of his healing craft, snatched at
the bridle of a (pony and started off at a gallop
lor the death trap where the wounded lay. That
he rode through a galling fire you may know by the
fact that his pony was shot three times before he
through a Valley of Death.
staggered, at last, into the hollow in which his
services were so much needed. But that did not
check this gallant healer for a moment. He
arrived at the very moment when he was required
to once again dash out into that veritable hell of
fire, and help Captain CONGRRVL recover the
wounded Lieutenant ROBKRTs. No one will be-
grudge Major BabtiK his Victoria Cross, for he
earned it by the relief he gave to others under such
trying circumstances But Mr. J W. Moir,
Chemist. Liverpool Street. Hobart, has also given
wonderful relief to those in our midst who have
been undergoing the various kinds of illness that
flesh is heir to, by his marvellous sticky fly papers.
Wherever they are used flies disappear, and rooms
are by their means kept free from this abominable
pest. As flies are to be found everywhere this
remedy should be universally used. They are sold
at id. each, or 9d. per dozen.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF AUSTRALIA
3/?, yhi4-/z%2


