

Centenary and Jubilee
EXHIBITION
SOUVENIR CATALOGUE - One Shilling and Sixpence
Proceeds to Lord Mayor’s Hospitals Fund


n
Make CHI IP's PIW
of housework
with
HOOVER
YES, IT’S TRUE ! Hoover Electric Cleaners
and Washing Machines are so simple, so
efficient, and so easy to handle, that a youngster
can operate them
successfully. You,
too, will find that
you’ll have hours
more leisure every
week and a cleaner,
brighter home, with
IjTfiHhn the friendly help of
these world-famed
// British products.
v.
HOOVER CLEANER
MODEL 612
The exclusive beat-sweep-clean triple action gets
carpets really clean. And there’s a full above-
floor cleaning kit to sweep dust in an instant from
walls, ceilings, draperies and furniture. 27 gns.
(Attachments £5/12/-). Easy terms.
V
-jit*
HOOVER ELECTRIC WASHING MACHINE
Compact, economical, efficient, unbelievably
thorough, and gentle, the Hoover Washing
Machine is so fast that an average week’s wash
takes less than an hour to finish and peg out.
£43/10/-. Easy terms.
See HOOVER at
STAND No. 12
Victorian Distributors : M. A. GIBSON (Specialities) PTY. LTD., 418 Bourke Street, Melbourne, MUBSI9


Souvenir Catalogue of the
CENTENARY A JUBILEE EXHIBITION, 1951
EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE:
Rt. Hon. Lord Mayor of Mel-
bourne (Cr. The Hon. Sir
James S. Disney).
E. Ormond Baker, Esq., J.P.
Lady Angliss, C.B.E.
Affon Morcom, Esq., F.H.A.
F. S. Waycoft, Esq., A.A.I.I.
A. N. Curphy, Esq.. F.S.S.
(Eng.)
R. Deoley, Esq., M.6.E.
J. V. Stout, Esq.
V. R. Hill, Esq.
John O'Keefe. Esq.
John W. Haysom, Esq,
R. W. Hodges, Esq.
W. J. Cudlipp. Esq.
ORGANISING SECRETARY :
HUGH G. FERGUSON. Esq.
EXHIBITION BUILDING. MELBOURNE
March 21st—April 7th, 1951.
CONTENTS
Page
Foreword by the Premier of Victoria, the Hon. J. G. B. McDonald, M.L.A. 3
Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation 7
’’March of Industry,” by the Rt. Hon. R. G. Casey, Minister for National
Development II
"Centenary Jubilee Year-—Victoria's Progress in a Hundred Years and the
Great Success of Federation," by E. A. Doyle, Editor in Chief Victorian
Centenary Volumes, 1951 17
"The Trade Union Movement—A Century of Progress," by J. V, Stout, Secre-
tary Melbourne Trades Hall Council 27
Plan of the Exhibition 4
Guide to the Exhibition 5
Alphabetical List of Exhibitors 15
Descriptions of Exhibits 43
The attractive cover design of this Catalogue was prepared by Alex. A. Brown, Commercial Artist, of Melbourne. T. B.
Hopkins and J. V. Reilly arranged the advertising and supervised production of the publication, which was printed by
Asher & Co. Pty, Ltd., of 285 Lennox Street, Richmond, for the publishers, the Centenary and Jubilee Exhibition Committee.
The Committee of Control of this Exhibition accepts no responsibility for the accuracy of the statements or opinions
expressed in contributed articles.


f ■ S
mm
<s
fiiii
a f
nc
t
rttw* ‘WS‘£' > ' ! '%' 5 *
if'
-
liiil
*vw /
- <?
Si
m o
'v'3
W
OP
.**■<» riv
'*»/ 7 /
M
DEPEND I ON AJAX
The vast pattern of modern
Buildings .. . Ships .. . Railways '«
Aircraft . . I All held by Ajax
construction—Bridges . . .
. . . Agricultural Implements
Bolts, Nuts and allied fasteners.
MANUFACTURED BY
Revised Handbook of
Bolts and Nuts now
available. Requests on
letterheads, setting out
the enquirer’s position
or occupation will be
given preference.
c
LTD
MELBOURNE
SYDNEY
ADELAIDE
PERTH


Foreword
By The Premier of Victoria,
The Hon. J. G. B. McDonald, M.L.A.
This Souvenir Catalogue of the Centenary and Jubilee Exhibition should
serve a double purpose—to locate with ease the many exhibits, and to remind
us all of the tremendous development that has taken place in Victoria in the
last 100 years.
We have reason to be proud of the industrial progress achieved; of the
way in which our industries have forged ahead, and the stability they have
maintained over the years.
I believe this exhibition, held to celebrate a memorable event, will bring
pleasure to a great number of people, and be the means of intensifying our
admiration for those who have brought many great industries to the forefront
in this State.
May the Exhibition be all that we could wish for; may it be the means
of further stimulating industry; may it be an event we can look back on with
pride and satisfaction.




GUIDE TO THE EXHIBITION
GROUND FLOOR EXHIBITS: A plan of the ground floor, indicating locations of Exhibitors* Stands,
appears on opposite page.
GARDEN AREA EXHIBITS : Located in Exhibition grounds and may be reached by leaving the building
through the South Door.
ELECTRICAL AND RADIO SECTION ; Upstairs in Gallery Stairs to right and left of Main Nicholson
Street Entrance.
HOME BUILDERS' SECTION : Upstairs In Gallery Stairs to right and left of Main Nicholson Street
Entrance.
FILM THEATRETTE : Upstairs in Gallery, adjacent to Electrical and Radio Section. Obtain your free
Souvenir Programme for the Theatrette at Stand No. 24.
REST AREA : In front of Stage, in centre of Building
SPOONER PRE-BUILT HOME: In Garden Area, through South Door. Further details pages 66 and 67.
LUNCHEON AND DINING ROOM : Entrance located off passageway to right of Stage.
SNACK BARS AND REFRESHMENTS: In North Nave. Ground Floor.
SECRETARY'S OFFICE : At left of Main Entrance when facing Stage.
PUBLIC TELEPHONES : At Main Entrance and near Stage.
ELECTRICAL INDUSTRIES BUYERS’ ROOM : A new departure at Australian Exhibitions is the provi-
sion of a buyers' room, where business may be discussed and appointments made. The room is
located upstairs in the Electrical and Radio Section.
LADIES' RETIRING ROOM : To left of Stage.
GENT’S RETIRING ROOM : To right of Stage.


I
TOYNE'S
The World’s Best Rotary
Clothes Hoist
Patent No. 129,479
Toyne’s announce a new Improved model which is a
revolutionary advance in Rotary Clothes Holst construc-
tion. It is precision built. External parts are rustproof,
being of non-ferrous metal. All joints are water tight
and the handle is of improved design.
Consult the Toyne's representative at the Exhibition.
He will gladly supply further Information of this world-
famous Hoist.
Cutaway Section showing
LARGE GEARS
the
Secret of the
Safe Easy Lift
On Display in Home Building
Section and at Spooner House
TOYNE'S ROTARY CLOTHES HOIST
PTY. LTD.
2 STANHOPE ST., MONT ALBERT, E.lO
VICTORIA, AUSTRALIA. Tel.: WX 144!.
Established 28 Years.
More Air Space
between lines on
Toyne's Hoist
means clothes dry
more quickly.
More Hanging
Room. Wider
gaps bet w een
i n e s allow
Toyne's Hoist to
revolve without
wet clothes hitting
housewife in the
face.
f
HI
2-
i
Swivel Joint
2 Worm with
two flat sides.


THE COMMONWEALTH SCIENTIFIC AND
INDUSTRIAL RESEARCH ORGANISATION
The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial
Research Organisation (C.5.1.R.0.) was estab-
lished in 1926 as the Council for Scientific and
Industrial Research (C.5.1.R.) to investigate
problems of importance to primary and second-
ary industry. The Science and Industry Re-
search Act, 1949, created the C.5.1.R.0. which,
like the C.S.I.R. it replaced, is a body corporate
with powers and functions very similar to those
of the old Council. Its responsibilities include
the initiation and carrying out of research
in connection with Australian primary and
secondary industries, the training of research
workers, the establishment of scholarships
for scientific research, and the making of
grants in aid of pure scientific research. It
also has the specific function of looking after
the testing and standardisation of scientific
apparatus, the assistance of Industrial research
associations, and the collection and dissemina-
tion of information relating to scientific and
technical matters. In setting up the original
Council, the Government followed the example
of other countries, which realised that indus-
trial research often necessitates expenditure
beyond the capacity of individual persons or
enterprises. In Australia the Importance of a
body like the C.S.I.R. was even greater than
in older countries because of the relatively
backward state of industrial development, the
need for building up industries based on Aus-
tralian raw materials, and the special nature
of many problems concerning Australian agri-
cultural and pastoral industries.
The necessity for dealing with problems on
an Australia-wide basis has resulted in a wide-
spread and adaptable organisation. Undesir-
able centralisation has been avoided by estab-
lishing laboratories and field stations in dif-
ferent parts of the Commonwealth wherever
the necessary facilities, contacts and other
suitable conditions can best be found. In
addition, C.5.1.R.0. is advised by a number of
committees set up on a State or regional 'basis,
the members being drawn from scientific and
industrial interests and familiar with the
particular problems of each State or region.
When it was formed in 1926, C.S.I.R. saw
that the farmer and pastoralist were confronted
with a host of difficulties In the form of animal
and plant diseases, soil problems, pests, water
problems and so on, and a number of labora-
tories were set up to investigate these prob-
lems. Since then other Divisions have been
started, and just prior to the Second World
War the Council extended its activities into
the secondary industry field. There are now
some fourteen major establishments, known
as Divisions, and a number of smaller estab-
lishments, known as Sections, as well as vari-
ous Field Stations and other units. None of
these establishments works as a completely
individual unit. Their interests are linked
with those of other parts of the Organisation
and, indeed, with other Commonwealth and
State Departments and with the Universities,
and a close and frequent interchange of in-
formation and discussion is maintained.
Basic to all primary industry in Australia
is the soil. The Division of Soils has its
headquarters at the Waite Agricultural Re-
search Institute of the University of Adelaide,
with which it works in close association. Its
main work is the examination and classifica-
tion of Australian soils so as to obtain funda-
mental knowledge on which to base methods
for their most appropriate and economical
use. At the present time a number of funda-
mental Investigations in soil chemistry, soil
physics, and soil microbiology are in progress;
on the applied side the Division’s main work
is concerned with soil surveys. These are
being carried out in all States of Australia
and the Northern Territory, and vary in type
depending on requirements from highly de-
tailed surveys to very broad reconnaissances.
Plant problems, in particular those con-
nected with pastures, are investigated by the
Division of Plant Industry which has its head-
quarters in Canberra, branch laboratories at
Brisbane and Lawes in Queensland, and field
stations and experimental farms at Stanthorpe,
Queensland; Kojonup,' W.A.; and Trangie,
N.S.W. In Queensland it is looking into the
possibility of irrigation in the Burdekin River
area where the use of irrigated pasture for
cattle fattening and tobacco production show
considerable promise. Intensive studies are
also being carried out in an endeavour to
obtain a legume for Northern Australia which
will do for pastures there what subterranean
clover has done in South Australia. The Divi-
sion also works in association with the Divi-
sion of Soils and the Land Research and
Regional Survey Section, a small unit estab-
lished to conduct surveys in Northern Austra-
lia and responsible for the research stations
at Ayr, in North Queensland, at Katherine,
Northern Territory, and at the Ord River,
Western Australia. Problems of Irrigation are
being intensively studied In two main areas
the Murray Irrigation Area at Merbein, Yic


wars
25 y e
oi jprofyreSS
-fG'-US/.
SOCKS
FOR
MEN
P IT-WEAR Socks for Men hove been
1 produced for discriminating
buyers during a quarter of a century.
The brand is appreciated for FIT and
WEAR throughout the Commonwealth.
3/rd/ With Xast Word
in
Wjen I We
ear
Obtainable
at all leading Stores.
UlaAe \>u ...
FETTER MILLS
PTY. LTD.


toria, where viticulture is the main industry,
and in the Murrumbidgee Irrigation Area at
Griffith, N.S.W., where citrus fruits are grown.
Problems connected with animals are mainly
investigated at the Division of Animal Health
and Production and the Division of Bio-
chemistry and General Nutrition. .The former
Division, which has a wide programme of re-
search dealing both with cattle and sheep,
has its headquarters in Melbourne, labora-
tories in Melbourne and Sydney, a branch
laboratory at Yeerongpilly, Queensland, and
field stations at Badgery’s Creek, N.S.W.,
Barooga, N.S.W., Cunnamulla, Queensland, and
Werribee, Tooradin and Coleraine, Victoria.
Some of the main problems which have been
studied include pleuro-pnuemonla in cattle, tick
fever, mastitis in dairy cattle, peg leg in cattle,
sheep blowfly, sheep worms and other para-
sites, entero-toxaemia and foot rot. The Divi-
sion of Biochemistry and General Nutrition,
with headquarters in Adelaide, is largely con-
cerned with studies of nutrition of the sheep
and its relation to wool production. This
Division showed that defective “steely” wools
were due to a copper deficiency and could be
eliminated by mineral supplements in the
sheep’s diet; more recently it demonstrated
that the sparse vegetation of the so-called
Ninety Mile Desert of South Australia is due
to mineral deficiencies, and with the applica-
tion of suitable top dressings this region will
produce heavy crops of lucerne and clover.
Insect pests cause enormous losses to pri-
mary production In Australia and the Division
of Entomology is mainly concerned with their
control. Its headquarters are in Canberra, and
it has field stations at Bright, Victoria, and
Trangie, N.S.W. In addition to the work done
on the sheep blowfly, other pests investigated
include the cattle tick, buffalo fly, grasshopper,
wheat weevil, grass grub, thrip and pests of
stored wool. Attention is also being given to
the possibility of controlling weeds by means
of insects.
The Division of Fisheries is concerned with
the development of the Australian fishing in-
dustry. Its headquarters are at Cronulla,
N.S.W., and it also maintains an exploration
section at Perth and stations at Brisbane,
Thursday Island, and Hobart, as well as three
research vessels. Problems connected with
the storage and transport of foodstuffs are
studied by the Division of Pood Preservation
and Transport. It has its headquarters in
Sydney, branch laboratories in Brisbane and a
minor laboratory at Gosford, N.S.W. A Dairy
Research Section is maintained in Melbourne.
The Division of Forest Products, with
headquarters in Melbourne, carries out
fundamental studies of wood structure,
wood chemistry, timber physics and tim-
ber mechanics, as well as applied research
in seasoning, preservation, gluing and utilisa-
tion of Australian timbers. Problems of the
Australian building industry, particularly those
connected with the use of local materials, are
the responsibility of the Division of Building
Research In Melbourne.
The Organisation is developing a large pro-
gramme of research on wool textiles, for which
laboratories are being established In Mel-
bourne, Sydney and Geelong. These include
fundamental studies, such as those of the
structures of the proteins found in wool, and
applied studies relating to such operations of
wool textiles manufacture as scouring and
carbonising. Flax, another fibre material, is
investigated by the Flax Research Section in
Melbourne.
The Division of Industrial Chemistry, which
is in Melbourne, is one of the largest of the
Organisation’s Divisions, its main objectives
being to promote greater technical efficiency
in the established chemical industries in Aus-
tralia, to encourage the use of raw materials
of Australian origin, and to seek substitutes
for Imported materials. Its sections deal with
such subjects as minerals utilisation, cement
and ceramics, foundry sands, physical chemis-
try, chemical physics, organic chemistry, and
chemical engineering.
The Division of Tribophysics in Melbourne
is concerned with studies of friction and lubri-
cation and metal physics, as well as certain
chemical problems. The Divisions of Metrol-
ogy, Physics and Electrotechnology in Syd-
ney comprise the National Standards Labora-
tory, and are responsible for maintaining the
Commonwealth standards of measurement of
length, mass, electrical units and other quan-
tities. The Radiophysics Division, also in Syd-
ney, has an extensive programme of work in
such fields as radio-astronomy, rain physics
and the application of radar methods to aerial
navigation.
Other Sections of the Organisation deal with
mlneragraphy and ore-dressing, coal research,
physical metallurgy, meteorological physics,
atomic physics, mathematical statistics, and
the rabbit problem. The Organisation also
maintains scientific liaison offices in London
and Washington In order to keep abreast with
the latest scientific and technical developments
overseas.
One of the great difficulties of a Govern-
ment organisation of the C.5.1.R.0. type is that
of striking a suitable balance between research
of a fundamental and an applied nature. In
carrying out fundamental research it is essen-
tial for the organisation to be sure that it is
not trespassing on the legitimate field of the
Universities, but, at the same time, it is equally
The Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (continued)


Melbourne's Leading
Hardware Store
ON
STAND 60
"Silver Grill"
Electric
Stovettes
Gas Coppers
Electric
Coppers
itrekt 4 DOORS FROM BOURKE ST Fuel Co PP ers
UJuftriM
CO
i
• Gleaming Porcelain Baths
• Wall or Pedestal Basins
• Imported Tiles
* Glass Shower Screens
• Chip Bath Heaters
• Gas Bath Heaters
• Bathroom Cabinets
• Stools. • Taps.
f , e
*U
r
I rsfe
• Stainless Steel
Sinks
• Gas Stoves
• Fuel Stoves
• Electric Stoves
• Gas or Electric
Sink Heaters
• Under Sink and
Under Stove Cabi-
nets.
• Light Fittings
• Room Warmers


necessary for the general health and well-be-
ing of a scientific establishment that a certain
proportion of fundamental research is carried
out. When a piece of fundamental research
has been carried to a successful conclusion, it
is published and the results are thus available
to all other workers. When a piece of applied
research is completed, however, there still re-
mains the problem of putting the new know-
ledge into use. Before the results of such
research can be applied in industry extension
work is necessary. In the primary fields this
is well recognised and extension work is car-
ried out by the State Departments of Agri-
culture, and the recently formed C.5.1.R.0
Agricultural Research and Extension Liaison
Unit. In the secondary field, however, the
responsibility for carrying out extension activi-
ties has not been so clearly defined. In some
fields C.5.1.R.0. does this work itself, for ex-
ample, in forest products, wool textiles, and
in building research.
THE BOY SCOUTS’ ASSOCIATION
Special Exhibit in Gallery
The Boy Scout Movement was founded by
the late Lord Robert Baden-Powell, the famous
defender of Mafeking during the Boer War.
Having published a book of “Aids to Scouting”,
for the use of Army Scouts, he found that
boys and girls were using it as a basis for
their games.
Following an experimental camp of boys he
published “Scouting for Boys” in 1908. Prom
then the Movement spread rapidly until it
became world-wide. Baden-Powell himself, on
the advice of King Edward VII, resigned from
the Army in which his career was assured,
and devoted himself to the furtherance of
Scouting, hailed as the first and last “Chief
Scout of the World”, until his death in 1941.
Using his own words, Scouting is defined as:
“The work and attributes of backwoods-
men, pioneers and explorers”, or
“A school of citizenship through wood-
craft,” or again,
“A jolly outdoor recreation which has also
proved to be a valuable aid to educa-
tion.”
Hence it is natural that the Boy Scouts’
exhibit takes the form of a camp, in which
Scouts learn to be self-reliant, to find delight
in simple things, and to live in thankfulness
to their Maker, who also made the beauties
of the bush amid which they live, eat, play
and sleep.
Scouting was not very old before younger
boys clamoured to join, so there arose the
younger section of the Movement, Wolf Cubs.
Similarly, as Scouts grew older and their in-
terests widened, they wished to continue
Scouting on a level more suitable to their age.
Thus developed Senior Scouts and Rover
Scouts, to cater for youths and young men.
In Victoria there are over 1700 men and
women (Scouters) who are giving liberally
of themselves and their time not to mention
tne money which their expenses cost them
to lead about 19,000 boys of all ages in this
greatest of games for boys Scouting.
Chief Scout for Victoria: His Excellency
Sir Dallas Brooks.
President: Sir Edmund Herring.
Chief Commissioner: Col. G. S. W. Anderson,
M.B.E.
General Secretary: F. R. G. Sanders.
THE BOY SCOUTS’ ASSOCIATION
(Victorian Branch)
Baden-Powell House, 516 Collins Street,
Melbourne, C.l. 'Phone: MU 6049.
THE GIRL GUIDES’ ASSOCIATION
The Girl Guides’ Association in Australia
has a membership of 33,000 10,000 of whom
are Victorians. In the Movement we have
Brownies aged 8 years to 11 years, Guides
from 11 to 16, and Rangers and Sea Rangers
from 16 to 21, all of whom promise on their
enrolment "To do their duty to God and the
King, to help other people at all times, and
to obey the Guide Law”.
The method of training is to give girls pur-
suits which appeal to them, such as games
and recreative exercises, which lead them to
develop for themselves many useful crafts,
with the purpose of developing good citizen-
ship among girls by forming their character.
They are trained in habits of observation,
obedience, and self-reliance; inculcating loyalty
and thoughtfulness for others; teaching them
services useful to the public, and handicrafts
useful to themselves; promoting their physical
development, and making them capable of
keeping good homes.
Guiding is an International Movement, with
members in practically every country in the
world irrespective of class, colour or creed.


MARCH OF INDUSTRY
By
The Rt. Hon. R. G. Casey, Minister for National Development
Australia is today adding a new chap-
ter to the story of its growth—the story
that began with a tiny foothold of Euro-
pean settlement only 163 years ago.
Events are on the move that are carrying
this nation of ours into what history may
record as its era of greatest progress and
development. New population is flowing
into the country; our industries are grow-
ing to cope with the greater demands; the
tempo of expansion is rising. We also
face today the burden of preparing again
to produce munitions and weapons of
war and to build up our fighting services.
Development and rearmament are con-
fronting industry with a great challenge.
Many factors have contributed to the
making of the Australia that we know
today. In the nineteenth century, it was
the wealth of the agricultural and graz-
ing and mining industries. In the last
fifty years, yet another factor appeared
to change the whole economic outlook and
speed up the momentum of Australia’s
progress. This was the growth of second-
ary industries, now playing a more and
more prominent part in our development.
Secondary industries were, of course,
in existence in this country long before
1900. Quantities of iron had already
been produced, locomotives and iron ships
built with imported materials, the pro-
cessing of food was well-established. But
there was no really vigorous expansion of
Australian secondary industries until the
early 1900’s. From that point onwards,
the number of factories and the number
of people employed in those factories
have climbed steadily. In the early
1900’s there were 11,600 factories in Aus-
tralia. In 1949, there were over 40,000.
In 1900 there were about 200,000 fac-
tory employees. In 1949 there were
nearly 900,000. Probably even more sig-
nificant is the fact that in 1900 there were
about 500 factory workers per 10,000 of
the population, whereas in 1949 there were
over 1100 per 10,000.
In 1900, manufacturing industries con-
tributed only about 20% of the total
value of goods produced, whereas in
1950, in spite of a great increase in the
value of rural products because of pre-
vailing world prices, the manufacturing
industries were producing 50% of the
total net value of all goods.
Victoria, which this year celebrates its
State centenary, has become a great
national workshop in the Commonwealth.
More than 30% of all factories are situ-
ated in Victoria, and they produce 32%
of the total net value of manufactured
goods.
NEW TARGETS FOR OLD
How has Australia benefited from this
change in her economic structure? It has
widened the variety of employment op-
portunities, and has thus not only helped
raise the level of technical and scientific
skill but has encouraged migration by
providing a greater choice of jobs for the
would-be migrant. It has established a
solid foundation for the defence of the
country so that in time of war we are by
no means entirely dependent upon over-
seas supplies.


One of our greatest problems at present
is that the supply of goods falls short in
many important respects. Particularly is
this true of manufactured goods, though
there are primary products and minerals
of which we are short also. Our needs-
and they are very pressing needs—are
growing at such a pace that they are out-
stripping our ability to supply them. We
made about 1.1 million tons of finished
steel products in 1950, but the demand
was about twice our production. Capacity
of our steel industry is being greatly in-
creased. We consumed about 1084 mil-
lion k.w. hours of electricity—a record
—but for the present we have to ration
power and endure electrical blackouts.
Installed power generating capacity is
expected to increase very substantially in
the next five years. Coal production, an
essential foundation for secondary indus-
try, totalled 16-J million tons of black
and about 7J million tons of brown, but
we need several million more of both
black and brown, which is being urgently
pursued. Our sea and rail transporta-
tion systems are inadequate for our needs
and are receiving special attention.
We are, as you know, trying to make
up some part of the deficiency of essential
goods with imports, but in 1951 world
rearmament is absorbing more and more
of the surplus materials of exporting
nations. We are compelled to redouble
our efforts to meet our needs from our
own resources.
TOMORROW’S AUSTRALIA
To help us with the building of the
great enterprises we are undertaking,
and with the development of the nation
generally, immigrants are coming in at
the rate of 200,000 per annum. This, to-
gether with our natural increase, means
an annual rate of increase in population
of about 35%, a rate equalled in few
other countries at any time.
The faith which private enterprise has
in the future of the country is shown in
the spectacular expansion of industrial
investment which has taken place since
the end of the war. About 4900 firms
have invested £210,000,000 in manufactur-
ing industries. More than £60,000,000 was
for the establishment of new enterprises.
A large percentage of the total was in-
vested by overseas firms. Of the total
number of firms, 1850 have invested
£78,000,000 in Victoria. At the same
time we hope that our economic life will
be stimulated by the great and continu-
ing influx of new population each year. A
population of 10,000,000 before 1960 is
envisaged. This promises to be the
dominant factor in the pattern of indus-
trial expansion.
Assuming that the planned rate of im-
migration is a reliable guide to the rate
at which our domestic markets will ex-
pand, the remarkable opportunities for
industry to undertake long range de-
velopment of essential industries are
apparent. In the immediate need for
defence preparation we must not lose
sight of our long term development need.
Examination of the industrial situation
suggests that there are openings in Aus-
tralia for some new branches of manufac-
ture of essential goods. But most of the
opportunities for industrial enterprise
must lie in development of existing indus-
tries as a result of the demands of new
population.
Defence preparations will add to the
strains on our supplies of basic materials,
essential services and manpower. These
problems must be solved before industry
can release the new productive forces
required for Australian development. The
various Governments and private enter-
prise are grappling with the problems of
shortages.
We are inclined, I think, to dwell on
our current difficulties and too frequently
we let ourselves become gloomy about
them. These difficulties are, after all, the
stresses of change which a vigorous,
healthy nation has to sustain in a period
of rapid growth.


Mechanical Power TRANSMISSION EQUIPMENT
jjt*
H
BRITISH
BALL and ROLLER
BEARINGS
"Angus" Oil Seals.
Speed Reduction Units.
Stand No. 42
•m
m
■
m
*
Clutches.
G.W. Couplings.
Flat and V-Rope Drives.
Morse Chain Drives.
MECHANICAL HANDLING EQUIPMENT
BRITISH ELECTRIC TRUCKS
Stacking Machines
Manual
Electric-Hydraulic
Elevating Trucks
Stillages
Gravity Roller Conveyor
Hoists
BEV. Electric Trucks
Platform
Elevating
High Lift
Fork—High Lift
Tractors
Locomotives
GARDNER WAERN & CO. PTY. LTD.
SYDNEY;
208 CLARENCE STREET
Phone: MA 9i 34
MELBOURNE;
481 FLINDERS STREET
Phone: M 83121
NEWCASTLE;
45 WATT STREET
Phone: B 1587
AGENTS IN ALL STATES


ALPHABETICAL LIST OF EXHIBITORS
Location
Amalgamated Wireless A’asla Ltd. E. & R. Section
Australian General Electric Pty. Ltd. E. &R. Section
Bank of New South Wales Stand 33
Berger, Lewis & Sons (Vic.J Pty. Ltd. Stand 27
Brehaut, H. E., Pty. Ltd, E. & R. Section
Builders' Steel Form Supply Co. Ltd. Stand 35
Burley, L. G., Pty. Ltd. E. & R. Section
Butler & Moss H. B. Section
Chamber of Mines of Victoria Stand 28
Chuclt, T. N., Wire Fence & Gate Pty. Ltd. Stand 4
Classic Radio Pty. Ltd. Stand 55
Coates & Co. Pty. Ltd. Stand 57
Cohen Bros. (Home Furnishers) Pty. Ltd. Stand 20
Colorgravure Publications Stand 39
Combined Services Exhibit Garden Area
Commonwealth Scientific & Industrial Research
Organisation Stand 32
Cook, Frederick L., & Williams Pty. Ltd. E. & R. Section
Cooke, Sidney, Ltd, Stand 15
Department of Supply On Stage
Deutsher, W. A., Pty. Ltd. Stand 37
E.G.A. (S. Cunningham Pty. Ltd.) Stand 60
E.M.I. Sales and Service (Vic.) Pty. Ltd. E. & R. Section
Eckersley & Sons Pty. Ltd. Stand 53
Electrical Industries Exhibit E. & R. Section
Electrolux Pty. Ltd, Stand 26
Enwite Pty. Ltd. H. B. Section
Excell & Jones H. B. Section
Felt & Textiles of Australia Ltd, Stand 23
Fowlers Vacola Mfg, Co. Ltd. Stand 56
Gardner Waern & Co. Pty. Ltd. Stand 42
Gerrard Wire Tying Machines Co, Pty. Ltd. Stand 58
Gestetner Pty, Ltd. Stand 38
Gibson, A. H. (Electrical) Co. Pty. Ltd. Stand 59
Gibson, M. A. (Specialties) Pty. Ltd. Stand 12
Globe Electrical Co, E. & R. Section
Government of Pakistan Stand 51
Location
Graham Industries Stand 2
Granowski, O. Stand 48
Hall. J. R., & Co. Stand 40
Healing, A. G., Ltd, Stand 29
Hecla Electrics Pty. Ltd. E. & R. Section
Henderson's Federal Spring Works Ltd. Stand 16
Imperial Chemical Industries of Australia
& New Zealand Ltd. Stand 25
Industrial Engineering Ltd. Garden Area
International Correspondence Schools H. B. Section
K. M. Steel Products Ltd. Stand I2A
Kelvinator Australia Ltd. Stand 14
Kempthorne Pty. Ltd. Stand 41
McColl Electric Works Ltd. E. & R. Section
Malcolm Moore Industries Ltd. Garden Area
Mallinson, William & Sons Ltd. Stand I
Masonite Corporation (Aust.) Ltd. Stand 6
Mechanical Handling Ltd. Stand 61
Metropolitan Gas Company Stand 47
Mitchell. Thos., & Co. Pty. Ltd. Stand 3
Morgan, L. J. Stand 8
Nettlefold. T. S.. & Sons Pty. Ltd. Stand 9
NeHlefolds Pty. Ltd. Stand 49
Nunawadlng Timber Co. Pty. Ltd. H. B. Section
Ogden Industries Pty. Ltd, Stand 52
Osborne, Herbert, Pty. Ltd. Stand 19
Persin, M.. Pty. Ltd. H. B. Section
Pope Products Ltd. Stand 36
Postmaster-General's Department Stand 2A
Red Point Tool Co. Pty. Ltd. E. & R. Section
Regent Traders Pty. Ltd. Stand 17
Renown & Pearlite Pty. Ltd. Stand 34
"Ring Grip" Electrical Accessories E. &R. Section
Rowe. H„ & Co. Pty. Ltd. E. & R. Section
Sachs, A. G, & Co. H. B. Section
Sackville, John, & Sons Pty. Ltd. Stand 45
Sellgson & Clare (Aust.) Ltd, Stand 24


See STAND 2
GRAHAM INDUSTRIES
Distributors :
“Silovac” Electrical Products
Offices and Service Dept.:
49 LITTLE NAPIER STREET. FITZROY
Telephone : JA 1639
W. GRAHAM & SONS
HOME ELECTRICS
Domestic Electric Appliances
Repair Specialists
49 LITTLE NAPIER STREET, FITZROY
Telephone : JA 1639
AILSA GRAHAM
ART FABRICS
Silk Screen Printers
Designers of Fabrics
49 LITTLE NAPIER STREET, FITZROY
Telephone : JA 1639
Semak Vitaliier Stand 7A
Singleton, G. C., & Co. Pty. Ltd. H. B. Section
Small Homes Service H. B. Section
Southern Cross Porcelain Co. Pty. Ltd. E. & R. Section
Southern Planning & Drafting Co. H. B. Section
Specialty Typewriter Service Stand 7
Spooner Homes (A'asia) Co. Garden Area
Stamp, John W,, Pty. Ltd. E. & R. Section
Standard Telephones & Cables Pty. Ltd. E. & R. Section
Standis Furniture Pty. Ltd. Stand I
State Electricity Commission of Victoria Stand 22
Suburban Timber Supply Stand 30
Sutherland, A. P. E. & R. Section
Thomas Bros., R. & C. p Pty. Ltd. E. & R. Section
Thompson, John, (Aust.) Pty. Ltd. Stand 43
Toynes Rotary Clothes Hoist Pty. Ltd. H. B. Section
Tutt-Bryant (Vic.) Pty. Ltd. Garden Area
Werner, R„ & Co. Pty. Ltd. Stand 5
Wilson Electric Transformer Co.
Pty. Ltd. E. & R, Section
Wiltshires Pty. Ltd. Stand 50
Wonder-Heat Pty. Ltd. Stand 10
Wormald Bros. (South) Pty. Ltd. Stand 21
Yencken, E. L., & Co. Pty, Ltd. Stand 44
Acknowledgements
An auxiliary lighting plant for the whole of the out-
side area has been supplied by the Department of
Army.
The space occupied by the Boy Scouts' Association
at the Exhibition was generously donated by Argus
and Australasian Limited.
Alphabetical List of Exhibitors (cont.)


OUR CENTENARY JUBILEE YEAR
Victoria’s Progress in a Hundred Years and
the Great Success of Federation
By E. A. DOYLE, Editor in Chief, Victorian Centenary Volumes, 1951
This is indeed a notable year, not only
in the history of our State but in the
history of the Commonwealth of Aus-
tralia —■ 1951 not only marks the
Centenary of the Government of Victoria
and the Centenary of the Discovery of
Gold, it also marks the Jubilee of the
Commonwealth of Australia.
There have been many historic mile-
stones in the development of our country
in its first century. We have had amazing
pioneers and witnessed development even
in our own lifetime that now becomes
historic as far as the world is concerned.
THE VICTORIAN CENTENARY
This year 1951 marks the centen-
ary of the foundation of Victoria. It is
fitting, because of the great part Victoria
has played in the development of the
Commonwealth, that the history of her
Centenary should be described first. The
proclamation separating the Port Phillip
District from New South Wales was
issued on July 1, 1851, and it was
announced that Her Majesty Queen
Victoria had graciously conferred her
name on the new Colony.
The story of the remarkable growth
of Victoria in its first 100 years of respon-
sible government is not only one of great
romance but one which emphasises the
strength of the Empire-builders of Great
Britain.
Victoria, which was originally the Port
Phillip District of New South Wales, was
in existence for only about 10 years when
the people began to demand its independ-
ence. In 1835, the land was comparatively
unknown and practically unoccupied.
Migrants came from Sydney, from Hobart
Town and Launceston, and they pros-
pered as a pastoral community.
Melbourne, now the fifth city of the
British Empire, was a settlement only of
rough shanties on the banks of the Yarra
in 1835. The small community of sturdy
pioneers in the Port Phillip District
resented what they regarded as the almost
complete indifference of officialdom in
New South Wales.
There was consequently great rejoicing
in Melbourne when it was announced on
November 11, 1850, that a Bill for the
“better Government of Her Majesty’s
Australian Colonies” which separated the
Port Phillip District from New South
Wales, had been passed by the Imperial
Parliament. The celebrations coincided
with the opening of the first Prince’s
Bridge across the Yarra at Swanston
Street, and the demonstrations continued
for several days, culminating in dancing
under what is known as the Separation
Tree in the Botanic Gardens.
Mr. Charles Joseph Latrobe, who was
Superintendent of the District of Port
Phillip, was promoted to the status of
Lieutenant-Governor on July 1, 1851,
and the first Legislative Council, partly
nominated, was established in November
of that year.
Victoria’s population had then grown
to 77,345, but the new Colony was to pass
quickly from the pastoral development of
the country to a rapid growth of cities,
towns and industries and wealth un-
dreamt of in the world, because
simultaneously with the declaration of
separation came the discoveries of gold
already referred to above.


In 1850, 18,091,207 lbs. of wool valued
at £826,190 were exported, but the pro-
gress of the country at that time was
not confined solely to the work of the
flock owners. In 1851 there were 52,176
acres under wheat, oats, barley, potatoes
and hay, and the average yield of wheat
was recorded at 20 bushels an acre.
But the discovery of gold revolutionised
the outlook. In the first eight years of
Separation, nearly £90,000,000 worth of
gold had been won and the population
had jumped to 410,766.
It is of interest to recall that about this
time Victoria introduced legislative
experiments of world significance. For
the first time in history, voting by ballot
was adopted by the Colony; Victoria, in
fact, became the pioneer of the ballot
system. When, subsequently, it was intro-
duced into England and America it was
generally referred to as the Victorian or
Australian ballot. The new system was a
signal success.
Another interesting political develop-
ment was that the franchise was conferred
upon adult males by the Adult Suffrage
Act of 1857. The bi-cameral system of
government was introduced in 1855, when
two Houses of Legislature, the Legislative
Council and the Legislative Assembly,
were established.
A STORY OP REAL PROGRESS
When the days of the gold rush passed,
industry began to flourish. Whereas in
1860 there were only 4000 factory workers
in Victoria, by 1880 there were 40,000.
By 1890, Victoria was a well-developed
Colony; the population was more than a
million; the deposits in the State Savings
Bank amounted to £9,110,793, the assets
of the Trading Banks were £63.435,125,
and the private wealth was estimated at
£200,000,000.
Now, the population of Victoria is
approaching 2,250,000. Since 1939, its
figure for consolidated revenue has
increased from £26,986,000 to £62,000,000.
There are nearly 5000 miles of railways,
and immense deposits of brown coal from
which are developed 70 per cent, of the
electricity of the State. There are fine
provincial cities Ballarat, Bendigo,
Geelong, Mildura, Shepparton and,
with the development of the brown coal
for electricity and gas, the province of
Gippsland, but more particularly the
Latrobe Valley, will become the Ruhr of
Australia.
The acreage under wheat amounts to
approximately 3,000,000 and a yield of
49,000,000 bushels was harvested in the
1948-9 season. The wool clip is approxi-
mately 195,000,000 lbs. annually.
Victoria faces a great future with the
expansion of its many power schemes
brown coal and hydro-electric. More
than £100,000,000 will be spent on develop-
ment in the next decade.
Victoria’s more recent history is well
known, but its great progress during the
past 100 years is a wonderful tribute to
the independent spirit of its pioneers and
the colonising enterprise of the British
people.
THE GOLDEN YEARS
The great part which the discovery of
gold played not only in the rapid develop-
ment of the new colony of Victoria, but
also in the greater development of all the
Australian colonies a development
which eventually brought about Federa-
tion must be considered next in order
of preference when discussing the anni-
versaries which we are celebrating in
1951.
It will never be known when gold was
first discovered in Victoria because history
shows that the authorities were afraid,
in the early stages, that the discovery of
gold which they knew to be in existence,
would lead to all sorts of problems and
difficulties and they preferred to delay
any official announcement until as a
Government they were prepared to deal
with the situation. There is no doubt
that gold was discovered in quantity in
many parts of Victoria long before the


Melbourne as it appeared in 1890, showing Bourke Street in left foreground.
official date which is given as July 5.
1851, when the first payable gold was dis-
covered at Climes and at Warrandyte in
Victoria. This is the date of the Centenary
of Gold we are celebrating.
Gold was discovered at Ophir near
Bathurst in New South Wales in Febru-
ary, 1851, and the rush of people in Vic-
toria and other States to this centre forced
the authorities in Victoria to expedite
the discovery of gold in payable quantities
so as to bring their population back.
The discoveries in Victoria were made
at Chines by Esmond and at Warrandyte
by Michel, and they were paid a reward
for having discovered the first payable
gold. This was the first official recog-
nition that gold was to be found in Victoria
and this occurred only five days after
Victoria had been proclaimed a self-
governing colony.
These and subsequent discoveries in
Victoria opened np untold wealth for
Australia; in fact, the fields at Ballarat,
('astlemaine and Bendigo were destined
to become the richest gold areas in the
world. So great was the wealth produced
and so enormous was the influx of
migrants from overseas, that the dis-
coveries were largely responsible for the
undreamed of development of Australia,
and more especially of Victoria, in the
ensuing one hundred years.
The story of the sensational discoveries
brought both an exodus of the local popu-
lation to the goldfields and a rush of
gold diggers from all over the world.
Fortunes were made in a few days. The
rush was hectic. Men came to Victoria
from all parts of Australia and from New
Zealand. It was not long before thousands
arrived from Britain, Europe, Asia and
America, from California itself. Some
diggers described the fields at Ballarat as
jewellers’ shops, and there were fantastic
stories of discoveries.
It was the greatest gold rush ever
known; but it brought about chaos in the
Colonies. Towns and stations were


c
Xg
'A &Sk
/
r
><
K
X
'T
STAND No. 22.
Today, four-fifths of Victoria's population receive their electricity from a modern system of
supply founded upon brown coal and its derivative, briquettes. Key to the State's prosperity,
this electricity is transmitted over a network that serves the metropolitan area, provincial cities
and rural towns, centres of industry, and thousands of farms. But vast projects are being con-
structed to provide more power for Victoria. Snow-fed mountain waters are being harnessed
for hydro electricity, steam-electric generating plants are being enlarged, more supply lines
are being built, and further great developments on the brown coalfields are under way. Within
five years the capacity of the State's electric power system will be doubled, and production of
briquettes for industrial fuel increased fourfold. By planning and building to supply the ever-
increasing demand for power and fuel of a growing population the State Electricity Commission
is filling a vital role in shaping the future progress of Victoria which is destined to become one
of the great workshops of the Southern Hemisphere.
STATE ELECTRICITY COMMISSION
OF VICTORIA
Head Office, 22 William St.. Melb


deserted, crews left their ships and the
Victorian Government had a great task in
endeavouring to cany on production and
maintain supplies for the increase in popu-
lation. Crime had to be suppressed and
sickness and disease were inevitable.
DEPARTED GLORIES
The hectic period of the gold fever
ended after the sixties when surface
claims generally were worked out and the
goldfields were deserted. While many of
the migrant diggers returned home, the
great majority remained in Victoria and
became absorbed in the trade, commerce
ami industry of the Colonies. In the pro-
cess of catering for the needs of the vast
population that had been attracted by
the gold discoveries, the basis of a sound
industrial community, not only in Vic-
toria, but in other parts of Australia, had
been established.
Australia would have become a great
country without the impetus of a gold
rush, but there is no doubt the present
state of development would not have been
possible for very many more years if gold
had not been discovered.
From the beginning of Australian
colonisation in 1788 to the gold rush period
63 years later, the white population of
Australia, had increased to only about
410,000. After the gold rush period
1851 to 1861 the population of Austra-
lia had increased to 1,153.000. Now the
population is more than 8,000,000, of which
nearly 2,250,000 are in Victoria.
THE JUBILEE OF THE
COMMONWEALTH
King George the Fifth, when Duke of
York, opened the first Federal Parlia-
ment at the Melbourne Exhibition Build-
ing on May 9, 1901, and thus came into
being the Commonwealth of Australia
a self-governing democracy divided into
six sovereign States under the Federal
Government. The Victorian people played
no small part in the establishment of
Federation, in fact, they were among the
prime movers to bring about a unified
government for the Continent.
Loch Line of Ships loading wool —January, 1908—showing width of Wharf on north-east side of
Victoria Dock prior to alterations and construction of Central Pier.


Behind
100 U4oM
of progress
in Victoria stands
«e
'
: •• r ' **•* gsm
*'*#//' t/ 7 X ~ -
Tg •
sfcsSSf:
Victoria’s first newspaper,
the Melbourne Advertiser,
appeared in manuscript
form on Jan, 1, 1838, and in
print on March 5 of that
year.' Later it passed through
successive stages as the Port
Phillip Patriot, and the Mel-
bourne Daily News, and in
1851 was merged with the
Port Phillip Gazette. All
these newspapers are em-
bodied in the present Argus,
which first appeared under
this name in 1846. The
Argus can thus claim to be
Melbourne’s oldest journal.
Argus Associated
Publications
include:
AUSTRALASIAN POST
YOUR GARDEN
WOMAN'S WORLD
AUSTRALIAN FARM &
HOME
Three tears after Batman landed in 1815, a newspaper
was founded- ... a newspaper which eventually became
The Argus as it is today.
Thus, The Argus has been intimately identified with
the progress and prosperity of the State for almost all of
its history, becoming in that time a newspaper of world
status and stature.
In the future, as in the past, The Argus will pursue a
vigorous, practical course, in parallel with the onward
march of Victoria, and of the Commonwealth as a whole.
RJ
he ItpS
VICTORIA'S FAIRPLAY NEWSPAPER


The frame of our Federal Constitution
owed much to the American Constitution,
upon which, in broad outline, the Austra-
lian Constitution was modelled. The
powers of the Federal Parliament include
defence, trade and commerce with other
countries, uniform taxation on a national
basis, industrial matters which involve
more than one State, social services, cur-
rency, immigration, nationalisation, navi-
gation and a number of smaller matters.
Briefly, the Federal Constitution trans-
ferred all distinctly national powers to
the Commonwealth, leaving the residue
in the hands of the States.
The Australian Constitution differs
from the constitutions of other democratic
federations in the almost unlimited power
of alteration it confers, but it includes a
long list of constitutional safeguards; for
instance, the Constitution prohibits the
enactment of any law which might inter-
fere with absolute freedom of religion
and ensures freedom of interstate trade.
Alterations to the Constitution may be
brought about by referendum of the
people.
The High Court of Australia is the
guardian and interpreter of the Con-
stitution, and in any dispute between
Federal and State Governments the de-
cision of the High Court is binding upon
both parties.
HALF-CENTURY OF PROGRESS
Great progress has been made in Aus-
tralia since the establishment of Federa-
tion. After sitting in Melbourne for 27
years, the Parliament was transferred to
its new home at Canberra, and the open-
ing there was by the present King (as
Duke of York), and it is befitting that
arrangements are being made for His
Majesty to visit Australia again in 1952,
when no doubt he will open another special
session of the Federal Parliament at Can-
berra, this time in his capacity as King,
the first time such an event has taken
place in this country.
Australia was always regarded as a
land of pastoral and agricultural develop-
ment until the First World War, when its
industrial potential became evident. The
industrial progress was most marked, but
in the Second World War new industries
came into being, many others were ex-
panded, and Australia for the first time
became a large manufacturing country
with an export in secondary goods.
British and American firms have played
a great part in the industrial advance-
ment of the Commonwealth. In four
years ending 1949, the amount of overseas
money invested in Australian industry
was £173,000,000, and it has since been
announced that Britain and America in-
tend to establish a production base in
Australia to supply the rapidly growing
markets of the East. This industrial
expansion has resulted in a great era of
prosperity in the Commonwealth and the
organisation of immigration plans, the
greatest in the country’s history. On a
population basis, these immigration plans
are of greater magnitude than the famous
influx into the United States in the 19th
Century.
While the story of the industrial de-
velopment of Australia, more particularly
since World War 11, is a great romance,
it must not be overlooked that Australia
still leads the world as a sheep-raising and
wool-producing country. She grows about
one-quarter of the world’s wool from
approximately one-sixth of the world’s
total flock.
Wheat is Australia’s principal agricul-
tural industry, and in the year 1942-43
the value of all Australia’s farming pro-
duction was £297,000,000 equal to
nearly £39 a head of population. In
1947-48, the latest period available, the
figure had grown to £583,800,000, repre-
senting £76 a head of population.


Products of Australian Industry
equal to the world’s best!
See the display by
OGDEN INDUSTRIES
PTY. LIMITED
STAND No. 52
The complete range of LOCKWOOD 100% AUSTRALIAN-MADE
PRODUCTS, includes Locks, Padlocks, Night Latches, Latch Handles,
Screen Door Latches, Cupboard Locks, Door Closers, and Key Cutting
Machines. "Lock-up with a Lockwood" for protection and security for
home and business premises,
SEBCO MASONRY ANCHORS
For Engineering, Building and allied trades, Sebco Anchors save time, money and labour on
fastenings to Concrete, Brickwork, Tiles, etc.
STELCON INDUSTRIAL STEEL FLOORING
The steel floor that lasts a lifetime. Non-slip, non-skid and non-wearing.
GARDENING EQUIPMENT
The Model "B" Ogden Lawn Mower is new and improved even better than its pre-
decessor. The Ogden Square Spray gets the corners leaves no section unsprinkled.
The Ogden Edge Cutter fitted with Rubber grips is easy and comfortable to use. These
products are truly symbolic of Australian industrial skill,
OGDEN RECORD-TYPE HYPODERMIC SYRINGES
PIONEERED IN AUSTRALIA BY OGDEN INDUSTRIES.
T. & H. ELECTRIC SWITCH GEAR
Dont miss Stand No. 52


Stand No. 7
TYPEWRITERS . . “DL Peak ofDype W nler efficiency
STANDARD & PORTABLE. IMMEDIATE DELIVERY
Available in 12", 14", 18" & 22" Carriages.
Features include the following:—lnterchangeable Carriage, Automatic
Type-bar Release, Keyset Tabulation, 44 Keyboard, Touch Control, Choice
of 5 Line Spacings, Automatic Bale Lift, Streamlined Appearance with
solid all-steel construction, and many other features. 12 months' guaran-
tee. Plenty of Spare Parts.
PORTABLE (Model 90). The most amazing Portable ever offered.
Ideal machine for Stencil Cutting and large numbers of Carbon Copies.
Large Keyboard, with standard touch. For the office or home.
£44/10/- cash, or £l5 deposit and 13/- per week.
Telephone: Central 3166 Central 4993.
Sole Agents :
SPECIALTY TYPEWRITER SERVICE
284 RUSSELL STREET, MELBOURNE, C.l. (Opposite Public Library)
INTERNATIONAL STATUS
The best evidence of the success of
Federation has been the co-ordination of
the armed forces of Australia in World
War I and World War 11. Before the
establishment of Federation, expeditions
were sent to ' campaigns from the
Colonies, which were then separate en-
tities under the British Crown.
Australian troops and the Australian
nation made a notable contribution to
victory in the two World Wars, from
which Australia emerged with a recog-
nised international status as a foundation
member of the League of Nations in 1919
and of the United Nations in 1945. In
proportion to her population, Australia’s
part and influence in international affairs
since 1919 has probably been greater than
that of any other country of comparable
size.
In addition, Australia’s place in the
British Commonwealth of Nations has
steadily become one of increasing import-
ance. Speaking as a united country in
imperial affairs, Australia has contributed
materially to the strength and develop-
ment of the British Empire during the
period of her nationhood.
The past fifty years have witnessed the
emergence of Australia from the status
of a collection of colonies to the dignity
of a virile and unified nation. We have
been welded into a single nation. Fed-
eration has made us conscious of the fact
that we are Australians and has given
us a pride in our nationhood and a self-
respect in our independence which cen-
turies of lesser deeds could not have
conferred.


ippp
.d’s V» teSt
60 ,
CONV^* 8
ELE V ' |(> f .p pi-'' 1
>n"'" II()(S rs
r
- ■
»*•
AIJS^
tc |l<^ :
I*l.1 1 11,1 , sVS TE» lS
»*#PSP
I?.|C
TK
UCK S
iCCE
.SSO
Rlfi s
& p
-AB fS
5»?
a
mm
*■'
* v
, v ?'< 4
*s
MECHANICAL HANDLING LTD.
( Formerly MAGNUS Industrial Equipment Pty. Ltd.)
368 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE, VIC.
Te!. MU mSI (3 line-,) Cables & Telegrams “MECHANISE” Melbourne
?:EW WALES QUEENSLAND SOUTH AUSTRALIA
HANDING LTD. BOURKE & RADFORD PASCOE & CO. LTD.
I Unwin's Brugb Pd.. ST. PETERS 129 Adelaide Sc.. BRISBANE 282 Port Rd.. WOODVILLE
Phone LA 3329 Phone B 3070 Phone M 7127
CONSULTANTS AND
SPECIALISTS IN MECHANICAL
HANDLING EQUIPMENT •
CONVEYING ENGINEERS •
CONTRACTORS AND
ERECTORS.
M2l


THE TRADE UNION MOVEMENT
A Century of Progress
By J. V. STOUT, Secretary Melbourne Trades Hall Council
“The days go by, the days go by,
Sadly and wearily to die.”
But do they? Rather, one thinks, that
over the years each year has contributed
something better, something more for
mankind and has provided the means by
which many unpleasant, unnecessary
things have been destroyed.
The Victoria of 100 years ago permitted
a freedom that was not as limited as
where personages were privileged and
the observance of customs was inelastic.
The climate, too, allowed of greater
mobility, and therefore of greater inde-
pendence. A proportionately larger
number of its inhabitants believed in the
leaders of the Chartist movement more
than they accepted Chartism. The com-
parative absence of established wealth
permitted the exercise of individual choice
in a wider sense than could be applied
in older countries. And although the
goddess of chance was no less fickle than
she is today the men attracted here were
free-er of the restraining influences of
unemployment than when in the land of
their birth. There were fewer obligations,
too. They were young men willing to
experiment in a country where arrogant
authority was more personal than real,
and where the social “inferiors” were in
many cases no less inferior than their
“betters”.
Victoria was a place where it was not
difficult for a free man to keep “out of
sight”, but where it was impossible to
hide wherever men assembled. It was
then that conduct indicated character and
character asserted itself in the shaping
of a code of justice. It was rough and
direct in the early stages of polities, but
there was much less tolerance shown to-
wards sham and hedging, although the
influences of British institutions were not
disregarded. The weaknesses and arro-
gance of the older world certainly existed,
but the formalities of repression and
oppression were taken less seriously or
rebelled against.
It was natural that greater individu-
alism would assert itself where democratic
tendencies were much stronger than
Colonial departmental management, and
where new forms of community or social
behaviour had not yet been made.
As the lust for easy riches passed with
the lack of success on the goldfields, men
essayed to practise the theories that were
being propagated before they left Eng-
land. Chartism had captured the imagina-
tion of many workers, business men, re-
formers and religious leaders. It was
thought that “the something that had to
be done” to allay the unhappy conditions
of the masses in Great Britain had been
supplied by the Chartism Movement.
Annual elections of and payment for mem-
bers of Parliament, legal wages, an eight
hours day for work, etc., made up a pro-
gramme of reforms.
In England, Unions had grown in spite
of anti-union laws and animus towards
factory inspection. In Victoria, British
Union men thought and acted in the spirit
of British Unionism.
So the Union came to Victoria, and in
1874 the foundation stone for the central
section of the present Trades Hall was
laid.
Probably the 70’s, 80’s and 90’s were
most prolific in the agitation for some
orderly way of attending to the conditions
of work. During these years many
Unions were formed. Strikes took place.
Gold miners, seamen, shearers, building


FOLLOW THE CROWDS TO
STAND
AUSTRALIA'S QUALITY RANGE
TRANSPORT & INDUSTRIAL
ENGINEERING NEEDS
FROM
HENDERSON’S
■rVU'
SPRINGS OF ALL SHAPES & SIZES
ENGINE AND CHASSIS PARTS
AXLES AND SHACKLES
HARDWARE AND TOOLS J
GEARS OF EVERY KIND
ASSORTED KITS . . . ETC
HENDERSON’S
FEDERAL SPRING WORKS* LTD
(Incorporated in Victoria)
MELBOURNE SYDNEY
l% o
TRAILERS
r
STAND
ALSOVA
• •
"shntiif
vr
ox*
U Xf'
H,aiKA
SENIOR” MODEL—up to IS cwt. Capacity.
JUNIOR" MODEL—up to 10 cwt. Capacity.
HENDERSON’S ALL-STEEL ENGINEERED CARAVAN CHASSIS.
CARAVAN & TRAILER AXLE ASSEMBLIES OF FROM 8 TO 15
CWT. CARRYING CAPACITY.
CARAVAN & TRAILER COMPONENTS & ACCESSORIES.
BENDY
TRAILER A CARAVAN PTY. LTD
Showrooms c? Sales:
lIS VICTORIA ST., MELB.
PHONE FJ2T46
f's!/ N


workers and other workers refused to sell
their labor-power at the prices offered by
employers. Their efforts to secure better
wages and working conditions brought
about a very important event: the forma-
tion of a political organisation to voice
the opinions of the organised Unionists.
Since the 90’s has developed the
organisation now known as the Australian
Labor Party, and since the 90’s has grown
in public favor and Union practice the
machinery set up by the various parlia-
ments for the settlement of industrial dis-
putes. The first Wages Board was
appointed in Victoria in 1896, since when
many changes have been made in the
method and scope of the treatment of
matters industrial.
An eight-hour day came to the building
workers in 1856. A 44-hour week was
secured by the same group of workers in
1906. In 1948 the 40-hour week became
operable. In 1950 the Parliament granted
to rural workers the right to apply for
Wages Boards.
In the life of a man it was a long road
to some of these reforms; in the history
of mankind relatively quickly. It has
shown that organisation is necessary to
enable some justice to be secured, and that
without organisation there is little or no
response to appeals for just treatment.
It is true that the powers of Wages
Boards have been extended, meaning the
liberalising of thought as experience has
been gained of the operation of Unionism.
The stilted limitedness of the power of
Wages Boards of earlier days compared
with the present simplicity of approach
shows the advancement made during the
54 years of their existence, and that the
ready acceptance by employer and em-
ployee organisations of the methods used
is more important than the decisions made
by them.
In a small community a fresh com-
petitor entering into business may, prob-
ably must, cause some disturbance,
whether he succeeds or fails. In a thinly
populated place like Victoria, attempts
to establish independent businesses far
exceeded the successes. It was found that
many Old-World habits had to be varied
or completely changed, substitutes found
for materials used in other countries and
experiments made in the efforts to measure
the requirements of the respective crafts-
men. Trial and error no doubt quickly
determined how the going was likely to
be. So men tried, succeeded, failed and
tried again in the romance of work and
business in a land that was raw and brittle
but without the disadvantage of conser-
vative customs.
While this sorting out was taking place,
the British Unionists’ claim for a “fair
day’s pay for a fair day’s work” was not
neglected. James Stephens, James Gallo-
way, the brothers Vines, Joseph Batten,
H. Sparks and many others strove for the
rights of the workers as the community
centres took shape in the development of
services and the supply of the needs of the
people.
In 1856 the working men of Melbourne
marched to the Cremorne Gardens in com-
memoration of the Anniversary of eight
hours day, and collected for the Mel-
bourne Hospital the magnificent sum of
£2OO. Of course they lost a day’s pay.
Today the payment for holidays decided
on by a Wages Board is part of the terms
of employment.
With what pride did coachmakers
fashion a hansom-cab, landau, Victoria
or commercial vehicle. With what pride
did men point to work that was identifi-
able in the circles of their craft. They
were wheelwrights, blacksmiths, chimney
builders, bootmakers, etc., etc. But time
has now provided the machines which
multiplies production which was previ-
ously the work of separate individuals.
Men now try to maintain their status in
the industrial community in a more keenly
social sense than by individual craftsman-
ship.
No longer is it said: “I made such-and-
such an article.” Today is said: “We
make this or that”; “our firm” does so


Jf
i3anh
C^ent
in
enany
vrm
Hi
mm
11
I i I
£ .* J
i l -:
I
I
.rlUii
mm
_i! } . - * ’' i .
JSTm i I nr
iVV ’A I *'" 1
Smßßm
BSBBiBi
The first branch of the Bank of New South If ales in
Melbourne, 1851 an artist’s impression based on an early
drawing.
ONE HUNDRED YEARS AGO, on 15th
April, 1851, the Bank of New South
Wales opened its first Victorian branch at the
corner of Collins and William Streets,
Melbourne.
For 100 years, the Bank of New South
Wales has played a vital part in developing
Victoria’s resources, assisting its production
both primary and secondary, and facilitating
its trade with the rest of the world.
This centenary will be celebrated by a dis-
play at the Centenary and Jubilee Exhibition.
Be sure you visit the “Wales” stand.
The chief office of the Bank of New South If ales in
Victoria Melbourne Office in 1951.
Consult and use
BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES
FIRST BANK I N AUSTRALIA
(INCOKrOUATED IN NKW SOUTH WALKS WITH LIMITED LIABILITY)
ASO3S


and-so. So personal pride has turned into
collective pride or responsibility with the
change in industrial methods.
One supposes (one hopes, correctly)
that the real milestones in history are not
recordable, are not the marking up of
what this or that chap has done, but that
the monument to social progress is the
resulting benefits for human good. It is
the healthy living thing that matters, not
some of the people who shaped, purloined
or promulgated the ideas that have grown
to be accepted.
We should really view the processes of
progress as not being limited to the ideas
of a few people, but rather like a language
that no person can claim as his own.
We are conservative in that we want to
see where we are going. We are gregari-
ous and social, and so want the horizon
to be where we want to go. Unfortunately,
some cannot see even a near horizon.
We look back to see how far we’ve
travelled. We view possibilities to enable
us to measure probabilities. We examine
the world so that we may try to under-
stand ourselves.
The hundred years during which Vic-
toria has had a Parliament has provided
a record in our history of feelings, hopes,
promises and achievement.
Our Trade Union pioneers pitched their
tents of calico and canvas, then built of
wood, of brick, of stone. The principles
they preached were more lasting and of
greater human interest and value than
the recorded milestones indicate.
Prom canvas-town, shanty-town, land-
boom industrial cottage to the houses re-
quired by the workers today is a long way
when the life of a dwelling is about fifty
years.
From any kind of wages as decided by
the “squatter” to the regulated wages
determined by the legal tribunals is also
an evidence of the influence of “human
rights”.
The difference between Victoria of 100
years ago and today may be noted in the
independence of the people, standard of
houses desired by working people, and the
demand for security in the future. Mainly
it rests in the general acceptance by the
people that better standards of living
should come with the mechanical ability
to progressively furnish greater material
wealth for distribution.
One hundred years of self-government
allows us to look with some marked degree
of satisfaction to what has been achieved.
It can’t rest there. We couldn’t very
well respect the settlers in our early his-
tory and at the same time neglect the
policy of advancement they have indi-
cated should be followed.


m-;m
I
y -*
MB
t
For the very latent in
WOODWORKING MACHINERY
he sure to visit
J. R. HALL & CO.
at STAND No. 40
THE
At left:
"METALCLAD"
GROUP COMBINED CHAIN
CUTTER and HOLLOW
CHISEL MORTISER
Specialists in I larhinery for
CABINET MAKERS EURNITLRE
MANUFACTURERS JOINERY WORKS
At right is the
"ME CO"
24 in. CIRCULAR
SAW BENCH
M
v: j
tk
*
1
ENQUIRIES WELCOMED BY
giiP^
Hn&g&b.
300 BOURKE STREET, MELBOURNE.
Phone: M 1566


A usiruiiu *s Nuiimnat
Wiri*U»ss Orff tin i sultan
Amalgamated Wireless (Australasia) Limited is
the largest radio manufacturer in the Southern
Hemisphere ami has heen the leader of the industry
for more than thirty-six years. It enjoys an
international reputation for efficiency and the high
quality of its products. Flic company maintains a
highly qualified research staff and has large production
resources for manufacturing all types of radio
equipment for use at sea. on land ami in the air. A.W.A.
maintains in a serviceable condition all radio
equipment in Australian Commercial aircraft and
overseas aircraft operating to Australia. Over ioO
aircraft for 20 different companies are serviced by
A.W.A. The company has radio servicing depots at ail
principal aerodromes.
A.W.A. manufactures: Radar. Air navigation beacons and distance measuring
equipment. Instrument landing systems, Aerudio stations, in addition to Broadcasting
equipment. Communication transmitters and receivers. Marine transmitters and equipment.
Micro-wave links. Radio programme recordings. Military communication
equipment. Transmitting and receiving radio valves. Broadcast receivers, etc.
47 York Street, Sydney. 167 Queen Street. Melbourne.
Vi elSintilon. N.Z. Australia House, London


HEALINGS'
55 Years of Progress
Closely parallelling Victoria's remarkable development
over the last half-century, A. G. Healing Ltd. are now
providing goods and services throughout the length and
breadth of the land.
The Victorian and Australian public need no intro-
duction to Healing Cycles, Healing Radios, Refrigerators,
Electric Cleaners or Thor Washers. Perhaps less
well known, but equally important, is Healings' function as wholesalers of auto-
motive, cycle, plating and refrigeration products. Your garageman relies on
Healings for supplies of Automotive Spare Parts and Accessories - and for an
Engine Reconditioning Service second to none.
So when you think of Healings fhink
of an organisation with branches in
Victorian country towns and in four
other Australian States who are
pledged to serve you - the public
through the medium of your local
retailer or serviceman. And while you
are at the Exhibition we invite you to
see the range of Healing products at
the . . .
HEALING No 29 STAND
Right Under Central Dome
J'l
i||l*
) 111* 1 1 *
filll 1J
ill
1951
Mil A.C.HtAUNS
JW aunt
yen ce
r
Ok
1896
A. G. HEALING LTD.
HEALINGS PTY. LTD.


VtS
\*
0^
S
c
Obtainable fro
A. P. SUTHERLAND
City Showrooms : 202 FLINDERS LANE, MELBOURNE
and at 2 Maffra St., South Melbourne 175 Sturt St., South Melbourne
ta/P) Victorian Wholesale Dist ributors for : WESTINGHOUSE, ROSEBERY PTY. LTD.
~t r nit of Electricity Meter and Allied Industries Ltd.


Why Work so Hard?
ELECTROLUX CUTS YOUR
HOUSEWORK IN HALF . .
sPSI
f
PJsfe.* : .I 1
at
V
fl
Housecieaning changes from a task to a pleasure with your Electrolux vacuum cleaner
because there is a scientifically designed attachment for every cleaning operation.
These are some of the qualities which make Electrolux your best buy;
• More attachments than any other cleaner. • More silent than any other cleaner,
• Greater cleaning power. *Air filter, which is a boon to catarrh, hoy fever, and
asthma sufferers. • The insector a fumigator for destroying moths and larvae
• Efficient spray gun for pointing. • Backed by Nation-wide service organisation.
TWO YEARS' GUARANTEE. Call and see this
labour-saving machine now, or, if it's more con-
venient, ring and a demonstration in your own
home can be arranged at a time to suit you—day or
night. Trade-ins accepted. Easy terms available.
Order now. It will pay you to buy the best.
See it now ,
whilst you 9 re in
the Exhibition
YOU CAN BUY AN ELECTROLUX FOR AS LOW AS 30/- PER MONTH.
VM
If you would like a demonstration
In your own home without obligation,
post this coupon now.
ELECTROLUX PTY. LTD..
277 Elizabeth Street, Melbourne.
Phone: M 185!
NAME
ADDRESS.


k S.T.C. are Contractors by appoint-
ment to the Departments of the Navy,
Army and Air Force, Dept, of Civil
Aviation, P.M.G.'s Dept., Dept, of
Air, Dept, of Supply, S.E.C., Victorian
Railways, and other Gov-
ernment Departments.
sjt
esand
* 588 BOURKE STREET, MELBOURNE. M 1406.
★ 252-274 BOTANY ROAD, ALEXANDRIA, N.S.W. MX 0444.


SfamJl
m
URNITURE
■
ure
■
■
..the anti
■
■
m
£J
PBHBj m
HE fine timbers and loving workman-
ship of Standis reproduction Furniture make every
piece a masterpiece. In your home, Standis Fur-
niture reflects your discriminating taste, your apprec
tion of beauty, and your sense of value.
This beautiful hand-carved wall table featured in the
Standis Display is a genuine Standis production and
typifies the fine craftsmanship in all Standis productions.
—Sold by leading furniture stores throughout
Australia.
Standis
Furniture
Exhibit No. 1
MELBOURNE.
BBS
William Mallinson & Sons Ltd.
Suppliers of
High Grade Queensland furniture and joinery timbers
Australian and imported veneers.
High grade panelling lor all interior finishes.
STAND No. I
281 COLLINS STREET, MELBOURNE
And At 130.150 Hackney Road, London, E. 2, England
TELEPHONE: CENT. 2451 CABLES: ‘ALMONER’ MELB.


COLOURS ALL THAT INDUSTRY CREATES .
s.
f
Did you know that the Paint and Varnish
industry making is one of Australia's most
important industries? Almost every surface
. . . from the colouring of a kiddie's toy bal-
loon to the cap of a soft drink bottle is
finished in paint or varnish. The Berger
Group of Companies, established in 1760, has
built up a huge reservoir of knowledge and
experience throughout its Empire-wide
organisation, and leads the field in the manu-
facture of paints and finishes.
v&
tO*
DO*
V
a"
s
111
LEWIS BERGER & SONS (VIC) PTY. LTD.


oj? tra iicm d^ndudtr i
¥
MAIN PRODUCTS OF ICI
GROUPS
NOBEL GROUP
Blasting explosives, fuse detona-
tors, sporting ammunition, slide
fasteners, synthetic ammonia.
Including formaldehyde, syn-
thetic nitrates, methanol: and
from Government owned plants,
ammonium sulphate and metha-
nol.
CHEMICAL GROUP—
Chlorine and chlorine com-
pounds, including D.D.T., “Gam-
mexane,” hydrochloric acid,
sodium hypochlorite. agricul-
tural chemicals and pharma-
ceuticals.
ALKALI AND PHOSPHATE
GROUP—
Soda ash, caustic soda, bicar-
bonate of soda, calcium chloride,
food phosphates, phosphorus,
disodium phosphate, trisodlum
phosphate and other phosphate
compounds.
DYES AND PLASTICS GROUP-
“Leathercloth” and P.V.C.
films, dyestuffs, dyestuffs auxili-
aries, pigments, plastics inter-
mediates, phenol formaldehyde
urea formaldehyde and acrylic
moulding powders, polyvinyl
chloride, plastic materials, nylon
Perspex/’ “Alkathene,” Rub-
ber Chemicals.
Ql
o*
V...
0m :
Stand No. 25
ICI DYES & PLASTIC PRODUCTS
The Dyes end Plastics Group of ICIANZ is one
of the four main selling Groups of the Company
Its products include: Dyestuffs, Plastics of many kinds
and "Leathereloth." Working exhibits on the
stand show how the products sold by this
Group are used by other Australian
industries to make arfich
needed In our
every-day „
live*.
w#
ICIANZ and INDUSTRY
The factories of )C1 in Australia use simple raw
materials such as coal, air, water, limestone and
salt to make a wide range of products required
by the great public utilities, by the primary pro-
ducer and the agriculturist, by the mines and by
all kinds of industrial and manufacturing concerns.
In addition to the products sold by the Dyes and
Plastics Group, other sections of the Company
sell industrial and agricultural chemicals, pharma-
ceutical and veterinary products, commercial ex-
plosives and safety fuse, sporting ammunition and
slide fasteners and so on.
No list of ICIANZ products can ever be complete,
for it must of necessity continually grow to meet
the demands of Australia's ever-expanding Industry.
ICI
IMPERIAL CHEMICAL INDUSTRIES OF AUSTRALIA AND NEW ZEALAND LTD.
All Capital Cities and Wellington, N.Z.
Head Office: 380 COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE. State Sales Office: 408 LATROBE ST., MELBOURNE




ATOMIC AGE EXHIBITION
MODERN HOMES EXHIBITION
AUSTRALIAN FASHION FAIR
INTERNATIONAL MOTOR SHOW
and now
Centenary and Jubilee Exhibition
★
Canvas Work Supplied by
EVAN EVANS Pty. Ltd.
680 ELIZABETH STREET, C.l.
Manufacturers of "AUSTRAL" Brand Canvasware
Auto Tents
Caravan Annexes
Camping Equipment
Tarpaulins
Interior and Exterior Blinds
Sporting Goods, etc.
★
Ring :
FJ 2173
FJ 2174
FJ 6587 for
CRAFTSMAN BUILT CANVASWARE


DESCRIPTIONS OF EXHIBITS
AMALGAMATED WIRELESS (AUSTRALASIA)
LIMITED
Stand : Electrical & Radio Section.
The exhibit arranged by Amalgamated Wireless
(Australasia) Limited is a simple and dignified
one in keeping with the A.W.A.'s standing as
Australia's National Wireless Organisation.
In the centre stands a 2000 watts broadcasting
transmitter of modern design. This unit is typical
of the very high standard of workmanship that
is so characteristic of all A.W.A. products.
Also exhibited is a projection television display
unit as used tor research and developmental
work, an A.W.A. Radiogram incorporating all
wave reception and short wave bandspreading,
and by way of contrast a Radiola personal port-
able which is little bigger than a Camera.
AUSTRALIAN GENERAL ELECTRIC PTY. LTD.
Stand ; Electrical and Radio Section
The exhibit comprises a range of Commercial
Cooking Equipment including Bake Ovens, Fish
Fryers, etc.
Domestic Washing Machines and Domestic Elec-
trical Appliances such as Jugs, Kettles, Irons and
Toasters are featured together with Domestic
Cooking Ranges. Also on display are Industrial
Motors of varying horse powers.
BANK OF NEW SOUTH WALES
Stand No. 33
Joining in the celebrations of the Victorian
Centenary is the oldest public company in Aus-
tralia the Bank of New South Wales, established
in 1817 which is also celebrating the centenary
of the opening of its first Victorian Branch on
April 15, 1851.
The "Wales" display at the Centenary and Jubilee
Exhibition will include many exhibits of historical
interest and early bank records, contrasting with
modern banking machinery from the present
Melbourne Office.
LEWIS BERGER & SONS (Vic.) PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 27
Berger Exhibit No. 27 will be a very colourful
demonstration stand. It will be divided into two
sections; one to cater tor Industrial Visitors. This
Unit will feature such things as Refrigerators,
Yachts, Telephones, Car Guards, Radiators, etc.,
ell painted with Industrial finishes. On the other
side will be featured a household paint demon-
stration, where a Master Painter will apply such
famous interior flat oil paints and enamels as
Kemtone, Matone, Synthelac Enamel, Pave-01, etc.
Attendants will be on duty to distribute colour
cards and answer any painting queries.
H. E. BREHAUT PTY. LTD.
Stand; Electrical and Radio Section
On display are the well-known "Helco" Motors
and Grinders.
The range of Electric Motors is from i to 15 h.p.
Grinding Machines range from 10 inch to 24
inch in the Pedestal type, and from 7 to 8 inch
in the Bench type.
Disc Grinders, Wet Grinders and Polishing
Lathes of Ii to 5 h.p. are also included in this
Exhibit.
BUILDERS STEEL FORM SUPPLY CO. LTD.
Stand No. 35
This exhibit includes Steelforms tor Concrete
Buildings, poured in situ, together with precast
concrete blocks also for concrete building purposes.
In the former case Steelforms have, over the past
25 years, proved to be more economical and re-
liable than timber form constructions. They are
available tor hire tor concrete wall and floor
constructions, also tor circular tank and silo con-
struction.
Precast concrete blocks can be obtained from
certain suppliers tor whom Builders Steel Form
Supply Co's Subsidiary B.S.F. Pty. Ltd. have
made the machinery under licence. These blocks
are made under a vibrating process which ensures
high strength concrete which is dense and perme-
able. The advantage of this type of block is in
its size which is such that it is quickly handled and
laid.
L. ©. BURLEY PTY. LTD.
Stand; Electrical and Radio Section
Exhibited on this Stand is the "Heatmaster"
Electric Washer Boiler. There are two models
a Cabinet Model with "Wringmaster" Wringer
and the Standard Model which is not equipped
with a Wringer. "The Heatmaster" washes as
it boils.
Also on display are "Heatmaster" and "Burley"
Automatic Electric Storage Bath Heaters. These
are of 14 and 25 gallon capacity suitable for
use in laundry, kitchen or bathroom.


Cawc£6aa& ffixofaolo
PPE-SHOW/NG Of 195/
"CZA33IC”
RAD/OCRAMS
i
m.
mm-
M
l\
M
cmic&OE
m
LTD
mio
• They incorporate the very
Record playing units, an
electronic improvement.
4th Floor, ALBANY COURT,
250 COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE
bracket to meet YOUR budget
nd Electrical Houses Everywhere
Leading Radio a
Also at a


BUTLER & MOSS
Stand : Home Builders' Section.
On this Stand is a working model of the famous
Supaluvre Window. It is the only louvre window
to which clip-on fly screens may be fitted on the
inside, A range of the various types of glass
available for Supaluvres is on display.
A further exhibit is the non-corrosive, bronze wire,
spring roller fly screen. It will fit any type of
window including box-frame, wooden casement,
steel casement or Supaluvre.
Butler & Moss are also distributors of a complete
range of "British" brand Paints, Enamels, etc.
These are on the Stand for your inspection.
CHAMBER OF MINES OF VICTORIA
Stand No. 28
The display presented by the Victorian Mines De-
partment and the Victorian Chamber of Mines
commemorate 100 years of gold mining during
which time an amount of over 73 million ounces
of gold have been won.
The progress of gold mining is shown in photo-
graphs and models, and emphasis is given to the
great part gold mining has played in building
up the industry of this State.
Several engineering firms have supplied interesting
items of mining equipment and working models have
been kindly loaned by the Museum of Applied
Science of Victoria.
T. N. CHUCK WIRE FENCE & GATE CO. PTY.
LTD.
Stand: No. 4.
The display by the T. N. Chuck Wire Fence &
Gate Co. Pty. Ltd., of 3 Barkly Street, Brunswick,
is of particular interest to Home Lovers and
features a representative selection of Antique-
style Wrought Ironwork, created and produced in
their Works by the noted craftsman, Rocco Vas-
sallo. These articles are all individually designed
and manufactured and include a Hall Set (Hat
and Coat Hangers, Mirror Frame and Telephone
Table), Occasional Tables, Standard and Table
Lamps, Exterior Hanging Lamps, Chandeliers, Fire
Screens and Fire Dogs, Picture Frames, etc.
CLASSIC RADIO PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 55
Cavalcade Radio Pty. Ltd. exhibit on Stand No.
55 an interesting selection of NEW model radio-
phonograph Combinations by "Classic".
The unusual variety of designs takes full advantage
of modern Cabinetry, from compact tablegrams
to luxurious Cocktail Bars. Latest technical de-
velopments manifest themselves in Tonal Quality
and the smooth performance of New Model Auto-
matic Record-Changing Units. New type sap-
phire needles are claimed to give high fidelity
pick-up for hundreds of playings, without changing
the needle. Dual speakers, tonally balanced, have
also been included in some of the new "Classic’*
models.
COATES & CO. PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 57
Exhibit 78 displays up to the minute domestic
gas appliances. This display has been arranged
by Coates & Co. Pty. Ltd., with a view to close
inspection of all appliances on show. New World
Gas Cookers, Electrolux Gas Refrigerators, Rheem
Hot Water Storage Heaters and High Beam Gas
Fires are all on display for individual inspection.
For the housewife there is the added interest of
cookery demonstrations which are arranged at
convenient intervals daily. These are being con-
ducted by Miss Plummer, cookery demonstrator for
Coates & Co. Pty. Ltd., and the ladies are cordl
ally invited to take full advantage of her services
and wide experience in cookery generally.
COHEN BROTHERS (Home Furnishers) PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 20
Lounge, Dining and Bedroom Suites, Kitchen Fur-
niture, Carpets, Linoleums and Bedding occa-
sional furniture, mirrors and art lighting.
Established 1854 (nearly 100 years) Cohen Bro-
thers is nearly as old as Melbourne, and as Victoria
celebrates its Jubilee this firm prepares to celebrate
its centenary.
Our display features reproductions of the old, to-
gether with creations that are of the most modem
design. Only the future can tell whether these
modern designs will survive in popularity as have
some of the classics we now feature.
With a background of nearly a century we claim
to be equipped to handle the requirements of
every type of home-maker. A cordial invitation to
inspect our showroom is extended to the public.
For those who wish to purchase but who are not
able to take delivery, storage facilities are avail-
able. Credit and lay*by accounts are arranged.
COLORGRAVURE PUBLICATIONS
Stand No. 39
The Herald-Sun Privilege Book Department (Stand
No. 39) provides in the Exhibition itself a depot
where the general public may examine the current
range of Australian and Overseas Privilege publi-
cations, normally only available to readers of fhe
Herald and the Sun-News Pictorial. For the period
(Continued on page 47)


mssm
i *
IB » n ,
P %
Hand- Wrought
Antique Ironwork
by
(Shuck}
Fashioned with loving care by Rocco Vassallo, the
attractive Hanging Lamp illustrated is but one of
this noted craftsman's many fine examples on show
at this exhibition.
See Chuck’s Display at STAND No. 4
T. N. CHUCK W!RE FENCE & CATE CO. PTY. LTD.
3 Barkly Street, Brunswick, N.lO. 'Phone FWIIIB
;;;


of the Exhibition only, this privilege will be ex-
tended to visitors to the Exhibition. Selected Privi-
lege Books are available at current prices, and
reservations will be taken for forthcoming publi-
cations.
COMBINED SERVICES EXHIBIT
Stand: In Garden Area
The three Services Navy, Army and Air
Force have combined to present an impressive
exhibit. The Army have provided a Staghound
Armored Car, a 5.5 Medium Gun, a 6-pounder
Anti-Tank Gun, a 3-inch Mortar, Anti-Tank Pro-
jectiles for the us© of Infantry, a Medium Machine
Gun, a Workshop Lorry and other small Lorries
and items of Infantry Equipment.
The R.A.A.F. ore responsible for a display of
Aircraft, and the Navy have contributed many
spectacular exhibits.
Young men will find much to interest them in this
display and they may secure first-hand informa-
tion in respect to the opportunities the Services
offer to those seeking a career.
COMMONWEALTH SCIENTIFIC & INDUSTRIAL
RESEARCH ORGANISATION
Stand No. 32
From the wide range of research activities under-
taken by the Commonwealth Scientific & Industrial
Research Organisation for the promotion of Aus-
tralian primary and secondary industries, ex-
amples have been drawn from the divisions of
Building Research and of Forest Products and
from the Wool Textile Research Laboratories.
Lightweight Concrete, Bituminous Roofing
Material and Boards made from sawdust and
shavings will become Increasingly important for
houses and furniture. Electrical Moisture Metres
permit an accurate control of Kiln drying of
timber.
The wool industry will benefit from a sheep-brand-
ing fluid which does not stain the wool and from
the development of unshrinkable wool.
SIDNEY COOKE LIMITED
Stand No. 15
Sidney Cooke Limited, of Brunswick, Victoria, one
of the early pioneers of Nail-making in Australia,
have on display two of the world's fastest nail
machines producing Brads and Shoe Nails at a
rate of 720 nails per minute. It is interesting to
compare this speed with the rate of 200 per
minute for Brad machines which had just become
available at the beginning of this century, and
which wore considered very fast at that time.
The Company also has displayed a range of
products from its five factories in Melbourne,
Sydney and Adelaide, which include Wood Screws,
Metal Thread Screws, Rivets, Washers, Tacks,
Corrugated Fasteners, Roofing Nails, 6rads and
Clouts..
DEPARTMENT OF SUPPLY
Stand : On Stage.
The Department of Supply when considered in
relation to the Navy, Army and Air Force may
well be regarded as the fourth arm of defence.
As a result of the operations of this important
Department, the three fighting services are sup-
plied with vital necessities ranging from under-
clothing to Aircraft.
In the last two world wars, the superior capacity
for production of the Allies has been a deter-
mining factor in the ultimate achievement of vic-
tory.
Various sides of defence production are shown
in the Department’s Exhibit. A full scale model
of the latest target type Jet Aircraft is on dis-
play. This Australian-designed machine provides
the ideal target essential for high-speed gunnery
practice in these modern times.
Of special interest is a two-stage Rocket of
advanced design.
W. A. DEUTSHER PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 37
Here may be seen working a modern method of
threading screws entirely automatically. This
method of screw making is used where very large
quantities are required. The machine in use is the
latest type from England, and works at a speed
of 120 pieces per minute, at a high efficiency
rating.
After threading, the screws are checked for dimen-
sions on an optical projector alongside.
Also shown in this exhibit is a large range of
sample component parts manufactured by the
exhibitors, W. A. Deutsher Pty. Ltd.
E.G.A. (S. Cunningham) PTY, LTD.
Stand No. 60
The E.G.A. Co. have their exhibition on Stand
No. 60. Over the years quality and value have
built their reputation as Melbourne's leading
hardware store. Apart from being the biggest
importers of tiles, baths, etc., the E.G.A. Co, are
the manufacturers of the famous "Silver Grill"
electric stovettes, "Crown" stainless steel sinks
and other well-known names in gas, electric and
fuel coppers, bath heaters, glass shower screens
and sink heaters. Let the E.G.A. plan your
kitchen with all our modern conveniences, style
your bathroom with fittings in delightful pastel
shades and establish your laundry with labour-
saving articles. Room heating and lighting or©
also a feature. All Items displayed on Stand
No. 60.
COLORGRAVURE PUBLICATIONS
(Continued from page 45)


Supplier* of tlnnnnphnne*. ftoeo >l.s
Radio (lixl T<lei'i»inn Appiimhis
To Hi* Majextu ttx Kh>v.
iSA
“HIS MASTER’S VOICE”
(fAe orfaMnui&A of
RADIO RECORDS TELEVISION
See the H.M.V. Exhibit in the Electrical and Radio Section
Southern States Distributors :
E.M.I. SALES AND SERVICE (VIC.) PTY. LTD.
167 Flinders Lane, Melbourne, C.l.
o


E.M.I. SALES & SERVICE (Vic.) PTY. LTD.
Stand: Electrical and Radio Section
Displaying all the latest models of His Masters
Voice Radio and featuring the RS3A De Luxe
Auto Radiogram.
Of special interest to visitors is the display
of raw materials which are used in production
of records and records in various stages of manu-
facture. These are now made in a recently
acquired Victorian factory at Prahran.
ECKERSLEY & SONS PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 53
Manufacturers of commercial and domestic
refrigerators.
Types demonstrated:
Coldstream Master Model domestic automatic
refrigerator.
Coldstream 15 cu. ft. two-door storage refrigerator.
Crusader Mode! JK4S Industrial Water Cooler.
Crusader Bobtail soda fountain.
Coldstream Cafe-type combination refrigerator.
Koldflo instantaneous beer cooler with bottle
cooler and automatic glass washer.
Zeroheat top glass delicatessen, grocer's display
refrigerator.
Coldstream frozen food self-service counter.
Eckersley hotel and cordial maker s bottling outfit.
ELECTRICAL INDUSTRIES EXHIBIT
Stand: Electrical and Radio Section
The Industries Exhibit is in two sections. One on
the edge of the balcony shows the methods of
distributing electricity and its application for
transport, medicine, industry and the farm.
Demonstrating one application in general use on
poultry farms, you will see young chickens being
reared.
The Tramway Exhibit clearly illustrates the way
in which a tram is driven by electricity.
A full working model of Railway Crossing Signals
Is also included in this display.
Electrical Arcs will be shown in some sections of
the Industries Exhibit.
The other Section of the Exhibit shows the appli-
cations of electricity in the home. Owing to staff
difficulties and the need to conserve power, this
will not be in operation. However, visitors will
be amazed at the extensive use for electricity and
appreciate the manner in which the burden of the
housewife and even that of her husband have
been lightened by electrical servants.
ELECTROLUX PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 26
The display of Electrolux Pty. Ltd. is devoted en-
tirely to the latest streamlined Model 40 Electro-
lux Vacuum Cleaner which is manufactured at the
Company's works in South Yarra, Victoria.
This Cleaner has a comprehensive range of nine
attachments for all home cleaning purposes. Each
of these attachments may be seen in actual use
on Stand No. 26.
A most interesting feature of the Exhibit is a
transparent working model of the Cleaner in which
can be seen the complete motor and turbine
fan assembly. This will have special appeal for
those who are mechanically minded.
Electrolux Model 40 carries a 2-year guarantee.
ENWITE PTY. LTD.
Stand: Home Building Section
On display is a range of Enwlte Specialties
including:
"Thermex" Heat Resisting Paints.
"Ferrosol" Rust Killing Paint
"Brynac" Enamel for Bath, Bathroom and Kitchen.
"Rustex" for removing rust from metals.
"Texit" Waterproofing Compound.
"Solvit" Paint Remover.
"Aqualac" Wood Putty.
"Proofem" for waterproofing Boots and other
leather goods.
"Episeal" for protection of the skin of Chemical
Workers.
"Dermacream" for treatment of dermatitis.
EXCELL & JONES
Stand: Home Builders' Section
Featuring the Electrosonic Clothes Washer which
washes by sound wave. It is Australia's own
washing machine and patents for it have been
taken up in all parts of the world.
The manufacturers claim that, owing to its ex-
clusive sound wave feature, the "Electrosonic" is
able to handle woollens and delicate fabrics as
readily as the regular items which are found
In the household wash.


• FOR ATTRACTIVE FLOORS
• FOR ECONOMY, TOO . . .
/
• *
I
■r~ r 'J
*r
n:
ssssas
*
tj \ L :
i,.
Feltex i- tin- comjtleteh -;iti-l\ iiig door
covering—long-lasting and offering a wide
choice of most attractive colour shades.
And because of its extra width Feltex is so
economical Marbled Feltex Is 72"
wide; Plain Feltex is 72" and 54"
wide; Patterned Feltex Is 54" wide.
It lake* onb :
81 yards of FELTEX to cover a room 12' x 12?
11 yards of FELTEX to cover a room 16' x 12' '
16h yards of FELTEX to cover a room 18’ x 16'
Consider, too, that when you buy Feltex
you buy' a branded product with a reputa-
tion extending back over a quarter of a
century.
FELTEX
FELT AND TEXTILES OF AUSTRALIA LTD. Manufacturers of Marbled, Plain and Patterned Feltex.


FELT AND TEXTILES OF AUSTRALIA LIMITED
Stand No. 23
Manufacturers of Marbled, Plain and Patterned
Feltex Floor Coverings will have on display at
Stand No. 23 not only samples of the entire range
of shades now available in the different types,
but will show you how this economical and long-
wearing material will appear when laid in the
lounge or nursery of your home.
The new Patterned Feltex is evoking much interest
in the minds of those people who are having to
provide Floor Coverings for new homes or have a
replacement programme in mind. Make sure you
see their Stand.
FOWLERS VACOLA MANUFACTURING
COMPANY LIMITED
Stand No. 56
This stand contains a comprehensive display of
Fowlers Vacola Fruit Bottling Outfits, Bottles and
Accessories.
Housewives in particular will find this display
very interesting, for the majority have long since
realised that the bottling of fruits and vegetables
is one of the most pleasant and profitable tasks
of modern housekeeping.
The big variety of bottled fruits makes this one
of the most interesting and attractive stands at
the Exhibition.
A qualified demonstrator is in attendance through-
out the day and night to attend to your enquiries
regarding any aspects of Fruit Bottling.
GARDNER WAERN & CO. PTY. LTD.
Stand No, 42
Exhibits of various forms of mechanical power
Transmission equipment are arranged to demon-
strate as near as possible to actual operating
conditions. Various types of ball and roller bear-
ings, complete and sectionalised to show features
of construction, clutches, as applied to industrial
applications, reduction gear-boxes, and variable
speed units, belt and chain drives, are included.
On the same stand, but representing a different
department, are examples of equipment for the
mechanical handling of goods. These include
stacking and transporting machines, and electric
vibratory equipment designed to facilitate and
control the flow of all kinds of materials through
hoppers, chutes, etc., and the application of the
vibratory equipment to packing tables, feeder
conveyors and feeder machines.
GERRARD WIRE TYING MACHINES CO.
PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 58
Gerrard Wire Tying Machines Co. Pty. Ltd. is
exhibiting at ground floor Stand No. 58 its range
of tensional steel strapping machines and packing
room supplies.
These machines range from a baby model to strap
small packages for parcels post to heavy-duty tools
handling steel strappings of up to 2 tons break-
ing strength. Included Is a fully automatic power
wire tying machine capable of double strapping
3000 cases per day.
Gerrard offers an expert advisory service on pack-
age reinforcement based on its wide experience
of packaging all types of products manufactured
by Australia's secondary industries.
GESTETNER PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 38
..Gestetner Duplicators have been manufactured in
London since 1881. Branches in all parts of the
world attend to distribution. In Australia. Ges-
tetner provides facilities for stencil making by the
use of any style of printer's type, blocks, and even
photography.
To increase the usefulness of Gestetner it may
be used for circulars, internal forms of all types,
illustrated catalogues and price lists.
Gestetner construction includes automatic pro-
cesses for inking, paper feed and counting copies.
Prints are produced at an easy speed of 80 copies
per minute. Coloured inks are readily available.
Machines are available with electric or hand drive.
See the Gestetner in operation at Stand No. 38.
A. H. GIBSON (ELECTRICAL) CO. PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 59
The display is limited to three major electrical
appliances, two of which will be demonstrated.
The Oprim Electric Ironing Machine is an appli-
ance that few.women have, but all woman want
because it eliminates the drudgery of hand ironing.
The O.G. Dishwasher is designed not as a luxury
appliance but for use by the average householder.
There is no installation cost with this appliance,
simply plug into a power point.
The Xcel Electric Range Is designed to combine
work-saving efficiency with kitchen beauty.


©see
0. G. ELECTRIC DISHWASHER
At last, an automatic dishwashing machine at a price
to suit the family purse. At only 69 guineas the O.G.
requires no additional plumbing, uses only a small
quantity of hot water and can be easily moved from
one position to another. Of baked enamel finish the
0.G,, in one operation, washes and rinses a complete
dinner service for a family of 6 in only 5 minutes.
XCEL ELECTRIC RANGE
The best looking, best cook-
ing electric range available.
Separate grilling compart-
ment. Modern smart styling.
Extra large oven. Vitreous
enamel finish. Roomy stor-
age compartment. Easy to
clean. Compare it with
others costing more then
you’ll realise that XCEL
has everything at a lower
price.
OPRIM ELECTRIC IRONING MACHINE
Direct from England comes this revolu-
tionary new ironing machine. The
OPRIM takes the hard work out of
ironing. The ease, the comfort, the “pro-
fessional” finish that OPRIM gives puts
it far ahead in its field. The OPRIM
is better and we can prove it to you.
A. H. GIBSON (ELECTRICAL) CO. PTY. LTD.
416 Bourke Street, Melbourne, MU 8121.


M. A. GIBSON (Specialties) PTY, LTD.
Stand No. 12
Featured are two models of the famous Hoover
Electric Cleaners. The outsize bag type with the
patented Hoover agitator which "beats as it
sweeps as it cleans", and the cylinder-type which
js a straight suction cleaner. Be sure to see
them demonstrated before leaving the Exhibition.
Of particular interest is the Hoover Washing
Machine, which is also on display. It has unique
principles including the renowned Hoover Pulsator,
which gives extra agitation, thus ensuring a whiter,
brighter wash.
GLOBE ELECTRICAL COMPANY
Stand: Electrical and Radio Section
Two new Units of outstanding interest, the "Heat-
master" Washer Boiler and a Table Top Storage
Bath - Hot Water System of 25 gallon
capacity make their first appearance on this Stand.
The Washer Boiler Is equipped with a detachable
Wringer and both Units are finished in durable
porcelain and baked enamel,
O. GRANOWSKi
Stand No. 48
A spectacular exhibit, featuring the mechanical
demonstration of an all-Australian product of
Centenary and Jubilee Year, 1951 the O.G.
Portable Electric Domestic Dish-Washer in
marked contrast to methods of domestic dish-
washing in the years 1920 and 1950.
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN
Stand No. 51
Pakistan, within three years of her exisience, has
built up a sound economical structure of national
finance, administration and industry, and given
ample proof of her ability to take her rightful
place amongst the free nations of the world.
Pakistan Is forging ahead; predominantly agricul-
tural, many new industrial enterprises are being
rapidly set up, thus creating immense oppor-
tunities for reciprocal trade. Pakistan’s exports,
to name only a tew, Include jute, cotton, raw
wool, hides and skins, tea, cement and sports
goods. Representative specimens of Pakistani
craftmanship displayed at the stall include surgical
instruments, cutlery, sports gear, silverware, foot-
wear, leatherware, camel skin lampshades, copper-
ware, embroidered ladies' handbags, and national
wearing apparel. Many of these are the produc-
tion of Pakistan Cottage Industries, which play
a vita! part in the economy of the country.
GRAHAM INDUSTRIES
Stand No. 2
An interesting display of "Silovac" Electrical
products is on Stand 2. Known as the "cleaners
with a tradition", Silovac Vacuum Cleaners, both
barrel and bag type, are worthy of your inspec-
tion, as are the "Silovac" Floor Polisher and the
"Silovac Domsew" Sewing Machine Motor.
One corner section of this Stand is devoted to
an attractive display of Ailsa Graham Art Fab-
rics. These are produced in a varied range of
designs.
J. R. HALL & CO.
Stand No. 40
This Stand has been laid out to display machines
of interest to Furniture and Cabinet Makers,
Builders and Joiners. Special prominence has
been given on the stand to a display of Metal-
clad machinery manufactured in Great Britain.
This display is a selection from the large range
manufactured by Metalclad Ltd. and is on dis-
play for the first time in this country. They are
all of the very latest design and some were first
shown at recent British Industries Fairs.
Other imported machines and equipment are the
Vonnegut Brush Backed Sander, Pacera Pneumatic
Sanding Drums and the new Bridges Portable
Electric Belt Sander.
Local machines have been drawn from most States.
Amongst those shown are the popular Meco 24-in.
Sawbench and 32-in. Bandsaw, and a selection
of the excellent Habco range.
A. G. HEALING LTD.
Stand No. 29
The Healing Stand is divided into four sections
to feature the main products of the company.
The first section features Healing Radio port-
ables. mantels, consoles and radiograms.
The second section features the Thor Automatic
Washing Machine with regular demonstrations.
{Continued on page 55)


n
ROAD MACHINERY
For CONSTRUCTION and MAINTENANCE
There’s a Malcolm Moore Road-Machinery unit to handle every size and sort
of job—each one a proven asset showing real savings in lower maintenance
and running costs and higher efficiency. Typical examples
(above) The RM2, a medium power-weight "Roadmaster" Grader.
(below) The HL-14, a hydraulically operated Shovel Loader.
You are invited to inspect
the full range of
MALCOLM MOORE ROAD MACHINERY
in Garden Area \
JUBILEE INDUSTRIAL EXHIBIT"/'*
T
*
wmmm
mS
mmm
*
ms
mm
■
MALCOLM
MOORE IS
ROAD MACHINERY DIVISION
FUll PARTICULARS FROM :VIC.: Malcolm Moore Pty. Ltd.. 300 City Rd. f Sth.
Heib. N.S.W.: Malcolm Moore (N.S.W.) Pty. Ltd ~ Chatsworth House, 1-7
Bent St., Sydney. Q'LAND.: Crossfe & Cameron Pty. Ltd., Sun Insurance
Bldgs., Eagle St., Brisbane. SOUTH AUST. Power Plant Ltd., 100 Currie
St., Adelaide. WEST. AUST.; Lynas Motors Pty. Limited, 981 Hay St., Perth.
TAS.: City Motors (1933) Pty. Ltd., Hobart. Launceston, Burnie & Smithton.


A. G. HEALING LTD.
(Continued from page 53)
The third section is a model Kitchen and Includes
all the labour-saving devices that can help the
modern housewife.
And the fourth section will appeal to the younger
generation, for here are Healing Cycles Juve-
nile roadsters and gleaming racing cycles.
HECLA ELECTRICS PTY. LTD.
Stand: Electrical and Radio Section
In the year 1900 Mr. C. W. Marriott, who is now
Governing-Director of Hecla Electrics Pty. Ltd.,
manufactured his first electric radiator. He was
one of the pioneers of the Electrical Appliance
industry in Australia, and from a small beginning
he has seen the organisation expand to its present
vast proportions. The Company now has 300
regular employees and its appliances are well
and favourably known in all parts of the Com-
monwealth.
A mass display of Hecla Appliances, some of
which will be in operation, may be inspected at
this Stand.
HENDERSON'S FEDERAL SPRING WORKS LTD.
Stand No. 16
Henderson's Federal Spring Works Ltd., with
Head Office and Factory at Alfred Street,
North Melbourne have a fine display of
hundreds of the thousands of various standard
and special engineered parts and equipment they
design and manufacture each year for use by the
Public; Commercial and Industrial Enterprises;
Road, Rail, Sea and Air Transport; Government
Departments, Municipalities, etc. Every year a
colossal amount of the highest-quality materials
goes into making Henderson's products for ex-
ample, over 1600 miles of wire are used for mak-
ing the millions of spring washers required.
Founded nearly 60 years ago Henderson’s policy
has always been, ''lf it's worth making at all it's
worth making best of all". That this policy has
been fully achieved will be obvious upon inspeci-
ing their display.
The Hendy Trailer & Caravan Pty. Ltd. Display
Showrooms and Sales are at 325 Victoria Street,
Melbourne features their 2-wheel Trailer, the
Hendy "Senior". With a carrying capacity of up
to 15 cwt., and with 6.00 x 16 tyres and tubes, this
is the trailer that is serving hundreds of satisfied
users. Hendy's latest 2-wheel Trailer, the "Junior",
is of identical engineered design and sturdy con-
struction to its big brother, the Hendy "Senior".
It is fitted with 5.50 x 16 tyres and tubes the
ideal small trailer for light English cars. Both
trailers are notable for their extra large carrying
space for bulky and awkward loads coach-built
body of kiln-dried timber, with reinforced flared
sides easily operated tailboard precision-
built Henderson’s Axle Assembly, and easily oper-
ated tubular coupling. They are the perfect trailers
for primary producers, tradesmen, storekeepers for
quick delivery work, and for carrying camping and
hunting gear.
IMPERIAL CHEMICAL INDUSTRIES OF
AUSTRALIA & NEW ZEALAND LTD.
Stand No. 25
The factories of 1.C.1. in Australia use simple raw
materials such as coal, air, water, limestone and
salt to make a wide range of the chemicals re-
quired by both our agricultural and secondary
industries.
Because of the large number of products manufac-
tured it is possible to display but a few at this
Exhibition, The Stand shows how 1.C.1. materials
such as plastics, dyestuffs, leathercloth, etc., are
used by other manufacturers in Australia to make
a wide range of articles considered necessities
of modern everyday life.
A small-scale screen-printing demonstration will
be given at intervals illustrating one of the
methods by which floral and other designs are
applied to fabrics for use as materials for dress
goods and furnishings.
The working exhibits will also show two of the
methods used in making plastic beakers from
1.C.1. moulding powders and "Perspex" sheet.
Both of these products are widely used by manu-
facturers of plastic articles in this country. An-
other demonstration shows how 1.C.1. "Survon"
tennis strings which are made from nylon are
used in the stringing of racquets.
Almost every home in Australia possesses a piece
of furniture which Is upholstered with 1.C.1. leather-
cloth, and the display of an upholsterer at work
using this materia! in making furniture will be of
interest to everybody.


*Stand Vo. 12a
■Hi
■M
■
mmm
■
■
ipl
am
«C
H
11111 l
mSm
K-M Standard Residential Steel Windows
Will Make Your New Home Attractive
LARGE STOCKS NOW AVAILABLE
PROMPT DELIVERY 58 TYPES FOR YOUR SELECTION
Glideaway All Metal Garage Doors
(Pat. i
See the Ease and Efficiency of Operation of these Doors now on Display
★
For Further Information, Write, Phone or Call
® K-M STEEL PRODUCTS LTD.
Corner Cremorne Street and Horcourt Parade, RICHMOND, E.l.
Phone ; JB 1361 (7 lines)
Representatives in All States.


INDUSTRIAL ENGINEERING LTD.
Stand : In Garden Area.
The exhibit of Industrial Engineering Ltd. is divided
into four main sections. They are:—(a) "Cater-
pillar" Earth Moving Equipment, including the
"I 12" Motor Grader a diesel type road grader
and the "Traxcavator", which is a front-end
loader. A Hydraulic Control Unit and a Cable
Control Unit are included in a range of parts
and attachments which is also on display.
(b) Garage Servicing Equipment such as Wheel
Alignment Machines, Compressed Air Outfits.
Hoists and Hand-operated Hydraulic Presses up
to 100 tons.
(c) A range of "Vickers" Oil Hydraulic Pump and
Valve Units.
(d) A rang© of "Harland" Centrifugal Water
Pumps.
The Traxcavator, an Air Compressor, Brake Drum
Lathe and a "Harland" Pump will be seen in
actual operation at the Stand.
INTERNATIONAL CORRESPONDENCE
SCHOOLS (Australasia) PTY. LTD.
Stand: Home Builders* Section
The International Correspondence Schools, origin-
ators of the Home Study method of instruction,
are the largest and oldest educational institution
of their kind in the world. The knowledge gained
from nearly sixty years' experience, and a student
enrolment exceeding five million, enables the
Schools to impart a rare skill to the preparation
of the 400 courses in. commercial, technical and
professional education for which they coach. See
the I.C.S. display in the Home Builder’s Section.
K-M STEEL PRODUCTS LTD.
Stand No. I2A
This exhibit features the latest design in Residen-
tial Steel Windows and demonstrates how K-M
Windows improve the appearance of the home.
Fifty-eight standard sizes have been developed by
K-M Steel Products Limited and approved by the
Standard Association of Australia and are 100
per cent. Australian Manufacture.
A large range of windows are available for prompt
delivery to suit architectural requirements.
All K-M Standard Windows have a protective
costing of "Bondseal" (Reg.), This special K-M
process has revolutionised the protection of steel
windows, and no extra cost is involved.
All steel sections are produced in K-M Rolling
Mill at Richmond, Victoria, from billets supplied
by Broken Hill Proprietary Coy. Ltd.
K-M "Glideaway" (Patented) All-Metal Garage
Door is demonstrated in our exhibit.
KELVINATOR AUSTRALIA LIMITED
Stand No. 14
On display is a rang© of world-famous Kelvinator
Refrigerators. Electric- and Kerosene-operated
Household Models are worthy of inspection.
Kelvinator are extensive manufacturers of Com-
mercial Refrigerators. A Commercial Unit of
modern type is on view.
Also present on this Stand Is the Kelvinator
Washing Machine.
KEMPTHORNE PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 41
Kempthorne Pty. Ltd. display many interesting
exhibits. A range of "Kempthorne" Home Light
Ing Fixtures is particularly noteworthy as they
are decorated by an exclusive process. In effect
glass is hand-painted with coloured glass which
is fused into the parent body at red-heat.
The "Lumeray" Bed Lamps and Exterior Electric
Lanterns are worthy of your inspection.
Also on display is a selection of Exhaust, Desk
and Wall Fans. These are available in both Fixed
Head and Moving Head types. The "Kemp-
thorne" application of +he gyratory movement to
the fanhead of the Moving Head type is new to
Australia. Here we have a second dimension
introduced into the movement of air delivered
by the fan. There is an "up and down" as well
as a "side to side" movement.
McCOLL ELECTRIC WORKS LTD.
Stand: Electrical and Radio Section
The exhibit includes Standard 3-phase Electric
Motors up to 25 h.p., Special Electric Motors for
special applications, Single-phase Motors from i
to 2 h.p.. Low Voltage Generators.
MALCOLM MOORE INDUSTRIES LTD.
Stand: In Garden Area.
The Exhibit includes Road Machinery and Power
Farming Equipment.
Road Machinery: (a) Malcolm Moore Shovel-
Loader Model HLI4 for shovelling and loading
earth, sand, aggregate and other bulk materials,
(b) Roadmaster Grader Model DRM4 a
medium power-weight grader for general purpose
road construction and maintenance.
Power Farming Equipment: (a) Cub Dozer
Dozer blade attachment for Fordson Major Agri-
cultural Tractors. (b) Rabbit-Ripper attach-
ment for Fordson Major Tractor for destroying
rabbit warrens, (c) "Weathergard" Tractor Can-
opy a n all-weather canopy for Fordson Major
Tractors. (d) Tractair an Air Compressor
Unit mounted on the Fordson Major Industrial
Tractor, (e) Farm Welder a Fordson Major
Tractor mounted mobile Welding Unit for the
fa rmer.


Stand No. 3
m
*
m
mm
¥T*%
lf ;
m
ft*
re
2* *
•&S
»lisl
IaMP
\
/
I
„y .<
%
f
MMI
riKsH
//«. f
fmtmtsummt
THOS. MITCHELL & CO. PTY. LTD.
Cr. Lonsdale and Elizabeth Streets, Melbourne
Factory; Victoria Street, West Brunswick


MASONITE CORPORATION (Aust.) LTD.
Stand No. 6
The exhibit of the Masonite Corporation gives a
graphic description with photographs of several
aspects of a great All-Australian industry. The
production of Masonite Presdwood is shown stage
by stage, from natural timber, through exploded
wood fibres and wetlap to completed board.
Also on view are actual samples of the various
products for which the Masonite Corporation is
renowned, together with numerous photographs
showing some of the thousand uses for which
Masonite Brand Products are ideally suited.
Masonite Concrete Formboard in use on building
projects throughout the Commonwealth is shown
in a series of interesting photographs; there is
also a section devoted to the Masonite re-affore-
station programme. Also included in the exhibit
are examples of finished wall panels, which are
now available for the home market.
MECHANICAL HANDLING LTD.
Stand No. 61
Mechanical Handling Ltd. formerly Magnus
Industrial Equipment for 17 years have an
Exhibition on Stand No. 61, which shows a small
range of Mechanical Handling Equipment, manu-
factured and distributed by them, based on three
main features, i.e.:—
(1) To increase production at a lower cost.
(2) To save floor space and manpower.
(3) Make the work of any labour that has
to be employed as light as possible.
There is no industry which does not require aids
to their handling problems, as in every case,
goods must be moved from one point to another,
and the cost of moving these materials in the
course of manufacture or distribution, can repre-
sent well over half the cost of productiou.
Mechanical Handling Ltd. will be pleased to show
you, on their Stand at the Exhibition, how these
savings can be obtained.
METROPOLITAN GAS COMPANY
Stand No. 47
One of the most interesting and important pro-
jects ever to be undertaken in Victoria is the
production of gas from brown coal at Yallourn
whence it will be pumped through pipes to Mel-
bourne.
Although the richest gas-making coal in the world
is found at Maitland, in New South Wales, the
new project will help to make Melbourne inde-
pendent of outside sources of coal supplies.
The brown coal will be surface-mined at the Open
Cut, dried and compressed In briquettes from
which the gas will be manufactured and pumped
over 90 miles to the city.
At the Gas Industry's Stand just on the right
of the Main Entrance the story of this project
is told in detail and many of the important by-
products obtained from the manufacture of coal
gas are illustrated and explained.
THOS. MITCHELL & CO. PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 3
In a spacious factory which covers 5 acres, Thos.
Mitchell & Co. Pty. Ltd. manufacture an extensive
range of Brushware for the Australian market.
They have been established since 1876. The fac-
tory is located at Victoria Street, West Brunswick,
but the Head Office and Warehouse is at 360
Lonsdale Street, Melbourne.
Mitchells, the Brush People, are renowned for their
Feather Dusters. Mops, Millet Brooms, genera!
Brushware and Painters’ Brushware An assortment
of their products is on display.
Of special interest to visitors is the Automatic
Brush Machine which is in operation. It boros
on one side and staples the fibres into the holes
on the other side. Don't miss this outstanding
Exhibit.
L. J. MORGAN
Stand No. 8
Stand No. 8 L. J. Morgan, manufacturer of
Stainless Steel Household and Hospital Equip-
ment, is situated on the south side wall towards
the south-western corner. Displayed on this stand
you will find "Radiant" Stainless Steel Equipment
such as Stainless Steel Sinks for Home and Hos-
pital Installations, also the latest in stainless steel
laundry troughs together with such valuable ex-
hibits as Electrical Bain Maries and Hot Presses.
T. S. NETTLEFOLD & SONS
Stand No. 9
Smith & Wellstood Ltd.. Bonnybridge. Stirling-
shire. Scotland, have been In the front ranks as
designers and producers of cooking ranges and
heating stoves since 1854.
Over the years, this Company has developed, and
today there are thousands of workers engaged
In the Works, which cover an area of twenty-five
acres.
(Continued on page 61)


Presenting on t
StandNo.36
s*
- _
• fyjecv ’‘Pope" Electric Washing Machines
• yjetv range of "Pope" Electric Motors
* % V "Pope" Centre-court Electric Mowers
• f/U "Pope" Wimbledon Mowers
"Pope" Wringmaster Clothes Wringers
Engineered and manufactured. by POPE PRODUCTS LIMITED, Perth: Adelaide; Melbourne: Sydney: Brisbane


The Esse Heat Storage Cooker Is an entirely
British invention, patented in all principal coun-
tries of the world.
T, S. Nottlefold & Sons Pty. Ltd, are the Aus-
tralian distributors and have branches in Mel-
bourne, Sydney, Adelaide and Perth,
NETTLEFOLDS PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 49
On display are two machines making wood screws.
The first trims and slots the head, and the second
cuts the thread. These machines are typical of
those used by Nettlefolds Pty, Ltd. for the manu-
facture of wood screws at their Works in Sun-
shine. The display includes a full range of these
screws in various metals and finishes.
In their Screw Department the Company also
manufactures Machine Screws and Nuts, Cotter
Pins, Screw Eyes, Rivets and Washers, and Self-
tapping Sheet Metal Screws. An interesting
example of one of the smallest machine screws
in existence is shown under a microscope.
A newly-developed department manufactures En-
gine Valves by the modern extrusion method,
while the Bright Bar Department turns out a wide
variety of Bright Bolts and Nuts and special
parts for the Motor and other industries.
Other items made by the Company at its Sun-
shine and Sydney Works are Cycle Spokes and
Nipples, Safety Pins, Bobby Pins, Paper Fasteners,
while stocks of Gate Hooks and Screw Hooks are
also carried.
NUNAWADING TIMBER CO. PTY. LTD.
Stand; Home Builders' Section
Designed 1o replace weatherboards end bricks at
a lower cost, Masonry Veneer is all that is de-
sired by the Home Builder. This machine-made
cement file, waterproofed with Nonporite, is per-
fect for all weather and climates, os it will ex-
pand and contract accordingly, and will not
crack or fracture in any manner. Masonry
Veneer is in one size only. I 8" x I0i" x li", and
has a fine sandpaper-like finish. All cutting neces-
sary for windows, doors, etc., Is done by an
abrasive power-driven saw. The structure forms
itself into a solid by the use of cross timbers and
the interlocking of each unit.
OGDEN INDUSTRIES PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 52
Ogden Industries Pty. Limited's stand has been
designed to give prominence to the five main
sections of products manufactured by them at
their East Oaklelgh factory, i.e., Sebco Masonry
Anchors, Lockwood Locks, Ogden Lawnmower and
Garden Accessories. Electrical products, Hypo*
dermic Syringes.
The full range of well-known Lockwood brand of
Padlocks, Night Latches, Door Closers, etc., occu-
pies a large section of the display, and will prove
of interest to architects, builders and others.
HERBERT OSBORNE PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 19
Stand No. 19, occupied by Herbert Osborne Pty.
Ltd., will be of particular interest to those con-
nected with Engineering and Woodworking Trades,
as the exhibit consists of Lathes of Australian and
English manufacture, Milling and Shaping
Machines, together with a specimen range of high
class Woodworking Machinery.
A recent invention which Is of the utmost import-
ance to Die-makers, Fitters, Advertising Display
Manufacturers and in fact all concerns doing small
precision work in practically any material, is the
Swedish Diprofil, now displayed for the first time
in Australia.
This high-speed, electrically-driven filing and cut-
ting machine weighs only one pound and has a
remarkable range of applications,
M. PERSIN PTY. LTD.
Stand: Home Builders' Section
M. Persin Pty. Ltd, are manufacturers of "Persin-
ware" goods. This well-known brand is well worth
looking for when purchasing Kitchenware, Builders
and Cabinet Makers' Hardware, and Travel Goods
Hardware. An attractive range of the Company's
products is on display. A most interesting work-
ing exhibit will be in operation on this Stand at
regular intervals during the Exhibition.
POPE PRODUCTS LIMITED
Stand No. 36
Of interest to housewife, handyman and industrial-
ist is the Pope Products Limited Exhibit, which
dynamically demonstrates over 25 years of pro-
gress of this important Australian secondary in-
dustry. Displayed for the first time in Victoria
is the ''Pope" Electric Washing Machine, a perfect
wedding of beauty and efficiency, and the range
of recently developed "Pope" Totally Enclosed
Electric Motors (fractional to 10 h.p.), "Pope"
Wringmaster Streamlined Clothes Wringers, and
"Pope" Electric and Hand-model Lawn Mowers
complete a gay display.
T. S. NETTLEFOLD & SONS
(continued from page 59)


INDUSTRIAL SERVICE ENGINEERS PTY. LTD.
Manufacturers of
A full range of Garage and Automotive Equipment and Service Tools, Oil
Hydraulic Power Pumps and Control Valves, under licence from Vickers
Incorporated of Detroit, U.S.A., Air Compressors and Truck Equipment.
STEELWELD PTY. LTD, (Tic. & N.S.W)
Builders of
Heavy Earthmoving Equipment including Motor Graders, Bulldozers, Hydraulic
and Cable Controls, Logging Winches and Front End Loaders under licence from
the Caterpillar Tractor Company, Hyster Company and Trackson Company, all
of U.S.A.
HARLAND ENGINEERING ABSI. PTY. LTD.
IN ASSOCIATION WITH THE HARLAND ENGINEERING CO., SCOTLAND
Manufacturers of
Centrifugal Pumps for Water Supply and Irrigation, Boiler Feed, Sewerage Pumps
and Paper Pulp Stock, also Mine Dewatering Pumps and Impulse and Reaction
Water Turbines.
GRIMWADE CASTINGS PTY. LTD.
Founders of
Meehanite High Duty Iron Castings.
INDUSTRIAL PATTERNS PTY. LTD.
Engineering Patternmakers.
FERROUS FORGINGS PTY. LTD.
Medium Weight Steel Forgings of ail kinds.


POSTMASTER-GENERAL'S DEPARTMENT
Stand No.
The development of Post Office Communication
services In Australia is truly a romantic story
linked firmly with the history and development
of a nation.
From 125 years ago right down to today the story
is one of a dogged determination and loyal
service on the part of postal pioneers in every
field of communication service. In every way
it is a record of progress and achievement.
Today the hug© organisation known as the Post-
master-General’s Department is responsible for
satisfying the communication needs of all sections
of the commercial, industrial and social spheres
by the provision of efficient and modern postal,
telephone, telegraph, mall, air mall and wireless
services. Relative equipment in these particular
fields will be on display.
RED POINT TOOL CO. PTY. LTD.
Stand: Electrical and Radio Section
This Company Is claimed to be the only producer
of Portable Electric Tools in Australia, Their
products are marketed under the trade name
"SHER".
A fine exhibit shows how steel, copper and alu-
minium are with great skill transformed into the
finest Electric Tools.
The latest models of streamlined Portable Electric
Tools can actually be seen in operation, and are
free to be used by those who may be interested.
Exhibited are the following Tools: —Portable Elec-
tric Tools from i" to I" capacity, Hand Grinders.
Sanding and Polishing Machines, Bench Drills,
Toolpost Grinders, Valve Seat Grinders, Tapping
Attachments, Fractional Horse-power Motors,
Portable Saws, Sirens and Paint Spray Equipment.
REGENT TRADERS PTY. LTD.
Stand No, 17
Regent Traders Pty. Ltd. are specialists 5n the
supply of Building Materials which are normally
in short supply. They have combed the world’s
markets to ensure that the urgent needs of many
home builders and property owners will be filled.
On display are such items as Galvanised Iron
and Water Piping, Asbestos Sheeting, Wall Board,
Imported Cement, Nalls and Sanitary Ware.
Also on the Stand for your inspection are Steel
Fencing Posts, Fencing Wire including 8 and 10
gauge, Barbed Wire, Wire Netting in four sizes,
and Sheep Netting.
Be sure to call at Stand 17 when visiting the
Exhibition and discuss your problems with the
attendant on duty.
RENOWN AND PEARLITE PTY, LTD.
Stand No. 34
"Greig's" Honey, Renown and Pearlites most
popular product, Is being featured at Stand 34.
The demand for "Greig's" Honey has been built
up over the years and is now considered the lead-
ing brand In Victoria.
Last year we introduced honey packed in attrac-
tively designed tumblers. The resulting demand was
even greater than was anticipated. These
tumblers will be the main attraction of our display.
All those interested in a first-class honey are
welcome to taste "Greig’s" Honey at the Stand.
"RING-GRIP" ELECTRICAL ACCESSORIES
Stand: Electrical and Radio Section
Manufactured by Frederick L. Cook & Williams
Pty. ltd.. "Ring-Grip" Electrical Accessories are
featured on this Stand. The Company claims that
as a result of Its manufacturing ability and effici-
ency it has now become the largest producer of
Electric Light Switches, Lamp Holders, Ceiling
Roses, etc., in the southern hemisphere.
Focal points of the Exhibit are:—
(a) Skilled operator converting at speed many
precision engineered components into
Switches.
(b) Intimate glimpses of Factory production.
(c) An intriguing Switch Testing Machine straight
from the "Ring-Grip" laboratory.
(d) The first public appearance anywhere in the
world of e Power Point which is claimed to
be completely safe "Ring-Grip's" latest
contribution to electrical development. You
will be given the opportunity of testing this
amazing Unit.
H. ROWE & CO. PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 21
H. Rowe & Co. Pty. Ltd., electrical manufacturers,
of Victoria and New South Wales, make a large
and varied range of electrical appliances which
are shown on Stand No. 21.
Rowco Buitrlbution System.—This is an electrical
reticulation system suitable for use in supplying
electric power to too! rooms and engineering
shops where a multiple of small electrified tools,
such as lathes, drilling machines, etc., are used.
Industrial Reflectors.—The Company manufactures
a complete range of Industrial lighting units which
have been carefully designed. They are used
for outside lighting both for yard and sport.
A complete range Is shown on the Stand.
(Continued on page 65)


REGENT TRADERS
a
»
*
£xt end a (dordiai
d^nuitutii
ton
To Visit Their Exhibit
at Stand No. 17
Our Experts will he in attendance
to assist you with your material supply
problems.
★
CEMENT
We Import
BUILDING STEELS
GALVANIZED IRON
WATER PIPE
BATHS
FENCING POSTS
NAILS and SCREWS
WALL BOARD
ASBESTOS SHEETS
SANITARY HOUSE SETS
WIRE NETTING
SHEEP NETTING
BARBED W IRE
FENCING W IRES No. « and 10
★
REGENT TRADERS PTY. LTD.
Sales Office;
598 Chapel Street, South Yarra.
Phones: BJ 1285, BJ 1286.
Bulk Store:
63 Hanna Street, South Melbourne.
Phones: MX 5741, MX 5743.


Fluorescent Lighting.—Units of the most modern
type manufactured by the Company are on dis-
play.
Industrial Holders. —On display Is a complete
range of porcelain industrial lampholders cover-
ing the range of 8.C., E.S. and G.E.S., of a very
high quality.
Industrial Plugs and Switches. —A complete range
of industrial plug sockets, switches, etc., which
have been manufactured in Australia for many
years, forms a prominent part of the display.
Heating Units.—A complete range of electric
convection heaters for use In industry, hospitals,
offices, etc., forms an interesting display.
A. G. SACHS & CO.
Stand: Home Builders' Section
Mirrors, In artistic frames of shatterproof sur-
face. According to Patent Applications these
frames are composed from sectional pieces of
highly ornamental cast (not containing plaster)
joined to form a continuous surround. The size
and shape of the frame is dependent on the
number, length and shape of the various sections
used and can be varied almost without limit.
Special finishing processes secure highlight effects
in gold, silver, brass, ivory or mahogany.
The display also comprises deep bevelled sec-
tional overmantels in peach, amber, green, blue,
amethyst or silver, plain framed 3-fold toilet
mirrors and others in plain designs.
We wish to add that the limits of our display
stand will not allow us to show every colour of
frame or glass mentioned above. We shall dis-
play certain objects and have fractional samples
of all others.
JOHN SACKVILLE & SONS PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 45
Of interest to visitors is a modern type of Button
Hole Machine which is in operation on the Stand.
The button hole is thread-bound and cut almost
in the same operation.
Also displayed for your inspection is a varied
range of Men's Garments. There are selections
in Sports Coats, Lounge Suits, and the well-known
"Sackgrip" patent-waist Trousers. "Aquagab”
wool and "Raymac" Cotton Gaberdine Overcoats
are featured. These John Sackville brands are
known throughout Australia. They always live up
to the Company's high reput^ion.
SELIGSON & CLARE (Australia) LTD.
Stand No. 24
In modern printing practice the emphasis rests
on small high-speed automatic presses which not
only give maximum production per manhour, but
are simple to operate and maintain.
On Stand No. 24 Seligson & Clare (Australia)
Ltd. are exhibiting three Heidelberg Automatic
Platen Presses, more than 37,000 of which are
now in use throughout the world. Two of these
machines will be demonstrated printing under
working conditions.
Also being exhibited Is the Printomatic Cylinder
Press, Britain's most successful printing press of
post-war design,
SEMAK VITAMIZER (Trevor Trading)
Stand No. 7A.
The Semac Vitamizer presents a new. modern
approach to cooking in Australia, although this
treatment is well established in the United States.
Smooth, creamy Soups and Desserts with new
flavour combinations; Cakes, Scones and delicious
Sandwich Spreads; Coffee Grinding, Crushed
Fruits and Puddings; Ice Creams and Drinks are
all a moment's mixing in a Vitamizer.
The Vitamizer may be seen on Stand 7A.
G. C. SINGLETON & CO. PTY. LTD.
Stand: Home Builders' Section
On this Stand are two unusual working exhibits.
There is a working model of a Carpet Beater Star
Dust Wheel. This equipment was originated by
the Singleton organisation. Also on display is a
model of the latest type of Carpet Sewing
Machine.
Singletons have been specialists in carpet main-
tenance since 1914. They are maintaining carpets
in some of the largest theatres in the Common-
wealth. The Company is represented in every
State except Queensland, and the extent of its
present operations is well illustrated by the fact
that approximately 80,000 carpets are treated
annually. Outstanding service to the public is
claimed to be the basic reason for the rapid
expansion of this firm.
SMALL HOMES SERVICE
Stand: Home Builders' Section
On the Small Homes Service Stand are exhibited
sketch designs of nearly 100 modern small homes.
Any of these Is suitable for erection by amateur
(Continued on page 67)
H. ROWE & CO. PTY. LTD.
(Continued from page 63)


»!pR-OOVi
is 6
ti ¥ tKC3 FvOCH
I
ass?
PLAN
! Sf
:* eßC!eeife.T !■■
J. ?MPI:W ff OWV'tA »i-t ■■' <,
4- COOfcti*.
t JjWfc 5-
« 4Tfi»Al
?, *»*« TK&i&*
8 HT«
Me Spooner house
This illustration represents an architect's im-
pression of a Spooner Home, which has been
slightly modified from its original form to
suit our Australian conditions.
A British Spooner Pre-Buiit 3-Bedroom Home
has been erected In the Garden Area at the j
Centenary and Jubilee Exhibition.
Further information will be found on the j
opposite page of this Catalogue. J


home-builders. They are planned for simplicity
of structure and economy of material.
The Small Homes Service is operated by the Royal
Victorian Institute of Architects in conjunction
with the "Age". It is constituted to give archi-
tectural advice to all home builders. Working
drawings and specifications prepared by architects
are available for £5. Any home building problem
may be taken to the Small Homes Service. There
is no charge for interviews with members of the
R.V.I.A. The city address is 4th Floor of the
Myer Emporium Building in Post Office Place
telephone Central 4711.
SOUTHERN CROSS PORCELAIN CO. PTY. LTD.
Stand: Electrical and Radio Section
This Company is displaying a wide range of
porcelain and bakelite products for the electrical
trade.
Porcelain and bakelite connectors, both heavy-
duty and light-duty, are specialised lines of South-
ern Cross Porcelain Co. Pty. Ltd.
This firm also make the well-known brand of
"Essco" domestic electrical appliances, including
their Junior Cooker, Stovette, Electric Jug, Travel-
ling Iron, Radiators; also Tubular Heaters tor
buildings, drying ovens, etc.
SOUTHERN PLANNING & DRAFTING CO.
Stand: Home Builders 1 Section
Southern Planning and Drafting Company, of 109
Commercial Road, South Yarra, have a display of
plans, home designs, etc. Their trained staff in
attendance will be pleased to discuss home build-
ing problems.
SPECIALTY TYPEWRITER SERVICE
Stand No. 7
Depicted on this Stand is the story of the progress
made in the manufacture of Typewriters since
1870.
"Everest" Typewriters are claimed to have reached
the highest peak with the new 1951 Models. They
represent, it is believed, the most advanced
design, qualify of workmanship and superior finish
ever offered to the Australian public.
Machines of various carriage lengths, In addition
to the very latest in Portables (Model 90), avail-
able in Pica, Elite and special types and in vari-
ous colours for immediate delivery.
SPOONER HOMES (A’ASIA) COMPANY.
Stand : Garden Area.
Scientific ingenuity has given our modern world
the benefits of mass- or flow-production methods
countless examples of which we use or see from
day to day.
Flow-production Is exemplified by the airliners in
our skies, the cars on our roads, refrigerators,
radios, clothing, food processing, furniture and
other forms of manufacture from our great daily
newspapers to the humble clothes peg.
It seems incredible that science has for so long
left almost untouched the actual constructional
methods of home building, and yet everyone will
readily agree that all these mass-produced
articles which make our daily lives easier, smoother,
faster, would be well outside the price-range of
the average citizen if they were produced by
the same outmoded principles which govern con-
ventional timber or cement building practice—
and would they be any better made? On the
average, most certainly not.
Every hand-built job which has to be cheapened
to supply a maximum price-range or to appeal in
a highly competitive market is subject to such
factors as the varying skills of each operative, the
difficulty of the Individual to benefit from inter-
nal research and inherent weaknesses In certain
individual productions due to lack of standardisa-
tion.
Now, after twenty-one years of research and
development, the British Spooner Pre-Built Home
provides a unique example of the successful and
scientific adaption of flow-production methods to
provide quickly and simply erected, attractive
and well-finished family homes at economical
cost.
Spooner flow-production methods and precision
machinery working to previously unattainable
narrow limits turn out mathematically accurate
sections for assembly on site. Timber is kept at
its correct moisture-content during manufacture,
reducing shrinkage or expansion in later months
to a minimum.
All materials coming Into the Spooner factories
are carefully inspected and ideally stored until
use. No handling on site is necessary, with the
result that all components go straight to the
assembly line in prime condition.
With Spooner Pre-Built Construction science has
come to the Building Industry in a big way, not
as a stop-gap or emergency measure, but as a
new and better way to lower cost, better homes.
The first Spooner Pre-Built Homo to be im-
ported to Australia specially for display at the
Victorian Jubilee and Centenary Exhibition
arrived by the R.M.S. "Mooltan" on March 10.
Landed by special arrangement on the llth,
erection was totally completed on the site out-
side the Exhibition by the 15th.
The work was performed by only five skilled
(Continued on page 69)
SMALL HOMES SERVICE
(Continued from page 65)


Visit
STAND No. 24
Equipment and Supplies for:
All Printing and Paper Converting Processes
Also
Packaging, Labelling and Filling Machines
SELIGSON & CLARE (AUST.) LTD.
567 Little Bourke Street, MELBOURNE, C.l
Stand No. 19
★
HERBERT OSBORNE PTY. LTD.
"HEIDELBERG HOUSE" 567-9 LITTLE BOURKE ST., MELBOURNE
Phone : MU 4437.
★
LATHES MILLING MACHINES
SHAPERS DRILLING MACHINES
GRINDERS WOODWORKING MACHINERY
"DIPROFIL" FILING MACHINES
ENGINEERS' SMALL TOOLS
"STIHL" CHAIN-SAWING MACHINES


building operatives under the supervision of Mr.
Arnold Bridge, A.R.1.8.A., A.RA.I.A., consulting
architect to Spooner Homes (A’asia).
The simplicity of assembly of the Spoorver Pre-
Built is very well demonstrated by the fact that
neither the architect nor building operatives had
any previous experience in erection of Spooner
Homes.
Invitations to inspect the interior of the Exhibi-
tion Spooner Home may be obtained on applica-
tion to Spooner Homes (A'asia), 478 Exhibition
Street, Melbourne. Telephones: FJ 6032-6038.
JOHN W. STAMP PTY. LTD.
Stand: Electrical and Radio Section
The Stampco Electric Washer, displayed on the
stand of John W. Stamp Pty. Ltd,, of Carlton, is
a post-war development of the' conventional
wringer-type washer, manufacture of which the
Company pioneered in Australia in 1929. Statistics
show that in America this type of washer continues
to enjoy highest popularity. Working models are
on display.
The Stampco Washer is produced by an old-
established firm of engineers, some of whose other
products are illustrated by photographs on their
stand. These products, such as hydraulic presses
and pumps and other machinery, are used in the
chocolate and confectionery, abattoir, textile and
other industries.
STANDARD TELEPHONES & CABLES PTY. LTD.
Stand: Electrical and Radio Section
S.T.C. presents some notable achievements in the
Radio Receiver Field together with latest domestic
labour-saving appliances.
Particular interest is centred on the S.T.C. F.M.
Mobile 2-Way Radio Telephone system which
enables the user to ring up his office or any
telephone subscriber from the installation in his
car, wherever he may be travelling. Fleet owners
will readily appreciate the advantages of this
high-speed inter-communication.
Business Executives will also be attracted to the
novel office Indicators with their bright circles
of light which eliminate the many interruptions
that beset every busy office.
STANDIS FURNITURE PTY. LTD.
Stand No. I
Stand No. I displays furniture by Standis Furniture
Pty. Ltd. against a background of polished panel-
ling by Wm. Mallinson & Sons Ltd. In conjunction
with Standis Furniture Pty. Ltd.
The main body of panelling is of genuine Burma
Teak, polished natural colour, whilst the roof sup-
ports are encased in examples of panelling in
Queensland Walnut, English Walnut, Sapele
Mahogany and Makore.
The furniture displayed includes a Queen Anno
Style Dining-room setting in Burr Walnut, and in
the Chippendale style in Curl African Mahogany
are two Bedroom Suites, a Dining-room setting and
a complete suite of office furniture.
In addition, there is a magnificent Hall Table,
the top of which is supported on the outstretched
wings of an eagle, and to please the children
there are two complete rooms of miniature fur-
niture, accurate in every detail down to the dove-
tailed construction of the drawers.
THE STATE ELECTRICITY COMMISSION OF
VICTORIA
Stand No. 22
Vividly illustrating the great undertaking which
today provides power and fuel for Victoria, the
exhibit of the State Electricity Commission des-
cribes with pictures, maps, diagrams and models
how the Commission is developing Victoria's
natural resources in the Latrobe Valley and in the
Australian Alps, and is harnessing the flow of
irrigation waters to provide still more hydro-
electric power.
A large model of the Latrobe Valley demon-
strates the location and extent of the great brown
coalfields in what is now in process of becoming
one pf the most important Industrial regions in
the Commonwealth.
Under the heading, "Power from Brown Coat", the
exhibit shows the operation of the famous Yal-
lourn open cut, where brown coal is won, and the
great Yallourn power station, Victoria's main
source of electricity,.
More pictures tell the story of work now in pro-
gress to double the output of Yallourn power
station within the next tew years. An artist's
impression shows Yallourn of the future when
extensions to the power station are complete.
Other pictures graphically illustrate the develop-
ment of the Yallourn open cut, where the Com-
mission is installing giant new machines to in-
crease production of brown coal from the present
figure of over six million tons to 10 million tons
a year.
A separate section, "Fuel from Brown Coal ,
describes the operation of the pioneer briquette
factory at Yallourn and goes on to show by
diagram and picture the great new project, on
which the Commission is now engaged, to build
four large new briquette factories and develop
a new brown coal open cut at Morwell, six miles
from Yallourn.
(Continued on page 7i)
SPOONER HOMES (A'ASIA) COMPANY
(Continued from page 67)


m/i
m
[SI
WERNER
-the Oldest Name in the Refrigeration Industry
ri m i
150-ton ammonia,
enclosed vertical
single-acting
compressor
Atmospheric
water-cooling
tower
Confectioner s
combination
cabinet
Manufacturers of
a complete range of
Refrigeration Equipment
Ammonia Vertical Enclosed Com-
pressors (Standard Single _ Acting and
Custom-built Double suction Multiple
Effect. Capacity Control. Two Stage).
Condensing Units—Water and Air cooled.—
Methyl-Chloride c Freon. Compressor Units -
Methyl-Chloride or Freon. _ Unit Coolers for
Ammonia and Methyl Chloride, etc. Condensers
Evaporative, Shell and Tube. Atmospnenc.
Pipe Colls—AH Types and Sizes. Finned Coils.
Receivers. Tanks of all Types and Sizes. Natural
and Mechanical Draft Water Cooling UmC.
Cooling Towers. Chamber Doors and Hard-
ware. Built-in Sectional Cool Chambers. Valve
and Fittings. Cabinets of all Types.
Beverage Flow-Coolers. !ce-making
Machinery. Air-conditioning
Equipment.
•V
Stainless steel draught
beer and bottle
cooling cabinet.
Multi-door storage
cabinets
Forced draught
"DIMCO" unit
cooler.
CHARLES HOPE
domestic refrigera-
tors.
STAND
5
10 h.p. condensing
unit
R. WERNER & CO.
PTY. LTD.
Showrooms; 602 LT. COLLINS ST., MELB. MU 646!
Works: 54-86 BURNLEY ST.. RICHMOND. JA 1161.
. ... at the
JUBILEE
EXHIBITION


Another section deals with "Power from Water’,
A comprehensive diagram explains the Commis-
sion's Kiewa hydro-electric project, as it wil!
operate in 1956, by which time six power stations
will generate annually enough electricity for the
needs of about one million people. Views of
Bogong Village and Mount Beauty Village show
the attractive model townships which the Com-
mission has constructed for its married employees
at Kiowa.
The exhibit includes views of the Sugarloaf/Rubi-
con group of hydro-electric power stations, and
illustrates new projects to harness for hydro-
electric power the greatly increased flow of irri-
gation water from the projected new Eildon Reser-
voir on the Goulburn River, and irrigation water
from Hume Weir on the River Murray.
One important section of the exhibit is devoted
to the distribution of electricity in Victoria. This
section illustrates how the Commission’s network
of power lines at present spreads through two-
thirds of the area of the State where four-fifths
of the population reside. Large-scale maps show
the areas of supply, which include over 700
centres of population.
SUBURBAN TIMBER SUPPLY
Stand No, 30
Lominex over the past few years has increased
in popularity until today it Is considered an essen-
tial in the modern home.
Suburban Timber Supply, of 416 Burke Road,
South Camberwell, have specialised in the press-
ing, fabricating and installation of household
equipment expertly covered with Laminex.
Tables and chairs in glittering chrome, Laminex
dresser tops, and many other examples of this
material are of interest.
An outstanding exhibit is an old wooden kitchen
table which has had half of the top Laminexed,
and the other half left in its original condition.
The transformation has to be seen to be believed,
A. P. SUTHERLAND
Stand: Electrical and Radio Section
Featured on this Stand are Westinghouse Electri-
cal Appliances for domestic use, Refrigeration
including the latest fast-freeze Units, Wafer
Coolers for industrial use. These are all products
of the "EMAIL" group. Also on display are Elec-
tric Fans for industrial and domestic purposes,
and Washing Machines.
An engineering display of special interest com-
prises a photographic record of the Pocket Live
Power Station, This portrays both the industrial
and scientific application. A Precipitron Unit
used for precipitation of dust is on view.
R. & C. THOMAS PTY. LTD.
Stand: Electrical and Radio Section
The electro-technical achievements of ASEA
throughout the world are featured as the back-
ground of ASEA's manufacturing activities in
Australia. Their modern Works at Tottenham,
Victoria, specialises in the production of squirrel
cage induction motors and the main exhibit
stresses the importance of dynamic balancing, a
process to which every Australian made ASEA
rotor is subjected.
The complete range is shown of 3-phase ASEA
machines up to 5 h.p., both drip-proof protected
and totally-enclosed, fan-cooled motors, all avail-
able in a variety of dispositions. These machines
coupled to a gear box forming an integral unit
and providing low output speeds, has wide appli-
cations of particular interest.
JOHN THOMPSON (Autf.) PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 43
This old established firm of Engineers and Boiler
Makers is exhibiting on Stand No. 43 one of their
Patented Submerged Ash Belt Conveyors, a Front
Plate fitted with Feeder for Spreader Stoker Fir-
ing, and a model of a Modern Water Tube Boiler
arranged for firing with pulverised fuel.
A large number of "John Thompson" Ash Con-
veyors have been installed throughout Australia,
enabling ash to be removed in a simple straight-
forward manner with elimination of dust, dirt and
labour.
The application of Spreader Stokers is of particu-
lar interest in Victoria for the burning of raw
brown coal. The Stoker is silent in operation and
handles coal without difficulty, either wet or dry.
TOYNES ROTARY CLOTHES HOIST PTY. LTD.
Stand: Home Building Section
The rotary clothes hoist is now recognised as an
essential piece of equipment for the home. House-
wives acclaim its compactness and appreciate Sts
labour-saving qualities and neat appearance.
Toynes have been manufacturing clothes hoists
for more +han 28 years. They hold patents which
control unique principles in both mechanical and
hydraulic types of rotary clothes hoists.
A New Precision-built Model is exhibited, (t has
just been released and represents a revolutionary
advance In clothes hoist construction. External
parts are rustproof, being of non-ferrous metal.
All joints are water-tight. The handle has a neater
Continued on page 73
THE STATE ELECTRICITY COMMISSION OF
VICTORIA
(Continued from page 69)


FAST ACTION with TRACTION
This TOURNADOZER ».n^..>
and other Construction Equipment
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE TUTT-BRYANT RANGE WILL BE DISPLAYED ON
THE TUTT-BRYANT STAND AT THE COMMEMORATION INDUSTRIAL FAIR.
You are invited to visit the Tutt-Bryant display and see for yourself
the Australian-built Tournadozer, which is the world's highest
powered and most versatile bulldozer, and the other lines of Con-
struction and Industrial equipment selected from the huge range
handled by the Tutt-Bryant organisations throughout Australia,
Units for Earthmoving, Roadmaking, Tanksinking, Mining, Quarry-
ing, Materials Handling, Ditching, Excavating, Loading, Logging,
Drilling, Bituminous and Concrete work, are part of the range.
• ADELAIDE • BRISBANE • MELBOURNE • NORTHERN
TERRITORY • PERTH • SYDNEY • TOWNSVILLE
DON'T MISS THIS DISPLAY!
Largest Supplier of Construction Equipment in Australia.
SERVICE CENTRES THROUGHOUT AUSTRALIA


finish and is of improved design. There are general
design improvements.
The Hydraulic type, which is operated by water
pressure, may be controlled either by foot valves
or stop taps. The inclusion of special, large gears
in the Mechanical type ensures a sate, easy lift.
Overseas architects have stated Toynes Hoists are
unrivalled throughout the world for design and
quality of construction.
There are two standard sizes 16 ft. diameter
(giving 120 feet of line) and 20 ft. diameter (170
feet of line).
Remember that a Toynes Hoist is built to give life-
time service.
TUTT BRYANT (Vie.) PTY. LTD.
Stand: Garden Area.
Construction and Industrial Equipment.
Founded in 1938 as L. Tutt & Company, Tutt-Bryani
is now recognised as the leading organisation of
its kind in Australia and is the largest supplier of
construction equipment in this country.
Tutt-Bryant is playing an important part in the
development of Australia. The organisation has
brought to this country equipment which is at
present being used in all fields of construction.
The men directing the Company's policy have had
wide experience of the needs of industry, particu-
larly in the construction field. The team working
under them has been carefully selected tor ability
and experience.
In all mainland States there have been established
Subsidiary Companies with factories for assembling,
distributing and servicing the Company's products.
In Tasmania and New Zealand the Tutt-Bryant
organisation works through progressive dealers.
Tutt-Bryant has made agreements for Australian
production of equipment urgently required tor
projects such as open-cut coal mining, water con-
servation schemes, and other large construction
projects.
To grow from a small one-man agency into the
leading manufacturer and distributor in Australia
of Construction and Industrial Equipment, all within
the space of 13 years, is a clear indication of the
quality of the products distributed by Tutt-Bryant
and of the appreciation of its after-sales service.
R. WERNER S CO. PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 5
"Deep Freeze", the sensationally new process
originally evolved by the American fishing in-
dustry, is demonstrated on the R. Werner stand
in a unit designed expressly for the home. R.
Werner & Co. Pty. Ltd., the oldest end most
highly specialised refrigeration firm in Australia,
has carried out extensive experiments in the appli-
cation of "Deep Freeze" for domestic use. It is
a process which permits excess produce from the
home garden, and supplies of meats, fish, vege-
tables, fruit, etc., bought in the flush of the sea-
son, when quality is highest and prices lowest,
to be stored for long periods. Thus, a wide
variety to the menu is provided all year round.
Other interesting exhibits on the Werner stand
include refrigerated storage cabinets for con-
fectioners, butchers, hotelkeepers, cates, and home
use, and larger condensing units for application
in the general storage of foodstuffs for all types
of trades.
WILSON ELECTRIC TRANSFORMER CO.
PTY. LTD.
Stand; Electrical and Radio Section
The following exhibits have been manufactured in
Australia by Wilson Electric Transformer Co. Pty.
Ltd.:
(a) 300 K.V.A. Wilson Transformer.
(b) 22,000 volt single-phase, rural distribution
type Transformer.
(c) 35 Kilowatt Mercury Arc Rectifier.
(d) Various Instruments and Metering Trans-
formers.
Further items comprise:
(e) Ring-Main Switch Gear Unit consisting of
two Isolators and one oil Circuit Breaker
made by Yorkshire Switchgear & Engineer-
ing Co. Ltd., of Leeds, England, for whom
the Company Is sole Australian representative.
(f) Camshaft type On-Load Tapswitch by Fer-
ranti Ltd., of Hollinwood, England. Wilson
Electric Transformer Co. Pty. Ltd. is sole dis-
tributor in Australia for Ferranti Transformers
and Regulating Equipment.
(g) Mercury type Tapswitch.
(h) 50 K.V.A., 3-phase, 415 volt Moving Coil
Regulator.
(i) 2 K.V.A. single-phase 230 volt Moving Coil
Regulator.
(j) 50,000 volt Oil Test Set.
WILTSHIRES PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 50
Wiltshires are manufacturers of Artists' Materials
Including Water Colours, Indian Inks, Poster Col-
ours and Oil Colours. On this Stand they are
exhibiting Water Colours both loose and packed
in Porcelain Palettes, Poster Colours in individual
tubes or bottles and in sets for students, Art
Powder Colours which are ready for use. Indian
Inks for draughting, and Students' use and Artists
Oil Colours, A special feature are the demon-
strations of the use of colour by artists on the
Stand.
TOYNES ROTARY CLOTHES HOIST PTY. LTD.
(Continued from page 71)


Builders Steel Form Supply Co. Ltd.
Suppliers of Steel Forms for Concrete Construction
★
CONCRETE FOR STRENGTH STEEL FORMS FOR ECONOMY
For the past 25 years most larger Building Contractors have recognised the adaptability and
economy of our type of STEELFORM and have used it exclusively. Its type and construction
is in accordance with modern practice both in Australia and Overseas. A minimum of
skilled labour is required in its use. STEELFORM WORK consists of fabricated lightweight
sections of Mild Steel sheet rigidly braced. All formwork is accurately made. Its nature
and construction make it superior and more economical than other types, whilst it is capable
of almost interminable re-use.
STEEL FORMS CUT CONSTRUCTION COSTS
No building is too large or too small for STEELFORMS
SPECIAL UNITS are available tor construction of CIRCULAR SILOS. WATER TANKS,
UNDERGROUND TANKS AND STORAGES. KERB AND CHANNEL (Road Construction).
TROUGH FORMS {Tee Beam and Slab Construction).
★
Registered Office end Works :
-11 DAVID STREET, RICHMOND, VICTORIA Phone: JA 2084
olloiuroc
CONCRETE BLOCKS
High grode concrete blocks manufactured by the modern
Vibrating Process giving high strength and very low
absorption qualities.
These blocks bond in with red brick size and can therefore
be used for alterations and additions to existing buildings
as well as new structures.
Blocks of this type, made from imported cement, are
available for early delivery from the following companies;
SNIDER CONSTRUCTION COMPANY,
397 Little Collins Street, Melbourne MU 3709
VICON MANUFACTURING CO. PTY. LTD.,
Albert Avenue, Springvale UM 9509
VICON (TRARALGON) PTY. LTD,,
Jeanette Street, Traralgon Traralgon 488


urn
■wai—m
■ 191
■all
■
m
■
mm
■
MASONRY VENEER
Now Available for Exterior Wall Linings
% Suitable for Modern Homes, Factories and Garages. % Simple Fixing by nailing
Battens to a Gauge and the "Masonry Veneer" interlocks itself as a "Solid." #The
Structure has added Strength with the cross timbers bracing the wails.
SUPPLIED BY :
No cracking of walls with ex-
pansion joints.
No plastering necessary.
Walls that last for Genera-
tion*;.
Passed all tests and by-laws.
We Supply and Fix.
Superior to weatherboards
and more economical.
Fire Insurance compares with
that of brick.
Waterproofed with "NON-
PORITE" and 5" cavity.
No maintenance cost of paint,
etc.
NUNAWADING TIMBER CO. PTY. LTD. 361 Collins Street, Melbourne, C.l
Enquiries: 107 WHITEHORSE ROAD, BLACKBURN. WX 1211.
THE NEW WONDER-HEAT COMPANY PTY. LTD.
Stand No. 10
The Wonder-Heat home heating unit is scientifi-
cally designed to provide air-conditioning benefits
whilst retaining all the cheer of the traditional open
fire. Infinitely more than an ordinary firegrate,
Wonder-Heat draws in fresh air from outside,
warms it through a series of ducts and fins, then
circulates it to every corner of the room, ensuring
an even temperature throughout . . . Wonder-Heat
burns any fuel with absolute economy, and the
dear armour-plate glass door ensures perfect
safety—reduces cleaning to a minimum . , .
Wonder-Heat, as a complete unit, is simply in-
stalled in new homes and can, with equal success,
be applied to existing fireplaces.
WORMALD BROS. (South) LIMITED.
Stand No. 2 i
The range of equipment to be exhibited by
Wormald Bros. (South) Ltd, will be the "GRIN-
NELL" Automatic Sprinkler and Fire Alarm Sys-
tem; "Simplex" Chemical Hand Fire Extinguisher;
"LUX" CO-2 Type Hand Fire Extinguisher.
Their Building Equipment Division supply and in-
stall all types of Steel Rolling Shutters, Rolling
Grilles, Fire Underwriters' Fir© Doors, "Metaibilt"
Fire Doors, aii types of Bangor Sliding Door
Tracks and "Metaibilt’ 1 Door Frames.
Another Division is operating under the name of
Kitsch Company (Aust.) limited. This Division
handles "Kitsch" All-Metal Venetian Blinds and
"Kitsch" Curtain Rods, and manufactures these
products under licence from the well-known Kitsch
Company of America.
E. L. YENCKEN & CO. PTY. LTD,
Stand No. 44
E. L. Yencken & Co. Pty. Ltd., who are suppliers of
most of the requirements of the building trade,
have an unusual display stand.
This incorporates the latest trends In glass, decor-
ated with Sandblasted designs which are 5-ilumin-
ated by, various types of lighting and colour.
There are deeply Sandblasted designs etched into
the glass, with fluorescent lights hidden behind
columns of stainless steel; this projects the light
through the edge of the glass, softly diffusing the
design with light. The general design of the stand
is an island of glass surmounted with a revolving
glass sphere of many faces.
The floor ground this exhibit has been covered with
the new Asphalt tiles in a very modern design.


NETTLEFOLDS (PTY.) LTD.
MANUFACTURERS OF :
Wood Screws and Roofing Screws
Self Tapping Screws
Machine Screws and Pressed Nuts
Bright Bolts and Nuts and Special Turned Parts
Cycle Spokes and Nipples
Engine Valves and Pushrods
Rivets and Washers
Cotter Pins
*
STAND No. 49
*
NETTLEFOLDS (PTY.) LTD.
BALLARAT ROAD. SUNSHINE. W. 20
VICTORIA


FOR
it WINS All TESTS
3,
ranL p. nut
Official Caterer for Centenary and Jubilee Exhibition
Dining Room down passage to Right of Stage
rJiunclieon, Sea, an J 3 inner,
£ quof Served with Iff}eats, 10 a.m. - 6 p.m.
■k
SNACK BAR lor Quick and Tasty Meals,
REFRESHMENT BAR for all Classes of Drinks, etc.


JOHN THOMPSON
(AUST.) PTY. LTD.
★
312 FLINDERS ST., MELBOURNE
Manufacture and Install
• WATER TUBE BOILERS • LANCASHIRE BOILERS • ECONOMIC
& MULTITUBULAR BOILERS • TRAVELLING GRATE STOKERS
• SELF-CONTAINED AUTOMATIC STOKERS • SPREADER STOKERS
• PULVERISED FUEL EQUIPMENT »ASH HANDLING PLANT
• WATER TREATMENT PLANT.
Works situated at Geelong Rd,, West Footscroy, Melbourne
HONEY
THE ONE HONEY THAT IS TOP QUALITY
EVERY TIME YOU BUY IT.
COME AND SEE EXHIBIT AT STAND 34


LORD MAYOR'S FUND
Jor lf!f}etropoiit an an J Ck ariti
Office; 243 COLLINS ST., MELBOURNE
The Central Collecting and Distributing Organisation for our Metro-
politan Hospitals and Charities, comprising 23 Hospitals and Medical
Charities and 112 other Charitable Institutions.
The Lord Mayor's Fund works in the closest co-operation with the Hos-
pitals and Charities Commission. Its Executive and Council is com-
prised of representatives from each of our major Hospitals and from
every section of the business life of Melbourne.
Since its inauguration a total of £2,775,992 has been collected.
“Specific" donations to the Fund are forwarded immediately without
deduction to the Charities named by the donor.
Contributions to the “General" section of the Fund are distributed upon
a formula actuarily determined by the Hospitals and Charities Commis-
sion year by year.
ENDOWMENT SECTION.
Apart altogether from Legacies bequeathed to the Fund for immediate
distribution, bequests directed to the Endowment Section of the Lord
Mayor's Fund now amount to £49,097, and the interest from these
Endowments is distributed annually among all participating Institutions.
Established 1923. Incorporated under Lord Mayor's Fund Act 1930
Honorary Auditors:
DAVID FELL & COMPANY
The Lord Mayor of Melbourne,
Chairman and Treasurer:
Chartered Accountants (Aust.)
CR. THE HON. SIR JAMES DISNEY
Honorary Legal Advisers:
OILLOT, MOIR AND AHERN
Secretary:
F. R. BURTON, E.D., J.P.


NOTES


I
*****
M
'■.-.>• m
* ■&*****-
-
r*
-
*®feV
WKSHSMCT
•• :•:
Hor almost a century Cohen Brothers have continued
1 ■ •■ **•• -. „ <**£•&?
V %• 'sip** -iS&*W
. _ ~V»; -
to meet the demands of discerning home planners -
with furniture and furnishings of distinctive design
and quality that is unsurpassed in Melbourne.
wL*
..’ V, v v’v- ' . ■'
r :S
(HOME-H4WNISHERS) ;TT
*'■'■ - - % 1 ■ ■s • "
•"> , ■' •'•■ w ‘ ' ■■ ’ .
(Next fo the Myer Emporium).
Stand
20


hen high fidelity recording is heard. . .
YOU CAN BE SURE IT'S PYROX
#>
i l
003457 2
508 C
The PYROX -majjictafUL. RECORDER
A WORLD-FAMOUS ACHIEVEMENT OF PYROX PRECISION ENGINEERING
Other Pyrox Products:
Pyrox Diesel Fuel Injection Equipment.
Pyrox PA & PT Sparking Plugs.
Pyrox NA2SZ & NA32Z Gas Heaters.
Pyrox Flex-Seal Pressure Cookers.
Pyrox Sound 16 & 35 mm.
Pyrox Electric Refrigerators and Washing Machines.
Robert Bosch and American Bosch, Automotive Electrical Equipment.
PL-21-FP
PYROX LTD.,
14-36 Queensberry Street, Carlton, Victoria.
Phone : FJ 9121
