

NGARIMU
INVESTITURE
SOUVENIR
PROGRAMME


THIS BOOKLET IS A PROGRAMME, AS ITS COVER AND
TITLE-PAGE ANNOUNCE. BUT IT IS NOT MERELY A
PROGRAMME FOR THE PRESENT CELEBRATIONS, IM-
PORTANT AS THEY ARE ; FOR IN THE COMMENTS
AND TRANSLATIONS, AS WELL AS IN THE APPENDED
MATTER OF PART HI, THE OPPORTUNITY HAS BEEN
TAKEN TO PUT ON RECORD A GOOD DEAL OF
MATERIAL OTHERWISE UNOBTAINABLE, FOR WHICH
THERE HAS LONG BEEN A DEMAND. IT IS HOPED
THEREFORE THAT AS A SOUVENIR IT WILL HAVE A
WIDE APPEAL,


SOUVENIR
OF THE
NGARIMU VICTORIA CROSS
INVESTITURE MEETING
AND RECEPTION TO
HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR - GENERAL
SIR CYRIL NEWALL
G.C.8., 0.M., G.C.M.G., C.8.E., A.M.
WHAKARUA PARK RUATORIA
EAST COAST
6 OCTOBER 1943


PART ONE
RECEPTION BY NGATI POROU, TE WHANAU-
A-APANUI AND ASSOCIATED MAORI TRIBES
Commencing at 10.15 a.rn.
Welcome to Prime Minister and Party.
His Excellency, the Governor-General, Sir Cyril Newall
inspects the Guard of Honour consisting of officers and men of
the 'Maori Reinforcements Training Unit.
On arrival of Vice-Regal Party at the entrance to the marae
(a) Te Wero or Challenge to the visitors, who advance and
mount the dais.
(b) A warrior accompanying the visitors in turn challenges the
waiting recumbent Ngati Porou War-dancers who perform the
oldtime Peruperu or Tutu Ngarahu, which commenced the
ceremonial welcome to distinguished visitors.
(c) The introductory Weapon Drill— ‘A Ki Waikurekure, ha ! ’
solo Whiti! Whiti! chorus E !
s. Kumekumea!
ch. Totoia !
s. Kumekumea !
ch. Totoia !
A e to ra kite tahataha,
A e to ra kite taparere,
Nga kokako huataratara
Waikurekure ha !
A ki Waikurekure ha !
A ki Waikurekure ha !


COMMENTS
.2/ (a) and (b). In former times the parties or matua were drawn up
a considerable distance apart to permit of charging into position when
challenged. The challenger, an expert from the hosts or tangata
whenua, would advance to the visiting party. Buick (Waitangi—Ninety-
Four Years After ) thus describes the challenge or wero ceremony :
“ Some yards in front . . . were two leaders who created no small amuse-
ment as they pirouetted along, grimacing weirdly at the heavens above
and at the earth beneath, violently swinging their taiahas the while.”
The challenger, a fast runner, would then dash at speed to within a
few yards of the visitors, throw a stick on the ground, then turn and
run back to his own party at top speed. The challenged visitors would
then advance behind their fastest runner, who would endeavour to
overtake and sometimes did catch the retiring challenger. In ancient
days the victor killed the chase, but in the mimic representation of
later days the kill was simulated.
(c) ‘A ki Waikurekure ha! ’ First performed with koikoi or spears by
the East Coast tribes at the reception to the then Duke and Duchess
of York, later King George V and Queen Mary, at Rotorua on 15 June
1901. The description will be found on p. 125 of Royalty in New
Zealand. It was a preliminary to the great war-dance with which the
Ngati Porou were wont to strike terror into the hearts of their foes in
all their wars.
The following is a free rendering into English of this ancient com-
position :
Arise ! Arise !
Draw it hither ! Drag it thither !
Draw it hither ! Drag it thither !
Draw it to the edge of the cliff,
Drag it to the brink of the precipice !
The serrated plumes of the chequered kokako
Ah to Waikurekure ! Ah to Waikurekure ha !


(,d) Peruperu : ' Kia kutia ! Au ! Au !
s. Whiti ! Whiti ! ch. E !
s. Ka paahi Itari ! Ka poharu Tiamani !
Ka miere Tiapani!
ch. Ko to arero tena
E whatero i mua ra,
I o rangi koroke whakakapohautia,
Kei te poharutanga, pou ! pa !
s. Ka tohe au, ka tohe au—
ch. Ka tohe au ki a Hitara,
Ki taku karaka i whakaura i te waru,
E tu nei kati kawana !
s. Kia kutia ! ch. Au ! Au !
s. Kia wherahia !
ch. Au ! Au !
E ! kia rere atu te kohuru
Ki tawhiti titiro mai ai
Ae ! Ae ! Aa !
Here is a version in English of the Peruperu above :
Fugleman. Arise ! Arise ! Chorus. E !
/. Italy is finished, Germany submerged,
And Japan euchred !
ch. Was that not your tongue.
That protruded aforetime
With ghoulish conceit ?
Now that you taste defeat.
What then ? Pa !
/. I strive ! I strive !
ch. I strive after Hitler,
My karaka-berry boiled in the eighth month !
Here stands the obstacle of the Allies !
f. So close your ranks !
ch. Au ! Au !
f. Then open, ah open !
ch. Au ! Au !
So let this murderer fly far
And regard me with fear and terror!
Ae!Ae ! A a !
When General Freyberg visited Gisborne recently a Ngati Porou spokes-
man asked that he bring Hitler’s tongue as a trophy and a proof that
the war was ended victoriously. He had this peruperu in mind.


2 (d) The Peruperu or tutu-ngarahu, anglice War-dance, was the
supreme example of disciplined frenzied rhythmic action under the
inspiration of warlike passion. It stirred the Maori warrior of old as
nothing else could. His descendant in the present world war harked
back to its dynamic inspiration at Suda Bay in Crete. The kawau maro
or concentrated charge to close grips with the enemy became the
bayonet charge of the Maori Battalion in many a devastating onset on
the enemy.
The example on the programme has come down the generations with
adaptations to meet the occasions, for most of these compositions are
topical. In 1901 Paul Kruger, the Boer leader, was the topic, ‘my
boiled karaka-berry.’ Twenty years later when the Prince of Wales
(now Duke of Windsor) was received at Rotorua ‘Te Kaiha ’ or
the Kaiser had succeeded Kruger. To-day the devil is Adolf Hitler. To-
morrow ?
The interested spectator is referred to many accounts of the Maori
war-dance. Thus Royalty in New Zealand, p. 118, describes the peru-
peru of the Ngati Tuwharetoa of Taupo : ‘ Next in order was the taua
of Ngati Tuwharetoa of Taupo. Smart, agile men, in waist-mat, white
feather, and uniform of natural buff, carrying the feather-plumed
battle-axe of old (tewhatewha) • They were massed in column at the
back of the marae, and, as their predecessors the Nga Puhi moved off,
their front was disclosed with their rangatira, Te Heuheu, at their
head. ... He was seen standing apart in the front line of the marae—
a martial figure, the huia feather of chieftainship in his hair, a superb
feather cloak on his shoulders, bearing his ancestral mere of greenstone,
and holding in his hand a spear. Presently he turned, ran lightly to
the head of his matua, hurled his spear in the ancient manner of
challenge, and raced back to the front, the matua tearing after him in
magnificent steady array, their battle-axes held aloft as though for
striking; the ornamental feathers below the blade vibrating and stream-
ing in the wild chase. Arrived at the foot of the marae, the upraised
weapon of the fierce, brawny chief halted the rush. . . . The chief
bounded down the front of the column, brandishing his mere and
sounding the tribal war-cry, ‘ Uhi mai te waero! ’ The tribesmen
taking it up, voiced it like thunder, with the precision of accord invari-
able with the Maori. As the fearsome roar went away afar the matua
leaped with frenzy, swinging their battle-axes. For some moments they
were a mass of leaping men, brandishing weapons, fierce eyes, ferocious
faces—a vivid barbaric presentment of grim-visaged warriors in frantic
action. Thunder is their element as they fall upon the enemy. Leaping
up they encounter him like lightning ; returning to the ground, shak-
ing the earth, they fall on him ; their axes swing blows on his devoted
head ; see how the fierce sons of Tuwharetoa fight.’
See also p. 127 of the same publication and A Scene from the Past in
this souvenir publication, pp. 37-8.


(e) THE WAR-DANCERS WITHDRAWING CHANT—
s. Toia mai !
ch. Te waka !
s. Ki te urunga !
ch. Te waka !
s. Ki te moenga !
ch. Te waka !
Ki te takotoranga
I takoto ai, te waka !
RECEPTION BY MAORI SCHOOL CHILDREN
R.N.Z.A.F. Band in attendance
(a) NATIONAL ANTHEM
First verse, in English first, then Maori
Tohungia, e te Atua,
To matou Kingi pai.
Kia ora ia !
Meinga kia kaha ia,
Kia hari nui, kia koa,
Kia Kingi tonu ia
Tau tini noa !
(b) Action Song: ' Hitara Wahahuke’
(c) Lament for Lieut. Ngarimu
(d) The ' Ngeri ’: ‘Ka mate ! Ka mate ! ’
Ka mate, ka mate !
Ka ora, ka ora !
Ka mate, ka mate !
Ka ora, ka ora!
Tenei te tangata puhuruhuru,
Nana i tiki mai whakawhiti te ra !
Hupane ! Kaupane ! Hupane, kaupane !
Whiti te ra!


2 (e) This is one of the ancient canoe hauling chants or ngeri,
which in time became the typical chant of welcome to visitors. The
visitors are likened to the canoe being drawn to the courtyard of their
hosts.
Draw to the shore—the canoe !
To its rest—the canoe !
To its bed—the canoe !
To the place where it is to lie—the canoe !
3 School Children’s Welcome : About one thousand children
selected from the Native Schools and Public Schools, where Maori
children attend, have been assembled for the occasion.
They are drawn up to represent the letters ‘V.C.’
The award of the first V.C. to a Maori together with other honours
gained by members of the Maori Battalion has thrilled school children
throughout the Dominion, and particularly those of the Maori race.
Te Moana Ngarimu was a pupil of Whareponga (his native village)
and other Native schools in the neighbourhood before going on to Te
Ante College. The children fortunate enough to take part in this
ceremony should gain inspiration of the best kind for a full partici-
pation in the future life of New Zealand.
The schools have been asked to assist in raising money for the Ngarimu
V.C. Scholarship Fund, and a list of their contributions to date will be
submitted to His Excellency, the Governor-General together with a loyal
address.
(d) As their last item the children give the famous mass cry of
exultation, Ka mate, ka mate! without which no gathering of the
Maori people is complete any more than a reunion of the Pakeha with-
out ‘ God save the King,’ ‘ For he is a jolly good fellow ’or Auld lang
syne.’ Recently the cry rallied the Maori Battalion to many a desperate
bayonet charge. Pte Hemara Aupouri of the Ngati Rangi sub-tribe of
Ngati Porou led it in the bayonet counter charge at Suda Bay, Crete.
It thrilled the ranks of the crouching tribesmen and the Pakeha units
alongside them as nothing else could have done. Thus it was that six
generations earlier Te Rauparaha emerged from the place of refuge at
Roto a Ira, Taupo, provided for him by ‘ the hairy man ’, climbing up
the upane or kaupane, the crosspieces, of the primitive ladder into the
light of day and in the exultation of escaping his enemies gave vent to
his relief in a chant of triumph, of which the famous 'Ka mate ’ cry
was the climax
It was death ! It was death !
Now ’tis life ! Now ’tis life !
Behold the man, the hairy man.
Who has caused the sun to shine !
Up this step, then up that step,
Into the blazing sun !


The Vice-Regal Party leaving the dais is waved to the
stand by a column of women dancers, branches in
singing—
(a) s. No wai te motoka e topa mai nga rori ?
ch. Aue ! Nou nei Kawana,
Tika mai nei taua, i nawa !
Aue ! Aue ! Aue ha !
Aue ! Aue ! Aue ha !
(b) ..
Maehe te marama i haere ai a Moana,
Aue ! I piki ai ra i te hiwi
Ki te mate i taua, i nawa !
Aue ! Aue ! Aue ha !
Aue ! Aue ! Aue ha !
(c) 5.
Homai he mata, kia haehae au,
Aue ! Kia kotia i te kiri
I awhi ai taua, i nawa
Aue ! Aue ! Aue ha !
Aue ! Aue ! Aue ha !
(d) 5,
Maura e Kawana
E hohoki ai te roimata!
Aue ! E maringi nei me he wai
Ki te ipo i taua, i nawa
Aue ! Aue ! Aue ha !
Aue ! Aue ! Aue ha !
SPEECH OF WELCOME BY MRS MATEROA REEDY
special
hands,


nl Programmes for Maori ceremonials do not admit of awkward
pauses or gaps. So this item covers the passage of the Vice-Regal Party
from the dais, where the school children tender their welcome, to the
central stand. To the distinguished visitors on this stand and on those
flanking it the rest of the morning’s entertainment and speeches of
welcome are addressed.
The women wave branches as they retire towards the plaza or marae
in front of the Vice-Regal stand, singing their ruri or topical songs and
waving branches the while.
Whose is the motor car speeding hither along the highway ?
It is thine, O Governor, coming direct to me.
March was the month, when Moana scaled the hill.
Alas ! It was to his death that he ascended.
Hand me the sharp obsidian to lacerate myself,
d hat I may disfigure the form you have oft embraced.
It may be that you can, O Governor, stem this flow of tears,
Which flows as a torrent for my loved one, alas !
S Mrs Materoa Reedy (nee Ngarimu) is the aunt of Lt. Ngarimu,
who went overseas with his cousin Hanara Tangiawha Reedy, Materoa’s
eldest son. Captain Reedy is a prisoner of war in Germany.
Materoa spoke for Ngati Porou at the great Waitangi gathering in
1934, being the only woman to address Lord and Lady Bledisloe on
the Waitangi marae. She thus asserted the right of women to speak
on ceremonial occasions according to East Coast etiquette. She had
said there, that ‘circumstances led people to think that the Maoris
should strive to attain to European methods of life, but it was not
advisable that they should altogether discontinue their old customs.
The Maoris cannot become Pakehas, and it would be a sad day if they
lost their ancient accomplishments.’ She ended with the plea ; ‘ This
I do ask of you : Assist us in keeping our customs and usages alive.’


POWHIRI OR DANCES OF WELCOME
Hikurangi section of A T gati Porou, representing the
Lt. Ngarimu.
(a) GIRLS—AN OLDTIME ACTION SONG IN 3/4 TIME
s. Hauldwi, hauweka, kawea he korero
Kia .whakarongo mai—
ch. Nga Iwi o te motu, pakia !
s. Aue ! E te tai whakarunga !
E te tai whakaroa !
Ka pupuru tonu
ch. Te huka tai moana nui aue !
Nga Iwi whakakeke o Niu Tireni,
Huri ke, anga ke !
s. Ta ke, ta ko, taka rawa !
ch. He paruparu no te Tai-rawhiti,
Kia ruku mai koe !
Ana to kai! Ana to kai! Aue hei!
Aue
Here is the English version :
Softly blowing wands take these words
So that the scattered tribes may hear,
Strike your thighs !
Peoples of the southern sea,
Peoples of the northern tide !
The waves are breaking along the shores.
Harken, ye stubborn tribes of New Zealand,
Who turn this way and that!
Twisting here and twisting there,
Risking it may be a fall !
Here is the mud of the Eastern sea
Through which you may plunge ;
There is your food ! There is your food !


6 Powhiri or Dances of Welcome by Girls and Women of the
Hikurangi section o£ Ngati-Porou.
The name Hikurangi is here applied as a parish designation to com-
prise the many sub-tribes, which centre on Ruatoria and are the most
closely related to the V.C. winner on his father’s side. The reader is
referred to the booklet The Price of Citizenship for a fuller account
of these relationships.
(a) Girls’ Welcome. These young ladies asked the annotator to
instruct them in the technique and graces of the Maori posture dances.
This was before news came of the tragedy at El Tebaga in Tunisia.
A few lessons were taken before the sad news reached Ruatoria; the
late Hokianga Awatere actively assisting. Her sudden death together
with that of Lt. Ngarimu interrupted the course, which was however
resumed when the present celebration was decided upon.
They have learnt much in the time, but have far to go to satisfy the
exacting standards of their elders. They present a fair cross-section of
the type of educated Maori girl now approaching womanhood or who
has just passed out of school or is in the senior forms. Their mode of
life, physical training and the claims of proper deportment in the
society of to-day have modified stance, suppleness and grace of gesture.
A wide gap has also developed between them and those best qualified
to teach them by example, so that they learn largely from one another
including bad habits of speech and posturing. The occasions when
first class performances may be seen, studied and followed as standards
are getting less and less frequent. So that the poor, fast-ageing instruc-
tors have much to get undone before sound foundations can be laid.
The item under comment is an adaptation of a very old women’s haka
of welcome. It is the very a b c of posture dancing, devised by the
wise men of old to exemplify rhythm of movement and the suiting of
action to words and words to action. The waltz tempo also suits the
rhythm of the poivhiri, with its long swinging action.


(b) girls’ song of welcome (Band accompanying )
Haere mai ra, e te Kawana, e !
Ki te Tai Rawhiti.
Haria mai te tohu toa.
He mea tohenga nui.
Na te toto heke ra,
Na te whakamomori.
Haere mai ra, e te Kawana, e !
Haere mai ! Haere mai ra !
Nan mai, e te Pirimia
Me te Tuarangi !
Haere mai ra, kia tangi koe
Ki taku Raukura.
Na te ao ana hanga,
Kia ram noa ko an.
Haere mai ra, e hoa ma !
Haere mai! Haere mai ra !
Aotea ! Te Waipounamu !
Tenei nga kura nei!
Na te toto heke ra,
Na te whakamomori.
Moana, e ! Manahi, e !
Me Te Tuahu ra !
E Tama ma, i hira ai
Ahau ki runga ra !
(The maidens now give way to the maturer women
the rear of the men’s haka party.)
and pass to


C) (b) Girls’ Song of Welcome with action :
This song, the words of which have been specially composed for this
occasion, is based on one sung and danced by the Rarotongan Party,
headed by Princess Tere Tinirau, at the 1934 Waitangi celebration.
(See Waitangi—Ninety-jour Years After.)
The ' tohu toa ’ or ‘ emblem of valour ’ is the V.C. to earn which blood
was shed and the last ounce of effort was demanded. The Tuarangi
are the distinguished visitors other than the Vice-Regal and Ministerial
parties. ' Raukura ’ was the red plume or any plume for head orna-
ment. Such was Te Moana Ngarimu. In the last verse the Maori tribes
of the two islands are invited to regard the ‘ Kura,’ the honours earned
by their young men at the risk of their lives and by the exercise of
supreme effort.
During the singing of this song floral representations of the Victoria
Cross, the D.S.O. and other military decorations earned by the Maori
Battalion will be laid on the marae.
Here is an English version—
Welcome to thee, O Governor!
Come to the Eastern Sea,
Bringing the Cross of Valour,
Emblem of striving to death ;
Won by the shedding of blood,
By will and effort supreme.
Welcome to thee, O Governor!
Welcome, thrice welcome to thee !
Greetings to thee. Prime Minister,
And to thy noble band !
Mingle thy tears with ours
For this our Beloved One.
What cares the world in travail
For such a one as I ?
Come then, ye Sirs, we greet you.
Welcome, thrice welcome, to you !
Aotea and Waipounamu !
Here are the honours they earned,
Risking their lives regardless.
Striving with might and main.
Moana, son ! Manahi too,
And Te Tuahu ! Ha !
Heroes who have by doughty deeds
Lifted my fame on high !


r 14
(c) women’s haka of welcome (parish of hikurangi)
' Te Urunga tu, te Urunga pae ! ’
s. Tena i whiua !
Taku pohiri e rere atu ra
Ki te hiku 0 te ika,
Te puku 0 te whenua,
Te pane 0 te motu ki
Te whakawhititanga i Raukawa
Ki te Waipounamu, e. . . .
ch. E i aha tera e !
Haramai koe i te pohiritanga
A taku manu !
Haramai koe i te pohiritanga
A taku manu !
s. He tiwaiwaka ‘ hau na Maui !
ch. Tiori rau.e he ha!
5. He tiwaiwaka ’hau na Maui!
ch. Tiori rau e he ha !
s. Ko tou aro i tahuri mai,
Ko toku aro i tahuri atu !
ch. Takina ko au ! Takina ko au !
s. Ko tou aro i tahuri mai,
Ko toku aro i tahuri atu !
ch. Takina ko au ! Takina ko au !
s. Porou koa !
ch. Ko Hamo te wahine koa !
s. Ko Tahu koa !
ch. Ko Hamo te wahine koa!
Nana i tohatoha ki Nui Tireni
Haere mai ! Haere mai !
Haere mai ! Haere mai !
ka hipoki !
Taku hui ! Hei!


G (c) The maturer women having passed to the front are drawn
up immediately in front of a large party of men, who will presently
pass through their ranks during the performance of items 6 (d) ‘Ka
panapana.’ This women’s powhiri or haka of welcome in waltz time is a
specialty of the East Coast women and is an ancient composition. To
justify the wide scope of the invitations to and the attendance of the
tribes from as far south as the South Island the composition stresses
the ancestry of most of the tribes of both islands from Porourangi and
his wife Hamo, and from the union of Tahu, younger brother of
Porourangi, after his brother’s death with the widow Hamo. Here is
an English version—
s. Begin with a swing !
My call has gone forth
To the tail of the fish,
To the belly of the land,
To the head of the island
Thence by the crossing at Raukawa
To the land, whose streams
Abound in greenstone !
ch■ The call has gone forth !
So come ye at the welcome
Given by my bird !
Respond ye to the cry
Of my bird’s welcome !
s. I am the fan-tail of Maui,
ch. Chirping restlessly to and fro
s. I am the fan-tail of Maui,
ch. Gaily singing, darting here and there !
s. You will turn yourself to me.
You will turn yourself to me,
And I will turn myself to you.
ch. There is your challenge to me !
s. ’Tis Porou indeed ! ch. And Hamo his consort too !
s. ’Tis Tahu indeed ! ch. And Hamo his consort also !
ch. They have broadcast their progeny all over New Zealand!
So welcome to you ! Welcome to you !
Come to our hui!


(d) ‘KA PANAPANA ! A HA ! HA !
Commenced by the women’s party and finished by the men’s
haka taparahi party after they have passed through the
Women’s ranks to the front :
s. A ra ra ! Ka panapana ! eh. A ha ha !
s. Ka rekareka tonu taku ngakau
Ki nga mana ririki i Pohatu-whakapiri,
Kia haramai te takitini, kia haramai te
Kia paretaitokotia ki Rawhiti!
takimano.
ch. Hi! Ha!
s. He mamae, he mamae ! ch. A ha ha !
s. Ka haere, ka haere taku powhiri
Ki te tai whakarunga!
ch. Hoki mai, hoki mai taku tinana !
s. Ka haere, ka haere taku powhiri
Ki te tai whakararo !
ch. Hoki mai, hoki mai taku tinana!
s. Kia huri au kite tai whakatu a Kupe,
Ki te tai o Matawhero i motu mai!
ch. E ko Hitara ki roto ki aku ringa.
Kutia rawatia kia pari tonu ihu !
Hi ha ! Auahi ana !
s. Kia Whakanga hoki au i ahau !
ch. I aue ! Hei!


IS (d) This, the first Haka Taparahi of the day, is marked by a
very decided stamp or waewae, of which the sub-tribes headed by the
Ngarimu family are the greatest exponents The measured staccato
tread with the flashing upward hand action, changing from right to
left while the feather-bedecked heads turn gracefully from side to side,
are splendid examples in the metre of Virgil’s Aeneid of the ancient
Maori ceremonial posture dance. It is the metre of the Patere, whose
recitative recalls those lines—
Quadrupe dante putrem sonitu quatit ungula campum.
Some day some student of Maori will render the text of this haka into
English of corresponding rhythm. Meantime—
s. Lo, it is throbbing ! ch. A ha ha !
s. My heart is throbbing, delighted
With the common peoples at Pohatu-whakapiri
Who have come in their multitudes,
Who have come in their thousands,
And alighted upon the eastern sea.
ch. Hi ! Ha !
s. My call goes out to the southern sea !
ch. Yet comes back, it comes back to me !
s. My call goes out to the northern sea !
ch. But comes back, yea! comes back to me.
s. So I turn to the sea, which Kupe raised up,
To the sea which breaks at Matawhero—
ch- Ha ! There is Hitler, within my embrace
Where I will crush him and break him !
Hi! Ha ! How splendid !
s. Now let me pause and rest a while !
ch. Down, down, down to the ground !
(And with that the ranks subside, heads slanting to the right and hands
clawing the earth.)


6 (e)
men's ceremonial haka
‘ Ruaumoko : The Earthquake God.’
s. Ko Ruaumoko e ngunguru nei!
ch. Au ! Au ! Aue ha !
s. Ko Ruaumoko e ngunguru nei!
ch. Au ! Au ! Aue ha !
5. A ha ha !
ch. E ko te rakau a Tungawerewere ! A ha ha !
He rakau tapu, na Tutaua ki a Uneuku,
I patukia kite tipua ki Orangitopeka,
Pakaru te upoko o Rangitopeka,
Patua ki waenganui o te tau ki Hikurangi,
He toka whakairo, e tu ake nei,
He atua ! He tangata ! He atua ! He tangata, ho !
s. He atua, he atua, Taupare-taitoko,
Kia kitea e Paretaitoko te whare haunga !
ch. Ahaha ! Ka whakatete mai o rei, he kuri! Au !
Na wai parehua taku hope kia whakaka te rangi
Kia tare au ! Ha !
5. He roha te kawau ! ch. Ha !
s. Kei te pou tara
ch. Tu ka tete, ka tete! Tau ha!
s. Ko komako, ko komako !
I aue !
ch. E ko te hautapu e rite kite kai na Matariki,
Fapareireia koi tapa! Tapa konunua koiana tukua


6 ( e ) Ruaumoko. Revived by Ngati Porou in 1901 this East Coast
classic, composed in the eighteenth century, was the star item of the
great reception to their Royal Highnesses the Duke and Duchess of York
at Rotorua. It was again prominent in the Maori welcome at the same
place to the then Prince of Wales, now Duke of Windsor, twenty
years later. By 1934 Nga Puhi, the northern tribe, had learnt it from
Ngati Porou, who gave a masterly and finished display in ‘ The Carnival
of Gratitude,’ as Lindsay Buick described it, to Lord and Lady Bledisloe
at Waitangi.
An English rendering, already published in Waitangi-Ninety-four
Years After, should satisfy all but deceased Maori elders, who held the
key to this old masterpiece of the phallic cult, and passed it on
not for publication.
5, Hark to the rumble of the Earthquake god !
ch. Au ! Au ! Au e ha !
s. ’Tis Ruaumoko that quakes and stirs !
ch. Au ! Au ! Au e ha !
s. A ha ! ha !
ch. It is the rod of Tungawerewere,
The sacred stick given by Tutaua to Uenuku.
It struck the monster Rangitopeka
And smashed the head of Rangitopeka
Cleaving the twin peaks of Hikurangi
Where the carved rock emerges,
A gift of the gods ! The wonder of men !
A miracle of Heaven ! The lure of Mankind !
s■ ’Tis divine ! ’Tis divine !
Behold Paretaitoko
Searches and finds the hidden places !
ch. A ha ! ha ! Where the dogs gnash their teeth
In frenzy ! Au !
s. A ha ! ha !
ch. They have gnawed and bitten deep
Until in pain I see the heavens blaze.
Ere I faint! Ha !
s. Like the shag with outspread wings !
ch. Ha!
s. In the throes !
ch. With its last expiring breath, Ha !


SPEECH BY A WHANAU-A-APANUI ELDER representing the
Tribes of the Bay of Plenty , to which the mother of Lt Moana
Ngarimu belongs. Followed according to custom by an ancient
waiata adapted for the occasion.
A LAMENT FOR THE DEAD OF THE MAORI BATTALION
Tu tonu ko te rae, e, i haere ai te makau.
E kai ana ’hau, e, i te ika wareware.
E an rere noa, e, i te ihu o te waka.
E kore hoki an, e, e mihi ki a koe;
E mihi ana ’hau, e, ki a Ngahua, te hoa;
Taku kahui tara, e, no roto i ahau;
Taku totara haemata, e, no roto no Moehau.
I haere te makau, e, i te ara kohuru ;
Kihei i tangihia, e, i te mata rakau.
To toto ka tuhi, e, ka rarapa i te rangi.
Totohu to hinu, e, nga one tuatua
I raro i Te Karaka, e, i te hau kainga.
Ka noho mai koe ra, e, te puke i Rangipo.
Ka whakawai mate ra e, te wahine ’Ati-Puhi.
Kanaka a koaia, e, he ngahoa toki nui.
Ko wai ra tohou, e, hei ranga i te mate ?
Ma Rohu-a-Whiu, e, mana e homai.
Tau no te makau, e, he huia rere tonga,
He unuhanga taniwha, e, tere ana i te muri i.


The ancestry of Ie Moana Ngarimu on the side of his mother,
Maraea, wife of Hamuera Ngarimu, is given in the companion booklet
to this souvenir, published under the title The Price of Citizenship.
The relationship between the tribes of father and mother is given
there, extending to Whakatane and Tauranga in the Bay of Plenty.
The Maori schools of heraldry are not yet extinct, but the occasions
for reference to them are less frequent and the method of transmitting
genealogies has been commuted from the oral to the written. Strangely
enough this has been a change for the worse. No one worries to carry
complicated genealogical tables about in one’s memory, if these are
assumed to have been recorded a la Pakeha in MS. books or in the
archives of the Native Land Court.
The Waiata rendered by Whanau-a-Apanui is an adaptation of that
given as number 53, Nga Moteatea ; Part I. The following is a free
rendering—
There stands the headland, whither fared my beloved !
I am suffering the dire result of neglected warning,
Although I tried in vain wailing at the bow of the canoe.
I do not weep for thee my husband ;
But I mourn for my beloved son Ngahua.
My flock of terns emanated from my own body ;
My young totara tree grew in the forest at Moehau.
My darling fell along the path of murder ;
He was not impaled at the point of the spear.
So thy blood glows and reddens the heavens ;
While the fat from your roasting carcase
Sinks into the ridged sands at Te Karaka,
While thy dried head rests on the hill at Rangipo,
And the Nga Puhi woman gloats over the spoil.
Do not rejoice or boast, for this is the thud of a great axe.
Who among your relatives will avenge thy death?
Tis the obligation of Te Rohu-a-Whiu.
Alas ! My loved one has dropped like the south-flying huia !
It is a sea monster withdrawn from its lair to drift to the north !


WELCOME BY THE WAIAPU AND NORTH
SUB-TRIBES OF NGATI POROU
(a) women’s powhiri : Tiki range, rere rangi’
s. Powhiritia atu ! ch. Haere mai! Haere mai!
s. Haramai ra, taku nui, taku wehi,
Taku whakatiketike i ahau ki runga ra, e !
ch. E ! I aha tera, e !
s. Piki rangi! Rere rangi! He rum koukoua
He aniwha te manawa nui o Porourangi,
Hopukia i te puku o te whenua, e !
ch. E ! I aha tera, e !
Haramai koe i te powhiritanga a taku manu
Haramai koe i te powhiritanga a taku manu
s. Kaore, kei te kamakama, whawhai ana mai ki
A kite koe i te Wikitoria, e !
ch. E ! I aha tera, e !
e. E Porou ! ch. Pakeke i ona mahi!
s. E Porou ! ch. Pakeke i ona mahi!
ch. Ka tika ha, taku powhiri, taku powhiri!
Haere mai! Haere mai! Ki taku hui! Hei!
(b) men’s haka taparahi : ‘te kiringutu.’
Men from the lower Waiapn Valley and north
Whakaara
s. Ponga ra ! Ponga ra !
ch. Ka tataki mai te Whare o nga Ture !
Ka whiria rate Maori ! Ka whiria !
E ngau nei ona reiti, e ngau nei ona taake !
A ha ha ! Te taea te ueue ! I aue ! Hei!
s. Patua i te whenua ! ch. Hei!
s. Whakataua i nga ture !
ch. Hei!
Na nga Mema rate kohuru,
Na te Kawana te koheriheri!
Ka raruraru nga ture !
Ka raparapa kite pua torori! I aue !
WAIAPU
Waiapu


8 (a) TE MANANA kauaterangi, great grandfather of Hamuera
Ngarimu, the father of Lt. Ngarimu, was of these sub-tribes of Ngati
Porou and more especially of the Whanau-a-Rakaitemania of Te Horo,
near Waiomatatini. The Ngarimu family, in common with many other
leading families of the Ngati Porou, had its roots at Okauwharetoa and
other famous pas of the Hicks Bay-Te Araroa, East Cape districts.
Between those districts and north-eastern Bay of Plenty the Apanui
and Porourangi lines are almost inextricably laced.
Here is an English version of this well known powhiri:
s. Give them your welcome ! ch. Welcome, thrice welcome !
s. Welcome to you great, distinguished ones.
Who have uplifted me to such great honour !
ch. So we greet you, we greet you !
s - Heaven ascending, heaven soaring like the screeching owl,
Boldly beats the great heart of Porourangi,
Gripping the vitals of the earth the while !
ch. So we greet you !
Come in response to the call of my bird !
Come in answer to the call of my bird !
5. Stirring and hurrying, speeding to see
To gaze on the Cross of Valour with me !
ch. Welcome, ye Sirs ! Welcome to you !
s. Porou ! ch. Be strong in your efforts
s. Porou ! ch. Be valiant in deeds !
Right then is our welcome !
Come then to this assembly !
Join in the acclaim !
8 (b) this composition has come down the generations and had
its greatest revival with topical adaptations in 1888, when the Porou-
rangi meeting house was formally opened. Led by the late Tula
Nihoniho, a noted chief of the Hikurangi sub-tribes, a section of
Ngati Porou registered their protest against the rating of their lands
and the taxation of articles of everyday consumption, specifying the
pna torori ’ or the tobacco plant. It was revived again at the Wai-
tangi celebrations in 1934, and was adopted by the men of the 9th
and 10th Maori Reinforcements as the piece de resistance of the recent
celebration of the opening of Tamatekapua at Rotorua. Its main theme
is not outdated, the complementary, yet seemingly, contradictory fea-
tuies of civilisation, with the still novel but bitter pill of taxation.
In the circumstances the vigour of the recitative and concomitant
actions may be appreciated.


(b) continued
Taparahi
s. Kaore hoki te mate o te whenua e,
Te makere atu ki raro ra !
ch. Aha ha! Iri tonu mai runga
O te kiringutu mau mai ai,
Hei tipare taua kite hoariri!
A ha ha ! I tahuna mai au
Ki te whakahere toto koa,
E kite ngakau o te whenua nei,
Eki te koura! I aue, taukuri, e !
s. A ha ha !
ch. Ko tuhikitia, ko tuhapainga
I raro ite whero ote Maori! Hukiti!
s. A ha ha ! ch. Na te ngutu o te Maori, pohara, kai-kutu,
ch. Na te weriweri ko’ i homai ke konei ?
E, kaore i ara, i haramai tonu koe kite kai whenua !
Pokokohua ! Kauramokai! Hei!
s. A ha ha ! ch. Te puta atu hoki
Te ihu o te waka i nga torouka o Nui Tireni,
Ka paia pukutia e nga uaua o te ture a te Kawana!
Te taea te ueue ! Au ! Au ! I aue !
Tuku Ko komako, ko komako, etc.


(b) continued
The rising
s. The shadows fall! The shadows fall!
ch. The House, which makes the laws, is chattering,
And the Maori will be plaited as a rope !
Its rates and its taxes are biting !
A ha ha ! its teeth cannot be withdrawn ! Alas !
s. The land will be destroyed ! ch. Hei !
s. The laws are spread-eagled over it! ch. Hei !
ch. The Members have done this black deed,
And the Rulers have conspired in the evil ;
ITe laws of the land are confused,
For even the tobacco leaf is singled out! Alas !
The body of the taparahi
s. Never does the loss of our landed heritage
Cease to burden our minds ! A ha ha !
Ever it is upon our lips, clinging
As did the headbands of the warriors,
Arrayed to parry the enemy’s blow !
A ha ha ! I was scorched in the fire
Of the sacrifice of blood, and stripped
To the vital heart of the land.
Bribed with the Pakeha gold ! Alas ! Ah me !
s. A ha ha !
ch. Lifted are we and suspended on high,
And told to get out of the way !
s. A ha ha ! ch. Was it not your declared mission
ch- To remove the tattoo from Maori lips.
Relieve his distress, stop him eating lice
And cleanse him of dirt and disgust ?
Yea ! But all that was a deep-laid design
’Neath which to devour our lands !
Ha! May your heads be boiled! Displayed on
sticks !
Reverting to the ground
It is komako, etc.
5. A ha ha ! ch. How can the nose of the bark you give us
Pass by the rugged headlands of New Zealand,
When confronted with the restrictive, perplexing laws.
Obstacles that cannot be removed ! Alas ! Ah me !
toasting


(c) speech by an elder representing the sub-tribes contributing
the above items.
(d) THE PRESENTATION OF ADDRESSES TO HIS EXCELLENCY by the
School Children and by the Assembled Tribes together with
Gifts , accompanied by a massed Actum Song.
He putiputi koe, i katohia,
Hei piri kite uma, e te tau !
He tau aroha koe, koronga roa,
Koronga i nga ra,
Maku ano ra koe e atawhai,
Kei kino i te ao;
Kia piri tonu ai, hei putiputi pai,
I katohia !
He aha ra, e tohe tonu nei,
Te aroha kite hoki mai ?
He tau i karea e roto te po,
Te ao, nga ra katoa!
He pai kia pono to whakaaro nui,
Kei kino i te ao;
Kia piri tonu mai, hei putiputi pai,
I katohia !
WELCOME BY THE TRIBES AND SUB-TRIBES OF THE
SOUTHERN PORTION OF THE HOROUTA CANOE
AREA. Te Whanau-a-Ruataupare, Te Aitanga-a-Hauiti, Ngati-
Konohi, Te Aitanga-a-Mahaki, Rongowhakaata and Ngai-Tama-
nuhiri (Tokomaru Bay to Wbarerata).
(a) women's action song : ‘ rukuhia '
Rukuhia Ngarimu te moana !
Mauria te mana o te motu,
Te tangi a to iwi Maori.
Me aroha te ao katoa,
I hinga koe ki Tunihia;
I reira to riri mutunga.
Kua mutu to rongo
I te haruru mai
O te mura o te ahi.


(c) and (d) written addresses of welcome to distinguished
visitors were of course unknown to the ancient Maori regime, but are
quite appropriate in the adapted ceremonials of to-day. Orations,
whether written or declaimed, would, however, lack definiteness with-
out the making of gifts. The Maori accompaniment of song and dance
is paralleled by the musical honours of the ‘ higher ’ civilisation. His
Excellency will overlook the letter of the action song, and accept the
sentiment of tribal regard, which is its theme :
You are like a flower plucked
To adorn the breast, my love !
You are my beloved, longed for
These many, many days.
I will shelter you tenderly,
Lest the world despoil you ;
Long may you cling as sweetly
As the flower upon the breast.
Why is it that love insists
To return ever and again ?
My beloved I sought in my dreams
And waking, counted the dreary days !
Ah ! that your love may remain staunch and true,
Unscathed by the world’s rough hand !
That firmly it may cling as a beautiful flower
Plucked to adorn my breast !
(The air of the song will be recognised, but need not be announced
for fear of invading some copyright.)


9 (b) girls’ action songs : ‘ NGARIMU ’ AND ' kauria ra e, pare
' NGARIMU ’
Haere mai ra e nga morehu !
Aue te aroha te mamae !
Mauria mai nga tini honore
O te Hokowhitu toa e
Te Moana-nui-a-kiwa Ngarimu,
Maranga mai ra e te tau !
Arahina mai ra nga morehu nei
Ki runga ki nga maere nei
Tenei te iwi nui, e tangi nei
Mo nga tini hoa kua wehe nei ;
Titiro kau noa ra, e tama ma,
Kei whea koutou e ngaro nei ?
' KAURIA RA E PARE ’
Kauria ra, e Pare !
Te moana nui a Kiwa
Tae rawa koe ki Ingarangi, e.
Nahau ra, e tama, a Ngatiporou
I mau atu ki Ihipa, e,
I runga o Karihi, e,
Me nga maunga o Kariti, e.
Hinga rawa mai koe, e tama,
I runga Ripia ;
Takoto mai, e Pare,
I runga o Haromu ;
I mate koe mo te iwi, e !
‘ Mate atu he toa,
Ara mai ra e toa ’
Te whakatauki a nga Tipuna.
Kua hinga Parekura;
Ko koe ra, e Reta,
Kei te arahi i nga morehu.
Ma te matua i runga ra


9 (b) continued
Koutou e atawhai,
Kia kaha, kia manawa nui,
Tae noa kite mutunga.
Hoki mai, e tama ma,
Ki Aotearoa,
Kia whakanuia e te iwi, e !
(c) speech of welcome by an Elder of the peoples mentioned
above.
(d) men's haka : ‘ kura tiwaka taua ’
Whakaara
s. Ma konei ake an !
ch. Titaha ake ai, hai!
Me kore e tutaki!
ch. He pupu karikawa, he pupu harerorero hai!
s- Ka tikoki! ch. Ka tahuri! s. Ka tikoki! ch. Ka tahuri!
ch. Ka tahuri ra Nui Tireni, i aue !
T a para hi
s. Papa te whatitiri, hikohiko te uira,
I kanapu kite rangi, i whetuki i raro ra,
Ru ana te whenua, e !
ch. E, i aha tera e! Ko te werohanga
A Porourangi i te Ika a Maui
E takoto nei! Aha ha!
Kia anga tiraha ra to puku ki runga ra!
Aha ha! Kia eke mai o iwi ki runga ki
To tuatua werowero ai e ha! I aue, taukuri, e !
s. Tena ra, e Tama ! tu ake ki runga ra
Ki te hautu i ohou waka, i a Horouta,
Takitimu, Mataatua, Tainui, Te Arawa,
E takoto nei! ch. Ahaha !


(d) continued
s. Aue ! He tia, he tia, he tia !
Aue ! He ranga, he ranga, he ranga !
ch. Whakarere iho ana te kakau o te hoe ko
Maninitua ! Ko Maniniaro !
Tangi te kura i tangi wiwini,
Tangi te kura i tangi wawana!
s. Tera te haeata takiri ana mai
I runga o Hikurangi!
ch. Aha ! Whaiuru, whaiuru, whaiuru !
Aha ! Whaiato, whaiato, whaiato !
Arara tini! Arara tini! Ara ri!
s. A ko tena, tena !
ch. A ko tena, tena !
Ehara ko te wai o to waha, ko te wai o to waha!
Hei koti, hei koti, hei koti!
s. Ka rere ! I ka rere !
ch. Te rere i te waka, kutangitangi, kutangitangi!
E kura tiwaka tana ! E kura tiwaka tana !
E kura wawawa wai! Ee kura wawawa wai!
T uku
Ko komako ! Ko komako ! etc.
Announcement Regarding the Proposed ‘NGARIMU V.C
AND 28TH (MAORI) BATTALION MEMORIAL SCHOLAR
SHIP FUND’
ch. A ha ha ! Dipping close to this side,
A ha ha ! Now changing and plunging to that side !
Urging and urging the bark on !
s. Now faster and faster!
ch. Yes faster‘and faster!
Is it not like the foam from your mouth.
Thrown out, expelled with force !
s. So it speeds, so it speeds—
ch. So my canoe rushes along, swiftly, so smoothly!
For it is the canoe of war! it is the master of the seas !
Cleaving the ocean waves, parting the wild rushing seas 1


9 (d j ‘ kura tiwaka taua ’is a survival from ancient days. It incor-
porates the chant, which accompanied and inspired the men in far
off Hawaiki to draw the Takitimu canoe to the sea side. There it was
fitted out for the long voyage to New Zealand, bringing the ancestors
of the East Coast and many other tribes of both islands. The chant
is the portion beginning 'He tia, he tia, he tia ’ down to the end. In
the present version young Ngarimu is apostrophied as the fugleman,
directing and inspiring the crews of five of the canoes of the Maori
migration from Hawaiki six centuries ago. The composition is full of
archaic matter, difficult to render into English. Here is a free English
version :
The rising
s. Let me proceed by this way ! ch. Sidling along !
s. Mayhap I shall there meet? ch. Some ancient lolling his tongue
at me !
s. It is heeling over ! ch. It has capsized !
s. It is careening over! ch. It has capsized !
ch. New Zealand has heeled over! Aue !
The body of the taparahi
s. The thunder crashes, the lightning flashes,
Illumining the heavens, while the shock strikes earth
Which trembles and quakes ! Ha !
ch. So Nature bears witness that Porourangi
Has pierced the great Fish of Maui,
Which lies beneath us ! A ha ha !
So it is your belly, upturned and laid bare !
A ha ha ! So that your people may mount
And spear you ! A ha ha!
s. Arise then, my Son, and take your stand
To direct arid urge on your canoes, Horouta,
Takitimu, Mataatua, Tainui, Te Arawa,
The great fleet drawn up here !
ch. A ha ha !
s. Striking, sweeping, paddling !
Now on the other side paddling !
ch. Down dips the blade of the paddle.
Sweeping behind, flashing before !
The speeding canoe sings in the wind !
Vibrant with energy it chants to the breeze !
s. Behold the first light of dawn
Is reflected from the crest of Hikurangi!


11 MATATUA TRIBES’ REPRESENTATIVE Acknowledges
‘the Welcome Extended to them, followed by
(a) girls’ action songs
(b) men’s haka
12 THE ARAWA CONFEDERATION OF TRIBES’ REPRE-
SENTATIVE Acknowledges the Welcome Extended to them.
followed by
(a) women’s action song. See inside back cover.
(b) POI DANCES
(c) war dance or PERUPERU. See inside back cover.
(d) HAKA TAPARAHI
13 ACKNOWLEDGMENTS BY REPRESENTATIVES OF VISIT-
ING TRIBES
I'tl NGATI KAH UNGUNU (Wairoa, Hawkes Bay and Waira-
rapa) contribute items to the entertainment.
15 HIS EXCELLENCY SIR CYRIL NEWALL replies to the
Welcome.
INTERVAL FOR LUNCHEON
Note : Visitors holding the appropriate Cards of Invitation to luncheon
will be entertained as follows :
(a) Those with red cards marked One will lunch in the
Pavilion underneath the centre stand at the first sitting;
(b) Those with red cards marked Two will lunch at the same
place at the second sitting;
(c) Those with blue cards will go to the canteens on the
Tennis Courts and be served there with refreshments;
(d) All others are asked to patronise the canteens on the park,
the profits from which will go to the Hui Expenses Account.
Surplus, if any, to the Scholarship Fund.


PAR
WO
THE INVESTITURE
1 (a) SERVICE CONDUCTED BY THE RT REV. BISHOP
OF AOTEAROA
(b) ADDRESS BY AN ELDER OF THE RINGATU
CHURCH
2 ADDRESS BY THE PRIME MINISTER
3 ADDRESS BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR-
GENERAL
4 INVESTITURE BY HIS EXCELLENCY THE GOVERNOR-
GENERAL
(a) Presentation to Mr Hamuera Ngarimu of the Victoria
Cross awarded to his son, 2nd Lieutenant Moana Nui-a-
Kiwa Ngarimu, 2nd New Zealand Expeditionary Force.
(b) Presentation of the Badge of a Companion of the Dis-
tinguished Service Order to Lieutenant-Colonel Charles
Moihi Bennett ; and the Badge of a Companion of the
Distinguished Service Order to Lieutenant-Colonel
Frederick Baker.
(c) Presentation of the Insignia of an Officer of the Military
Division of the Most Excellent Order of the British
Empire to Lieutenant-Colonel George Frederick Bert-
rand ; and the Insignia of a Member of the Military
Division of that Order to Warrant Officer (Class II)
Martin te Takaha Mcßae.
(d) Presentation of the Military Cross and a Bar thereto to
Major Rangi Royal and to Captain William Porter ; and
the Military Cross to Lieutenant John Puiraki Tikao-
Barrett.


PAR
HREE
A SCENE FROM THE PAST
description of the Maori Haka, by Sir Apirana T. Ngata
prologue
We reck not that the day is past
That Death and Time, the cruel Fates,
Have torn us from the scenes we loved,
And brought us to this unknown world.
In mem’ry ling’r'ing, all too hazy,
Blurred, uncertain, still they charm us.
Ah, we love them ! Language doth but
Clothe in artifice our passion,
Doth but to the world proclaim
We are traitors to the past.
Traitors? when our hearts are beating,
Thrilling stirred by recollections ?
Present, Future ? Them we know not;
For us no memories they hold.
Traitors ? when our ears are ringing,
Filled with echoes from the dead?
Deaf to all these chords alone
Make heavenly music, penetrating
Souls by strangeness long since deadened,
Now in sympathy vibrating.
Traitors? Nay, we scorn the name!
Bigots, blind fanatic worshippers,
Idolaters serving things of clay!
Call us, and that name were dear !


On life’s rough stream you launched us forth
You thought to buoy us, gave us hope.
Your sturdy oak, our flaxen bark,
Your iron-clad, our humble reed,
Made sorry company, and you glided.
Well equipped, the whilst we trembled.
Ah, no ! your hope but kills all hope;
You crush the life you wish to save.
Nay, rather leave us with the past;
In mem’ry let us wander back
Amid the scenes we loved of yore.
There let us roam, untrammelled, free !
For mem’ry, like that herb, embalms,
Preserves, endears our recollections.
THE MARAE AND HUI
One dear scene in my mind’s eye is floating.
Martial, warlike, yet so graceful;
Stag’d in meads that heard no bleating,
Save of savage babes at play.
There the old pa stands to-day,
Where the mountain, clad in koukas,
Bends with gentle slope and fondly
Showers kisses on the stream.
Rippling, laughing, winding, moaning,
Hies she on to join the ocean,
Emblem of a race that’s speeding
Sadly onwards to oblivion.
Day is breaking on that pa;
All within is bustle, stir.
’Tis the hour of dedication,
Te Kawanga, solemn consecration,
When our whare in its beauty,
Tukutuku pukana, e korirari!
Duly to the gods in Heaven
With our war-dance must be given.


THE ASSEMBLY OF THE TRIBES
All day long from far and near.
The crowds pour in to see and hear.
Amid this group are chieftains bold
Rewi, Taonui—names of old.
Yonder Kahungunu, mere in hand.
Frowning marshals forth his band—
Te Arawa, Tainui me te Whakatohea
Whakaata, Taupare, Tuwhakairiora.
A noble sight th’ intruding band.
But grander yet unfolds itself.
Yonder, massed, one sea of forms,
Maids with warriors alternating.
In the van are maidens lovely,
Dressed in mats of finest fibre,
Cheeks with takou gaily hued.
Plumed with quills of rarest huia.
Beyond—but no; no more is seen,
Though hundreds lie to shout ‘ Haere mai ! ’
The maids must first display their graces,
Then we’ll gaze on warriors’ faces.
maidens’ welcome
Softly and gently and chanting most sweetly.
Uplift they their welcome, ‘ Haere mai! Haere mai! ’
With knees bent gracefully, with slow step and gesture
As soft as the panther, yet queenly and stately.
Hark ! now it is changing, in chorus they’re joining;
It swells and it rings, it bursts forth triumphant.
In voice and in gesture, in body and limb,
Their welcome is spoken, ‘Naumai! naumai!
How nimbly they foot it, how supple their bodies;
Ye nymphs and ye naiads, beware of your laurels!
These children untutored, by Nature endowed,
May charm yet Apollo, the god of all graces.


CHANT WHILE WITHDRAWING
Kihei aku mihi i pau atu, e hine!
Rokohanga koe ka pikauria e !
But now behold the nymphs subside,
The rhythmic motion’s ceased, and lo !
The ranks give way, the van files off.
Unfolding terrors to our view.
Rows of warriors, dusky war-like,
Line the earth and make it bristle ;
All recumbent, silent, speechless,
Seeming in lethargic sleep.
THE MEN’S WELCOME
Aotearoa’s sons, ye warriors stern,
Awake ! awake ! they come ! they come !
‘Welcome, ye strangers; Naumai ! Naumai!
Respond ye to the call so feebly,
Though your war-paint glows so fiercely !
‘ Welcome ye strangers ! Haere mai! haere mai !
Ha! ye sluggards, raise your voices,
Up and stamp and tread like Maoris !
’Tis the haka, powhiri, war-dance,
Fierce and warlike, savage, martial!
THE WHAKAARA
Ko te nvi Maori e ngunguru nei! An, au, au e ha!
Ko te iwi Maori e ngunguru nei! Au, au, au e ha!
Ko nga hoi katoa ra, tau tangata e taoho ai koe, Taoho
Ha ! your blood is coursing now !
Ha! your spirit’s roused at last!
Ha ! the welcome rings out clear !
Powhiritia atu! Haere mai! Haere mai!
Heads erect and bodies stately.
Proud, imperious, yet be graceful;
Arms and limbs in rhythm moving,
Mars, Apollo, are reviewing.


THE GRAND POWHIRI
Tena i whiua!
With motion majestic, their arms now wide sweeping
Now circles describing, then to heav’n uplifted,
Their bodies set firmly, yet limbs in mid-air!
Tena i takahia !
With knee joints set loose
With frenzy in gesture, with eyebrows contracting,
With eyes glowing fiercely, with bounding and leaping !
But, mark, mild Apollo the War-god is soothing.
Powhiritia atu ! Haere mai! Haere mai!
Ha ! warriors are leaping; the ranks they are surging ;
The War-god has conquered; the war-cry is raised !
’Tis sounding, ’tis swelling, ’tis roaring, ’tis thund’ring !
Ha ! Frenzy, thou workest; ’tis blood now they smell.
‘ The battle ! the battle ! our taiahas and meres! ’
They shout as they leap; a madness has seized them.
‘Take ki to kai rangatira! Tako!’
THE POI-DANCE
by Sir A. T. Ngata
THE SINGLE PC) I
As the visitors halt, and stand at ease, expectant, the poi ranks
bow to the knee, while the mass of warriors behind, with one
stentorian shout, raise their spears and taiahas aloft, then sink
crouching to the ground. As the vibrating sounds of the tuku die
away, and the soft murmurs of welcome are hushed, the women
advance in two ranks to dance the poi, their two leaders, both
men, slightly ahead, one on each wing. The right leader opens
with a chant, and ere he pauses to take breath the left leader
catches the measure, and so the song alternates from right to
left and back again. Between them the ranks, in perfect time,
quickening as the measure hurries on, accompany the song
with the poi—the poi of which the Maoris sing—
Taku aroha kite ran o te poi,
To putiputi pai e, piri kite uma i ra !


How my heart longs for the poi leaf !
How beautiful a flower it is to grace
Thy breast, my love !
The poi balls commence to spin ; the deft hands twirling them
move up and down, side-ways, backwards and forwards, hover-
ing now over the shoulders, now over and across the knees, the
whirling balls appearing to surround, as with a network of
gossamer, the bodies of the dancers, as they sway from side to
side, lifting alternate feet and throwing one across gently forward
with a lilting motion giving the general effect of a waltz step.
The women are handsome and shapely; they wave with grace;
they sing soft words of welcome with musical notes in exact
accord of time, in a strangly attractive monotone. With flashing
teeth and smiling lips, and beaming great eyes, they keep their
pois twirling and swaying with daintiest play of arm and wrist,
rhythmic swaying of bodies from side to side. Sometimes the
song speaks of welcome ; sometimes it grows sad and slows down
to a weird lament; now it quickens with a note of triumph as
the maidens bow in salute to the visiting rangatiras; anon it
wanders gracefully over many appropriate themes. The whole
effect is entrancing. The deliciously soft voices, the perfectly
ordered motion, the bright colours of dress and mat and piupiu,
moving with brilliant beauty, together with the white kotuku
feather against the dark hair, complete a singularly graceful
and delicate example of the poetry of motion.
At length conies the end, like the finale of some admired
composition, the approach of which gives the absorbed listener
a pang of regret. As the pois flash overhead the command rings
out suddenly. The poetry and the motion cease at once ; the
flashing colours are still; the infinite variety of the faces give
place to a settled gravity, and at the same instant each poi ball
glides down over the right breast of its owner, and is caught
firmly in her left hand. Then the fluttering ranks bow once
more to the knee, a long, steady, courteous salute. The single
poi dance was over.
THE DOUBLE POI
As this group of dancers file off with dainty precision there is
disclosed a second group of dusky wahine, some dressed in the
plain, light-coloured korowai, others in the kahu-kiwi, the sombre,


yet valuable kiwi feather mat. They come lightly tripping into
line, with three little maids in front to marshal and lead. And
these they do right well, with little voices firmly raised in
command—they are high born damsels, and command is natural
to them. The poi is as picturesque, as graceful and beautiful as
the first, but much more intricate and bewildering. It opens with
a quick schottische measure, that causes the poi balls to beat
and spin and twirl with amazing rapidity. Every now and then
the ranks, which stand slightly extended, two deep, wheel by
sections to the right, forming fours, to the accompaniment of
the plaintive ditties and the weird notes of the flute or koauau.
Then one realises in a flash the ingenuity of the colour arrange-
ment, dark and white. As the poi faces the visitors two deep,
white alternates with black; as they form fours, the white and
black are grouped in sections apart; and on returning to line
the two colours come together again with beautiful effect. The
whole is set off by the solid background of the crouching
warriors, with spears aslant, dug lightly into the earth.
Presently the accompanying music seems to glide into a
seductive waltz. And was there ever a stranger dance set to
music than this? Before the second bar is reached there is a
change in the ranks, which are now in quincunx formation, the
white in front, the black in the rear showing between. The
rhythm having changed, the motion is subdued to a slow gliding
swing, the faces of the dancers half-turned to the right. In their
hands they now grasp two pois, one in each hand, and with
these they bewitch all who gaze upon them. One whirls in a
half circle from shoulder to head, while the other sinks from
head to breast, to linger a brief moment ere both flash outwards
and circle down to meet the knee. With bodies swaying forwards
the dancers step brightly and bring the pois up, merrily playing
round each other until level with the breast; then with a half
turn the right poi glances outwards and touches the next dancer
on the shoulder, while the left poi lingers twirling at an angle
to the left of the head. And ever the black and white change
places, mingle, or draw up into one long rank of alternate light
and shade, or wheel to right or left in fours, to no command
other than the unwearied strains of the small band of Maori
musicians.


See page 32, item 12
women’s action song
Uia mai koia, whakahuatia ake
Ko wai te waka nei, e ?
Te Arawa
Ko wai te tohunga o runga ?
Whakakau Matatua, hei !
Whakakau Tokomaru, hei !
Ka u Te Arawa ki Maketu,
Pakia !
A Ngatoroirangi,
Nana i noho te kei te waka ;
Aue ! Aue ! ka rant koe Toro e.
WAR DANCE OR PERUPERU
Uhi mai te waero !
O, ko roto ko taku puta,
He puta aha te puta ?
He puta tohu te puta,
E rua nei ko te puta,
Hue !
Ko Ngatoroirangi ! Ko Ngatoroirangi !
Whakakau Tainui, hei !
Ko Tamatekapua te tangata o runga,
Me awhi o ringa kite ruahine
PRINTED BY AVHITCOMBE & TOMBS LIMITED


t SKiIMO SOSI £
