

ss<r
goodwood Presbyterian Church
Souvenir of Jubilee
Rev. Robert Itlitcheil
(157M022)
* *
*
Tebrnary 10,25, 26, and 27,1022




Goodwood Presbyterian Church
(Incorporated)
Officers t
minister:
Rev. Robert Mitchell.
eiders:
Robert Mitchell (Moderator),
Mervyn F. Culliford, James T. Hobbs
Edgar H. Lowe, Robert J. Chesney,
John 11 . Snell, John Steel.
Board of management
Thos. G. Souter.
Wilfred W. Paris, M.M.
William Anderson.
Malcolm McKechnie.
David W. Arnott.
Edward Tweeddale, sen.
Edgar L. Bean, M.A.
John Edgar.
Arthur T. P. Hanson
Clerk of Session —Mervyn F. Culliford.
Church Secretary —John Edgar.
Church Treasurer —-Edgar H. Lowe.
Organist —Arthur T. P. Hanson.
Choir Conductor —John Steel.


foreword
This little book is issued as a memento
of an occasion which is marked by a two-
fold event The Rev. Robert Mitchell,
after a career in the Presbyterian ministry
in South Australia, which has won him
honour and affection among all sections
of the community, is at the same time
celebrating his Jubilee as a minister of
the Gospel and retiring from active
work.
Such an occasion was deemed a fitting
time for placing on record some account
—necessarily brief and incomplete—of
Mr. Mitchell’s life. It is hoped, there-
fore, that besides serving as souvenir of
the commemoration services for those who
are present on the 19th and 26th of
February, 1922, this book may also be
not without interest for Mr. Mitchell’s
friends in other parts of South Australia.


Rev. R. mitcbell and his work
Who is the happy warrior? Who is he
Whom every man in arms should wish to be ?
It is the generous spirit, who, when brought
Among the tasks of real life, hath wrought
Upon the plan that pleased his childish thought:
Whose high endeavours are an inward light
That make the path before him always bright.
Wordsworth.
He who surveys as a whole the life work
of the Rev. R. Mitchell will see that it
possesses the unity of a work of art.
There runs throughout one dominant
note with which all lesser details are
consistent and to which they are sub-
ordinate. There are no irrelevant parts.
There seem no false starts. Like the
happy warrior Mr. Mitchell has wrought
upon the plan that pleased his childish
thought. In early years lie conceived the
idea that his life’s work was to be the
ministry of the Church, and to this idea —
ministry, which is service—he has been
consistently faithful. In his life there
has been no self-seeking. To the idea
of service he has sacrificed considerations
of money. He has always laboured where
the need has been greatest. No one' has
ever found him too weary to do a kind
act, nor too preoccupied to give a
courteous greeting. Few are aware of the
full extent of his benevolence. Indeed,
in this respect one might almost say that
he sometimes needs to be protected against
his own charitable instincts. But it is
not here proposed to describe in detail the
faithful, benevolent, and gracious char-
acter which lias won Mr. Mitchell friends
innumerable throughout the Common-
wealth. At this stage all one need do is
to suggest that the keynote to Mr.
Mitchell’s life and character is to be found
in unswerving devotion to one great end
—the service of God. The facts of his
life which are outlined hereunder sub-
stantiate this to the full.


Kiork prior to Goodwood
Mr. Mitchell was born in the modest
village of Meigle, on the east coast of
Scotland, in 1851. His father and mother
belonged to the Established Church of
Scotland. On his mother’s side he traces
his descent from the Scottish Covenanters
who, away back in the seventeenth cen-
tury, fought for the right to adhere to
their own form of worship. In 1855 as
a lad of four he landed in South Aus-
tralia. It was just four years later that
an ‘ event occurred which influenced the
course of all his later life. It happened
that the boy of eight years was taken
to hear a most impressive sermon. So
great was the effect of this upon his mind
that there and then he formed the resolu-
tion to be a minister when grown up.
Ten years later that resolution was still
strong upon him. In his seventeenth year
a great spiritual change occurred in his
nature. A new vision of life appeared,
accompanied by an intense longing to be
used of God for the saving of souls. Fol-
lowing this impulse the aspiring minister
began to prepare addresses and to deliver
them to imaginary audiences from a rock
pulpit in a quiet valley. On 12th June,
1870, as a lad of not yet nineteen, Mr.
Mitchell’s first public attempt at speak-
ing was made. It was at Springton. The
place of meeting was a private room
adjoining a bootmaker’s shop. Forty
persons were present. The text (2 Peter
iii. 10), although too difficult a passage
for a tyro to expound fully, was made the
ground of a strong appeal for a decision.
At the conclusion of the service one
member of the congregation ventured to
remark that the address was “not too bad
for a beginner.”
It was about this time that the way was
opened for giving effect to the resolution
referred to before. Mr. Mitchell applied
to the authorities to be received as a
student for the ministry, and his applica-
tion was—though not without hesitation—
granted. For some time private studies
were carried on under the patient and
4


wise' stimulus of the Rev. James Roddick.
In 1869, however, Mr. Mitchell trans-
ferred to Adelaide and attended Whinham
College. In the absence of any Theol-
ogical Institution (for at that time South
Australia had not even a University) the
work of fitting theological students for
their life calling was undertaken by the
Presbytery. Three years were spent in
undergoing the training of a theological
student. As fellow-candidates for the
ministry Mr. Mitchell had John McEwin
and J. Hall Angus. ,
morß at Clare
Six mouths before Mr. Mitchell had
completed his studies he received a
unanimous call from the Presbyterian
Church at Clare. This call, however,
Presbyterian Church, Clare
could not be dealt with until he had com-
pleted his course. The Presbytery, how-
ever, rose to the occasion, as is shown by
the following minute dated 6th February,
1872;—“That inasmuch as Mr. Mitchell
had not yet received license as a preacher
in accordance with the rules and usages
of the Church, the Presbytery, after much
reasoning, agreed to recognize it as an
exceptional case. It was accordingly
arranged that Mr. Mitchell be taken on
5


trials for license, that the supply of the
Church at Clare be in the meantime
confided to him; that the Rev. R. Hain-
ing be appointed to officiate at Clare
on Sabbath first, meet with the people
and intimate to them the action of the
Presbytery in relation to their call.” In
obedience to this arrangement, Mr.
Mitchell took up the work in Clare on
the 17th of February, 1872. The instruc-
tions given to him were to play the part
of a minister in every possible way, and
to build up the congregation for his
ultimate settlement there.
With manly vigour the congenial task
was begun. People responded heartily to
the young student's efforts and rallied round
him in an encouraging way. In due time
the trials for license were undergone, and
three months later—on the 20th August,
1872—Mr. Mitchell was set apart to the
work of the ministry by the laying on
of hands of the Presbytery. It was the
first ordination of a Presbyterian minister
in South Australia. Previous ministers
had all received their dedication prior to
arrival in this country. As Mr. Mitchell
had accepted the call to Clare before he
was ordained, his ordination was accom-
panied by induction to the charge at
Clare. Two days later his marriage with
Miss Mary B. Fraser, who has been his
faithful helpmeet throughout his ministry,
took place in Flinders Street Church,
Adelaide, and the manse in Clare became
their first home. Ten years of hard work
were spent in that country charge. Going
thither straight from College, and having
to face many of the harder problems of
life, with little assistance, proved an ordeal
of no small dimensions for a young man.
There were several men of advanced years
and experience in the congregation. These
were the guardians of orthodoxy and
order. They were veritable sermon-
tasters, and the youthful preacher was
often called upon to explain and justify
the utterances which he had made in the
pulpit. Such was not without
good results, especially as it was carried
on in a kindly spirit. The little cause
6


grew during the decade, and there were
many tokens of God’s favour manifest.
Besides the local expansion, regular visits
were made to the surrounding districts,
and the Gospel preached wherever oppor-
tunity offered. These missionary tours
bore fruit in due season in the establish-
ment of preaching stations at Koolunga,
Collinsfield, Woodlands, and Blyth. At
the last-named place, eight miles from
Clare, as a result of Mr. Mitchell’s efforts,
a comfortable Church was erected. The
congregation was established as a branch
Church in connection with the Clare pas-
torate. Service was held there every
Sunday afternoon, thus necessitating the
Presbyterian Church, Port Augusta
conduct of three l diets of worship each
Sunday between the two Churches. Mr.
Mitchell also conducted a flourishing
Bible Class at Blyth which met half an
hour after the afternoon service. The
idea of a mission to the shearers was also
taken up. Yearly gatherings of these men
were held and the services much appre-
ciated.
Port Augusta
Time passed quickly, as usually happens
when one’s hands are full. When Mr.
Mitchell’s ministry in Clare had become
a spiritual force in the lives of the people,
7


an urgent cry for help came from the
North. Port Augusta had initiated a
cause in her midst and wanted a man to
take it in hand. The lot fell on Mr.
Mitchell. Although the wrench was
severe he was induced to face it, owing
to the wider field of opportunity pre-
sented. There was a land boom on at
Port Augusta at the time; the population
increased rapidly; and commercial in-
terests were flourishing. The services held
at the Institute Hall were well attended.
A large number of men and women came
into the kingdom during those meetings.
Among the number were men who had
served the world with all their might;
and when they came over the line they
manifested a like zeal in the cause of their
new Master. Such were Elder Holds-
worth, that marvel of saving grace, and
Elders Barratt, Arnold, Black, Driscoll,
and White. Steps were taken to build a
Church in the town. Land was dear,
and the erection of a Church was an
expensive process. Half an acre cost
£I,OOO. The Church cost £1,300 and the
manse £BOO. At the time of opening
there was an audience of 300 worshippers.
For three months every prospect was
pleasing. Then came the commercial
slump with a vengeance. Within a few
weeks forty families, chiefly of the artisan
type, were compelled to seek fresh fields.
Days of trial for the congregation came
quickly and stayed long. Still, the brave
remnant gathered round their minister
and held up his hands. The outward
depression was tempered by fellowship of
a sacred order and devoted Christian ser-
vice. The Public Hospital and Stirling
Goal were visited regularly. A preaching
station was opened at Winninowie, and
this was followed by the erection of a
comfortable Church.
A scheme for the training and recog-
nition of laymen to enable them to exer-
cise the gift of preaching was drafted
by Mr. Mitchell. This scheme was
adopted by the Presbytery of Belalie.
Elder Holdsworth was the first candidate
successfully trained under the scheme.
8


Beltana—Cbc Smith of Duncsk mission
Thirteen years went by amid many
discouragements, and more than many
blessings. In 1894 the Smith of Dunesk
Bequest was discovered amid the archives
of the Presbyterian Church by the late
Rev. W. P. Main. Negotiations were
opened up with the Free Church of
Scotland, with the result that a field of
operations suggested by Mr. Mitchell
was agreed upon, and he was nominated
as the man to inaugxxrate the Mission at
Beltana. After the loyalty shown by the
Port Augusta charge, however, the
thought of withdrawing could not be
entertained unless suitable provision were
made to fill the vacancy. After various
Presbyterian Hall, Beltana
schemes had been proposed, Mr. Mitchell
said to Elder Holdsworth, “I can only
leave my post, if yon will keep the flag-
flying at the old fort.” The reply was,
“By God’s help ITI try.” He did try
and God greatly helped him and honoured
him. For twenty-two years that Elder
played the part of minister, preaching
twice a Sunday at Port Augusta and
taking a third service at Winninowie,
sixteen miles distant, every second Sun-
day, besides faithfully discharging his
duty as Town Clerk during the week.
Probably there is no such other record
beneath the Southern Cross. This splen-
did courage enabled the minister to face
9


the call of the Assembly and take over
the responsibility of opening the Smith
of Dunesk Mission. This Mission, thus
begun by Mr. Mitchell, was destined to
have a great future. The Australian
Inland Mission whose activities are now
spreading over the whole of Central Aus-
tralia, is the lineal descendant of Mr.
Mitchell’s Mission in the North. One
may predict with confidence that whatever
the future holds in store for the A.1.M.,
that Mission will go down to posterity
forever associated with the name of Mr.
Mitchell. He was. particularly suited to
the work. His tact, his infinite patience,
and his complete freedom from all cant
and insincerity were calculated to make
him a favourite with the men of the
North, who are not always of a tractable
disposition, and who* are quick to discern
the smallest suspicion of humbug. In his
work Mr. Mitchell was fortunate in his
choice of a helpmeet. His second daughter,
Agnes, volunteered to act as organist,
companion, and general helper. Fixing
headquarters at Beltana, and supplied by
the Smith of Dunesk Committee with a
beautiful buggy and a pair of saltbush
horses, they began a useful work in a
hitherto much neglected country. Jour-
neys were made to the out-back stations,
to boundary riders’ huts, prospectors’
camps, Government bores and mines, as
well as to the townships along the line of
rail. Four years and eight months were
spent in this attractive field of labour.
Then owing to a breakdown in his
daughter’s health, and the pressure of
family claims, he reluctantly withdrew
from Beltana. Six months prior to this,
the Goodwood charge, through its Moder-
ator (Rev. J. T. Robertson, M.A.), sent
an overture for the consideration of a
transfer to that centre. Mr. Mitchell’s
reply was “that until a successor was
found he could not think of quitting the
work in hand.” In the end of 1895 he
was relieved of the agency of the Smith
of Dunesk Mission and joined his family
in Adelaide. The call to Goodwood was
passed through the Presbytery in January,
10


1899, and accepted by Mr. Mitchell, and
on the 24th of that month he was inducted
into his fourth and last charge.
Ulork at Goodwood
The welcome given to Mr. Mitchell at
Goodwood was very hearty. The numbers
present and the interest displayed were
sufficient to show the forces of the con-
gregation when once they were mobilized.
The addresses delivered by Dr. Paton,
Rev. J. T. Robertson, Rev. W. S. Moore
(Anglican), and others were inspired by
hopefulness. It was pointed out that in
the previous twenty years of the Church’s
existence there had been several ministers
in charge, but that the length of the com-
bined pastorates covered little more than
seven years. That left thirteen years
during which the pulpit of the Church
had been chiefly supplied by laymen. The
three Elders—James McLellan, James
Laught, and William Andrew—had
carried a heavy burden in the administra-
tion of affairs. Be it said to the credit of
Mr. McLellan specially that he gave a
great deal of his time in this direction.
The only institutions within the congre-
gation were the Sunday School, the
Choir, the Fellowship Association, and the
Society of Christian Endeavour. The
membership roll stood at 57 and the
adherents numbered 36. When Mr. Mit-
chell took over the leadership no radical
changes were introduced. The old order
proceeded so quietly that when some new
feature appeared it came without a shock
and generally without opposition. The
pastoral work was set in motion with
vigour. People saw their minister in
their own homes, got to know him, and
he to know them by common consent, the
two first requisites of a successful ministry.
Strangers were looked up and welcomed.
A good many who from various causes had
ceased attendance were approached in a
friendly way with the result that most of
them were glad to receive a welcome back
to the old fold. The membership began
to increase as time wore on, specially
11


among the young people. The Rev. James
Lyall, formerly of Flinders Street, a
minister greatly respected and one who
had stood by Mr. Mitchell from the
latter’s student days, came to reside in
Goodwood. It was not long before the
congregation invited Mr. Lyall to the
Eldership. This was followed by his
appointment as Session Clerk. For several
year’s he and Mrs. Lyall rendered whole-
hearted help to the minister and to the
cause. Other branches of service were
opened up. The Endeavour Society
Rev. R
Mitchell
maintained regular meetings at Haw-
thorn until the erection of a Church
there and the establishment of an
organized congregation. The same Society
also found a sphere of profitable labour
in the holding of cottage services in
different parts of the parish. These were
greatly appreciated,
came from the choir.
Valuable assistance
Mr. John McLellan
proved an ideal conductor for many years.
Under his inspiration, large sums of
money were raised for religious and
12


charitable purposes. The Psalmody of the
Church was made both pleasing and im-
pressive. This organization should have
existed still, but for an unhappy differ-
ence which arose. All efforts to save the
situation proved unavailing, and a large
majority of the members, including the
conductor and organist, withdrew from
the congregation. After a time a new
choir was enrolled with Mr. John Steel
as leader. This appointment has yielded
satisfactory results to all concerned. The
songs of Zion continue to be rendered
Mrs. Mitchell
with increasing efficiency. In 1906, Mr.
Mitchell made a visit to Scotland. The
scenes of early boyhood were revived, and
the land of his fathers traversed almost
from end to end. Opportunity was taken
to hear the best preachers in Scotland,
England, and Wales. All manner of
religious institutions were inspected.
Leaders of religion were consulted and
Church methods inquired into. On the
return journey a short tour was made to
Palestine. Such places as Jaffa, Jerusalem,
Jericho, the Jordan, Dead Sea, and
13


Bethlehem were visited. This furlough,
together with the impressions created,
seemed to open a new chapter in the life
and preaching of the Goodwood minister.
Lectures were given, addresses and ser-
mons delivered, all of which were intended
to make others sharers of the delightful
experiences. During 1910 Mr. Mitchell
suffered from a relaxed throat, and was
ordered by the doctor to the milder winter
of Queensland. Compliance with this
mandate was made possible through Mr.
R. J. Burrow (now of the Bolivian Indian
Mission, South America) undertaking the
supply of the Goodwood pulpit. For five
months he officiated with great acceptance
to the people. Mr. Mitchell’s work in
Goodwood has extended over twenty-three
years. During the war period pastoral
duty not only increased, but was intensi-
fied. The enlistment of 100 men, including
a doctor and a trained nurse, increased
the responsibility and the anxiety
immeasurably. Comforting the afflicted
homes, bearing news of bereavement,
praying for the soldiers and for victory,
preaching to a people loaded with appre-
hension, and from time to time conducting
“in memoriam” services for the fallen,
these were circumstances which had to be
faced continually, but through it all there
was no misgiving and no stinting of
ministration. In this connection it
should be recorded that a Soldiers’ Mis-
sion was formed, with Mr. Culliford as
Chairman and Miss Maggie Alexander as
Secretary. The object in view was to care
for the men at the Front, to provide them,
with comforts, and to send each man a
birthday and a Christmas parcel yearly.
This scheme brought many a letter of
genuine gratitude from the members of
the Church at the Front.
In the matter of oversight Mr. Mitchell
has been blest with the help of faithful
men. Though death from time to time
robbed the Session of worthy members,
others were found to fill the vacancies.
The deceased members are; Mr. James
McLellan, Mr. William Andrew, the
Rev. James Lyall, Messrs. R. Edwards,
14


H. J. Driscoll, James Laught, and Wm.
Alexander. Tire present occupants of tire
position are; Elders M. F. Culliford, R.
J. Chesney, J. H. Snell, J. T. Hobbs,
J. Steel, and E. H. Lowe. The 'personnel
of the Board of Management lias changed
almost at the same rate, though there
have been fewer deaths. Both bands of
men have rendered loyal help to their
minister and thereby have made his
burden lighter. Outside the regular work
of the parish, Mr. Mitchell has taken
a share of responsibility. His attendances
at the Church Courts and Committee
meetings has never flagged. He has
taken his turn with members of Presby-
tery to visit the Adelaide Hospital for
Mitchell Home, Beltana
two months in each year. In missionary
enterprise and temperance reform he has
also played an influential part. Since the
opening of his Goodwood ministry he has
acted as Convener of the Smith of Dunesk
Committee. The Medical Hostel at
Oodnadatta was for years under his care,
and for the past three years the Home at
Beltana designated the “Mitchell Home”
by the General Assembly as a memorial
of Mr. Mitchell’s work fared the same.
This Northern work has always held a
place of favour in his heart, and any-
thing to further its progress has never
been grudged. The following figures will
15


Total admissions to membership
287
Disjunctions
183
Baptisms
333
Funerals
328
Marriages
256
show something of the visible results
attending his labours at Goodwood :
Some idea of the expansion of Church
activities during Mr. Mitchell’s ministry
will be gained from the following list,
which shows the various Church institu-
tions that he leaves behind him in full
swing:
Sunday School. Girls’ Guild.
Choir. Hockey Club.
Kindergarten. Tennis Club.
P.W.M.U. Men’s League.
Junior Endeavour.
Young Men’s Bible Class.
Young Women’s Bible Class.
Boys’ Gymnasium.
Girls’ Fellowship Society.
League of Young Worshippers.
These facts and figures speak of the
scope and amount of the work Mr. Mitchell
has done in Goodwood. But they cannot
express the spirit in which all his labours
have been carried out and which has
earned him the gratitude and affection of
all those with whom he has come into con-
tact. The sick and the dying have always
been the subject of his unremitting care.
The bereaved have never lacked his sym-
pathy. His manner—simple, direct, and
pleasing, coupled with the wide range of
his interests—has always served to put
him at once in sympathy with all classes
of people. He has, to a remarkable ex-
tent, the “common touch.” He is
equally at home with the young and the
aged, with the rich and the poor, with
the mighty and the humble. As a
preacher, Mr. Mitchell has always been
original and practical. His sermons are
marked by sanity and, above all, by
commonsense. The subtleties of the phil-
osopher have no great interest for him
—he is a man with a plain message' and
an advocate' of a plain course of conduct.
Action, not argument, interests him. For
16


him the Gospel is clear and imperative,
and no fit subject for arguing about.
Though he is a man of mild disposition,
one class of persons never fails to rouse
Mr. Mitchell’s moral indignation, namely,
the class of persons whose reason blinds
their faith, and who arrogate to them-
selves the function of criticising God and
His works and the Christian religion. In
his daily life Mr. Mitchell is a man of
regular habits and exact punctuality in
all things. To this, combined with his
unflagging industry, may be attributed
his success in the performance of his very
many parochial duties. And, above all,
Mr. Mitchell is a man from whose mind
the spiritual aspect of life is never
Oodnadatta Hostel
absent. One can call to mind few in-
stances in which a human character has
so fused the practical and the spiritual
and made religion a matter of daily life.
Such in brief compass are some of the
characteristics of him whose retirement
after fifty years of active ministry we now
celebrate. Of him it may truly be said
that he retires full of years and honour.
The last of his fifty years has been as full
of work well done as the first. For Mr.
Mitchell has always been a man who
realized that the road winds up hill all the
way, and that the burden must be borne
to the very end. May he long be spared
that his noble example may continue
to be an inspiration to all.
17


Jubilee Services
Sunday, February iv, 1922
morning Service : n a.m.
Doxology —634, "Praise God.”
Invocation and Lord’s Prayer (chanted).
Psalm xxiv. 7-10—“ Ye gates, lift up.”
(Tune, "St. George’s, Edinburgh.”)
Prayer.
Quintette —“O Thou whose glory”
(Hoot), Mesdames A. Fuss and J.
Tester, Miss J. Steel, Messrs. J.
Steel and A. Harrison.
Scripture Lesson—Hebrews xi.
Hymn— lB, “Praise, my soul, the King
of Heaven.”
Announcements and Offering.
Anthem—“o give thanks” (Maker)
(Soloist, Mr. S. R. Edgar).
Sermon —Right Rev. Hugh Morris
(Moderator).
“The Transitory and the Abiding.”
Solo—“O rest in the Lord’ ’ (Mendelssohn),
Miss Elsie Zeugofsge.
Hymn— 2os, “Jesus, Thou Joy of Loving
Hearts.”
Benediction.
18


Jubilee services
Sunday, Tebruary 19,1922
evening Service { 7 run.
Invocation.
Psalm xliii. 3-s—“O send Thy Light
forth.” (Tune, “Invocation.”)
Prayer.
Hymn— 379, “Worship the Lord.”
Scripture Lesson— John ix.
Anthem— “ Softly the Silent Night”
(Winn) (Soloist, Miss M. Steel).
Prayer and Lord’s Prayer (chanted).
Announcements and Offering.
Offertory Solo — “O Divine Redeemer”
(Gounod), Miss Dorothy Culliford.
Hymn-273, “Courage, Brother!”
Sermon—Rev. Geo. Davidson, D.D.
“The Necessity of Christian Belief.”
Anthem— “ Sing a Song of Praise”
( S tainer ).
Hymn— 43B, “Jesus shall Reign.”
Benediction.
19


farewell Services
Sunday, February 26,1922
morning Service: n a.m.
Preacher: Rev. Robert mitchell
Doxology— 634, “Praise God.”
Invocation and Lord's Prayer (chanted).
Psalm cm. 1-5 —(Tune, “Crimond.”)
Scripture Lesson— l Cor. i. 18-31.
Prayer.
Solo— “ The Lost Chord” (Sullivan),
Mr. Arthur Harrison.
Announcements and Offering.
Children’s Address.
Hymn— s 93, “Safe in the Arms of Jesus.”
Sermon— “A Divine Gospel” (Gal. i. 11).
Anthem—“o Love that casts out Fear”
( Marks).
Hymn— 294, “O God of Bethel.”
Benediction.
20


farewell Services
Sunday, fcbruary 26,1922
Evening Service; 7 p.m.
Preacher : Rev. Revert mitcheii
Invocation.
Hymn— 3o6, “The Sands of Time.”
Prayer.
Hymn— 4s9, “Through the Night of
Doubt and Sorrow.”
Scripture Lesson —John xvii
Prayer and Lord’s Prayer (chanted).
Hymn— 2Bl, “Through the Love of God.”
Announcements and Offering.
Offertory Solo— “ The Prayer Perfect”
(Baynes), Mr. Edgar H. Lowe.
Sermon — “Able to keep” (Jude v. 24).
Anthem — “Lead, Kindly Light” (Back)
Hymn— 9s, “Crown Him with many
Crowns.”
Benediction.
“May God bless and keep you
Till the day break,
And the shadows flee away.”
21


farewell Social, goodwood institute
Chursdav, february ij, 1022
$ p.m.
Chairman: Ren. m. Tloyd Shannon,
B Ji, 0.8. G.
Speakers:
Right Rev. Hugh Morris (Moderator).
Rev. Geo. Davidson, D.D.
J. Holdsworth, Esq.
J. Cram, Esq.
(The above represent the S.A. State
Assembly.)
Rev. J. P. H. Tilbrook, B.A. (Unley
Ministerial Association).
Mr. M. F. Cullipord (Session Clerk
Goodwood).
T. H. Smeaton, Esq. (Chairman Test!
monial Committee).
During the evening the Choir will
render the following :
1. Part Song— “ Night, lovely Night”
(Berger).
2. Madrigal —“lt was a Lover and his
Lass” (Morleyj.
3. Part Song—“ When lengthening
Shades” (Woolley).
4. Glee— “ The Fisherman’s Good Night’
(Bishop).
Refreshments .
AN INVITATION
You are cordially invited to attend the
above Farewell Social tendered to Mr.
Mitchell in the Goodwood Institute.
Reception 7.30 p.m.
Meeting 8 p.m.
22


farewell Communion Service
monday, february 27, at« p.m.
Dader-. Rco, aim. «rav
Introit —“ The Sacrifices of God”
( Grampian ).
Invocation
Hymn —4ll, “I am not worthy.”
Scripture Lesson —l Cor. xiii.
Hymn —4o7, “ ’Twas on that night.”
Prayer and Lord’s Prayer (chanted).
Anthem— “ Rock of Ages” (Buck).
Sermon—Rev. J. A. Seymour, M.A.,
S.T.H. “Christ’s appeal to Memory
Hymn —4l9, “Till He come.”
Communion
(Rev. Robt. Mitchell presiding).
Hymn —4l7, “By Christ Redeemed.”
Benediction.
23


53 i?
GILLINGHAM. SWANN & CO., |
LIMITED,
|| PRINTERS. ADELAIDE. fj
A 4-7487 fe' s


K . .V v. ... ■


