

TWO SHILLINGS AND SIXPENCE
SOVIET
RUSSIA
AS I SAW IT
BY
E. SYLVIA
PANKHURST
M.H.W.


SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT.




SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT
BY
SYLVIA PANKHURST.
LONDON:
THE ‘ WORKERS* DREADNOUGHT ” PUBLISHERS,
152 FLEET STREET, E.C.4.
1921.




CONTENTS.
To Soviet Russia, across the Arctic Sea . 7
From Murmansk to Petrograd ... . 21
Moscow ....... 33
The Congress in the Ki’emlin . . .40
To Kolomna with Melanchansky . . 59
How the Communist Party is Organised . 65
At a Public Meeting . . . . 79
The Soviets ...... 84
The Co-operatives . . . . .100
The Russian Trade Unions . . .105
The House of the Mother and Child . .126
Babies’ Homes and Clinics . . .132
Commissariat of Public Health . . .136
Education ... . . . .139
The Rest Houses . . . . .146
At a Camouflage School . . . . 15’5
What Russia thought of the British Labour
Delegation . . . . .161
A Fire in the Train . . . . .167
What and Where is the Shortage? . .169
The Polish War . . . . .176
A Whiff of Alcohol . . . . .182
The Villages on the Arctic Coast . .185




CHAPTER I.
To Soviet Russia across the Arctic Sea.
Across the deserted quay I . went, in the pour-
ing rain, with two new-found comrades ; the big,
blonde Norwegian skipper and the little, dark-
eyed Finnish boy.
No Government officials were there to stop us.
Only the “ duty man,” a very informal
Customs’ officer in plain clothes, looked into my
bag, gave me a hand down the wooden steps,
and came with me and the skipper in the ferry
boat to the craft that would carry us over to
Soviet Russia.
I had been told that I should go over in the
‘ Soviet Steamer,” and had imagined a smart
vessel painted bright red, not large, but new and
well-fitted.
I found instead a little old motor fishing boat,
unpainted for many years, hey deck scarcely
eight feet across and her gear battered and
weatherworn. As a matter of fact, she was not
a Soviet boat at all; but the property of the
skipper, a Norwegian fisherman.
“ You’d better have stayed in England, than
be going to Russia a day like this,” the Customs’
officer said, a little sourly.


“ You’d like to be going yourself !” I re-
torted.
And so, from the low-lying Northern shore,
we bounded over the waves, away from
Capitalism.
But the sky was dark, the wind cold, and
the rain and spray would drench the stoutest
clothing. Three steps down the ladder led to
the tiny cabin, strongly smelling of oil, with two
four-foot bunks and a rusty stove.
“ If you’re sick, it’ll be bad for you,” the
skipper said.
I protested that I should not, but who could
be anything else in such a gale, in that boat that
tossed and pitched and plunged like a mad horse
rearing? It w 7 as as cold as the grave.
The skipper offered to “ put some fire in her,”
but I fancied the oil stove would fill the place
with smoke, and I groaned : “ No, no.”
The hatch was clapped down. Hours of
misery passed.
I found myself waking to a gentle swaying,
which melted softly and never jarred. A com-
forting warmth and a sweet scent of burning
wood filled the cabin. The skipper sat slicing
with his sharp knife another faggot for the
good stove; how I had misjudged it!
We were at anchor, and the noisy thud of the
little engine had ceased.
The storm had forced the skipper to make for
the nearest shelter, and he had found harbourage
in Russian waters beside a tocky, deserted shore.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


We lay tranquil here, and the hours slipped by
us.
Sometimes the skipper and his mate poured
hot coffee from the old copper kettle, and fried
.Norwegian fish cakes on the stove. Two brown-
faced Finns clambered on deck to examine the
skipper’s credentials.
Night and day were alike; sunrise following
sunset without a pause, the orb scarcely hiding
itself for a moment behind the horizon’s rim.
The following evening we re-started our
journey. A heavy swell still prevailed,
drenching the deck of our small craft over and
over again, and keeping the mate busy pumping
up greasy, black bilge-water from below. .
The sun was high and the heavens a splendid
blue, as at four o’clock in the afternoon, or nine
at night by Russian time, we reached Murmansk,
a two years’ old, war-bujlt town of wooden
houses.
Big grey ships, flying the Red Flag, and one
of them newly picked out with scarlet paint, lay
in the foreground. Their sailors and white-
coated kitchen-workers waved us a cheery wel-
come. A long line of railway waggons bordered
the wide harbour, but many of them were
broken and useless, and behind the big ships
Were battered and rusty submarines and various
other craft that had been submerged and hauled
up again from the deep. Damaged cranes,
smashed gun-carriages and sentry boxes, army
huts and stacks of old iron and other relics of
the Allied Militaxy occupation, were the principal
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


features of the place; but all had been tidily
arranged and sorted out, with a view to convert-
ing the material to the best possible uses.
Our skipper and a Finnish Comrade, named
Christiansen, whom we had taken on board the
night before, from Vaida Gouba, a fishing village,
were well-known to the cordial crowd of people
who awaited us at the landing.
Every one had an air of genial friendship and
happy confidence. A group of Comrades guided
us through the town, over the unpaved roads,
where one’s feet sink into the soft sand, and
where innumerable little pigs, playing like
children, race each other round the houses.
Murmansk is evidently preparing a great stock
of bacon!
Our destination was the commercial Port
Office and the local headquarters of the Third
International, which occupy one end of a single-
storied building, where live several working-class
families.
The official part of the building (which is also
the guest house and the dwelling of Comrade
Wastein, the Third International representative,
of a colleague of his and their wives) consists only
of three rooms, a kitchen and a square entrance
hall which serves as store-house and waiting-
room. Each of the three rooms is used both as
office and bed-room. The walls are covered with
a sort of oil-cloth painted white, the wood-work
is unpolished, the boarded floors cleanly scrubbed
and without mats or carpets. Electric light,
several typewriters and an abundance of
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 19W.


literature contrast with its otherwise primitive
features.
Everything is clean and in order.
It is a place of constant work, carried on in
quiet harmony, of homely and informal kind-
ness. Parcels of literature and letters pass con-
stantly through this office to and from
many countries. Communists, journeying as
exiles and fugitives, or as students and
propagandists, come here on their way to
Moscow and Petrograd, from America, Britain,
Norway, Sweden and other lands. Peasants and
fisher-folk from the neighbourhood are alw T ays
calling. Yet the atmosphere of the house is as
restful and smooth as the best managed English
home.
Comrade Mrs. Wastein, a charming girl,
dressed in white, brought! in the supper—a little
salt fish, black bread and butter and glasses of
coffee. After the meal was over and she had
cleared the table, she drew a white curtain
across the room, converting it into two, in one of
which she made up a bed for me, and in the
other a bed for herself and her husband. So, in
Russia one uses one’s household accommodation
to the full.
Next morning was Sunday.
All the Comrades in the house were so busy
that I Went alone to take a w T alk in the sunshine.
People w r ere strolling about with happy,
holiday faces; mothers and fathers with their
children. All were plainly and comfortably
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SATP IT IN 1920.


dressed. There were no signs of poverty or
suffering.
Men were fishing at the quay side
bringing up curious black and grey monsters with
huge mouths, and other fish that looked like
plaice. The Chinamen, < of whom there were
many, seemed to be getting most of the lucky
catches.
I searched out the little Norwegian boat and
hailed the skipper.
Hearing that I spoke English, a man came
forward and said obsequiously :
“ I have been in the British Army.-’
“ How was that?” I asked.
“ I have been an interpreter for both the
British and French Armies.”
“ But how was it that you were willing to
help them against Soviet Russia?”
He looked .sulky and disappointed that I,
being English, had not applauded him.
“ I know nothing of politics. I was mobilised.
If I had refused I should have been shot. I was
mobilised then, as I am mobilised now by the
Bolsheviki.”
“ For which side would you prefer to work?”
“ I care nothing for politics,” he answered
crossly, then added in a burst of anger, “ I hate
these Red politics.”
“ Why?”
“ We have nothing to eat; we die of hunger;
we live like dogs.”
Why?”
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


“ The Russian people are backward. The
country is backward. It has always been so
“ Many people were hungry before the War
also and under the Czar ?’ ’
“Oh yes, poor people, but not everyone. I
was a ship-owner and an officer in the Czar’s
volunteer fleet. It is worse now than in the
Czar’s time for people like me. The Russian
people will not work, except when forced by the
baton. No one works here now.”
“ But in England they say that there is
forced labour in Russia, and that everyone is
compelled to work for long hours.”
“ Yes, we are slaves! We are forced to work.
I am forced to work. We die of hunger. We
have nothing but the Red Flag! The leaders
have all that they desire; the citizens nothing.”
“ Have you any proof of that? Can you give
me facts?”
“ No one cares to work,” he went on, ignor-
ing my question. “We hafe tremendous
quantities of fish, but no one will go fishing,
because each must give what he catches to the
community.”
“ That would be selfish. But look, people are
fishing all around us!”
Close beside us a man. sitting at the quay’s
edge, had laid aside his rod and line for a
moment, to-cut himself a big slice of bread and
smoked salmon.
“ Oh yes, they just fish for themselves. People
don’t work now, they sleep till noon,”
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


Stt. he perpetually contradicted himself, in a
way which certain people from Russia had al-
ready made familiar to me.
- “ Pay no attention to him, he is one of the
Whites ' —a lying fellow; he asks me for to-
bacco, but I always say: ‘ None for you!’ ” in-
terposed the Norwegian skipper, climbing out of
his boat.
A Comrade soon summoned us to dinner with
Comrade Wastein : “ One of the leaders ” of
whom the “ White ” Russian had spoken.
Breakfast had consisted of black bread and
tea, with condensed milk brought bv a delegate
from Norway the week (before, and carefully
husbanded as an unusual luxury. For dinner
there were small helpings of thin soup, a very
little salt fish and a* few slices of potato, meagre
portions with which people in England would
not be content.
A meeting had been hastily summoned to
welcome me to Russia, and alongside the Petro-
grad train, contingents of Red soldiers and
sailors were lined up, wearing captured British
uniforms and displaying red flags and .banners,
A crowd of men, women and children of Mur-
mansk made up the rear. The “ International ”
w r as sung with a vigour I had never heard before.
Looking down on the people from the top
step of the railway carriage to speak to them,
I was impressed by their robust and comfortable
appearance.
Tamara Ketlinsky, who stood beside me,
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SA W IT IN 1920.


narrow-chested, thin and pale, was a marked
exception.
She was not a proletarian like the rest, and
when in London before the war, she lived in a
fashionable district near Hyde Park,
Her father was Military Commander of Mur-
mansk at the outbreak of the Bolshevik Revolu-
tion. He took the part of the Soviets and was
murdered by the counter-revolutionaries.
Tamara had been ill from overwork in the pro-
letarian cause. She was engaged in an office
and also in the women’s and young Communists’
organisations, trying to do the w r ork of three
persons.
Some of the Comrades decided to come an
hour’s journey in the train with me. One of
them, I w r as told, had«fought like a wolf in the
hills against the Whites,” blowing up bridges,
cutting telegraph wires and stopping trains.
Tamara Ketlinsky told me that a Soviet had
been set up in the Murmansk district at the
time of the first 1917 revolution, but like the
other Soviets at that time, it possessed no power.
Two days after the Revolution of October
1917, when the Bolsheviki seized the power and
handed it to an All-Russian Congress of Soviets
which had assembled, the Murmansk Soviet re-
ceived a telegram conveying the news and call-
ing upon it to assume the power of government
in its own district.
, Ketlinsky’s father, w'ho was Naval Commander
of the district, informed the officers under him
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920


that they must submit to the Soviet Govern-
ment.
The( Murmansk Soviet therefore came into
power without difficulty.
A British warship, Glory HI, already lay in the
harbour, but, as yet, the Allies took no hostile
steps.
One of Ketlinsky’s subordinate officers
journeyed often to Petrograd, and it was
rumoured that he went there to visit the Allied
Embassies.
Gradually he gathered a counter-revolutionary
clique around him, and presently Ketlinsky, the
good Commander, was assassinated by order of
this clique. Afterwards the counter-revolution-
ary. officer began to work openly in Murmansk
Soviet for separation from Moscow.
On July 12th, 1918, of the
British, French, and American Governments,
including the British Consul, Major-General
Poole, appeared in the Soviet to advocate separa-
tion from Moscow. When the Allied representa-
tives had spoken, the President of the Soviet
said : “ You see, comrades, if we refuse to
separate, the Allies will suppress us; if w T e
separate, they will continue allowing us to man-
age our own affairs.” Then a motion
to separate from Moscow was put, and,
though only a minority of those present
raised their hands for it, the motion was declared
carried, without the contrary being put.
Railway workers in the meeting protested
against this verdict, declaring that it would
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SA W IT IN 1920.


lead to war. The counter-revolutionary
newspapers asserted that the motion had been
carried unanimously.
The sailors on board the Russian cruiser
Askold, which was stationed at Murmansk, held
a meeting and decided to adhere to Moscow.
The Allies then seized the Askold, arrested
the Russian and *ent to Soviet
Russia; put a British crew aboard the Askold
and took her off to England, since when she has
never x'eturned.
In August 1918, the Allies took Archangel,
and at the beginning of November, an order
came from the Allied representatives that the
Murmansk .Soviet was to be dissolved and its
place taken by a Governor named Yermoloff. ■
In the spring of 1919 the Murmansk revolu-
tionaries planned an attempt to recapture power.
Held down by the autocratic discipline of the
Allies, they asked their permission to hold a de-
monstration to celebrate the anniversary of the
March Revolution, intending to make this
gathering the cover for their revolt.
The Allies somehow got wind of their scheme,
took precautions to forestall it, and forced the
ex-President of the Soviet and the Trade Union
leaders to issue a declaration that Yermoloff and
the Allies were acting in the best interests of
Russia.
All this Tamara Ketlinsky told me with much
earnestness.
She added, that anyone caught attempting
ievolutionary propaganda during the Allied occu-
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


pation, or speaking against the counter-revolu-
tionary North Russian Government, which the
Allies were maintaining, was sent to Yorkanger,
an isolated part of the coast, surrounded by
mountains. Its climatic conditions were very
bad, and not a tree existed there.
Ihe situation of the prisoners was kept secret
until some of them were brought to Murmansk
to be tried for an alleged attempt to escape.
1 hen it leaked out that the prisoners were only
allowed to .rise from their beds between 11 a.m.
and 1 p.m., and that if they attempted to do so
at other times, they were shot by a sentry who
pointed his gun through a window. There was
much illness amongst the prisoners, and many
died.
The British gradually withdrew from Mur-
mansk between September and October 1919,
leaving behind the North Russian Government,
in the effort to stabilise which, they had ex-
pended so much life and treasure. On February
21st a revolt against the North Russian Govern-
ment took place. The soldiers seized the guns
and ammunition and arrested the officers, eleven
of whom were killed on the spot, whilst three or
four others lost their lives in attempting to
escape. The greater part of the North Russian
Army, which had been formed by the “Whites,”
was then at the front, near Petrosavodsk, fighting
against the Soviet troops. The Murmansk revo-
lutionaries could not tell what the North Rus-
sian Army would do. Should it side with the
counter-revolution they fvould be overwhelmed.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


The soldiers of the North Russian Army, de-
clared for the Revolution; the officers fled to
Finland and Norway.
Thus the Murmansk Soviet took control.
Long before Tamara had finished her story,
we were all drinking the inevitable Russian tea,
without milk, but with much sugar.
Helen Gorielova, an organiser of Petrograd
women, was also with us, and she was going all
the way to Petrograd. Her work is to organise
into groups women who are occupied with the
care of their children and homes.
One would guess that Gorielova had been a
garment worker. She has her prototype amongst
the revolutionary proletarian women of Russian
origin in many European cities; you may see
her like any day on the East side of New York.
She is pale-faced, short and thick-set. She
cares nothing for dress; her hair is twisted in a
tighf little knob on the top of her head. She
wears a man’s tweed cap, an old navy blue serge
coat and skirt, heavy boots, and a dingy, grey-
striped flannelette blouse, worn Russian fashiom
outside her skirt. Her luggage consists of a few
impromptu -parcels. Either she gave too much
away, or brought too little for her journey, for
on the third day, I discovered that all her tea
was gone and she had nothing left to eat.
She works as hard and lives almost as poorly
now that the Workers’ Soviets are in power, as
she did under Capitalism. She is a most ardent
Communist, and lives for nothing but to serve
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 19 W,


the Cause. Having passed through the Revolu-
tion, she had learnt to shoot, and can handle a
revolver or a carbine; the rifle is too heavy for
her.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


CHAPTER II.
From Murmansk to Petrograd.
The Comrades had arranged that I should have
a compartment to myself during the nights.
The seats were of bare uncushioned wood, but
Gorielova brought me a sack of hay for a mat-
tress, a sheet, a flannelette blanket and a pillow.
I discovered next morning that she had given
me the bedding she had brought for herself,
for I found her lying, most uncomfortably, on
a sort of shelf in the corridor with her luggage
under her head.
She swept out my compartment with a broom
of twigs from time to time and, until her stock
was exhausted, brought me a glass of sweet hot
tea at frequent intervals.
After the Murmansk Comrades left the train,
I was only able to communicate with my fellow-
passengers by feigns, fill a young ,Red Ax*my
political instructor, who spoke French, joined
us.
This young enthusiast assured me that “ even
the bourgeoisie love Comrade Lenin and Com-
rade Trotsky.” He told, with great pleasure,
of the thousands of classes on history,
economics, literature, languages and so on, held
daily for the Red soldiers.
The train stopped frequently because, for the
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


lack of coal, the engine was fed with log's of
wood, and fresh supplies were often required.
Now that Soviet Russia has begun to use electric
trains,* the journey between Petrograd and
Murmansk, which took us four days, will be
accomplished more swiftly.
During the finst days we passed through
swampy lands and w’oods of thin and feeble birch
trees. There had been many forest fires and
over wide stretches of country the trees were
scorched and scarred or burnt to the ground;
for long distances neither a house nor a human
being was to be seen, but everywhere evidences
of labour; trees felled and logs piled together,
mile upon mile of new ditch cut to drain the
land, long stretches of new road made of logs
laid crosswise and covered with earth; mile upon
mile of railway track repaired.
Many of the wooden houses we occasionally
passed were new. The new were larger and better
built, more richly carved than the old. In the
doorway of one of the newest houses, with
beautifully carved eaves and chimneys of red and
white glazed bricks, a woman was standing,
beside her, two fat bare-foot babies who waved
hands vigorously to the train.
Occasionally we came to a place where the
* On October Ist, 1920,' Makonin’s electric train
made its first journey from Petrograd to Moscow
without a reload. This first electric train was con-
structed in the Baltic works, Petrograd. It con-
sists of three motor carriages and three tender cars.
The cars are of Pullman style, and each accommo-
dates eighty persons. There is also a sleeping car.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS J SAW IT IN 1920.


train stopped longer, and quite a number of
people were at the station. All the passengers
jumped out to stretch their legs and get hot
water for their tea.
What an assortment of clothing! What num-
bers of British and French uniforms, trophies
which the Russians wear gladly and display with
pride.
It was warm, the sun shone from a cloudless
sky, but the temperature seemed to have no in-
fluence on costume. Heavy British and French
khaki overcoats, and longer, heavaer Russian
ones were worn freely, British khaki trousers or
riding breeches and puttees, and British, sailors’
trousers are combined with Russian blouses, of
all sorts.
Some people wore leather top-boots, a few went
bare foot. One young man had a white blouse
wadded coat, and another a sheepskin with the
wool inside. One woman had a white cotton
dress with a short skirt, and her fat legs were
bare. Most people were well shod. Dark skirts
with light-coloured cotton blouses (Were most
common, and many women wore long scarves,
tightly bound about the head, and tied on both
sides with big bows or long floating ends.
At a station nearer Petrograd, surrounded by
smiling meadows and corn fields, women stood
by the train with sickles in their hands. There
was a curious blending in these Russian scenes
of the very old and very new.
Those old men with fur caps and long beards,
the women with gay, bright peasant costumes,
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920


and that baby girl with the close-fitting black
cap, patterned, by big red and yellow flowers,
seem to have stepped out of an ancient picture.
Close to them is a youth in a black college
gown and a group of girl students with bobbed
hair, returning to study in Petrograd. They
carry great bunches of blue cornflowei’s. A
beautiful dai’k girl in white muslin whose shining
black hair hangs in a gi'eat plait, says good-bye
to them. A woman with the dusky, almost pur-
plish bloom of the East on her cheeks, has a
flaxen-haii’ed baby boy by the hand.
“ Tabac, tabac,” cried a little swarm of
women and children, running beside the train, as
it stopped at a lonely station.
They hold up jars of wild raspberries and the
familiar whin- or blaeberries, which are growing
beside the railway line, just as they do at home
in England. I threw down to a wistful-faced
little girl, a piece of Norwegian chocolate and at
once a woman handed to me a jar of berries.
I shook some of them out into a paper and
handed back the jar and, as the train moved on,
the uncomfortable thought crept into my mind
that, by giving the chocolate and accepting the
berries, I bad perhaps encouraged illegal petty
ti-ading in Soviet Russia. Afterwards I dis-
covered that the peasants bring to the train, not
merely wild berries, but milk, eggs, potatoes,
chickens and other produce, which they exchange
with the passengei’s for tobacco, tea, sugar,
sewing-cotton, needles, or any useful things
the passengers may have to offer.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SATE IT IN 1920.


For money the peasants care little. I saw an
old woman, after much bargaining, part reluct-
antly with half a cup of wild raspberries in ex-
change for 50 roubles of the Kerensky period,
which are still in Circulation.
This petty trading is tolerated and will con-
tinue so long as it meets popular need. The
community, as yet, makes no arrangement for
supplying food to the railway passengers. Only
hot and cold water can be obtained at the
stations. The passengers are therefore glad to
get food from the peasants and, as the commun-
ity is not able to provide transport for all the
produce, the peasants are glad to dispose of it to
passing travellers.
Illicit profiteers are constantly trying to ex-
ploit this situation by taking journeys into the
country, buying largely at low rates and selling
their purchases at exorbitant prices in the towns.
The Soviets are always on the look-out to prevent
this.
At Petrosavodsk we left the train and walked
through the quiet little town. We stopped to
gaze at the blue arm of the sea stretching out
below us, and the white church with its gilded
domes glistening in the sun.
A little boy and his frolicking clumsy, white
collie puppy came up to make friends with us.
Some laughing children showed us a tiny kitten.
We visited the big wooden building that houses
the offices of the Communist Party, which are
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


just like other offices save for three or four rifles
standing in a rack in an inner room.
A triumphal arch erected in honour of the Third
International Congress, was standing at the
junction of roads named after Lenin and Engels.
One changes trains at Petrosavodsk, and for
the rest of the journey we travelled in one of
the carriages of an old international train de
luxe of pre-war days. A special delegates’ com-
partment had been reserved for a Finnish
delegate and myself, and for our companions,
Gorielova and the young Red soldier. An ex-
pensively-dressed man and woman, with aggres-
sive manners, demanded admission because they
objected to sitting amongst peasants in a pre-
cisely similar compartment adjoining. They had
a heated controversy with the Red soldier, who
refused to let them enter, though when the train
filled up he called in some of the peasants.
Petrograd at last! From the train emerged
a teeming population; weather-worn peasants
from remote villages, their luggage wrapped in
goatskin, sackcloth or coloured hearthrugs;
bourgeois illicit traders with handsome leather
bags and smart new clothes; students and factory
workers.
On the station walls were big notices :
“ FRATERNAL GREETINGS TO THE THIRD
INTERNATIONAL. LONG LIVE THE WORLD
PROLETARIAN REVOLUTION.”
“THE SPIRIT OF THE PROLETARIAN
REVOLUTION BREATHES THROUGHOUT THE
WORLD.”
“WORKERS OF ALL LANDS UNITE!”
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


Ihe people were streaming in orderly file past
the barrier, amongst them the bourgeois man
and woman who had attempted to invade our
compartment the previous day.
“ See how we have them disciplined!” said
the young Red soldier.
Gorielova pulled her cap over her eyes, thrust
her hands deep into her pockets and sped away.
We followed her sturdy little figure into a once
ornate office. Its walls, scratched and dirty,
were defaced by many notices and scarred
by an occasional shot. Its floor, once
polished parquet, is now but a patchwork
of inconvenient little pieces of wood that
curl up and chip away, leaving dark holes
in which rubbish collects.
“ Telephone out of order.” We rushed on
through a room with walls lined by stacks of
rifles, a soldier on guard; through another room
crowded with soldiers, rifle in hand; to an office
where clerks were writing. A peasant, bending
forward under his heavy load, humbly, respect-
fully, took up his stand before one of the scribes
as though expecting hours to elapse before anyone
would notice him. His patient resignation was
a habit born of long experience. A slow surprise
seemed to dawn on his face when he got prompt
attention.
Outside in the Square of the Revolution, as it
has been re-named, was concentrated the little
traffic and bustle that is in Petrograd. A few
motors on official business, a few carriages for
hire, some porters and travellers with their lug-
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN 1920.


gage, standing or sitting upon the steps.
Placards concerning the Revolution that swept
its way first through the streets of Petrograd,
had been pasted so thickly on certain patches
of wall that they stood out several inches thick,
their edges broken away, brown and brittle.
The once splendid shops on the Nevsky Pros-
pect were all shut up, bolted and barred and
needing a coat of paint. Their glory had
vanished long before the Soviets closed them.
They had fallen into the hands of the small
speculators, whose trumpery and incongruously
assorted wares—a few little pieces of glue, some
bobbins of silk and fish-hooks, an occasional hair-
net and packet of safety pins, were still displayed
in all their feeble sparseness. Gone indeed are
the bourgeois riches of the Nevsky !
In the Soviet shop windows were large assort-
ments of Communist literature, photographs of
the leaders, meetings of the Soviets, demonstra-
tions and incidents of the Revolution. A curious
combination of photography and drawing was
much used, the faces and hands alone being
printed from the negative, the figures lightly
sketched with brush or pen. Such a portrait of
the British Labour Delegation showed Tom Shaw
in the centre, looking like a rubicund old
Bacchus.
The trams were not running; since they are
only brought out at times of special need, there
was little traffic of any kind. Most of the
pedestrians, both men and women, wore simple
Russian blouses of light-coloured stuff.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN 1920.


By the bridge over the Neva the wood paving
of the roadway was being repaired. Two great
barges were lying in the river a hundred yards or
more below the bridge. One of these barges was
loaded with logs of wood. Men standing on
planks which sloped up to the bank passed these,
hand over hand, in unloading them. From the
second barge, women hurled wood blocks like
those which paved the Nevsky up on to the
roadway. Their strong, bare arms rose and fell
in unison, and the blocks went hurtling through
the sunshine.
“ They make sport of the work,” said the
young Red soldier beside me.
“ Don’t you know what work is?” the women
cried with mocking laughter, as a couple of
men from another country stopped to watch them.
The gigantic statue of Catherine surrounded
by her courtiers, looked down on the changed
Nevsky. The great churches, monuments of the
dead past, still retained some of their influence,
even in proletarian Petrograd. Some women
still crossed themselves as they passed the
shrines, but the congregations were small.
In the vast dimness of the Isaac Cathedral,
one Sunday afternoon, I saw barely a score of
people at the service, and thpugh some of them
knelt and bowed many times, so low that their
foreheads touched the stone flooring, only a few
one- or two-rouble notes were put into the col-
lecting plate. This would have been a poor
collection, even in pre-war days before the great
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW If IN 1920.


fall in the value of money. Indeed, there was
an atmosphere of poverty and decay in the
church. The altar cloths looked soiled, their
gold fringe was tarnished. Frowsy old artificial
fiowers lay on the engraved brass images of the
Virgin and Child.
Outside in the great square, children were
playing around the great stacks of firewood, piled
by the Saturday volunteer workers, whose foot-
steps had not worn away the green blades of
grass that had grown up between the stones be-
cause the traffic over them was so small. Grass a
foot high grows in what were once the busy
streets in Petrograd.
In the entrance hall of the Hotel International,
once the Hotel des Anglaises, which accom-
modated foreign delegates and visitors and some
Soviet officials, a Ijittle woman was on guard,
sitting on a high chair with a rifle in her hand.
On the point of the bayonet were thrust many
tiny pieces of coloured paper. These were the
‘ probusks,” or permits to enter, presented by
people who came to visit the official residents in
the hotel.
The dining-room had been newly decorated in
honour of the Second Congress of the Third In-
ternational ; its white panelled walls were shaded
by soft sunrise colours. On the tables were pale
pink and lilac hydrangeas. The damask cloths
w’ere snow white. The glass highly polished.
The waiters hovered courteously around, attend-
ing to all things with the greatest care. One
scarcely noticed that their clothes were shabby.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SA W IT IN 1920.


Breakfast was being served. A smart young
Naval officer and a red-haired Amercan journaF
tst sat at the centre table. An American lino-
type operator was by the window. The waiters
laid before each person some black bread, so
«our that I, being unaccustomed to rye bread,
could only eat a few crumbs of it, two tiny
sardines, a glass of weak tea and three or four
tittle pieces of sugar.
For luncheon, later on, the waiters Served,
with equal aplomb and grace, a small cake of
mashed potatoes measuring about three inches
by four, covered with gravy sauce and followed
by weak tea. For fifty roubles they would also
supply a bottle of pink sparkling liquid which
they called lemonade, but the taste of which
strongly recalled the smell of scented soap. For
fifty roubles they also had a purplish drink which
tasted like a weak solution of water and mouldy
fruit that had begun to ferment. These most
undesirable drinks were the only things charged
for; the food was all quite free.
Dinner to-day was an exact replica of luncheon.
for the rest, the hotel had probably changed
little since the old days. The furniture, w r hich
was in good condition, was as before. The ser-
vice was good; the beds clean. The traveller
might have, cost free, for the asking, a hot bath
and the hair shampooed by an expert and dried
with a hot air fan in the hairdressers’ shop below,
Mrs. Pelman who spoke excellent English
and her colleague who spoke French and
German, were most hospitably attentive to the
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


guests, and at any first sign of illness, called in
the doctor who supplied, again without charge,
whatever suitable remedies the prevailing short-
age had left him.
Soon after my arrival at the hotel came
Comrade Kingisepp of the Third International,
Baying: “ Come to Smofcney,” and away we
went in a motor to that headquarters of revolu-
tionary activity which was once a school for noble
girls.
Before the main entrance was a most outrage-
ously bad statue of Karl Marx. Young artists
of talent who starve unwanted in Europe would
find a generous welcome for their work in Soviet
Russia.
On the bare white walls of the barrack-like
interior of Smolney, hung numbers of red banner-
ettes. Red guards were stationed everywhere,
and without a probusk one could not pass be-
yond the office where they might be obtained.
Zinoviev, the Secretary of the Third Interna-
tional, has his office here, and through Smolney
pass all the literature and communications to and
from the Communist Parties of the world.
The rear windows overlook the Neva, and the
green banks where the noble girls used to play.
Across the river is the fortress of St. Peter and
St. Paul, where for many generations revolution-
ary comrades wearied away long years.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


CHAPTER III.
Moscow.
And now to Moscow—oh strange city qf
contradictions—so deeply mediaeval yet, in spite
of the Revolution.
The intense heat weighed one down like a
heavy cloak. Great forest fires were burning for
miles around Moscow, and 60,000 Red soldiers
were engaged in beating them out. A smoky
haze filled the city.
One rose from the sleeping-car to a strange
scene : a great square, a mass of almost motion-
less people in loose straight clothing, white, grey,
and dust coloured. Old women sat on the
pavement, peddling small green apples, wild
berries and other trifling wares. The crowd hung
around them. Patient travellers sat in the road
beside their luggage. Nothing seemed to move.
The roads are cobbled, the walls a sunny blend
of pink and yellow, the domes of the churches
blue, speckled with golden stars. The churches
rising in the roadway, stand as fortresses of the
old world that is swiftly passing. Inside they are
dim and strange; a flat glare of monotonous gold
with dark little primitive images painted upon
it. The priests in their robes, have long and
matted hair.
a
33


At that church with the blue and gold carved
canopy, the people, in a frenzy of faith and fear,
once tore a priest to pieces because he refused to
hang out the ikon they used to kiss. The plague
was rampant; the priest feared the spread of in-
fection ; but the i eople thought only of miracles.
The weird Basil Cathedral is like a bundle of
footless towers, surrounded by porches and capped
by domefe that burst into green and yellow
spirals, or are covered, porcupine-like, with
spikes of green and red. Tapestry-like patterns
of painted flower pots and imitation stonework
ramble over it. It is like a schoolboy’s Christmas
nightmare, and yet it possesses a strange barbaric
beauty. The eyes of its architect were put out
by the Czar, in order that he might build its like
for no other monarch.
With the old superstitions, the old buttresses
of autocracy still living within her, Moscow goes
hastening onward in the creation of the newest
brotherhood.
The Djelavoi Dvor Hotel blazed with red
banners and the watchwords of proletarian solid-
arity an many languages. It was thronged with
delegates of the Third International, come to
take part in making the world revolution; striv-
ing through the crowd of their own numbers that
veiled the real Russia like a fog. to learn something
of this gigantic thing we call the Soviet Republic.
They were greeted in Petrograd by the spon-
taneous uprising of the proletarian masses, in
Moscow by magnificent ordered marching.
Children threw flowers in their path, magnificent
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


athletes and wonderfully-wrought pageants were
displayed for them. Tremendous indeed was
their welcome; because to the Russian workers,
these delegations represented the hope of the
world revolution, the only hope of pace for Soviet
Russia, and the ending of her gieat hardships and
sacrifice. This welcome was indeed a challenge
to the Communists of a hundred countries to
play heroic parts.
The delegates thus challenged, thus received
with a welcome of awful beauty, seemed a light-
hearted, gregarious crowd.
The representatives of each country mostly
went together in droves.
The Italians had brought with them, it was
said, a special train of tinned and bottled meats
and wines. Upborne on the crest of the great
popular movement in Italy, they were gay and
confident.
The English, Irish, Canadians, Americans and
others who speak our language, kept first their
national divisions, but showed a distinct affinity
amongst the entire group, and a marked divi-
sion from the Germans. This division sprang a
little, though they refused to own it, from the
consciousness of the racial differences in a closely
aided people. There was also the language
barrier; but the great irritant was that the
majority of the German delegates came from
the Communist Party of Germany, the K.P.D.,
which still adheres strongly to Parliamentary
action. «nd looks with little favour on the newer
forms of insurgent industrialism, to which the
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN 1920 .


majority of the British and American delegates
pinned their faith.
The representatives of the Communist Labour
Party of Germany, the K.A.P.D., left the Con-
ference early, because the majority view was
opposed to theirs.
Souchie, a tall fair young man who represented
the German workshop movement, and spoke
good English, worked amicably with the British
Shop Stewards in Committee, but never became
one of the English-speaking fraternity.
Big John Reed, apparently full of radiant
health, clear-eyed and good tempered, modestly
ignoring his own brilliant talents as a desciip-
tive writer, was consulted by ail, and was always
ready to serve. Lndoubtedly, among the
English-speaking members, he was the most
popular of their number. The British Shop
Stewards showed their respect for him by pro-
posing that he should be the Chairman of the
forthcoming Unity Conference in Britain.
The delegates were better fed than the
mass of Russians; better fed even than the
Commissaries and responsible workers, 'whose
rations had been lately increased, but were stall
below the standard of the Red Army. 1 bough
the delegates’ rations were really ample, those
who came from the English-speaking countries
(the countries which during the War were not
forced down to a very meagre war diet), were
inclined to grumble. They were unaccustomed
to rye bread and to Russian food in general.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IS mo.


Caviare to them was no luxury, but merely rather
distasteful.
To the Russians, the Conference, which sat for
a month and met between 8 p.m. and 4 a.m.,
was an addition to their usual work.
The foreign delegates w'ere left with many
leisure hours. Soon tired of sight-seeing, many
of them occupied themselves by making tea in
each other’s rooms with provender brought by
newcomers from Norway. They endeavoured
to secure a slice or two of the wdiite bread, or a
glass of milk kept at the buffet for those who
had been given a note for them by the doctor.
Eggs for breakfast, though not always fresh,
w 7 ere hailed as a great event, as a change from
the usual bread, butter, cheese and caviare (or
occasional “ kasha ”* —a dish made of boiled
wheat meal, with a piece of butter on top).
Cocoa or coffee instead of the universal tea, were
received with enthusiasm, although with each
glass of tea there was always a little saucer con-
taining five or six sweets wrapped up in coloured
paper. Delegates used to plead for strong tea,
* Kasha is usually made of buckwheat.. When
cooked in an earthenware pot in a slow oven for
hours it. looks dark brown, but when cooked like
porridge it. is a, tight greyish brown. Any other
cereals boiled in water or milk may be called kasha.
If rice is used it is called “ Rissovaia Kasha ” ; if
semolina (the Russian name for which is Manna),
it is called “ Mannia Kasha.” When bodied and eaten
with butter and milk, kasha is popularly called
“Eazmaznia.” Kasha is also made of wheat, the
Russian name for which is Phsemitza. The Kasha is
then called “ Pshonnaia Kasha.”
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT W 1920.


44 Crepky Tchay,” as though it had been really
a matter of serious moment to them. Fairly
substantial portions of duck, fish, meat,
soup, and puddings of various kinds were served
for lunch and dinner.
Most of the delegates wore Russian blouses,
provided freely on application, after a few
days of waiting. These blouses sat less gracefully
upon them than on the Russians, most of vyhom
had grown spare and hard by long continued
living on bare necessities and by strenuous toil.
Each delegate was supplied on application with
5,999 roubles to spend.
The Soviet paper money is printed in various
bright colours with the Soviet Arms the sickle
and hammer in the light of the rising sun, sm-
surrounded by a wreath of wheat. It bears in
six languages the motto : 4 * Proletarians of All
Lands Unite!” 5,000 roubles will buy only a
carriage ride or two, or a few pounds of green
apples from the street pedlars.
Delegates were also supplied daily with cigar-
ettes, matches, and cheroots. Russian tobacco
for the pipe, which everyone reviles, and is a
light greenish colour, was served out every few
days. There were all sorts of attempts to get a
little more than one’s due of these small privileges
and much competition for theatre tickets and
motor cars.
All this, and even the Conference itself, seemed
like a vapourous mist through which one must
peer to discover the real life of Soviet Russia.
One night, escaping from the perpetual
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


stream of humourous anecdote which fell on one’s
ears at the Djelavoi Dvor, I went'off down the
banks of the Moscow rivet with Borodine, the
translator of Lenin’s “ Infantile Sickness of
Leftism.”
Big comets with long tails of light, and
frequent shooting stars entrapped half my atten-
tion. Borodine talked of his long exile in
London, and compared the dull visionless life of
a British worker, mentally starved, though per-
haps comparatively well-fed, with the desperate,
hungry struggle, lit by tremendous hopes and
dreams that has brought Soviet Russia where it is.
In the great, panelled dining-hall of a
millionaire’s mansion, now occupied by Com-
munist. workers, Borodine’s meagre supper, a
little piece of cold meat and a spoonful of rice,
had been left waiting.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


CHAPTER V.
The Congress in the Kremlin.
But all this was in the yet uncovered future,
when, almost immediately after my arfival at the
Djelavoi Dvor, a message came: “ Lenin has
sent for you to come at once to the Kremlin.”
The Commandant wrote out a little pink
prohusk. The motor car took me over the cobbles
to the walls of the Kremlin. The Red Guards,
five or six of them, checked the car to examine
my probusk, and three times afterwards I was
obliged to display it before I reached my destina-
tion. Once, later on, when I walked to
the Kremlin to keep an appointment with Lenin,
I was stopped for twenty minutes at the
gate, because I had only the pass issued by the
Conference, which \vas by that time out of date.
Unable to understand the reason why I was being
held up, I ran past the guards with their rifles
and fixed bayonets, through the open archway
to the telephone on the other side.
“ You might have been shot,” a comrade told
me later.
“ What would be the use of shooting me; I
could not do any harm?”
“ It was a woman who shot Lenin!”
Passing the Czar’s big bell, which lay on the
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 19%U.


ground with a piece chipped out of it, the road
led to the private apartments of the Czar
and the Throne Room where the Congress
was held. Looking at the great entrance,
one sees a staircase. To-day it
was all hung with long red flags blazoned with
the sickle and corn-sheaf, and at the end, a
painting of “ Labour,” huge and naked, break-
ing the chains that bind the earth, hideous and
ill-proportioned, but having a certain effective
vigour. The walls of the corridors and ante-
chambers were lined with photographs, posters
and literature. The Russian Communists are
indeed great propagandists!
In the innermost of the private apartments of
the Czar’s, Lenin, with smiling face, came
quickly forward 1 from a group of men waiting to
get a word with him.
He seems more vividly vital and energetic,
more wholly alive than other people.
At first sight one feels as though one
has always known him, andyone is amazed and
delighted by a sense of pleasant faniiliarity in
watching him. It is not that one has seen so
many of his photographs, for the photographs
are not like him; they represent an altogether
heavier, darker and more ponderous man, in
place of this magnetic and mobile being.
Rather short, rather broadly built, he is quick
and nimble in every action, just as he is in
thought and speech. He does not wear a
picturesque Russian blouse, but ordinary
European clothes that sit loosely upon him. His
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


brown hair is closely shaved, his beard lightish
brown, his lips are red, and his rather bright
complexion looks sandy, because it is tanned and
freckled by the hot sun. The skin of the face
and head seem drawn rather tightly. There
seems to be no waste ‘material to spare. Every
inch of his face is expressive. He is essentially
Russian with a Tartar strain. His bearing is
frank and modest. He appears wholly un-
conscious of himself, and he met us all as a simple
comrade. His brown eyes often twinkle with
kindly amusement, but change suddenly to a
cold, hard stare, as though he wpuld pierce one’s
innermost thoughts. He disconcerts his inter-
viewers by suddenly shutting one eye and fixing
the other sharply, almost fiercely, upon them.
I had been sent for to take part : n the Com-
mission on English affairs, which had been set up
by the Third International.
We sat at a round table in the Czar’s bed-
room. Lenin was on my right hand, and on my
left, Wynkoop of Holland, who was translating
the German speeches into English. Lenin has
a complete knowledge of English : he more than
once humorously pulled up Wynkoop for mis-
interpreting the speakers.
Bukharin, Editor of the Pravda, and one of
the leaders of the Left in the Russian Communist
Party, regarded the excited debaters from other
countries with laughing blue eyes. Young and
vigorous, he had the expression of one to whom
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


life is full of enjoyment. In brown Holland
blouse with sleeves rolled up to the elbows, he
looked like a painter who has just laid down his
brushes. During Committee meetings he is con-
tinually drawing caricatures of the delegates, but
no important point in the discussion escapes him.
To-day he drew Wynkoop as a solemn, pompous
owl.
Radek, who was going to the Polish front in a
few days, was also smiling and cheerful, with a
detached, dreamy air. One is constantly im-
pressed by the absence of strain or excitement
amongst the Russians. These men, standing
against a world of enemies, appear to face the
situation with perfect calm and much humour.
Zinoviev is of another type : the controversy
seemed to bore him. He was a bttle impatient
with the opposition, and criticised, with a tinge
of contempt, which he doubtless regarded as
salutary, the Communist Parties which had not
yet learnt how to appeal successfully to the
masses. One of the American delegates said of
Zinoviev that he always talks to one asjbhougl
he were taking a bath.
During an interview he seems generally bent
on hurrying away to another appointment. An
indefatigable pamphleteer, he was probably,
even then, composing another Thesis; but he
was ready to enter vigorously into the dis-
cussion and to speak at considerable length when
his turn came.
His voice is not musical, but he is evidently
a very popular orator.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


At the great meeting in Moscow’s biggest
theatre, which was the final demonstration of the
Congress, Zinoviev and Trotsky were the principal
speakers. Trotsky received by far the greater
reception. Coming from the Polish front, with
the fall of Warsaw to the Red Army daily anti-
cipated, he was naturally the hero of the
occasion. He spoke without effort, no
shouting, breathless excitement, but perfect
control and ease. Outwardly well-groomed, he
had evidently an excellent mental equipment.
He proceeded slowly and leisurely up and down
the platform, with an ever varied flow of tone
and gesture. The still audience listened eagerly,
but he spoke so long that at length he tired them,
in spite of their great interest and admiration.
Zinoviev, on the other hand, held the people
to the last and finished amid a brisk round of
cheers.
At the Commission on private affairs in the
Czar’s bed-room, Zinoviev sat a little apart from
the table. He leaned back comfortably on a soft
lounge. Beside him was Levi, of the German
K.P.U. The French, the Austrians, and others
were also represented on the Commission. The
Italians, characteristically, were • unreprefeented
because they could not agree on which of their
number should represent them. They were
nevertheless present in force and took part in
the discussion, Bordiga even presenting a Thesis
for discussion against Parliamentary action
Obviously Lenin enjoys an argument, even
though the subject, may not seem to him of first
class importance, and though the adversaries may
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


be unskilled. At present he was in a bantering
mood, and dealt playfully with the British
delegates. The majority of them were objectors
to certain passages in a Thesis now under dis-
cussion, written by himself, on the tasks of the
Communist Party.
The passages in dispute dealt with the British
Communist Patties and declared that they should
affiliate to the British Labour Party and make
use of Parliamentary action. Lenin evidently
does not regard either of these questions as
fundamental. Indeed, he considers that they are
not questions of principle at all, but of tactics,
which may be employed advantageously in some
phases of the changing situation and discarded
with advantage in others. Neither question, in
his opinion, is important enough-to cause a split
in the Communist ranks. I am even inclined
to suspect that he has not been uninfluenced by
the belief that the course he has chosen is that
which will appeal to the majority of Communists,
and will therefore cement the largest number of
them in united action. As to the question of
affiliation to the Labour Party (a question that
may presently arise in similar form for decision
by tbe Communist Parties of Canada and the
United States), Lenin says :
“ Millions of backward members are
enrolled in the Labour Party, therefore Com-
munists should be present to do propaganda
amongst them, provided Commun st freedom of
action and propaganda is not thereby limited.”
When, afterwards, in the Kremlin, I argued
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


with Lenin privately that the disadvantages of
affiliation outweighed the advantages, he
dismissed the subject as unimportant, saying that
! he Labour Party would probably refuse to accept
the Communist Party’s affiliation, and that, in
any case, the decision could be altered next year.
So too with Parliamentarism; he dismissed it
as unimportant, saying that if the decision to
employ Parliamentary action is a mistake, it can
be altered at next year’s Congress,
When, however, it is argued that Communists
should not go into reformist Labour Parties c
bourgeois) Parliaments, because they may L
affected by their environment and lose the purity
of their Communist faith and fervour, Lenin
replies that after the proletarian conquest of
power, the temptation to weaken in principle will
be much greater. He argues that those who
cannot withstand all tests before the Revolution,
will certainly not do so later.
He is for attacking every such difficulty, not
for avoiding it; he is for dragging Communist
controversy out into the market-place, not closet-
ing it amongst selected circles of enthusiasts.
He does not fear that Communism will be post-
poned or submerged by the advent to power of
reformists. Convinced that reforms cannot cure
or substantially palliate the capitalist system,
he is impatient for the rise to power of the Re-
formists in order that their importance may be
demonstrated. When 1 talked wih him in the
Kremlin, he urged that British Communists
should say to the leaders of the Labour Party :
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


“ Please Mr. Henderson, take the power.
You, to-day, represent the opinion of the
majority of British workers; we know that, as
yet we do not; therefore we cannot at present
take the power. But you, who represent the
opinion of the masses, you should take the
power.”
In those days, news had come that Councils
pf Action had been set up to stop Britain declar-
ing war on Soviet Russia in support of Poland.
Lenin declared that we should inform Hender-
son that he must no longer scruple to seize power
by Revolution, since he and his Party had already
committed themselves to that by setting up a
Council of Action charged with the work of
bringing about a general strike in the event of
further war measures by Britain against Russia.
As Henderson, Clynes and their colleagues
had frequently themselves declared, such a strike
would lie aye volutionary act. The Labour
Party was now committed to it.
Lenin said that the creation of the Councils of
Action was due to a wave of revolutionary senti-
ment in the British masses, which had forced
their Labour leaders to take some sort of action.
That the declarations of the Council of Action
failed to satisfy Communists, and that the Council
was inactive, merely meant that the wave of mass
feeling had not yet gone very far and had largely
subsided.
The feeling of the masses rises and falls, he
argued, in irregular tides; it does not remain
at high-water mark.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN 1920


We in Russia,” he said, “ seized the power
at the moment the masses were prepared to rise.
When they receded from us, we were obliged to
hold on till the next wave of feeling brought them
back to us.”
Lenin argued, that in order to explode the
futility of reformism and to bring Communism
tc pass, the Labour Party must have a trial in
office. Therefore British Communists should
affiliate their Party to the Labour Party and come
to arrangements with it for the formation of a
jo nt Parliamentary block and the mutual sharing
out of constituencies. In addition to the Thesis
under debate, Lenin had prepared and had
translated, ready for the Conference, a book
called “ The Infantile Sickness of ‘ Leftism ’
in Communism.” This book was intended to
confound and convert those of us who disagree
with its author. We assert that the Labour
Party will in any case come to power, that the
British Communist Party cannot dissociate itself
too early and too clearly from the Labour Party’s
reformist policy, and must by no means enter
into alliances or arrangements with it. We
believe that Communists can best wean the
masses from faith in bourgeois Parliamentarism
by refusal to participate in it.
The passages in Lenin’s Thesis on Trade and
Industrial Unionism, and Zinoviev’s Thesis on
Unionism were also the subject of hot debate.
Lenin and the other Russians of his school,
regai d the Unions primarily as agglomerations of
workers providing opportunities for Communists
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN 1920.


to win the masses for Communism. The dis-
sentients, who belong to the highly industrialised
Western bourgeois democracies, are unable to
detach themselves from the view that an indus-
trial organisation is an organisation for fighting
the capitalist employer. Moreover, they are most
of them influenced by the view that, if the in-
dustrial organisations which the workers are de-
veloping for themselves under Capitalism do not
actually become the organisations which will ad-
minister industry under Communism, they are at
'east a training ground for preparing the workers
in the shops to administer Communist industries
on Soviet lines.
The Western industrialists engaged in the daily
struggle for existence under Capitalism, feeling
the constant pressure of rising prices and the
perpetual encroachments and demands of the em-
ploying class, regard the old Ctaft Unions as out
of date and inefficient for the task of protecting
the workers’ interests, and are impatient with
the Trade Union bureaucx*ats who think on the
old sectional and palliative lines. The Western
industrialists strive to substitute Industrial
Unions for Trade Unions, and Shop Committees
and government by the rank and file for the
Union bureaucrats.
All this seems of small moment to the Russian
Communists. They have abolished the capitalist
employer in Russia; and they wish to see him
abolished throughout the world. To them there
is little merit in securing improved conditions for
the workers under Capitalism. They are only
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 19£0.


interested an the Shop Committees and extra
Union organisations, in so far as it can be demon-
stiated that these organisms develop a revolution-
ary consciousness amongst the workers. As for
the Trade Unions, the concern of the Russian
Communists is to make revolutionaries of the
Trade Union members, rather than to carry on a
tight with them to set up a newer form of in-
dustrial organisation which may be more effici-
ent in making the conditions of capitalist wage-
slavery less intolerable.
The Russians have sounded the depths of the
proletarian democracy, towards which the West-
ern industrialists are striving. Ihe Western In-
dustrialists also have discovered that because a
man has been a worker in the factory, he does
not necessarily remain a democrat when he leaves
the bench and becomes a Member of Parliament
or a Trade Union official. But they proceed on.
the theory, in spite of overwhelming evidence to
the contrary, that a man must be filled with dis-
interested and intelligent proletarian solidarity
if he has been elected by a shop Committee. The
Russian Communists who have Pved through the
Revolution and know how frail a plant is opinion,
which depends purely on environment, regard the
vague unconscious proletarian solidarity on which
the Western industrialists stake their faith, not
as a driving force, but as material which the
forces of conscious Communists may drive and
manipulate. The material provided by the rank
and file organisation may be more responsive to
Communist manipulation than that of the old
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920


Trade Unions, because the workers therein are
more energetic and politically conscious. But
the workers in Trade Unions are also part of the
proletariat, and they are more numerous than
those in the workers’ committee movement.
The Russians insist that the members of Trade
Unions must also be won for Communism, for
making the Revolution and for building Com-
munism after the Revolution is made.
The Russians urge that one cannot wait to
begin making Communists of the Trade Union
members till they have joined the I.W.W. or the
Shop Stewards’ Movement. Therefore they urge
the Communists to remain in the Unions.
The Russian Communists are realists; they
develop their theories out of their experiences.
In their revolutionary struggle, they have had to
use and to contend with great masses of people.
Revolutionaries in countries far from the Revo-
lution are apt to underrate the magnitude of the
task of breaking down the established order of
society and building up one that is new.
The Western industrialists contend that the
Russians are unable to judge the old bureaucratic
Trade Union of Western countries, and that they
fail to understand how it is interwoven and allied
with the capitalist system. Moreover, the
British Shop Stewards and the American
“ Wobbly’s ” are obsessed by another idea; they
distrust the politician who wears a black coat,
however Red may be his Communism. Their
distrust of the theorist, the scientist, the admin-
trator is only less than their distrust of the
SOVIET RUSSIA .48 I SAW IT IN 1920


capitalist. They insist on control by the manual
worker at the bench; they will tolerate no talk
of waiting till he is cultured, and they do not
believe anyone is to be trusted even under Com-
munism, who is not strictly controlled by the
rank and file. The Russian Communists who
have stuck unswervingly to their posts and their
theories, at times in spite of the fickle and im-
pulsive swaying to and fro of mass opinion, are
mainly concerned with (converting the masses
to Communism and securing that the mechanism
of Society shall be under Communist control.
They know that unconscious unawakened masses
cannot exercise effective control, therefore the
masses must be awakened.
Whatever the merits of the rival contentions
might be, the Theses of Lenin and Zinoviev, and
indeed all the Theses and resolutions coming from
the Russian Communist leaders, because of their
great achievements, were certain to be adopted
at this first anniversax-y of the founding of the
Third International. The Russians, although the
60 delegates of their Party had between them
but five votes, like the British, could steam-roller
anything they chose through the Congress.
We, who were in opposition on certain matters,
nevertheless .argued our case in fcpijte of the
hopelessness of the task, and Lenin ai’gued
against us, as though our defeat had not been a
foregone conclusion.
The Congress meeting in the Czar’s Throne
Room the following evening, allowed me to ex-
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN mo.


tend to twenty-five minutes, the allotted five
minutes in which I had to accomplish the
stupendous task of replying to a Thesis and
book of Lenin and several days of speeches.
The Congress had lasted a month. As the
speeches were delivered in various languages and
translated, delegates streamed restlessly in and out
to an adjoining room, where tables were loaded
with slices of bread and butter and sardines,
caviare, preserved meats and cheese, and saucers
filled with sweets wrapped in coloured papers.
Glasses of hot tea were always on hand there.
Angelica Balabanova often had to complain that
very few auditors were present to hear her trans-
lation. Giving but a cursory sketch of rambling
speeches, empty of real matter, Balabanova al-
ways rendered well and fully the words of those
who had anything to say, though she was ill and
very tired.
Artists sat amongst the delegates, making
drawings of them or roamed about looking for
models. Balabanova protested, as she always does,
against such portraiture.
On the defeat of the English amendments and
the unanimous adoption of Lenin’s Thesis, with
which, in the main, I am in complete agreement,
the Congress ended. The delegates sprang up
singing the “International,” Serrati, Editor of
the Italian Socialist paper Avanti! led the singing
of the “ Carmanol.” Reed and others
caught Lenin, and though he resisted., hoisted
him upon their shoulders. He looked like a
happy father amongst his sons.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


Delegates from other countries had been dis-
cussing the Russian Communist Party through-
out the Congress. All admitted Lenin’s pre-
eminence in the world movement and recognised
him as the leader of the International. Not only
was every delegate prepared to acknowledge his
political greatness, but all expressed a regard for
his personality,
“ He is a very nice old man,” said a British
delegate, who was perhaps the most critical and
unenthusiastic of all.
Trotsky too, is universally acclaimed. As to
the others, there is much diversity of opinion.
Many express admiration for Bukharin, Zinoviev,
Lunacharsky and others, but there is no general
concensus of opinion. Some delegates express
profound respect for all the prominent Russian
Communists and for the Russian Communist
Party as a whole; others acclaim the Party, but
declare, that after Lenin, it contains no :p* ci-
ally remarkable personalities. Some insist that
the Russian people are the salt of the wox-ld’s
population in these days. Others belittle con-
stantly the Russian people and the Russian Com-
munist Party, saying that the Russian Commun-
ists have no capacity for organisation, and that
they had no hand in making or moulding the
Revolution, which “ just happened.” When the
getting of probusks and the sameness of black
bread and weak tea become irksome to them,
these people complain that the Russian Revolu-
tion is an example of “ how not to do it.”
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


Yet if we ask even the most critical delegates
to leave out of account the movement in their
own country, and to compare the Russian Com-
munist Party with the Communist Party of any
other country, they will at once, unhesitatingly,
give the palm to the Russians, even though they
may sigh ruefully for the paucity of great people,
and of greatness in those called gi’eat.
To me it seems that, in surprising numbers,
file Russian Communist Party possesses he.oic,
clear-thinking and powerful personalities. I
look in vain for their like in Britain. Per hip: the
future may develop them, but I see little
sign of them at present. In a generation of
autocratic persecution and revolutionary fighting,
in which even the bourgeois reformist had to face
stern sacrifices and grave and constant risks of
which we in this country have no experience and
little comprehension, the Bolshevik Party came
to the front and proved its paramount qualities
in the time of acutest trial. The leaders of the
Bolshevik Party only came to the head of that
Party of truest, strongest stalwarts and
clearest thinkers, by virtue of special qualities,
tested in time of danger, when courage and
strength of conviction are of most account.
Having won through to the positions of foremost
power and responsibility in the State, that pro-
letarian State which is faced with bigger oppor-
tunities and difficulties than ever State
faced before, the Bolshevik leaders have
been broadened and steeled bv the necessities
t
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


and experiences o£ their position. The habit of
command and leadership makes leaders and com-
manders of those who have capacity; the practice
of administration makes administrators of those
who are fitted for the task.
The representatives of Communism in other
countries have been tried, for the most part, only
as irresponsible propagandists. Amongst the
Russians, not alone the score of leaders' whose
names are known the world over, but thousands
of other Communists have been tested, refined and
strengthened by battle and responsibility. In
the Conference Chambers of the Kremlin, a
woman comrade of the proletariat, who passed
uneventful days in London, and attended our
Trafalgar Square meetings there, all unknown to
us, told me that she had just returned from the
Polish front. Since the Bolshevik Revolution,
she had spent most of her time with the Red
Armies. The,Party had called on her always to
do the work most repugnant to her. She had
been a spy for the Soviet Government in the
White Army, and in the Red Army too, on the
look-out for counter-revolutionary elements
there. She had also been a member of the
Cheka,” the extraordinary commission for
combating the counter-revolution, which has to
try men and women charged with counter-revo-
lutionary crime. She loathes this work, but it
is necessary; the Party calls on her to do it, and
she obeys.
Beside her in the Kremlin was the President of
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I S.IW IT IN 1920.


a far-Eastern Republic situated within the
territory which once comprised the old Empire of
Russia. Ele wore an immense fur head-dress.
He too, had spent years of unknown proletarian
poverty as an exile in London.
As the sittings of the Congress closed for the
last time at three in the morning, I went out
with Comrade Peters, made notorious by tbe
“ yellow ” press of the world because he was a
member of the Cheka.
The press has said that Peters of the Cheka is
Peter the Painter of the Sydney Street affray.
Peter the Painter was a cousin of Comrade Peters
and much older than he. He brought Comrade
Peters into the Marxian Socialist movement, but
later drifted away and became “spoilt” from the
point of view of Peters of the Cheka. Neverthe-
less, the object of Peter the Painter and the other
Sydney Street burglars was to obtain money to
propagate the Cause. That is doubtless why
Winston Churchill was so eager in exterminating
them, and went himself to take part in burning
out their place of refuge.
Slim and boyish-looking, with small-featured
brown face and wearing a simple cotton blouse,
no one would guess that this was Peters of the
Cheka. Carrying ray bundle of literature, help-
ing me as we groped our way in the dark over
the cobble-stones, he talked earnestly of the
Bolshevik Party’s hard struggle; how it was
smashed to pieces again and again, with only a
few branches left to it. Even after the Soviets
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


came to power and it rose to the height of Gov-
ernment, it was rent asunder, with only half a
dozen stalwarts left in the Central Executive,
watching, waiting and working throughout the
night, and a world of militant Capitalism and
unawakened workers against them.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SATE IT IN 1920.


CHAPTER VI.
To Kolomna with Melanchansky.
One morning, Melanchansky, a prominent
official of the Russian Trade Union movement,
offered to take some of us to see the big metal
factory of Kolomna, more than sixty miles away
fx-orn Moscow; Minkoff, an organiser of the
Moscow Communist Party, was also going to
Kolomna to attend a quarterly conference of the
local Party which he wanted us to see.
Melanchansky is a genial fellow, big, blonde
and burly, with a broad, cheerful face, ruddy,
healthily tanned and clean shaven. In his blouse
of bright brown sateen and light grey cloth suit,
he looked both spruce and comfortable. He is
an old revolutionary, and has spent long years in
Russian prisons. He was also an exile in
America, and speaks English as though it were
his mother tongue, with a wealth of idiomatic
slang and humorous anecdotes.
Minkoff is in most things Melanchansky’s
exact opposite. He is a Jew, dark and sallow,
wears ugly black clothes and is apparently quite
careless of dress and outward appearances. He
is exceedingly serious, always near the boiling-
point of enthusiasm and ever ready with inform
alien.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920


We set off from Moscow, four British, a Swede
and the two Russian comrades, in a big motor
car, using the railway track as oui» road. Trains
are infrequent, and roads often bad or non-
existent in Russia.
William English Walling in “ Russia’s Mes-
sage,” Hodder and Stoughton, published in
H’oB, said :
“ I have seen almost no paved roads, ex-
cept for a few miles down the towns and
across some of the properties of the Grand
Dukes and the Czar. The mileage of paved
x’oads in France is one hundred, and in Great
Britain, six hundred times as great as in
Russia.”
Occasionally we came to a bridge, where we
always halted, that our driver’s pass might be
examined by the Red soldiers stationed there.
On the return journey, the soldiers seemed
dissatisfied with the pass, which ought perhaps
to have been renewed; there were many dis-
cussions over it. One sentry fired a shot in the
air to summon his superior officer, to decide
whether we might go forward. Another sentry
ordered us back to the preceding station, but
seeing the driver preparing to obey him, decided
to be merciful and allowed us to go on.
Melanchansky’s personal credentials would
have pi’oved his authority, but he did not inter-
vene, except once, when the soldiers, instead of
being at their post, suddenly spx’ang out upon us,
a couple of hundred yards frdm the bridge.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I Sitr IT IN 1920


Mrs. Sheridan, in her diary of Russian ex-
periences, tells that when a sentry stopped
Trotsky’s car and she asked him to reveal him-
self, Trotsky abruptly silenced her. The Times
inferred that Trotsky was afraid to make him-
self known. That is ridiculous; the Russian or-
ganisers rightly desire that where there is a
rule that only persons carrying permits shall be
allowed to pass, the rule shall be obeyed ir-
respective of personalities.
Melanchansky only laughed at the various
stoppages and told us that Lenin once said to a
sentry : “ I am Lenin.”
The soldier answered : “ You might be Lenin,
but let me see your pass.”
On nearing Kolomna we left the car and found
the carriages, each with a pair of horses, waiting
for us on the high road.
The country was luxuriant, and Kolomna, a
quiet, pleasant place, with very wide cobbled
streets, large detached wooden houses and many
fruit trees.
We took a glass of tea with the young manager
of the Kolomna metal factory in the one-time
Board-room of capitalist directors, where por-
traits still hung on the walls.
The manager had begun his working life as a
child employee of those directors, and had re-
mained at the factory ever since. He was an
enthusiast, keen and eager for production and
progress. He told us that out of 6,000 em-
ployees in the factory, 600 were members of the
Communist Party. They were the guiding
spirits of the concern. On the whole, he was
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT LV mo


well pleased with the general atmosphere and
discipline of the place, and with the rate of pro-
duction, the difficulties being considered. The
factory was not so well provided as he would
wish, either with fuel, raw materials or skilled
workers. Nevertheless, the programme of work,
which consisted mainly of the construction and
repair of locomotive engines for this half year,
was much greater than the last, and the present
production was exceeding the programme.
The Russian organisers of production being
short of many things, have to make
good with something else. He pointed to his
own shoes by way of illustration. They were
tiim-looking and well-shaped, made of light
green canvas,- with soles of thin three- or four-
ply wood, and a hinge under the ball of the foot,
so that they would bend comfortably in walking.
Owing to the shortage of leather, a large pro-
poition of Kolomna people we-e wearing shoes
of that kind, also the shoes of plaited bark,
which have been usual amongst the peasants for
generations. Such shoes do well enough in the
fine, warm weather prevailing at that time of the
year, but in the winter snows they are of little
use. It is for the winter season that Soviet Russia
must make the great effort to provide leather.
Bark shoes have their draw-backs, however, at
all seasons in the metal factory. Presently we
saw two men wearing them hammering away at
a red-hot iron. Sparks flew, and one of the bark
shoes caught alight. Its owner kicked out the
flame and no harm was done, but ther shoes would
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SA W IT IN 1920


not last long under such conditions, and seemed
a poor protection for the feet.
Do not imagine that the scarcity of leather
shoes is a new thing in Russia : it certamly is
not. William English Walling who made an
exhaustive study of Russian peasant conditions,
reported in 190$ :
“ In the South and North in summer, the
the shoe is not of leather, but is of woven
bark, such as is used by many a primitive race.
Even in winter, one sees more boots of felt
than leather.”
It was not only in summer that poor Russians
in pre-revolutionary times were deprived of
serviceable leather shoes. A secret report on
the Manchurian war by the Controller of State
for 1904, endorsed “ August 6th, 1905, N.
741,” stated :—-
“ In the 4th Corps, the winter shoes are in
frightful condition; the soles are made from
chips of wood covered with strips of leather.”
The Czar added a marginal note :
“ This is disgraceful : How many legs have
been frozen as a result?”
As we left the Office Department, the manager
called our attention to a photograph of a group
of men employed in the factory and a young girl
clerk in the office. Every member of the group
looked dejected. Under the photograph was a
notice stating that these workers had left their
posts in the factory without reasonable excuse,
and that their 'fellow-workers had therefore
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920


decided to exhibit their photographs here for
public condemnation.
In tlie factory itself, things were going
briskly, and the Shop Steward members of our
party announced that the poeple were working
harder than they and their comrades do in the
capitalist concerns at home.
A rugged old pian with long white hair called
us to his lathe, saying that he had been engaged
thus for fifty years, and before the war had won
several gold medals for his skill. When the
Revolution came and shortage of raw material
made it impossible to keep all the machines
going, he was told that he had done his share
of work, that the community would support him
and that his sons could do the family duty as
producers.
“ But they couldn’t do without me; they had
xi send for me to come back, old as I am,” he
rdded triumphantly.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920


CHAPTER VII.
How the Communist Party is Organised.
Ihe Conference of the Kolomna Communist
Party met in a sort of open-a'r shelter. The
delegates came from units of the Party in fac-
tories, villages, agricultural Communes, the
adult staffs of children’s homes and schools, the
staffs of hospitals, Soviet institutions and offices,
Red Army I nits, Young Communists and so on.
At one time it was the rule that each member
of the Party Executive must directly represent
a large unit of the Party, having at least fifty
members. It was found by experience, how-
ever, that the best committees were not obtained
in this way. Some of the units had no specially
able members : some possessed several. It was
therefore decided to elect the Executive from
amongst all the Party members, without regard
to their special units. To secure that the Ex-
ecutive shall keep in touch with all the units,
frequent meetings are held between the Executive
and the secretaries of the units. > —-
The formation of Party branches in all centres
of industry and administration, instead of on a
merely territorial basis, is, of course, the right
method of organisation for a Party seeking to
create a Communist Society administered by
Soviets. I his method of organisation must in-
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920 .


evitably be adopted by the Communist Parties
of all countries both before and after the Cm -
inunist Revolution; but it is especially essential
after the Revolution has placed the power m the
hands of the proletariat, when the difficult work
of social reconstruction is entered upon.
The Kolomna Conference elected, according to
custom, a committee, called the presidium, tor
the temporary duty of attending to the business
of the Conference. The Conference also elected
a new Executive for the Party, to hold office for
three months, at the end of which the next
Quarterly Conference would elect another com-
mittee, the retiring members being eligible for
re-election. Local Party Executives usually con-
sist of from nine to fifteen members. A com-
missission of three members is also elected to
supervise the finances of the local Party.
The retiring Executive of the Kolomna Party
having given its report, the delegates proceeded
to criticise its work. The chief comp amt was
that the committee had not arranged enough
lectures in the factories. Members of the E
ecutive replied that they had done as much
as thev could with the lecturers at their disposal.
More could have been accomplished had some of
their critics been willing to qualify .themself
as lecturers instead of sheltering behind the ex-
cuse that their position as technicians m h
factories left them too little time for study.
Moreover, the Party Executive had had to choose
its lecturers with care. An instructor had been
sent to a certain Party unit; but instead of im-
proving it, he had done such bad work that the
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 19®0


unit had to be disbanded. A motion to accept
the report of the Executive was finally carried.
Comrade Minkoff addressed the Conference as
representing the Moscow Executive of the Party.
He reported on the national and international
situation, giving the latest news on all important
questions, and especially in regard to the Polish
front. He declared that the situation neces-
sitated harder work by the Communist Party.
Production must be increased; there must be
better discipline, and better work in the fac-
tories and other institutions. Each Communist
must be at post, careful, tactful and zealous,
doing everything possible to sustain Soviet
Russia till the workers of other countries should
be ready to join the World Revolution.
Minkoff explained that we strangers were dele-
gates to the Second Cong-ess of the Third In-
ternational, and expressed the hope that our
attendance at this ninth Congress of the
Kolomna Party w 7 ould induce us to organise in
our own countries on the same basis. It was
well, he thought, for us to see the hardships
of Soviet Russia, in order that we might under-
stand what we ourselves must face in the
struggle for Communism. He urged that where
w'e saw scarcity, we must remember the British
blockade and the attack of the Entente Capital-
ism on Soviet Russia. We must remember that
tne workers in the Entente countries were still
lagging behind, unready to rise.
Some of us were asked to address the Con-
ference after Minkoff had spoken. We did so
with humility.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I S.4W IT IN 1920


Russia is struggling through countless obstacles
fto Communism. Naturally he Communist
Party leads the way. Obviously, the lead cannot
be taken by people who either do not know
what Communism is, or are not sure that they
want it. Obviously, too, the Communists,
banded together in a strong party, are able to
act more effectively than if they were working in
isolation and disunity.
Bourgeois democrats of capitalist countries
complain that the Russian dictatorship of the
proletariat is dictatorship of Communist
Party. They are shocked when they find that
the Communist Party is in command at the
Soviet offices. Yet these same democrats do not
see anything unfair in the dictatorship of the
Liberal, Conservative, or Coalition Party, which-
ever happens to form the Government in power
in the British Parliament. They do not object
to the dictatorship of Republicans or Democrats
i n America. When the Party which is success-
ful in the election appoints the Ministers at the
head of the great Departments of State, and fills
all the seats of Government with its Party
friends, no outcry is raised by the partisans of
bourgeois democracy. They make no objection
based on principle. If their opponents aie
put in office they merely blame the elector
for stupidity, and urge the members of their
own Parties to redouble their efforts to convert
the voters. Ramsay MacDonald, who has talked
glibly against Bolshevik dictatorship in Russia,
has actually opposed proportional representation
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920


in Britain, on the ground that it might militate
against large Government majorities. He argued
that strong Governments with large majorities
are best.
When the Russian people send to their Soviets,
as they have done steadily, a majority of Com-
munist Party delegates, it is natural and inevit-
able that the Communists should (control the
Government and appoint the heads of Depart-
ments ; in fact, that is precisely whatl the Soviet
electors instruct the Communist to do, by giving
them the majority of seats in the Soviet.
When the majority of the electors in any
country have placed a Party in power, we find
that not all, even of those wdio voted for it,
fully understand and are convinced of every
point in that Party’s programme. The same is
of course true in Russia. The Russian Com-
munist Party secures big majorities in all the
elections; it has greater popular support than
any other party in the world. Nevertheless,
neither all the people of Russia, nor all those
who vote for Communist candidates, are con-
vinced, logical, and unswervingly sincere Com-
munists. Some do not fully understand Com-
munism, some are without settled convictions,
some are a prey to self-intereset. Some are
even opposed to Communism.
On every question that arises, whether
theoretical or political, whether dealing with
home or foreign affairs, there are, of course,
many different opinions. The Communist Party
works out for itself a definite policy on each
question, always gu : ded by the final objective :
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920


World Communism. When the Communist
Party’s policy has been settled, the group
of Communists in every factory and on every
factory committee, in every dockyard, mine and
office, in every village and farm colony,
in every department of the social structure,
methodically set to work to apply and propagate
the Party policy, meeting regularly to confer,
as we saw them doing in Kolomna. A
tremendous driving force is thus generated. The
non-Communist elements, conflicting, vacillating,
adopting a hundred different policies, some
of them constantly desiring to modify Communist
application to suit each temporary and personal
interest that appeals to them, are naturally swept
aside by the united force of the Communists
who, even where they are few in number, are
united, determined and consistent.
It is important to notice that the first resolu-
tions on the programme of the ninth Congress
of the All-Russian Communist Party, in March
and Ap.il. 1920. dealt with “ Immediate
Problems of Economic Construction,” “ The
Increased Productivity of Labour,” “ Uniform-
ity of the Economic Plan,” “ Mobilisation of the
Skilled Workers,” “ Mass Mobilisation for
Compulsory Labour Service,” “ Food Prob-
lems,” “Locomotive Repairs and Construction, ’
and so on.
The following passages from the resolutions
adopted by the Conference are instructive :
“ It is the business of the Party to explain
to every one of its members that at the present
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920


moment, when the Russian Communist Party
is responsible for the econom’c life of the
country, the most lowly and common work in
the economic sphere is of the greatest import-
ance, and is to be considered responsible Party
work. The following are the principal forms
of Party work at the present time: factory
work of groups led by Communists, Party or-
ganisation on railways and transport generally,
work in connection with compulsory labour
service, work of Communists in organisation
for the supply of wood, Communal feeding
organisations, barracks and house committee
organisations, the repair and proper working
of public baths, cleaning and repair of houses,
guidance and control of work carried on in
public gardens ancE public places, schools,
social maintenance institutions, etc.
“ The chief organising problem of the
Party is the proper distributon of Party work
amongst every one of the 600,000 members.
The general rule is that loyal organisations send
each of their members to work at his trade or
speciality. The regrouping of Party forces
in every town, province and factory must be
carried out from the point of view of their use
in the various processes of production. The
most important concerns should be the first to
be supplied Avith Communist workers, whilst
within the latter, the Communists are to be
distributed in such a way that every workshop
possesses a formidable Communist nucleus
capable of independent] initiative ....
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


“I n the registration of the members of the
Party, both the local organisations as well as
the Central Committee should pay particular
attention to the member’s trade, economic
and organising qualifications, and to the part
he can take in the economic revival of the
country.”
A further resolution instructs the various sec-
tions of the Party to prepare lists of the mem-
bers, giving records of their past work and
indicating the work for which the section con-
siders them best suited. These lists are to be
sent from the Party units to the local sections
of the Party, and from thence to sections cover-
ing wider areas and dealing with more respon-
sible and centralised work, dhe units of the
Party in factories, Trade Unions, Soviets, and
so on, are all asked to compile such lists.
Similar investigations and records are carried
>n in regard to non-party conferences and non-
party workers in all branches, in order to discover
efficient and suitable workers for the various
branches of Soviet activity.
During my stay at the Djelavoi Dvor in Mos-
cow, a girl typist engaged in connection with
Third International work, who had lived in the
East End of London, told me that she and her
colleagues had each been asked by the department
to write an account of their lives, giving details
of their experiences, capabilities and training,
and stating what they desired to do and to be in
the future. .
Membership of the Russian Communist Party
entails hard work and sacrifice. The Communist
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


must always be ready to obey the call of the
- arty to any work of difficulty and danger. The
ignorant and malicious sometimes assert that
membership of the Communist Party opens the
door to special privileges, such as additional
rations of food and clothing. This is untrue.
On the contrary, the Communist Party has ex-
pected its members to lead the way in sacrifice
for the general good, cheerful acceptance of low
rationing and every other hardship.
The rule of the Communist Party on this
point, clearly reiterated at the ninth Congress in
M arch-April, 1920, is unmistakable :
“ Communists who form part of the staff
of factories or works enjoy no advantages
whatever over the rank and file of the workers.
“ Their duties, however, are far greater than
that of the average worker. Every one of
them, as far as the every day life of the enter-
prise is concerned, must present an example
of zeal, precision and performance of duty.
“ The Party groups, which are to be found
in industrial enterprises, take care, without in-
terfering in the administration of the latter,
that all the directions are carried out uncon-
ditionally.
“ Communists are to render every assist-
ance, both to the administration and to the
factory or works’ committees, in all the
attempts of the latter to raise the pro-
ductivitiy of labour. They are to use all their
Party authority and influence to this end, and
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN im.


to spread them as widely as possible amongst
the working masses.
“ In all labour mobilisations, and the or-
ganisation of labour Saturdays and Sundays,
the local committee must keep a strict watch
on the conduct of the Party members, in
accordance with these instructions.
“ All those who in any way elude the ful-
filment of their labour duty, are not only to
be expelled from the Party organisation, but
are also to be entered upon a black list, so as
to prevent them in the future from occupying
any post requiring public confidence.”
Communists are more severely punished than
others, for any neglect of duty. By frequent
re-registration of members, searching inquiries
into their bona fides and the demand for the
production of reliable references on admission,
the Communist Party seeks to limit its member-
ship to sincere and convinced Communists, pre-
pared to act always, in conformity with the above
instructions. In spite of the barriers and obliga-
tions which the Party imposes, many persons
seek membership in the hope of securing
important and remunerative positions. I had
scarcely arrived at the Hotel International in
Petrograd, before a young woman of bourgeois
education and antecedents asked me to recom-
mend her for membership of the Communist
Party. I pointed out that she was quite un-
known to me, and advised her to apply to some
Communist friend. She replied:
” I only know Balabanova, and she says : 4 I
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


cannot understand, if you are really a Commun-
ist, why you have been so long in joining the
Party; you have had so many opportunities for
doing so.’ ”
The practice of giving additional food rations
to persons termed “ responsible workers ” who
are engaged in work for the community entail-
ing great expenditure of energy and long hours
of work has lately been introduced.
The extra rations are granted to these persons
to ensure that the work shall be effectively done.
The long-continued food shortage in certain
areas and especially in the cities, has reduced
the working capacity of the people. The evil
has been counteracted, firstly by equal rationing,
and, latterly, by increasing the ration at the
points of acutest necessity. Thus additional
rations are supplied to the children, to the Red
Army, to munition workers, workers in essen-
tial industries, responsible workers. The basic
ration itself has been steadily increased, and the
supplementary rations have been constantly ex-
tended to wider and wider sections of people.
As the responsible positions are naturally and
necessarily filled by members of he Communist
Party j these particular Party members, of
course, get the supplementary rations accorded
to “ responsible workers,” but masses of Com-
munist Party members, who are working in the
ranks of industry, have no such privileges.
The giving of special rations and privileges
for the more arduous or skilled work cannot be
theoretically justified as a Communist principle.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SA W IT IN 1920.


Only necessity can justify such exceptions, in
conceding which, the interest of the community,
not of the individual, should be the sole guide.
Such exceptions are regretable; they inevitably
tend to excite jealousy and to encourage petty
corruptions. The high pay to bourgeois tech-
nicians and experts which Soviet Russia has
conceded, and the various scales of pay
and bonus that have been built up to secure in-
creased output, are evils, minor evils of the
transition period, and very small as compared
with the gross and firmly-buttressed differences
which are essential features of the capitalist
system of which they are a heritage.
All such distinctions are repugnant to Com-
munism, which, in its complete fulfilment, will
bring equality and unstinted sufficiency and
freedom of use in all things material.
As we left the Kolomna Party Conference, a
pale, dark-faced man in poor clothes, unshaven
and looking ill and neglected, called to us saying
»he was a member of the 1.W.W., newly arrived
from the United States. He seemed thoroughly
discontented and his expression was most
rueful.
Life in Russia was very hard, he said, and the
food nasty and insufficient.
Mrs. Philip Snowden has described as “ loath-
some,” the sour, black rye bread, which is the
staple bread of Russia and of Europe generally
excepting our own little island, and this
American “ wobbly ” doubtless agreed with her,
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


He repeated the story, which lie probably
believed, that the Communists get extra rations,
explaining, as though the reason were an all-
sufficient one : 4 4 They are the predominant
Party here.”
By this time we foreign delegates were all
very hungry and pleased to learn that the next
function would be dinner.
We went with a part of the crowd streaming
away from the Conference, to one of the Soviet
dining-rooms. Already a number of men, whom
one could tell, from their hands and dress, to
be outdoor manual workers, were seated at
pmal‘l tables eating their ■ meal. Others wfere
passing in, in a constant procession, showing
their ration cards at the buffet and receiving in
exchange, the plates of food that come up in a
A from the kitchen.
As we were the guests of the day, our hosts
politely refused to allow us to carry our own
food from the buffet, and had it brought to us
at the table; but both in quantity and quality,
our meal was just like all the rest. It consisted
of pickled fish, soup with fresh tomatoes in it,
meat and small green cucumbers, of which our
hosts consumed a large number, cutting them in
half and spreading them liberally with salt.
Black bread was added, of course, and then,
rather to our surprise, for the portions of other
things had been more than ample, enormous
plates of Kasha were brought in. Knowing that
there is no food to waste in Russia, I left quite
ashamed of being obliged to leave most of
the last dish, Kolomna appeared to be a district
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN 1920.


in which there was no scarcity of food, at least,
not at that time.
The American I.W.W. fetched his dinner
with the rest and sat alone at one of the side
tables. Looking so poorly and dismal, he was a
striking contrast to the strong, cheerful, sun-
browned Russians in their coloured blouses.
Minkoff and Melanchansky had at once noticed
his discontent. They made a point of getting a
talk with him before we left, and evidently
arranged for him to come to Moscow, for a
few days later, I saw him there taking his meals
with the delegates at the Djelavoi Dvor, and
looking considerably better.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


CHAPTER VIII.
At a Public Meeting.
We roamed about the offices of the Kolomna
Communist Party for some time before Minkoff
and Melanchansky met us there. The staff had
left for the day and we were quite alone. At,
Petrosavodsk we had seen guns in the Party
office, but Perosavodsk was near the front, there
were no guns here.
The caretaker brought us tea, the first tea
substitute I had had, though Mrs. Snowden has
reported that one cannot get real tea in Russia,
She would have known the difference had she
tasted this. It was rather musty, hut Melan-
chansky showed us how to improve it, by putting
into it small green apples cut in slices. Mean-
while he told us stories of the Revolution, giving
each one a humorous turn, so that even the most
heroic and dangerous exploits were enveloped
in an atmosphere of light-hearted gaiety.
Since the Communists came to power, he had
often been obliged to assume authority; but he
always seemed to regard himself with amusement
in that guise, as though some other self of his
had been playing a part upon the stage. Curi-
ously enough, one of his early duties had been
to inspect a Sovietised factory in which he had
once been employed under the capitalist regime.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN mo.


He found the place now in a state of chaos and
mismanagement; indeed, it was because of this
that he had been sent there to intervene. He
appeared in military uniform, and having in-
spected all departments, he summoned the factory
committee, composed of his one-time workmates.
He told them frankly and forcibly that the con-
dition of affairs was a disgrace to proletarian
Russia, and could not be tolerated. The com-
mittee, fully aware that his condemnation was
justified, and impressed by his military uniform,
at once agreed to resign and arrange for the
election of a new committee. The manager, a
member of the Communist Party, pleaded to be
allowed to remain at the factory under any con-
ditions, but Melanchansky sternly insisted that
he should leave for Moscow that very day.
I was sorry when Minkoff broke into Melan-
chansky’s stories, telling us that a meeting had
been arranged and we must go there to make
speeches. The prospect of inflicting speeches in
English upon a Russian audience seemed tire-
some ; but Melanchansky and Minkoff made the
affair go with a swing, and the evening proved
full of interests.
We made our way to a pleasure garden where
throngs of men, women and children of the
neighbourhood, a handsome, shapely crowd in
their simple garments, strolled amongst the
flower beds, whilst the band played.
The meeting hall, with the sides only partially
walled in, was filled with a wait'ng audience.
The children in the front rows sat as quietly as
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 Si IF IT IN 1920.


little mice through the English speeches, and
followed the translations with intense earnest-
ness applauding vigorously. These eager little
figures, responsive to every word and gesture,
were lavishing the selfless ardour of which children
and few but children are capable, upon the pro-
letarian cause.
What a splendid period is this for the youth of
Russia! How much nobler, how much finer, as
a builder of character, is the environment of great
enthusiasms in which Russian boys and girls are
spending their childhood and developing to
maturity, than that of the superficial, spurious
Empire-worship and snobbery of the elementary
schools erected under British Capitalism, com-
bined with the selfish mercenary cult of
getting on,” taught by anxious parents,
desirous of securing the material welfare of their
offspring in a cruel competitive world. The
parents and teachers who, under Capitalism,
enjoin on the young that they must love their
neighbours as themselves, even placing the
welfare of others before their own, are preachino-
a doctrine which capitalist society renders im-
possible of fulfilment, and with which their ex-
ample is perpetually at variance. The guides of
youth, under Communism, are able to place be-
fore their pupils an ethical rule of conduct which
is practical!}’ possible, and to stand unashamed
before them, having followed their own precepts.
Soviet Russia is producing an enormous gener-
ation of young Communists, by whom Capitalism
k regarded as altogether evil. Reared during the
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


strain and turmoil o£ a world war, and yet
safeguarded by Communism from the poverty
which kills off millions of children in the capi-
talist' Empires, these Russian youngsters are
growing to be of soldierly metal, eager to do
battle against the ancient barbarism. In a few
years, many millions of them will be in the
fighting ranks. The war that Capitalism is
making upon their parents is one of the factors
preparing them for the world struggle to extin-
guish it.
The cinema show began as we left the meeting.
We saw the first sections of a Yankee comic
burglary story, and wished that a shortage of
films had not prevented Soviet Russia from al-
together banishing the capitalist product.
In the cool, black night, so grateful after the
great heat of the day, Melanchansky calling oc-
casionally to members of our party lest any one
might be straying from us, we went home to
supper. The table was laden abundantly; tea
and black bread, soup, salt fish, apples and a great
bowl of freshly-picked tomatoes, of which, led
on by Melanchansky, we consumed unprecedented
numbers.
Melanchansky again told us stories, this time,
of his imprisonments and the ingenious
measures by which Russian prisoners used to
communicate with each other. In one prison,
to economise material, one iron table and one
iron bedstead had been used to serve for two
cells, the wooden partitions dividing the two
cells being shaped to divide in half the bed
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I .S I W IT IS iMO.


and (table Thius, each cell had on one side,
half a bed, on the other half, a table. The
prisoner drew a thread out of his stocking and
tied this tightly, one end to the bed, the other
to tihe table. An impromptu telephone was
thus made, and by its use, lectures were given
to the entire range of cells.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


CHAPTER IX.
The Soviets.
The Soviet system of organising society is a
system of Councils of workers’ delegates. The
assembly of all men and women inhabitants over
eighteen, which transacts the affairs of the
smallest community and sends a representative
to a council of delegates from a group of such
communities, is co-ordinated with Councils
covering wider and wider areas, and with the
All-Russian Congress of Workers’ Delegates,
which appoints the Central Executive Commit-
tee for the entire country. The Central Ex-
ecutive Committee appoints the Council of
People’s Commissaries and the Executive
Boards or Commissariats, ' which administer the
various departments of the Republic.
The Soviet electors are, as far as possible,
grouped upon an occupational basis. Work is
the main qualification for voting; no one may
vote who lives on income arising from interest
on capital, from industrial enterprises, or landed
property. No one may vote who employs
another for private gain.
The Constitution of Soviet Russia is not re-
garded as a rigid finality, on which the coping
has been placed; it is constantly being devel-
oped and improved. The seventh All-Russian
Congress of Soviets, held in 1920, instructed itg
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


Central Executive Committee to prepare a
scheme for a new administrative division of
Soviet Russia, on an industrial basis, instead of
on that of the present historical provinces and
districts, which do not follow the lines of
modern industrial development. The Con-
gress also instructed the Executive to elaborate
for submission to the next Congress, further
regulations on the organisation of village
Soviets and “ Volost,” or district Executive
Committees, and on the functions of the
presidium of the All-Russian Executive itself.
The Seventh Congress adopted a number of
new resolutions.
In a report read by Kameneff, and adopted
by the Congress, occurs the following declara-
tion : —•
“We are faced with the task of attracting
to the Soviets, ever greater masses of the
people. Our Constitution says, and we must
again confirm it, that should we be
forced by the heavy struggle, in which we
have been involved against our will, to
experience a temporary weakening and de-
cline of the work of these organs of labour
representation and labour government—this
manifestation is not normal, being the result
of temporary circumstances. In spite of all
difficulties created by the war. by the back-
wardness of the population and the economic
disorganisation, our task is to make the
Soviets of Workers, Peasants’, and Cossack
deputies attract ever greater masses of the
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


working population, to get these Soviets ac-
tually to take the administration of the
country into their own hands, to take
over the control of the entire adminis-
tration and the entire industry and to create
in the Soviets a constantly alternating cadre
of workers and peasants who will cope with
the tremendous difficulties l met by those,
who, for the first time in history, realise the
government of the workers for the workers.”
This report of Kameneff to the Seventh Con-
gress of Soviets, admitted that hitherto the
duties and the relations of the All-Russian
Central Executive and its presidium had
not been precisely defined, and that the Central
Executive Committee had met too seldom, be-
cause its members had been over-burdened with
military and local work. The Congress therefore
adopted the following regulations :
The presidium of the All-Russian Central
Executive conducts the sittings of the Central
Executive, prepares the material for the
sittings, submits projects for decrees to be
considered at its sittings, sees to the execu-
tion of the Central Committee’s decisions,
negotiates in the name of the Central Exe-
cutive, is the centre for guiding the work of
the central and local institutions, considers
questions of amnesty, solves questions of ad-
ministration and confirms presentations of
the Order of the Red Flag.
When the Central Committee is not sitting,
decisions of the Council of People’s Commis-
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


saries must be submitted to its presidium for
confirmation. When the Executive is sitting,
such must receive confirmation
from it. The presidium may suspend deci-
sions of the Council of People’s Commissaries
till the meeting of the Central Executive,
which may confirm or reject such decisions.
The All-Russian Central Executive Com-
mittee must be convened by its Executive
for session every two months. Special
sittings will be convened on request of the
Council of People’s Commissaries or of one-
third of the members of the Executive.
Until the Seventh Congress of Soviets, the
Constitution had not embraced all the Soviets
which had sprung up in Russia. In some places
where war had absorbed masses .of the most
enlightened workers, it was difficult to main-
tain efficient Soviets. In some districts, a
general meeting of Soviets w 7 as said to be rare,
and even when an assembly w 7 as held, it was
only to obtain information, to hear a few 7
speeches and so on. But, declared the Con-
gress :
“ We do not consider this normal. We
find that if fifteen or twenty men take part
in the administration, they will, against their
own will, become bureaucrats, however much
they speak against bureaucracy.”
These regulations were therefore adopted :
Soviet Congresses shall consist of delegates
from all the Soviets within the given adminis-
trative unit, including delegates from those
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN 1920,


localities, settlements, factories, works and so
on, where questions of administration are de-
cided, not by delegates, but by meetings of all
the electors.
The largest administrative area in Russia is
the “ Goubernia,” a government or province.
A Goubernia is divided into a number of dis-
tricts, each of which is called a 44 Ouyezd.” A
Ouyezd is divided into a number of smaller areas,
each called a 44 Volost.”
A Goubernia Soviet Congress consists of dele-
gates from Soviets of towns and factories and
with a poulation of more than 5,000, on the basis
of one deputy for every 2,000 electors, and from
Volost Congresses, on the basis of one deputy
for every 10,000 inßabitants .
A Ouyezd Soviet Congress consists of one de-
from the village Soviets for every 1,000
inhabitants, and from the Soviets of towns, fac-
tories and works, one delegate for every 200
electors.
Volost Congresses consist of delegates from
every Soviet on the territory, on the basis of
one delegate for every 100 inhabitants.
Local Soviet Congresses are convened by their
Executive Committees or on the demand of local
Soviets comprising one-third of the population
of the territory. In any case, Volost Congresses
must meet not less than every three months,
and Congresses of the larger districts not less
than twice a year.
All questions concerning the local and general
conditions of life are to be brought before the
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN 1920.


Assembly of the Soviets. The functions of the
Soviets are to be not merely those of an appar-
atus of agitation and information. They must
serve also as a business mechanism. Every
member of the Soviet is imperatively called
upon to execute a definite State work.
“ All the members of the Soviets are obliged
to report to their constituencies not less than
once a fortnight. A member of the Soviet who
fails to give good reasons for not carrying out
the above regulations on two occasions, deprived
of his mandate, and a new deputy is elected in
his place.
The Kameneff Report went on to state that the
question of the rights and functions of the vari-
ous Soviet Executive Committees was an acute
one. There was an unfortunate tendency
to transfer the functions of administration from
wide sittings of workers’ delegates to small
committees. Also there w r ere conflicts between
the local Soviets and Labour organisations and
the Central Institutions. The question of
centralisation and de-centralisation had not yet
been satisfactorily settled. The conclusion pre-
sented by the Report was that the rights of the
local Soviets and their Executive must be ex-
tended, for it said :
“ We place the greatest faith in the class
instincts of the workers and of the poorest
masses of the peasantry ... With the
assistance of the local Soviet, the People’s
Commissaries, and the Central Executive
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


Committee, we have been able to unite Soviet
Russia into a complete whole.*
“ We know now that the instructions eman-
ating from the centre, whether they concern
military mobilisation, fuel mobilisation, or
the supply of corn, will be carried out by the
local authorities.
“ We can now make one step more for-
ward, and free the hands of the local organi-
sations and the local Soviets, fully confident
that these local Soviets will put the interests
of the whole Russian Proletarian Republic
above the interests of their parish, village,
ouyezd or goubernia town.
“ The Executive Committees are elected by
Soviet Congresses. They represent the
supreme organ of the Soviet Government in
their territory, and are subject to the Execu-
tive Committee, next in authority to the All-
Russian Central Executive Committee and to
the Council of People’s Commissaries.”
The Seventh Congress gave the Goubernia
Executive Committee the right and duty of con-
trolling and supervising the activity of all the
Government institutions within the territory
except those connected with the Army on active
service.
* Travelling instructors are sent to aid the Local
Soviets in their work and t® report as to their
progress. The department of administration has
the duty of solving disputes arising between the
Soviets and the masses, but such disputes are said
to be rare.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


The Goubernia Executive Committee has the
following departments :
1. Administration.
2. Military.
3. Justice.
4. Labour and Social Maintenance.
5. Public Education.
G. Post and Telegraph.
7. Finance.
8. Agriculture.
9. Provision^.
10. State Control.
11. Council of Public Economy.
12. Public Health.
13. Statistics.
14. Extraordinary Commission.
15. Communal.
The closing down of existing departments or
opening of new ones, is effected by the ExecuCve
Committees in agreement with the Council of
People’s Commissaries. The number of de-
partments in the smaller local bodies, the
volosts and others, are defined by the Goubernia
Executive Committee.
The supreme Economic Council and the local
Economic Councils are appointed by the Trade
Unions and the Soviet Executive Committees.
The Soviet Labour Department and the Central
Administrative Organ for each industry are also
appointed by the Trade Unions. The functional
relationship of these various bodies is not easy
to understand, there is admittedly overlapping,
and Losovsky predicts thast the Labour Com-
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


missariat wiljl shortly be abolished, and the
Economic Council and Central industrial ad-
ministrations will be eventually merged with the
Trade Union organisation.
The Seventh Congress o£ Soviets decided :
“ All local Goubernia Economic Counc'ls
amalgamate with the Goubernia land depart-
ments under the general guidance o$ the
Goubernia Executive Committees, District
Economic Councils unite wPh Ouyezd land
departments undeir the general guidance of
the Ouyezd Executive Committee.
“ All local administrative organs are part
of the Goubernia Economic Council. In
the case of important State factories, the pro-
duction of which is required ,by the whole of
Russia (such as the great metal works at
Kolomna), the rights and duties of the
central and local institutions of the Economic
Council, in regard to their management, are
drawn up by the Supreme Economic Council
and established through the Council of People’s
Commissaries and All-Russian Executive Com-
mittee.
“ Directors of Government Departmentst
work with committees called collegiates.
f This statement of the seventh All-Russian Coin-
gress of Soviets is already being superseded. Both
the Communist Party and the Trade Unions are
determined to put efficiency first ; and, as I ex-
plain in the chapter devoted to Trade Unions, they
axe advocating single-man management of factories
and industrial enterprises.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


“ Often one comrade can manage the work
far better than can be done by a collegiate,
but for us builders of the proletarian State,
collegiates become important as organs in
which the workers and peasants are called
upon to take part in and be trained for ad-
ministration.’
“ The director and members of the collegi-
ate are elected by the Executive Committee.
“ The director has the right to dcide ques-
tions concerning his department, and to in-
form the collegiate of his decision. Should
the colleg'ate disagi’ee with his decision, it
may bring the matter before the Executive
Committee.
“ Every people’s Commissary has the right
to object to a director. Differences of opinion on
this head are decided by the Presidium of the
All-Russian Central Executive.”
A study of the above regulations which only
cover a part of the exhaustive set of rules
adopted by the seventh Congress of Soviets, and
do not comprise those which were already in
operation, shows that, incomplete though the
Russian Soviet Constitution still is, it contains
a system of democratic checks and safeguards
quite foreign to the Parliamentary and Cabinet
system of capitalist states.
As I have already pointed out, the Communist
Party has deliberately organised to mould and
control the Soviet machinery, with the object of
advancing Communism, whilst the electors have
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW If IN 1920.


placed the Communist Party in power, by giving
them the majority of seats in the Soviets.
But the question constantly asked is : “ Have
the Soviets any power? Or has the power been
taken from them and concentrated in the hands
of a few people—the leaders of the Communist
Party, or the Council of People’s Commissaries,
which actually is one and the same thing?”
The Kameneff report, as we have seen, frankly
admits that the local Soviets have not yet played
so real ajid vital a part in the administration of
affairs as is hoped and desired for them. Their
backwardness, the report attributes to the inex-
perience of the people and to war conditions.
The Seventh Congress of Soviets accepted this
view, and decided to extend the power of the local
Soviets and to regulate and limit the power of
the Central Executive Committee and Council
of People’s- Commissaries.
Certain non-Communists allege that whatever
the written constitutions and the resolutions of
of Soviet Congresses may dictate, the power of
the Soviets is waning. Communists and other
enthusiasts for the revolution take the opposite
view, and insist that the Soviets and their power
work and value, are constantly growing and de-
veloping. Only a prolonged experience of the
Soviet administration can prove conclusively how
far they are guided and directed from above;
but two facts stand out with an important bear-
ing upon this question.
Firstly, the Soviet electors and the number of
Soviets have alike grown enormously ; a powerless
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


and functionless organisation does not grow, but
dwindles. The growth of the Soviets and their
electorate indicates that the Soviets have func-
tions and power.
Secondly, as the Kameneff report states, there
are conflicts between the central and local in-
stitutions of the Soviets, the conflicts indicate
that the local Soviets possess vitality and
initiative.
The Moscow Goubernia Soviet consisted, in
September, 1920, of 1,500 delegates, only fou.
of whom happened to be women. The presidium
elected by the 1,500 delegates consisted of eleven
members and two secretaries. On the wall of
the Soviet building were many maps and charts
dealing with production and population within
the Moscow Province. The various Ouyezd,
volost, and smaller Soviets within the area were
indicated; the urban and rural areas and the
density of population within them. The pro-
portion of various crops in various districts, and
the areas cleared for cultivation were clearly
shown. Such statistical computations had only
been started in 1918, and the 1920 figures were
not yet complete, but a big improvement upon
1918 was recorded in 1919.
The Petrogx*ad Soviet in the month of May,
1920, contained 1,924 members, of these, 95
persons possessed superior education, 398
medium education, and 1,250 primary; particu-
lars as to the education of +he remaining 186
members of the Soviet were not given. The
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


Mathematician
1
Teachers
22
Doctors
13
Surgeon’s Assistants
22
Sisters of Charity
6
Journalists
11
Lawyers
5
Musicians
8
Pupils and Students
11
Chief Clerks
3
Statisticians
1
Book-keepers
29
Telegraph Employees
20
Telephone Employees
4
Electrical Fitters
50
Shorthand Typists
3
Draughtsmen
12
Accountants —
17
Commercial Travellers
5
Political Economist
1
Clerks
118
Printers
16
Painters and Musicians
16
Printers’ Operatives
34
Technical Staff (Engineers)
2
Engineers
39
Metal Workers
18
Watchmakers and Jewellers
n
i
Photographers
3
Tram Conductors
2
, Carried forward...
499
previous trades and professions of the members
were as follows :
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


Brought forward..
199
Motor Drivers
38
Chaffeurs
14
Tram Drivers
2
Locksmiths
240
Turners
go
Workers in water supply
9
Textile Operatives
5
Wood-cutters
6
Wood-workers
7
Carpenters
5
Blacksmiths
24
Moulders
12
Linen Weavers
. 7
Sorters
10
Coppersmiths
10
Folders in Printing Trade
8
Upholsterers
10
Corn and Hav Chandlers
2
Vulcanisers in Ebonite
1
Weavers
10
Engine Drivers
6
Cardboard Box Makers
10
Founders and Smelters
5
Tanners
23
Leather Cutters
4
Shoemakers
22
Galoche Makers
‘ 5
Tobacco Workers
3
Sea Divers
2
Carriage Builders
3
Hairdressers
9
Carried forward...
1,050
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SA W IT IN 1920.


Brought forward...
1,050
14
Shop Assistants
45
4
3
Cabinet Makers
46
5
22
. 104
2
28
8
8
14
3
4
4
5
Bakers
24
6
13
.. 240
., 55
15
.. 204
Total
1,924
The Kolomna Soviet office was just one of the
larger wooden houses in the town. A number of
women clerks and two or three men were at
work there. Several women of the neighbour-
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SA W IT IN 1920.


hood, with Howered kerchiefs on the : r heads and
little children by the hand, had called on
business.
The President of the Soviet, a short, lithe and
vigorous man, in a brown hoi land blouse, look-
ing something under forty years of age, was at
work in his office, and though he received us
kindly, he almost immediately left us to our
guides, Minkoff and Melanchansky, in order to
continue his duties.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN ' 1920.


CHAPTER X.
The Co-operatives.
The co-operative societies will inevitably be
absorbed into the Soviet Administration. As
separate entities, they will altogether disappear,
their functions being distributed amongst various
departments. Their greatest function is that of
distributing commodities to the individual
homes.
The Co-operative movement in Russia, as in
other countries, was mainly led by bourgeois re-
formists. Co-operation is, of course, in fact,
petty capitalism. It is capitalist trading and
manufacture by an agglomeration of small capi-
talists, whose dividends may be limited almost
to vanishing point, but who are, nevertheless,
conducting their business in accordance with the
capitalist system, although with the object of
protecting the small employers and better-paid
workers, who form their membership, from the
gross profiteering attendant on capitalism,
During the Czarist regime, the progress of the
co-operaitive movement was handicapped. In
January 1914 there were between 10,000 and
11,000 co-operative societies, with a total
and largely inactive membership of less than one
and a half millions. The turnover of the co-
operative societies in 1913 was 250,000 roubles.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SA IF IT IN 1920.


During the war, and after the February Re-
volution, the co-operative societies grew rapidly.
In 1917 their turnover was between six and
seven milliard roubles', and on January Ist,
1918, there were 25,000 co-operative societies,
with a membership of 9,000,000.
Before the Revolution, the co-operative move-
ment was professedly non-partisan, but when
the Revolution brought with it the prospect, not
of such palliations of the capitalist system as Co-
operation, but of sweeping away the capitalist
system altogether, the leaders of the co-operative
movement came out against Socialism. The
organ of the co-operatives, edited by Prokopo-
vich, declared for co-operation with bourgeois
capitalism, whilst Kouskova, another prominent
Co-operator, found even the Menshevik doc-
trines far too strong. “ I would rather chop
off my head, than vote for the Menshevik
Party,” he said.
When the Soviets came to power, their admin-
istration had many a tussle with the co-operative
leaders, and though the latter continued insist-
ing that the co-operatives were non-political,
and their activities purely humanitarian, like the
Red Cross, they took every opportunity to assist
the anti-Communist reaction. For instance, in
a report to Denikin, published in Bulletin No’. 2,
of the Co-operatives of South Russia, on Decem-
ber 10th, 1919, Mikhailov, a member of the
Governing' Board of the Central Organ of the
Co-operatives, the C' entrosoyuz, wrote :
Wherever the co-operative organisations
found themselves in the sphere of influence of
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


the Volunteer Army (the “ White ” Army of
Capitalism), they immediately, and this time
sincerely and willingly, established close re-
lations with you, sometimes suffering bitterly
from the Bolshetiki, when the Bolshevik
power would be temporarily restoied.
The All-Russian Extraordinary Commission
for Combatting the Counter-Revolution, dis-
covered that the old Co-operative leaders had
formed a group within the governing board of
the co-operatives, and were working secretly m
opposition to the other members of the hoard
negotiating with non-Communist members of
the old Russian co-operatives m England other
counter-revolutionary forces, through A. M
Berkenheim. When in 1919, it was thought
that Yudenitch might capture Petrograd, this
group of reactionaries in the co-operative govern-
ing board issued instructions to their Petrograd
representative, V. N. Krokhmal, based upon in-
structions they had received from Berkenheim
in England. They told Krokhmal to buy for
export from Russia, everything obtainable, flax,
hemp, lumber, “we can use everything, not
from Petrograd only, but also from the sur-
rounding district. He was to use all the means
in his possession for this purpose, anc ose a
the goods he had, in order to buy for export with
the proceeds. He was urged: Do not worry
about profits. Sell at the prices you can get,
and profits or losses we can count afterwards.
He was also to buy in Petrograd, editions of the
Russian classic®, which were to be obtained
SOVIET RUSSIA 1 S I S.t WIT IS IV AO. -


there at comparatively low prices, but were in
gx'eat demand elsewhere. Petrograd was to be
drained of everything worth keeping. This sort
of thing hardly savours of pure
When all the capitalist banks were abolished,
the Soviets allowed the Co-operative bank to
remain, but the co-operators allowed the Czarist
reactionaries and capitalists to use it and made
it a bulwark against Communism.
In spite of such difficulties, the policy of the
Communist Party and of the Soviet Government
towards the co-operative societies remains that
of converting the co-operative machinery and
organisation to Communist uses. The Communist
Party instructs its members to endeavour to ob-
tain a predominant influence in every branch of
the consumer’s co-operatives, thus following con-
sistently the Bolshevik policy of permeating with
Communist thought every organisation where
workers congregate.
Where co-operative institutions are doing
the same work as Soviet institutions, and the
latter are able to cope with the entire business,
the activities of the co-operatives are trans-
ferred to the Soviet institutions, and the co-
operative disappears. Where the co-operative
institutions supply a real need, they are placed
under Soviet control. The co-operative machin-
ery is especially used for the distribution of
commodities to the individual homes under the
control of the Soviets. The co-operatives are
used by the Soviets as technical organs of supply,
of commodities which have been made
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN 1920.


State monopolies, and those in which private
trading is still permitted.
The agricultural producers’ co-operative so-
cieties and the peasants’ home industry co-opera-
tives are organised by groups of well-to-do
peasants These producers’ co-operatives were
amalgamated in an All-Russian Agr'cultural
and Industrial Co-operative Union. Ihis
union has been abolished by the Soviets, and the
producers’ co-operatives have been brought into
the Central Union of Co-operatives, where the
labouring masses, as consumers’ co-operators,
hold the majority power. The control exercised
by the consumers’ co-operatives is of a general
political character. Technical supervision over
the producers’ co-operatives is exercised by the
Council of Public Economy and the People’s
Commissariat for Agriculture under which the
producers’ co-operatives have the rights of
autonomous industrial sections.
The Communist Party declares that the initi-
ative and independence of the peasant producers
must be preserved whilst they are guided away
from petty capitalism into Communist ways.
SOVIET RUSSIA /IS I SATE IT IN 1920.


CHAPTER XI.
The Russian Trade Unions. The Trade
Unions and the Revolution.
In Soviet Russia, the Trade Unions, which
actually are not Trade Union's, but industrial
unions, are no longer organs of struggle against
the capitalist employers. They are a part of the
Soviet State, and are the machinery by which
the workers in a given industry take their part
in administering it and governing the affairs
which affect their working lives.
The Communist Party moreover, regards the
Trade Unions as the political tra,ining-ground
of the masses. Every worker must belong to a
Trade Union, for everyone must work, and none
can obtain work without presenting the Trade
Union card; but only the tried and educated
minority of the workers belongs to the Commun-
ist Party.
The mission of the Communist unit within
the Trade Union is to teach Communism to the
masses of Trade Unionists outside the Party.
The Russian Trade Unions have formally ac-
cepted the political guidance of the Communist
Party. The Third All-Russian Trade Union
Congress, held after the Soviets came to power,
which took place in April 1920, declared :
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


“ The Trade Unions as a whole, standing
on the platform of the realisation of
Communism through the dictatorship of
the proletariat, are guided in their activity
in the proletarian revolution by the Rusian
Communist Party.”
The Communist Party, in its turn, has de-
clared the importance of the Trade Unions, and
the necessity of the co-operation between them
and the Communist Party itself. The Ninth
Congress of the Party recorded its opinion
thus :
“ Any antagonism of the economic organi-
sation of the workiing-cla&s, known as the
Trade Unions, towards its political organisa-
sation, the Soviets, is an absurdity, and a
deviation from Marxism towards bourgeois
ideas, and particularly towards bourgeois
Trade Union prejudices. This kind of
antagonism is still more prejudicial and
absurd during the epoch of proletarian dic-
tatorship, when all the struggle of the prole-
tariat, and the w'hole of its political and
economic activity, should more than ever
be concentrated, united, and directed by a
single will, and bound by an iron unity. . .
“ . . . Proletarian dictatorship and the
construction by Socialism, is only possible to
the extent to which the Trade Unions, though
nominally remaining non-party, in reality,
adhere to the Communist policy, and
actually realise this policy in life.”
The Russian Trade Union Congress early de-
clared against political neutrality, and for solid-
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


arity with the Soviet Government and the Com-
munist Revolution, and finally, at the Congress
of April 1920, declared themselves a part of the
machinery of the Soviet State, thus :
“ The Trade Unions in Russia practically
become an inseparable part of the Soviet
system,a necessary supplement and support of
the proletarian dictatorship of the Soviets.”
The easy rapidity with which Russian Trade
Unionism was won for Communism is explained
by the fact that Trade Unions did not achieve
any conceivable foothold in Russia until after the
overthrow of Czardom, when Efussian institu-
tions were already in a state of flux, and Russia’s
desperate economic situation was swiftly urging
the workers onward to Communism.
Workers’ Mutual Benefit Societies date back
in Russia to the early nineteenth century; but
fighting Trade Unions, which appeared later,
had only a small, precarious and illegal exist-
ence ; formed and nursed by the Socialist organ-
isations, they were always under Socialist in-
fluence. A law r of 1874 made membership of
an “ for rousing hostility between
employers and employed,” and “ provoking ”
strikes, punishable by eight months’ imprison-
ment, exile to Siberia, and forfeiture of rights
and property. This law was no dead letter.
The first Conference of Russian Trade Unions
could not be held until 1905, when the first Re-
volution had almost burst the chains of Czarist
authority. Even in 1906, despite that revolution,
there were only 200,000 organised workers in
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I STTT IT IN 1920.


all Russia. With the fall of the Revolution, the
Unions were again suppressed, 104 of them being
shut down in 1907. Nevertheless, the efforts to
form Trade Unions continued, and these attained
to some small successes in 1912-13. The Unions
were again utterly crushed at the outbreak of
war in 1914, and when the successful Revolution
of 1917 broke out, there existed not a single
Russian Trade Union. That is a very remarkable
fact.
The Council of Workers’ Deputies, which
sprang into being as the organ of the Revolution,
took the initiative in forming Trade Unions, and
either aided or substituted the Unions as the
workers’ champion in disputes with the
employers. It was the Council of Workers’
Deputies which convened the Third Trade Union
Congress in January 1917, the first effective
Trade Union Congress ever held in Russia.
The Council of Workers’ Deputies was at that
time led by the Mensheviki and Social-Revolu-
tionaries, and the Third Trade Union Congress
had also a non-Bolshevik The Men-
sheviki were for co-operation with the bourgeoisie,
the palliation of the capitalist system, and the
prosecution of the war, side by side with the
capitalist Allies. The Bolsheviki were, of course,
for the entire sweeping away of Capitalism, the
establishment of Communism and proletarian
rule, and peace with the workers of all countries.
Though it took the part of the Bolsheviki
against the Mensheviki, the Third Trade Union
Congress adopted a programme of reform, in-
cluding the eight-hour working day, which pro-
SOVIET RUSSIA AS J SAW IT IN 1920.


duced continual conflicts with the .temployers.
Moreover, the factory committees, wlTch sprang
up with the outbreak of revolution, carried on a
vigorous struggle to obtain control of the factory
management, and the right to engage and dis-
miss the workers.
Strike followed strike, and at last, in August
1917, the Moscow Trade Union Council called
out 500,000 Moscow workers to strike against
the Coalition Provisional Government, with the
battle-cry of “ All power to the Soviets.” Al-
ready the Bolsheviki had gained the majority
in the Unions. At the Democratic Convention,
held in Petrograd in September, 1917, nine-
tenths of the Trade Union delegates were op-
posed to the Coalition, and 70 per cent belonged
to the Bolshevik Party, The Unions and factory
committees were now forming Red Guards and
Red Cross detachments for the fight against the
Government. The Unions and Councils of Trade
Unions were directly represented on the revo-
lutionary committees, and their premises were
used by the revolutionary troops.
When the Soviets took power, the Trade
Unions placed all their machinery at the disposal
of the Soviet Government. The only purely
proletarian Union which definitely opposed the
rise of the Soviets to power in October, 1917,
was that of the printers, who came out in support
of the Provisional Government and the freedom
of the capitalist press.
The majority of the Unions, whose members
had struck to secure the fall of‘Kerensky’s Co-
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


altion, called their members back to work when
the Soviets took power, and declared that
striking against the workers’ Government could
only injure the working class.
The first Trade L nion Congress held under the
Soviet Government was in January, 1918. It
represented two and a halt’ million workers, and
declared firmly for the Revolution, saying :
“ The idea of neutrality of the Trade
Lnions was, and remains, a bourgeois idea.
There is, and there can be, no neutrality in
the great historical fight between revolution-
ary Socialism and its opponents. Support of
bourgeois policy and betrayal of the working-
class was always concealed beneath the mask
of neutrality. Least of all in Russia, a
country passing through a great revolution,
having overthrown the bourgeoisie, could the
Trade Unions be ‘ neutral.’ All the questions
arising in the process of the revolution; Con-
stituent Assembly, Nationalisation of Banks,
the fight against the bourgeois press, the re-
pudiation of loans, etc., directly affect the
interests of the Trade Union movement. In
all these questions, the Trade Unions must
give their entire support to the policy of the
Socialist Soviet Government, as conducted by
the Council of People’s Commissaries.”
Every declaration of the National Congress of
T rade Unions proved the falsity of the statements
made by Alexinsky and others, that the Trade
Unions of Russia are opposed to and oppressed by
the Soviet Government. It is true that the
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I .S I W IT IN 1980.


Total
Men-
Per
Delegates.
sheviks.
. cent.
1st Congress, Jan.
1918
416
66
21.3
2nd Congress, Jan.
1919
748
29
9.4
3rd Congress, April,
1920
1,229
48
6.8
Clerks’ Union and the Printers’ at first declared
for political independence, but by 1919, the
National Congress of both these Unions had
announced their solidarity with the workers Re-
volution. The position of the Mensheviki in the
Three All-Russian Trade Union Congresses held
since the Soviets came to power, was as follows :
Finding themselves quite out of sympathy with
the existing Trade Union International, the
Russian Trade Unions, in which, as has been
seen, the Communists have the lead,, decided to
form a Red Trade Union International to rival
the old International, the headquarters of which
is at Amsterdam. The organisations which
at once decided to send representatives to the
Red International, were the American, and other
branches of the Industrial Workers of the
World, the British Shop Stewards’ and Workers’
Committee Movement and kindred organisations
in other countries. These bodies were reluctant
to agree to the admission of the orthodox Trade
Unions, which the Russians desire to attract and
transform. The conflict between the ideas of
permeation from within and attack from
without, which had been acutely manifested at
the Third International Congress again arose
at the discussions held at the same time at
Moscow, regarding the Red Trade I nion Inter-
national .
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


It was argued that the Russians, if they were
to act in logical accord with their own theories,
should make no attempt to form a new Trade
Union International, but should transform the
existing one; but the Russians insisted that
whilst the masses within the old Trade Unions
can be won for Communism and a Red Interna-
tional, the Amsterdam organisation cannot be
won, and must be fought.
Gallacher, of the Scottish Workers’ Commit-
tee, declared that the proposed Red International
would be, not Red, but piebald. Every Red
Internationalist present was sceptical as to the
Russian project.
Tomsky, the Russian Trade Union leader, who
presided over the discussions, a little man with
Tartar eyes, had something of Lenin’s skill in
negotiations. No one doubted his revolutionary
fervour, and somehow he induced the delegates
to agree to everything. He argued just as Lenin
does
“ This is not a question of principle for us;
it is a question of tactics. We have never re-
garded existing organisations as sacred. We
have always been of opinion that it is easier
to get at the masses through existing Unions;
but if that is impossible, the existing organi-
sation must be destroyed and a new' organisa-
tion created. That is why we wish to destroy
tfoe Amsterdam Internatiional. We do not
wish to help Appleton and Gompers. There-
fore we must not build up a theoretical struc-
ture under which the existing organisations
must be assumed to be reactionary in any case.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN 19%0.


In Russia we have a much wider basis
for the Trade Unions than for the Communist
Party. We do not demand that every Trade
Unionist shall be a Communist. Therefore
we are also proposing something wider than
the Third International for the Red Trade
Ifnion International. The 'principal differ-
ence between the Mensheviki and the Com-
munists in this regard is that the Mensheviki
are only willing to admit the official Trade
I nions. We admit also the unofficial organi-
sations. The Italian Confederation of Labour
is ready to join the Red International, but we
are inviting also the Italian Synd'calist Unions,
which are outside the Federation.”
As we have seen, the Russian Trade Unions
were active supporters of the proletarian revolu-
tion, but the Workers’ Committees were earlier
and more active in the fight. They were, indeed,
the first organs created by the masses in then-
struggle to overthrow Czardom and Capitalism.
It was from the factory committees, not from the
Trade Unions, that the delegates were sent to
form the Soviets of Workers, Peasants and
Soldiers. The factory committees carried on
the class-war with the employers and the Coali-
tion Government. In some cases, where the em-
ployer had closed the factory in order that
hunger might crush the revolution, the factory
committee re-opened the factory and carried on
production ; in other cases, the factory committee
ejected the employer and took over the manage-
ment, At first the factory committees were
striving for workers’ control of industry owned by
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SA TF IT IN 1920.


the capitalist employer, later for workers’ man-
agement of industry owned by the workers’
State.
The industrial unions had at first enrolled but a
few of the workers. The factory committees,
a vast, spontaneous growth, performed all the
functions of industrial unions. In some cases
the factory committees soon became the local
nuclei of the industrial unions in other cases
the factory committees regarded themselves as
rivals and more efficient substitutes b£ the
Unions, which they considered out of date.
Central Councils of factory committees were
formed, and conflicting national organisations of
factory committees and industrial unions began
to grow up. It was soon decided, however, that
the factory committees should form the local
branches of the industrial unions, and the central
councils of factory Committees were dissolved
after the Trade Union Congress of January 1018.
The basis of a Russian industrial union is very
broad and comprehensive. For instance, the
Metal Workers’ Union included all persons en-
gaged in obtaining metal in any form, from
smelting to the making of machines and metal
instruments. Unskilled workers, office staff,
technicians, engineers and all the various crafts-
men in the metal works, the wood mould makers
and all who work in the metal factory, are in-
cluded in the membership. The factory com-
mittees are elected every six months at a general
meeting of all the workers in the factory. Con-
ferences of the factory committee elect the Re-
gional Committees, and Regional Conferences
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN IM(>.


elect delegates to the National Congress of the
Metal Workers" Union, held once a year. This
Congress elects the National Committee.
There now exist in Russia, but twenty-three
industrial unions, covering all branches of in-
dustry. These are :■ —
1. Medical and sanitary workers (doctors,
nurses, hospital porters and attendants,
pharmacists, etc.).
2. Transport workers (railwaymen, sailors,
stevedores, chauffeurs, etc.).
3. Miners.
4. Woodworkers.
5. Land and forest workers.
6. Art workers (actors, choristers, music-
ians, painters, sculptors, theatrical,
circus and cinema employees, etc.).
7. Workers on public feeding and housing.
8. Leather workers.
9. Metal workers.
10. Workers in Communal services (drains,
Mater, militia, fire-brigade, baths,
laundries, hairdressing, street lighting,
etc.).
11.. W orkers in education and social culture
(teachers, professors, school and univer-
sity staff, porters, etc.).
12. Workers in public communications
(post, telegraph, telephones, wireless).
13. Printers.
14. Paper workers.
15. Workers in food industry (bakers,
confectioners, sausage makers, etc,).
16. Builders.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN IMO.


17. Sugar workers.
18. Soviet workers (in co-operatives, shops,
commissariats, etc.).
19. Tobacco workers. t
20. Textile workers.
21. Chemical workers (soap, perfume, ex-
plosives, matches).
22. Workers in sewing industry (outer and
under garments, hats, etc,).
23. Workers in taxation, finance and con-
trol departments.
All these Unions are constructed on the same
principle, with the factory committee, as the
local branch.
In the first period of the revolution, the factory
committees strove everywhere to become the
managing authority in the factory. Afterwards,
the factories were managed by boards, consist-
ing of representatives of the factory committees,
the Trade Unions, and the Council of National
Economy, which is a body created jointly by
the Trade Unions and the Soviets. Ihe steady
tendency is for the election of the management
to give way to selection, based on practical experi-
ence, technical competency and organising
capacity'. The Ninth Congress of the Russian
Communist Party declared in favour of manage-
ments by single persons. T hese passages from
the resolutions adopted are interesting, as indica-
tions of the trend of thought developed by the
effort to secure an abundant production and the
removal of capitalist exploitation, which made
control by the rank and file appear the paramount
necessity'.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


“ The chief problem in the organisation of
industry, is to create a competent, firm, and
energetic dictatorship, whether the question
is one ot an individual enterprise, or ol an entire
sphere of production.
For the purpose of attaining a less com-
plex and more exact form of industrial ad-
ministration, as well as in the interests of the
organising powers of the country, the Congress
finds it necessary to introduce in industrial
administration, instead of the hitherto pre-
vailing management by collegiates and boards,
a management by single persons ... in
workshops and guilds, and in factory and works
administrations, as well as decreasing the col-
legiates and boards in all the average-sized and
more important links of the administrative
productive apparatus . . .
“ . . . The Congress makes it obligatory
upon all the members of the Party to fight
mercilessly that particularly obnoxious form
of ignorant conceit, which deems the working
class capable of solving all problems without
the assistance, even in the most responsible
cases, of specialists of the bourgeois school.
The demogogic elements who speculate on this
kind of prejudice in the more backward sec-
tion of our working classes, can have no place
in the ranks of the Party of scientific
Socialism.”
The last paragraph quoted, of course refers to
the present transitory stage; for Communists
hope to eradicate all class distinctions, and pro-
duce a generally cultivated population, in which
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


the expert in some particular line will neither
expect, nor secure, a higher social and economic
position than the general average of the people.
Not only the Communist Party, but the Trade
Unions also have declared for individual manage-
ment where this will benefit production.
The present function of the Factory Committee
is to act as the basic nucleus of the Trade
Union, to assist in raising labour discipline, to
see to the carrying out, in the factory, of in-
structions by the Trade Union, the Labour Com-
missariat, and the factory management, to hold
Courts of Honour for the enforcement of discip-
line and punishment of offenders, and to enforce
the decisions of the Courts of Honour. To carry
on propaganda, both political and industrial, in
support of the workers’ revolution, to educate
the workers and to interest them in the general
activity of the factory, to assist in selecting
labour administrators, inspectors. industrial
union officials, and so on; to take part in con-
trolling the industrial commissions, which fix the
rates of pay. Except indirectly by their part
in electing officials and hoards, the factory com-
mittees no longer interfere in the management
of the factories.
The industrial unions fix the wages of the in-
dustries and define tlfr conditions of labour. The
decisions of the unions .are merely confirmed by
the Commissariats. The wage rates worked out
by the industrial unions are submitted to the
wages department of the All-Russian Council of
Trade Unions, in order that a uniform wage
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I 8/1 W IT IN 1920.


policy may be established. Having been system-
atised in relation to the conditions of other in-
dustries, the wage rates are finally passed by the
All-Russian Council of Trade Unions and sent to
the Labour Commissariat for final ratification.
The Labour Commissariat and all its respon-
sible officials are elected by the Trade Unions.
All legislative and other proposals of the Com-
missariat affecting questions of principle must
first be submitted to a joint meeting of - the in-
dustrial unions and the Labour Commissariat,
and none can become operative without the sanc-
tion of the Unions.
The Unions, jointly with the Soviets, appoint
the Councils of National Economy and the Cen-
tral economic administations at the head of the
various industries, such as the Committee for
State Building and Construction, and the chief
administration of the nationalised textile under-
takings.
Except in taking part in the appointment of
managers and managing boards, the Trade Unions
do not interfere with the management of the
industries.
The. Labour Commissariat has the duty of pro-
tecting the workers from exploitation and injury
due to the exigencies of Russia’s productive
needs, and of improving the conditions under
which their work is carried on. The Commis-
sariat has established clinics and laboratories for
the study of industrial diseases. It is studying
to discover how the scientific foundations of such
schemes for increasing production as the Taylor
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


system ran be combined with care of the
workers’ health and development. The Com-
missariat is responsible for the hygienic and sani-
tary construction of housing and working places,
for the limitation of working hours and special
protection of women and young people, and it
provides inspectors to see to the enforcement
of its regulations.
The Labour inspectors are elected at confer-
ences of Trade Unions and factory committees.
The Inspector of Labour, though responsible to
the Labour Commissariat, must work in close
touch with the Trade Unions. He reads papers
at Trade Union branch meetings, and carries out
the instructions of the; local Trade Union
Councils. He may be withdrawn by the local
Trade Union Council if found by it to be in-
efficient. In April 1920, out of 405 Labour In-
spectors, 375 were men, 30 were women. They
were drawn from the following categories :
Workers 232
Foremen and technicians 75
General clerks 60
Medical assistants 5
Teachers 6
Druggists 2
Students 6
Doctors 3
Lawyers <► 1
Engineers 2
Unknown 9
SOME! RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN 1920.


Their educational attainments were as follows :
Higher education 16
Average education 68
Average technical and craft 49 ?
Lower education 272
Domestic education 13
Not known 17
The majority were between twenty-five and
thirty-five years of age.
Their Party affiliations were as follows :
Communists 183
Communist sympathisers 85
Mensheviki 15
Left Social Revolutionaries 6
Anarchists 2
Zionist Socialists 1
Bund
Non-party 93
Unknown 18
It should be remembered that these Inspectors
are elected by their fellow-workers in open con-
ference.
To assist the Labour Inspectors, 125 technical
inspectors and 60 medical inspectors have been
appointed. They act in a consultative capacity
under the Labour Inspectors who bear the re-
sponsibility for the work of labour inspection.
Soviet Russia is so short of industrial labour,
so pressed by the need for production, so much
handicapped by war and the backward state of
the country, that ideal conditions of labour are
still far away.
The eight-hour day was inaugurated on Oc-
SOilf.T RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


tober 29th, 1917, as soon as the Soviets came to
power. Overtime is allowed only on work of ex-
treme social necessity by sanction of the Trade
Union and Labour Inspector. It is paid for at
time and a half. Night-work is limited to seven
hours. Sedentary and mental work, which
is considered more exhausting than manual
work, is limited to six hours a day. Work
in tobacco, gas, chemical and other in-
jurious processes is limited to six or seven
hours a day. The dinner interval is from thirty
minutes to two hours, included in the working
day. Theer must be a weekly rest of 42 hours.
Each worker was entitled to two weeks holiday on
full pay after six months’ work, but in view of
the economic crisis, this holiday was reduced to
two weeks per year, except for children and per-
sons engaged in harmful trades. Women are
liberated from work on full pay for eight weeks
before and eight weeks after confinement;
sedentary workers for six w r eeks before and six
w T eeks after. Nursing mothers have half an
hour’s rest every three hours for feeding their
children. Creches for the children are attached
to the factories. For juniors between sixteen
and eighteen years, the working hours are lim-
ited to six per day. Children under sixteen who
are already wwking in the factories, must not
work more than four hours a day, and may only
remain at work until a school or other suitable
environment can be provided for them. When
the child taken from work was giving financial
assistance to the family, the equivalent is pro-
vided for the family from Soviet sources.
SO VII T RUSSIA AS I SA WIT L\ 7 1930.


As the cultural development of the workers
increases, as then- sense of responsibility and zeal
for the common good enlarges; as the industrial
unions lose the narrow sectional outlook produced
by Capitalism and the struggle with the exploit-
ing employer; as the disproportion* between
Russia’s enormous population and relatively
tiny resources for the producing of manu-
factured goods is reduced, the need for these
opposing bodies, the Trade Unions and the
Labour Commissariat and the Economic Council
and the Central administrations of the industries
will probably cease. Losovsky’s prediction that
eventually there will be but one organisation
in place of these, will probably be fulfilled.
At present, the Trade Unions comprise the
workers organised to protect themselves and es-
pecially their wages. The Labour Commissariat
comprises the Inspectors, the doctors and ex-
perts on hygiene, who strive to protect the
workers from exploitation, both by those who
are responsible for production, and by themselves
in their own eagerness to earn as much money as
possible.
The F 'conomic Councils and the Central In-
dustrial Councils are the bodies responsible for
production; those who are faced with the duty of
supplying the needs of great Russia and her vast
population, and who, in the effort to meet these
ever-pressing needs, must somehow mould the
raw material of circumstances, and the wayward
wills of masses of human beings, to the pro-
ductive end.
SOVIET RUSSIA .1 .S I ,S 1 H IT IN 1920.


Already the Trade Unions have largely dis-
carded the character of a- body fighting purely
for the interests of the workers as employees, and
caring nothing for the needs of the consumers.
This is proved by the resolutions adopted by the
Unions’ Congresses, by their willingness to give
power to the factory managements; their own
assfstance to the management in maintaining
discipline amongst the workers without inter-
ference, with the rules imposed by the manage-
ment. A still more striking proof is the accept-
ance by the Unions of the principle of
compulsory labour. It must be remembered
in this connection, that the committees of actual
workers in the shops are the branches of the
Unions, the basis on which they are constructed.
Like every other institution of Soviet Russia,
the Trade Unions are labouring under a great
shortage of capable administrators. The pro-
letariat has suffered from lack of educational
opportunities. It has been held down always in
stultifying drudgery and poverty. The Russian
Proletarian Republic, with its gigantic institutions,
has created a need for immense numbers of effici-
ent organisers deeply imbued with Communist
ideals. This need could not possibly have been
supplied at such short notice in any event; and
the counter-revolutionary war is constantly re-
ducing the ranks of those best fitted to adminis-
trate. V Nevertheless, great things have been
accomplished.
At the Petrograd Palace of Labour, where all
the Industrial Unions have their offices, a staff
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN 1920.


of 300 persons was at work, a staff much too small
for the requirements of their task. Our guide,
an important official, was going to the Polish front
in a few days’ time. Whilst willing to go, he
spoke with regret of the work he must leave
behind.
The interior of the Palace was beflagged and
upholstered in revolutionary red, with special
adornments added in honour of the Third Inter-
national. The main assembly hall, which seats
1,000 people, was hung with the banners of the
Unions, and every one was red. The banner of
the Tailors symbolised the solidarity of the
workers by the figures of a European, an Indian
and a Negro.
A smaller hall is used almost continuously for
conferences. An extensive library is open from
10 a.m. to 10 p.m.
A class in physics was being held in the labor-
atory. The students, six men and five women,
were textile workers elected by their comrades
in the workshop. They are provided with free
board and lodging and their shop pay during their
studies.
Part of the Palace of Labour was, like
Srnolney, a school for noble girls. An enormous
and splendid stable, which formed part of the
building, has been converted into a dining-room,
where meals are provided for the workers in the
palace, and many others in the neighbourhood.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN 1920.


CHAPTER XII.
The House of the Mother and Child.
Soviet Russia early adopted a new code of laws
of marriage, divorce, guardianship and inherit-
ance. Under the code which is already obsolete,
divorce can be obtained by mutual consent, or the
desire of either party. Husbands and wives can
choose what surname each will adopt after marri-
age and on divorce. 1 hey can also decide each
to retain their original citizenship after
marriage, or both to take that of husband,
or wife. Marriage does not establish community
of property, and contracts between husband and
wife, having a right to diminish the right of
either over property, are void. If husband or
wife is in need and unable to work, he or she has
the right to support from the other, provided
the latter can afford it. Parents and children
have the same mutual right to support, if in
need and unable to work, but not otherwise, and
other members of the family have the same claim
on well-to-do relatives. Men over 55, and women
over 50 are considered unable to work. The
right of inheritance is abolished, but husbands,
wives, children and other relatives who are in
need, may be maintained out of the property left
by the deceased, maintainence being paid out to
them by the Department of Social Security. In
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


determining the character of the maintenance,
the code directs that the Department shall take
into account the need and working capacity of
those concerned, and the minimum wage of the
district. If the property in question is a trading
or industrial enterprise, its management passes
under control of the local Soviet. The mother of
an illegitimate child should notify the time of
conception, and name and residence of the father,
not later than three months before the birth of
the child. The person mentioned as father is
then notified, and if he wishes to appeal against
the mother s statement, lie must do so within two
weeks. Should it be established that the person
designated had such intercourse as to become in
the natural course of events, the child’s father,
he must share in tjie expenses of pregnancy,
birth, and maintenance. If several persons had
such intercourse with the child’s mother, they
must all share the expenses. Paternal rights are
exercised by both parents conjointly. All
measures concerning the children are taken by
mutual consent of both parents. Parents are
bound to maintain and educate their children
under age.
This code, revolutionary as it may seem to the
jurists and legislators of capitalist countries, is
already obsolete. The steady disappearance of
private property, the progressive discarding of
money, and the assumption by the Soviet com-
munity of the duty of maintaining the children,
the aged, the sick and disabled, and pregnant
mothers, have practically swept away all occa-
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


sion for such private claims for support as are
dealt with by the code.
The desire of Communist Russia to make affec-
tion, and not legal ties the basis of marriage,
produces a growing tendency to ignore both the
formal marriage, and the easily granted divorce
provided by the code. The fact is that marriage
laws now exist in Russia merely for those who do
not feel happy without some legal forms and
ceremonies. Prescient and courageous thinkers
recognise that the present marriage and divorce
regulations are but a temporary bridge to carry
public opinion from the old sex and family rela-
tionships of Capitalism, to those of Communism,
Marriage as we know it to-day, has grown
with capitalism and private property, and the
consequent economic dependence of women and
children, the economic burden of parenthood,
and the man’s individual obligation to bear it.
Communism, by abolishing Capitalism and
making the community responsible for the
economic burden of motherhood and childhood,
will modify the marriage relation, as it will
modify every other featux - e of human life.
Nevertheless most Russian Communists do
not desire to accelerate the substitution of free
unions for the legal marriage ties, lest persons of
irresponsible temperament be encouraged to
foolish excesses. Propaganda for the free unions
is carried on mainly amongst the women’s sec-
tions of the Party, and largely in order to allay
the anxiety of women worried by the spread of
new ideas. Many women are slow to accustom
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


themselves to the fact that wives and children are
no longer economically dependent upon their
husbands and fathers, and they are sometimes
inclined to under-rate the hold which affection
for the wife and family has on the aver a ore man,
and to imagine, therefore, that once the legal tie
is removed, he will desert.
Belief in free unions and contempt for the old
harsh condemnation of those who disregard the
legal marriage have, however long been current
amongst intelligent Russians, and have spread
far.
W e were reminded of this fact when at a
“ House of the Mother and Child,” in Moscow,
the Matron was asked :
“ Are these illegitimate children or the chidren
of widows?”
We know nothing either of legitimate or
illegitimateJ We do not ask the mothers such
questions!” she retorted with a burning indig-
nation, that made her hearers ashamed of the
question.
I his house for mothers and children was
started in 1919, and was the first of its kind in
Russia. 1 here are many such houses now, for
they are everywhere regarded as a necessity.
1 wenty mothers and twenty-five babies werq
living there; one of the mothers having two
was a teacher of four languages, and one a
children, and four children being motherless.
Some of the mothers were unskilled factory
workers, some were university students. One
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SA TC IT IN imo.


was a teacher of four languages, and one a
librarian at the University, who declared that
she was longing to go to London to viSit the
British Museum.
The children, none of whom were more than
two years of age, are cared for by nurses who have
had a year’s special training in this work.
Probationers also come in daily to assist the
nurses and to learn from them. Several bright
airy rooms, opening from each other, are set
apart for the infants, and there are two isolation
rooms for them, in ease of illness.
There is also an isolation room for the mothers,
who sleep in dormitories.
When I saw the home, the mothers had only
one common room where they took their meals;
but another was being prepared for them. The
house lacked, 1 thought, enough aecommrdat on
for quiet privacy. When we arrived, the teacher
of languages was reading alone in one of the
dormitories. Ihe other mothers were either
with their children, or sitting together in the
common room. I hey all seemed satisfied, how-
ever.
Two laundresses are employed. They wash
the babies’ garments, bed-clothes of children
and adults, and the household linen. tfie
mothers wash their own clothing. They also
assist in the housework dn the evening. All
these mothers were earning their living outside
the home. I think both the washing and house-
work a mistake for people who work for their
living in other ways, especially for nursing
mothers.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT LV 1920.


I he mothers go in and out of the home as
they please, but it is a general rule, which re-
quires no compulsion, for them to return to
suckle their children at the proper time; the
usual evening hours for this being eight
and eleven o clock. F.xcept for this, the resident
nurses take entire charge of the children, unless
the mothers wish to care for their babies in the
evening.
I he babies’ garments are provided free of cost
by the institution, also the underclothing of the
mothers, and the dresses they wear in the home.
The mothers bring their own outer garments.
The mothers emphatically said that the food
was sufficient and good. For dinner, they had
soup, fish, and Kasha ; for supper, soup. They
had 1 lb. of bread each a day, the ordinary allow-
ance at that time being | lb. for two days. They
have 3 lbs. of sugar each per month ; 3 lbs. of
butter, and a liberal allowance of tea and coffee.
For board, lodging and clothes, the mothers paid
TOO roubles, which was half the cost of their
food. No charge was made for the children,
because for children under s : xteen years, every-
thing is free in Soviet Russia.
The babies .were thoroughly well cared for,
and in the pink of condition whilst the mothers
formed a merry party.
The home is reserved for mothers and infants;
as the children grow older, the mothers will move
to homes arranged for older children.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


CHAPTER XIII.
Babies' Homes and Clinics.
. Homes for Mothers and Children are now re-
garded in Russia as a necessary institution. Babies'
Homes are also opened as a matter of course.
The Kolomna Babies’ Home occupied a large
country house, not specially built for the put-
pose, but with all the equipment necessary. No
one could fail to be impressed by its exquisite
cleanliness and management. The babies, except
for a few newcomers who had been brought in
suffering from illness, were all in perfect health.
It was a pleasure to behold them. Both here and
in the Moscow House of the Mother and ( hild,
just described, the bright, engaging manners of
the babies showed that though they were
sufficiently well trained to remain in their cots
without crying, they were by no means left to
themselves for hours at a time; but had plenty
of petting and baby games with their nurses.
Some of the babies had been born in the Home,
for there was a maternity wing; some had been
left by mothers who visited them and would
reclaim them ; some were orphans; a few were
foundlings, some actually abandoned on the door-
step of the Home. Evidently there are still
women in Russia who fear to confess then-
motherhood.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


la Moscow I visited a large Infant and
Maternity C linic and Babies’ Home and Hospital,
situated in a park at the rear of the Djelavoi
D\or Hotel. Hiree hundred babies Mere
accomodated there, and and a large number of
mothers attended the C linic, obtaining without
charge, advice, treatment, medicine, milk and
foods. Hie Babies* Hospital had been built
originally for tubercular cases; some of the babies
Mere alone in little isolation rooms, others were
in wards. There were many premature infants
in cradles cased with hot water,
Ihe normal children were housed in one-
storied wooden bungalows. Their cots could be
brought out into the park without difficulty. I
was not very favourably impressed with this part
of the institution. The babies looked, on the
whole, thinner than they should be, even those
whose own mothers were suckling them and
helping with the nursing.
The place was infested with flies, and the
attendants complained that they could not get
enough fly-papers, or gauze to put over the cots
to prevent the flies from settling on the babies.
Butter muslin was used in some cases, but it was
lather thick for the purpose and there was not
enough of it for all the cots. Insects always
abound in hot climates, of course, and one need
not be surprised by finding a quantiy of flies in
Moscow; but the flies w r ere especially prevalent
in this institution, because some of the houses
skirting the park tipped their refuse, including
the contents of dry closets, on the open ground
at the edge of the park.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN 1920.


I wanted to ask whether a “ Subotnik,” or
Saturday working party could not clear all this
refuse away. But no doubt it was periodically
removed, and the real difficulty probably was that
no efficient system had yet been devised to
prevent its ever being tipped there at all. A
country that is in its seventh year of war, and is
still burdened with the decaying relics of
mediaevalism in every direction, has many diffi-
culties to contend with.
The Report of the People’s Commissariat for
Health, issued in 1920, states :— *
“ We should like to change completely our
drainage and water-supply system, especially
in provincial tow ns; but we do not possess
sufficient materials, neither are our factories
in a position to produce a sufficient quantiy,
nor even can we receive them from abroad, on
account of the blockade.”
Rome was not built in a day, nor can the Soviet
Republic change all things in a year or two.
Moscow’s infant mortality before the war was
36 per cent., and that for the whole of Russia,
25 per cent. The evils responsible for such an
appalling death rate will take some time to over-
come.
A large ball in the same institution was devoted
to an excellent maternity and infant welfare ex-
hibition. There w r ere models and pictures,
showing how to dress and bathe the baby, what
foods and toys to give it, and what not to give it,
in what position it should be carried and held
during feeding, and so on. The sort of garments
SOVIET UtJSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


the pregnant and nursing mother should and
should not wear, were also shown, and the effect
of tight corseting upon her body were demon-
strated by models of skeletons, showing the de-
formities which result from tight lacing.
The foetus was shown in the womb at various
stages. Models of coloured wax, showed venereal
diseases, In both mother and child, attacking
various parts of the body. The exhibition was
certainly a terrible warning against sexual in-
temperance. There was a quantity of free
literature with charts and diagrams. Parties of
mothers were brought to the exhibition, which
was free to anyone, and free medical lectures
were given there.
SOVIET RUSSIA A S I SA IT IT IN 1920.


CHAPTER XIV.
Commissariat of Public Health.
The Soviet Government, for the first, time,
_ established a Health Department for Russia, and
thus set an example to the other Governments of
Europe.
During the first eighteen months of its exist-
ence, it spent a milliard roubles in combatting
epidemic diseases. It has established 150,000
beds for civilian special epidemic patients, and
250,000 for military patients. During two and
a half years, the number of permanent beds for
civilian patients in therapeutic, surgical and
other hospitals where infectious diseases are not
treated, increased by 40 per cent. 2,000 new
beds for venereal diseases were established in
1910. In every government (or province),
approximately 100 to 200 new medical beds
were established, and four provincial physico-
mechanical-therapeutic institutions were opened
at Kazan, Saratotf, Orel, and Kostroma.
All medical and surgical treatment, hospitals
and sanatoria, drugs and medical appliances,
artificial limbs and so on, are free.
Institutions for defective children arc being
established >in all government towns, i.e,,
capitals of provinces.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SA TV IT IN 1920.


Children under eighteen cannot be tried in
the courts. Their cases are examined by a
special commission of parents and teachers, which
may send them, as the circumstances necessitate,
either to an educational institution, under the
People’s Commissariat for Education, or to a
medical institution under the People’s Commis-
sariat for Health.
In the Czar’s time, every inhabitant of Russia
was taxed one rouble a year for health purposes,
of which 95 kopecks were spent on general
treatment, and 5 kopecks for preventative
medicine and sanitation. The Soviet Health
Commissariat, in 1920 spent 60 per cent, of its
budget, which amounted to many milliard
roubles, on preventative measures.
Shortage of soap and medical and surgical
requisites have hindered the work of this
department.
When in 1918 Spanish influenza swept through
Russia, as through other countries, .and over
700,000 cases were registered, the Health Com-
missariat set up a special medical commission to
study the disease, which from time to time pub-
lishes Ps researches. Important discoveries,
valuable to the entire world, may therefore be
looked for. When an epidemic of small-pox
arose, the Commissariat inaugurated compulsory
vacination for the first time in the history of
Russia. Between November Ist, 1918, and July
1919, 81,851 cases of small-pox were registered.
Great sums of money were spent by the Soviet
Health Department in the effort to exterminate
the disease. It is now believed that small-pox
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


has been finally eradicated from the country.
Anti-vaccinators will contend that this is not due
'to vaccination, but to other measures; but what-
ever may be the cause, if Russia, hitherto one of
the world’s great forcing houses of epidemic
disease,can rid herself of such plagues, the entire
world will benefit. As to cholera, in 1918,
Russia had 3.5,619 cases ; in 1919 only a few cases.
Typhus and spotted fever have also been ener-
getically dealt with.
Like all other Government Departments,
the Health Commissariat is controlled by the
Soviets of workers, peasants and soldiers, and the
assistance of the workers was enlisted in the
daily work of the health service. Labour Com-
missions for combating epidemic disease w 7 ere
established in April, 1918. They inspected baths
and public places, railway stations, prisons,
boarding-houses and so on, saw to the soap
supply and the cleanliness of dwellings, and
issued to the people advice and information on
questions of hygiene. In all this work, the
assistance of women housekeepers was specially
enlisted. Conferences, to devise measures for
dealing with phthisis and other disease, were held
with delegates from Trade Unions, women’s or-
ganisations, and Leagues of Youth.
It is interesting to compare the record of what
the Russian Soviet Health Department has ac-
complished under such great difficulties, with the
position in Britain, where the great hospitals
nm by private charity are, one by one, closing
down or threatening to do so. for lack of funds,
whilst the Government takes no steps either to
save them, or to take over their work.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


CHAPTER XV.
Education.
Soviet Russia promises to be the foremost
country for educational developments. It is
already tlie country in which educational work re-
ceives the greatest support and recognition, for
the Soviet Republic places the welfare af the
coming generation before all else.
The highest food ration is that accorded
to the Red Army, because Soviet Russia
has been forced to depend for existence upon
her soldiers. The University students have the
same ration as the Red Army. Soviet Russia
will extend education and maintenance to all
young people up to 20 years of age, according
to the law adopted, as soon as material condi-
tions make that possible. The number of
students, that was 4,000 in 1911 (the last year
for which Czarist statistical data is ava : 'able),
even yet has only risen to 34,000, and though
that is an increase of more than eight times,
great masses of young people are left out still.
Therefore at present the students are carefully
selected according to merit; in some cases
are elected by the workshop committee. Sixty
to sixty-five per cent, of the Russian children
fp'c now accommodated in Soviet schools.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I S/ITT IT IN 1920.


In 1911 there were 55,840 elementary schools;
there are now 88,000. There are 8,000 Soviet
second grade schools, accommodating about half
a million pupils, only between seven and eight
per cent, still of the children of this age.
Lunacharsky, the Soviet Commissary for
Soviet Commissary for Education, protests that
this is “ disgraceful.” and struggles to improve
matters. /
There are 400,000 educational workers;
Lunacharsky wants more than a million. He is
proud of the kindergartens, of which there were
8,623 in 1019, and about a thousand were added
in 1920. Great efforts have been made to stamp
out illiteracy. 58,000 persons have passed
through the schools for illiterates in the province
of ( herepovetz alone, and 50,000 in Ivenovoz-
nessensk. Six and a half millions of reading
primers have been printed. Nine thousand
persons under sixteen are studying music.
There are 3,000 peasant theatres, and in some
provinces there are 1,000 to 3,000 libraries.
Educational facilities, in’, spite of their great
growth, are far below the needs of Soviet Rus-
sia. Men and women who are privileged to
become University students are not only given
the food ration of the Red Army, but are also
placed under Red Army discipline, to indicate
that a firm attention to duty is required of them.
When the Communist Revolution opened the
doors of the University to the proletariat, the
first desire of the students was mainly for
theoretical knowledge. To-day there is a swing
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


of the pendulum towards practical utilitarian
studies. Hie industrial unions specially urge
that the students shall learn what is necessary
for the development of industry. Some unions
provide their own course of technical instruction,
the pupils being selected by the shop committees,
and maintained during their training at their
ordinary rates of pay.
In addition to the courses for full-time
students, the Universities provide many classes
for part-time students.
At the Moscow I niversity, which has been
re-named after the Communist Sverdloff, there
is a special ” Workers’ Faculty.” Comraues
who have been teachers in London, told me
that it already provides a more serious
theoretical study than do the London Poly-
technics. The ” Workers’ Faculty ” provides
courses for whole-time, part-time and evening
students. Having taken a course in the
” Workers’ Faculty,” the student passes to
more advanced and specialised work. At a late
afternoon class at the 1 ‘ Workers’ Faculty ,” we
found that the pupils were railway clerks, textile
workers and other factory workers.
In Moscow, Petrograd and elsewhere, exten-
sive developments are taking place in the or-
ganisation of children’s work-schools, in which
manual constructive work goes hand in hand
with academic study, in eurythmics, in pupils’
self-government nursery schools- and so on.
The organisation for the development of pro-
letarian culture, called the Proletkult , seeks to
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


develop and give expression to the latent
artistic faculties of the workers and peasants in
music, painting, sculpture and the drama. All
schools and courses of study, whether of arts,
or sciences, or elementary education, are con-
ducted without fees.
There has been a great struggle to provide
equipment and text books for all the educational
developments. We were told of a certain far-
distant village school being found quite without
pencils, the teachers instructing the children to
write with sticks upon sand. This was an ex-
treme case .of need.
Some visitors complain that Communism is
taught in the schools. That is true. Capitalist
Governments have also endeavoured to capture
the young idea and train it according to their
desire. The teaching in their State schools, the
patriotic demonstrations, Flag days,” and so
on, the portraits of monarchs or presidents, all
tend to inculcate respect for the established
system. Soviet Russia has gone about the work
more openly and directly, because there is
nothing in the Communist doctrine to which the
Government endeavouring to practise it need
fear, to open young minds. Communism and
the nature of Capitalism can be taught scienti-
fically, and without reserve, in the Soviet
schools. Soviet Russia, moreover, wins the love
and enthusiasm of the children, just as parents
win their children’s affection by giving them the
best that there is to give, and placing their in-
terests before all other considerations.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1980.


The children’s food rations are everywhere
the best, and there are no class distinctions, no
special privileges amongst the children, save
those based upon age and health.
In the towns wherever there is a shortage of
milk, the supply is reserved for the children
and invalids.
Paradoxically, the capitalist blockade is ac-
tually tending to accelerate the education of
the children in Communist ways of life. The
food scarcity facilitates the removal of masses of
children from their individual homes to
children’s colonies where, besides living in dis-
tricts where food is abundant, they are removed
from the still surviving remnants of Capitalism
and private 1 trading, and the individualistic
spirit which may remain in their own homes.
As far as possible, the children are under the
care of Communists. There is always a unit of
the Communist Party amongst the staff of the
colony. It is the duty of the unit to secure
that) the life of fthe child ren 5s brought as
closely as possible to the Communist ideal.
Many mothers regret being separated from
their children, who remain in the colonies for
months at a time, but though they might refuse
under other icircumstancas, they send their
children there of their own free will, choosing
to do so because they know they will be better
fed than they could possibly be at home. As
for the children, some of them seem greatly to
prefer the colonies to their own homes, and this
is said to be a little mortifying to some parents.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SA W IT IN 1920.


The use of children’s colonies is at present stimu-
lated by economic need, but whilst in all
countries, poor i eople xarely allow their children
to be separated from them, the rich habitually
send their loftspring to boarding schools. In
the future the average practice in this respect
may probably be somewhere midway between
the present-day habits of rich and poor.
At Kolomna we saw one of the orphan homes.
It v\ as not a famous institution like the wonderful
children’s village which has been started on
Tolstoy’s estate, but just an average home.
The house was comfortable and roomy, not
built as an institution, but as a place to live in.
It was surrounded by extensive grounds with
many fruit trees. The children might pick and
eat the fruit, provided they did not take enough
to make these!ves ill. There were eighty chil-
dren in the home, and a staff consisting of a
cook, a gardener, a laundress and two resident
'teachers. Special teachers came in to give
lessons in music, drawing, games and so on.
The children attended the local day school, and
the teachers assisted them with their home-
work and holiday tasks. The children took part,
under supervision, in the work of the house.
The boys and girls, in cotton clothes, with
bare legs and close-cropped hair, were playing in
the garden when we arrived. They looked
happy and healthy youngsters, with nothing re-
markable about them. We asked what lessons
they liked best and were greeted with a storm
of information, which ended by the children
asking permission to sing to us. They took us
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SA W IT IN 1920.


upstairs to a fine large room with a grand piano.
A boy of ten played the accompaniment, and
the singing was certainly much above the
standard of any English high school or grammar
school for boys and girls of the same age. At
the request of the other children, a gifted boy
of eleven years played several classical pieces
most enelrantingly. Then the children showed
us their drawing books. The system on which
they were taught did not seem to me particuarly
good ; but the additional practice and tuition re-
ceived in the home had produced a higher aver-
age of execution than one would find amongst
the pupils of an ordinary British day school.
Russian orphans, in losing their parents, are
deprived, like all other orphans, of the affection-
ate companionship of a mother and father; but
they do not suffer economically, as the orphans of
the workers do under Capitalism. The status
and prospects of the Russian orphan are not
worsened in the slighest degree. They are as
well fed and clothed as other children; they are
as well, if not better, educated. They have
equal opportunities with other children in latex-
life. .The boys are not obliged, like the institu-
tion-bred orphans of capitalist countries, to go
on to a naval training ship or to emigrate to
the Colonies; the girls are not obliged to be-
come domestic drudges. If the Russian orphans
go into the homes of their relatives, they ax-e
no bin-den upon them. Food, clothing and
education are free to them, as to other children.
Childi’en in Soviet Russia do not suffer economic-
ally for the sins or misfortunes of their parents.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN 1920.


CHAPTER XVI.
The Rest Houses.
The ear bounded onwards past the' one-time
residences of the bourgeoisie, across the Neva,
and down a soft green avenue of shimmering
trees splashed by the morning sunlight.
The way was enlivened by strange painted
placards of various shapes affixed to poles stuck
in the ground. Some were of rich purplish ultra-
marine blue, painted with yellow or white, or
a mixture of pale bright, flowers, or with a sheaf
of golden corn. Some were of white, with blue
and red flowers, and others again were of
brilliant lemon yellow, bearing the hammer and
sickle, or plough. Always the device stood out
bold and clear, light on dark, or dark on a, light
background, and always the pigments were
clear, bright and challenging. Sometimes an
actual cornsheaf topped a gate post. Red flags
abounded.
We passed the outer walls of an open-air
theatre, which seats ten thousand persons and
where already the Communists of the proletcult
and the sports clubs have held great spectacles.
We passed by many luxurious villas and palaces,
built for the rich in the time of the Czars. The
vanished owners of these pleasure houses never
saw the gay flags and signboards that now flaunt
SOVIET lIV SSI A AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


around them. We enter one ot‘ these houses.
Its stairs are marble; its woodwork Hashing
white; its doors are mirrors; its ceilings richly
painted. In a sumptuous ehafnber the eyes are
distracted by gilded sculpture and alabaster. A
great picture by some old master, of a nude
nymph, gracefully reclining, looks down on us.
Seated stiffly on luxurious morocco-covered
divans, and keenly surveying us, is a group of
Petrograd dockers in their heavy boots and clean
but well-worn dungarees.
Up the marble stairs, in the first of the great
windowed, sunny bedrooms, furnished with
costly daintiness, are a young husband and wife,
obviously proletarians, she with a book, he with
a pen in his hand. In the next white room are
three smiting young women fn white muslin
dresses. The wide window is open to the
veranda. In voluble French, one of the oc-
cupants bids us enter. • leading us out there to
see the water and the swift oarsmen passing.
She is eagerly explaining ;
“ It is all most delightful, and all free, no-
thing to pay. We are here for two weeks, and
we have dances, the ballet, concerts, a magni-
ficent library, boating, games: and before, it
all belonged to a few rich people; we could not
even come to look and see what there was here
on these islands. lam a painter; everyone here
is working at something. Over there is the,
sports club, fan we not arrange for you to go
boating? Would not this gentleman like to take
out a boat for himself?”
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


The next house vve visit is still more magnifi-
cent. The great rooms, opening one from the
other, are crowded with beautiful and costly
objects. There are palms and flowers, creeping
plants, gilded chairs and sofas, and sculptured
figures. A white; marble nymph, life size,
perched high, bends forward as though to bathe
herself in a waterfall, and seems to be shrinking
back, with an arm raised as a shield from the
chill water, A touch on the pedestal makes it
revolve, in order that this dainty sprite may be
seen from another angle.
Passing on, we find walls lined with pictures,
a large company of chairs arranged as though
for a concert, two grand pianos, and at one of
them is a musician in soldier’s uniform, playing
with only himself to listen. In a delightful
ante-room, surrounded by painting and sculp-
ture, are two kaleidoscopes.
And so on from room to room.
Upstairs on the parquet floor, between the
costly cabinets and sculpture, are placed in
every room as many little white beds as will
fit in conveniently. On nearly every bed, a
woman or girl, in humble proletarian clothes, is
lying, as though she had come in very tired
from a walk in the hot sun and had thrown
herself down to rest. Some read or talk, but
the majority are sleeping; their faces are pale
and they look very tired, more t : red than the
people one sees in the streets day by day. These
working women of Petrograd greatly need d
this holiday.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


Here and there on a marble window-sill or a
glass-topped toilet table, is a tiny vase of wild
flowers, with a piece of folded paper under
it, to, make sure that no harm shall come to
its magnificent surroundings.
Our guide, from the time we reached the
islands, had been a benignant personality, a
clear-skinned, clear-eyed man who seemed to
be somewhere between forty and fifty years of
age, with a sandy beard and a Holland blouse.
This was Stephanoff, cook to the late Czar
Nicholas 11, who, from the first days of the
Bolshevik Revolution, had settled down to work
for the welfare of the community, and had con-
tinued doing so with zealous efficiency ever since.
He is manager of the catering arrangements of
the islands, and visits each house twice a day
to see that everything is as it should be. Ob-
viously he takes a keen pleasure and interest in
the work.
He now invites us to rest, and glasses of tea
are wrought in; strong tea, “ crepkey Tchay,”
by special request of a certain Scottish delegate,
with bread and butter and cheese. But there
are no teaspoons, and the table is altogether not
so well ordered as Stephanoff would desire.
When the maid returns to refill our glasses, he
reproaches her gravely. Guests must be better
served than this ; things must be better done now
than in the days of the Czar.
Standing apart in .its own grounds is the
little marble palace which General Pdletsev,
built with the money he made under the Czay.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IS 1930.


dom, by defrauding soldiers of tbeir boots and
other sueli requisites, during the great war.
Later on he became the highest General in
Kerensky’s army. This house, designed only for
the General and his wife, is constructed after the
model of a Greek temple, with modern comforts
and adaptations. Its ground floor halls are pillared
with white marble, the ceilings and friezes are
painted in fresco with Grecian ornament in har-
monious colours. their gilded furniture is
upholstered in gorgeous silWs, their floors are
inlaid with marbles of unusually strong and
beautiful colour, Ihe staircase is white marble,
with a splendid brass and marble balustrade.
From the ceilings hang wonderful electric can-
delabra of carved and gilded wood.
At the head of the stairway is a most lovely
square chamber, doubtless the drawing-room of
the Generalwife in the old days, but a pro-
letarian bedroom now. The artist who painted
the ceiling might well have foreseen the Revo-
lution, for ilt is perfectly appropriate. The
centre of the ceiling, where hangs the
candelabra, is an enormous wh te plaster sun-
flower, most delicately modelled. In a circle
around it is a garland of scarlet poppies, and at
intervals on the white field between the sun-
flower and the poppies, are placed alternately,
and painted in golden yellow, sheaves of corn
with sickles crossed behind them, and hour-
glasses wreathed in roses.
Ihe walls have a white panelled dado some
tlu-i'Ce feet high, and above that they are covered
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I ,SVI W IT TV 1920.


with a rich corded silk of biscuit colour, striped
with hair’s breadth lines in dark-bright colours*.
The curtains and the furniture coverings are of
the same material. At the end of the suite of
rooms leading from this, is a little pale blue
ante-chamber with deep crimson curtains and a
great crimson divan, so soft and deep that one
sinks down into it w/ih surprise. A great
Chinese jar in which the blue and crimson are
blended with many colours, a fine Rembrandt
portrait, at once sober and translucent, and the
open window through which one sees the wide
green landscape, all lend to this room a remark-
able attraction. With one accord we pause to
rest here.
Someone asks : ” Did that] mean-spirited
little Englishwoman, who said England had
nothing to learn from Soviet Russia ready visit
these houses?”
Did she realise how the Russian workers and
poor peasants lived, and how the parasitic oc-
cupants of these houses revelled in luxury, and
that now all their .life of extravagance and arti-
ficiality has been swept away?
Did she realise the old starved, oppressed ex-
istence of the Russian workers and poor peasants
crowded together in dingy dwellings, and the
life of luxurious extravagance and ostentation
in which the parasitic occupants of these houses
took their ease?
The i little palace of Maria Feodorovna,
nother of the late Czar Nicholas IT, is also on
the islands. It is not tenanted by the proletarian
v'sitors. Its white marble chambers painted by
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT 7.V Jim.


Rossi and other famous artilsts, its much prized
blue room, and all its treasures, are kept merely
for show. The great flower-beds around it are
filled with vegetables, and the circular building
the Queen built for a theatre is now the central
food depot and kitchen of the islands.
Dinner is served to i«s in one of the simpler
houses which belonged to a Government official.
It is an ample meal : a big plate of vegetable
soup in which there is bully beef left by the
British army, followed by baked potatoes and
minced bully beef. Visitors may have three
helpingjs of each dish if they desire, but I
found one of each more than I could finish.
Bread and a glass of strong coffee with as much
sugar as one desired, completed the meal.
Everyone on the islands has five substantial
meals a day. This was the dinner served to all
the island visitors on that day.
The yisfitors come normally for two weeks,
but if they are in poor health they may stay a
third week. If their health is not then restored
they may go to a sanatorium where they may
stay up to six months if necessary. Over 4,000
workers were accommodated at one time in the
islands during the summer of 1920, and ar-
rangements are being made to house still larger
numbers during 1921. Visitors come in the
winter also, hut only some of the houses possess
the necessary heating facilities.
Many stories have been told of the damage
done by the revolutionary proletariat to the
property of the rich; hut most of these stories
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


are told outside Russia. No one can fail to be
struck by the perfect preservation and
the absolute cleanliness of these houses,
built for the occupation of a few people
and their servants and now tenanted by a numer-
ous stream of people such as was never contem-
plated by the architects. The delicate fabrics
are everywhere unspotted; the polished furni-
ture shows no scratch. In rooms that are much
used, for meals, concerts and so on, there are
loose washing covers on the chairs, but in most
cases the original upholstery is uncovered, and
looks entirely new. Again and again Stephanoff
calls our attention to the fact that the inmates
of the houses are genuine proletarians.
The visitors do no house work of any kind.
The servants who wait at table and undertake
the other domestic duties, are on duty during
sixteen hours one day, and have the next com-
pletely free. This arrangement they have sub-
stituted for the eight-hour working day by. their
own choice. On the alternate days when they
are nominally on duty for sixteen hours, they
of course do what is necessary in the house from
morning till night; but they are not actually
working the entire day through.
Our guides enquired with anxious solicitude
as to the health of a lovely dark girl with a
scarlet handkerchief adorning her long black
hair. All dimpling with smiles, she assured them
she was well. She had taken part in a
“ Subbotnik ” (Saturday volunteer work) a
fortnight before. The work had been piling
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN U/W.


wood, and a log, falling upon her head, had
knocked her senseless for a time. Therefore
she had been sent to the islands for three weeks’
rest. She had completely recovered, and was
enjoying herself immensely. If the incident
came to the ears of any counter-revolutionary
grumblers, it has probably given rise to a serious
story of ill-usage.
The Saturday work parties, in which
volunteers gather to do any necessary work they
can, frequently devote themselves' to the essen-
tial and simple task of carting wood fuel. From
this circumstance hals probably arisen some of
the many stories about dressmakers being set to
carry wood, and round holes being tilled with
square pegs.
The Subbotniki were originally started for
members of the Communist Party, but in Petro-
grad the great malss of the workers join them.
Foreigners passing through the city on a Satur-
day afternoon, are surprised to find themselves
jeered at for not being at work.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I &4 W IT IN 1920


CHAPTER XVII.
At a Camouflage School.
The audience were streaming out of the great
meeting where Trotsky spoke, when some young
Red sokfieirs (surrounded me, declaring (that I
must go with them to speak at another meeting.
I refused, but with an insistence that was
really a genial compulsion, and with laughing
chatter about proletarian discipline, they dragged
Comrade Raymond Lefebre of France, Comrade
Steinhardt of Austria, and myself into a motor
car and drove off at a mad pace. The interpreter
and moving spirit in the escapade was a Swiss
comrade who had attached himself to the Red
Army. As the car dashed along, jolting over the
rough road, the glass wind screen in front was
suddenly broken, cutting the face of the Swiss
who sat on another soldier’s knees.
The blood gushed out and poured down his face
and neck in thick streams; he wiped it off un-
concerned. I had imagined that the meeting
would be close at hand; but, to my surprise, we
went speeding away out of Moscow by the high
road from whence Napoleon with his advancing
troops first gazed upon that city.
At last we stopped, in a pleasant birch grove,
before a wooden chalet curiously ornamented
with painted carving. The chalet was quaintly
and very comfortably furnished. A large hail,
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 19V0.


lit from the roof, and with a gallery, seemed to
me like a studio. We learnt that this had been
a millionaire’s pleasure house and was now a
Hed Army camouflage school.
In a cosy little room we found a party of
young officers seated at a table eating bread and
jam. i hey invited us to join them, and set be-
fore us glasses of kvass, a drink made from rye
bread, which tastes and looks like sour, weak
red wine. The young men seemed jubilant at
having kvass to give us, and anxious to hear us
say that we liked it. They were so jfull of
joking excitement that I guessed there was some
little mystery about the drink and that it had
the savour attaching to forbidden fruit, when
the peccadillo incurred for procuring it is not
too serious. I asked whether kvass was Intoxi-
cating, and with bursts of laughter some of our
hosts declared it was not, whilst others said one
could manage to get drunk on it if one drank
a great many bottles. I learnt afterwards that
the making of kvass was prohibited, and the
ground that it consumes too much bread,
Ihe little repast we had shared was like the
Norwegian “ bread and butter” which precedes
the real meal. We had barely finished it when
a simple but good am} substantial supper was
brought in. 1 here w r as a bottle for each one of
us of some sort of drink made from pears, which
we were told was not intoxicating, and which
probably was not.
Several times .1 asked whether there really
would be a meeting, for the night was wearing
SOVIET RUSSIA A S I SA W IT IS 1920.


on. Our hosts always laughingly replied that
it would take plaee in good time. Finally they
led us round the house to a clearing surrounded
by fir trees. Here, ranged in front of a little
stage, were, rows of wooden benches; children
occupied the front seats, and behind them were
women and men, both soldiers and civilians.
The charming little proscenium and all the
scenery and equipment of the stage were the
work of the soldiers of the camouflage school.
We sat amongst the children, who quickly made
friends with us, until the brilliant sunlight faded
and the tardy twilight began to fall.. Then we
were asked to mount the stage, illuminated with
little electric lights, masked by scarlet decora-
tions. A young officer was pressed for the work
of translating the speeches. He was apparently
unable to comprehend a single sentence of
french or English, but he agreed to do his best.
He afterwards informed Comrade Lefebre and
myself that he had composed good speeches for
us, though he did not quite know what we had
said. Comrade Steinhardt spoke in German; a
large proportion of the audience obviously under-
stood and warmly applauded him. The
Russians follow with intense sympathy the
struggle of the German Communists.
After the meeting an entertainment was given
by artistes from the principal theatres of Mos-
cow, There was a scene from King Lear, songs
and recitations, one of which was put on as a de-
terrent from alcohol. Such entertainments for
the soldiers and people of the district were given
SOVIET HU SSI A AS / SAW IT l\ 1920.


at the camouflage school open-air theatre three
times a week.
The arrangements for entertaining and edu-
cating the Red Army are on a vast scale.
In January 1919, there was not a single school
in the Army, there were only two clubs, and not
a single travelling library. By December 1919,
there were 3,800 Army schools for political and
general instruction, 1,315 clubs and 2,392
travelling libraries. During 1920, these insti-
tutions have been still further extended.
Trotsky, in reporting to the All-Russian Con-
gress of Soviets, on December 7th, 1919, de-
clared that the educational work in the Army
would send the soldiers back to their villages
and workshops head and shoulders above their
former selves.
In addition to the Army schools for general
culture, there are numbers of Red Army schools
of military technique. Workers from the
factories and villages take courses which
qualif.v them to enter the lower ranks of officers.
After experience in the fighting detachments,
the more able pass through a higher military
school and become commanders of regiments and
brigades. The most able are then selected for
study at the general start academy and academies
of artillery and engineering. Some of the best
officers, however, have passed through no mili-
tary school; they have, gained their knowledge
by experience in fighting for the Revolution.
Some officers have come over from the Czars
regime. Working with these last, there is
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


always a Communist political commissary, not
merely to prevent any treachery on their part,
but also to arouse in the soldiers the revolution-
ary enthusiasm which is an enormous asset to
the lied troops. The old-style military com-
manders, in many cases, admit the value of the
political commissaries and their propaganda.
Trotsky reported that when inspecting a regi-
ment at Zerkoff in 1919, he found that a quarter
of the officers were Mensheviki. They were
brave fighters, but when any hitch or dissatis-
faction arose, these Menshevik officers, because
they desired victory, always asked for more Com-
munist agitators and literature to be sent to the
regiment.
Soviet Russia continually hopes and strives
for peace with the capitalist aggressors ; but it
knows that such a peace could be no more than
an armed truce, and that whilst Communist and
capitalist governments exist side by side, war
may break out at any moment. Therefore, if
peace is concluded, it is intended to send the
soldiers of the Red Army back to agriculture and
industry, but at the same time to form a people’s
militia, always kept in training, and always
ready for swift mobilisation. Already the De-
partment of Universal Military Training is pro-
ceeding with this work.
The Red soldiers urged us to remain at the
chalet till day* but Lefebre and I msisted on re-
turning to Moscow. The motor had broken down,
so we were obliged to make a slow journey
through the night in a horse-drawn carriage.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SA W IT IN 1920.


“ These two comrades will go with you, said
our hosts, as a young soldier and a man of middle
age climbed up and sat opposite to us. Lefebre
soon fell asleep, and as we drove home in the eail\
morning hours, the elder man opposite, an artist
employed to teach camouflage to the Red soldiers,
made a vigorous attempt to prejudice me against
Communism and the Communists, cynically ex-
plaining his hostility by the phrase : I am
bourgeois,” as though that fact were an all-sufti-
cient reason.
Communist friends to whom we related the
incident, dismissed it as unimportant. “ Many
bourgeois technicians sell their skill to us at die
highest possible price, give us as little service as
they can, and slander us all the time Their
abuse does not matter.”
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN J9QO.


CHAPTER XVIII.
What Russia thought of the British Labour
Delegation.
How the Delegation got Soviet Clothes.
The official British Labour Delegation to Rus-
sia has not left behind it an imposing impression.
All sorts of humourous anecdotes are told at its
expense. In recording some of these, it must be
understood that I am not disclosing official con-
fidences, but the current talk of Moscow, in which
I fancy there is more than the proverbial grain of
truth.
It is said that when met on the frontier by
Melanchansky and other Russian Trade Union
officials, the British delegates, with high pomp-
osity, declared that they would only consent to
visit Russia on condition that they were able to
go where they pleased, and to see what and whom
they chose, without interference. Melanchansky,
a jovial fellow, has, nevertheless, an iron will and
a keen sense of the dignity of the Soviet Re-
public. Doubtless it was with a very scathing
politeness that he told the Labour delegates they
might go where they pleased, but they would be
treated as guests and not as judges.
When the British delegates discovered that
Melanchansky and his colleagues were staying in
the same hotel with them, Tom Shaw and some
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1020.


of the others declared that they would immedi-
ately return to England, as they considered that
Melanchansky was placed there to keep them
under observation. Melanchansky had to explain
that Soviet Sussia does not keep numbers of guest
houses half empty for passing strangers, and that
both they and he were staying in the only house
available for visitors. The delegates’ curiosity as
to what could be seen in Soviet Russia was evi-
dently strong enough to make the explanation
suffice.
The Soviet Government not wishing to receive
the British Labour delegates as its guests, they
were called the guests of the Russian Trade
Unions. A number of banquets and other
functions were arranged to welcome them. The
Russians there deliberately incited the British to
respond to the toasts, in order that they might
commit themselves to public statements regarding
Soviet Russia, before returning to the hostile at-
mosphere of capitalist Britain. There seems to
have been an understanding, either expressed or
implied, that no member of the delegation should
make a statement except by general agreement.
But the opportunities for making speeches to big
enthusiastic crowds under picturesque Circum-
stances, proved irresistible to some members of
the delegation. Once on their feet, their caution
was thrown to the winds, and they gave utter-
ance to more cordial expressions of friendship
and much more revolutionary sentiments than the
silent members of the delegation were prepared to
approve. Reports of these speeches were sent all
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


over the world by the Soviet wireless. It is said
that in consequence, there were meetings amongst
the delegation, and those who had not spoken
demanded that there should be no more speech-
making and no more individual expressions of
opinion. But the flow of British Trade Union
oratory could not be stopped, and even the silent
members were soon making speeches. Mrs.
Philip Snowden proved one of the most obstin-
ately determined not be influenced by the pre-
v; iiing atmosphere. She bolstered up her original
pejudices by visits to counter-revolutionaiies
ano anti-Communists, who supplied her with a
jumble of feeble and mutually conflicting stories,
which she has recently published in book form.
She is said to have told Russian audiences that
most of the working people in Britain own their
own houses, and that the bourgeoisie are the main
sufferers from poverty in this country. What she
actually meant is probably conveyed in this
passage from her book on Russia :
“ Most of the organised workers of Great
Britain (and probably America) possess a little
property, if it is only the dividend they draw
from the Co-operative Stores. The illiterate
man or woman is practically unknown among
them. Their children enjoy free education.
Their cities are organised and comparatively
healthy. With the power of the franchise and
the industrial power of their trade organisation,
they can achieve any reform they may desire.
They possess a tradition of freedom of con-
science, of speech, of Press, of general living,
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SA W IT IN 1920.


which no tyrant in office would dare long and
without good cause to defy.”
Russian workers who had spent long years of
exile in the slum districts of British cities,
realised the falsity of such statements.
When the British Labour Delegation was in
Russia, it was high summer, and the heat was
almost unendurable. Perhaps this was why the
members of the delegation accepted as a gift
from the Soviet authorities a complete rig out of
new clothes. But knowing that they did so, and
remembering the great heat of the season, one
received a little sceptically such phrases as these
in Mrs. Snowden’s account of her visit these :
“ Those dear Russian people thought we
were attired like princes ... 1 hey patted and
stroked our dresses and coats. They turned
1 longing eyes upon our boots ... I gave the
girl who looked after my room a warm woollen
jacket, and she fell on her knees and covered
my hands with kisses ...”
“ One thinks of . . . how much comfort
an old flannel nightdress gave to a sick
woman. ...”
Captain Guest was regarded in Russia as ex-
ceedingly hostile to Communism and the Soviets.
His. professions of pacifism and of regret that
Soviet Rusia should possess an army, and should
use it to defend herself from attack, were regarded
as specially hypocritical coming from one who used
a British military title and had assisted in the
work of the capitalist War. Several persons
independently reported to the Cheka their opinion
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


that the conduct of Captain Guest was suspicious.
They urged that he was possibly a secret agent of
•the British Government, and asked that he
should be kept under observation. It is said that
he was accordingly Matched by agents of the
Cheka, but this may be a joke.
In the first days of their arrival, the British
Labour delegates declared that they wanted to
have just the same rations as the ordinary
Morkers. “ No, no,” they Mere told, “ you are
not used to such a plain diet. You could not
stand it; one has to come down to it gradually.”
But the delegates persisted, and finally had
their way—at one meal only. That was enough;
they made no more requests to. live like other
people!
As to the decoration said to have been granted
to JRobert Williams for “ service for direct
action on the home front,” Moscow gossip says
that this was not the “ Order of the Red Flag,”
but a simple badge that anyone may wear.
George Lansbury’p first telegram to England
from Soviet Russia was received by Revolutionary
Russia with amazement. It is regarded as extra-
ordinary that a man who is supposed to be a
leader of British progress and enlightenment,
should single out as the first matter for rejoicing,
the fact that, though bread may be lacking, there
is still gold on the domes of the churches, and
poor people are still held by chains of ignorance
and superstition under the influence of the reac
tionary church.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


When Lansbury, in addressing a proletarian
audience, appealed for the display of brotherly
love towards all men, the interpreter transformed
the utterance to a call for class-solidarity in light-
ing the counter-revolution. When the change was
explained to him, Lansbury took-it in good part.
The young Russian Communists say of Lans-
bury ; “ He does not understand; his mind is too
old.” But they regard him as a sincere man.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I &4W IT IN 1920.


CHAPTER XIX.
A Fire in the Train.
During the night journey between Moscow and
Petrograd, I was thinking sleepily : “ I am going
to have a sore eye; what a nuisance!” Then a
fellow passenger jumped down from an upper
berth, crying out:
“ There’s a fire in the train! The smoke
would have suffocated me if I’d stayed up
there much longer!”
A shower of sparks and glowing charcoal swept
past the windows-on either hand, and as the door
of our compartment was opened the smoke came
pouring in. We gasped for breath, our eyes
streamed with tears and smarted horribly. We
struggled to find our clothes. The train rushed
on for a few' seconds and then stopped. People
with bundles in their arms dashed past us and
jumped down on to the line. We stood on the
stones and grass beside the track for half an
hour w'hilst a hose-pipe sprayed water on the
train, and one carriage was removed. It had been
impossible to dress; the smoke was too suffocating
and painful ; one was lucky if one managed to
put on a coat and a pair of shoes. It was un-
pleasant. It might have meant getting one’s
death of cold in mid-winter. As it was, I got a
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


chill from it, which kept me in bed for several
days. .
A common occurrence this, in Soviet Russia.
Owing to shortage of lubricating oil, the bearings
become red-hot, causing the wooden carriages to
ignite. This is another effect of the capitalist
blockade which makes it dangerous to undress in
a Russian train, no small consideration in a
country of such long journeys.
Later, when we were travelling back to Mur-
mansk, the white metal in the hearings of
the engine, again, for lack of lubricating oil,
grew molten hot and spurted out. The bearings
then had to be packed with cotton, waste, which
resulted in constant stoppages and much delay.
We passed in the night, many forest fires which
had been started by the big sparks and burning
charcoal Hying from the engines, constructed tor
burning, not wood, but oil or coal; another effect
of the blockade and the counter-revolutionary
war. ,
I found “ Red ” Petrograd hungrier than on
mv first visit. ~ ,
“ This is the worst month of the year, people
told me. 1 feared the Wish was father to the
thought, that September would prove the
hungriest month.
The shortage of medicine was made very clear
to me. Kind Mrs. Pelman, at the Hotel Interna-
tional, sent for the doctor (whose services cost me
nothing), and it transpired, incidentally, that the
stock of medicine at the hotel was nearly
at an end. “ Hot milk would do you
said Mrs. Pelman, “ but I can’t get any for you.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


CHAPTER XX.
What and where is the Shortage ?
From Murmansk to Petrograd, from Petrograd
to Moscow, and in the surrounding country, I
was constantly impressed by the healthy and
happy appearance of the people, especially the
young. Their carriage was upright, their eyes
shone, and they displayed a strong steady patience
under any sort of delay or discomfort. The
goods wagons of passing trains were crowded with
people whose legs hung dangling over the sides.
Men, women, and youngsters sat on the steps of
the passenger carriages, singing and waving
merrily. There was talk of the food shortage,
but one saw little sign of it in the people. Their
physical condition was infinitely superior to that
of the Germans as I saw them in Berlin, Frankfort
and Stuttgart in December, 1919, and January,
1920. The German workers looked pale and
tired, hopeless and discontented. An expression
of weary peevishness and despair was common
amongst the faces I met by the way and saw
massed together in public meetings. There was
nothing strange to me in such faces. In Germany
they were at that time more general; but
they abound also in British cities. They are
everywhere about me in the East End of London.
When I take the ’bus in the morning and look
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN IMO.


down on the women in the crowded market
streets, I can seldom discover one of them who
is not marred by gnawing anxiety, chronic under-
nourishment and lack of health. When I chanced
on a crowd of Frankfort children going into
school, I was shocked ,to see at least a third of
them seriously deformed by rickets, and hardly
a child unblemished by rnal-nutrition. It was a
procession of twisted and shrunken limbs; of
pale pinched faces and bulging foreheads. Rick-
etty, wasting babies are one of the commonest
sights of East London, but I was not used to
seeing such a large proportion of older children
so cruelly deformed.
From Russia, on the other hand, 1 brought
away with me a prevailing memory of beautiful,
well-grown children and healthy people.
It appears that a happy contentment and
buoyant, confident enthusiasm is radiating from
the active makers of the revolution and builders
of the proletarian State, to wider and wider sec-
tions of people. Though some sections have been
little touched by it, it seems that all have been
influenced more or less, when one compares even
the outermost fringe with the poor of other
countries.
If it is not the exaltation of revolutionary
fervour which produces this evident mental and
physical well-being, it must be the freedom from
individual anxiety, which the absolute assurance
of even a low minimum scale of food, clothing
and other necessaries provides. Perhaps both
these things operate together.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


It is constantly said that clothing is scarce in
Russia, but people, in the mass, appear much
better clad than in other countries. Most people
are well-dressed, with a refreshing, graceful sim-
plicity. At the great theatre meeting in Moscow,
which celebrated the close of the Third Interna-
tional Congress, almost all the men and women
wore Russian- blouses of bright-coloured cotton
stuff. Hardly a woman had a hat. No one was
ragged qr untidy; no one was dirty. The
rationing of clothes, and the supply of half the
ration in ready-made garments, has certainly pro-
duced an effect that any artist would welcome.
Moreover, the rationing is wiping out class dis
tinctions in dress. Some women, even Com-
munists, still wear fussy, unpractical garments,
and unserviceable, foot-deforming shoes with high
heels and exaggerately pointed or crumpled toes.
Under Communism there will no doubt always be
a public opinion against making things to wear
that are unserviceable or entail the expenditure
of an extravagant amount of labour. At present,
necessity compels that factory-made clothes shall
be simple.
Private trading in clothing, as in many other
commodities, still continues. Goods that were
hidden away in the early days of the revolution
are now brought out for sale. Probably, too,
there has been smuggling by counter-revolution-
aries to counter-revolutionaries across the
frontiers.
At the summer theatre when Chaliapine, who
supports the revolution, sang in “ Boris Goudem
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


off,” an audience of people in Russian blouses
flocked to hear him. Ploletarian boys and girls
left their seats and ran to the front of the audi-
torium to applaud him at the close of every act.
On Monday night at the ballet, in which the
dancers were said to be counter-revolutionary,
members of the old bourgeoisie half-filled the
theatre, the women gorgeously dressed and in
the latest styles.
One sees people riding into Moscow from the
country on farmers’ carts, with worn shoes and
shabby clothing; one also sees people shabbily
dressed, who live in Moscow and Petrograd; bark
shoes are still worn in the country, and canvas
shoes with wooden soles are used to substitute
leather; but the general impression left by all
the numerous crowds that passed before my eyes,
is of a people, in the main, comfortably clad.
The harrowing pictures of poverty and famine
some others tell of I did not see; but 1 am left
with the opinion that there is undoubtedly an
uncomfortable shortage of some things in some
places.
Petrograd was certainly short of food ; Moscow,
Murmansk, and the Northern villages were short
of some kinds of food. In some districts, how-
ever, food was abundant.
Shortage of transport is one of Russia’s main
difficulties now that the Red Army has won back
the rich territories which were cut off from her
by the native and foreign counter-revolutionaries.
The transport difficulties' are at once patent to
anyone who visits Russia. The fact that Russia
is a vast agricultural country that hitherto has
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


only developed industrialism on a small scale and
is cut off from the manufactured products of other
countries, is the greatest cause of shortage, and
incidentally includes the transport difficulty also.
The fact that Russia’s production, both agricul-
tural and industrial, has hitherto been remark-
ably low, having regard to her size, population
and resources, must be borne in mind.
J. Larin, the well-known Soviet economist,
estimates that the output of manufactured goods
in Soviet Russia in the year 1919-1920 was only
20 per cent, of the pre-war average. His estimate
of the agricultural production is also low.
I find it exceedingly difficult to accept statis-
tical estimates regarding Russia, especially in re-
gard to agricultural production, because exact
statistics were not a feature of Russian life before
the Revolution, and even yet it seems impossible
that exact statistics can be obtained about Rus-
sia’s agricultural production. It is' notorious
that the peasants conceal a considerable proportion
of their produce. Larin himself admits it in his
articles. The cruel terrorism of the old landlord
and tax collector was undoubtedly able to force
more from the peasants than the Government of
the Peasants’ and Workers’ Soviets could or
would do. The peasants, who are the vast
majority of the Russian people, be it remembered,
have enormously benefited by the Russian Revo-
lution.
Larin further says, that between 1908 and
1916, the daily average food standard for an adult
working-man in Russia was 3,289 calories, and
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


that at the beginning of 1920 the workman’s
daily average of food calories was 2,980. Happily,
Soviet Russia’s supplies of food and raw material
are now greatly increasing; but still, I cannot
accept Larin’s estimate as anything but a rough
comparative guess. The sources of supply from
the private trader and from relatives in the
country, now open to the Russian Morker, are
probably underrated in the estimate. They can-
not possibly be checked exactly.
Comrade Fineberg, who left London for Russia
during the Revolution, told me when I saw him
in Moscow that one of the things which im-
pressed him most about life in Russian cities was
that most of the proletarian families there had
friends in the country who sent them regular
supplies of food. I do not know whether, in
judging that the Russian workman before the
war had an average of 3,280 calories, allowance
was made for the periods at which, through sick-
ness, unemployment, or short time, his wages
were reduced, and with it the amount of his daily
calories. I do not know whether any allowance
was made for the burden cast upon the worker of
supporting sick, aged or unemployed relatives,
and the consequent reduction in his food.
The great boon which the Soviets have bi ought
to the Russian workers is the security that they
will get their share of whatever food and clothing
Russia may have.
The,fact that all the children’s food is free is
in itself a wonderful thing to have brought into
the world. Free feeding for the children of Petro-
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN nm


grad began in May, 1918, at first for theychildren
up to fourteen years, and later, for those up to
sixteen. By June 16th, 1919, 80 per cent of the
iTtrograd children were taking free meals in the
restaurants.
Nursing mothers still work in the Russian
factories, but they are liberated on full pay for
eight weeks before and eight weeks after child-
birth. They have an additional grant to the value
of a fortnight’s minimum pay at the time of the
confinement, and their pay is increased by one-
fourth during the nursing period of nine months.
Invalids are entitled to free cure and mainten-
ance at full pay during illness. During disable-
ment they are entitled to the full average
minimum pay of the district for a 60 per cent,
disablement; to a three-quarter’s pay for a 45
to 60 per cent, disablement; half pay for a 30 to
45 per cent, disablement. The family of a
deceased worker is entitled to pension. One de-
pendent gets 60 per cent, of the worker’s mini-
mum pay, two dependants get 75 per cent., and
three or more get 100 per cent.
Soldiers’ pensions are on the same basis as
those of the industrial workers; widows and chil-
dren of the soldiers get the same pension as the
Red soldiers.
Victims of the counter-revolution are also com-
pensated.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN 1920.


CHAPTER XXI.
The Polish War.
Soviet Russia thrilled with confident expecta-
tion that Warsaw would fall to the Red Army,
that the Polish workers and peasants would rally
to the Red flag, and a Polish Soviet Government
would be established straight away. Communist
Poland would then form both the link with Com-
munist Russia and the bulwark against attack by
Entente Capitalism, which were necessary to
secure a successful Communist revolution in
Germany and Austria. Revolutions in Italy and
the Balkan States would immediately follow, and
with the greater part of Europe already submerged
by the Red tide, the world proletarian revolution
would go marching forward.
This was the news which greeted me when I
reached Russia in the first days of August, 1920.
Already, on July 31st, a revolutionary committee
had been set up in Poland. Its members were
as familiar and popular in Soviet Russia as in their
native land. Its president was Marchlevsky
(Karsky), an old colleague of Rosa Luxemburg
and Leo Yogehes, the story of whose bves he
■recently wrote for the Moscow C ommunist
International.” Marchlevsky had actually
spoken in Moscow a few days ago at the Second
Congress of the Third International, he and the
other Polish delegates had now hastened away to
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN mo.


Poland, leaving the Congress still in session.
Other members of the Polish Revolutionary Com-
mittee were Dzerjinsky, organiser and president
of the All-Russian Extraordinary Commission for
Combatting the Counter-Revolution, Unschlicht,
a famous Commissary of Food in Soviet Russia,
and Felix Kohn, one of the most learned Polish
'Communists, and a leader of the Left Socialist
Party called the “ Levitsa.”
'1 he Russian Red Army was advancing through
Poland with the watchword : “ For our Freedom
and Yours!”
The Polish Revolutionary Committee issued a
manifesto hailing the advance, announcing the
fulfilment of the dreams of those Polish Revolu-
tionary heroes who threw themselves into the
struggle against Russian Czarism, to free, not
merely the Polish people, but the Russians also.
The manifesto proceeded :
A secure peace is only possible between a
Communist Russia and a Communist Poland
governed by Workers’ Councils. The factories
and mines must be wrenched from the hands
of capitalist speculators and usurers, and
handed over to Workers’ Committees. The
land and the forests must also be owned and
administered by the people. The landlords
must be expelled, and their estates admin’s-
tered by committees of agricultural workers,
whilst tl»e soil of the peasants who work their
own land shall rema : n untouched. In the cities
the power is, already passing into the hands of
the workers’ delegates; in the villages, pro-
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SAW IT IN 19jiO.


visional councils of workers are being formed.
As soon as the Government which plunged the
country into this criminal war has been over-
thrown, the Councils of workers delegates from
the villages and the towns will establish in all
Poland a Communist Soviet Republic.’
The Red troops had made a tremendous and
unprecedented march from Polotsk, and were
approaching Warsaw, had indeed reached its
suburbs. The rumour flew round in Moscow that
Warsaw had actually been taken. Ihreats of re-
newed attack from the Entente; even the threat
of a formal declaration of war and the approach
of the British fleet, seemed to-damp no one’s
spirits. Comrades laughed at such prospects and
applauded the Soviet Government’s refusal to
recognise the League of Nations, and repudiation
of the British proposal that peace negotiations
should be opened in London.
Nevertheless, the news of Warsaw’s fall was
lagging strangely. People said it was being held
up for announcement at the meeting of the Mos-
cow Soviet; but the Soviet met and the news did
not come. Then other rumours began to circulate,
and the delay in receiving the good news gave
them credence. It was whispered that the Red
/ i'my was short of munitions, had had to letire.
St) 11, no one admitted a doubt that Warsaw would
Lll presently. This was but a slight delay; it
could not be more,
I saw Lenin in the Kremlin, when the rumours
of bad news had scarcely begun. He looked tired
and anxious, and answered by sad little exclama-
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


'‘: - I
tions of sympathy and regret a telephone message
that broke into our talk. With his usual frank
realism and complete absence of bluff, he said
that the news from the front was bad, and that
the message just received had told of a reverse.
“ I do not know whether we shall be able to
take Warsaw. The resistance is greater than we
expected.”
“■ But you will take it presently,” I urged.
He answered ; “ I do not know whether we
shall be able to take it.”
And yet he put the trouble aside, and went on
to talk in detail of the British movement, showing
knowledge of the'p e °pl e who are active in it that
was extraordinary in one who had all the world to
consider, even recalling to me things which I
myself had written. Other comrades have given
me similar accounts of his familiarity with the
movement in the : r countries.
The Red Army had been over-wearied by its
great unprecedented march from Polotsk to
Warsaw. The officers could not restrain the en-
thusiasm of the soldiers, who, dashing forward
in their eagerness, had been thrust back by the
superior munitions with which Entente Capitalism
had equipped the Polish reaction. Orders for
large new drafts of men for the Polish front con-
firmed the unhappy rumours. Communists, and
especially Polish Communists, were most urgently
called for.
The corridors of the Djelavoi Dvor. in Moscow,
were full of the sound of leave-taking. We found
Eetrograd preparing to send 1,500 Communists
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


to the Polish front, a terrible levy upon a city
with a population fallen to little more than half
a million, from which again and again all the
active Communists had been drained. Petrograd
has been the greatest forcing ground of the Revo-
lutionary proletariat. The Viborg quarter, once
the centre of the movement, is now deserted.
A meeting was held in the Nevsky Prospeckt
to speed the departure of the fifteen hundred.
Petrograd soldiers and factory workers marched
there with bands and banners, and great crowds
assembled from every quarter. From a window
hung with red bunting, speeches were dehvefted
and a resolution calling upon the fifteen hundred
for steadfast bravery was unanimously adopted.
It seemed like a triumphal occasion. The bands
played, the soldiers and people marched this way
and that, winding in and out in Greek key forma-
tion.
The Communists going to the front carried
their knapsacks and bundles. Many of them
were still in civilian clothes. Their friends
and relatives walked beside them. Wives,
mothers, and lovers carrying flowers, went with
them now, in these last few moments of parting.
No one seemed to be crying, though the very
aged had tears on their cheeks, and the eyelids of
the younger women were swollen with weeping.
They are going out to the hardest points of
the fight; to wherever is greatest danger, these
. Petrograd comrades; Miey are going to then-
death, but they go bravely. They dp not wear
smart uniforms, like the soldiers of Capitalism,
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1980.


but old clothes variously assorted; they are
sturdy and fit, their eyes are shining.
They were gone with the music.
J'he trams had been brought out for the oc-
casion and were waiting to take the dispersing
people, who had walked to that meeting, home
down the Nevsky.
A little woman from Riga walked beside me.
I asked her in agitation :
“ Do the people ever complain when orders
come to send more soldiers?”
“If they complain we do not hear it. The
soldiers always go willingly. It is said there are
no soldiers so mighty as the soldiers of Soviet
Russia, because they fight for principles. They
are not like the men of the old armies who went
only because they were forced to fight for Capital-
ism. But no woman can see this unmoved. I
am not of the Communists* not of the Party, but
I understand that Capitalism cannot remain, that
Communism must come everywhere.. Why do
the capitalists fight against it? It is cruel to carry
on this warfare against inevitable progress; to
force the young men of Russia to fight for pro-
gress against the entire world.”
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN mo.


CHAPTER XXII.
A Whiff of Alcohol.
A slow journey, with no eventful happening,
brought us from Petrograd to Murmansk one
lovely Saturday afternoon. A Belgian comrade,
Edward van Overstratten, two English Shop
Stewards, a Scotchman, and myself, made rather
a large party to entertain at the 1 bird Interna-
tional House. Moreover, the stock of food there
was by no means abundant; for Murmansk as well
as for Petrograd, September was proving a time
of shortage. Therefore, as we had provisions left
still, it was arranged that we should continue to
lodge in the railway train.
Strolling through Murmansk that Saturday
evening we discovered a cinema and a little theatre
where we learnt that plays were given free of
charge four times a week by a party of eleven
actors, who had been stationed there for several
months past.
The theatre was a simple wooden building with
the rafters showing. The proscenium was rather
pleasantly decorated in a primitive, unpretentious
way. The audience of young soldiers and fisher-
men with their girls, was aglow with merriment.
After one scene, we went in search of a
musician whose playing at one of the cottage
doors had already delighted us. We again heard
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920 .


similar music, but proceeding in the direction of
the sound, we came, not to the cottage we sought,
but to a house occupied by the Red Army. A
soldier seated on a bench outside was playing;
another, surrounded by a ring of comrades,
danced to the music. The soldiers identified us
as delegates, made way for us to join the ring,
and brought from within another comrade who
could both play and sing to us.
Folk dance after folk dance followed. Mean-
while, some of the soldiers had commandeered a
civilian who spoke English. With his assist-
ance. they told ns they had just come from Siberia
and were soon going to the front. They urged
us to tell the workers at home in Britain that
the Russian workers are suffering from severe
pfivations, but are happy because they have won
their freedom. They look to British workers to
follow' their example.
Whilst watching the dancing, I suddenly per-
ceived a smell that surprised me. “ Surely,” I
thought, “ that is yes, certainly it must be.”
But alcohol is forbidden in Russia!
Nevertheless, a man standing near to us was
babbling in a way we had not heard since we left
the shores of the British Empire. Presently an
officer came riding up, A soldier called his atten-
tion to the drunkard, who was quietly arrested
and led away.
Where had the intoxicating spirit come from?
Doubtless from stores left behind by the
British army, or the Russian “ Whites,” for, as
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


everyone knows, Red Russia is a prohibition
country. The Czar prohibited vodka for the
period of the war; the Soviets extended the pro-
hibition to all alcoholic drinks. We were told
that when the Communists seized the power in
Petrograd, the Red soldiers brought out all the
wine from the cellars and smashed the bottles
in the streets. People who had not tasted vodka
for several years and who could scarcely afford to
buy wine, lay down to drink it from the gutters.
The soldiers called on them to rise, and at last,
even fired to clear the roadways, but some of the
people still refused to move.
To-day it is believed that the Russian people
have mostly forgotten the very existence of
alcohol.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 SA W IT IN 1920.


CHAPTER XXIII.
The Villages on the Arctic Coast.
Four British delegates and a Belgian, a Rus-
sian, an old Finnish man and his grand-daughter,
fifteen or sixteen years of age; together we set
out from Murmansk with a crew of three. The
Norwegian fishing-boat had only three bunks for
eleven of us.
The Comrades Wastein and others waved good-
bye to us from the quay. We all stood up and sang
the “ Internationale,” the comrades on shore
responded, and the Red officer who had just ex-
amined our passports, gravely raised his hand to
the salute.
We had been warned that it would be stormy ;
but for two hours’ journey down the sound we
were able to laugh at the prophesy. The sun set
gloriously behind the mountains on our left hand ;
the moon rose on our right, green, faint and
ghostly, in a haze of dull, soft purple, with a
dark cloud bar above. Our craft and its people,
the watch boat and its sailors on guard at the
mouth of the sound, were lit by golden rosy light,
as again and for the last time in Russia we sang
the “ Internationale.”
Then as the sky grew cold, the sea steel-blue,
and the moon a hard white, crisply reflected, we
rode out into the open sea. and the great waves
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


tossed us, drenching our deck and us with it.
Most of us were sick, and all of us were cold.
The storm grew with the darkness, till at last
our captain decided to run back and make for a
little harbour whose glimmering light we had
passed some time before.
When we had anchored. Tanner kindled the
stove, the captain put on his big copper coffee pot
and gradually we grew warm. The Finnish girl
gave me a turn at the bunk, where she had lain
all through the tempest. The men packed them-
selves up somehow, and we slept in the not 100
cleanly darkness till the morning wore into noon
and the captain woke us to breakfast on coffee
from his pot, and a piece of Norwegian bread for
me, that tasted like cake beside the sour black
bread we had brought from Russia.
The men came rowing out to us from the shore.
Gallacher and I went back with them. After a
s wet clambering over a stretch of rock and sea-
weed, we reached the solid earth, which undu-
lated ' pleasantly and, carpeted with peat, was
soft and springy to the foot. Growing thickly
everyhere and clinging close to the ground, suic
sign of a bleak, cold climate, were red and
purple berries, the majority inedible, but some
the familiar whinberries, though of stunted
growth. Here and there the peat had been cut
away, and small fields of grass and vegetables
took its place.
The women, with white aprons and black
shawls over their heads, were coming towards us.
They spoke Norwegian, and we learnt later on
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN IMP,


that this village was mainly peopled by Norwegian
settlers, and was called Zipnavalok. We went
with the women to their home, half an hour’s
walk over the moors, a clean, bare place with
home made rugs on the floor, a bright copper
kettle ajid a fine tortoiseshell cat. We exchanged
a few Norwegian kronen, the first money I had
spent since I left Norway, for a couple of quarts
of milk, a loaf and some new-laid eggs. The
younger woman then led us to a house by the
sea, where she said we could get fish. On the
way, we met van Overstratten and the English
Shop Stewards.
The five of us were received at the fisherman’s,
not as customers, but as guests. Who we were and
where we were going we did not tell, only that
we were storm-bound.
The good wife gave us coffee with thick cream
and thin bread and butter. The butter she had
just finished making, in a curious little wooden
churn that looked rather like a wooden' umbrella
case. It was three feet high, only about six inches
in diameter at the top and tapered to a point at
the foot. The butter was beaten up in it with a
long w T ooden pestle.
The husband brought out an old English gram-
mar he had used at school, the better to converse
with us. He told us that six of his seven children,
all of whom regarding us with a constant,
interested gaze, were pupils at the local school.
The school had been greatly improved, he said,
since the Soviets came to power. A new teacher
had come from Murmansk and there "were now
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT ik 1920


six classes instead of four, as there used to be.
There were only twenty pupils in the school, and
a population of about a hundred in the village.
A Soviet was held in the village as often as neces-
sary, and three delegates were appointed by it
to carry on business in the- interim. Having
bought some fish from our hosts, we returned to
the boat, where Tanner played the part of cook
with much success.
The Norwegian skipper, a short man with pink
cheeks and light hair, regarded us as a source of
amusement, and had many a joke at our expense.
He provided food for the crew—the Russian and
the Finns, but for us he had only coffee and, as
a very great favour, an occasional slice of bread.
When it grew dark he told us that, as it was still
too stormy to leave Zipnavalok, we should go on
shore for the night. We suggested that lodgings
were unlikely, but he laughed: “ Oh, yes, yes!
It will be better for you.”
We thought the skipper would assist us in
finding lodgings, but he sent with us only a sea-
man who could not talk to us and who rowed .off
back to the boat as soon as we had landed,
leaving us on the pier in the dark.
Chance favoured us. As we stood to shelter a
moment from the strong wind by the house near-
est the pier, a man came towards us. We uttered
only the magic words :
“ Delegates, Third International.”
He answered: “ Come along, comrades!
almost the only English words he knew.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS 1 &4TT IT IN 1920.


The house beside which we had taken shelter
was the office of the local Soviet. This was its
Secretary who now made us most hospitably wel-
come. A comrade was fetched who had learnt
German, through being kept prisoner in Germany
during the war; several others also called in, and
soon a large party of us were drinking tea.
Next morning we saw the people,of the village
coming to the Soviet house for their labour tokens,
and our host, the Secretary, entering the particu
lars in a ledger. He told u s that he was a native
of the rich lands of the Ukraine, sent to this
barren place by the Communist Party, because
the people here had little experience of organi-
sation.
The steeple of the little wooden church on the
headland looked curiously as though it had been
knocked awry. We tramped off to see whether
our eyes were deceiving us, and found the steeple
indeed very crooked. The windows and doors,
now barricaded, had been smashed. Peering in
through the holes we saw that the reading desk
had been broken open, the books it had con-
tained were torn and thrown about, the altar had
been stripped. We could only guess at what had
happened. Zipnavalok now apparently existed
without any church service. Yet the building was
in a perfectly weather-tight and serviceable con-
dition, and could have been re-opened had the
people so desired, since the Soviet Government
allows complete freedom to all religious ob-
servances.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


A short distance across the moors was a wireless
station where a detachment of the Red Navy was
quartered. When the sailors learnt that
Communist delegates had come to Zipnavalok,
they hoisted the Red Flag and invited us to
supper. The main room of the wireless station
was a big barn-like place. Its dark walls were
hung for the occasion with great international
signalling flags, red, yellow, white and blue,
reaching from floor to ceiling. Long tables were
spread with hot minced bully beef, and crisp
cakes made with white flour and fried in butter,
with an abundance of sugar, new milk and tea.
The flour and the beef had, of course, been left
by the British Army. The sailors, thirty or more
of them,* were variously clad in traditional blue
sailor suits, striped jerseys, duck or holland
trousers. The leader of the Communist unit,
for there was a unit of the Communist Party at
the wireless station, as everyhere, was a fair,
flaxen-haired North-man, dressed as though
for a storm, and wearing great sea-boots. An-
other ardent young Communist, tall and slight,
and looking no more than twenty years of age,
wore a French uniform. He had been imprisoned
by the British for more than a year. His wife,
also very young, was an excellent dancer, as we
discovered after supper when the tables were
cleared away. The finest dancer amonsgt the
men, who was not a Communist because his in-
clinations were not political, he was nevertheless
a very capable fellow and a staunch upholder of
the Revolution. Later in the evening, women and
girls of the village came in to join the party.
SO VIET R USSiA AS 1 SAW IT IN 1920.


Next morning the captain came to the Soviet
house whilst we still in bed, calling to us that we
must be off at once lest the weather should
change. We need not wait for breakfast, he said,
as we should be at Vaida Gouba, which he always
represented to us as a land of plenty, within four
hours. We ignored his instructions and ate our
breakfast, which was fortunate, as we did not
arrive till late in the afternoon.
And what a disappointment was Vaida Gouba;
a barren spot, greatly inferior to Zipnavalok, it
lay on a cruel grey coast of jagged slate, with two
wrecked hulks lying on either side of the bay.
The fisherfolk there had only fish, milk (for
there are many cows), bread, which comes from
Murmansk, and not enough of it, as they com-
plained, meal for making Kasha, and peat fuel.
'I he single-storied wooden houses contained but
two or three rooms. Several houses in course of
construction had been stopped for lack of material
to complete them. The village possessed only
two hens. Attempts had been made to grow
vegetables, but the results had been poor. The
blockade has prevented the people selling their
fish to Norway and buying things they need there.
They deal only with Murmansk, which has little
to give them.
The people were living barely, but I did
not think there was any question of actual
want. The men of our party were housed with
an old woman and her feeble-minded son. Their
house consisted of two very large rooms and an
out-house where potatoes and so on were kept.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920.


The old woman was comfortably dressed; the
man, who was incapable of working, was a little
ragged. They seemed to have plenty of fuel for
their stove.- They eat Kasha with butter and
milk, both night and morning, and fish at mid-
day. They appeared to have plenty of tea,
butter, bread, and milk ; and the old woman daily
put a basin or two of llussian sour milk
away on some shelves behind a curtain.
In England these two would have been beggars
or inmates of Poor Eaw institutions.
I stayed in a much more prosperous house-
hold ; the wife was a Norwegian, and her husband
was said to have enriched himself by trading with
foreign vessels, r lhere w 7 ere silver travs and fine
old polished furniture, fine white linen, and
several lovely blooming rose trees in my little
room. Smoked salmon, coffee with cream, and
great bowls of sour milk were placed on my
table. The wife provided her husband with
stewed meat for his mid-day meal, but meat was
evidently a rarity here; whilst vegetables and any
other fruit than the wild berries were not qften
seen*
Comrade Petersen had been sent here by the
Communist Party to lead the organisation of the
fishing industry. He spoke ruefully of the long
dark winters and the harsh climate. He had
been on this coast for nearly tw T o years, and hoped
the Party would soon call him away. Till
that time, he will dutifully remain at his post.
There was as yet no school at Vaida Gouba,
but one was shortly to be opened. Comrade
Christiansen had come to organise one. A bath-
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1920


house for the village was in course of construc-
tion.
The people of the district had fought hard to
maintain the Soviet Republic against the Whites,
and would again. Yet comrade Petersen com-
plains that the love of private property is abroad
here still, and that this one and that one has still
his private fish-curing factory. It is hardly what
we in Britain would call a factory, only a shed
with a few vats of salt and a few barrels of salt
fish on the quay, but it is the germ of a private
business, run for one man’s benefit, instead of
his sharing and helping to improve the common
lot.
There is an enormous contrast between the
tiny primitive North Russian villages and the not
far distant fishing towns of Norway, with their
prosperous shops, big curing factories and har-
bours, crowded with boats. The Russian villages
have been little altered by the Revolution. The
blockade, the war, and the shortage of transport
have as yet made it impossible to inaugurate
great changes. Some day, no doubt, the fishing-
industry will be greatly developed. Improved
transport in cold storage waggons will facilitate
the carriage of fish to distant parts of Russia.
I imagine that a great canning industry will
arise. The peat will be used here, as in Moscow
and Petrograd, for fuel for electric generatmg
stations, which will supply the power for the
canneries. In many directions it may be dis-
covered that this soil can be used for something
more than growing wild berries, for though it is
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN mo


dark here all the winter, in summer the sun is
shining both night and day.
It was dark in the little cottage by the sea.
and must remain dark till the morning, for the
household possessed neither lamps nor candles,
and there was not a match in the place.
The household had gone to bed at dusk. It
slept, and I with it,when suddenly came a knock-
ing at the window and a voice crying :
“ You must be dressed in four minutes, and
across the bay to the motor boat in half an hour.
The programme was kept to time.
We crept over the slippery rocks in the dark-
ness. Comrade Petersen, striving to give the
boat a final push off the stones, fell and almost
capsized her. Several gallons of sea water rushed
over the side. The comrades tipped her, baled
her with both hands quickly, and waded out to
the knees to set her going, then rowed her out
to the motor boat.
This was a tiny craft to cross the ocean; with
one mast and without a cabin, quite open, with
only a shelter over the motor at the rear and a
single: man to steer her. I leaned my back to
the mast, and the curl of the waves that br<&e
on our prow splashed over my faee. The skipper
made a shield for me with the end of the sail,
but the waters defied his efforts to keep them out.
It was here, on this last stage of the journey
across the Arctic, that the French delegates
Comrades Raymond Lefebre, Lepetit
Vergcat, were drowned a few days later.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN Idm


We landed before the dawn, but the place shall
not be written, for I learnt that the British
authorities had wired the Norwegians to stop me
as I returned through from Soviet Russia.
So I returned to the British Empire.
The last I had seen of it was a pile of dingy,
smoke-begrimed buildings, and nearest to the
quay, a row of hovels, built for the working
class, which had fallen to decay. Poor little
children, bare-legged, ill-clad and dirty, climbed
amongst the ruins. Two ragged, shawl-girt
women with towzelled hair passed by us. A
ragged, shoeless dwarf, with legs all twisted,
crawled after, supporting himself on his hands
and one great toe, and wincing as the sharp stones
cut his palms.
THE END.
SOVIET RUSSIA AS I SAW IT IN 1980 .


Printed by
S. v CORIO
10 Wine Office Court, Fleet Street
London, E.C.


