

I V L ~I 6 '-
ki.L%™Ji^‘^ uU t
X* CP. X 7.




When I was in the Timor and Javanese seas, in 1829, I heard
of several instances of quarrels having taken place between the
Indian Islanders and the masters of small European traders, as
also the misconduct of some of those captains of vessels, in their
intercourse with the islands of the Archipelago : these misunder-
standings arising generally from the European trader not being-
acquainted with the customs of the Islanders in their modes of
barter or sale. Such occurrences as these also tend to confirm
me in a belief that a more profitable intercourse would be carried
on with the Indian islands if a central depot was established, and
the intermediate intercourse carried on between this depot and the
islands by the native traders themselves.
In conclusion, I shall introduce an extract from Mr. Crawford’s
excellent work on the Indian Archipelago; and this gentleman
was most intimately acquainted with the resources and habits of
those islanders, as well as with the productions and the manner
of trading in the islands :— ■
“ In order to carry on an extensive intercourse with the Indian
islands, a colonial establishment becomes the only means of effecting
this object. Such a colony should be situated in the direct route
between the most civilized tribes of the Archipelago, and in the track
of the navigation between the great nations of the East and West.
The harbour should be good, and the land fertile: a free trade,
liberal administration, and such a degree of regular government as
would ensure security of persons and property, will inevitably ensure
a large share of success.
“ There ought to exist the most unbounded freedom of commerce
and settlement to persons of all nations and religions ; and a pure and
impartial administration of a code of laws, suited to the state of such
a colony, and adapted to the peculiar character of its varied popula-
tion, should form the most important branches of the administration.
A moderate impost on external commerce—which that commerce
well protected should certainly afford—with the sale of public lands,
and an excise on vicious luxury, would afford a sufficient revenue to
defray the expenses of government and the charge of public works.
“ Such an establishment would become a great emporium; the
native trader would find it the best and safest market to repair to;
and the scattered productions of the Archipelago would be accumu-
lated and stored in it for the convenience of the distant and inex-
perienced trader of Europe. The European voyager would find it the
best market for his goods, and the sacrifice of a great nominal profit
would be compensated by the expedition with which his business
would be dispatched, and an immunity from those dangers and risks
to which inexperience must necessarily commit him, in a direct inter-
course with the natives.”


Vll. —Extracts from a Spanish MS. giving an Account of certain
Expeditions undertaken by Order of the King of Spain, be-
tween the Years 1749 and 1776, and of the Establishment of a
Colony on the Island of Juan Fernandez. Communicated by
Woodbine Parish, Esq., F.R.S. Read 9th June, 1834.
The notice which has appeared in the March Number of the
bulletins of the French Geographical Society respecting a voyage
performed in 1774 by the Spanish ship Jupiter has induced me
to believe that some further account of the history of that voyage,
and of some other undertakings by the Spaniards in previous
years, to make themselves better acquainted with the southern
shores of the Pacific, may be worth recording, tending, as they
do, to complete the chain of our historical notices of the voyages
of discovery in those seas, and affording, what cannot but be
interesting to us in a national point of view, a striking evidence
of the effects produced upon other nations by the enterprising
spirit of our own navigators.
The Spaniards were not altogether so indifferent to the progress
of maritime discovery in the last century as has been generally
believed. Alarms for their own interests did occasionally rouse
them, and, as will be seen, the publication of the voyages of our
own great navigators stimulated them to exertions of which, till
now, we have been in ignorance.
The history of some of those alarms, and of the measures
which followed them, is given in the following passages extracted
from a MS. report in my possession, drawn up by Don Manuel
de Amat, the Viceroy of Lima, for the information and guidance
of his successor in that government, in 1776. In an abstractly
geographical sense they perhaps contain nothing new to us; but,
as 1 have above stated, I think there are other grounds on which
they may be deemed to be of interest.
Cook, on his last voyage, found traces of the visits of the
Spaniards to Otaheite; and the accuracy of his account of them, so
far as it goes, is strikingly corroborated by the Viceroy’s narrative.
In point of date, the first proceedings of the Spaniards of
which the Viceroy makes mention, may be referred to Commodore
Anson’s voyage, the account of which appeared in 1748. He
says :
“ By communications from the Court dated in May 1749, we
were confidentially apprised that the British Government pro-
jected forming a settlement either on the island of J uan Fer-
nandez, or in the archipelago of Chonos, in consequence of the
reports made by Commodore Anson on his return from those seas
of the great advantages which might be expected from such an
establishment. The king, naturally alive to the consequences of
such a project on the part of the English, and seeing how detrimental


it might prove to the peace and quiet of his majesty’s dominions
in these parts, desired that a ship-of-war should be immediately
despatched to examine the said islands, as well as all the coasts
to the southward, with orders to expel any foreign ship whatever
which might be met with in any of the ports or possessions of
his majesty in these seas. His majesty commanded that the
island of Juan Fernandez should be peopled, and a suitable
garrison immediately established there for its protection ; and that
further the archipelago of Chonos should be also carefully
examined, and a survey made of all the ports and harbours found
there; and that at the island of Inchin, described in Anson’s
voyage, a fort should be built and a garrison established sufficient
to prevent any other occupation of it.
“ In proceeding to inform your Excellency how these orders
were executed, I shall commence with the islands of—
“ Juan Fernandez. —These islands are two : the one called by
us de tierra, generally known as Juan Fernandez, in 34° latitude,
may be six or seven leagues in extent; the other is called mas a
fuera, and lies about twenty-five leagues from the former in the
same latitude. The first is convenient enough, and capable of
subsisting a small population, although the extent of the lands fit
for cultivation is inconsiderable; but mas a fuera is but a heap
of rocks, where it is difficult to land, and still more so to find
means of subsistence : there is, however, a great abundance of
fish, especially of cod, which might prove a very valuable fishery
to us, if our people would employ themselves in it.
“ No time was lost in establishing a settlement on Juan Fer-
nandez, conformably with the king’s orders: besides the garrison,
consisting of a company of infantry and the necessary staff, with
twenty-two prisoners condemned to hard labour to assist in the
works, 171 persons of both sexes, and of various ages and occu-
pations, were safely landed, with cattle, mules, sheep, and a variety
of poultry of all sorts, as well as a suitable supply of seeds and
agricultural implements: eighteen guns were also sent for the
fort. But this little colony had not long been settled when it was
almost totally destroyed lay the same dreadful earthquake which
in the year 1751 overthrew the city of Conception in Chili: with
the earthquake the sea rose, and overwhelmed the houses, most of
which had unfortunately been built upon the sea-shore: thirty-
five persons perished from this calamitous event, and amongst
them the Governor with his wife and all his children. The Pre-
sident of Chili sent such relief as he could to remedy this disaster,
and the settlement was rebuilt by my orders in a more convenient
and safe position, further removed from the sea, under the super-
intendence of Don Manuel de Castel-bianco.
“ On the rupture with England, in 1762, the President of Chili


would have withdrawn the garrison and broken up the settlement
had I permitted it; but I considered it our duty rather to reinforce
it with an additional company of infantry and such a supply of
ammunition as would enable it to make a vigorous defence if
necessary, of all which the king was pleased highly to approve.
I was guided in this by recollecting the extreme distress in which
Commodore Anson reached those islands ; and that, destitute as
he was of all succour, and his crews utterly helpless and reduced
by sickness, he must have surrendered to any force we might have
had there at the time; whereas from the want of such a force on
our part, he was able to relit his ships and restore his invalids, so
as afterwards to do the greatest injury to our interests in those
parts —reasons, it appeared to me, sufficient to show the impolicy
on our part of abandoning such a position.
“ The expense of the settlement to the king, according to the
estimates for the year 1753, was about 12,640 dollars.*
“ The Archipelago of Chonos was examined as carefully as
possible, in obedience to the same orders from his majesty.
“ This group of islands lies in 45° and 46° of latitude, between
the isles of Chiloe and Cape Tres Montes : from the circum-
stance of the Anna pink having been driven in, and having found
shelter and refreshment there, Anson has given some account of
this archipelago, which he considers would be a convenient position
for a settlement, especially the island of Inchin ; but our people,
sent to examine the said islands, and who remained there some
time, after a careful survey, especially of Anson’s Inchin, were
entirely satisfied that they might be safely abandoned, as holding
out no inducement whatever to any foreign nation to settle there,
being entirely barren, frigid, and uninhabitable. The island of
Inchin is known to the sailors on the coast ot Chili by the name
of Tequegen, and is occasionally frequented by the Indians ot the
neighbouring continent for the fish taken there : the English
seized one of the boats of these Indian fishermen, and on asking
* Carteret appears to have been the first of our navigators who noticed this settle-
ment. lie gives the following account of it:—■“ 10th of May, 1767, we made the
island of Juan Fernandez. As I did not know that the Spaniards had fortified this
island, I was greatly surprised to see a considerable number of men about the beach,
with a house and four pieces of cannon near the water side, and a fort about 300
yards further from the sea, just upon the rising of a hill, with Spanish colours flying
upon the top of it. The fort, which is faced with stone, has eighteen or twenty
embrasures, and within it a long house which I supposed to be barracks for the
garrison. Twenty-five or thirty houses of different kinds are scattered round it,
and we saw much cattle feeding on the brow of the hills, which seemed to be culti-
vated, as many spots were divided by enclosures from each other.” I hoisted no
colours, having none but English on board, which at this time I did not think proper
to show. As I was disappointed of wood and water at this place, and of the refresh-
ments, of which, after the dangers and fatigue of our voyage through the Straits, and
our passage from it, we stood in the most pressing need, I made all the sail I could
for the Island of Masafuera.—Vide Hawkeswort/i s Collection.


how they called that island, were answered Inchin, which signifies
in their language It is ours ; and this mistake in the question put
to them gave rise to the name given to it by the English.
“ The Islands of Chiloe are of much greater consequence, and
I consider them as the key to the King of Spain’s possessions in
the Pacific. In the year 1767,” observes M. de Arnat, “ I -was
so impressed with this opinion that I thought it my duty to state
to His Majesty that if the English had any further views of esta-
blishing themselves in these seas, there was no point so suitable
for them as upon these islands ; and I in consequence received
His Majesty’s commands to fortify the port of Lacuy, to send there
a political and military governor with an allowance of 4000 dollars
per annum, and to take every measure requisite for their security
and protection. In former times they were subject to the Cap-
tain-Generalship of Chili; but considering the impediments to
their communicating by land with that government, on account of
the hostility of the intermediate Indians, and the want of oppor-
tunities by sea with Valparaiso, I thought it better at once to make
them a direct dependency of this government of Lima, through
which they received their succours and orders from Spain ; an
arrangement of which the king was pleased to approve by his
royal letters of the 15th of October, 1768.
“ These islands were first peopled by us in about 1565-9,
during the government of Don Jose Garcia de Castro, in Peru,
from whom the principal place takes its name of Castro. To the
north, they are separated from Valdivia by the savage Indians
who inhabit the intermediate coast; to the south lies the archi-
pelago of Chonos and that chain of islands which extends to
the Straits of Magellan. On the continent opposite, a Mission
formerly existed, called Nahuilchuapy, for the reduction of the
Indians to the Catholic religion, but it was destroyed by the
savages, who put the missionaries to death.
“ The principal entrance to this archipelago is in latitude 42°,
and runs to 44°, where it is lost in another and wider channel.
The population may be from 12 to 14,000 souls, of which about
2500 may be capable of bearing arms. The fortified places are
Castro, St. Carlos, Chacao, Calbuco, and Maullin. The inhabitants
grow wheat, maize, barley, and flax ; but their principal food is
the potatoe. The islands abound in useful timber, suited to ship-
building. Cattle is scarce from the want of pasturage, but there
are vast numbers of hogs : there is also plenty of fine fish, which
might be turned to good account; and if the people were enter-
prising, they might make much of the numerous whales which
resort to their coasts.
“ The expense of the king’s troops is annually about 26,883
dollars for the defence of these islands.”


The visit of Byron to the Falkland Islands in 1765, and the still
more formal occupation of those islands by Captain Macbride in
the following year, seem to have confirmed the previous sus-
picions of the Spaniards as to the designs of the British Govern-
ment to establish themselves in the South Seas. It was reported,
that, not satisfied with the settlement on the Falklands, they had
formed another on the coast in front of the islands of Chiloe; and
the Viceroy states, that in consequence of these rumours, he was
again ordered to examine all the ports and harbours to the south-
ward, and to drive out the English wheresoever they might be
found. An expedition for this purpose was accordingly fitted out,
and sailed from Callao in October, 1770. No British settlement
was discovered ; and the further survey of the Chonos Islands
only confirmed the opinion previously formed, of their total unfit-
ness for any settlement whatever.
With these expeditions the Spaniards would probably have
rested satisfied, but for the return of Cook from his first voyage,
and the accounts circulated in Europe of the islands he had
visited in the Pacific Ocean, especially of Otaheite, which appear
to have excited no inconsiderable jealousy in Spain. Captain
Cook returned in June, 1771, and in the following October
orders were sent out to the Viceroy at Lima, accompanied by
all the notices which could be collected as to the late British
discoveries, to send an expedition immediately to examine the
Society Islands, and particularly Otaheite, and to report upon the
probable utility of those islands, their general state, resources,
and population; and this measure was hastened by intelligence
that the Resolution and Endeavour were again equipping in Eng-
land to return to Otaheite, as was believed in Spain, to take
formal possession of those islands in the name of his Britannic
Majesty.
The Viceroy, referring to these orders, proceeds to relate, “ that
upon receipt of them, he fitted out the Aguila frigate under com-
mand of Don Domingo Bonechea. The Aguila sailed from
Callao on the 26th of September, 1772, and reached Otaheite on
the 10th of November following. On her return she was forced,
on the 26th of March, 1773, to put into Valparaiso in a very crazy
state, having been out just six months from Callao.”
“ Captain Bonechea made a most favourable report of the
people of the Society Islands, by whom he had been kindly
received and treated, in return for the presents he had taken out for
them. He stated that no foreign power had as yet formed any per-
manent establishment either at Otaheite or in any of the adjacent
isles; but he was told by the natives that the English had visited them
a few months before his arrival. He brought away in the Aguila
four of the natives, one of whom died at V alparaiso, and a second


afterwards at Lima; the other two the Viceroy ordered to be well
clothed and carefully attended to in his own palace, that, upon their
return, as he says, they might be able to impress their countrymen
with proper notions of civilization, and of the benevolence ot the
Spaniards. The whole of Bonechea’s journals and observations
on this voyage were forwarded to the King of Spain, in April
1773, together with a variety of specimens of the productions of
the islands he had visited, and of the works and manufactures of the
natives, proving them to be far from so uncivilized as might be sup-
posed,'and showing,” says the Viceroy, “what useful dependents
they might be made of the King of Spain. I could not,” he adds,
“ but at the same time strongly express my own opinion to his ma-
jesty as to the great prejudice which would result to his dominions
in these seas if any other pow'er were permitted to take previous pos-
session of them; and the King, concurring in these views, sent
out instructions, in October 1773, again to dispatch Captain Bo-
nechea in the Aguila to make a more careful survey of Otaheite,
and to report how far it might be desirable to form a Spanish
establishment there. Captain Bonechea, in consequence, again
sailed from Callao on the 20th of September, 1774, and reached
Otaheite on the 27th of November. He had on board two
Franciscan missionaries, Father Geronimo Clota, and Father
Gonzalez, as well as the two natives brought away on the former
voyage. In company with the frigate went the Jupiter, com-
manded by Don Jose Audia y Varela, carrying out a portable
house, a linguist to be left at Otaheite with the missionary fathers,
some and cattle, and an assortment of seeds and imple-
ments. . , . .
lllCUtof i ( , , .
“ 111 about £6o° longitude from they fell in with vast
numbers of birds of various species, and shoals of flying fish.
ct Bonechea found the harbour of 1 allapura inconvenient, but
at Tatou-tira (Owhatow-tira) the ships had excellent anchorage :
this port lies in 17 u 45' latitude, on the south-east side of the
island. According to his account, the island of Otaheite may
be generally described as resembling a figure of 8 : it is from
thirty-five to forty leagues in circumference, mountainous, and
much covered with wood ; the water found there is excellent.
“ The complexion of the inhabitants, though in some fairer and
in some darker than in others, is generally of an olive cast; from
which and from the great similarity in the customs observed in the
various islands examined in these seas, the Viceroy infers that
the inhabitants are from one and the same common origin—most
probably Asiatic, and deduced through those various groups ot
* About 117° W. of London. The Spaniards estimate their longitude round the
globe by the east.


islands which, on a reference to the chart, will be found to extend
continuously between the equinoctial line and the tropic of Capri-
corn, from the Moluccas to the centre of the Pacific.
“ In their religious notions and ceremonies, the Otaheitans were
found to be extremely superstitious and particular; but their
chiefs, whom they call eries, are absolute rulers, with power of life
and death over their vassals—a state of things,” the Viceroy ob-
serves, “ which may conduce much to facilitate the introduction
amongst them of the Catholic faith. The numbers of these
people could hardly be estimated without a careful survey of the
interior of the island. They breed pigs and dogs, for which they
have a high value, and a small sort of domestic poultry; they have
besides an abundance of wild fowl in great variety.
“ The plantain and walnut-tree were found there, with many un-
known fruits of an agreeable taste, and cocoa-nuts equal to those
of Guayaquil: the sugar-cane also, but the inhabitants did not
appear to understand its uses. The climate in general was humid
and warm.
“ The Otaheiteans are expert in the management of their ca-
noes, in which they pass from one island to another: they use
sails made from the bark of the palm-tree.
“ Unfortunately, in the midst of his investigations Captain Bo-
nechea fell sick and died : he was buried/on the 26th of January,
1775, by the missionary fathers, at the foot of a cross which they
had erected on their first landing. His loss was irreparable, and
the frigate returned to Callao, arriving there six months and
eighteen days from her departure. The Jupiter also came in a
few days afterwards, bringing four more of the natives, who were
as kindly received as their countrymen had been previously.
“ The result of this voyage was the examination of twenty-one
islands, nine of which were low, and the others lofty. A particular
account of them, as well as the track of the frigate correctly laid
down, and all the details of the interesting expedition, were imme-
diately forwarded to Spain.
“ In a few months,” the Viceroy states that, “ becoming anxious
to learn the fate of the missionaries, and their progress amongst
the natives, he determined to send the Aguila back again. She
sailed accordingly on a third voyage the 27th of September,
1775, under the command of Don Cayetano de Langara, of the
Royal Navy. One of the natives brought away by Bonechea
returned in her, but nothing could induce his companion (the
other two had died) to leave Peru.
“ Captain Langara was made fully acquainted with the king’s
view's, and received his instructions and orders accordingly. With
respect to the missionaries, he was to ascertain whether they were
willing to remain or not in their avocation ; and, in any event, he


was to receive from them all the information they had been able
to collect.
“ The Aguila was out upon this voyage 143 days: she reached
the port of Tatou-tira in thirty-six days, remained there ten, and
was at Callao again on the 17th of February, 1776; having fol-
lowed much the same track as on the preceding voyage.
“ On reaching Otaheite, Captain Langara found a positive de-
termination on the part of the missionaries not to remain there. In
vain he exerted himself to induce them to recollect their particular
vocation, and to persist in the glorious work they had been sent
upon, viz., the conversion of the infidels to Christianity. Fear
seemed to have taken the place of all that holy zeal which ought
to have animated them, and they were obstinate in their resolution
to give up entirely their original pious undertaking. Nothing but
a Spanish garrison in the place would have been sufficient to
induce them to stay where they were. They had made not the
slightest progress in the conversion of the natives, of whom they
lived in continual dread ; and this appeared the more strange,
since the linguist, who had been alone over every part of the
island, declared that the people everywhere showed the most docile
and amiable disposition, and were marked in their expressions
of respect for the fathers. He reported, that the island was well
peopled, and that the inhabitants, as far as he could judge, could
not be fewer than 150,000; that they were governed by two prin-
cipal Enes or chiefs, having others subordinate to them ; the one
rules on the western side of the island, called Opure, the harbour
of which is Matauvai, where the English astronomers had passed
some time, giving the natives sheep, goats, dogs, pigs, cats, and
geese : they had also distributed amongst them coloured cloths
and a quantity of small gilt medals, dated 1772, having on one
side the likeness of their king, George 111., crowned with laurels,
and on the other, two ships on the seas. The other principal Erie
resides on the opposite side of the island, near the port of Tatou-
tira, where the portable house of the missionaries was erected.
From this chief, as well as from his wife and all his people, the
fathers had experienced every kindness ; and when their intention
to go away was known, they showed their grief in the most marked
manner, being only consoled with the assurance that they would
speedily return amongst them. To satisfy them on this head, the
portable house and Us contents were, in the mean time, recom-
mended to their especial care.
“ The missionaries had been frightened at witnessing the sacri-
fices made by these people to their gods, for the health of their
Fries. Not, content, it appears, with offering up animals, they
did not hesitate also to sacrifice human beings at the shrines of
their Eatua or divinities. The same barbarous ceremonies, it was


understood, were practised on the succession of their chiefs, whose
power is hereditary, and whereby it was supposed that their good
and prosperous government Was ensured.
“ Nevertheless, and in spite of these idolatrous practices, these
people have very proper notions of right and wrong, and believe
in the immortality of the soul • and although they were perfectly
acquainted with the character of our missionaries, it did not ap-
pear that their heathenish customs in any way prevented their
treating them with great kindness and respect. In fact, excepting
some trifling instances of theft, from which these people can with
difficulty refrain if tbmptation be thrown in their way, the fathers
had no cause to complain; and even in these instances, the
offenders were almost always denounced, and on complaint to
the Erie, the stolen articles were returned, and the delinquents
would have been thrown into the sea, had not the fathers inter-
ceded to save their lives.
“ is evident, however,” observes the viceroy, “ that those
selected for the conversion of such infidels should be either en-
dowed with the ardour and constancy of our holy apostles, or at
least should be possessed of such a knowledge of some of those
useful oi mechanical arts ot which these idolaters are ignorant, as
might ensure for them such a measure of esteem and influence as
would mainly assist them in the propagation of the doctrines of
Christianity and civilization. Such qualifications,” he adds,
“ would certainly produce a strong impression upon these people,
who might thus be brought, without much difficulty, to embrace
the Catholic faith.
“ Captain Langara received some account of another island, of
some importance, called Orairoa (either Roggewin’s Carlshoff, or
-Byron s Isle of Disappointment—according to Forster, Orimaroa),
distant from Otaheite, in a N.N.E. direction, about forty leagues,
from some of the natives, who had fled to Otaheite after a battle,
in which they had been defeated by their enemies. They said
ti.at the English ships had been also there : and they reported,
amongst other things, that pearls were found there, but our
people saw none of them.”
Cook s account of these visits of the Spaniards to Otaheite is
as follows. In the narrative of his Second Voyage, in 1773, he
says : “ Soon after our arrival, we were informed that a ship,
about the size of the Resolution, had been at Owpaiurua Har-
bour, near the south-east end of the island, where she remained
about three weeks, and had been gone about three moiVftis before
we arrived. We were told, that four of the natives were gone
away in her, &c. &c.
“ At. t!l 's time we conjectured this was a French ship, but on
our arrival at the Cape of Good Hope, we learnt she was a


Spaniard, which had been sent out from America. The Otahei-
tans complained of a disease communicated to them by the people
in this ship,” &c. &c.
On reaching Otaheite, in 1777, on his third and last voyage,
Captain Cook says, “ he was then told by the natives, that two
ships had twice been in Oheitepeha Bay since his last visit to the
island in 1774, and that they had left animals there, such as the
English had on board : but, on further inquiry,” he adds, “ we
found they were only hogs, dogs, goats, one bull, and the male of
some other animal, which, from the imperfect description now
given us, we could not find out. They told us, that these ships
had come from a place called Keema; by which we guessed that
Lima, the capita! of Peru, was meant, and that the late visiters
were Spaniards. We were informed, that the first time they came,
they built a house, and left four men behind them ; viz., two
priests, a boy or servant, and a fourth person, called Mateema,
who was much spoken of at this time : carrying away with them
four of the natives : that in about ten months the same two ships
returned, bringing back two of the islanders, the other two having-
died at Lima; and that, after a short stay, they took away their
own people, but that the house which they had built was left
standing.
“ I found it (the house) at a small distance from the beach';
the wooden materials of which it was composed seemed to have
been brought here ready prepared to be set up occasionally, for
all the planks were numbered; it was divided into two small
rooms, and in the inner one were a bedstead, a table, a bench,
some old hats, and other trifles ; of which the natives seemed very
careful, as also of the house itself, which had suffered no hurt from
the weather, a shed having been built over it. At a little distance
from the front stood a wooden cross, on the transverse part of
which was cut the following inscription, —‘ Christus vincitand
on the perpendicular part (which confirmed our conjecture that
the ships were Spanish)— ‘ Carolus 111. imperat 1774.’ On the
other side of the post, I preserved the memory of the prior visits
of the English by inscribing —‘ Georgius Tertius Rex, annis 1767,
1769, 1773, 1774, and 1777.’
“ The natives pointed out to us, near the foot of the cross, the
grave of the commodore of the two ships, who had died there
while they lay in the bay the first time: his name, as they pro-
nounced it, was Oreede. Whatever the intentions of the Spaniards
in visiting this island might be, they seemed to have taken great
pains to ingratiate themselves with the inhabitants; who, upon
every occasion, mention them with the strongest expressions of
esteem and veneration.”


Vlll.— Observations on the Manners of the Inhabitants who oc-
cupy the Southern Coast of Arabia and Shores of the Red
Sea; with Remarks on the Ancient and Modern Geography of
that quarter, and the Route, through the Desert, from Kosir to
Keneh. Communicated by James Bird, Esq. Read June
23d, 1834.
As steam-communication, between India and this country, has be-
come a subject of public inquiry, the latest information regarding
the people of southern Arabia, and along the shores of the Red
Sea, may be of interest to the members of this Society. lam
indebted to others for some of the geographical facts which I here
communicate; and the remainder of this paper is the result of
personal observation and inquiry among the Arabs.
In the afternoon of the 10th of January, 1833, 1 embarked on
board the Hugh Lindsay, government steamer, which was now
to perform her fourth voyage to the Red Sea; and, early in the
morning of the 20th following, first saw the high land on the Ara-
bian coast, which lies to the eastward of Ras Sharwin or KisSn
point. At 9 a.m, we had advanced within twenty-five miles of
the shore, and observed that the whole of this coast is bold and
mountainous. It appeared at first sight to closely resemble the
shores of India ; but a nearer view soon convinced us that we had
been deceived. The mountains, which rose to the height of two
or three thousand feet, presented, here and there, the fiat tabular
appearance of the trap formation, with that scarped and fortified
aspect which characterises the hills on the Dekhan coast, but with-
out a tree or mark of verdure, without even the stunted brushwood
which covers and gives beauty to the most barren of those on the
Indian shore; sterility claiming this dreary region as its own.
The eye of the observer ranges in wonder over this country, where
the depth and ruggedness of the ravines, that descend to the
ocean, convey to him an impression that desolation here reigns
triumphant.
The two vertical pillars 'which crown the mountain ridge near
Ras Sharwin, and are named Asses’ Ears, on account of their
fancied resemblance, were soon left behind, while the steamer
continued her course through the now smooth sea; and early on
the morning of the 21st our anchor was cast at Mukallah, This
port, since the ruin of Aden, has become a place of some import-
ance ; and is generally frequented as an emporium by the trading
vessels from India and the coast of Barbara.
Mukallah, situated N.N.W. of a small point of land that shel-
ters the town on the east, is concealed from the observation of
those coming from India until the vessel rounds the headland, and
has almost entered the bay. Here large vessels obtain safe


■
