

Speaker’s Handbook
No. II.
ON THE
REFERENDA
(TO BE SUBMITTED TO THE ELECTORS,
26th APRIL, 1911).
Compiled by the Council of the Leagues.
MELBOURNE:
SANDS & McDOUGALL LIMITED, PRINTERS.


THE REFERENDA.
The questiona that thè people are asking in connection
with thè Federai Referenda are:—
WHAT IS IT ALL ABOUT?
Why this additional expenditure of over £40,000 on a
Referendum immediately following upon an expenditure of
£50,000 upon a Federai Election and Referendum in Aprii last?
Those who are honest in their purpose and desirous that
thè people should exercise an intelligent. as well as a direct
influence on thè affairs of Government will endeavour to
clearly set forili thè position as regards each phase of thè Five
proposed amendments.
On thè one hand, you have those who oppose thè pro-
pesala becauso they will devitalize thè States and destroy thè
basic principio of thè Federation ;
On thè other hand, you have those who support thè pro-
posed amendments because they are consistent with thè poiicy
to extend Federai povrers of control to thè domestic and in-
ternai affairs of thè States.
The onus of proof lies upon thè advocates of thè amend-
ments.
They must prove thè necessity of each alteration.
It will not sufflce to demonstrate thè necessity for
Only one of thè powers sought. They must fumish thè
justiflcation for thè Five proposed amendments with whioh thè
Referenda deal.
But now that thè responsibility of deciding thè issues is
placed upon thè people, thè questions should be weighed dis-
passionately, uninfluenced by politicai or party feeling.
THE FEDEBAL CHARTER.
Section 51, with its 39 Paragraphs, covering two pages
of thè Consititution, contains thè Charter of thè Federai
Powers to make laws for thè Peace, Order, and Good Govern-
ment of thè Commonwealth.


ONEY THBEE LIMITATIONS.
With one minor exception, relating to “Fisheries in Aus-
tralian Waters,” there are onlj three of thè thirty-nine powers
that are subject to any actual limitation.
These three concern:—
(1) Trade and Commerce,
(2) Corporation®, and
(3) Conciliation and Arbitration.
It is proposed by thè amendments now submitted to thè
people—
First.—To remore all these limitations of Federai Powers,
and
Second—To give additional unlimited powers to thè
Federai Government,
as set forth in thè following statement: —
STATEMENT OF PROPOSED AMENDMENTS.
REFERENDUM NO. 1.
Section 51.
As it reads—
Paragraph I.
“Trade and Commerce wlth
“other countries and among
“States.”
Paragraph XX.
"Foreign Corporatlons, and
"trading or financlal corporation»
“formed within thè limita of thè
“Commonwealth.”
If thè amendments he carried
It will read —
“Trade and Commerce. 1 ’
“Corporation», includine—
“(a) The creation, dissolution,
“regulatlon, and control of
“Corporatlons;
“(b) Corporatlons formed under
“thè law of a State (except
“any Corporation formed
“solely for religlous, charlt-
“able, sclentlfic, or artlstic
“purposes, and not for thè
“acquisltion of gain by thè
“Corporation or its mera-
“bers), Including thelr dis-
“solution, regulation, and
“control; and
“(c) Foreign Corporatlons, ìn-
“cluding thelr regulatlon
“and control.”


Paragraph XXXT.
“Conclliation and Arbitratici!
“for thè prevention and settle-
“ment of Industriai Dìsputes ex-
“tending beyond thè limite of any
"onc State.”
“Labour and Employment, ìn-
cluding—
“(a) The wages and conditions
“of labour and employment
“In any trade, industry, or
“calling; and
“(b) The prevention and settle-
“ment of industriai dls-
“putes, inciuding dlsputes
“in relation to employment
“on or about rallways thè
“property of any State.”
New Paragraph.
“Combinatlons and monopolles
“in relation to thè production,
“manufacture, or supply of goods
“or Services.”
REFERENDUM NO. 2.
New Section 51A.
“When each House of thè Parliament in thè sanie Ses-
“sion has by resolution declared that thè industry or business
“of producing, manufacturing, or supplying any specifled goods
“or of supplying any specifled Services is thè subject of a
“monopoly. thè Parliament shall bave power to make laws for
“carrying on thè industry or business by or under thè control
“of thè Commonwealth, and acquiring for that purpose on
“just terms any property used in connection with thè industry
“or business.”
Trade and Commerce.
The flrst paragraph of Section 51, as it at present stands,
gives thè Federai Parli ameni thè power to legislate in respect
of Foreign and Interstate Trade and Commerce.
It is now proposed to extend this power to all Trade
and Commerce —Foreign, Interstate, and Locai —by omitting
thè words “with other countries and among thè States,” and
leaving only thè words “Trade and Commerce,”
and as,
under Section 98, thè laws with respect to Trade and Com-
merce extend to
Navigation and Shipping
and
Eailways thè property of any State,-


if thè amendment be adopted, thè Central Government
#lll bave thè power to legislate in respect of thè control of
thè State railways and their management as commercial cou-
ceras, not onlj as regards Interstate, but also thè Internai
trade of thè Railways.
THE PBESENT FEDEBAL AREA.
At present there are no boundaries to thè subject mat-
tar upon whieh thè Federai Parliament can legislate as
regards trade and commerce, and its area and operation ex-
tend to all Foreign and all Interstate Trade and Commerce.
Commerce among States is commerce which begins in
ohe State and ends in another, and it may pass throngh one
or many. States in its operation.
THE STATES ABEA.
To thè States is reserved exclusively thè control of thè
internai Trade and Commerce—that trade which begins and
ends in a State. The rlght to regalate such trade belongs
to thè States alone, wàth one. notable exception, viz., they
cannot impose duties of excise on commodities produced or
manufactured within their borders. That power is exclu-
sively invested in thè Federai Parliament.
THE FEDERAI. EIMITATIQIV.
The only limitation, therefore, to thè Federai powers.
is thè exclusion frani Federai control of thè domestic
or internai Trade and Commerce of each State—that which
begins and ends within its own boundaries.
This is obviously a Federai limitation, justifled by thè
Federai Constitution, not as a protection against thè Federai
Legislature—which is entrusted with thè widest powers—but
as one of thè stipulations of thè Federai compact.
The argument in favour of a Federai as opposed to a
Unified form of Government, is that thè States are made
responsible for their domestic and internai development.
The Federai form of Government gives thè States power
to encourage and stimulate locai Trade and Production, un-
fcampered by thè restrictions of a centrai authority that
would make uniform laws for thè whole continent, irrespec-
tive of locai eoawiitions and regardless of locai requirements.


THE EFFECT OF THE FIRST PROFOSAL.
The flrst amendment proposes to remove all restrictions
•of Federai powers regarding Trade and Commerce, and to
subjeet thè whole of thè domestic or internai trade of a State
to thè control of thè Central Government.
If sanctioned, Federai laws may then supersede State
laws, with respect, for instance, to thè following important
matters :
Freights and Fares on Railways and Tramways.
The Navigation and Control of State Rivers.
Shipping Freights and Fares, Ports and Harbour Dues,
Wharfage and Pilotage Rates.
Wholesale and Retail Trade in Goods. Wares, and Mer-
chandise.
Contracts and Bills of Sale.
Supervision of Food, Liquor, Milk, and Dairies.
The Licensing of Auctioneers.
Registration and Sale of Newspapers.
Locai Option and Licences Regulating thè Sale of In-
toxicants.
Together with all thè hundred and one domestic matters
at present regulated by State Statutes.
Corporations.
The unlimited powers asked for in thè Second proposai
would gire thè Federai Parlìament authority to overrido any
State laws goveruing Companies and Corporations.
PRESENT FEDERAI. POWERS.
•
At present thè Federai Parliament may legislate eoncern-
ing Trading Companies or Corporations fonned within thè
limits o£ thè Commonwealth. The business of foreign cor-
porations is subjeet to Fed.eral legislatìon in so far as it
is not limited by thè comity of nations or by thè convention?
concluded between Creai Britain and other countries.


A corporation lite private firms and individuala is liable
to Federai laws if it be engaged in Interstate or Poreign
Trade.
But it is also subject to thè locai Oompanies and Indus-
triai laws of thè State in which it operates.
If thè amendment be adopted, Federai laws will super-
sede State laws both as regards thè Industriai control and
thè validity of Contraffa of Oompanies and Corporations.
LOCAL TRADE FENALISED.
There is danger to progress in thè proposal. Small
companies, whose origin is locai, whose interests are locai,
whose trade is locai, may be subject to thè saine laws and
restrictions as thè most expansive Combine that may exploit
Anstralian trade.
The effect will be to seriously menace thè prosperity of
any State or part of a State where trade has been developed
by enterprising locai companies or by State aid and municipal
enterprise.
INDUSTRI AL AMENDMENT.
The third proposai, if adopted, will give pre-eminence to
Federai laws in all industriai matters.
The Factories and Shops Acts and Miners’ Wages
Boards of Victoria.
The Industriai Disputes Acts of New South Wales,
The Factories Act of South Australia.
The Wages Boards Act of Qneensland.
The Industriai Conciliation and Arbitration Act of
Western Australia,
will be superseded by Federai legislation for thè creation of
one centrai control to deal with—
Wages,
Conditions of Labour and Employment in any Trade, In-
dustry or Calling, and thè Settlement of Disputes.
This control will not be limited to private employés, but will
also extend to Railway Employés of thè State Governments.


As thè dictionary defìnition of a calling is “an avocatimi,
a profession, a trade, a collective name for persons following
a profession, thè state of being divinely called,” it would be
almost impossible to detine thè scope of thè Federai Labour
Pourt should this proposai be ratifled.
Combinations and Monopolies
The new paragraph proposed to be added to Sectiou 51
is closely allied wìth thè proposai for inserting a new Sectiou
in thè Constitution which is thè subjeot of thè Seeond Refer-
endum.
It has been shown that:—
The flrst proposai—“Trade and Commerce” deals with
control over thè Sale of Commodities and articles of varions
Linds, as well as thè Transport of all (ioods, Merehahdise,
and Articles of Trade—Foreign. Interstate, and Locai.
The seeond proposai gives nnlimited powers of control
over companies, corporate bodies, and all trading coucerns —
Foreign, Interstate, and Loca]—State, Municipal and Private.
The third places in thè hands of thè Federai authorities
thè minutest detail for thè control of thè hours, thè wages.
and thè conditions of employment: of every person who has a
wage or salary.
The fourth proposai, if adopted, will give thè Federai Parlia-
ment power to legisdate with respect to thè control of
“Combinations and Mouopolies in relation to thè production
“and manufacture or supply of goods or Services.”
This clause might be said to complete thè circle of Federai
control.
To quote MR. HUGHES.
“The clause gives Parliament (thè Federai) thè power to
■‘make laws in respect of all those phases in which goods ap-
“pear and reappear, from thè moment of production to thè
“moment of cousumption; it follows thè production, thè sale,
“thè manufacture, and thè ultimate disposai of them, both
“from thè side of thè producer and thè side of thè consumer.”


The Second Referendum.
The effect of thè new Section which it is proposed to inserì
in thè Constitution is to gire thè Federai Parliament a free
hand to declare what is a monopoly, and, after so declaring it,
it will also have thè power to nationalise thè particular
monopoly.
If it he ratifled, there will he a Federai Statuto to thè
effect :
“That a monopoly is a monopoly when Parliament de-
“clares it to he a monopoly.”
and after maldng this declaration thè Federai authorities
may acquire any private, munieipal, or State enterprise.
COMENT.
It may he nrged that thè States' have now all thè powers
asked for by thè Commonwealth, and that thè Federai Laws
will he concurrent with present State enactments.
PUAH control.
If so, there will he dual control in all matters affected
by thè ramifications of thè proposed amendments for thè ex-
tension of Federai powers, and thè eost to thè taxpayer will
be practically duplicated.
FEDERAI LAWS PRErEMINENT.
But even assuming that thè taxpayer would he content
to bear additional burdens, Section 109 of thè Constitution
says ;
“When a law of a State is inconsistent with a law of thè
“Commonwealth, thè lattee shall prevali, and thè
“forrner shall, to thè extent of thè inconsistencv, be
“invalid.”
This not only makes-the Federai law pre-eminent, but pro-
teets thè people from two codes of laws—one Federai and
one State. ’
If these proposals be ratifled, it means pre-eminent centrai
control over all


Trade and Commerce,
Companies and Corporations, and all
Industriai Legislation,
as well as extending to thè Federai Government thè power
ro control State and Municipal Enterprise [and thè Servants
of thè State].
The Industriai Proposal.
PRESENE POWERS.
Without amendment, thè Constitution gives thè Federai
Government thè power under Sub-Section XXXV. of Sectio-n
51 to legislate for: —
“Conciliation and Arbitration for thè preventori and
“settlement of Industriai Disputes extending beyond
“thè limita of any one State.”
CONVENTION DEBATES.
At thè Federai Conventions thè iusertion of this clause
in thè Constitution was thè subject of mudi debate, and it
was eventualìy carried by 22 votes to 19.
ME. B. R. WIBE did not think it would be prudent
to create a Federai Court having authority to fìx thè rate of
wages for thè whole of Australia, and deprive thè workers of
locai self-government.
SIR JOHN QIJIOIC (then Dr. Qujck) supported thè
proposai, beeause it would give thè Federai Parliament juris-
dictión in regard to labour disputes eommencing within a
State and extending beyond thè limits of that State, and it
would devolve upon thè Federai Parliament to devise some
means of creating sudi a Court.
MR. ISAACS also supported thè proposal. He said: —
‘ It is only when thè matter becomes an Interstate dispute,
“interforing with thè trade and commerce, which is, by
“generai consent, a conceru of thè Federai Parliament, that
“thè power can be exercised.”


MK. SYMON, of South Australia, opposed it beeause
it was an interference with thè domestic legislation of thè
States, affecting thè relation of master» and servants. He
said;—"The industriai life of thè State is eonsidered by all of
“us a thing of purely domestic concern. We do not want to
“interfere with thè domestic life, or with thè industriai life,
“except in thè last resort.”
MK, O’CONNOK inow Mr. Justice O’Connor) said; —
“We base our opposition to thè insertion of this clause in thè
“Federai Constitution upon this ground only, that thè inatter
“is a matter, not for Federai control, but for State control.”
In thè oourse of his speech, Mr. O’Connor said: —“If it is
“put into thè Constitution it will be exercised, and if it is
"exercised it will be exercised in thè direction of enforcing,
"by thè powers of thè Federai authority, interference with
"contracts in a State, thè carrying out of which must depend
"originally upon an agreement, and in thè second place upon
"conditions which are undoubtedly locai.”
A perusal of thè debates accentuates thè fa et that there
was a clear understanding that there should be no interference
with domestic or industriai laws and contracts of thè States.
The people are now asked to tear out of thè Constitution
a clause that was inserted only ten years ago (after prolonged
debate) by thè most eminent statesmen of Australia.
The originai proposai of thè Caucus. while thè Referendum
Bill was before thè Federai Parliament, was:—“lndustriai
“matters, including employment and.thè wages and conditions
“of employment, and also including thè preyention and settle-
“ment of industriai disputes.”
This was amended in Committee, on thè motion of Mr.
Hughes, and thè proposai now is to give thè Federai Parlia-
ruent power to legislate for: —


“Labour and Employment, includiug—
“(a) thè wages and conditions of labour and employment
“in any trade, industry, or calling; and
“(b) thè prevention and settlement of industriai disputes,
“including dispute» in relation to employment on
“or about railways thè property of any State.”
In speaking to his amended proposala, MR. HUGHES
said :—“I take it that, since we are going to be properly
“charged with thè prevention of all industriai disputes, and
“thè promotion of industriai peace generally, there ought not
“to be excluded from onr jurisdiction 100,000 men—and I take
“it that thè State railway servante all over Australia fall not
“far short of that number.”
NO APPEAL COURT EOE STATE SEBYANTS.
If this proposai be ratifìed, a Judge of thè High Court
will decide thè conditions regulating thè employment of State
Servante.
From his decision there will be no appeal to thè repre-
sentatives elected by thè people.
THE PRIME MINISTER, MR. ANDREW PISHER,
says that
HE DESIRES TO PROTECT THE STATE PARLIAMENTS
AGAINST THE CIVIL SERYANTS.
Federai “Hansard” of thè 27th Aprii, 1904, page 1243,
MR. FISHER said: —“In thè Queensland Parliament I
“know that a large number of old Pariiamentarians complain
“of thè power of thè Civil Service. For years they bave
been urging that thè public servante of that State should be
“granted separate representation, in order that thè Legisla-
ture might be prevented from granting them more than
“their rights. Have honourable members in other States Par-
“liaments had no experience of a similar character? In thè
“Queensland Parliament thè contention was that its servante
“should have separate representation to prevent them domi-
“nating thè State Legislature. 1 desire to protect thè States
“Parliaments against thè civil servante by transferring thè


powers which aro at present vested in them to a judicial
s body which will bave ampio opportunity to investigate every
“grievance which may come before it. Believing as I do in
‘‘State socialista, and holding that'thè generai welfare of thè
“people should be our flrst consideration. I am bound to em-
‘‘brace every opportunity to advanee those views.”
In thè course of thè debate on thè amendment of thè Con-
stitution, Mr. Eiley, Labour member for South Sydney, said;
“This (thè Foderai) Parlianient will not flx thè wages and
“conditions, but merely provide a proper tribunal to perforai
“that duty.” F
ARBITRATION COURT.
Mr. Hughes on State Servarris.
Federai “Hansard,” page 637(i, 17th Novcuiber, 1910.
MR. HUGHES said; —“The Parliament has lately ap-
"proved of a measure which will be submitted to thè country
“in Aprii next for ratitication, whereby it will be clothed with
“very much wider industriai powers, enabling it to deal with
“rates of wages and conditions of labour of workmen, includ-
"ing State railway employés throughout thè Commonwealth.
‘‘Under these circumstances, thè Government consider it
would be analagous and illogical to deny to our own em-
“ployés access to this tribunal which is open to all others.
“We think it advisable to make all persons throughout thè
‘ Commonwealth subject to thè sanie tribunal, and, therefore,
“we propose, in respect to any disputes which may arise in
“connection with rates and conditions in thè Post and Tele-
“graph Department, to clothe thè Arbitration Court with
“sufflcient power to determine sudi disputes. We intend at
‘‘thè earliest possible moment next Session to ask thè House
“to agree to sudi legislation as is necessary to enable thè
“postai employés to refer their disputes to thè Arbitration
“Court.
“Because we shall, if thè people approve of them bave
“power through thè Arbitration Court to determine, if’ neoes-
“sary, thè ratps and conditions for all workmen in this
“country. We consider that that is thè tribunal and thè only
“tribunal which ought to settle disputes, if any there be in
“connection with our own employés.” ’


■ Snbsequently, when this argnment was tried on thè
postai employés, whose grievances were acute, they said: —
“Wc want our cases considered by Parliament.’’
Are thè railway men of Victoria prepared to remore thè
responsibility fremi Parliament and give one man power to
adjudiente concerning their rights and privileges, wages, and
conditions of einployment?
The power asked for would give a jndge thè control of
State expenditnre, with no responsibility regarding thè
revenue to meet that expenditnre.
The Alternate Course.
A Federai Industriai Tribunal.
It was at tlie Conferenee of Premierà witb representatives
of thè Commonwealth, in August, 1909, that thè creation of
a Federai Industriai Tribunal was given concrete forni.
At this Conferenee it was agreed that additional powers
for thè control of Industriai matters should he vested in thè
Commonwealth by virtne of Paragraph XXXVII of Sectiou
51 of thè Constitution, which gives thè Commonwealth Par-
liament power to deal wilh matters referred to it by thè
Parliament or Parliaments of any State or States.
At this Conferenee thè following resolutions were
adopted:—
1. It is desirable that each State should establish tri-
bunals for regùlatiug thè conditions of labour in that State.
2. That thè jurisdiction and powers of each State indus-
triai tribunal should be uniformi as far as practicable.
3. That to meet thè case, where it is proved that Inter-
state competition exists in industriai matters which is unfair,
and thè State tribunals bave failed to grant relief, thè Par-
liaments of thè States should agree to vest thè Commonwealth
with thè power to adjust thè grievance conuplained of.
4. When thè Court pf thè State determines on complaint
of an industriai tribunal that—


(a) Injury is caused to an industry carried on within
tliat State;
(b) Such injury is caused by corapetition of pjersons en-
gaged in thè sanie industry in gnother adjoining
State or States;
(g) Such injury is solely caused by thè conditions of
labour under which employés in thè competing
industry work;
(d) Such conditions, whilst making allowance for locai
circumstances, are unfair to thè complaining
State;
(e) The industriai tribunals of thè States cpncerned
have fàiled either jointly or by separate action
to alter thè conditions of labour which caused
such injury;
such Court may order that thè conditions which are thè cause
of thè unfair competition shall be referred to a Commonwealth
tribunal for adjustment.
This proposai was a new development, and an extensiou
of Federai powers, but it was àn extension along thè recog-
nised lines of thè Constifution.
It was not, as now proposed, intended to destroy thè in-
dustriai machinery al ready established.
It preserved, encouraged, and stimulated thè present
equitable and economical means of dealing with industriai
interests in thè States, and extended an effective application
to thè whole Commonwealth, as well as providing machinery
for thè adjustment of differences in keeping with locai con-
ditions and thè purchasing power of wages.
INTERSTATE COMMISSION.
To gire effect to thè resolutions required thè creation of
an Interstate Commission, which powers though vested in
thè Federai Parliament it had failed to use.
Se.ction 101 of thè Constifution provides: —
“There shall be an Interstate Commission with such
“powers of adjudication and administration as thè Parliament


“deems necessary for thè execution and maintenance within
“thè Commonwealth of thè provisions of this Constitution re-
“lating to Trade and Commerce and all laws made there-
“under.”
Such Commission, vested with judicial and administra-
tive powers for thè maintenance of thè provisions of thè Con-
stitution relating to Trade and Commerce, together with thè
additional powers imposed by thè Premiers’ uesolutions for
thè supervision, regulation, and adjustment of industriai
interests, would bave provided well-equipped auxiliary
machinery to cope with contingencies*as they arose, and would
bave met all thè present requirements for Federai control.
INTERSTATE COMMISSION BILL.
On thè 6th October, 1909 (following thè Premiers’ Con-
ference), Sir Robert Best moved in thè Senate a Bill for thè
creation of an Interstate Commission.
Clause 45 of thè Bill prolided that:—
“In determining any industriai matter under this part
“(industriai matters), thè Commission may, so far as is neces-
“sary for thè purposes of thè determination, regalate thè
“terms and conditions of employment in each State con-
“cerned.”
“And Clause 51 provided for thè Commonwealth Ooncilia-
"tion and Arbitration Court referring disputes to thè Coni-
“mission for investigation and report, and delegating to thè
• Commission all thè powers of that Court in relation to Con-
"ciliation and Arbitration and thè settlement of thè dispute
“by amicable agreement as it deemed advisable.”
It is also provided that thè Court on receiving thè re-
port of thè Commission would forthwith make its award.
Under Clause 52 thè Commission was charged with thè
investigation and thè diffusion of iuformation regarding;—
(a) The production of trade in commodities.
(b) The encouragement, improvement, and extension
of Australian Industries and manufactures.
(c) Markets outside Australia, and thè opening of Ex-
ternal trade generally. ,


(d) The effect and operation of any Tariff Act in regard
to Eevenue, Australian Manufactures, and In-
dustry and Trade generally.
(e) Bounties paid by foreign countries to encourage
shipping or export trade.
(f) Unemployment and Insurance relating thereto.
(g) Population and industriai conditions; and
(h) Immigration. ,
Had thè Bill beoome an enactment it would have proved a
marked advance on thè procrastinating, unwieldy, and costly
proposai as'now submitted by thè pauty whose obstruction
was responsible for having it shelved.
Prom thè outline given it is manifest that thè Federai
Parliament is already clothed with extensive powers (which it
has not used) to dieal effectively with Trade and Commerce,
and that thè Constitution provides for thè co-operation of
thè States and thè Commonwealth in thè great work of assist-
ing thè development of Australian trade, production, in-
dustries, and manufactures.
Had thè Deakin- Government Bill become law there would
have been little requirente»t for any of thè drastic propesala
now placed before thè people. Sudi an Industriai Tribunal
would link up thè Wages Boards of Australia, supplement
their great work by harmonizing their awards consonant with
locai requirements, and protect thè States against unfair
competition. in keeping with thè governing principle of a
Federation.
WAGES BOARD v. ARBITBATION COURT.
WAGES BOARD.
(1) Oompcsed of equal number of (1) Judge, or Judge and Assessors.
employers and employés in
thè trade concerned, with a
Chairman elected by them-
selves or nominated by thè
Government,
(.2) The members are oonvc-rsant (2) Judge gets his knowledge
with . all thè intricacies of secondhand from thè evidence
their particular trade and its brought before hlm.
Innumerable requirements.


(3) In 1911 there will be about
1(X) boards sitting in Victoria
dealing with their respective
trades.
(4) The functions of thè Roard
are exercised without any
expense to any trade.
(5) The cost to thè Consolidated
Revenue for Wages Boards
in 1910 was £6,700.
(G) At a Wages Board, thè men
meet in a friendly spiri! to
settle their differences and
come to a determination.
(3) There would require to be 100
Courts for Victoria alone lo
deal as expeditiously with
these determìnations.
(Congestioni
(4) A Court must be moved by au
individuai or an association,
and thè cost of inoving is
borne by thè person moving it.
(5) (a) The cost of thè Conciliatiou
and Arbitratimi Court of
New South Wales in 1910
was £18,861.
(b) Frmn 1900 to June. 1909,
thè cost to ali parties con
cerned before thè Federai
Arbitratimi Court is esti-
mated at nearly £37,000.
This estimate is—
For Arbitration Court —
7 cases and several smaller cases—
Bmployers . . . . £22,900
Bmployés .. . . 5,960
' ' £28,860
Harvester Bxcise Case.
Bmployers . . . . £3,500
Bmployés . . . . 1,400
£4,900
Government Bxpendlture.
Federai Government.
Arbitration Inter-
ventions . . . . £1,047
Excise Cases . . 1,384
£2,431
Siate Government 400
£2,831
£36,591
(0) The atmosphere of Court is
not eonclucive to conciliation.
Ooneiiiation becomes sub-
ordinate to legai contenFons,
technicalities, and bitter feel-
'ings aroused by thè advocates’
cross-examination of witnesses
in their efforts to prove theìr
clients’ case.


HOW IT IS PROPOSED TP EXERCISE THE
POWERS NOW ASKED FOR.
Both Mr. Fisher and Mr. Hughes scora thè idea of exer-
cising thè wide powers asked for. This is a frank adraission
. from them that thè powers are not required.
The Reassurances of Mr. Hughes.
In his specoli in Parliament on thè second reading of thè
proposals now submitted to thè people, Mr. Hughes said: —
“The very essence of true progress is that it should be tem-
“pered by wise conservatisi^”
He also issued a letter to thè State Premiers in which he
deals with what he “conceives to be thè lines along which
“Federai legislation will go.”
He speaks of—
“Sudi amendments as may be necessary.”
“Sudi measures will be passed from time to time as
“may'be necessary.”.
“Whatever legislation is necessary.”
The followers of Mr. Hughes are more definite.
MR. ARCHIBALD, Labonr Member for Hindmarsh,
S.A., says;—“l do not think that we need trouble onrselves
“mudi about uniflcation or federation.
“Perhaps in three or four years we may bave again to
“consult thè Australian electors, and ask them to endow us
“with more legislative power.
“What will be left of our Yankee Constitution in thè
“end, is a question for thè Yankee framers to answer. Tt is
“their business rather than mine.”
• MR. PI-A IN’, Labonr Member for Geelong, addressing
thè railway employés at that place, said:—“The railway men
“bave much to gain by thè railways being federalised, and
“giviug their control over to thè Federai Government. . . .
“Yon must he up and doing, and organise as you bave never
“done before, and be ready for thè Referendum in Aprii. . .
“I say it will be carried, and that you in thè near future will


“become servants of thè Federai Parliament ... in thè
“near future thè railways will he worked by thè Federai
“Government.’’
Mr. Plain strongly urged support for thè Referendum,
for in a short timo thè railway men would he able to say to
thè Commissioners ;—“You are our masters no more.”
MK. PRENDERÒ AST, Leader of thè State Opposi-
tion, says;—“His labour ideals were bound up more with that
“Federai Parliament than with thè State Parliament.
“Would it not he better to bave uniflcation, and wipe out
“thè politicai barnacles in thè State.”
RAILWAYS.
For many years our railways as a commercial concern
was a losing proposition.
Lntil eight years ago thè accumulated deficit on account
of railways was over £10,000,000.
This loss was mafie good out of generai revenue, that is,
out of taxation and other revenues of thè State.
The people of Victoria courageously bore thè burden of
thè loss on their railways, convinced that a bold policy of
construction was absolutely essential to open up thè lands of
(he State for settlement, to stimolate production, and assist
in thè development of thè State’s Industries.
The people were not discouraged by thè deflcits, for they
helieved that eventually Victoria’s most reproductive asset
would be her railways, and that thè levies on thè taxpayers
would be repaid by concessions in freights and fares, in which
(he producers and people generally would participate.
The time has now arrived when thè Victorian Railways
are in a position to relieve thè taxpayer, and afford conces-
sions to thè patrons of thè railways.
There is one fact which must be berne in mind—that thè
producers of this country must not be loaded with heavy
transit charges. They must be relieved so far as thè rev-
enues of thè State will permit of any freight charges that
would handicap their efforts to compete on an equitable basis


with countries more conveniently placed as regards thè mar-
kets of thè world.
The extension of thè Federai control over thè Victorian
Railways is a question fraught with vital importance to thè
State’s flnancial position.
At thè present time half thè revenue of thè State comes
from thè railways.
Mach of thè surpkuses of late years have been nsed to
make good thè rolling stock and thè permanent way, which
were neglected in thè years when there were deficits.
We have now a reprodnctive asset of which any country
in thè world inight he prond.
Is it fair to ask thè Victorian taxpayers to jeopardise thè
solvency of thè State by parting with thè control of an asset
upon which they are responsible for an annnal interest charge
of £1,480,000, and which, although now highly reprodnctive,
has a deficit of about £10,000,000 to wipe off?
The intelligent man does not want cash for this —but he
looks for its eqnivalent in reduced freights.
How can he expect sneh concessions if thè revenues of
thè transcontinental lines and all Services are to be pooled,
for pooling thè proflts would be thè inevitable resnlt of
Federai control.
Victoria has not called a halt in railway construction.
The requirements of this State for commnnication de-
mand thè construction of many rniles to stili further open
up thè land for settlement and assist thè development of thè
country.
Bnt in this respect we are far ahead of other States.
Victoria has 1 mile of railway to every 25 square miles of
territory.
Tasmania has 1 mile of railway to every 41 square miles of
territory.
New South Wales has 1 mile of railway to every 82 square
miles of territory.
Queensland has 1 mile of railway to every 174 square miles
of territory.


South Australia has 1 miie of railway to every 201 square
miles of territory.
West Australia has 1 mile of railway to eyery 420 square
miles of territory.
Northern Territory has 1 mile of railway to every 3,598 square
miles of territory.
In thè event of thè control going to thè Commonwealth,
which State would haye thè largest claim for new railways?
Victoria, that is interlaoed with lines, or thè vast terri-
tories of thè other States where thè i>eople are clamouring
for communication ?
This is not put forward in auy provincia! spirit. It is a
domestic matter of concern to Victoria, for which she has
already made large sacriflces.
MB. HUGHES ON THE STATE BIGHTS OF NEW
SOUTH WALES, IN 1899.
On thè 13th Jane, 1899, at thè Masonic Hall, Suinmer Hill.
Sydney, Mr. Hughes said: —
“That sentimental considerations of thè Bill must give
“way to cooler passions and cairn consideration of what thè
“colony was going to lose in a . commercial and industriai
“senso.
“It had been freely stated that thè enibarkation of foreign
“capitai poised at present in midair was going to swoop down
“upon thè colony with untold amounts of gold. . . . The
“tact of thè matter was that thè proposed federation was to
“he cheerfully paid for by New South Wales. Luckily thè
“future of thè colony and democracy did not rest with Messrs.
“Reid and Wise. It was absurd for people to promise vast
“railway and ironworks under thè federation proposed. They
“could look at America, and keep looking at it. There they
“had progress under proportiouate representation. Here
“there w T ould bave been a sacriflce of majority rule, and they
“would be asked to relinquish control of their own destinies.”
At thè Protestant Hall on thè 16th June, 1899, Mr.
Hughes said


“The brotherly love manifested towards New South
“Wales by thè other colonies was one of a belated character.
“It carne at a time when New South Wales didn’t want it.
“The great blots in thè Bill were, it did not provide for
“majority rule, and it had no provision for amendment. If
“thè existence of those facts did not bring home to all demo-
“crats thè necessity for voting against thè measure, nothing
“he could say would induce them to vote against it.”
After accusing Mr. George Eeid of treachery to New
South Wales by supporting thè Bill, Mr. Hughes said: —
“New South Wales had had experience of men who had
“‘slipped up’ this country before.”
“He urged all to reject thè Bill, because thè whole
“dèmocracy of Australia relied upon New South Wales.”
Despite thè efforts of Mr. Hughes and his followers
eleven years ago to defeat thè establishment of thè Federa-
tion, thè people adopted it by a large majority.
Mr. Hughes and his party, unable to retard thè Federai
movement in 1899, now desire to pose as leaders, and urge
thè people to so mutilate thè Oonstitution as to destroy thè
Federai form of government.
THE OONSTITUTION.
Our democratie Oonstitution as it now stands gives thè
people thè fullest opportunity of making their wishes known
through Coustitutional organs, and it protects thè rights of
a minority against an intoxicated majority.
The responsibility placed upon thè people in Aprii next
of rejecting or confirming these proposals for drastic amend-
meuts of thè Oonstitution is of more than usuai importance.
Their verdict will indicate their confidente or otherwise
in a Federai form of Government as opposed to thè establish-
ment of Uniflcation.
Experience has proved that Unitary control is impractic-
able and unsuitable for Australian requirements.
The people should therefore pause and weigh well thè
arguments for and against thè proposals before deciding upon
a verdict seriously affecting thè principle of Federation.


NOT THE PEOPLE’S PROPOSALS.
These propesala did not originate with or emanate troni
thè people.
They were drafted in secret by thè dominant party in
Federai politica and, consequently, owing to thè weighit of
numbers, thè approvai of Parliament was a merely formai
procedure to comply with thè requirements of thè Constan-
ti on.
DEGRADINO THE REFERENDUM.
Four out of thè Five questions are bunched together so
that thè people must reject or accept thè lot.
The democratic ideal of a Referendum ìs to submit one
dear question fon thè decision of thè people.
The party responsible for degrading thè Referendum by
means of tangled issues hope to obtain thè people’s approvai
to thè ideals of thè Extreme Socialists —thè Nationalization
of thè means of Production and Trade—regardless of thè
ruination that would eventuale to thousands of small traders,
producers, and manufacturers, who would be overshadowed
or ousted by a Socialistic Octopus.




