

SPECIAL RESOLUTIONS
OF THE
QUEENSLAND
Cotton Browing and Selling
COMPANY,
LIMITED.
WITH
MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION
AND
CERTIFICATE OF INCORPORATION OF THE COMPANY.
REGISTERED OFFICE: BOLTON.
BOLTON:
PRINTED BY T. CUNLIFE, “GUARDIAN” OFFICE, OXFORD-STREET
1863




SPECIAL RESOLUTIONS
OF THE
QUEENSLAND
Cotton Browing and Selling
COMPANY.
LIMITED,
WITH
MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION
AND
CERTIFICATE OF INCORPORATION OF THE COMPANY.
REGISTERED OFFICE: BOLTON.
BOLTON:
PRINTED BY T. CUNLIFFE, “ GUARDIAN ” OFFICE OXFORD-STREET.
1863.




LIMITED COMPANY.
MEMORANDUM OF ASSOCIATION
OF THE
GUEENSLAND
COTTON CROWING & SELLING COMPANY
LIMITED.
Ist. The name of the Company is “ The Queensland Cotton Growing
and Selling Company, Limited.”
2nd. The registered office of the Company is to be established in
England.
3rd. The objects for which the Company is established are to afforo
pecuniary and other assistance to its members, to enable them to emigrate to
Queensland, and for the Company to acquire free and other grants of land
to be held by the Company, or to be held by its members on behalf of the
Company, and to sell or otherwise dispose of such lands to be so granted or
purchased or otherwise acquired, and to provide all necessary implements,
machines, and engines for its members, for the, cultivation, gathering,
cleansing, and packing of cotton, in Queensland, and for the sale of cotton
in Queensland, or elsewhere, and the conveying and transporting of cotton
in ships, boats, or otherwise, between Queensland and such other place or
places, and for such purposes as the Company shall from time to time
determine, and the manufacturing, buying, selling, and executing, doing, and
making of all such other implements, machines, engines, matters, and
things as are incidental to, or necessary for, the successful attainment of the
above object.
4th. The liability of the shareholders is limited.
6th. The nominal capital of the Company is one hundred and fifty
thousand pounds, divided into six thousand shares of twenty-five pounds
each.


We, the several persons whose names and addresses are subscribed, are
desirous of being formed into a Company, in pursuance of this memorandum
of association, and we respectively agree to take the number of shares in
the capital of the Company set opposite our respective names.
No. of Shares
Names and Addresses of Subscribers. taken by each
Subscribere.
JAMES CROMPTON, of Bolton, in the county of] jg
Lancaster, Engineer... J
JESSE EDGE, of Bolton, in the county of Lan-)
caster, Joiner [
AARON JOHNSON, of Bolton, in the county of[ g
Lancaster, Broker 1
WILLIAM CUBBIN, of Bolton, in the county of 1 g
Lancaster, Joiner )
CHARLES WILKINSON, of Little Hulton, in the | ~
county of Lancaster, Gardener I
JAMES PHILLIPS, of Bolton, in the county of |
Lancaster, operative Cotton Spinner 1
JOSEPH LEE, of Bolton, in the county of Lan-1
Lancaster, Machinist I
35
Dated the twenty-ninth day of July, 1862.
Witness tothe above signatures,
WILLIAM JAMES CHALLINOR,
Clerk to John Gordon, Solicitor,
Bolton, Lancashire.
[COPY.] O O O
No. 2780. L ,L. 2142, o vs *o
LIMITED COMPANY. ,
CI) cq CO ;
stj eq I
CERTIFICATE OF INCORPORATION of the . •
Queensland Colton Growing and Selling Company, Limited, under
the Joint Stock Companies’ Act, 1856, 1857. §
d
.
I, GEORGE DEANE, Esquire, Assistant Registrar A
■ ■ - . -S 'o'-
of Joint Stock Companies, do hereby certify that the Queensland, s
Cotton Growing and Selling Company, Limited, is Incorporated g "g,
under the Joint Stock ComjmnieA Acts, 1856, 1857, and that it is
a, Limited Company,
.
Given under my hand this first day of August, eighteen hundred and
sixty-two.
GEORGE DEANE,
Assistant Registrar of Joint Stock Companies.


SPECIAL RESOLUTIONS
Of the Queensland Cotton Growing and Selling Company,
Limited, passed on the 22 nd day of May, 1863, and con-
firmed on the 6 th day of June, 1863.
Resolved, —
That the regulations of Table A contained in the first schedule to
the Companies’ Act, 1802, shall not apply, except so far as they are
incorporated in these resolutions.
In construing these resolutions, words importing the masculine
gender shall he considered to includs females, and the singular num-
ber to include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the con-
trary is expressly provided, or is from the subject or context to be
necessarily or reasonably inferred.
Registered and Branch Offices.
1. The registered office of the Company shall be in Bolton, in tho
county of Lancaster, where all the general business of the Company,
out of tho colony of Queensland, shall be transacted; but an office
shall be established in the said colony of Queensland, where all the
general business of the Company in the colony shall be transacted ;
and branch offices may be established in any places in the United
Kingdom, or in the colony, with such districts and for such purposes
and subject to such provisions and restrictions as the Company shall
prescribe ; but so that (subject to the control in all respects of the
Company in general meeting) the officers of every branch office shall be
elected and removed, and the expenses of every such office, iiududing
salaries, shall be borne and paid by the members resident within the
district of such branch office.
Shares.
2. Every member shall, on joining the Company, pay an instal-
ment of one shilling on each share taken by him, and shall thence-
forth pay weekly on each such share an instalment of threepence for
himself, and a like instalment for his wife, and a like instalment also
for each of his children, except such of them (if any) as he shall in
writing declare his intention not so to pay for, until he shall have paid
on each such share in the whole the sum of £5.
3. Every member shall, on completion of his said payments on
any share up to the sum of £3, be entitled to have his name inserted,
in respect of such share, in a register to be kept by the Company, and
to be called “ The Register of Qualified Members” (each such share, if
he shall have more than one, constituting a separate qualification, and


entitling him accordingly to a separate insertion of his name in the
said register), and the names of all such members shall be inserted in
the said register in order according to the dates of such completion of
their said payments respectively, and such dates and the distinguishing
numbers of their said shares shall also be inserted in the said register.
4. Whenever the Directors shall have determined to send out any
number of members to the colony, twice that number of members shall
be taken from the register of qualified members in the order of their
priority thereon, every member entitled to more than one such
qualification as aforesaid having in respect of each such qualification a
separate and distinct claim. And the members to be sent out shall be
drawn by lot from among the members so taken, in such manner as
shall be determined by the Directors, but so that the members then
unsuccessful shall retain their respective position on the said register,
and shall have preference on any future drawing over those newly
taken from the said register; and every member so di’awn by lot shall
be entitled to have sent out with him to the said colony his wife and
his children (except such of his children, if any, as he shall have
declared as aforesaid his intention not to pay for), and shall for every
additional share, if any, beyond one share on which he shall have paid
the sum of £3, be entitled also to have sent out with him any such
relative or other person as he may be desirous of introducing into the
colony under the immigration regulations for the time being of the
government thereof.
5. Every member shall be entitled at pleasure to pay or complete
the said sum of £5 on any share held by him, either at once or by
larger instalments (whether uniform or not uniform in amount) than
those hereinbefore originally prescribed, and also to pay on any such
share, either at once or by instalments (whether uniform or not uniform
in amount), any further sum or sums of £5, and every such payment
as last aforesaid shall, according to the date thereof, constitute a
separate qualification in such member for the insertion of his name as
aforesaid in the said list of qualified members, so as to entitle him in
due course to an additional chance of being drawn by lot as aforesaid,
and shall be acted on accordingly, and credit shall be given to such
member in his account with the Company for every sum so paid
as last aforesaid, with interest thereon at the rate of £5 per cent, per
annum ; but no such payment as last aforesaid, nor any payment or
completion of the original sum of £3, or any share otherwise than by
the instalments, and in the manner hereinbefore originally prescribed,
shall qualify the member effecting the same to be drawn by lot as
aforesaid until after the end of three calendar months from the time of
such payment or completion, which restriction, however, shall not pre-
clude him from any other privilege arising in any way from such pay-
ment or completion respectively.
6. Every member shall, notwithstanding the payment or com-
pletion of the sum of £5 on any share, continue to pay thereon the


aforesaid weekly instalments of threepence until he shall have
been drawn by lot as aforesaid, when such payments shall cease ; and in
case of such payments or any of them being in arrear for four weeks or
upwards, he shall not be entitled until the discharge thereof to be so
drawn as aforesaid, unless the Directors, upon proof of his inability
from sickness or other sufficient cause to discharge such arrears, shall
think fit to remit or reduce the same.
7. 'lf any member shall be unable to pay his instalments or calls,
or desire to retire from the Company, he shall, on payment to the
principal Secretary of the Company in the United KingdoTn, or in the
colony, according to the then residence of such member, or if resident
within the district of any branch office, then to the Secretary of such
branch office, of a fee of one shilling, be entitled to have his name
inserted in a book or register to be kept by the Company, and to be
called “ The Register of Retiring Members,” and the names of all such
members shall be inserted therein in order, according to the dates of
their respective payments of the said fee of one shilling, and such dates
and the distinguishing numbers of their shares shall also be inserted
in the same register ; and when the whole number of 6,000 shares
shall have been issued, the respective shares of the members then
standing on such last-mentioned register shall, in the order of their
priority thereon, be disposed of by the Directors on such terms as they
shall think reasonable, to any persons (not disapproved of by the
Directors) who may be willing to take the same, and the consideration
money (if any) paid by such persons shall be applied, so far as the same
will extend, in the first place in repaying to the retiring members
respectively the amount of the instalments and calls paid by them
respectively on such shares, and the surplus of such consideration
money shall go and belong to the Company.
8. When, the whole number of 6,000 'fhares shall have been
issued, any person desirousof obtaining a share or shares in the Com-
pany, shall, on payment to the principal Secretary of the Company in
the United Kingdom, or in the colony, according to the then residence
of such person, or if resident within the district of any branch office,
then to trfe Secretary of such branch office, of a fee of one shilling, be
entitled to have his name inserted in a book or register to be kept by
the Company, and to be called “ The Register of Intended Members,"
and the names of all such persons shall be inserted therein in order
according to the dates of their respective payments of, the said fee of
one shilling, and such dates shall also be inserted in the same register,
and such persons (if not disapproved of by the Directors) shall be
entitled in the order of their priority on such last-mentioned register,
to take on such, terms as the Directors shall think reasonable, the
shares, or any of the shares for the time being disposable by the
Directors, under the regulation lastly hereinbefore cpntained, and
shall, on payment of the consideration money (if any) for such shares,
be entitled to transfers thereof respectively. And any such person as


aforesaid, who, on account of being disapproved of by the Directors,
shall be precluded from taking shares, shall be entitled to a repayment
by the Company of his aforesaid fee of one shilling, and, shall accept
such repayment in discharge of all claims.
9. No person shall be allowed to become a member of the Com-
pany who shall in age or in any other particular be incapable of com-
plying with the immigration regulations for the time being of the
Colonial Government of Queensland; and if any member shall, at the
time at which under these regulations he would otherwise be sent out, or
be qualified to be drawn for being sent out to the colony, be under any
such iucapacity, he shall not be sent out or deemed qualified to be
drawn for being sent out till such incapacity shall have been removed.
10. Members desirous of leaving for the colony in one and the
same party shall be allowed so to do, provided that such party do not
consist of more than four families; and that if drawn by lot at different
times, the member or members first drawn be willing io wait at his or
their own expense for the member or members afterwards drawn.
11. Each party of members sent out by the Company to the
colony shall be subject in all respects to the government and control of
the Directors, and the Directors shall have power, subject to the
regulations for the time being of the Company, to make rules for the
observance of such members, and from time to time to alter or repeal such
rules ; and in case of the nonobservance by any such member of any
rule so made as aforesaid, or of any of the conditions hereinafter pre-
scribed as to the holding of the land hereinafter mentioned, or of any
of the regulations for the time being of the Company, then to impose
such fine as they shall think merited; anfi in case of nonpayment
thereof, as they may direct to charge the amount thereof with interest
thereon after the rate of five pounds per cent, per annum against the
offending member iifjhis account with the Company, but with power
also at their discretion to remit or reduce such fine and interest.
13. Each party of members sent out to the colony as aforesaid,
shall, immediately on their arrival, proceed to the Boarding House and
Store House to be provided, as hereinafter directed, proper means of
conveyance being supplied by the Company for that purpose, and they
shall be lodged and boarded there under the superintendence of the
Directors, at the expense of the Company, until they shall respectively
take possession of the land obtained by them as hereinafter provided.
And upon taking possession of such land each of them shall be supplied
at the expense of the Company with a cow, two sheep, two pigs, and
suitable poultry, and with suitable provisions, seeds, implements, and
utensils for the support of themselves and their families, and of the
live stock to be supplied as aforesaid, and for the cultivation of their
said land.
13. Every member shall be entitled and bound to take possession
of the land obtained by him as soon as with the assistance to be fur-
nished to him as hereinafter provided, or otherwise, he shall have


erected and completed on such land a house, with suitable conveniences
and appurtenances, so as to be fit in the judgment of the Directors for
the occupation of such member and his family.
14. The members of each party sent out by the Company to the
colony shall be entitled, in order of precedence to be determined by lot
in such manner as shall be prescribed by the Directors, to apply for
and obtain for their own ultimate ownership, according to the number
of their respective shares, such of the blocks of land in the colony then
open to their selection as they shall respectively prefer, but subject to
such regulations, if any, as may be made by the Directors, and shall
thereupon, at the expense of the Company, if required by the Directors,
take, or join in taking all necessary and proper steps for obtaining from
the Colonial Government proper land orders and grants of such land
respectively, and forthwith deposit such land orders and grants with
the Directors on behalf of the Company, to be retained as securities for
the payment by such members respectively of all money due and to
become due on their respective accounts with the Company, and the
interest thereof, and for the observance of the conditions hereinafter
prescribed for the holding of such land as aforesaid, and of the regula-
tions for the time being of the Company.
15. The land to he obtained by each member, as aforesaid, shall,
during such deposit as hereinbefore mentioned of the land order or
land orders and grant thereof with the Company, be subject, as between
such member and the Company, to the following conditions :
That such member shall not assign, underlet, or otherwise part
with such land, or any part thereof, without the sanction of a
meeting of the members then resident in the colony specially con-
vened for the purpose.
That at least three-fourths of the land in cultivation shall he
devoted every year to the growth of cotton*
That the quality of the cotton to be grown and cultivated on such
land, and the mode of growing, cultivating, gathering, and cleans-
ing the same shall be such as may be prescribed by the Directors,
and that the utmost care and attention shall be employed on the
part of the member entitled to such land, in the growth, cultiva-
tion, gathering, and cleansing thereof.
That all the cotton produced on such land shall be sent in by such
member, at the expense of the Company, at such times and in
such manner as shall be prescribed by the Directors, to the
stores of the Company, and that none of such cotton shall be
otherwise employed or disposed of.
That such member shall not be engaged, either directly or indi-
rectly, in any business or employment other than the cultivation
of the land comprised in his land order or land orders and grant,
according to the conditions aforesaid.
16. The members of each party sent out to the colony, as afore-
said, shall, in the order of precedence in which they will become


entitled to the obtaining of their respective land, be entitled to the
assistance of each other (which they respectively shall he bound to
render) in the erection and completion of their respective houses, with
suitable conveniences and appurtenances, and also (subject to the
control of the Directors) to the use of all proper machinery and imple-
ments, to be provided by the Company for clearing and cultivating
their respective lands.
17. All the cotton to be sent in by each member to the general
stores of the Company, shall be forthwith examined, and the quality
and weight thereof ascertained; and the value thereof, according to
such quality and weight, shall be fixed and determined by a valuer
appointed for that purpose by the Directors, and shall as so fixed and
determined be binding both on the Company and on such member.
18. An account shall be opened and kept between the Company
and each member, in which such member shall be debited with all
passage money and conveyance money paid by the Company on behalf
of such member and his family; with the expenses of such member
and his family at such boarding-house and storehouse, as aforesaid;
with the expenses of the grant of the land obtained by such member
and the deposit of such grant, as aforesaid ; with the value of the live
stock, provisions, seeds, implements, and utensils to be supplied to
such member, as aforesaid; with a reasonable price or consideration
for the use by such member of the machinery and implements of the
Company ; and with all other expenses and moneys justly chargeable
by the Company against such member; and shall be credited with the
value (so fixed and determined as aforesaid) of all the cotton sent in by
such member to the general stores of the Company, after such deduc-
tions as may appear proper; and on the first day of May in every
year such account shall be balanced, and a statement thereof in
writing sent by the Directors to such member.
19. The charges to be made against each member, in the account
to be kept with him as aforesaid, shall be made at such rates or on
such principles as shall be determined by the Directors.
90. In the event of the death of any member during his passage
to the colony, the Company, if required, shall act as protectors towards
his family, if any, and assist them and his representatives in enforcing
their respective rights, subject to the rights of the Company under
these resolutions or otherwise.
91. Every member shall, on payment of one shilling, or such less
sum as the Company in general meeting may prescribe, be entitled to
a certificate, under the common seal of the Company, specifying by
their distinguishing numbers the share or shares held by him and the
amount paid up thereon.
99. If any such certificate bo worn out or lost' it may be renewed
on payment of one shilling, or such less sum as the Company in
general meeting may prescribe.


Calls on Shares.
23. The Directors may from time to time make such calls as they
shall think fit upon the members in respect of all moneys (other than
the aforesaid instalments) unpaid on their respective shares, provided
that twenty-one days’ notice at least he given of each call; and that no
call exceed the sum of ten shillings per share, or be made so as to bo
payable before the end of thirteen calendar months from the incorpora-
tion of the Company, or (as to all calls except the first) before the end
of three calendar months from the day on which the last preceding
call for the time being shall have become payable, and every member
shall be liable to pay the amount of the calls so made to the persons
and at the times and places appointed by the Directors.
24. A call shall be deemed to have been made at the time when the
resolution of the Directors authorising such call was passed.
25. If any member shall not, on or before the day appointed for
payment of any instalment or call, pay the same at the time and place
appointed, he shall be liable to pay interest thereon from that time, at
the rate of £5 per cent, per annum up to the time of the actual payment.
Transfees of Shares.
26. The instrument of transfer of any share in the Company shall
be executed by the transferor and transferee, and the transferor shall
be deemed to remain a holder of such share until the name of the
transferee is entered in respect thereof in the Register of members of
the Company.
27. Shares shall be transferred in the following form:—
“ I, A. 8., of in consideration of the sum of £
“paidto me by C.D., of do hereby transfer to
“ the said C.D. the share [or shares] numbered standing
“in my name in the books of the Queensland Cotton Growing
“ and Selling Company, Limited, to hold unto the said C.D., his
■“ executors, administrators, and . assigns, subject to the several
“ conditions on which I held the same at the time of the execution
“ hereof. And I, the said C.D., do hereby agree to take the said
“ share [or shares] subject to the same conditions. As witness
“ our hands the day of .”
28. The Company may decline to register any transfer of shares
made by a member indebted to them in respect of any instalment or
calls, or any interest thereon.
29. The transfer book shall be closed during the fourteen days
immediately preceding the ordinary general meeting in each year.
Transmission of Shares.
30. The executors or administrators of a deceasedmember shall be
the only persons recognised by the Company as having any title to his
shares, except that when the executors or administrators have assented
in writing to a bequest of any such shares, the legatee claiming
under such bequest shall thenceforth be the person so recognised.


31. Erery person becoming entitled to any share in consequence
of the death, bankruptcy, or insolvency of any member, or in conse-
quence of the marriage of any female member, may in respect of such
share be registered as a member upon first producing such evidence of
his title as is usual in like cases, or as the Company may reasonably
require', and furnishing to the Company in ■writing his name and
address.
32. Every person becoming entitled to any share in consequence
of the death, bankruptcy, or insolvency of any member, or in conse-
quence of the marriage of any female member, may, instead of being
registered himself, procure any other person (If not disapproved of by
the Directors) to be registered as a member ift respect of such share,
first producing such evidence of his own title as is usual in like cases,
or as the Directors may reasonably require, and furnishing to the
Directors in writing the name and address of the person proposed to be
registered, but he must execute in favour of such person a transfer of
such share.
33. The instrument of transfer shall be presented to the Com-
pany, accompanied with such evidence as the Directors may require to
prove the title of the transferor, and thereupon the Company shall
register the transferee as a member.
FoefeitueS* op Shaees.
34. If any member shall fail to pay any instalment or call on the
day appointed for payment thereof, the Directors may at any time
thereafter, so long as such instalment or call shall remain unpaid, serve
a notice on him requiring him to pay the same, together with any
interest and expenses that may have accrued by reason of such non-
payment.
35. The notice shall name a further day on or before which such
instalment or call, and all interest and expenses that may have accrued
by reason of the non-payment thereof, are to be paid ; it shall also name
the place at which such payment is to be made, and shall state that in
the event of non-payment at such place, on or before the day then
named, the shares in respect of which such notice is given will be liable
to forfeiture.
36. If the requisitions of any such notice shall not be complied
with, the shares in respect of which such notice shall have been given
may, at any time before payment of all instalments, calls, interest, and
expenses due in respect thereof," be forfeited by a resolution of the
Directors, but may afterwards be discharged from such forfeiture by
the Directors upon such terms as they may think proper, yet not after
any disposition thereof on the part of the Company, nor after the end
of six calendar months from the date of the forfeiture.
37. Every share so forfeited shall be deemed to be the property
of the Company, and may be disposed of in such manner as the Com-
pany in general meeting shall think fit.


38. Every member whose shares have been forfeited shall never-
theless be liable to pay to the Company all instalments, calls, interest,
and expenses which may be owing upon such shares at the time of the
forfeiture.
39. A statutory declaration in respect of any share by the Secre-
tary or any other officer of the Company, that default has been made
in payment of an instalment or call thereon, and that such share was
forfeited by a resolution of the Directors, shall be sufficient evidence
of the facts therein stated as against all persons who would otherwise
be entitled to such share, and such declaration and the receipt of the
Company on any sale of such share for the purchase money for the
same shall constitute a good title to such share* and a certificate of
proprietorship shall be delivered to the purchaser thereof, and there-
upon he shall be deemed the holder of such share, discharged from all
instalments, calls, interest, and expenses due prior to his purchase ;
and he shall not be bound to see to the application of the purchase
money, nor shall his title be affected by any irregularity in the pro-
ceedings on such sale.
General Meetings.
40. The general meetings of the members of the Company shall,
until three-fifths in number of such members shall have been sent out
to the colony as aforesaid, be held at the registered office of the Com-
pany in Bolton aforesaid, or at such other convenient place there as the
Directors may appoint; and shall after three-fifths in number of the
members shall have been so sent out, be held at the principal office of
the Company in the colony, or at such other place in the colony as the
Directors may appoint.
41. A general meeting shall be held on the first Monday in
August in every year, beginning with the first Monday in August, 1863.
43. The general meetings to be held on the fixed days aforesaid
shall be called ordinary general meetings, and all other general meet-
ings shall be called extraordinary.
43. The Directors may whenever they think fit, and they shall
whenever required in writing, signed by not less than one-fifth in num-
ber of the members of the Company, convene an extraordinary general
meeting.
44. Every such requisition must, until three-fifths in number of
the members shall have been sent out to the colony as aforesaid, be
left at the registered office of the Company at Bolton aforesaid, and
must afterwards be left at the principal office of the Company in the
colony, and must in every case express the object of the meeting.
45. Upon the receipt of any such requisition the Directors shall
forthwith proceed to convene an extraordinary general meeting accord-
ingly, and if they shall not proceed so to do within twenty-one days
from the receipt of the requisition, the requisitionists or any of them
being not less than the aforesaid proportion may themselves convene
an extraordinary general meeting.


Peooeedings at Geneeal Meetings.
46. Not less than fourteen nor more than twenty-one days’ notice
shall be given of every general meeting specifying the place and day
and hour of meeting, and in case of special business the general nature
of such business and such notice shall be given by advertisement, and
also by sending to each member resident in the United Kingdom, if
the meeting is to be held there, and if not then to each member resi-
dent in the colony, or in either case as to members resident in the
district of any branch office, to the Secretary of such branch office,
(who shall he bound without delay to inform all such members thereof)
a circular letter, signed when the meeting shall be convened by mem-
bers by such members, and in all other cases by one or more of the
Directors, or by the principal Secretary, but the non-receipt of such
notice, or of due information thereof, by any member or by the Secre-
tary of any such branch office, as aforesaid, shall not invalidate the
proceedings at any general meeting.
47. All business shall be deemed special that is to be transacted at
an extraordinary general meeting, and also all that is to be transacted
at an ordinary general meeting, with the exception of the consideration
of the accounts and balance sheets of the Company and the ordinary
reports of the Directors.
48. No business shall he transacted at any general meeting unless
a quorum of members shall be present at the time when the meeting
proceeds to business, which quorum shall he forty.
49. If within one hour from the time appointed for holding any
general meeting a quorum shall not be present, the meeting, if con-
vened upon the requsition of members, shall be dissolved ; but in any
other case it shall stand adjourned to the same day in the next week,
at the same time and place, and if at such adjourned meeting a quorum
shall not be present it shall be adjourned sine die.
60. The Chairman (if any) of the Board of Directors shall preside
as chairman at every general meeting of the Company at which he
shall be present.
51. If there shall be no such chairman, or if at any general meet-
ing he shall not be present within fifteen minutes after the time
appointed for holding the same, the members then present shall choose
some one of the Directors,, or if all the Directors shall be absent, or
such of them as shall be present shall decline to take the chair,
then shall choose some one of their own number to be chairman at the
meeting.
52. The Chairman at any general meeting may, with the consent
of such meeting, adjourn the same although the required proportion of
members shall be present, and such adjournment may be from time to
time repeated, but no business shall be transacted at any adjourned
meeting other than the business left unfinished at the meeting from
which the adjournment took place, and the chairman before such


adjournment shall take place shall declare to the meeting what business
is so left unfinished.
53. All elections of Directors and Auditors, and all other questions
at any general meeting except such as may he the subject of a special
resolution shall be decided by a simple majority of votes taken by a
show of hands of the members present and not declining to vote, and
in all cases of an equality of votes the Chairman shall be entitled to a
second or casting vote.
Votes of Members.
54. Every member, whatever may be the number of his shares,
shall have one andymly one vote.
55. Every member who is a lunatic or idiot may vote by his'
Committee, curator bonis, or other legal curator, and any member
who is a minor may vote by his guardian, tutor, or curator, or any one
of his guardians, tutors, or curators, if more than one.
56. If two or more members shall be jointly entitled to a share or
shares, the member whose name shall stand first in the register of
members as one of the holders of such share or shares shall alone be
entitled to vote in respect of such share or shares.
57. No member shall be entitled to vote at any general meeting,
unless all instalments and calls which shall have become due from him,
and all interest and expenses, if any, accrued in respect thereof, shall
have been paid, and no member shall, in respect of any share acquired
by him by transfer, be entitled to vote at any general meeting held
after the expiration of three months from the incorporation of the Com-
pany, unless he has been possessed of such share for at least three
calendar months previously to the time of holding such meeting.
Directors and Other Officers.
58. There shall be twenty-one Directors of the Company, one o
whom shall be called the Managing Director, and
Joseph Walsh Lee, of Queensland, Plainer.
Peter Mc.Donald, of Queensland, Grinder.
Charles Wilkinson, of Queensland, Gardener.
Thomas Clayton, of Queensland, Taper.
John Flitcroft, of Queensland, Spinner.
Matthew Agnew, of Halliwell, Spinner.
Thomas Cooke, of Bolton, Spinner.
John William Savage, of Bolton, Carder.
Joseph Sanders, of Preston, Joiner.
Richard Finch, of Manchester, Bookkeeper.
Robert Asquith, of Oldham, Shoemaker.
Samuel ShiUito, of Sheffield, Fitter.
William Washington Smith, of Bradford, Warehouseman.
George Henry, of Leeds,
’Jacob Holden, of Darwen, Weaver.


William Byers, of Adlington, Platelayer.
George Boshell, of Bury, Moulder.
Abraham Crompton, of St. Helens, Fitter.
Jarvis Harrison, of Accrington, Weaver.
Emmanuel Butterworth, of Great Harwood, Weaver.
Matthew Cox, of Wigan, Miner,
shall be the present Directors, and the said Joseph Walsh Lee shall
be the present Managing Director.
59. There shall be four Auditors of the Company, and Thomas
Nicholson, of Little Bolton, Finisher, Richard Hilton, of Halliwell,
Spinner, William Nettleton, of Bradford, Bookkeeper, and James
Eastham, of Preston, Clothlooker, shall be the present Auditors.
60. Messrs. Hardcastle, Cross, and Company, of Bolton aforesaid,
shall be the Bankers, and Mr. John Gordon, of the same place, the
Solicitor of the Company.
Duties and Powers of the Directors.
61. All the business of the Company shall be conducted by the
Directors, who may pay all expenses incurred in getting up and regis-
tering the Company, and of bringing the same into working order, and
may exercise all such powers of the Company as are not by the said
Company’s act, 1862, or by these resolutions required to be exercised
by the Company in general meeting, subject, nevertheless, to these
resolutions, and to the provisions of the said act, and also to such
regulations (being not inconsistent with the aforesaid provisions) as
may be prescribed by the Company in general meeting ; but no regu-
lation made by the Company in general meeting shall invalidate any
prior act of die Directors which would have been valid if such regula-
tion had not been made.
62. The Managing Director, and also, until three-fifths of the
members shall have been sent out to the colony as aforesaid, five at
least of the other Directors, and after such members shall have been
sent out, then (besides the Managing Director) twelve at least of the
other Directors shall (except when required or authorised by the Com-
pany to return to the United Kingdom, or to go elsewhere) be always
resident in the colony.
63. The Directors for the time being resident in the United King-
dom shall, until three-fifths of the members shall have been sent out
to the colony as aforesaid, and after that event then the Directors for
the time being resident in the colony shall be considered as consti-
tuting or representing the general body of Directors, and the other
Directors in each case shall be considered as only a committee of
Directors, but having, in the former case within the colony, gigd in the
latter case within the United Kingdom, all the powers of the general
body of Directors (except those of making calls and of borrowing
money, and except such others, if any, as may from time to .time be
withdrawn from them by the Directors); and they may exercise the


said powers (except as aforesaid) as fully and effectually as if actually
constituting or representing the general body of Directors.
64. The Managing Director shall, as to the exercise of the powers
of the Directors, he considered in all respects as on the footing of an
ordinary Director, but he shall be bound especially and particularly to
see to the affairs of the Company, and to attend and devote his energies
to the management of those affairs, and to bring before the general
body of Directors, and before every committee of Directors, all such
matters and things as ought to be brought before them; and in con-
sideration of his so doing he shall be entitled to suitable lodging and
board at the boarding-house to be provided in the colony as aforesaid,
and shall be reimbursed all his travelling and other incidental expenses
properly incurred on behalf of the Company, and shall also be allowed
the salary or wages of a duly-qualified male servant to attend to his
farming and other business, but he shall not be entitled to any salary
or other pecuniary remuneration for his services.
68. Copies of the minutes of the proceedings at every general
meeting, and also of the accounts, balance sheets, and reports, laid
before every ordinary general meeting, shall if such meeting shall be
held in the United Kingdom, be sent as soon as possible to the Direc-
tors in the colony, and if such meeting shall be held in the colony,
shall be sent as soon as possible to the Directors in the United King-
dom, with such explanations and information as may appear necessary
or proper.
66. The Directors for the time being resident in the colony,
until three-fifths of the members shall have been sent out to
the colony as aforesaid, and after that event, then the Directors
for the time being resident in the United Kingdom, may respectively,
whenever they think fit, and they shall respectively, during the
same periods, within fourteen days after receiving any such
copy of minutes, accounts,’balance sheets, or reports, as aforesaid;
and also whenever instructed by the Directors for the time being repre-
senting the general body, or required in writing signe'd by not less
than one-fifth in number of the members resident in the case of the
first-mentioned Directors in the colony, and in the case of the secondly-
mentioned Directors in the United Kingdom, convene a meeting of the
members so resident.
67. Every such meeting convened in the colony shall be held at
the principal office of the Company there, or at such other convenient
place in the colony as the Directors resident there may appoint, and
every such meeting convened in the United Kingdom shall be held at
the registered office of the Company, in Bolton aforesaid, or at such
other convenient place there as the Directors resident in the United
Kingdom may appoint.
68. Every such requisition as last aforesaid, must in the colony
be left at the principal office of the Company there, and must, in the


United Kingdom, be left at the registered office of the Company, and
must express the object, of the meeting.
69. Upon the-receipt of any such requisition the Directors to
whom it is addressed shall forthwith proceed to convene a meeting
accordingly, and if they shall not proceed so to do within twenty-one
days from the receipt of the requisition, the requisitionists or any of
them being not less than the aforesaid proportion may themselves con-
vene a meeting.
70. The meetings to be held under any of the last four preceding
regulations shall not be regarded as general meetings of the members
of the Company, or have the powers or authorities hereby given to
general meetings, but so far as circumstances will permit they shall be
convened in the same manner and be governed in all respects by the
same, rules and regulations as are herein prescribed and contained with
regard to the general meetings, and all such copies of minutes and of
accounts, balance sheets, and reports as aforesaid, shall at the first
meetings held after the receipt thereof respectively he laid before such
meetings, and the resolutions passed at such meetings and at all other
similar meetings, shall be deemed entitled to consideration as expres-
sions of feeling, and shall be treated by the Company accordingly.
71. Copies of the minutes of the proceedings of every such meet-
ing shall, if such meeting be held in the colony, be sent as soon as
possible to the Directors in the United Kingdom, and if such meeting
be held in the United Kingdom shall be sent as soon as possible to the
Directors in the colony, with such explanations and information as may
appear necessary or proper, and a full report of the affairs of the Com-
pany in the colony and of all matters and things there of any import-
ance or interest to the Company shall, as well before as after three-
fifths of the members shall have been sent out to the colony as afore-
said, be sent once at least in every month to the Directors in the United
Kingdom.
73, The Directors shall cause to be erected upon land to be
obtained by them from the Colonial Government a large and com-
modious building, with suitable conveniences and appurtenances, to be
used as a boarding-house and store-house by the members sent out to
the colony on their arrival, and shall cause to be cultivated, cropped,
and stocked, a suitable portion of such land for the purpose of pro-
visioning the said boarding-house, or otherwise supplying such mem-
bers, or any of them, with suitable necessaries and conveniences, and
with the live stock, provisions, and other articles to which they
respectively may become entitled.
73. The Directors shall cause all the cotton sent in by the mem-
bers to the general stores to be disposed of on the best terms that can
be obtained, and may for that purpose cause the same to be shipped
for the United Kingdom or elsewhere, and may accept payment of the
proceeds either in cash or by note or bill or otherwise, as they may


think proper; and may effect insurance against loss or damage by fire
or by sea, and may act generally in regard to such cotton and the dis-
posal thereof in such manner as they may think expedient.
74. The Directors shall, besides all other powers vested in them
by the said act and by these articles, have the following potters :
With the exception of the present Solicitor, to remove the Bankers
and Solicitors for the time being at pleasure.
To employ Secretaries, Superintendents, Agents, Clerks, Work-
men, and Servants, and to remove them at pleasure, and to
authorise the Superintendents and Agents to employ any workmen
and servants under them.
To give the Solicitor, Secretaries, Superintendents, Agents, Clerks,
Workmen, and Servants such powers, and impose oh them such
duties, and allow and pay to them such salaries or other remu-
nerations as the Directors shall think proper.
To purchase, or take upon lease or otherwise, a convenient house
or office, in Bolton aforesaid, for the registered office of the Com-
pany, and also to purchase and take upon lease or otherwise, in
the colony, any house, building, or land which they may think it
expedient so to purchase or take.
To contract with the Colonial Government of Queensland for
grants of other land in the colony besides that originally applied
. for, and to enter into any other contracts or arrangements with
the said Government, either in respect of any such land as afore-
said, or otherwise, and to cause such contracts or arrangements, if
any, to be duly carried into effect.
To purchase or otherwise provide for the purposes of the Company
such live or dead stock, provisions, seeds, steam engines,
machinery, implements, articles, and things as they may think
proper.
To let upon such terms as they may think proper, any house,
office, building, or land, or any part of any house, office, building,
or land belonging to the Company, but not wanted for the pur-
poses of the Company, or to permit the same to be occupied by
any of the Directors, or other officers, or servants of the Com-
pany, paying or not paying any rent or taxes for the same.
To sell with the sanction of a general meeting any house or office,
building or land, not wanted for the purposes of the Company ;
also without any such sanction, any steam engines, machinery,
implements, articles, or things not so wanted.
To appoint any substitute for the said Managing Director during
his absence at any time from the colony, either subject or not
subject to any conditions or restrictions.
To borrow money on behalf of the Company, but so that the
money so borrowed shall at no time, exclusive of interest, exceed
the sum of £BO,OOO, and also on behalf of the Company for
securing the repayment of such money with interest, to make


accept, or indorse bills of exchange or promissory notes, so
that the same be made, accepted, or indorsed by, and in the
names of two at least of the Directors, and be expressed to be so
made, accepted, or indorsed, on behalf of the Company, or to
give any bond, signed by the Directors or any two of them, and
sealed with the common seal of the Company, or any mortgage so
signed and sealed, with or without power of sale, of the funds
or property of the Company, or any part thereof, but so that no
person from whom any money shall be so borrowed, shall be
bound to inquire whether any money already borrowed is then due,
or what is the amount of such money, if any, or be in anywise
prejudiced, if the amount thereof either alone or together with
the money then proposed to be borrowed, shall exceed the said
sum of ±'30,000.
To make bye-laws at any extraordinary meeting of the Directors,
for the government of their own proceedings, but subject to the
regulations of the Company.
To act generally in all cases not expressly provided for by the
regulations in such manner as they shall think best calculated to
promote the welfare of the Company,
Qualification of Dibectobs.
75. No person shall in future be qualified te be a Director unless at
the time of his election he shall be a holder of at least one share on
which not less than £2 shall be paid up, and shall have been such holder
for at least the last six calendar months.
Rotation of Dibectobs.
76. At the first ordinary general meeting after the incorporation of
the Company, and also at every succeeding ordinary general meeting
the whole of the Directors for the time being (except the Managing
Director) shall retire from office, but shall, notwithstanding the appoint-
ment of their successors, be considered as still in office until the meet-
ing shall break up or adjourn. And also as to Directors in the colony,
if the meeting shall be held in the United Kingdom, and likewise as to
Directors in the United Kingdom, if the meeting shall be held in the
colony for six calendar months thereafter, and the retiring members
shall be re-eligible.
77. The Company shall at every ordinary general meeting fill up
the vacancies then occasioned by the retirement of the Directors for the
time being by electing a like number of Directors in their places ; and
if at any such meeting the places of the retiring Directors shall not be
filled up, the meeting shall stand adjourned till the same day in the
next week at the same time and place; and if at such adjourned meet-
ing the places of the retiring Directors shall not be filled up, the
retiring Directors, or such of them as shall not have had their places
filled up, shall continue in office until the ordinary meeting in the
next year, and ao on from time to time until their places are filled up.


78. The Company may from time to time, in general meeting,
increase or reduce the number of the Directors, and also vary in any way
the regulations hereinbefore contained for their retirement.
Disqualification of Directors.
79. The office of Director (including the Managing Director) shall
be vacated—
If he ceases to be the holder of such share as is hereinbefore required
for the qualification of a Director.
If he holds any other office or place of profit under the Company.
If he becomes bankrupt, or insolvent, or lunatic, or non-compos-
mentis, or suspends payment in the ordinary mercantile acceptation
of the term, or compounds with his creditors.
If he is concerned in or participates in the profits of any contract
with the Company.
But the above rule shall be subject to the following -exception :
That no Director shall vacate his office by reason of his being a
member of any company which has entered into any contract with,
or done any work for the Company of which he is a Director.
Nevertheless he shall not vote in respect of such contract or work,
or if he does so vote his vote shall not be counted.
80. The Company, in general meeting may by a special reso-
lution remove any Director, Auditor, or other officer (including the
Managing Director) for negligence or misconduct, or any other reason-
able cause, and may, either by a special or by an ordinary resolution,
appoint a successor to the person so removed, but so that the person so
appointed shall in the case of a Director (not being the Managing
Director) or Auditor hold office only during such time as the Director or
Auditor in whose place he is appointed would have held office if he had
not been removed.
81. Every casual vacancy occurring among the Directors by death,
resignation, or disqualification, or any other means, except the annual
retirement from office, and except removal by the Company in general
meeting, followed by an appointment in like manner of a successor, shall
be supplied by the Directors, who shall have power, if they shall think fit,
to invite candidates from the branch districts, or any of the branch dis-
tricts of the Company; each such branch district being entitled to send
one candidate for election; but every Director so appointed shall hold
office only during such time as the Director in whose place'he is
appointed would have held office if no vacancy had occurred.
82. The Directors and every Committee of Directors may meet
together ffir the despatch of business, and may adjourn and otherwise
regulate their meetings as they respectively may think fit, and may
determine the quorum necessary for the transaction of business. A
Director may at any time summon a meeting of Directors, or of any
Committee of Directors to which he may belong; and all questions
arising at any meeting of Directors, or of any Committee of Directors,


shall be decided by a majority of votes ; each Director having one vote,
and the Chairman in case of an equality of votes having a second or
casting vote.
83. The Directors may elect a Chairman at their meetings, and
determine the period for which he is to hold office; but if no such
Chairman shall be elected, or if at any meeting the Chairman shall not
be present at the time appointed for holding the same, the Directors pre-
sent shall choose some one of their number to be Chairman of such
meeting.
84. The Directors may at any time delegate any of their duties and
powers to Committees, consisting of such member or members of their
body as they thinji fit, and every such Committee as aforesaid shall in
the execution of the duties and powers delegated to them, conform to
such instructions and regulations as may be imposed on them by the
Directors.
85. All acts done at any meeting of the Directors, or of any Com-
mittee of Directors, or by any person acting as a Director, or as the
Managing Director, shall, notwithstanding that it may be afterwards
discovered that there was some defect in the appointment of any such
Director or Committee, or of the person acting as aforesaid, or that he,
they, or any of them was or were removed or disqualified, or having
retired by rotation, had not been re-elected, be as valid as if he or they
respectively had been duly appointed, and had not been removed or dis-
qualified, or having retired as aforesaid, had immediately been re-elected.
86. All money received on account of the Company at any branch
office shall, together with a clear statement in writing, showing from
whom, and on what days, and on what account such money has been
received, and all other particulars necessary or desirable for a due
explanation of such receipts, be remitted once in every fortnight to the
registered office of the Company, in Bolton aforesaid, if such branch
offices shall be in the United Kingdom; and if not, then to the principal
office of the Company in the colony; and every such remittance shall be
made in such manner as may be appointed by the Directors, and in
default of any such appointment, shall, so far as the case will permit, be
made on every Monday next preceding the fortnightly examination by
the Directors of the affairs of the Company, and shall be so made by
registered, fetter, by the first post in the morning of every such Monday.
87. All money received at the registered office of the Company,
including all money remitted from the branch offices, shall forthwith be
placed to the credit of the Company, at their Bankers, by two at least of
the Directors, and no larger amount than £lO shall at any time be kept
in hand.
88. No money shall be drawn out from the Bankers except by order
of the Directors, or otherwise than by cheque or draft on the Bankers,
signed by three at least of the Directors.


89. All money received on account of the Company in the colony
shall be forthwith placed to the credit of the Company at some respect-
able bank there by the Directors resident in the colony, and no larger
amount than £lO shall at any time be kept in hand.
90. No money shall be drawn out from such bank otherwise than
by cheque or draft on such bank, signed by three at least of the Directors
resident in the colony, and before drawing any such cheque or draft, or
otherwise paying any money, the claim to be thereby satisfied shall be fully
examined by two at least of such Directors, and certified by them in
writing to be correct.
91. All money received on account of the Company in the colony,
shall, after payment of all necessary expenses 'and outgoings i n the
colony, be subject in all respects to the orders or restrictions of the
general body of Directors, and shall accordingly be remitted to the
United Kingdom, or otherwise disposed of in such manner and at such
times as shall be prescribed by any such orders or resolutions.
92. All money received by the general body of Directors, or other-
wise becoming subject to their order or disposal, shall be applied as they
may think fit, first in payment of all expenses and outgoings hot already
discharged to which the Company or the property of the Company may
for the time being be liable, and afterwards in sending out members to
the colony, and otherwise in carrying into effect the immediate objects and
purposes of the Company.
93. All such money as last aforesaid which shall not for the time
being be wanted for any of the purposes aforesaid, may be accumulated
by the Directors at compound interest, in such manner as they shall
think most advantageous ; and the Directors may for that purpOse-invest
the same, and the resulting income thereof in and upon any of the public
stocks or funds or government securities of the United Kingdom, or of
Queensland, or of any other colony or dependency of the United King-,
dom, or upon freehold, copyhold, or leasehold securities in England,
Wales, Ireland, or Queensland, or in or upon the stocks, funds, debentures,
mortgages, or other securities of any corporation, company or public
body, municipal, sanitary, commercial, or otherwise, in the United
Kingdom, or in Queensland, or in any other colony or dependency of the
United Kingdom, and may at their discretion cause aUy of the: funds..or
property of the Company which shall be so invested to be called in or
disposed of, or otherwise converted into money, and the money arising
therefrom to be again invested in like manner, and so from time to time
as occasion shall require.
94. When the whole number of 6,000 shares shall have been issued,
and all the members for the time being shall have obtained grants of
land in the colony, in respect of their respective shares, and the property
of the Company, independently of such grants, shall be sufficient to cover
all their liabilities, the Company shall be woundup, and all their liabilities
shall be discharged, and all their property then remaining, independently


of such grants of land as aforesaid, shall be divided among the members
or their respective executors, administrators, .or assigns, in proportion to
the amount and value of the cotton sent in by them since the formation of
the Company into the Company’s stores, all money due from such
members respectively to the Company being deducted or allowed for, and
the grants to be deposited with the Company as aforesaid shall at the
same time be given up.
Accounts.
95. The Directors shall cause true accounts to be kept, both in
England and in the colony, of the funds and property of the Company,
of the money received and expended by the Company, and the matters in
respect of which such receipt and expenditure takes place, and of the
credits and liabilities of the Company.
96. The Directors in the colony shall, until three-fifths of the mem-*
hers shall have been sent out to the colony as aforesaid, transmit once at
least in every calendar month to the Directors in the United Kingdom a
copy of the accounts kept in the colony up to a period not exceeding
seven days before the sending of such account, together with a clear
statement in writing showing all particulars necessary or desirable for a
due explanation of such accounts. And the Directors in the United
Kingdom shall, after three-fifths of the members shall have been sent
out as aforesaid, transmit once at least in every calendar month to the
Directors in the colony a similar copy of the accounts kept in the United
Kingdom, together with a clear statement in writing showing all such
particulars as aforesaid.
97. The books of account kept in the United Kingdom shall be
kept at the registered office of the Company, in Bolton aforesaid ; and
those kept in the colony shall be kept at the principal office of the Com-
pany in the colony, and subject to any reasonable restrictions that may
be imposed by the Company in general meeting as to the time and man-
ner of inspecting the same, all such books shall at all times be open to
the inspection of the members during the hours of business.
98. At the end of every successive fortnight from the incorporation
of the Company, the accounts, so far as they can be ascertained, shall be
examined and balanced by the Directors.
99. Once at least in every year the Directors shall lay before the
Company in general meeting a statement of the income and expenditure
for the past year, made up so far as tlifey can then be ascertained, to a
date not more than three calendar months before such maeting.
100. Tire statement so made shall show, arranged under the most
convenient heads, the amount of gross income, distinguishing the several
sources from wnich it has been derived, and the amount of gross expen-
diture, distinguishing the expense of the establishment, salaries, and
other like matters, every item of expenditure fairly chargeable against
the year’s income shall be brought into account, so that a just balance
of profit and loss may be laid before the meeting; and in cases where


any item of expenditure which may in fairness be distributed over several
years ha? been incurred in any one year, the whole amount of such items
shall be stated, with the additions of the reasons why only a portion of
such expenditure is charged against the income of the year.
101. A balance sheet shall be made out in every year and laid
before the Company in general meeting, and such balance sheet shall
contain a summary of the property and liabilities of the Company
arranged under the heads appearing in the form annexed to Table A,
comprised in the first schedule to the said Companies’ Act, 1862, or as
near thereto as circumstances admit.
102. A printed copy of such balance sheet shall, seven days pre-
viously to such meeting, be served on every member ; or as to members
resident in branch districts in the manner in which notices are hereinafter
directed to bo served.
Audit.
103. At the end of every successive month of twenty-eight days
from the incorporation of the Company, the accounts of the Company
shall be examined and reported upon by the Auditors.
104. With the exception of the present Auditors, the Auditors
shall be appointed by the Company in general meeting.
105. The Auditors maybe members of the Company, but no person
shall be eligible as an Auditor who shall be interested otherwise than as
a member in any transaction of the Company ; and no Director or other
officer <sf the Company shall be eligible during his continuance in office.
106. The election of Auditors shall be made by the Company at
their ordinary general meeting in each year; and every Auditor on
quitting office shall be re-eligible.
107. If any casual vacancy occurs in the office of Auditor, the
Directors shall forthwith call an extraordinary general meeting for the
purpose of supplying the same.
108. If no election of Auditors shall be made in the manner afore-
said, the Board of Trade may on the application of not less than five
members of the Company, appoint an Auditor for the current year, and
fix the remuneration to he paid to him by the Company for his services.
109. Every Auditor shall, after the balance sheet for the current
year shall have been made out, be supplied with a copy of it, and it shall
he his duty to examine the same with the accounts and vouchers relating
thereto.
110. Every Auditor shall have a list delivered to him of all books
kept by the Company, and shall at all reasonable times have access to
the books and accounts of the Company, and may, at the expense of the
Company, employ accountants or other persons to assist him in investi-
gating such accounts, and may in relation to such accounts examine the
Directors or any other officer of the Company.


111. The Auditors shall immediately after each audit make a report
to the members upon the accounts and the balance sheet, if made out, and
in every such report they shall state whether in their opinion the accounts
are duly kept and are satisfactory, and whether the balance sheet, if made
out, is a full and fair balance sheet, containing the particulars required
by these regulations, and properly drawn up so as to exhibit a true and
correct view of the state of the Company’s affairs, and- in case they have
called for explanations or information from the Directors, whether such
explanations or information have been given by the Directors, and whether
they have been satisfactory, and such reports shall be read, together
with the report of the Directors, atthe ordinary general meeting.
Notices.
112. A notice may be served by the Company upon any member,
either personally or by sending it through the post in a prepaid letter,
addressed to such member at his registered place of abode; or as to
members resident in the district of any such branch office as aforesaid by
sending it in like manner to the Secretary of such branch office.
113. All notices directed to be given to the members shall, with
respect to any share to which persons are jointly entitled, be given to
which ever of such persons is named first in the register of members, and
notice so given shall be a sufficient notice to all the holders of such share.
114. Any notice if served by post shall be deemed to have been
served at the time when the letter containing the same would be
delivered in the ordinary course of the post; and in proving such service
it shall be sufficient to prove that the letter containing the notice was
properly addressed and put into the post office.
Tmui Cmsrra, Firms, " Gvamuk " Omc*, Oims-ttiiMX, SewMf,


Unrecorded Emigration Company
(Australia) Special Resolutions of die Queensland Cotton Growing and Setting
Company, Limited, with Memorandum of Association and CertiGcate of
Incorporation of the Company. Registered (Mice Bolton.
Bolton: Printed by T. Cunliffe, “Guardian” Office, 1863, 12mo, 26 page pamphlet,
wraps, the wrappers are somewhat dust soiled and spotted, comers a bit dog eared
otherwise good. This was an emigration company, started by cotton workers in
Lancashire to enable them to escape the widespread unemployment in their industry
brought on by the American Civil War. “ The objects for which the Company is
established are to afford pecuniary and other assistance to its members, to enable
them to emigrate to Queensland, and for the Company to acquire free and other
grants of land to be held by the Company, or to be held by its members on behalf of
the Company, and to sell or otherwise dispose of such lands to be so granted or
purchased or otherwise acquired, and to provide all necessary implements, machines,
and engines for its members, for the cultivation, gathering, cleansing, and packing of
cotton, in Queensland, and for the sale of cotton in Queensland or elsewhere, and the
conveying and transporting of cotton in ships or boats, or otherwise between
Queensland and such other place or places,...,”
A rare and unusual emigration pamphlet, unrecorded in Ferguson, Bibliography of
Australia, not in British library Catalog, unlisted in NUC as well J '
