

LJ
TiU
JULY, 1885.
i i— .
Hfijl
ip
p
m
Ul
iLjt
pj
ni
At
Lit
Compiled by EDWARD P17LSF01U),
nil
i
SECRETARY OF THE SOCIETY,
An
-ill
ihj i
[TTL
SYDNEY-
in
m
ffi
T1
i
in
i
SYDNEY:
A
1
F. CUNNINGHAMS & CO., GENERAL PRINTERS,
in
nil
LMJ!
i
146 Pitt Street.
lass. s
1
Ira
1
xJ
M S4
i
'& ilbriLilLrArArLr&i
| SPECIAL RECORD I
m pi
p, OF THE
I PROCEEDINGS p
p m
-j]j OF THE [}=
i! p q • P
II LrEOGR APH ICA L pOCIETY f
pj I ikn
1 OF AUSTRALASIA, J
i . i
E IN FITTING OUT AND STARTING g
1 ti
jT ®ljc ispeMHtm iQ
f—Li ! uni
Lri tiJ 11 Cu» ( { j uitt C it* (nil
m ii 1
Ikrl [p
-HI JULY. 188 8. \h




SPECIAL RECORD
OF THE
PROCEEDINGS
OF THE
Geographical
OF AUSTRALASIA,
IN FITTING OUT AND STARTING
(&xpi&vaiovt} (Bxpebxtion
to 3Jl znx (ttxxixxea*
JULY, 188 S.
Compiled by EDWARD PULSFORD,
SECRETARY OF THE SOCIETY,
SYDNEY.
SYDNEY:
F. CUNNINGHAMS & CO., GENERAL PRINTERS,
146 Pitt Street.
± a a 5.




INDEX.
General Statement
The Part of New Guinea to be Explored
The Position of Leader
The Scientific Staff, Officers, &c.
The Agreements, &g., with the Party
The Departure of the Expedition
The Exploration Fund
The Instructions to the Leader, &c.
Inventories of Stores, Arms, Trade, &c.
The Arrangement with Mr. H. O. Forbes
•s;- -,C -s'r ¥r -3'r * * * *




SPECIAL RECORD
OF THE ARRANGEMENTS FOR
THE EXPLORATION OF NEW GUINEA
GENERAL STATEMENT.
The interesting and important character of the exploratory
work undertaken by the Geographical Society of Australasia
makes it desirable that the public should, at the earliest possible
moment, be put in possession of full details of the Society’s
operations ; and, moreover, remembering that these operations are
.sustained almost wholly by funds contributed by various Colonial
Governments, the Society considers it to become a duty that this
should be done. That, in the very infancy of the Society, £4OOO
of public monies should be entrusted to it, is a noteworthy fact,
and one that imposes the responsibility of proving that the honour
thus signally bestowed is not altogether unmerited.
Considering the great size of the Island of New Guinea, and
that its natural resources are generally believed to be very
important, it is strange that so little has hitherto been done to
discover and to open to the world the secrets of the interior. Of
the coast line much is known, but the interior is to us still almost
a blank ; of the people, the flora, the fauna, the geology, the
climate, and the great geographical features therein, we know
nothing with even an approach to accuracy. It therefore would
have been most strange if exploration in New Guinea had not
been one of the very first things to attract the attention and the
energies of the newly-formed society. For the purposes of this
particular record it is unnecessary to recount the steps taken in
1883 and 1884. We will begin with January of the present year.


At that time a committee, afterwards called the Exploratory-
Committee, had been appointed by the Administrative Council.
Victoria and New South Wales had each voted £lOOO, and the
latter colony had voted a further <£looo, conditionally on other
colonies contributing ; the Australasian Geographical Conference
had just met in Melbourne, and had discussed and approved the
proposal for the exploration of New Guinea.
The Exploratory Committee held its first meeting on the 15th
January; it numbered eight members, specially appointed, viz.—
T. B. Belgrave, Esq., M.D.
Lieut. E. R. Connor, R.N.
Captain H, C. Everill
Lawrence Hargrave, Esq.
John F. Mann, Esq.
E. Marin La Meslee, Esq., Hon. Secretary
C. S. Wilkinson, Esq., Government Geologist
Harrie Wood, Esq., J.P., Under-Secretary for Mines
The President of the Administrative Council, Sir Edward
Strickland, K.C.8.; F. Gerard, Esq., Treasurer; and J. H.
Maiden, Esq, Hon. Secretary; being also members ex-officio.
Mr. Hargrave has considerable personal knowledge of New
Guinea, having accompanied D’Albertis in his expedition up the
Fly River in 1876; and Mr. Mann is a well known explorer,
having been Dr, Leichhardt’s second in command. Mr. Harrie
Wood was appointed Chairman of the Committee. The Com-
mittee has met twenty-three times; and, during the same period,
the Administrative Council has met seventeen times; making a
total of forty meetings which have been devoted almost wholly
to arrangements for the exploration of New Guinea.
The resolution appointing the Committee conferred consider-
able executive power upon it, but the Committee did not act on its
authority, preferring to submit the results of its deliberations, in
the shape of recommendations, to the Administrative Council.
This method, of course, added largely to the amount of work, but
it ensured greater consideration being given to all proposals.
During the last month of the preparations for the Expedition the
Council met at the close of the meetings of the Committee, and
delay was thus saved; the resolutions of the Committee being
considered forthwith.
It proved a fortunate circumstance for the Society that the
Rev. W. G. Lawes was spending some months in Sydney. His


great experience of New Guinea, his high personal character, and
the esteem in which he was known to be held by the natives
pointed him out as a man who could give advice and information
of more than ordinary value with reference to schemes for explor-
ing that Island. He was therefore on January 19th, elected by the
Council a member of the Exploratory Committee. He attended
many of its meetings, and when, in April, the time arrived for his
return to New Guinea, to complete the indebtedness of the Society
to him, he kindly undertook to act as its agent and official
representative in carrying out the business details of the arrange-
ment whereby the Society undertook to assist Mr. H. O. Forbes
in his exploration of the Owen Stanley range of mountains, full
details of which arrangement will be found elsewhere. Captain
Everill resigned his position as a member of the Committee after
the ninth meeting, he having then become an active candidate for
the position of Leader of the Expedition.
In February, the work of the Society having become very
heavy, it was decided by the Administrative Council to advertise
for a Secretary at the salary of £3OO per annum, a considerable
number of applications were received, and from amongst them
that of the compiler of these pages obtained the preference.
Considering the fact that nearly every member of both the
Administrative Council and the Exploratory Committee is fully
occupied with either the cares of professional life or the active
duties of the Government service, and also that the Expedition
was the first undertaken by the Society, it is thought that the
public of these Colonies will not be dissatisfied with the work
that has been done. It can be safely said that no appointment,
purchase, or arrangement for, or in connection with, the Expedition
is due to favor; fitness for the work has alone been considered.
With a view to facilitate the work of preparing the Expedi-
tion, the following sub-committees were formed:
Steam Launch Sub-Committee:
John F. Mann, Esq.
Lieut. E. R. Connor, R.N.
General Stores Sub-Committee:
Law. Hargrave, Esq.
Dr. Belgrave.
John F. Mann, Esq.
Lieut. E. R. Connor, R.N.


Scientific Instruments Sub-Committee:
C. S. Wilkinson, Esq.
Lieut. E. R Connor, R.N.
Medical Stores Sub-Committee:
Dr. Belgrave.
Instructions Sub-Committee:
E. Du Faur, Esq.
Dr. Belgrave.
C. S. Wilkinson, Esq.
Much time was occupied in the selection of a steam launch.
Messrs. Burns, Philp & Co. (Ld.) offered to supply at Thursday
Island, a steam launch of very light draught for river
exploration, and also a small schooner to serve as a base of
operations. The advantages of the proposal, especially as the
vessels were to be provided at Thursday Island instead of at
Sydney, were very great; but as a larger and more powerful
steamer, to be selected in Sydney, was considered preferable, the
A.S.N. Co’s, steamer “ Bonito,” 77 tons gross register, was event-
ually chartered for the period of six months ; the charter money
being at the rate of £5O per month—the Society also paying
insurance on £1,500 at the rate of 10 per cent, for the six months.
In connection with this charter the warm thanks of the Society
are due to Captain Hixson, President of the Marine Board, and
to his Surveyors for their great care in examining the vessel and
seeing that she was well fitted out for sea. The “ Bonito ” is a
very handy, commodious vessel, and of fairly light draught of
water. On the way from Sydney to Brisbane she met bad
weather and came through it entirely to the satisfaction of the
party.
It has been the aim of the Council and the Committee to
subject their arrangements to the approval of His Excellency the
High Commissioner for New Guinea, and of the Admiral com-
manding on this station, and the plans of the Council as finally
arranged were submitted to them and sanctioned. In February,
His Excellency kindly offered to take the party to New
Guinea in the “ Wolverine ” which vessel the New South
Wales Government had agreed to place at his disposal: the politi-
cal complications which arose, however, compelled that Govern-
ment to retain the “ Wolverine ” and the Council had to make its
own arrangements on this point. His Excellency has made a
personal subscription of £5 to the Exploration Fund, and has


honoured the Society by becoming a member of it. His Excel*
ency has stated that when the time comes for a second expedition
he will probably be able, in his official position, to give help in
a variety of ways.
The work of preparing the Instructions for the Expedition
entailed a great deal of labour. The various members of the
Committee were, in the first instance, each asked to send in a
memorandum of items which they might think should be included
in the Instructions: the same request was also made to the Victorian
branch: after this was done the Instructions Sub-Committee,
already referred to, was appointed, and the memoranda were
referred to it. The result of the Sub-Committee’s work was
considered by both the Exploratory Committee and the Adminis-
trative Council, and finally referred back to the Sub-Committee
and completed by them.
Whilst every care was taken to make the position of the
Leader supreme, the scientific character of the Expedition was
duly considered, and a certain amount of power given to the
scientific staff.
In the preparation of the Instructions for the scientific staff
much valuable assistance was rendered by Mr. E. P. Ramsay,
the Curator of the Australian Museum, Sydney.
The Instructions were printed in pamphlet form and a copy
was given to every member of the Expedition.
In accordance with the wish of the Council and the Leader
himself, the Expedition took no wines or spirits, beyond small
quantities to be dispensed by the surgeon as medical comforts.
It was represented to the Trustees of the Australian Museum
(Sydney) that most of the New South Wales’ share of the speci-
mens obtained in New Guinea would be presented to that
Institution, and that consequently the Society would be glad if they
would help to prepare the stores required by the scientific staff
for the preservation &c. of specimens. The Trustees readily
responded, and they presented the expedition with many articles
of service to that staff.
At a meeting of the Administrative Council held July 9th,
the following resolution was passed; “ That the Vice-President,
(Sir Edward Strickland) be requested to convey to the Hon. J.
Douglas (Government Resident at Thursday Island) and Robert
J. Gray, Esq. (Under-Colonial Secretary, Brisbane), the thanks of
the Administrative Council for the very valuable assistance they
have rendered to the New Guinea Exploring Expedition.”


THE PART OF NEW GUINEA TO BE
EXPLORED.
This question required and received the greatest consideration.
The expedition of this year was at first intended to be merely
preliminary to more important operations next year; and at a
meeting of the Committee on February 9th it was resolved to
restrict the operations to exploring the Aird or some other river
■on the south coast. However, more ambitious projects were soon
brought forward, and it was proposed to explore the rivers in the
south of the island and also some portion of the interior. The
proposals were discussed with Melbourne by letter, but the
progress in this way was too slow, and it was therefore suggested
that a telegraphic conference should take place between the
Councils of the two branches. The telegraph authorities in both
Melbourne and Sydney gave their consent to the free use of a wire
between the two capitals, and on the evening of March 31st the
Council of the Victorian branch assembled at the Central Tele-
graph Office, Melbourne, and were put into communication with
the Council of the New South Wales branch at the General Post
Office, Sydney. The Conference was begun by the transmission
of the following message to Melbourne :—“ The Vice-President
and Council of the New South Wales branch of the Society send
their kindest greetings to their brother geographers in Victoria,
and hope that the Conference of this evening will result in
arrangements that will greatly increase the fund of general
knowledge ; and will at the same time place the Geographical
Society of Australasia in a strong and prominent position.” To
this almost instantly came the reply—“We return our best
greeting to our brethren of the Sydney branch, trusting that this
evening’s deliberations will lead to final arrangements for grand
discoveries through the Geographical Society of Australasia.”
The business of the evening, thus courteously opened, proceeded
very satisfactorily: final arrangements were completed with
reference to Mr. Forbes: and with regard to the Society’s
expedition, Sydney suggested that it was desirable to at once
make a bold effort to get to the centre of New Guinea, not only
because of the greater probable results, but because of the
necessity for securing substantial public sympathy in the Society’s
work; and the proposal of the Exploratory Committee was
submitted, which was for an expedition up the Aird River : thence


inland; and that the inland exploration start from the first high
land met with up the river, shown on the map as Aird Hill. The
proposal was considered in Melbourne for about two hours, during
which time the telegraph was frequently used to ask and answer
questions on many matters of detail. Ultimately the message
came from Melbourne, “We fall in with your wishes regarding
Aird River Expedition,”
This satisfactory termination of the conference left
matters apparently in a very straightforward condition,
but trouble was still to be met. it soon became clear
that the funds contributed were not sufficient to despatch the
expedition with two distinct parties under separate leaders, one
for high land, and one for riparian exploration, and it was finally
decided that the high land exploration should take precedence of
the riparian. It was well known that the south-east monsoon made
it a rather difficult task to enter the Aird River during the winter,
and a telegram from Thursday Island, kindly handed to the
Society by Messrs. Burns, Philp and Co., emphasised this, and
drew attention to some good rivers to the Eastward of the Aird;
consequently, when the expedition was ready, the Leader received
instructions, that if he found the route by the Aird River imprac-
ticable, he was to choose the first available estuary to the Eastward
thereof: and with those instructions the expedition sailed.
Unfortunately, at the very last moment, when the expedition was
nearing Thursday Island, it became imperative to issue instruc-
tions which must alter and affect the whole expedition. Telegrams
were received from Robert J. Gray, Esq., the Under-Colonial
Secretary of Queensland, stating that Captain Williams, of the
Queensland Government steamer “ Advance,” which vessel was to
convoy the expedition, had asserted that an entrance to the Aird
was, at this time of the year, not only difficult but exceedingly
dangerous; and that, indeed, it was not safe for the Bonito to
cross the Gulf of Papua. At the time when this information
was received the expedition had left Cooktown, the last point of
telegraphic communication in Queensland. Mr. Gray, however,
detained the “ Advance” there, till the matter could be considered,
A meeting of all those members of both Council and Committee
who could be got together, was at once held, and the matter
thoroughly debated. Much regret was expressed at the necessity
that had arisen to alter the instructions given before the expedi-
tion sailed, and a resolution was passed on the subject.
The following telegram was sent to Mr. Gray.
“ Much obliged for your second telegram. Will you kindly
forward the following message to Captain Williams, to be handed


by him to Captain Everill at Thursday Island.— ‘ The Council
request that you do not cross the Gulf of Papua, or run any risk
in attempting the Aird. Consult with Captain Williams, and
other competent authorities, as to best route to reach high lands in
interior of New Guinea. Proceed if possible by course suggested
by Mr. Hargrave, or via Baxter River.’ ”
It will be perceived that the Council has, under altered
circumstances, still aimed at the exploration of the high lands,
rather than the low lands, or the river system of New Guinea.
It may be that the expedition will discover some inland water-
way by which, after all, to reach the neighbourhood of the Aird,
which is thought to be the best starting point for reaching the
mountains.
THE POSITION OF LEADER
The importance of this appointment was strongly felt, and
there was a general belief that the Rev. James Chalmers
was by far the most suitable man who could be chosen
for the position. In the course of a discussion on the subject the
Rev. W. G. Lawes said that he himself could not undertake
exploratory work, as he was not strong enough; but he stated
that his colleague, Mr. Chalmers, was admirably suited for it by
reason of his great physical powers. It was, therefore, a severe
disappointment to find that Mr. Chalmers could not undertake
such work this year, as, after an absence of nineteen years, he
had arranged to visit England. A positive offer of the leadership
was made to him when he was at Cooktown, but he replied by
wire on February 2nd: “ Thanks for honour conferred, but
cannot at present accept.” In a letter from New Guinea, dated
February 12th, Mr. Chalmers wrote : “ I hope, on my return, to
carry through several journies I have long planned, and if then I
could be of service to your Society, I might arrange accordingly.”
In reply to his letter Mr. Chalmers was told that the Society
would be glad to have some information about his proposed
journies, and would be glad to help him in carrying out his plans
if it were possible. It is quite likely, therefore, that in the course
of a little time Mr. Chalmers may be assisting the Society in the
work of exploration.


Having failed to enlist this gentleman for present service,
the idea was entertained of having what would have been
practically a double expedition, viz., one party to be landed to
push its way to explore the mountains, and to be under a scientific
leader ; the other party, under a nautical leader, to remain on
board the steamer and undertake a riparian exploration. This
full and tempting scheme had to be abandoned, as it was found
that it would not come within the compass of the Society’s funds;
and negotiations which had been opened with two gentlemen
were closed. It was decided, on April 10th, to invite applications
for the position of leader, by advertisements inserted in the
leading papers of Queensland, New South Wales, Victoria, and
South Australia, applications being invited also at the same time
for the various other positions on the Expedition. The applica-
tions for the office of Leader were considered on May 4th by the
Exploratory Committee, who selected the names of three
gentlemen, all of them captains fully certificated, for the
consideration of the Administrative Council. They also recom-
mended that the leadership should be entrusted to a gentleman
acquainted with navigation. This recommendation was adopted
by the Council, and out of the three selected applicants Captain
Henry Charles Everill was finally chosen as Leader; the resolution
appointing him being moved by Sir Edward Strickland, K.C.8.,
and seconded by the Hon. W. A. Brodribb, M.L.C.
Henry Charles Everill, who has been placed in this important
position, is thirty-eight years of age. His certificates as master
are of the highest class given, and he has lately been employed by
the Technical Board as teacher of navigation. He has travelled
a great deal, was three years a tobacco planter in Sumatra, has
practical knowledge of exploration in tropical swamps and jungles,
and is able to speak the Malay language fluently. He, therefore,
possesses many admirable qualifications for the post of Leader.


THE SCIENTIFIC STAFF, OFFICERS, ETC.
The Society has very good cause for congratulation on the
secondary appointments; as far as it has been possible to ascertain
the selection that has been made is exceedingly good, and completely
justifies the policy of advertising for applicants over the wide
area previously named. The Committee had nearly two hundred
applications from which to make choice, and the task of going
through the whole of them proved a very arduous one ; still, for
some of the positions, none of the applications were satisfactory,
and other steps had to be taken to find suitable men; happily,
the Committee finally succeeded in obtaining a good man for
every position. Many of the applicants were most enthusiastic
in the matter, and some of them were quite willing to go without
the slightest payment. The principle was, however, decided upon,
that no volunteers should be taken, but that salaries should be paid
in every case so as to constitute every one employed on the
Expedition a servant of the Society. However, the available funds
being so limited, it was impossible to be very generous in the
matter of salaries, and it is not to be concluded that the figures
given represent the merit of the recipients.
In the selection, consideration was given to the desirability
of having as many colonies represented as possible, and there is
Sfood reason for satisfaction with what has been achieved on this
O
point.
The Melbourne Branch of the Society, especially the Vice-
President, Baron F. von Mueller, K.C.M.G., rendered invaluable
aid in the selection of the scientific staff.
We will briefly go through the list of appointments.
J. W. Haacke, Ph.D., age 30, of Adelaide, is the chief
scientist of the Exhibition, with Zoology as his speciality. He
has filled the posts of first assistant at the Zoological Institute of
the University of Jena ; and first assistant at the Zoological
Institute of the University of Kiel, both in Germany. In New
Zealand he has worked for Professor Parker at the Otago
Museum, Dunedin; and for Dr. Haast, at the Canterbury
Museum, Christchurch. In 1882 he was appointed Curator
of the Adelaide Museum. His range of scientific knowledge
is very considerable, and his reports may be expected to be of real
value.


Sidney A. Bernays, M.D., age 32, of Melbourne, is the
surgeon of the Expedition, for which position he is undoubtedly
a most competent man. He is, moreover, a scientist of no mean
ability. He is at home in geology, but botany is his speciality,
and this department of the Expedition has been put under his
care.
Godfrey Hemsworth, age 28, of Brisbane, fills the post of
nautical sub-leader, and in the event of the death, or serious
illness, of the Leader he would take his position, except that he
would not lead the party on land. He holds a master’s certificate
and has been navigating officer of some of the finest steamers
afloat, is a member of the Meteorological Society of London, and
is qualified to undertake any kind of marine surveyino’.
R. Gethin Creagh, age 38, of the Manning River, who fills
the post of sub-leader on land, is a most competent man for the
work of exploration. Is six feet three inches high, with a strono*
constitution, ignorant of personal ill-health; he has had many
years’ experience of exploring, and in taking up and stocking new
country in Queensland, South Australia, and Ne w Zealand 5 also o’ygat
experience of the aboriginals, being a good shot with rifle and
fowling piece, and knowing bush life in all its phases. With these
recommendations, combined with personal testimonials of the
highest character, there can be little doubt of his fitness for the
position assigned him. In the event of the Leader’s death or
illness he would take his position on land.
James H. Shaw, age 27, of Sydney, is a most enthusiastic
explorer. He was eighteen months in New Guinea with the
expedition of Mr. Andrew Goldie, and spent a further six months
with another party of which, unfortunately, he was the sole
survivor. He has great experience of river navigation, havino-
sailed between three and four thousand miles in a Rob-Roy canoe
on Australian rivers. He is able to turn his hand to almost
anything, either ashore or afloat. The special duties assigned to
him are those of photographer, and general assistant to the
Leader.
Kendall Broadbent, age 55, of Sydney, is the general
collector. He has been employed for many years collecting
specimens of natural history in several colonies. Is well versed
in ornithology and taxidermy, and in prospecting for gold, silver,
and other metals, and has some knowledge of geolo°y. He is
placed under the orders of Dr. Haacke.*
♦ This Scientist has been obliged to resign his position, while at Thursday Island
having experienced a severe attack of sciatica. See page 25,


Walter W. Froggatt, age 27, of Sandhurst, Victoria, fills
the post of special zoological collector and assistant to Dr. Haacke.
He is an amateur entomologist and naturalist, and has a good
practical, though not scientific, knowledge of botany.
Wilhelm Bauerlen, age 40, of Sydney, is the special
botanical collector. He has been employed in this capacity by
Baron von Mueller, K.C.M.G., on whose recommendation he was
engaged for this Expedition.
A. Hastings W. Senior, age 28, of Lismore, N.S.W., is a
licensed surveyor, employed in the Department of the Surveyor-
General ; and has been some years at sea. His application was not
received till late—owing to his absence inland—and it was
declined at the time, the main positions being filled. However,
the very week the Expedition left, room was found for him as a
supernumerary, at a trifling salary, the Surveyor-General kindly
consenting to this abrupt suspension of his work. There is no doubt
that Mr. Senior is an acquisition to the Expedition, and his
anxiety to do his utmost to promote its success is attested by the
fact that he has taken with him scientific instruments and other
articles of his own to the value of nearly £lOO.
Arthur J. Vogan, age 26, of New Zealand, was allowed to
join the Expedition at the very last moment. He has many
useful accomplishments—is an artist, understands photography,
taxidermy, building huts, and every species of bush work. He
not only offered to go as a volunteer, but tendered a subscription
of £25 to the Exploration Fund. The subscription was declined,
but Mr. Vogan was appointed a supernumerary at a nominal
salary, in accordance with the general principle above cited.
Mr. Vogan has provided himself with a first-class personal
equipment.
Wm. McGechan, age 22, the engineer of the steam launch,
specially selected by Captain Everill, has already proved himself
a good man, and well worthy a place in this record. In the bad
weather that overtook the Bonito while on the way to Brisbane
he stuck to his work, almost without a rest, for three days and
nights.


THE AGREEMENTS, &c., WITH THE PARTY.
wise to make the agreements with the
members of the party of as binding and strict a character as pos-
sible. dhe following Covenant was therefore drawn up and duly
signed. A Schedule attached gives the salaries that are being
paid.
COVENANT.
|nti ml tire made the tenth day of June, one thousand
eight hundred and eighty-five BETWEEN THE GEOGRA-
PHICAL SOCIETY of AUSTRALASIA (hereinafter called
the said Society) of thefirst part, Sir Edward Strickland, K.C.8.,
of Sydney in the Colony of New South Wales as President
of the said Society of the second part, and THE SEVERAL
PERSONS WHOSE NAMES and addresses are set out in
the Schedule hereunder written of the third part. WHEREAS
the said Society have inaugurated an Expedition to New
Guinea having for its object the making of a scientific
exploration of that island and the said Society have secured
the services of the several persons appearing in the said
Schedule to accompany the said expedition and to fulfil the
several duties that will devolve upon them and in respect of
which written instructions will be handed to Mr. Henry
Charles Everill prior to the departure of the said Expedition.
AND WHEREAS it is desirable that the respective
obligations of those concerned should be evidenced by the
signatures and solemn covenants as hereunder contained
NOW THESE PRESENTS WITNESS that in pursuance
of the premises and in consideration of the respective salaries
allotted to the said several parties hereto of the third part,
each of them DOTH hereby COVENANT with the said
Sir Edward Strickland and his successors in office that they the
said several parties will truly and faithfully observe and
perform the duties that have been respectively assigned to
them and which form the subject of instructions issued by
the said Society to the Leader of the said Expedition and will
in all things and at all times cheerfully obey the commands
of the said leader and will do all things within the tenor of
their obligations to bring the said Expedition to a successful


issue AND FURTHER that they will truly disclose to the
said Sir Edward Strickland or other the President for the time
being of the said Society all information scientific or otherwise
that may be gathered whilst on the said Expedition nothing
excepted or reserved, it being expressly understood that the
said Society are to receive all the benefits and advantages
that may accrue from the enterprise. IN WITNESS whereof
the said parties to these presents have hereunto set their
hands and seals the day and year first before written.
THE SCHEDULE REFERRED TO.
NAME. AVOCATION. SALARY
PER MONTH.
H. E. Everill Leader £4O 0 0
J. W. Haacke Zoologist 35 0 0
S. A. Bernays Surgeon 30 0 0
Godfrey Hemsworth Sub-leader on board 15 0 0
R. G. Creagh
W. W. Froggatt
K. Broadbent
J. H. Shaw
Wilhelm Bauerlen
Sub-leader on land 15 0 0
Assistant Zoologist 15 0 0
General Collector 15 0 0
Photographer 15 0 0
Botanist 15 0 0
The following form of receipt will explain the arrangements
made for payment of salaries.
Sydney, 9th June, 1885.
Received from the Geographical Society of Australasia, the
sum of pounds, being salary from June 8, to July 8,1885,
the first month of my employment on the Society’s New Guinea
Expedition.
I request that one-half of my salary for the remaining months
of the engagement be paid as it accrues due to The
balance of my salary shall remain in the hands of the Society
till the return of the Expedition and the payment thereof shall
then be subject to the Society’s approval of the way in which I
have fulfilled my duties.
It is understood that this engagement does not exceed a
period of six months.


It is further agreed that should this Expedition he unable to
return by the expiration of the said six months, that any claim
for such extra time shall be subject to the Society having funds
to meet such claim.
I further agree that should I fail in any way to fulfil the
duties of my position the retention moneys in the hands of the
Society shall be absolutely forfeited to the said Society as liqui-
dated damages for breach of engagement.
Dated this the eleventh day of June, 1885.
Witness.
It should be stated that the reason why this document limits the
claim for salary of the members of the Expedition to six months was
fully explained to all concerned, and is, that the Society having ex-
pended, or contracted engagements for, the whole of the funds
contributed to it, (six months’ salaries being included in the en-
gagements,) could not undertake liability for a longer period.
Should the party be unable to return within the stipulated time, or
remain behind on their own authority, it would be manifestly un-
just for the party to be able to claim salaries for such extra time
whether the Society had funds or not.
Ship’s articles were also signed by the whole of the party,
with the exception of Drs. Haacke and Bernays, who were speci-
ally exempted therefrom.
It is to be noted that the whole of the party signed the vari-
ous documents, stringent as some of the clauses undoubtedly are,
with the utmost readiness, a pleasing evidence of the spirit in
which one and all began their work.
The party, made up as stated, consists of 13 white men: on
arrival at Thursday Island, this was increased by the addi-
tion of 11 Malays, specially engaged in Java for the expedition,
by Messrs. Tidman, Balfour, & Co., of Batavia, the correspondents
of Messrs. Eldred & Co., of Sydney. This latter firm un-
dertook to do all in their power to obtain good men, and their
connection with Java gave value to their promise. The eleven
Malays, who were due at Thursday Island about ten days before
the exploration party, include a carpenter, a cook, and a serang or
head man. The remainder are principally carriers; and as such
Malays are considered far superior to white men. The Malays
will bring the party up to a total of 24; and to this total will
probably be added one or two New Guinea natives as
interpreters.


THE DEPARTURE OF THE EXPEDITION.
On Wednesday, June 10th, the Society’s chartered steam
launch “ Bonito,” sailed for Brisbane, towed by the A.S.N. Go’s,
steamer “ Egmont.” She was in charge of Mr. Godfrey
Hemsworth, the nautical sub-leader, and he was accompanied by
Messrs. Creagh,Froggatt,Shaw,andßauerlen,as well as the engineer
and two men engaged for the run. Before the “ Bonito ” started
the members of the Expedition, with a number of the members of
the Society assembled in the saloon of the steamer “ Egmont.”
Sir Edward Strickland, who presided, said that they had met there
to bid farewell to the members of the Expedition and wish success
to the enterprise which was about to be undertaken. He wished
to avail himself of this opportunity to say a few words to the
members of the Expedition, which, if not of service, he hoped
would be received in the spirit in which they were given. He
would like to point out a few rules that might be laid down for
their guidance while they were away together; and here he might
mention that he had received a telegram from the Hon. Secretary of
the Melbourne branch of the Geographical Society stating that the
Victorian members offered their cordial congratulations on the
completion of the arrangements for the Expedition, and wished
Captain Everill and his officers every success. The importance of
this Expedition could scarcely be overrated, for it was second to
none to New Guinea that had preceded it. They knew
very well that some of the previous Expeditions had met with
great hardships and loss of life; but those connected with expedi-
tions and explorations whose work had been crowned with
success had won for themselves undying fame. The same reward
was in view in this enterprise, and he hoped it was what each
member of the Expedition would endeavour to obtain. He was
sure that there was not one member of the Expedition who did
not feel that the enterprise would be judged from its results, and
that there was not one who did not fully realise the importance of
his mission. Exploration carried civilization in its train, and
geographical expeditions had always been the precursors of com-
merce, and he felt sure that this would be no exception to the rule.
All of them were determined to succeed, but to ensure success
a great deal of work was required. It would be impossible for
him to exaggerate the possible results of this Expedition. They
were going into a new country almost untrodden by white


men. They were induced to explore another part of New
Guinea by the bountiful manner in which the Almighty had
enriched other parts of the island more or less explored. They
hoped it would be the means of encouraging settlers to go to the
country, and of offering some certainty of a subsistance, if they
did not show where wealth could be rapidly acquired. Success
could not be obtained without the exercise of prudence and cordi-
ality in dealing with each other, and their first motto should be
Temperance. He did hope that the leaders would bear this in
mind. He had perfect confidence in Captain Everill, but he
would venture to give him this counsel, that he would endeavour
to suppress everything in the shape of intoxication, and if any-
thing of the kind did occur, he hoped it would be dealt with
summarily, and effectively so as to render its repetition very improb-
able. If he were the Leader, he would try to bring about some
system so as to keep every man occupied as much as possible, and
this he thought was not a difficult thing to do. If they worked
together with the same objects in view, they would find strength
in their union, the value of which would be ascertained in times
of danger. Let them band themselves together for each other’s
protection, for where there was cohesion there was the greater
safety. The Council of the Society had entire confidence in
the qualifications of Captain Everill, but it would be impossible
for him to perform his duties unless he was ably supported by
those serving under him. They must obey their Leader, and his
rule must be binding; and it must be a most sacred duty that, so long
as his orders are just and reasonable, every one of them must stand
by him, and support him in the exercise of his authority. Let
them be very merciful with the natives, and not give way to temper,
for they must recollect that these Nature’s children do not
understand meum and tuum, and that they must be treated like
children. If they merited punishment, it could be given, but
they need not draw blood—in fact he hoped that this Expedition
would return without having shed one drop of blood—a result
that could be obtained only by the exercise of sound discretion,
mercy, and forbearance. He had found among savages that if
they were dealt with liberally they would seldom steal, and if
trade with them was carried on in a friendly way it facilitated
progress through their country. Perhaps they might never have
an opportunity of meeting again; but they would hope for
better things, and so far as the Geographical Society was con-
cerned, he would see that they received every necessary aid.
Every attention had been paid by the Society to the fitting out
of the Expedition. The steamer, provisions, and general equipment,


had been selected on the recommendations of the Commander of
the Expedition, and every precaution had been taken to have the
ship thoroughly examined, He had now only to hope that the
day would come when they would congratulate each other upon
their great success, and that another page would be added to the
book of successful explorations from New South Wales; and that
the new country traversed by this Expedition would be opened
up in the future in a manner that they themselves could hardly
now realise.
Mr. J. F. Mann said that he had spent about six weeks among
the natives of New Guinea, and could bear testimony to the value
of the advice tendered by Sir Edward Strickland. Trading with
the natives required a great deal of tact. The law of blood for
blood seemed to exist amongst the various tribes. If a European
killed a native, or if a native killed another, they never rested
until they killed some one in return. He had no doubt that this
Expedition would be successful in its efforts to further reveal
the wonders of the great and glorious island of New Guinea.
Mr. Harrie Wood said, as chairman of the Exploratory
Committee, he had to acknowledge the onerous duties performed
by its members in preparing the Expedition. It must be borne in
mind that they were not merely a New South Wales Society;
and that, while seeking to get men specially qualified for the
work they had to do, the Committee had kept in view the fact that
each Colony should be represented on the Expedition, The selec-
tion, he believed, had been a good one in every respect, for no
body of men could have worked harder, both in the selection of
the men and the fitting out of the Expedition with stores and
scientific instruments. He trusted that the Leader of the Expedi-
tion would keep in sight the objects the Society had in this
undertaking, and that he would facilitate in every way its progress.
He wished every member of the Expedition success and a safe
return.
Further remarks were made by Messrs. J. H. Maiden, C. S.
Wilkinson, E. M. La Meslee, and Dr. Belgrave, also by Captain
Trouton of the A. S. N. Company.
Captain Everill,said that he was extremely grateful for the kind
reference madeto him by the distinguished President of the Society.
He had only one or two words to say. They were all working
with the one thing in view—to bring the Expedition to a favorable
end. He would just say that they intended to do their duty,
both as Englishmen and members of the Expedition, towards the
Society which had sent them out. At the same time he would
remark that a good deal depended on luck. They might be


successful without encountering any hardships, and on the other
hand they might have great hardships without any success. He
should, therefore, like the public to think well of them, and to
retain their confidence in them, and he hoped they would have
more to tell them when they returned than they had now.
The proceedings terminated with a vote of thanks to Sir
Edward Strickland for presiding.
It was intended to have a photograph of the entire party
taken on board the “ Bonito,” and Mr. J. Hubert Newman, of
Oxford-street, was commissioned by the Council to take it, but the
day was so exceedingly unfavorable that it was impossible for it
to be done.
The explorers had a rough time of it on the way to Brisbane,
meeting with head winds, and it was necessary for the “ Bonito ”
to steam nearly the whole way, (although she was towed) and it
was not till Sunday morning, the 14th June, that Brisbane was
reached
The following are extracts from Mr. Hemsworth’s report,
“ Thursday, 11th June.—The sun set gloomily, and the sea
commenced getting up; so every preparation was made for a dirty
night; nor were expectations disappointed, for at about 9 p.m. the
wind went into the N.E. with a considerable sea: however, all
went well until morning, sea and wind increasing in violence.”
“Friday,—Weather dark and cloudy with frequent rain
squalls, high sea and fresh wind. In the afternoon two heavy
consecutive seas broke on board, starting the after rail, and
causing the little vessel to strain from stem to stern: immediately
sounded the well, and finding we were making water, called on
all the scientific staff to assist in freeing her from it. Some
of the most distinguished members of that body were in the last
throes of sea-sickness, and appeared perfectly indifferent as to
whether they swam or sunk, but responding to the call of duty,
did their utmost to assist their more fortunate comrades who were
not afflicted with that most terrible malady, and all working
together soon freed her from water.”
“Saturday.—At 9 p.m. Cape Moreton was rounded. The
returning smoothness of the water could be accurately calculated
by the brightening countenances of some of the Expedition.”
On the 13th of June the Leader, Captain Everill, accompanied
by Dr. Haacke, Dr. Bernays, Messrs. Senior and Yogan left
Sydney in the steamer Wentworth for Brisbane. The hon.
Secretary of the Society, Mr. J. H. Maiden, went with them to
Brisbane with a view to see the Expedition off from there, and
arrange many matters of detail. The party reached Brisbane in


safety and had about forty-eight hours to spend there before
proceeding. This time was well occupied; Mr. Maiden, the Leader,
and several of the scientific staff being kept very busy. Mr.
Gray, the Under-Colonial Secretary, was seen, and the Society is
indebted to him for much friendly assistance, and also for a
promise that efforts should be made from time to time to commu-
nicate with the Expedition during its absence. The Postmaster-
General consented to all the telegrams relating to the Expedition
being sent free ; a boon of which full advantage was
taken. The Treasurer gave orders that the Customs officials at
the various ports were to forego the usual formalities. The Marine
Board kindly presented the Expedition with the latest New
Guinea charts, and a tracing of Commodore Erskine’s New Guinea
map. These and many other kindnesses extended to the Expedi-
tion whilst in the Capital of Queensland have been thoroughly
appreciated by the Council, and deserve the most hearty thanks
of the Society,
The Expedition left Brisbane on Wednesday, June 17th,
arrived at Rockhampton on the 19th, at Bowen on the 20th, at
Townsville on the 21st, and at Cooktown on the 22nd. Cooktown
being the limit of telegraphic communication, the following final
farewell messages had been sent there, addressed to the Leader.
(1) From Baron Ferdinand Yon Mueller, K.C.M.G., Vice-
President of the Victorian branch :
“ Baron Ferdinand von Mueller, is anxious you shall not start
without a final word from him. Please accept his most earnest
wishes for the complete attainment of the object of the Expedition,
and a safe and happy return of yourself and your fellow workers.”
(2) From Sir Edward Strickland, K 0.8., Vice-President of
the New South Wales branch :
“As President and on behalf of the Administrative Council,
I send to you, and through you to all your companions, this fare-
well greeting. May safety and success attend you; be united,
make duty paramount, and difficulties will then grow less; your
honour will be secure, and Australia will be proud of you.”
(3) From Harrie Wood, Esq., J.P., Chairman of the Exploratory
Committee; —“ The chairman and members of the Exploratory
Committee wish you and your friends farewell. They have done
their best for the Expedition, and are now full of hope and confi-
dence that through your zeal and enterpriser great and splendid
success will crown its work,”
The following reply was received from Captain Everill:—
“ Read telegrams to party —all in high spirits. Members of the
Expedition send their adieus to Council, Committee, and Society;


thanking them for their good wishes, and trusting by perseverance
to retain their confidence, and merit their good opinion. Good-bye.”
The expedition left Cooktown at daybreak, on Tuesday, the
23rd June.
By messages sent to Cooktown, and telegraphed from there,
news has been received that the Expedition reached Thursday
Island on the 25th June. The following message from the
Government Resident (The Hon. J. Douglas) to Sir Edward
Strickland, came to hand on the Ist July;—“Shall have much
pleasure in affording New Guinea Exploring Party every possible
assistance. Have conferred with Captain Everill, and hope to
introduce him, to-morrow, to Mr. McFarlane, from Murray Island.”
Messages from the Leader stated that the “ Bonito ” required
some repairs, which were being effected ; that Mr. Broadbent, the
General Collector, was suffering from sciatica—and as the Surgeon
thought the complaint was likely to return at any time, if Mr.
Broadbent got wet, it had been decided that he should return to
Sydney. The Council regrets to lose his services ; but, happily,
the Expedition is large enough for his special duty to be still
properly performed.
The Malays were, as expected, already arrived, and the
Leader appears to be satisfied with the men. Unfortunately,
Mr. H. O. Forbes had not arrived; so that the meeting of the
two parties that had been expected may not take place. With
regard to interpreters, Captain Everill was likely to be able to
make very satisfactory arrangements, as the Rev. Mr. McFarlane
had most kindly undertaken to accompany the Expedition to
Kewi, where his influence will, doubtless, secure reliable men.
The Council is much gratified by the probability of good inter-
preters being obtained, as it is a matter of great importance.
The Under Colonial Secretary of Queensland has telegraphed
that it had been arranged for the “ Advance ” to leave the Expe-
dition at Brampton Island, at the mouth of the Fly River.
July 14th.—The following message, dated July Bth, tele-
graphed from Cooktown, is to hand from the Hon. John Douglas
of Thursday Island: —“ Am leaving to-day with Rev. Mr.
McFarlane for Saibi and Katow to meet Geographical party at
entrance to Fly River on the 15th. ‘Bonito ’ has been thoroughly
overhauled, and everything promises well. Party in good spirits
and well ordered. Everything will be done on our part for them.
‘ Mavis ’ (Queensland Government schooner) takes twenty tons of
coal for them to Fly River.”


The Leader also sends a message. He states that the stores
are shipped ; that the Surgeon reports all the party, including the
Malays, fit for service; that the “Bonito ” was to leave on the 11th
in tow of the “ Advance,” the “ Mavis ” also accompanying with a
supply of coals ; that it was arranged for the Expedition to wait
in Missionary Pass for the Hon. John Douglas and the Rev. Mr.
McFarlane, who were expected to be there on Wednesday, the
15th July; that the Expedition would probably try a branch of
the Fly River (100 miles from its mouth) running in a north-
easterly direction —but in this would be guided by final infor-
mation received through Mr. McFarlane and others.
The Expedition is now fairly launched, [and all connected
with the Society can but feel deeply grateful for the kind and
valuable assistance rendered to it at "Thursday Island.
THE EXPLORATION FUND.
At the commencement of the year, as already stated, the
Council had the promise of <£looo from New South Wales, with
the promise of a further £IOOO conditionally on other Colonies
contributing; at that time Victoria had already contributed £1000;
and in March the Queensland Government also voted £IOOO, which
enabled the Council to claim the conditional grant made by New
South Wales. A sum of £4OOO therefore was available, the whole
of it being voted for exploration in New Guinea.
Applications for grants were made to the Governments of
South Australia, New Zealand and Tasmania. Replies have been
received from the two latter Governments, declining to make the
grants, on the ground that their respective Colonies were not
sufficiently interested in New Guinea; the former Government
has twice written to say that the application was under consider-
ation. The Council therefore entertain a strong hope that before
long a contribution will be made by South Australia. The sum
of £4OOO was not large enough for the Society to carry out the
full scheme of exploration that was desired; and if the steam-
launch required for the Expedition had not been hired, instead of
purchased, the Council would have been greatly crippled in its
work. It was thought that the Sydney Chamber of Commerce


might be induced to use their great influence to assist the Council
in raising £IOOO or £2OOO amongst the commercial public. The
Chamber most readily consented to receive a deputation from the
Society, and held a special meeting of their Committee for the
purpose, on April 21st. The deputation consisted of Sir Edward
Strickland, K.C.8., Mr. Harrie Wood (Under-Secretary for
Mines), Mr. C. S. Wilkinson (Government Geologist), the Rev. W.
Wyatt Gill, M.A., and the Secretary, Mr. Edward Pulsford.
Sir Edward Strickland, in pointing out the objects of the
deputation, remarked that they had waited upon the Board to
perform a duty which, perhaps, had much better been performed
long ago: in which event, possibly, both societies—the Geograph-
ical Society and the Chamber of Commerce —might at present
have been working together. The neglect had been on the part
of the Geographical Society; but it was to be hoped that from
that day they would take a new departure, and witness a great
advance for the benefit alike of commerce and geographical re-
search ; especially in the direction of co-operative action. (Hear
hear.) It was by no means the first time, or the first place, that
such an attempt of mutuality of commercial and geographical
enterprise has been made with immense advantages to commerce
and science in all their branches. The facilities now offered for
travel, and the generosity with which the Society had been sup-
ported at home, and by kindred Societies elsewhere, made it
imperative upon them to endeavour to perform as good service as
had been performed elsewhere. (Hear, hear.) The New South
Wales Society was but in its infancy, and their troubles were very
great. However, he felt certain that when they became thoroughly
well-known to the Chamber of Commerce, their efforts would
receive every assistance and co-operation. He would particularly
like it to be recognised and appreciated how thoroughly a course
of co-operative action between Commerce and Geography must
tend to benefit both : geographical exploration and the extension
of civilization and commercial relationships must advance hand in
hand; and, in proportion as they made fresh steps in Geography,
the first to derive benefit therefrom would be Commerce, it
would readily be seen how essentially useful they might prove
to one another, if working together. Albeit the Society
was in its infancy and comparatively weak, they were
none the less fully determined to carry out the labours placed
upon them. They meant to geographically explore, and to be the
pioneers of New Guinea. (Hear, hear.) He prognosticated that
before very long they would find commerce rapidly following their
explorations. As a matter of fact, commerce was already there, inas-


much as cedar-cutters and almost every other kind of timber-
cutters were on the island, and had stocks ready for shipment.
The timber trade, however, though, by no means an insignificant
factor, formed but a very small part of the commerce and trade
which might be expected from that great island in the future. The
Society’s pecuniary difficulties were very great, albeit its influence
and usefulness were extensive to a degree. They would much wish
to secure the sympathy and co-operation of the Chamber of Com-
merce. At the very utmost their funds amounted to about
£4,000 ; £SOO of that they had voted to Mr. Forbes, the well-
known explorer, a gentleman of high character and bright
career as a pioneer in unexplored countries. And in passing he
would take the opportunity, on behalf of the New South Wales
Geographical Society, of expressing his warmest thanks for the
Victorians’ hearty sympathy in every way. (Hear, hear.) It
would be an extremely weak and impolitic plan to despatch a
small and improperly equipped party for such an important and
responsible task as the exploration of New Guinea. Equally
would it be absurd to attempt the task with inferior machinery for
the undertaking, or an inferior steam launch, as a result of which
everything might come to grief. A general feeling was abroad
in Sydney and in Melbourne that before commencing they should
provide good instruments, and good men. (Hear, Hear.) They
all, of course, knew that without money nothing could be done,
and if a person wanted anything done well, cash must be provided
wherewith to pay for it. It would be readily seen that deducting
£SOO for Mr. Forbes, and another £ISOO for a steam launch—
without which nothing could be achieved —the remaining £2OOO
would not suffice to pay for keeping up an expedition for six
months. He thanked the Board for the attentive hearing which
had been accorded to the deputation, and expressed a wish that
coram populo the benefits of the Society might be made manifest
and proclaimed.
The Chairman (Mr. W. G. Murray) remarked that having only
just returned to town, and received a notification of the meeting, he
had not had time to frame any sort of formal or official reply. The
Chamber of Commerce was not very wealthy. For the carrying
on of their own more immediate work, certainly, they could raise
funds; but of course special reasons would have to be given for
voting funds outside of it. He thanked the deputation very
much for the information they had afforded, and for having
pointed out so clearly and briefly the intimate connection which
existed between geographical development and commercial pros-
perity. In point of fact, the very colonies in which we lived—


Allowance to Mr. H. 0. Forbes
500
0
0
Salaries of leader, scientific staff, &c.
1400
0
0
Pay of Malays
200
0
0
including Victoria, New Zealand, Tasmania, &c. —were exempli-
fications of the truth of what had been stated, Captain Cook’s
explorations, and the subsequent rise and marvellous prosperity
of Australia proved this. He thought he might take it upon
himself to say, without conferring with the other members of the
board present, that the Chamber would take a deep interest in the
work that the Geographical Society had undertaken. Hear,
hear.) He had been delighted to see the enthusiastic way in
which the matter had been taken up, and desired that his name
might be added to the list of the Society’s members; and at the
same time he could not see why individual subscriptions should
not be forthcoming.
In the course of the ensuing discussion, the Rev. W. Wyatt
Gill, M.A., alluded to his experiences in the island, and to the
almost inconceivable fertility of the soil, and richness of vegeta-
tion, He instanced one natural production—jute—which grew
profusely. A sample of this, when in Europe, he had shown to
Mr. Dalgleish, a well-known Dundee spinner. That gentleman,
after examining it, had at once volunteered to purchase every ton
of it that could be procured. It was running wild on every hand
in New Guinea without any attempt at cultivation.
After some further incidental discussion, the Chairman inti-
mated that the members of the Society would, in all probability,
hear from the Chamber of Commerce before long, and the depu-
tation having returned thanks for their reception, withdrew.
Since the meeting, the Chamber of Commerce have intimated
that they are drawing up a circular to send to the leading firms;
this is being deferred until the completion of this Record, so that
copies of it may be sent with the circulars. Mr. P. J. Clark, the
Secretary of the Sydney Marine Assurance Company, having
kindly undertaken to pave the way for the insurance of a steam-
launch, the necessity for purchasing one ceased, and the Council
were able to proceed with the arrangements, and, with care and
economy, to prepare a thoroughly first-class Expedition; though
unfortunately not without, at the last, considerably exceeding the
available funds, after calculating the expenditure for six months.
The following is an approximate statement of the payments
already made, and the liabilities incurred.
J £ s. d.
Carried forward, £2,100 0 0


Brought forward, £2,100 0 0
Fares of Malays from and to Batavia ... ... 110 0 0
Expenses in connection with Malays ... ... 100 0 0
Expenses Leader, &c., Sydney to Thursday Island
and back ... ... ... ... ... 65 0 0
Steam Launch —Hire 6 months, at £5O per month 300 0 0
Do. Insurance £l5OO, at 10 per cent. 150 0 0
Do. Stores, Fitting out, &c. ... ... 200 0 0
Do. Coals, &c., &c. ... ... ... 50 0 0
Do. Towage, Thursday Island and back 50 0 0
Insurance on Stores, &c., £5OO at 10 per cent. ... 50 0 0
Whale Boat ... ... ... ... ... 45 0 0
Salary of Secretary, telegrams, printing and sundries 300 0 0
Provisions ... ... ... ... ... ... 300 0 0
Arms and ammunition ... ... ... ... 170 0 0
Medical stores ... ... ... ... ... 50 0 0
Trade ... ... ... ... ... ... 40 0 0
Scientific instruments, &c. ... ... ... ... 200 0 0
Sundry stores and contingencies ... ... ... 220 0 0
£4500 0 0
This statement shows that a deficiency of £5OO may be
expected at the close of the present exploration, early in
December next, and should the Expedition be detained, or serious
contingencies arise, the deficiency would be increased. With this
statement before the public, it is hoped that the subscription which
has been set on foot will be well supported—indeed, the public of
these colonies may well, and wisely, be asked to subscribe a total
of £2OOO, for it must be remembered that the present exploration,
however successful it may be, can only do a small portion of the
work that has to be done in New Guinea, and that large funds
will yet be required. It is evident that, with an Expedition
already in the field, it might be very desirable, at the close of six
months, to refit it at Thursday Island, instead of bringing it back
to Sydney, disbanding it; and then at a little later period going
through the whole laborious and costly process of preparing an
entirely new Expedition. The Council therefore appeal direct, and
through the kind agency of the Sydney Chamber of Commerce,
and other public bodies, to the public spirit of the business men
of these Colonies for help in this work of exploration—the greatest
■ever undertaken by Australians outside Australia.


The following subscriptions have already been promised:—
General Sir Peter Scratchley, K.C.M.G., £5 ; Hon. G. H. Cox,
M.L.C., £5 ; E. Du Faur, Esq., £10; C. S. Wilkinson, Esq., £10;
Dr. Belgrave £5 ; F. Gerard, Esq., £5 ; Messrs. Eldred & Co., £lO.
A Special Finance Committee, consisting of Messrs. Harrie
Wood, and Francis Gerard, was appointed by the Administrative
Council in January to receive and pay monies in connection with
the Exploration Fund. The Federal Bank are the ordinary
bankers of the Sydney branch of the Society, but, with a view to
secure the greatest exactness, a special account for the “ Explora-
tion Fund ” has been opened at the Mercantile Bank of Sydney.
INSTRUCTIONS ISSUED EOR THE GUIDANCE
THE NEW GUINEA EXPLORATION EXPEDITION.
Sydney, June 12th, 1885.
GEOGRAPHICAL SOCIETY OF AUSTRALASIA,
142 Phillip Street,
Sydney, 10th June, 1885.
To Captain Everill, Leader of the Expedition to New Guinea
of the Geographical Society of Australasia.
Dear Sir —lt is with much pleasure that I announce to
you, previous to your departure in command of the very
important Exploratory Expedition to New Guinea, that you take
with you the full confidence of both Councils of the Victorian
and New South Wales branches of the Society, as to your fitness
for the office to which you have been appointed. Their confidence
is based chiefly upon the excellent certificates which you have
produced, the high character which you bear in this community,
and your experience in tropical exploration.


Addressing myself now to you, as the mouthpiece of the
Councils already alluded to, I wish you clearly to understand that,
whilst we are unwilling to hamper you with many detailed
instructions, yet, bearing in mind the great power placed in your
hands over those associated with you in the Expedition, and over
the property and interests of the Society, we feel sure that you
will hereafter afford proof, by the success of the Expedition, that
our confidence is not misplaced, and that you are well able to bear
the heavy burden of responsibility which you have undertaken.
In so far as the united funds available to us have permitted,
we have supplied you liberally with experienced scientific and
other assistance, all subject to your own approval, and with stores
selected also at your suggestion ; the steam launch has also been
specially chosen by you, as well as the whale-boat, which, it is
hoped, may prove a valuable addition in the work of exploring
rivers or creeks.
Thus liberally supplied with men and all necessary means to
carry on the work of exploration, the Society looks forward with
some certainty to a great success, and abundant additions to our
present limited knowledge of New Guinea, geographically and
otherwise.
The Society is of opinion that the acquiring of accurate
knowledge of the geography of the new country you are about to
enter is of primary importance ; it will therefore be your duty to
map out with care all the new country through which you may
pass, noticing the physical formation of such country, such as the
rivers, mountains, and other important features.
An ample supply of material requisite for the preservation
of specimens of Natural History and Botany, has been furnished
to you, and as it will be impossible to replenish such materials
whilst away from civilization, they should be husbanded with
great care. * The same economy will be exercised in regard to all
stores placed under your charge, and it will be your duty to
watch over the expenditure of all stores and supplies with a very
watchful eye, and to impress upon every one serving under your
orders the necessity of the practice of strict economy. This
economical and conservative spirit should be enforced from the
very day of starting, and it should never be lost sight of that it
may easily occur that the whole success of the Expedition may
become dependent upon the advice now given being acted upon
in its true spirit and reality. A scale of rations should be laid
down before you embark, and this should be strictly adhered
to, except under medical advice or pressing emergency, the
reality of each case being left entirely to your decision.


To one accustomed to command men, it can hardly be neces-
sary to refer to the imperative necessity of using the authority
placed in your hands at all times with equal firmness and discre-
tion. I feel an inward conviction that there is not one amongst
those who have volunteered to serve under you who will not he
ready himself to yield an implicit obedience to your just orders,
and to encourage in others the same spirit, and all will recognise
at all times the danger to the whole Expedition if ever any
departure is permitted from this great golden principle.
More formal instructions will be given to you in another
paper, the object of this somewhat informal communication being
to place before you briefly the leading features of the important
duties and responsibilities which have fallen to your lot, and to
impress upon you some points which my own experience has
taught me, may, though small of themselves, be made to exercise
in the aggregate a great influence over the future of the Expe-
dition, if neglected or treated lightly.
Your Journal and Log-book will both be looked for with
great anxiety by the Society, and I anticipate much pleasure in
publishing them, and thus securing to our Society an abundant
mead of praise, and to you a highly creditable place in the ranks
of English explorers, who have done so much to promote the
science of geography all over the world.
As regards your correspondence, you should take every
possible care to ensure the Society receiving information as
frequently as possible of your progress and proceedings. You
will receive instructions on this point officially. lam myself of
opinion that the missionaries on the spot, and the Government
Resident at Thursday Island, will be the best channels through
which to keep your Expedition in communication with Australia,
I hope very much that you may meet Mr. Forbes at Thursday
Island or Port Moresby, or elsewhere. It cannot fail to be of
great consequence to the ultimate success of the efforts about to
be made by Mr. Forbes and yourself in the interests of geography,
if you can meet and confer together, with a view to establish
if possible, a co-operative action, before you actually commence
the task of exploration,
It will be very necessary that it be clearly explained to all
under your command, that all specimens collected are the property
of this Society, and they are not authorized to appropriate to
themselves, or to dispose of to others, any portion of what has
been collected by the Expedition whilst in the service of the
Society.
Very strict rules should be laid down with reference to the
use of fire-arms, and in preparing these rules one cardinal point


must always be held clearly in view, i.e., it must be insisted upon
that a native must never be fired upon except the life of a
member of the party is in danger. Everyone belonging to the
Expedition should be made to feel the necessity of adopting the
spirit of this rule, and putting it in practice himself and enforcing
its practice upon others—one shot fired with a fatal result would
make me feel very despondent as to the success of the Expe-
dition, certainly it would immensely increase the difficulties of
exploring. No precaution, therefore, should be omitted to
avoid any such untoward event.
In the matter of trade, a liberal or rather a generous spirit
should, as far as possible, be shewn, thus utilizing the infancy
of commerce as means to advance civilization. Every oppor-
tunity should be availed of to establish a friendly feeling
between the members of the Expedition and the natives; efforts
should be made to amuse them, and you cannot impress it too
earnestly upon all under you that the safest and the most
profitable treatment to adopt towards the natives is one of
conciliation, treating them always as children—Nature’s children.
I am perfectly aware that circumstances may easily occur where
a very opposite course of treatment may be forced upon you:
in such a case I can only counsel firmness and all forbearance
that is consistent with your own safety.
I will conclude this, my farewell letter to you, by reminding
you that a grand field of action is opened to you, a glorious
opportunity is offered to you of acquiring great fame, which
ought, and I am sure will, call for every energy of your nature,
and the vigorous exercise of every ability that God has given
you which may tend to the accomplishment of a triumphant
success, no matter how perilous and apparently insuperable
may be the obstacles opposed to you.
Of course you clearly understand that nothing in this
informal letter is to be interpreted as cancelling or superseding
the detailed instructions which will be furnished to you and the
members of the party. Each member of the party should,
during the voyage to New Guinea, make himself thoroughly
intimate with those instructions, as ignorance of orders will not
be accepted as an excuse for neglect of the same.
Believe me to be, Dear Sir,
Very faithfully yours,
(Signed) EDWARD STRICKLAND,
President of the Administrative Council


Sackb of Rostral asm.
New South Wales Branch,
Sydney, June 12th, 1885.
Captain Henry Charles Everill,
Sir, —On the 7th of May you were advised that this Society
had elected you “to the important position of Leader of the
Society’s New Guinea Exploration Expedition.” Since that date
the preparations for the Expedition have been continued carefully
and energetically. A scientific staff, including a thoroughly
efficient surgeon, has been chosen; competent sub-leaders have
been selected, as well as several supernumeraries; and eleven
Malays (picked men) have been brought from Java. The
principal appointments have been made after advertising for
applicants in South Australia, Victoria, New South Wales and
Queensland, and careful enquiry as to the ability and character
of those selected, and in the selection the Melbourne branch of
the Society has co-operated.
The A. S. N. Company’s steam launch “ Bonito ” has been
chartered for the party, after being selected by you as specially
fitted for the purpose. The Expedition will start well provided
with stores, provisions, trade, firearms and ammunition, scientific
instruments, medicines and medical comforts, all carefully
selected by competent men, and in the purchasing, packing, etc.,
of these articles, you have been fully consulted.
Considering the limited funds at the command of the Society,
the Council is well satisfied with the equipment of the Expedition,
and has no doubt that it is fully equal to the work that is before
it. The “ Bonito ” will be towed to Thursday Island by a steamer
of the A. S. N. Company. On the way you will spend a short
time at Brisbane, and you are furnished with a letter of introduc-
tion to the Colonial Secretary of Queensland, on whom you will
please call, and you are requested to give him any information
about the Expedition that may be of interest to him; and you will
thank him for the consent given to the request made by the
Society, that the Queensland Government would kindly grant
the Expedition the assistance and the honor of the convoy of the
steamer “ Advance,” from Thursday Island to New Guinea. You
will also call on the Postmaster-General, and urge him to grant


the request made to him by letter, viz.: that telegrams for, from,
or relating to the Expedition, may have free transmission
over the Queensland lines. You will further arrange with the
proper authority that the Customs Officials at Thursday Island
be requested to forego any formalities that would hamper
the Expedition. If, at Brisbane, you find yourself in want of
coal, or any other essential article, you will please obtain it
through or of the Agent of the A.S.N. Company, and for the
amount of any such purchase you will give an order on the
Society. Should necessity of any kind drive the Expedition into
any other port before reaching Thursday Island, you will avail
yourself of the presence of the Agent of the A. S. N. Company
at such port, and reimburse him in the same way for any needful
outlay. Arrived at Thursday Island, you will please call on the
Government Resident, the Hon. J. Douglas, whose good offices
on behalf of the Expedition have already been solicited by the
President, Sir Edward Strickland, K.C.B. Mr. Douglas being
a member of the Society, you will be likely to receive valuable
assistance from him, should any emergency arise. The 8.1.5. N.
Company’s steamer “ Westminster,” bringing the Malays from
Batavia, will probably have arrived about a week before you.
Messrs. Burns, Philp and Co., kindly instructed their repre-
sentatives to take charge of these men, and they will debit
us direct with any expense incurred in relation to them. It
will be advisable for the surgeon to examine the Malays, and
should any of them be found physically unfit for the Expedition
you will not take them, but will make some equitable arrange-
ment for their return to Java. In the event of any of these
men being found to be unfitted for the Expedition you are
at liberty to take other men in their place. The Agents of
the A.S.N. Co. will supply you with coal and any other necessary.
Before leaving Thursday Island you will (1) make an examina-
tion of the “ Bonito,” her machinery, &c., and make sure that all
is in satisfactory order. (2) You will also arrange with the
Government Resident for letters, news, &c., from, for, or relating
to the Expedition, being forwarded as opportunity may permit.
Mr. Douglas will perhaps kindly consent to undertake to see this
important duty performed. (3) You will see that the stores, &c., &c.
are carefully transhipped to the “ Bonito,” and that the ammuni-
tion is stowed in two or more separate places, protected against
climatic influences or salt water, with waterproof wrappings ; and
you will have the magazines built into the ship, but not so as
to be immovable. (4) You will endeavour to see the captain of
the schooner “ Elsea,” and obtain from him any information he can


give about the Coast of New Guinea, of which he has had great
experience. (5) You will complete arrangements for protection
against fire. (6) You will give the Nautical Sub-Leader full
inventories of all stores, &c., &c., and request him to check them.
You will earnestly impress upon him the serious responsibility
attaching to the position conferred upon him. His duties at all
times will combine those of chief officer and purser, whilst during
your absence he will also act as master ; he will then have in
his custody valuable property and records which could not be
replaced, and, more important still, the stores of various kinds
on which the health and safety of the party may depend. A few
moments of carelessness on his part might cause a disaster that
would be irreparable. At your early convenience you will give
him a copy of these remarks.
On the return of the Expedition you will dispose of the
unused stores, provisions and trade, at Thursday Island, if you
can do so to advantage.
You will be good enough to bear in mind that the charter
and insurance of the “ Bonito ” expire on the Bth December ; it is
desirable therefore that you should be back in Sydney before that
date.
The Council has caused the enclosed instructions to be
drawn up and printed, and you are requested to hand at once to
each of the members of the party a copy thereof, with reference
to his special as well as general duties, and to observe the special
instructions and views which have been adopted in connection
with the duties which devolve upon yourself as Leader.
By direction of the Administrative Council.
Your obedient servant,
(Signed) EDWARD PULSFORD, Secretary.


INSTRUCTIONS FOR THE LEADER.
The object of the Expedition is to ascertain and fix the
geographical features of New Guinea and the nature of its fauna,
flora, geology, and climate, and to illustrate the same by speci-
mens, sketches, photographs and written descriptions. And it is the
primary duty of the Leader to facilitate in every way the accom-
plishment of this object by consulting as far, and as frequently
as possible, with the members of the Expedition in regard to the
country to be explored, and in all cases of importance and
emergency. Nevertheless he is authorized to act at any time
independently of their judgment, but shall enter in his diary his
reasons for so differing.
Should the Leader at any time be incapacitated from duty,
or, if in his discretion it may appear necessary to divide the party
for the purpose of exploration in different directions, he is to
assign his position on board to the Nautical Sub-Leader, and to
Mr. Creagh on the land. The Council, however, desire that such
division of the land party shall not be made except in case of
absolute necessity. In the event of the total incapacity, or death
of the Leader, the Nautical Sub-Leader shall assume command;
but Mr Creagh shall be the leader of any expedition on land.
The Council having decided to make, if possible, the Aird
River the basis of operations of the Expedition, requests the
Leader to proceed thither from Thursday Island.
The Leader shall proceed up the Aird River until he finds a
convenient landing place near to a hill marked on the Admiralty
Chart as Aird Hill.
After leaving a party in charge of the steamer sufficient for
its safety and protection, the Leader shall proceed with the rest of
the party, including the scientific staff, to Aird Hill; and if it
be found that that hill forms part of a spur from the Main
Dividing Range in the interior of New Guinea, he will follow up
that spur as closely as he can to that Range. Should he, however,
discover a more practicable route from Aird Hill to the Dividing
Range than by following such spur, he shall take it: the first
named route is suggested to him as the Council desires him to
leave the low lying country, and to direct his attention chiefly to
the exploration of the high lands.
In the event of Aird Hill not forming part of a spur from the
Main Range, the Leader should ascend the first spur that he meets
with on the same side of the river, and follow it up to that
Range.


The Leader will make arrangements for keeping open a
communication in his rear to the steamer as a depot, so that he
may be enabled to make his movements known, transmit from
time to time the scientific objects collected, and receive any stores
required.
The Leader is responsible for the organization and carrying
out of all vigilance arrangements in camp and field on which
the safety of the party will so much depend.
He is to endeavor to promote friendly relations with the
natives and to avoid any possible collision with them; never
resorting to the use of fire-arms for defence except in case of
extreme necessity : as it will be a source of great satisfaction to the
Society if the objects of the Expedition should be attained with-
out loss of life.
The Leader is requested to obtain and note information
regarding the language, habits, and customs of the natives ; the
character of their implements and utensils; and, in reference to
their modes of sepulture, what implements, if any, or food, are
buried with their dead, also, whether periodic feasts are held at
the graves, and the traditional object of such customs.
In the event of the route by the Aird River proving im-
practicable, the Leader will choose the first available estuary to
the eastward thereof, and from the depot there formed will proceed
with his land expedition on a similar basis to that laid down in
the case of the Aird—namely, to ascend the first available high
land and work thence to the Main Dividing Range ; to attain
and explore to the furthest possible limit of that range within
the boundary of the British possession being the principal object
of the Expedition.
He is to note the distance and course travelled, and to
describe and fix the position of all the principal physical features
of the country along the line of route, and on either side of it, as
far as practicable ; and daily to complete, from his observations, a
feature map of the country traversed, a copy of which may be
furnished to the scientific officers of the party, if desired. He is
to note the number, character, distance apart, and general trend
or fall of all water courses, or drainage channels crossed: the
quality of water, if any, in such courses or channels : the mode
of occurrence of water : springs, lakes, pools, or running streams,
with average depth of the same; the indications relative to pro-
bable permanence or otherwise of the same: also of periodical
floods.
As it is very desirable that the route should be so marked
as to be readily distinguished from those of other expeditions,


the Leader shall mark, or cause to he marked, on the nearest
large tree at each camp the initial E., with the number of each
camp and the date. This is to be done by removing a .sheet
of bark, taking care not to injure the tree, and then by means of
a chisel to make the required mark. Thus, E.—B will indicate
the eighth camp; 5 | 10 | 85 the date ; the word “ Dig ” will of
course refer to a message buried near the tree.
The Leader is to mark the routes as permanently as
practicable, by building cairns, and marking trees and rocks, at as
many points as possible, consistently with his various other duties;
a record being kept of the marks made in all the more important
places.
Every opportunity should be taken to ascertain the geogra-
phical position of the party by referring it to some well-marked
point, as afforded by an easily recognizable mountain, the junction
of rivers, creeks, etc.
This should be done by astronomical observations, as well as
by dead reckoning. The dead reckoning always to commence
with the last good, reliable astronomical observations made.
The altitude of all the principal hills and valleys crossed to
be noted from aneroid observations.
At every camping place a systematic registration of the
pressure and the temperature of the air should be carried out.
The hours of registration are to be as numerous as possible. The
hours 6 a.m,, 9 a.m., 3 p m., and 9 p.m. being obligatory. The
state and changes of the weather, storms, direction of the
wind, etc., should be daily recorded.
The Leader is to make arrangements for an exact account
being taken of the stores and their expenditure, by the persons
in charge of them.
The Leader is to address all his communications, on subjects
connected with the exploration, to the Secretary of the Society,
and all persons acting with him are to forward their communica-
tions through him.
He will cause full reports to be furnished on any subject of
interest, and forward them to Sydney as often as may be practi-
cable without retarding the progress of the Expedition.
On the completion of the exploration of the Main Dividing
Range as previously proposed, the Expedition shall return to
Thursday Island for the purpose of delivering under seal into
safe keeping of the Government Resident there, all specimens
and records in their possession. And should time allow of further
exploration of New Guinea, the Leader, after consultation with
the members of the Expedition, shall decide upon the course to be
adopted.


Instructions for the Nautical Sub -Leader.
He shall have charge of, and be responsible for, the safe
keeping and properly authorised issue of the stores, provisions,
trade, arms, ammunition, &c., on board the steamer, and shall keep
a clearly written record of the disposal thereof, so as to be able at
any time to tell the quantities remaining. He shall keep an
account of expenditure. In the absence of the Leader, he shall
have sole control of the steamer, and he must carry out to the
smallest detail, the instructions left by the Leader. He shall never
relax that vigilant watchfulness, or cease to observe those needful
precautions, which alone can be relied on to effectually prevent a
surprise.
The Nautical Sub-Leader, during the absence of the Leader
and land party, when carrying out any system of river exploration
which may have been determined upon by the Leader, shall leave
in a cache, previously pointed out to the party, a clear explanation
of the date, direction, and probable duration of his absence, in case
of the unexpected return to the depot of any of the party.
Instructions for Mr. Creagh, Sub-Leader on Land.
He shall prepare the equipment of the land party. He shall
assist the Leader in carrying out the details of camping, travelling,
etc., and be responsible that the Leader’s instructions for the safety
and health of the party are carried out. The condition of the
firearms and the safe packing of stores, etc., shall be his special
care. He shall also assist the Leader by his example and vigilance
in preventing surprises by the natives. When on the steamer, in
the absence of the Leader, he will assist the Nautical Sub-Leader
in maintaining discipline, acting in these circumstances under his
orders.
Instructions for the Surgeon.
The duties of the Surgeon shall be to place himself at the
orders of the Leader in reference to station; to have exclusive
charge of the medicine chest and medical comforts of the sick;
and he shall be at liberty to select, with the consent of the Leader,
necessary assistance from among the Malays. In case of neces-
sity the Surgeon shall have the right to claim assistance from any
member of the party, the Leader consenting. The Surgeon shall
keep a clinical record of each case of illness. He shall direct
the work of the botanical collector.


Leader’s Assistant and Photographer.
He shall enter in his note-book, under a given number, a
description of each view taken, with the time of exposure of the
photographic plate: on the plate he is to affix a number corres-
ponding with the number entered in his note-book. He shall
act specially as Leader’s Assistant, as directed from time to time.
Instructions for Zoologist.
The Zoologist is to direct the work of the geological and
zoological collectors, and to receive from them a complete inven-
tory of all specimens collected (the inventory to be kept in dupli-
cate) ; to furnish each collector with numbered labels to affix to
each specimen where possible, the number of each label so affixed
to be entered by the collector in his own note-book ; to see that
the specimens are all properly cured, labelled, packed and stored.
Geology.
Note the occurrence of all rocks, their character and extent,
or the distance travelled over them ; note the nature of the soil
both where rocks occur at the surface, and where they are not
seen.
Where slate, granite, or diorite formations occur, prospect the
gravel where it rests on the bed rock, in the gullies, or beds of
streams for gold, tin ore, gemstones, &c. Collect samples of all
metals and gemstones found.
If quartz reefs, or ironstone, or other metalliferous lodes are
met with, break up some of the stone and wash it for metals,
which, if found, save small samples. Note the compass direction
that the quartz reefs, &c. run in; and whether they traverse
slate, granite, or other formations.
In beds of streams flowing from a locality to which you
have not access, take note of the different kinds of pebbles
that occur; and if possible, collect samples.
Where basalt rock is seen resting upon slate or other forma-
tions, examine if any quartz pebble drift occurs between them;
if it does, wash some of it for gold or tin ore, &c.
If crystalline particles be seen in basalt rock, collect small
samples of them.


If shales or sandstone rocks contains impressions of fossil
leaves, examine the locality for coal. Note the direction in which
the strata dip, and take the angle of dip.
Note the occurrence of all rocks containing fossil plants or
marine shells ; if possible, collect some of the fossils.
In limestone country particularly, fossils are likely to be
seen in the rocks If caves occur, examine the earth on the floors
for bones.
Of fossil animals, if any should be noted, it would be very
desirable to secure characteristic specimens.
Collect specimens of different kinds of rocks, and duplicate
specimens if possible. All specimens to be numbered consecutively
and entered with a corresponding number in a book kept for that
purpose, with the locality, height above the sea level, and date of
collection, and ashort description of each. The numbers also to
be entered in the diary on the day of collection thus August
22nd, 1885, specimens 1 to 20, stating whether rock, mineral, or
fossil. Describe the surface features, whether undulating, preci-
pitous, rocky, mineral, character, &c. of the different formations.
Each specimen to be wrapped separately in paper. The locality
and date of collection to be written in pencil on the wrapping
paper. The specimens not be larger than 2xlxl inches.
As geological specimens are difficult to transport owing to
their weighty character, it is desirable that only such as are new or
doubtful should be collected. In all cases the gross weight of the
specimens that are taken must be subject to the approval and
control of the leader. Should it be found necessary to abandon
any specimens, they should be marked off in the catalogue, and
the date and cause of their being so abandoned stated. If fossils,
sketches of them should, if possible, be obtained.
Note the probable thickness and relative geological position
of different formations (conformable or otherwise) of igneous
rocks, whether intrusive or contemporaneous. Boundaries of the
different rocks or geological formations crossed on the line of
route, should be marked on a map, to be supplied by the Leader,
Collect samples of stone tomahawks (specially to show the
different kinds of stone that they are composed of ) and ascertain
if possible, where the natives originally obtained them, or where
the stone came from.
Ascertain whether the natives of one tribe trade with other
tribes for stone-chips, tomahawks, &c., and whether the natives
possess any metals.


Zoology.
The Zoologist, in addition to all general observations which
he may be able to make on all classes of animals that may occur
him, illustrated by sketches; is particularly required to
ascertain, when possible, the fishes, shells, or articulata occurring
in any stagnant or running waters met with, as these are of
the highest interest in connection with questions of the
geographical distribution of animals.
The larger fishes may be skinned by the removal of one-half
of the fish, leaving the fins of the mid-line perfect. If then
washed with a solution of corrosive sublimate in spirit, the
specimen can be packed flat between papers without injury.
The soft Annelida and small Crustacea, as well as the soft
parts of Mollusca, should be enclosed in vessels of spirits, the
specimens separated by portions of linen cloth to prevent their
being injured by shaking. Paper labels, written with black
lead pencil, will remain uninjured with specimens so packed. As
a general rule every specimen collected should receive one of a
consecutive series of numbers (irrespective of the natural series
of the objects) by which it should be indicated in the journal of
the day, in which the particulars observed about it or illustrative
sketches should appear.
Of Mammalia, the nocturnal ones, as bats, and the small
murine forms (rats, &c.) are specially interesting, and should
receive particular attention.
No opportunity should be lost to obtain, through the officer
in charge of depot, or through reconnoitring parties, additional
specimens of rocks, fossils, minerals, and natural history.
It will be of vast importance to ascertain as extensively as
possible, what relation the vegetation bears to its geological
formation. 6 &
The accompanying general directions have been drawn
up to assist the taxidermists in the collection and preserva-
tion of specimens, and should be given to the zoological collectors,
and to each member of the expedition who may be able to
render ssistance to the Zoologist.


GENERAL DIRECTIONS FOR THE PRESERVATION OF
SPECIMENS OF NATURAL HISTORY.
The Human Race.
In cases where skeletons of aborigines cannot be procured,
the skulls, along with the lower jaw, will prove of great interest
and value to Museums. Any apparent malformation or pecu-
liarities in the formation of the cranium of the various tribes
should be carefully noted; obtain all the information possible re-
specting such occurrences, and whether produced by artificial
means or otherwise.
Mammalia.
Remove all blood-stains if possible, and plug any shot holes
or other bleeding wounds with tow, wadding, or rag; put a plug
of moss or tow in the mouth to keep any blood or other matter
from exuding. Note the shape and colour of the eyes and the
fleshy parts, and the sex. Slit the skin open from about the
centre of the belly downwards to the vent, but in the case of
female marsupials, take care not to cut into the pouch ; or this
may be avoided, by cutting from the chest, between the fore arms
downwards, and making an opening, in all cases large enough to
extract the body; loosen the skin round it with the fingers, or
handle of the knife, being careful not to use the blade more than
is absolutely necessary ; generally the skin will be found to be
easily separated ; now sever the leg from the pelvis bones at the
body, leaving the tail attached to the body, by which it may
be more easily slipped out of the skin ; turn the skin back, out-
wards, and slip the tail out entire, the skin will then draw off
over the back with ease; sever the fore limbs from the body
with the shoulder blades attached to them, and the neck close up
to the back of the skull (at the atlas vertebra); skin the head as
far as the tip of the nose, remove all the flesh from it, take out
the eyes, and remove the brains by enlarging, if necessary, the
opening at the back of the skull; anoint it well, inside and out,
with arsenical soap, and fill out the orbits with tow or wadding,
&c.; clean the limbs, stripping the skin back as far as the paws :
anoint all the bones and roll a little tow round them to make
up for the amount of flesh removed; the tail often strips easily
enough, but in some animals (as in the Platypus) requires literally


to be cut out, making an incision along one side of it. Anoint
the skin inside well all over with arsenical soap, and dust it well
with the powdered burned alum, now turn the skin back, and pull
the limbs and tail into their original position ; open the palms of
the hand and soles of the feet, remove the fleshy parts and rub
in some soap and alum, remove the testes and fill up the skn to its
natural size—if a female marsupial, fill out the pouch \v ith a
little tow. Allow the skin, after it has been prepared as directed
to remain for a few hours, or a day, if the time can be spared,
before filling it out, afterwards fill out* the skin to about the
natural size, and sew up the opening ; tie the mouth shut, and
pull up the wadding in the orbits, and adjust the eye-lids, but do
not distend them. Anoint the eye-lids, face, ears, the fleshy parts
of the feet, and the pouch, &c., with a solution of mercuric
chloride and camphor in spirits of wine ;f hang the animal up in
a dry airy situation, not in the sun, until quite dry, when, if
required, to save space in packing the filling may be removed
from the body, and the feet and tail folded over the belly, and the
skin doubled up.
The smaller mammals, such as mice, rats, bats, and even the
smaller species of native cats and bandicoots, are best preserved
entire, in strong spirits of wine, to which a little arsenic has been
added’ taking care to make an opening in the abdomen to allow
the spirits to enter freely. The body should be well covered with
the spirit, and care taken that the stopper or cork of the vessel
be made air-tight. A very good contrivance for large vessels is
that known as a “ man-hole fastening, used for steam boilers, &c.
Birds.
When first obtained, push a small piece of cotton wool, tow,
or moss into the throat, to prevent any liquid from escaping, and re-
move any blood from the feathers. N ote the colour of the eyes, bill,
lens and feet. If the weather be hot and the bird cannot be
skinned at once, it is advisable to brush the bill, eyelids (being
careful to note the colour of the eyes first), the inside of the
mouth, and other fleshy parts, as well as the abdomen under the
feathers, and the vent, with the solution of mercuric chloride and
camphor this will prevent those parts being blown by dies, and,
to a great extent, arrest putrefaction.
* Tow, dry grass or moss, coco.armt fibre, unravelled rope, or the refuse tow
from the rope works.
+ Solution No. 1, see p. 55. t Solution No. 1.


Before beginning to skin, for convenience sake dislocate or break
the first hone (the humerus) of the wings about the middle, and
then, after separating the feathers on the abdomen, open the skin
from the lower end of the breast-bone, or from a little above it,
down to the vent, being careful not to cut into the intestines; if
there is much moisture or fat, dust these parts well with powdered
lime, or better, plaster of Paris; detach the skin from the flesh on
either side until you come to the knee-joints, which push up
inside the skin, and cut through the exposed joints carefully;
draw the legs back again, and detach the skin round on either
side to the tail, cut through the vertebra at the tail, taking care
not to injure the skin, which is very thin about this part; draw
the skin over the back, holding the feathers clear of the body
which may be powdered well with plaster of Paris to keep it
from soiling them. The skin will now easily stip off as far as
the wings, which must be cut through at the broken part or at
the first joint ; pull back the skin carefully over the neck until
you come to the skull, and ease it gently over the head with your
nails ; detach the head, cutting the neck off with a small portion
of the skull attached ; pinch up the skin over the ears and pull it
carefully over them as far as the eyes, the tough skin round which
cut through, when it has been eased over the orbit, taking care not
to cut the eyelid, detach the skin as far as the base of the bill,
remove the eyes and flesh from the head, and the tongue, &c., and
take out the brains through the opening enlarged at the back of
the skull; anoint the head well with arsenical soap inside and
out; fill up the orbits with a plugget of cotton wadding for eyes ;
roll up a piece of tow or wadding and plug the end of it tightly
into the back of the skull, leaving a piece out of sufficient length
to form the neck.* Now turn to the legs—remove the flesh from
the bones, anoint them, and roll a little cotton wadding round
them, leaving some of it over the end of the bone ; clean the wing
bones, but put no wadding round them, cut off the humerus, or
the broken part of it, tie them a little apart by passing a string
between the bones and drawing the wings together, but not too
close, leaving a space of about one quarter of an inch in a bird as
large as a thrush, and proportionately greater or less for other birds,
as the case may be (in very small birds the wing bones may be tied
close, just leaving room enough for them to play); clean the tail
carefully and remove the fat and oil glands, anoint it well with the
soap, and turn it back into its place with a small piece of wadding
over it; soap the legs and wings and adjacent .skin, and turn them
* Some taxidermists prefer to put the neck in after the skin is turned back ;
it is immaterial at what stage it be done, provided a good neck be formed.


back as near as possible into their original position; soap the
remainder of the skin well all over, especially the neck, ease it
carefully back over the skull, pulling the head through, assisted
by the string previously passed and left through the nostrils;
in some birds, as the larger cockatoos and parrots, and the
stilts and avocets, &c., the neck being very small, the head
cannot with safety be drawn through, it is advisable to open
the skin at the back of the head or along the throat, and turn
out the head through the opening, which can be sewed up
afterwards.
Having turned the skin back, and pulled the head, legs,
and wings into their original position, arrange the feathers of
the head and ears as neatly as possible, with the point of a
long needle, lifting up the skin here and there, and getting all
smooth, pull up the wadding in the orbits to fill out the eyes,
taking care not to distend it or bulge the eyelids out; shorten
the neck by pulling the false neck of wadding down a little
inside, place a piece on either side near the wings, and thrust a
small piece up from the breast as far as the throat, to fill it out,
and close the bill on the end of it to hold it in position, or by
pulling the end of it the neck can be shortened at will; fill the
body out to about its natural dimensions, or a very little more, to
allow for the shrinking of the skin in drying, and arrange the
wings closed on the sides, in the natural position; pull the legs
down to their proper length, and take care not to elongate the
neck ; see that the bird is filled out enough, and sew up the
opening—small birds need not be sewed up. Cross the legs, the
tarsus of one over the tarsus of the other, and tie them; the right
leg, as the bird lies on its back, should be crossed over the left, if
the bird is a male, and vice versa for a female. The legs and feet,
margins of the wings, the bill, orbits and nostrils, should be
brushed over with the solution of mercuric chloride,* which may
be repeated two or three times as the skin dries, if the specimen
be a large one. Having settled the feathers, and affixed a ticket,
with date, locality, sex, colour of eyes, hill, and legs, and a number
referring to the note book, in which particulars should be entered
as to the contents of the stomach, &c., the skin should be carefully
pushed, head first into a cylinder of stiff paper (not funnel
shaped) made just wide enough to contain it, and not small enough
to cramp the bird—this keeps the wings together and the feathers
smooth whilst drying.
• Solution No. 1, p. 55.


Carefully ascertain the sex of each specimen by dissection.
On removing the intestines the ovaries (if a female), resembling
a small cluster of round seeds or beads, may be plainly seen,
situated on the inner surface against the back bone; if a male,
two small (usually yellowish) bodies will be found near the
same place. Large birds require to have the last joint of the
wings opened from without, along the inner margin, and any flesh
removed, and the bone and skin well anointed with the soap, after
which the incision may be sewed up, and the margins and joints
of the wings and legs well brushed with the solution of mercuric
chloride; should the legs (tarsi) of the birds be fleshy, as in some
of the larger ducks and geese, and some of the eagles, or puffed
out by decomposition, it will be necessary to slit them open along
the under portion, down to the soles of the feet, and rub in
arsenical soap or dry arsenic, bind the legs round tightly with
strips of rag or tow, to bring the skin into its original position,
until quite dry. This is, however, seldom necessary with the
Australian species, except when decomposition has set in.
Fishes.
These are best preserved in strong spirits of wine (methylated
spirit will do). Care must always be taken to have close air-tight
fitting stoppers to the vessels containing the spirits. The
specimens may be plunged in whole, after first having a small
opening made in the abdomen, to allow the preserving fluid to enter
the intestines. If they can be put in alive, all the better. If spirits
cannot be obtained, strong brine may be used, to which a little
alum may be added with advantage, and after the specimens have
been in soak for two or three days, they may be taken out and
well salted inside, and packed between layers of coarse salt, and
fastened up tightly in a box or keg. In all cases where small
specimens are placed among larger ones, or when they are packed
for transit in fluid, each one should be rolled up separately in cloth
or paper to prevent friction, without which precaution the fins
and spines are likely to get broken, and the fish damaged.
Specimens too large to be conveniently preserved whole may
be skinned, and the skin, with the head attached, be placed in the
preserving fluid, or salted, or they may be only partially skinned
—an opening being made in the abdomen (the intestines pushed
aside but not removed), and as much as possible of the back bone
and flesh should be taken out; this greatly reduces the bulk, and
permits of a long fish being doubled up into a comparatively small
compass.


Some of the larger fishes, rays, sharks, &c., may he preserved
dry, after skinning. Make an opening in the skin below the
pectoral fins, large enough to extract the body through, remove
the intestines, cut through the back bone and flesh all round, until
the skin is reached ; remove each portion of the body by cutting
through the fin bones inside, and pulling the skin back, after the
manner of .skinning eels; when doing the head portion, the cleaning
of the gills and removing of the brain, and all fleshy parts, must be
carefully attended to, and the whole of the skin, skull, and any
bones that may be left, well anointed inside with arsenical soap,
and powdered with burned alum ; the skin may be then sewed up
and the body filled out to its original proportions with dry sand or
dry sawdust, which, when the skin is dry and ready for packing,
may be shaken out to save room. Any parasites or intestinal
worms, eggs or young found inside, should be preserved in spirits
of wine.
The colour of the eyes and fins, and the general colouration
of the specimens should always be noted ; any information as to
their capture, &c., or respecting their habits will be valuable.
Reptiles.
Lizards, Snakes, Frogs, Turtles, Crocodiles, &c. —These
animals, when not too large, are best preserved in strong spirits ;
a small incision should be made in the abdomen to allow the
spirit to enter. The larger specimens of lizards may be skinned
in the manner described for mammals, but in filling out the tail,
feet and limbs, the material should be cut up fine, to allow its
being pushed into the small recesses, or dry sand or sawdust
may be used. Care must be taken in skinning the tail—which
cannot be stripped back, as in most cases with mammals—the
skin of the under side must he carefully slit up to the tip and the
tail removed, which can be replaced by an artificial one made of
tow wound round two or three rushes. In skinning lizards,
particularly the glossy species of Tropidolepisma, Gyclodus, &c.,
care should be taken not to break the tails, which are
particularly brittle.
In preserving large specimens in spirits, the bodies can be
skinned out through an incision made down the belly, the bones
of the legs, arms, tail and head being left attached to the skin.
Snakes are always best preserved in spirits, but if it be
desirable to skin some of the large boas and pythons common in
the north, it may be done by making an opening in the skin
just below the neck, a few inches in length along the belly, sever


the vertebra through to the skin, and turn out the body after
the manner of skinning eels ; do the same with the head portion,
leaving the skull attached to the skin, removing as much of the
flesh as possible, the eyes and the brains; anoint the head and
the whole of the skin on the inside with arsenical soap, and
powder it with burned alum ; turn the skin back and fill it out
with dry sand, &c., as directed for fishes ; curl the body into
shape.
Tortoises and Turtles may be preserved dry, the breast-
plate being more or less severed along the sides, laid back, and
the head, limbs and tail skinned and cured as before described
for animals; the carapace (back) should be well cleaned and
anointed with soap and burned alum, and the breast-plate
returned to its original position, may be sewn or wired on, and
the specimen set out to dry on a board ; in the smaller specimens
the bones within the body need not be removed, but cleaned
carefully and left in their places.
In the case of large Alligators or Crocodiles, &c., the entire
skeleton should be preserved, if possible. The flesh may be
easily removed from the bones, and the head carefully cleaned ;
and after drying a little, may be packed in dry sawdust, grass or
seaweed ; if the whole cannot be secured, obtain the head at least.
Insects.
Beetles, Bugs, Cockroaches, Centipedes, &c., in fact almost
all insects except Moths and Butterflies, are best killed in
spirits of wine. Procure a wide-mouthed bottle with tight-
fitting cork or stopper, half filled with methylated spirits of
wine, and plunge the insects in as soon as captured. For
killing beetles hot water may be used, if no spirits can be
obtained. Wasps, Hornets, and Flies may be killed in the
same way. Some beetles with powdery, hairy backs or thread-
like appendages on their wing-covers, should not be put in
spirits—they should be killed by chloroform, as advised in the
case of Moths and Gnats, &c.
Insects, when killed, may be taken out of the bottles and
dried on blotting paper or cloth, and then packed away with
dry sawdust previously soaked in weak carbolic acid and well
dried, in layers, in boxes, with a little crushed camphor
sprinkled through the sawdust. The boxes should be fastened
up tightly, and strips of strong paper pasted over the cracks.
They will keep this way for months. Small packages thus
prepared may be transmitted by post.


Lepidoptera, <Ssc.
Butterflies, Moths, and soft-winged insects in general,
should be killed by chloroform after first squeezing them
across the thorax and pinning them to the bottom of a cork-
lined collecting box. Most of the Butterflies, however, are
easily killed, and a slight pressure under the the wings
between the finger and thumb, is sufficient. Fat-bodied Moths,
&c., should be stuffed; make a longitudinal cut on the under
side of the abdomen, remove the intestines carefully and
replace them by a small piece of wadding, and bring the
edges together again. Small Lepidoptera may be first pinned
against the substance they are found resting on, and then put
in a box with chloroform, or a wide-mouthed bottle containing
cyanide of potassium, inverted suddenly over them ; the cyanide
may be kept at the bottom of the bottle by a piece of
gummed paper or wadding. Insects killed in this
way must be pinned aud “ set out ” as soon as
possible, as they dry and become brittle very quickly
after death. Moths and Butterflies, Gnats, &c., may be kept
for transmission, folded with their wings and the feelers between
them together and laid in triangular shaped pockets of paper
made by doubling a suitable sized square of paper into a trian-
gular form, turning over and gumming together the edges.
Land Shells.
Look on the leaves and stems of trees and large foliaged
plants, especially after a shower of rain, under leaves by the sides
of logs and fallen timber, sometimes burrowing the rotten timber
or in the ground beside it several inches deep.
Insects.
Many may be taken by having a bright light burning in the
tents at night, and can be caught on the canvas, &c., or they may
fly inside.
If large caterpillars are found at the depot, they should be
kept in a box with gauze over it and fed on the plant on which
they are found, until they turn to the chrysalis.
Land Shells
Are found most abundantly in the alluvial wooded regions,
especially upon hill-sides, where during the day they are concealed


under fragments of fallen trees, bits of bark, stones, &c., some-
times under leaves or in the tufts of rank growths of moss. Some
are found on the trunks of standing trees, also on the under sides
of the leaves, others found burrowing in the soft earth.
Fresh-Water Shells
Are found along the banks of rivers and creeks sticking to logs,
stones, leaves and aquatic plants; also in small pools, swamps and
rivulets. All species or specimens must be killed with boiling
water poured over them, then extract the animal with fine bent
wire. All bivalves must be tied together when dry, then put
away in boxes with any packing, such as moss, so as to prevent
them from getting broken.
Shells.
Shells, or the calcareous coverings of molluscous animals, only
require cleaning. The animals should be allowed to come partially
out of the shell, and then suddenly dash boiling water over them,
and leave them in the water for a few minutes, or more according
to the size of the specimen and thickness of the shell, the animal
can then easily be picked out with a pin or bent wire. The
horny or calcareous mouth 'pieces , or opercula, which close the
openings of certain shells, should always be preserved and
gummed inside the shells to which they belong. Bivalve shells
may be scalded with hot water and then cleaned, but in no case
allow the animal to rot out, as in most instances during decompo-
sition an acid is formed which corrodes and disfigures the pearly
lining of the shell. They may also be packed up in dry sand
without removing the animal, which will dry up, but may after-
wards, at a more convenient time, be softened in water and
removed.
General Remarks.
Wounded birds and animals may be easily killed by pressing
them tightly across the windpipe, In the case of smaller birds,
place the thumb and second finger under the wings on either side
and the forefinger in the hollow of the chest, just over the wind-
pipe, press all tightly together for a minute or so, until you find
that respiration has ceased.
The collector should always be careful to note down the
color of the eyes and fleshy parts as soon as possible after the
specimen is captured. The locality and situation in which the


White Arsenic
... 1 ft
Common or Hard White Soap* ...
... 1 lb
Salts of Tartar ...
... 4 oz.
Lime in Powder ...
... 3 oz.
}
Camphor ...
... 2 oz.
animal is taken, with a few remarks as to the style of the country
and the nature of the vegetation, geological characters, and
elevation, &c.; also the vulgar, local or native name, and the
rarety or commonness of the animal, and any information
respecting its habits, &c., being 'particular about the dates and
season of the year. The color and shape of Seals, Porpoises,
Whales, Dugongs, &c., should be carefully noted, and a sketch
made of their forms, whenever opportunity offers. In cases where
the skins of these animals cannot be cured, the skeleton or at
least the skull should always be preserved, being careful to note
the sex—the females should be carefully opened in search of the
foetus, which should be preserved in spirits.
Should the collector obtain what he believes to be a scarce or
rare animal the skull should not be cut or the opening at the back
part enlarged; with a little trouble the brains may be extracted
through the natural opening.
In preparing skeletons of animals for transmission to
Museums, if you have a choice of the animals, select the largest
and oldest, discarding those with fractured bones, if
you can get better. All the flesh should be carefully cut off, and
the bones made as clean as possible, the head, arms, legs, and tail
may be severed from the body, the back disjointed in convenient
sized pieces, and the parts thrown into a tank or tub of cold
water, with a few handfuls of salt, or about two or three ounces
to the gallon, the salt and water renewed every second or third
day for about a week or so; the remainder of the flesh can then
be removed, and the brains extracted through the opening at the
base of the skull, which must not be enlarged or cut in any way,
and the bones when dried packed up.
When none of the chemicals aforementioned can be obtained,
the specimens may be skinned in the way described, the skin and
the bones carefully cleaned, and the bodies filled out with fresh
dry charcoal, or wood ashes, crushed into a coarse powder, to
which may be added with advantage grated or bruised “ galls”
the excresences found on the twigs and leaves of many of the
gum trees {Eucalypti) ; hang the specimens up in a dry airy place
till quite dry.
Receipt for making Arsenical Soap.
* Soft Soap must not be used.


Mercuric Chloride* ...
| oz.
Camphor
... ... 1 oz.
Spirits of Wine
... 1 pint
Cut the soap into thin slices and melt it in a saucepan over a
slow fire, when melted add the Salts of Tartar which will reduce
the mass into a creamy consistency, take it off the fire and put in
the arsenic, and stir it up well, add the lime, and then the camphor
either reduced to a fine powder or dissolved in a small quantity of
strong methylated spirits of wine, stir the whole up well, and pour
out into earthenware jars to cool; if it is required very hard to
pack up for travelling with, it may be poured out into 'porous
vessels, when cold it may he cut out and pressed together into
cakes like common soap, and when wanted for use, softened with
a brush in a little water.
Solution No. 1.
Dissolve the camphor in methylated spirits with the mercuric
chloride, shaking it up occasionally until it is all dissolved.
General Remarks.
The brains of many of our Australian animals are interest-
ing and valuable to many of the naturalists, and should therefore
be collected whenever opportunities occur.
Having removed the head of the animal with at least two
of the neck vertebrae attached, make a straight cut from the
back of the head over the forehead and down to the nose,
throw the skin back on either side as far as the upper row
of teeth, remove the ears and any flesh that may be in the way,
but not the eyes; take a small sharp dissecting saw, or a tenon
saw and cut carefully and not quite through, the bone of the
skull round the upper part and across behind the ears and orbits
completing the circle ; now with a sharp strong knife, held as if to
cut a pencil, finish cutting through being careful not to stick the
point into the brain, prise up the piece from time to time as you
cut along to ease the cap off the brain and skin just under the
bone, when the cap is removed either in one or more pieces, a
membraneous covering called “ dura mater ” will be seen. Cut
this through carefully over the centre and sides of both hemi-
spheres, so as to allow the spirit to enter freely, now immerse the
* Corrosive sublimate.


whole in the spirit or preserving fluid to harden it; after a few
hours (10) remove it again, take off the dura mater carefully and
slightly open the hemispheres, shake the brain a little forward
from the base of the skull to allow the liquid to penetrated
behind to the very base where the cerebellum is situated; as the
brain will be a little shrunken and hardened you may remove the
thin membrane called the “ pia mater,” which will be found
immediately over the brain and between it and the first covering
called dura mater, replace the cap of bone, tie it in its place again,
and keep the whole covered in strong spirit.
The brains of abmngines so prepared would be of great
value.
Skeletons of the aborigines are much wanted, and for the
benefit of the collectors, annexed is a list of the separate bones
of a complete human skeleton.
Bones in the Human Skeleton.
Vertebral Column.
Neck, 7 (cervicals) .. .. .. .. 7
Back, 12 (dorsals) .. .. .. .. ~ .. .. 12
Loins, 5 (lumbra) .. .. .. .. .. ~ .. 5
Sacrum and coccyx, 2.. .. .. .. .. .. .. 2
The twenty-two (22) bones of the head or skull are considered here as one
piece (1), and the lower jaw as another ( 1). In the upper and lower jaws, there
should be 32 teeth in all.
3 3
Molars ~ .. g—- Three on either side, above and below.
2 2
Bicuspids .. .. g Two on either side, above and below.
Canines .. .. | | One ditto ditto ditto, ditto ditto ditto
2 2
Incisors .. .. wo ditto ditto ditto, ditto ditto ditto
Tongue bone (Hyoid) shaped something like the letter U .. 1
Breast bones (Sternum ). —Two large and one small piece, ossified
with age .. .. .. .. ~ .. ~3
Ribs, 24 —Twelve on each side .. .. .. .. ~ .. 24
Collar bones (2) one on each side .. .. .. .. .. 2
Shoulder blades [ Scapula) 2 .. .. .. .. ..2
Arm bones, 3 each (humerus, ulna (2), radius (3) .. ..6
Bones of the hand —Wrist or carpal bones, Bin each wrist.. .. 16
Middle of the hand, or Metacarpal bones, 5 each ~ .. .. 10
Fingers, 3 each = 121 . OQ
Thumb, 2 .. 2/ “ 14
Under the thumb joint 2 sesamoid bones .. .. .. ..2
Pelvis or hips, 2 bones .. .. .. ~ ..2
(In the young divided into 3 pieces,)


Leg Bones —
Femurs, 1 each .. .. .. .. ..
.. 2
Tibia, 1 ,,
.. 2
Fibula, 1 „
..2
Kneecap,! ,,
.. 2
Foot Bones —
.. 14
Metatarsus, 5 .. .. .. ..
.. 10
Sesamoid bones under the joint of the great toe*
.. .. 2
Toes. —Great toe 2, 4 other toes, 3 each —12 ..
.. 14 = 28
Skulls of aborigines found around native dwellings are of
little value, but authentic skulls may be obtained from the graves
of the natives of each tribe.
Crustacea.
The larger kinds, such as lobsters, crabs, crayfish, &c., and
some of the large swimming species, are usually obtained in deep
water by means of lobster pots or baskets, and traps of various
kinds, nets, &c., &c.: also by dredging and trawling, and in the
seine and trammel nets. They should have an incision made
under the carapace to allow the spirits to penetrate into their
bodies.
Many may also be obtained in fresh water, or even on land,
as the robber crabs, and hermit crabs, or in the streams, as the
freshwater crayfish, &c.
Small crabs, prawns, shrimps, &c., are obtained both from
shallow and deep water —in the former situation by wading and
turning over stones at low tides on the reefs; in the later by
means of the dredge. Many small Crustacea are found burrowing,
or in the canals of sponges &c.; others in the sand on the shore,
—under stones and masses of decaying seaweed or dead bodies ;
some burrow in mud also, others live in seaweed on the rocks,
or under them ; others (Pinotheres) inhabit large shells (living),
such as the large Tridachna or clam shells, and the Pinna; some
few in the interior of large sea urchins : a few small forms inhabit
dead medusae.
Small species inhabit stagnant pools, both in fresh and salt
water.
All may be preserved by throwing them into strong spirits
of wine. The smaller ones should be put into separate tubes or
bottles. In every case attach a label written with a lead pencil
on strong paper, or a tin-stamped number. Enter in your note-
book a corresponding number and as much information as possible
* The sesamoid hones are very small, and easily overlooked.


about each species, and the nature of the locality , and circum-
stances under which it is found. Also, its native name if that can
be ascertained.
Sponges
On the contents of the dredge being emptied, if the sponges
are mixed up with the mud, rinse them out in salt water, slightly
shaking, but not squeezing them. Put them into strong spirits
as soon as possible. On no account let them get dry, unless you
want them for the skeleton only, when the horny kinds can be
washed and squeezed out in fresh water, put in a shady, airy
place to dry, and packed in boxes.
Echinodermata.
All these, such as sea eggs, sea urchins, sea stars, &c., &c.,
may be thrown into spirits alive. If no spirits are to be had,
wash them in fresh water to get the salt out, and let them soak
an hour or so; dry them in the wind. Care must be taken to get
all the salt out of them , otherwise they will usually fall to pieces
and become useless.
Sea eggs, in the absence of spirits, should have the “ lantern ”
or mouthpiece containing the teeth, &c., cut round and taken out
carefully ; then the inside should be washed and the contents
shaken out. Replace the “ lantern ” and set the specimen away
to dry. In packing carefully 'protect the spines with paper or
shavings, rubbed grass or any soft substance, or roll them in
paper and pack in sawdust.
Sea worms, <kc., &c., ascidians, sea anemones, &c., &c., and all
soft marine animals should be washed out carefully if mixed with
the mud or ddbris of the dredge, and placed for a few minutes—
-3 to s—in a saturated solution of corrosive sublimate in water to
harden; then take them out and wash them in weak spirits for a
few minutes; afterwards put them in strong spirits and cork them
up tightly.
All marine specimens should have the labels of strong paper
written on with deep black lead pencil, and put in the bottle with
the specimen— do not use metal labels for these.
Large specimens of sea-stars, &c., which cannot conveniently
be put in spirits, can easily be cured by washing out the salt and
drying as above advised; pack up carefully and keep dry, in
rat-pxooi boxes. (A little spirit poured over them will help to
dry out the water.)


In dredging, respecting every haul, note the depth and locality,
and bottom and surface temperature of the water, and the time of
day; also the nature of the bottom, whether sandy, mud, mud
and clay, shells and sand, etc., etc., as the case may be; and keep
always some of the fine shell sand and debris for future examina-
tion : this can be put in small half-bushel bags, and let dry.
MARINE MAMMALIA.
Whole Skeletons or the skulls and lower jaws of all species
of whales should be collected. These are frequently found
washed up on the sea beaches.
Skeletons of porpoises and seals, &c„ are also desiderata.
The smaller kinds can be skinned, and the skins salted and
packed in strong brine, the skeleton cleaned and dried.
In the case of seals, prepare in the same way as any other
mammal and save the skeletons also. Use plenty of burnt alum
and paint the face, flippers and feet well several times while
dying with a strong solution of corrosive sublimate in spirits
of wine.
THE FOLLOWING ARE AMONG THE SPECIAL DESIDERATA
OF THE AUSTRALIAN MUSEUM.
Mammals.
Skins and skeletons whenever both or either can be obtained.
Look for small marsupial rats and allied forms. There
are several small “native cats” and small kinds of opossums, &c.
“ Hedgehogs ” or “ porcupines,” (Echidna). There are two or
three species. Cut open the belly and put the whole animal in a
large quantity of strong spirits. If plentiful, others may be
skinned and cured in the ordinary way. Always save the
skeletons. Look for a large species with a very long snout,
it is much larger than the N. S. Wales species.
A large bandicoot (Perameles Broadbenti).
Tree kangaroos and small scrub wallabies.
Skin and skeleton and some skulls of the wild pig of the
inland tribes.
Skins, skulls, and skeletons of Aborigines, males and
females.
Authentic skulls of aborigines from the graves of the natives
of each tribe, also the whole skeleton if possible.
Skulls with the hair left on of any mammals.


Birds.
Long curved billed paradise birds.
Golden orioles.
Twelve wired bird of paradise.
Nests and eggs of any species with the birds belonging to
them.
Very small parrots feeding in fig-tree, &c.
Cassowaries, their eggs, and their skeletons.
There are some very small Parrots, about three inches long,
worth looking for. They creep about the stems of the fig and
other fruit trees, and being all green on the back, are not easily
seen.
Be careful about sexing all birds.
Large Landrail—can scarcely fly.
Black Hawk, with some white markings on breast; very
thin, weak bill.
Nests and eggs of Paradise birds.
Nests and eggs of Bower birds.
Hawks and Owls of all kinds.
Long-tailed honey-eating Parakeets.
Fishes.
Particular attention should be paid to fresh water fishes, such
as are obtained from inland water-holes, lakes and lagoons
Those of the sea are not of so much importance.


INSECTS.
By A. Sidney Olliff.
Assistant Zoologist, Australian Museum.
The following method of preserving coleoptera or beetles, is
the one generally adopted by collectors who are travelling from
place to place, as it not only kills the insects but preserves them
in excellent condition as soon as they are captured. The specimens
when collected, should be placed in a wide-mouthed bottle, about
one-third filled with sawdust, containing a small piece of cyanide
of potassium, which, it should be recollected, is a deadly poison;
they will then die instantly, and without injury to themselves.
The sawdust should be sifted through muslin, and the chips
rejected, and should if possible, be of some light wood containing
little colouring matter. When the day’s collecting is over, the
insects contained in the collecting bottle, should be transferred to
a tin canister or stock bottle, which has been prepared by placing
a layer of sawdust at the bottom, similar to that used in the
collecting bottle. The sawdust should be slightly damped, not
soaked, with a mixture composed of nineteen parts of methylated
spirit or benzoline, and one part of carbolic acid. Another layer of
sawdust should then be added, then another layer of beetles, and
so on alternately until the tin is full. Tin canisters are to be
preferred on account of their being free from the danger of break-
age, but any kind of wide-mouthed bottle, such as a pickle jar, will
answer every purpose if it is provided with a tightly-fitting bung.
If this plan is from any reason found to be impracticable, the
beetles may be killed by being placed in a bottle with a drop of
chloroform on a piece of blotting paper or cotton wool. Lastly,
the beetles, with any other insects possessing hard integu-
ments, can be preserved in alcohol.
Butterflies should be killed without removal from the net by
a sharp nip applied to the muscles which are situated at the base
of the wings with the finger and thumb. If this is done when
the wings are over the back of the butterfly, very little evidence
of the rough usage will be left. Thick-bodied species are best
killed by means of a killing bottle, which may be made by
taking a wide-mouthed bottle with an air-tight bung and placing
three or four pieces of cyanide of potassium at the bottom, and
over this a thin layer of plaster of Paris, mixed with a sufficient
quantity of water to make it of about the consistence of thick


cream. A few pieces of cyanide with a pad of blotting paper
tightly pressed down over them will answer very if the
plaster of Paris cannot be obtained. Moths can also be
killed in the fumes of ammonia, chloroform or benzine. Butter-
flies should he placed in paper envelopes, folded in a triangular
form, but care must he taken that their wings are brought irTcon-
tact over their backs. A number of these envelopes packed in a
biscuit or similar tin, will travel any distance with perfect safety.
All should be pinned through the centre of the thorax, and
large species .should have the contents of the abdomen removed.
This is readily done by making a longitudinal incision on the
underside of the body, removing the contents, and substituting a
little cotton wool.
The small moths (Micro-Lepidoptera), to which I would draw
particular attention, must be pinned. They should be brought home
alive in pill-boxes and killed in the cyanide bottle, or the boxes
(having previously had a small hole bored in the bottom), may be
placed in a tin canister with a small piece of sponge or blottino-
paper moistened with chloroform or strong liquid ammonia and
left until the following morning, when they should be pinned.
The best way of collecting these little moths is to disturb leaves
low-growing plants, securing them as they fly out and
placing each specimen in a separate pill box.
Diptera (flies), Hymenoptera (bees, wasps, &c.), Neuroptera
dragon flies, mayflies, &c.), and all pubescent insects should be
pinned. They may be killed in the same manner as the moths.
Orthoptera (grasshoppers, walking-stick insects, &c.) and
Hemiptera (bugs) are best preserved in spirit, although the latter
may with safety be packed in sawdust with the beetles.


INSTRUCTIONS FOR BOTANIST.
For the purpose of elucidating to the fullest extent the
phytology of the country to be explored, the Botanist should
keep a diary, in which the principal botanical features of the
country should be noted, and into which any plant, either
remarkable or observed for the first time, should be introduced
under the same number or designation by which it is
distinguished in the herbarium.
To the specimens which will be collected, and which should
be pressed into paper always immediately, and dried as speedily
as circumstances will permit, a label should be fixed, containing
a note of the day of collecting, the habitat of the plant, the soil
of the locality, the color and perhaps odor of the flower, the nature
of the bark and of the wood of any arboreous species, the size of
the plants, and any other characteristics which cannot be derived
from the examination of the dried specimens.
These, when dried, it will be desirable should be well secured
against pressure and moisture, and the thus formed collections
should be forwarded to the Hon. Secretary of the Exploration
Committee, always at the very earliest opportunity afforded for
transmission.
To such selections of botanical specimens might be added
any well-matured seeds collected on the journey, which should
either be numbered corresponding to the specimens in the
herbarium, or be accompanied by leaves, flowers and seed vessels,
for the purpose of recognizing the species.
Samples of gums, resins, barks, and any other vegetable
substances, likely to be technical, or economical, or of medicinal
use, should be gathered and labelled in such a manner as to
facilitate specific determination.
No opportunity should be lost to obtain, through the officer
in charge of depots, or through reconnoitring parties, additional
specimens of plants and seeds.
Particular attention is directed to the necessity of closely
examining the Pandani and Palms which are likely to be met with
within the tropics; and since it will be difficult to procure the
large fruits of the former, and since the determination of the
species greatly depends on the habit of the plants, it would be of
great advantage to have, through the artist of the expedition,
sketches of the outlines of these rare trees secured, and the flowers
and fruits fully delineated.
Of any plants suspected to have been deleterious to animals,
such a quantity should be dried as will suffice for chemical anal y sis,
and any experiments to be instituted thereafter.


Of plants which may he of utility for food or otherwise, or
which are drawn into use by the natives, more particularly,
information is sought.
The following general directions, which have been drawn up
by Baron Sir Ferd. Yon Mueller, K.C.M.G., F.R.S., M.D., &c., &c.,
for the collection and preservation of botanical specimens, should
be given to the Botanical Collector, and to each member of the
expedition who may be able to render assistance to the Botanist.
1. To endeavour to secure as many different kinds of plants
as circumstances will permit, in order that the fullest insight
into the vegetation of any of the districts, traversed by the
expedition, be obtained.
2. To collect each phanerogamous plant, as well in flower as
in ripe fruit, whenever and wherever possible, and under no
circumstances, to miss collecting a plant when in fruit only.
3. Not to pass even the minutest plants, but in the case of
mosses, to endeavour to obtain fruiting specimens.
4. Not to miss collecting seaweeds and fresh-water weeds,
whenever the opportunity presents itself.
5. For securing proper material of palms, it will be needful
to preserve a leaf or portion of the leaf with part of the stalk,
but to add a flower-spike or a portion of it, also some ripe fruit.
Leaf, flower, and fruit of each species, to be carefully packed
together in strong paper, and then to be dried in the sun-warmth
or at a fire ; each sort of palm to be numbered, and a note to be
added at once to each species regarding height, nature of stem,
place of flowers, between or below the leaves, and any other
striking peculiarity, such as could not be ascertained from the
dried specimens.
6. To secure in the same manner, specimens of any bamboos,
which might happen to be in flower. A small piece of the stem
in these cases also to be gathered, and some leaves with basal
sheet.
7. To secure of very bulky specimens only, 1, 2 or 3, in all
other cases, several.
8. For hastening the drying of plants, so as to save time, the
specimens, after being put and pressed in paper, to be laid out
soon, in thin sets (plants and paper together with cross string)
in the open air or near a fire, to halve the set (as in shifting of
cards) after an hour or two, so that that the moist inner specimens
and paper come outward, and the outer drier portion inward ; this
process to be repeated till the specimens are quite dry. Time and
convenience for shifting plants from moist into dry paper being,
during travelling, rarely available. Under no circumstances to
allow specimens to rot.


9. Paper used for drying seaweeds cannot be used subse-
quently for drying any other kinds of plants.
10. Large dry fruits to be wrapped up carefully in strong
paper, and to be numbered correspondingly to the flower and
foliage specimens in the general collection; large succulent fruits
to be preserved in methylated alcohol, small labels to be attached
to them indicative of the number to be assigned to the flowering
and leafy specimens in the general collection.
11. Parcels of specimens, when perfectly dry, to be wrapped
up at once into wax cloth or some other fabric impervious to
moisture, of which material a large quantity, as well as of
printing and packing paper for drying plants, should be provided.
12. Some kerosene to be dropped between the dried
specimens before packing the parcels into wax cloth, with a view
of keeping off insects of all sorts, and such parcels, if possible,
to be packed into water-tight boxes, which might be provided
purposely at the outset of the expedition.
13. All smaller plants, including ferns, to be collected with
their roots ; of ferns, fruiting specimens only to be gathered and
no preference to be given to ferns for filling the collecting paper,
as they will mostly prove identical with Indian species, though
each kind should be present in the collection, with the object
of proving which of the South Asiatic species do occur in New
Guinea. Also tree ferns (or fern trees; to be marked as such on
the accompanying label, and to be noted what are the particular
characteristics of their stems.
13. On the labels to be noted, in the case of any specimens,
their precise locality, the date of collecting, the color of the fresh
flowers, any scent of the flowers. Further, the color of fresh
fruits, should they be succulent; also, in the case of trees, their
approximate height, the outer appearance of their bark, and
should a tree be felled, the nature of its wood.
14. When firewood for the engine, &c., is cut, a piece of
wood to be secured of any kind of tree, from which flowering or
fruiting branchlets can be obtained for identification. Timber
specimens without such accompanying flowering or fruiting
branchlets, will prove of little or no value.
15. When from friendly natives wood implements, wood
weapons, nets, cloths, fishing lines, &c., are obtained, an endeavor
should be made to trace these articles to the trees, shrubs, bamboos,
grasses, rushes, &c., affording the material, and a corresponding
label to be fixed both to the article in the ethnological collection,
and to the explanatory botanic set of specimens.


16, When steep mountains are to be ascended, or jungle to be
traversed, baskets to be carried, into which all sorts of specimens
in flower and fruit are to be put expeditiously, without paper, as
such specimens will keep for about a couple of days, particularly
if collected in dry weather. This will save the trouble of carrying-
much paper, which can be left at the camp : and if men are
available as carriers, they could carry each a basket on his back
tied with straps. Provisions could be carried in such baskets up
the mountains; and the empty baskets to be filled with plants as
specimens on the way down.
17. It is of the greatest importance to muster as many
different kinds of distinct species of plants as ever possible, as the
result of the expedition, so that a creditable enumeration can be
published therefrom; thus all sorts of fungi should also be
collected, the hard kinds requiring simply drying : the soft kinds
will need quickly to be immersed in methylated alcohol, from
which they should be removed after a few hours, and then be
simply dried, a note of the fresh colour to be attached to each
kind.
18. Seaweed of tender or gelatinous structure should be
floated out on writing paper, and only be pressed and covered by
blotting paper when nearly dry : rough kinds of algae need merely
be dried on a sunny place, or near a fire, till quite crisp, and can
then be simply tied together into a parcel, as they will be re-
soaked and prepared here afterwards, so that no time needs
necessarily be spent on rough seaweeds in preparing them during
the Expedition. Even green slimy masses in rivers, brooks, and
swamps can be floated out on writing paper like tender seaweeds.
19. Careful inspection of bark and roots should take place
for lichens in fruit: some are mere little specks of various colour,
each sort representing, however, microscopic characters of its own.
20. In a wet tropical country blotting paper can only
exceptionally be used for drying botanic specimens, as the mere
getting wet of one corner of the paper will draw by capilarity,
quickly, the humidity through the whole. A good kind of
printing paper is the best for drying plants in the tropics : of this
several reams should be available, and one ream or two of strong
packing and writing paper. To spin out the supply of paper as
far as possible during the journey’s operations, it will be needful
to pack closely together the dry plants whenever ready for
wrapping up into parcels, so that a portion of the paper could be
used again. Pasteboards should also be available to some extent,
for pressing and packing botanic specimens,


2L It is a mistaken notion to rely on bulbs, tubers, seeds,
and living plants to be carried away instead of flowering and
fruiting specimens. Such tubers, seeds, seedlings, shoots, &c.,
may, in conservatories not flower for years, and seldom ever
produce mature fruits in culture,
22. When the land-party reaches the temperate and cold
zones of the higher mountain regions the most strenuous efforts
should be made by all members of the party to make as large a
collection of flowering and fruiting specimens of the various trees
(probably oaks, cypresses, junipers, &c. among them), also
of the various shrubs (whether ornamental, as rhodendrons, &c., or
not showy), so also of all rushes (in fruit), grasses, herbs, &c.; the
approximate elevation of each of their places of growth to be
carefully noted on the label. If, under the urgency of circum-
stances, only small specimens of each sort can be brought, it will
suffice, provided the specimens are so selected that a photogra-
pher can work with them. The higher the elevations in the
ranges, the more numerous and interesting will be the new forms.
23. If any particular insect or bird &c. lives on any particular
plant, a note to that effect should be made on the label. Entries
of such kind in the diary should, as speedily as possible, be copied
out, and placed with the specimens at once, as otherwise, subse-
quent confusion is sure to occur.
24. Even on the sea-shores or river-banks specimens of
the common mangroves in flower and fruit should be secured, as
well as of any other widely distributed series of plants, inasmuch
as such common plants may not yet have been recorded from New
Guinea; and as the specimens, if properly labelled, will afford us
the means of recording new particular localities, which will
always be done under the finder’s name.


GENERAL INSTRUCTIONS.
The Leader, officers and scientific staff shall each keep a
diary in duplicate for the Geographical Society, and shall each
record not only matters concerning his own special department
but all that he deems of interest. The duplicate copies should
be placed with the camp equipment, and never be taken out when
making explorations away from camp.
The diary is to be kept regularly, and all observations made
during the day are to be entered before the next day, and as soon
as possible after the camp is pitched for the night, and the neces-
sary duties connected with camping, attention to stores, &c., are
completed. This is to be in all cases determined by the leader.
Tracings or plans of the route should be obtainable from the
Leader, upon which to mark the position of observations. To
effect this rapidly, the daily observations in the journal should be
numbered, and a corresponding number placed on the map at the
point where the observation was made, or to which it refers.
The Nautical Sub-Leader shall keep a similar diary, record-
ing his daily work and experience.
Observations upon the natives, and the physical features,
geology, fauna and flora of the country, should be copiously
illustrated by sketches and photographs, with the number of
the specimen or observation in the journal to which they refer,
attached.
All views should be numbered and dated with the time of
day, the position whence they were taken marked on the map,
and the compass bearing, and estimated distance, given of the
extreme points embraced in each view.
Scientific observations, or work that would cause hindrance,
or otherwise interfere with the progress or necessary work of the
Expedition, must never be undertaken if contrary to the instruc-
tions of the Leader.
All specimens, journals, sketches, photographs, maps, or other
documents to be exclusively the property of the Geographical
Society, and on no pretence whatever are either specimens or
copies of the said documents, &c., to be given away or forwarded
privately to any person, or even officially, except through the
Leader ; although it is intended that each observer should, on
publication of the results of the Expedition, receive the credit
due to him for his observations.


All scientific or other documents, journals, &c., relating to
the Expedition to be at all times accessible to the Leader.
In the event of any occurrence by which a member thinks
himself aggrieved, it shall on demand be entered in the Leader’s
diary, with the attested statements of the member in question, as
soon as possible. All such matters shall be dealt with by the
Administrative Council after the return of the Expedition to
Sydney. Every member of the party shall abide by the decision.
Each member of the Expedition shall receive a copy of the
above instructions, and he is expected to render every assistance
in his power to his colleagues when opportunity offers.
Special Memoranda.
Always make natives march in front.
Never land in face of a party of natives, who are without
their women and children.
In making a movement, or marching before natives, always
have a covering party.
ADDITIONAL INSTRUCTIONS SENT BY LETTER AND
TELEGRAM TO THE LEADER.
June 13 th, 1885.
Herewith you are furnished with memoranda relative to (1)
the route from Thursday Island to the Aird River; (2) the
necessity of taking interpreters; and (3) the best ways of
obtaining the goodwill of the natives. Of some of these sug-
gestions the Council think highly. They request you will not
fail to obtain one or more interpreters, and take them with you.
Whilst considering it wise not to hamper you with definite
instructions on the other points, they yet request you to give your
most serious attention to them, and not to disregard them without
ample reasons for so doing.
The memoranda have been drawn up by John F. Mann, Esq.,
and Law, Hargrave, Esq., both of whom have the advantage of
speaking from experience gained in New Guinea itself, a fact
which gives great weight to their opinions.
June 18th, 1885.
At the eleventh hour Mr. W. Hastings Senior, and Mr.
Arthur J. Yogan have, with your approval, been permitted to ioin
the Expedition, No agreement having been made with these
gentlemen, they will please sign the ship s articles.


The Council do not wish the clause in the instructions
confining exploration to British territory, to be too literally
observed. If there is at any time good reason to expect im-
portant discoveries might be made at a short distance over the
boundary line, you will be at liberty to cross the line for that
special purpose.
June 15th, 1885.
(Telegram.) Captain Everill is specially requested to make
sure that no intoxicants are taken on board the Bonito by any of
the party.
June 15th, 1885.
(Telegram.) It is announced that a German expedition is to
shortly start to explore German New Guinea. This should put
our men on their mettle: at the same time it will show the
wisdom of respecting the boundary line, and using the special
permission to cross it with the utmost discretion.
June 18th, 1885.
As news of the expedition will be anxiously looked for by
the friends of those who are taking part in it, will you have a
list prepared and sent from Thursday Island, of the names and
addresses of persons to whom the various members of your party
may wish information to be sent. In the event of news being
brought by the “ Advance,” or coming through other channels,
the explorers may be assured of their friends being fully
informed thereof.
Of course you will understand that the list must include the
friends of the engineer and the seamen, and you are requested
to inform these men that the Society has received, and been much
gratified by, the report you have been able to send of their ability
and conduct on the way to Brisbane.
The Society will be equally ready to send information to
Batavia—should it be so desired by the Malays.
June 18th, 1885.
You are desired to be exceedingly careful with reference to
the transmission of news of discoveries made in New Guinea, and
if you are able to send reports by any vessel during the progress
of the Expedition, they must be under seal and addressed to the
Secretary. This is necessary to ensure the news being distributed
to the various Governments and newspapers at one and the same
time.


PROVISIONS
50 lbs Tea
112 „ Coffee
86 Cocoa
620 „ Sugar
385 ~ Biscuits
1000 Flour
6 Kegs Corned Beef
858 lbs Tinned Beef and Mutton
5 Kegs Cod Fish
2 Cases Ling
1 Keg Molasses
2 Tons Rice (for the Malays)
355 lbs Bacon and Hams
6 Cases assorted Preserved Meats
and Fish
1 dozen bottles Sauce
150 lbs White Beans
50 lbs Split Peas
50 lbs Lard, in tins
70 lbs Oatmeal
1 Bag Salt
224 lbs Soap
207 lbs Tobacco
84 lbs Candles
48 Tins Condensed Milk
36 One-lb Tins Butter
70 Two-lb Tins Butter
77 lbs Currants
2 gross Damp-proof Matches
7 gross Safety Matches
8 gallons Vinegar
25 tins (2 oz) Liebig’s Extract
12 tins (4 oz) ditto
36 lbs Sultanas
72 lbs Dates
2 dozen Boxes Figs
Total Cost of Provisions.
i, £255.
10 boxes Tea, the gift of Messrs. Griffith Bros
GENERAL STORES.
24 Mosquito Nets
12 Blankets
12 yards Waterproof Macintosh Sheets
98 yards Grey Calico
12 Men’s Serge Trousers, for the
Malays
12 Men’s Serge Shirts, ditto
2 cases Collins’ Axes
1 case Weed’s Hunter’s Hatchets
3 “ Lightning” Cross-Cut Saws
24 Pannikins (one pint each)
3 dozen Camp Kettles
PROVISIONS, STORES, ARMS, &c., &c.
12 dozen Tins preserved Fruits
4 Tins (each 56 lbs) Preserved
Potatoes
6 Tins (each 16 lbs) Preserved
Vegetables
40 lbs Corn Flour
1 case Hop Bitters, the gift of Messrs. Montefiore, Metcalfe and Co.
7 Packages Curry, Pepper and Mus
tard
2 dozen round Tin Meat Dishes
1 „ tin Dinner Plates
1 „ Knives and Forks
2 „ Johnson’s Sheath Knives
2 „ Leather Sheaths for same
1 „ Williams’ Butcher’s Knives
2 „ Metallic Tape Measures
6 “Vagabond” Tents
16 Flasks, with cups and slings
2 dozen White Duck Haversacks
3 ~ Flints and Steels


MEDICAL STORES AND COMFORTS.
60 oz Quinine, &c.
Various Medicines, selected by Dr. Belgrave and the Surgeon of the Expedition,
value £27
1 case Brandy
1 case Gin
10 gallons Colonial Wine
28 tins Arrowroot
STATIONERY.
Note Books, Charts, Commercial Code, Log Book, Paper, Envelopes, Pens, Ink,
Pencils, &c., value £25.
STEAMER’S OUTFIT.
Life Buoys, Signals, Patent Log, Lanterns, Steam Whistle, Flags, Tallow, Paints,
Oils, Cotton Waste, Brooms, Tools, Nails, and other requisites for
Engine Room, Deck, Cabins, &c. ; total cost, £l2O.
WHALE BOAT.
Cost, all complete, with awning, &c,, &c., £45,
TRADE,
5 dozen Hatchets
4 „ Pocket Knives, assorted
3 „ pairs Scissors
6 „ Iron Table Spoons
1 „ Sportsman’s Knives
2 „ Fishing Lines
100 „ Limerick Fish Hooks
Quantity of Iron—sheet and hoop
3 cwt Galvanized Iron Wire
2 pieces (121 yards) Prints, 4 ‘ Island
Fancies”
5 pieces “ Turkey Red ” Calico
2 pieces (96 yards) Scarlet Saxony
Flannel
5 dozen Island Handkerchiefs
dozen Cricket and Boating Caps
4 dozen Fancy Garters
3 boxes (191 lbs) Tobacco
4 cwt Salt
1 gross Jews’ Harps
6 dozen Mouth Organs
1 gross Tin Whistles
3 „ Pipes
10 ~ Matches
19,500 Beads, assorted
3 dozen Feather Dusters
1 gross Snake Bracelets
1 ~ Glasses
3 „ Zinc Mirrors


3 Snider Rifles.
3 Winchester Rifles
12 Double-barrel breech-loading Guns
12 Bull Dog Revolvers
2500 Cartridges
2000 Snider Cartridges
3000 Brass Cartridges
5000 Revolver Cartridges
112 lbs Shot
64 lbs Lead
2 doz No. 5 Powder
3 Crimping Machines
2 lbs Grey Felt Wadding
SCIENTIFIC
2 Compensation Balance Silver
Watches, keyless
1 Maximun and Minimum Ther-
mometer
2 Aneroid Barometers, with leather
cases
2 Clinometers with spirit levels, do
1 Pocket Sextant in leather case.
1 Thermometer in case
24 Small Pocket Compasses
CHEMICALS, &c.
1 Drum, 751bs, Plaster of Paris
10 lbs White Arsenic
5 lbs Camphor
5 lbs Corrosive Sublimate
50 lbs Burnt Alum
10 lbs Arsenical Soap
10 lbs Glycerine
2 lbs Chloroform
5 lbs Strong Ammonia, in bottles
1 lb Muriatic Acid
f lb Cyanide of potassium
5 lb Collodion
2 lbs Chromic Acid in Crystals
\ lb Gelatine
6 lbs Carbolic Acid
1 lb Arseniate of Soda
2 lbs Ether, in gib bottles
2 lbs Sulphur
2 lbs Dry Gum
1 lb Arseniate of Potash
6 Syringes (various sizes) for inject-
ing
1 Morphia Syringe
3 Glass Funuels
ARMS, AMMUNITION, &c.
1000 Cardboard Wads
3 Shot Measures.
INSTRUMENTS
FOR COLLECTORS,
and Mammals
sects.
3 12-guage Combination Machines
3 Powder Measures.
6 Barrel Cleaners, 12 guage
3 Barrel Cleaners, Revolvers
3 Bullet Moulds, 12 guage
12 Steel clip Cartridge belts.
Leather casting boxes, turn screws,
nipper wrenches, plyers, hand
vice and files
4 Doz. best ship signal Rockets.
3 Doz. Bickford’s DT fuse
1 Pocket Log
1 Brass Parallel ruler,
2 Ivory Protractors
2 Brass Compass Dividers
1 Field Glass and Case
1 Prismatic Compass and leather
1 Artificial Horizon and leather case
2 Pocket Compasses
5 Rolls of Cotton Wool
10 Bundles of Tow
4 Dozen empty Canvas Bags for A
dredging debris I ’sb
2 Rolls of Rope, 50 fathoms each I’g
2 Galvanised Iron Tubs | -S
2 Dredges and 4 Nets I §
4 Sieves ) **■*
1000 Small Tin Labels, numbered from
1 to 1000 for labelling Birds
5 Double-boxes, cork lined, for in-
3 Cases of Glass Jars, screw tops.
£ gross in each case, various
sizes
4 Casks of White Spirit, 117 gallons
1 Man-hole Cask, filled with sawdust
6 Iron Man-hole Collecting Drums.
10 Wooden Cases, tin-lined, size24in
x 18in x 12in
1 Wooden Case, containing 50 tins
for collecting, sizes 12in x 12in
x Gin, and 12in x 6in x 6in


MISCELLANEOUS
12 Yards Calico, to be oiled for Zoo-
logical and Botanical Collectors
2 Gallons of Oil, and Brush, for do.
4 Collecting Canvass Bags
48 Cardboard Collecting Boxes
1 Prospecting Pick
2 Hachet Hammers for Collectors
1 Pair Scissors, do
2 Knives, do
1 Package of Seed for Botanist
2 Large and 2 Small Brushes.
2 lbs Beeswax for Collector
4 Small Boxes of Gum Labels
PHOTOGRAPHIC
1 Half-plate, brass-bound, folding
Camera, with three slides to
hold six plates, and leather case
for same
1 Ross’ Rapid rect-lense
1 Tripod Stand, 1 Focussing Cloth.
1 Ruby Lamp, and spare ruby glasses
22 Half-plate Tin Boxes, each con-
taining 12 dry plates.
4 Half-plate Wooden Boxes, each
containing 24 dry plates.
4 Half-plate Wooden Boxes, each
containing 12 dry plates,
4 Half-plate Ebonite Trays.
26 Dozen half-plate Baker’s dry-plates
10 Dozen half-plate Baker’s dry-plates.
instantaneous
ARTICLES
APPARATUS
FOR COLLECTORS.
1 Beam of White Blotting Paper
2 Reams of White Paper, for packing
plants
1 Ream of Brown Paper, do
1 Package of 60 sheets of Cardboard
1 Spring Balance, 281bs
2 Rolls Copper Wire, 11b
1 Pair Nippers
20 Yards of Muslin
Guaze Wire Netting, 10ft long, with
minute meshes
8 pairs Scissors, Knives, Saws, Pin-
cers and Plyers, for Zoologist
AND CHEMICALS.
4 Ounces Pyro-acid
J lb Bromide of Potassium
Baker’s Stock Solution, No. 1
Baker’s Stock Solution, No. 2
2 lbs Hypo-sulph-soda
2 lbs Alum
6 ozs Soda Sulph.
1 Set Scales and Weights.
lb Ammonia Bromide
6 oz Liquid Ammonia
1 Bottle Negative Varnish
1 Quire Blotting Paper
1 Tin Box, for lamp and dry plate
3 Cedar air-tight Cases, with locks
and keys, for holding the boxes
of dry plates.


THE OWEN STANLEY RANGE
EXPLORATION
Mr, H. O. FORBES, F.R.G.S,




THE OWEN STANLEY RANGE EXPLORATION
AND MR. H. 0. FORBES, F.R.G.S.
This gentleman, who is well-known in scientific circles in
London and who has had some experience of exploration in the
neighbourhood of New Guinea, undertook last year to explore the
great Owen Stanley range of mountains lying at the rear of Port
Moresby. The undertaking was entirely a private one so far as
arrangements and responsibilities were concerned, but Mr. Forbes
had grants, of five or six hundred pounds in all, from the Royal
Geographical Society and one or more other English societies; this,
however, left him considerably short of the amount he would have
to expend. Under these circumstances, Mr. Forbes, about the end of
February cabled to Sydney “Willing join Lawes or Chalmers’
expedition, if neither able (to) go, will Society co-operate with me.”
As neither of the gentlemen named were able to lead the Society’s
Expedition, the question of supporting Mr. Forbes was discussed
between the Sydney and Melbourne branches of the society. Lord
Derby had given special permission to Mr. Forbes to enter New
Guinea, and, as His Excellency the High Commissioner viewed
his (Mr. Forbes’s) expedition with much favor, it was soon decided
that he should be supported, but the special form which such
support or co-operation should assume was not arranged without
lengthened deliberation. It was at one time proposed to send two
scientific gentlemen to join Mr. Forbes, at the cost of the Society,
and also to make a money grant towards his general expenses: but
the scheme was ultimately abandoned, and it was decided to make
a grant of £5OO, subject to certain clearly defined conditions, which
are fully set forth in the letters, &c., which we append. The
Society thinks the generous support given to Mr. Forbes to have
been wisely given, inasmuch as his Expedition, becomes Anglo-
Australian instead of purely English; and Australia will be
entitled to a full share of the results of his exploration.
Sydney, April 13, 1885.
Dear Sir—l confirm my letter of the 21st ultimo, addressed
to you at Batavia. Since that date, a cablegram has been received
advising that you would leave England on the 30th ultimo, and
asking the amount of help the Society intended to grant. The


Society having been anxious to deal with you in a liberal manner,
decided to assist you to the extent of £SOO, if required, under
certain conditions, and a cable-message to this effect was sent to
Mr. Anderson in London.
I must explain to you that in consequence of the funds of the
Society, for exploration purposes, consisting almost wholly of mon-
ies voted by Colonial Governments, our expenditure will be
subject to a close audit and we are, therefore, obliged to use the
greatest exactness in financial and other details.
The £5OO, or so much thereof as you may require, is to be
paid to you in the form of monthly or periodical allowances,
and the conditions which I am directed to put before you are
simply; (1) that you, in consideration of such assistance, give the
Society, at the earliest time possible, a complete report, and a
duplicate collection of specimens; (2) that you recognise the Rev.
W. G. Lawes as in every respect the agent and official representa-
tive of the Society.
The Rev. W. G. Lawes, who for some time past has been in
Sydney, leaves here on the 18th instant, for Port Moresby. He
takes with him a written form of agreement which kindly sign.
I herein enclose a copy.
As the method of payment named may not be quite
practicable, authority has been given to Mr. Lawes to alter or
vary the same in such manner as he deems to be required by
circumstances. The Society will open a bank credit at Cooktown,
in favour of Mr. Lawes, whose payments to you will probably be
in the form of drafts on the said Bank.
In conclusion, I ask you to accept the Society’s good wishes
for a safe and thoroughly successful exploration in the interesting
and important district you have chosen for your Expedition.
I remain, dear sir,
Yours truly,
(Signed) E. Pulsford, Secretary.
To H. 0. Forbes, Esq., F.R.G.S.
Thursday Island.
FORM OF AGREEMENT TO BE SIGNED BY Mr. FORBES.
In consideration of the subsidy granted by the Geographical
Society of Australasia to assist me in the exploration of the Owen
Stanley range of mountains:—l hereby agree to give the said
Society, at the earliest time possible, a complete report on the
country explored, and a duplicate collection of specimens; delivery
-thereof to be made to the Society in Sydney, or to the Rev. W. G.
Lawes, in New Guinea.


I further agree to recognise the Rev. W. G. Lawes as in
every respect the agent and official representative of the said
Society.
Sydney, April 13th, 1885.
The Rev. W. G. Lawes, Sydney.
Dear Sir, —The following resolution has been passed by the
Council:—
“ The Administrative Council of the Geographical Society of
Australasia hereby request and authorise the Rev. W. G. Lawes
to act as its agent and official representative in making and
carrying out the needful arrangements in connection with the
subsidy granted by the Society to assist Mr. H. O. Forbes in his
exploration of the Owen Stanley range. The following resolution
passed by the Council on the 31st March conveys the wishes and
intentions of the Society : ‘ That the arrangement to be made
with Mr. Forbes be a monthly allowance, for a period to be agreed
upon, so that the aggregate allowance shall not exceed £5OO.
Mr. Forbes to supply duplicates of all specimens and of all reports
upon country explored.’ The Council, considering that it may be
impracticable for the money to be paid in the way stated, hereby
authorise Mr. Lawes to alter or vary the method of payment in
such manner as he deems to be required by circumstances. Mr.
Lawes is requested to obtain Mr, Forbes’ signature in duplicate to
a written agreement, and also to obtain duplicate receipts for all
payments.”
In accordance with the foregoing resolution, and your own
kind promise to accept the position, I ask that you will consider
yourself the agent and official representative of this Society, in
arranging and disbursing the subsidy granted to Mr. Forbes.
The sum of £5OO will this week be placed to your credit at
the Queensland National Bank, Cooktown, where it will be
necessary for you to call to leave your signature, and to arrange
any detail required.
With this are sent: (1) letter for Mr. Forbes, (2) Form of
Agreement to be signed in duplicate by him, (3) a number of forms
to be used by Mr. Forbes in giving receipts, (4) six copies of the
Society’s “ Proceedings.” One of the forms of receipt is filled up
for your guidance ; details of course may be varied as required.


In conclusion allow me to again express my appreciation of
your helpful kindness, and to wish you a safe and pleasant
voyage to Port Moresby.
I remain, dear Sir,
Yours faithfully,
(Signed) E. Steickland,
Vice-President Geographical Society
of Australasia.
As intimated, the £5OO was put to the credit of Mr. Lawes,
and he telegraphed from Cooktown that he had called at the
Bank, and that all was in order. The Society cannot too strongly
express the sense of its deep indebtedness to Mr. Lawes, and
indeed without his aid it would have been a very difficult matter
to carry out its wishes with regard to Mr. Forbes.
At the meeting of the Administrative Council held on April
10th, the following resolution was moved by Sir Edward
Strickland in laudatory terms :
“ The President and Council of the Geographical Society of
Australasia offer to the Rev. W. G. Lawes their most sincere thanks
for the readiness and kindness with which, during his stay in
Sydney, he has assisted them with information and advice relative
to New Guinea exploration; and further, for having undertaken the
task of arranging and conducting the Society’s business with Mr.
H. O. Forbes.”
The resolution was seconded by Dr, Belgrave, and carried
with acclamation.
Contrary to expectation Mr. Forbes did not leave London
till the month of April. On May 14th a cablegram was received
from him announcing his arrival in Java, and stating that he would
remain there a month collecting porters. He also asked for
information about the conditions attached to the grant to him, to
which message a reply was sent to him by cable. The Society
takes this opportunity of most warmly thanking Mr. J. E. Squier,
the Manager of the Cable Company, for the favour of the free
transmission of various messages to London and Batavia, which
relieved the Society of no slight expense
July 18.—A cable message is to hand from Mr. Forbes,
stating that the 8.1.5. N. Company had refused to take his
porters by the steamer Dorunda, and asking the Society to
arrange for their passage by the next steamer. Mr. Forbes will
not be likely, therefore, to get to New Guinea before September.
F. Cunninghame & Co., Printers, 146 Pitt-street, Sydney




' ■■ ~ ! . • : " 1 ■*.
■ ■
'■ y: , i’ -; ■■ »': A * ' - . -. r ‘-v - •
