

Commonwealth Parliamentary Association
(Victoria Branch)
Speeches delivered at the
LUNCHEON
THE HONORABLE JOHN LEMMON, M.L.A.
on his Completion of Fifty Years’ Continuous
Service as a Member of the Legislative Assembly
of the State of Victoria
(Ist June, 1904 to Ist June, 1954)
Parliament House, Melbourne,
Ist June, 1954.
W. M. HOUSTON, Government Printer, Melbourne.


;
■


Speeches delivered at the
LUNCHEON
given by the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association
(Victoria Branch)
THE HONORABLE JOHN LEMMON, M.L.A.
on his Completion of Fifty Years’ Continuous
Service as a Member of the Legislative Assembly
of the State of Victoria.
(Ist June, 1904 to Ist June, 1954)
CHAIRMAN:
The Hon. P. K, Sutton, Joint President and Speaker of
the Legislative Assembly.
THE GUEST OF HONOUR:
The Hon. John Lemmon was escorted to his place at the table
by the Joint Presidents and Members of the Executive Committee.
On his entrance Mr. Lemmon was greeted with applause.
The HON. SECRETARY (Mr. H. K. McLachlan). —I have to
announce apologies for non-attendance from the following members
of Parliament:
Mr. J. S. Bloomfield, M.L.A.
The Honorable P. T. Byrnes, M.L.C.
The Honorable K. Dodgshun, M.L.A.
The Honorable W. O. Fulton, M.L.C.
The Honorable J. W. Galbally, M.L.C.
The Honorable T. Hayes, M.L.A.
The Honorable Sir James Kennedy, M.L.C.
The Honorable A. R. Mansell, M.L.C.
The Honorable G. S. McArthur, M.L.C.
Mr. W. Ruthven, V.C., M.L.A.
The Honorable G. J. Tuckett, M.L.C.
The Honorable A. G. Warner, M.L.C.
Mr. R. K. Whately, M.L.A.


The following congratulatory letters and telegrams have been
received from the General Council and sister branches of the
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association:
Dear Mr. McLachlan,
I have heard with great interest that your Branch of the Commonwealth
Parliamentary Association is giving a luncheon on Ist June next to the
Hon. John Lemmon, M.L.A., in honour of his having completed on that day
50 years’ continuous service as a Member of the Legislature.
I should like to take the opportunity, on behalf of the General Council
of the Association, to extend warm congratulations to Mr. Lemmon, both
on the completion of what, I would think, is a unique and unparalleled
period of continuous service, and on his valued support of the Association
as a Member of your Branch since its foundation nearly 30 years ago.
I am sure that Members of the Association in the Parliaments of the
Commonwealth, represented by the General Council, would individually
wish to congratulate Mr. Lemmon on completing this great record of
service. As an Officer of all the Branches, I should like to ask you to take
an opportunity of conveying this message to Mr. Lemmon from the Council
and from the Members generally throughout the Commonwealth. I would
like to express also the sincere hope of the Council and of myself that
Mr. Lemmon will be spared for many more years to carry on his work
for your Parliament and for the Association.
Yours sincerely,
Howard d’Egville,
(Secretary-General, General Council).
{Telegram.)
McLachlan,
Secretary,
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association,
Parliament House, Melbourne.
At Luncheon June first please convey Mr. Lemmon warmest congratula-
tions of Executive Committee United Kingdom Branch of Association on
completion of fifty years continuous and distinguished service in Legis-
lative Assembly Victoria. In membership of Association Mr. Lemmon ranks
with Sir Winston Churchill foundation member of this Branch.
J. G. Lockhart,
(Secretary, U.K. Branch).
Dear McLachlan
Will you please convey the heartiest congratulations and sincere good
wishes of the Northern Ireland Branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Association to the Honorable John Lemmon, M.L.A., on the completion
of fifty years’ continuous service as a Member of the Legislative Assembly
of Victoria.
We know that Mr. Lemmon is an ex-Minister of the Crown and also a
foundation Member of the Melbourne Branch of the Commonwealth
Parliamentary Association, and is a great supporter of the aims and
objects of the Association, and we hope that he will be long spared to
render still further signal service to the Victoria Branch.
Yours sincerely,
Geo. Thomson,
(Honorary Secretary,
Northern Ireland Branch).


{Telegram.)
Comparlasso,
McLachlan,
Victoria.
Canadian Branch of Commonwealth Parliamentary Association extends
greetings and congratulations to Honorable John Lemmon may he continue
for many years in the service of his country.
L. J. Raymond,
(Honorary Secretary, Canada Branch).
Dear Sir,
I am directed by my Executive Committee to convey to the Honorable
John Lemmon, M.L.A., through the Victoria Branch, the very warm
congratulations of the members of the Commonwealth of Australia Branch,
on his completion of fifty years’ continuous service as a Member of the
Legislative Assembly of Victoria.
Mr. Lemmon’s very long Parliamentary record and his public service in
the State of Victoria are well known; they confer distinction not only upon
the Victoria Branch but upon all the Australian Branches of the Common-
wealth Parliamentary Association.
Yours sincerely.
F. C. Green,
(Honorary Secretary,
Commonwealth of Australia Branch).
(Telegram.)
The Hon. John Lemmon, M.L.A.,
care H. K. McLachlan, Honorary Secretary,
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association,
Parliament House, Melbourne.
Joint Presidents and members this Branch Association delighted to
realize your completion of fifty years continuous and outstanding Parlia-
mentary service as Member of Legislative Assembly of Victoria, a record
probably unequalled in Australia. On behalf of Joint Presidents and
members this Branch I extend to you their warm congratulations on your
distinguished Parliamentary record and as one of its foundation members
on your long and ardent support of the Association.
H. Robbins,
(Honorary Secretary, N.S.W. Branch).
(Telegram.)
Hon. J. Lemmon,
c/o McLachlan,
Parliament House, Melbourne.
On behalf of Queensland Branch extend congratulations on completion
50 years’ continuous service as Member Victorian Parliament. Queens-
land’s best is just under 40 years.
J. H. Mann,
(Speaker, Queensland Parliament).


( Telegram .)
Mr. H. K. McLachlan,
Hon. Sec., Victoria Branch,
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association,
Parliament House, Melbourne.
Please convey to the Hon. J. Lemmon heartiest congratulations and
very best wishes of the President Executive and Members of this Branch
on the unique record of having represented the same district in the
Legislative Assembly for 50 years continuously.
I. J. Ball,
(Honorary Secretary, S.A. Branch).
My Dear Mr. Lemmon,
It affords me great pleasure, at the direction of the Executive Com-
mittee of the Western Australian Branch of the Commonwealth Parlia-
mentary Association, to extend to you heartiest congratulations on your
completion of fifty years’ continuous service as a Member of the Legislative
Assembly of the Parliament of the State of Victoria.
During this long period you have endeared yourself, not only to your
colleagues in your own august Parliament, but you have made numerous
friends throughout the Commonwealth. We, in this State, know you
well, for it has been our great privilege to meet you on the many occasions
that you journeyed to Western Australia.
Yours is a record of which to be justly proud, and is no doubt
unsurpassed by any Member in an Australian Parliament. You have
served your Parliament and State with high distinction for 50 years, and
it is the fervent wish of this Branch that you will be spared long years
of good health and strength to enjoy the well-earned retirement that we
believe you are contemplating.
The splendid service you have rendered for so many years to this
Association is well known and appreciated. This Branch joins with your
own in the congratulations that will well-deservedly be showered upon you
at the Parliamentary Luncheon now being held in your honour.
With kindest regards and best wishes from all your friends in Western
Australia.
Yours sincerely,
Fred E. Islip,
(Honorary Secretary, W.A. Branch).
Dear Mr. Lemmon,
Members of the Tasmanian Branch of the Association have been
interested to learn that on the Ist June next you will have completed
50 years’ continuous service as a Member of the Legislative Assembly of
Victoria.
So far as we know this constitutes a record for the whole of Australia,
which is unlikely to be broken for very many years, if ever.
I understand that the Victoria Branch of the Commonwealth Parlia-
mentary Association has invited you to a complimentary luncheon on that
day. The Members of the Tasmanian Branch will be thinking of you on
that occasion, and on their behalf I extend to you the warmest congratula-
tions on a truly magnificent record of service to the people. It is indeed
a great honour to serve the people as one of their representatives in
Parliament, and when one considers that this wonderful service of yours


has been as the representative of the same party for the same district
continuously for half a century, it is realized what confidence the electors
have in you.
All members of this Branch join with me in wishing you the necessary-
health and strength to continue the great service you have given to the
people of Victoria.
With kindest regards,
Yours sincerely,
H. W. Strutt,
(President, Tasmanian Branch).
{Telegram.)
McLachlan,
Parliament House, Melbourne.
Please convey to Mr. Lemmon congratulations of members of New
Zealand Branch on establishing unique record of 50 years’ continuous
service in your Assembly.
H. N. Dollimore,
(Honorary Secretary, N.Z. Branch)..
Dear Mr. McLachlan,
Senator the Hon. C. A. van Niekerk, President of the Senate, who is
also Joint President of our Branch, has asked me to convey through you
to Mr. Lemmon on behalf of our Branch its very hearty congratulations
on his having completed, on the Ist June, 50 years’ continuous service as
a Member of the Legislative Assembly of Victoria, and also Senator van
Niekerk’s personal felicitations on this achievement from one who having
been a Member of a Legislature for over 47 years was under the impres-
sion that he himself might have laid claims to holding the record for
length of service in a Commonwealth Legislature.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely.
W. T. Wood,
(Honorary Secretary,
Union of South Africa Branch).
Dear Mr. McLachlan,
It is a proud achievement indeed for Mr. Lemmon to be completing
50 years of continuous service as a Member of your Legislative Assembly
on the Ist June next —an achievement which rarely falls to the lot of a
legislator. The achievement speaks for itself as to how immensely
popular Mr. Lemmon has been in the constituency which has been
returning him to the Legislature over such an unusually long and
continuous period of time.
We heartily congratulate Mr. Lemmon on this unique achievement
and wish that he is spared for many more years to serve the cause of
his country and the Association.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
N. M. Kaul,
(Honorary Secretary, India Branch).


C Telegram .)
Honorary Secretary,
Commonwealth Parliamentary Association,
Victoria Branch,
Melbourne.
Kindly convey to Mr. Lemmon congratulations of Ceylon Branch and
good wishes for future on conclusion of his 50 years of service to Victoria
as a legislator.
R. St.L. P. Deraniyagala,
(Honorary Secretary, Ceylon Branch).
Dear Mr. McLachlan,
I write on behalf of the Kenya Branch of the Commonwealth Parlia-
mentary Association to ask you to convey to the Hon. J. Lemmon, M.L.A.,
tthe hearty congratulations of the Branch on having completed 50 years’
-continuous service as a Member of the Legislative Assembly of Victoria.
We here can well appreciate this achievement as our Council is not yet
50 years old itself and no member has yet sat continuously much more than
twenty years.
May Mr. Lemmon yet be able to serve you for many more years to come.
Yours very sincerely,
E. A. Vasey,
(Secretary-Treasurer, Kenya Branch).
I am indebted to Mr. Tye, of the Assembly staff, who has
provided the facilities necessary for the making of a tape recording
which will enable the family and friends of Mr. Lemmon to listen to
a verbal record of the speeches. I am also grateful to Mr. Roberts
and Mr. Clarke, of the Hansard staff, who volunteered to record our
proceedings.
The LOYAL TOAST having been proposed by the Chairman,
Members rose and drank to the health of Her Majesty the Queen.
The CHAIRMAN (The Hon. P. K. Sutton).—Mr. President,
Mr. Premier, and gentlemen: This golden jubilee celebration is
unique in the Parliamentary annals of any part of the British Common-
wealth of Nations, and probably of any other country. In all its
aspects, it appears likely to remain unique, for even in the most
extraordinary circumstances conceivable it is unlikely that ever again
will there be in a Parliament —our Parliament, at all events—a man
who can claim to have served for 50 years one electorate, the name of
which throughout the entire period has remained unchanged. A
further, fortuitous, element of uniqueness is imparted by the fact
that the guest of honour, the jubilarian, is accompanied by his son,
who also is a parliamentarian and has been newly re-elected to the
Federal Parliament.


As Chairman of these proceedings, I shall do no more than to
point out that Mr, Lemmon’s career has been decisively influenced by
two bodies which, in his and in their early days, worked under the
stimulus of mutual national ideals for the cultivation of a virile
Australianism. I refer to the party to which Mr. Lemmon gave his
allegiance and to which he has been unswervingly and constructively
but unprovocatively loyal, and to the Australian Natives Association
of which, in due time, he was to become Chief President.
Mr. Lemmon came of age politically in an atmosphere of the
mateship about which Lawson sang—an authentic, a distinctive,
an almost exclusively Australian quality which Mr, Lemmon has
exhibited consistently throughout his long term of service tow r ards
political friends and foes alike, all of whom have remained his close
personal friends.
The toast of Our Guest will be submitted by the Honorable John
Cain, the Premier, who ranks next to Mr. Lemmon in the order of
seniority of members of the Legislative Assembly, and it will be
supported by other representative speakers.
The Hon, JOHN CAIN (Premier and Treasurer): Mr. Chairman
and fellow members: The privilege of proposing the toast of the
Guest of Honour has fallen to my lot, not because I shall be the
successor of the Hon. John Lemmon as the senior member of this
Parliament, but because I happen to be Premier. During the whole
of my Parliamentary career I have had the pleasure of being closely
associated with Mr. Lemmon. He has been a member of this Parlia-
ment for 50 years, during which time he has held the portfolio of
Minister of Education, and has served as secretary of the party to
which he has always belonged. In addition, he has been a staunch
supporter of the Victoria Branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary
Association.
Mr. Lemmon was born in the Trades Hall, Melbourne. What better
birthplace could there be for one destined to be a Labour politician?
Mr. Lemmon was nurtured in the institution in which trades unionism
began and grew. In the old days, when Mr. Lemmon was an active
pioneer member of the movement, it was not as popular as it is now,
but throughout the years he consistently presented the case for trades
unions. Associated with him in the early days were other Labour
stalwarts whose names I could mention. They went into the highways
and byways of this State preaching the gospel of unionism. The
outcome of their pioneering is seen to-day in many of the privileges
that we enjoy. I emphasize that when they fought for the principle
of unionism, the movement was not popular and often they were
threatened that dogs would be set on them. They had to possess not
only courage and industry, but also tenacity, and Mr. Lemmon
displayed those qualities.


The younger members of this Parliament have known Mr. Lemmon
in his mature years and they regard him as an authority on our
Standing Orders. In the early days of his membership, he expended
his energies in the building up of the trades union and Labour move-
ments, and in latter years he has devoted attention to the rules and
regulations governing Parliamentary procedure. I can say without
the fear of successful contradiction that no other member has been
a greater supporter of the rights and privileges of members of
Parliament. From the inception of his membership, Mr. Lemmon
fully appreciated what our Parliamentary institution means to the
people of this country and to fhe world in general. At all times, he
has fought for the rights of this great institution. Probably no other
member has had longer experience of the duties of the Opposition
and better realizes the advantage of a virile Opposition in our
Parliamentary system, Mr. Lemmon has always been a credit to the
political and industrial wings of the Labour movement and, as the
Chairman mentioned, he has not only been a good friend to his party
colleagues, but he has also built up a strong friendship with members
of all other parties, which is a personal achievement.
As Mr. Speaker pointed out, our colleague has the distinction of
having represented one electorate for 50 years, and the name of the
constituency has been retained throughout the whole of that period.
In these days of redistributions of electorates, how envious some
members must be! Doubtless they would not mind if a name was
altered so long as the electorate was preserved!
Mr. Lemmon is an outstanding example of what a public man
should be. Before he entered Parliament at an early age he fought
two or three unsuccessful contests, but ultimately he was elected as
the member for Williamstown. He followed the usual practice of an
aspiring politician, whose first thought is to be elected to Parliament,
and whose aim then is to remain there. To-day, Mr, Lemmon is
celebrating the fiftieth year of his Parliamentary life. I cannot
understand why he has decided not to seek nomination again. When
I look at him, I see that he has no grey hairs. In fact, he looks
better than many of us. His excuse for not seeking re-election is,
“ I have a ‘ gammy ’ leg.” To my knowledge, that is the outcome of an
accident that occurred 30 years ago, and one can be an efficient
politician even though one has a “ gammy ” leg. While I am sorry that
Mr. Lemmon contemplates leaving Parliament, I am delighted that so
many members are present to-day to pay homage to a statesman who
has rendered valuable service to the Parliament and the State of
Victoria. On behalf of all present, I wish him well and express the
hope that he will be long spared to look back with pleasure upon his
50 years’ membership of the Victorian Parliament.
The CHAIRMAN (The Hon. P. K. Sutton). —The toast will be
supported by the Honorable Sir Clifden Eager, Joint President of this
Branch of the Association, and the President of the Legislative Council.


Sir CLIFDEN EAGER. —Mr. Speaker, I regard it as a very great
honour indeed to be present on this occasion and to be asked to
support this toast. This jubilee dinner, I think, is unique in the
history of Australian politics, and perhaps of politics in any other
part of the British Commonwealth. A man who has completed 50
years of public service in Parliament and receives to-day’s tribute in the
presence of practically every member of all the political parties in
this State, and with the international acclaim that he has received, as
indicated by the letters and telegrams read by the Honorary Secretary,
has achieved a great record. We hear a good deal nowadays about
Parliament and that a man cannot long remain a member of Parliament
or a member of any political party without becoming besmirched and
without his morale deteriorating. Mr. Lemmon, in his own person,
proves the untruth of that statement. After 50 years, not as a silent
member, but as an active member and a ministerial member, and as
one who has taken part in many contests, he will leave Parliament
without the slightest stain upon his character. Now that may be
rather a stock kind of phrase that we hear sometimes in other places,
but it is a very great thing indeed that a man, after 50 years of
Parliamentary work, retires with the complete accord and respect
of all his friends in Parliament and, I am certain, of the whole of the
public. Mr. Speaker, I would say that every member of the Legislative
Council is pleased to join in this tribute to their friend and Parlia-
mentary colleague, Mr. Lemmon.
The Premier has said, very truly indeed, that Mr. Lemmon is a
past-master in Parliamentary studies. One thing that has appealed
to me in Mr. Lemmon’s recent membership —because I have been in
this Parliament only a little less than one half of the time he has —
is that in season and out of season, whether he has belonged to the
party in office or out of office, he has always insisted on the rights
of Parliament, and of members of Parliament, and on upholding their
rights and privileges. He has upheld those rights and privileges in
this way particularly, that he has always insisted upon the proper
procedural forms being applied and upheld. Experienced members
of Parliament know that it is in the upholding of those procedural
forms that the rights and privileges of Parliament and of its members
are protected, and particularly the rights of minorities, represented
as they always are in the Assembly by the Leader of the Opposition
for the time being. I understand that there are to be other speakers,
and I, Sir, join the Premier in wishing our Guest a long continuance
of life in happiness and good health.
The CHAIRMAN (The Hon. P. K. Sutton). —Gentlemen, the
next supporting speaker will be Brigadier the Honorable Sir George
Knox, M.L.A., representing the Leader of the Opposition, the Honor-
able Henry Bolte.


Sir GEORGE KNOX. —Mr. Speaker, Mr, President, Mr. Premier,
and my colleagues, I am deeply honoured that the Leader of the
Opposition—the Honorable Henry Bolte —should have delegated to me
the privilege of voicing the deep regard held by all of us for the
Honorable John Lemmon. We who sit in Opposition are members of a
party and we in some matters disagree with the views that have been
so honourably and long espoused by our friend, Mr. Lemmon. To-day
is an epic one, not only in his life but in the lives of us all. Those who
believe in the rights of democracy, even if it is as yet in an imperfect
state, and who have seen the gradual evolution, attribute a great deal
of the reforms and the urge for those reforms to men of the type of
the Honorable John Lemmon. When he became a member of this
institution the Labour party was experiencing difficult times. The road
ahead looked rocky; there was prejudice and ignorance massed against
any reforms; there were difficulties of every description in convincing
people that they did not owe just the need of prosperity to themselves
but that the community at large had a right to enjoy it. The present
conditions of arbitration and conciliation were unknown; the idea of
wages boards was merely being toyed with; and the technical and
primary education of the young people of this State was in its
infancy. All of those difficulties might have confounded the deter-
mination of a lesser man than John Lemmon, but he, through
brilliance of argument, assiduity of work and forcefulness of character,
decided to throw in his lot with this new vision, this new creed that
was so necessary in view of the social, intellectual, and industrial
conditions of the State in those days. He got behind the movement
in an endeavour, without fear, to introduce reforms to correct the
then existing wrongs, as we would regard them to-day; we think
more of the completion of this great work than the structural
alterations necessary over the years to evolve the many economic and
social benefits that we now enjoy.
After 50 years of trial and difficulty, and of triumph, this must be
a proud day for John Lemmon, as it is a great day for us who are
combining to show him the honour that he so richly deserves. John
Lemmon would be the last man to attribute all of his achievements
and successes to himself alone. Without the aid of his wife, and
later, the support of his family, these things would not have been
possible. Mrs. Lemmon has played her part—as the wives of all
members must of necessity play their part in helping their husbands
—in the social activities of the Williamstown electorate and within
her church and without the church, not with a view of seeking
gain for her husband, but morally supporting all his actions. The
blood of the Lemmons is now down to the third generation—or I
should have said the “ juice ” of the Lemmons. We have present
with us to-day John Lemmon’s distinguished son who, in turn, has
passed on the breed to a son of 22. He will, no doubt, carry on the
tradition established by his grandfather and father.


The Premier has spoken, and rightly so, of the outstanding abilities
of John Lemmon and the strong urge that he has always had in
upholding the privileges and rights of democracy both inside and
outside the House. I can visualize, from my 27 years’ association
with our Guest, the three steps that John Lemmon always took from
his place in the cross benches, whether on the Government side or
the Opposition side, holding a copy of the Standing Orders. Then
followed the thrust and parry of debate on a point that he thought
was at issue, even though it be contrary to the accepted Speaker’s
ruling. He was mostly right, as I and the Honorable William Slater —
who is now Attorhey-General—and our present Speaker and others
who have occupied the Chair, know full well. We had one ear on the
honorable member’s plea, and with the other ear we listened to the
Clerk’s opinion so that an immediate decision might be given.
I can say only this: When he looks back on his career, he will
possibly feel some regrets at his retirement, as we all would do, but
he will leave a lasting memorial, not only for our remembrance, but
also in the written word. If I may presume to do so, I suggest to
John Lemmon that he should record his life and times so that in
the Parliamentary library there may be a printed document of what
he has achieved, outlining the changing world of personalities and
events that occurred during the last 50 years. I conclude on this note,
Mr. Lemmon: You hold the esteem and affection not only of this
generation who are gathered here to-day to do you honour, but of
those figures of the past who have now gone. No man has ever
pointed the finger of scorn at you; no one has ever thought that you
did other than the honorable and right thing in all the battles of
your political career, and from that point of view you can truly say
unto yourself, as did Saint Paul —I have fought a good fight, I have
finished my course, I have kept the faith.”
The CHAIRMAN (The Hon. P. K. Sutton).—The toast will now
be supported by the Honorable J. G. B. McDonald, the Leader of
the Country Party.
The Hon. J. G. B. MCDONALD (Leader of the Country Party).—
Mr. Chairman, Mr. President, Mr. Premier and our Guest; It is a
great privilege for all of us to be associated with the celebration of
our Guest’s jubilee of his Parliamentary life. What an outstanding
record it is for one man to have served the people for 50 years, and
what a great tribute it is to our Parliamentary system, which Mr.
Lemmon helped to establish, that it permits the people to choose a
man to represent them in Parliament for 50 consecutive years. When
I look back upon my comparatively short Parliamentary career, I will
remember how keen debates were when I first became a member—
motions were moved expressing no-confidence in the Government of the
day, or seeking the adjournment of the House to discuss items of public


importance; points of order.were raised continuously, even as to
clauses of Bills —when discussion was most heated I used to watch
the Honorable John Lemmon. He would bide his time and at the
appropriate moment he would rise in his place and make a suggestion
to the Speaker. As Sir George Knox said, he would more often be
right than wrong. I used to think, what a grand example that is
to the younger members. I felt that Mr. Lemmon was one of the
greatest Parliamentarians of this Commonwealth, and that opinion
has been confirmed over the years. He believes in and thoroughly
understands our Parliamentary procedure. It is important for all
members to have wide knowledge of the procedure to be followed
under the Standing Orders so that this Parliamentary institution may
be maintained at its present high level. One of the lifelong objectives
of Mr. Lemmon was to assist to build up the prestige and rights of
Parliament as the organization representing the desires of the people.
We will always remember the friendly, kindly John Lemmon who
would engage one in quiet conversation over a cup of tea, and relate
incidents from past Parliamentary crises; or when he was in the House,
how he would whisper advice to a young member. I thank him for
the advice he has given me. It is to be regretted that “ time marches
on ” for all of us.
I know I express the desire of all present when I thank Mrs. Lemmon
and the other members of the family for the support they have given
John Lemmon. As the Premier said, he fought for the ideals of
unionism, and assisted the Labour party to reach its present position.
He has passed on the Parliamentary urge to his son, Mr. Nelson
Lemmon, who has just been re-elected to the Commonwealth Parlia-
ment; we congratulate him on his success.
No member could have greater moral support in his home life
than John Lemmon has always had. I join previous speakers in
wishing him good health, and express the hope that he will long be
spared to come to the House and meet his friends. We trust that he
will not completely retire from political life but that he will keep in
touch with his colleagues in this Parliament.
The CHAIRMAN (The Hon. P. K. Sutton). —I think we will
find it interesting and profitable to listen to a brief digest of Parlia-
mentary statistical information relating to the service of Mr. Lemmon.
The HON. SECRETARY (Mr. H. K. McLachlan). —The records
disclose the following items of interest:
The Honorable John Lemmon was first elected to the Legislative
Assembly on Ist June, 1904, at the General Election for the
Twentieth Parliament, for the Electoral District of Williamstown.
He was re-elected to each subsequent Parliament, and was returned
unopposed on seven occasions.


He held the portfolios of Minister of Public Instruction and
Minister of Labour from 9th to 22nd December, 1913; from 18th July,
1924, to 18th November, 1924; from 20th May, 1927, to 22nd Novem-
ber, 1928; and from 12th December, 1929, to 19th May, 1932.
He was Secretary to the Parliamentary Labour Party from 1913 to
1938; a Member of the Royal Commission on the Murray Waters,
1909-10; a Member of the Council of the University of Melbourne from
1932 to 1939; and a Member of the following Select Committees:
Parliament Buildings, from 1907 to 1914; Marketing and Transporta-
tion of Wheat, 1911; Standing Orders, from 1912 to 1917; Public
Accounts, from 1918 to 1923; Unemployment Relief (Joint Com-
mittee), 1931; and House Committee, from 1945 to 1949.
Mr. Lemmon has served in 20 Parliaments under 29 different
Governments, and during this time a total of 252 members (excluding
present members) have passed through the House.
Mr. Lemmon has served under the following Speakers:
The Honorable Sir Frank Madden, 1904-17.
The Honorable Sir John Emanuel Mackey, 1917-23.
The Honorable Sir John Bowser, 1923-27.
The Honorable O. R. Snowball, 1927-28.
The Honorable Sir Alexander James Peacock, K.C.M.G.,
1928-33.
The Honorable M. R. Blackburn, 1933-34.
The Honorable W. H. Everard, 1934-37.
The Honorable Thomas Tunnecliffe, 1937-40.
The Honorable William Slater, 1940-42.
Brigadier the Honorable Sir George Hodges Knox, C.M.G.,
V.D., 1942-47.
The Honorable Sir Thomas Karran Maltby, 1947-50
The Honorable Sir Archie Michaelis, 1950-52.
The Honorable P. K. Sutton.
The following Clerks of the House occupied office during Mr.
Lemmon’s service:
Thomas G. Watson, C.M.G., 1904-10.
Hibbert H. Newton, 1910-23.
William R. Alexander, C.8.E., 1924-37,
Frederick E. Wanke, 1937-51.
Hugh K. McLachlan.
During the 37 years of my service as a Parliamentary officer I
have always regarded the Honorable John Lemmon as an outstanding
Parliamentarian and a man of high ideals. He is an authority on
Parliamentary procedure, and in this connexion I support the remarks
of previous speakers. Doubtless, my predecessors in office advised


their Speakers along the same lines as I have advised my Speakers,
saying, “ Watch out for Mr. Lemmon —if you see him entering the
Chamber with a volume of May’s Parliamentary Practice under his
arm—be prepared.” My assistant, Mr. Robertson, and I know there is
always a possibility of a point of order being raised when we see
Mr. Lemmon perusing a volume of May. To be forewarned is to be
forearmed, which is half the battle of successfully carrying out our
duties.
I hope Mr. and Mrs. Lemmon will have many years in which to
enjoy a happy, care-free retirement. As Clerk of the Parliaments
and Clerk of the Legislative Assembly, I thank Mr. Lemmon for the
example he has set in the upholding of the traditions of this
institution.
The GUEST was then honoured, members rising to drink to the
health of the Honorable John Lemmon.
The CHAIRMAN (The Hon. P. K. Sutton). —Gentlemen, the
Honorable John Lemmon will respond to the toast.
Mr. LEMMON. —Mr. Speaker, Mr. President, Mr. Premier, and
gentlemen, I assure you that words fail me to express adequately
my appreciation of the great honour conferred upon me this after-
noon. I thank particularly my esteemed friend, the Honorable the
Premier, in the manner of his submission of the toast, the Honorable
Sir George Knox, who so kindly expressed the views he held regarding
myself—all too generous even for this occasion—also the President
of the Legislative Council, Sir Clifden Eager, and the Leader of the
Country Party, the Honorable John McDonald. I also express my
thanks to the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association. I became
a member of the Association shortly after its formation in 1925. I
did so perhaps with a little imagination. When I heard that right
throughout the then far-flung Empire representatives of the various
Parliaments would be meeting to exchange views, I considered that
there was a possibility that it may prove to be the genesis of the
“ Parliament of Man ” of the future. I also thought that it well
typified that great statement of Edmund Burke when, speaking in the
House of Commons at the time of the loss of the American Colonies,
he said —
My hold upon the colonies springs from common names, from kindred
blood and similar privileges. These ties, though as light as air, are as
strong as links of iron.
I thank Mr. President, Mr. Speaker, and our esteemed Clerk of
the Legislative Assembly, who is the secretary of the Victoria
Branch of the Commonwealth Parliamentary Association, for the
great work they have done in organizing this function. Mr. Speaker,
when I heard that this dinner was mooted and that Parliament was


going to confer an honour on a rank and file member, I did have a
sense of concern and almost wended my way to the sacred volume of
the law pertaining to the rules of Parliament according to Sir Erskine
May. Then I thought of a precedent which would cover the situation
as far as Mr. Speaker and particularly the President of the Legislative
Council were concerned. That occurred many years ago and concerned
the late E. L. Zox, who was a great wit, a wealthy man, and a very
kindly member of the Jewish community. He was an outstanding
figure in Parliament in those days, and always wore a white vest.
However, on one occasion when he came to Parliament without that
adornment the wags organized a function. The late Mr. Deakin made
a presentation to Mr. Zox; he expressed great sympathy to him and
handed to him, nicely wrapped and tied with a piece of ribbon, a cigar
box filled with pennies. Mr. Zox, the great wit, thanked Mr. Deakin
for the great honour conferred upon him, and when he opened the box
and saw the pennies, he said, “Ah! Nothing could be better. I will
take this home, and every time I put one of these pennies in the gas
meter it will remind me of honorable members.”
It has been truly said that when I entered this institution I was
the baby of Parliament. I often thought that I carried the burden
of youth. It is true that I contested no fewer than five elections in
not more than three years —four State and one Federal. In the three
elections that I contested prior to being returned as a member of
the Victorian Parliament, I was beaten by an average of less than
60 votes, and my supporters became concerned. I remember a
university friend of mine coming to me and saying, “ Look here, they
‘ dish ’ you every time because you are so young. I have brought you
a book containing speeches of the great orators of the House of
Commons; I want you to learn what Pitt said to Walpole when
Walpole spoke of him being a boy in the Parliament of the nation.”
I read the volume and I learned what Pitt had said. Then when
anyone interjected regarding my youth—one person said that I would
not know how to spend the Parliamentary salary—l replied in the
words of Pitt to Walpole—
The Right*Honorable gentleman has charged me with the crime of being
a young man and with theatrical behaviour, but with respect I desire to
submit that youth has its rights and privileges as well as old age.
After that I got into Parliament. During my last election campaign,
the supporters of a very aggressive little doctor in my electorate said
that I was too old and that there must be a change—so I began to
study what Walpole had said to Pitt!
The burden of youth and the crime of being a young man followed
me even when I got into Parliament. I recollect that when I entered
the Footscray railway station on the day following my election on the
Ist June, 1904, the staff offered me their congratulations. When the
train arrived, although my monthly ticket had expired, they said, “ Go
on, hop in the train.” I got in and then I started to think how I was


going to get out at the other end without a ticket. However, when the
time came, I walked up to the porter on the gate, and I imagined that I
was a prospective Brigadier Knox or something of that kind. I
straightened my shoulders, gave the porter a salute, and he let me
through. But coming home that night, a friend of mine who was
attending to the clocks on the Flinders-street station, called me over
and said, “ You are beginning your Parliamentary career very badly.”
When I asked why, he said, “ You broke the regulations this morning;
you travelled without a ticket or pass.” When I said that I had been
elected a member of Parliament the day before, he said, “ Look, the
chap on the gate came to me after he had knocked off and said, ‘ Billy,
I had an experience here to-day. At about a quarter past nine, a bit
of a kid came up to me. He must have known the elections took place
the day before. He straightened himself up and he said, “ I am the
member for Williamstown.” He gave me a salute and did it so well
that I let him through.’ ” From that time onwards I have had the
good fortune to remain the member for Williamstown.
I have always felt reluctance against canvassing for myself, think-
ing it might be a reflection upon the secrecy of the ballot box, or some-
thing of that nature. I broke away from that high ideal on one
occasion following the coronation of the late King George VI. I was
given a number of the coronation medals presented to school children
by the State Government. I wrapped them in tissue paper and carried
them in my pocket. When I saw a lady elector wheeling a baby in
a perambulator, I would say, “ Excuse me, but is that a coronation-year
baby? ” If the mother said that it was, I would then say, “ Perhaps
you would like to have one of these medals? ” On the Williamstown
railway station one night I saw a baby in its pram, and I said to the
parents, “ Was this child born in coronation year? ” It was, and so
I added, “ Let me give you one of these medals so that the child can
regard it as a souvenir when it grows up.” The husband said, “ That
means two votes for life for you, Lemmon.” I said, “ Perish the
thought. I never dreamt of that!”
The sequel is interesting. While walking to the railway station
a few days later, I saw a little girl wheeling a baby in a pram, and I
asked, “ Whose baby is that? ” The little girl replied, “It is our baby,
and you gave her a coronation medal on the station. Mrs. Brown lives
next door to us. She has a baby and would like a coronation medal for
it.” When I said that I did not know Mrs. Brown, the little girl
stated that Mrs. Brown knew me, and so I asked, “ Was Mrs. Brown’s
baby born in coronation year? ” The little girl said that it was, and
so I gave her a medal for Mrs. Brown’s baby, A few days later, I met
the same little girl, who had with her a child of nearly two years, and
I asked, “ Whose child is that? ” She said, “It is Mrs. Brown’s baby,
the one you gave the medal to.” When I pointed out that she had
told me it was a coronation-year baby, the little lass retorted, “ Mrs.
Brown told my mother that she meant it to be a coronation-year
baby! ”


I desire ito say how much I appreciate this large gathering of
my fellow members. I am sure that it is the greatest honour that
has ever been conferred upon me. I have ever appreciated the
importance of Parliament, and I have always been proud of my
membership. Whenever I have been asked, “ What would you do if you
had an opportunity to start all over again? ” I have always replied
that it would be my ambition to become a member of Parliament. I
know of no greater service one can render to his fellow men than that
of becoming a member of Parliament, and then a member of a
Government of his native land.
I have always had the highest regard for our Parliamentary
institution, and can vividly recall my first experience as a member in
1904. You may ask, “ What type of men constituted the membership
of Parliament in those days? ” I found that they were men of honour,
of integrity, and of great capacity. They were anxious to render
service in their day and generation for the welfare of the State. I
found those who occupied official positions on the staff of Parliament
were men of character, of capacity, and of strict impartiality. They
were unselfish in their endeavours to promote the welfare of this
institution. The characteristics that existed in the Parliament of
1904, 1905, and 1906 I have found in every succeeding Parliament over
the years. I deplore unfair criticism reflecting upon this noble
institution, no matter whether it comes from the pulpit, the press, or
the public platform. In this land, there is no institution that is more
valuable to the mass of the people than Parliament. It is tangible
evidence of our struggle for freedom and the establishment of
economic justice and fair play among every section of the community.
Every honorable member should realize that, in these days when
we are faced with the aftermath of wars and the onward march of
dictatorships, the British form of responsible government that we
enjoy has emerged from world upheavals without blemish. It stands
supreme to-day because it was founded on the democratic rock of
the right of the people to govern themselves. It is our duty to
maintain the prestige and the rights of Parliament, together with
the privileges of honorable members. We should use them for the
benefit of our people in this day and age and, from generation to
generation, we must pass on those principles unstained and unsullied
so that our Parliamentary institution shall abide for ever.
I am wondering whether honorable members noted the reported
words of His Excellency, Field Marshall Sir William Slim, our
Governor-General, during a visit to the great industrial centre of
Geelong. When responding to the official welcome, His Excellency
said, in effect, “I have noted your splendid city, your beautiful beaches
and your progressive industries. I have also had the pleasure of meet-
ing your children, and when I noticed their bright eyes and their fine
physique, and realized the happy life they are living, I felt that
the destiny of Geelong is assured.” Those words reminded me of the


last visit I paid to Ballarat, the centre of culture —notable for its
beautiful statues and horticultural triumphs. Upon the pedestal of
the statue erected to the memory of Robert Burns, that democratic
poet of poets, is written—
To make a happy fireside clime
To weans and wife;
That’s the true pathos and sublime
Of human life.
I am sure that all present recall that great saying of the writer of
writers of the Victorian era, John Ruskin—
There is no wealth but life. Life including all its powers of love, of joy
and of admiration. That country is richest which nourishes the greatest
number of noble and happy human beings.
The final outcome and consummation of all wealth is in the producing as
many as possible full-breathed, bright-eyed, and happy-hearted human
creatures.
Whilst we may continue to gather the opal stones to please the
eyes of man, and listen to the wheels of industry producing life’s
necessities, and rejoice with him that gathereth the golden corn,
let us look forward to the time when Australia, like unto a Christian
mother, will be found leading forth her sons from the mine, the mill,
the plough, the pen, the brush, and the lancet and declaring to the
nations of the world—These, my noble sons of “Australia Fair,” are
the precious jewels of our great Commonwealth. Australia, “ not as
the songs of other lands, her songs shall be,” Australia, my country,
“ a prophesy yet to be.”
* * * * *
At the conclusion of the Luncheon, members individually offered
their congratulations to the Guest of Honour.
Parliament House,
Melbourne, Ist June, 1954.


W. M. Houston,
Government Printer, Melbourne


