

?rooonciomW50E/lD (j |
i n /King nr rpL,
rnmm
SPEECH OF THE RIGHT REV.
THE LORD BISHOP OF BATHURST
ARMISTICE DAY DINNER
NOVEMBER 11th, 1929


JCtbrrs
I
JSluart JiEraga


TOAST
?THE BRITISH FORCES?
The Toast was proposed by Dr Horace Crotty,
Lord Bishop of Bathurst. Bishop Crotty said:
Mr Chairman, Gentlemen,
It is extraordinarily gracious, if somewhat
rash of you, to entrust into the keeping of a mere
man of peace, this very militant and splendid
toast. Perhaps, however, I may find it less diffi-
cult than might some clerics to address myself to
it with a real enthusiasm, as my more militant and
unregenerate instincts, my friends assure me, are
considerably more highly developed, than those
more pacific graces and those gentler virtues,
which I understand are the more proper endow-
ment of the man of God.
Perhaps, too, the fact that for two years I
was attached to the British Forces as a Chaplain in
the A.I.F. enables me to speak with some know-
ledge, and with no unnecessary blushes, of the
virtues of the British Forces, since Chaplains, it is
well known, though they ate rations and were the
despair of Colonels, were but camouflaged civi-
lians, after all.
BERKELOUW
BOOKDEMJSHI


I have been reading recently a good deal of
the biography of the pre-war and post-war
periods of our time ?Grey?s Twenty-jive Years.
Page?s Life and Letters , the Intimate Payers of
that remarkable individual, Colonel House, Cur-
zon?s three volumes, Churchill?s World Crisis
and Haldane?s Autobiography , last of all. Not
the least portion of their fascinating story is the
record that their lives contain of the steps where-
by the British Forces had been made so mercifully
ready for their task in history, when there burst
upon us the crash of 1914.
In Grey?s and Churchill?s, and in Haldane?s
records, there is cumulative testimony to the steps
whereby, through the preliminary military con-
versations with the French General Staff, through
Haldane?s work on the Territorials and the up-
building of the British General Staffs, and through
the work of men like Fisher and Churchill at the
Admiralty, the British Fleet was mobilized and
ready at its battle stations when the crisis came,
and a military organization perfected and made
ready, which enabled us to land that extremely
useful, if contemptible, little army, within four-
teen days on the soil of France.
And when we look back, as we can this even-
ing, from the security of victory, on the paralysing
swiftness of that first German blow, we may thank
God surely that there were such things as British
Forces, in that shattering moment, furnished and


made ready for their world-wide task. If there
had not been, I doubt very much if you and I
would be gathering, as we are gathering, enjoying
this excellent dinner here to-night.
As I rise, moreover, to put this toast before
you, my mind goes back to other scenes and other
memories, which awake perhaps our more local
Australian prides and gratitudes. My mind goes
back to that small, but not insignificant section of
the British Forces, which we called the A.I.F.
I remember something of its life, its onward
marches, its driving blows, flinging its body
into every breach it met. I remember its
body, its staff and its transport, its guns and
its men. But I remember something else. I
remember something of its soul as well. And
it was a noble soul, a soul and a spirit that
we could well do with in Australian life to-day.
I remember hoping that that soul was going
to live on into our post-war life, that its
vigour, its patriotism and its brotherhood were
going to enter into Australia?s soul, drenching its
weakness with their strength. But these things
have not come. The A.1.F., I say, had a soul.
There was a heart-beat underneath it all. There
were notes of beauty, strength, and splendour in
it. They had their jollities, their leaves, their
jokes and their games, the huts and canteens, the
concerts and sing-songs. And there was that other
life as well ?the long night-marches, the trenches,


the mud, the duckboards, the gas and the barrage.
Over that life they might have written: ?As dying
and behold we live, as chastened and not killed, as
sorrowful yet always rejoicing, as poor, yet making
many rich, as having nothing, and yet possessing
all things.? And all that must be reckoned in the
soul of the A.I.F. They had their faults, and
they were glaring ones. They had their sins, and
they were terrible. If they were swifter than
eagles and stronger than lions, they had the sins
of the swift and of the strong as well. And yet,
they were big and great-hearted in it all. The
memory of them and the vision in them of what
Australians, when they are put to it, can do, and
will do again, is one of our great encouragements
in days when there is so much in Australian life
to tempt us to despair.
To-night, on Armistice night, we may be
pardoned, I suppose, for something of a reflective
mood. An old world went down into the grave
on the day when the Great War burst upon the
world. Since it has ended, we have been engaged
on the process of building up a new one, nor can
we say that we have been extraordinarily success-
ful. We are not only back to where we were.
The safety of our skins excepted, we are in some
respects worse off. Certainly, so far as Australia
is concerned, we would seem to have fallen from
an intolerable frying-pan into an uncontrollable
fire. There are dangerous and explosive veins


in our Australian mentality to-day, and some very
blind and stupid ones as well. It is time we were
getting back to certain sanities.
In your Sydney Mail the other day, I
read a rather striking article. Its theme was not
particularly exhilarating. It was about inflation,
or something of the sort. But it began somewhat
as follows. ?I am credibly informed that on a
certain occasion a gentleman, by name Moham-
med, commanded a mountain to appear before
him. The mountain, with an impassivity amount-
ing almost to impertinence, failed to appear. So
Mohammed did the next best thing, and went
to the mountain. So the story ends on a note of
recovered sanity, in which reflection there is much
consolation for Australian hearts. For Australia,
in her present temper, imitates Mohammed in
his most megalomaniac mood.? And there is
quite a lot, I think, in that. Meanwhile, over all
our life in this young country there broods, at
the present time, that disastrous phenomenon
known as the ?social quack.? Concerning him,
says Dr L. P. Jacks: ?His job is to nurse and
exploit the sick fancies of his day, to trade on low
spirits and disappointed dreams and poison society
with his wretched medicines. Amid much poverty
he manages to fashion for himself the softer
nest, feathered with selling cures for poverty.
Posing as a pacifist, he does a roaring trade in
peace pills, while manoeuvring to get an army at


his own back. This done, all throats must swal-
low his wretched physic, or be shot. And no
mouse may squeak and no dog bark, without his
permit.? And Australia is in danger of him, too.
It is that megalomaniac incapacity to see our-
selves as others see us, that delicious indifference
to both the interests and the viewpoints of other
people, mingled with the false and stupid pacif-
ism so called, which talks quite a lot about class
conflicts, which we need not have, but yet seem
peculiarly blind to certain world-tensions which
we cannot escape, that vitiate so much of the life
and thinking of this country, at the present time.
I have no patience, gentlemen, with those expo-
nents of a lambent internationalism, who saunter
contentedly with lighted matches, mid social and
industrial explosives of their own mixing, out of
which, for some reason best known to themselves,
they hope to extract a peaceful and co-operating
world. To defend a common heritage is at least
a nobler militancy, than to encourage, in the name
of peace, a fratricidal strife.
I am no militarist, and I doubt if you are.
If such a glimpse as was given me of the major
and minor obscenities of war had not sufficed me,
the reading of books like Sergeant Grischa y
All Quiet on the Western Front and that sensi-
tive and brilliant little fragment, JJourneysy y s End
would have robbed me for ever of any linger-
ing illusions as to the glory and magnificence


of modern war. lam no militarist, but there are
certain realisms, it seems to me, which we are
bound to envisage and respect. One of them is
this. Providence, so far as I have been able to
read history, never has handed out, and never
will hand out, perpetual and unconditional leases
to any six millions of humans to hold a continent,
irrespective of their willingness or capacity to
work it or hold it, or defend it, if need arise. The
mountain is not for ever coming to Mohammed.
The world is not going to come interminably to
our way of thinking about ourselves and our im-
portance, and the importance of our happiness.
We, on the other hand, must be marching out to
meet and accommodate ourselves to-certain stub-
born and world-wide facts. Mohammed, sooner
or later, must move off to that mountain. Our
happiness, as a matter of fact, is considerably less
important to other people, than it is to us. There
is no current of general privilege in this modern
world, which I have been able to detect, whose
special business it is to set in in our direction.
Australians, sometimes, appear to imagine that
there is.
For the rest, ?What we have, we hold? was,
lam told, the motto of the A.I.F. It has been the
motto of the British Forces throughout their
history. It was a great military leader that said
of the British soldier that he was the best soldier
in the world, because he could last five minutes


longer than the other man. We shall be wise,
I am convinced, in Australia to carry on the spirit
of that motto, into that inheritance which the
British Forces, our own brave men among them,
have made secure for us in this young Common-
wealth to-day. And the greatest compliment that
we can pay to those British Forces, which we toast
to-night, as we toast their memory, their deeds,
that priceless gift to us of our Australian free-
dom, is to hold, by working for it, paying for it
and being ready at any moment to defend it, what
they have gained for us.
We are enjoying ourselves this evening,
gentlemen. And our radiant dead would not, I
imagine, have it otherwise. And yet, mid all of
our hilarity, there is another note which you, I
am sure, would wish that I should strike. These
men, when all is said and done, did not die to
bequeath to us a place to play the fool in, but to
hand on to us an opportunity and a task, in which
they trusted that we should not fail.
And if we should hesitate in this answering
dedication, if we should fail them in that task
for which they gave their lives, it; is not, as
Professor Cramb has told us ?it is not the loss of
territory, it is not the narrowed bounds, we have
to fear. It is the judgment of the dead. It is
the despair of the living. It is the arraigning
eyes of the unborn.


Sd 362
-
3 1508 01570488 0
, m/t* /a.4 , S>r*A /ft. 2lA./f.ZOIU.


I
