

SPEECH
DELIVERED BY
HIS ROYAL HIGHNESS THE DUKE OF CORNWALL AND YORK
AT THE OPENING OF
THE FIRST FEDERAL PARLIAMENT.
9 TH MAY 1901.
N
394
GEC.








SPEECH
DELIVERED BY
HIS HIGHNESS
THE DUKE OF CORNWALL AND YORK,
AT THE OPENING OF THE
FIRST FEDERAL PARLIAMENT.
9th MAY, 1901.




GENTLEMEN OF THE SENATE:
AND
GENTLEMEN OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES:
My beloved and deeply-lamented Grandmother, Queen Victoria, had desired
to mark the importance of the opening of this the First Parliament of The
Commonwealth of Australia, and to manifest Her special interest in all that
concerns the welfare of Her loyal Subjects in Australia, by granting to nie a
special Commission to open the First Session.
That Commission had been duly signed before the sad event which has
plunged the whole Empire into mourning, and The King, my dear Father, fully
sharing Her late Majesty’s wishes, decided to give effect to them, although
His Majesty stated, on the occasion of His opening His First Parliament, that a
separation from His Son at such a time could not be otherwise than deeply
painful to Him.
His Majesty has been pleased to consent to this separation, moved by His
sense of the loyalty and devotion which prompted the generous aid afforded by
all the Colonies in the South African War, both in its earlier and more recent
stages, and of the splendid bravery of the Colonial Troops. It is also His
Majesty’s wish to acknowledge the readiness with which the Ships of the special
Australasian Squadron were placed at His disposal for service in China, and the
valuable assistance rendered there by the Naval Contingents of the several
Colonies.
His Majesty further desired in this way to testify to His heartfelt gratitude
for the warm sympathy extended by every part of His Dominions to Himself and
His Family in the irreparable loss They have sustained by the death of His
beloved Mother.
His Majesty has watched with the deepest interest the social and
material progress made by His People in Australia, and has seen with
thankfulness and heartfelt satisfaction the completion of that political union of
which this Parliament is the embodiment.
The King is satisfied that the wisdom and patriotism which have
characterised the exercise of the wide powers of self-government hitherto enjoyed
by the Colonies will continue to be displayed in the exercise of the still wider
powers with which the united Commonwealth has been endowed. His Majesty
feels assured that the enjoyment of these powers will, if possible, enhance that
loyalty and devotion to His Throne and Empire of which the People of Australia
have already given such signal proofs.




It is His Majesty’s earnest prayer that this union so happily achieved
may, under God’s blessing, prove an instrument for still further promoting the
welfare and advancement of His Subjects in Australia and for the strengthening
and consolidation of His Empire.
Gentlemen of the Senate :
AND
Gentlemen of the House of Representatives :
It affords me much pleasure to convey to you this message from His
Majesty. I now, in His name and on His behalf, declare this Parliament open.








