

c o<^'
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA
SPEECH
RY
Senator E. D. MILLEN
(Minister for Repatriation)
PACIFISM
AND ITS CONSEQUENCES
\From ihe *'Parliamentary Debatesl4th June, 1916.\
authority:
ALBERT J. MULLSTT. GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SPEECH
SENATOR E. D. MILLEN
{Minister for Repatriation).
4
PACIFISM AND ITS CONSEQUENCES
[From the “ Parliamentary Debateslith June, 1918. J
Senator MILLEN (New South Wales
• —Minister for Repatriation) [1.15 a.m.].
—I do not feel justified, after the pro-
tracted sitting, in detaining the Senate
for any length of time. But two or three
things were said in the course of the de-
bate that presents sufficient justification
for my making a few remarks at this
juncture. The speech to which I par-
ticularly wish to direct attention was that
delivered in the early portion of the sit-
ting by Senator Gardiner.
I shall not make any reference to that
portion of the honorable senator’s ad-
dress which was a more or less anaemic
reproduction of a recent State election
squabble in New South Wales. However
interesting that might be to those im-
mediately concerned, it was not of suffi-
cient importance to have occupied the
time of the Senate. I say without any
hesitation that the only justification
there appeared to be for bringing the
matter here was that it might figure in
the records of Hansard, and by that
means find a convenient, and not expen-
sive, form of circulation in the district
immediately concerned.
Passing from that, I should like to
make a reference to a remark falling from
the same honorable senator as to the rea-
sons for the alleged jcheapness of meat in
Queensland. He was referring, Avith
something of a note of triumph, to the
fact that the Queensland Government
were enabled by the methods they
adopted to furnish cheap meat to the con-
sumers in that State. Until I inter-
jected, Senator Gardiner carefully
abstained from saying how that cheap-
ness of meat in Queensland had
been brought about. It is as well to
place on record exactly what has hap-
pened there. There is no magic in ob-
taining cheap food if you are prepared
to commandeer it at a price below its pro-
per value.
What happened in Queensland was
this: When Mr. Ryan, acting as head of
the Queensland Government, made a con-
tract with the Imperial authorities, by
which they undertook, to pay a certain
price for Queensland’s exportable surplus
of beef, he blackmailed the owners of
that beef by insisting as a condition o|
the contract that he should be allowed


take meat for his State shops at some- only to proceed a little further in Queens*
thing less than the price at which he con-
tracted to supply it to the Imperial Go-
vernment. One of two things follow from
that. Either Mr. Ryan acted unfairly to
the British Government when he charged
them the price he did, or to the pro-
ducers of beef in Queensland when he
paid them a lower price than he cnarged
the Imperial Government. If he was
justified in paying for local consumption
—for his own shops, and not for all the
shops in Queensland —a lower price of
about Id. per lb. than that which he
charged the Imperial Government
Senator Shannon.— The difference was
the difference between 3|d. and 4|d.
Senator MILLEN. —A difference of a
shad© over Id. ner lb. If Mr. Ryan was
entitled to pay the producers of beef in
Queensland something over Id. per lb.
less than his own contract with the Im-
perial Government showed it to be worth,
he was equally entitled to pay them 2d.
or 3d. per lb. less. I say that, to the
extent of the difference between those
prices, Mr. blackmailed the pro-
ducers of beef in Queensland.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin. —They
are getting a payable price.
Senator MILLEN. —If it is a payable
price, then Mr. Ryan had no right to
'blackmail the Imperial authorities by
'charging them a higher price. He was
acting unfairly to the Imperial authori-
ties, who left the matter with him to
make the contract, and was guilty of a
breach of the trust reposed in him by
them at a time when the Empire is fight-
ing for its very existence, or he was act-
ing unfairly to the producers in his own
State. If there is any virtu© in obtain-
ing cheap meat by taking it at less than
its fair value, Mr. Ryan is entitled to the
credit of it. It is easy to obtain things
cheaply on those terms. But why pay
anything at all? If you are going to
take anything, and pay only a portion,
and not the whole of its value, the extent
to which you rob those from whom you
take the commodity is only a question of
degree. One marvels almost, as in the
case of the celebrated Indian ruler, at the
moderation of gentlemen who see virtue
in taking a thing and paying for it less
than its market value, that they stopped
where they did. Perhaps we may regard
•this transaction as the beginning of a new
system of statecraft, and matters have
land on similar lines when the people
there will have still cheaper meat.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin. — They
approve of what was done. That wafl
shown at the last elections in Queens-
land.
Senator MILLEN. Senator O’Logh-
lin’s interjection reminds me of a story
which may be appropriately repeated
here. A man was charged with stealing
some hogs, and his own lawyer advised
him that he had not a hope of getting
off. But to the astonishment of every-
body but the accused the jury returned a
verdict of not guilty. The lawyer con-
gratulated bis client upon the verdict,
and said, “ I do not know how you did
it.” The answer was, “It was easy
enough. All of those jurymen had some
of them hogs.” It is not difficult to under-
stand that the people of Queensland, re-
velling in cheap meat taken unfairly from
a minority of their number
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin. —That
is the honorable senator’s statement. I
say the producers are getting a fair
price.
Senator MILLEN.—Then I say that
Mr. Ryan is impaled upon the horns of
a dilemma. Either he was unfair to the
Imperial authorities, who trusted him to
make a fair deal, when he asked them to
pay 4fd, per lb. for beef.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin.—lt
was fair all round.
Senator MILLEN.:—If that was a fair
price to pay the producers when purchas-
ing for the hardly-pressed Imperial
authorities it was- a fair price to ask the
people of Queensland to pay. If the
price he charged the Imperial authorities
was a fair price, then it was unfair that
he should demand that meat should be
released at 3|d. per lb. for his shops, and
not for other shops in Queensland. Mr.
Ryan did not care a hang about those who
purchased at other shops. He was con-
cerned only about getting some political
advantage by making it appear that the
State shops were selling beef cheaper than
other shops.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin. — He
acted in the interests of the people aa a
whole.
Senator MILLEN. —He did not act i«.
the interests of the people.


Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loqhlin. —The
great majority of the people.
Senator MILLEN.—The majority of
the people of Queensland do not purchase
at the State shops. There was no fixed
rule that any butcher in Queensland
might get beef at that price. That
would not suit Mr. Ryan’s hook. He
wanted to be able to say, “ There are the
State shops managed by Ryan and Com-
pany, and you can get meat cheaper there
than elsewhere.’’ Why could that be
done? Because Mr. Ryan had paid for
the meat a price below what he had him-
self decreed was a fair price for the com-
modity.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin.—lt
was of no advantage to him.
Senator MlLLEN.—Senator O’Logh-
lin has himself shown the advantage to
Mr. Ryan. He sees to-night what Mr.
Ryan saw a few months ago, and that
was the effect upon the general com-
munity, who, without going deeply into
causes, were satisfied with the result, and
gave Mr. Ryan what he wanted. Regard-
less of morals and the equity of the thing,
Mr. Ryan saw a political advantage, and
seized it.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin.—lt
was in the interests of the community.
Senator MILLEN.—The interests of a
community will never ultimately be
served by any act of injustice. If it is
to be regarded as not inconsistent with
public policy that it is right to take from
any individual, or from a minority, in
order to advantage the majority, sooner
or later the country in which such a
policy is adopted will rue the day of its
adoption.
Senator Bakhap. The citizens of
Rome got bread and oil free, and Rome
was ruined.
Senator MILLEN.—So will any coun-
try be ruined in which public affairs are
run by dishonest methods of that kind.
The answer to Senator O’Loghlin is that
when I questioned Senator Gardiner as to
whether he approved of what Mr. Ryan
had done, whilst applauding the cheaper
meat, the honorable senator would not
identify himself with the method by which
that cheap meat was obtained.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loqhlin. —What
have the views of Senator Gardiner to do
with me?
Senator MILLEN.— Nothing; but is
this case Senator Gardiner saw a little
more clearly than Senator O’Loghlirr,
and he was not prepared to identify him-
self with the methods adopted by Mr.
Ryan. Only one of two interpretation*
can be put upon what was done. Either
Mr. Ryan was false in his trust to the
Imperial Government, or he was guilty
of an act of dishonest injustice to the pro-
ducers of meat in Queensland.
I com© now to a more important
matter—the war. Important is hardly
the word. When we recognise that on the
outcome of the war depends all we have,
all we are, and all we hope to be, that
the very right to sit in this chamber ia
to-day trembling in the balance, depend-
ing upon the efforts of those who are so
gallantly fighting for us, it is so out-
standingly important that one wonders
that any time should have been taken
in this debate to discuss any other sub-
ject. Senator Gardiner was an open and
frank advocate of the policy of peace
by negotiation. He is not present now,
but those who heard him will say that I
am not overstating the case.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin.
General Smuts is an advocate of peaee
by negotiation.
Senator MILLEN.—I wish Senator
Gardiner stood where General Smuts does
on this matter. I say at once, in fairness
to Senator Gardiner, that, in common
with every other member of the chamber,
I fully understand the difficulty of his
position. No one could have listened to
Senator Gardiner, not only in this debate,
but on one or two previous occasions, and
read his recent public utterances, without
recognising that if there is one unhappy
and troubled man in the political world
to-day, it is Senator Gardiner. He see*
clearly, as his speeches indicate, the
dangerous road that is being taken by his
colleagues, but lacks the moral courage
to leave them, even in this great national
crisis. He is torn between the calls of
his own inner conscience and fear of the
political 'associates whom he is leading.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin.—The
Labour party leads itself; it does not need
individuals.
Senator MILLEN. —We shall see
directly where it is leading itself to.
What does peace by negotiation mean ?
The honorable senator talked as if this
were a debating society, where rival
teams from various schools of arts had


«ome to debate a mere matter of abstract likely that we should be left to fight those
1 . • 1 * 1 _ 0 1 J nAM U. M /V nl-1 n 4-1 «
interest. Does not peace by negotia-
tion at this juncture mean an abject and
cowardly surrender of all we have been
fighting for? I shall take Senator Gar-
diner’s alternatives and test them. He
said the first was victory for the Allies,
which he had always believed in and
fought for; that the second was peace by
negotiation, and the third, victory for
the Central Powers. Let us examine
those three things and see what course
Senator Gardiner is urging to-day in
order to secure that victory for the Allies,
which he said he had always believed in
and fought for. I propose to succeed by
a process of rejection, and will take the
three propositions in reverse order. The
third, Victory for the Central Powers.
To avert that’surely calls for all our effort
and for every sacrifice of which we as a
people are capable. Are you making that
effort and sacrifice when you talk of
peace at this juncture?
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin.— Yes.
Senator MILLEN. —Then I fail to
understand the meaning of words.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin. It
depends on the terms on which peace is
made.
Senator MILLEN. —I shall come to
that, and the pehple with whom we are
asked to make them. Undoubtedly the
possibility of a victory for the Central
Powers makes the strongest appeal to us,
not merely because of any attachment _ to
the Imperial authority, the idea of which
seems to appal some of my honorable
friends opposite, but, if on no higher
ground, that of our self-preservation
here as an independent community. What
does the second alternative, peace by
negotiation, mean but to delay No. 3 ?
Peace by negotiation to-day with an un-
beaten and unbroken Germany is tanta-
mount to a victory for the Central
Powers. It may not be the victory to-
day, but can any one look forward with
any degree of confidence to a renewal of
the conflict if Germany is allowed time to
recuperate, when we shall have no pros-
pect or no great probability of having
associated with us in the renewed struggle
all the other nations of the civilized world
as we have them to-day ? If this struggle
terminates in an undefined way, can any
one presume that, when the encounter is
renewed, the twenty-six or twenty-seven
Powers, which are now our Allies, will be
again fighting with us? Is it not more
two Powers alone ? Peace by negotiation,
therefore, is but a postponement of vic-
tory for the Central Powders.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin.—Can
you tell us how it can ever come without
negotiation ?
Senator MILLEN. —I shall tell the
honorable senator what we can do. We
can strive to get it, and not weakly,
treacherously, and in a cowardly way
talk about “ throwing in the towel ” at
this juncture. Is not the first alternative,
victory for the Allies, the only safe course
for us to pursue ? It is in that direction
only that we can ever hope for safety.
How is it to be obtained ? Is it to be ob-
tained by talking peace to-day—by giving
indications to the enemy that we are, as
Senator Gardiner expressed himself,
doubtful of obtaining victory? Are we
by passing resolutions here to send this
message of encouragement to Germany,
that if she will only hang on a little
longer, if she will only develop and dis-
play that tenacity of purpose which we
have always claimed as a national attri-
bute of the British people, we are getting
so tired, so faint-hearted, that we are pre-
pared to withdraw from the contest under
a pretext of a peace by negotiation ? %
There is only one basis for a real and last-
ing peace'’,', only one means by which we
can achieve those purposes for which we
went to war, only one means by which
we can free the world from that menace
which has been hanging over it like a
nightmare for the last quarter of a cen-
tury, and that is to carry on the contest
until the Allies have managed to secure
their ends. Did we enter the war
prompted by any blood lust, or seeking
territory, or with the idea of crushing
competitive nation ? Even Senator
O’Loghlin would not venture to say that
any of those purposes prompted the draw-
ing of the sword by the British Empire
or her Allies. The war was entered upon
by the Allied nations because they recog-
nised that Germany was making her bid
for the great prize of world-dominance,
which she had long dangled before her
people. Whatever may have been the
immediate or professed causes of the war.
we and our Allies are fighting to-day for
our national independence, for the right
to live in our own way, and for all that
has made civilization, as we understand
it, worth fighting for, living for, and


dying for. If we surrender in this con-
test before we have achieved those pur-
poses, we can rest perfectly assured that
it will be only a few years before we shall
pay a well-merited penalty for our
cowardice in yielding at this juncture.
Does it never strike these peace propa-
gandists that the nation which has done
more peace talk than any other is Ger-
many? But she has not talked peace at
home, Germany talks victory to her own
people, but she talks peace beyond her
borders. Is Germany heartened, or
discouraged, by these peace reso-
lutions passed in the circles of
those associations to which my hon-
orable friend belongs ? Does the re-
cord of our Hansard, which sooner or
later will find its way to Germany,
encourage or depress her. Let there be no
mistake about "what I say. Just as we get
extracts from German papers, honorable
senators may rest assured that Germany
peruses our Hansard after the lapse of
only sufficient time to. enable it to filter
through that channel which, no doubt, she
has provided. Peace has played Ger-
many’s part only too well during the last
few months of the war. Undoubtedly, the
talk of peace played Germany’s game in
Russia—and peace naturally has an ap-
peal to us all. The spectre of golden-
winged peace floating over the land again
was held up to the gaze of a too-easily de-
luded Russia. It also played Germany’s
game in Italy. It was the poison which
Germany had gradually instilled into a
section of the people of that country that
brought about the disaster which overtook
a great body of the Italians a year or so
ago. All these things were the result of
this idle, dangerous, prattling about
peace.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin.— You
are making assertions without a shadow
of proof. Any on© can make assertions.
Senator MILLEN. —I agree with my
honorable friend, but I am not making an
assertion unsupported by facts when I say
it was the gospel of peace which brought
about the downfall of Russia.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin.—No-
thing of the sort.
Senator Colonel Rowell. —What was
it, then?
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin. —lt
was the superiority of arms and the dis-
organization of the Russian people.
Senator MILLED. —And wliat brought
about that disorganization? It was this
poisonous virus that disorganized the
Russian people.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin.—We
congratulated them upon the revolution at
first.
Senator MiTLEN.—Perhaps we did.
I see by recent publications that the Rus-
sian people are now saying, “ Yes, but
we have saved the revolution.” They
have, but they have lost their country.
Senator Needham. —Lloyd George con-
gratulated them in the House of Com-
mons.
Senator MILLION.—He spoke then in
the light of the circumstances of the time.
It is quite conceivable that even a gentle-
man of outstanding capacity, and with
the many sources of information that are
available to Lloyd George, seeing the Rus-
sian people arising in the first flush of
the revolution, and, being, as he is, a
Democrat, should hav© congratulated
them upon their bid for liberty—especi-
ally when they declared, as they did, that
they were not only going to free them-
selves of their internal tyrants, but were
determined to see the war through against
the tyrant who rules over Germany.
Lloyd George has not congratulated them
upon later developments. In the light of
after events, and with the experience
which comes with the lapse of time, we
can see more clearly what has happened
with - Russia. This gospel of peace—
preaejied, I firmly believe, by the paid
agenfs of Germany—has not merely left
Russia as she is to-day—chaotic, helpless,
and hopeless —but has resulted in
that call for the increased effort and
sacrifice that is being made by our
men and their Allies on the fields of
France to-day. These are the results of
peace by negotiation. Does any one op-
posite pretend that the Allied cause has
been helped by this triumph pf peace by
negotiation? If there is anything in
this doctrine we ought to be rejoicing to-
day that Russia obtained peace by ne-
gotiation ; but is any one traitor enough to
this Empire to say that he can rejoice in
the spectacle of Russia impotent, know-
ing that because of her fall the German
troops previously occupied there are to-
day representing that spearhead, composed
of German reserves, which is giving the
Allies all they can do to hold their own


where they stand to-night? This talk of 29 of the report of the Conference de*
i n j j i i •»
peace proved Germany’s greatest ally in
.Russia. It proved equally effective in
essence, if not in extent, in Italy, and
there was clear evidence that they were
trying it also in France. I shall pursue
the parallel no further; but I cannot shut
my eyes to the fact that Germany has
more to gain than from a dozen victories
on the battlefield if she can only show her
people the spectacle of one portion of the
British Empire saying, u We, too, will
follow the example of Russia, because the
time has arrived to declare, with Senator
Gardiner, that it is hopeless to obtain com-
plete victory, and therefore, in order to
avoid complete defeat, we are prepared to
accept peace by negotiation." A declara-
tion of that kind from a leading public
man published in Germany would be
worth to them many victories.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loohlin.
Exactly what General Smuts said as a
member of the War Council.
Senator MILLEN.—But, sir, I want
to point out and remind the honorable
senator that this war is not merely a war
of armies. It is a war of nations, and
victory will come to that nation which
shuts its teeth tight and hardens its heart
with a resolute purpose to see it through.
It is going to be a war of endurance for
all the nations engaged in it. If we saw
two men in conflict, and one who, between
blows, talked continually about pulling
out and making a peace by negotiation,
we may be sure that our money would not
go that way.
Senator Lt.-l Colonel O’Loghlin. —But
the only way to make peace is by nego-
tiations.
Senator MlLLEN.—Negotiations will
come ultimately. They came for Russia.
But has Russia got peace?
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin.
Russia was conquered.
Senator MlLLEN.—Russia was not
conquered. Russia was an invader before
she talked peace. It was not until the
poisonous peace propaganda was circu-
lated among her people that the
German armies began to push the
Russians back. In order to show the
effect which this peace by negotiation has
had upon Russia, I cannot do better than
quote words uttered by Senator Gardiner
at the Conference to which he referred.
If honorable senators will turn to page
bates, and read the speech by Senator
Gardiner, they will see that he said—
I admit freely now that I was quite unable,
before Russia dropped out, to come to any
other conclusion than that the war was more
than half over, and I believe it would have
been had our Russian Ally maintained his
position.
There, it will be seen, Senator Gardiner
expresses the view that if Russia had
maintained her position—if Russia had
turned a deaf ear to those prattlers of
peace—and had gone on with the job-
that confronted her, this war would have
been over. I share that opinion with.
him. If peace by negotiation a good
thing, we ought to be glad that Russia,
adopted it. If peace by negotiation is
going to give us all that is hoped for, we
ought to hail with delight an intimation
that Italy had followed suit; and, like-
wise, we ought to approve of any similar
action on the part of France.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin. —Not
negotiations by the conquered with the
conquerors.
Senator MILLEN.—Was Russia con-
quered?
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin. —Yes-
Senator MlLLEN.—Russia never was
conquered, even if she were overrun-
Servia was overrun, but not conquered;,
and Belgium is not conquered yet. I
would be prouder to be a citizen of a
country like gallant, dismembered Bel-
gium, which, regardless of the awful odds
opposing her, resolutely held on the path
of duty, prepared to make every sacrifice
in the defence of her national honour,
than a citizen of a belligerent allied
country, which, at the present juncture,
would talk of peace by negotiation.
But I world like to say to those who
are offering this way out, and suggesting
that we should cease from this hateful
struggle, that there are others en-
gaged in this fight who take a sterner
and a clearer view of the position. Only
in last evening’s paper there appeared the
following cablegram from the Paris cor-
respondent of the London Times: —
The Republican groups of the Left have ad-
dressed an appeal to the people of France in-
voking the citizens' support of the soldiers
in an inflexible will, tranquil hearts, and a
lucid spirit. “Do not listen,” they say, “to
whispers of peace without victory, which meam


a century of moral degradation and economic otherwise would only be maintained a*
slavery for all classes.” long as it suited her.
In that statement there breathes the
spirit of an unbeaten and unbeatable
people, and it is only by imbibing and in-
dorsing that spirit that we can look for-
ward to the time when we may claim
victory.
Senator Gardiner said he was appalled
at the prospect of another four years of
war. I admit that, but I say that, better
far another four years of war than an
eternity of degradation and humiliation;
better four more years of this deadly con-
flict than that we should go down beneath
the foot of the Hun barbarian.
Senator Lt. -Colonel O’Loghlin.
Hear, hear! If that is the alternative.
Senator MILLEN. —Senator Gardiner
also said that we should make an offer of
peace, and there should be behind it a
kind of threat against Germany. But
I point out that the Allies to-day are
making all the threats they are capable of
makings and the one thing that a*
troubling them, as it troubles us, is that,
apparently, the threats are not quite
potent enough at this juncture. When
Senator Gardiner talks about threatening
Germany, does he overlook the fact that
we are all out, and that as threats are
not likely to disturb the enemy, negotia-
tions for peace at this juncture will lead
nowhere ? Senator Gardiner said he
would like to punish Germany if that
were possible. Evidently he does not
believe it is possible to punish her for
her great world crimes. It may, or may
not, be possible to do that; but I say that
the adoption of resolutions for peace
negotiations will not only not punish Ger-
many, but will save her absolutely.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin.—lt
would depend on the terms of that peace.
That is the whole question.
Senator MILLEN.—Does the honor-
able senator think or believe that an
unbeaten Germany will concede the only
terms which would insure safety for us.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin. — lt is
worth trying, anyhow.
Senator MILLEN.—AII I can say is
that peace with an unbroken Germany
would not be worth five minutes’ pur-
chase. The only way to make for our own
national safety, and to insure that free-
dom by which we may shape our own des-
tinies, is to be prepared to sacrifice every-
thing in the effort, for we must know in
our hearts that peace with Germany
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin.
Britain and America both declare that
they do not want to destroy Germany or
the German people.
Senator MILLEN.—I have not said
that we want to do that. But I do say
that we want to curb the German power
which menaces the world to-day. And
there is only one way in which that may
be done, and that is by teaching the Ger-
man people that it is neither possible nor
profitable for them to continue the course
of public policy which they have followed
for the past generation. Let the German
people see that militarism has brought
triumph to them, has expanded their
borders, and given them what they call
their “ place in the sun,” and the
German people will say that as militarism
is the means by which they have secured
all they have, they will stick to it.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin.
Naturally, if they get all that.
Senator MILLEN.—At this juncture
there is no power, other than the force of
arms, to take it from Germany. Ger-
many will never yield until she is beaten.
Let me say now that I welcome the fact
that at least one member of the party
opposite takes an entirely different view
from that advanced by Senator Gardiner.
Senator Needham said that this is not
the time to call for peace. And he is
right. We may negotiate to obtain a
peace with Germany; but with whom
shall we negotiate? In order to negotiate
with any one, the negotiations ought to
proceed on the understanding that any
agreement arrived at would be observed,
for, obviously, there would be no sense in
drawing up an agreement which would
not be adhered to. And can we with any
degree of safety negotiate for peace with
this breaker of treaties, this robber of
innocent people, this murderer of women
and children, of Nurse Cavells and Cap-
tain Fryatts, this sinker of hospital ships;
this nation whose hands have committed
every foul crime known in the calendar
of humanity? Certainly not. Before we
negotiate we must show this nation that
the way of the transgressor is hard, and
that as a people they cannot hope to main-
tain their place in the civilized world
until those means they have used to
our detriment have been taken from
them for ever. Senator Lt.-Colonel


O’Loghlin has suggested that we should
distinguish between the German people
and the German rulers. There is no dif-
ference to-day.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin.—Pre-
sident Wilson says there is.
Senator MILLEN. The German
people have been misled by their rulers,
not to-day, but for many years past, and
so I readily believe that they to-day are
heart and soul as much behind their
rulers as the people of the British Empire
are behind the Imperial Government.
If their rulers are able to point
oift to them that in —the British
Empire there are people who aie
willing to surrender and talk of peace,
that their enemies are being disrupted
and becoming faint-hearted, that they are
ceasing to put forth a supreme effort, un-
doubtedly they will be encouraged to con-
tinue in the hope that before long victory,
and the rewards of victory, will be theirs.
I say it is too late io talk of peace by
negotiation. The time to talk peace and
consider the consequences of war is not
to-day. It was in 1914. If we were
afraid of the consequences of war and
were prepared to surrender our national
safety, we ought then to have taken that
attitude, because we could have made any
peace we liked with Germany in 1914 so
far as Australia is concerned. Germany
would have made any peace with Great
Britain then. But when she had made it
would she have hesitated to tear up the
treaty, just as she tore to shreds the bond
to which her rulers had placed their sig-
nature, and which was a sacred at it
was possible to make any such bond ?
There is only one way to win through
and make peace, and that is to destroy
German militarism. It is undoubtedly
unfortunate if in our action to destroy
that militarism we inflict suffering upon
the German people and similar suffering
upon our own people; but I speak with
firm conviction when I say that if
war terminates with German mili-
tarism unbroken, we shall not be entering
into a peace, but into a prolonged pre-
paration for another war, in which the
circumstances from- our point of view
will not be so favorable. Therefore,
we must win to-day or the Empire, sooner
or later, goes out of existence. It is for
that reason, seeing that no peace by
negotiation will break down German
militarism, that we must fight on. Is it
to be supposed that if we say, “ Peace
by negotiation, rid yourselves of your
ruling class, depose your Kaiser, and dis-
band your armies,” Germany will listen
to that?
Senator Lt .-Colonel O’Loghlin.—Not
likely.
Senator MILLEN. —As the honorable
senator says, “Not likely,” indeed! If
peace by negotiation led to peace now, it
would leave Germany free to recuperate,
and the Allies in the position to fall
apart. If we prize our liberty, of which
we talk so freely, if we believe that our
rights are worth the effort to hold them,
then the only time to be making that
effort is now.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin. —The
British Government have repudiated all
idea of the imposition of a new form of
government on the German people.
Senator MTLLEN,—Is that a reason
«why we should leave the German power
unbroken and free to return in hostile
attack upon the nations of the world so
soon as it is ready again?
Now, 1 turn briefly to another aspect.
Senator Gardiner was indignant when he
stated that certain accusations were being
made against the Labour party. Some
question arosb as to its loyalty. Senator
Bakhap, in plain terms, said he questioned
that loyalty so far as a big section of the
Labour party was concerned. I join my-
self with the honorable senator. Ido not
believe for one moment—and I am prou*d
and glad to be able to say it —that all the
adherents of the Political Labour League
are traitors to our country. The doom
of our Empire would be sealed if that
were so. But in that party, working
steadily, and many of them directing the
destinies of their various organizations,
there are those who say by every word
and action that the last thing they desire
is to help the Empire at this present time.
I support that assertion of Senator Bak-
bap by drawing the attention of honor-
able senators to the war resolution recently
passed by the Labour Conference in
Sydney, which was, in effect, that a com-
munication be made to the Imperial
authorities demanding that negotiations
for peace be opened at once, and that,
failing acquiescence, Australia should
take no further part in the war.


Senator Lt. -Colonel O’Loghlin.—Was
that at the Conference or at the Trades
and Labour Council?
Senator MILLEN.—I am not certain
which.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin.— lt
makes a difference. The Conference re-
presents the Labour party of New South
Wales, and the Labour Council does not.
Senator Bakhap, —lt is a section of
the Labour Executive.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O'Loghlin—lt is
the Conference which frames the policy of
the party.
Senator MILLEN.—The point is that
that resolution was not passed a
National gathering, but by a gathering
"of adherents of some one or other of the
associations affiliated with the Labour
party. It cannot, therefore, be wrong for
me to term it an expression of the view
of an important section of the
Labour party. Is that evidence of
loyalty, of a desire to play the game?
I can understand those who, like mem-
bers of the Society of Friends, may urge
peace. But when a party of this kind,
under no stress of religious conviction,
says, “Not only do we ask you to con-
sider our views, but if you do not adopt
them, then, so far as Australia is con-
cerned, we shall pull out of the war ’
Senator Colonel Howell.— That is
peace by negotiation.
Senator MILLEN.—Yes, and a most
damnable forsaking of our boys who
have gone to the Front.
In denouncing those who have questioned
the loyalty of some of his associates, Sena-
tor Gardiner referred rather bitterly to
accusations which, he said, had been made
by Nationalist papers against those with
whom he was allied. Nothing that has
been said by any Nationalist paper is one-
half as scathing as that which has been
stated by Labour itself. What is taking
place in my State to-day ? Why is one
union after another breaking away from
the Labour party ? Is there any stronger
condemnation of its actions possible ?
Senator Guy.— What are they breaking
away from ?
Senator MILLEN. —I will tell the hon-
orable senator why the Newcastle Trades
and Labour Council broke away from the
Sydney Trades and Labour Council.
Senator Guy. —Possibly a lot of those
members had no sympathy with the
Labour party.
Senator MILLEN.—It is a new thing
to say that a Trades and Labour Council
in a district like Newcastle, with its
robust body of miners, is not Labour,
and has not Labour sympathies.
Senator Guy. —l said, “ What did they
withdraw from?”
Senator MILLEN.—From affiliation
with the Sydney Trades and Labour
Council, owing to the latter body’s peace
resolution. And for that reason, I
stretch out my arm, and metaphorically
shake hands with those robust loyalists
represented by the Newcastle Trades and
Labour Council.
Senator Bakhap. —lt was precisely for
the same reason that honorable senators
who are now associated with us withdrew
from the Labour party.
Senator MILLEN. —Here is a short
statement by a member of the Newcastle
Council who seconded the motion
We cannot remain affiliated with the Sydney
Council. They are anti-British. We believe
in recruiting. It would be far better if Judd
and his followers were in Germany. We would
then have a better chance of fighting them,
and giving them their deserts in this war.
The language is crude, but the sentiment
is magnificent.
Dealing further with Senator Gar-
diner’s complaints as to the criticisms
cast upon himself and his associates, let
us look at what Labour journals have to
say upon the matter. Here is an article
from the Railway Union Gazette —a
Labour journal, surely! I have never
heard it in any way associated with the
political party to which I belong. This
is what it has to say about Senator
Gardiner.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin. T
thought you would be using that. It is
a choice little bit for you.
Senator MILLEN. —The Railway
Union Gazette states —
Senator Albert Gardiner, leader of the
Labour Party in the Australian Senate, should
be seized'by the ear, led to the portals of
Labour’s temple, and kicked ignominiously
down the steps.
I am not saying that that journal is
or is not right; but not to my knowledge
has any Nationalist —individual or news-
paper—ever spoken of oi referred to
Senator Gardiner in those terms. The
Gazette continues —
Gardiner has been false to his trust, and has
attacked the Victorian movement in a most
scurvy fashion. He doesn’t like the Victorian
branch of the movement, and there is a reason.


He hasn’t forgotten the chastisement he re-
ceived from the conference of 1916, for at-
tempting to smash the Clothing Trades Union
at the time its members employed in the Com-
monwealth Clothing Factory struck for decent
conditions.
The blow inflicted to Gardiner’s vanity at
that time rankled, and it is common know-
ledge that he obtained legal opinion with a
view of taking legal proceedings against the
Victorian party. Advised that he had no case
at law, he swallowed his chagrin, and ap-
parently waited his opportunity.
We next find our worthy senator as silent
as the proverbial oyster, and clinging desper-
ately to office, whilst Hughes and some other
of his colleagues were attempting to Prus-
sianize Australia. Gardiner never raised his
voice on that issue, and there is not the
smallest measure of thanks due to him for the
vote of 1916.
We next find this elusive gentleman on no
fewer than two occasions advocating a coali-
tion Government, notwithstanding the very
definite decisions of the Labour party upon
this point.
And now we have this malicious attack upon
the Victorian A.L.P. Gardiner has been wob-
bling for quite a time. If he will not volun-
tarily join his Nationalist friends, then the
sooner Labour lodges a writ of ejectment upon
him the better it will be for the good name of
the movement.
Have any Nationalists ever spoken of
Senator Gardiner in that way ? The
strongest critics of the Labour movement
to-day are Labour men themselves.
Senator Lt. -Colonel O’Loghlin.
What brought that attack upon him ?
Senator Pearce.— Because he said in
this Senate that we should fight to a
finish.
Senator Thomas. —Because he stood up
for the Empire.
Senator MILLEN.—I would like to
pass on now to say that there is nothing
more dramatically complete than the ac-
tion being taken in the Labour movement
to-day. Those unions which are falling
apart are not doing so without cause.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O’Loghlin.— Are
you worrying about it?
Senator MILLEN.—No; not when I
see men, with the right course before
them, having the courage to follow it.
I do not expect that any one of those
unions which are withdrawing from the
Labour party will be siding with my party
politically. There is a higher thing than
party to-day. I would shake hands with
those men, and I am most willing to stand
with them shoulder to shoulder in any
effort we can jointly make to further
that which we all have at heart, namely,
the permanent security of the British
Empire.
Let us consider this action on the part
of the unionists. We know the tenacity
with which Labour clings together. We
know that solidarity has been the chief
lever to the success of the Labour move-
ment. Can we suppose that those unions,
knowing that, have voluntarily surren-
dered the principle without excellent
cause? If there is any justifica-
tion for charges of disloyalty against
the leaders of the Labour movement to-
day, it is to be found in the attitude and
actions of those unions whose loyalty is
forcing them to break away. What is
the nature of the resolutions which have
gone over to Western Australia? What
are the resolutions that have been carried
from the eastern States to the Labour Con-
ference in the West? They are peace re-
solutions, and consequent upon them these
loyalist unions have declared, “ Much as
we love our unions, we love our country
more.”
I wish to clear up one other point
raised by Senator Gardiner, and I do so
because he stated distinctly that I was
wrong in an interjection which I made
during the course of his remarks. He
stated that at the Governor-General’s
Conference the initial motion which was
submitted had not been proceeded with
because Mr. Hughes, owing to ill-health,
was not present. I contradicted Senator
Gardiner, and he challenged me to find
in the record of that Conference evidence
of any other reason. In looking through
the reports of the gathering I came across
the following on page 12, where Senator
Gardiner said—
I could join with Senator Millen in carry-
ing a resolution of that kind, but would that
link up with us the hundreds of unionists who
have been thrown out of employment, or the
82,000 unionists who have been de-registered
because of the action of the National Govern-
ments in combination?
I hope, however, that we will close this
Conference without any resolutions being
carried, because in that way we shall demon-
strate the unity and good feeling of delegates.
Hard and fast motions drafted to meet the
occasion will not, in my judgment, bring about
unanimity.
My statement is—and that quotation proves
it —that it was not the temporary absence
of Mr. Hughes for a day or two which
prevented Senator Gardiner and his asso-
ciates from adopting that motion. It was
because Senator Gardiner and a number


of those associated with him were afraid
to go back to their unions and tell them
they had subscribed to the motion.
Mr. Ryan also objected to the motion.
Although these delegates to the Confer-
ence found no fault with it, and although
they all say that they would willingly
have supported it, they did not do so.
Mr. Ryan said—
But I am inclined to think that, perhaps,
the experience in connexion with the two con-
scription issues has made the delegates in-
clined to scrutinize very closely the wording
of a motion which superficially may appear
innocuous, but which may subsequently prove,
by the use that would be made of it, to be
loaded.
No reference to Mr. Hughes’ absence
through illness! As a matter of fact it
was never mentioned in the whole course
of the debate as a reason for not adopting
the motion. Mr. Scullin said —
If the Conference insists on putting this
motion to a vote now, it will be placing in
a, false position men who have come here from
all parts of Australia.
Let me direct attention to the motion, the
adoption of which was going to place
them in “ a false position.” It read as
follows: —
That this meeting, recognising the urgent
necessity for united effort in order to secure
adequate reinforcements under the voluntary
system of enlistment, resolves to consider im-
partially and with all good-will such proposals
as may be made to enable Australia to re-
spond to the appeal for men addressed to the
Dominions by the Imperial Government.
With whom was the adoption of that mo-
tion going to place them in a false posi-
tion? With loyalists who wanted to get
recruits, or with that section of the Official
Labour party which does not want to get
them, and declines to do anything in the
direction of getting them? Mr. Storey,
the Leader of the Labour party in New
South Wales, said—
It is useless to talk of carrying a motion
that we uncompromisingly commit ourselves
to assist in recruiting work, because, when the
Conference disperses, members generally will
take no further notice of it.
He could only claim to be speaking for
himself and his immediate associations.
He had no right to speak for the whole of
the Conference in using those words.
Mr. Tudor said —
My suggestion is that we should not take a
vote upon anything.
I mention these things in order to show
that the statement made hy Senator
Gardiner, or the excuse that he offered
for not voting for the motion Mr.
Hughes’ absence through ill-health—had
not a vestige of truth in it. The fact is
that Senator Gardiner and his friends, or
many of them, were afraid that hy adopt-
ing it they would be placing themselves
in a false position with those by whom
they would be called to account on return-
ing to their respective organizations. In
order to show the attitude of these gentle-
men, let me read the motion which was
put up by them at the end of the proceed-
ings. Mr. Tudor moved —
That this Conference, meeting at a time of
unparalleled emergency, resolves to make all
possible efforts to avert defeat at the hands
of German militarism, and to secure an honor-
able and lasting peace.
I ask honorable senators to note the words
“to avert defeat.” It was a resolve,
not to make an effort in order to secure
victory, but merely to make an effort in
order to avert defeat. Any peace so-
ciety in the country could have adopted
the same motion. The Conference was
not called together for that purpose; it
was called together for the purpose of de-
vising means of getting men to carry on
the war. Yet they put that motion
forward. A more, flabby, anaemic motion
in a time of national crisis was never
submitted anywhere, and I regret to say
that when Mr. Hughes submitted a more
vigorous proposal it was declined, and the
Conference broke up with a resolution
which was an admitted compromise in
order to secure unanimity. It reads as
follows: —
That this Conference, at a time of un-
paralleled emergency, resolves to make all pos-
sible efforts to avert defeat at the hands of
German militarism, and urges the people of
Australia to unite in a whole-hearted effort
to secure the necessary reinforcements under
the voluntary system.
It is mild enough, heaven knows to what
extent! But, although it had nothing in
it to offend anybody, and everything in it
to appeal to those who were loyal to their
country and saw the danger confronting
it, what reception did it receive from
those who speak for Labour in New South
Wales? It was defeated by a majority
of three to two. A curious incident oc-
curred in that debate in Sydney. Mr.
Morby was at the Conference at Govern-
ment House, and he carried the resolu-
tion into what was an apparently hostile


meeting in Sydney, but he fought for it
loyally, and the fight continued for seve-
ral days, but neither Senator Gardiner
nor Mr. Tudor uttered a word of encour-
agement to him or took any action to
strengthen his hands. They left him
alone to fight as best he could, fearful,
apparently, of bringing upon themselves
that hostility w r hich they left unchecked
to range round the man who had been
their fellow colleague. There are a dozen
ways in which a man who is in the public
eye may be helped, 'Even if that Council
had declined to receive either Mr.
Tudor nr Senator Gardiner, a letter
in the press or a public statement by one
of them would have had a welcome or a
moral effect which would have told, if not
at that gathering, at any rate with the
community outside. Yet neither raised
his voice nor stretched a hand to get
through that council a motion to which
they had subscribed in Melbourne. Evi-
dently they were by the hostile
reception extended to it, and so they left
Mr. Morby to stand alone.
In the course of his remarks, Senator
Gardiner indulged in prophecy, or rather
expressed the opinion that it would be
impossible to look for victory over the
Central Powers. I hope that the Senate
will not be too prone to regard the honor-
able senator as a prophet in these mat-
ters, but lest it should be, I would like
to place on record another prophecy in
vvhich he has indulged. Speaking at the
Conference, he ventured into the arena
of expert military opinion, and delivered
himself of these words—
Surely, when the position is so serious, this
Conference is one in which we can drop all
pretence. In saying that the position is
serious, I am not much concerned about the
battlefield of France to-day, because it looks
to me as if the Allies have made the cleverest
move that they have made in the war to date,
in drawing the Germans out of their concrete
trenches, and I shall await with interest the
developments during the next montlT.
Honorable senators will remember that
while the Conference was sitting, the first
of the three German drives had com-
menced, and our troops had fallen back
about 25 or 30 miles. Is it to be assumed,
as Senator Gardiner did, that the Allies
had adroitly drawn back in order to draw
the Germans on ? If so, they have re-
peated the operation twice, and they have
only to go on drawing back in order :o
encourage the Germans to advance, and
they will soon reach that position when
there will bo no further land upon which
to draw back. Utterances of this kind
show that Senator Gardiner has absolutely
no conception of the position we stand in
to-day, else he would never have uttered
such an opinion. *
The honorable senator has asked what
the Government have done to redeem the
promises we made at that Conference. The
New South Wales Government have taken
steps to redeem their promised absolutely,
and have called a special session of the
State Parliament with a view to passing
Bills to secure the re-registration of de-
registered unions. The Commonwealth
Government promised to remit all out-
standing money penalties; those penalties
have been remitted. We also promised to
release from prison any person sentenced
for offences arising out of and during the
strike; that promise has been fulfilled.
We also promised to review any war pre-
cautions regulations after Mr. Tudor had
communicated his views to us as to which
regulations he thought should be with-
drawn. He has done so, and we have
repealed some of them, and have com-
municated with him regarding the others.
We promised that there should be a re-
laxation in connexion with the adminis-
tration of the censorship; a supervising
committee has been formed on which
Labour journals are represented, and
short of giving up the right, which w©
dare not give up, of exercising a censor-
ship, we have honestly redeemed our
promise in that regard.
Another matter discussed, and referred
to by Senator Gardiner, was the matter
of the Industrial Workers of the World
prisoners. He and others, not only here
but elsewhere, are continually repeating
the statement that these men are detained
in gaol after having served their sen-
tences. That statement is not correct.
The law requires that after the members
of the Industrial Workers of the World
have completed in gaol the term to which
the Court has sentenced them, they shall
be detained there until such time as there
is an opportunity for deporting them.
That is their sentence. They cannot be
detained one moment after they have ful-
filled that sentence. It is a perversioxf
of the truth to say that these men are
illegally detained in gaol. I listened to
Senator Gardinqr as I have listened -o
others pouring out a flood of sympathy for
members of the Industrial Workers of
the World organization. My sympathy


goes out, not to them, but to those
who would have been their victims had
they been allowed to carry through their
programme. ■»! have not forgotten that
tho members of this association tried to
burn down places in Sydney in the middle
of the day when they were crowded with
women and children.
Senator Lt.-Colonel O Loghlin.
Those are not the men for whom we are
pleading.
Senator MILLEN.—It is the members
of that association for which the honor-
able senator and member? of his orga-
zation are stumping the country to-day,
seeking to raise an utterly false sympathy
for them, I remember that two members
of the Industrial Workers of the World,
in cold blood, murdered a policeman. He
was sitting at his office desk when they
sneaked up in the dark, and fired at him
through the open window. There was a
petition got up to secure the reprieve of
those men, who have met a very well-
merited punishment, but there was no
movement to render succour to the rela-
tives of the murdered man. When these
beasts in human form are walking through
our streets it is a perversion of what sym-
pathy really is to talk about having sym-
pathy for them.
Senator Lt. -Colonel O’Loghlin.—
Those are not the cases brought under
the Minister’s notice.
Senator MILLEN. —These men are
members of the same organization, which
has been formed for that purpose. Tho
Act declares that those- who join it shall
suffer penalties, and unless one is a sym-
pathizer with them he should'be offering
congratulations to the country on having
a Government in power which, in spite
of all the pressure from the other side,
is determined to rid the country of these
pests.
Senator Lt. -Colonel . O’Loghlin.—
Specific cases were submitted to the Min*
ister •
Senator MILLEN. —The Government
have gone into all the specific cases sub-
mitted, and where they thought leniency
might be extended they have extended it.
Where they thought it should not be ex-
tended it has not been shown, and Minis-
ters are not disposed to yield to a popular
cry and release men whom it believes to be
dangerous. If I have detained honorable
senators more than a reasonable time I
ask them to remember that, more or less
imperfectly, I have attempted to deal
with those things which are of vital im-
portance at the present moment.
MELBOURNE : ALBERT J. MULLETT, GOVERNMENT PRINTER,
