

?ern
N.^
SPEECH
SIR GEORGE GREY, K.C.8.,
IN ANSWER TO
ME. CAUTLEY’S ENQUIRY
FOR INFORMATION AS TO THE PROPOSED EXTENSION
OF THE CANTERBURY BLOCK,
IN THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL,
ON THE 18th JUNE, 1851.
NEW ZEALAND:
PRINTED BY R. STOKES, AT THE “ SPECTATOR OFFICE,” WELLINGTON.
1851.




[lt having on several occasions been recently publicly stated that
Sir George Grey, upon the 18th June last, made, as President of
the General Legislative Council, an attack on the Canterbury Asso-
ciation, upon the settlement of Canterbury, and on the settlers
there; and such statements being at variance with fact, and being
likely to produce erroneous impressions regarding what really did
fall from Sir George Grey, we have thought it desirable to republish
the speech made by His Excellency on that occasion.— Ed. N.Z.S.]
(Extracted from the New Zealand Spectator of 21st June, 1851.)
“ Sir George Grey said, that any information on this sub-
ject, in the possession of the Government, rested, he believed,
solely on his own personal knowledge. All he knew re-
garding it was that the Agent of the Canterbury Association
had read to him the draft of a letter, in which, as far as he
remembered, was a recommendation that an application
should he made for an extension of the block of land which
was to be subject to disposal under the peculiar rules of that
settlement. He had, however, heard rumours on the same
subject from other sources. As far as he was informed of
the intentions of the Home Government and of Parliament,
he believed that they were in no way desirous that this par-
ticular mode of disposing of lands should be forced upon the
inhabitants of this country. In fact, they were solely desirous
of promoting the welfare of the inhabitants of New Zealand, and
of consulting, in as far as practicable, their wishes. It there-
fore was the duty of those persons who disliked the portion
of the islands they lived near being subjected to such regula-
tions, to state their objections to them. The points which
appeared to require attention were these: —A district con-
taining nearly three millions of acres, including within its
boundaries Banks’ Peninsula, and embracing one of the


most fertile districts in New Zealand, which contained also
—before the present regulations were established—many
persons of a different faith from that of the Church of
England, was placed under the control of the Canterbury
Association; and then regulations were made, an impor-
tant feature of which was, that until three millions of
pounds were paid for the purposes of the Church of Eng-
land, the whole of that district could not be used, as their
necessities required, by civilized man; nor could any part
of it he used for these purposes, until the proportionate part
of the three millions of pounds which was due under these
regulations upon that part was paid over for the purposes of
the Church of England: even for depasturing purposes the
land could not be used under the present regulations, except
at a rate which, calculating that a hundred acres would feed
thirty sheep, required a payment of nearly 2d. per head per
annum for the same purposes. Now, as he understood from
rumours, it was intended to ask that a further block of per-
haps 3,000,000 or 4,000,000 of acres should be placed under
the same regulations, so that the case would then be, that
before the whole of this block could be used, seven millions
of pounds must be paid for the purposes of the Church of
England,—and no part of it could be used until the propor-
tionate amount due on that portion had been so paid. This
appeared to involve questions worthy the consideration of
all classes in New Zealand, as the power of the humbler
classes to acquire properties for their families was involved
in it, the amount of the produce of the country was involved
in it, and the extent and value of the commerce* greatly de-
pended on it. The oidy argument he had ever heard used
in defence of this arrangement was, that Great Britain had
done much for New Zealand, and therefore had a right to
make such regulations for the disposal of its lands as were
for the benefit of the population of the whole empire. This


argument he admitted in its fullest extent; but he could
not consider it for the benefit of the mother country that one
of the most fertile portions of the empire should be closed
by such restrictions, which, in as far as he understood them,
placed obstacles in the way of industrious men raising them-
selves from a state of want, by the use of lands which, in
their wild state, were useless to mankind. As a churchman,
he viewed this attempt with the utmost alarm, although on
this subject he spoke with great diffidence, as he had the
highest reliance upon the judgment of many members of
the Association ; indeed two right reverend prelates belong-
ing to that Association were his intimate friends: yet it did
not appear to him —at the time that so large a portion of
the population of Great Britain were in such distress —to be
in accordance with any rule of Christianity, that the poor
of the earth should have closed against them, by such re-
strictions, so large a tract of fertile country which a boun-
teous Providence had placed at the disposal of the human
race. It did not appear to him to be in accordance with the
principle, that those who preach the gospel should live by
the gospel; because it wrung contributions to a church from
those who were not friendly to that church, but whose ab-
solute necessities compelled them to buy land necessary for
their operations; and because it made the clergy, in the early
stages of the scheme, dependent for their support, not upon
their flocks, not upon the members of the church, but solely
upon the amount of land to be sold; so that, almost involunta-
rily, men might be led to aid in the sale of lands—a duty foreign
to their calling. He thought, therefore, that this system of ob-
taining an endowment was objectionable, whilst he thought
the endowment itself far too large, and likely ultimately to in-
troduce habits of sloth and negligence into the church, and
thus to be injurious to its own welfare. He would far ra-
ther have seen the virtuous and industrious, who could find


no place at home, encouraged to occupy such a country upon
terms which would have enabled them easily to acquire
homes for themselves and their families, and readily to de-
velop the resources of the country, and to have seen a busy,
active clergy, by acts of kindness and Christian virtue, gain-
ing from the members of their own church, in that fertile
district, a love and gratitude which would readily have
yielded ample endowments for all their wants. He feared
the present system would injure the church; it led men in-
cautiously, even in the publications issued under the autho-
rity of the Association, to hold out the clergy as a feature
of attractiveness, and even to use such language in support
of what is termed the religious principle, as that ‘ the
merest land speculator has an interest in the Canterbury
bishopric.’ He thought that such arguments, whilst they
might gain endowments for the church, must injure the very
religion they were meant to support. It therefore behoved
those who objected to having the lands in their vicinity
placed under such regulations to state their views upon
the subject.”


V
*1
/


■
'
.
)
*
