

SPEECH
OF
WILLIAM CHARLES WENTWORTH, ESQ.,
MEMBER OF THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL,
OF NEW SOUTH WALES, FOR THE CITY OF SYDNEY.
On moving the Second Reading of the University
Bill on 4th October , 1849.
REPORTED BY MR. E. K. SILVESTER,
OF THE "SYDNEY MORNING HERALD.”
Sydneg:
PRINTED BY DAVID WALL, 76 & 78, YORK STREET.—1850.
REPRINTED BY CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.—1896




SPEECH
OF
WILLIAM CHARLES WENTWORTH, ESQ.,
MEMBER OE THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL,
OF NEW SOUTH WALES, FOR THE CITY OF SYDNEY,
On moving the Second Heading of the University
Bill on 4 th October , 1849.
REPORTED BY MR. E. K. SILVESTER,
OF THE “SYDNEY MORNING HERALD.”
§ybnts :
PRINTED BY DAVID WALL, 76 & 78, YORK STREET.—IBSO.
REPRINTED BY CHARLES POTTER, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.—IB96




SPEECH
OF
WILLIAM CHARLES WENTWORTH, ESQ.,
MEMBER FOE THE CITY OF SYDNEY,
In the Legislative Council , on moving the Second Reading oj the
University Bill , on the 4-th October, 1849.
[Reported by Mr. E. K. Silvester, of the Sydney Morning Herald .]
On the 6th September, Mr. Wentworth moved
“ That a Select Committee he appointed to inquire
into the matters contained in the Petition of the
proprietors of the Sydney College, and to report
upon the best means for instituting a University
for the promotion of literature and science, to
he endowed at the public expense.” The latter
part of this resolution was carried, and the follow-
ing Committee appointed :—Mr. Wentworth, the
Colonial Secretary, Mr. Cowper, Mr. Lowe, the
Speaker, the Attorney-General, Mr. Nichols, and
Mr. Macarthur.
On the 22nd of September, Mr. Wentworth
brought up the Report of the Select Committee,
and on the 28th obtained leave to bring in the
Bill.


On the 4th October he moved the second reading
of it in the following Speech :
Mr. Speaker, —In moving the second reading of this Bill, I
feel bound, in the first instance, to express my gratitude, my deep
gratitude, to the Government for the cordiality with which the
proposition which I felt it my duty to introduce has been met.
I rejoice that the Government has assented to that proposition,
and the cordiality of its acquiescence is sufficiently expressed in
the message of the Governor, intimating his readiness to facilitate
the measure. True it is that some of the recommendations of the
Select Committee, made perhaps without due consideration of all
the circumstances, cannot be carried out by the Government, but
the acquiescence in the allowance to the University of £5,000 per
annum sufficiently indicates the sentiments of the Government
on this great question. I feel bound to make these remarks, not
only in gratitude for what it has done, but to show, that though
the Government has not complied with all the recommendations
of the report, it has done so as far as its powers extended ; and
I believe to that essential extent which will permit of the design
of this Bill being carried into effect. The endowment which
the Bill will give to the University will enable the Senate to
send Home for Professors to accomplish the great object of the
measure. It will, in fact, set the institution in motion, and I take
it that for a year or two it is of little consequence where the
peculiar local habitation of the University may lie, or what shall
be the local habitations provided for its Professors. The latter,
in all probability, as in England, will prefer to reside in private
habitations. Therefore, so far as regards any vote for building
purposes, I agree that it is better it should be deferred, until
experience has shown us what the results of this educational
experiment are likely to be. When the Bill is in actual opera-
tion ; when the Professorships of the University are established,
then it will be time enough to think of a building-fund. The
Bill I have now the honor to introduce to the notice of the
Council is derived from the Bill for the foundation of the


London University, and as the provisions are not numerous,
although the Session is drawing to a close, I hope the House will
assent to them. [The honorable and learned Member here
entered into a detailed explanation of the various clauses of the
Bill.] The principle of the measure has been assented to by the
Government, and if the various provisions do not altogether meet
the approbation of the House in their present shape, still I hope
the recommendations of the Select Committee will be adopted.
It is argued by some that this University is, for the present at
least, unnecessary ; that a Grammar School, liberally endowed,
would be of greater and more extended usefulness, for although
at the present moment it may seem that the education afforded
by a Grammar School is all that the Colony requires, continual
additions would have to be made to such an institution to make
it adequate to the increasing wants of the Colony. But after all,
those who know anything of collegiate matters will admit that
mere collegiate institutions engender a laziness and inertness,
both in pupils and teachers, destructive of the ends such institu-
tions are designed to advance, and to endow such institutions
here would be the way most effectually to retard education. It
is true that collegiate institutions have one advantage—the pupils
are resident under the same roof, and under the control of the
master. This is an advantage which the University, I contemplate,
will not possess ; but it will be found that the Bill gives to the
officers of the University a surveillance over the private residences
of the students. But I contend, whatever the faults in detail of
the present measure may be, there is a power of expansion in a
University which no other scholastic institution possesses. It
will be seen from a clause in the present Bill that scholastic
establishments, endowed and supported for the purpose of
enforcing and maintaining peculiar religious views, can affiliate
to this institution. I trust and believe that the result of this
clause will be the erection of these affiliating establishments in
every part of the Colony, and this, if not the immediate result,
will certainly not long be delayed. The standard of education
in the Colony will then be regulated by the University. Those


who receive its Degrees will be recognised equally with those
who have received similar Degrees at Home, and therefore I
contend that the operation will be to advance education in the
highest degree. Another incalculable advantage which this
measure will afford will be that it will give a much higher class
of education than has hitherto been attainable in the Colony. It
will lead to the increase of the education of our youth of the
higher classes, not only in amount but in degree. Nor will this
advantage be conferred on the higher classes alone, for it must
be remembered that the only expense to which students at the
University will be put is the expense of the classes; they will
not be required to reside at the University, and therefore, to a
considerable extent, the education afforded by the institution will
be free. The great principles of the Bill are inserted in the Ist
and sth clauses. It is to be an institution intended for the
purposes of secular education only. This principle I considered
absolutely indispensable. If we once introduce the principles of
sectarian interference, all good and successful government of
such an institution is at an end, because if any one sect assert its
supremacy, all other sects will retire from it, and thus be virtually
excluded from any participation in its benefits. No doubt there
are provisions in this Bill which have given offence to many. The
sth clause, rendering the election of any clerical person to the
Senate of the University ipso facto void, has been strongly
protested against in some quarters. I, however, maintain that if
we really wish to carry out a great educational design,- it will be
wise and politic to exclude the clergy of all denominations from
any share in the management of an institution like this. I would
not only have the managers and trustees of the institution laymen,
but I would have all the teachers laymen too. I also anticipate
that in the first event a strong disinclination may exist to the
appointment of lay tutors ; but the clerical influences under
which this feeling will originate cannot prevail under this Bill,
when the representations and claims of every sect are taken into
due consideration. But I cannot see, as it at present stands, why
this Bill should excite any jealousy. All sects alike will be free


to compete for the Honors and Degrees which the University
affords. Whether it be a candidate from St. Mary’s or from
Lyndhurst, the broad principle upon which the institution is
founded will admit all. Any society, any institution, which may
arise, let it be based on what principle it may, if it be worth
preserving, may affiliate to this institution for the benefit and
instruction to all; therefore lam prepared to support an amend-
ment to this Bill, should such amendment be proposed, that
clerical men should not only be excluded from the Senate of the
University, but also from teaching, or in any way assisting in the
instruction of the students, though I admit that considerable
difficulty may arise in procuring sufficient and competent teachers
without incurring a large expenditure. It may be that an opinion
favourable to the admission of the clergy of various denominations
as teachers may exist in the Council, but I believe, amongst those
whose opinions are valuable, both in and out of the Council, a
strong disinclination exists to admit them to the Senate. If
they are to be teachers, at all events exclude them from the
Senate, who are to appoint and direct the teachers. I must now
come to the most serious objection that has been urged against
this Bill. It is argued that it is an irreligious measure. I
can only hope that though it be, to some extent, confined
strictly to the objects of secular instruction, it is not without
provision to satisfy those who have higher views. The 21st clause
provides that although religion may not be taught in the Uni-
versity it may be instilled. Still will it be left to their pastors to
impress upon the minds of the students the tenets of the faith to
which their fathers have clung. Whether, therefore, reverend
gentlemen are to be admitted into the University as teachers or
not, I trust that their exclusion from the Senate w r ill be a rule
strictly adhered to. It has been said within these walls that this
will be an infidel institution. If such a charge wanted or
deserved refutation, it is to be found in the 21st clause of the
Bill. I have no sympathy with any of those halting opinions
which would restrict and limit education. I believe the wider
the spread of education, the higher the degree to which it is


carried, the more elevated will the tone of morals in this Colony
become. I believe the best, the surest mode of proving the
divinity of the great Christian code, and to enforce its laws and
ordinances, is to enlighten the mind and enlarge the intellect of
those who put their trust in it. Ido not believe the great truths
of Christianity can be safely instilled into the mind of the unedu-
cated man, if they can be instilled at all. The seed of the word
cannot spring up and fructify in the heart in the barrenness of its
native ignorance. (Cheers.) I cannot conceive that the unrefined
and uneducated man can appreciate the convictions at which a
Paley arrived in the same spirit as those who can admire and
comprehend the thoughtful process by which those convictions
were attained. No doubt in this day, as in all past ages, the rant
and rhapsody of ignorant and designing men are more acceptable
than the purer and holier faith which is founded in reason and
conviction : but to the calm philosophical mind the cause of
religion will have its surest stronghold in the educated intellect.
(Cheers.) The London University was founded on the same
principles as those contained in this Bill. The preamble states
“ that it was for the better advancement of religion and morality,
and the promotion of useful knowledge, &c.” Surely a Bill the
object of which is thus set forth cannot contemplate the passing
of an infidel measure. I think, with such a precedent as this, I
can have but little to contend against, so far as the infidelity
which the measure is said to contain is involved. I believe it to
be a measure which, by increasing education, by diffusing en-
lightenment, by softening and elevating the habits and manners
of the people, will greatly advance the cause of true religion.
It is not by stunting the intellect, by suppressing intelligence,
that Christianity is to be promoted. Look back on the past, look
around on the present, and you will find among the greatest men
of our common country the most cultivated talents and the most
profound learning most consistent with the deepest convictions
of Christianity. Another argument which has been used against
this Bill is that it is a Bill for the rich and not for the poor. I
deny that this objection has any force. The main object of this


Bill, its greatest and most important object, is to advance the
cause of education amongst all classes. On the continent of
Europe, in the States of America, and latterly in England, the
principle of extending facilities for a higher class of education
has been recognised. In England I find £IOO,OOO has been
voted for institutions of this description, and I consider that, in
this respect at least, we ought to follow the example of the mother
country. There may be parties so grovelling, so low-minded, as
to wish to keep down the scale of education for their children
in this Colony. To those, whose better aspirations are thus
deadened and blunted by ignorance and prejudice, I would reply
that there are two parties to consult —those who would thus
stint education, and the children themselves. The Legislature
must judge between the prejudice of the parents and the rights
of the children. I see in this measure the path opened to every
child in the Colony to greatness and usefulness in the destinies of
his country. I see in this measure the unerring finger which
points out to the poor man’s child the road to all that is respect-
able in position —all that is lofty and dignified in the estimation
of his fellow-countrymen. So far from this being an institution
for the rich, I take it to be an institution for the poor. It is,
at least, the only measure which the Select Committee has been
able to devise to prevent a degeneracy in mental caste through-
out the whole Colony. The necessity of such a measure has
long been felt in this Colony, for though what were termed the
wealthier classes of the community might be able to send their
sons to Europe, such a course was always resorted to with
extreme regret, and oftentimes could not be resorted to at all.
The difficulty which existed had increased in the altered circum-
stances of the Colony, and I am therefore justified, looking at the
largely-increased population of the Colony, in saying that the
education of the higher class of youths in this Colony has degene-
rated. I believe this to have been the case already, and I cannot
conceal from myself the disastrous effects it has had, and must
have, on this community. The Self-Government for which we have
sought so ardently will be but a worthless boon without the


educational advantages this measure holds out. How # many of the
native youth of this Colony are there fitted to become the Minis-
ters of its Government? If we obtain Responsible Government,
in order to carry it out we shall be obliged to employ people who
come from abroad— people who cannot feel that intense interest in
the country which the sons of the soil ought to feel. The native
youth cannot now obtain the education which would fit them for
the high offices of the State ; and thus a state of things is created
which is not to be endured ; —it is derogatory to the Colony, and
must be put an end to. The establishment of a University seems
to be the only way by which to rid ourselves of this great evil;
and if it result in no higher achievement than the preparation
of the youth of the Colony for the various Departments of the
Government, the money it may cost will be well employed. Por
myself, I take no meed of praise for the introduction of this Bill.
I seek none. I believe in proposing this measure lam only em-
bodying the conviction of its necessity, which has gradually grown
up in the mind of the community at large. I believe it is this
deep and growing conviction which has stamped the measure with
that success which has hitherto marked its career, and which, I
believe, will eventually carry it through the House. It is not I, it
is not you, who are the originators of this measure; it has its
origin without these walls —in the depth of public opinion—and
we are only the active agents to give that opinion force and effect.
No doubt,in the minds of many, this measure outstrips expectation,
but I believe that in recommending a large measure like the pre-
sent the Select Committee have acted wisely. I believe that of
two evils it is better to do much than to do too little—it is better
to make this institution great at once, to give it lofty aims and
ends, than to endow it moderately, and see it dwindle into insig-
nificance. .At all events, the Senate which will govern this insti-
tution will reap no profit from it; whatever the result may be,
they will stand in the position of dispenser, not of receiver. I have
a profound and aspiring belief that in after years the Members of
the Council will be enabled to look back on the accomplishment of
this undertaking with pride. Amid many troubles, many variances


of opinion, I believe that tbe establishment of this institution
will be the highest honor, the greatest glory, which the Council
has yet achieved. (Cheers.) In passing this measure I would fain
hope we are doing no selfish or confined benefit. That in this
institution, at least, our legislation will be purified from that dross
of interest and party which but too often clings to the most exalted
philanthropy of our nature. In after years, it is my earnest hope
that we may survey this institution affording, in its extended
sphere, education and instruction, not to the natives of this Colony
alone, but to the whole family of the human race ; that it may
prove a fountain of knowledge at whose springs all may drink, be
they Christian, Mahomedan, Jew T , or Heathen. That its gates will
be open to all, whether they are disciples of Moses or Jesus, of
Brahmin, of Mahomet, of Yishna, of Buddha. I look upon it
that this University must be of this hemisphere, not of this clime.
Some there may be who think that its objects are so lofty that we
shall fail in our spring to reach them. I have no such trembling
anticipations, because looking at the bond which is to unite the
Colonies in this part of the world together, I cannot but feel that
this institution must become a necessary and component part in
the maintenance of such a Federalism. From the moment this
institution is established a new era will have commenced in the
Colony. From the moment of its existence a beneficial and a
holy light will shed its beams on the lowest dwelling of Australia
—a light which will give warmth and life to the humblest
aspirant after the great and good. The Members of this
Council will always recur to this, their greatest work, with
heartfelt satisfaction. The good we seek to do will fructify
and increase, until on every cottage the light of Education
and Civilisation shall shine, and the better aspirations of the
patriot and the philanthropist shall glow in every heart. The
youngest Member of this House, in all human probability, will
not live to witness the full consummation of all these benefits.
It is a fulfilment reserved for our sons, perhaps for our sons’
sons, but we shall have the proud consciousness of having done
our duty. At our dissolution it will be ours to exclaim with the


immortal Poet—“ Non omnis moriar, multaque pars mei vitabit
Libitinam.” # And we ought to have even higher thoughts, a still
more glorious expectancy. We ought to cast our glance forward
on the period when we shall cease to be a dependency, and stand
forth amongst the nations of the earth, enlightened and refined.
By the aid of this institution I trust that when the hour of our
deliverance draws nigh it will be unstained by the torrents of
blood which marked the severance of the American Colonies from
the parent State; that the glorious Ensign of English freedom
will never more be washed in the blood of free men, as was the
case with that country whose power has now become the shelter
for the destitute of all countries—the home of the struggling
patriot—the land whose name is now the hope and destiny of
nations. Never again for liberty may useless blood be shed.
Never more may British bayonets be directed against British
hearts, to compel them to a slavery their souls disdain. A better
era has, I trust, arrived, and through the instrumentality of such
institutions as I am now advocating, a more peaceful regeneration
of the liberties of mankind may be effected. And when the hour
of separation from our ancestral Empire arrives, I humbly trust
there may be no desolation of hearths, no separation of friends,
no betrayal of trusts, no breaking of hearts. That while these
trials are spared to individuals with regard to the countries, we
may have no national feuds, no deadly animosities, no usurpation
of power, no injustice or oppression. That if the hour must come
when we must part from the Empire, we may part as the child
from the parent, not to reciprocate animosities and differences,
but to perpetuate benefits and blessings. I believe this will be
the crowning Act of the Council—l may say with Oliver Crom-
well, that this Act will be the crowning mercy of the Council.
I believe it to be a measure to test the philanthropy and
patriotism of the Council—a test by which we may safely abide,
bo long as this institution shall exist, we shall not be forgotten.
So long as it shall flourish, our memory will not decay. Ear
more important will its effects be than aught that we have yet
* Hor. Od. 111, 30, 6.


done. We have passed laws, but these laws may be altered
may in the change of fleeting circumstances be swept away. But
this measure —this which is to enlighten the mind, to refine the
understanding, to elevate the soul of our fellow-men; this, of all
our Acts, contains the germ of immortality—this, I believe, will
li ve —live to commemorate the Council who passed it. I believe
that from the pregnant womb of' this institution will arise a long
line'of illustrious names, —of Statesmen, of Patriots, of Philan-
thropists, of Philosophers, of Poets, of Heroes, and of Sages, who
will shed a deathless halo, not only on their country, but upon
that University we are now about to call into being.
(The Honorable and Learned Gentleman sat down
amid the cheers of the House.)
The motion was carried, and the Bill read a second
time, and passed through Committee, but owing to
an unhappy difference as to the constitution of the
Senate, the Bill, unfortunately, dropped through for
the Session. The Bill was revived in the ensuing
Session, and eventually became law.
Sydney : Charles Potter, Government Printer.—lB96.




