

SPEECH
Delivered By
The Right Hon. W. M. Hughes, P.C.,M.P.
Prime Minister of Australia
In the Federal House of Representatives,
Melbourne
on
THURSDAY, 7th of APRIL 1921
DEALING WITH—
Relations of the British Dominions and Great Britain;
Imperial Naval Defence;
The Japanese Question—as it relates to
British Foreign Policy and renewal of
The Anglo-Japanese Treaty:
Australia’s Position in Relation to the Far East
League of Nations
Danger of Naval Rivalry in the Pacific;
and the
Necessity for closer relations between the two great
branches of the English speaking peoples.




SPEECH
Delivered By
The Right Hon. W. M. Hughes, P.C.,M.P.
Prime Minister of Australia
In the Federal House of Representatives,
Melbourne
- on -
THURSDAY, 7th of APRIL 1921
DEALING WITH —
Relations of the British Dominions and Great Britain;
Imperial Naval Defence;
The Japanese Question —as it relates to
British Foreign Policy and renewal of
The Anglo-Japanese Treaty;
Australia’s Position in Relation to the Far Fast
League of Nations
Danger of Naval Rivalry in the Pacific;
and the
Necessity for closer relations between the two great
branches of the English speaking peoples.


SPEECH
delivered by
The Right Honourable W. M. HUGHES, P. C., M. P.,
Prime Minister of Australia,
in the Federal House of Representatives, Melbourne,
on Thursday, 7th April, 1921.
The Prime Minister of Australia delivered the following
important speech in the House of Representatives regard-
ing the questions to be discussed at the forthcoming Im-
perial Conference of Prime Ministers of the British Do-
minions, to be held in London in June next.
Mr. Hughes dealt with the relations between the various
Dominions and Great Britain; Imperial Naval Defence;
The Japanese Question as it relates to British Foreign
Policy in general and the renewal of the Anglo-Japanese
Treaty in particular; League of Nations; Australia’s posi-
tion in relation to the Far East, and the necessity for
closer relations between the two great branches of the
English speaking peoples.
Relations Between the Dominions and Great
Britain—
Mr. Hughes said:
Recently the question of Constitutional changes in re-
gard to the relations between the Dominions of the British
Empire and Great Britain have been discussed in the
press and on the platform, and I have been criticized for
not disclosing my views in regard thereto.
There seems to be an impression amongst certain gen-
tlemen who consider that they have special claims as
experts on all things pertaining to the Constitution, that
the forthcoming Conference has been called to consider
the question as to how to effect some great Constitutional
changes. These critics protested against the Australian
Representative being armed with plenary powers without
giving Parliament an opportunity of approving or dis-
agreeing with his views.
The actual position is a somewhat cruel anti-climax to
these self-appointed Constitution mongers, whose burning
desire is to substitute for the present system, a brand new


Constitution framed by themselves. The Conference has
not been called to even consider Constitutional changes.
That matter is to be dealt with at a subsequent Confer-
ence which may be held next year—so that all this is much
in the air. The matter will be set down for consideration
at the earliest next year—but probably at a later date. It
is painfully evident from articles which have appeared in
the press and in magazines—and that have occasionally
been enshrined in a more permanent form, that to a cer-
tain type of mind, the Constitution of the British Empire
is far from what it should be.
One object of these enthusiastic but inexperienced per-
sons, is to redraft the Empire constitution and substitute
for the present empirical, illogical structure —fashioned by
time and the circumstances under which we have lived
and flourished—a constitution built according to some
logical plan which they have devised. When challenged,
they repudiate any desire to establish some kind of Im-
perial Parliament. They want to gild the pill. Falling
short of a grandiose scheme for an Imperial Parliament
they hint at a central council endowed with powers over
various parts of the Empire. They seem to think it neces-
sary for the Empire to be held together by some Imperial
Council or by some legal formula. They forget it has
existed for centuries without any of these things. They
fail to realize that a thousand formulas or Imperial Coun-
cils would not keep the Empire together, if either Britain
or various Dominions desired to drift apart. In their
desire to improve upon the British Empire, these gentle-
men display complete ignorance of the historical, ethno-
logical and geographical facts. If their advice were fol-
lowed the Empire most assuredly would tumble to pieces.
Freedom of Action of Dominions—Basis of Empire
Unity—
The British Empire has not been built according to any
plan of philosophers or Constitutionalists. Happily for
mankind, they have not had a hand in it. Its structure
or development is not the result of a deliberate purpose.
It has grown up as it were, haphazard—there never was
time when its structure was crystallized. It is now as it
always has been, in a state of flux —its constitution, if we
can apply so definite a term to a thing so indefinite, has
adapted itself to everchanging and evergrowing require-
ments. The British Empire, as a fine silken garment,
adapts itself to the movements of the body. The timely
verdict of impartial history will affirm that in these


matters our forefathers displayed, in its highest form,
a genius for self-government which they have se-
cured for themselves, and which applies to the ever-
varying needs of the greatest Empire the world has ever
seen. The pillars of this temple of Empire are firmly
embedded in the rock of Liberty. No wonder other na-
tions find it difficult to understand the relation between
different parts of the British Empire and the Mother
Country. That the Dominions should enjoy what for all
practical purposes amounts to independence and self-gov-
ernment —and yet, while boasting their independence, pas-
sionately insist that they are parts of an Empire one and
indivisible, appears to a foreigner both illogical and incon-
sistent. What, for want of a better term, we call the
British Constitution ought not to work, yet paradoxically
it does work—not in spite of its inconsistency, but because
of it. I think nothing is more certain than that the surest
way of destroying this mighty Empire, which is one of the
chief bulwarks of civilization, is to tamper with its Con-
stitution. The complete autonomy of its parts is the
foundation upon which its unity rests. Neither Britain
nor the Dominions are prepared to yield one jot or tittle
their perfect freedom to govern themselves in their own
way, and from this assurance of perfect freedom for each
of the several parts, ensues the spiritual unity which binds
us together. The basic principle underlying the relations
between Britain and her oversea Dominions, is freedom
of action.
The relations between Britain and Australia today are
as different as those existing a hundred or even fifty years
ago —as is the World today different from that then exist-
ing. The strength of the tie binding us together, lies in
this very fact. There is no rigidity, yet bars of triple steel
are as wax compared to the tenacity and strength of the
ties binding the different portions of the Empire together.
End of the Great War Has Not Brought Peace—
The June conference has been called to deal with Em-
pire defence—particularly Naval Defence, with the ques-
tion of the renewal of the Japanese Treaty, with the for-
eign policy in regard to wireless, etc. The Japanese
question involves foreign policy in general and renewal of
the Japanese treaty in particular. This being so, the ques-
tion of Constitutional changes does not arise, and no good
purpose can be served by mere academic discussion. War
has not changed the hearts of men. Love has not replaced
hate. The attitude of the world towards war has changed,
and it is clear that if men have not changed in this, they


have changed in nothing save externals. How stand the
Nations of the world today? Are they beating their
swords into ploughshares? Ever since that fateful day
in November. 1918, when the Armistice between the Allies
and Germany brought the Great War to an end, wars and
rumors of wars have filled the air. Not one day since the
Great War ceased, has there been peace on earth. Wars
of Nations, of classes, internecine wars, incessant indus-
trial turmoil, talk of great navies and of other wars, has
been the grim aftermath of the war to end war.
League of Nations Powerless at Present to Bring
World Peace—
It is true that the League of Nations met but a few
months back and considered many things. It dealt with
some and avoided dealing with many more, but it did
not even attempt to deal with war —the great question
which it was created to settle. The Council of the League,
which for all practical purposes, is another name for the
representatives of the great Allied Powers, has been in
frequent session, but like the League Assembly, has by
inaction, confessed itself for the time being, powerless to
bring peace to a world drenched with blood. Who in the
face of all that is happening today can say it has fulfilled
the expectations of its creators. It may be that in the
fulness of time the League may prove a sure and certain
shield behind which the world may rest secure against
the awful scourge of war, but that day is not yet. Until
then I must say with Marcus Aurelius “Would’st thou
confer upon any .country the clouds of war, induce its
Government to disarm.” War is still one of the great
facts men and nations have to face. That is the first point
I desire to emphasize. It is a fact of such supreme mo-
ment to Australia that even if we would, we dare not
ignore it. Before the war it could hardly be said that
Australia realized how greatly the welfare, and indeed the
safety of the Commonwealth, depended upon the policy
and acts of other nations. Owing to our remoteness from
great centres of population and the vastness of our heri-
tage, the Australian had become self-centred and insular
in outlook, concentrating upon domestic policy which he
thought essential to his welfare —without giving a thought
how it might affect or be regarded by other nations. Be-
fore the war, the average Australian did not understand
that in the world of today relations between nations are
such that no nation can afford to ignore what others are
doing. It is a far crv from Australia to Belgium, yet it
is possible that had it not been for the invasion of Bel-
gium, the Empire would not have gone to war on August


the 4th, 1914. Certainly no Australian dreamed that the
assassination of an Austrian Grand Duke at Sarajevo would
lead to a war in which Australia would spend nearly 400
millions sterling and lose 60,000 men.
Dominions to Have Voice in Empire’s Foreign
Policy—
Until quite recently the foreign policy of the Empire
was shaped entirely by Great Britain. The Dominions
had no voice in or control over it. No doubt any other
course was practically impossible. Britain was and still
is the predominating partner. She was the mother to
whom all her children looked. These, although sturdy
youngsters have not reached maturity. Since any foreign
policy for the Empire must depend upon naval power and
the British Navy was owned and maintained by Great
Britain, any claim by the Dominions to a voice in Empire
foreign policy was hardly justified. Time and circum-
stances have changed the position. Five years of war have
done more than a generation of peace to develop the
national spirit of the Dominions.
The manner in which the Dominions equipped and
maintained armies larger than Britain herself had ever
before placed in the field, put the seal upon that new
status, which not only Britain but the world has now
acknowledged. The statesmen of Britain were the first
to recognize that the Dominions should be consulted on
such acts of foreign policy as might in future involve them
in war.
Cost of Empire Naval Defence to be Shared by
Dominions—
For another reason too besides that of their increasing
population, wealth and importance, the relations between
the Dominions and Britain regarding foreign policy have
been materially changed. It is out of foreign policies that
wars are hatched. Before the war the great burden of Em-
pire naval defence rested upon the shoulders of Britain,
but the debt and sacrifices resulting from the war made
this no longer possible. The Dominions have claimed the
status of Nations. They have earned their right to be so
considered by their war efforts. They have lost tens of
thousands of men, incurred debts amounting to hundreds
of millions of pounds, but neither in men nor money, are
their losses as heavy as Britain’s. The British Navy is not
needed for the defence of Britain alone, but of the whole
Empire including the Dominions. Britain has told us
plainly she cannot longer bear the expense of maintaining


this great navy, and that the Dominions must share the
burden. No request could be more reasonable, and for
Australia there is no alternative but participation in a
scheme of Imperial Naval defence in which we shall play
our allotted part and contribute our due quota. I am of
course dealing with the question of naval defence from the
standpoint of Australia. I think the position of New Zea-
land is for all practical purposes the same. The safety of
Australia rests upon an adequate naval force. The Com-
monwealth cannot provide this from her own resources.
Britain on the other hand can no longer afford to bear the
burden of a navy sufficient to ensure the safety of the
whole Empire—and has informed her Dominions that she
expects them to bear their fair share. That is the posi-
tion, and it leaves no room for argument except as regards
the nature of the details of the scheme to be adopted.
Australia’s Position in Regard to the Far East—
Any scheme of Imperial Naval defence must necessarily
provide for defence in the Pacific Ocean, as it is there
that the present and future of Australia is to be decided.
Whatever the splendour or greatness, menace or trial, the
future has in store, good and evil alike will come to us
from the Pacific. Naval defence is for us a Pacific ques-
tion, and our foreign policy must concern itself closely
with the aims and aspirations of peoples and countries
surrounding that mighty ocean. It behoves us to know
and be known to our neighbours. Although remote from
the great centres of population in the Western world, we
are much nearer than any other western people to the
bulk of the world’s population. We are very near to the
overcrowded East. We cannot afford to be indifferent
to what these great Eastern nations are doing. We must
take steps to see that our own acts and views are not mis-
represented, but placed fairly before them. These nations
are our neighbours with whom we desire to trade, and
with whom we desire to live in peace and amity.
I have seen in the press a good deal about the necessity
for a strong American Navy. It is said that one reason
why Americans want the strongest Navy in the world is
that they have such a great coastline to defend. But we
have a coastline nearly three times as long as that of
America. They have over one hundred millions of people
to defend a country slightly smaller in size than Australia,
and only vulnerable from the seas on two sides. It is evi-
dent we want a much larger navy than the Commonwealth
itself is able to maintain.


Empire Dependent Upon Naval Power—
In considering the question of naval defence, we must
remember how far the Empire itself is dependent upon
sea power. From the Constitutional point of view, the
nexus which holds the Empire together is the Crown. The
fundamental truth is that the Empire is impossible under,
say a Republican Government. As the Dominions have
developed, their legislators have claimed wider and wider
powers which Britain in accordance with her traditional
policy, has always granted. Today while the Dominions
are accorded a place in the family of nations, and take
seats in the Assembly of the League of Nations on a foot-
ing of equality with all other countries, Constitutionally
they are one by virtue of having one King. The Prince
of Wales spoke of the Empire as a Commonwealth of
Nations. Whether we call it a Commonwealth or an Em-
pire is not material; words are nothing —it is things that
matter. The fact is the constitutional nexus of the Empire
is the Monarchy. We, in the Australian Commonwealth,
now call ourselves a Nation. So we are. But in the same
breath we declare ourselves part of the British Empire.
These apparently inconsistent declarations combine at
once our history and our circumstances. Whatever material
prosperity or national greatness we have, have come be-
cause of our partnership in the British Empire, which in
its turn depended for its very existence upon the British
Navy. When we speak of the British Empire there is no
delusion as to that on which its existence and greatness
depend. It depends upon naval power, and Australia’s
existence depends upon adequate naval defence. The
Navy is what the people of Britain make it, and it is vital
to us that it should remain a great Navy.
The Conference is therefore important because we as
Dominions may there express our opinion as to what it
means to us. The question then of a satisfactory scheme
of imperial naval defence is one literally of life and death
to Australia.
Good Relations Between the Two Great Branches of
the English Speaking Peoples-the Hope of the
World—
The bearing of the Japanese Treaty upon the naval
fence of the Empire is obvious. As we have seen lately,
there has been much talk of strained relations between
the United States and Japan. Now in that lie the germs
of great trouble—possibilities of infinite disaster to this
world. What is the hope of the world? This is no party
question. I hope that every honourable member will ex-
press himself freely, remembering only that every word


said here in relation to a foreign nation is one which
must he weighed before being uttered. Words of counsel
I welcome—words of warning too —but not words which
lightly uttered make a task that is now sufficiently diffi-
cult, almost impossible. What is the hope of the world?
As I see it, it is an alliance—an understanding between
the two great branches of the English speaking people.
Now here is our dilemma. Our safety lies in a renewal of
the Anglo-Japanese Treaty, yet that Treaty is anathema
to America. America has said that she must have the
greatest Navy in the world—that she must have a Navy
sufficiently strong to defend herself. To defend herself
against whom? She has left the world in no doubt, or in
very little doubt, as to whom. We not only have no quar-
rel with America —we have no quarrel with Japan. We
have our ideals—Japan has hers. There is room in the
world for both of us. We want to live in terms of amity
with all Nations of the Earth. We could not afford to
do anything else no matter what we might think, even
if we desired otherwise. But of course we do not. If I
know the Australian people they desire with all their
hearts to concentrate themselves on those domestic prob-
lems which mean more to the people of the world than
anything else. War is a curse and it is our business to
endeavour not to bring about war but to prevent it.
Australia Desires Anglo-Japanese Treaty Renewed
in Form Acceptable to Britain, America and
Japan—
Our ideal at the Conference, as I see it, is a renewal of
the Anglo-Japanese Treaty in such form, modified if that
should be deemed proper, as will be acceptable to Britain,
to America, to Japan, and to ourselves. It may be said that
is impossible. It may be so, but I do not think it is im-
possible. Even when one comes to the alleged causes of
disputes and of difficulties between Japan and America,
those differences appear to be trivial compared with the
tremendous evil which war would inflict upon both na-
tions. What do the Japanese want? They want to hold
land in America and the right to enter the United States.
What is our own attitude? Our attitude is very much
like that of the people of the Western States of America
towards Japan. Indeed, any honourable member who,
like myself has been to the Western States, will say that
for all practical purposes we view this problem eye to eye.
What have the Japanese to complain of in regard to our
treatment? First let me sav, speaking now as I believe'
as the spokesman of Australia upon this matter, that we'
desire above all things to live in peace and friendship with


Japan. It is utterly wrong for the Japanese people to
think that because we have passed certain laws, we regard
them as inferiors. We do not. We admire their bravery
and their patriotism, and we stand amongst those who are
loudest in admiration of their magnificent achievements,
for no other Nation has advanced so far in so short a time.
But as I had the honour of telling Japanese representatives
at the Peace Conference, while we were friends of Japan,
and while we considered them the equals of ourselves, we
do not always invite our friends into our houses. We
have our ideals, and they have theirs. I want the Jap-
anese people to understand clearly that we, the Australian
people, are anxious to be and to remain in peace and
friendship with them. If they complain of any act of
ours, I think they complain without reason. Let me re-
mind them of their laws in relation to foreigners. No
foreigner may hold land in Japan. So far as unskilled
labourers are concerned, these may not reside outside the
foreign settlements except with the permission of the
Prefectual Government. For all practical purposes the
foreign labourer is excluded, and under the provision just
alluded to, Chinese were deported from Japan. Naturali-
zation is extremely difficult if not impossible in Japan,
other than by marriage with a Japanese person. Our treat-
ment of the Japanese will compare quite favorably, I
think, with their treatment of foreigners in general. We
do not complain of these things. We say, “These are our
ideals and this is our country; Japan is yours and we shall
treat you with courtesy; we desire your friendship and we
want to trade with you, but we cannot go any further.”
The Japanese are so intensely patriotic that they do not
recognize naturalization by any other country as denation-
alizing Japanese. A Japanese no matter what he does,
cannot divest himself of his nationality. The patriotism
of the Japanese could not be displayed in any more effect-
ive way. Yet these are the main grounds of the difference
of opinion between the United States and Japan. Do hon-
ourable members tell me that such matters as these are not
capable of adjustment by a peace loving Nation? Do they
rather not tell me that it is the bounden duty of Australia
to use every means at her disposal to effect such a modus
vivendi as will secure a renewal of the Anglo-Japanese
Treaty in a form agreeable to the United States? Whether
she is a party to it or not, is not so material so long as
she accepts it, and does not regard the renewal of it as
being in itself a hostile act by Britain directed against
herself. That is our dilemma. While making every effort
to retain the friendship of Japan, we cannot make an
enemy of the United States. Nor can Britain do so. We


must steer our barque between Scylla and Charbydis. In
some way we must attain the calm water of port. That is
the mission which the representative of Australia has to
fulfil.
Danger of Naval Rivalry in the Pacific—
I need not elaborate on the advantages of the renewal of
Japanese treaty, nor on the consequences of its abrogation;
they are very obvious. It seems our expenditure on naval
defence will'fie to a large degree determined by whatever
steps are taken by means of this Treaty to assure us peace,
or in its absence, by the steps we take in co-operation with
Great Britain to attempt to ensure it. For obvious reasons
it is undesirable to discuss this question in all its phases.
One thing I think I ought to say, and that is, that what-
ever may be the opinion of this country in regard to the
Anglo-Japanese treaty in its present form, I think the
interests of Australia lie in a renewal of the treaty in some
modified form. I see no reason why the treaty should not
be renewed in a form which should be satisfactory, not
only to the Empire and Japan, but to America as well.
We cannot shut our eyes to the fact that there is now a
great danger of such naval rivalry in the Pacific as will
not only be a heavy drain on the nations directly affected
but which will have its reflex influence upon the whole
world. An uninterrupted era of peace is impossible to
contemplate while the world is resounding with the clang
of naval construction. I have always taken the attitude
that while very little may be expected from the League of
Nations, yet because peace is so desirable and war so awful,
all civilized Nations ought to do all things possible to
prevent war. But I have never been under any illusions
as to the power of the League to do this. In future the
spirit of the world may be changed, or when the League
shall have perfected its machinery and methods, we may
expect great things from it. Let us not chase away the
substance for the shadow. The most powerful agency for
the world’s peace today is the British Empire. The hope
of the future peace of the world seems to lie in some un-
derstanding, call it what you will, between America, Eng-
land, and France. The League of Nations is an unwieldy,
clumsy, contrivance. There is only one way to prevent war
and that is for the world to turn its back upon it and since
the progress of the world is uneven, some nations surg-
ing ahead of others, if war is to be prevented there must
exist amongst those who are opposed to war, the power
to prevent war.
