

eeuaious pa M 3
BOX */
STD TP TP P TPT
Jl JCa Xa w XX
THE
REV. I). S. M’EAOHRAN,
IN DEFENCE OF THOSE PARTS
OF THE
CONFESSION OF FAITH,
WHICH HAVE RECENTLY BEEN ASSAILED.
Delivered beforethe Presbytery of Melbourne
September 6th, 1881.
M. L. HUTCHINSON Publisher,
Presbyterian Book Depot, 1 5 Collins Street West, Melbourne.
1881.


NOTICE.
Several gentlemen having expressed an earnest desire that Mr.
M’Eachran’s speech on the Confession of Faith should be published in
a separate form, Mr. M’E. has agreed to comply with their wish. And
in order that it may be widely circulated, »it has been arranged that
fifty copies can be had for 3/., or one hundred for 5/. I shall be glad
to execute any order you may send~ me.
M. L. HUTCHINSON, Publishes.
Presbyterian Book Depot,
15 Collins Street W., Sept., 1881.


The Rev. D. S. M’EACHBANsaid: —Moderator, —I wish to say a few words in
seconding this motion. At first I was disposed to put a very charitable construc-
tion on Mr. Stewart’s letter. We all know that when a man confesses that he has
made a false step, he is not usually willing to confess frankly that he has done
so, but is anxious to say something at the same time by way of justification or
excuse for himself. It was in that light that I was disposed at first to regard Mr.
Stewart’s letter. But it is plain that his friends do not so regard it. They regard
him as simply drawing back his foot in order that he might plant it more firmly,
and I must assume that they know his mind.
That being the case, Mr, Stewart’s position still is that, if Mr. Strong is a
dishonest man because he does not believe in some of the doctrines contained in
the Westminster Confession, we are all equally dishonest; for not one of us
believes all the doctrines contained in it. Now, Ido not know where Mr. Stewart
got his information, but I regard it as a simple calumny to say of us that we do not
believe the standards which we have signed. For my part, I believe with my whole
heart every doctrine contained in them. Ido not believe in Mr. Stewart’s mis-
representations of their teaching, but I do believe in all that they really teach.
But even if I were not quite clear with regard to some small points, while I
honestly adhered to all that is essential in their teaching, is it to be said that, in
that case, I am equally dishonest with the man who attacks all that is most vital
and fundamental in them ? That is Mr. Stewart’s contention, but could anything
be more unreasonable ?
In order to make good his charge of dishonesty against us, Mr. Stewart pro-
pounds a new theory of subscription. He says that we swear by the Confession
verbatim et liberatim. Now such is simply not the case. We profess our faith in
the doctrines of the Confession, bnt we, by no means, bind ourselves to every word
and phrase and turn of expression in it. The declaration which we make when
entering upon office is—“ That we own and believe the whole doctrine contained
in the standards of this church as an exhibition of the sense in which we under-
stand the Holy Scriptures, and we acknowledge it as the confession of our faith.”
Such a declaration does not bind me to approve of every word and phrase in the
Confession. It binds me undoubtedly to its doctrines. If I did not believe in the
whole doctrine contained in the Confession ; if, for example, I did not believe in
the Divinity of our Lord, or in his propitiatory sacrifice, or in his resurrection
from the dead; or if I did not believe in the infallible truth and the Divine
authority of the Scriptures ; or even if I did not believe in the doctrine of elec-
tion, I feel that, as an honest man, I could not remain as a minister of the Pres-
byterian Church of Victoria. On the other hand,. I may not altogether approve
of the phraseology of the Confession in some parts ; I may wish that some things
had been stated somewhat differently ; I may wish that some truths had not been
stated quite so baldly, or that the balancing truths had been placed side by side
with them to guard against misapprehension ; I may wish, for instance, that when
stating the doctrine of election, the Confession had stated in the same chapter
God’s love to the world at large, and his readiness to receive every sinner that
repents and believes j—l may have such feelings with regard to the wording and


the arrangement of the Confession, yet, if I adhere to the substance of the doctrine
therein taught, I can sign it with a good conscience. But’with Mr. Stewart’s views
as to the teaching of the Confession, the marvel to me is that he should ever have
signed it. (Applause.) The charge of dishonesty lies against him for signing a
document which he does not believe, and not against us who have signed a docu-
ment which we do believe.
Another thing which plainly follows from our form of subscription is that we
are not bound by the private views of individuals, or by the inferences which
men may draw from the statements of the Confession. We are bound by the whole
doctrine of the Confession—nothing less and nothing more. This remark should
at once clear away much of the dust which has been attempted to be raised. The
Confession is not inspired. I am bound by every fair inference which can be
drawn from the words of Scripture, but I am not bound by any inferences which may
be drawn from the words of the Confession. Mr. Stewart draws dreadful inferences
from some statements in the Confession, and says we are dishonest men because
we do not believe them. I repudiate his inferences. In the first place, they are
not fair inferences, and in the second place, even if they were fair I am not bound
by them. They form no part of the doctrine of the Confession. Let me illustrate
my meaning. The Confession teaches that elect infants dying in infancy will be
saved. That is the whole doctrine of the Confession on that point, and I most
cordially believe it. Mr. Stewart infers from that statement that there are non-
elect infants, and that they will be damned. That is Mr. Stewart’s inference. It
is not my inference, and it is no part of the doctrine of the Confession ; for the
Confession says not one word about the damnation of any infants. In full con-
sistency with the teaching of the Confession, I can believe, as I do believe, that all
children dying in infancy will be saved. This will be the more evident when we
consider that, as the statements of the Confession in general were designed to shut
out error, so this statement in particular was also designed for the same purpose.
Holding the doctrine of baptismal regeneration, the Church of Rome taught, and
still teaches, that all unbaptised children who die in infancy perish. In opposi-
tion to that, the Confession teaches that “ elect infants dying in infancy are
regenerated and saved by Christ through the Spirit, who worketh when and where,
and how he pleaseth.” How beautiful does the doctrine of the Confession appear,
when viewed in connection with the purpose for which it was introduced ! Or let
us take the statement of the Confession with regard to the creation of the world
in six days. Mr. Stewart says that the days are days of twenty-four hours. But
the Confession does not say that. That is his inference, and I am at perfect
liberty to repudiate it. I admit frankly that the common belief of Christians has
been that the days were days of twenty-four hours. But it must not be too hastily
assumed that the compilers of the Confession had not other theories before their
minds. We know that the theory of Philo, that the days indicated merely the
succession and order of events, gained general acceptance in the early church. We
know also that the early Protestant theologians were careful not to dogmatise on
this point, and that some of them—Amesius, for example—suggested that the
active creative periods were six natural days with indefinite intervals between
them. Is it to be supposed that the Westminster divines, some of whom were the
greatest and most learned men of the age, were not acquainted with these theories ?
But, be that as it may, the great point for us is that they have given no theory, but
have contented themselves with giving the words of Scripture. Whatever latitude
therefore may be taken in interpreting the words of Scripture on this point, the
same latitude must be allowed in interpreting the words of the Confession. All
candid men will admit that. (Hear, hear.)
We all know that Dr. Chalmers had one way of reconciling the account of
creation given in Genesis with the ascertained facts of geology, and that Hugh
Miller had another. Dr. Chalmers’ theory was that the first verse in the first
chapter of Genesis asserted the creation of all things out of nothing ; that between
the first verse and the second was a great gap, during which all the changes on the
earth’s surface of which geology tells us might have taken place ; that the subse-
quent verses refer to the preparation of the world to be the abode of man, and that


this was accomplished in six natural days. Hugh Miller’s theory, on the other
hand, was that the days denoted great periods. Now, the thing which I wish you
especially to observe is this—that while Dr. Chalmers held one theory, and Hugh
Miller Jheld another, neither of them had any difficulty in holding office in the
Presbyterian Church, and no one will accuse them of having been dishonest men.
Having shown how unjust is the charge of dishonesty which Mr. Stewart has
seen fit to fling against us, I wish now to say a few words for the purpose of show-
ing how unjust and baseless are the representations which he has given of the
teaching of the Confession with respect to the state of the heathen and the decrees
of God. He represented our Confession as teaching “ that millions and millions
of God’s people have been sent to destruction because they never heard the gospel.”
That is a most extraordinary statement to be made by an elder of our church.
Who ever heard of such a thing ? Who ever heard of one, not to say millions, of
God’s people being sent to destruction ? The wicked will perish wherever they are,
but who ever heard of God’s people perishing ? That Mr. Stewart should have
given utterance to such a sentiment shows how utterly untrustworthy he is as an
interpreter of our Confession. Mr. Stewart has explained that by God’s people
he meant mankind. But his explanation does not help him much, for who ever
heard of millions of mankind being sent to destruction because they never heard
of Christ ? Has Mr. Stewart forgotten the statement of Paul that “ They who have
sinned without law shall also perish without law, and that they who have sinned
in the law shall be judged by the law ? ”
Mr, Stewart thinks he has made good his charge’when he quotes the words of
the Confession, which says :—“ Much less can men not professing the Christian
religion be saved in any other way whatsoever —that is, in any other way than by
coming to Christ—be they ever so diligent to frame their lives according to the
light of nature and the law of that religion they do profess.” But is Mr. Stewart
not aware that the same thing is taught by every church in Christendom —by the
Eoman Catholic church, the Lutheran church, the Wesleyan church, and the Church
of England, as well as by the Presbyterian church ? The language of the thirty-
nine articles is even stronger than that in the Westminster Confession.
“ They also,” says the 18th article, “ are to be had accursed that presume to say
that every man shall be saved by the law or sect which he professeth, so that he be
diligent to frame his life according to that law and the light of nature. For Holy
Scripture doth set out unto us only the name of Jesus Christ whereby we must be
saved.”
No one will venture to say that God may not communicate the light to some
of the heathen in ways which we would not expect, and no one need have any
hesitation in saying, with Peter, that “ in every nation, he that feareth God and
worketh righteousness, is accepted of Him,” If there be good men among those
who are outwardly heathen —good I mean in the Bible sense of the word —they
shall assuredly be saved. The righteous can never be as the wicked. “ Shall not
the Judge of all the earth do right 1 ” No one need have any hesitation in saying
that. But what we teach is that the heathen are sunk in sin, and that they deserve
to be punished for their sins. We teach also that being all guilty before God,
neither they nor we can be justified by our own works, and that neither they nor
we can be saved except by believing on Christ. But we teach, further, that while
the heathen will be punished for not walking according to the light they have, we
shall be visited with a far heavier punishment if we do not walk according to the
fuller light which we have. In other words, we teach, as our Lord teaches, that
“ he that knew his Lord’s will and did it not shall be beaten with many stripes,
and that he that knew not his Lord’s will and did things worthy of stripes shall
be beaten with few stripes.” These things are so simple and elementary that lam
amazed to see them called in question. (Hear, hear.)
But passing from that, I go on now to the next point. Mr. Stewart has said that
the Confession teaches “ that there are elect and non-elect, and that the elect
would be saved whether they liked it or not, and that the non-elect, do what they
could, could not be saved.” A more shocking travesty of the doctrine of the
Confession I never read, except in the writings of the coarser infidels. Who ever


heard of men being dragged to heaven whether they liked it or not, and with no
meetness for the services and enjoyments of that holy place? And who ever
heard of men doing what they could to be saved and yet perishing ? In other
words, who ever heard of any one perishing, who strove in right earnest to enter
in at the strait gate, or who ever heard of Christ casting out any one that came to
Him ? Is Mr. Stewart aware that in railing against the doctrine of that Confes-
sion which he has himself signed, he is railing also against the doctrine of the
Church of England, the teaching of whose articles is in entire unison with the
Westminster Confession ? Mr. Stewart has explained that his remarks were made
off-hand, and that, if he had written them, he would have expressed himself differ-
ently. I was willing to receive this as a virtual withdrawal of them ; but from
what has since emerged, I am shut up to the conclusion that he did not mean to
withdraw his charge, but that he meant to reaffirm it in other words.
Sir, I should not have chosen to discuss the doctrine of election before this
community, who, in my view, require much more to have repentance toward God
and faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ preached unto them. At the same time,
when the discussion is forced upon us, we must try and guard the doctrine against
misapprehension. And that is all that I propose to do.
First of all, then, let it be observed that we do not profess to explain every-
thing. We simply profess to teach the truths which are set forth in Scripture. If
two truths can be established, each on its proper evidence, it is a most unscientific
thing to reject either of these because we cannot reconcile them with each other.
The wise, as the scientific course, is to receive both, and wait for further light. Or,
to put the matter otherwise, it is vain to contend against facts. That God is
supreme, and that man is free and responsible, are facts, and it is vain to fight
against them, or to set them a-fighting one with the other.
Again, I have to say that if a tree is known by its fruit, our doctrine will
stand the test. They who have held it in every age have certainly not been the
weakest nor the worst of men. It has been held in every age by some of the
greatest and the best of men—by men who have been fired with the love of souls,
and who have spent and been spent in seeking their salvation. It has been held
by such men as Paul and Augustine, and Luther and Calvin, and Cranmer and
Knox, and Jonathan Edwards and Thomas Chalmers—men who have been as
remarkable for their love to souls as for the greatness of their intellects. A doc*,
trine which has moulded and fashioned the characters of such men, and of millions
more of a like spirit, cannot be such a very bad doctrine after all.
The doctrine of election is only a branch of the wider doctrine of fore-ordina-
ation ; and that God, has fore-ordained whatsoever comes to pass is a doctrine of
natural, as well as of revealed religion. Philosophers have taught it on the grounds
of reason, just as theologians have taught it on the grounds of Scripture. It flows
from the infinite perfection of the Great Creator, “ Known unto God are all his
works from the foundation of the world.” “ He declareth the end from the beginn-
ing, and from ancient times the things that are not yet done.”
The confession teaches this doctrine, but in teaching it how careful is it to
guard against its being abused !
Its words are :—“ God from all eternity did, by the most wise and holy counsel
of His own will, freely and unchangeably ordain whatsoever comes to pass. Yet
so, as thereby neither is God the author of sin, nor is violence offered to the will of
the creatures, nor is the liberty or contingency of second causes taken away, but
rather established.” Let those whose only argument is misrepresentation or a sneer
grapple with such a statement as that.
Jonathan Edwards, and Dr. Chalmers, and many others have shown with
irresistible logic that the certainty of future events does not interfere with the
freedom and responsibility of the human agents who may be instrumental in bring-
ing them about. And the Scripture teaches the same thing. God can govern his
creatures without doing violence to the nature which he has given them. “ The
King’s heart is in the hand of the Lord as the rivers of water; he turnest it whither-
soever he will.” “He makes the wrath of man to praise him, and the remainder
of wrath he shall restrain.” Joseph’s brethren acted most freely and most


wickedly when they cast him into the pit, and when they sold him to the Ishmeel-
ites, but God used their wicked deed as the means of fulfilling his purpose with
regard to Joseph, so that Joseph could say to them, “As for you, ye thought evil
against me ; but God meant it for good to save much people alive.” The king of
Babylon was animated only by ambition when he went forth to lay waste the
nations, but he was at the same time the axe in God’s hand wherewith he hewed a
guilty people. The Jews were guilty of the most heinous sin when they crucified
the Lord of Glory, but that event had been predetermined by God from everlasting.
And so little real opposition is there between those two things that Peter hesitates
not to place them side by side when charging home their guilt upon his hearers.
“ Him being delivered,” says he, “by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge
of God, ye have taken and, with wicked hands, have crucified and slain.”
We thus see that God’s fore-ordination of all things does not interefere with
the freedom or responsibility of man. So neither is it inconsistent with the neces-
sity for the use of means. We never think so with regard to ordinary things. We
all admit that the day of our death is absolutely fixed, but we do not neglect to
take care of our health on that account. We do not say, “ The day of my death is
absolutely fixed. Do what I may, I cannot change it. There is no use in my eat-
ing and drinking, and consulting physicians. If lam to live, I’ll live ; and if lam
to die, I’ll die.” We never speak in that way. On the contrary, we use every
means to prolong our lives, because we know that if we do not we shall surely die.
In like manner, we all admit that it is fixed what kind of harvest there will be
next year. But the farmer does not on that account fold his hands in idleness and
neglect to plough and sow his fields, saying, “I need do nothing. Everything is
fixed. If there is to be a good harvest, there will be a good harvest, do what I may,
and if there is not to be a good harvest I cannot alter it,” He does not so act and
speak, but, knowing that God has fore-ordained the means as well as the end, and
has so tied them together that if the means are not used the end cannot be gained
—knowing that, he ploughs and sows his fields with all diligence, and looks up to
God to crown his labours with His blessing. In full consistency with this did the
apostle Paul act when on his voyage to Eome. He bade his fellow-passengers be
of good cheer, because God assured him that there should be no loss of any man’s
life save only of the ship. But when the ship struck upon the ground, did he say
to them, “ I am sure you will be saved, there Is no need of your doing anything to
save yourselves 7” On the contrary, when he saw the sailors about to flee out of the
ship, he said unto the centurion and the soldiers “ Except these abide in the
ship, ye cannot be saved.”
Thus does it appear that the scriptural doctrine of fore-ordination is a very
different thing from the fatalism of the Mahomedan. It is not inconsistent with
our freedom and responsibility, and the necessity of the use of means on our part.
And now, what is the doctrine of election but the doctrine of fore-ordination ap-
plied to the salvation of man 7
Once more, the Confession teaches that election is not inconsistent with the
free offers of the Gospel. It does teach that out of our lost and ruined world God
hath chosen some to everlasting life ; and we know that these some are a multi-
tude that no man can number probably a multitude so large that, as
the great John Howe suggested, the lost will in the end bear no larger
proportion to the saved than the criminals of a community to the honest citizens.
But be that as it may, the doctrine, I repeat, is not inconsistent with the
free offers of tne Gospel. God condemns no man by an arbitrary decree. No man
is doomed or fated to die whether he will or no. No man is under a necessity of
perishing. Any man may be saved if only he will repent and believe the Gospel.
The door of mercy stands wide open, and whosever will may enter in. No man
under the Gospel will perish, but simply because he chose death rather than life,
because he would not come to Christ that 'he might have life, and he was
so occupied with his farms, his merchandise, and his pleasures, that he begged to
be excused from accepting the invitation to the marriage supper of the king’s son.
Such is the teaching of Scripture, and the Confession echoes that teaching. It
teaches that no man will perish but for his own sin. It teaches that “ God freely


ofEereth unto sinners life and salvation by Jesus Christ, requiring of them faith in
Him that they may believe and be saved.” It teaches “ that repentance as well as
faith is to be preached by every minister,” and that “ whoso confesseth and for-
saketh his sin shall find mercy.” I would like those who think that the doctrine
of the Confession destroys human responsibility, and is inconsistent with the tree
offers of the Gosnel, to read the sum of saving knowledge which is appended to is
for the purpose* of explaining and applying its doctrines. Just let me quote a
sentence or two from it—“ The sum of the covenant of works or law, it says, it
this * If thou do all that is commanded and not fail in any point, thou shait he
saved : but if thou fail thou shait die. The sum of the Gospel or covenant of grace
and reconciliation is this : If thou flee from deserved wrath to the true Redeemer,
Jesus Christ (who is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God through
him), thou shait not perish, but have eternal life.”
Then, speaking of one of the warrants to believe, and after quoting the first hve
verses of the 55th chapter of Isaiah, it says : . , „. .
a The Lord, in this chapter, maketh open offer of Christ and His grace, by
proclamation of a free market of righteousness and salvation, to be had through
Christ to every soul, without exception, that truly desires to be saved from sin and
wrath. ‘Ho every one that thirsteth,’ saith he. _ . .
2. He inviteth all sinners, that for any reason stand at a distance from God, to
come and take from him riches of grace running in Christ as in a river, to wash
away sin and to slocken wrath. ‘ Come ye to the waters,’ saith he.
I need quote no more. I have quoted enough to show that our forefathers did
not consider the teaching of the Confession to be inconsistent with the free offers
Sir I have thus tried to vindicate the teaching of the Scriptures and of our
Confession on the high subject of election, by placing side by side with it those
balancing truths which they also teach. Ido not profess to have cleared away the
mystery which surrounds the subject. That mystery attaches equally to all
systems ; for, when traced to its source, it will be found to run up to the great
primal insoluble mystery of the entrance of sin into the world. But while Ido not
profess to have cleared away the mystery which surrounds the subject, I have tried
to guard it against misapprehension, and sure lam that, if we have grace wisely
to consider of God’s doings, then instead of quarrelling with them, we will stand
still and reverently adore, exclaiming with the apostle—“o the depth of the riches,
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God ! How unsearchable are His judgments,
and His ways past finding out 1 For who hath known the mind of the Lord ? or who
hath been His counsellor 1 Or who hath first given to Him, and it shall be re-
compensed to Him again? For of through Him, and to Him are all
things :to whom be glory for ever. Amen.” . . _ ... _v.
Sir it may be necessary by and bye to revise the Confession of Faith. I have no
objection to that, provided that it be wisely gone about. I have always thought that
we have too many standards in our church. I would be satisfied if our office-bearers
were only asked to sign the Confession of Faith, or the Confession of Faith and the
Shorter Catechism. But revise or abridge our standards as we may, our friends may
rest assured that we shall not change the doctrine contained in them. We believe
the doctrine contained in them to be the doctrine of the Word of God, and God help-
ing us we are resolved to abide by it while we live. I conclude with the words ot
the late Norman M'Leod, which have so seasonably been brought to our remem-
brance “If the battle has come, let it; but, before God, I will fight it with those
only, be they few or many, who believe in a risen, living Saviour. Nothing can
possibly move me from Jesus Christ the Living Saviour, the Divine Saviour, the
Atoning Saviour, whatever be the philosophy of that atonement. (Applause).
M. L. Hutchinson, 15 Collins Street West, Melbourne.
