

SPEECHES
DELIVERED AT
A DINNER
GIVEN BY
THE HONORABLE EDMUND BARTON,
SPEAKER,
IN THE PARLIAMENTARY REFRESHMENT ROOM,
SYDNEY,
ON THE
10th DECEMBER, 1883.
SYDNEY: THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1883.






SPEECHES
DELIVERED AT
A DINNER
GIVEN BY
THE HONORABLE EDMUND BARTON,
IN THE PARLIAMENTARY REFRESHMENT ROOM,
SYDNEY,
ON THE
lOth DECEMBER, 1883.
SYDNEY : THOMAS RICHARDS, GOVERNMENT PRINTER.
1883.




THE SPEAKER’S DINNER.
A dinner given by the Hon. Edmund Barton (Speaker of the
Legislative Assembly) in honor of the visit of the Earl of Rosebery
and the Australasian delegates, took place on the 10th of December,
in the Parliamentary refreshment-room. The Speaker occupied the
Chair, having on his right His Excellency Lord Augustus Loftus,
and on his left the Earl of Rosebery. The following gentlemen
were also present at the same table, viz., the Chief Justice, Mr.
Justice Faucett, Mr. Justice Windeyer, Sir G. William Des Voeux
(Governor of Fiji), Captain Lafon, Hon. Graham Berry, Hon. F.
Whitaker (late Premier and Attorney-General of New Zealand),
Captain C. de Amezaga, Colonel Richardson, and Lieutenant
Moore. The Vice Chairs were filled by Sir Alfred Stephen,
K.C.M.G. (Lieutenant-Governor), Sir John Hay, K.C.M.G.
(President of the Legislative Council), the Hon. Alexander Stuart
(Colonial Secretary and Premier), and the Hon. W. J. Trickett
(Postmaster-General). The other Members of the Legislature
present were—the Hon. W. B. Dailey (Attorney-General), G. R.
Dibbs (Colonial Treasurer), Hon. H. E. Cohen (Minister of
Justice), Hon. F. M. Darley, Hon. A. Campbell, Sir John
Robertson, Sir Patrick Jennings, Messrs. Harris, Suttor, Lynch,
Russell Barton, Young, Holtermann, Day, Levin, McLaughlin,
Barbour, Humphery, Tarrant, Gray, Heydon, O’Connor, W. J.
Fergusson, Mitchell, Burns, Pigott, Henry Clarke, Moses, H.
H. Brown, Murray, W. R. Campbell, See, Purves, Holborow,
McCulloch, Butcher, Hutchinson, Bruce Smith, Poole, Badgery,
Tooth, Garrard, Abigail, Withers, S. Smith, Targett, Melville,
Tighe, Olliffe, Dalton, Levien, H. Taylor, Coonan, Fremlin,
Buchanan, Quinn, Cameron, Garvan, Roberts, White, R. B.
Smith, Wilson, G. Campbell, and Loughnan, Ms.L.A. ; Hon.
Malcolm Fraser (Colonial Secretary, Western Australia), and
Messrs. J. J. Calvert (Clerk of the Parliaments), L. J. Harnett
x


(Serjeant-at-Arms), S. W. Jones (Clerk of the Assembly),
S. M. Mowle (Usher of the Black Rod), Mr. Wallington, Mr.
Unwin, and Lieutenant Nathan, A.D.C. A programme of music
was furnished by the Permanent Artillery Band.
After dinner, the toast of “ The Queen,” proposed by the Hon.
The Speaker, and that of the “ Prince of Wales and Royal
Family,” proposed by Sir Alfred Stephen, having been given,
and duly honoured,
Sir James Martin proposed the health of “ His Excellency the
Governor.” He said : It is a trite saying that history frequently
repeats itself, but it is not so generally acknowledged that these
repetitions take place at regularly recurring periods. Of the truth
of the saying we have had a somewhat remarkable illustration in
the Convention whose labours have just closed. In the ninth
decade of the seventeenth century, a Convention which sat in London
declared that the King, by withdrawing himself from the kingdom,
had abdicated the government, and that the throne had thereby
become vacant, and they then proceeded to fill up the vacancy
thus declared. That was the Revolution of 1688. In the last
decade of the eighteenth century, a Convention sitting in Paris
themselves rendered the throne vacant, by the trial, condemnation,
and execution of the King. That was the completion of the Revo-
lution which commenced in the preceding decade, 1789. In the
ninth decade of the present century (1883), a Convention met in
Sydney, but beyond the facts of the similarity of name and decade,
the parallel holds no further. Our Convention took no steps to
interfere with Her Majesty’s Imperial position as the head of the
great Federation—the greatest that the world has ever seen—to
which we in these Colonies are so proud to belong. (Cheers.)
Whether the certainly hot, though possibly fertile and probably
savage island of New Guinea shall or shall not be allowed by the
supineness of Lord Derby to fall into the hands of France or
Germany will not matter one jot so far as our loyalty is concerned.
(Cheers.) The strong but silken cord which unites us to the
mother country is not by any such cause as this in danger of being


severed. From sentiment as well as interest—tlie one as powerful
as the other —we are likely in the distant future to cast in our lot
in peace and war, in prosperous and adverse fortune, with the old
land from which we have inherited, with our glorious mother
the literature, the laws, the enterprise, and the inalienable love of
freedom which have made the Anglo-Saxon name so famous.
(Cheers.) While we thus hold on with “ hooks of steel” to the
Imperial connection, the sole visible symbol of paternal control is
the presence amongst us of Her Majesty’s representative. (Hear,
hear.) In all other respects we ai'e practically our own masters.
In the selection of our Governors much discrimination has upon
the whole been displayed. Men distinguished in civil as well as
military life have occasionally been sent to preside over us; and
now we have a gentleman who, after having filled with credit the
high post of Ambassador at three of the leading Courts of Europe,',
has brought to the aid of our public men, in the government of
this young and advancing community, the tact, urbanity, dignity,
and judgment, which intimate association with some of those
master minds whose names have already become historical is cal-
culated to create and develop. (Hear, hear.) I propose to you
the health of His Excellency the Governor.
The toast was enthusiastically received, the band playing “ Fine,
Old English Gentleman.”
His Excellency the Governor responded, and said: I beg to
offer my best thanks to you, Sir James Martin, for the flattering
terms in which you have proposed my health, and to you, gentle-
men, for the kind reception with which you have met me. I may
say that it is a pride and pleasure to me to meet at this convivial
meeting of gentlemen a distinguished Peer of England—(hear,
hear) —one of her foremost, if not the foremost, future statesman
of the day. I know he is destined to make his mark on the
political annals of our history. (Hear, hear.) The Earl of Rose-
bery has already told you, in a most eloquent and forcible speech,
that the object of his visit to the Antipodes, at some personal
sacrifice, has been for the purpose of gaining information of and


seeing for himself the wonderful and marvellous progress and
advancement which these Colonies have made within a limited
period of time. (Hear, hear.) The visits of persons in his high
position cannot but be most beneficial to these Colonies. (Hear,
hear.) I feel confident that the reports of this sunny, prosperous,
and happy land will be an encouragement to those in his own
station to imitate his noble example. (Cheers.) • Gentlemen, I
am not going to make a long speech. I have very few words to
address to you. The toasts and the speeches are both numerous,
and we are all most anxious to hear the flowing eloquence of
the distinguished orators who are present. (Hear, hear.) I
think it is a matter of regret that many of the distinguished
Australian representatives at the Convention are, from unavoid-
able causes, unable to be present; and lam all the more anxious
to congratulate them, and also those who are here, on the good
work which they have done at the Convention. (Cheers.) I hope
and trust that what they have already laid down for the future
will be carried into execution. Since my arrival in this Colony I
have always favoui’ed the great idea of federation—an idea which
I foresee must be realized one day—and I trust that that day is
fast approaching. (Hear, hear.) I venture to hope that the
foundation-stone has been laid, and that the creation of a Federal
Council, which is the first and necessary step to unifying and
consolidating the material interests of these Colonies, will form a
solid basis upon which an edifice of complete federation will be
carefully and cautiously laid. (Cheers.) I will not say more ; but
I will only express my belief that no greater honor can devolve
upon colonial patriots than having affixed their signature to the
first official document which is likely to lead to the consummation
of that great object. (Cheers.) I thank you again for the kind
reception you have given me. (Cheers.)
The Speaker rose, amid loud and continued cheers, to propose
the health of the Earl of Rosebery, and said: Your Excellencies
and Gentlemen: It has been said that shutting one’s self up in a
convent, marrying, and throwing one’s self over a precipice, are


three things to he done without thinking too much about;
them. (Laughter.) I take leave, adding one operation to the
list, to include in it the delicate duty of the proposal, to so brilliant
and distinguished a company as the present, of the chief toast of
this evening. For the more one thinks of the qualities necessary
to enable him to do justice to the toast and to the circumstances
which lead to its proposal, the more he is convinced that his
attempt to do so will result in failure. (No, no.) To those who
are given to thought upon the politics of the nation, perhaps no
figure in Australia possesses more interest than that of the noble
Earl who sits beside me. (Cheers.) But it is not the great
influence which his rank confers, it is his distinct and steady pro-
gress in the forward lines of the great and ruling Liberal party—
(cheers) —which caused the public men of this continent to expect
with eagerness Lord Rosebery’s arrival amongst us, and which
accounts, with and beyond mere personal ideas, for the heartiness
of his welcome hither. (Cheers.) And to enhance to the utmost
the opportuneness in our eyes, and the advantage to himself as an
intelligent inquirer, he could not have landed in Australia on an
apter occasion. (Cheers.) The representatives of civilized Austral-
asia were about to meet in confei’ence. The cause of their
gathering was no matter of mere intercolonial concernment. On
each of the two great questions which they had resolved to answer,
their deliberations were necessarily to be of national and indeed of
world-wide moment, affecting as they must, not only the extent but
the relations, internal and out-reaching, of the mighty British
Empire. (Cheers.) What study could be more attractive to an
English statesman than the natural but loyal aspiration of a young
—perhaps a restless—but withal a peace-loving people of his own
race ?—(cheers) —and the attractiveness of the study must increase
with the nearness of his view. (Loud cheers.) To us, at the
same time, nothing could be more congenial than to welcome His
Lordship to this new field of observation. (Cheers.) And he will
forgive us if our goodwill to him was not wholly unselfish in its
source. It has been our habit to think that we and our cir-
cumstances have not always been rightly understood by our


countrymen at home. It lias been our ardent wish that a
larger number of Englishmen, able to make themselves heard
by the nation, might think it well to come amongst us and to
observe us for themselves. (Cheers.) We do believe that our
strides in self-development, never timid, are seldom rash when
their inevitable rapidity is considered. (Hear, hear.) The
force of our resources pushes us forward, and we are left only the
choice of foothold—not that of direction. (Hear, hear.) I think
then that I have leave from all around me to tell Lord Rosebery
that the timeliness of his coming, as well as his ability to help us,
render his visit a source of peculiar gratification to the public men
of Australia—(cheers) —and I especially rejoice that it falls to my
fet to express these their opinions within this building, where
they may most fittingly find voice—(cheers) —and where I take
leave to think they will fall not unpleasingly upon his ears. For
one who has borne his part in Land Law Reform with relation to
Ireland, the measure now under discussion by the politicians of
fthjs country must possess a vivid interest. He will have seen that
.the tenant’s battle here is not with any private landlord, but with
the State, from which he holds his lease ; and it may strike him
that such a contest is the more susceptible of peaceful settlement
where that landlord cannot set up the claim of a vested interest,
except in the direct interest of the whole community. (Cheers.)
It is due to this company that I should assure Lord Rosebery
that we are well aware not only of his general political services,
but also of the interest which he has taken in the solution at
home of two great questions which have assumed the highest
importance in this Colony also. He will have observed that the
.question of National Primary Education is, with us, practically
settled, at all events for a long time to come. (Cheers.) In fact,
a system of unsectarian instruction has been in force amongst us
for seventeen years. But we are in a sadly crude state with
regard to the problem of Local Self-government, to which Lord
Rosebery has devoted so much of his energy. Doubtless His
Lordship has viewed with some consternation the lavish expendi-
ture of our national funds upon wrnrks of merely local importance.


In a dominion so vast and so thinly populated as this, such a state
of things was of course long unavoidable ; but reform securing
local responsibility and local taxation cannot much longer be
delayed, and will soon liberate the representatives of the people
here from any attempted tyranny of mere local interests. (Cheers.)
Your Excellencies and gentlemen, I have here in your name to
give the warmest greeting to a statesman of whose exploits on
the field of national politics we here shall always read with
delight. (Cheers.) It is to men like Lord Rosebery that these
young countries are now looking for practical friendship, and for
that assistance which only the personal knowledge of ourselves
and our affairs can enable them to render with the utmost effect.
(Cheers.) For you I thank him for the readiness with which he
has applied himself to this duty ; and because he has, in a very
short time, succeeded in mastering some knowledge of Australia
and her aspirations. (Cheers.) There is one way in which that
knowledge can be turned to the best account. If it should be his
lot in due progression to attain to the distinguished position
in which his intimacy with Australia will be supported and
vivified, you will join with me now in assuring him that Australia
will salute him with a full heart—(cheers) —and will unite with
him to show the world that such a position, for the distinction of
its occupant and the advancement of humanity, stands hardly
inferior to any honor in the service of the Crown and of the
world. (Cheers.)
The toast was drunk with loud cheers, and, at the call of
Sir Patrick Jennings, with a cheer for the Countess of
Rosebery.
The Earl of Rosebery (who on rising was heartily cheered) said :
Mr. Speaker, to-night I realize for the first and only time that I
can remember in all my life one of the aspirations of my early
youth, and that was some time or another to begin a speech which
commenced with “ Mr. Speaker.” (Laughter and cheers.) Your
Excellency will, I am sure, excuse my omission of the customary
commencement of a speech in your presence, when you know that


the absence of courtesy on my part was due to the fulfilment of
that aspiration. (Laughter and cheers.) Mr. Speaker, it was
many years before I gave up that aspiration, and it was only a few
months before I came of age that I was compelled against my will
to abandon it altogether; and you may therefore understand with
what pleasure it is, if from no other feeling, that I have the honor
of being your guest to-night. (Cheers.) Mr. Speaker, there is a
reason beyond that which makes me proud to be here to-night, and
it is that I have the opportunity here to-night of meeting many, if
not most, of the Legislature of this great Colony. Now, if I were
to fulfil my view of my task on this occasion, having recently
spoken at almost intolerable length the day before yesterday, it
would be to possess my soul in silence, because, after all, in
speaking to you, gentlemen, I speak to many of you as the younger
to his elders, and that is an unfortunate position. I speak in
many respects in that way, and in all cases I have to speak to
Australians as one who speaks rather from surmise than from
experience. Now, my Lord, you were good enough to refer, in
terms which betrayed your warmth and kindliness of heart rather
than a proper appreciation of the nature of my journey, to the
voyage I have been able to make to this country. I think any-
body who knows the hospitality and friendship with which he will
be met in Australia, from the vice-regal lodge down to the humblest
home of the settler we might pass during an inland journey—l
think that anybody who knows the reception an Englishman will
meet with would not hesitate to come that journey to meet with
that reception. (Cheers.) It is true there are disadvantages con-
nected with the journey. lam told to-night to be glad it does not
take six months to get to Australia and six months to get back ;
but after all that is a sort of mediaeval view of the subject which I
cannot yet be expected to take, and I think six weeks a sufficiently
long time for any one man to get from one place to another
(Hear, hear, and laughter)—and more especially for one lady to get
from one place to another. (Cheers.) Now, my wife and lin making
this journey have, I have no doubt, regretted sometimes that we were
not like your own marsupials, and had some means of carrying our


little ones with us. (Laughter.) But that not being practicable,
we had to take some means of obviating that necessity, and of
getting back to them at some time, which will prevent them becom-
ing a burden upon the parish. (Laughter.) But, gentlemen,
even if one does not take that gloomy view of a voyage of this
description, I think one has a right to land on this soil even
for a short time, and particularly if one has taken an interest,
which I claim to have taken in this country in which we
are at this moment. I will sum up the view I take of
such a journey as this, for however short a time it may be, in
the words of a book which very often sums up our best and
highest ends : Formerly one saw things darkly, but now one sees
them face to face. (Cheers.) Parliament is one of those nostrums
that Great Britain exports with all the large feeling of free trade
to every part of the world—(cheers) —that she sows broadcast in
every land, and that she considers a remedy for every evil. (Cheers
and laughter.) On every occasion I observe that Great Britain
is said to be fond of colonizing. I beKeve that in this country
we are supposed not to be fond enough of colonizing ; but in this
country you are accustomed to nations that go abroad with a flag
as they do with a pocket-handkerchief and sow it broadcast.
Great Britain is supposed not to be fond enough of colonizing;
but we in England think that she has been tolerably fond of it in
days gone by, and wherever she does colonize she is fond of
launching the God-given Constitution which she has received—
(cheers) —this most perfect and most traditional form—its House
of Lords and House of Commons, its Chancellor and its Speaker
—every form and every tradition, whatever the climate or the
position of the locality may be. (Cheers.) I sometimes think
that she does that almost too hastily, and that when she has
launched her colonies on the ocean of Constitutional Government
she enters into the position of the hen we all know of, that has
hatched a brood of ducklings, much to her surprise, and having
conducted them to a harmless pool, sees them swim away without
being able to follow them. (Laughter and cheers.) I do not
suppose that this country has much reason to complain of being


too small, and I suppose that she may well feel that the time is
not far distant when she may swim away a considerable distance
from the mother country. [“ No ; we don’t want to cut
the painter.”] I think that gentleman mistook my meaning. I
mean that the Colony may swim away from the mother country,
and grow until she becomes such a duckling that the mother hen
is almost afraid to own her as her offspring. I remember clearly
the impression existing in my mind up to comparatively recently,
which was that there was not sufficient interest taken in Australia
by the mother country. Even now I think that on some occasions
there has been a deficiency in that interest. (Hear, hear.) lam
here to confess it. I am a Member of the Parliament of the
mother country, and I am not ashamed to confess that we are
so bewildered by the multitude of subjects which come from all
parts of the world, and which have relation to the empire on
which the sun never sets, that it is excusable, and it is absolutely
a fact that there is not sufficient attention given to all parts of
the Empire. But since I have been here lam inclined to think
that it is more of a fault and less of a misfortune, for I am inclined
to think that this country owes much to the fact of its being left alone.
(Cheers.) You have referred to the interest I have taken in local
government. Ido take that interest, and I expect that the Imperial
Parliament in its next session will take us further into the subject.
But it does impress an Englishman, and would do good to many
Englishmen, to come out here and see how far local government
can be carried out with efficiency and self-respect, and then return
to England to find that there is only one Government there over
thirty millions of people, and that great portions of the United
Kingdom are supposed to be incapable of self-government. I see
there are Members of the Imperial Parliament who take the
trouble to make the journey here. Mr. Eustace Smith is one who
has been amongst you lately, and I have no doubt that all those
who come will go back again amply rewarded by the experience
they gain in these Colonies. Now, there has been one meeting in
this country that will draw even more attention in Europe and
the whole world than the Parliament, and that is the Convention


to which some allusion has been made. I have no doubt that some
impatience will be felt by those to whom I am now speaking upon
hearing the word Convention, because the topic has become such a
stale one during the last few days. I will not detain you long in
connection with it, but to me it is a subject of the most absorbing
interest. It is perfectly easy to overrate the importance of that
Convention ; but there is one fact which will strike the imagina-
tion and intellect of all Europe, and it is this, that that Convention
was an assembly of the foremost Ministers in office of all the
different Colonies, and they will certainly take it to be the first
congress which has ever sat in these Colonies of great representa-
tives of the different Colonies to discuss, not local topics, but large
national ones. It is for that reason that it seems to me it is
an epoch in the history of the Colony. (Cheers.) In the first
place, it presents federation as a principle at least to be recognized
in the politics of these Colonies. How, we in England have been
greatly struck by the absence of all reference to the possibility of
federation in these Colonies, and whether federation be carried out
or not it will be a useful lesson to us to know that the Colonies
have been prepared to send their foremost men to Sydney to dis-
cuss calmly, reasonably, without prejudice, and without jealousy,
the question of the possibility of national federation. (Cheers.)
How, I do not want to say one word about federation as regards
Australia, because that is a subject of which I know nothing,
and with which I have nothing to do, but speaking as an
Englishman I have a right to say this—that we look with interest
on federation if for this reason alone, that it enables a fair and
manly and frank communication of views between Australia
and the Mother Country. (Hear, hear.) For if you have any
sort of federation, we have some sort of a united voice to answer,
and not the dispersed voice of different Colonies, which may be
supposed to represent their narrow interests and individual
jealousies, but the broad voice of united Australia, which is en-
titled to respect not merely in Great Britain but in the civilized
world. (Cheers.) On that subject, and in that way, you can
speak to the Mother Country with the voice of an eldest son who


lias attained liis majority, and on whom the property is strictly
entailed. (Cheers.) You can not only speak to Great Britain, but,
as a European, I say you can speak to civilization on a subject which
interests the world. (Cheers.) One of the matters which has been
before the Convention, which interests the civilized world and not
only the civilized world but all humanity, is the importation of the
convict element into the Pacific Ocean. On that one subject,
if on no other, the Convention spoke with a power with which
the different Colonies could not have spoken individually. It
spoke to the whole world as a nation determined to take its part
in the future, and determined to control the present as regards
its individual self. (Cheers.) I doubt if a single personage in
this assembly of mixed parties and opinions will deny that
on this question the Convention spoke with a unanimous voice.
It is very easy to speak upon the impulse of humanity, and still
easier to speak on the impulse of self-preservation, but it is differ-
ent when you are threatened with noisome contagious diseases to
be able to speak with the voice of statesmen. As statesmen they
recognized that there were three points of view from which this
should be looked at. First, the Australian point of view; second,
the point of view of the Mother Country, whose relations might be
complicated by action on the part of the Colonies; and, in the
third place, the rights of the rest of the world, and the way in
which the relations of the Mother Country might be disturbed by
precipitate action on the part of the Colonies. Ido not wish to
dilate upon this point, but I will say that when the history of
Australia comes to be written there will be nothing more memor-
able than the fact that in the year of grace 1883 a Convention of
your leading statesmen met in Sydney and recognized the destiny
of Australia, and that the destiny of Australia was to be the trustee
of the Pacific. (Cheers.) That I believe to be one of the greatest
destinies that has ever been reserved for a powerful nation; and I
believe there is more in it than I have said now, because it is a
destiny unlike the destiny of any other nation, as it has to be
worked out in perfect peace. (Cheers.) We in the Mother Coun-
try are in a totally different position to what you are here. We


have succeeded to the greatest inheritance that has ever been
bestowed in the world, and it is an inheritance so complicated in
its title and so hampered by its traditions, so mortgaged in various
ways, that it is difficult to know in what position we stand. But
as for you, you can draw drafts upon the future, because you
know posterity will honor your overdrafts. (Cheers.) Now,
Mr. Speaker, I consider this toast, that you have been so good as
to address me in, in terms so superior to the occasion, to be my
stirrup cup in this country. I leave to-morrow, and I do not
suppose I shall speak again except in private while I am in Aus-
tralia ; and I will ask you to remember that, unlike the Mother
Country, you have to make your own precedents, and start upon
your own path into the future, where no old chart or compass can
guide you. As regards the Mother Country she does not, regarded
in the strict sense of the word, attempt to guide you or pretend
to control you, but at the same time she regards her offspring with
an admiration which it would be an assumption of affectation to
conceal. (Loud cheers.)
Sir John Hay proposed “The Health of the Australian Dele-
gates.” He said : I am sure you must all sympathise with me
very much in having to rise so soon after a speech of such brilli-
ancy which has been addressed to you. If it were not that I feel
it a duty on my part to obey your behest, I certainly would say at
once that the toast would be best given in some of the words
which the Earl of Rosebery has used, and that there would be no
cause to waste further language upon it. I shall not unnecessarily
detain the company by enlarging upon a toast which requires but
little to be said in its favour. It might seem as though I did not
appreciate the labours of the Australian delegates if I did not on
the present occasion say a few words; and I may claim perhaps
the privilege as a very old colonist and one who could at all events
lay claim to knowing something of what he was speaking, to give
you the impressions which have animated myself for a very great
number of years. At a time when the country between here and
Melbourne, which is now traversed by a railway which carries


passengers (perhaps not always with safety) from one city to the
other in seventeen hours, and over which travellers could not
start without a preparation of a fortnight or three weeks, it
was my lot to reside in a part of this Colony almost equidistant
from the two capitals. I was then living on the banks of
the Murray, and it often struck me that it would be a most
unhappy thing if two Colonies were formed by the separation of
Victoria and New South Wales, and that at some future time
they should become separate nationalities, and that the fertile
banks of the river should be the scene not of triumphs of peace
between the two countries, but of war. And it also struck me,
and the impression has never been absent from my mind, that
there was only one way in which that could be avoided, viz., that
the common sense and the general sagacity which belong to British
people and colonists might bring about a reunion which would
ensure a foundation of one of the greatest empires perhaps in the
world. It was in that spirit from the beginning that public life
has always affected me in the pursuit of this great object—that,
without union, without federation, without amalgamation in some
shape, the young Colonies of Australasia would remain nothing
but miserable, little, petty, quarrelsome nationalities, such as now
disfigure the South American continent, instead of a great and
happy country, which would be a glory to England and to future
generations. Having said this much to show my sympathy for
the objects which the Convention had in view, I will not attempt
to describe what it has done at the present time, but I will say
this much in its favour—that it has been composed of the best
men who sit on the right side of the Speaker in the various Legis-
latures of Australia, and that the work which has been done will
have the support of the Legislatures of the various Colonies. I
think the delegates have done wisely and well, and I do not think
the Legislatures they represent will be slow to recognize the ser-
vices they have rendered. (Cheers.) I think they have met with
but scant justice at the hands of some of their critics, and I must
say that the Press of Australia has been hardly fair to the gentlemen
engaged in this Convention. (Hear, hear.) No one would go


beyond myself in appreciation of the Press of the Colony, or the
importance of the Press of the world, because we must all acknow-
ledge that without the Press all our institutions would be
comparatively in disorder ; but I think that the respectable Press
of Australia ought not to have been so often finding fault
with those gentlemen for holding their sittings in the way
they have done. I think they might have waited for the
results of their deliberations, and then they could have criti-
cized as severely as they liked. (Hear, hear.) But I think
that—for at all events a fortnight—they might have been satisfied
with recording that interesting debate upon that everlasting sub-
ject, the Land Bill. (Laughter.) lamby no means in a position
to criticise what these gentlemen have done in the Convention,
but I know what ability they have shown, and I am prepared to
receive at their hands the fruit of their labours, which I hope will
be decisively to the interest of this Colony in the future. We
know that the immediate objects of the Convention have been
two : one to deal with the vague question of what is called “ the
annexation of New Guinea,” but what I call the “ protection of
New Guinea by the British Empire,” for I do not like the word
“ annexation,” which to my mind is too much like taking what does
not belong to you. The other object was to see that the islands
in the Pacific do not become a nuisance to the civilized commu-
nities near them, and to see, above all things, that they are not
made the cesspools of European crime. (Cheers.) If, with regard
to the latter subject, the delegates to the Conference or Conven-
tion have spoken what some may deem a little strongly, or more
strongly than perhaps a diplomatist would have done, yet I think
you will appreciate the honesty of these gentlemen in speaking
their full mind with regard to a subject which I personally think
cannot be spoken upon too strongly, as it is a matter which is
likely to cause an abomination which will interfere with the pro-
gress of civilized humanity in this world. These are the two
questions they have had chiefly to deal with. Australians do not
wish to oppress any nation whatever; they do not wish to un-
duly acquire the property of any nation, or to take the power


from any people who possess it at this moment, but they will
stand up for what is right and just. (Cheers.) I beg to propose
the health of “ The Australasian Delegates.” (Cheers.)
Sir G. W. Des Y ceux, in responding to the toast, said : I must
thank Sir John Hay for the kind way in which he has proposed
the health of the delegates, of whom I am in some respects the
most insignificant member. (No.) Fiji may be regarded as in some
respects the daughter of New South Wales—(hear, hear) —and a
very large proportion of those who are developing its soil and a
large proportion of the capital which has been invested there have
come from this Colony, and therefore I cannot but think it will
be of interest to the colonists of New South Wales to know that
their daughter, in spite of all you hear to the contrary, is in a
steadily progressive condition—(hear, hear) —that after a number
of difficulties, upon which I shall not dilate, we have at length
brought our revenue level with our expenditure, and this year we
will have a surplus which, in proportion to the total, is by no
means an insignificant one. Our exports this year will be nearly
double that of any previous year, and that this progress is likely
to continue may be gathered from the fact that an enterprising
Company in New South Wales are about to increase their already
large investment in the Colony by the erection of new works at a
cost of £200,000 —(cheers) —and this is in spite of the exceed-
ingly depressing condition, the heart-harrowing circumstances
which you are led to suppose the settlers are labouring under, with
the abominable form of Crown Government which exists there.
(Laughter.) It is not to be supposed that those who have not
made their lives there a success should regard the Government
from any favourable light: those who are not successful never
do. (Hear, hear.) When I went into this Convention I
went, I say most distinctly, as an Australian delegate. Circum-
stances arose which rendered it an absolute duty for me to
take my seat in that Convention. I was prepared to expect
ability in that assemblage, and my realization went far beyond my
expectation ; but what I did not expect to see was from the


smaller Colonies representatives who, I venture to say, would
take not only a fair but a prominent position in any represents--
tive assemblage in the world. Whatever may be said in dis-
paragement of this Convention, I venture to think that it will be
regarded in the future in a much stronger and better light than it
is at the present time, and that by it the first stone has been laid
of Australian union. (Cheers.) Now, whatever may be the
result of the Convention, I shall never forget, isolated as my
position is in some respects, the warm sympathy I have ex-
perienced, not from the members of this Convention but from
many others whom I have met in New South Wales, and even if
I should never return to New South Wales, I shall have a feeling
for the Colony which will last me my life. (Cheers.)
Mr. Berry, who was received with loud applause, said : I shall
not presume to keep you at this late hour of the evening. I felt
when I came here very great regret that so many of the delegates
who had recently assembled at the Convention were absent to-
night: but whatever my feelings may be, however large and over-
whelming I may consider the occasion that brought that Convention
together, I feel that after the very many able speeches and the
variety of subjects we have listened to to-night, it will be alto-
gether out of place for me to attempt at this late hour to do
justice to the subject of the toast. Because I feel so strongly the
importance of this gathering, its wonderful unanimity of senti-
ment, its composition, composed as it was of every Colony in this
part of the world, and not only of every Colony but the Prime
Minister of every Colony—(hear, hear) —the men who command
the support of their colleagues, and who also by virtue of their
position command the support of the majority of their respective
Legislatures. (Hear, hear.) I feel that men who pledge the acceptance
of their Governments to what they do have a right to be regarded
and spoken of in different terms to what they have been since I have
been in this city. (Hear, hear.) And I may say that, whilst coming
here to-night with a most fixed determination not to allow
one word to escape my lips that would in any way disturb the
B


possible future unanimity between this Colony and the rest of
Australasia, I must say that I have experienced one of the deepest
disappointments of my public life, in that a representative gathering
of this description has not risen to the occasion, and has not felt
that what has been done within the last fortnight is the greatest
work ever done since Captain Cook discovered this land. (Hear,
hear.) And you will excuse me if, feeling as I do that no work
we can be engaged upon can have the smallest relation in magni-
tude to the desire to bring about a union of these Colonies into
one great federation, I say everything is dwarfed in comparison
with that work. I have listened to-night with the greatest grati-
tude to the speakers who may be considered strangers and sojourners
in the land which our representatives govern. I tender my
sincerest thanks to the Earl of Rosebery for the very able and
statesmanlike speech he made with regard to the subject; and I
know from the utterances of the public Press in England that no
sentiment connected with Australasia has come with stronger force
than the desire to see the work begun by this Convention con-
summated by the Legislature. I felt during some of the remarks
made by Lord Rosebery that the future with regard to the work
of the past fortnight had its true value more than in the present
generation, because it will be seen that you must either have
federation or disintegration, disunion or union, and it is quite
clear that no more useful or noble work can be accomplished than
by bringing about a union of these Colonies. I say it is impos-
sible to over-estimate the importance of what has been done,
because whatever may be the future result with regard to the
consummation of what we have done, it can never be removed
from the pages of history that the Premiers of all the Colonies of
Australasia met together and decreed that there should be common
union on this question. (Cheers.)
The Hon. E. Whitaker said : I am not going to repeat the
words you have heard from the gentleman who has preceded me ;
but I will call your attention to one thing which I think of very
great importance. We have been in this Conference unanimous.


The matter now rests with the Legislatures of the Colonies, and I
do hope that they will look upon it not in a party spirit but with
a comprehensive view—that they will look upon it not as a matter
of party politics, but will give it that deliberation and consideration
which it deserves. (Cheers.) The Chief Justice has called your
attention to three important Conventions, beginning with the
Convention of 1688, which had the effect of upsetting the Con-
stitution ; he then comes to the Convention of 1789, a French
Convention, which not only upset the Constitution but cut off
the head of the King, and then he comes to the Convention which
has been held during the last few days, and puts it in the same
category as the other two. Well, you are aware we were sitting
in this Convention in what has been called secret conclave, and
although very considerable reports of what was done there have
gone forth, you have not heard of all that took place. I can
assure you that it was never contemplated by the gentlemen who
sat in that Conference to upset the Constitution or to cut off the
head of the Governor. (Laughter and cheers.) We have
endeavoured to the full to discharge our duty, and we have done
so without any personal or political feeling whatever. We have
carefully considered eveiy question that has come before us, and if
we have failed at all, it is from our inability, and not from the
want of a desire to succeed.
The Hon. Malcolm Fraser said : At this very late hour I feel
that to entrench further on your patience would simply be an act
of impertinence on my part. I rise simply to respond to the toast
on behalf of the absent representatives of Australasia who attended
at the late Convention. I am sure that if other important business
had not called them away they would have been here ; and I must
say that if we have not, by what we have done in the Convention,
laid the foundation-stone of a great structure, we have at any rate
broken the ground oil which, after the building has been traced
out, the foundation-stone may be laid. I feel myself an immense
interest in the progress of Australia, not only from the fact that I
am now a somewhat humble servant of a colonial office in the


Colony which I represent, hut because in the past I have
been a resident of Australia, and particularly of New Zealand.
(Cheers.)
The Hon. A. Stuart said : I am not going to inflict a speech on
you, and this for three very good reasons : First of all, the hour is
late; secondly, the majority of those who are at the table with us
hear my voice too often and have no wish to hear it now ; and,
thirdly, I will have an opportunity in another department of your
dominion, Mr. Speaker, to raise my voice upon this question to
which this toast relates, where I shall be confronted with criticism
both friendly and hostile—(hear, hear) —and where I shall have
an opportunity to reply. But having been elected by my
colleagues in this Conference or Convention to the honorable
position of President, I feel gratification at having been called
upon to say a word on this occasion. I could not have been
elected to the highly responsible position without feeling in some
degree gratification at the event—(cheers) —and I feel that what-
ever may be thought of the movement which we have initiated,
the day will come when it will be thoroughly appreciated. lam
convinced that the mode which we have adopted of quietly,
calmly, and by slow degrees endeavouring to build up that which
is the desire of many, has been far better than if we had rushed
at it and failed in the attempt. lam hopeful that before long
the Conference in which we have been engaged will bear fruit that
will redound to the credit of this Colony and to the glory of the
entire continent. (Cheers.)
The Hon. W. B. Dalley said: Mr. Speaker, My Lord
Augustus, Lord B.osebery, and gentlemen, though I appreciate
the difficulty of making any response whatever for those gentle-
men who have been engaged so recently in the Convention which has
formed the subject of so much of the eloquence and wisdom which
we have heard this evening, I may be permitted to make one
reference to a constitutional criticism which has fallen from the
lips of my distinguished friend, the Chief Justice. That dis-
tinguished gentleman has, as it seems to me, correctly defined the


constitutional meaning of the term employed to designate the
character of our assemblage; but I may inform him and this
company that his criticisms were anticipated by myself when the
proposition to confer this name upon our assemblage was made in
that body. I was only a humble student of constitutional history
acquainted with two great English Conventions. One of these
was that which recalled from his foreign travels to the government
of England that humourous sovereign who observed that had he
known how much his restoration to his Crown was desired he
would have more quickly returned to the cares and responsibility of
sovereignty. (Laughter.) That was the Convention which brought
back to the government of England the second Charles. The
other body which bore the constitutional name of Convention was
that which declared the abdication of the throne of England by
James II, —that was the forfeiture of his title to rule over England.
These are the only two bodies bearing that title of which I had any
idea as a student of constitutional history. (Laughter and cheers.)
I was of course aware that there was a Convention, of which my
Lord Rosebery might possibly furnish us with more authentic
information, and of which I know very little myself. I refer to
the constitution of the Royal Burghs of Scotland. (Laughter.)
We are all acquainted with the meaning of the term in the United
States of America and the revolutionary Government of France.
But at a very early period of the sittings of our own diplomatic
body I saw the expediency of the more modest but more appro-
priate and constitutional title of “Conference.” That is not,
however, a matter which I need more specifically refer to on this
occasion, since I am entrusted with a toast which has no imme-
diate reference to such a subject, and to this toast I shall now
proceed to make a very few observations. Though the toast with
the proposal of which I have been honored is new in form at our
public banquets, the sentiment which it is intended to embody is as
old as our history. We may not before have specially drunk to the
Imperial Parliament and the Imperial connection, but we have
never for an instant ceased to cherish the feeling of the grandeur
of the one and of the glory of the other. This is a fitting place


and time and company to propose such a toast for the enthusiastic
acceptance of all present. (Cheers.) We are within the precincts
of our own Legislature, founded as it has been in imitation of
that Imperial Parliament which to-day, in the noblest palace of
legislation in the world, occupies the site of the struggling
village which had grown up out of a marshy swamp of the
Isle of Thorns 600 years ago—we are, I say, here and now
privileged to express our reverence and our admiration for and
our gratitude to the Imperial Parliament. (Cheers.) It would
be vain as it would be tedious to attempt to show that that Par-
liament has been, not for Englishmen only, but for humanity, one
of the great sheltering bulwarks of the world between civilization
and barbarism—how it has stood against nations which have
revolted from liberty, maintaining in peace
The cause of truth, mightier than they in arms.
(Cheers.) In these distant lands we strive to walk in the light of
its high example. There are moments, Sir (as unhappily no one
knows better than yourself, when, owing to our human infirmity,
we are unable to maintain high resolves, when we stumble in the
path, and lean somewhat heavily upon your parental tenderness
and support to guide us aright; but there is never a time when
we are disloyal in thought to the august body to which we owe,
and towards which we always feel, the profoundest reverence. It
is fitting, Sir, to propose this toast at this time. On the eve of
the submission to the various Legislatures of Australasia of a pro-
position for the establishment of a united authority concerning
many subjects of common interest, it is well to point out that in
these Colonies the project only finds acceptance because it is
regarded as strengthening the bonds of union with the Mother
Country, and as witnessing our readiness to share the obligations
as we have participated in the glories of the Empire. And,
finally, it is appropriate to propose this toast to this company be-
cause we are honored by the presence of one who has a claim to
our respect stronger than his personal or his intellectual distinc-
tion, and which is based upon the circumstance that he is one of
the dearest friends of the illustrious man in whose hands have


been for so long a period the custody and protection of the great-
ness and glory of the Empire. (Cheers.) He proposed the toast
of “ The Imperial Legislature and Imperial Connection.”
The Earl of Rosebery responded. He said : Mr. Speaker, I
have to return thanks for a toast which is somewhat comprehen-
sive in its nature. If it is the pleasure of this company I can
compress my remarks on the Imperial Legislature into two or three
hours—(laughter)—and on the subject of the Imperial connection
I could publish an essay of two or three volumes. (Laughter.) It
seems to me, however, that at this hour of the evening, eager as
we are for some intellectual treat of that description, we must
remember there are others who will not enjoy this highly intellec-
tual exercise. I will try, therefore, to compress my remarks into
some forty minutes. (Laughter.) In the lirst place, I have a task
which I did not expect, devolving upon me in this company, that
of itself would, if it were properly dealt with, take an hour or two.
It is to defend your Chief Justice against the charge of laying down
unconstitutional principles. (Laughter.) Of all things in this
world that I thought I should be called upon to do in the course of
a long and chequered career I did not think I should be called
upon to defend one of the ablest Judges, I may say not only in
this little continent, but in that great continent of Great Britain—
a Judge who has that reputation—against a charge of bringing
unconstitutional accusations against a great body. Still the Chief
Justice appeared to me to lay down a series of coincidences, and he
pointed out that the third coincidence was a very happy one. In
his eloquent speech my friend the Attorney-General made two
appeals in his accusation against the Chief Justice—[Mr. Dailey :
No.] —or if not an accusation an implication which is rather entirely
proving the case of the Chief Justice. He appealed to the Con-
vention of the Royal Burghs. That is a body with which lam
perfectly conversant. It is a body which sits in Edinburgh, and I
see by the look of recognition on Sir John Hay’s face that he
knows something of that body too. (Laughter.) It is an ancient
body, some three centuries old, and entirely represents the feeling
of Scotland; but I think that is rather an argument in favour of the
Chief Justice’s contention, instead of being used by the Attorney-
General a little perhaps against the Chief Justice. Then the


Attorney-General referred to the Convention in America ; but
America is a great nation, and the Conventions in America elect
the chiefs of that great nation, and therefore the Chief Justice I
think was fully justified in the arguments he used. I hope the
Attorney-General will excuse my humble vindication of the head
of his own profession. (Hear, hear, and laughter.) As far as the
Imperial Legislature and Imperial connection are concerned, I
really cannot compress my remarks so much as I would wish. As
regards the House of Commons here, I have had an opportunity of
observing it, and it seems to me, comparing it with our House of
Commons, an assembly of most stupendous orderliness. I think
as time goes on, and your population increases, you may become as
disorderly as our own Parliament. (Laughter.) If you preserve
your principles as they are at present and adopt our rules, you may
arrive at the apotheosis of legislative wisdom, which is to transact
your business in perfect silence. (Laughter). I only know of
the Legislative Council by one short visit, and by reading. It
appears to me to be a place which one may get into and out of
with the facility of a rabbit popping into and out of a burrow.
In England a man becomes a Peer without any choice on his
part, and remains so while he lives. But the gentlemen of your
Legislative Council are not in the position which I will describe
by an anecdote, and which is that of the Members of the British
House of Lords. A proposal to erect a wall around a burial-
ground came before a JVlunicipal Council of which a celebrated
sporting character was a member. That gentlemen opposed any
expenditure on the wall, because, as he said, “ Them poor fellows
as is in cant get out, and them as is out don’t want to get in.”
(Great laughter.) Mr. Speaker, I hope these Colonies will ever
preserve and cherish that imperial connection of which their
mother land is so proud. Often as we hear of the Empire of
Great Britain as the dominion on which the sun never sets. I feel
that when, if ever, Australasia falls away from that Empire, the
sun will indeed begin to set upon it. (Loud cheers).
His Excellency proposed the toast of “ The Speaker,” which
was duly acknowledged, and the proceedings terminated.
Sydney : Thomas Richards, Government Printer.—lBB3.




