

SPEECH
BY THE
HONORABLE WILLIAM SHIELS, M.P.,
ON THE
STATE BANK BILL
Delivered before the Legislative Assembly of Victoria on Tuesday
evening, the 10th November , 1896.


Mr. SHIELS. —Mr. Speaker, I feel
that the Government are placed in an
embarrassing position by the amend-
ment which the honorable member for
Maldon has moved, having regard to the
request with which he accompanied
it. The attitude the Government have
taken up is one which I myself, if
I were a member of the Government,
would have adopted. It would be futile
to deny the far-reaching consequences of
this measure —probably the roost im-
portant ever submitted to the Legislature
of Victoria. It would be equally futile to
close our eyes to the tremendous results
that might ensue to the prosperity of
this country, to its peace and happiness,
to the stability of our commerce, if we
made a false step in what my honorable
friend the Treasurer has just called “ this
great reform.” Now, I have waited for
this Bill with impatience ; I have waited
for it since I saw the report of the commis-
sion of last year with much apprehension.
I represent here in Parliament a great rural
district, occupied largely by farmers and
small selectors. As the representative of
a farming district, I must frankly admit,
in a tone somewhat different from that
of my honorable friend the member for
Dandenong, that the farmers of Victoria
cannot fairly reproach the Government
of Victoria with any want of considera-
tion or any lack of generous treatment.
We have given them land, generally
on easy terms, often below the market
rate.
Mr. Longmoee.— The United States
have given them everything.
Mr. SHIELS.—I say we have given
them land on easy terms, and usually below
the auction rate. We have practically
divested ourselves of a magnificent terri-
tory in the desire to settle a yeomanry
upon our soil. We have followed them
with railways to the furthest portion of
the colony, and we have carried their
produce at rates which in many instances
have proved unremunerative. We have
granted them, at huge loss to the State,
loans to enable them to get water to irri-
gate their holdings. We have, in a time
of the sorest State need, allowed what we
call the rents, but which are really prin-
cipal —the amount for which we sold the
lands—to remain in arrears to the extent
of over £700,000. As the representative
of a farming constituency, I admit that
frankly.
CONDITIONS OF AFFORDING
HELP.
But, sir, I go with my honorable friend,
the member for Dandenong (Mr. Long-
more) thus far: I say that the pitiable
position of the farming industry to-day,
and for some time past, merits further
consideration from the State in the way of
providing agriculture with cheap loans j.
but always on the one condition that
those cheap loans are compatible with the
State’s immunity from loss. Because we
must not forget that the State at this
juncture has grave embarrassments and
difficulties of its own, and any further
help which we may grant to the farmers
must conserve the State’s interest first;
and, secondly, the succour we give must
be offered in such a way as not to ener-
vate the spirit of independence and self-
help. Our watchword in considering
the Credit Foncier part of this Bill must,
therefore, he not “aid at all costs and
risks,” but “ aid without risk ” to the
State. We cannot afford at this junc-
ture to embark upon a dangerous sea of
untested experiments, or coquette with
specious theories in finance. Igo so far
with my honorable friend the member for
Dandenong as to say that I should have
been pleased if the Government had been
able to meet the request of the leader of
the Opposition. We are to some extent
postponing help to the farmers because of
the time we must necessarily give to the
consideration of the further proposals of
this Bill. My honorable friend the Trea-
surer has said that he is still of opinion
that the only means of giving help to the
farmers is through the other parts of the
Bill. That statement has been a surprise
to me, and I shall deal with it later on,
because it appears to me that there is
absolutely no connexion between the
Credit Foncier part and the proposal for
the establishment of a State Bank abso-
lutely no connexion whatever. But because
of that answer of the Premier we are now
face to face with an extremely abstruse
set of hotly-contested questions.
CURRENCY AND BANKING
REFORM.
Now, sir, I approach the question of cur-
rency reform in no spirit of hostility to it.
I cherish no patriotic delusions that we
have, either here or in England, an ideal
system of currency or of banking. It is
some years since, after careful and anxious
I came to a conclusion which has


been expressed infereiitially in powerful
language before an audience, not long ago,
in the city of London, by the present
leader of the conservative party in the
House of Commons —Mr. A. J. Balfour—■
that the English system of currency—
“is assuredly the worst of all conceivable
systems,’ because ‘ it gives you a standard
steadily, continuously, and indefinitely appre-
ciating, and which by that very fact throws a
burden upon every man of enterprise—upon
every man who desires to promote the agricul-
tural and industrial welfare of his country —
and benefits no human being whatever but the
owner of fixed debts in gold.’ ”
Mr. McKenzie. —He was speaking on
bi-metallism.
Mr. SHIELS.—Mr. Balfour said that in
his speech on bi-metallism; and I believe
every professor of political economy at
the universities of England, and Scotland
holds bi-metallic views.*
Mr. Murray Smith.—What?
Mr. SHIELS.—Mr. Leonard Courtney,
M.P., in the House of Commons, is respon-
sible for the statement that the occupants
of chairs of political economy in Great
Britain are bi-metallists. Mr. Courtnev
-—I am speaking of course from memory—-
phrased it that every one of them was
prepared to sign, either a petition or a
memorandum to the Government, stating,
in their belief, it would be competent to
maintain, by international agreement, a
stable par between silver and gold.
Air. Fink.— Half the writers in the
Economic Review are mono-metallists.
Air. Longmore.— But they are money
lenders.
Mr. SHIELS.—Now, sir, some two or
three years ago I myself, in the course of
an address, expressed my views cautiously
in regard to the proposal for the establish-
ment of a State Bank of issue.
Air. Hancock.— Hear, hear.
Mr. SHIELS.—My honorable friend
the member for Footscray was present on
that occasion, and no doubt remembers
what I said. I said, in the course of that
address—
“lf a State Bank of issue can be put on
sound and safe lines I shall probably be found
a supporter of it.”
Honorable members will see that I spoke
with extreme caution; and I further felt it
to be necessary then to point out that no
* Fr °m personal acquaintance with their writings lam
able to affirm that Professors Marshall of Cambridge
Edgeworth of Oxford, Foxwell of London, Nicholson of
kdmourgh, Smart of Glasgow, and H. Sicigwick are
bi-metallists, and I know also that the names of several
other professors are on the roll of and write for the
Bi-metallic League.
State Bank emitting notes on the credit
of the Government could practically
avail the colony of Victoria much or
anything, dependent as we were on the
home prices of all our great staples of
produce. I pointed out that no enlarge-
ment of local credit, no issue of credit
substitutes for gold or silver, could have
practically any effect in relieving the
tension of our position. I said there were
only two avenues from which we might
hope for relief. Those were—winning
more gold from the soil, or joining with
the other friends of the cause of bi-me-
tallism in Europe and America to urge
the re-assembling of the Brussels Con-
ference, in the hope of remonetizing silver
by means of an international agreement
between the great nations of Europe and
America.
THE CREDIT FONCIER BILL OF
1894.
When I spoke shortly on this question in
the debate two years ago, I said, objecting
to the measure then before the House,
that the proposal it contained was not
true Credit Fonder at all, but a bastard
system, omitting all the essential precau-
tions and securities which had made the
legitimate system such a success on the
Continent of Europe. I further said
that I thought the best way of estab-
lishing a true Credit Fonder, in which
the State ought not to do everything,
but only to aid and supervise, was
through the issue of State notes, by
way of subsidy to that institution. And
the members of the present Government
will recollect a division which took place
on an amendment moved by the mem-
ber for Melbourne East (Mr. Stuart), in
which the then Opposition and every
member of the present Government took
that view and voted against the proposal
of the Patterson Government, which
cast upon the State the work of borrow-
ing the money on its own credit, and
then lending it direct to the farmers
through a new State department. There
was a difference of opinion as to how
those notes were to be secured. I had
a stronger view in regard to the high
amount of the reserve than some of my
honorable friends, but the point is, that the
Opposition as a body, including every
member of the present Government, con-
demned the proposal of the preceding
Government upon the same lines as the
honorable member for Essendon and


myself condemned it—because it was not
true Credit Foncier at all, but a mongrel
system of Credit Foncier which was
highly dangerous to the State. Since
then, however, things have moved. Ido
not blame the members of the Government
for having changed their views. I have
modified my own views in regard to what I
thought should be the reserve behind any
issue of State notes. The opinion I held for-
merly was that we should have true Credit
Foncier, in which the State was not to do
everything, but only to come in and help
those who would be willing to help them-
selves. I thought that the State help
should take the form of an initial subsidy,
through State notes issued to the institu-
tion, backed by an adequate reserve in
gold, and not, as in France, by a guarantee
of £400,000 by the Government. The
honorable member for Gippsland North
will remember how strong 1 was in the
expression of my opinion that the Govern-
ment of Victoria should not have oast
upon it the sole responsibility. Honorable
members will also recollect how earnest
we were that politics and the politician
should be shut out from everything in
connexion with it, because of our fears
as to what would follow if a business con-
cern of this kind was not conducted purely
on business principles, and without politi-
cal considerations being allowed to enter
into it.
Mr. Higgins.—With no power to resist.
Mr. SHIFTS.—With no power to resist.
The modification which my opinion has
undergone since* then, in consequence of a
study of the debates which have taken
place in South Australia—and seeing what
an object-lesson of lurid warning to this
House has been offered in New Zealand—
leads me to the view that it is safer not
to have a State issue of notes at all. If
there is a State issue of notes, it must be
supported by a much larger reserve than
the 50 per cent, which I formerly deemed
necessary.
HERR PINSCHOF’S EVIDENCE.
Will the Treasurer allow me to call the at-
tention of the House and himself to the
language which was made use of in regard
to the Credit Foncier Bill of the honorable
member for Melbourne ? The present Bill
contains few changes as compared with the
honorable memberforMelbourne’s measure.
Some of the changes are certainly for
the better. The Bill now before us is
more completely worked out than the
preceding one, but some of the alterations
are certainly more hazardous. Neverthe-
less, substantially the Credit Foncier part
of the Bill now before us is merely a
counterpart of the honorable member for
Melbourne's Bill. My opinions have
undergone very little change as com-
pared with those which I expressed on a
previous occasion. If there is one gentle-
man who is entitled to be heard upon
this question it is Herr Pinschof,, who,
introduced Credit Foncier to the attention
of the people of this colony, and who has
done more in his private capacity to for-
ward it in the various colonies than any
other person I know. I think we should
pay the tribute of our respect to his
earnestness in his endeavour to establish a
system by which in his own country and in
other countries of Europe so much has been
done to render stable the farming interest.
Mr. Fink.— But Herr Pinschofs recom-
mendations have never been adopted by
any colonial Government.
Mr. SHIFTS.—That is so. Every word
of what Herr Pinschof says of the Bili of
1894 is applicable to the measure now be-
fore us, and which is simply a counterpart
of the earlier one. In his evidence given
before the Royal Commission on State
Banking Herr Pinschof says—
“ln speaking of the Credit Foncier Bill I
shall refer to the form in which it was sent up
to the Legislative Council. I consider the mea,-
sure, as sent up to that Chamber, simply un-
workable. It is not a Credit Foncier at all ;
the essentials of Credit Foncier are not in it.
In the Credit Foncier system, which has stood
the test of European experience, advances are
made on the security of the land absolutely. ”
Then, in answer to another question, Herr
Pinschof states —
“The Bill not only throws the door open to
political interference, but also embraces blun-
ders in the financial machinery. It displaces
the land in favour of the Government guarantee.
McLeod lays stress on the fact that in Prussia
the Credit Foncier mortgage bonds withstood
the course of war and revolution. He says that
when the Government stock fell down to 69 per
cent., the stocks of the land banks were still
quoted at 96 per cent.”
The importance of that will be found in
the argument of my friend that the credit
of the State must be always better than
the credit of any private institution.
Mr. Garter. —So it is.
Mr. SHlFTS.—Unfortunately, we have
known it not so. We must not judge of
ourselves at all. It is a question of how
outsiders judge of us.
Mr. Hancock. —We must be cautious
about believing what outsiders say also.


Mr. SHIELS. —It is a question of
monetary credit. We have seen the bonds
of some of the Australian colonies lower
in the London market than bonds of some
of the colonial institutions.
Mr. Longhorb. —That was at the time
when money was robbed from the people.
Mr. SHIELS.-—No, lam speaking of &
time not very long ago, when the bonds of
Australian institutions were quoted at a
higher rate in the London market than the
stock of some of the colonies. In answer
to a question by the honorable member for
Bourice East, Herr Pinschof said—
“ This Bill as it stands gives very little benefit
to the agricultural interest. It would be a
source of danger to the whole community, and
no benefit to the farmer. I want to see a Credit
Foncier which would benefit the farmers, and
in fact every class in the community. This Bill
might provide some farmers with money at a
Cheaper rate than is ordinarily obtainable, but
it will assuredly throw open the door to _ all
sorts of abuses—political patronage, political
influence, public corruption, and great national
loss in the end. The price paid for such a pass-
ing advantage to some members of the commu-
nity would be the infliction on the community
at large of evils that might be lasting in their
effects.”
In other places Herr Pinschof further
enlarges on the dangers of that particular
measure. The remarks which I have
quoted certainly represent the honest
opinion of a gentleman whom I may call the
father of the Credit Foncier in Australia,
and they offer to us food for serious reflec-
tion when we come to consider the Credit
Foncier parts of this measure. The Trea-
surer says he thought, and still thinks,
that Credit Foncier can be best established
through the machinery of a State Bank
of issue. I would ask the honorable
gentleman to state what part of that
machinery has any connexion whatever
with the Credit Foncier proposals before
us ? If State notes are to be used, there
is the natural connexion between a State
Bank of Issue and a system of Credit
Foncier. If the Government believed in
the State issue of paper, it would have
been shown by using their own credit in
that form as a subsidy to the Credit Fon-
cier system which they were inaugurating.
But, as the parts connected with the State
Bank of Issue and the State Bank of De-
posit can be dropped bodily from the
measure without entailing any serious
alteration in the first part of the Bill, I
must certainly deplore that the Govern-
ment felt bound to include them in the
same measure.
CONDITIONS OF STATE
INTERFERENCE WITH NOTE
ISSUE.
I do not hold that opinion on the ground
that the State must be warned off the new
enterprises on which this Bill invites us to
enter because they are foreign to its sphere.
I do not take the extreme view of laissez
faire. There are certain functions which
the State in every community must dis-
charge, and discharge exclusively, allowing
no private individual to intervene—such
as matters relating to national defence,
quarantine, police, &c. Then there are
other spheres in which the State will have
to enter, because some work is necessary
to be done, and private enterprise at the
time is unable to supply the want. The
cold negations of an extreme laissez faire
have no charm for me. I believe that the
State has a much more dignified office to
fill than that of traversing the roads and
thoroughfares of life as a kind of glorified
policeman. If the State feels (and there
is warrant for that feeling) that the bank
notes which are now circulating through
the colony, and the bank deposits of the
public which are now lying in the banks,
are insecure, then it would appear to me to
be a clear function of the State, if security
can be attained in no other way, to take
over the issue of those notes, and take
charge of those deposits for the people.
That appears to me to be absolutely a
vital part of Government duty. But the
conditions are that there must be reason-
able grounds for holding that the bank
notes and the bank deposits are insecure.
Mr. Hancock. —It ought to be suffi-
cient if the banks are not able to meet
their liabilities.
Mr. SHIELS. —The member for Foots-
cray will remember that when, in conjunc-
tion with the honorable member for Kil-
more, we occupied seats on a public platform
at Collingwood some three years ago, I.had
to challenge the same kind of view as that
which be has put forward to-night. We
have to determine this most vital ques-
tion in the way which I then expressed.
We have to ask are the bank notes at
present insecure—are the people’s deposits
in the banks now m jeopardy ? And that
question has got to be decided before we
can feel that there is any justification for
the State claiming, on the grounds which
have been urged, a monopoly of the note
issue, and of the use of the deposits. It
is my honest opinion, for reasons which I
will give directly, that the State notes


under this Bill would certainly be less
secure than the bank notes which are at
present circulating through the com-
munity. I hold strongly the opinion
that we have most ample security, which
should satisfy every rational mind, for
the bank notes at present in circulation.
THE TREASURER’S SPEECH.
Now, it cannot be denied that this Bill
opens up a wide vista of contested ques-
tions in banking and in currency—some
most occult and technical subjects will
have to come under discussion and de-
cision in this House before it can pass it.
The Treasurer took three hours and a
half in explaining the present Bill. My
honorable friend is brief, is plain, is
always lucid, but, sir, the greater part of
that time was occupied, not in vindicating
the novel proposals of the measure, but
really in explaining it so as to bring its
provisions clearly before the apprehension
of the House. I have read that speech
with care, and I fail to understand myself
whether the Premier and his colleagues
have frankly adopted the currency
system of banking, or the banking prin-
ciple. I am also in doubt whether he
thinks the currency of Victoria is either
contracted or inflated, or in danger of
contraction or inflation. There is one
part of the Bill which would seem to show
that the Government had in their mind
the adoption of the banking principle,
but then in another part up pops the
face of the great father of the currency
principle, Lord Overstone. I see a con-
tinued struggle between those two abso-
lutely contradictory principles in this
measure.
MERELY A REPLICA OF THE S.A.
BILL.
The first thing I would say of this
Bill is that, as we have it to-night, it
is an exact replica, not of the South
Australian Act, but of the South Aus-
tralian Bill as originally introduced. If
honorable members will Just compare
clause 3 of the measure which we are
considering with clause 2 of the original
Bill of the South Australian Government
they will find a remarkable correspondence
not only in the scope of the measure, but
in its very language.
Mr. G. Turner. —lt was taken from it,
but it contains principles that are not in
the South Australian measure.
SHIELS.—Of course, if the Premier
admits that this Bill was taken from the
South Australian Bill I need not go
further into that point. The Victorian
measure, as ive have it to-night, is
really a counterpart, even in language, of
many of the clauses of the original South
Australian Bill. The South Australian
Bill contained 95 clauses, and our measure
contains 109. Therefore, there is a little
more completeness, as was natural, shown
in the adoption of the South Australian
proposals. Now, I have in my hand a copy
of the actual South Australian Act, and I
followed carefully the discussion of the
South Australian Bill in the Legislature
of the sister colony. I should say, from
my knowledge of this Chamber and of
the Legislative Assembly of South Aus-
tralia, that the South Australian House
may be claimed to be the more radical,
of the two Chambers.
Mr. Longmore.— lf it is not it is a
pity.
Mr. SHIELS.—I certainly think the
head of the South Australian Government
is much more radical in his opinions than
I know the head of this Government or his
colleagues to be, and I think there is a
larger radical party in that Chamber than
there is in this. But what happened in
the neighbouring colony 1 They had there
practically four parts in their Bill. The
.South Australian Assembly, after ample
discussion, struck out the State Bank
of Issue and the State Bank of Deposit
and Loan, and they struck those out
in the Assembly because of arguments
which were addressed to that House in
regard, first of alt, to the novelty of the
proposals; secondly, to the dangers of
the proposals; and, thirdly, to the
fatal precedent which those proposals
would establish. Any one who follows the
divisions which took place in that House
will see some of the most earnest of the
liberal party acknowledging, as far as I
remember, a change of opinion when
they came breast to breast and face to
face with proposals which they formerly
had thought would be beneficial.
FOUR FEET IN ONE BOOT.
Now t , the present Bill is divided into four
parts also—there is the Savings Banks
branch, the Advances branch, the issue of
State paper, and the deposits and loans de-
partment. In other words, we have four big
feet crammed into one boot. Let honor-
able members just look, as I have done, at


the wide scope of the duties of the Inspector-
General under this Bill. Why, sir, that
Inspector-General, who is practically the
executive officer of four banks roiled into
one, would require to be a universal
genius.
Sir John Mclntyre. —An Admirable
Crichton.
Mr. SHIELS. —I would ask the House,
therefore, looking at our present position,
recognising our embarrassments, knowing
the huge loss amounting to many millions
of pounds which has befallen this State
in its other novel enterprises —in its
railways, in its irrigation policy, and in
other directions —is it not a colossal order
for a State—l won’t say overwhelmed with
difficulties, but certainly not yet emerged
from the trough of the wave—to undertake
these novel enterprises at the present
juncture 2
Mr. Cook. — What percentage of the
banks failed also!
Mr. SHIELS. —If the honorable mem-
ber will give me his attention—l am
speaking under great difficulties of weak-
ness at the present time —I shall frankly
avow my sentiments on that matter.
But, I say, before the State undertakes
this colossal order, don’t you think that
it would be a matter of prudence, a
matter of ordinary sagacity, before strik-
ing its tents and trekking out to the
unexplored domains of this new enter-
prise, to have done something to have set
the old pasture ground in order, to have
left the old homestead secure 2
GOVERNMENT MANAGEMENT OF
BUSINESS CONCERNS.
The honorable member for East Bourke
Boroughs (Mr. Cook) talks of the manage-
ment of private concerns. I admit, rue-
fully, and with personal pain and loss,
that private management in the city of
Melbourne cannot afford to throw a single
stone at the State. It is “ honours easy ”
or “ dishonours easy.” I am not going
to argue in regard to the superior
merits of private enterprise as against a
Government; lam going to appeal to you
on a different ground. I ask you this
question : Have you any reason to believe
that future Parliaments, and future Legis-
lative Assemblies who will occupy this
chamber when we are unhorsed, will be
wiser, more patriotic, or more intelligent
than we have been 2
Mr. Webb. —They ought to be from our
experience.
Mr. SHIELS. —With nations as with
individuals, each one must buy its own
experience in the furnace of affliction.
I ask you, is there the slightest reason to
believe that the State will manage these
novel and intricate concerns with more
fidelity, more prudence, and more efficiency
than it has managed its other ventures
and enterprises 2 When I think of a por-
tion of the Budget, and when I have
ringing in my ears the warning words of
the honorable member for Geelong (Mr.
Higgins) and the honorable member for
Essendou (Mr. Deakin) in regard to the
borrowings of this young State in its time
of difficulty, authorized by the Budget of
this very year to be spent without an avail-
able asset, or a direct return in interest, I
say solemnly we cannot encourage the
delusion that we are better and wiser than
our predecessors, or that our successors
will be wiser and better than we are. Take
as a whole, the Parliaments of the last 25
years, and those Parliaments will be the
measure and gauge of the honesty and
the intelligence of the Parliaments of the
coming 25 years.
Mr. J. B. Tucker.—That does not say
much for the proceedings of the past.
Mr. SHIELS. —My honorable friend may
have a different opinion. Ido not believe
that our successors will be worse, but I do
not think they will have a higher sense of
patriotism, or a higher sense of prudence,
than vre ourselves possess to-day. They
will be farther removed from the diffi-
culties we have now to confront; they
will be farther removed from the feel-
ings of pain and embarrassment, which
ought to have brought home lessons of
caution and lessons of sagacity to our-
selves. What do these new enterprises of
banking involve 2 I will tell you. Looked
at most hopefully they involve grave
hazards. What do they demand 2 They
demand special aptitude and training,
they demand special experience, they-
demand something far more than that
even —they demand firm resistance to
private importunity. They desiderate for
this House a resolute and determined
attitude against all the influences which
will be brought to bear by a new class
—a debtor class —who will be formed
under this measure, by the municipalities
already too powerful, and the rural popula-
tion who will contract loans under these
proposals.
Mr. Hancock. —That is all provided for
in the Bill.


Mr. SHIELS. —It is not. The honor-
able member cannot have read the Bill.
Supposing we admit that the State
functionaries to be created under this
Bill will be as pure as a crystal of
ice, firm as the roek supposing we
admit that the Government will not do
as the Government of New Zealand did
when their State officials had rejected,
because of the insecurity, a great number
of the advances claimed from the State
Bank. In that colony a significant hint
was given by the Ministry, and that hint
was followed up by those gentlemen who
had rejected the securities lending on
what they had originally deemed to be
insecure.
Mr. Hancock. —They could not do it
under this Bill.
Mr. SHIELS.—The honorable mem-
ber will be able to show how it is provided
against in this Bill.
Mr. Hancock. —The old bogy.
PROBABILITY OF POLITICAL
INFLUENCE.
Mr. SHIELS.—It is not the old bogy.
Supposing we admit the Commissioners
will not be susceptible to any of these
mischievous political influences which
operated in New Zealand, what may
happen ? Supposing bad seasons come
on; supposing any calamity befalls this
country; supposing the shire councils,
from one cause or another, have fallen into
arrears with their payments, will not hon-
orable members be importuned ? Will not
all the potent electoral influences wielded
by those organized bodies be brought to
bear? Will not honorable members be
asked, and will they not consent to go on
deputations to the Treasurer to ask for-
tune, for grace, for some concession ? Will
not the voice of these organized and in-
terested bodies be heard powerfully in
this Chamber to urge legislative action?
Why, sir, as certain as the sun will
rise in to-morrow’s heavens, so certain
are these things likely to happen, and
none of them are provided against.
Mr. G. Turner.— The same thing
applies to the Credit Foncier portion of
the Bill.
Mr. SHIELS.—I admit that, and I
would remind the Premier that that was
the view I held two and a half years ago.
I wished then the Credit Foncier to be
swept out of the purview of Parliament
altogether, and many other honorable
members the honorable member for
Essendon (Mr. Deakin), if I do not forget
—took the same view, that we should com-
mence the Credit Foncier by subsidy or
guarantee from the State, as in France, leav-
ing the management, as on the Continent
of Europe, to those who contribute the
further capital requisite. Then we should
have brought to bear all those essential
elements which tend to security in the
Credit Foncier systems of European coun-
tries, the neighbourly supervision and con-
trol of the borrower, knowledge of his
methods and habits, what I may call the
personal character, which is solid security
itself for the loan. If I could guarantee
the life of my borrower I would as soon
take into account his moral qualities
as the security of the dead thing called
“ property ” which he offers me. All
these things appear in the Credit Foncier
of the continent. lam certain that the
honorable member for Essendon took the
same view as myself on this question,
because I not only heard him speak in
this chamber, but we conversed privately
on the subject.
CONTRACTING NATIONAL LOANS
WITHOUT PARLIAMENTARY
AUTHORITY.
Now, let me deal with another most
serious objection which I take to this Bill.
Under clause 63, by the power to issue
notes, there is a power given to the Execu-
tive practically to borrow moneys to an
unlimited extent without the sanction
of Parliament. The Treasurer admitted
that it was to an “ unlimited extent.”
Surely that is a most dangerous power to
give away to the Government of the day.
Now, 1 would ask honorable members to
look at clause 79. Having given that
power of unlimited borrowing without the
previous sanction of Parliament, by the
emission of notes, we come to the provisions
in regard to spending.
LOANS TO SHAKY BANKS.
All those moneys under clause 79 are avail-
able for banks in difficulty or danger. Now,
I would appeal to honorable members, look-
ing at clause 63 in conjunction with clause
79, are there not, I will not say possibilities,
but grave probabilities here of serious
inflation of the currency ? Are there not
grave probabilities of pressure being
brought to bear upon the State and its
functionaries ? Are there not terrible
hazards to be run under those two clauses
taken together?


Mr. Higgins.— How will you deal with
the “ sponge ” metaphor, as to the State
Bank not being able to issue more notes
than the people can absorb ?
Mr. SHIELS.—I think that is one of
the most dangerous of all arguments—the
argument of false analogy. It has been
repeatedly urged in the heat of contro-
versy. McLeod puts it—-with some sort
of approbation—that the people cannot
take up more than is wanted, and there-
fore the measure of what is wanted is
what they can consume. Suppose we
apply that argument to the digestive
organs of the human body. ‘Under it
the measure of the food that a man
requires, and should have, is simply what
he does take. Now, we all know that
that is not true. You may eat and
digest so much as to become obese and
unwieldy.
Mr. Murray Smith.—ls not that rather
a false analogy, too ?
Mr. SHIELS.—No. The industrial body
has a stomach ; that stomach has the
power to take a certain amount of cur-
rency nutriment in its media of exchange
without financial obesity. Bonamy Price’s
apt illustration of money is “ carts,” but
these “ carts ” may be in excess, they may
have to carry half loads instead of full
ones, and that has been the case. Therefore,
you have not only the argument from
analogy, but also the argument from ex-
perience. But Ido not want to deal with
that further. Under clause 79 you have
power to lend to the hanks. Under clause
80 you have not only the power to lend this
unlimited supply of the State printing press,
but you have the power to lend the cash
which may have been deposited in the
State Bank, and which, under this Bill, may
have been drawn from the private banks.
I say that that power to lend involves the
State in huge new responsibilities—in a
responsibility for nearly every banking
crisis which may prevail. Supposing there
is a likelihood of a panic arising—-sup-
posing some banks are trembling—is it not
absolutely certain that with these powers
on the statute-book the banks in distress
or in danger will come to importune the
Government ? What will be the argument
that will be used?—“lf you allow us to
go down you will bring about a banking-
crisis.” Suppose the Government stand
firm, and those banks do go down, who will
be blamed ? The Executive of the State,
for refusing to aid them.
Mr. Hancock. —That is all provided for
in the Bill.
Mr. SHIELS.—I say, and say it rever-
ently—“ God help the poor State.” You
are asking the State to adopt the novel
nSle of playing the part of knight-errant
to every moribund banking company —to
every bank that is in jeopardy.
Mr. Hancock. —No.
Mr. SHIELS.—I say yes. If these par-
ticular clauses had been in operation in
1892 and 1893 nothing is more certain—
considering w-hat then took place—than
that the State would have been forced
into the position of coming to the help of
institutions which at that time were beyond
the possibility of recovery, and millions of
loss have fallen upon the Government.
Mr. Hancock. —Not if this Bill had
been law.
Mr. SHlELS.—Certainly.
LOANS TO MUNICIPALITIES.
Now, I come to consider clause 84, which
provides that—“ All moneys received by
the bank from the issue of State notes over
the amount required for the gold reserve,
and all moneys belonging to or in the
possession of the bank which shall not
be reasonably required lor the purpose of
carrying on the ordinary business,” may be
lent and used, first of all, by the Treasurer
for public works, and, secondly, may be ad-
vanced on loan to the municipalities. Now,
it appears certain that all the deposits
can be devoted to these purposes. It also
appears that the notes which the State
issues may go, by way of loan, to the
municipalities. Now, I want to deal with
that. The State, under clause 84, is prac-
tically holding itself out to do and is
practically bidding for the banking busi-
ness of every municipality in the country.
That appears to me, from what I know
has taken place, to be a most unwise and
dangerous proposal. I affirm distinctly
that the less financial connexion there is
between the central Government and the
local councils, the better for both. The
State is now weak, if not absolutely power-
less, against a combination of the munici-
palities. The municipal councils are really
too strong against the State ; wo have had
evidence of it. Complaints have been
made in this House openly of the impor-
tunity of these municipal councils. They
are organized bodies; they have brought
their organizations and the means of
influencing honorable members to a fine
art. We who represent country districts


all know what takes place. Some muni-
cipality has some little axe to grind.
Immediately a circular is written, and sent
round to all the other municipalities, with
a request that they should bring influence
to bear on their members to support it.
This is a common thing.
Mr. Hancock. —The municipal councils
went against the land tax.
Mr. SHIELS.—We have evidence of it
in regard to the Constitution Act Amend-
ment Bill. The municipalities, it appears
to me, are continually invading the poli-
tical domain, and few honorable members
have the courage of the honorable member
for East Bourke Boroughs (Mr. Cook) to
tell them —■“ This is your sphere and this
other is my sphere.”
Mr. Peendergast.-— They have got no
right whatever to interfere.
Mr. SHIELS.—Oh ! I won’t say that.
Mr. Peendergast. —They ousted the
Patterson Government all right by sup-
porting them.
Mr. SHIELS.—Oh, no. We almost feel
that this House lacks the power of resist-
ance against the organization which the
municipalities can and do repeatedly exer-
cise, that they have interests which some-
times are not in harmony with the interests
of the State and with the interests of this
House.
Mr. G. Turner.— We cut down their
endowment pretty well in spite of them.
Mr. SHIELS.—But look at the trouble
we had to do it.
Mr. G. Turner. —We did it all the
same.
Mr. SHIELS.—But no sensible man,
knowing what we have gone through,
would want to create another cause of
friction between this House of Parliament
and the municipal councils.
Mr. Hancock. —But this is for the benefit
of the ratepayers.
Mr. SHIELS.—You can argue that it is
for the benefit of the ratepayers if you
like, but we are charged with the duty of
benefiting all classes of the community,
some of whom are not ratepayers, and we
have also to look out for the State’s into
rests, and it is from that point of view and
from the point of view of the general tax-
payer, that I say most distinctly that the
less financial connexion there is between
the municipal councils and the State the
better for both parties.
Mr. Hancock.— lt is State work.
Mr. SHIELS. —It is not State work,
it is municipal work.
A WARNING FROM CANADA.
Let me ask the attention of the House to
a similar experience which another British
dependency went through in regard to State
loans to local institutions. I have in my
hand a report of an interview with a gen-
tleman from Canada who is connected with
important bodies there, and I trust that
honorable members will give their attention
to his statements, so that they may judge
of the clause that I am now dealing with—
clause 84.
Mr. G. Turner. — Where does it ap-
pear ?
Mr. SHIELS. —It is reported in the
South Australian Register of last year.
The experience of Canada is exactly on all-
fours with what may be our own experience
in regard to this measure. Indeed, part
of this article might appear to be a page
from Victorian history. This gentleman
says—
“ First, I will tell you what happened in re-
ference to local government loans, and it was
just the sort of thing to be looked for with
human nature as it is. This system was tried
largely in Canada before full federation was
established. Both Ontario and Quebec, at the
solicitation of the municipalities, advanced
large sums, to be spent ostensibly for the
purpose of developing local improvements
and building railways, as well as in other
ways. To aid political designs, as you can
readily understand, these grants gradually be-
came greatly increased, and thus reckless ex-
penditure was encouraged. Lightly come,
lightly go; and so the thing went on. When
the confederation was formed the province of
Ontario was obliged to take a claim against the
municipalities as one of its assets in connexion
with the national financial adjustments. One
of the conditions of the State loans to the muni-
cipalities was that interest should be regularly
paid and the principal refunded according to
arrangement. For two or three years the in-
stalments of interest came in—l am limiting my
remarks to my own province, of which I have
special knowledge—then one local body at first
ceased to make these payments, and, of course,
others followed its example. Finally, notwith-
standing the large sums of money lent, not one
single penny of interest was paid to the Govern-
ment. The Administration of the province had
to appoint a commission to deal with the whole
matter, and try to make some sort of a bargain
with the defaulting local bodies. This was
found to be a difficult task, and all attempts to
perform it proved practically fruitless. The
ultimate experience was that not one munici-
pality which had borrowed money paid in full;
that some of them were unable to pay anything
whatever; and that, in common justice to the
corporations which had not borrowed, the Go
vernment was obliged to give to them an amount
equal to the payments which had to be foregone
in the case of the municipalities that did not
redeem their obligations. So that, instead of
the province taking over an asset in the shape


of the advances to municipal bodies, it discovered
that it had been saddled with a serious liability.
As some compensation, however, a valuable
lesson had been learned. Canadians had been
taught that it is not possible for a Government
safely to be a money lender to municipalities,
that it is easier to advance a loan than to get
the money back, and that extravagant local
expenditure was caused by the very fact that
municipalities 'were able to undertake local
works with State funds instead of directly
touching the ratepayers’ pockets.”
This gentleman further says—and I will
ask the House to listen to his remarks, al-
though they' are more relevant to another
part of the observations that I intend to
address to the House—
‘ ‘ What experience has Ontario had of loans
to the individual ?
‘ ‘ Experience equally significant, and its re-
sult has been to show that advances to farmers
and other persons are infinitely more dangerous
financial expedients than those to which I have
just alluded. I have no hesitation in character-
izing such a system as absolutely fatal to sound
finance. Part of our scheme of municipal loans
provided for the establishment of sinking funds
in connexion with the repayments of principal.
The local bodies had power to invest this money,
and in a number of cases portions of these sink-
ing funds were lent at moderate interest—from
5 to 6 per cent. to farmers of 100 or 200
acres, on freehold security, as well as to owners
of township lands. What was the result ? Well,
I need not go into figures. It will be sufficient
to say that wherever this plan was adopted
losses were made. This, too, notwithstanding
the facts that in the total only a moderate sum
was advanced, and that naturally the munici-
palities which lent the money had some special
knowledge of the value of the security. What
has happened is that the municipal lenders have
not been able to collect all the advances or to get
the interest, and —if they can evict the debtors
•—their only chance of securing a refund lies in
selling the land, which is difficult, for obvious
reasons, or in working it themselves.
“ The way for you to look at the proposed
State advances to farmers is simple. The
practical questions are—(l) Can the State
collect the money ? (2) Can it turn out de-
faulters ? (3) Can it afford to go into the
farming business itself ? The probable answers
to the two former inquiries may he gathered
from what I have said.”
Mr. G. Turner. —That is the State
dealing direct.
Mr. SHIELS.—No, the State was deal-
ing with these advances to the farmers
indirectly through the municipalities. The
State dealt directly with the municipali-
ties. The bank which this Bill proposes to
establish is to be a State Bank, and the
functionaries are to be State functionaries.
The Government will not have washed
their hands of the control of the whole
business. It will be, practically, a new
department of the State.
Mr. Gray. — Will not the commissioners
be independent ?
Mr. SHIELS.—They' will be no more
independent than the Hallways Commis-
sioners.
Mr. Hancock. —From whom are you
quoting 1
Mr. SHIELS.-—I am quoting from the
statements of Mr. Petrie.
Mr. Hancock. —Who is he ?
Mr. SHIELS.—He is a gentleman who
is connected with various enterprises in
Ontario.
Mr. Hancock. —Is he anybody in par-
ticular?
Mr. SHIELS. His statements are
matters of history. The honorable mem-
ber might very well spend a little time
in the Library in studying the sub-
ject.
Mr. Hancock.— l would like to know
what spectacles he looked at them through.
Mr. SHIELS.—It is not a question of
spectacles, but of fact, whether these losses
did occur.
Mr. Hancock. They might be ac-
counted for.
ABSTRUSENESS OF CURRENCY
PROBLEMS.
Mr. SHIELS. —Now I will proceed to
deal with another part of this measure,
the part which is the least inviting, be-
cause it is the most abstruse. I refer to
the State’s prerogatives and the State’s
duties in regard to banking. Unfortu-
nately this opens up most technical ques-
tions in the consideration of what money
is, and of the functions which it discharges.
I would ask honorable members to listen
to the words of one of the most brilliant
of all economic writers.
Mr. Murray Smith. —You had better
wait until the Ministers return to the
chamber.
Mr. SHIELS.—The Ministry may have
engagements. I am glad that the hon-
orable member for Gippsland North is
present, because he will know that I am
now expressing views that I have already
expressed in conversation with him. With
the exception of theology no subject offers
such a field for controversy and reasonable
doubt as currency problems. In none is
there more conscientious quackery and
more honest imposture. I have given
to the question of money long years of
anxious study. 1 do not claim to speak
upon it ex cathedra. It is true that- I
have formed upon it some definite and firm


convictions. Upon several of the grave
questions that are still in the cauldron of
controversy, I have only formed tentative
opinions, and upon other points 1 am in
serious doubt. Honorable members will
not be able to come to the proper con-
sideration of the State Bank business
which we are invited to sanction unless
they attempt to understand something of
these technical questions. Moms. Bastiat
states—
‘ ‘ I curse money because it is constantly con-
founded with wealth, and from this confusion
arises errors and calamities without number.
I curse it because its functions are ill under-
stood and very difficult of comprehension. I
curse it because it confuses all ideas, causes
the means to be mistaken for the end, the
obstacles for the cause, Alpha for Omega,
because its presence in the world, beneficial in
itself, has introduced a false notion, a begging
of the question, a fallacious theory that, in
its numerous ramifications, has impoverished
man and encrimsoned the earth with blood.
I curse it because I feel myself incapable of
wrestling against errors to which it has given
birth, otherwise than by a long and fastidious
dissertation to which no one will listen. ”
Mons. Bastaat is probably the most bril-
liant of all economic writers. Ido not
say that he is the soundest. It is be-
cause of that abstruseness that I wish the
House to give me their earnest attention
while I express, with these qualifications
as to doubt, and to tentative opinions,
ray views on the underlying principles of
this particular branch of the Bill pro-
viding for a State Bank of issue. Many
of what would appear to be the simplest
questions are still in the theatre of
fierce debate. Is money wealth in the
economic sense ? Some say yes. Others
of equal eminence say no. Is money
capital? Mill says it is not. McLeod
just as certainly insists that it is. Then
is credit wealth? Mill says “Ho.”
Other economists distinctly say “Yes.”
INVECTIVES AGAINST THE BANKS.
I will deal with one particular branch of
this question which has been opened up
to us to-night by the honorable member
for Daudeaong. I do not indorse at all
his invectives against the manner in
which the banks have acted to the far-
mers of the colony. I think I may
claim to know more of the way
in which the banks have fulfilled
their duties in regard to their debtors
than even the honorable member. I
know of interest foregone; of considera-
tion extended to farmers and squatters in
this community, which I do not suppose
is without parallel or equal in other
countries, but which certainly merits
acknowledgment and commendation. If
my honorable friend would only go and
ask the legal firms that have to do busi-
ness lor the hanks in regard to the
arrangements of those institutions with
selectors and settlers, he would find speak-
ing evidence of the consideration which
has often been extended. Remember the
hanks have to deal with these matters
from a business point of view. Now, sir,
in regard to this particular question of in-
terest, my honorable friend the member for
Dandenong has said that the Savings Bank
were getting money at per cent., and
he said they could afford to lend it at 4 per
cent. My honorable friend the Treasurer
whispered to me across the table that the
Savings Bank money, even under the
present exceptional circumstances of this
country which are rather unhealthy
from that sign than otherwise —is costing
the bank over 2 per cent. Now, Ido
know that the lending of money to
selectors and farmers has been in many
oases —I will not say in the majority of
cases—most unprofitable. It has been a
source of tremendous anxiety to those who
have lent it. It has been to private parties,
whose names I could give, a cause of loss
almost bringing them to their knees in a
financial sense. I have gone through de-
serted farms and deserted selections —■
when I was last in my own electorate I
went through some of them—which have
reverted to the lender, and the lender
was unable to find a tenant for them.
And that is not a single instance. I do
not say there are thousands of such cases,
but, at all events, it is not a single
instance.
CHEAP MONEY IS NOT THE
SYMBOL OF PROSPERITY.
In this particular matter of loans, lam
going to bring before the House facts
which, I think, will prove to honorable
members that low loan rates are not the
sign and the symbol of prosperous times,
but that low interest rates are actually the
symbol of adverse circumstances. I shall
endeavour to show that the true interest of
this country is not to have fastened down
upon it a permanent reign of low loans at all.
Money is the arch-hypocrite of economics.
It wears continually a double and a delu-
sive face. Now, paradoxical as they may
appear, these propositions are absolutely
true. When money is cheapest to borrow'


it is dearest to buy; and, on the other
hand, when money is dearest to borrow, it
is cheapest to buy, and that not merely
from coincidence, but from a causal rela-
tion which exists between them. Again,
when money appears scarce, it is generally
most plentiful, and is at that time most
efficiently discharging its most important
functions; but when it appears most plenti-
ful, it generally is really most scarce. Those
assertions may appear to persons not
versed in these occult questions to be
absolutely paradoxical. But let me ask
honorable members this question : First,
when I say that money is cheapest to
borrow it is dearest to buy, how do you
buy money? You buy money by exchang-
ing for it goods and services. It is dear
to buy when you have to give more goods
or more services than at a previous time.
You have to give more goods and more
services for money in a time of low prices
than at a time of high prices.
Mr. Rogers.— You have to give twice
as much security to get the same amount.
Mr. SHIELS. - Precisely; you may
have to give twice as much security to get
the same amount. When low prices rule
for produce, as at present, money is hard
to invest, and capital cannot be em-
ployed productively so as to give proper
and certain remuneration ; money which
moves and circulates capital stagnates;
borrowers who can give the requisite
securities are scarce, lenders are many, and
low loan rates prevail. And these low loan
rates prevail because law and unremuner-
ative prices for labour, and the produce of
labour, are ruling in the markets of labour
and commodities. I would ask the atten-
tion of my honorable friend the member
for Melbourne North to this matter par-
ticularly, because he and those who sit
with him in the Ministerial corner are
keenly interested in it. If what I say
is not perfectly plain, I shall he happy to
explain it more clearly; and If it be not
true, I shall be delighted to bear it dis-
proved. Low loan rates, I say, are caused
by low prices for the produce of labour; and
high loans—high interest—-are caused by
good prices for products. I would ask the
representatives: of the farmers and selec-
tors to consider this. Is net the farmers’
interest to have high prices for his wheat,
wool, and other produce ? To have assured
profits for his outlay of labour and capital ?
The surplus of these profits goes into
money or credit at his bankers. If he does
not use them himself he expects a rate of
interest for them as deposits or loans pro-
portionate to the profits he would make if
he directly employed them himself. There-
fore, the links in the chain are—lst., high
profits, 2nd., dear deposits, 3rd., high in-
terest. Therefore,, low loans,, as I have
shown, are neither the symbol, nor are
they a consequence of prosperity.
Mr. Prbndergast. They need not
necessarily be opposed to it, though.
Mr. Cook. —And they may be the result
of previous reckless lending.
Mr. SHIELS.—Low loans often prevail
when money is scarcest —-when a contrac-
tion of the currency takes place.
Mr. Cook.—That is the whole point.
SCARCITY AND PLENTY OF
MONEY.
Mr. SHIELS.—When currency con-
traction occurs, the first thing is that
prices fall. And by the currency I
mean not only coin and token money,
but all the credit substitutes for coin.
If the currency, through any cause, is
contracted relatively or absolutely, there
is at once a fall in prices, and profits
are diminished and become more uncer-
tain. It is then that money coagulates
in great clots in banks and treasuries, and
actual scarcity masquerades as plenty. On
the other hand, when the currency through
any reason—greater discoveries of gold,
the remonetization of silver, the enlarge-
ment of credit—is expanded relatively
with the need for it, prices rise, profits
become larger and more certain, and
business becomes brisk. Then money
is circulating freely throughout all the
veins and arteries of the industrial system.
Then it is in demand, because profits are
good and certain, and interest immedi-
ately rises. Plenty thus wears the
garb of scarcity, baffling and deceiving
many. That is due to what is called
the quantitative theory of value, and, as
Mr. Mill said, without some apprehension
of that great and universally accepted
principle, it is impossible to understand
anything of currency matters. “Thatan
increase in the quantity of money tends
to raise prices, and a diminution tends to
lower them, is the most elementary pro-
position in the theory of currency, and
without it we should have no key to any
of the others.” General prices are simply
the expression in £. s. d., of the ratio
between goods on the one hand, and


currency on the other.* Honorable mem-
bers will best understand this view of
the quantitative theory of money when
I put it this way: Goods representing
the demand for money are the divisor;
the dividend is money in all its various
forms; the resulting quotient is the level
of general prices. Now, money has actu-
ally two values. It has interest value,
or what you call loan value, and it
has prinicipal value. A fall in the
loan value of money means a rise in the
principal value. In other words, a rise in
principal value means that it is harder, by
the services of the labourer, or by the pro-
duce of labour, to get the old amount of
money. You have to go into the markets
and accept less wages and smaller prices
for your products. Therefore, a fall in the
loan value of money means a rise in the
principal value—means a fall in wages and
a fall in prices. On the other hand, a rise
in what we call the interest value of money
means a fall in the principal value, that is
to say, that for the old quantum of ser-
vices, either in the shape of labour ren-
dered or goods delivered, you get a
greater amount of money than you did
before.
Mr. Higgins.—lf you pay less for what
you have it comes to the same thing.
Mr. SHIELS. —No, you have fixed obli-
gations to meet. All fixed charges do
not diminish with equal steps as goods
decline in price. Here you get into
that recondite third function of money,
which is sometimes called standard of
value. The proper term is standard of
deferred debts or deferred obligations. It
is there that we get an occult and iniqui-
tious variation of the standard Some-
times it moves up and sometimes it
moves down. When gold appreciates
owing to contraction of the currency, it
prejudices the working bees of industry—
producers and manufacturers ; and allows
the drones in the hives—the lenders of
capital—to obtain the honey. It is better
for producers that there should be a fall
in principal value, i.e., that money should
buy less of goods, should depreciate, and
general prices of products rise, and loans
become in demand and ascend in rate.
* “ It is the proportion between circulating mone.y and
the commodities in the market which determines prices.”
—Hume. “That commodities would rise or fall in price
in proportion to the increase or diminution of money, I
assume as a fact which is incontrovertible.”— Ricardo.
“An addition to the circulation raises all prices, a deduc-
tion from it lowers them.”— Giffen. “ I accept the
common doctrine that prices generally rise, other things
being equal, in proportion to the volume of the metals
which are used as currency.”— Marshall.
The honorable member for East Bourke
Boroughs (Mr. Cook) raised a point with
regard to the low rate of loans. In a
brilliant controversy which took place in
the early part of the century, it was
pointed out that when the currency con-
tracted suddenly the first effect was the
tightening of money and rising of loan
rates. Then, strangely enough, in a short
time loan rates fell permanently until ex-
pansion of the currency occurred increas-
ing prices of goods and improving profits.
WHY LOANS HAVE BEEN DEAR.
Let us ask ourselves why has loan money
been dear in Victoria 1 Loan money
has been dear in Victoria because the
profits of industry have been high. That
means that, before a man would lend
money to another, he must obtain a cor-
responding rate of remuneration to what
he would have got if ho had invested the
money in his own industry.
Mr. Longmorb.-— Profits have not been
high during the last four or five years.
Mr. SHIELS.—Nor has interest. Never
since my earliest experience in Victoria,
going back to the time when I was a boy
four or five years of age, and had just
come from the part of Ireland from which
the honorable member for Dandenong
comes, has it ever been possible to get
money at lower rates, provided you are
able to give the requisite security. For
the last year, as everybody knows, money
has been a drug in the market.
An Honorable Member.— Why 1
Mr. SHlELS.—Profits have fallen, and
prices have fallen.
An Honorable Member. —That is in
consequence of over-lending.
Mr. SHIELS.—No. Profits, unfortu-
nately, have dropped to a point at which it
is almost unremunerative to produce. The
reduction is due principally to the price of
our staple products at home, and that fall in
price is due to the contraction of the cur-
rency, and was predicted as the inevitable re-
sult of silver demonetization. Loan money
previously in Victoria was dear because
industry was profitable and labour well
paid. Deposits were dear because the in-
vestments of capital were remunerative.
Let honorable members ask themselves
which have been the most prosperous
years in Victoria or Australia, and they
will find absolutely, without a single varia-
tion, that the golden eras have been the
times in which interest has ruled high.
On the other hand, the times of adversity,


of falling profits, of shrinkage of returns,
and of reduced wages have been the times
of the lowest rates of interest.
Mr. T. Smith. —Such a time as this.
Air. SHlELS.—Certainly, prosperity
brings high interest.
Mr. Hancock. —If you give the farmers
cheap money, would they pay less wages
than at present 1
Mr. SHIELS.—If the honorable mem-
ber for Footsoray will investigate that
matter calmly in the Library and lay his
views before me in writing, I shall be
delighted to discuss it with him. Why
has interest been high in Victoria ? It may
be asked also why is interest generally
high in new countries 1 Because we had
a virgin territory which was richly produc-
tive and sparsely inhabited ; because most
of the adult men were producers, and pro-
duction was profitable. This virgin territory
responded lavishly to the inducements
which we offered to it to give forth its
great natural wealth. The men who
cultivated it used their surplus profits in
further developing their own industry.
The farmer and the squatter with unde-
veloped areas did not throw their annual
profits into the loan market. What they
had in the way of surplus they invested
themselves. Therefore, relatively, in a
new country, such as ours was, lenders
were scarce. As the returns of invested
capital were high, and their industries were
capable of expansion, producers employed
their own savings rather than throw them
into the loan market; thus there were
more who were direct investors than
lenders. That is mainly why the rates of
interest in new countries rule high.
WHAT INTEREST IS.
I now come to another point in regard to
which grave misconception exists. On what
is interest really paid 2 Superficial rea-
soners at once say that it is paid on
the cash which, in some more or less
indirect manner, is placed to one’s credit.
Now, that is a most grievous mistake.
There is a little work in the Library called
Money, Trade, and Industry, by Professor
Walker, from which I have made an
extract. Professor Walker is a most
eminent writer on money, and I beg to
commend his works, which are in the
Library, to the attention of honorable
members ; also another set of works by
Mr. Patterson, who is a most brilliant
economist. Mr. Patterson’s two works are
magnificent efforts of judicial reasoning.
It is not true that interest is really paid
on the cash which goes to one’s credit. As
Walker points out—
-11 Interest is the compensation paid for the
use, not of money, but of capital. Money is
only one of many forms of capital, and in loans
is usually only the agent of effecting a transfer
of other forms of capital than itself. ”
What causes the rate of interest 1 Pro-
fessor Walker states—
“ The rate of interest depends on the supply
of capital in all its forms suited to productive
uses, compared with the opportunities to use
capital productively. ”
Mr. McCay. —Why not quote Walker
on paper money 1
Mr. SHIELS.—I will do so later on,
because Walker is an authority who ought
to be listened to on that matter ; and he is
not an authority who can be quoted in
favour of a State Bank. However, I do not
wish to be unjust to the honorable mem-
ber for Castlemaine. There are two econo-
mical writers in America named Walker,
and perhaps the junior member for Castle-
maine is confounding Professor Francis
Walker with Mr. Amasa Walker. I speak
from a long and deep acquaintance with
Professor Francis Walker’s writings, which
I have read many times. I refer to these
works in order to disabuse the minds of
honorable members of their notions in re-
gard to the rate of interest, and in regard
to the incompetence of the House to fasten
any rate of interest down permanently
irrespective of the market. The honorable
member for Jolimont has just placed in
my hands the following extract from
Walker’s book:—
“Of all the contrivances for cheating the
labouring classes of mankind, none has been
more effective than that which deludes them-
with paper money. This is the most effectual
of inventions to fertilize the rich man’s ffelds by
the sweat of the poor man’s brow.”
I am going to contradict that from memory.
That is not Walker, but Daniel Webster,
whom Walker quotes and indorses.
Mr. Hancock.— Does the quotation just
read refer to the issue of paper money by
private individuals 1
Mr. SHIELS.—I have referred to this
matter because the Bill before us is
founded on an evident desire to inau-
gurate and maintain in this colony the
reign of low loans, in the belief, firstly,
that the Government can do so; and,
secondly, that it ought to do it. I say
that the Government cannot do it. There


are higher laws than any which we
can enact here which govern the rates
of interest, and for the Government to
attempt to do what I have just referred to
would be to reverse that natural working
of economic law’s, which I have sought to
sketch out to honorable members. The
rate of loans will be, as Walker says,
governed in the manner of cause and effect
by the productive uses to which that which
is produced is put, by the remuneration
which is gained from it.
OPERATION OF BILL TO INCREASE
LOAN RATES,
Now, let me look at one of the likely effects
of this Bill. I will suppose that the Govern-
ment have been successful in getting money
temporarily —because they cannot get it
permanently—under the market rates.
First of all, if they have got it much under
market rates that is rather an unhealthy
sign. It is just as unhealthy as to see
stocks go up to such a point as that the}-
will only give Ito 2 per cent, upon the
money invested in them. It is a sign that
there is a sinking of the mercury in the
barometer of public credit, that confidence
in the remunerativeness of profits and the
certainty of profits has, for some reason,
fallen. It spells retrogression, not pro-
gress. It means disease, not health.
Now, if the Government do succeed in
temporarily diverting a plentiful supply of
cheap money into the State loan reservoir,
this hurt may be done to an unfortunate
class. Those outside the operation of
this measure—those whose securities can-
not come under it—will certainly find the
loan market to which they- must go
largely depleted, because of the Govern-
ment’s success. Their securities, upon
which they must borrow, become imme-
diately, in the opinion of lenders, some-
thing like a war risk. Therefore, it shows
you that economic laws are far above
anything that human laws can devise—.
“How small, of all that human hearts en-
dure.
The part that laws or kings can cause or
cure.”
It shows you that they operate on the
old and unjust lines—“to him that hath
shall be given.” Under this Bill the men
who have got what we call cream securi-
ties will be able to get the cheap money—
the men who have got an unassailable
margin; but the other class whose securities
are outside the Bill will find the conditions
of borrowing,, unless I wholly mistake,
grow harder and more drastic.
Mr. G. Tuexee.— The man who cannot
borrow under this Bill will not be able to
borrow anywhere else, because nobody will
lend on security with less than a one-third
margin.
Mr. SHILLS. —There is one of the
dangers of the Bill. There is a departure
from the evidence given by gentlemen like
Mr. Hoare, of the Age, and other witnesses,
earnest in the cause of cheap loans to the
farmer, that you must not dare to go below
a5O per cent, margin. In the countries
that have the Credit Fonder they have
got a large population ready to come in
and buy the land if the present owners
fail. In those countries you have land
more stable in value than in, a country like
this, and if a margin of 50 per cent, is
essential for security there, a fortiori , it
must be essential here, with quite dif-
ferent conditions, and with our smaller
population.
Mr. McLean".— Land is better security
in a young country with an increasing
population than in an old country.
Mr. SHILLS.- —No, land like most other
things must be governed by the law of
supply and demand, and where the popu-
lation is most dense, as in Belgium, France,
and other countries, it must fetch a higher
price in the market because it is more
wanted. In a country like Australia,
where you have a vast territory with a
limited population, your land cannot be
of the same, security, because it cannot
have centred upon it the same forces of
demand as in an old settled country. We
all know that that is a fact; I know it pain-
fully as a trustee. Now 1 , why has money
been dear to the farmer 1 First of all, be-
cause deposits were relatively dear. It has
not been, I honestly believe, in the majority
of cases through reprehensible greed or sel-
fishness on the part of the lender. Of
course, the lender must take care of
himself.
Mr. Peacock.. —The lender wants to get
big dividends.
Mr. SHILLS.—And rightly so. But it
has not been from greed that we can
characterize as excessive. It has been,
in the first place, because the deposits
available were dear, and profits were
high, because the security was to some
extent risky, and because of slip-
shod financing on the part of the
farmers themselves.


NORMANBY—A TYPICAL
CONSTITUENCY.
My constituency is a typical constituency.
I have in that constituency three classes
of farmers who have borrowed money, and
I know pretty well their circumstances. I
have farmers in that district who have for
years past had loans at from 5| to 6 per
cent., which was not an excessive rate.
That was only a fair rate of interest
considering what profits were. That class
of farmers generally had the best security,
and they were generally the best finan-
ciers. Unfortunately, all through life,
it is the old story of “to him that hath
@lift] 1 be given. The most poverty-stricken
and the most necessitous have often to
suffer most severely, although they are
most in need of relief—and that will be
the case under this Bill. The first class
of farmers I have mentioned had the
necessary aptitude for financing. They
could get the money they required at fixed
rates easily enough, and they did so.
There is another class who have had to
pay 7 to 9 per cent, on overdrafts at the
banks. That is not a prudent way of
financing. That is not the way in which
any of us, as trustees, would borrow
money. Borrowing for a stated term, if
your security is good, is the cheapest
way. But, from want of knowledge and
through a slipshod style of doing business,
those farmers paid that rate of interest.
The most necessitous class, many of whom
will be outside the sphere of this relief,
did differently. They are paying loan
rates of 10 to 15 per cent. I will show
you why. I have them in my mind’s
eye. Those men went on to the land
with insufficient capital. They took up
land which was not rich—the areas of
poorer land remaining to the Crown. With
those large areas of poor land, and through
insufficiency of capital, those farmers al-
most immediately had to become debtors
to the storekeepers in the local towns.
1 hey had to buy their grain, their ploughs,
their carts, and other farming requirements
on credit; and they had to buy their sugar
and tea and other necessaries of life on credit.
Thus they got deeply and irretrievably into
the books of the storekeepers. That was
i isky for the storekeepers, as honorable mem-
bers who know the circumstances can tell.
The storekeepers had to pay the bank 8 or 9
percent, for their discounts; and the local
storekeeper, in factand of necessity, became
what we call in Ireland the “ Gombeen ”
man. He had to practically guarantee
the selector at great risk, and for giving
such a guarantee he was entitled to in-
terest. And, unfortunately, these lenders
and guarantors, to use the ordinary
phrase, have burnt their fingers over that
class of security. There are other things
in this connexion that I would like to have
gone into, but other honorable members
who will follow me may touch upon them,
and I will pass them by.
THE FIRST COMMANDMENT IN
CURRENCY LEGISLATION.
As I have said, I have given many years of
earnest study to currency questions. Ido
not claim to speak dogmatically upon them.
I hope I have not done so. I have reached
only tentative conclusions upon some
matters, but on one point I have acquired a
strength of conviction amounting almost
to religious sentiment—that no Legis-
lature is wise that does anything to tamper
with or vitiate its currency. I say that
the hrst commandment in currency,
overriding all things else, is this—Keep
the breed of your money pure j have no
half-caste system. History is lurid with
warnings as to the catastrophes brought
upon nations by deviating from thestraight
path in these matters. Wherever notes
have been issued, either against land or
credit—here they are to be issued against
credit—disaster has occurred. How, I
will not take America since 1861 on this
branch of the case. The best warnings
against deviating from the path of safety
and sagacity are anterior to that period.
I will quote the words of the first of the
Websters of whom I have spoken—Peletiah
A ebster who says, speaking of the cur-
rency of his time—
‘ ‘ We have suffered from this cause more than
from any cause of calamity; it has killed more
men, pervaded and corrupted the choicest in-
terests of our country more, and done more in-
justice, than even the arms and artifices of our
enemies.
Now, if there was one earnest intelligent
patriot in America it was Daniel Webster.
Writing half -a - century afterwards, he
says—
tll6 close of the war to the time of the
adoption of this Constitution, as I verily be-
lieve, the people suffered as much, except in
loss ol life, from the disordered state of the
currency and the prostration of commerce and
business as they suffered during the war.”
Let me give you one or two examples in
regard to the state of America between
the years 1830 and 1836. Notes were
freely issued against a security which was


thought to be the best security which
could be given—the laud of a fast advanc-
ing enterprising people. Population was
even then beginning to pour in from the
crowded countries of Europe. Those notes
were like the notes that are to be issued
under this Bill—they were redeemable;
there was the legal obligation to redeem
them. Bat the notes drove the gold out
of circulation, and they could not be paid
in coin. If you will consult American
statesmen you will see that the forces of
public opinion set in against the redemp-
tion of those notes, because of the fearful
consequences to trade and commercial
credit. As one eminent statesman —Sum-
ner—says —
“ Public opinion frowned on people asking for
the redemption of the obligation to pay.”
Actually some of those who did so were
lynched. Eventually such a collapse took
place in the year 1837, as, I think, has not
its peer on the page of history. Unmea-
sured calamity to banking and commerce
was America’s experience in that fateful
year. Now, in the Argentine Republic
306,000,000 dollars were issued on the
security of land, and the depreciation was
such that five paper dollars were equal
only to one silver dollar.
Mr. Kerr. —Was not that caused by
insecurity of government 1
Mr. SHIELS.—No, not wholly by in-
security of government. That may have
been a factor in Argentina, and I believe
it was a factor; but in the United States
that factor did not obtain. There was no
insecurity of government there, and yet
the same state of things occurred.
Mr. Hancock.— -What was the nature
of the collapse 1
Mr. SHIELS.—The wages of the ordi-
nary labourer in Argentina—and this is a
most important thing for the honorable
member for Footscray to observe—which
ruled at 2s. Id. a day fell to 4|d., and you
will see a most singular recommendation
in the report of a distinguished traveller
who went from here on a mission to the
Argentine Republic upon that very point.
Eourpence halfpenny a day for a working
man—think of the misery and suffering of
it, and caused by reckless currency legisla-
tion ! In Norway, where notes were issued
on the credit of land, the depreciation soon
was 42 per cent, in the notes, and there
they insisted on a wider margin than the
Premier is insisting on in this Bill for a
Credit Foncier loan. Now, in the case of
England, where there was no insecurity
of government, and where there was the
obligation to redeem, as is in this Bill, the
notes came back to the Bank of England, at
the end of the last century, in such volume
that specie payment was suspended and
the notes were made inconvertible. The de-
preciation was nearly 50 per cent. When
the Bank of England was willing to resume
specie payments, the Government refused
to permit it. These are warnings to us,
and they ought to come home to us.
GOVERNMENT- MONOPOLY OF
BANK NOTES.
Now, I am going to deal with the claims
which the Government set up in this Bill,,
and in the speech of the Premier, to take
over the note issue. The head of the Go-
vernment claims for the State a monopoly
of the issue of notes. Honorable members
know that a bank note is simply a promis-
sory note, payable to bearer on demand.
The honorable gentleman said —
“ I think that it will hardly now be con-
tended that the State has not a perfect right, if
it thinks fit, to have the exclusive power of
issuing notes in its own hands. That has been
advocated by many leading men and by many
prominent writers.”
He said, you will observe, it would hardly
be contended that tire State has not the
exclusive right to issue notes. Now, sir, I
was simply astounded when I read that
statement. If the honorable gentleman
had said just the reverse—that few
writers, and few legislators, contended
for that monopoly then he would have
been actually within the bounds of truth.
Why, sir, the mass of authorities against
the monopoly by the State of this particular
portion of the currency is overwhelming.
1 cannot do better than read you the
words of one of America’s most brilltiant
and most reputable Presidents, General
Garfield, a man of rare intelligence and
courage, and who had given years of study
in close association with Secretary Chase,
afterwards Chief Justice of the United
States, to the question of currency legis-
lation), during that critical period in
American history when Chase had to
organize the banking and currency of the
Federal Government to carry on that tre-
mendous civil conflict. I ask honorable
members to set these words of President
Garfield, who was an authoritative writer as
well asjspeaker on currency matters, side by


side with the Premier’s statement. This
was the question which President Garfield
put: —
“ Whether the Government should itself be-
come the manufacturer of the currency of the
country ? ”
The way in which he answers this question
will be found on page 175 of his speeches,
as follows:
. the first place, it is the experience of all
nations, and it is the almost unanimous decision
of all statesmen and financial writers, that no
nation can safely undertake the supplying of
its people with a paper currency issued directly
by the officers of the Government. And, to
apply that principle to our own country, let me
cisk li gentlemen believe it to be safe to subject
any political party who may be in power in the
Government to the great temptation of over-
issues of paper money in lieu of taxation ? In
times of high political excitement, and on the
eve of a general election, when there might
happen to be a deficiency in the revenue of the
country, and Congress were called upon to sup-
ply that deficiency by additional taxation, the
temptation would be overwhelming to supply
that deficit by an increased issue of paper
money.” r 1
Mr, G. Turner.— That is not what is
proposed here.
Mi. SHILLS.— Yes, it is. Wb have
here 25 per cent., which may be only
20 per cent, in gold.
Mr. G. Turner.— But the State is to
issue direct.
Mr. SHILLS. Garfield’s statement pro-
ceeds—
Thus the whole business of the country, the
value of all contracts, the prices of all commodi-
ties, the wages of labour, would all depend
upon a vote in Congress. For one, I dare not
trust the great industrial interests of this coun-
try to such uncertain and hazardous chances.”
And then the quotation answers the argu-
ment of the honorable member for Foots-
Cray. It continues—
• ‘ But suppose that Congress and the Adminis-
tration should be always superior to such poli-
tical temptations, I affirm, in the second place
that no human Legislature is wise enough to
determine how much currency the wants of the
country require. Test it in this House to-day.
Let every member mark down the amount which
he believes the business of the country requires
and who does not know that the amounts will
vary by hundreds of millions ? ”
Mr. Hamilton. —That is mere guess-
work, and we do not proceed on that basis.
. r - SHILLS.-—Oh, but you do; you
give unlimited power to the Executive to
issue notes.
Mr. Hamilton.— Under certain restric-
tions.
Mr. SHILLS.—And were they not ap-
plicabie to America! Of course they
I were, and the Legislature that may do to-
clay may undo to-morrow. That is what
General Garfield is contending against.
He said—
“ But a third objection, stronger even than
the last, is this : that such a currency pos-
sesses no power of adapting itself to the busi-
ness of the country. Suppose the total issues
should be five hundred millions, or seven hun-
dred millions, or any amount you please ; it
might be abundant for spring and summer, and
yet w-hen the great body of agricultural pro-
ducts were moving off to market in the fall that
amount might be totally insufficient. Fix any
volume you please, and if it be just sufficient at
one period it may be redundant at another.”
Now, listen to this :
bo currency can meet the wants of this
country that is not founded upon the demands
of business, and not upon the caprice, the
ignorance, the political selfishness of the party
in power.” J
Ou another occasion General Garfield
said—
“ There never did exist on this earth a body
of men wise enough to determine by any
arbitrary rule how much currency is needed for
the business of a great country. The laws of
trade, the laws of credit, the laws of God
impressed on the elements of this world are
superior to all legislation.”
I do not think the Premier can show
any precedent for this particular claim
except in two countries—in Queensland
since 1893, and in India. Now, the
case of India has absolutely no applica-
tion. But apart from those countries,
in no country that I know of, except
where there is irredeemable paper, has
the State asserted a claim to have a mono-
poly of the issue of these promissory notes
payable to bearer on demand. The whole
argument for it, and I admit candidly
that the Premier probably has been de-
ceived by some great names, proceeds on
a totally false analogy. The currency has
been defined in legal cases and in the
works of economists to be not only legal
tender coins, which may be absolute legal
tender or only to a limited amount, and
then they are token money, but also bank
notes, promissory notes, bills of exchange,
bank drafts, telegraphic transfers, postal
notes, and cheques. There are three great
branches of the currency the metallic
currency of absolute or partial legal ten-
der, in the latter case token money;
the banking currency; and commercial
currency. The currency which plays the
greatest part in human affairs is currency
not in the partial sense which the Premier
used it.


A SOCIALISTIC CLAIM.
The Treasurer not only claims the exclusive
right of the State to issue notes, but
—unless he is using economic language
loosely —he sets up a claim for the State
to have the monopoly “ of the whole of
the currency.” These are his exact words,
and I shall show you what is involved in
this tremendous claim.
Mr. G. Turner. I meant only the
bank note part of the currency. I was
referring solely to that.
Mr. SHIELS. —I am glad of my hon-
orable friend’s disclaimer, and it ren-
ders it unnecessary for me to say some
things I intended on that point. It is
the tak, the eleatingheuse, telegmphie
transfers, postal notes, bills and drafts
■and cheques which do the great work of
circulation, and are the wholesale cur-
rency of commerce, coin and notes being
merely the retail or pocket money cir-
culation. Although the Treasurer says
that he meant only the note part of the
currency, unfortunately, the claim has
been set up that the State shall take
over the control of all the currency.
That is necessarily the corollary of the
socialistic propaganda. When the fight
comes between the gathering forces of
socialism and of individualism, I shall be
on the side of individualism, and I think
that the Treasurer will also be on that
side. But I cannot shut out from my
eyes that this control of the whole of the
currency, according to the language used
by the Treasurer, is in accord with and
involved in the claims of the socialists that
the State shall monopolize the land, mines,
all the means of production, manufacture,
and transfer. When production, manufac-
ture, and means of transfer are taken over,
of course, the Government must also take
over the whole of the currency in its
widest meaning. Then we shall have
reached the position which is described in
Bellamy’s Looking Backward, in which a
man presents a ticket given by a State
department when he wants to obtain
goods and food for his consumption, and no
money is ever current or in any one’s pos-
session, and the names of “ dollars ” and
“ cents ” are retained merely as “ algebraic
symbols.”
MR. TURNER’S AUTHORITIES.
The Treasurer has, in support of this
portion of his Bill, very few authorities.
The honorable gentleman can certainly
quote a few high names on his side, and I
want to give him the full benefit of the pre-
cedent of the Bank of England, which was
established by the Imperial Act of 1844.
I have, therefore, been pained when I have
heard disparaging remarks, as though the
Bill were merely a debating society scheme,
forgetting that the Treasurer had got for
it the sanction of some great names, and
the partial sanction of English precedent.
That sanction of names and precedent-
weighed on me at one time, hut, on re-
flection, I found that the argument for
the monopoly of the bank notes by the
State is a false analogy.
Mr. Fink. —The Bank of England is not
the State.
Mf ; iHIELi.=Th§ honorable member
for Jolimont must not urge that. The
State issue department of the Bank of
England is declared by writers to be a
branch of the State at work in the bank,
and the Treasurer may plead that.
Mr. Fink. —lt is regulated by law.
Mr. SHIELS.—WhiIe the monopoly of
using the notes is given to the Bank of
England, the bank is considered to be the
hand of the State in issuing these notes.
Mr. Fink. —The Bank of England is not
managed by the State.
Mr. SHIELS. —I merely say that, at
the first blush, the Treasurer appears to
have on his side the precedent of the
Bank of England. I have been the head
of a Government, and, therefore, I am not
going to be unfair to the Treasurer. I
believe that in submitting this Bill he has
been influenced by the sanction of names
and authority, and that he sincerely believes
that this measure is for the benefit of the
country. I differ from the honorable gentle-
man; but I am not going to deny him the
credit of honest and patriotic motives.
Mr. Murray Smith. —No one does.
Mr. SHIELS. —An unfair charge has
been made that the Treasurer introduces
this Bill simply because ho is leaning
towards the labour corner, and I have had
to refute that charge privately. A State
Bank was advocated in this colony long
before there was a labour party in Parlia-
ment. There are solid arguments which
can be brought forward on the merits of
the question without importing bitter per-
sonalities.
Mr. McKenzie. —It is not personality.
Mr. SHIELS. —Personalities and impu-
tation of such motives have been intro-
duced. lam not going to argue this
matter on the point of the supposed source


from which it emanates. The Treasurer,
when moving the second reading of the
Bill, said—
“We refuse absolutely to allow any indi-
vidual to issue coins. The State has taken
possession of that part of the currency in order
to keep it absolutely pure. All the reasons
which can be adduced against granting any
private person or firm the right of issuing coins
may be applied with equal force in favour of
the principle that the Government should have
in its own hands the control of the paper
money. A pound is more frequently repre-
sented by a note than by gold, and it is not
wise to leave the power of expanding or con-
tracting the currency in the hands of a private
individual. If that is done, there will always
1)6 ft danger that trade may be over-stimulated
at one time, or that, at another time, from fear
or other circumstances, the advances may be
called in, with the result that trade will be un-
duly depressed. Therefore, it is wise that this
power of issuing paper money should be kept
in the hands of one body, that body being
representative of the Government of the coun-
try in which the notes are issued.”
A FALSE ANALOGY.
The first argument which I bring to bear on
that reasoning is the same as was brought
against Mill on the question. Mr. Glad-
stone gave a passing approval to the pre-
rogative right of the State to issue
notes in one of his Irish speeches, but
he never proposed it either for Ireland
or England. The first thing to be
remembered is that the coin which is
here spoken of is legal tender. It is
that thing which the State says, apart
from any expressed stipulation to the con-
trary which will in equity support a suit
for specific performance, men must take
in final settlement of their mutual obliga-
tions. Now, that attribute of legal tender
which attaches to coin does not attach
to the notes of the banks of this colony.
If the bank notes had that attribute of
legal tender, I would candidly admit the
right of the State to take over the issue.
None but the State should be responsible
for that which every citizen of the State
must take in final settlement of obligations.
But another distinction next comes show-
ing the fallacy of the analogy. In coining
the metal, the State did not create its
value. The value was there, pre-existent,
long before the State came upon the scene.
It was that which made men search for
the gold and risk their lives and fortunes
in the quest. That value was there by
the conventions and desires of thousands
of years, aided and maintained, I admit,
by the legal tender attribute of our laws.
It was nature that minted the metal in
her vast store-houses ; men discovered it,
and the State shaped it and gave it back
to them in the form of coin. All that the
State did in coining it was to shape the
metal and place upon it the seal of its
purity and weight by the State’s own
stamp. That was all.
Mr. Hamilton". —What gave the gold
its value ?
Mr. SHIELS.—What gives diamonds,
rubies, or anything else their value 1
Value, as has been defined by the modern
school of economists, is altogether psychi-
cal. It arises in and comes from the mind.
Gold, diamonds, and rubies, just as any-
thing on which the human mind has
fastened in desire, acquire a value by the
fact of that desire. Gold, by its rarity,
beauty, and other qualities has, from
immemorial and immutable prescription,
became a precious metal and is universally
sought after. I was going to quote from
a famous speech by President Garfield to
show the false analogy on which Mill, and
a few others who have followed him, have
proceeded in regard to that matter. As
the excerpt has been misplaced, you will
have to take my word that Mr. Garfield
has exhibited how Mill and others were
misled.* Mr. McLeod, a great English
authority on banking, also protests
against that false analogy. The State
has never assumed the duty of supplying
its citizens with their money. It plays
a very subsidiary part in its coinage-
laws. The State in coining simply shapes-
and certifies the metal, which had value
long before the State came upon the scene.
The argument from analogy fails : Firsts
because bank notes are not a legal tender;
second, because the State has never claimed
the right to mine exclusively, as it certainly
ought to do if it is its duty to be the-
sole maker of money, as some contend;
and, third, because value was in the metal
long before the State dealt with it. When
the State has stepped in and declared
that coins of one particular metal shall
be legal tender, the State, in the opinion
of bi-metallists, has, by setting in motion
economic force in the shape of demand,
done something to give the metal of which
the coin is made increased value, but that
is disputed by mono-metallists.
“Here has arisen the chief error in reference to money.
Because the Government coins it, names its denomination*,
and declares its value many have been led to imagine
that the Government creates it —that its value is a gift of
the law Congress cannot create extension,
weight, or value. It can measure what exists. It cannot
make weight of that which has no weight, it cannot make
value of that which has none.”— Garfield,


THE TRUE ANALOGY OF COINAGE.
Now, what is the true analogy to be drawn as
regards notes from the act of coinage ? In
coining gold the State says, by its stamp
“ This is gold of a certain weight and fine-
ness.” The analogy of that is that when a
note purports to be made by—say, the Bank
of Australasia—the State should say—
“ This is a true note of that bank, not a
counterfeit one.” The State’s prerogative
right is to authenticate merely the promise
of the maker, and not one step further will
the analogy go. Does any other right come
up? Y”es; not because the bank note is
different in kind from other promissory
notes, but because of its more general cur-
rency. Then arises the general right of
police which the State has to protect
against fraud or hurt. The State has a
right to see that the promise to pay gold is
fulfilled, and if the State has valid reason
to believe that that promise will not be ful-
filled, and cannot otherwise be made certain
of fulfilment, the State has a right to take
over the issue, so that it may be fulfilled by
the Government. If there is a reasonable
doubt that the State cannot secure ful-
filment of that promise to pay gold by
the banks, it has a fair right to take over
the note issue and become the monopolist,
but not till then.
VICTORIAN BANK NOTES ARE
SAFE.
Are the notes which are issued by the
banks in Victoria secure or insecure ? AVe
have to deal with that matter as reason-
able men. Can we say that the notes are
insecure, and that we cannot make them
secure except by giving the issue to the
State ? I say no. AA r e know, as I said at
Collingwood, in reply to Mr. Hancock, in
1894, that the notes which are issued
by the A r iotorian banks are absolutely
safe.
Mr. Gray. —Not always.
Mr. SHIELS.' —The Victorian bank notes
have been safe ever since the Government
came in and made them a first charge
upon the assets. That having been done,
those notes are indisputably safe, and,
in my opinion, they are safer than
they would be under the Bill which
is now before us. If these notes could
not be made safe without the State
gaining a monopoly, I would advocate
the adoption of that course by the State.
There are at present less than 1,000,000
notes in circulation in Victoria, and our
legislation makes them a first charge
on the assets. The banks have over
8,000,000 sovereigns in their coffers, and, in
addition, in the quarter ending last March,
speaking from memory, the banks showed
declared assets of £49,000,000. So it
may be said that behind these notes
there are at least 7,000,000 sovereigns,
allowing for the State’s pre-emptive claim
and the value of that £49,000,000 of
assets
Mr. G. Turner.— The sovereigns may
go out any day.
Mr. SHIELS. —But practical experience
shows that they will not, and the assets
will remain. Has our experience been that
the notes have ever depreciated or been
doubted 1 I say distinctly not.
LOSS TO THE REVENUE CERTAIN.
The State also gets a revenue of 2 per cent,
from the notes. As far as I can make out,
the State will be a loser of at least £7,000 a
year if it is to issue £1,000,000 of notes.
It is possible that the State will lose on the
issue nearer £12,000 a year. Knowing
the disadvantage of currency contrac-
tion, I have always doubted the wisdom
of the State taking over by its 2 per cent,
duty all the profit of the note currency.
It is the same sort of mischief which the
English Government has done in declaring,
in regard to the two-thirds of the lapsed
issue of private banks, which were to be
taken over by the Bank of England, that
the whole profit of the lapsed issues shall
go to the State. That 2 per cent, duty
deprives the Victorian banks of all induce-
ment to give commerce necessary support
just when business is in a critical position
and most needs such support in notes. It
leads up to a contracted condition of the
Currency. All inducements have been with-
drawn from the issuers to give credit in
notes at a time when it is most necessary.
The idea that the State will lose revenue
in becoming the issuer of notes is not
fanciful, because in Queensland there has
already been a loss of more than the
amount which I say will be lost here. ’ I
find that—
“ The total notes issued by Queensland up to
last year was £813,809. Of these notes, three
banks held £433,050 worth, so that the actual
notes in circulation amounted to £380,759
Against the total note issue—instead of there
being only one-fifth, as provided in this Bill—
there was bullion held to the extent of £604,000.
Three local banks agreed to take notes and pay
2 per cent., and the total held by the banks on
which they paid the tax of 2 per cent, was
£294,000. Notes to the value of £55,000 were


in the hands of the public, and it was on
£349,000 that the tax was paid. Before the
Act was passed, there was a circulation of
£547,000, which produced, with a 3 per cent,
tax, £16,410; but the 2 per cent, tax only
brought in about £6,000, so that the Govern-
ment had lost about £B,OOO per annum by the
introduction of this system.”
I have shown by the words of President
Garfield anct others that the State is ut-
terly unfitted to be the issuer of currency.
It does not know the needs of commerce,
and it does not kuow when it is wise to
contract and when to expand the currency.
The Government not being in daily and
hourly communication with the wants of
trade, the State must utterly fail in such a
position. In Queensland there has been
currency contraction in regard to notes.
The tendency of currency contraction is
towards diminution of general prices,
thus causing robbery of the debtor for
the benefit of the creditor. For the rea-
sons I have given, the monopoly argu-
ment fails.
WHEN THE STATE MAY ISSUE
NOTES.
But the State may have a concurrent
right to issue notes. The State has
embarrassments of its own, and it may
sometimes, though very rarely, be neces-
sary for the State at some juncture of
dire extremity to become the issuer of
paper money; and when it does that, it
may, in order to make that paper money
fulfil its ends of yielding aid and revenue
to the Government, abolish private notes,
and make its paper irredeemable. There-
fore, the claim for a monopoly by the
State to issue notes is a prelude to the
assertion of the claim of the State to issue
irredeemable paper. In England there is
the Bank of England, which, so far as the
issue department is concerned, may be
deemed the agent of the State. We may
call, for the purposes of the Bill now before
us, a Bank of England note a State note.
But the utmost that can be said is that it
is a State note issued under the sanction
of law by the Bank of England. But in
England private notes of banks are still
allowed to remain. In America there are
greenbacks, which are State notes, and
there are also the private notes of banks
issued against 90 per cent, of Government
bonds lodged by the issuing banks with
the Treasury as a reserve to meet thorn.
In Canada there are Dominion State notes,
and also private issues of banks emitted
against a reserve of Dominion notes. But
Canada is a warning to us, as it would
seem that the Government has brought
about or connived at a violation of
the Notes Act. However, I will not go
into that now, because it would occupy
me for too great a length of time. Only
in Queensland and in India, and in one or
two other countries where the Government
has been forced to issue inconvertible notes,
we have the assertion of this claim—that
the State should be the sole issuer of
the notes. Practically, we may say that
the universal testimony of all civilized
Legislatures, as well as—in the words
of General Garfield ■—- the overwhelming
testimony of all financial writers of re-
pute, is against giving to the State a
power which might be wielded to the dis-
advantage of the community.
A PIG-TAIL PRINCIPLE.
The strange thing is that this part of the Bill
comes before us with a pig-tail principle.
We have to go to China for the sanction
of this strange mixture of the currency
principle. Bank notes were issued first
in China over a thousand years ago, and
it is there we find the first announce-
ment of the quasi-currency principle em-
bodied in this Bill. If I recollect rightly,
China was the first country to claim for
the State a right to the exclusive issue of
paper money. When we get to Europe,
we find that bank notes were first
issued in Sweden in 1658. The Bank
of Scotland first used paper in 1704,
issuing £1 notes. England has, in cur-
rency legislation, always shown its conser-
vatism and been a laggard. Up to 1759
England issued only £2O notes, and up to
the present day, so far as the Bank of Eng-
land is concerned, it issues only £5 notes.
SCOTCH BANKING.
We have here the Scotch system of banking,
with a new feature which makes the note
issue absolutely safe. The notes are
made a first charge on the assets. The
Scotch system of banking has been the
subject of universal eulogy. Let me show
how admirably the notes issued in Scot-
land have served their great purpose.
According to McLeod, Scotland, in the
150 years up to 1844, enjoyed the
perfection of banking. The circulation
was not limited by law, but solely by
he wants of the public. There was
very little coin in circulation. In 1838,
according to McCulloch, the coin in


circulation amounted to only half-a-
milliou sterling, and in 1841 the
Treasurer of the Bank of Scotland
testified before a committee of the
House of Commons “ that 7,000,000 notes
are found to be requisite to keep up an
average circulation of 3,000,000”; that
there had been few failures of the Scotch
banks, and that the losses of the public by
them in 175 years had been only £25,000,
which "was less than would have occurred
by abrasion and loss if coin had been
used ; and that for more than a century
no bank note was ever unpaid in Scotland.
Now, what is the English system? Go
and read Patterson—go and read McLeod.
I might, in fact, give a string of authori-
ties as long as from here to Bourke-street
—authorities of the greatest weight.
They will tell yon that the Bank of Eng-
land was founded by Sir Robert Peel on a
fatal delusion ; the words of McLeod are,
on “a stupendous delusion.” They will tell
you that it is a system in which an excess
of currency becomes a dangerous redun-
dancy, in which, when there is a scarcity,
it creates a famine. I shall, however,
deal with that point in another connexion.
I want to quote as evidence which ought
to weigh with this House in favour of the
Scotch system—which is the system in
vogue in Victoria, with a new feature of
stability—the language of the report of a
committee of the House of Peers which was
appointed in England to investigate this
question. In that report it is stated—
“lt is also proved by the evidence, and by
the documents, that the banks of Scotland,
whether chartered or joint-stock companies, or
private establishments, have for more than a
century exhibited a stability which the com-
mittee believe to be unexampled in the history
of banking; that they supported themselves
from 1797 to 1812 without any protection from
the restriction by which the Bank of England,
and that of Ireland, were relieved from cash
payments : that there was little demand for gold
during the late embarrassments in the circula-
tion ; and that in the whole period of their
establishment there are not more than two or
three instances of bankruptcy. As during the
whole of this period a large portion of their
issues consisted almost entirely of notes not
exceeding £1 or £1 Is., there is the strongest
reason for concluding that, as far as respects
the banks of Scotland, the issue of paper of that
description has been found compatible with the
highest degree of solidity, and that there is not,
therefore, while they are conducted upon their
present system, sufficient ground for proposing
any alteration, with the view of adding to a
solidity which has so long been sufficiently
established.”
The report of the committee of the House
of Commons also was adverse to any
interference with the banks of Scotland
at that time. I have here an authority
which was put into my hands by the
honorable member for Stawell (Mr. Bur-
ton) some two years ago, and it is an
authority of a most valuable character in
regard to Scotch banking. It is that of the
distinguished protectionist economist of
America, H. C. Carey, which ought to be
for the Ministerialist side of the House
the best authority for allowing things to
remain as they are now—that is, for main-
taining the Scotch system, and not at-
tempting to add to a solidity which has
been sufficiently established by the ex-
perience of a long series of years. This is
the language of Mr. Carey :
“ Governments have arrogated to themselves
the task of regulating the currency, and the
natural effect is that nothing is less regular. At
present each day brings to London an abundant
supply of fish, meat, vegetables, &c., and each
day proves that the persons who furnish those
supplies understand tolerably well what is re-
quired. Were Government to regulate the
markets as they do the currency there would
be a succession of over-supplies, during which
vast quantities of provisions would be spoiled,
followed by a succession of scarcities, when
double prices would be paid for the necessaries
of life, precisely as is now the case with money.
Whenever those who control the operations of
government shall learn that the trade in money
is like all other trades ; that every man has a
right to associate himself with his neighbours,
and to trade with others on such terms as they
may mutually deem most likely to be advan-
tageous, whether of limited or unlimited lia-
bility, and that every man has the same right
to furnish currency that he has to furnish hats,
coats, or shoes; and whenever they shall abolish
all restrictions thereupon there may and will
exist a good, sound, safe, and cheap currency,
but not till then. ”
Another distinguished French authority,
Monsieur G. du Puynode, says, in regard
to the Scotch banks:—
“No banks in the world have been so wisely,
so prudently, managed as the Scotch banks, and
none have been so free from legislative control.
It must be, therefore, that there are other and
far preferable guarantees for the proper admin-
istration of banks than those resorted to by
legislators. Is it not truly a strange idea to
ignore intelligence and morality (he should
have added self-interest) as sources of capacity
and stability ? What admirable foresight to
regulate everything, to order everything, in the
midst of a present which we scarcely under-
stand, in contradiction of a past admired by
all, and in the face of a future entirely un-
known ? Without liberty and without competi-
tion there can be no true progress, and no
efficacious guarantees. ”
Mr. Hamilton. —When wasthat written?
Mr. SHIELS.—I am quoting from a
book which was furnished to me by an
honorable member, and bears date 1863.


Mr. Hamilton. —I suppose it was
written before the collapse of the Glasgow
Bank.
Mr. SHIELS. —Even assuming that its
notes brought it down, which is not the
case, we have in connexion with our own
banking system a feature which is not
present in the Scotch system. We have
attempted togiveadditional solidity, and we
have £8,000,000 of coin, and £49,000,000
of assets, upon which the notes are a first
charge.
Mr. Harper.—- As against a million.
Mr. SHIELS. —Less than a million.
The Government are attempting —against
the views of these distinguished econo-
mists; against the opinion of General Gar-
field, who has gone through all this kind
of currency-mongering; and against a
legion of protesting authorities—to become
the gauge and the regulator of the wants
of the business community in connexion
with its most delicate and most essential
tool—the currency.
Mr. Higgins. —How do you arrive at
that ?
Mr. SHIELS.—The Government are
taking over and claiming a monopoly of
the State notes, which is a part of the
currency.
Mi - . Higgins.—That is a different thing
altogether. The Bill leaves the public to
say how many.
Mr. SHIELS.—No ;it leaves the Go-
vernment to say how many. Under clause
63 of the Bill the Government have an
unlimited right of issue of notes.
Mr. G. Turner. —With the knowledge
that the notes will come back.
Mr. SHIELS.—They came back in other
places. The Government are proposing to
create, under this Bill, the exact American
position. They are going to bring into being
th@ position which confronted President
Cleveland, and to which he, together with
his secretary, Mr. Carlyle, had to bend his
best energies, Many millions sterling
were lost to America by the sale of its
bonds to get the gold with which to re-
plenish its coin reserve, and unfortunately
Cleveland’s personal integrity was bitterly
assailed because of his former law partner,
who w r as then associated, I believe, with
the firm of Pierrepoint, Morgan, and Co.
Mr. Moule. —All these attempts have
been accompanied by limitations.
Mr. SHIELS. —Yes, and notwithstand-
ing the limitations and the discipline to
which they were subjected, the force of cir-
cumstances in every case swept them away.
ESSENTIALS OF A GOOD
CURRENCY.
Now, what are the essentials of a good
currency 1 I have here a little book
called Honest Money , which was written by
an American economist of liberal views.
Before I quote this writer I will tell you
in my own language what I regard as the
essentials of a good currency. It must
be so elastic as to be capable of expansion,
and then of contraction, commensurate
with the increased or decreased demands
of the community for exchanges. Its
amount depends upon the services to be
met, the goods in the markets to be ex-
changed, and the rapidity of the circula-
tion. What we want is a currency which
will keep prices stable.
Mr. Murray Smith. —And yet you are
a bi-metallist.
Mr. SHIELS.—Yes, for that very rea-
son. The cause of bi-metallism is one that
is growing and growing. We want a cur-
rency with the power of expansion and
contraction according to need, and that is
the kind of currency the Scotch had got
before 1845. Sometimes in Scotland
notes have been out in one part of a
season to the extent of £7,000,000, and
the amount has come back to £3,000,000,
the issue expanding and contracting na-
turally with the markets. W T e want a
currency that will keep prices stable, and
not a currency that may be unduly inflated
or contracted. This writer quotes Walker,
who says—
‘l Of all ills, war and pestilence alone seem
to fill the cup of human suffering more nearly
full than the depression and stagnation of
industry which is brought about by constantly
declining prices. In view of these facts, the
necessity for a money that shall vary in its
amount in accordance with the demands of
business is evident. Not only must it respond
to the long-continued, slow, and almost imper-
ceptible increase of demand due to growing
trade and population, but it should also respond
quickly and surely to those sudden demands
known as panics—when credit fails for any
reason to do its usual work. This need is
recognised by bankers in their demand for a
flexible or elastic currency.”
Ricardo says—
“ All writers on the subject of money have
agreed that uniformity in the value of the cir-
culating medium is an object greatly to be
desired. A currency may be considered as per-
fect of which the standard is invariable, which
always conforms to that standard, and in the
use of which the utmost economy is practised.”
Professor Foxwell, of University College,
London, affirms that
‘ ‘ Reasonable stability of prices is the first
condition of social justice in a society whose
economic relations are determined by price.”


Professor Laughlin states—
“ The highest justice is rendered by the
State when it extracts from the debtor at the
end of a contract the same purchasing power
which the creditor gave him at the beginning
of the contract—no less, no more; and that
can only be when prices are left stable by an
elastic currency.”
Professor Sherwood, in the History and
Theory of Money , says —
“The ideal that we want, so far as price ad-
justment is concerned, is to keep prices stable
so that a contract which is payable in one year
from now can be paid with just the amount of
commodities which will then represent the value
stated in the contract of to-day. That is what
we want—a stability of prices that persists
from one year to another and from one gene-
ration to another. The object at which we aim
is, as it seems to me, a currency which shall keep
prices stable ; a currency which shall expand,
therefore, with the expansion of trade and com-
merce and development generally ; a currency
which shall not be lagging behind the com-
merce and development of the country and
hindering that development; and a currency
which shall not, by being too rapidly increased,
lead to excessive speculation and to loss.”
The book from which I am quoting is
in the Library, and is available to all. I
have spoken of the two dangers of the
currency. We have seen that in America
the currency depreciated until the dollar
reached a point at which its real value was
less than one farthing of its face value.
The bank notes which were redeemable
were not met, and people were lynched
because they presented them. We have not
only the assignats of France depreciating
till 1,000 were worth less than 1 in silver
francs and the State notes of America,
reaching almost a vanishing point in value,
but we know what occurred in the Argen-
tine Republic. There is another danger—
the danger of contraction; and on this
time will not permit me to say more than
reiterate my strong opinion that the Go-
vernment are not fitted, owing to their
absence from the theatre upon which the
drama of trade is played, and their not
being brought into daily and hourly con-
nexion with the wants of business, to
supply the just amount of currrency to
obviate its contraction.
THE PRECEDENT OF 1844.
I have given the Government the credit of
the precedent of 1844. At the first blush
there is some justification for their action,
although honorable members on the oppo-
sition side of the House deny' it; but
they have followed that precedent, so far
as they have followed it at all, without
any of its safeguards, and without any of
its discipline. It is true that the State,
through the Bank of England, may be said
to issue the notes, but the bank is under a
most rigorous discipline in the issue of
those notes. It has to obey the law, and
it is penalized if it departs one jot from
the law. And there is this other feature—-
that if the State through the bank is the
issuer, the bank is the user of the notes,
and the safeguard against abuse is the self-
interest of the shareholders and the possi-
bility of bankruptcy. Where is that discip-
line in this Bill ? Where is that powerful
sentiment of the shareholders’ interests
which centres on the fortunes of the bank
and prevents excess 1 It is wholly wanting.
If the notes the Government issue come
back, as they may come hack, and they have
no gold to meet them, their next resource
would be to do what other States have
done'—declare them inconvertible. That
is the State’s act of bankruptcy and
repudiation, and these are the essential
differences between the precedent of 1814
and this proposal. The precedent of 1844
is one of the most unfortunate that any
Government could follow. All the latest
authorities are against it. The galaxy
of writers who protest against the un-
wisdom of that Act is surprising. Pre-
dictions of failure before it became law
were offered in regard to the Bank Charter
Act of 1844 by some of the highest autho-
rities in the land. I have not the names
here, but they include Lord Ashburton
(one of the Barings), John Stuart Mill,
James Wilson (then editor of the Econo-
mist, and a man of singular capacity), and
many others. They protested that the Act
was founded on false principles, and that,
instead of accomplishing its object, it
would aggravate the difficulties of a crisis.
No sooner was the Act brought into opera-
tion than it failed.
Mr. Higgins.—And it has been violated
several times since then.
Mr. SHIELS.—Yes. That Act was
founded on similar principles to this Bill.
What happened in 1847 1 Honorable mem-
bers conversant with banking legislation
know that the Bank Charter Act broke
down in that year, and the country was
saved from a conflagration which would
have consumed everything by the viola-
tion of the very Act which was brought
in to prevent such an occurrence ! Sir
Robert Peel himself, that candid fearless
statesman, in 1848, admitted in the House
of Commons that that Act had failed in


its first object. I will quote from several
authorities to show that the Act of 1844
was based on several-cardinal errors. Mr.
Moran says —
“ Upon what plea should the issue be sepa-
rated from the banking department? Why
should not the supply of currency be in propor-
tion to the demand ? If the issues beyond
£14,000,000 be injurious, why not also those
under that amount ? Are State stocks proper
reserves with which to redeem bank notes pay-
able in coin on demand ? If a bank attempt to
realize State stocks in a moment of embarrass-
ment, when its notes are being presented for
redemption in coin, can their realization fail to
depredate sensibly the value of the State
stocks, and thus aggravate existing difficul-
ties ?”
I would ask you, Mr. Speaker, to allow
me to address the House sitting. I have
been suffering from great weakness for
several weeks past.
The SPEAKER.—Certainly.
Mr. SHIELS (having resumed his seat)
said—This writer further states —
“It must not be forgotten that the main diffi-
culty in moments of commercial crisis is that
confidence is shaken ; most holders of commo-
dities and securities become eager sellers ; pur-
chasers are not to be found, and consequently
property cannot be realized, and thus becomes
useless as means of meeting pressing liabili-
ties. ”
Tooke, who is a great authority, states —
“ The theory sought to be explained and
established as forming the grounds for the mea-
sure of 1844 is, in every point of view, erroneous,
proceeding, as it does, on an ambiguous use of
language, on unfounded assumptions of princi-
ples and facts, and on false analogies.”
And then referring to the failure of the
Act, of which I have spoken, this writer
adds —
“ As the result of a careful examination of
the principle on which the Act of 1844 was
founded, and on the experience of its working
siijce the time when it came into operation, I
have no hesitation in giving it as my opinion
that it is a total, unmitigated, uncompensated,
and, in its consequences, a lamentable failure. ”
This is said of the precedent which the
Government in this Bill are in a far-away
manner following. 1 have already quoted
from memory Mr. McLeod. His words
are :
“ Peel’s Act .... w-as meant to carry
out a particular theory of currency, which we
have no hesitation in affirming is one of the
most stupendous delusions on the subject that
any one ever conceived. A theory as opposed
as possible to all the greatest authorities on the
subject. . . . The most remarkable thing is
that the Act authorizes the most flagrant viola-
tion of the principle it is intended to enforce ;
for the issuing of notes upon the public funds is
the most vicious principle possible. ”
The public funds. Upon what are the
Government proposing to issue their notes ?
The debt of England, McLeod says here, is
a most vicious principle to issue notes
against.
“ It is the theory of John Law
The issues of notes, then, of the Bank of
England are founded upon two of the most
fatal delusions that ever prevailed on the sub-
ject of the paper currency.”
—that is, Lawism and the mushroom
currency theories of Lord Overstone and
his disciples. Now, sir, I will quote the
words of a most distinguished statesman,
a man of judicial impartiality, as all who
know him by repute or through his
speeches or writings will admit. Sir
George Coruewall Lewis, who was a
liberal, and who himself, if I remember
rightly, favoured the Act of 1844, said,
in 1857, speaking I think as Chancellor of
the Exchequer—
“ Peel’s Act did great good except for a week
once in ten years, but in that week it did so
much evil as almost to counterbalance the good
which it had effected before. ”
SEPARATION OF ISSUE FROM
BANKING.
In regard to the issue department being
separate from the banking, I have to say that
this is another attempt to follow the bad
precedent of 1844. Now, sir, that portion
of that Act has also been universally con-
demned, and those who favoured it origi-
nally, when they saw it in operation,
came to the conclusion that it was an
unwise step. Let me quote Mr. Tooke.
He says—
“ The issue department is acted upon by the
public, while the banking department acts upon
the public, thus producing a result the very re-
verse of that contemplated by the propounded
of the scheme of separation. If, then, the due
regulation of the currency depends, as it un-
doubtedly does, upon the banking department,
and not upon the issue department, it is the
height of inconsistency to restrict the latter,
and to leave the former entirely at the discre-
tion of the directors.”
Then, he says, again—■
“ The union of functions, instead of being in-
congruous and incompatible, as—most gratui-
tously, without authority or proof from experi-
ence or reasoning—they are held to be by the
currency school, would, in truth, be eminently
conducive to the congruity of interests and har-
mony or perfect compatibility of action. Sup-
posing that two large banking institutions had
originally been formed in a separate state, the
oncTsimilar to the present issue department, the
other to the banking department, a correct view
to the respective interests of the proprietors'
and to the convenience of the public would
have led to the proposal of an amalgamation.”


Now, sir, let me quote another eminent
authority—Mr. Carr Glyn —who gave
evidence before the House of Lords com-
mittee. In his evidence he said—
“He had been of opinion, before the Act
passed, that the division of the bank into the
issue and banking department was a desirable
experiment; but, after the experience of the
preceding year, he considered that it had de-
cidedly failed.”
Mr. McLeod and other authorities whom
I had intended to quote agree with that
opinion.
SECURITY OF ENGLISH BANK
NOTES.
Now, I come to another point. So far
as I can gather, this Bill appears to
be founded on that currency principle
which Mr. McLeod called one of the most
stupendous and fatal delusions that ever
English statesmen acted upon. That
principle is that, for every bank note there
should be equal coin behind it, that the
paper currency should expand and contract
exactly as coin would contract and expand.
Now, sir, comparing the position under
this Bill, with its proposed maximum of ss.
in the £1 and minimum of 4s. in the £1
against the note issue, a most serious depar-
ture from the currency principle is at once
seen. What is the exact state as to the Bank
of England 1 At the end of last week (4th
November), as far as I can gather from
the financial telegram, the Bank of Eng-
land had £27,136,000 in notes in circula-
tion. But it had in coin and bullion in the
bank department and the issue department
£35,806,000. That is to say, the Bank
of England had over £8,000,000 more
than pound for pound for every note
issued. And we are to have here, with
our liability to panic, our extreme sus-
ceptibility to pressure and impulse, and
our other features of unrest and insta-
bility, only 4s. in the £1 !
Mr. G. Turner. —The bankers recom-
mended it; and they are practical men.
Mr. SHIELS.—But the banks have no
interest in it—and there is the trouble.
I see the dangers and evils of currency
contraction, and I have pointed them
out as earnestly as any man in the com-
munity. I see what it means for the pro-
ducer and for the labourer. I want to
prevent these evils by keeping the cur-
rency elastic. I want it to expand with the
increased demands made upon it, so that
prices may be kept stable and prevented
from falling by currency causes. I hold
the views of my honorable friends in
the Ministerial corner with regard to
cheapness to some extent. There is a
cheapness which is harmful; but, on the
other hand, there is a cheapness adminis-
tering to an abundance of things, and sub-
serving wide-spreading comfort and luxury.
Such cheapness comes from the employment
of the great forces of nature, and harness-
ing them to the car of industry rather than
men. Such a cheapness, I allow, with some
loss and harm temporarily to a section of
the community, is marvellously beneficial
in the long run to the progress of a nation,
and it I commend; but the mischievous
cheapness that comes from contraction of
the currency I shall always protest against
as spoliatory and iniquitous.
CREATING THE AMERICAN
POSITION.
You are actually bringing about under
this Bill a position akin to that which
existed in America under Mr. Cleve-
land’s administration. You have here
proposed a power for the issue of an
unlimited amount of note currency. Now,
sir, we will suppose that you have over
issued—that is what all Governments
similarly situated have done, and you are
open to all the pressure that maybe brought
against you, to the seduction of wrong theo-
ries,and all the fallibilities of government—
what will the effect be ? The first effect, ac-
cording to that quantitative theory of value,
which I explained earlier in my speech, is
that local prices will rise, because the cur-
rency has expanded. Then these conse-
quences follow : You have a good market
to import into, and a bad market to export
from. It is a good market to import
into when local prices rise, and conse-
quently imports will come in rapidly.
But the balance of exchange soon turns.
Our exports will not pay for our im-
ports. Our exports not paying for our
imports, the interest upon the inter-
national debt we have incurred and the
discharge of the adverse balance of trade
have to be met in gold. Gold goes out.
The Treasurer admits that the notes will
replace gold. Where will the gold go
to? It will go where there is employment
for it. It will leave these shores, and
you will then have this state of things—
that the reserve stock of gold on which you
have to rely in case you sell your bonds
is gone or depleted, and you find when
you want it that you have not got it.


My honorable friend, the Treasurer, can-
not eat his cake and have it. You can-
not expel gold and still have it. Of
course, gold is a valuable commodity, and
in such circumstances as I have described
it will go elsewhere, where it ean be used
with profit. Then you will have the posi-
tion in which America found herself
under Mr. Cleveland’s administration.
Your notes come tumbling back for re-
demption in gold, because the balance of
exchange is against you. You have not the
coin to redeem them. You have to sell
your debentures which were held in trust.
But the gold is not there—your Govern-
ment paper is depreciated, and dire confu-
sion is upon the country.
Mr. G. Turner.—We shall have plenty
of gold left.
Mr. SHIELS. —I am supposing over-
issue.
Mr. G. Turner. —The Government has
nothing to do with the issue.
Mr. SHIELS.—But the whole of those
officials are part of the Government; their
branch is only a department of the
State.
Mr. G. Turner. — Not at all.
Mr. SHIELS. —Supposingyoulent these
unlimited quantities of paper under clause
63, you might have millions of paper out
and no gold there. Take the case of
panic.
Mr. Prendbruast.—Let the banks go
bung then.
Mr. SHIELS. —It is not the banks, it is
the credit of the country I am anxious
about.
Mr. Pebndergast.—The credit of the
country has been besmirched by the banks
already.
Mr. SHIELS. —But their notes have
been paid. Take again the case of a panic.
The same factors are at work. There is
the same demand upon the State for
gold, especially if there is a belief that
there has been an over issue and that
trouble is ahead. Gold will be hoarded, as
it has been in America and in Russia, and
elsewhere, and it will not be brought out.
You may tumble your securities into the
market, but the gold is not there; and the
next thing is that you will have to write
up on the doors of the State Bank : “ Pro-
mises to pay not recognised.”
Mr. Harper. —The same effect would
overtake the Government as overtook the
banks.
Mr. G. Turner. —The Government are
not likely to issue notes to that extent.
Mr. SHIELS, —But Governments have
clones it bj force of circumstances, and I
fear that the same would happen here.
Youi assume too much. You assume that
mem here are as pure as crystal, and as
infalllible as His Holiness himself.
DANGERS OF A MIXED CURRENCY.
Now, I promised the honorable member for
Castfclemaine to quote to him the opinions
of oine of the most profound thinkers upon
currency matters whom I have ever read.
I refer to Professor Francis Walker, who
is also an international bi-metallist. I
wamt the House to listen to these remarks,
becaiuse they are vital to the consideration
of ttlhis question. We are proposing here
to issue a mixed currency —that is, a cur-
rency based on coin and credit. Now,
Walker says—
“ The more there is issued of a mixed cur-
rency, the more will be wanted. The supply
does not satisfy the demand, it excites it. Like
an mnnatural stimulus taken into the human
system, it creates an increasing desire for more.
Theare are two reasons for this : one, that, as
the currency is expanded, prices are raised ac-
cordingly, and more currency is demanded to
effeect the same exchanges ; the other, that the
spec-illation inevitably following the rise of
prices leads to an enormous extension and repe-
tition of indebtedness, which requires for its
discharge a greatly increased amount of the
circulating medium. ”
Ansy one who has studied the question
knows that that inevitably follows.
Gemeral Walker goes on—•
‘“Secondly, of contraction. The cause which
limiits the expansion and finally produces con-
traction is the liability of the notes to be pre-
sented for payment in money. The occasion
for this cause may be almost anything—a
political convulsion, an adverse balance of
trade, a failure of some large trading or bank-
ing company, or an unaccountable mood of the
popular mind. A mixed currency has in itself
no power whatever to satisfy a foreign creditor. ”
That is the ABC of the question.
General Walker continues—
“ With a value currency, the fact that it was
especially -wanted would be a reason why it
should stay. Not so with credit money ;it
won’t bear to be looked in the face. ... It
should be borne in mind that these contractions
and expansions are not imaginary, not possible
only, not merely occasional, nor at all local, but
they occur frequently, and everywhere within
the field of such a currency.”
Then he goes on to ask—
““ Does it ‘ pay ’ to substitute credit for value
in (the circulation? ... I apprehend that
theme are few thoughtful and intelligent Ameri-
cams who will not accede to the statement of
Prcofessor Perry—‘There can be no hesitation
in .-affirming that the expense of maintaining a


gold and silver money for all the wants of the
whole country might have been met many times
over from the losses resulting from this bank
paper system.’ ”
Let that argument sink into your minds.
Then Walker goes on—
“ A single commercial disaster, checking pro-
duction to the extent of one-third only, through
a period of four months, would involve a loss
equal to the cost, out and out, once for all, of a
metallic money sufficient for all the wants of
the country. How often have the mills and
furnaces and factories of the United States
been ——
During 1816-GO —long before the issue
of the greenbacks.
“on three-quarter, two-third, half-time, and
that, not through months, but through years !
Bad money has not done all the mischief, but it
has done enough completely to justify Professor
Perry’s assertion. ”
Then General Walker goes on to say-—■
“ But if there is reason to believe that a
paper issued above the amount of specie held
for redemption, however carefully managed,
tends to excess in a greater or lesser degree, we
must, I think, conclude that there is no true
economy in effecting such a saving in the first
cost of the circulating medium
Credit introduced into the money of a country
may cause no shock, may threaten no disaster,
while yet it may jar the whole structure of
industry and trade, and cause the machinery of
production and exchange to operate with less of
precision and force than would otherwise be the
case.”
I would ask the honorable member for
Footscray to pay attention to this, as he
and those who sit with him represent more
particularly the working classes of this
country. Walker continues—
‘ ‘ The great fact of modern industry, under
the wide diversification of production, the
localization of trades, and the minute sub-
division of labour, is waste of industrial power
through the tendency to a divergence of demand
and supply, leading now to an over-production
which is never fully utilized ; now to a cessation
of industry which is carried by the timidity of
merchants, manufacturers, and bankers far be-
yond what is necessary to equalize production
and clear the market. Oscillations in demand
and supply are indeed inevitable in the nature
of things; but our modem system, by which
two or three towns make half the goods of a
certain sort which the whole world consumes,
extends these oscillations into wide-reaching
fluctuations, which in the aggregate-largely
reduce production from its economicial maxi-
mum, and render the employment of labour
irregular and precarious. This tendency must,
as it appears to me, be in a greater or less
degree, but always with unfortunate results,
aggravated by the issue of paper, not based
cent, per cent, on the money of international
commerce.”
LABOUR VITALLY INTERESTED IN
A GOOD CURRENCY.
I have, after years of study, after years of
anxious reflection, struggling with difficul-
ties and doubts, come to the opinions which
I am enunciating to-night. And I urge
these views particularly upon my honorable
friends in the Ministerial corner, because I
feel strongly for that class which they speci-
ally claim to represent, which is the most
helpless of all. Labour would be the
class which would suffer most grievously
from the effects of a depreciation of
the currency which, in the words of
Webster, “ is the most fertile of inven-
tions to fertilize the rich man’s fields by
the sweat of the poor man’s brow.”* Now,
let me cite to you before I conclude
■ —and my strength is almost exhausted—
a few more evidences which I hope will
teach this House to be cautious, and to
pause before they enter upon this slippery
path, which the study of years shows me
leads inevitably to depreciation, distress,
and, commercial catastrophe. Let me quote
again from General Garfield. He says—
“ There never did exist on the earth a body
of men wise enough to determine by any
arbitrary rule how much currency is needed
for the business of a great country. The laws
of trade, the laws of credit, the laws of God
impressed upon the elements of this w r orld are
superior to all legislation. . . Let us not
offer to the people of this country the apples
of Sodom that shall turn to ashes on their lips. ”
Then again, I quote the great authority of
Chief Justiee Chase (then Secretary Chase),
* According to the well-known economic law of Oresme
and Copernicus, reformulated in England by Sir Thomas
Gresham, Master of the Mint in Queen Elizabeth’s reign,
base or degraded currency tends to expel good money
from circulation. But our Law of Legal Tender will
compel the labourer to accept the legal tender notes of
the State Bank at face value, although they may have
depreciated 25 per cent., 50 per cent., or more in pur-
chasing power, and thus insidiously his real wages will be
reduced 55., 10s., or more in the £l. In Argentina real
wages fell from 2s. Id. to a day by the over-issue and
consequent debasement of paper money. Daniel Webster,
the great American statesman, from whom I have pre-
viously quoted, points out this danger to wages most
significantly “ The very man of all others who has the
deepest interest in.a sound currency and who suffers most
by mischevioustflegislation-in money matters is the man
who earns his daily'bread by his daily toil. A depreciated
currency, sudden changes of|prices, paper money falling-
between morning and noon, and falling still lower between
noon and-night. These things constitute the very harvest
time of 'Speculators, and of the whole race of those who
are at ■once idle ,and crafty. .... The labouring-
man,what can he hoard ? Preying on nobody, he becomes
the prey of-all.” On another occasion ho said —“A dis-
ordered currency is one of thexgreatest political evils. .
lt wars against'industry,, frugality, and
economy, and it fosters the evil spirit'of extravagance and
speculation. Of all the contrivances for cheating the
labouring classes of mankind, none has been more effectual
that* that which deludes them with paper money. This is
the most effectual of inventions to fertilize the rich man’s
fields by the sweat of the poor man’s brow—ordinary
tyranny, oppression, excessive taxation. These bear
lightly on the happiness of the mass of the community
compared with fraudulent currencies and the robberies
committed by a depreciated paper.”


to whose lot it fell to bring before the
Legislature of the United States that sys-
tem of banking and currency which enabled
that mighty republic to triumph over its
enemies and to free the unfortunate negro
from slavery. Chase, according to Presi-
dent Garfield, used these words —
“ Legal tender notes are the devil made mani-
fest in paper, for no man can foresee what mis-
chief they may do when they are once let
loose.”
I will now go to an earlier President of
the United States, and a man of eminent
capacity. I will quote from Thos. Jefferson.
He said —
“Capital maybe produced by industry and
accumulated by economy; but jugglers only will
propose to create it by legerdemain tricks with
paper. ”
Now, sir, let me quote a passage from
the latest work on banking which I have
seen. Conant, in his History of Modern
Banks, published a few months ago,
says :
‘ ‘ The currency of a commercial country should
be regulated by commercial conditions, and not
by the whims of politicians.”
Now, there are many other questions in
connexion with this matter upon which
I should have liked to have touched.
There are, I say, other grave considera-
tions that arise out of this Bill.
MOMENTOUS CONSEQUENCES OF A
FALSE STEP.
I have spoken at this length this afternoon
because all my reading, all my reflection,
teach me the momentous consequences
that follow from one false step in dealing
with the currency. I believe this claim
to the sole issue of the note currency by
the State is most hazardous. I have
attempted to show that it is against the
practice of the majority' of nations and
against the advice of the overwhelming
majority of economic writers. Over-issue
is a kind of alcoholism in the body-politic,
which creates a thirst so insatiable that
the attempt to appease it breaks down the
whole system. 1 have not denied the con-
current right of the State in case of grave
extremity to issue its credit notes, but
such issue, as all experience shows,
should be surrounded by checks of the
most drastic kind. When I spoke two
and a half years ago, I thought that a 50
per cent, coin reserve for the notes sup-
plied to a Credit Fonder system lending
too farmers on a half margin would be snffi-
ciient; but, sir, as I admitted, I have now
nnodified that opinion. I fear the dangers
otf issuing State notes in such a democracy
ats ours ; with all the tendencies surround-
img us, and with the pressure that would
b>e exercised. I think now that no less
tlhan a cent, per cent.,reserve (using
Walker’s language) will infallibly insure
tus from the dangers arising from the
itssue of paper money by the Go-
wernment. With such a reserve we
slhould be absolutely safe. Then we
sihould be beyond the possibilities and
Hiazard of depreciation and the calami-
tfcies that befall any community that in-
cdulgea in such stimulants.*
CURRENCY MONGERS.
Tin every age there have arisen currency-
imongers who have vended their pernicious
wares and taught nations how to grow
wealthy, not by industry, not by frugality,
mot by enterprise, but by rushing to the
press. The earliest of these,
to my reading, was Andrew
Yarranton, who, in 1677, published in
London a book, the title of which I will
iread:—•
‘ ‘ England Improved by Sea and Land. To
lont-do the Dutch without fighting, to pay debts
without moneys, and to set at work all the poor
i of England with the growth of our lands ——
And how do you think he proposed to do
it ? By means of a public bank like this,
issuing notes upon the registered value of
houses and lands.
“ the credit whereof ” (he said) “ making paper
go in trade equal with ready money, yea, better
in many parts of the world than money. ”
Now, sir, I have attempted, as far as I
can, to acknowledge the authorities upon
* “ There ought surely to be no such thing as legal
tender, even in the case of convertible paper currency,
either on the part of the Government or on the part of
private banks. It is plain injustice to compel us to take
anybody’s paper as gold. If the Government is solvent,
and its security is good, the paper is sure to be taken in
preference to carrying about a weight of specie. Legal
tender confuses the ideas of the people, shakes commercial
morality, and prepares the way for the attempts of the
fiat-money man, and for all the mischief which they breed.
. . . there about the money trade in particular
to make us desire that it should be put into the power of
the politician ? Judging by experience it would be about
the last branch of commerce on which we should wish them
to lay their grasp. . . . Government can no more de-
cide what amount of notes is required than-it can decide
how many promissory notes, or bills of exchange, or dock
warrants ought at any given moment to be afloat. Setting-
Government to settle the circulation of paper is having
the barometer regulated by superior wisdom without
reference to atmospheric pressure. . . . The American
Silver Bill shows what we might have to expect of the
power to which it is demanded that the function of the
banks should he transferred. Would commerce have an
hour of security, or be able to conduct any of her opera-
-11 tions in peace and confidence, if the hand of demagogism
J j were all the time upon her heartstrings?”— Goldwix Smith.


which my honorable friend has acted ; but
we have here a Bill which not only in
what it does, but in what it sanctions, and
in the precedents which it creates, in-
volves consequences of a far deeper
import than appear on its surface.
AN ANECDOTE.
I would like to emphasize what I am
am now saying by an anecdote. A sailor
had just landed from his vessel, carry-
ing a cockatoo on his finger. Wan-
dering aimlessly about the streets of
London, he saw this advertisement—
“ Chemical experiments upstairs. Free ad-
mission.” Jack went in and took aback seat,
perching his bird on a chair behind him.
As the experiments went on—all beau-
tiful illustrations Jack would turn
round and say to his pet—“ Damned
good, Cockey ; what next?” The last
experiment was announced to be the
mixture of a number of highly inflammable
gases, in order to make an innocuous and
useful compound. Unfortunately, one of
the jars exploded. Flames were soon
circling round the platform. Underneath
the flooring was stored a mass of explosives.
Soon a loud resounding roar was heard,
and the building was in ruins. Jack,
when he woke to consciousness, found
himself minus an arm, besides other in-
juries. The bird was beside him singed
and almost featherless, but true, to its
instincts, it called out —“ Damned good,
Cockey ; what next ? ”
DANGEROUS CHEMICALS,
Now, sir, my honorable friend the Premier
and his colleagues are experimenting with
dangerous chemicals in this Bill. They
are attempting to manufacture a harm-
less and useful compound from what all
nations and all Legislatures have found
to be dangerous explosives. Something
will go wrong, and eventually we shall
reach the catastrophe of my story —a
loud resounding roar, and a calamity.
“ What next,” then ? I would ask my
honorable friends who have so patiently
listened to me —I would ask them as
sagacious men, looking back at the his-
tory of other lands—is it wise to forsake
the old moorings and launch out with the
ship of commerce, industry, and labour on
to the stormy sea of untested experiments
and unsanctioned theories? Is it wise to
commit the credit of this young nation—
its solvency, its peace and happiness—to
“The God of Storms—The Lightning and the
Gale ” ?
No one has championed our immunities
under our Constitution more than I. We
are the trustees of noble privileges; we
are dowered by the grace of the mother
country with a puissant prerogative in our
supremacy in finance. I say earnestly,
and as my last word to this House, we shall
be unworthy of those high privileges held
by the Commons House of England—we
shall prove ourselves incapable to wield
that splendid prerogative of financial pre-
eminence—if we countenance the dan-
gerous proposals of this measure.
[From Hansard , 12 th November, 1896.]
Mr. MURRAY SMITH observed that
the speech of the Premier, in moving the
second reading of the State Bank Bill,
had been published in pamphlet form,
and, as the House had since then had
another very valuable contribution to the
debate from the honorable member for
Normanby, he would suggest that that
honorable member’s speech also should be
circulated in pamphlet form, so that both
sides of the question might be fairly laid
before the public. He would have made
the same suggestion with regard to the
speech of the honorable member for Joli-
mont, but, although he yielded to no one
in his admiration of that honorable mem-
ber’s speech, still the honorable member
for Jolimont was a private member, and
the honorable member for Normanby stood
in a different position. He thought that
it would be only fair to have both sides
of the question circulated, and the honor-
able member for Normanby’s speech was
one which perhaps would be better fol-
lowed in pamphlet form than when it was
delivered, as it was very erudite as well
as valuable.
Mr. G. Turner. —There is no objection
if it is the wish of the House.
ROBT. S. BRAIN, GOVERNMENT PRINTER, MELBOURNE.
