

SPEECH
OF
SIR ALFRED STEPHEN, G.C.M.G.
IN
THE LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL OF NEW SOUTH WALES
ON
THE SENDING OF THE AUSTRALIAN
CONTINGENT TO EGYPT.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY ROBERT BONE, AT THE "PHOENIX" OFFICE, BOND STREET.
1885.




PREFACE.
On the 17th March, 1885, the Parliament of New South Wales was con-
vened, for the purpose —as stated in the Governor’s Speech—of “ considering,
and taking the necessary steps to give Parliamentary sanction to, the course
recently adopted by the Ministry, in despatching a Contingent of Australian
troops to assist the Imperial Forces in Egypt.” Then followed this para-
graph. “In conveying to England for the first time in our history an offer
of assistance in her military undertakings, it was necessary, under the
critical circumstance in which it was made, that the proposal should be of
help immediately available. To have postponed the offer till Parliament had
been consulted as to the propriety of its being made, and been invited to
make provision for carrying it into effect, would have had the result of render-
ing it useless ; but, at the earliest period after despatch of the assistance,
it has been deemed desirable to submit the action of the Government to the
consideration of Parliament.”
In reply to that Speech an Address in the following words was moved in
the Legislative Council by Mr. King, and seconded by Mr. Thornton. —
“We desire to express our hearty approval of the conduct of Ministers in
despatching the Australian Contingent to aid the Imperial forces in Egypt;
and we regard their action as manifesting the loyalty of the Australian people
to the Crown, and as drawing more closely together the various portions of
our great Empire.”—An Amendment on this was moved by Mr. Stewart, de-
clining to offer any opinion as to the propriety of despatching troops from the
Colony, until the Council was informed of the circumstances which induced
the Government to adopt that measure without the authority of Parliament-
The debate having been adjourned, Sir Alfred Stephen on the following
day addressed the House. His speech is taken from the “ Sydney Morning
Herald” of the 19th March, with a few corrections and additions only;
such as any person acquainted with Newspaper reporting will understand
may be necessary—in any case where, as here, no sentence was written, but
the words were spoken under the feelings of the moment. It is marvellous,
indeed, that the reporters should have succeeded in reproducing them with
such substantial accuracy. The few supporters of the Amendment did not
call for a division; and the Address was carried with one dissenting voice
only.
The facts —so memorable in the history of the Colony—will never be for-
gotten, that the offer of the Australian Contingent was made on the 12th
day of February last j that the telegraphic announcement of its acceptance
was received in Sydney on the 15th; and that on Tuesday, the 3rd day of
March, the troops —fully equipped, and with every requisite for action—left
our shores for Egypt.
A. S.
Sydney :
19th March, 1885.


LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL.
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 18, 1885.
THE ADDRESS IN REPLY.
The debate on the Address in Reply was resumed by
Sir Alfred Stephen ; who said that although he felt quite
persuaded that the Address in Reply would be carried in that
House with but very few, he trusted not more than two, dis-
sentient voices, and though he was conscious, after the very
exhaustive explanation of his hon. friend Mr. Dailey, and the
very admirable address they had heard from Mr. Macintosh —
an address which did equal honour to that gentleman’s mind,
his heart, and his good sense —no words of his (Sir Alfred
Stephen) could add much force to the strength of the arguments
already used in favour of the motion,—his heart was too full
to allow him to remain silent on such a question. And,
considering the importance of that question, and what had
been done during the past few weeks, and the position which
he occupied in that House and in the community, remembering
that he had been a resident in these colonies for sixty years,
and in this colony for above forty-five years —and he thought
he might also say he was the oldest member of that House —
some words from him might perhaps be expected, and would
at all events not be unacceptable. In common with the vast
majority of the inhabitants of this and the neighbouring colonies,
he looked upon the events of the past few weeks —the offer of
this Government to send troops to the Soudan, the acceptance
by England of that offer, and the departure of these men under
such singularly exciting circumstances, as the grandest that
had happened or could well have taken place in the annals of
any country or any colony ; and he further, in common with
the great majority of people, not here alone but in all the
Australasian colonies, regarded those events as calculated at
once to raise the character of this community above all that


could be attained for them by any increase in wealth, or by
any efforts of their own of any kind. These colonies are
spoken of as dependencies of the Crown, as a portion of her
Majesty’s possessions; but they are no longer now to be
considered as possessions merely. They are recognised as part
and parcel of the great British Empire. It may be said that
this was well understood here already ; but, if so, it had
never been expressed until now, and now that it had been,
the fact would never be forgotten. Some ridicule had been
cast upon this great movement, ag, if it had been said to be
engrossing the attention of the world. He did not know that
such words had been uttered elsewhere; but if they had been
he was not disposed at all to dispute their truth. In the
House of Lords, which possessed perhaps the largest pro-
portion of the intellect of the Empire, a large amount of
wealth and great descended names, the offer had been thought
well worthy of an address to the Crown, and the Crown had
been pleased to express thankfulness at the offer so promptly
and spontaneously made. (Hear, hear.)
The effect of this movement, successful as it had been, and
accompanied by the enthusiasm which it had caused in every
portion of these colonies, would find its way and have its effect
upon other nations than their fatherland. (Hear, hear.) He
did not think it likely that the few men whom this colony had
sent to the Soudan would have any material effect upon the war
there; but in other countries the effect of our action would be
seen, and it would be thought a grand thing that the colonies of
the Empire were willing to support the parent State in a moment
of supposed peril; and not only so, but that they had the men
and the means to enable them to extend that support. They
were now found to be not the insignificant communities which
they had been said to be. Had not France, Germany, and Russia
consuls in this city, and was it not their duty to report to their
Governments something of what was going on P We might
fairly assume that what had taken place had not been con-
sidered unimportant, but, on the other hand, that it would have
its bearing upon events that might arise between Great Britain
and other countries. He had recently returned from the sister
colony of Victoria, where he found that all classes—from the
highest to the lowest—were in sympathy with the movement.


He had heard that opinion expressed in various circles; and
had been pleased to hear it from an educated German settler,
whose heart was wholly Australian, and who felt strongly in
favour of this action. He (the speaker) undertook to say that
in every society in which he had moved there was but one
feeling, that of respect and admiration towards the colony
which had been able to carry out such a measure, and for the
Government that had shown it had the skill, and power and
determination, to carry out its resolution so successfully as it
had done. He believed there was as much enthusiasm in Vic-
toria in its support as there was here, and only one feeling
existed, that of regret that her offer also could not at that
moment be equally accepted.
Well, was it nothing to be elevated thus into the character
and status at once of a nation P Was that no just cause of
pride ? Was it no cause of thankfulness that they had a
Government with the audacity, so to call it —the wise, grand
audacity of originating the movement, although not then sus-
tained by any expression of Parliamentary opinion, but which
had received, and he was sure had the support of every human
being whose opinion was worth considering —the vast mass of
people out of doors who sent representatives to the other House,
and the many members of this House who at one time were
members of the other Chamber. The offer of troops was pecu-
liarly a grand one; for it was not made in any selfish spirit, nor
for the protection of their hearths and homes. He hoped the
day would never come —but it might come —when they would
have to raise a large body of men to defend those near and dear
to them. Did we think there were not thousands who then
would leap to arms for the defence of their wives and little
ones P In such a case they would not feel the want of the
gallant men we had sent away. He doubted not that
Australians had the stamina and courage of the race to which
they belonged, and whosever might come would not find this
colony unprepared, but would have here a very difficult cus-
tomer to deal with. He did not believe that the offer made
by his honorable friend —he was proud to call him friend—had
been made with any idea of reward —(hear, hear) —but that
he had acted as a true patriot to the country in which he was
born. Of that no one who knew him would doubt; and he


(the speaker) might address the words to him which had been
addressed on other occasions to distinguished men. Mr. Dailey’s
services to the colony, he might rely on it, would not he for-
gotten. He would say to him, in well-known and appropriate
words, “ Semper Jionos, nomenque tuum, laudesque manebunt."
There were topics involved in the question before us on which
he had as yet said nothing, yet on which he wished to address
the House; but they were so many, and crowded so much on
his mind, as almost to defy arrangement by him, and he feared
the charge of needless repetition. But he would here make
one remark. He did not believe that those who had the direc-
tion of the military affairs of the Empire absolutely required
the seven hundred and fifty men which this colony had sent to
them. That, however, was not the question. The grandeur of
the event consisted in this, that it was thought here that there
was a moment, not of peril, but a moment in which they could
show their sympathy with the mother-country, and therefore
they did all in their power to help her and to show that they
were with her heart and hand. (Hear, hear.) It was not a new
idea this among Australians of its being possible, some day,
"however humbly, to assist the mother-country. Their earliest
and most distinguished patriot, Mr. Wentworth, when an under-
graduate at Cambridge, in a prize ode recited there by him,
spoke almost prophetically when he foreshadowed such an event.
The glory of the Empire he felt would never die ; but days of
distress might come upon her, and her power might be on the
wane ; and Mr. Wentworth, contemplating such a possibility,
said that the great Australian colonies would then come to the
rescue of their fatherland. They would send their fleets and
armies to assist the country from which they sprang, and
“ Australasia plant, with flag unfurled, a new Britannia in
another world.” (Cheers.) And should the day arrive when
the Empire required greater aid than she had received from the
colonies, depend upon it there were hearts here warm enough
and arms strong enough to help her. (Hear, hear.) At the
same time he did not think that what we had done pledged us
to assist her in all her wars; but that we should desire to do
so, he hoped would always be our feeling.
But a so-called Constitutional objection was raised. It was
said by some that, however laudable in itself the step might


have been, the exercise of such a power should not have taken
place without the previous sanction of the House. On that
point he would now speak. There was, he might mention by
way of illustration, a strong instance of audacity on the part
of Lord Nelson—an instance of unconstitutional action, of
illegality, of disobedience, yet a glorious one, on the part of
Nelson at Copenhagen. He knew that if he failed he would
lose his head ; but there are times when a man in a difficult
position must not have regard to his own safety if he felt it to
be necessary to carry out a great object, and so secure a great
national good. Lord Nelson disregarded the signal of recall,
and took his ships to victory. The object of the expedition was
attained, for otherwise the fleets of Denmark would have fallen
a prey to the Conqueror of Europe. The legality of a step,
therefore, is not necessarily a test of prudence or of duty.
There were other instances not so grand in themselves, but
more directly to the question, and pretty conclusive as to the
principle he was contending for. What did they think of Lord
Beaconsfield suddenly bringing 10,000 Indian troops to Malta ?
That was said to have been an unconstitutional measure, and
against the bill of rights, although why against the bill of rights
he could not understand. But whatever it might be, Lord
Beaconsfield by that action gave to Europe a new and im-
pressive lesson as to the strength and resources of the Empire.
What did they think of the purchase by Lord Beaconsfield of
four million shares in the Suez Canal ? (Hear, hear.) Did
he have Parliamentary authority for that ? Not the least;
but the moment had arrived, and if he had not purchased the
shares then the opportunity for doing so might have been lost
for ever. (Hear, hear.) Yet Lord Beaconsfield was as con-
stitutional a Minister as they ever had, and certainly as able a
one. It was no idle thought, that had he last year held the
reins of power, General Gordon might have been still alive.
(Loud cheers.) The purchase of the shares was objected to
at first, but eventually it was ratified, and it certainly was one
most advantageous to the nation. Commercially at least, the
shares acquired by England were worth double what was given
for them. And by purchasing them England had secured a
preponderance of influence over the canal, which otherwise she
might never have secured.


it was important to bear in mind always that the objection
here to wbat the Government of New South Wales had done,
was not that it was wrong in itself, but solely that it was without
Parliamentary authority. The immense value of the step to the
Colony, its grandeur, even its patriotism, were acknowledged.
The community almost to a man approved of and advised it.
With such facts before us, he held this to be only a technical
objection —(hear, hear) —and one without foundation. He
would venture to read to the House an opinion of his upon it,
which opinion, he would add, rested upon authorities which he
had consulted on the subject. He ventured to maintain that
a Ministry would be justified in incurring expenditure without
previous Parliamentary sanction in any case where there was a
high probability, though not an absolute certainty (which could
never be predicated as to any political measure) that it would
be sanctioned, and where there were strong existing grounds of
expediency, though not amounting to a case of emergency,
calling for or excusing the expenditure. And that which was
true of expenditure would obviously be equally true of any
public measure which necessarily led to expenditure. This he
conceived to be a true and accurate statement of Ministerial
responsibility and power in cases of this kind. The Government
might have waited, but they might have waited until the oppor-
tunity was lost. The Attorney-General had shown that then and
then only was the time for action. Had he waited, the object to
be achieved would have passed and gone for ever. (Hear, hear.)
With the fall of Khartoum and the lamentable death of General
Gordon and the swarming around our troops of thousands of
Arabs came the supreme moment which the Government had
happily taken advantage of. Their action had raised the colony
to its proper position as a portion of that Empire which was
greater than Greece or Kome ever knew. They shewed that
Australians had not changed their nature by simply migrating to
another country. They had engraved on their hearts the motto
inscribed on the walls of their University, Sidere mens eadem
mutato —the star and the degrees of latitude had changed, but
the mind remained the same amongst them for ever. (Cheers.)
