



COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SPEECHES
ON THE
CONSTITUTION ALTERATION
(LEGISLATIVE POWERS) BILL,
AND THE
CONSTITUTION ALTERATION
(MONOPOLIES) BILL.
BY
THE HON. ALFRED DEAKIN, M.P.
[From the “ Parliamentary Debates," 19th, 27tH, 28th October, and 2 nd
November , 1910.]


COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SPEEOHES
ON THE
CONSTITUTION ALTERATION
(LEGISLATIVE POWERS) BILL,
AND THE
CONSTITUTION ALTERATION
(MONOPOLIES) BILL.
BY
THE HON. ALFRED DEAKIN, M.P.
[Fremi thè ‘‘ Parliamentary Debates,” lsth, 26 th, 27 th, 28 ih October, and 2 nd
1 Novemher, 1910.]
C;16329.


CONSTITUTION ALTERATION (LEGISLATIVE
TOWERS) BILL.
SECOND READING.
19</i Octoher, 1910.
Mr. DEAKIN (Ballarat) [10.47]. —
While feeling and expressing every appie-
datici of thè speech of thè Acting Prime
Minister last evening, he will not mis-
understand me when I say that it appeared
quite inadequate to thè subject we bave
in hand. I hasten to add that my own
speech most certainly, and probably every
other speech which may be delivered, will
be open to somewhat thè same imputation.
So many and so grave are thè issues in-
volved in this series of alterations of thè
Constitution that an attempt, strictly on thè
line and in thè light of principio and not of
detail, to deal with them satisfactorily and
fully would surpass thè endurance, if it did
not surpass thè ability, of any member of
thè House. My own contribution in thè way
of criticism, therefore, will be offered subject
to those reservations. In fact, thè proper
place for a specific and detailed considera-
tion of mudi in these fundamental altera-
tions of our Constitution is in Committee.
The only manner in which I feel
able to approach a consideration of thè
roeasure is not only with an admission
of thè necessary inadequacy of any treat-
ment I may offer, but also with an admis-
sion that, even with that restriction, I
shall be of necessity compelled, as well as
by choice induced, to confine myself to thè
principles involved. No doubt something
was required from thè Attorney-General in
relation to other Constitutions which claim
thè title of Federai, but I may be per-
mitted to remarle that thè practical con-
siderations were not touched upon. He
gave us in rough outline thè familiar
features of thè several Constitutions
capable of being grouped together form-
ali)’ under thè title of Federai. That
review was almost irrelevant, inasmuch as
every one of these was under careful and
continuous review in our Conventions last-
ing for many months—in thè case of thè
country, for some years —before ours was
àdopted. Those who framed our Consti-
lutlon, those who submitted it to thè people,
those who opposed it, and thè overwhelm-
ing majorities which indorsed it having
F. 16329.
all these choices before them preferred
our form of Federation, and it is
late in thè day, therefore, to revive
thè question, as if it were an open
one, or now required to be solved. Of
course, every precedent is open to recon-
sideration, but it shouid not be a recon-
sideration of that elementary character. It
ought to be conducted in thè light
of our own particular circumstances, for
it is a Constitution for Australia that
we want, and not a Constitution for Canada
or South Africa j a Constitution which
shall, as far as possible, fit our own cir-
cumstances, and not dictated to us by
abstract doctrinaires or a slavish copying
of any System adopted in another country.
For instance, thè one Constitution of all
others which most commends itself to my
honorable and learned friend was “ made
in Germany,” but it was made for that
country. Are there two countries in which
either thè politicai, or thè social, or thè in-
dustriai, not to say thè geographical, con-
ditions are more dissimilar than are those
between Germany and Australia ? I say
less of thè differences between thè peoples.
We carne originally from thè same stock,
and we bave reason to be proud of our
Teutonìc relations and relationship ; that is
by way of admission. But they bave fol-
lowed for centuries a different path and
to-day stili represent thè principle of ab-
solutism in European politics rather than
thè principles of thè democracy which is
struggling with that absolutism.
I, too, might be tempted into these fer-
tile, but rather unproductive, comparisons
by thè point of view from which thè At-
torney-Gcneral chose to approach this
question, but so far as possible, must needs
husband my resources in this vaguer por-
timi of thè’ arena, in order to come into
closer grip with thè subject. It is not
only that we may lack time to fully con-
duci an inquiry into thè proposed amend-
ments, but because at this stage, unless we
prolong our sitting into next year, we shall
not be afforded sufficient opportunities for
thè consideration of these five important
measures, each of them fundamentally and


vìtally affecting thè Constitution of this
country, and, together, of immeasurable
influence on its politicai future.
During this session we have led a
strenuous life. Never before in thè
Commonwealth Parliament has there been
such a pace kept, or so distinct a grouping
of parties*. For thè first lime, a single
party with an absolute majority of its own
—quite apart from thè peculiar character-
istics of that party —reigns in each House
of this Parliament. Those who sat for
constituencies ptior to thè last election will
recollect thè very adverse circumstances
under which thè simplest of measures had
then to he faced. But, even allowing
for thè ovenvhelming numbers of my hon-
orable friends opposite, our progress has
been, when fairly measured by thè legis-
lation of locai Parliaments in similar cir-
cumstances, extremely rapid. In fact,
we have been suffering from “ quick
lunch ” legislation to an inordinate degree,
and already thè process of resórting to
thè usuai stimulants, such as thè sacrifice
of thè business of thè unhappy private
member, has happened early in October—
a thing never known to occur before.
We not only have forced upon us thè
consideration of a series of Government
measures which cali for thè most thought-
ful review, but superimposed upon them
we have five proposals which go tb thè
root of thè whole Constitution. Such a
burden is almost more than this House
can bear in one session, if we are to pro-
portion our efforts to thè magnitudo of thè
subjects with which we are faced. This
does not mean extending thè length of our
speeches, but thè much heavier charge of
taking every practical point into full con-
sideration. If we do that we shall do
well. Partially exhausted, overdrugged
with legislation, we approach these ques-
tions towards thè dose of a session when
physical weariness becomes an importarli
factor, since it carries with it inevitably a
certain amount of mental weariness. We
must regret that this is so, and also regret
that it may not be possible for usto see these
questions approached from both sides of
thè Chamber with that complete and entire
openmindedness which allows every one to
weigh proposals of a national and per-
nia nent cha rader without consideration of
party ties and responsibilities.
Mr. Mathews. —Hear, bear ! I expect
a good deal of help from thè honorable
member.
Mr. DEAKIN.—Let me do my bt.,t
to begin, and I trust that I shall
clisappoint so amiable a critic as my honor-
able friend. But does any one expect that,
or ready hope for it ?Is it not a fact
that, although this need not be, and ough;
not to be, a Ministerial question, we com-
mence thè consideration of it with thè
knowledge that, whatever case may be put by
us we have no reasonable prospect of seeing
any of these proposals materially altered ?
That is a very discouraging condition with
which to open a debate on questions which
ought to be considered apart from party.
I have not had an opportunity of ascer-
taining whether honorable members on this
side are all atone. My personal
opinion is that there will be dilferences of
opinion in regard to some proposals ; al-
though 1 hope that if they exist we shall,
by a fair process, arrive at an agree-
ment as to what ought to be done in
each instance in thè public interest.
If that could be done by thè House as a
whole, we should then be adopting thè righi
attitude in circumstances which would give
us ground for hope. I must confess, how-
ever, that, while members opposite are
evidently good enough to give our case a,
thoughtful hearing, their decision is
weighted, to begin with, very adversely
against us.
Mr. Mathews. —Oh, no; only that we
mean to make it effective.
Mr. DEAKIN.—If by “ it ” thè hon-
orable member raeans a Federai Constitu-
tion in thè sense in which this Constitution
was federai when it was adopted, I am
entirely with him ; but if what he wishes
to make effective is an anti-federal or un-
federal Constitution, I sincerely hope he
will not succeed. Whether it is or is not
is a point which I shall reach shortly.
One of thè most suggestive portions of
thè speech of thè Attorney-General last
night was that in which he stated that thè
party opposite were returned to carry out
their full programme, to impose a graduated
land tax, to legislate in regard to trusts
and combines, to take power to nationalize
monopolies, and to accomplish several other
radicai changes in our constitutional Sys-
tem this session.
Mr. Mathews. —And to give effect to
new Protection.
Mr. DEAKIN.—He mentioned tha) '
also. The Attorney-General was perfectly
righi in making that claim. He and most
of his followers made that assertion


directly and repeatedly during thè late dec-
lorai campaign. In thè tace ot it they got
a majority in this House, as I have already
poiiucct out, out ot propomon to thè voting
in tne country. They got a majority in thè
country, but very smau, and ni tbe House,
one very large, but they got both on that
programme. lam not one to dispute it. I
caiied attention to it over and over again at
pubhc meetings, and put it in thè strongest
possible fashion.
More, after thè present Prime Ministeri
prediction of thè number of seats that he
expected to win in thè different States, giv-
ing him a majority, instead of joining in
thè chorus of derision which arose, speak-
ing on thè first night after that estimate
was made I said thè honorable member for
Wide Bay was prophesying on excelient
Information, and, so far as I could see, it
was quite likely that his forecast would be
realized. At every meeting addressed after
that I told thè same story, at all events in
Victoria, where I think I was then tour-
ing. Pointing to thè platform and thè
prophecy, I said thè prophecy was quite
likely to be realized, and that if it were
thè whole platform would be carried out.
I could get scarcely any of my own side
to believe either statement. They ridiculed
thè forecast of thè numbers to be returned,
and many others, some friendly to thè
Labour party, assured me over and over
again that when thè party got into office
nine-tenths of their programme would be
laid aside, merely thè other tenth, which
was acceptable, would be carried out, with
perhaps a few little reforms thrown in.
Personali)', therefore, I have thè sad satis-
faction of having prophesied correctly.
Not being thè least surprised, I make no
protest against my honorable friends’
actions. They stateci what they were going
to do, and are quite justified in doing it.
The responsibility rests on this community,
which chose to rely upon its own theories
in its action or want of action. A sufficient
proportion acted, or failed to act, in con-
sequence of that opinion. Therefore. we
start fair bere, and my critics opposite have
no crronnd for romplaint on that score.
Mr. Page. —The honorable member will
believe in our “ crowd ” yet.
Mr. DEAKIN.—Some of them are very
pleasant, and some very 3angerous, per-
sons.
I am addressing members opposite,
whose opinions with regard to this Con-
stitution were made up before they carne
A 2
here, and who were returned on those
opinions, but if they had not made up
their minds beyond all recali, 1 should
commence by asking what is wrong with
thè Constitution we have. At all events,
what is wrong with it that is not capable of
being put righi without wrenching it apart
or breaking into it by violence ? Why not
bring any powers that are insufficient In thè
Constitution to their naturai flower and
fruii wherever an amendment is needed?
When all we suffer is from irritating
symptoms attending some slight, but rather
aggravating, complaints, why not adopt a
simple change of diet and a few ordinary
constitutional household remedies ? Why
rush to thè surgeon at once and ask for
live operations in fi ve different portions of
thè body politic? Health is not to he
achieved by violent means. It is nchieved
in spile of them, if at all. No one de-
sires to break into thè human constitution,
seeking to carve its vita! organs with thè
knife, cxcept in cases when desperate cir-
cumstances demand desperate remedies.
Does any one pretend that thè state of Aus-
tralia to-day is in a desperate state calling
for desperate remedies ?
Air. Fenton. —Socially and industriali
it is.
Mr. D*EAKIN.—No ; socially and in-
dustriali)', comparing like with like, thè
honorable member can show me no pari of
thè world where thè state of society is
healthier than in Australia. All things
human are imperfect; some of our affairs
are out of joint, and we encounter various
maladies. Apparenti these conditions are
incident to humanity in its present stage.
All desire to see it outgrown ; but who can
say that Australia’s condition is such that
it calls for these novel and heroic reme-
dies ? Shall we not certainly run thè risk
of begetting more, and perhaps more seri-
ous, ills than those we are endeavouring
to cure by this hasty and hazardous method ?
Air. Page.— But that only applies after
some operations.
Air. DEAKIN. —Putting South Africa
aside. as thè Attorney-Generai properly did,
with its unitary constitution, thè Australia»
is stili thè youngest of thè federai Constì-
tutions in thè world. Not only that, but
it comes more closely to thè intentions of
those who framed and those who adopted
it than any existing Constitution of a simi-
lar kind. Naturally that is so, because it
is only ten years ofd. This is thè Consti-
tution to which we are proposing, not what


might be called a naturai or forced, or
even hasty, ripening, but changes, some of
which are both fundamenta! and perilous.
We shall deal with them seriatim pre-
senti)'.
The people of Australia ten years
ago voted this Constitution in four
States by two to one, and, after
some important, but not vital, altera-
tions, voted it in live States by nearly three
to one. Consequently bere is a Constitu-
tion, so to speak, fresh from thè hands of
its makers ; comparatively recently ap-
proved by thè people by large majorities ;
and yet about to be amended, not in a
curative, but in a reckless fashion. That
in itself must suggest to honorable mem-
bers thè query whether we are justified in
sanctioning thè five-fold operation now
proposed. Ido not say that thè Consti-
tution when passed was perfect. I do
not say it is perfect now. On thè con-
trary, to be a Constitution, it ought to be,
and I thlnk it is in this case, something more
than an ordinary statute or piece of legai
machinery. A Constitution is, and was
in our case, made by a nation ; is made, as
in this case, for a nation, and lives with
thè life of thè nation—a growing organism
that should naturally and without undue
convulsion re-adapt itself to changing cir-
cumstances.
If this were thè “ dead hand,”
as it was sometimes termed by those who
originally opposed its adoption, there might
be a legitìmate cry that what we wanted
was a living and not a fixed Constitution ;
but we have a growing Constitution. As thè
Attorney-General pointed out, three amend-
ments have been already proposed ; two of
them have been carried and form a part
of thè Constitution. Others can be carried
without any great difficulty. In fact, Min-
isters are sanguine that bere they can carry
thè whole of these extraordinary proposals.
If they do, one will be ohliged to admit
that not only is our Constitution living and
growing, but that it possesses a capacity
for self-mutilation not exercised by many
living creatures.
Mr. Roberts. Self-mutilation is
scarcely compatible with life and growth.
Mr. DEAKlN.—Unfortunately it some-
times occurs, but I shall not shock thè
fastidious taste of thè honorable member
by pushing any metaphors of that sort too
far. It conveys roughly what I mean, and
we need not pretend that it is flawless.
Having found already that it is not diffi-
dili lo alter thè Constitution, we are
not now placed in thè position of
choosing between either a revolutionary
altcration or such a partial adapta-
tion as will meet thè demands of to-day.
No honorable member will pretend that
we are limited to that choice. Every
one will agree that if a fair case
can be made out for alterations thè
people of this country will give us authority
to make them. Consequently honorable
niembers cannot plead any emergency of (he
present situation as a ground for ask-
ing more than are actually required.
We are under no pressure. We are faced
with no emergency which compels usto
do more than is now necessary to enable
thè Constitution to evolve, as it ought to
do, as thè lifeof thè nation evolves. But we
are asked to-day to do so very ranch more
than this, that thè Constitution we shall
have to consider, if thè people accept these
proposals, will be a new one in every sense
of thè word.
May I point out that this state-
ment is no new expression of opinion
from myself. In opening thè late Fede-
rai campaìgn at Ballarat, I took occasion
to reiterate what I had often said in this
House, and in a previous election cam-
paign, that thè Federai Constitution was
stili incomplete, and its powers needed to
be rounded off ; that there were subjects
which necessarily required to be included
within its scope before it could be re-
garded as complete. I called attention to
two particular proposals which were then
before thè country in support of this view.
Consequently, I ara merely emphasizing
once more a conviction arrived at some
years since. We do not approach this
question with a mind closed against
argument in any direction, or bound or
pledged by anything I have said or done
to view unfavorably any or all of these
proposals. Any opinion I happen to ex-
press is formed on thè best material
now before me, with such capacity as I
enjoy, and with no limitations inherited
from thè stormy past.
Under these circumstances, I believe that
bere a very admirable and comprehensive
memorandum by my late colleague, thè
honorable member for Angas, may be
quoted with advantage. When Attorney-s
General he felt it his duty to consider thè
position created by certain judgments of
thè High Court in interpreting thè Consti-
tution, in one respect at all events in a


more restrictive fashion than most of us
anticipated.
Mr. West. —When was thè memoran-
dum written ?
Mr. DEAKIN.- —About August of last
year. It will be in thè hands of honor-
able members to-day, and supplies evi-
dence, if any were needed, that our Go-
vernment immediately preceding thè pre-
sent Federai Government did not fear to
face at once any situation created by these
new decisions. This elaborate memoran-
dum was prepared for that Government,
though, as a matter of fact, thè members
of it were never, as a Government, called
upon to consider it. Our hands last ses-
sion, as those who were members of thè
House then will recollect, were more than
full. We had all that we could do at
that time in this House to transact thè
very satisfactory record of business with
which we closed thè session, after a most
unpropitious opening of two or three
months’ preliminary exercises. Conse-
quently we never had an opportunity as a
Government to take into consideration thè
recommendations contained in this memor-
andum. They were made in thè light
of knowledge then, and they stand now,
although I bave no doubt my colleague,
thè late Attorney-General, and my other
colleagues, may read it to-day with eyes
which are more open to some necessities of
thè case than they were when it was ipre-
pared, because since then at least one de-
cision has been given which adds to thè
strength of thè case put forward.
In August, 1909, so far from being blind
to thè situation which was being created by
High Court judgments, this memorandum,
which was then confidential, and is now
fortunately made public, is evidence of
vvhat our Government at thè time under-
took as part of its every-day ordinary
duty in this regard. The present Attor-
ney-General last night read some very appo-
site passages from thè memorandum. I was
very gl ad thè honorable gentleman did so.
He has relieved me of thè necessity of
reading them. But there is one very excel-
lent passage which he did not read, and
which I propose to give myself thè plea-
sure of being thè first to place before hon-
orable members. The honorable member
for Angas said—
- 1 When thè apportionment of powers is being
considered there is no frimà jacie presumption
in favorir of either thè Commonwealth or thè t
States; both alike being parts of thè Federai
System, thè distribution among them of govern-
mental agencies must bave regard chiefly to con-
siderations of self-sufliciency and effective use.
The success of a federation depends upon thè
nice relation and co-ordìnatìon of thè parts; on
thè preservation or development of locai, as well
as national, centres of interest, discussion, and
opinion. Whìle remembering that a strong cen-
trai Government is required to cope with many
modem conditions, and may, therefore, be for
some proposals at least relatively good, we must
not forget that centralization does not always
assure thè perfect working of thè Democratic
principle ; that directness and proximity stimu-
late electoral intexests and strengthen adminis-
trative control; and that uniform regulation of
all thè affairs of a continent may be inexpedient,
if not mischievous.
There is a fair balancing. That, I take
it, is thè Federai spirit intellectually ex-
pressing itself at its best. Here we bave
thè true national view, which takes thè
people of Australia as a unit—thè people
indivisible, and thè territory indivisible,
constituting thè unit to be considered. It
then justifies their two organs of govern-
ment, thè Federai, or national, and thè
locai, including State, municipal, and
other governmental agencies subsidiary to
thè Government of thè State, which it is
not necessary to particularize.
But thè health and activity of each
and all of these is essential to thè
well-being of thè whole of thè body
politic. To ignore, to maim, or evento
dispirit either of these organs of govern-
ment, would be to defeat thè ends of
Federation, which are to bring both into
intimate and contìnuous co-operatìon for thè
fulfilment of national ideals, by whichever
means is most suitable to thè particular end
to be achieved. VVhen this instrumentality
is locai, and in very many cases it must
be locai, then it is to thè locai Government
we bave to look. It would but impair
thè usefulness of a National or State Par-
liament if thè duties proper to muni-
cipalities, trusts, boards, and other sub-
sidiary instruments of Government were cast
upon it. In thè same way a duty which is
essentially and indispensably national, no
one would think of remitting to such sub-
sidiary bodies, or evento a State Parlia-
ment. All depends upon thè balance and
reciprocai adjustment of thè powers to thè
rircumstances. As my honorable and
learned friend, in his memorandum very
aptly says, thè people having a choice of
means, can defeat national ends just as
mudi by overweighting this Parliament,
which is naturally their princlpal and
national agency of Government, as they
could if they unduly depended on thè State
or municipal or other locai Government,*
established throughout this country.


If thè Attorney-General had added last
night to thè passages he quoted that which
I have just read from thè memorandum,
he rvould have struck its keynotes, making
thè contention of my able and learned
friend, thè honorable member for Angas,
perfectly clear. It seems, therefore,
that thè two dangers which we have
to confront are, first of all, undue
centralization, which may overstrain thè
national heart, and greatly diminish our
effective strength. Every one admits
that over centralization must have such
effects. I confess that I do not like thè
words, “centralization," and ''decentra -
lization,” but our language is wanting in
precise terms in this regard. There
must be centralization and there must be
decentralization. In thè same way, if there
be an excess of decentralization, if there
is a plurality of organs of government, we
shall suffer from a want of unity of
purpose and lack thè vertebrate life of a
nation. Here we face a difficult division
of powers which those of us who under-
stand thè demands of our nation find grave
in thè extreme.
The Attorney-General last night passed
with a gay bound over all those gulfs
surrounding thè reai question at issue,
which is thè distribution of powers be-
tween thè Federai and locai Govern-
ments. He relied upon thè presentation
of a number of subjects to honorable
members as capable of being best dealt
with by thè National Parliament, and in
an absolute manner. The honorable gen-
tleman w'on thè applauso of his party by
putting before thè House thè argument
that in achieving this programme, and
for this purpose, thè short and direct
route was to gìve this Parliament, of w'hich
we are members, thè power to magnify its
office and opportunities, so as to enable
usto achieve thè nationalization of mono-
polies, taxation, and other objects which
he set out. The honorable gentleman put
before us thè objects to be attained, and,
so far as absolute silence could, he diverted
our attention from what we should be
sacrificing in our Federai Constitution.
now based upon a fairly naturai and
healthy balance of powers in order to
achieve these immediate ends. We who
take thè opposite view are at a great dis-
advantage, because instead of being able
to make concrete appeals diverting public
attention to certain practical results which
may be obtained more easily after an altera-
tion of our constitutional machinery, we
have thrown upon us thè responsibility of
defending thè constitutional machinery it-
self. The relation of Governments to
Governments to thè man in thè Street ap-
pears a mudi less practical matter than
thè ends sought to be achieved according
to hìs immediate programme. The reai
question in this House is not whether this
industriai legislation supported by our
honorable friends opposite is necessary.
It is not even a question whether there
should be a greater control over trusts and
monopolies. On many, if not all, of these
questions, honorable members on this side
are prepared to take a progressive vievv.
But these are not thè questions immediately
at issue. The question is whether ive are
going to endeavour to achieve these ends
by a great alteration of thè national
machinery which will be permanent —un-
less thè people alter it back again—an
alteration in thè national machinery and
character of our Constitution which will
continue to be operative long after thè
immediate and particular object of thè
change has been accomplished.
Mr. J. H. Catxs. —We cannot get that
unless thè machinery is altered.
Mr. DEAKIN. There I venture to
join issue, but that is a matter for later
consideration. At thè present moment thè
fact remains that we are handicapped, in-
asmuch as we appear to be fighting chiefly
for constitutional machinery—for thè main-
tenance of thè present situation so far as it
allows thè free play of locai institutions,
finds them a distinct field, and encourages
them to develop it. Our position, it seems
to me, can be defended on thè most prac-
tical of all grounds, as well as on theo-
retical principles. I venture to repeat that
those who suppose that all our affairs can
be governed by 125 men at Canberra,
under a System which throw's on them at
that one centre all thè affairs of this vast
continent, capable of sustaining, not only
millions but tens of millions, are commit-
ting themselves to a line of constitutional
concentration which must break down, and
be followed by reaction, in order to secure a
more cfìicient government. Our people
must keep their direct control'of locai mat-
ters, coupled with a direct control of thè
vvhole in national matters.
Mr. J. H. Catts. We can all s-
“ bear, bear,” to that.
Mr. DEAKIN. —It is thè next step in
thè argument which justifies my positiort.
Perhaps I have taken a little leap, but i r
is necessary to establish thè grounds ior


_ thè opinion I hold that thè government of
Australia from Canberra under thè Consti-
tution, altered as is proposed, must be im-
practicable on any satisfactory basis.
Mr. West. —We thought that thè ori-
ginai Constitution gave us thè power.
Mr. DEAKIN. —The honorable mem-
ber is probably speaking for himself. But
I was more than amused when thè Attor-
ney-General pointed out what “ we
thought ’ ’ —speaking of thè electors at thè
tinte of thè adoption of Federation —thè
Constitution empowered this Parliament to
tlo. “ We thought,” said thè Attorney-
General, “ that this Constitution assured us
unlimited industriai and other powers,”
and ‘ ‘ how deceived we were. ’ ’ Who were
thè “we”? Not thè Attorney-General.
Fle was one of thè strongest and most de-
termined opponents of thè present Consti-
tution.
Mr. Hughes. —At thè originai referen-
dum, yes ; because it provided for equal
representation in thè Senate.
Mr. DEAKIN. —Having opposed thè
Constitution to thè utmost of his power,
energy, and ability, he may be justified in
his present action, but not in his pretence
t of being misled into voting for it.
Mr. Hughes. —l opposed thè Constitu-
tion because it did not give thè majority
of thè people an opportunity to express
themselves..
Mr. DEAKIN. —If so, then thè pre-
sent Government and their supporters bave
no right to be in office —they must bave
captured it by accident.
Mr. Hughes. —The honorable member
is evadìng thè point. The Constitution
places us bere, but it does not give us
thè opportunity to do what thè people teli
usto do.
Mr. DEAKIN.—The Ministeri objec-
tion first, was that thè Constitution could
not be altered ; but it has been altered
twice, and nearly a third time, and now
five more alterations are proposed. Next,
it was said that thè majority of thè
people would never be represented by
a majority in thè Senate—that it
might be represented in this House,
fout not in another place. I ask
honorable members to look at thè Senate
to-day. What was said by thè Attorney-
General, and those who thought with him,
_jit that time was not true —their calcula-
tions were hopelessly wrong. It is possible
fór a majority to capture both Houses, and
it is possible for thè Constitution to be
Itered. Therefore, their antagonism then,
which was based on want of approdati on
of thè facts, was unjustified ; and that is why
I contend that their antagonism now —this
calling for ruthless root-and-branch altera-
tions —is unjustified, and based on another
mistaken forecast made by thè same mer.
Over and over again last night thè At-
torney-General returned, and properly, to
what is thè key to thè whole position. He
claims that thè distinguishing feature of
all Federai governments is thè maintenance
of two sovereignties within it —a sove-
reignty of a centrai government and legis-
lature, and a sovereignty of subordinate
governments and legislatures. The hon-
orable gentleman committed himself to that
sound and unanimously accepted view ; but
he, further, committed himself to an ex-
traordinary doctrine —which, so far as I
know, is entirely his own —that thè extent
and character of thè distribution of powers
between thè sovereignties does not matter a
pin. It seems to me that here his argument
committed suicide with happy despatch.
What thè Attorney-General first said was
perfectly true. We bave two sets of Go-
vernments, one locai and one Federai ;
and each must be sovereign within its
sphere. He repeated that over and over
again, though it is an axiom which every
one accepts. He then went on to say
that so long as we leave to thè States
some fragmentary power of legislation
while endowing thè Central Parliament
with almost every power now possessed by
thè States, yet that such a Federation,
as a Federation, would be complete and
satisfactory—“ complete,” was his own
word. Such a whole is “complete” only
as a description of an abortion. Federa-
tion of a kind could, in that sense, continue
to exist —there wlll stili be something nomi-
nally, and in form, federai. But, in truth
and in fact, thè only reai Government
would be centrai, and thè sham Government
locai. After thè Central Parliament had
made its meal, there might be some scraps
left on thè piate for thè locai legislatures.
While thè Attorney-General, with vexbal
accuracy, and in a strictly formai sense,
could cali such an arrangement “ Federai,”
in truth and in fact we should bave a uni-
tary Government, with a number of echoes
and mockeries of Government existing as
its attendants and always at its mercy.
A federai government, in thè true sense
of thè term, is thè most complex and deli-
cate form of government yet devised by
humanity. It represents thè highest ideal
and requires thè most politicai culture of


thè most civilized races of thè worid. It is
not even conceivable by less developed
people, and cannot be carried on except by
a community of highly-developed intelli-
gence and judgment. There are examples
of federation, taking thè widest meaning
of thè term, as far apart as Germany and
ourselves—and we may be regarded as,
perhaps, thè two opposite poles. Every
federai government treads a narrow path,
with an abyss on either side. Let thè
national parliament be weakened too much,
and thè government sinks to thè level of a
confederacy ; in thè absence of a national
union, there is no true and effective nation.
Or if thè locai governments dwindle while
thè centrai government is aggrandized
you obtain a democratic despotism. It
becomes a despotism when its centrai and
sole Government is elected by a mere
majority at a count taken over thè whole of
thè continent. There should be a provision
to insure that thè deliberate and permanent
vili of thè community prevails, and not
thè chance result of a particular decision
registered in a single chamber. Yet that
is what we are threatened with.
Mr. West.— The electors spoke loudly
enough on thè i3th Aprii !
Mr. DEAKIN.—Most honorable mem-
bers will admit that I am justified in call-
ing attention to thè delicate and difficult
task which besets any people undertaking
such a Federai Government as shall estab-
lish and maintain a balance of power suffi-
ciently to keep both locai Governments and
national Governments in full effectiveness,
United in harmonious co-operation under thè
bidding of thè whole people. That is thè
ideal we all bave, and we should not admit
any other. The Federai principle alone
can sudice for this continent—Australia is
too huge for an entire centralization. Al-
though not pausing for authorities, let me
quote thè late Professor Freeman, one of
those who contrlbuted most to thè history of
federations, and did much to illustrate and
elucidate their principles, contrastlng those
which made for success with those which
made for failure. He poìnts out that not
only is its balance and harmony essential to
thè development of trade, commerce, em-
ployment, on thè material side of progress,
but is also essential to mental culture, par-
ticularly on thè politicai side. In these
regards a Federai Government gives thè
greatest results, because, a single and
dominating Parliament, without locai
legislatures, ready equipped with some
share of power and responsibility, has lost
its best training ground of a democratic
character. No matter how vast thè country
may be, if truly federai in constitution
every man in bis own State and neighbour-
hood may train himself in locai govern-
ments acquiring a knowledge of that pari
of thè country, and of politicai practical
methods, making him a much better and
more efficient representative in thè national
parliament when his fellow-citizens send
him there. The best training ground for
politics, said Professor Freeman, is found
in such subsidiary governments clothed
with responsible powers.
Mr. Bamford. — Such as provincial
councils, for instance?
Mr. DEAKIN. —Provincial councils, if
of sufficient responsibility and weight,
would meet thè purpose. I am labounng
these broader aspects of thè question for
this reason, that, unless I err, it is neces-
sary that they should be stated at least
once. If I relieve my colleagues upon this
side of thè House, or my friends upon thè
other, of thè necessity of recalling them,
that may enable usto come to closer grips
afterwards. Upon thè electors of Austra-
lia, under a federai forra of government,
more demands are made than would be
made upon them under any other forra of
government. It is not enough for them to
understand thè particular question which
they are asked to decide, as, for example,
a tax it may be proposed to levy. They
bave to comprehend thè balance of thè
Federai powers, to keep clearly before
them thè balance of their Federai Consti-
tution, and to ask themselves : “ To which
of our Legislatures can these powers be in-
trusted, or how should they be shared?”
In other words, they bave to determine
w'hich Legislature —Federai or State —is
likely to most efficiently exercise each par-
ticular power committed to it. I venture
to say that very few of thè people of Aus-
tralia asked themselves such questions at
thè last elections. They should bave con-
sidered first ivhat thè particular proposals
meant, and also how far they affected their
two kinds of governments
Mr. West. —The electors showed that
they understood thè questions submitted for
their decision on thè two referenda very
well.
Mr. DEAKIN.—Of course, we all knoyw
that a short cut is generally a tempting
one ; but that in many instances we are
likely to find that, after all, it is thè
longest way round ; what appears to be a


less direct path of advance is often thè
more permanent and satisfactory. When
thè people jealously support our State Go-
vernments within their spheres, and yet de-
vote sufficient time to questions which
are being dealt with by thè National Par-
liament, we shall see them setting apart
a full day for every ten minutes they now
spare to their public affairs. If we take
a group such as one meets in a tram or
railway carriage, it is astonishing to dis-
cover how few bave even read thè reports
of parliamentary proceedings in their daily
newspapers
Mr. Hedges. —Would thè honorable
member bave them neglect football and
cricket ?
Mr. J. H. Catts. —It is thè so-called
educated class who neglect to inform them-
selves of our parliamentary proceedings.
Mr. DEAKIN.—-To make thè experi-
ment a few times is to receive a lesson in
thè politicai education of thè people. The
closer thè canvass condurteli, thè more
amazing are thè misapprehensions un-
earthed at every turn. To establish and
attempi to maintain a Federai Govern-
ment during a period in which this indif-
ference and haphazard method of inquiry
into thè public affairs of thè nation obtains,
is to receive a lasting lesson in thè risks
which any ready federai form of govern-
ment runs, and must run, until an absolute
transformation takes place in thè attitude
of our electors until thè desired In-
formation is not only supplied to thè
people, but is by them weighed, mea-
sured, criticised, and consistently acted
upon. Until that is done we can-
not hope to bave a thoroughly sound
System of Federai Government.
Ecfore I leave this aspect of thè ques-
tion—only touched upon bere —it is scarcely
necessary for me to remind honorable
members of thè striking faci that politicai
developments in practically all unitary
systems of Government to-day point in a
Federai direction. If we look at thè re-
latively despotic Governments of Russia,
Austria, and Gerrnany, we shall discover
decentralization. If we look to our own
F.mpire, we shall discover it there. What
is thè cry in Great Britain to-day but “ de-
volution ” ? What is thè cry which is to
be heard in Ireland, Scollanti, and Wales,
but “ devolution ”? Our own and only Im-
periai prospect is of some form of Federa-
tion adapted to thè special circumstances of
a world-wide Empire. Every Dominion
will naturally adopt that form of self-
government which its people prefer. That is
no concern of ours. But thè only possible
union of those Dominions and peoples
in one Empire must be upon a Federai
basis. I repeat that to-day thè whole trend
of politicai thought in every country is
more or less in a Federai direction.
Mr. Archibald. —lt all depends upon
what thè honorable member calls
11 Federai.”
Mr. DEAKIN.—The existence of dual
sovereignties, each supreme in its own
sphere, and both responsible in degree to
their common electorate. The ideal that
we bave always cherished for Australian
Federation is to obtain thè most highly
developed of all these forms of govern-
ment, though it is and will be thè most
difficult to establish or maintain, because
it aims at a full realization of all our
powers by means of two sets of Govern-
ment. The strongest criticism that I bave
to offer of these Bills is that, judged by thè
standard of thè highest Federalism—thè
complete development of locai governing
bodies—they fail—they proceed much too
far in an opposite direction. They unduly
centralize, and unduly discourage locai
development.
Whilst dealing with this subject, let me
referto thè Budget speech of thè Prime
Minister in which he outlined thè pro-
gramme of his party for thè current session.
On page 2683 of Hansard he is credited
with having made a rather remarkable
slip. He affirmed that thè industriai
powers which thè Commonwealth possesses
through its Courts of Conciliation and
Arbitration carne to us in their limited
form owing to thè timidity of thè
draftsmen. So far from that being thè
case, there was not a proposai submitted
to thè several Federai Conventions which
attracted so much attention and involved
such a series of divisions. The Prime
Minister said—
We have been more successful in our Federai
Arbitration law, and I think it was nothing but
thè timidity of thè draftsmen of thè Constitutìon
which led them to insert thè limitation.
The limitation to which he was then re-
ferring was that which permits thè Con-
ciliation and Arbitration Court to take
cognisance only of industriai disputes which
extend beyond thè limits of any one State.
If honorable members will take thè trouble
to look up thè officiai debates hearing on
that proposai they will see that it was first
brought forward in those very terms by thè


late Mr. Kingston in 1891. Twelve mem-
bers of thè Conference voted for it, of
whom I was one. When thè Convention
met in 1897, Mr. Kingston occupied thè
position of President, and consequently
asked Mr. Higgins to submit his
proposai for him. Upon that occasion
twelve members again voted for it and
twenty-two against it. Finally thè matter
went over to thè Melbourne session in 1898
where, after a prolonged effort, and as
thè result of a vigorous whip, we were suc-
cessful in obtaining twenty-two votes in
favour against nineteen. So that even
after three fights—and I remember no
triple fight in thè Convention on any other
question—and after three divisions, thè
last of which was a dose one, we only at
thè very last effort managed to secure a
sufficient majority to put thè section in
this limited form into thè Constitution at
all. So far from its previous omission
being due to thè timidity of thè draftsmen,
we were fortunate indeed in securing this
reward for perseverance.
Mr. Archibald. —Mr. Kingston had
great faith in State legislation on thè lines
of his own Bill, and he would be grievously
disappointed if he were living to-day.
Mr. DEAKIN.—Does thè honorable
member think so? Would Mr. Kingston
expect nothing from thè South Australia!!
Government of to-day ?
Mr. Fenton. —It is thè Legislative
Councils of thè States that bog us always.
Mr. DEAKIN.—AII of us who have
been State members of Parliament have
been brought, more or less, into connexion
with Legislative Councils ; but there has
been no question on which thè Legislative
Assemblv—in Victoria, at all events —made
up its mind and kept its mind, which it
has not managed eventually to pass.
Mr. Parker Moloney. —What about thè
land tax proposai ?
Mr. DEAKIN.—If you look at thè poli-
ticai differences dividing each House you
will find thè key to sudi failures almost
as mudi in thè House in which thè pro-
posai originated as in thè Legislative Coun-
cil. The Prime Minister went on tn sum
up in a sentence a contention of his of
considerable significance—•
The occurrences of thè last ten years make
it impossible to take too optimistic a view of
thè possibilities of Australia under one centrai
Government.
That opinion was echoed last night by thè
Attorney-General, in his own way, and in
different forms. Three-fourths of thè
arguments he used put that assertion in
different phraseology—that vve could not
take too optimistic a view of thè future
if thè destinies of Australia were intrusted
to one centrai Government. With that
due in hand, we are able to under-
stand each and all of thè proposals
before us. Every one of them takes
away from thè locai or State Governments
what it gives to thè centrai or Common-
wealth Government, thus seeking to bring
about thè politicai redemption of Australia
through its centrai Government, and prac-
tically through it alone. Nothing less, said
thè Attorney-General last night, than thè
entire control of industry and of trade and
commerce, can make thè work of thè Fe-
derai Parliament easy, or worthy of itself.
It would no doubt make thè work of thè
Federai Pailiament easy —I might say,
free and easy. But it would be pur-
chased at thè expense of all thè distant
portions of thè community, and of many of
those that are nearer. The relevant and
significali! thing is—it is quite a» prone* -
thing, too —that thè Prime Minister and thè
Attorney-General are singing exactly thè
sartie lune, or rather thè same refrain.
Mr. West. — They are both in thè same
boat.
Mr. DEAKIN.—They are both in thè
same boat, and evidently steering for thè
same port. Consequently, when thè At-
torney-General put it—and in doing so used
an old Victorian phrase, which is not
patented, and was perfectly open to him—
that this country was arriving at “ a part-
ing of thè ways,” I think he was quite
right. These proposals do mark a parting
of thè ways, even more decisively than did
i3th Aprii. Because, after all, that was
only a Ministerial change. This is con-
stitutional. This is enduring. We bave
one Constitution to-day. Make these
amendments, and it will be another Con-
stitution. It will not only bave lost its
bai ance of powers ; it will bave lost its
Federai character. It will bave become a
new kind of Constitution. Therefore.
what is proposed does mark a parting of
thè ways—first, between those who be-
lieve that by amending and improving
thè present Constitution—amending it on
its own lines, and preserving as far as
possible its bai ance of powers—will be
found thè soundest road to national well-
being, and those on thè other hand who
wish to make a decisive departure seeking
to open up an entirely new road. On that
for a long tirae there will be no sufficient


opportunity farther on for a turning to
bring us back to thè path on which we have
been proceeding. If we take to this new
road we must go on governing Australia
through one centrai Parliament, that is, as
long as thè people of Australia permit.
Mr. Hughes.
these amendments of thè Constitution im-
pair or violate thè Federai principle?
Mr. DEAKIN.—I have tried to show
some. I will referto others. But let me
now turn to a portion of thè Attorney-
General’s speech with which I am able to
agree, where he rapidly referrcd us lo thè
one thoroughly established and officiai de-
finition of Federation—not merely recol-
lecting that our two sovereignties should
be left relatively unimpaired, to act side
by side, but that fuller defmition which
says that thè Central Government shall
possess powers limited but enumerated. In
a true Federation thè Central Government
is endowed with powers enumerated and
limited in scope, set out on thè face of thè
document in clear terms, while thè States
are left with powers separate and in-
dependent. Further, thè interpretation
to be given in any case of doubt as be-
tween thè two should be against thè
Central Government, so far as it makes
for a unitary reading of thè Consti-
tution, or would impair thè separate and
independent powers of thè States. Those
are thè principles and thè rule of inter-
pretation which mark a Federai Govern-
ment.
Now, these five amendments, as proposed,
•depart altogether from that definition.
They also make very significant an omis-
sion which surprised me in thè speech of
thè Attorney-General. He impressed upon
this House that thè amendments for which
he so eloquently appealed lime and again,
and which he deems thè one thing
necessary for thè salvation of thè Com-
monwealth, were an increase of Federai
powers. But he did not mention—or, at
all events, Be did not impress thè House
with thè fact —that each and every one of
thè powers under these amendments of h's
alreadv exists to thè full and untrammelled
in each and all of thè States of Australia.
If he had mentioned that fact, he would
have had to remind thè House that every
fresh endowment of power to us under
these amendments is not taken out of thè
void, or some new reservoir, but is taken
out of those of thè States ; that every fresh
endowment provided for us in these
amendments must be made at thè expense
of thè States, because each of them at pre-
sent possesses it to thè full.
Again, there is a stili more importuni fac-
tor than that upon which thè Attorney-Gene-
ral did not touch, but which affords thè key
to thè whole situation. Of course, none of
those who heard thè honorable gentleman in
this House supposed, but nevertheless many
of thè public will suppose, that, after all.
thè amendments simply mean dipping our
hands into a common puise, and that which-
ever authority has thè quickest hand gets
most —dip and dip again. That is not thè
case. Section 109 of thè Constitution
lays it down that—
Whcn a law of a Siate is inconsistent with
a law of a Commonwealth thè latter shall pre-
vali, and thè former shall, to thè extent of thè
inconsistency, be invalìd.
That is to say, all of these powers are
to-day possessed in each of thè States,
and by them alone. The amendments be-
fore us create a similar authority for thè
Commonwealth ; hence thè Commonwealth
(eglslation in these respects would have no
limit, while all State laws would become
iuoperative in so far as they conflicted with
any laws passed by thè Commonwealth.
The States take what is left, and retain
only what is left. They can neither main-
tain thè laws they have passed already, nor
pass new laws in thè future, except within
whatever ambii that thè Commonwealth
chooses to leave untouched.
The Attorney-General dwelt last night
with great satisfaction on thè great power
of thè South African Government, on thè
power of thè Canadian Government, on thè
power of thè German Government, in each
case thè national legislation being, as he
said, national in thè true sense of thè word,
so that each Central Government followed
its ow r n sweet ■will. Wherever it went
in thè State jurisdiction went out. When thè
public realize that these powers exist in thè
States to-day, and can be exercised by
them to thè full, without limit ; while if
Minister’s amendments are passed those
powers can no longer be exercised by any
of thè States in any portion of thè fìeld
covered by Commonwealth legislation ; and
when they remember that thè programme of
Ministers and their supporters, which they
propose to achieve, covers practically thè
whole realrn of State legislation—it will
surely be scen that thè whole life, thè
whole core, of thè Federation, has gone if
these amendments are approved bv thè
people. The States become outside sup


pliants, poor relations, lodgers, dependent
for everything they possess upon thè neglect
or thè generosity of thè person in posses-
sion. They beccane junior sleeping part-
ners, who need never be consulted, and
must be content to accept whatever share
of thè profìt, if any, thè senior and active
partner chooses to allow them. But is that
Federation? Is there any tinge of federai
principio left in proposals of this kind ?
Do they not absolutely establish a unitary
forni of government ?
Mr. Bamfoed. —Who should be thè
judge?
Mr. DEAKIN.—The people.
Mr. Bamford. —Exactly.
Mr. DEAKIN. —But we want thè
people, as I bave said, to be educated in
regard to these delicate and difficult ques-
tions affecting thè bilance of powers and
thè maintenance of Federai health. We
wish them well informed and instructed
upon all such issues. My only objection to
these proposals going to thè country now
is that thè true question to be decided is
not put directly. Tens of thousands of
electors in voting will be influenced merely
by industriai or monopoly considerations —
considerations of substance in themselves,
but concealing thè constitutional conse-
quences of seizing these powers in this
fatai way. If we could, fìrst of all, put
a distinct question to thè people, “ Do you
wish to destroy or uphold your Federai
Government and thè Federai principio of
your Constitution ?” we should bave an
opportunity after they had been informed
of thè effect of their votes, of learning their
will, and, knowing their will, should bow
to it. But this reai question of national
permanency will be obscured by all thè very
grave and important proposals of thè pre-
sent moment, though even they will not be
putto thè people so as to obtain their im-
paciai judgment. The will of thè people
can be only indirectly interpretable from
their verdict. It will be subject to contest on
thè ground that they voted for or against
thè merits of these commercial and indus-
triai projects, as thè case may be. The mis-
fortune is that thè constitutional case can-
not be putto thè people sepnrateiv, authori-
tatively, and officially under thè present
proposals. If these were preceded by thè
submission of a concise, concrete proposi-
tion authorizing this major operation on
thè body politic, we should bave some hope.
But with these several temptations, induce-
ments, and baits held out to thè people we
shall bave a vote in which thè great ma-
jority will ignore all thè constitutional re-
sults that must follow from their grasp at
other things.
A question on which I do not pro-
pose to dwell, but that is worthy of thè
consideration of honorable members and thè
public is : What will be left to thè State
Legislatures and thè State Governments if
these proposed amendments of thè Consti-
tution are passed? One important subject,
Education, will remain theirs as long as
this Parliament chooses. Although of fìrst
importance, it is not a subject upon which
frequent legislation is called for. What
is demanded is a large expenditure of
money. Unless thè States can fully sup-
porr a scheme of education that shall bring
Australia to thè front rank, and fit our
people for citizenship in a perfectly Fede-
rai community, maintaining complex organs
of governments with a clear recognition of
their several uses, thè whole Commonwealth
will suffer, and fresh demands for thè ex-
tension of Federai power will ar se. At
all events, beyond Education and thè con-
trol of their locai Courts and locai govern-
ing bodies, there promises to be little left to
thè States absolutely. With our land tax
we bave made a fìrst inroad upon their
land policy, and it may not be thè last.
As to their waters, we bave already under
thè Constitution a certain indirect control.
Their railways are subject to certain neces-
sary uses of a national character, as for
defence purposes. Their mines may at any
time come within thè sweep of thè Federai
land tax.
Mr. McWii.liams.— Freehold mines al-
ready do come within it.
Mr. DEAKIN.—That is so. The
highest Court in thè country is our own
High Court. The time is not remote when
it will become thè supreme appellate tri-
bunal of thè whole of Australia in a more
absolute sense. What, then, will thè State
Legislatures bave that is deserving of legis-
lation? We_ may count on one hand thè
subjects of importance open to them that
are not open to Federai acquisition and
aggression. They are lìkely, consequently,
to dwindle in importance and in thè interest
of our people. The State Legislatures
must* possess mudi less than they did, and
then what further powers will go if these
amendments of thè Constitution are agreed
to?
First of all we shall bave affected,
chiefly under “ trade and commerce,”’


agriculture, manufacture, Industries, busi-
nesses, corporations, and all their organiza-
tions. These to-day, where they are under
State control alone, occupying four-fifths or
more of thè time of thè State Legislatures,
and representing more than four-fifths of
their powers, will all be open to invasion by
this Parliament. When this Parliament is en-
flowed with thè authority to enter these
fields, it will undoubtedly occupy and use
them. Nothing will be left to thè States.
The yolk of thè egg will bave gone ; thè
white of thè egg will bave gone, and they
will bave nothing but thè shell. Ulti-
mately no Parliaments attractive to men of
ability and standing will exist in such
State Parliaments. There will not be suffi-
cient training or exercise, such as Professor
Freeman hoped for, to fit men to occupy
Federai positions later. This is our busi-
ness, so far as it disturbs that balance of
power and those opportunities for locai de-
velopment that are essential to thè success
of a Federai form of government.
Let us pass to another view of thè effect
of these amendments. At present we
bave six States with full power to legislate
on thè whole of thè questions included in
these amendments. If these are adopted
we shall bave a seventh Government oper-
ating in every one of thè States in respect
of all these subjects. They embrace actu-
ally thè whole field of State legislation.
There are some subtle considerations as to
possible limitations in this regard that I
must brush aside for want of time. Speak-
ing broadly, trade, commerce, industry,
occupation, and hours of employment will
all pass to thè Federai Government. The
States will bave thè leavings, if there are
any, but, as thè boy in thè story said of
thè appiè, “ There ain’t going to be no
core” in most instances. Under these
amendments in each of thè six States a
doublé jurisdiction will be established.
There will be thè jurisdiction of thè
Commonwealth and thè jurisdiction of thè
State prevailing on thè same subject at thè
same time in thè same place, and when they
come into conflict thè Commonwealth law
must rule. If thè amendments be assented
to we shall establish a doublé jurisdiction
in every State over innumerable everyday
bread-and-butter questions. We shall be
answerable in State Courts as well as in thè
Commonwealth Courts, answerable both to
thè State laws and to thè Commonwealth
law. Is that desirable? Is not that a de-
struction of our Federation as a federation?
The Acting Prime Minster’s appeals
were for power, and more power, and yet
again for power for thè Commonwealth.
He actually went so far as to say that with-
out more power thè Commonwealth would
soon bave nothing to do. I look back in
amazement at thè Governor-General’s
speech, to find there twenty direct proposals
for legislation, with promise of more. I
bave read replies of Alinisters to deputa-
tions in which they bave regretted that cer-
tain grave matters could not be dealt with
until next session. Already one can see
next session’s programmo outlined fairly.
It will be crowded, and when it is reached
there will be yet a third programma ready.
Even if these amendments were not car-
ried, thè Commonwealth Parliament would
by no means bave exhausted its present
legitimate powers of legislation.
Mr. Archibald.—Por legitimate or
shadowy legislation?
Mr. DEAKIN. —Actual legislation. We
bave many urgent questions before us.
Only in this morning’s newspapers we re-
ceived an intimation that Tariff anomalies
are to be dealt with this session.
Mr. Parker Moloney.— We were told
in thè Governor-General’s speech that they
would be dealt with.
Mr. DEAKIN.—Yes, but only now, at
this late hour of thè session, are thè anoma-
lies ready for submission. There must be
not only a reclification of anomalies, but a
revision of thè Tariff. That cannot be
postponed beyond next session. Conse-
quently those who urge with thè Attorney-
General that thè Commonwealth has nothing
to do are not merely wanting evidence in
support of their theory, but bave a great
volume of testimony to thè contrary.
Sir Robert Best.— The Navigation Bill
alone is a big item.
Air. DEAKIN.—That little measure
trave!ling down from thè Senate, and which
wiil reach us, let us hope, by thè end of
thè session—thè Navigation Bill —will cut
out a very large section of next session.
However, thè key to all these d’fficulties
lies in thè fact that although we bave sundry
Legislatures and several Governments, we
bave only one Australian people. It is to
thè people alone we can look to decide our
fortunes in this emergency. It is from
them alone that thè necessary help can come
to ennble usto maintain thè Federai Con-
stitution which they accepted ten years ago
bv a three to one majority. Let me remind
honorable raembers that even when we se-
care this doublé jurisdiction in every State


thè Federation itself will not be free.
Section 99 of thè Constitution provides
that—-
The Commonwealth shall not, by any law or
regulation of tracie, commerce, or revenue, give
preference to one State or any pari thereof, over
another State or any pari thereof.
Have honorable members considered what
thè ellect of that section will be
upon thè proposals before us? “ Trade
and commerce ’ ’ are to come over to thè
Commonwealth. This Parliament is to have
power to legislate in regard to trade and
commerce within a State as well as between
thè States and other countries. When this
power comes to us thè Commonwealth must
exercise it without giving preference to any
State, or part of a State. As in thè case
of thè taxing power, there is to be no dis-
crimination. This practically means that in
respect of all these subjecis thè Common-
wealth is severely restricted. We shall
have a power exercisable only in a
uniform manner and not discriminating,
as industriai or agricoltura! and other in-
terests must require, between thè different
portions of this vasi continent. We shall
have our Administration at thè new Seat
of Government, controlled under section 99
of tire Constitution on all these everyday
bread-and-butter wage-earning questions.
That provision is to be taken into account
and thè meaning of preference given con-
sideration at every stage. We must face
many new questions, because for thè first
time thè great commerce power will be ap-
plied to thè thousand and one interests
within thè States. This fresh endowment
of power, on which thè Attorney-General
so joyously dwelt, will be subject
to these limitations upon which he
did not see fitto dwell, although
they are undoubtedly of great importance.
Mr. West. —Does thè honorable member
object to uniformìty of manufacture?
Mr. DEAKlN.—Absolute uniformity is
impossible over thè whole area which
stretches from Torres Straits to Ho-
bart, whose cimiate, supplies, and other
conditions vary enormously. It is essen-
tial that thè innumerable practical questions
arising out of thè control of trade and com-
merce sha.ll be dealt with in accordance
with thè circumstances of that part of our
territory in whìch they arise. If uniformity
were insisted on. we should have to apply
thè same conditions to our inland as to
metrnnolitan Industries, taking no account
of differences of situation, with acompany-
ing differences of cost and carriage.
Mr. J. H. Catts.—Does not thè honor-
able member assume a little in suggesting
that thè Commonwealth would override all
locai authority?
Mr. DEAKIN.—These proposals to
amend thè Constitution are an at-
tempi to enlarge our powers to thè
utmost. We have already a certain autho-
rity in these matters, and are being asked
to assert it to thè utmost. Inevitably,
if wider powers are obtained, similar pres-
sure will be put on thè Parliament to ap-
ply them fully. Thus all thè operations
of industry in thè six States will have to
be moulded to a pattern whose unsuita-
bility to thè conditions of any one State
may be treated as a mailer of comparative
indifference. What has been said about thè
transfer of powers is a little misleading,
since we are all citizens of thè States, as
well as of thè Commonwealth, and as elec-
tors control thè Legislatures of thè States
as well as that of thè Commonwealth. We
transfer from and to ourselves.
Mr. Webster, —These powers cannot be
exercised as freely by thè State authorities
as they could be by thè Commonwealth
authorities.
Mr. DEAKIN.—Are thè results of thè
New South Wales and South Australian
elections to go for nothing?
Mr. Webster.—The existence of Legis-
lative Councils has to be remembered.
Mr. DEAKIN.—How long will it take
thè Governments of those States to appeal
to thè electors for thè reform of their
Legislatures, if that be thought necessary ?
Mr. Archibald. —How can a reform be
got through a Legislative Council ?
Mr. Fowler.—lt has been done in
States other than South Australia.
Mr. DEAKIN.-—I was a member of a
State Parliament whìch reformed its
Legislative Council.
Mr. Scullin.—ls thè honorable member
proud of thè reform effected?
Mr. DEAKlN.—Certainly. We carried
not only that reform, but thè legislation
which we set out to pa c '",
Mr. Scullin.—There was not very much
carried.
Mr. DEAKIN.—The honorable member
speaks forgetfully of something that oc-
curred thirty years ago, when a great
advance was gained by thè Lower House,
with thè resul t. inter alia , that Victoria look
thè lead in industriai and other legislation
for many years.


Mr. Scullin. —What was done was quite
inadequate.
Mr. DEAKIN. —What was done then
has been and can be developed. This is
not thè place for thè discussion of State
reforms, but I should be willing to main-
tain thè thesis that thè Legislative Councils
are unreformed either because thè people are
content with them, or because party dif-
ferences prevent united action. If thè
South Australian Government, and that
whlch is about to be formed in New South
Wales, do not brìng thè Legislative Councils
of their States into harmony with thè popu-
lar will, thè responsibility will lie on their
leaders, and on thè shoulders of thè party
whose members are interjecting.
Mr. Webster. —They will be dealt with.
Mr. Groom. —Then what is there to
complain of ?
Mr. DEAKIN. —The charter of Fede-
rai powers is section 51 of thè Constitu-
tion, in which thirty-nine are enumerated.
Of these, twenty-seven are unqualified ;
they apply all over Australia, subject onlv
to thè interpretation of thè High Court
as to thè consistency of their exercise
with thè principio of thè Constitution. Of
thè remaining twelve, in three cases thè
limitations imply a certain grani of con-
trol to thè Commonwealth respecting
State-owned railways ; by two others, con-
cessions are made to State banks and State
insurance offices ; in another to thè abori-
gines ; while two more preserve thè
equities, requiring that our taxation shall
be without discrimination, and that boun-
ties shall not be unfair. Thus thirty-
five of our thirty-nine powers are unlimited
so far as this Parliament is concerned.
The three subject toreai limitations con-
cern trade and commerce, corporations, and
Conciliation and Arbitration. The restric-
tion of fishing in territorial waters
can be put on one side. Do honorable
members realize that thè purpose underlying
thè proposals now being discussed is thè
removai of thè only important limi-
tations now existing upon thè Com-
monwealth powers already glven? Trust
combines and monopolies represent new
growths, which, in America, have been
de-dt with under thè trade and commerce
provisions, and could be dealt with simi-
larly fiere, though to that I shall revert
later.
My first and strongest comment upon
this measure is that thè four amendments
proposed by thè Government should he
embodied in four separate Bills. The
people are not dealt with fairly when four
separate propositions relating to allied, but
independent and fresh gifts of power, are
clubbed together in such a way as to pre-
ven: discrimination or distinction between
them. The electors may approve of thè
removai of any limitations upon our power
respecting trusts and combines, but may
object to any alteration respecting corpora-
tions. Why bar them? The Government
can claim no advantage for this bunching
other than a party gain, which, in a matter
of this kind, should not be considered.
Honorable members opposite may hope
that electors who favour thè extension
of our industriai powers, but who, if they
could, would distinguisi! between it
and thè others, will be obliged to vote
for all ; that thè four tied together
will be approved though one or two
of them, if proposed separately, would
be rejected.
Evidently this is merely a tactical con-
sideration. As such it is unworthy of
thè piane on which this question ought
to be argued or dealt with. If thè
people of this country cannot be trusted
to choose for themselves, who can be
trusted? If they are not allowed to give
a distinguishing verdict on each of these
proposals, which one of them does thè
Ministry fear it may lose ? They never
would be bunched together if Ministers
did not believe that by this means they
will obtain a stronger vote for them than
would be secured if put separately. Upon
some of them they fear thè verdict of thè
electors. They desire to defeat it by a
trick. That is not only not playing thè game
in thè parliamentary sense, but it is a most
serious reflection upon thè community as
a whole. It implies that thè electors are
not able to distinguish between these seve-
ra! matters, are not able to judge for them-
selves whether they will have Industries or
corporations federalized, or whether they
will have thè trade and commerce power
enlarged or not. It implies that thè pro-
posals are to be carried by a wave of feel-
ing which will lead thè electors to say,
“No matter how injurious some of these
proposals are, we must stick to thè party
and to thè bunch because there is no other
choice left to us.”
Mr. West. The honorable member
must be thinking about thè Fusion busi-
ness now.
Mr. DEAKIN. No, I am thinking
about what thè honorable member calls thè
national aspect. These are great national


issues, and thè essence of thè procedure
adopted is that Ministers will not trust
thè nation to speak its own mind. It
must either vote in shackles or hobbled,
going blindfold to thè poli, or it must
throw away its vote. Electors must
either vote against all thè proposals, some
of which they believe in, or vote for some
proposals in which they do not believe.
Is that a state of affairs which is either
honest or fair to thè country? Are Min-
isters acting honestly according to their
oaths ?
From thè point of view of those who
oppose these propositions nothing more
advantageous could be done. From thè
party point of view it is to thè advan-
tage of those who resisi some of these
amendments that they should be tied to-
gether. Ministers hope that a number
of electors will be dragooned into vot-
ing for some of these proposals in which
they do not believe, against their con-
science and judgment ; because if they
were able to discriminate, they .would
exercise thè power of discrimination. Why
should Labour members distrust thè
people ? What was thè result of thè
last election ? The people chose then
to support our proposai to amend thè Con-
stitution in respect to thè transfer of thè
State debts ; although that had distin-
guished opponents in some of thè States,
including leading members of thè Labour
party. Yet we were able to carry it. But
thè people rejected, unwisely and unfor-
tunately, thè Financial Agreement, though
it will come up for consideration again in
ten years, and they stili retain thè righi
to speak upon it. With their verdicts
we should be satisfied.
Mr. Webster. —Thanks to thè Labour
party, they will have another opportunity
to speak.
Mr. DEAKIN.—Yes, and I rejoice in it.
Mr. Parker Moloney,— They would
have not had another oportunity to speak
if they had accepted thè Financial Agree-
ment.
Mr. DEAKIN.—Yes, they would; if
thè Financial Agreement had been placed
in thè Constitution thè power which put
it in could have taken it out. The people
always retain thè same right of review.
My point now is that thè public did exer-
cise a discrimination between our two
amendments. If it had been possible, and
we had tried to tie thè two together, what
would members opposite have said of our
conduci? One probability is that we might
have lost thè amendment relating to thè
transfer of thè State debts because of thè
objection to thè Financial Agreement. But
by putting thè proposals separately and
fairly to thè people, and allowing them to
act as they thought best they gave a de-
cision which everybody accepts. The ma-
jority against thè Financial Agreement was
not great, but fortunately thè majority in
favour of thè other proposai was very much
greater. Thus we asked and obtained
thè people’s decisìon frankly and fairly.
No one has complained of it, or can com-
plain. Why should not our precedent be
followed now ? What reason is there to
depart from thè course then taken? The
fact that these subjects interrelate, as do
all subjects connected with thè employ-
ment of thè people or thè production of
this country, does not alter thè situation in
thè least degree.
Mr. Webster. — Each is essential to thè
other.
Mr. DEAKIN.—No; thè people are thè
judges of that as well as of thè other ques-
tion. If they want all four proposals be-
cause they are essential to each other they
will vote for them. But if, in their opinion,
some of thè four proposals are not essen-
tial, they will exercise their undoubted
righi to say “no” to thè one to which they
object. Let us see who it is that welcomes
thè verdict of thè people and encourages
its free expression. Who is it that will
oppose thè people and forbld them to de-
cide for themselves? That will teli its
own tale.
Last night thè Attorney-General in-
sisted that thè power which is being asked
in all these respects is plenary—that is to
say primary and fundamental. In these
fi ve amendments he enumerates thè dif-
ferent powers which are to be given to thè
Commonwealth. Whilst he keeps to thè
form prescribed for a Federai Constitution
by indicating thè powers with which thè
Commonwealth is to be endowed, he
denies and defeats thè Federai prin-
cipio by making these enumerated
powers of thè Commonwealth un-
limited instead of limited. Take what is
by far thè widest and most discursive
amendment of all. The trade and commerce
power is wide even as it stands, although
it is confined to trade and commerce with
other countries and among thè States. But
when those limitations are struck out, and
it will apply to trade and commerce within
every State as well as without it, it be-


Comes an unlimited Commonwealth power,
and therefore absolutely in antithesis to thè
essential principle of a Federai Constitu-
tion that a Federai power must always
have its limits defined. Nor, as regards
thè amendment proposed in relation to in-
dustriai powers, will there be any limit;.
it, too, will be absolute. So that by both
these amendments thè Attorney-General, on
his own showing, seeks to endow thè Com-
monwealth with unlimited powers. If he
does, our Constitution will cease to be in
fact, as it will cease to be technically,
and even in name, a Federai Constitution.
Again, it will be remembered that thè
other arm of that division of authority
under a true Federai Constitution requires
that thè powers of thè State shall be sepa-
rate and independent. Now thè powers re-
lating to trade and commerce, corporations,
Industries, and monopolies, are to become
capable of being exercised by thè Common-
wealth in each State at thè same time as thè
State exercises them ; and being exercised
in every State excluding State legislation
wherever they meet it, they leave thè
powers of thè States not independent, but
dependent. Of thè four requirements of a
Federai Constitution. as laid down by thè
Attorney-General, his own amendments
strike out three. both in fact and in defini-
tion, and strike out one in fact although
not in definition. Consequently, on his own
showing, these amendments will leave thè
States without any separate powers covered
by these amendments, and although these
are nominally enumerated, yet, being un-
limited, they defeat thè definition again.
Mr. Webster. —It will be a harmlcss
Constitution then.
Mr. DEAKIN. —No; it will be harmful
and it will be unitary, because it will cease
to be P'ederal. What have we been told
already ? That equal representation in thè
State can go, and leave thè Federai prin-
ciple unimpaired. If these amendments
are carried, all I can say is that equal
representation must go. There will be no
need for maintaining it, because thè Consti-
tution will have ceased to be Federai and
thè country will be under no P'ederal ob-
ligations. In a country which would be
governed by a bare majority of thè people
it would be idle to talk about Federai con-
siderations. The second Chamber must
then harmonize with this Chamber in so
far that its representatives must also be in
proportion to thè number of thè people.
Mr. Fowler.—The second Chamber
must go altogether.
Mr. DEAKIN. —It might as well go
altogether now, I admit.
Mr. Webster.-—Far better, because it is
of no use that I can see.
Mr. DEAKIN. —I agree vvith thè hon-
orabie member that under present cir-
cumstances it is of no use. It only affords
an opportunity for members opposite to
echo one another.
Mr. Page.—The honorable member asked
for thè two-party System and got it.
Mr. DEAKIN.—We are not complain-
ing ; in fact, I bave nothing to say by way
of objection to thè two-party System except
that both parties should be formed on thè
same principle. As we cannot adopt our
honorable friends’, we suggest that they
had better adopt ours. Now with equal re-
presentation gone and thè Senate gone, be-
cause it is becoming, as honorable mem-
bers say, an unnecessary replica, what
about thè sovereignty or thè quasì-
sovereignty of thè States which, according
to thè Attorney-General, is to be preserved ?
Mr. Fowler.—That has to go too.
Mr. DEAKIN.—Under this proposai
it, too, will disappear.
Mr. Webster.—The sovereignty of thè
people will stili prevali,
Mr. Parker Moloney.—The sovereign
people.
Mr. SPEAKER.—Order !
Mr. DEAKIN,—AII but thè one centrai
sovereignty will disappear; we shall have
a unitary Government, and must be pre-
pared to travel a new road in a new way.
I have trespassed so long upon thè patience
of thè House that ì had better omit ■ thè
part of my speech devoted to constructive
proposals.
Honorable Members.—No, go on.
Mr. Laird Smith.—lt has been a highly
hiteresting speech.
Sìtiing susfended front 12.56 to 2.30 p.m.
Mr. DEAKIN.—The broad and rea!
distinctions between thè Constitutions cited
by thè Attorney-General are demonstra-
tively exhibited in thè terms deliberately
adopted in each case. In thè United
States Constitution thè word “ Federai ”
nowhere occurs. In thè Canadian Consti-
tution it occurs once, and then only in thè
preamble. In thè Australian Constitution
it occurs fifteen times, and was intention-
ally so employed to strike again, and yet
again, thè keynote of thè whole measure.
The amendments now before thè House are
equivalent to striking out thè word “ P’ede-
ra! ” fifteen times, and inserting in its
stead thè word “ unitary ” fifteen times; so


complete is thè transformation which will
be accomplished if thè whole of them are
placed upon thè statute-book.
This transformation scene is one upon
which none associated with thè originai
Federai movement can possibly look with-
out grave alami. The whole tendency of
public opinion, as expressed at that time on
platforms all over Australia by men of thè
most opposite politicai opinions, was un-
equivocally in support of a strictly Federai
Constitution in thè full sense of thè term.
This implies, first and last, no crippling
of existing organs of government whenever
they are competent to discharge their duty,
but thè retention of them all, stimulated
to their fullest activity within specific areas,
subject ahvays and only to such a generai
control as may be necessary to give point,
effect, and practical force to thè intentions
of thè people of Australia.
The Federai Constitution was not made
to please or to serve thè Federai Parliament.
The Federai Parliament is bound by thè
Federai Constitution. It re-shaped in-
dlrectly, but effectively, all thè State Par-
liaments, and bringing them, wherever ne-
cessary within thè Federai sphere. Some-
thing was left to thè future intentionally,
and more, because at that time it was
almost impossible to foreshadow thè par-
ticular line of development that would be
followed by thè thought of thè Australian
electors.
We are in a better position to-day by
far because of our ten years’ experience,
if it were only for thè" checks that w r e have
sustained in thè process of completing thè
interpretation of thè Constitution. Wehave
endeavoured to make thè most of our
powers within thè Federai arena as it has
become understood. We have been thus led
to a reconslderation of many matters with
which practical experience brought us face
to face. As already observed, no opposition
should be offered to improvements wherever
possible, subject only to thè ordinary re-
quirement that thè remedy adopted shall be
that called for by thè existing condition and
pi ain necessities of Federai affairs. The
present reference to thè people is not thè
first. and will not be thè last. We are
not called upon. even if we thought we
pnssessed thè ability and knowledge requi-
site for such a task, to endeavour to decide
thè course to be followed by thè people of
Australia for more than thè period for
which w r e can clearly see ahead.
The criticism that I have to offerto thè
whole of these five proposals, speaking
generaliy, is that they have been drafted,
not in accordance with thè needs of our
situation, thè facts as we fmd them, or thè
immediate circumstances of thè Common-
wealth, but with a sole eye to furthering thè
vaglie and generai programmo adopted by
thè Ministerial party to indicate as far as
they could, at thè time when it was framed,
thè direction in which they were travelling,
and thè intentions which they then
cherished.
Mr. Mathews. —“ In thè clouds,” as
thè honorable member has said.
Mr. DEAKIN.—One cannot complain
even if there are a certain number of cloud
prospects. Honorable members opposite can
continue to enjoy their view, whether it be,
as they suppose, of a rising or, probably,
a setting sun. But we are not dealing now
with their vague party programmo which
may be amended Wholesale by thè
party itself within thè next year or two.
We are really being asked to import
that programme into thè Constitution,
while what we ought to be dealing with
are thè practical necessities of each case of
grievance. The Attorney-General, in his
introductory speech, passed over in an e.x-
treraely light way these five segments of
that programme, but without coming to
dose grips with thè situation. There was
a bald indicatimi of thè existence of what
he considered evils, obstructions, or difficul-
ties, and there was then a proposai to re-
move them by drastic provisions which
would accomplish mudi more than was re-
quired, and go far beyond any of thè evils
described.
Surely thè first criticism of all reasonable
men upon any propositions for thè amend-
ment of thè Constitution will be, ‘ 1 Are they
snfficient for thè needs of this time, and
not more than snfficient for thè situation,
a.s we see it? ” I submit that these Whole-
sale and unqualified projects point to an
attempi to forecast what, in thè opinion of
those who framed them, will be thè needs
of a remote future. That essay, which has
been made before in thè world’s experience,
has uniformly led to reactions, sometlraes
of a severe kind. The experience of thè
French people furnishes a remarkable illus-
tration of thè effects of a System whidi
proceeding from thè abstract to thè con-
crete, endeavours to lay down atone par-
ticular time generai rules which, according
to thè opinions of particular men, ought to
govern thè future progress and development
of a nation, The movement which. in
Trance, is generaliy known as Jacohinism,


was of that character. It is quite in har-
inony with thè nature of thè sweeping pro-
posals now before us.
Mr. Frank Fosxer. —Does thè honor-
able member object to thè people amenti-
ing their Constitution ?
Air. DEAKIN. —No; I am urging, not
only that thè people shoulcl amend their
Constitution when necessary, but that they
should amend it exactly where it most
needs it, and as it needs it, and that they
should not endeavour to exercise thè gift
of prophecy so as to determine what thè
generations to come may requìre. I sub-
mit that all thè proposals before us go far
beyond proved or admitted evils at thè pre-
sent lime. They are not pertinent to thè
particular obstacles encountered. They do
not simply step over each crevasse, but talee
running jumps in thè dark, landing us far
beyond and no one knows where.
Mr. West. —That is all a matter of
opinion.
Mr. DEAKIN. —What expression is
there in this House that is not an expres-
sion of opinion? What does a decision of
thè Legislature express except thè opinion
of thè majority ? The only complaint I ara
urging of thè opinìons of those on thè
ether side of thè House is that they are
not founded on faets, nor confmed to an
admitted area of necessary operations, but
on thè contrary wobble widely out of bounds
and out of sight.
If we do our work here as efficiently
as we canto meet thè clear needs
of each situation, we shall have done
all thè future can ask of us. We had
better refrain from doing a great deal
now proposed which thè future is almost
certain to condemn, and in similar cases
has had good grounds to condemn. The
reaction against what I have called
Jacobinism, for want of a better analogy,
a movement undoubtedly characterized by
thinking in thè abstract and then en-
deavourlng to make abstract rules apply
to concrete instances, has in every case
occasìoned an extremely costly and pro-
longed struggle to return to a better and
more naturai adjustment to actual condi-
tions. If we cut up our locai governments
by thè roots as these amendments practically
do, we shall not merely injure thè States,
but injure thè Federai System as a whole,
not excluding thè Federai Parliament
itself. In so doing we overshoot thè mark.
Instead of being content with remedying
old difficulties or dangers, we shall be
creating new ones.
The demand to-day, therefore, is, as
always under Federation, for a two-
fold loyalty—to thè Federai Parliament
on thè one side, and to thè locai
Governments on thè other. We need a
firn and consistent grip of thè circum-
stances of,Australia —not of Victoria, New
South Wales, Queensland, or Western Aus-
tralia, but of this vast continent as a
whole. Some of thè amendments seem
to me to take no account of thè great part
of thè continent which is as yet but thiniy
settled and lightly developed. They seem
to me to be drafted with an eye only upon
large cities and their neighbourhoods, or,
to closely settled country and its needs.
Then, above all, if it be possible, we
should approach this national task with
minds free from class prejudice or party
aims, free from subterranean motives
or greeds, or thè gains of particular sec-
tions utterly indifferent to thè possible cost
to thè fellow members of that community.
Air. West.— What a lovely world it
would be if we could all be like that !
Air. DEAKIN.—The honorable mem-
ber, I hope, lives in such a world. If
thè Federai course is not followed, I am
not by any means sure that thè frank and
fair way to deal with our situation would
not be to face thè proposai made by thè
honorable member for Herbert in thè Bill
which he has laid before thè House. If
there is to be such an absolute recasting of
thè whole System of government which ob-
tains in Australia to-day, let us face it.
Despite thè claims of thè existing States,
and despite thè fact that their railways
have béen developed, as a rule, from a
single centro, and despite thè fact that
they have been developed as units, I am
by no means certain that, if we are de-
finìtely going to set aside thè Federai
Constitution, thè best way would not be
to take into consideration thè proposai of
thè honorable member, or some proposai of
a similar character.
We should have to face thè supersession
of thè State Legislatures, and thè re-
shaping of new States or provinces with
specified powers. The Government are
going that road, and will reach that goal
before long. If these amendments are
carried to their logicai conclusion, they will
be pushed on to thè next step necessary to
make our new forra of government—which
is not Federai —complete. If that be
done, I take it that thè proposals of thè
honorable member for Herbert, related as
they are to those lately adopted by thè


unitary Government of South Africa, will
be well worthy thè practical consideration
of thè House. They would save a long
detour and loss of time and money. If
we are to face a unitary Constitution we
had better face it at once.
Mr. West. —The proposai before us is
thè stepping stone !
Mr. DEAKIN. —Yes; thè stepping stone
is one out of a Federai arena into a
unitary arena, but at thè same time accept-
ing thè existing distribution of States and
circumstances which will no longer bave any
meaning in thè new regime. There is a
great deal to be said for thè State Govern-
ments with their historic associations and
adaptation to thè circumstances of their
country. But if we are going to put thè
Federai System aside, thè sooner we look
thè whole of thè faets fairly in thè face thè
better, and, with this as our confessed
object, adjust both thè endowments and
thè powers under thè Constitution. Into
that tempting subject I shall not enter fur-
ther, but commend those considerations to
thè honorable member for Herbert and
those who think with him, their clear duty
being to vote against thè proposals now be-
fore us, for thè purpose of obtaining thè
better proposals he has in view.
Mr. Bamford. —We propose to ask thè
people for an indorsement or otherwise.
Mr. DEAKIN.—I would rather ask
them that than thè indirect, and in this
relation misleading, questiona proposed to
be put in this Bill.
Mr. Bamford.— The Government are
simply stealing my clothes !
Mr. DEAKIN.—I base my contention
on what I hope to bave proved, namely,
that, providing thè proposals before us are
carried, only thè form of Federation re-
mains—nearly all thè contenta are gone,
and thè rest will soon follow.
Mr. Mathews. —There is no power left
for thè Legislative Councils !
Mr. DEAKIN. —The alternative to thè
Government proposals is not a mere nega-
tion of those proposals, unless indeed they
be submitted, as at present, tied together
so as to prevent an independent and full
consideration of them either in this Housb
or outside. The cumulative extension of
power by thè five put together I ìgnore.
But while thè first four propositions
are laced together, it will he impossihle
for honorable members, or for thè people
outside. to discriminate in their choice,
as they bave already discriminated, or will
discriminate, in their judgment. If we
are about to treat thè proposals in this
way, and bave thè first four pinioned
in thè first Bill, sudi a measure Comes to
us and to thè country handicapped in sudi
a way that it will he extremely difficult to
give a fair vote bere and impossibile to get a
fair vote outside. If thè four proposals
were divided, as they ought to he, into
simple and distinct proposals
Mr. J. H. Catts. —With four ballot-
papers ?
Mr. DEAKIN.—Yes, with four ballot-
papers asking thè people four distinct ques-
tions, we should be placed in a fair posi-
tion in regard to’ each. Before taking
them seriatim, let me cite in respect to
trade and commerce thè memorandum of
thè honorable member for Angas, which is
worthy of repetition. It is as follows—
“It is now no longer possible,” says Pro-
fessor Woodrow Wilson in a recent article on
“ The States and thè Federai Government,” “ to
frame any simple or comprehensive definition
of ‘ commerce. 5 Above all, it is difficult to dis-
tinguisi! thè ‘commerce 5 which is confmed within
thè boundaries of a single State, and subject
to its domestìc regulation from that which passes
from State to State, and lies within thè juris-
diction of Congress. 55 He is agaìnst arbitrary
extension of thè Federai power—
Professor Wilson is against thè arbitrary
extension of Federai power; and why?—
being of opinion that thè success of thè American
Federation is largely due to thè spontaneity and
variety, thè independent and irrepressible life,
of its component communities, whjch bave pre-
served thè people from thè paralysis, which
sooner or later falls on those who look to thè
Central Government to patronize and nurture
them. “It would be fatai,” he says, “to our
politicai vitality really to strip thè States of
their powers and transfer them to thè Federai
Government.”
Mr. Fowler. —That is even more em-
phatically thè case in Switzerland.
Mr. DEAKIN. —I believe it is berne out
by Swiss experience.
Mr. West. —Professor Wilson has not
been in Australia.
Mr. DEAKIN.—He has not enjoyed
that pleasure, but he speaks of thè United
States of America, where thè commerce
power is thè same, and where thè circum-
stances are of mudi greater tension, trial,
and difficulty than they are bere. If he so
speaks of that country, with its large num-
ber of well-developed States able to look
after themselves, what would Professor
Wilson say of a country sudi as this, unduly
swayed at present by thè large number of
its population gathered into large cities
with civic interests, when compared with
thè number of those who are making their
task thè subjugation of thè continenti


What is it we are likely to lose? Is
it not exactly, as Professor Wilson says,
thè “ spontaneity and variety ” and thè
“ independence and irrepressible life of
thè component communities ” of Aus-
tralia? These are what are making Aus-
tralia to-day, have made Australia what
it is, and must make thè Australia of thè
future. These give life to thè continent
as a whole ; it is thè life of our component
communities, and w r e fear for them with
good reason —
thc paralysis which sooner or later falls on those
who look to thè Central Government to patronize
and nurture them.
Mr. Fenton. — State rights !
Mr. DEAKIN. The cry of “ State
rights ” will not offend us in Australia,
where all citizens of thè States are citizens
of thè Commonwealth, and all citizens of
thè Commonwealth are citizens of thè
States. Every one of us votes in a State
election, and every one is affected by
State legislation. If we, w'ho are at pre-
sent thè custodians of Federai representa-
tion are, as we necessarily must be at all
stages of our lives, also State citizens, and
concerned with our State’s development,
what have we to dread from thè States
since they are only ourselves in one capa-
city, while w r e are Federai nationalists in
another capacity?
Mr. Page. Why did thè honorable
member’s party raise thè cry at thè last
election ?
Mr. DEAKIN.—If thè honorable mem-
ber refers to thè programmo of thè late
Government he will find nothing nearer
“State Rights” than anxiety for thè pre-
vention of that “ paralysis ” which falls
on those who trust too much to a Central
Government. We say that thè Federai
Government and thè locai Governments
should balance each other, working to-
gether for a population energetic, indepen-
dent, and self-reliant.
Mr. Page. —Did thè honorable member,
when Prime Minister, not propose to amend
thè Constitution with regard to new Pn>
tection ?
Mr. DEAKIN.—Yes.
Mr. Page. —Thers is no “ paralysis ”
about that, I suppose?
Mr. DEAKIN. —I have not reached
that subject yet ; but am nearing it. As
ray preliminary criticism of thè amend-
ments applies to two or three of them, I
shall not have to repeat it.
The only cure proposed by Ministers
for thè grievances of which they complain
is that of direct legislation by this Par-
liament. Ministers appear to believe that
every one of our problems can be met
by a law to be tramed in this Par-
liament and administered in thè ordinary
fashion. The view which many of us
took, on refiection, was that thè better
means of coping with trusts and combines,
for instance —which are usually associated
with monopolies and industriai issues—•
was not to go too far in thè way of
direct legislation, butto take advantage
of thè hitherto unused powers of thè Con-
stitution, which provide for thè creation
of an Inter-State Commission. Such a
body in thè United States of America to-day
is of capitai importarne ; and, under our
Constitution, is capable of being made stili
more effective. An Inter-State Commission
would discharge both administrative duties,
and what might be termed judicial duties
in all matters of actual practical concern.
This Commission being provided for in ad-
vance by thè Constitution, we have made
more than one attempt to bring it into exist-
ence, but our efforts have not been crowned
with success.
The important result to be secured by its
use is that, instead of endeavouring to lay
down in advance, in a Statuto, all thè
minutia; of procedure and action in con-
nexion with Industries, or trusts and mono-
polies, we should create a body which
would secure thè whole of thè available
data relating to them or to thè enterprises
with which they were connected. It would
act as thè great organizing body of thè
Commonwealth, collecting and collating
knowledge and studying opportunities. We
proposed to bring into being an Inter-State
Commission clothed with certain judicial
authority, and to encourage thè States to
develop to thè utmost all their existing ma-
chinery, or machinery to be called into
being, for dealing with thè problem.
Wages Boards, for instance, are established
throughout Australia, Tasmania alone Jag-
ging behind. Under thè course we proposed
to follow, any State Jagging behind its neigh-
bours and insufficiently developed in that
regard, could have been brought into line,
pending its own action, either by means of
thè Inter-State Commission, or appoint-
ments made under it. In that way w'e
should not only have made a long stride
towards thè settlement of industriai dis-
putes, but should have accompanied it by
a large expansion of State energies and
developments in thè same direction. The


States would either have taken that course
for themselves, or would have found it
provided for them. I know of only one
State that at thè time of our proposai
seemed to need such a stimulus, and prob-
nbly it would not have needed it as soon as
the situation had become clear.
The great advantage of our pian
was that it would have developed m
the Commonwealth, wherever necessary,
locai bodies able to deal efficiently
with that first indication of indus-
triai difficulty upon which the Attorney-
General elaborated iris argument last even-
ing. It would have brought such bodies
into existence, stimulated them into action,
and harmonized their findings so far as
might be necessary in order that the Car-
dinal principle of Federatici!, free and
euual competition, should obtain all over
the Commonwealth, no State being allowed
to take advantage of the inferior position
of its neighbours. These were practical
proposals, and as submitted, or with little
development, appear to me to
lie sufficient to meet the needs of the situa-
tion. Nothing would require to be un-
done. Everything done would be per-
manent. It would. follow thè line that
public opinion, it seems to me, intends
io take, broad-basing the whole of our
industriai supervision upon locai Wages
Boards —constituted of men in the indus-
tries concerned, familiar with the weak and
the strong points of each case of complaint
—and, knowing the sores, better quahfied
to undertake the healing. It would be one
of the most promising social experiments
ever undertaken. It would be an undei-
taking unmatched in the world to-day, and
certainly unmatched in any country of the
size of Australia.
Bv way of illustratici! let me point out
that if we had these' four proposals placed
before us separately, it would have been
comperent for usto take the opinion of the
Parliament upon an amendment of each that
would meet the admitted needs of thè
situation in this way. Those who wish
to go further would have been called upon
to prove to the satisfaction of the Parlia-
ment that something was ignored, the omis-
sìon of which was prejudicial to the coun-
try. So far as our industriai proposals
were concerned, I do not think that this
could have been proved. They were prac-
tical, unlversal, and capable of indefinite
expansion.
Mr. W. H. Irvine. —The honorable
member is illustrating what tvould have
been thè position if these several proposals
had been separately before us ?
Mr. DEAKIN.—Yes, and also that our
proposai in regard to industriai matters
covers thè whole ground so far as is neces-
sary.
Mr. West. —Then thè honorable member
admits that there is something wanting?
Mr. DEAKlN.—Certainly. The memo-
randum issued by thè ex-Attorney-General
shows what we were doing twelve months
ago —before those of 1907 and 1908.
Mr. Webster. —That has been kept a
secret until now.
Mr. DEAKIN. —Honorable members
with short memontò should not make such
interjections. We had considered several
forms of amendment years ago. Last year,
when laying thè policy of our party before
thè country, I explained at length thè very
propesa! just mentioned. I dealt with it
in every State in which I spoke as part of
thè then Ministerial programmo. We were
also considering another amendment twelve
months ago. Our first propositions were
put before thè State Premiers, and assented
to by them. The all-important principio
then and now is to deal with thè evil you
know as you know it and where you know
it.
Mr. Hughes. —That memorandum cou-
templated two amendments of thè Con-
stìtution.
Mr. DEAKIN.—Yes, thè then Attorney-
General, my colleague, thè honorable mem-
ber for Angas, submitted them, and with
some minor amendments or development, I
believe they represent bis opinions to-day.
On that point, however, he will speak for
himself.
In a word, in respect to industriai mat-
ters we aimed at a sufficient unity of ad-
ministration over thè whole of Australia to
secure uniformity of procedure and fair
dealing, giving at thè same lime a strong
stimulus to thè creation of these practical
bodies of practical men. Then, with thè
locai stimulus so obtained, we hoped to
bring about over this vast country —and we
must think of it, not with its present popu-
lation. but with its existing population
largely multiplied—a guarantee for locai
activity and efficiency to meet emergencies,
not dependent upon a centralized control
directed from Canberra to any portìon of
thè continent. That efficiency was to be
guaranteed by a System established in thè
occupations themselves and comprised of
those engaged in them.


1 pass from thè industriai to thè most
stringent and extensive proposai made by
thè Government —that with relation to thè
trade and commerce power. I think thè
Attorney-General will find, on further con-
sideration, that thè amendment of thè Con-
stitution he proposes will not leave thè
Commonwealth in thè position in which thè
Dominion of Canada finds itself. The re-
gulation of trade and commerce was pro-
vided for in thè originai Canadian Con-
stitution. The point to be regarded in this
connexion is that, first of all, thè words
to be struck out, “ with other countries
and among thè States,” are thè only limi-
tations imposed upon our endowment of
power to legislate with respect to trade and
commerce.
The Attorney-General, as it seems to
me, improperly made merry because thè
Federai Conventions adopted those words
from thè United States Constitution. He
pointed out that a very large number of
cases, involving great expense, had been
necessary to determine thè meanings under
this phrase. It rnight bave occurred to him
that thè very existence of those cases con-
stituted a reason for their adoption. First
of all, thè circumstances of Australia in
this regard were generally similar to those
of thè United States ; and, secondly, by
adopting thè very words of thè United
States Constitution we took over in a gene-
rai way thè whole of thè case law on thè
subject. By a long course of decisions at
thè expense of thè Americans thè relative
spheres of thè States and thè Federation had
been fairly defined, and consequently thè
most practical and most federai course to
pursue was to adopt this phraseology. The
Attorney-General would bave done well to
recollect in his criticism of this portion of
thè Constitution that no case is to be found
in thè Commonwealth Law Resorts turning
upon thè precise interpretation of thè ìimits
of this power. He put forward thè uncer-
tainty existing on this point as if it were his
sole ground for asking for thè amendment.
So far from there being any friction in that
respect, thè position is exactly thè opposite.
In no case that I can recollect has any
Commonwealth litigant suffered yet because
of thè adoption of thè United States defini-
tion.
A glance at either Quick and Garran,
Professor Harrison Moore’s hook, or thè
Commonwealth Law Resorts will enable
honorable members generally to realize why
thè first of thè powers with which thè Com-
monwealth is endowed under section S 1 is
that relating to trade and commerce. Even
with thè limitatìon adopted by us, it takes
quite a portion of a page to name all thè
authorities and subjects with which thè
trade and commerce power has enabled thè
United States Courts 'to deal. It is too
long a story to repeat, and unnecessary to
place it on record bere, since it is assumed
to be known to a great many, and is cer-
tainly known by all our lawyers. If hon-
orable members will referto thè authorities
I bave quoted, they will see at once that
“ trade and commerce ” extends to a great
variety of agencies—shipping, navigation,
and other matters expressly mentioneci in
our Constitution, and implied, according
to American precedents, even if they had
not been specified.
In brief, all I desire to put now is
that of all thè powers in thè Con-
stitution probably that relating to trade
and commerce, even with its present limi-
tations, is thè widest. With thè whole of
thè undefined authority in thè same sub-
jects now vested in thè States, added to
rhat we already possess, it would be fair
to say, speaking generally, that there would
be no limit to thè trade and commerce
power of this Parliament. Wide as its
range is in thè United States of America,
with its restrictions swept away even thè
Canadian experience by no means exhausts
its possibilities.
What are thè grounds on which we
are invited to make this immense trans-
formation making thè Commonwealth
all potent in every State and responsible for
thè mass of law governing all thè incal-
culable number of interests and activities
included under trade and commerce, ex-
change and transit. Inter-State and
foreign being added to thè locai powers,
its legislation immediately overriding that
of thè States, what mass of circumstance,
what grievances tower-high, or other justi-
fication is there to offer in order to justify
thè enormous extension of power with
which this Parliament is to be charged,
and for which it is to be made responsible ?
Hosts of measures, some of them of a very
minor character, would require to be
brought forward and dealt with by thè
National Parliament as national causes,
though actually provincial or merely locai.
Our trade and commerce power is already
buttressed by other paragraphs section
5r relating to weights and measures, bills
of exchange, and foreign corporations. as
well as by section 98 dealing with naviga-
tion ; section 100, affecting thè rivers ;


sections ioi and 102, concerning thè Inter-
state Commission, and section 103, con-
trolling preferences on railways. Section
105, dealing with State debts, has already
been amended. With this all-embracing
and complex power, •we already rule over
an area which, so far as present necessities
and circumstances go, makes any except
special extensions unnecessary. Let thè
Government point out thè particular evil
or evils to be met, and submit pro-
positions for meeting them, and they
will receive thè serious consideration of
honorable members. Ministers should show
us thè need, and propose thè remedy. In
this case, no need has been shown, and
thè remedy is one for imaginary accidents
or possibilities, against which no practical
Parliament would attempi to provide.
A specific case should also be made out
for dealing with thè foreign corporation
to which thè Attorney-General referred at
length. I am not prepared to pronounce
on thè advantages of any particular course,
but thè proposai before us seems to be
altogether excessive. Our present disabili-
ties in connexion with corporations could
be met by very few amendments, which
would be much simpler than thè casting of
thè whole responsibility for thè manage-
ment and control of corporations, their
by-laws, and all their doings, on thè Com-
monwealth. The same absence of justifica-
tion applies to thè case made against com-
binations and monopolies. Their existence
is asserted, and a list of names was read,
but thè monopolies referred to are evi-
dently locai.
Mr. West. —They all extend beyond one
State.
Mr. DEAKIN.—The Sydney brick
combine, for one, does not.
Mr West. — Every State has a brick
combine.
Mr. DEAKIN. —Then they are sepa-
rate combines, and can be dealt with by thè
State Legislatures. I believe that thè
House as a whole, if thè particular evils
bere complained of, were shown, and an
efficient remedy suggested, would view a
proposai for legislation with favour, even
for very strong legislation, if need be.
Mr. W. H. Irvine. —What is a combi-
nation ?
Mr. DEAKIN.—There is a definition in
thè Australian Industries Preservation Act.
Mr. W. H. Irvine. —We cannot define
thè expression in thè Constitution.
Mr. DEAKIN.—The Attorney-General
made one statement regarding combina-
tions and monopolies which, strong though
it was, lam prepared to echo. He said
tbat such a condition of things might occur
that thè question would arise, “ Shall com-
binations and monopolies rule thè Common-
wealth, or some part of it, or shall thè
Commonwealth rule them?” There are
not two opinions on that subject. Show us
thè actual danger, and thè efficient remedy,
and, no matter how strong that remedy
may be, Parliament will be ready to assert
thè sovereignty and mastery of thè Com-
monwealth over all combinations and mono-
polies, be they what they may.
Mr. Webster.— After they bave assumcd
gigantic proportions.
Mr. DEAKIN.—At any time thè case
is proved. At present, we have no proof
of specific evil, and no suggestion of spe-
cific remedy.
I come now to thè last of thè four pro-
posals in thè first Bill. The transforma-
tion sought to be accomplished is even
more baseless in this case than in thè
extravagant extension asked for, to thè ai-
ready potent trade and commerce power.
Our Constitution provides for thè creation
of a Court of Conciliation and Arbitration
with power to deal with industriai disputes
extending beyond any one State. That Court
has been appointed, and cases have arisen
with which it ought to be, but is not, compe-
tent to deal. Legai minds think that means
can be found for coping with some of them.
It would be proper to direct our attentìon
to these difficulties and to propose a re-
medy, but that has not been done. They
have been lost sight of, and a proposition
launched having practically no relevancy
to any existing situation. It would be pos-
sible to frame an amendment which would
meet every difficulty that has yet occurred
without practically creating a new Court
and new jurisdiction as thè Attorney-
General proposes. He is not seeking to
meet 'difficulties which have arisen or may
arise, butto embody in our Constitution thè
politicai proposals which he favours, aris-
ing out of theories more or less sound,
based on experience more or less insufficient.
There is practically no relation between
thè judicial power of thè Court, which has
been found too confined, and thè gift of
legislative power over all employments, In-
dustries, and businesses of all thè States
bere provided for. Wages, hours, terms,
and conditions are alike to be brought
under this Parliament. Every trifling in-
dustry in every part of thè continent will
have thè right, and may be compelled, to
appeal to this House for legislation to


meet its ends. The whole of thè industriai
powers of thè States are to he transferred
wìthout limitation to thè Commonwealth.
The minutici of every occupation through-
out Australia will he thè concern of thè
National Legislature.
The creation of an unlimited frade and
commerce power, with all its developments,
and of an unlimited industriai power as it
deprives thè States of any control wherever
their legislation comes into conflict with
ours, marks an economie and constitutional
revolution. This entirely alters thè centre
of gravity of thè Australian Constitution.
It changes ours from a distinctly Federai
to a distinctly Unitary forra of government,
under which thè States exist only at thè
pleasure of thè Commonwealth, with such
domains of power as may he permitted to
them, because too trifiing, or because thè
exigencies of business bave not permitted
them to be resumed. One will not be able
to buy a pennyworth of lollies, to drive a
nail into a boot, to shear a sheep, to sow
grain, to pick fruit, or to carry a hod, in
any part of this continent without coming
under thè operation of Commonwealth
laws. At every stage, and in every act of
daily life, sleeping and walking, we shall
be under Commonwealth law, if this Par-
liament chooses to legìslate.
Let me now allude very briefly to thè
fifth proposai, which is closely allied to
thè proposition in respect to combina-
tions and monopolies. This elaborates
thè Commonwealth control of thè latter,
adding authority to this Parliament to
take over any monopoly it pleases and
carry it on at thè Government expense.
This, again, like all thè others, is a power
now existing in thè States, which could
have been and can be used at any time
their Legislatures think fit. So far as thè
nationalization of monopolies is concerned,
no line has yet been drawn which satisfac-
torily divides those of which our people
have thought fitto approve, and others.
In many instances thè States have autho-
rized thè municipalities to enter into busi-
ness as tramway proprietors. In New
South Wales thè State runs thè tramways
itself, and in Victoria a eoa] mine. No
line of demarcation has yet been drawn,
and, personally, I do not attempi to draw
one, between thè, enterprises which it may
be politic to deal with by thè community
in some one of its aspeets, and those which
should be left entirely in thè hands of pri-
vate individuate.
Mr. J. H. Catts. —lt is not likely that
there will be any overlapping of State
and Commonwealth action there.
Mr. DEAKlN.—Commonwealth inter-
venirne is provided for in these proposals.
For me, thè best defence of any proposai
of this sort is made when it is shown that
thè controlling authority is in thè same
dose and immediate contact with thè carry-
ing on of thè particular business referred
to that ordinary employers and proprietors
would be. One can easily discover cases
in which municipal investments can for that
reason justify themselves by results, though
State investments would be dangerous
and Federai outrageous. The State has
power, either by itself or through its muni-
cipal bodies, to carry on any businesses
that it pleases. It is quite within its
competence, and we shall watch with in-
terest what State businesses follow thè ad-
vent in South Australia and New South
Wales of Governments which are favorable
to experiments of that kind. They have
thè field open. We shall see what they
do and judge them by what they do.
Any municipality is far more capable of
dealing with thè problems within its own
boundaries, because they are small, and thè
ratepayers being directly concerned will
not lightly consent to pay rates and taxes
without getting full value. In thè States
thè control is much less satisfactory, be-
cause thè State is terger and control is fur-
ther removed, while thè taxpayers who
suffer are not those who undertake thè ex-
periment or favour its continuance. Na-
tionalization by thè Commonwealth any-
where or everywhere within Australia,
supervised from Canberra, is thè most ex-
travagant of all propositions, and could
only be justified under thè most excep-
tional circumstances. I know of no
means by which thè practical interests of
thè taxpayers of all Australia can be so
connected with these enterprises as to ra-
sure thè adoption of a business manage-
ment which will prevent thè people from
having bad bargains and burdens cast upon
them.
Of course, in relation to thè Defence
Department, it is quite possible that some
enterprises which we know to be unre-
munerative ought to be carried on under
Government control. I know and approve
them, because they provide supplies re-
quired in times of threatened war, not
to speak of times of war, when they
could hardly be expected from abroad.


In those instances we may go into
businesses knowing they will involve
a loss, but in ordinary industriai mat-
terà I can conceive at present of no cir-
cumstances in which thè Commonwealth
ought to enter into any engagements of this
kind. If it does so it will be enormously
handicapped as compared with thè States,
and stili more enormously as compared
with thè locai bodies, which should be in-
trusted with this control if any body is.
This measure is signalized by another
departure, not at all serious in itself. De-
lie ving a definition of “ monopoly ” to be
necessary, and apparently not being able
to find one wide enough, thè resources of
thè English language not sufficing to cover
all thè possible variety of objects or enter-
prises which Ministers may wish to cali
a monopoly, and purchase at public ex-
pense, they have resorted to thè extraordi-
nary expedient of putting into a statate a
declaration that anything thè Federai Par-
liament says is a monopoly shall be a
monopoly. That sounds like magic. It
may be nothing like any monopoly that
any of us ever saw or. hopes to see.
It might be this Parliament itself. If
so, I hope thè Government will not turn
it into a monopoly until we have a majority.
This House, consisting of men who
have all by legai reckoning at any
rate, reached years of discretion, is
asked to accept this extraordinary device
as a substitute for a definition of mono-
poly. The next question that everybody
will be asking is, “ When is a definition
not a definition?” And thè answer from
thè statute-book will be prompt: “When
it is a resolution of both Houses of Par-
liament.” I should have thought that
thè draftsmanship of thè Attorney-General
would suffice to enable him to accomplish
tris end without such an extraordinary feat
of legerdemain as thè English language has
never before achieved. Against this pro-
posai as a whole there is everything to
be said, and practically nothing to be
nrged in ìts favour. Fortunately we have
it in a separate Bill, and, therefore, can
deal with it on its merits. We ought lo
have had all thè other propositions in sepa-
rate Bills, and dealt with them on their
nwn merits in thè sa me way, first discover-
ing thè specific evil, and then applying thè
spedile remedy.
I have bere some further notes on
thè possible developments, legislative,
administrative, and judicial, which must
necessarily follow if these proposed
amendments of thè Constitution are ac-
cepted, but they can wait for another time.
We are turning thè stream of national life
out of thè Federai channel in which it has
been flowing into a deeper and narrower
course, where it ceases to be Federai, and
ceases to be free. It may turn a mill
grinding out a certain amount of legìslation
purporting to govern thè whole continent,
although on several of its most important
subjects it is forbidden to discriminate be-
tween one part and another, or between one
section and another of its people. Consti-
tutionally we cannot stop long just where
we are, nor can we stop at all after these
amendments are carried. The functions
left to thè States will be so limited and'
so few that it will be necessary to transfer
them too. We shall come then to a reign
of provincial councils having even less
power than thè honorable member for Her-
bert proposes to endow them -with, under a
centrai Parliament overburdened with
Work, choked with appeals from all quar-
ters, sections, and classes, for remedies that,
in most cases, cannot be satìsfactory, sitting
desperately all thè year round, and legis-
lating as does thè United States Senate in
America, at times, when in a single sitting
Rills are rushed in by thè score, and
dumped into thè waste paper basket by thè
dozen.
Mr. Fenton. —Our Senate will behave
better than that.
Mr. DEAKIN.—Our Senate will not
then exist. It is gone in faci, and might
as well go in name. The single Chamber
which will then dispose of thè destinies of
Australia, will formalize, sterilize, hamper,
and interfere with whatever is stili left in
thè Australian people of that enterprise
which, as Professor Wilson says, makes
and maintains thè United States to-day.
Mr. West.—This is like a burial service.
Mr. DEAKIN.—It is a burial of Fede-
ration, if you pass these amendments. I
do not envy thè honorable member thè
prospect of sitting in such a Parliament
with his colleagues.
Mr. Archibald.—We will not bury
British institutions.
Mr. DEAKIN.—What have we left of
British institutions? The British Consti-
tution permits each and all of thè pro-
posals which are now to be made possible
at thè will of this Parliament under amend-
ments of thè Federai Constitution to be
carried out at any moment thè British Par-
liament thinks fit. The best comment on
them is that thè British Parliament has


never thought fit, and, according to all ap-
pearances never will, think fit to attempi
them. Yel that ìs a country that could be
lost to sight in Australia, and with all its
millions cannot hope to cope with thè num-
ber of millions that must be contained In
this great continentìf it is to be maintained
for thè white race. Yet vve shall be ex-
pected to carry on thè pioneering work of
settling and cultivating it under restrictions
dictated from a centrai Chamber, sitting at
Canberra ! There is no possible common
measure between this new System of govern-
ment, and this continent with thè future
people of Australia, upon which and whom
it is to operate. The ruling machine and
thè ruled will be absurdly out of all pos-
sible proportion. Why, then, instead of
modestly endeavouring to determine our
obstacles, and define thè difficulties in our
path, in order to take thè necessary steps,
and no more, to surmount them, while
keeping on thè high road of national de-
velopment
Mr. Arciiibald.- —The high road of
shadowy legislation.
Mr. DEAKIN.—No; our high road is
not that which thè honorable member indì-
cates. The high road of shadowy legisla-
tion is that to which he and his fellows are
seeking to drive us. Its route discloses no
evidences of practical knowledge or judg-
ment, but is dictated by thè abstract con-
siderations of a shadowy progiamme—
shadowy in all its application to thè
circumstances around us.
What I am pleading for is a calculation
of what all these extravagances will cost us.
We hava a great Australia, do not let us
leave it peopled by little Australians, whose
ideas of thè National Government and its
operations shall be founded more on those
of magnified municipalities, than upon
thè actions of men charged with thè desti-
nies of a great country. Are we not pre-
pared to trust thè people of Australia after
next year wi( h some competence for deal-
ing with any new situation vvhen it arises ?
Are we not prepared to trust thè people
of Australia to, at least, bave thè oppor-
tunity of saying “ Aye ” or “ Nay ” to
each and every proposition for thè amend-
ment of their Constitution that is to be
laid before them? Are we not prepared
to trust them to meet any of those emer-
gencies and difficulties conjured up In
anticipation in thè minds of my honorable
friends opposite if they arise and when
they arise? Is all wisdom to die with
us, and all power to meet emergencies and
contingencies to be strapped down by a
statute-book ? Are we to consent to thè
transformation of our Federai Constitution
into something new, foreign, and strange,
all its provisions based on mìstrust of thè
future governing capacity of thè people of
this country? Let us trust them as we
trust ourselves, content to do our day’s
work to thè best of our ability, and to go
down to our rest having done that day’s
work, meeting its actual trials—and God
knows they are severe enough in both new
and old countries even at thè present day !
It is our chìldren that are to follow us.
Let us trust to them as probably more com-
petent, more Australian in spirit, and less
hampered by provincial considerations or
day-dreams of redemption by mere law-
makìng methods. Let us face thè situa-
tion manfully to-day, leaving our country
better provided than we found it with thè
means of progress, and, without loss of
liberty, stili free to meet fresh difficulties
and fresh trials as they arise, strong in thè
faith that our race has so long justìfied.
26 ih Octoher, 1910.
Mr. DEAKIN (Ballarat) [10.52].—The
subject-matter of this clause is of
such magnitudo that thè Committee
would be failing in its duty if,
quite irrespective of thè ultimate re-
sulta to be achieved in thè way of amend-
ment, we did not at least contributo as far
as we can to a better understanding
of thè consequences of this, perhaps thè
most vi tal of all thè amendments be-
fore us. I say “ perhaps ” because thè
industriai amendment from some aspects
may appear to be even more serious ; and I
say nothing of thè reciprocai influ-
ence of each one of thè proposals on thè
others, although, as mentioned in my
second-reading speech, thè cumulative
effect of these proposals taken together,
coupled with thè fifth, which is included
in a separate Bill, present a problem of thè
highest complexity and difiiculty.
Corning to this specific proposai in re-
gard to trade and commerce, I shall not
attempi to deal at this stage with more than
one point, which appears to me to be of
Principal importance, at all events, at thè
outset of our consideration. My only con-
tention beyond that will be in answer to
thè Attorney-General’s quotation from thè
speech of thè honorable member for VVim-
mera, which can be put in a few sentences.
Western Australia is to-day a State of thè


Commonwealth. Nobody ever has sup-
posed, and nobody supposes that it will
continue to remain one State. As a mai-
ler of fact, except in pari of thè South-
west corner of that immense territory, there
is not sufficient settlement. Without that
settlement there would be no State of
Western Australia. Ultimately, into at
least three, probably four, portions must
that great area be divided. And for what
purpose? For thè purpose of effective ad-
ministration. To point to an enormous
area of unoccupied territory, and to teli
us that so long as there is no population
very few administrative difficulties can arise
is no mo*re than to say that if we were to
take an altogether uninhabited country no
difficulties could arise in regard to trade
and commerce. We claim, on thè basis of
thè experience of thè United States, of
Canada, and of this country, in varying
degrees, but particularly in thè circum-
stances of Australia, that effective adminis-
tration of legislation is not possible when
such immense areas are sought to be dealt
with by a Central Legislature. This ap-
plies equally w'ell whether a Central Legis-
lature operates over that of thè States
within thè Commonwealth, or where, as
in thè case of Western Australia,
pending further developments and settle-
ment, an enormous unoccupied area con-
tinues to be retained under one Government.
What is thè proposai with which thè hon-
orable member for Capricornia and others
in this House are associated? It is to
subdivide Quensland, though it contains a
mudi smaller area than that of Western
Australia, because population and develop-
ment have reached a stage causing a
demand for its division into three States,
to promote efficient locai government.
Mr. Page.—Does thè honorable member
think that similar conditions prevail in thè
unoccupied territory in Western Australia?
Mr. DEAKIN.—No; but I hope and
believe they will obtain before many years
have passed over our heads.
Mr. Sampson.—That will depend upon
thè distribution of population in thè future.
Mr. DEAKIN.—Yes ; but thè distribu-
tion of population geographically has a
great deal to do with subdivision. A com-
paratively small community in thè neigh-
bourhood of Derby and Broome would be
entitled to self-government at an early
date, simply because of thè distance and
entire centrasi between thè conditions ob-
taining there and those obtaining in thè
southern portion of thè State.
Now vvhat is thè main contentici! which
thè Acting Prime Minister has submitted
in defence of thè proposai to strike out
thè only limitation on thè trade and com-
merce power? It is quite possible that my
answer may seem technically too large, and
that thè reai nature of that power must be
considered first. We differ from thè
United States, although our gift is ex-
pressed in precisely thè same terms as
theirs, because we bave a large and very
valuable specific endowment of trade and
commerce powers, which, under thè
American System, ha ve been developed from
a series of judicìal decisìons. Since thè
judiciary in America has made those en-
dowments, they can be looked at there from
one side as marking an extension of thè
trade and commerce power, because they do
expand its terms in given directions. They
may be looked at from another point of
view, as implying limitations of thè main
power. That has been a tendency in
thè interpretation of thè Canadian Consti-
tution. It was there held, if I remember
aright, that although a power to regulate
trade and commerce was vested absolutely
in thè Dominion Parliament, yet, since that
generai grant was accompanied by certain
specific endowments, it acquired a specific
character, and in point of fact became
limited in its nature. Both of these
two cross currents would bave to be
taken into account if one endeavoured to
coin a precise definition of thè trade and
commerce power in our own Constitution.
This consideration meets, in a certain
sense, thè explicit statement of thè Attor-
ney-General that by striking out thè limit-
ing words in our Constitution we shall
endow thè Commonwealth Parliament with
“ plenary ” powers in these regards. Even
thè word “ iilenary ” is used colloquially
in a different sense from that in which it is
used legally, and thè Attorney-General
may have applied it in a colloquiai manner.
By way of introduction let me cali
attenlion to a few considerations which
leave it doubtful whether thè omission of
these words will make thè power as
“ plenary ” as thè honorable member sup-
poses. By way of precaution, let me ask thè
Attorney-General whether thè striking out of
thè limitation “ amongst thè States and
with foreign countries ” in paragraph i of
section 51 will really have thè boundless
effect that he assumes. He appears to
think that it endows thè Commonwealth
with all thè trade and commerce powers at
present possessed by thè States in addition


to thè power conferred on us by thè Con-
slitution. ‘ But has thè trade and com-
merce power of a State within itself ever
been defined, or can it be defined? Is it
not an endowment derived from that huge
reservoir of undefined authority which
ready belongs to thè Crown, thè limitations
of which are not set out, because they
never needed to be set up within thè
State? When a State passes an Act, it is
not asked whether that is under its trade
and commerce power or any other named
power. It acts upon its generai authority
as a sovereign State. The States will re-
tain that sovereignty even after thè pas-
sage of this amendment though their powers
are nowhere enumerated. VVe have another
sovereign State created in thè shape of thè
Commonwealth, but it is a sovereign State
of enumerated and expressed powers. The
question, therefore, is whether thè Attor-
ney-General is accomplishing thè complete
cession of power he seeks. He will look
in vain in State legislation for a limita-
tion of State powers in regard to trade and
commerce, or even for a definìtion of those
powers. Such considerations do not arise,
nor can they arise, within a State.
In spite of theraselves, therefore, thè
Government will require a definìtion
of trade and commerce to carry over from
thè Federai sphere when entering thè State
sphere under this amendment. I doubt if
thè Attorney-General does get further than
thè conveyance to thè Commonwealth by
these means of thè problem what it is that
thè words “ trade and commerce ” can
cover in this relation. That will have to
be thè subiect of ludici al defini tion and de-
cision. The Attorney-General is not escap-
ing from thè barriers in thè shape
of legai decìsions which he thought he had
thrown aside. He is not getting beyond
thè iurisdiction or thè interpretations of
thè High Court. Whatever thè High
Court’s interpreta tion of thè meaning of
thè words “ trade and commerce ” in a
State may be, thè endowment which they
convev in its different asnects must be thè
subiect of a series of decìsions.
Mr. Hughes. — l said that whatever
“trade and commerce” means, we are to
use that power wherever we find it.
Mr. DEAKIN. —The honorable member
cannot escape thè necessity of discovering
what it means to thè States, and what it
means to us. He will be liable to be chal-
lenged at any time in thè exercise of this
power by thè question whether it is really
exercisable as such. Where in thè world is
there yet sufficient guidance as to what a
trade and commerce power within a self-
governing State really is? When you have
it “ as amongst thè States or with foreign
countries,” you have something to guide
you in thè hosts of judgments in thè United
States and bere, and can gather where thè
demarcation is intended to run. There
must stili be some line of demarcation to
run even when thè whole of thè trade and
commerce power is sought to be transferred.
But it will be a new line; and thè jurisdic-
tion of thè High Court cannot be escaped.
Nor will thè Commonwealth obtain an un-
qualified and unquestioned field of legis-
lation, as thè whole of thè Attorney- Gene-
rali argument assumed. After all, thè
definition of “trade and commerce” is
going to be for a long time under these new
conditions as complex and difficult as thè
demarcation of thè trade and commerce
power has been so far under thè Constitu-
tion. But thè great advantage of thè
present Constitutional provision, owing to
thè legai definitions and interpretations
we now possess, will no longer exist.
Mr. Mathf.ws. —Then why do thè Oppo-
sition oppose it so much?
Mr. DEAKIN. —For altogether different
reasons. One of thè principal advantages
claimed by thè Attorney-General for this
clause is, as I have shown, unreal and
imaginary. If it does exist at all, it cer-
tainly does not go to thè extent to which he
claimed.
Mr. Hughes. —ls not thè fact that we
have no power over Inter-State commerce
a serious limita tion ?
Mr. DEAKlN.—Certainly.
Mr. Hughes. —Will not this proposai re-
move that limitation ?
Mr. DEAKIN.—Yes, but only to fix it
in some indefinite place further on yet to
be explored. I do not say that thè Com-
monwealth will not enter into thè trade
and commerce field hitherto reserved to thè
States. It will do so, as far as it
can ; but that entry carries a limitation.
Does a particular State Act arise under its
trade and commerce rights or not? This
amendment of thè Constitution, instead of
giving thè Attorney-General, as he supposed,
thè run of thè larder, enables him to take
only from certain shelves. The decision as to
what shelves he can take from, and where
and how, will have to be threshed out
before thè High Court This consideration
was entirely ignored by thè whole of his
argument, which assumed that, with this


power, thè Commonwealth entered at once
into a field in which litigation regarding
limitations would be altogether avoìded.
That hope has absolutely no foundation.
The trade and commerce power, as it
exists, is not thè simple proposition that
is assumed owing to thè existence of other
spedile endowments in thè Constitution.
There are half-a-dozen or more sub-sections
of section 51 which give spedile authority
for thè exercise of Commonwealth authority
in matters which might bave been deduced
from thè trade and commerce power itself.
In addition, there are that group of sec-
tions 98, 99, 100, and 101, of thè utmost
importance, intended to introduce new ele-
ments of Commonwealth authority within
distinct limits. They are thè peculiar crea-
tion of thè Australian Constitution, which,
in these relations differs from any other.
It was never intended that our Con-
stitution should be a slavish copy of thè
American. If that had been thè intention
it would bave been a great failure. It is
an Australian Constitution, and thè best
that thè Convention, with its knowledge
and ability, could frame at thè time, adapt-
ing it as exactly as possible to thè circum-
stances of Australia.
Mr. Hughes.—How does this particular
paragraph differ from thè American?
Mr. DEAKIN.—Not at all in its own
terms, but absolutely in having at least
half-a-dozen trade and commerce powers,
as they are considered in America, speci-
ficially set out in section 51, and those
other sections, beginning with 98, giving
powers as to railways, waters, and other
matters not included in thè American Con-
stitution. All these react on thè originai
definition and turn it into something entirely
different from thè American.
Mr. Hughes. —Conferring a wider
power ?
Mr, DEAKIN.—I think so now, though
it would be hard to say that any power is
wider than thè American trade and com-
merce power bìds fair to become in course
of time. As thè honorable member for
Flinders reminded us, Chief Justice Mar-
shall, to his everlasting honour, trans-
formed what might bave been marie a dead
Constitution into a living one, although
its life was derìved rather from judicial
interpretation than from a plaìn reading
of thè originai legai intent.
Mr. W. H. Irvine. —For that purpose
he had to go almost beyond interpretation,
and strain words.
Mr. DEAKIN. —But every one vvill ad-
mit that whatever successful growth has
been achieved by thè American Constitu-
tion, enabling it to meet thè demands of
recent and present times, has been owing
mainly to Chief Justice Marshall’s inter-
pretation. If, at thè rime thè Constitution
was drawn, thè intended legai interpreta-
tion of its powers could bave been put
down in black and white, they would bave
had nothing like thè scope that Marshall
afterwards gave them. In short, he marie
thè American Constitution live.
I do not desire to get into a second-
reading discussion, but all these factors bave
an important and direct influence upon fhe
actual effect which thè Attorney-General is
going to obtain by striking out these few
words. It may be said, “ Whatever thè
results may be, thè Government propose
this alteration in order that, so far as they
can, by this means, they may enlarge
Commonwealth powers. They may bave
overlooked many difficulties, and thè ques-
tion is much more complex than they at first
snpposed. It is not thè clear run that they
expected to secure ; nevertheless, we under-
stand their motivo, and must admìt that
to strike out thè limìting words of para-
graph i must bave some immense effect on
thè future of Australia.” I agree. It
will bave an immense effect ; but it will
bave to be paid for. The cost will re-
prime to be met. It begins a process,
not of creation. but of development bv thc
vprv iudirial decisions which it was thought
might be escaped. As this Constitution is
in so manv respects distinctlv Australian in
ifs nature, thè effects of thè alteration will
not be entirely known until there bave been
ohtained from thè Hi ah Court sufficient in-
terpretations of thè meaning of these very
words.
Mr. Page. —The same argument which
thè honorable member is using against thè
alteration of thè Constitution was used
against thè honorable member in Queens-
land bv thè nnti-Federalista, when he was
advocating thè adoption of thè Constitn-
tion.
Mr. DEAKIN.—No doubt ; and there
was a measure of truth in it then, as there
alwavs must be. I bave admitted frnm thè
first that you cannot bave a Federai Go-
vernment withnut paving for it. On thè
one side vou get enormous advantages in
a united defence and development, and by
thè breaking-down of unfraternal Cnstoms
and other barrìers. In ihose directions thè
gains are immense.


Mr. Page. —For thosc icasons Federa-
tion is worth all that it costs.
Mr. DEAKIN. —But Federation is not
all 'gain, although its gains far outweigh its
losses. It involves sacrifices. When we
establish a national unit, if we wish to re-
tain our locai self-Governments they must
bave certain locai self-governing powers —
if we regard them as essential to thè free-
dam and growth of thè nation, as I most
certainly do —we must pay thè price by
accepting some necessary, but in a sense
artificial, adjustments, owing to thè legai
demarcation necessarily made between thè
Federai and State spheres of Government.
The CHAIRMAN. —I am afraid that
thè honorable member is getting away from
thè question which is before thè Chair.
Mr. DEAKIN.—I fear that is so.
Every one will recognise that we cannot
bave two concurrent Governments without
defining their respective spheres. That
task must, for a time at least, mean litiga-
tion. The question under this Bill is
whether thè boundary lines of Federai
powers now being shifted into State territory
are not being pushed mudi too far. While
undoubtedly thè labours of Federai mem-
bers will be eased, we shall dry up that
spring of life and energy which can only
be derived from locai self-Government.
Then there is another argument against thè
omission from thè Constitution of thè words
proposed, which bave behind them thè
weight of an immense mass of American
experience
Mr. Hughes.— Will thè honorable mem-
ber give us thè benefit of some of thè ex-
perience which warrants thè retention of
those words ?
Mr. DEAKIN.—As I understand it,
even with any limitations which may be ira-
posed, thè net effect of thè proposed endow-
ment of thè Commonwealth will be to place
almost thè whole of what may hereafter be
defined to be thè trade and commerce
powers of thè States at thè mercy of thè
Federai Government. The provision in
our Constitution under which a Common-
wealth law overrides a State law in every
case where thè two come into conflict, will,
in a comparatively short time, practically
exclude thè States from most fields of
this kind of legislation. Taking this
circumstance into account, together with
thè further invasion of State rights
which it is proposed to authorize by
succeeding amendments, I say that thè re-
sult of thè passing of this Bill will be to
leave thè States with only thè shell of thè
power which they at present exercise, and
that in this Parliament will be found al-
most thè whole of thè powers which are
capable of being exercised. The tendency
of such an unbalanced growth must be to
weaken thè State Legislatures so much
that whatever little scraps of power may
stili be left to them, must hereafter be ap-
propriated in thè same fashion owing to
thè weakness of thè locai Governments.
The result must be that we shall attempi to
govern Australia by an entirely unitary
form of Government. That, I think, will
be thè effect of these amendments. Per-
I had thought that my own con-
tribution to this debate would be limited
to calling attention to thè fact that, in
spite of himself, thè Attorney-General by
this proposai has not escaped from thè ne-
cessity of defining thè trade and commerce
power of thè Commonwealth.
Mr. Hughes. —No power has been better
defined so far as judicial decisions go.
Mr. DEAKIN. —But thè definitions
bave been gained either under thè American
or Canadian Constitution, and imply an in-
terpretation of their particular provisions.
What is proposed bere is neither American
nor Canadian. It is a departure which
takes away all thè relevancy of American
cases and nearly all that of thè Canadian
cases.
Mr. Hughes. —Either our power is wider
than is that of thè United States or it is
not. If it be as wide as thè power of thè
United States, then thè United States deci-
sions must govern it. If it be not as wide as
that power, we desire to make it so.
Mr. DEAKIN. —It will be enormously
wider than thè power possessed by thè
United States. But thè question to be de-
termined is an entirely different one. It
will be no longer a question whether a
matter is one of State trade and commerce
in thè present sense, butto what extent it
is Commonwealth trade and commerce de-
ducted from thè similar power remaining
in thè State, which is quite a different
thing.
Mr. Hughes. —The difference is only
one of application.
Mr. DEAKIN. —To my mind there is
so great a gulf between thè two that, while
thè American cases now present to us a
number of most valuable stepping stones,
these will be of very little value to us in thè
new circumstances. We shall bave to dis-
cover new stepping stones for ourselves. We


shall need a series of Australian decisions
laying down what is thè Commonwealth
power under this generai authority now
conferred. When Australia has an
additional population of 5,000,000 or
10,000,000, as I hope she will bave within
a comparatively short space of time, thè
result of this amendment will be to over-
burden our centrai Legislature even more
than thè American Congress was over-
burdened. There, as thè honorable mera-
ber for Darling Downs has pointed out,
Bills are poured into thè Legislature by
thousands, and rejected by hundreds.
A similar state of affairs—and a most un-
healthy one —is likely to be brought about
in this country by thè amendment which is
now proposed. I do not say that such a
state of congestion can be prevented,
even under thè existing Constitution, but
certainly thè evil will be enormously in-
creased by thè amazing endowment of
power which is bere proposed. I admit
that there are certain advantages to be
gained from thè stand-point of convenience,
and of simpler legai interpretations if we
abandon all attempi to limit thè trade and
commerce power of thè Commonwealth, in-
stead of endeavouring to icstrict it to cer-
tain selected avenues. Some national
gain would result from thè transfer. But
I certainly do not see my way to frame
any such definition as could secure these
and these alone, nor bave I yet heard any
definition which I can support.
Mr. Hughes. —Can thè honorable mera-
ber suggest a definition?
Mr. DEAKIN.—I bave already said
that I do not. If, within certain defined
limits, any one can frame such an amend-
ment, I shall be most willing to take it
into consideration. Generally speaking, thè
existing limitation is very apt. Indeed, it
seems thè best which can be framed,
though I am open to bear of a better.
But that better cannot involve anything
like thè Wholesale obliteration of State
jurisdiction which must follow thè adon-
tino of thè new amendment proposed.
This is not a party matter, and if I
could see my way to frame such a
definition as we require, or if I could
frame one which would serve for a few
years as a via media, I would most wil-
linglv do so. In thè circumstances, I see
a great balance of disadvantage in accept-
ing thè sweeping amendment of thè Go-
vernment. It will bring about a transfor-
màtìon which is utterly uncalled for, and
in itself enormously difficult. The pro-
posai is absolutely antithetic to thè very con-
ception of a truly Federai Constitution. If
thè State Governments cannot be trusted to
deal with trade and commerce within theii
own particular areas, subject to thè authority
which thè Commonwealth Government ought
to enjoy, I do not know with what they
can be trusted to deal. At all events, I
bave endeavoured to convey my own feel-
ing that this extreme alteration of sub-
section i of section 51 of thè Constitution
is not only uncalled for, but unjustifiable,
and should be rejected by thè Committee.
* * * *
Mr. DEAKIN (Ballarat) [10.2].—!
think thè Attorney-General understands
that whatever power may be necessary lo
enable this Parliament to deal at once in
thè most thorough and complete manner with
trusts and combines, or operations of that
kìnd, thè whole Committee is unanimously
willing to concede. But what is submitted
is that thè Attornev-General can obtain all
that power for dealing with trusts and com-
bines which associate themselves with cor-
porations, are corporatìons, or attempi to
disguise themselves as corporation, in thè
most thorough-going fashion, wifhout go-
ing to thè extent of this clause. Beyond
that, since certain advantages, obvious to
all, can be gained by unity of legislation.
There is no opposition bere. But by this
proposai thè Attorney-General is forcing
into thè Federai arena thè whole treatment
of corporation thè naturai and inevitable
effect of which will be to render nugatory
whatever legislation there is on any of thè
State statute-books specially affecting cor-
poration. Corporation must naturally ob-
serve their contracts, and accept State law
generally in such matters, or if they stray
from thè paths of rectitude, will be sub-
ject to correction by State tribunals. But,
in this case, as in thè preceding instances,
thè Attorney-General, I think inten-
tionally, is seizing thè whole of thè
subslance of thè authority that can
be exercised in relation to corpora-
tion strictly and solely as corporatìons.
He is leaving to thè States, except
in ordinary matters as to contracts and
torts, so narrow and small a field
that it will be not worth their while to
occupy it. Consequently, thè whole of thè
law dealing with corporatìons, as corpora-
tions, will under this amendment pass into
thè hands of thè Commonwealth. That


is a good deal more than thè Attorney-
General has admitted to be his object, but
it must be obvious to him that it will be
thè inevitable result of his proposai.
Mi. Hughes. —lt does not follow that
we shall exercise it, but we ought to bave
power to make thè Commonwealth legis-
lation other than futile if thè necessity
should arise.
Mr. DEAKIN.—I should be as keen as
thè honorable member in preventing Com-
monwealth legislation from being rendered
futile in thè least degree in respect to trusts
or combines, or to any of those impor-
tant matters to which he has been allud-
ing. But if we take this Wholesale power,
ine whole of our experience in this' Parlia-
mcnt proves that, wherever we bave a
power, we exercise it to thè full. That
will always be thè naturai tendency of
any Parliament. If thè Attorney-General
frankly avows that, as in effect he does,
there is no more to be said on thè subject.
It is no use arguing with “thè master of
forty legions.”
Mr. Hughes. —l am willing to listen to
anything, but am bound to say that I can-
no! see why we should not use these words,
when, on thè very face of thè judgment, it
appears that, without their insertion, we
bave no power over thè operations of cor-
porations.
Mr. DEAKIN.—We do not need power
over all thè operations of corporations,
large and small, but we certainly can
claim, and ought to bave, all necessary
powers over them, over trusts and combines,
or similar matters. If, as it is evident that
they do, thè Government insist that we
must annex thè whole field, it would bave
been better to say so at once, and avoid
part of this discussion.
27 ih Octoher, 1910.
Mr. DEAKIN (Ballarat) [ll.3B].—We
bave heard thè Acting Prime Minister in
many moods, and on many notes, thè most
familiar being those in which he is wont
to cheer on his followers by thè many in-
flammatory means within his prac-
tised power. But, severe as bave been
thè raids which he has made upon us under
those circumstances, they are absolutely
nothing compared with thè pillage he sub-
jects usto while in thè mildly benevo-
lent mood in which he has addressed
us this morning. Never was anything so
sweet and simple as thè manner in which he
sought to demonstrate that when he puts
P. 16329.—»
his hand into other people’s pockets appro-
priating their necessaries of life in case he
may requìre them in thè future, this is all
to he understood as in thè way of kind-
ness. Only one enthusiasm consumes him
al thè present moment—his enthusiasm for
State rights. Rather -than that any State
rights should he invaded, he offers himself
as a willing victim on thè aitar. He seeks
to suggest that on thè present occasion he
is making quite a new - departure. But it
is by taking away thè control of State
servants from their State masters he poses
as a State Righter !
Mr. Hughes. —My merits are becoming
visible to thè honorable member.
Mr. DEAKIN.—The honorable gentle-
man’s past annexations and aggressions
bave been costly enough, but his present
concessions and condescensions are ab-
solutely ruinous. The next lime that he
is out for politicai rapine, let it be
in his old familiar style. This modest
method of thè domestic fowl does not
fit eithér his appearance or purposes.
Generous sentiments will not make us ridi,
and a few more proofs’of it will send thè
State Legislatures out into thè world in a
condition positively verging upon thè inde-
cent. They will not bave a rag left with
which to clothe thè nakedness of their locai
governments. They will be turned out into
thè world burdened with nothing but his
effusive sympathy and good-will.
Let me emulate thè Acting Prime Minis-
ter by assuming, though far off, a somewhat
simìlar patience under provocation. This is
thè first amendment in thè Bill which has
any prospect of being carried, and it has
been proposed by thè honorable gentleman
himself. He has given usto under-
stand that it is submitted in obedience
lo thè strong representa tions of Opposition
c.ritics. They bave shown him that in
thè words “ industriai matters ” theré may
possibly lurk some desperate, piratical at-
lack by thè Commonwealth upon techni-
cal schools. Rather than that thè techni-
cal schools in any hamlet of thè Common-
wealth should be threatened, thè honorable
gentleman has come down to this House,
withdrawn his originai clause and sub-
mitted another under which we bave his
personal guarantee that those schools will
hereafter be safe from thè tyrannical clutch
of this Parliament. That represents an
enormous gain ! Throughout this country
thè glad tidings will flash to thè presidents
and secretaries of our technical schools.


They may henceforth slumber in peace.
The fechnical_ schools have been saved.
But at what price? What pressure and
strain have been put upon thè sympathies
of thè Acting Prime Minister inducing him
to part with this prize, while incidentally,
nnostentadously, compassionately —and as
a sort of casual consequence —annexing
xoo,ooo employés from thè State railways ?
This is no bargain, but a gift to thè tech-
nical schools !
Mr. Hughes. —l omitted to mention
thè kindergarten schools, which are also
in perii.
Mr. DEAKIN. —The only persons quali-
fying for thè kmdergartens are, tirsi of all,
thè innocent and retatively youthtul man-
bers on this side, and thè members of thè
State Legislatures overwhelmed by thè
benevolences of thè honorable gentleman.
In case it is by a lapse of memory that he is
annexing some hundreds of thousands of
persons who are receiving State pay for
discharging State Services, but who are now
to have their wages and conditions dictated
by this Parliament, perhaps we had better
take him at his word. All lam dreading is
lesi thè super-generosity of his nature
should be so affected by some argument of
mine that he may desire to re-draft his
amendrnent out of some further con-
sideration. After these ìnstances we ask
for no more sympathy. The honorable
member may continue to favour us with a
few half-bricks, or any other mìssile that
is handy ; but we ask him to give us no
more concession and no more charity, even
to save more technical schools.
Let us be fair to my honorable friend,
whose attitude throughout has been per-
fectly consistent. For instance, in regard
to trade and commerce, he look out of thè
States all a man could take ; he struck out
thè only limitations that exist. There is no-
thing left; but, as to that, we have no
room for compiami. Of course, as has to
be incidentally pointed out, thè trade and
commerce power never having been de-
fined, so far as I am aware, within any
sovereign State, thè task of defining what-
ever residuary relics may remain to thè
States after thè Attorney-General has taken
all he can get under thè widest amendrnent
he can possibly frame will stili leave a large
field for legai interpretation. But that is
not thè honorable member’s fault, because
he would have taken thè residuum too if he
could. There was really nothing more
within grasp that he could seize; and, there-
fore, his consistency is amply manifest.
He was above any pettifogging considera-
tion as to what thè Commonwealth actually
needed—as to what extension of thè trade
and commerce powers was really required
in thè interests of Australia. Some of
us were reckless enough to admit that we
could see directions in vvhich, if a segment
of thè sphere could have been technically
severed, there might have been some valu-
able additions to our trade and commerce
powers. Unfortunately, we did not have
thè honorable gentleman’s assistance, and
were unable to make any such advance.
But, as I have admitted, so far as it is
possible for him to lead or thè House to
go, he has gone.
Again, in regard to corporations, we
were able to make a distinct offerto fede-
ralize and sterilize them so far as they
related to monopolies, combìnatìons, or
trusts—to give all thè power necessary to
meet thè highest and widest view o£ pre-
sent Commonwealth needs. But bere, too,
thè honorable member was consistent j he
was not concerned with meeting thè needs
of thè Commonwealth, even where they
could be clearly defined—he wanted all,
and he look all.
Next, having proposed an amendrnent of
our industriai powers, drafted in some
guìleless hour—an amendrnent which ap-
parently left something in thè corner of
his mind unswept —his conscience pricking
him with sleepless vigils, he at last pro-
duces another amendrnent of which it can
be frankly and fairly said that, like every
other he is associated with, it leaves thè
States nothing of their own to come and
go on—vvhen he has taken what he desires,
he leaves a vacuum.
Mr. Hughes. —The honorable member
is very hard to please.
Mr. DEAKIN. —The honorable member
does not seem to realize that I am praising
his consistency above everything. The most
stern and severe member of thè revolution-
ary committee in France, who voted for
thè guillotine on every possible occasion,
from thè highest moral motives, was not
more strictly consistent than thè honorable
member.
Mr. Hughes. —What became of him?
Was he guillotined?
Mr. DEAKIN.—As Mark Twain once
said, that member of thè revolutionary com-
mittee, having attended an execution, unfor-
tunately received personal injuries, which
terminated in his death. The polnt is that


thè Attorney-General is consistency itself.
Having, on reflection, suspected that his
previous amendment might, by some per-
verse legai construction, exclude 100,000
State employés, who bave 100,000 votes,
he hastens to repair thè omission. His new
proposition embraces everything possible,
and places thè dominance of thè Common-
wealth beyond doubt. This tribute to thè
consistency of thè Attorney-General is due;
and I bave paid it not ungenerously.
Mr. Hughes. —l am following thè ad-
mirable example set by thè honorable mem-
ber’s colleagues.
Mr. DEAKIN. —I do not propose to de-
tain thè Committee by considerations which
originally would bave been strictly
aprnpos, and, in fact, unavoidable. In thè
briefest and most summary way I bave
given my view of thè effect of thè Attor-
ney-General’s consistency on thè various
proposals before us. The further clause,
which has yet to come, is precisely of thè
same character. If it had been material
to any possible action by this House, or
if we could bave influenced this Com-
mittee in any way, it would bave been
necessary to consider how far this clause
could be modified so as to meet, at all
events in this instance, thè actual, present,
or approximate industriai difficulties of thè
Commonwealth by ampie and sufficient,
but not excessive, extensions of thè Fede-
rai power. We bave considered this ques-
tion in 1907-8, and at other times, making
a steady advance towards a practical
method of meeting sudi cases as are now
unprovided for by thè machinery of thè
Constitution. Personally, I think that our
progress has been very reai ; at all events,
for my part, I confess to having a
mudi clearer opinion than that previously
cherished. I believe that if opportunity
had offered, we could, with confidence,
bave submitted to thè Committee à
modificatimi of thè proposai of thè Govern-
ment bringing within thè scope of Federai
jurisdiction every industriai dispute, dif-
ficulty, or, using thè word in a large sense,
every industriai unfairness which might be
expected to occur in connexion with thè
working of thè Commonwealth. I fully
admit that until this is accomplished our
Constitution will remain incomplete. But
great as this issue is, it is not,. under' pre-
sent cìrcumstances in this House, and in
view of thè fact that thè Bill must be sent
directly to thè electors, a practical obliga-
tion on usto enter into thè particular field
covered by thè amendment. We should be
n 2
doing so then for thè purpose of assist-
ing, so far as we can, by mutuai consul-
tation and expressions of opinion, in thè
formation of a right judgment bere, and
of a practical conclusion in thè country. I
put these considerations aside somewhat
reluctantly ; but time is valuable, and thè
amendment which we had before us, and
which would bave evoked these considera-
tions as necessary corollaries, is now dis-
placed by anpther Minìsterial amendment,
which differs not simply in its effect, but
also in its character.
So far as I can forni an opinion in
this short space of time, I think that thè
amendment, first drafted by thè Attor -
ney-General, as it appeared in thè Bill,
would not bave covered clearly it
might not, and, in my opinion, it would
not —thè case of thè railway servants with
which he now proposes to deai expressly.
There was more than a slight doubt
whether it would bave included that body
of men ; but whether it did so or not is
immaterial now. The Government bave
placed thè issue beyond all doubt by sub-
mitting an express proposition,. to in-
vest this Parliament with thè control of
thè employés of all thè State railways of
Australia, present, and to come. This Com-
monwealth, without any financial or other
responsibility in connexion with thè rail-
ways, is to “cali thè tune,” and thè
States, submitting to thè Commonwealth
superior control, with no possìbility of chal-
lenge or appeal, are to “ pay thè piper.”
That is a relation which in itself is remark-
able, inasmuch as both bodies being repre-
sentative of thè people, chosen by thè
electors to dìscharge certain administrative
functions under legislative control, thè
Commonwealth is to seize, not simply thè
doublé jurisdiction which every one of those
proposals gives us in all thè field covered
by trade and commerce
Mr. Hughes. —There is doublé jurisdic-
tion now.
Mr. DEAKIN. —We bave a certain
doublé jurisdiction, but there is now pro-
posed an extension of our authority
incomparably greater both in its actual
working and effect than any doublé
jurisdiction hitherto suggested. We shall
rather create a new jurisdiction than
extend that we bave, so complete is
thè transformation. With thè trade and
commerce power added to thè power, over
corporations and over industriai matters,
now proposed in a wider form, and speci-
fically over railway servants, buttressed


again by thè provisions in regard to com-
binations and monopolies, with a fifth
amendment coming dose behind, we shall
attain, as I bave several times observed, to
a grouped, cumulative action of those
powers, each to some extent, and some
of them to a large extent, reinforcing
thè others, so as to bind, as with an
iron chain, every State in this Common-
wealth to thè chariot wheels of this Par-
liament. The position was serious enough
when we were protesting against thè doublé
jurisdiction, in spheres of State action,
implied under thè conjoint powers. I, for
one, am not prepared to say what State
jurisdiction is left, so small is thè remnant
that cannot be invaded should this Parlia-
ment choose to exercise its full powers
under this group of amendments. But thè
former exercise of thè doublé jurisdiction
proposed represented, so to speak, in-
vasions of territory. The territories of
thè States were as much invaded as if by
a hostile army, one that will soon be in
effective occupation ; but, large or small
—as I think very small—as thè tract left
to thè States was, at all events it dìd leave
them with some nominai sovereign control
over it. Thus their dignity was preserved, al-
though they were reduced from what might
be termed large States to pettv principali-
ties. But this intervention is altogether of
a different kind. It is impossible to cali
anv State sovereign thè conditions of em-
plovment in whose Services is governed by
a body outside itself. Not onlv bave thè
possession and power gone, but thè prestige
and dignity, thè independence and sove-
reignty, of thè States are now to be im-
paired also.
Sir John Forrest.—“You pay; we will
control.”
Mr. DEAKlN.—Exactly.
Mr. W. H. Irvine.—The last remnant
of efficient management and control has
gone.
Mr. DEAKIN.—Ecfore we consider
material considerations, we ought to recol-
lect that in politics, as in national diplo-
macy, prestige—often considered of little
or rio significance—is really an active power
which has to be allowed for. One of thè
great objections to diminishing thè juris-
diction of thè State Governments is that
it causes them to dwindle in thè public
eye, makes them less attractive to men of
affairs, of character and independence,
affords a much narrower field for thè exer-
cise of whatever self-governing capacities
our people possess, and generally promotes
public indifference. Public indifference in
politics always exists in Australia, where
private considerations—as in all other coun-
tries—occupy so much thè larger place,
when compared with public interests. We
are always much more slack than our demo-
cratic government can afford. In some
other forms of government that want of
care for public interests may not count for
so much ; but in ours—under a Constitu-
tion which brings Parliament into such dose
and intimate relation with thè people, and
brings thè public into dose touch with
their Governments —it becomes a much more
serious matter.
The greatest agency which thè States
possess for developing their territories, their
greatest means of placing people on thè
koìl—unless you put it second to water sup-
ply—is their railway System. That is in-
separably connected with thè lands and thè
water supply ; it is by far their greatest
business Department. Under present cir-
cumslances, thè Ministry are asserting that
thè States of Australia cannot be trusted
to deal equitably with their own servants,
and that thè electors of State representa-
tives will not deal as fully and fairly with
these men as they would be dealt with if
they were under thè thumb of thè Common-
wealth. This places a very curious imputa-
tion upon all thè electors of Australia.
We are asserting that we, as Federai re-
presentatives, having no financial respon-
sibility, are in a position to deal more justly
and equitably with thè employés of thè
States than are thè States which bave to
pay thera, which bave to malte thè System
remunerative, which bave to carry out thè
development of their territory. This ìs
rather a curious by-path, however, into
which I do not propose to entei.
Mr. Frazer. —Does thè honorable mem-
ber mean to say that this Parliament would
influence thè Court ?
Mr. DEAKIN.—I mean to say that this
Parliament takes power to appoint a Court
—that in itself is a very great power.
Mr. W. H. Irvine. —This amendment
goes a great deal further. It includes
power to legislate as to all thè conditions.
Mr. DEAKIN. —Exactly. It places thè
control of thè State railway servants first
under a Court appointed by this Parlia-
ment —under a Court whose jurisdiction is
under thè control of this Parliament. Next
it will keep under thè control of this Par-
liament, by any legislation it pleases tò


pass, all thè conditions of employment of
thè whole of thè 100,000 persons said to be
employed on thè railways of our States.
Mr. W. H. Irvine. The amendment
means that this Parliament may legislate
as to all conditions.
Mr. DEAKIN.—That is thè second
point. In addition to, or substitution for,
but quite irrespective of. State laws, it will
be competent for thè Federai Parliament to
lay down all thè conditions of employment
• —as long as thè conditions are generai—
which must be applied to thè servants of
thè State Parliaments.
Of course, oné is at a great disadvantage
at every turn during thè discussion of this
Bill. Because every man of us here knows
that thè great bulk of thè votes that will
be cast for it, when it is submitted to thè
country, will be given by men who perhaps
approvo of one or other of thè four dif-
ferent and separate proposals which are
here improperly tied together. The electors
will look at what they may get industrially,
01 at what they may get by some exer-
clse of thè trade and commerce power, or
at what they may get by dealing with cor-
poration, or at what they may get by
checking trusts and combines ; and, wishing
to get some advantage, they will vote for
getting that particular thìng, and not for
changing thè Constitution. But it will be
transformed. As we are all citizens of thè
State; —it may be said that we are citizens
of States before we are citizens of
thè Commonwealth —and we are brought,
in one way or another, most intimately into
relations with locai Governments.
Besides, we are all accustomed to a
unitary form of government. That is to
say, our States have accustomed usto a
unitary form of government, and to dealing
with their problems in thè relatively direct
and simple fashion, characteristic of a uni-
tary forra of government. We are now
asked to lay before thè people proposals
which a great portion of our population
will read and consider as though they were
made under a unitary form of government.
They will ignote thè fatai effects that their
action will have upon our Federai structure
■ —a structure which ought to be permanent.
Aiming at industriai matters, or those con-
nected with trade and commerce, or with
corporations, they will ignore thè fact that
*\they are striking at thè Constitution and
destroying thè pillars which support it.
The consequence is that we shall get
a vote on particular legislative pro-
posals which ought to be a vote,
wholly and solely at this stage, to de-
termina a new distribution of legislative
powers. We labour under an enormous
difficulty. Those who take thè view
that thè Federai Constitution, and especially
its Federai principle, should be preserved,
and that any amendment made should be
in accordance with that principle, start
with that very heavy handicap against us.
And now thè Attorney-General—excellent
tactics, if you like !—gets 100,000 more
votes into his scale by this specific
proposai affecting thè railway servants.
He holds out a specific inducement
to every railway servant in this country
to vote for altering thè Federai Constilo-'
tion, with a view of securing thè anticipated
benefits which he may think likely to arise
hereafter from thè operation of Common-
wealth legislation, Yet that is not thè reai
question on which he is voting.
What did thè Attorney-General say?
That this power, making thè Common-
wealth supervisory and supreme over thè
State railways, is to be employed whenever
this Parliament ventures to think that there
has been State neglect of anything it
chooses to cali thè interests of thè men.
Whether for anything or nothing, this Par-
liament may interfere at pleasure with thè
States which built thè railway systems,
which owe thè money invested in them,
which bave to find thè interest upon thè
money borrowed bere or abroad, which
bave to manage those railways for thè de-
velopment of their own territories, adjust-
ing them to their municipal growth, while
supporting them by their land legislation
and by their generai policy. These rail-
ways will be, and remain, at thè dictation
of an outside, independent, irresponsible
power, compelling them to do its will at
thè States’ risk and expense.
Mr. W. H. Irvine. —Without having any
responsibility for thè indebtedness which
thè States bave incurred in connexion with
their railways.
Mr. DEAKIN.—If we put thè States in
thè power of thè Commonwealth in this re-
spect, we shall bave to assume responsibility
for their indebtedness. There will be no
choice then. We must take over their rail-
ways. The Commonwealth’s credit would
be ruined if it permitted thè States to get
into Queer-street. But now you are taking
power to enable thè Federai Parliament to
cut righi into thè control of th«
State railways in any fashion—thè
most trivial or thè most serious, as.


it thinks fit—without regard to thè
locai Governments of thè country directly
responsive for them. Surely in a
country such as ours, whose government
is based upon universal suffrago, vvith every
member of thè Public Service, together with
his wife and his relations, armed with votes,
does any one pretend that our public ser-
vants are not strong enough to obtain a
prompt responso to any legitimate request
for consideration ?
Mr. Fenton. —Votes were taken away
from thè public servants on one occasion.
Mr. DEAKIN.—And why? Has thè
honorable member asked himself that ques-
tion? Why was that step taken in Vic-
toria?
Mr. W. H. Irvine. —The only mistake
thè Victorian Parliament made was in repeal-
ing that Act.
Mr. DEAKlN.—However, thè State
battles of long ago, though fought after this
Parliament was established, are not within
our sphere, and are not germane to
this debate. There, again, you get away
from thè fundamental point at issue, which
is thè alteration of an established Constitu-
tion, under cover of a knot of other ques-
tions only incidentally associated with it.
The only points that it seems necessary to
establish at this stage are thè magnitudo of
thè possible interference, and thè fact that
thè nature of that interference makes it
much more than a business matter. It
establishes a dual control that is wholly
unjust, and absurdly unbusinesslike. It
could not be employed in circumstances of
private employment. We are interfering
with thè manner in which another Legisla-
ture discharges its business, dictating thè
terms and conditions by which it shall be
carried on. How can that principio of
control without responsibility be justified?
Mr. Hall. —Do not thè Arbitration
Courts act in that manner now ?
Mr. DEAKIN. —So far as is necessary
to fix thè generai conditions with which all
private owners must comply. But we are
dealing now with bodies which are, and
will remain, Government monopolies in
every State—businesses in which, there
being no competition, there is no
question of putting competitors on
a fair and even footing. Com-
petition is excluded—a factor which is
enormously to thè advantage of those
engaged in State employment. Besides,
a State or public body invariably con-
siders those under its charge more liberally
than a private employer. It is not
under thè same pressure. A State
cannot be forced into thè Bankruptcy
Court by its rivals. It can raise its
charges, and deal with its conditions, as it
pleases. The private employer, however,
has no such choice. He may not alter his
charges, nor vary his conditions, except at
thè risk of ruin, while thè State can go on
its way rejoicing, developing at thè public
expense. The Attorney-General has not
given an illustration of a State in Australia
in which railway servants are unfairly
treated. Even if he could, he would re-
quire to proceed to thè next stage, and to
show that thè electors in that part of Aus-
tralia were so insensible of thè demands of
justice that they were not taking steps to
remedy that condition of affairs.
The circumstances of thè States vary,
and administrative control and legislation
change also. To-day, employment in Aus-
tralia is more plentiful than ever. There
has been, for some time, a steadily increas-
ing activity. In thè face of that deyelop-
ment, and, in thè face of a better
temper and disposition towards industriai
questions than has previously existed—we
are stepping in as if there had been some
grave injustices to State servants calling
for violent interference by an outside body.
The injustice would need to be widespread
and severe to justify such an interference.
It does not exist, and, further, cannot be
justified, as long as thè States remalo
sovereign.
Bad as are thè other proposed amend-
ments of thè Constitution for which this'
measure provides, because, in every case,
they go beyond thè necessities, making
wide and sweeping changes that are not
yet justifiable, that now before us is far
worse. It carries us into a new sphere. It
alters, or should alter, thè attitude which
ought to be adopted by thè country to-
wards this measure. I had hoped that thè
people of thè Commonwealth would set this
Bill'aside, so to speak, on its merits; that
they would say that whatever thè necessities
of thè country required could be obtained
without throwing thè whole Federai System
into thè melting pot and taking it out again,
with its federai character eliminated.
I had thought that they would
weigh it on those grounds, without re-
gard to thè particular matters on which
an amendment. of thè Constitution was
sought. But we bave now reached a
new position. We are not only to become
militant invaders of all State territories,
but, as thè Attorney-General says, we are'


to possess concurrent authority with thè
States. He never reminds thè Committee
that, once we have concurrent authority,
every State law must yield to any Federai
law on thè same subject. In such circum-
stances, thè State law disappears, and thè
Commonwealth law remains. The State
law ceases to operate directly a valid Com-
monwealth law touches thè particular mat-
ter with which it deals. That being so,
this concurrent legislation, so lightly spoken
of, only continues concurrent as long as
this Parliament dpes not choose to exercise
its powers. Let this Parliament choose to
exercise its concurrent powers, with or with-
out cause, and thè State authority dìsap-
pears. Honorable members opposite speak
of that as concurrent legislation. It sounds
well, but I do not know what ownership we
should have in a house in which we could
reside only until another persoti having con-
current ownership chose to put us out.
Mr. Matiiews.—There are a lot of men
in that position.
Mr. DEAKIN.—There may be some,
l-u r they have not reached it in consequencc
of an invasion of a self-governing com-
munity. Here w r e, as representatives of
thè whole of thè people, are undertaking
an aggressive invasion of all thè important
telds of legislation of other self-governing
bodies elected by our own constituents in
our own country.
Mr. Frazer.—Only with thè consent of
thè people can we do anything of thè kind.
Mr. DEAKIN.—If thè Federation
secures this power, it will be, not because
thè people are dìssatisfied with thè Con-
stitution as it exists, but rather because thè
Government are holding out four or five—•
shall I say bribes?—or inducements.
Mr. Palmer.—Baits.
Mr. DEAKlN.—Because thè Govern-
ment in this one Bill dangle four or five
Iraits before thè people affected. Those
engaged in trade and commerce, employed
on our railways, interested in industriai
matters, or affected, or believing them-
selves to be affected, by trusts and combines,
represent together a great majority of thè
people of Australia. They are directly or
indirectly interested in takìng thè baits that
this Government are holding out to them,
and will accept them innocent of thè fact
that thè Federai Constitution is to be de-
stroyed in order to obtain them.
Mr. Mathews.—What more does thè
honorable member want? If these powers
are granted, it will be by thè will of thè
people.
Mr. DEAKIN.—But thè Federai Con-
stitution should be retained. As far as
possible thè people should achieve these ob-
jects through their locai Governments.
Those relating to industriai matters, thè rail-
ways, trade and commerce, and production,
must ahvays be largely conditioned by locai
circumstances. The locai governing bodies
should keep their share of thè work,
remaining a self-governing community.
Australia cannot be ruled by one Parlia-
ment from one centra.
Mr. Frazer.—When thè Financial
Agreement was before us thè cry was
“Trust thè people.”
Mr. DEAKlN.—Exactly. In that case
there was a clear issue to submit to thè
people, and we did trust them.
Mr. J. H. Catts. —The Constitution
Alteration (Financial Agreement) Bill com-
prised five clauses.
Mr. DEAKIN.—But they affected only
one matter. The voting was very dose,
and we, who were in thè minority, have
not complaìned of thè verdict of thè people.
Mr. Parker Moloney.—We had better
put thè Constitution in a glass case.
Mr. DEAKIN.—If thè people assent to
these proposals, we shall need a glass case
for six stuffed birds, representing thè
States of Australia. Moreover, such a
transfer of energy and responsibility as
will flow to this Parliament, if these
amendments of thè Constitution be carried,
will find it already over-burdened with its
own national work. It will not present
proper outlets for its activities, such as co-
operating locai governing bodies, each
vigorous in its own sphere, would afford.
I have indicated, as well as I can, that
this branch of this amendment, being
quite different from thè other proposed
amendments of thè Constitution for which
thè Bill provides, places thè meàsure
in an entirely different posìtion. What-
ever were thè objections on other grounds,
there is now added thè Cardinal objection
that this proposed amendment of thè
Constitution would not only invade thè
terrìtorìes of thè States, but deprive them
of a sovereign power. It would sub-
ordinate them once and for all, render-
ing it impossible, even on thè theoretical
grounds adopted by thè Attorney-General,
to tema this a federation of States. If thè
Constitution be amended in this way, we
shall have not a federation of States, but
six locai bodies with all their principal
activities subordinated to this Parliament.
Not only will thè balance of power be


destroyed between them and thè Federai
Parliament, but they will be deprived of
their character and dignity. The States
will be sovereign no longer, but merely
provincial. They will be provinces rather
than States. We tabe their lives when we
tabe thè means by which they live.
Once thè proposed invasion of thè legis-
lative powers of thè States in all these
spheres is crowned by this transfer of their
authority over their own railway servants,
thè worb of thè destructionist and unifica-
tionist will be complete. And yet thè
Attorney-General told us, in words which
I toob down as they fell from his lips,
that his chief anxiety was to mabe it per-
fectly clear that he was not proposing to
tabe from thè State Governments a jot or
tittle of their power. He was depriving
them. he said, of nothìng that was not
essenti al to secare industriai peace, and in
thè other cases, I suppose, to secare trade
and commerce peace, and thè pence of cor-
porntinns, trusts, and monopolies. All
is to be done in thè interests of peace.
Mr. Finlayson. Even if that were
true. would thè States bave nothìng left?
Mr. DEAKIN. —Next to nothing. If
this latest amendment be made they will
not bave left to them even their self-re-
spect. The Attorney-General in his de-
meanour to-day posed as “ thè mildesl
manner’d man ” that ever, so to speab,
attempted to cut thè throat of six States
at once. The conduct of those who sup-
ported him was most appropriate. While he
spobe they felt that thev were at a
funeral, and behaved as mourners. They
were extremelv sympathetic, and at times
discreetlv sad. They were determined
to inter thè corpses of thè States,
and not only to burv them. butto place
upon them a weìght of legislation against
which even their ghosts must find them-
selves powerless.
THIRD READING.
2 Sth October, 1910.
Mr. DEAKIN (Ballarat) [n.s3].
Despite thè dose attention that honorable
members bave given to this measure, we
cannot claim to bave covered much of thè
enòrmous area or anything libe all of thè
manifold considerations that require to be
taben into account before pronouncing a
judicial verdict upon it. It is idle at this
hour to attempi more than a brief summary
of thè generai views that most, if not all,
honorable members on this side hold in re-
spect to this great proposal. During our
short debate several major issues bave been
relatively ignored while side issues, as is not
uncommon, bave engaged a large proportion
of our attention. At thè same lime, in a
generai way, most of thè salient points
bave either been seized or touched upon.
Those who examine thè debates hereafter
will find that in some particulars, at least,
thè Bill before us has been examined as
well as could be expected in view of thè
pressure under which we are worbing.
The public bave not realized, and pro-
bably will not, thè full effect 6f
these propositions which are to form
a permanent part of thè Constitution
of thè Commonwealth. Those of us who
uphold thè existing Constitution as, with
some faults, a most effective and invaluable
development of thè Federai principio, ap-
plied with very generai appropriateness to
thè conditions of Australia, must realize
that thè battle to be fought in thè country
will be apt to turn upon considerations in
no degree as important or of as much reai
substance as those to which we bave endea-
voured to direct attention. The necessary
insufficiency of thè criticism we bave been
able to offer has been due in part to thè
circumstances of this House, with its blocb
vote on thè other side and a distinct
minority on ours ; and also to thè conse-
quential effects of thè rate at which we bave
been legislating. The Government are evi-
dently anxious to tabe thè tìde while
running at its strongest, and to utilize thè
force generated during thè late generai elec-
tion to thè last pound of pressure to thè
square inch that can be brought to bear
in this Chamber. Unfortunately, in this as
in other Parliaments, there is no speed
limit. There is no measured legislative
mile by which we can test thè rate at which
we are travelling.
Mr. W. H. Irvine. —And not even thè
danger of thè speed to thè public is re-
garded.
Mr. DEAKIN.—The danger to thè pub-
lic is disregarded, nor bave we even an un-
sympathetìc constable, with a more or less
reliable stop-watch, to test our gallop. We
bave neither land-marbs nor log to enable
usto determine thè rate of our progress, as
compared with previous sessìons, but it is
obviously quite exceptional. It has never
been equalled in relation to measures of
such magnitudo as those which we bave had <
before us. In thè circumstances, there-
fore, despite certain disabilities, we are
doing our best. Although thè Attorney-
General has not occupìed more than thè


proportion of time due to him in such a
debate —has, indeed, curtailed his'remarks
on many points unduly—one could vvish
there had been some authority in this
matter, before which he could bave been
brought for putting thè five cylinders of his
present politicai motor up to thè reckless
rate at which we are now travelling.
Could any speech be more ostentatiously
curt than that which he delivered when
moving thè third reading of this Bill? It
consisted of a gracious bow to you, Mr.
Speaker, and a pleasant smile to thè House.
Apparently, there is no argument that thè
honorable gentleman feels it necessary at
this stage to address to us, and, indeed,
for him argument is wholly unnecessary.
One of thè very few new aspects developed
in thè course of thè debate shows that this
measure is principally justified, in thè
opinion of a great number of honorable
members opposite, by thè misdeeds and
neglect of thè State Governments. The
whole measure might be fitly described
as a comprehensive vote of censure against
thè State Administrations, collectively and
severally.
Mr. Hughes. —lt is certainly not in-
tended as such.
Mr. DEAKlN.—lnstances of what are
considered offences committed by one or
other of thè States have been repeatedly
elaborated, although those given were par-
ticular, and applied only to single States.
The kaleidoscopic conditions which have
generally attached to State Legislatures, as
well as to thè Commonwealth Parliament,
suffice to explain most. Although thè At-
torney-General has not put any such ex-
plicit contention before thè House, it carne
in set terms from thè lips of thè few honor-
able members opposite who have addressed
thè House. The bulk of their speeches
consisted of charges of derelictions of duty
on thè part of one or more States, with thè
demand that this Bill should be passed,
because it affords us.a remedy. Amend-
ments of thè Commonwealth Constitution
were never intended to be passed with an
eye to our dictating to Legislatures which,
like ourselves, are chosen by thè electors,
receive directions from them, submit their
policies fo them, and are held answerable
by them. It is no function of this Parlia-
(ment to shape its measures, and, above all,
its Constitution, in order to control thè
course which representatives of thè majori-
ties of voters in thè States think fitto pur-
sue. If that were so, we should have a
continually changing Constitution, sought
to be adapted and re-adapted to thè vary-
ing circumstances brought aboùt by hosts
of different conditions in different States.
We each receive direct instructions from thè
people. No more unsound principle could
be pursued than that of justifying amend-
ments of our Constitution by thè various
changes of politicai weather in thè various
State Governments. When considering pos-
sible amendments of thè Constitution, we
should be governed by a far larger view
and by a far more serious recognition of thè
intended permanence of that instrument and
thè purposes for which it is created. The
ground of this line of argument is utterly
unsound.
With respect to thè graduai discovery in
this Parliament, during thè past few years,
of thè principal limitations of our powers,
one retrospective observation deserves to be
made. I do not wish to return to thè past,
except in one particular, in which allusion
even. to State Governments Comes fittingly
and naturally in this debate. Undoubtedly
some, and, I think, on some occasions, all
thè State Governments in thè early days of
Federation adopted a distìnctly aggressive
attitude, which had to- be rigidly and
sternly resisted in this Parliament. Hav-
ing been frequently thè subject of adverse
criticism for thè stand we took against such
attempted invasions of Federai rights, I can
point to our condùct then as 'justifying our
claim to be equally Federai now when re-
sisting attempted Federai aggressions upon
thè privileges of thè States. Those who
take a consecutive view of thè various
phases through which thè relations between
thè Commonwealth and thè States have
passed, will realize that for some years we
were occupied in resisting unjustifiable in-
roads upon our domain. Now, owing to
thè swing of thè pendulum, thè naturai
duty of consistent Federalists is to be
equally active and pi ain spoken in order to
discourage aggressions by thè Federation
on thè preserves of thè States. Having
borne thè brunt of battle then, we should
be entitled to a more considerate hearing
now from those who advocate unfair inva-
sions of State authority.
Again, taunts have been made during
thè debate in respect of my responsibility
for having proposed three, and carried two,
amendments of thè Constitution. We have
held from thè first that thè Constitution
was no stereotyped sacrosanct document, be-
yond improvement. On thè contrary, our
persistent assertion has been that it was
a living Constitution, growing and intended


to grow, and that our duty was to assist its
legitimate growth from time to time by every
means in our power. Consequently those
taunts are timely, since they balance
thè unjustifiable assertion that thè present
proposals for amending thè Constitution
bave met with our dogged, stubborn, and
unqualified resistance. Both statements
are equally erroneous. The first charge
is that we treated thè amendment of thè
Constitution as an easy matter to be readily
and hastily resorted to ; thè second that we
bave taken up a position of determined
resistance to any attempi to allow it *o
develop. Neither charge can be in thè least
substantiated. On thè contrary, I claim that
thè history of this Parliament during thè
last few years shows, as regards thè great
majority of its members, a distinct line
of policy seeking to avoid both extremes,
not treating amendments of thè Constitu-
tion lightly, but recognising that they le-
quire special justifications, and proceeding,
unhasting and unresting, to face every
emergency as it arose. We bave never
feared to readapt thè Constitution either
to new circurastances, or to thè more
clearly seen demands of old circumstances,
in order to make it effective. We
bave kept thè straight and equitable
palh. Without claiming to be free from
mistakes, looking backwards I think thè
majority of thè members in this House
must recognise that our party bave pur-
sued a thoroughly straightforward and
consistent Federai policy.
Nor is it true, as some honorable members
bave been careless enough to allege, that
we bave exhibited an unreasonable an-
tagonism to thè proposals submitted by
thè Government in this measure. On thè
contrary, to every one of its four distinct
propositions we bave submitted alternatives
which were as far as possible definite. I
do not claim thè existence of an absolute
uniformity of opinion upon all points
among all members on this side, but their
disagreement, if any, has certaìnly not im-
posed new disabilities on thè free con-
sideration by honorable members of thè
situatlon before us in thè light of our past
knowledge and experience. Although we
bave acted together, there has been no
rigid partisanship, and no appeals to party
feeling or party unity. The whole Bill,
and all its branches, bave been studied
freelv, frankly, and independently by
members on this side, and except in one or
t'"o important instances with what may be
termed practical unanimity.
I should bave preferred to see thè Go-
vernment amendments of thè Constitution
limited to spedile propositions, adapted to
spedile ends. I do not say that those ends
should be detailed in thè Constitution, but
that new departures proposed in thè existing
Constitution should all be framed as far
as possible to permit of thè achievement of
thè spedire ends for which amendment is
now needed. The door should.not be thrown
w.'de, as appears to bave been thè case in
several of these clauses, without any
clear idea of what may pass through it.
We must, of necessity, in constitutional
amendments, adopt more or less generai
statements of principio, rather than expres-
sions pointing to particular kinds of legis-
lativi. While complying with that neces-
sary condition, thè amendments can be
so shaped as to exclude to a large degree
any entirely unexpected uses of or develop-
ments from them. This risk has been by
no means provided against in these
amendments. That being our view, thè
opposition which has been offered to thè
Government proposals has been measured,
defined, and express, not based upon
vague terms, but concrete. Those who
take pains to sift thè criticisms which
bave been offered on this side will fine!
that, so far from shutting thè door to im-
provement and advance, we bave sought
to open it in each case as wide as necessary.
Of course, a further question of thè
urgency of thè need for amendments
ir particular cases would disclose some
differences of opinion. There are pro-
positions for thè amendment of thè
Constitution which can be theoretically jus-
tified, but for which no pressing need has
yet arisen. Towards these our attitude is
necessarily one of reserve. So far as we
can teli, improvements would be possible
in those directions, but as no necessity
for them has yet arisen, they are capable of
postponement, not only without in-
jury, butto thè advantage of thè people
and of thè many interests involved.
Unfortunately, thè chief amendment we
sought to make is not now within our reach.
At thè very outset we would bave sevcred
from these live particular amendments thè
generai issue whether thè Constitution can
admit such amendments under present
circumstances and yet survive. If it had
been possible to do this without deciding
whether thè immediate objects of these
alterations are -good or bad, we could
bave settled thè prior question sim-
ply as afifecting thè proper theory


and practice of Federai government.
If such an amendment could bave
been framed directly—unfortunately, it
could not, although it involved, and is in
itself, thè most vital issue now before us —
we should bave had an opportunity of ask-
ing thè people of Australia whether thè
amendments now proposed in thè Constitu-
tion, taken all together, were ready fede-
rai or unfederal—whether they involved
such a disturbance of thè balance of power
as would or would not tend to destroy thè
federai character of thè Constitution. That
preliminary question is, even now, thè
greatest issue to be decided in this Bill ;
but, unfortunately, it cannot be submitted
at all. These amendments may be fatai
tc Federation, though some of them desir-
able in themselves. But thè voting will be
■decided by thè four or five propositions for
specific legislation, without regard to thè
constitutional results of deàling with them
in this fashion. With thè programme of
thè Labour party in their hands, thè sup-
porters of that party know what those
.powers are to be used for. Consequently,
as I bave said twice before in thè en-
deavour to make this obvious but disre-
garded point a little more plain, thè vote
we shall get will disregard thè federai and
constitutional consequences of those amend-
ments in order to attain certain definite in-
dustriai and business aims.
Mr. Care.—Could that not be obviated ?
Mr. DEAKIN. —The generai question
could not now be submitted separately.
Before popular audiences one will not be
able to effectively discuss thè distribution
ot Federai powers while concrete proposi-
tions are àlso at stake. Yet in thè par-
ticular Bill before us, so great is thè in-
vasion that it could bave been brought home
to thè great bulk of thè people how violent
and unexampled were thè changes it meant.
They could bave been asked whether they
were prepared to sacrifico thè Federai prin-
cipio in order to secure industriai altera-
tions in this Wholesale way.
Mr. Care. —The people would draw their
-own deductions.
Mr. DEAKIN. —Unfortunately, we shall
not bave this separate, broad, Federai issue
in an effective way before thè electors.
Then there is another difficulty which is
also thè creation of thè Government, and
also raises a serious obstacle to thè free
expression of opinion by thè electors. That
■ ìs thè launching of these five proposals in
a single measure, to which, as a whole, thè
'people are required to say “Yes” or
“ No.” Having developed this point to
some extent on thè second reading, 1 shall
not weary honorable members vvith repeti-
tion ; but there is no doubt that, with these
fi ve separate and independent proposals,
\ve increase thè already existing confusion
of issues. There is first thè issue as to thè
preservatimi of thè Federai principio in thè
Constitution, and next thè issue as to each
of thè five particular purposes to which
these amendments are intended to be ap-
plied. Here we bave as complex and varie-
gated a set of issues as can be put before
thè country deliberately confused in one
question. That, I venture to say, is dis-
tinctly to thè disacfvantage of thè country
—which is denied, not only a constitutional
verdict, but any distinct choice between five
different propositions.
It has been a defect in our Democracy—
a defect for which thè referendum was
believed to be a cure —that at generai elec-
tions there are perhaps a score of different
issues, of different subjects, before thè
people. As they are confined in many
cases to thè necessity of returning one of
two candidates opposed to each other, they
must accept thè whole programme of one
and reject thè whole programme of thè
other. The electors are thus deprived of
a discrimination that they should ha ve an
opportunity to exercise. In a small coun-
try like Switzerland that discrimination has
been rendered possible by thè continuai re-
mission of measures, confined to specific
subjects, to thè verdict of thè electors ; but
thè extent of Australia, and our conditions,
render that impossible. Manifestly, then,
thè referendum, if it is to act as thè cor-
rective to thè Wholesale forcing of party
policies upon thè electors, must be a refer-
endum on specific subjects. Every man
and woman must be invited to say " Yes ”
or ”No” on each separate issue. But thè
course adopted by thè Ministry deliberately
sacrifices thè chief virtue of thè referen-
dum. It is no corrective ; electors are
denied that freedom of choice which is
their undoubted birthright. There is no
recessity whatever in thè nature of these
proposals why they should be rohbed of
their free choice. It is perfectly true
that these subjects can be said to
be allied ; but so could every power
for which authority must be sought in this
way from thè people; it is only a ques-
tion of more or less. In thè present
instance thè questions are distinct, not
in their nature, but in their effects and


operation. Each contains very important
elements of its own, quite distmctive, and
quite etlective, if taken by itself. lo
bunch them together, treating them as
thougti they form part of one whole, while,
in fact, they only form a part of thè very
extensive and varied programme of thè
Labour party, is to multiply, without any
justification or excuse, thè disabilities ai-
ready imposed on electors at each generai
election. Mmisters are enforcing their pet
projects upon thè community in an arti-
licial bunch fot party ends and to thè
demal of thè right of discrimination which
should belong to every elector of Australia.
The subjects comp’rised in this Bill
lead one very far afield, but my
desire is to compress my remarks in
thè shortest possible time ; and _ I pass on
to say a few words on thè particular pro-
posals before us. My principal purpose is
to indicate clearly in each case thè broad
alternative that thè Opposition desires to
be placed before thè country. The fìrst
amendment relates to Federai trade and
commerce; but in fact both thè clause re-
lating to corporations and thè clause relat-
ing to combines also come within this trade
and commerce power. In America they
would be treated under that head. This
proposition of thè Government destroys as
far as it is possible any line of demarca-
tion between thè Federai trade and com-
merce jurisdiction —and that of thè States,
thè former is enormously wide —here they
are merged, whether vested in thè States
or vested in thè Federai Parliament. No
doubt, by judicial decisions, some boundary
w ili probably be established between their
respective spheres, though thè remnant pre-
served to thè States will be relatively trifling.
But ignoring thè powers relatìng to
corporations, trusts, and to combines, thè
trade and commerce power of thè Com-
monwealth proposed to be enlarged by thè
Government did not cali for any distinctwe
amendment of ours at that point. Any
amendment framed by us would have meant
a specific proposition, such as thè Govern-
ment have submitted already in relation to
corporations and trusts and combines. It
could have extended thè powers of thè
Commonwealth under thè and com-
merce provision without attempting thè im-
possible task of delimiting thè power other-
wise than as it is delimited under thè Con-
stitution.
The argument for recognising State
boundaries appears on thè face of thè
Constitution. It has been attacked from
various points of view, but it is of thè very
essence of Federation that a centrai Go-
vernment should comprise within itself in-
dependent, and only in a sense, subordi-
nate bodies, which retain a certain area to
themselves. What other bounds could be
putto thè trade and commerce power,
except those of thè several States, each of
which possesses a territorial domain of
its ovvn within, that of thè principal
Government? No other division is pos-
sible ; and if thè States are to exist as
States, I venture to say some such divi-
sion is essential. If we sweep it away, we
shall bave nationalized an area so vast
that it must fundamentally alter, not only
thè relations between thè Federai partners,
but of thè States themselves. The pre-
sent boundary is thè naturai and necessary
concomitant of a Federai Constitution, in
which thè existence and activity of thè
States is in their way and within their
domain as important as that of thè
National Government. The lìfe principio
of Federation demands thè perpetuai co-
operation of thè centrai and national power
with responsible and effective locai powers.
Mr. West.—Have we not been trying all
through to remove these Statelines?
Mr. DEAKIN.—Yes, wherever that is
essential to thè better working of thè
federai System ; but, in my opinion,
thè removai of boundaries here pro-
posed would be fatai. The advan-
tages gained would not compensate
by any means for thè impoverishment
of our locai governing bodies, and we
should impede, in a very short time,
thè future development of Australia.
Although thè precedent of Canada has been
quoted, most of us never considered that
thè Dominion enjoyed a really Federai
Constitution. If now, at this stage, we try
to adopt thè Canadian principle, we shall
not be following it exactly, but only so far
as to throw thè whole trade and commerce
realm of thè provinces open to thè Com-
monwealth Governrr.ent so far as it can
take it. We shall be departing from that
classic definitìon of federai government
which endows thè centrai government with,
none but Hmìted and enumerated powers.
It is all very well to say that we enumerate
a “ power ” over “ trade and com-
merce,” and, in a certain sense of thè word,
we do ; but in act and in fact so wide and!
vague is that sphere that thè words “ trade
and commerce ” cover without defining
them' a large group of powers, many of
them stili undefined, and nearly all of


them capable of development. Within
that very wide range such an endowment
can scarcely be called limited. Limits will
be discovered, at some lime ; but, in
faci, it is not strictly an “ enumerated ”
‘‘ power,” nor is it a power which, in
thè Federai sphere, is fairly described as
“ limited.”
In respect to thè second amendment pro-
posed by thè Government —that relating to
corporations—we look thè objection that thè
transfer of thè whole authority over such
bodies was not called for by any evidence
laid before us, and was also in thè teeth of
a very strong decision by a Justice of thè
High Court, quoted in extenso by thè hon-
orable member for Flinders. The late At-
torney-General proposed, in thè memoran-
dum which was issued last year, a very
effective, though limited, authority over
corporations, which could bave been vested
in thè Commonwealth without impairing
thè efficiency of State legislation, or bring-
ing about thè chaos which Mr. Justice
Higgins’ judgment shows will be thè se-
quence of thè step we are now asked to take.
As to thè amendment respecting trusts
and combines, thè Opposition has given
thè Government its support, though de-
siring that restraint of trade should be a
material condition rendering them amen-
able to our law. We bave given thè Go-
vernment a broad and generai assurance
that any power which it can show to be
required to enable this Parliament to cope
in thè most effective manner with trusts,
combines, and monopolies, would be heartily
supported. Ministers bave not chosen to
accept our overtures. We bave thus of-
fered two trade and commerce alternatives,
to which they did not give thè fair con-
sideration which their practicability de-
manded.
Mr. Bamford. —The High Court will
bave to decide as to thè eflfectiveness.
Mr. DEAKIN.—I am satisfied, especi-
ally since hearing thè arguments of my
learned friends, that these two would bave
been absolutely effective. By thè adoption
of either we should bave done all that is
necessary now in its sphere, and prepared
for a good deal that may be foreseen,
though remote.
As to thè very important industriai amend-
ment, thè honorable member for Parra-
matta put forward a proposition expressing
in generai terms thè alternative of thè Op-
position. He wished to inserì thè wòrds —
In thè opinion of this House thè industriai
piovlsious of thè Constitution should not be
altered except to regniate conditions of employ-
meni in all Industries that are federai in opera-
tion, or which cannot be effectually regulated by
any one State, further enabling thè fnter-State
Commission to prevent and remuve unfair com-
petition between thè same Industries carried on
in different States.
The proposai is not drafted in thè technical
language necessary for embodiment in thè
Bill, but it makes clear thè intention of thè
Opposition to enable thè Commonwealth
to regniate conditions of employment in all
Inter-State industries which cannot be effec-
tually regulated by thè States, and to pre-
vent unfair competition between thè same
industries carried on in different States.
_ Mr. West. —The honorable member pro-
vided for thè same power as thè Govern-
ment asked for, but in a different way.
Mr. DEAKIN.—The power thè Govern-
ment asked for goes far beyond what was
proposed by thè honorable member for
Parramatta. It is unconditioned. The
proposai of thè honorable member beside me
would meet thè actual needs of to-day and
provide against thè disabilities in sight,
whereas thè Government proposai is not
bounded by any visible horizon, and is there-
fore capable, in thè opinion of most of us,
of being very seriously misapplied. We
claim that amendments of thè Constitution
should be carefully adjusted to thè par-
ticular evils of which we know.
Until now our endeavour has been to
treat industriai differences and dissonances
extending beyond State limits by judi-
cial or semi-judicial processes, and to
establish an independent Court to deal
with industriai causes as legai causes are
dealt with, but without thè technical re-
strictions of Courts of law. Our Arbitra-
tion Court, as such, has done all that
could be expected. Part of its duty
was to discover thè legai limitations
necessarily implied as a corollary
of thè Constitution interpreted as a
Federai whole. • That, unfortunately, has
resulted in a serious curtailment of thè
powers which we’thought thè Court could
exercise, and makes amendment necessary.
The Court must be equipped for thè work
which it is intended to do, and was
thought capable of doing. We bave al-
ways looked forward to thè extension of
its jurisdicfion to all thè Federai indus-
tries of thè country conducted by private
enterprise. Form first to last we resisted
all attempts of thè Commonwealth to in-
terfere in thè management of thè railways
through thè employés of thè States, just
as we resisi any attempi by thè States
to intervene between thè Commonwealth


and its employés ; both invasions are incon-
sistent with thè Federai principle, and in-
volve thè destruction of thè balance of
power between them. On that subject I
bave no wish to repeat myself. At no
time bave 1, either directly or indirectly,
sanctioned an invasion of this kind. One
Government of which 1 was thè head re-
signed rather than consent to such an in-
vasion.
But this proposai of thè Attorney-General
is, not simply to follow thè old road of
judicial determination, securing industriai
peace by thè arbitration of an independent
and qualified Court, sitting aloof from
politicai and party influences, studying thè
interests of employers and employed. He
asks usto follow a new road. Under his
proposai, not only may our present judicial
authority continue over industriai differ-
ences, but also that of this Parliament,
apart from any Court, except so far as thè
ordinary interpretation of its statutes is
concerned. We are to be empowered to
diciate by Act all thè conditions of employ-
ment of all or any of thè employés in all
thè railways of thè States. It is proposed
to take specifically this far-reaching and
invidious power to legislate respecting
State railways. This point has been
missed by critics outside, but it will Le
thè chief thing to impress on thè electors
when they are asked to arrive at a deci-
sion. If thè authority that is asked for is
granted. this Parliament will be able to
pass laws declaring how many hours
should be worked each day by any or each
of thè various classes of railway employés,
thè wages which they shall receive, thè
holidavs which they shall enjoy, thè terms
of apprenticeship in thè Service, and in a
hundred and one other matters.
Mr. Fenton. —Does thè honorable mera-
ber think that it would do that without
thè absolute necessity arising?
Mr. DEAKIN.—No * Federai Parlia-
ment should claim a power over its States
which even those who ask for it declare
ought not tó be exerciaed. Parliamentary
powers are given for use, and can only be
granted on such a supposition.
This Government wishes to give this
Parliament a power which now belongs
only to thè State Parliaments. Such
a transfer would be fatai to thè sovereignty
of thè States, as well as to thè proper
conduci of thè railways, sìnce it would put
their control into thè hands of a body in
no way responsible for thè proper manage-
ment of a business in which
has been invested. This Parliament would
incur no fmancial or practical responsibility
for thè working results of a law that it
passed with respect to State railvvays.
Consider thè effect upon thè discipline of
those engaged in thè service whose appeals
would be to this Chamber. Our assump-
tion of power to decide such questions all
over Australia would cause such a shifting
of thè centre of gravity in our Constitution
as would in itself, quite apart from thè
other proposals in this Bill, destroy thè
Federai character of our government, and
obliterate thè true line of demarcation be-
tween thè spheres of thè centrai and thè
locai Governments.
Mr. Archibald. —Has not every sove-
reign power in thè world got it ?
Mr. DFAKIN.—Every Unitary Govern-
ment has, of course, thè control of its em-
ployés, and so has every Federai Govern-
ment of its Federai employés. But we
must not forget that thè States bave bor-
rowed money to build their railways and
are responsible for it. They tax their elec-
tors to maintain those railways, and to
them they are first responsible. They ad-
just their railways to their own locai
policies of land development and other con-
siderations. This greatest of governmental
enterprises is related to and intertwined
with all thè practical functlons of thè State.
The railways are their largest investment
and best means of their development. If
we take from them thè power of their con-
trol we beggar them at once. There can
be but one outcome. The only justifica-
tion for this proposai would be an
intention on thè part of this Parlia-
ment to take over thè whole of thè rail-
ways of Australia as its property, and
with them thè whole responsibility for
thè dehts incurred. Even then thè Com-
monwealth would be vastly inferior as an
agent for locai development to thè agencies
now existing in thè States ; but it would,
at all events, bave assumed thè responsi-
bility properly associated with this legis-
lation. This power ought not to exist
divorced from that responsibility. The
great transcontinental lines which it is pro-
posed to build can be undertaken federally
without any such ruthless inroads.
Mr. Hughes. —How does thè honorable
membei- distinguish between thè maintenance
of national peace generally and industriai
peace generally?
Mr. DEAKIN.—I bave already fur-
nished.a sufficient answer for this stage.
That can be secured by Federai means.


There is a gulf between private enterprise,
in any form, and public enterprise under
thè control of Parliamems, Federai 01
State, elected by thè men and women,
responsible for thè whole cost and charges
of that enterprise, and dealing with it
freely subject to their responsibihties. Sucn
enterprises dealt with, not by an outside
body, but by thè State electors, who are
all shareholders in their railways, are sure
to adjust themselves to thè equities of em-
ployment. The State railways are con-
ductod in thè interests of thè electors who
build them, pay for them, man them, and
bear thè responsibility for them. The gulf
between State railways, owned by thè elec-
tors, including thè employés, and those
which are owmed by another body alto-
gether, consisting of private shareholders,
or, as in America, perhaps, of a few capi-
talists, is unbridgable. Over private rail-
ways thè law requires to be mandatory in
(he public interests, but not for State em-
ployés, nor from one Federai centre.
Add to your vague extension of thè trade
and commerce and industriai powers this
pow'er of specific industriai legislation
with its other incidentals overriding our
State electors in State affairs, and you
arrive at results that I shall not attempi to
calculate. They will prove very much
more serious to thè electors when thè full
scope of Federai authority in these matters
is finally measured. It is far wider than
even thè members of thè legai profession
appear to bave realized.
I note in passing thè one little humorous
gleam that can be detected in thè Govern-
ment measure now before us. If it be
passed and accepted by thè people every
restriction imposed upon thè Federai powers
conferred by section 51 of thè Constitu-
tion will be removed with one excep-
tion. The State sovereignty will bc
proudly asserted against thè overmas-
tering Commonwealth in one sphere.
Their Legislatures will retain thè right to
govern thè privileges of their citizens
when fishing within territorial waters.
Within three miles from thè shore, thè
fishermen of a State, as fishermen, vvill be
beyond our authority. I do not say that
they will be beyond our trade and com-
merce, or navigation powers. Fishermen
in thè act of baiting their lines, throwing
them in, and drawing them up again may
be for thè moment sovereign State citizens.
That ought to be a consolation and comfort
when thè whole of their remaining indepen-
dence has been swept away. Between thè
lime that they hook a fish and draw it up—
while thè fish is on thè hook or getting off—
they may be in most circumstances free
citizens of a free State.
I bave thus hastily endeavoured to deal
broadly with a measure which effects more
important changes in thè government of
Australia, and contains more potentialities
than any other that this Parliament has had
before it. No other Bill, however long,
complex, or high-sounding its title, has con-
tained as much as this single sheet of print.
The remedy is out of all proportion to our
complaint. Its effects may be likened to
that of a surgical operation on thè vital
organs in a case in which thè ailment might
be met by simple treatment, without resort
to any dangerous expedient. Whether thè
patient—thè public—will realìze this risk in
time it is unnecessary to prophesy, but
certainly thè measure is more heavily
freighted with thè fortunes of thè people of
Australia than any other which has come
before this òr any other Parliament in Aus-
tralia. The consequences, if it be sane-
tioned, will be fatai to Federation. If it
be not sanctioned, this Parliament can
soberly return to its task of devising more
practicable and immediate measures to meet
our existing needs —we bave ourselves
pointed to a certain number which require
to be met —but they can be coped with
cn well-beaten ground without hazardous
and reckless excursions into thè immeasur-
able hinterland of dangers and destructions
that must be assocìated with this short
measure.
CONSTITUTION ALTERATION (MONOPOLIES) BILL.
2nd JVnvember, 1910.
Mr. DEAKTN (Ballarat) [lo.39].—The
Acting Prime Minister passed vervlightly
this nmenrlment of thè Constitution,
when he referred to it with numerous others
whon moving thè second reading of thè
Con&titution Alteration (Legislative Powers)
Bill. The brevity of this Bill is in no
sense a measure of thè importance of its
These cali for a great deal of
ìustification, whether as independent pro-
positions or in relation to thè other amend-
ments of thè Constitution, all of them re-
lated, and some of them going to thè very


xoot of thè grievances cited as a warrant
(or thè introduction of thè Bill. VVhen
thi.s carving of thè Constitution is to cease,
one cannot loretell, but under this proposai
it is being carved a second lime, in exactly
thè same place, for thè same aìlment.
This Bill can be justified only on thè plea
that thè extraordinary powers already taken
in respect to our commercial, industriai,
and producing interests are not adequate to
our emergency. But, so far as one can
form an idea on so vast a subject, thè
vvhole sphere of this Bill is already occu-
pied, mudi of it doubly and trebly coyered,
by thè amendments of thè Constitution to
which thè House agreed last week. Con-
sequently, whatever case there might bave
been for thè submission of this Bill if those
amendments had been rejected, there is
none under existing circumstances.
It is only right that this proposai should
be dealt with separately. What is sought
is not an amendment of either section 51
or section 52, thè two great power-giving
provisions of thè Constitution, because I
suppose even thè Acting Prime Minister,
whose audacity is more than equal to any
contingency, dare not venture to asserì that
what he is now asking for is in any way
necessary for thè peace, order, or good
government of thè community to which
those clauses are confined. He has stepped
out of thè familiar and customary paths of
government hitherto pursued, in order to
enter a field which has been safeguarded by
every previous Government of this country.
I again repeat, that if you consider thè
grounds on which action of this kind is
now excused you will find that they all fall
under one or other of thè amendments of
thè Constitution which this House has al-
ready agreed to recommend to thè people.
For such a departure as this in any com-
munity under a Federai Government, you
will look in vain for a precedent. Of
course, under an ordinary unitary govern-
ment of thè British pattern, without clearly
marked boundaries in these directions and
with an unsounded depth of unexercised
powers, capable of being called upon at any
time and by an ordinary Act of Parliament,
this argument does not specifically apply.
But under no Federai Constitution can any
raid of this kind be defended under our
present circumstances. Nor in any country
has a proposai of this drastic character. or
of such extent, ever been submitted by a
prominent party.
Mr. Webster.— ls not that an argument
in favour of it?
Mr. DEAKIN.—It depends upon thè
point of view. To most of us, I think, thè
path of experience is always thè safest.
When other countries bave been considerate
enough to make experience for us we are
very glad to take advantage of it instead
of venturing out into thè void.
Mr. Riley. —This amendment is required
to cope with monopolies.
Mr. DEAKIN. —We bave coped with
them already and directly by three out of
four amendments of thè Constitution al-
ready approved, and, if they cannot be
coped with as monopolies under them they
cannot be coped with in this way.
My first point is that this Bill constitutes
almost in form, and certainly in fact, a dis-
tinctly new departure. Moreover, it is an
entirely needless new departure having re-
gard to thè amendments to which we bave
already assented. Let me remind hon-
orable members in a very few words
that we bave given thè trade and com-
merce power a scope which no one has
yet ventured to attempi to define. Under
American conditions that power, wide as it
already is, though limited to Inter-State
commerce w'ould, if extended to Intra-State
in this fashion, suffice of itself to meet all
thè practical difficulties which are alleged.
But it is sufficient for my purpose to cali
attentimi once more, first to thè unknown
extent of this pow'er, next to point out
that almost all thè trusts and combinations
sought to be dealt with being corporations,
are brought specifically under Federai con-
trol ; w'hile ovèr and above all this, we bave
approved of a third specific amendment put-
ting trust and combines at our mercy.
Thus in addition to thè trade and commerce
power, which goes a very long way, w*e
bave thè new corporation power which goes
stili farther in thè same direction. Then
we bave both supported by an express pro-
vision empowering thè Commonwealth to
deal with “ combinations and monopolies
in relation to thè production, manufacture,
or supply of goods or Services.” What
more is needed ; w r hat more can be given ;
what more control could be asked for so far
as combinations and monopolies are con-
cerned ? Again thè cumulative effect of those
three amendments of thè Constitution,
is strongly buttressed by thè whole control
of labour and employment which is to pass
into thè hands of this Parliament. There is
now absolutely nothing left, relating to
trusts or combines, or of thè possible in


justices or injuries to be occasionaci
by trusts and combines which canndt be dealt
with out of band.
Remember, too, that under labour and
employment, in thè industriai clause, you
command all thè conditions of all thè labour
of all thè community. You deal with these
interests indefinitely under thè extended
trade and commerce power, over part of thè
same field, but without borders. Projecting
stili further, you manacle all corporation.
You rule specifically all trusts and com-
bines. You already bave them tied down
by a triple or quadruple knot, so that thè
addition of another knot is of no reai
assistance or practical value so far as cop-
ing with, and controlling of, trusts and
combines is your aim. I therefore submit
that thè House is simply duplicating legis-
lation by adopting this proposai in this
particular aspect.
Of course, I bave been reminded by inter-
jection that thè one avowed object of this
particular amendment —thè nationalization
of monopolies—is to crush trusts and com-
bines. That was set out briefly, but very
distinctly, in thè Labour (now thè Minis-
terial) platform, signed by thè head of thè
party and its secretary, issued to thè coun-
try before thè late generai election, and ex-
pounded by its members. The Federai
Labour platform says—
The nationalization of monopolies demands thè
urgent attention of thè people. It may be ad-
mitted that trusts and combines bave not yet at-
tained thè same giant proportions in Australia
as elsewhere, but notwithstanding our youth,
thè capitalistic System is developing bere upon
thè same generai lines.
Then it names certain alleged combines,
and continues as follows—
In igoy thè Federai Parliament passed an Act
to restrain Trusts and Combines. . . . The
experience of America shows that nothing short
of nationalization of these monopolies will pre-
vent their exploìtation of thè public.
That is thè whole of thè case made out in
thè Federai platform of thè Federai Labour
party for thè introductìon of this Bill. But
now this House has brought all thè trusts
and combines under its heel ; has enlarged
thè measure for their restraint which was
ineffective ; and supported it by thè corpora-
tion and thè trade and commerce powers.
\We bave already fulfilled every requirement
lof thè Federai platform in relation to
trusts and combines, which was and is thè
only justification put forward to excuse this
proposai for thè Commonwealth ownership
and working of particular industries.
Concerning thè great advantages which
may flow from some of these amendments
controlling trusts and combines, let me, for
thè third or fourth time, remind thè House
that to that clause there was no opposition
offered from this side. No amendment was
sought except that thè trusts and combines
dealt with should be operating in restraint
of trade. Beyond that essential condition
no exception was taken to thè full power
in regard to trusts and combines asked by
thè Government. That was approved by us
at once, and, in addition, thè widest power
of dealing with a trust or combine which
exists only within a single State. Hence,
without this Bill, and with our assistance,
this Parliament is already equipped with
authority to deal, not only with trusts and
combines in existence, butto prevent them
as well as cure. Under thè existing amend-
ments of thè Constitution it would be pos-
atole for this Parliament, not only to deal
with every trust and combine in existence in
Australia, butto so legislate as to prevent
thè formation of any other trust or combine,
or, if it is attempted, to nip it in thè bud.
Without pushing those powers to anything
like their full extent, we should bave legiti-
mately and readily within our reach, not
only thè effective control of every combine
or trust in Australia, coupled with thè power
of regulating wages and conditions of labour
in every industry, but of dealing with all
trust operations, whatever they are and wher-
ever they are, holding their chiefs respon-
sive for any abuses, and penalizing them
to any necessary extent for breaches of
thè law.
These trusts and combines could be either
eradicated or, better stili, allowed to exist
under conditions equitable to thè country,
their employés, and thè employers. If
legislation of this kind is to be pushed to
its fullest extent, surely that is not only
thè legitimate but thè most prudent, and
in every other respect thè wisest, way to
deal with any reai trust and combine.
Draw its teeth, remove its opportunities,
and destroy its powers for evil, but
allow those who bave chosen to unite
their businesses to conduci them under
thè control and supervision of thè
Commonwealth, so long as their opera-
tions are such as to make for
thè generai welfare of thè community.
Now, that being easily within thè reach
of this Parliament by means of thè amend-
ments we bave already made, what pos-
sibile justification on that score ìs there for
this further amendment.


The Labour manifesto issued in Victoria
follows exactly thè same line as thè
Federai. Under thè heading of “National-
ization of Monopolies ” thè manifesto
says—
In every country thè production and sale of
commodities in generai use, and thè conduci of
generai public Services naturally fall into thè
hands of monopolists. Australia is following thè
lead of older nations in this matter.
Then thè same reference is made to al-
leged monopolies.
The controllers of these monopolies diciate
their own terms to thè people.
Under thè amendment we bave already
passed they can do nothing of thè sort.
They charge what prlces they choose.
Under thè powers taken they can he for-
bidden to do that or anything lìke it —
They diciate retail prices to shopkeepers, and
impose other conditions rigorously.
Under thè amendment already passed they
cannot do that or anything like it.
Except where they have been prevented by
labour legislatura, or by trade unions, they have
paid such wages and demanded sudi Services as
they please.
Under thè industriai and other amendments
which we have passed they can be for-
bidden to do that or anything like it.
Mr. Fenton. —It is a case- of making
assurance doubly sure.
Mr. DEAKIN. —The memorable sen-
tence is—
Labour’s policy is to acquile where it cannot
establish all such large business concerns and to
manage them in thè interests of thè community.
There you have at last, in one sentence,
thè frank confession of thè true reason for
this proposai. It has nothing to do with
trusts and combines, monopolies as mono-
polies, thè conditions of employés, or thè
prices paid by thè public. All that has
already been provided for.
What I wish to make clear beyond chal-
lenge, without being guilty of undue re-
petition, is that this amendment is super-
added not for any reasons given in thè
Labour platform, not for any reasons given
in this House by thè Attorney-General,
not for any reasons given by a single mem-
ber of thè House to whom I have listened,
or whose speech I have read. It is being
pressed on, not because it has anything to
do with thè trusts or monopolies or abuses
to control which it is placed in thè Labour
platforms. It is made for another pnrpose
altogether—that of acquiring large busi-
nesses and carrying them on at Common-
wealth expense. Ministers are not able
to allege that this is necessary to
cope with any of thè injurious con-
ditions or to meet any of thè draw-
backs associated with trusts and combines.
First, Combines are already constitutionally
dealt with and disposed of ; Julius Csesar
is not more dead than every trust and com-
bine will be if even a part of thè amend-
ments of thè Constitution already passed
become law—everything that has been com-
plained of will be cured.
Mr. Fenton.—l wish that were true!
Mr. DEAKIN.—I say so on my own
personal responsibility ; and challenge thè
verdict of lawyers in thè House or out of
it, who are qualified io criticise. That
being thè case, thè whole foundation upon
which this claim for nationalization has
been built, both in thè country and in thè
House, is no longer available for this pro-
posai. That foundation has been built
upon three or four stories high in thè
amendments already carried. There is no-
thing more that thè foundation needs, or,
indeed, will stand. When, therefore,
Ministers and honorable members wish to
justify this proposai, they will require to
break entirely new ground—to point to
some injustices, handicap, or injuries which
thè amendments already approved cannot
cure, and which this particular proposai
will. The question now is, What is this
for?
Mr. Archibald. Why should thè
National Government not have this latent
power ?
Mr. DEAKIN.—It is quite sufficient for
usto deal with patent powers ; latent
powers are beyond thè purview of practical
discussion.
We are. now dealing with a proposai to
take patent powers; and my objection, in
thè first instance, is that those powers, hav-
ing been taken already, cannot be taken
over twice as an excuse for further mea-
sures. Next, that this new departure is
not only needless, but dangerous.
Of course, I am not forgetting that this
is a proposed amendment of thè Constitu-
tion, and is, therefore, drafted in a form
suitable to be placed in thè Constitution.
But even after that allowance is made, we
have only to read thè clause attentively. It
needs no legai education to see that we have
bere a proposai, not for dealing with mono-
polies, or, at all evonts, with monopolies


only, but with any and all private busi-
nesses. The Government, declining to at-
tempi a definition of vvhat they mean by
“ monopolies, ” give future Legislatures of
thè Commonwealth a blank cheque fof pur-
chasing thè property of anything they
choose to cali a “monopoly.” The word
“ monopoly ” is left for future interpreta-
tion. That word has already a chequered
history of its own, and is susceptible of
a great variety of meanings. Whatever,
and wherever it be, within a State or
within thè Commonwealth, it can be appro-
priated by us under this Bill.
Mr. West. —Parliament does not need
to do that under thè clause.
Mr. DEAKIN.—But Parliament will
bave thè power if this Bill be passed. It
means, in plain English, that anything this
Parliament chooses to place under thè head-
ing of a “ subject ” of monopoly may be
dealt with, though we do not know what
“ monopoly ” is until thè High Court helps
us.
Mr. West. —Parliament should bave
that power.
Mr. DEAKIN.—Why referto mono-
polies at all? Only because, like “ Meso-
potamia,” it is a “ blessed ” word, and
being associated with a number of question-
able and tyrannous commercial transac-
tions, and also with underhand bar-
gains and lawless privileges abhorrent
to every Democratic community. It
becomes a very convenient word for Min-
isters to shelter under. If this clause
frankly declared that anything Parliament
desires to take over sjiould be taken over,
it would give in plain Saxon English thè
intention of this proposai. If, now that we
bave elaborately dealt with trusts, combines,
and monopolies, we desire to deal with some
thing else, why not say what that something
else is, where it is to be found, and how
we shall know it when we see it ? It is
not fitting to place in thè Constitution of a
Federai Commonwealth grants of power
which may exhaust thè subtleties of thè
legai profession for generations.
To repeat, whatever “monopoly” may be
held to cover under thè trade and commerce
powers, thè subject of hundreds of cases
which bave discovered continuous exten-
sions or alterations of their boundaries,
thè word ‘ ‘ monopoly ’ ’ may be, coupled
.with them, even more pregnant. There-
ifore, this departure is dangerous, be-
cause it is not taken within guiding lines,
or with any precise goal, but opens a way
to all sorts of divergenues. Is this new
departure essential to thè Commonwealth?
Is it a proper functiori for thè Common-
wealth ? Is it a business in which thè Com-
monwealth Parliament ought to be engaged ?
Having authority to diciate thè conditions
of labour and thè conditions on which, not
only trusts and combines, but every pri-
vately-owned business, manufacture, or
calling in thè country shall be carried on,
supported by thè power to protect thè pub-
lic against thè levying of an undue toll or
an unfair charge by any capitalistic com-
binatici!, what reason can we give for
seeking to acquire monopolies ? Mere we
bave a definition -vhose centre is every-
where, and whose circumference is no-
where. What use will it be to us? It
is not as if this power existed nowhere
unless we created it ; it exists in every State,
and it has been used sporadically and oc-
casionally by different States in different
directions. Not only in regard to thè great
national Service of thè railways, but in
other directions where thè States bave been
brought into hopeless conflict with difficult
conditions, they bave exercised their privi-
lege of acquiring property and carrying on
business for themselves. They will be able
to take thè same course in thè future. The
States having all thè powers necessary in
this regard, that which we are now asked
to take will be thè seventh of thè kind in
Australia, thè only difference being that,
whereas thè others operate in particular
State territories, ours will operate in every
one of thè six territories, and, therefore,
create all over Australia a duplication of
legislative authorities. Of course, this sub-
ject affords àll sorts of opportunities for
caricature and humour, of which thè Attor-
ney-General, were he in my place, would
make abundant use. I am sure there must
be fleeting through his mind already a dozen
effective and ludicrous images of thè Com-
monwealth nationalizing absurd “ Indus-
tries ” of Australia; but I bave no leisure
for that.
There is one more Cardinal objection,
and this is that thè whole clause is distinctly
anti-Federal. If rhe Commonwealth is
to use this power, thè authority of thè
States within their own boundaries already
being more than ampie for anything they
may desire to do in that way, we should be
subject to thè ìndispensable conditìon of all
Federai powers of this kind—that is, it
should apply only to industries thè opera-
tions of which extend beyond a single State.
If there is to be any running of State
businesses within State borders, surely such


a power belongs to thè State Governments
and thè State Legislatures ? If thè Com-
monwealth Parliament is to venture into this
field, all we require, in order to make thè
power of thè Australian people complete,
is to ask from them authority qualifying
usto deal with any conditions with which
thè States severally are unable to cope. The
words that ought to be inserted, therefore,
if this preposterous proposai is to be
pressed, should, at all events, leave it ap-
plicale by us only in thè strictly Federai
sphere,-and not make it, as in every other
instance, an invasion of State opportuni-
ties.
This clause will enable usto deal with
industries or “ businesses ” —thè industry
of producing, and, I suppose, thè business
of supplying goods or Services. In those
cases it appears to me that thè Fede-
rai line could only be preserved if thè
’■ businesses” to be dealt with were those
that thè States themselves within their own
borders could not deal with effectively.
That must mean “ businesses ” which over-
flow State boundaries —there must be very
few, except those of a strictly personal
character, which do not overflow to some
extent —and, in that case, thè Wholesale
businesses to be Federally controlled must
possess features which prevent a State deal-
ing with them thoroughly within its own
border. For honorable members will
realize, without my further impressing it on
them, that, under this proposai, we can deal
not only with any business, no matter how
small, in a single State, but with any business
in a single municipality of a single State,
and also with a single shop in thè lane of a
municipality. There is absolutely no re-
cognition in thè Bill either of thè Federai
character of our Constitution or of thè
authority of thè State, which is ampie, in
this regard. There is nothing to show that
it is intended to form part of a Federai
Constitution. It permits of thè pettiest, as
well as of thè largest, intervention.
Mr. West. —Cannot we leave that matter
to thè States?
Mr. DEAKIN. —Whv should not thè
Commonwealth Parliament show that it is
governed by national consìderations, re-
serving its national strength to cope with
national difficulties ? Why should it come
down to possible municipal incursions bere
or State incursions there?
If any one of thè amendments of thè
Constitution more than another points
directly to thè abolition of our Federai
System, and to thè establishment of a
unitary Government, it is thè amendment
proposed in this Bill.
I do not think it material to enter into a
consideration of thè question of thè effici-
ency of thè management of State indus-
tries. We bave practically had none of
suffident scope to permit of that being
done—thè railway Services being a mono-
poly, and, therefore, out of this compari-
son. It Is true that there bave
been minor attempts made in thè
various States to establish State industries
■—some of which bave been attended with
very unfortunate results from a business
point of view. But these bave been so
small and scattered that I do not point to
them as sufficienti y confirming any conten-
timi. We bave, however, suffident know-
ledge of thè administration of our Public
Service to watch with apprehension thè en-
largement of its area to such wide fields
and thè steady increase of thè pressure
placed upon those ,officially in control
to prevent it from gettting out of all
bounds. If thè power which is em-
bodied in this Bill be placed in thè Constì-
tution, it will be placed there with thè
intention of being used. And if it is to be
used, it will be used—judging by thè illus-
trations which bave been given to us—in
connexion with half-a-dozen or a dozen of
thè greatest employing agencies in Aus-
tralia. We bave to remember, too, that it
will be used after all these industries bave
been deprived of thè opportunity of earning
more than a fair profit for themselves —
after they bave been rendered unable to
pirate thè public or to unfairly burden their
employés. After they bave been rendered
harmless, or, possibly, very beneficiai by
reason of our trust and combine laws, re-
turning only ordinary interest on thè money
invested in them, thè conditions of their
employés improved to thè best standards.
while at thè same time they bave been ren-
dered impotent for evi], in Heaven’s name
in whose interests shall we be called upon
to interfere? It would not be in thè in-
terests of thè persons employed, nor in
those of thè employers, nor in those of thè
generai public in such a case.
Mr. Riley. —That will be a question for
Parliament to decide.
Mr. DEAKIN. —It will be. But why
should this proposai be brought forward '
unless strong grounds can be given for ai
indefinite extension of thè national power
of interference without good cause. Legis-
latively it is piling Pelimi upon Ossa.


Personally, thè extraordinary condition
in whicb we are likely to find ourselyes
suggests to me one generai condition
upon which we certainly ought to insist
in all thè cases in which this new tyranny
is to be exercised, though it should
not be thè only condition. Certainly
it would be wise to require that thè tak-
ing over of any industry by thè Common-
wealth should only be authorized tenta-
ti vely by an Act to which no elTect should
be given until after thè next succeeding
generai election. At that all candidate?
would bave an opportunity of Consulting
thè electors as to whether it was or was
not a desirable extension of thè Common-
wealth power. I am assuming,_ for thè
moment, that thè fellow Bill to this, which
has already been approved by this House,
has received thè popular ìndorsement, and
that thè amendment of thè Constitution
which it contemplates has been made.
That would be a very moderate, a. very
simple condition to impose, and _ it is only
one of thè conditions which will require
to be imposed for thè protection of thè
public if this extraordinary power is to
be prevented from breaking loose,_ and
shattering without warrant thè fabric of
business society. If thè prior Bill does
not find favour with thè people no doubt
thè reasonable proposals submitted by us
would.
The amendment of thè industriai powers
of thè Commonwealth specifically bringing
State servants within its control, has also a
significant relation to this proposal. The
employés in any Industries taken over by
thè Commonwealth as Commonwealth Ser-
vices will become Commonwealth servants,
and I presume that means will be taken —
as they bave been taken in thè case_ of
railway servants —for meeting any griev-
ances which they may allege. Thus,
unless thè greatest cautìon be exer-
cised, a future Parlìament of thè Com-
monwealth may find itself saddled with
responsibility for many thousands of per-
sons engaged in various occupations all
over thè Commonwealth whose wages and
conditions of labour will require to be
placed to some considerable extent outside
thè power of this Parlìament. It will be
impossible to deal with those conditions
all over a great continent by legislativi
sufficientiy elastic to apply of itself in
ordinary course. Complaints must of
necessity be dealt with through some _ de-
velopment of thè Conciliation and Arbitra-
tion Court adapted to public servants.
Not only will Parliament bave thè future
burden of this legislation to face, but it
will also bave to face a condition of
things hereafter in which some consider-
able portion of thè population will be
public servants needing such a semi-inde-
pendent control of their wages and condi-
tions. These considerations involve a
host of industriai problems, which, even
in their simplest and most primitive forra,
bave already forced on us a great deal
of research, and occupied a large share
of public rime. I do not wish to dwell upon
this matter. Industriai disputes between
thè Commonwealth itself and its own
employés are possibilities of thè future
with which thè future must be left to deal.
There are straws already. Only to-day
thè Minister of Home Affairs was ques-
tioned with regard to a leading arride in
a newspaper, reporting a deputation
thatr waited upon him to protest against
certain appointments being made in his
Department on thè ground that they
were of a particular politicai colour. I
do not know that any evidence was ad-
duced in support of that astonishing asser-
tion. During thè whole of my associa-
tion with our Public Service under thè
Commissioner I bave never known a case
in which politicai influence was attempted»
or in which it operated in connexion with
any appointment. I thìnk that is thè
universal experience of members of Par-
liament. I believe that our Public Service
Commissioner, and thè officers who advise
him, are absolutely free from any touch
of partisanship, politicai or otherwise. If
there any such development as
has been alleged, ' it must be of very
recent date indeed. In thè absence of
very strong proof to thè contrary, I ven-
ture to say that there is no ground for any
such complaint. Some very sinister infer-
ences are to be drawn from thè representa-
tions which were made by thè deputation
in question. That body attempted to reach,
through thè Minister, officers who are
under oath to be absolutely impartial in
their choice of thè best men available for
any position. The very worst legislation
that we bave ever enacted will not bave
so injurious an influence upon this country,
as would thè appointment of officers
to any grade in our Public Service as thè
result of favoritism. Once let that eie-
ment enter into thè Service, and thè whole
scheme underlying it will break down, and
we shall find ourselves engaged in discus-
sions of a degrading character.


I am very sorry that thè deputation
waited upon thè Minister without just
cause, and am equally sorry that publicity
was given to representations evidently in-
tended to react. When I read thè report
yesterday morning, it was with grave appre-
hension of thè results which may follow
it. Under these circumstances, there
is one golden rule in connexion with our
Public Service, from which no departure
should be made. It is that every appoint-
ment, whether large or small, within thè
gift of thè Commonwealth, should be ad-
vertised. Every person who wishes to
apply for any vacancy should be afforded
an opportunity of doing so, and thus we
should have some guarantee that thè most
qualified applicant would obtain it. In thè
case of thè medicai officers to which I
called attention to-day, I have not one word
to say regarding thè qualifications of thè
ladies chosen. No doubt their qualifica-
tions must be ampie. But my point is
that they were selected by some one, and
we do not know by whom.
Mr. SPEAKER. —Order- The honor-
able member is now going beyond thè ques-
tion which is before thè Chair.
Mr. DEAKIN.—I think not. I am
merely using thè appointment of these
medicai officers in illustration of one of
thè effects of thè extension of thè Com-
monwealth Services under this Bill.
Mr. Hughes.—The Bill deals with thè
nationalization of monopolies.
Mr. DEAKIN.—And thè nationalization
of monopolies means that thè employés in
our so-called monopolies, already number-
ing thousands, may become Commonwealth
public servants. They must, therefore, be
dealt with in Public Service fashion. To
this end, it is absolutely necessary that ap-
plications should be invited for any vacant
positions, and that thè choice of thè Pub-
lic Service Commissioner should be made on
non-political grounds. While it is dan-
gerous for usto find. I think for thè first
tinte, a suggestion of politicai influence
hrought under notice, what would be thè
dangers of its extension indefinitely ?
Mr. SPEAKER.—Order. The honor-
able member must not follow that course
If I allowed him to discuss that particular
matter
Mr. DEAKIN.—I am not going to dis-
cuss it.
Mr. SPEAKER. —The honorable mem-
ber is making certain statements, and if 1
allowed him to continue to do so, I could
not stop other honorable members if they
desired to follow thè same line of argu-
ment. If I allowed thè honorable mem-
ber to follow that course, I can foresee a
discussion taking place on that particular
matter, and thè question really before thè
Chair not being mentioned at all.
Mr. DEAKIN.—Of course, I bow to
your ruling, Mr. Speaker, as I ahvays bave
done and always will do.
Mr. Joseph Cook. —On a pointof order,
Mr. Speaker, I hope you are not going to
rule that we cannot discuss thè effects that
will follow from thè taking of monopolies
into national control. If you do, you will
cut away thè only argument that we can
use to demonstrate thè fallacy of thè pro-
posal. It seems to me that that argu-
ment is more relevant than any other. We
should be allowed to show how dangerous
and hopeless it is to take monopolies over
into thè control of thè State.
Mr. SPEAKER.—The honorable meni-
ber will be allowed ampie latitude to dis-
cuss thè question before thè Chair, and to
use any illustrations which he desires to
biing forward in thè course of his argu-
ment ; but what was being dealt with
was a matter regarding which certain
questions have already been asked to-
day, and thè discussion of which
mlght lead to a very contentious de-
bate, quite foreign to thè Bill be-
fore thè House. I allowed thè honor-
able member for Ballarat to make a casual
reference to thè matter, but when he went
further I stopped him.
Mr. DEAKIN.—For once, Mr. Speaker,
I do not agree with thè grounds of your
ruling, but, of course, bow to it. Among
thè incidents of politicai life which arouse
in this Chamber most exasperation, evoke
most feeling, and produce thè least
results, are those which turn upon
thè reai or alleged grievances of people
in thè employment of thè State, or
thè manner in which they shall be dealt
with. In thè last Bill, thè introduction
of thè control of thè railway servants added
more heat to one debate than any other
single proposai submitted. My point is
that so it always must be. In proposing
to extend thè powers of thè Commonwealth
so as to make thè Government not only
thè greatest employer in Australia, as it is
to-day, but indefinitely more thè greatest
employer, as it would soon be, quite a
majority of thè public might be directly
or indirectly in Commonwealth or State


employment. We are tending to a con-
dition of things which will make thè ex-
dusion of all politicai bias in appoint-
ments or promotions more and more neces-
sary to preserve us from grave national
dangers. These considerations demon-
sirate once again how wise are thè
conditions of our Public Service Act, which
require that everything shall be done in thè
light of day, nothing behind closed doors,
every position advertised for, all who think
tnemselves competent entitled to be con-
sidered, and a definite choice made, not
from some unknown number by unknown
persons, but by responsible persona in thè
sight of all. The whole of thè people of
thè Commonwealth must be given freedom
to compete, if they choose, for public em-
ployment. I do not think this principio
can be too much enforced. I attach thè
greatest 'importance to it as thè only way
in which we can prevent friction in this
House, and thè absolute destruction of
discipline in thè Public Service.
Mr. Laxrd Smith.—Does thè honorable
member mean to say that no politicai in-
fluence is brought to bear to get men into
thè Public Service?
Mr. DEAKIN.—I do not know of a
single instance. Our system is an excellent
one, and I am protesting in advance against
any attempi to introduce thè thin end of thè
wedge.
Mr. Fenton. —The honorable member
must bave been living in a rare atmosphere.
Mr. DEAKIN.—In thè same atmos-
phere as any one else.
Mr. Fenton. —The honorable member
must bave been oblivious of thè facts.
Mr. DEAKIN.—If thè honorable mem-
ber can point out relevant facts to prove
that in a speech and not by interjection, I
shall be glad to bear and reply to them.
Mr. Parker Moloney.—The social in-
fluence is worse than thè politicai.
Mr. DEAKIN. Social influence
amounts, in Australia, to next to nothing.
Whatever social influence there may be
about a particular officer, what is he to
know even of thè rest of his own State,
not to speak of thè neighbouring States?
The applicants for positions are but names,
in thè majority of cases, to thè officers who
eventually deal with them. Many honor-
able members are, perhaps, thinking of
State Services. That sort of thing is posi
sible in localities, or small States, but it
is usually an absurdity to suggest it in Ihe
Commonwealth Service.
The proposai in this amendment is na-
tionalization without justification naked
nationalizatìon. It is without reason. It
is a nationalizatìon, federai neither in its
character, conditions, aim, or limitations.
It is absolutely not required as we bave
met, or can meet, thè only conditions which
bave ever been put forward as calling for
Government monopoiizations. The only
ideal which justifies it is thè ordinary
Socialistic one. That arises from a
Socialism which was framed in countrles
and under conditions quite unlike our own,
There existed then an honest belief that no
regulation of industry, and no safeguarding
of thè weaker members of thè community,
consumers, or employés, was possible,
Therefore, there being no other escape, some
took thè extravagant leap from privately-
contrólled ownership and activities to State-
control led activities and ownership. That
is no longer thè case to-day. The old forced
choice has practically disappeared. All thè
world over, Governments, with a keen seme
of their responsibilities, are making steady,
and, in some countries, rapid advances.
All are being made without thè State ap-
piopriation of Industries. In thè Mother
Country, although they ha ve not yet got
very far in some directions, thè change in
thè last few years, to those of us who re-
member thè atmosphere of opinion there a
few years back, is really remarkable. There
has been a transformatìon in thè whole
lone of public feeling. There has also been
a transforma tion in America, where to-day
one of thè strongest of her statesmen is
heading a great crusade against thè trusts
and combines with which thè nation is con-
fronted. Of course, thè Americans bave
not, under their Constitution, anything like
thè power which we possess, and bave
partly used, and not a shadow of thè un-
stinted authority we can exercise under thè
constitutional amendments lately approved
by this Chamber. Consequently, thè choice
is no longer between abominably unfair
conditions, thè grinding and sweating of
labour, with thè fleecing of thè public, all
finding themselves helpless against bodies
of organized capitai, on thè one side, or,
as an alternative, thè conduci of all indus-
-tries by thè Government on thè other. It
is being proved perfectly possible to regn-
iate conditions of trade, commerce, and
industry. It is being done gradually in all
civilized countries. But a fraction of thè
amendments of thè Constitution to which
this House has already consented would


enable results to be accomplished in Aus-
tralia, not only in advance of anything at-
tempted elsewhere, but in such a way as to
take thè whole of thè sting out of any
of thè complaints made. We could, by
thè few amendments we have ourselves sug-
gested, meet thè reasonable and fair de-
mands made by humanitarians of all par-
ties. Mence this proposai is a belated sur-
vival which has really no place bere.
There is no room for it. The old limit
has beeri removed. We have grubbed it
up by thè roots. We have, in thè last Bill,
gene far beyond what was necessary to re-
move all thè evils of which complaint was
made when this proposai was launched in
thè Labour platform. They have no cause
of complaint left. I am putting thè case
from their stand-point.
In these circumstances, I submit that thè
amendments which I have suggested are
necessary to bring this Bill into line with'
thè Constitution in form and spirit, but that
nothing can make it properly a part of our
Federai Constitution. The circumstances
of thè Commonwealth as a whole do not
cali for it. The power of thè States is
ampie, while our declaration of legislative
control over all thè subjects of “mono-
polies ” could not possibly be just or work-
able. We should be wise, therefore, to
say at this stage that, having already sent
a measure sanctioning an enormous trans-
formation in thè whole of our commercial,
industriai, producing, and business interests
to thè country, we refuse to authorize an-
other departure which would bring upon us
a new throng of evils of its own, without
lending us a scintilla of extra power to deal
with thè ills and difficulties of which hon-
orable members opposite have been com-
plaining, and for which they have already
obtained all their own remedies.
MELBOURNE: J. KESIP, GOVERNMENT PRINTER»






