

[Pass on when read.
COMMONWEALTH OF AUSTRALIA.
SPEECH
ME. W. WEBSTER M.P.,
ON THE
REPORT OF ROYAL COMMISSION
ON POSTAL SERVICES.
[From the “ Parliamentary Debates,” 9th November, 1911.]
F. 16978.


\
■ • . ■, ■ .
■' / “■
■
- , ■


REPORT OF ROYAL COMMISSION ON POSTAL SERVICES.
Mr. WEBSTER (Gwydir) [4.30].—1
move—
That, in the best interest of the public and
of the Commonwealth Postal Service, the re-
port of the Royal Commission on Postal Ser-
vices should (in a general sense) be adopted by
this House.
I need not inform the House that I regard
this as one of the most crucial periods in
my existence as a public man. During my
political career I have had occasion to ad-
dress this and other Parliaments upon
matters of very serious concern to the wel-
fare of the people, but on no occasion has
it fallen to my lot to face such an excep-
tionally heavy task as that which now lies
before me. It is no exaggeration to say
that, for practically four years, I have
been soaking myself, so to speak, in the
affairs of the postal services of Australia;
and after such a lengthy term of critical
and minute observation on one of the most
extensive inquiries ever held in this country,
I think I may well claim the indulgence
of honorable members while I endeavour
to do justice to the subject that I have
taken in hand. I may briefly summarize
the objects to which I intend to address
myself. In the first place, I shall give a
short review of the trials and vicissitudes
of the Royal Commission, of which I had
the honour to be a member. Next will
follow a brief history of the Postmaster-
Generalships under both State and Federal
control; and thereafter I shall give an in-
dication of the condemnation of the system
by the Public Service Commissioner, and
by the Public Service Inspectors. I shall
also deal with Mr. McLachlan’s evidence
on the question of salaries, and other mat-
ters of importance in relation to the De-
partment. I propose then to review the
Ministerial changes that have been made
since 1908, when the Commission entered
upon its inquiry, as well as to indicate the
departmental changes that have been made
since that date. Questions appertaining
to Boards of Inquiry that have received
attention during that period will next en-
gage my consideration, together with ques-
tions by the Public Service Commissioner,
dealing with rates of salary, classification,
&c. Honorable members will thereafter
be given the results of the system, or lack
of system, under the old regime; and I
hope also to deal with the opinions of Sir
F. 16978.
Robert Scott, Mr. 'McLachlan and Mr.
McKay—the three most prominent officers
of the Commonwealth service—concerning
what the management of this great insti-
tution ought to be. In the next place, _ I
shall review the Public Service Commis-
sioner’s latest report on the Repo;t of
the Royal Commission, as, that gentle-
man had a double deal, so to speak, as
compared with all others who had to place
their case before the Commission. Finally,
I shall endeavour to sum up the actual
situation. In attempting to give a brief
history of the Commission, I may be par-
doned by the House if I have to be some-
what severe in my observations. It is a
painful, but nevertheless a necessary duty
to perform, in order that honorable mem-
bers may know the difficulty that will beset
them' when at any time they endeavour to
secure means of doing justice to some big
Government concern. I hope for the in-
dulgence of the House while I attempt
one of the most arduous tasks that has ever
fallen to the lot of any Parliamentarian,
It is to me particularly arduous, inasmuch
as I stand practically alone. I have a full
recognition of my infirmities, and I appre-
ciate also my limited capacity, due, to some
extent, to restricted education, and to the
fact that I have had to spend the greater
part of my life in an occupation involving
hard physical toil. With these drawbacks,
I appeal for the consideration of honorable
members. The magnitude of my task may
be understood when I point out that the
shearers’ dispute, although it does not in-
volve machinery anything like as intricate
as that relating to this great Department,
has taken, not hours, but days, to present
to the Court. The advocates of the re-
spective parties have occupied days in pre-
senting to the Court the points involved in
that dispute, although, compared with
those covered by the report of the Royal
Commission, they are comparatively few
in number. The Postmaster-General’s De-
partment was described by the late Pub-
lic Service Inspector of New South Wales
as being of infinitely vaster proportions
than is the machinery of any railway ser-
vice in the world. I mention these facts
to show that I have before me no easy task
in endeavouring to marshal the whole of
the essential evidence so as to put it as
concisely as possible .before the House.
I have also laboured under a difficulty in


ex-member for Dailey being elected chair- waters, I cannot compliment them on bav-
arian. Our troubles, however, were not at an
end, for we were castigated by the press, and
subjected to never-ending humiliation at the
instance of newspapers all over the country.
Day after day, and week after week, we
were attacked ; and never in history was
there so consolidated an attempt to wipe
out of existence a Commission appointed
by the highest tribunal of the country.
Then, having gone through all this, our
position was made still harder by the know-
ledge that, of the Commissioners, there were
at least two who would have ended the
Commission. Actuated largely by their
personal interests and their vanity, they
struggled to take action of a character
which, but for the casting vote of the chair-
man, on more than one occasion, would
have thwarted us in carrying out the duties
with which we had been charged. Alto-
gether, it will be seen that we had a
hard and thorny road to travel. As I
have said, we had the press against us, and
country newspapers were invited to publish
articles manufactured in Melbourne, behind
which step there was, it was strongly sus-
pected, a prominent officer. Not only had
we internal troubles, but we had to face
cold treatment from honorable members of
this House, who, at least, should have
given the Commission credit for trying to
perform their high duties. We had a hard
task to perform, involving great concentra-
tion of thought and effort; but we were
ridiculed and calumniated on every hand
by those who knew better, but who had
the power. Our path was strewn with dif-
ficulties such as have beset no Royal Com-
mission in the history of the Commonwealth
or the States.
I congratulate this and other Go-
vernments on the way in which they
have followed the chart laid down on
an ocean that had had no chart before —
the chart laid down by the Postal Commis-
sion. When the Commission was ap-
pointed, there was nothing to guide a Post-
master-Genera! as to what was best for the
emancipation of the service. Since that
time, however, previous Governments to a
degree, and the present Government to a
greater degree, have had this chart at their
command ; and I congratulate, not only the
Minister, but the departmental officials, and
the Public Service Commissioner, on having
so largely adopted it for their guidance.
While, however, I make this acknowledg-
ment for the way in which the ship has
been prevented from striking the rocks,
and brought into somewhat more placid
ing adopted suggestions without any ac-
knowledgment or recognition of their in-
debtedness to the Commission. In the out-
side world such action would be regarded
as piracy or plagiarism; but here it seems
to be a virtue. What I have stated in this
connexion is a fact, and it is no use pre-
tending otherwise. That fact should be
stated, though not for my benefit; for,
after I have made my speech and per-
formed my task to the bitter end —having
done what I believe to be my duty—l care
nothing for what politics may offer me.
I desire now to pass from this rather un-
pleasant part of the history of the Com-
mission, and to deal with the great Postal
Service itself. This is the greatest public
service in Australia, involving an expendi-
ture of nearly per annum.
This Department is acknowledged by Mr.
McKay to be of greater magnitude than
any railway service. Its ramifications enter
into the life of every man, woman, and
chiid in this country, and into their rela-
tions with their brethren in other parts of
the world. Yet all along the line, from
the days of State control onwards, this
great Department has been made the play-
thing of Governments. There has always
been an idea that the man who was unfit
for any other office, was fit for the position
of Postmaster-General. I have looked
through the history of the Postmasters-
General of Australia; but I do not desire
to mention them in detail. In South Aus-
tralia there was, at one time, an up-to-date
Postmaster-General, and the results of his
administration are still to be seen. In no
other State, however, can we point to any
Postmaster-General who has been instru-
mental in redeeming the decadent service of
which he had the honour to be the head.
In the Commonwealth there has been the
same old story. From the time of Senator
Drake, our first Postmaster-General, we
have had men appointed who have never
given any serious portion of their lives to
the consideration of the vital issues that
underlie the success of such a Department.
We have had eleven Postmasters-Genera!
in eleven years. I have endeavoured —and
I say this with all humility—to master the
great problem, and to grasp it to its very
roots. This has taken me four years dui-
ing which neither I nor my wife has had
a holiday. Honorable members will under-
stand, therefore, why I am pleased to be
now nearing the end of my
We have had Postmaster-General after
Postmaster-General; but, as a matter of


fact, there is no manager of this great missioner, let me refer honorable members
Public Service. The Minister of course,
is supposed to take the place of a manager;
but I care not how able, adaptive, or in-
dustrious a man may be, he has no time, in
administering a Department of this kind, to
study the great problem as it ought to be
studied. It has been proved again and
again that the Postmaster-General is merely
the instrument of the official heads, and is,
therefore, liable to continue conditions that
have been our bane for years.
Mr. J. H. Catts. —It is like a ship
without a rudder.
Mr. WEBSTER. —The Public Service
Commissioner said that the Department is
like a ship without a captain—that, though
there were captains in the States, in the
persons of the Deputy Postmasters-General,
there was no commodore. What business
concern in the whole civilized world, doing
.£4,000,000 worth of business per annum,
could we find conducted without a
manager ? What business house, with
great branches like that of the Post Office,
would dream of leaving the control to one
manager, when there is work enough, and
probably more than could be grasped by
three of the ablest administrators, organ-
izers, or financial geniuses that could be
obtained in any part of the world ? The
present method is like taking a man from
the stokehold, putting him on the bridge,
and expecting him to navigate the vessel.
I desire honorable members to note par-
ticularly what Mr. McLachlan said when
he gave his evidence before the Commis-
sion. Mr. McLachlan, unfortunately, is
■one who can read the political barometer
with more precision than any man I know
in this country, as is shown by what has
taken place. Mr. McLachlan, when giving
his evidence, said, “ I blame the system ” ;
but when he was asked who was respon-
sible, he replied, “ I do not know.” When
Mr. McKay was examined, he also said
the troubles were due to the system, the
responsibility for which he placed on the
Deputy Postmasters-General and the Cen-
tral Office. When we asked the Deputy
Postmaster-General and the Central Office
who was responsible for the troubles, they
said, “ The Public Service Commissioner.”
When we asked subordinate officers who
was responsible, they blamed first one,
-and then another. It mattered not how
we tried to get at the cause of the trouble,
the responsibility was always transferred.
All we heard was that it was the system
that was at fault. To show that I am not
•unfairly treating the Public Service Com-
to questions 48891-2-3,
Mr. SPEAKER.—I would remind the
honorable member that if he wishes any-
thing to go into Hansard he must read it;
it is not enough to give a reference.
Mr. WEBSTER. —Mr. McKay also
blames the system. This is part of his evi-
dence —questions 47884-5 —
Who is responsible for that lack of discrimina-
tion? —In my opinion, no one is responsible.
It is due to the general system.
Who is responsible for the general system ?
Perhaps one would have to go a long way,
probably to the Deputy Postmaster-General, and
eventually to the Head of the Department, to
locate the responsibility for conditions which,
in my opinion, are improper.
Mr. McKay cannot say who is the author
of the system. Evidently, it had no author,
but grew, and was growing until the inter-
vention of the Postal Commission. The
Public Service Commissioner, Mr. McKay,
and other prominent officials, sheltered
themselves behind the system, I ask hon-
orable members to pay particular attention
to the evidence of the Public Service Com-
missioner, especially in view of his criticism
of the Postal Commission’s report. He
was permitted to read all the evidence, and
to call to his assistance his inspectors, and
was made the last witness, that he might
be in a position to reply to everything.
When examined on the 25th November,
1909, he read a statement which, being ten-
dered after he had been sworn, became his
evidence. In this statement, dealing with
postal assistants, he said—
Under the Commonwealth classification postal
assistants are in a much better position; they
commence at a salary of £6O at iS years of
age, and advance to a maximum of £ 150 per
annum, which, in view of the nature of the
work performed, is fair remuneration for the
service rendered.
He has since stated that it is not fair re-
muneration. Again, referring to clerical
assistants, he said :
Under the State, when performing similar
duties, they could only have advanced by annual
increments of and £ls to whereas
under the Commonwealth, they have advanced
by £2O increments to £l6O, and many of them
have received long service increments to
Not only did the Commissioner consider
that the clerical assistants received the re-
muneration to which they were entitled by
reason of their services, but he upheld the
rates and conditions of the sorters. Since
then he has shown his readiness to adjust
his sails to the breezes that blow, and by a
so-called re-classification has taken away
the barrier between the junior and senior
sorters. Formerly a junior sorter could


not become a senior sorter until he had assiduously endeavoured to make it appear
passed a difficult test, but the test is now
dispensed with, and junior sorters can rise
to be senior sorters, and to a maximum
salary of a year. At the same time,
however, the position of despatching officer
has been abolished, these men being made
senior sorters. As despatching officers was
a position created by the Public Service
Commissioner himself, with a view to the
recognition of superior service, they were
entitled to receive ,£2OO a year, but as
senior sorters, they cannot get more than
a year. The Commissioner has made
this change with a view to placating the
larger number, and to re-establish his popu-
larity with the service, for whose troubles
he is chiefly responsible. Dealing further
with the sorters —page 2299, the Commis-
sioner said :—-
It must be recognised that the conditions of
the sorting class in every State have been con-
siderably improved since Federation, that
no warrant exists for conferring further advan-
tages upon these officers.
In 1911, the Commissioner realizes the need
for trimming his sails again, and acknow-
ledges the justice of the case presented on
behalf of the sorters. I would point out
that the tree which figured in one of his re-
ports some time ago, to show that every man
in the service could climb from the foot to
the topmost branches, has fallen. Its every
branch has been lopped off. When the
Commission began its work, the maximum
salary of a letter-carrier was a year,
and men could rise from that position to
become junior sorters, with a minimum of
£ z 44 a year. The sorters to-day are still
at a minimum of per annum, while
the letter-carriers have a maximum of
£ x sj> per annum. Therefore, a letter-
carrier who becomes a sorter will receive
a lower salary.
Mr. Scullin. Is that called promo-
tion?
Mr. WEBSTER. _ “ Engineering ”
correctly describes the process. The
Public Service Commissioner has left one
weak link in his re-modelling of the ser-
vice. _ The evidence given by the sorters
regarding the conditions existing in New
Zealand was largely contradicted by him in
a circular which he issued; but the officers
of the Department published another cir-
cular, in which they established their posi-
tion by showing the exact conditions that
exist in New Zealand under the recent
classification. That, of course, was not
palatable to the gentleman who had so
that they had misrepresented their case
before the Commission. Ido not know
whether that is why the sorters have been
picked out for special treatment, but, save
for a slight advantage gained by the
juniors, the sorters as a body have secured
less recognition than other classes. The
scale of wages paid to sorters in New
Zealand is as follows: —In Grade 3,
the sorters rise from to
by three yearly increments of £lO
each; in Grade 2, their salaries increase
from ,£l5O to by two annual incre-
ments of £lO each; in Grade 1, the
salaries .are increased from £lBO to
by two annual increments of each;,
and the despatch clerks rise from £2OO to
£220 by two annual increments of £lO
each. That is the scale under the classi-
fication scheme of 1908. An attempt was
made to lead the public to believe that the
men had not faithfully presented their
case when before the Commission; but, by
the production of these, the actual facts,
they have now established their position..
This scale shows that a sorter in New Zea-
land is allowed to receive up to per
annum, and that, on becoming a despatch,
clerk, he may receive up to £220 per an-
num. The Commissioner declared that
the postal assistants of Australia were well
paid when their maximum pay was
per annum. Even that was not the maxi-
mum when we commenced our inquiries, but
as soon as the Public Service Commissioner
saw that the evidence pointed strongly to
the inadequacy of the salaries of these men
he raised the then existing maximum, not
by annual, but by long service, increments,
extending over twelve years, at the rate of
£6 per six year period. In that way he
got rid of what I described as the sweating
rates that prevailed in 1907. Postal as-
sistants, according to the Public Service
Commissioner, were worth only per
annum in 1907; but in 1908 they were
worth £l5O a year, and to-day they are
worth even more, since he has raised the
maximum to £l6B. He now indicates that
he proposes to grade them, and to provide
for a maximum salary of If a
postal assistant is entitled to a maximum
of per annum, surely no one can say
that the sorters are being adequately re-
warded ! Many men do not fully realize
what the work of a sorter involves. A good
many people regard it as comparatively
easy. They may be surprised to learn,
however, that a sorter in New South Wales,


-for instance, must carry in his mind some- but he increased this amount to £ xSo by
thing like 4,000 postal addresses, and that
be must be able to sort at a given rate with-
out more than 2 per cent, of errors. If
the percentage of errors is continuously
greater he receives a black mark. The
work is certainly most strenuous.
Mr. Laird Smith.— Are the men who
-bring down the gold from Bendigo sorters ?
Mr. WEBSTER. —They were formerly
regarded as sorters, but the Commissioner
has improved their position—-on the recom-
mendation of the Commission, I presume—
and they are now known as senior sorters.
Coming to the position of the letter-carriers,
the Public Service Commissioner is re-
ported, at page 2301 of the Minutes of Evi-
dence, to have said, when before the Com-
mission :
It cannot be said that these officers are in-
adequately paid at existing rates . . . and
there is no justification for any further con-
cession.
That statement was made prior to the re-
port of the Commission being issued. At
that time the letter-carriers were receiving
per annum, with increments; but to-
day their salary is fixed at per an-
num. The Commission recommended a
payment of £l5O per annum, but the Com-
missioner went one better. He displays a
tendency to go either a little above or a little
below our recommendations, the object evi-
dently being to show that he is taking in-
dependent action. Let us look for a mo-
ment at what he has done in the Telegraph
Branch. He contended that his propor-
tional grading system was perfect, and that
it was the only way in which each man
could be allocated a fair reward for the
•services he rendered. When he saw the
storm clouds gathering, however, what did
he do? He abolished the plan on which
he had sought to work that particular
branch of the service, and introduced
another system more in accordance with
the recommendations of the Commission.
Nevertheless, in evidence given by him be-
fore he knew what we were going to report,
he contended that the proportional grading-
system was all that could be desired, and
that the officers working under it were pro-
perly and fully rewarded. We recom-
mended that those officers in the fifth class
should go up to per annum. The
Public Service Commissioner would not go
so far, but soon after the Commission
began its inquiry he raised the remuneration
from £l6O to _£rBo. When we began
'our labours they were receiving only £l6O,
long-service increments of £1 o each. Since
then he has adopted a system under which
they will receive, not £2lO per annum as
recommended by us, but £2OO a year. Yet
he said that they were amply paid when
they were getting only £l6O per annum.
The Postal Commission considered that
£2 ro should be the maximum pay in the
fifth class; the Public Service Commis-
sioner now fixes the maximum at £2OO per
annum. We also said that fourth class
officers should be able to go up to £285,
the increased pay being granted for merit
alone. Mr. McLachlan did nothing to in-
dicate how he was going to treat the fourth
class officers. The presumption is that they
will be restricted, and that, as in the case
of the despatch officers, the senior men will
be placed at a maximum of And
so he juggles with his classification, taking
off a little bit here and adding a little
there. In every case his conclusions prac-
tically refute the evidence that he gave be-
fore us when he had nothing to guide him
as to what our findings would be. I come
now to the linemen—the men employed in
the Construction Branch—-concerning whom
the Public Service Commissioner said, as
reported at page 2302 of the Minutes of
Evidence —
It is considered that the present grading of
linemen in the Commonwealth service is based
on fair and equitable conditions, and that no
good reasons exist for saddling the Postmaster-
General’s Department with an increased expen-
diture not warranted by the work performed.
In other words, in 1909, the Commissioner
said that these men were not entitled to re-
ceive any better remuneration, but in 19 11
he gives them all that the Postal Commis-
sion recommended.
Mr. J. H, Catts. —Did not the Public
Service Commissioner have available the
same evidence as the Commission had ?
Mr. WEBSTER.—The departmental
evidence was available to him long before
we commenced our inquiries, and I propose
to show, by a reference to his latest report,
what type of man he is.
Mr. Thomas Brown. — No Public Ser-
vice Commissioner could sift the Depart-
ment as the Royal Commission did. It
would take a man all his time to do that.
He would have no time for anything else.
Mr. WEBSTER. —That supports my
contention that there is a necessity for a
complete change of the whole system. I
absolutely agree with the honorable member,
but the Public Service Commissioner does
not. He holds that he is the right man in


the right place, and that he can do wlhat exacted that would not be accepted from
the service requires. I propose now to
refer to the telegraph messengers. It
will be remembered that a difficuilty
arose in regard to the dismissal of
these boys on reaching the age of eightaen.
Just as they were beginning to show wlhat
they were made of, and to be of services—
just as the Department was likely to reeap
the benefft of the training it had given these
youths they had to be discharged
because of some idiotic provision in
the regulations, -which made it imperra-
tive that, if there was no other positiion
available for them, they should be refiretd.
Mr. McLachlan, in his report, stated thatt it
bad been suggested to him that the aige
should be extended to twenty years. Since,
however, he saw the Postal Commissiora’s
report, he has not only extended the age to
twenty years, but has abolished the wh®le
arrangement, which should have beien
abolished years before, and the Department
is now at liberty to secure the services ®f
the boys that it trains, and keep them to
fill positions which, to a large extent, had
been left unfilled in days gone by.
Mr. Thomas Brown.—That was dome
by legislation,
Mr. WEBSTER.—I presume the Publlic
Service Commissioner took as a recommen-
dation the action of the honorable member
for Caiare in moving the extension of tlhe
age to twenty years when the Public Ser-
vice Bill was before this Chamber. We
cannot do anything even by legislation
without consulting the Public Service Com-
missioner, because he is the “ boss of the
show,” and we must obey him or, at least,
consult him. We have his striking opinion
on relieving staffs expressed at page 2303
of the report—
A suggestion has been made by one of the
Associations that each officer should be relieved
by an officer of his own division and class,
and, as far as possible, in the same subdivision
of class. Such a proposal is preposterous and
impracticable, and only serves to indicate the
lack of knowledge of the general working of
the service and the expenditure involved.
That opinion has already been considerably
revised, and a relieving staff has been ap-
pointed. Such a staff was most necessary,
but was most scandalously neglected, par-
ticularly in New South Wales. In that
State I found boys receiving nominal
salaries doing relieving work in offices
where they were exposed to temptations to
which they ought never to have been ex-
posed. 1 found many things going on in
that State which would not be tolerated by
any business man, and services being
any ordinary employe. I have seen men
getting £l6O a year relieving postmasters
at a year for months and months at
a stretch, and in one or two cases for years,
and never rewarded for the greater respon-
sibilities cast upon them. This was one of
the standing disgraces of the Department,
which was never sought to be remedied
until the Commission began to lay bare the
facts.
Mr. Laird Smith.—Has it been re-
medied ?
Mr. WEBSTER.—Yes, to this extent,
that a relieving staff of so many officers of
a certain grade has been proposed, high
grade officers relieving in high grade post-
offices, second grade in second grade, and
so on. Therefore, what the Public Ser-
vice Commissioner said, before he knew
what the Commission’s report was going to
be, was preposterous, is practically,
although not perhaps wholly, adopted by
him and those who are administering the
Department to-day. The Public Service
Commissioner then went on to indicate the
system whereby the selection of officers was-
achieved under the Public Service regime.
He said the system was perfect, that
there had never been any trouble about
the officers who had been allocated posi-
tions by him, and quoted Queensland as an
example. He said that in that State some
men were sought by the Chief Officer to be
put in a superior position, which he claimed
they were not entitled to, and which the
subsequent permanent Deputy Postmaster-
General also decided that they were not en-
titled to. He used that as an illustration
of the fact that the recommendations of the
then Deputy Postmaster-General were not
reliable, but he did not mention the fact
that subsequently, when things began to
mould themselves into shape, practically all
of those men who had been denied promo-
tion were given promotion by the very same
Deputy Postmaster-General. The recom-
mendation of the Public Service Inspector,
on which the denial Of the promotion was
based, was negatived only when the De-
puty Postmaster-General fully realized the
quality of the staff upon which he had to
rely in the carrying out of his duties.
I come now to something which will
be rather a surprise to the House
and the country. The Commission made
175 recommendations. Of these, 130
have a reasonable chance of being
adopted. One hundred and three have al-
ready been adopted. Eight of the remainder


•deal with which come within the must be done, the interest due to the States
purview of the Minister of Home Affairs,
who has apparently not yet decided what
he is going to do about them. They deal
with improved buildings, improved sanita-
tion and ventilation, improved designs for
country buildings, and specifications that
\vill be more uniform and in keeping with
modern requirements. Three of the re-
commendations affect matters under the con-
trol of the Treasurer. One of these is to
the effect that the deficit of
which was the result of the first six years
of Federal control of postal administra-
tion —a deficit arrived at by an honest com-
parison of receipts and charges—should be
wiped off, because there is no hope of it
ever being met in any other way.
Mr. Poynton.— What does the honor-
able member mean by ‘ 1 deficit ’’ ?
Mr. WEBSTER.—I refer the honorable
member to a table attached to the report
showing how we arrived at our conclusions,
which have not since been challenged by
any financial authority.
Mr. Poynton. —Does the Postal De-
partment owe the Treasurer the amount you
mention ?
Mr. WEBSTER.—The Postal Depart-
ment was worked at a loss to the public
revenue of ,£2,300,000 for the six years,
when the proper charges that should have
been made to the Department are taken
into consideration.
Mr. Poynton. —ls it correct to call that
a deficit ?
Mr. WEBSTER.—If the honorable
member looks into the question he can de-
cide whether it is the correct term or not.
I regard it as correct, and use it accord-
ingly. I admit that we inherited some
disabilities from the States, which, with
the exception of South Australia, shirked
■their responsibilities prior to Federation,
knowing that the postal services were to
pass under Federal control. Maintenance
and construction were allowed to fall be-
hind; but, whilst that was the state of
affairs when we took the service over, prac-
tically the same condition was still in exist-
ence when the Commission began to make
its inquiries. There was, therefore, no
set off that could be allowed for a service
that was no better after six years of
Federal administration.
Sir John Quick.—ls that deficit arrived
at after debiting capital expenditure and
works done ?
Mr. WEBSTER.—Yes; it is arrived
at, after taking into full consideration, as
on that part of the transferred properties
represented by the postal services and equip-
ment.
Another recommendation is that the Trea-
surer shall not have power to cut and chop
the Estimates of the Postal Department at
his own sweet will, irrespective of what in-
jury he does to the Department or the
penalties that it will have to pay in the
future on account of his action. There are
three other recommendations towards which
the Government are favorably disposed,
and there are thirty-four which have not
been agreed to. Of those thirty-four some
are not indispensable, although it seemed
to the Commission that they would be use-
ful if adopted. One of them was that offi-
cers should be compelled to liquidate the
just claims of their creditors. I presume
that the Government and the Department
and the Public Service Commissioner do
not think that is a fair proposition, and,
therefore, have not adopted it. Another
was that all staff matters be placed in
charge of a staff committee. That, of
course, comes under the heading of the
Board of Management, and, therefore, is
not adopted, because the Board of Manage-
ment idea has not yet been adopted.
Mr. Page.— Does the honorable mem-
ber expect that the Government will adopt
it?
Mr. WEBSTER.—I am not expecting
anything. I am leaving the matter to the
public to judge when they know the facts.
We also recommended that the right of
appeal be preserved to officers, and a de-
partmental arbitrator appointed to deal
with appeals. We recommended that tea
money be abolished, and extra services be
paid for. That has not been wholly
adopted, but the conditions in that regard
have been materially improved by the
Public Service Commissioner since , then.
No fewer than 134 of our recommendations
have been adopted, or are under considera-
tion. When the Hobhouse Commission in-
quired into the position of the employes in
the British Post Office there was no hesi-
tation on the part of the British Postmas-
ter-General in immediately showing his
appreciation of the work which had been
done by the members of that Commission.
As soon as he had read the Report, which
did not take him long, he came down to the
House of Commons, and, although it in-
volved an expenditure of £1,000,000, he at
once moved its adoption. He did not give
a crumb here and a crumb there, but he


told the House that the Commissioners hard
done work which entitled them to recognii-
tion and appreciation ; and the Report wars
adopted by Parliament in less time than iit
has taken the Commonwealth Governmentt
to consider some of the more simple issues
raised.
Mr. Thomas Brown. —The British Corm-
mission was appointed with the hearty ap>-
provai of the Government of the day;,
whereas the Australian Commission was
not !
Mr, WEBSTER.—Is that any reasom
why there should be any lack of apprecias-
tion of the value of the work done? Thes
work of the Australian Commission iss
proved to have been necessary and to haves
been well done, by the fact that 134 outt
of 175 recommendations have been ac-
cepted. The Commission was clearly en-
titled to credit at the hands of the Go-
vernment for a determination that knew na>
limits to get at the bottom of the trouble
in the Department. I have here a list off
the Ministerial changes that have beem
made, and if any one would take the
trouble to read through the evidence
Mr. Page. —Good God !
Mr. WEBSTER.—The honorable mem-
ber may say 1 ‘ Good God ’’; but any man;
wishful to do justice to the country, andi
interested in the work, would not hesitate
to take the short cut I am prepared to show
him to find a basis for the statements I arm
now making. The Ministerial Department
has been most vigorous in picking the fruit
of the tree —more vigorous than any other-
section interested.
Mr. Thomas Brown. —Then to that ex-
tent the Government has done good work ?
Mr. Page. —And the honorable member
for Gwydir should not grumble !
Mr. WEBSTER.—I am not grumbling,
but mereW stating facts. If the honorable
member for Calare worked for two years
without any appreciation of his effort," and
practically no reward, he would think the
“ boss ” was not too kind to him.
Mr. Page. —The honorable member will
never get any other treatment all his poli-
tical life.
Mr, IV EBSTER.—I am not looking
for reward. I have paid a heavy penalty
for the action I took in this matter, not
only personally and at home, but else-
where. I have here a list of the changes
mad'e by the Ministerial head since the
Royal Commission began to lay bare the
troubles that existed—that is, changes made
in the Postal Service by the Minister since
January, 1908. The words used in this-
list are not mine, but are taken from the
authentic reports supplied to me by the De-
partment.
Sir Robert Best. —They are changes
made long before the Commission’s report
came out.
Mr. W EBSTER.—That is not so.
Sir Robert Best. —Most of these
changes were made a very considerable
time before the report came out.
Mr. WEBSTER.—How does the hon-
orable member know what I am going to
read ? Here we have a sample of how the
honorable member can prejudge a case.
Sir Robert Best. —Not at all; we heard:
of the honorable member’s complaint after-
wards.
Mr. WEBSTER.—The farce to which
the honorable member for Kooyong, as a
member of the late Government, was a
party, in appointing a Cabinet Committee,,
will stand as one of those cunning devices
of an Administration to get out of a diffi-
cult position.
Sir Robert Best. —It took the wind out
of the honorable member’s sails anyhow.
Mr. WEBSTER. —It took no wind out
of my sails. It was only a subterfuge of
a Government that could not act straight:
to a supporter. The first Ministerial
change is—
Increase of delegated powers to Deputy Post-
masters-General.
Mr. Thomas Brown. —The point is whe-
ther the Government would have made
those changes if there had been no Royal
Commission.
Mr. WEBSTER.—WouId the Govern-
ment have so acted if they had not been
provided with a chart?
Sir Robert Best. —The Government did-
act.
Mr. WEBSTER.—In those matters the
Government did not act until the Commis-
sion had inquired. The increased powers
are—-
Inflict fines under Post and Telegraph Regu-
lations; appeal through Secretary to Minister.
That was a change made after 1908, and
not before the Royal Commission began
to inquire. I have this on the authority
of the Department, and I thrust the fact-
in the teeth of the honorable member for
Kooyong, who tries to take credit to which
he is not entitled.
Mr. Fenton. —Was the evidence pub-
lished in the newspapers as it was given ?
Mr. WEBSTER.—Yes.


Mr. Fenton. —Then much information
could be gleaned from that.
Mr. WEBSTER. —Undoubtedly the Go-
vernment were watching the Commission
very closely; there never was a busier time
in the Department, the office of the Public
-Service Commissioner, or the office of the
Minister. Let me relate one little incident
to prove my case. The immaculate ex-
member for North Sydney, in 1910, came,
with the honorable member for Bal-
larat, to defeat me in my electorate if he
■could. This immaculate ex-member on the
platform gave a typical reason why I
should not be returned. He told the elec-
tors that it was not necessary to return me
to Parliament to produce or deal with the
report of the Postal Commission, because
the Government, he said, were “ picking
the eyes 1 ’ out of it as the evidence was
given, and by the time Parliament met there
would be nothing left to report on. These
were the tactics used by a member of the
Government which preceded the present
Government. When we find a gentleman
like the ex-member for North Sydney,
whom we would never credit with stoop-
ing—
Mr. Deakin. —Is the honorable member
alluding to Mr. Dugald Thomson ?
Mr. WEBSTER.—Yes.
Mr. Deakin. —He and I were never to-
gether in the honorable member’s elec-
torate.
Mr. WEBSTER.—No; each went to a
different part of the electorate; and it is
unnecessary to say that wherever they went
I increased my majority. Other changes
made are—
To discriminate re lowest tenders.
To accept tenders, grant preference, &c.
To establish allowance post and telegraph
offices, money order and receiving offices, maxi-
mum £ lOO instead of £so-
To establish telephone exchange at semi-offi-
cial and allowance post-offices.
To establish new mail services and authorize
deviations up to £lOO instead of £5O,
To sign on behalf of Postmaster-General con-
tracts for telephones.
To deal with cases coming within sections 103 C,
104, 105, and 106 of the Post and Telegraph
Regulations, where persons elect to be dealt
with by Postmaster-General as per section 156
of Act.
To sell condemned stores or material, &c.,
to value £lOO, instead of
More used to be spent in selling stores than
the stores were worth —-
To sign for Postmaster-General contracts for
material, repairs, &c., in connexion with tele-
phone lines.
To deal with expenditure re works repairs of
telephone and telegraph lines without submit-
ting to Central Office.
That used to be the clogging part of the
machinery—
Power delegated under section 8 of the Post
and Telegraph Act to Chief Electrical Engineer
to deal with all routine matters re telegraph,
telephone construction, maintenance and equip-
ment, also all matters re working of above and
telephone exchanges, other than questions in-
volving policy of Public Service Act.
That was not done prior to this date.
Power was given where previously men had
been fettered—where men had been asked
to control a Department without any power
to act. Now we come to the departmental
changes—
Granting cash bonuses re suggestions of offi-
cers from £1 to £io„ higher amounts to be
further considered.
There used to be a limit of as a re-
ward for a suggestion.
Mr. Carr. —Some officers have got
Mr. WEBSTER. —I think that recently
some grants of that kind have been made.
Hitherto the best has not been got out of
the employes, who have been offered no
encouragement. Many have made avail-
able most valuable discoveries, thus saving
hundreds of pounds to the Department,
but have received either no reward, or a
miserably poor reward.
Mr. Carr. —I understand that in this
connexion a distinction is made between
officers and men.
Mr. WEBSTER.—That is true; the
higher the officer the Tugher the reward.
At present, however, I am dealing only
with the men in the lower grades.
Telegraph messengers to be granted half-holi-
day each week where practicable.
This change was indicated, but not parti-
cularly recommended, by the Commission,
because it had practically been made by
the Postmaster-General before we re-
ported—
Improved methods re schools of instruction to
train for telegraphic positions.
Anybody who reads the report of the Royal
Commission will see where that suggestion
came from. Will honorable members be-
lieve that in 1907, with the great demands
made on the telephonic and telegraphic ser-
vices, there was practically no means pro-
vided to give instructions to juniors who de-
sired to qualify themselves for higher posi-
tions? In this great Department, valuable
raw material was allowed to go to waste
for want of guidance. I am speaking of
the training of the boys. In all advanced
countries opportunities are given for pros-
per training, and classes are established


under the direction of the best experts,
but in the old days of our postal service
the boys were left to pick up knowledge as
best they could, and were compelled to learn
in their own time. The inferiority of the
Service to-day is due to the unpardonable
neglect of its heads in the past to give
junior officers the training they needed for
the proper performance of their work.
Other reforms are—
Granting £i per month to cooks in country
line parties.
Granting leave for attending military camps.
Formerly there was no grant for cooks,
and the granting of leave to attend drills
or camps was at the discretion of the
higher officers. To-day the men must be
granted this leave. That, of course, is
necessary, seeing that we have compulsory
military service. These are further re-
forms —
Test cards for sorters to be placed in en-
velopes.
Encouraging engineering officers to study
electrical science by refunding fees paid for
tuition.
It would be better for the Department to
have its young officers under the super-
vision of, and taught by, its own experts.
With regard to travelling, the determina-
tion is—
First class fares under Public Service report
158 to be granted at the discretion Deputy Post-
master-General, and liberal interpretation exer-
cised.
Formerly only the higher officials were
allowed first class railway fares, the men
on the lower rungs of the ladder having
to travel second class, but, owing to the
recommendation of the Postal Commission,
first class fares are now to be allowed in
many cases. Honorable members will
understand that in the tropical parts of
Queensland travelling is an irksome duty,
and the second class carriages are not very
comfortable, nor is the company very
select, being composed of varied nationali-
ties. The Department now enjoins—
Special vigilance to detect and tax insufficiently
prepaid mail matter.
Some thousands of pounds of revenue were
being lost because a great deal of mail
matter was insufficiently prepaid. This
was reported by an officer, without notice
being taken of the report for some time,
but he ultimately was called as a witness
before the Commission, and since then this
change has been made.
Mr. Laird Smith. —Was he dismissed
in consequence? That would have hap-
pened in the old days.
Mr. WEBSTER.—EIe is still in the
Service, though I do not think he has been
promoted. New rules aie—
Advances to be made to line repairers to cover
travelling expenses.
Cost of removal or transfer of members of
line gangs and families to be borne by Depart-
ment.
Supply of uniform; rates of wages and con-
ditions of labour determined by Wages Boards
to be observed.
The last is a reform for which the Minister
is responsible. New instructions are —
female telephone attendants not to be re-
quired to work later than 10 p.m.
Letter carriers’ and porters’ loads to be reason-
able.
Ihe first of those instructions is due to
the complaints that were made of the ex-
cessive hours that were being worked. As
to the loads of letter carriers and porters,
the Commission found that they were be-
yond reason. I have seen loads which the-
men could not carry, but had to drag.
Another reform which has been initiated
is the —
Introduction of labour-saving appliances where
necessary.
Had the Department been up to date, it
would have utilized, as ordinary business
concerns do, the latest labour-saving de-
vices. Then this instruction has been
issued—
Three months’ supply of telegraph poles to
be held at principal telegraph centres.
In the old days it often happened that the
carrying out of contracts was delayed
through want of poles, or green poles had
to be used. Provision is now to be made-
for—-
Employes, line construction and maintenance,
to be insured by contractors.
Supply of first-aid cabinets for line parties.
Formerly injured men got no compensa-
tion, and means were not provided for-
saving life, or relieving pain. Another
reform is the—
Establishment of pole depots at suitable cen-
tres.
The moving of poles from one place to
another greatly increased the cost of lines.
The new arrangement will reduce expendi-
ture on construction, and should reduce
the guarantees required from those asking
for telephone communication. It has been
determined—
To discontinue condenser service where it
seriously impairs telegraphic working.
It was shown by the evidence that, by rea-
son of the overloading of the telegraph
lines under the condenser system, double


rates for telegrams had become the rule in-
stead of the exception. The Department
has determined that —
Country linemen are to be afforded opportuni-
ties to transfer to city parties.
There were no country parties in Victoria
until just before the inquiry commenced.
Now there are four or five. Formerly the
work was done haphazard. The linemen
employed in the country, however, com-
plained that they never had the chance
to get back to the city. Two more reforms
are —
Collective tenders for all States confined to
the supply of sulphate of copper.
Manufacture of mail bags, harness, &c., to
be undertaken by Commonwealth Harness Fac-
tory.
We recommended the establishment of fac-
tories to provide all the requirements of the
service, so far as that might be possible.
It has been determined to grant an— ■
Increase of initial allowance to telegraph
messengers from to yjto, from xst March,
1911, also to assistants at semi-official post-
offices.
At one time messengers were being paid
10s. a week, but in consequence of an ex-
posure of the conditions applying to some
of the semi-official offices the pay was
raised to 15s. a week. The boys who were
getting 10s. a week were often given the
important work of letter delivery, and were
sometimes found playing marbles while the
letters intrusted to them were being blown
away by the wind. It is now resolved
that—•
Preliminary training of telephone attendants
is to be given after instead of before appoint-
ment.
Postmasters without assistants are to be
granted full number of days in lieu to be added
to annua! leave.
In 1906 and 1907, a great many men were
working overtime, for which, after much
agitation on my part, some thousands of
pounds of compensation were paid, but the
evidence of country postmasters revealed a
system of sweating unexampled in my
knowledge or reading. They sent in re-
turns which were attached to the report of
the Commission, but they have not received
compensation. In future, however, over-
time is to be added to their annual leave.
There has been an—
Alteration re private box fees.
Commission allowed to private bag holders on
not less than £1 of stamps.
Uniform conditions re issue of duplicate
postal notes T>y chief officer in each State.
Formerly there was ,iO uniformity, and
each State had a different system. It has
been determined that —-
Furniture to conduct semi-official offices is to
be a charge on Departments.
Semi-official offices are to be abolished
practically in consequence of the recom-
mendation of the Commission. Two more
reforms are these—
Boys under i 5 years not to be employed to
relieve men acting as letter carriers.
Carbon copying process to be extended to re-
duce clerical labour.
The old practice was to set clerks to work
to re-write copies; the Department never
thought of adopting the copying processes
which have been in vogue in commercial
houses for decades past. Other changes
made are—
Supply of typewriters to selected officers where
clerical labour is involved.
Abolition of back-stamping of letters.
That was a change made by the ex-Post-
master-General —-
Parcel post facilities to be extended to all
receiving offices.
That is another reform proposed by the
Commission—
Mail services where loss not more than 50 per
cent, of estimated revenue or does not exceed
That is an improvement made by the ex-
Postmaster-General —
Provision re return of unclaimed newspapers.
Another Ministerial proposal—
Planning of buildings to secure effective ex-
tension.
One of the recommendations of the Com-
mission—
One hundred per cent, of postage each way
as based upon estimated revenue on new mail
services.
Before the Commission entered upon its
labours, when a new mail service was re-
quired the estimated revenue was based on
the amount of outward postage, the in-
ward postage not being taken into account.
Subsequently it was decided to allow 50 per
cent, in respect of both inward and out-
ward postage —clearly a more equitable
plan. To-day, owing to penny postage,
however, that has to be increased to 100
per cent., otherwise a material loss would
be shown—•
Mail contracts over —contract to be car-
ried out by the contractor or a member of his
family, the former provision as to disallowing
the employment of a son of the contractor under
eighteen years of age being discontinued.
Under the old system a contractor was not
allowed to employ a son who was under
eighteen years of age, and this often


resulted in hardship. A contractor might
have a son under that age who was quite
competent to do the work, but he was not
allowed to employ him. The provision as
to age, however, no longer applies. Other
changes are—
Abolition of acknowledgment to apply to all
parcels.
Charges for information re postal notes.
That is one of the ex-Postmaster-General’s
innovations—
Action to secure prompt and correct delivery
of mail matter.
To prevent accumulation of letters at post-
offices.
To employ extra hands.
To prevent overworking of sorters and letter
carriers.
f was glad when that last-named change
was announced. An attempt has been made
to prevent overworking, but little has been
achieved —-
To regulate sorting and delivery to obviate
late hours and long periods of duty.
which went on until 1907-8 —
Book receipts for registered letters to be
adopted generally.
Previously loose receipts were given, al-
though any business house would have
adopted the book system—
Deposit from newspaper proprietors to cover
value of papers posted in one night.
Re increased frequency of mail services, if
revenue equals 75 per cent, of cost of service,
or public concerned makes good the loss.
I give the Ministry great credit for having
introduced this change. The old system
imposed on many residents of country dis-
tricts serious disabilities in securing deli-
very of mails. The ex-Postmaster-General
deserves credit for having realized the in-
equity of the old system—
Issue of a Commonwealth Post arid Telegraph
Guide,
Prior to the advent of the Commission,
there was a separate post and telegraph
guide in respect of each State, and the sys-
tem created a network of confusion. Since
our inquiry, however, a Federal Post and
Telegraph Guide has been issued, as was
urged in the report, and it gives informa-
tion regarding the whole Commonwealth—-
Abolition of charge re missing postal
articles.
That was one of our recommendations—-
Restriction re letters addressed -j>oste restante
to a period of six months.
That is another recommendation which was
strongly urged.
Improvements re letter receptacles and facing
table versus baskets or secure box.
Application of extra payment to allowance
and semi-official postmasters for telephone ex-
change duties.
Adoption of uniform scale of payment to
allowance postmasters on basis of work done.
Kconomy re parcel mails.
Additional postage facilities at General Post
Offices to facilitate sorting.
Sitting suspended from 6.30 to 7.45 p.m.
Debate resumed.
Mr. WEBSTER. I am grateful
to the Opposition for the considera-
tion they have extended to me on this
occasion. I should certainly not have ex-
pected the concession had not the Ministry
led me to believe that my motion would
be given precedence over all other business
this evening. The next items on the list
of departmental changes made since the
Commission began its inquiries in 1908
are—-
Economic means to convey letter carriers over
ten minute distances, to and fro by tram omni-
bus, or contract vehicle, at Department’s ex-
pense.
The effect of that is to expedite the work
of the Department, and save the officers
from the necessity of carrying heavy loads
for great distances—
Inspectors of letter carriers to be appointed.
They have been appointed—
Reform re collection of porterage charges on
telegrams.
Uniform form of certificate re copies of tele-
grams, improving method of check.
Steps to improve method of dealing with Inter-
State telegraphic traffic.
Matters re Press message ‘despatch.
Refunds bn repeat telegrams to be made at
once.
The latter is a Ministerial action outside the
scope of the Commission—-
Telephone trunk lines, utilized to transmit
press telegrams.
of uniform telegraph forms.
Telegrams to take preference over telephone
trunk line conversations.
. Wheatstone instruments to equip at least one
circuit between all Capitals.
That is one of the great innovations that
have been made in the Department to the
advantage of the public. Some people
may think that the Commission’s inquiry
has had to do Largely with the welfare of
the Postal service itself, but it has been
of equal interest and benefit to the public
whom the Department serves. In no case
has greater relief been given to the public
than by the introduction of Wheatstone in-
struments into the Telegraphic Branch. For-
merly, on congested lines, the public had
to pay double rates to get their messages
through; but now the introduction of the


Wheatstone instruments enables the busi-
ness to be done more rapidly, and the
public are assured of a reasonable service
at the ordinary rates. Strange to say,
when the Commission were inquiring into
the matter, there was an obsolete Wheat-
stone apparatus lying idle in the Sydney
General Post Office. No one seemed to
care whether it was worked or not, or to be
aware of its advantages. There was only
one Wheatstone operator, and he was the
only expert, in the whole Commonwealth.
He was stationed in Western Australia. He
has since been appointed teacher of Wheat-
stone operating, and is travelling through
the States instructing the staff. The pub-
lic are benefited by practically every recom-
mendation in the report, even by those
which relate most closely to the service,
because, if a service feels that it is justly
rewarded for its labours, the public are
bound to receive better attention and better
results—
Direct duplex working between Melbourne and
Brisbane through repeaters at Sydney.
That is another change that will expedite
public business—
Out-door supervisors of messengers to be ap-
pointed.
This is a reform which affects the welfare
of the public, because previously there
was no supervision of messengers, and the
appointment of supervisors enables the pub-
lic to be better attended to, and the mes-
sengers to do their work more expedi-
tiously—-
Limit of cross check telegrams to five days
instead of nine days per month.
That is a saving of revenue which is very
beneficial to the public—
Appointment of wireless expert for three years.
That is a Ministerial act
Department provide sleeping requisites for tele-
phonists.
Continuous service on revenue of
Abolition of telephone coupon system.
Two-mile radius telephone from exchange.
The two last are Ministerial changes—
Exception re seven years’ guarantee to lines
costing not more than
That was a matter which was urged very
strongly in the recommendations of the
Commission—
Separate rooms for telephone exchanges with
continuous services.
This also is of great benefit to the public.
In country districts, previously, the tele-
phone exchanges were stuck in any corner
of the big offices; and this, and the obso-
lete character of the appliances, all mili-
tated against a good service being given
to the public. By having separate tele-
phone exchanges with modem switch-
boards, proper attention can be given to
those who use the telephones. Therefore,
as distinct from the benefits to the service
itself, the public come in all the time —
Improvement re tenders, sealed pattern instead
of maker’s name.
That is another safeguard against imposi-
tion by contractors.
Adoption of hygienic appliances for use with
telephones.
That is a Ministerial change.
Alteration in connexions common battery tele-
phones to reduce effect of extraneous noises.
Under guarantee, deposit 75 per cent, of es-
timated difference between estimated and mini-
mum revenue instead of the whole difference.
That reform is of great advantage to all
country districts. Formerly no allowance
was made with regard to making up the
estimated loss on a telephone connexion.
A concession of 25 per cent, has now been
made, which will enable many districts to
get telephone communication which they
would not have got before.
Connecting lines to be credited with per
cent, of total revenue from new business.
That is another innovation which means
economy of working -and a saving to the
public.
Reduction of telephone lines in country dis-
tricts partly erected by Postmasfer-Generai.
Night telephone attendants, no duties to in-
terfere with ordinary work.
Basis for fixing hours of telephonists under
present varying conditions.
Asbestos blankets for fire extinguishing in
telephone exchanges.
Up to this time the provision against fire
was absolutely nil. The arrangement was
most unbusinesslike, but now asbestos
blankets have been provided for the pur-
pose of putting out fires when they occur
at the switchboard at any of the exchanges,
which they are liable to.
Tea money allowed where two meal hours
occur during period of duty.
Tea money used not to be allowed under
the old conditions, unless an officer could
prove that he had been on duty for several
hours after the usual time at which his ser-
vices should cease.
Broken time limited to fourteen hours.
There was no limit before in this regard.
The Department worked its officers in many
cases—l do not say on the average—for
very long hours. The limit has been
brought down to fourteen hours now,
which, in practice in the great body of
cases, means about eleven hours for broken


shifts. We recommended a reduction to
twelve hours maximum.
Minors not to be prosecuted without Post-
master-General’s approval.
Minors used to be prosecuted without rhyme
or reason by irresponsible persons, the De-
partment being put to great expense and
trouble, and the whole Service being in
some cases dislocated.
Official offices instead of semi-official in charge
of General Division officers.
Simplification of official correspondence.
When we were inquiring into this question
any one who saw the different methods
adopted in the different States in regard
to correspondence would have marvelled
how the Department could be so behind
the times. Some of the States had a de-
cent system, while others were not at all
in accordance with modern commercial re-
quirements.
Persona! allowance of semi-official postmasters
raised to per annum.
Semi-official offices being abolished, that
does not apply.
Casual or exempt employes, eight shillings a
day.
This went one better than our recommenda-
tion.
Tests for promotion of sorters and senior
sorters, facilities provided for practice in sort-
ing, &c.
Those are matters to which I referred in
speaking of facilities, which were formerly
denied, having now been provided in large
offices for men to acquire knowledge to lit
them for advancement in the ranks of
sorters.
Appointment of chief accountant and staff
to reorganize departmental accounts, to se-
cure uniformity and provide balance-sheet and
profit and loss account.
Imagine a great Department like this,
spending a year, and having
no uniform system of accounts ! When we
had the Accountant of the Service before
the Commission, we asked him to give us
an indication of the revenue and expendi-
ture in the three main branches of the Ser-
vice, and business men will marvel when
I say that the reply we received was: “ I
cannot do it. The Department has never
kept separate accounts, and, therefore, no
information on that vital point can be given
to the Commission, nor could any informa-
tion be given for the guidance of the vari-
ous Ministers who have had charge of the
Department.” Such a condition of affairs
is almost unthinkable. Nevertheless it was
a fact; but since that time an accountant,
who, I believe, is a capable officer, has
been appointed, and he is now doing things
which ought to have been done from the
beginning of Commonwealth administra-
tion.
Officers called out at night to attend line
troubles to be paid overtime.
Officers used formerly to be called out at
all hours of the night to serve the De-
partment and convenience the public, even
after doing their ordinary day’s work, but
they were not entitled to any payment
therefor. They are now paid, as they
ought to be, for the extra services they
render.
Detailed instructions issued for taking store
stocks.
That was one of the weakest links in the
whole administration of the Department.
We found, in the Stores Branch, a lack of
system and method in bookkeeping, stock-
taking, and the checking of stores. In
every State there was a hybrid system,
which was practically no protection to the
revenue; and there was .consequently a
loophole left for manipulation at any time
by the men employed. As a matter of
fact, in Western Australia, one employe,
without being detected, took enough copper
wire from the departmental stores to fence
his selection. He was not found out until
the investigations of the Postal Commis-
sion caused the officials to make some
inquiry, and they discovered that many
pounds’ worth of material had been pur-
loined over many months. This case show’s
the loose system that prevailed all through
the service; and but for the honesty of the
men generally, the Commonwealth would
have suffered to a much greater degree.
The next change is—
Regulations and forms dealing with the pur-
chase, receipt, custody, inspection, disposal, and
accounting in connexion with stores, adopted.
All States brought into line re use of money
order account for paying moneys, received, and
paid out from this account.
Only New South Wales had adopted the
system; _ though in South Australia it was
in practice to a certain extent, none of the
other States had fallen into line. There
was the cumbersome method of sending
money to the country to meet liabilities,
with all the risk of loss and unnecessary
bookkeeping. Now payments are made by
money order, which provide their own
check.
Uniform forms re money orders adopted.
Revenue and expenditure classified, adopted by
Conference re expenditure.
* nere never had previously been any classi-
fication. After the report of the Commis


sion was issued, a Conference was ap-
pointed to deal with revenue and expendi-
ture. Here was a Department spending
000,000 per annum, and yet there was
no classification of the revenue and
expenditure. There was no means of
ascertaining the financial position of
the Department; and even to-day there
is no such record. There have been
two Committees—a Committee of ex-
perts and a Committee appointed by the
previous Government—and each has been
condemned by the Public Service Commis-
sioner as ineffective, and as entailing an
absolute waste of public money. Both
Committees have issued reports, but these
have proved not worth the paper on which
they are written. Instructions have been
issued to classify the revenue and ex-
penditure. A public accountant from
a railway service has been appointed
chief accountant of the Commonwealth;
and, although he has been at his
work for nearly twelve months, there is no
result as yet. He is, however, I believe,
getting the system into order; he is laying
the foundations of a system; but even now
as I say there is no result showing the
actual expenditure and revenue. Can we
imagine a Public Service Commissioner, or
a Minister, without any guiding star to the
financial situation ? Such a state of affairs
is unbelievable to the ordinary commercial
or business man; and yet neither the Min-
ister nor the Treasurer to-day can ascer-
tain to what extent each branch of the ser-
vice is paying, or is not paying—
Detailed instructions re methods of ascertaining
the value under classified headings of the de-
partmental assets existing on ist July, ign.
This means that for the first time a legiti-
mate attempt is being made to discover the
departmental assets on the first day of the
financial year. At present, there is no
knowledge of what the assets of the Depart-
ment are; everybody is in the dark, and
would have continued to be in the dark
but for the appointment of a chief ac-
countant, as recommended by us.
System of ledger accounts embracing the whole
of the financial transactions of the Department
designed to show the financial position of the
Department and results of working the Depart-
ment’s business, have been laid down.
Ordinary business methods have been laid
down for the first time in the year of our
Lord 1911.
Uniform charging of expenditure items; all
forms used by Department to be put in block
form to prevent waste and expedite handling.
In other words, there has been waste in
handling, and there is an attempt being
made to prevent it.
Adoption of uniform buckram label for Inter-
State mails.
Re letters addressed to deceased persons being
sent to dead letter office—postmaster to advise
relatives re proper procedure.
In many instances, letters addressed to de-
ceased persons have been sent to the Dead
Letter Office, without any intimation being
given to those who addressed them; but
now that is to be changed. That prac-
tically is the list of the improvements and
amendments that have been made by the
Department itself. If these changes were
necessary—and I say they were —what was
the condition of the Department before they
were made ? It was very nearly in a state
of chaos.
Now we come to the changes made by
the Department.
Reduction of red tape re files of papers in
which Commonwealth Public Service Commis-
sioner was concerned, saving time and expense.
There is a lot of red-tape yet to be
abolished, not only in the Postal Depart-
ment, but in all other Government Depart-
ments. I am glad to say, however, that
some of this tape is being cut away in
the Department immediately under discus-
sion; and it is time that was done, for the
Department has been tangled up in red-
tape for so many years that one wonders
how it is now to be liberated.
Duties assigned by Permanent Head to the
various Deputy Postmasters-General.
I find that it would be more convenient and
fitting to deal with the question of organiza-
tion when I come to discuss the Board of
Control, and the management, and deal
with the final problem of how the Depart-
ment is to be managed in the future—of
whether this Parliament is wide-awake
enough to recognise the importance ot the
recommendations made by the Commission.
As to the question of furlough, it may not
be known to honorable members that offi-
cers who have served twenty years, and
whose record is good, are entitled to six
months’ furlough on full pay, or twelve
months on half pay, as a reward for their
diligence. Previously, however, if an offi-
cer died before he obtained the furlough to
which he was entitled, there was no means
of handing over an equivalent to those de-
pendent on him. I find that the payment
depends on the recommendation of the
Permanent Head and the certificate of the
Public Service Commissioner; but a new


scale has been adopted, and the recommen-
dation of the Permanent Head eliminated,
it being now left to the Chief Officer to say
whether the furlough shall be paid for.
Indeed, more has been done; because, in
the case of death, an equivalent will be
paid to those dependent on the deceased
officer. Thus, some degree of justice has
been done in a manner which common sense
and equity dictate.
Mr. Thomas Brown. —That is not gene-
ral, though it may be done in particular
cases.
Mr. WEBSTER. —It is adopted as part
of the recommendation.
Mr. Roberts. —A recent interpretation
is that this furlough is not allowed unless
the officer is coming back to resume duty.
Mr. WEBSTER. —An officer is not al-
lowed to go away on furlough merely to
get out of the service when he is not en-
titled to retire.
Mr. Thomas Brown. —I was referring
to cases where an officer dies when he is
entitled to furlough.
Mr. WEBSTER. —Another change is—-
Boards of Inquir
Permanent Head on advice of Chief Officer
may impose penalties, curtail leave, or Public
Service Commissioner may reduce grade and
salary, &c.
That is an improvement in administration
which I need not discuss.
General Division.
Vacancies to be reported to Inspector by Chief
Officer, with opinion thereon. General tie up,
Chief Officer reports, then confers with Inspec-
tor, report to Commissioner if not agreed, re-
port to Permanent Head, he forwards to Com-
missioner, who recommends to Governor-General,
and all have again to be informed.
That is the sort of red-tape we find in re-
gard to vacancies in the General Division.
Same process re Clerical and Professional
Division.
Offences of temporary employes to be dealt
with by Chief Officer, and he shall advise In-
spector, eliminating the Permanent Head and
Commissioner.
The Public Service Commissioner was the
gentleman, who, in giving his evidence, said
that everything wag, “ all right in the gar-
den”—that salaries, conditions, grading,
and everything else, was tip-top; indeed,
there was hardly anything he would admit
to be wrong.
Officers in Western Australia who do not re-
ceive a district allowance may be paid a special
allowance equal to 5 per cent, of salary.
That was done at the instigation of the
honorable member for Coolgardie. Fur-
ther reforms are —
Altering the ‘personnel of boards of inquiry..
That was necessary, and, indeed, essen-
tial—
Public Service Inspectors may approve of
transfers exceeding three months.
Formerly, there was no approval, men be-
ing transferred on the ipse dixit of any
one—•
Chief Officer in lieu of Minister to have power
to grant leave.
Formerly, the Minister only could grant-
leave—•
Special allowances approved by Chief Officer
in place of Permanent Head.
A reform suggested by the Commission—-
New procedure to be followed in filling staff
vacancies.
Further extension of power to Chief Officer.
Alterations of subjects of examination under
section 21.
The Public Service Commissioner, when
giving evidence, said that the examinations
were not too difficult; but he has since
acknowledged the need for altering them,,
as recommended by the Commission—
Abolition of receipts for less than ss.
Power to reprimand or caution extended.
In the General Post Office, Sydney, what
was called the “ blue terror ” prevailed,
officers being fined for trivial offences. If
the practice of fining has not been
abolished, it has been curtailed.
Air. J. H. Catts. —There should be a
proper Appeal Board.
Mr. WEBSTER.—That was recom-
mended by the Commission —an Appeal
Board under the Board of Control. To
continue my statement of reforms—
Deferred increments. Commissioner to decide
when due re seniority.
Leave of absence to attend camps.
Rates of salary, Professional Division, fixing
minimum at ,£iBo.
The Commission recognised that the salaries
paid in this division should be at least
£2.0 a year higher—
Raising age of approval for messengers 14
to 16, instead of 13 to 15.
That is a recommendation of the Commis-
sion—
Fees in certain cases of officers abolished.
Formerly, officers were required to pay fees
on presenting themselves for examination
for promotion to a higher class or grade—
Long-service increments granted to Clerical
Division at maximum of
Removal expenses of transferred officers, fix-
ing maximum allowance of weight of furni-
ture.


At one time, no hard-and-fast rule was in
existence—
Absence of officers to be entered in attend-
ance-book, except when on official business.
While we must treat our officers justly, we
must see that the public is fairly served,
and provide against malingering or neglect
of duty—
Monthly return of fines and punishments to
go to Commissioner by Chief Officer not to the
Permanent Head.
Alteration of scale of marks re examination
for General Division.
Another barrier removed—
Prescribed scale of travelling allowances,
making Clerical and General Division uniform,
re the minimum from ys. to Bs. per day.
Formerly, there was no equitable arrange-
ment. The Commission recommended 7s.
a day, but the Commissioner has gone one
better, making the allowance Bs. a day
all round. The Commission recommended
what it believed to be just and equitable,
•in view of all the circumstances—
Alteration of the scale of marks re examina-
tion to another division.
Examination abolished for advancement of
telegraphists beyond £ l2O.
Vacancies caused by retiring officers going on
furlough to be filled without waiting actual re-
tirement, thus obviating the necessity of acting
appointments.
The last is one of the most important
changes that have been made. At one
time, when a Deputy Postmaster-General
was on the eve of retiring, he was allowed
six months’ furlough, and his successor
was appointed temporarily to fill his place.
Finally, New South Wales was what was
called a widowed service, nearly every man
in 1907 in the higher positions being merely
an acting officer. The Public Service Com-
missioner thought the regulation wise and
equitable, but he has since consented to
alter it —
Compensation to officers acting for more than
six months, pay to be between present and mini-
mum salary of higher position.
There used to be much sweating of relieving
officers. Men getting from £l2O to £ l6O,
and in some cases only were reliev-
ing officers much more highly paid. Some
getting £l6O were doing the work of others
with salaries of without any re-
ward ; and others were relieving for years,
taking big responsibilities, without com-
pensation. The Commission recommended
that, after three months, a relieving officer
should be paid the minimum salary of the
next higher grade; but the Commissioner
has provided that an officer must be re-
lieving for six months before he receives
such minimum.
Payment of tea money independent of evi-
dence of actual expenditure.
At one time men received only fba amount
which they could prove they had expended.
If they had spent less than the allowance,
they got only their actual expenditure—
Allowance granted to linemen in camps who
did not previously receive the same.
Nominal advancement to officers on furlough
to preserve seniority.
Officers in charge of mail vans to be senior
sorters.
Abolition of grading.
Regulation of what shall constitute an off-day
or day in lieu.
District allowance revived.
Casual artisans and mechanics to be paid rates
fixed by Arbitration Court or Wages Board.
The Commission had nothing to do with
the latter.
Minimum wage granted irrespective of period
of service.
It was stated, in evidence before the Hob-
fiouse or Chamberlain Commissions in
the Old Country, that there should be a
minimum wage for all above a certain age;
that when men had reached an age at which
they ought to take up the duties of citizen-
ship, the fact should be recognised in their
pay. In England, an increase is given with-
out seniority being attained or an examina-
tion passed. At twenty-three, a man ob-
tains an increase because he ought to have
undertaken additional responsibilities of
citizenship. I was anxious that the principle
should be recognised here. The Commis-
sioner regards the married man as a more
useful officer than a single man. There-
fore, to secure a good service, marriage
should be encouraged. Formerly, a person
who had been in the service for three
years, and had attained the age of twenty-
one, received a minimum wage of
but now the minimum is on attaining
the age of twenty-one, without regard to
length of Service-
Temporary relief officers to receive allow-
ance.
Advisory Boards to decide qualifications of
sorters.
If the Advisory Boards are composed of
experts, the sorters need have no fear.
Temporary telegraphists’ rates go to Bs. mini-
mum and ros. maximum per day.
These wages were raised because it was
pointed out that temporary telegraphists
were not paid In proportion to the services


rendered, and the conditions under which
they were employed.
Abolition of 18-year limit for retirement.
Temporary employes (adult) to receive Bs. per
day.
Method of calculating overtime to letter car-
riers altered.
The system that formerly prevailed was
something in the nature of a Chinese
puzzle; but it has been somewhat im-
proved.
Uniform system of grading position of post
and telegraph offices occupied by the officer next
to postmaster in seniority.
Time and half pay where telegraphists are
on duty seven or more consecutive days, for
Sunday half-day’s pay and time in lieu
abolished.
Uniform allowance for all men on duty away
from station, including exempt casual, tempor-
ary, and permanent men.
These privileges applied only to a certain
extent to the permanent men. They now
apply to all men engaged in this service.
Hours of supervising officers in mail branch
to be the same as those of the staff they control.
Formerly the supervising officers in many
cases were expected to remain on duty for
hours after the staff had ceased work. It
is now recognised that, not only the staff,
but the supervising officers, are entitled to
justice at the hands of the administration.
These constitute the changes that' have been
made in what the Public Service Commis-
sioner declared to be a perfect service, so
far as administration was concerned. I
do not mean to suggest that he said that
everything was perfect ; but it was difficult
to get him to admit that there were any
imperfections. If he did make an admis-
sion of the kind, he usually qualified it
with the statement, “If the position is not
what it ought to be, it is certainly better
than it was under the State regime He
would then endeavour to prove his conten-
tion by bringing to his assistance the ex-
ploded theory of averages. The Commis-
sioner’s resort to the theory of averages to
support the excellence of his administra-
tion, as compared with the condition of
affairs in pre-Federation days, provides an
amusing study. I come now to his clas-
sification scheme. I have already quoted
opinions expressed by the Public Service
Commissioner when being examined on oath
before the Commission, as to the wages that
prevailed in the several branches of the
service. I am now going to read what is
reported to me by the Department as to the
changes he has made —changes that are al-
together out of keeping with the statements
which he made on oath. Let it be remem-
bered that those statements were made, not
in the early days of the Commission, but
in November, 1909. The Public Service
Commissioner was the last witness to be
examined. We adopted that course, in-
order that he might have the last word ou
the subject. In the first place, he has fixed
the minimum salary of the fifth class at
£6O, instead of and the maximum
has been raised from £l6O to ;£iBo. The
latest proposal is to adopt the Commission’s
recommendation and to raise the fifth class
of the clerical branch of the service up to
£,200 a year. That is the decision of the
Commissioner. I take it that it will be
adopted by the Government, and that
a year will in future be the maximum. It is
worthy of note that the proposal agrees
with the recommendation made by the Com-
mission, which considered that £2OO would
be an equitable return for the services of
diligent and deserving officers in this class.
Postmasters, Grades XIV. and XV., fixed
salaries of £l2O and abolished; and post-'
masters in Class V. permitted to advance to
Proposed further increase of maximum
to
The salaries of postmasters are also to be
increased. Another change made is—■
Number of grades above sth class reduced
from twelve to six.
I was astonished to find that there were no
less than twelve grades of postmasters.
Since the cost of conveying every post-
master to a new position has to be borne
by the Department, one could not help
wondering why an administrator should
have seen fit to fix upon no less than twelve
grades. The Commissioner, however, has
now seen the error of his ways, and has re-
duced the number to six. The Commission
recommended that the number should be
reduced to five, and the Commissioner has
gone as near as possible to our recommen-
dation without actually adopting it. Com-
ing to the telegraphists, we find that the
maximum of the fifth class has been
amended as in the Clerical Division, by
being increased to per annum. The
Postal Commission recommended that the
maximum of that class should be £2lO.
Further changes made by the Commissioner
are—
Proportional grading to be abolished and 4th
class officers to be paid and upwards, ac-
cording to the value of their work.
All clerical officers of 21 years of age to
receive not less than ,£llO per annum irrespec-
tive of service.
General Division minimum raised from .£l3B
to per annum.


Bar at removed and maximum of
obtainable by annual increments.
It will thus be seen that the General Divi-
sion are to come up from the original maxi-
mum of a year in 1907, to _£i6B per
annum. According to a paragraph in the
newspapers, it would also appear that the
maximum salary of assistants is to be in-
creased to as provided for in Grade
7, Regulation 104, which applies to senior
sorters and senior mechanics. The jack-of-
all-trades in the Department, who had very
few to speak for him on the Commission
because of his isolation—the man who
could not marshall his evidence owing to
want of organization—is, therefore, to get
a fair deal. The salary of a year
is in excess of our recommendation. We
recommended that it should be • but
we certainly indicated that the duties of
these officers were very varied, and that
there should be some classification for them.
Some of these men rank next to post-
masters; they do telegraphic work, and
possibly counter and financial work, and
are, therefore, more valuable to the Com-
monwealth than others who discharge
merely routine duties—
Assistants and postal assistants, minimum
raised from /60 to £72 1 adults receive £126
irrespective of service.
We agree that the minimum should be
raised, and the Commissioner, in order
to show that he was able to see further than
"e could—although he could not see what
we wanted him to see at the time—has
undertaken to raise the minimum from /j6o
*9 Thus a youth will enter the ser-
vice under improved conditions—
Adults receive /126 irrespective of service.
Maximum raised from /138 to /iso.
Grade bars removed.
Advance to maximum by regular increments,
and postal assistants to go to a maximum of
£lBO a year. .
New positions of senior assistants and senior
postal assistants created. Minimum salary /132,
maximum £156, by annual increments.
These officers are to advance to the maxi-
mum, not by increments that may be given
at the will of the Chief Officer for the State,
but by annual increments. So long as an
officer performs his work satisfactorily he
will be entitled to an annual increment as
provided by the latest classification scheme
of the Public Service Commissioner. Then,
again, other changes made are—
Battery men raised from /60 to £72 ; adults
/126. Maximum raised from /125 to /150.
The Commissioner could not see the neces-
sity for any of these changes a little over
eighteen months ago—
Grooms, salary raised from /no to /12&.
Grooms in charge, minimum raised from
£ l2 ° to /144; maximum from to /ic6:.
annual increments.
Labourers from /no and /120 to /126.
Linemen, minimum from /'ll4 to /125; maxi-
mum £126 to /iso. Regular increments. Grade
bars removed. Allowance granted to officers in
travelling parties.
We have here a wholesale adoption of the
recommendations of the Commission. After
reviewing the evidence given by the Com-
missioner, one cannot but marvel at the way
in which he is able to accommodate himself
to conditions existing from time to time, and
brought about either by the Government of
the day or by the political winds that hap-
pen to be blowing. I s ay without hesita-
tion that if ever a man displayed a re-
markable aptitude for adjusting himself to
conditions that appeared to be most-
popular, and popularizing himself with the
service when he saw that there was no
alternative, that man is the Public Service
Commissioner. These linemen have got
practically all that we recommended, and
that which he said would not be warranted.
Line foremen have been granted a maximum
of £lBO instead of while other
changes are—
Line inspectors, minimum increased from-
£iyo to /192.
Letter-carriers, minimum increased from £6O
to *7 2 ;. adults /126, irrespective of service,
and maximum increased from /no to /mo
te Advance to mechanics on passing efficiency
The door is thus opened for advancement—-
M / d dr J v ® rs > minimum increased from £6O
IrA 7 L adul S lrres Pective of service, £nd
grade bars removed. Maximum raised from
£126 to /150.
All these grades upon which the Commis-
sioner set so much value have practically
been removed One would have thought
that the Commissioner was engaged in srad-
utter ’ havmg re S ard to the many grades
Tat he set up m each division.' They
were set up apparently, to prevent officers
getting too far ahead. Many of these bar-
riers have been removed under this re-ad-
justment, and even proportional grading has
become a thing of the past. Men mav now
advance, as recommended by the Royal
commission, according to merit ■
Minimum of mechanics increased from /n 4
Sri 3 ’ grade ars reDiOT ed, and advarre to
A 6. armum by annual increments
/ , a j ers ’ ? inimum increased from /„ 4 to
£126, and maximum from /126 to /no Rem,
lar increments. A - ■ rxegu-


Mr. Archibald.—That is a lot of money
for a sailmaker.
Mr. WEBSTER.—It means an advance
of nearly ios. a week.
_Mr. Archibald.—Evidently the Com-
missioner did not think that sailmakers were
worth very much before.
Mr. WEBSTER.—There were many
whose services, apparently, were not
thought to be worth much before we com-
menced our inquiry. I come now to other
■changes made by the Commissioner—
Telephone monitors, minimum raised from
A JI 4 to and maximum from ,£126 to
Regular increments.
Telephone supervisors, minimum raised from
*i3 2 to maximum from to £1 36,
■and from £156 to £l6B as per grade.
Telephonists, minimum from £32 to £3O,
adults £ no, irrespective of service.
Those are rates for the women of the ser-
vice, who have not been overlooked since
the Commission began its inquiries.
Telegraph messengers, minimum raised from
£26 to £jg, maximum from to £6O.
Pole-dressers, minimum from to £126,
maximum from ,£132 to
f after time the Public Service Com-
missioner declared that the wages he was
paying to the pole-dressers were an ample
reward for the services they rendered. In
.spite of that repeated assertion, he has now
acknowledged that they are entitled to the
wages of a tradesman, as those figures show.
Ship mailmen, minimum raised from to
grade bars removed; maximum £l5O to
Storemen, minimum from to ,£126, grade
bars removed; maximum, ,£l3B to ,£l5O.
Typists, minimum raised from £6O to £72,
adults receive £126 irrespective of service; maxi-
mum from to ,£l5O.
As will be seen, the claims of both men
and women typists are also recognised. He
has not missed any of them, this time, al-
though he missed them all formerly—
Watchmen, raised from ,£l2O to £ 126.
Cleaners also advanced.
I would rather have handed all those de-
tails to Hansard than have read them in
full, but it was necessary for me to read
them in order to put them on record, and
have them published, so that all those in-
terested may see what is being done, why
it is being done, and how it is being done.
I have not had an estimate made, but I
should think that the difference between the
rewards given to the service under this so-
called new classificattion, or as I would
rather call it the breaking down of the
old classification, and the pay previously
.given to the service, must be at least
per annum. To that extent the
Postal Service benefits. If the pay now
given on the Public Service Commis-
sioner’s own classification, based on
our report, is a fair reward for the
■ services rendered, what must the position of
■ the service have been before attention was
drawn to it by constant agitation in the
' course of the Commission’s inquiry? The
: service must have been absolutely sweated
■ in those days; but the Public Service Com-
missioner turned round and said that “ Of
course they did not do anything, because
they were waiting for the Postal Commis-
sion’s report. ” He practically belied
that statement in his own evidence, when
he said, on oath, that these increases were
not warranted, and that the additional
money would not be earned. Now that the
service benefits to that extent even by the
concessions that have already been made,
they ought, I think, to be much more con-
tented and energetic. Now that they have a
chance of advancing by merit, the men and
women in the service ought to work to
achieve the best results possible, and to give
the public the very best services that are
in them. Apart from the question of sala-
ries, look at the changes which the Public
Service Commissioner has made in the ad-
ministration. I have not yet dealt with
organization, because that fits in with the
more vital question of control and manage-
ment, and when we come to consider the
changes in organization, as well as the
other changes, absolutely not a shadow of
the old conditions—not enough even to
identify them—is left. Those old con-
ditions were the outcome of nine years’
efforts at administration by this public ser-
vant. If his system, his methods, his re-
wards, his classification, his grading are
now all thrown to the winds, I would like
to know what there is left standing to the
credit of his reputation as an administrator
of the affairs of a great service of this
kind. The Public Service Commissioner
says, and his Inspectors repeat it, for they
evidently all learn the same tune, that the
Public Service Inspectors are best qualified
to judge the merits of the services rendered
by any officer in the Department. I admit
that after a thing is produced it is easy for
a man to justify his position as a critic
by altering some little detail, just as the
Commissioner has altered his programme in
this case to make it appear that he is
omnipotent in this Department. In the
first classification on which the Postal Ser-
vice was based, the men were classified,
and had the right of appeal to an Appeal


Board, but they had to appear in person.
They had no one to represent them. Ido
not mean to say that the Board treated
them badly, or did not try to help them,
but in any large body of men there are
bound to be some nervous 1 individuals who
cannot put their own cases properly, and
they would be liable to have their appeals
cast out by reason of that infirmity. Mr.
McKay, the Public Service Inspector, told
us that he inspected the work of every man in
the service in New South Wales before that
first classification was made, and in spite of
the disability under which those who ap-
pealed laboured, no fewer than 33 per cent,
of the appeals were allowed by the Board.
Mr. McKay was therefore wrong in one
out of every three cases, and probably the
proportion would have risen to one in two
if all the men had been able to put their
cases before the Board as they should. If
that gentleman, after watching and inspect-
ing the work of every officer, as he said he
did, could not arrive closer to a just de-
cision than that, he cannot be as well quali-
fied to judge the value of the services of
the officers as the head of a Department
or the heads of branches would be if they
were properly qualified to occupy those
positions. There is therefore a duplica-
tion of work, and a duplication of expense,
in that regard, without any corresponding
advantage to the Department or to the
country. Let us take the case of a senior
Public Service Inspector of New South
Wales. I wish to illustrate what has been
the result of this magnificent reign of Mr.
Duncan McLachlan, our Public Service
Commissioner.
Sir William Lyne.—The best man you
ever had.
Mr. WEBSTER.—I know he is a par-
ticular pet of the honorable member, and
probably I shall have a word or two to say
on that point a little later. A Department
is generally judged by results.
Sir William Lyne.—The honorable
member is talking rubbish.
Mr. WEBSTER.—The honorable mem-
ber was amongst those Ministers who never
thought this Commission would come to
fruition. The result has been rather a dis-
appointment to all of them.
Sir William Lyne.—l do not know that
it has been fruitful yet.
Mr. WEBSTER.—I have shown that
the tree has been bearing a magnificent
crop.. I have placed before the House
some of the results. I have shown the
state of the Department under Ministerial
control, under departmental control, and
under the Public Service Commissioner’s
control; and I have indicated the changes
that have now been admitted to be neces-
sary to bring the ■Department into some-
thing like working condition.
Sir William Lyne,—And now it is under
Webster control.
Mr. WEBSTER —lt is not under my
control at all, but I am pleased to say that
I have had something to do with relieving
both the general public and the service
itself from what would have been a very
unfortunate position had things been
allowed to continue in the old way. Let
us now look at the system and what it has
produced. Here we have a Public Service
Inspector, Mr. McKay, dealing with some
of the leading officers who climbed to the
top of the tree under Mr. McLachlan’s
system of promotion. When Mr. Mc-
Kay was examined about the qualifications
of one officer to take up the position
of senior postal inspector, he gave cer-
tain evidence which I shall quote. There
is an anomaly in the State of New South
Wales. That large State is subdivided into
a number of districts, in which inspectors
have to do the work'of supervising the ser-
vices of the officers of the Department-
The most remarkable feature of this ad-
ministrative system is that there is no con-
nexion between the metropolitan area and
the country districts, although the interests
and the work of both are interdependent.
The metropolitan area is under a senior
inspector, and the country is run under in-
dividual inspectors. How uniformity of
administration or action is to be obtained
under such conditions is a problem which,
the Commission could not solve. The wit-
ness was asked with regard to that officer—
Is he a typical man for the position of senior
postal inspector?
The answer was—
On some points the senior inspector is a very
competent man—•
That might mean at the table—
but in others he is not so competent, but one
has to take the man available.
The next question was—
As senior inspector is he responsible for the
district inspectors of the State?
The answer was—
No, but he should be.
Therefore, the gentleman who had control,
of the Public Service in New South Wales,
and who was responsible for making the
machinery work smoothly, said that a cer-
tain officer had no control, but should have,


and was “the best man available! ” In
other words, it means that the officer was
the best of a bad lot; and this is the result
of years of administration under the sup-
posed refined system of advancement —that
instituted by the Commissioner. Now we
come to question 47875, which shows how
the service is run, according to Mr.
McKay—
Is it not a fact that up till recently many
■offices had not been inspected in the country
for a great length of time? —That is quite true,
and I think the service suffers in consequence.
I think it is absolutely essential for the proper
conduct of the work of the Department to have
frequent inspections of offices.
Mr. McKay knows what ought to be done,
and he thinks it ought to be done, and yet
it is not done. That is the system under
the control of the Public Service Com-
missioner, the Central Office, and the De-
puty Postmasters-General; and while we
have a man with power and no responsi-
bility, we cannot escape results of the kind.
The Commissioner is prepared to appoint
officers, but evidently he is unable to see
that the officers are put to duties which
they can discharge effectively. Yet we are
told that we have to speak in an undertone
when we refer to the Commissioner and
those associated with him. Questions
48116 and 481x7 and 48118 deal with the
absence of power to remedy anomalies —
Is there a disability owing to dual control as
between the promotion of the staff as laid down
by the Commissioner and the administration of
the Department?—l think I have called attention
to the fact that, although the Commissioner or
his inspectors may direct attention to anomalies
in the working of a Department, the Commis-
sioner has no power to enforce a rectification of
those anomalies, but he can refuse to grade a
staff, or to supply additional staff, even though
it be desired by a branch of the Department.
Do 3'ou consider that a weakness in the Com-
monwealth Public Service Act? —Yes.
Have you any means of overcoming it ? —The
only means would be to amend the law, so as to
give the Commissioner power of enforcing some-
thing he regarded as necessary.
Here, we have men in wrong positions, who
are not giving the country their best ser-
vices ; and yet there is no power to make
a change in the interests of the public.
When we have regard to the type of offi-
cers produced under the old order, we cease
to wonder at the results. I notice that the
Public Service Commissioner complains in
his report that the Royal Commission cut
short his examination. I wish to tell the
House, however, that the Public Service
Commissioner had eighteen months’ or two
years’ notice, and was permitted to make
his statement in writing. He was supposed
to give us the best in him, and he had
months in which to prepare, with the help
and advice of his inspectors. He had the
evidence of tevery witness before hitai;
and his statement occupied eighteen and a
half pages of closely-printed material; yet
he complains now that there were lots of
things he intended to say, and which he bad
no opportunity to say. I may remark that
1 myself had him under examination for
eight hours, and then I had not finished.
The Commissioners did agree to meet again,
and _ resume the evidence by the Public
Service Commissioner, but that was in
igio, when we had to go to face the elec-
tors. Two of the Commissioners did not
come back to Parliament, though two did ;
and, in any case, the newspapers, Parlia-
ment, and people generally began to de-
mand our report. Some of my comrades
must have been frightened, for they de-
cided not to continue, on the ground that’
the written statement of the Public Service
Commissioner ought to contain all he had to
say. That is why that gentleman’s exami-
nation was not resumed. If he had anything
“up his sleeve”—and he implied he had
■ —it was not creditable on his part to keep
it there when he had a chance to put it
into his statement. If he was merely wait-
ing for an inspiration from somebody else
as to what he ought to say or do, he was
evading his responsibility as a witness be-
fore the Commission. Yet the Commis-
sioner complains in his report, which I
have described as “ lamentations and apolo-
gies,” that his examination was cut short.
The Public Service Commissioner is the
greatest man at reporting I ever knew,
and his reports are marvellous in their
construction. One thing stands out pro-
minently in them, namely, that Dun-
can McLachlan is always on top; that
everything he does is right, or, if it
is not, it is better than is done in the
States, and, therefore, every one ought to
be satisfied. As to the opinion of the Pub-
lice Service Commissioner and his Inspec-
tors, who say that they can judge what an
officer is, I read the following evidence on
page 23lx —
Have you any knowledge of the fitness of
the telephone manager in Brisbane for his posi-
tion ?
This is the evidence of Mr. McLachlan,
who fixes the salaries, and who says he
gets his knowledge only from papers sup-
plied.
I have only the knowledge that I get from the
official papers about him, and it is said that he


is not the best man for that particular position.
The Department would like to have a better
one.
But the Department evidently had not a
better man, or he would be known to the
Public Service Commissioner, who is re-
sponsible for the advancement of officers.
If there were better men in the service,
then one should have been sought, even
if he were low down in the scale of seni-
ority. The following is question and
answer No. 49950:
If Mr. Watson is inefficient, cannot he be re-
moved ? —I would not say he was so inefficient
as that. He can conduct the business. The
Commonwealth Public Service Inspector is of
opinion that a more up-to-date man should be
in the position.
This officer apparently gets along some-
how, although the Commissioner is con-
vinced that a better man should fill the
position. There is a traffic manager in
New South Wales in the telephone service,
and this is said of him by Mr. McLach-
lan—
Are you aware that Mr. Nelson, the electrical
engineer in New South Wales, maintains that
the telephone traffic manager in Sydney is not
the right man in the right place ? —I believe he
holds that view, but it is not uncommon for
professional men to think that because an officer
does not know as much as a professional man
does technically, he is not a good man, whereas
it might be the other way about.
Mr. Hesketh, who is a technical man, and,
I admit, of high attainments, said in his
evidence that it is essential to the proper
working of a telephone exchange that the
manager shall have technical knowledge;
and in one case we found a manager so
qualified, and his exchange and its ad-
ministration were a great improvement on
what was found under other conditions.
Why did the Public Service Commissioner
not get a better man ? We may assume
that the service could not produce one.
Here is another, and, perhaps, the most
heartrending instance of a general state of
inefficiency. It is shown in question and
answer No. 48971 —-
Is either death or retirement the only way
by which an improvement can be effected in the
officers in the Commonwealth Public Service ?
That is so.
Evidently the only way in which the officer-
ing of the Postal Department can be im-
proved is by death or retirement. Fancy that
being said of a Department with 13,000
permanent hands. Amongst these must be
men who must deteriorate from time to
time, owing to their own fault or otherwise;
and yet there is no means of removing
them to make room for better men.
-Mr. Carr. —Does the Commissioner say
Mr. WEBSTER.—He says—
nt is most difficult to get a man out of the
serrvice, or displace him from the position he
is in.
Imiagine a man trying to carry on business
wiithout being able to discharge employes
wlito are not capable of doing their work.
Mr. Bamford. —Is it fair to make the
Commissioner the only judge of an officer’s
capacity ?
Mr. WEBSTER. —I have not made him
thxe only judge; this Parliament did so
when it placed the service under his do-
miination. To show how hopeless is the
state into which the system has drifted,
amd how poor are the products which the
gaurdener has. reared after years of cultiva-
tion, I instance the fact that, when a new
Deputy Postmaster-General was needed for
Western Australia recently, on the retire-
ment of the former occupant of the office,
the Commissioner had to go down several
grades to get him. The next man to the
Dteputy Postmaster-General in each State
is the Chief Clerk, who is supposed to be
the understudy of his chief, and capable
tcD act as substitute when the chief is on
lerave, or otherwise absent. Next in rank
ta> the Chief Clerks come the Chief Ae-
ccauntants, and then the Chief Electrical
Engineers. The Western Australian posi-
ticon could not be filled by any of the
Clhief Clerks, by any of the Chief Ac-
countants, by any of the Chief Electrical
Engineers, or by any of the Mail Branch
Managers. The Commissioner had to take
thie Assistant Mail Manager in New South
Wales, who was getting a salary of about
and promote him to the position at
£l°°-
Mr. West. —He is a good man.
Mr. WEBSTER.—Yes. The recorn-
miendations of the Commission are being
adopted, and merit is being recognised,
wiithout regard to the tree of promotion
which figured in one of the Public Service
Commissioner’s reports. But this case illus-
trates the weakness of the service. A
position on the top branch having become
vacant, none of the four men on the second
branch was capable of filling it, none on the
third, fourth, or fifth. It was not until
tlhe sixth branch was reached that a capable
man was found. That shows how ineffec-
tive the selection of officers by the Public
Service Inspectors has been. They are
suipposed to supervise and correct the re-
commendations of the Deputy Postmasters-


General; but they do not do it. We had
the Chief Clerks before us. Ido not wish
to injure any one; but 1 have my duty to
perform, and it cannot be done in kid
gloves. One Chief Clerk came before us,
and we commenced to examine him; but
he was so hopeless that we had to let him
go. Nothing was to be got out of him,
because there was nothing in him. He was
a standing joke. In Western Australia, we
found a man of similar type. As to the
man in Queensland, the least said the
soonest mended. He had been the head
of the Staff Committee. The nearer the
men are to the throne, the sooner they get
the crowm. This man had risen more quickly
than a man in the lower ranks would ordi-
narily rise, and had attained a position
which, in my judgment, in that of the Com-
mission, and in that of the Commissioner
and his officers, he was not capable of
filling. , The only Chief Clerk worthy of
his position was the man in New South
Wales. The Public Ser vice Inspector re-
commended him highly for promotion; but
the Department jockeyed him out of it.
He is an able, honest public servant in
every sense of the words, and has for years
been a slave to duty, carrying the burden
of administration in an acting capacity for
half the time during the past five years.
By reason of some influence which cannot
be analyzed, he was driven, as he admitted
in his evidence, to withdraw his name from
an application for promotion, feeling that
he would not be able to work happily with
those who were hungering for it.
Mr. Roberts. —What evidence <jid he
give to that effect?
Mr. WEBSTER.—The Honorary Min-
ister can refer to his evidence. Were Ito
read every question and answer, I should
never finish. This is evidence to which I
direct attention—question 49009—
Taking the officers to whom I have referred,
such as the telegraph manager in Queensland,
telephone managers, and chief clerks, would
those men set a standard that would induce the
staff to possess a higher appreciation of their
duties to the Commonwealth ? —ln certain cases
they would not. We live in hopes of getting
better men when they go out. There is room
for improvement.
What an admission of weakness ! There is
hope of improvement only when men oc-
cupying prominent positions in the various
States leave the service. The Department
■cannot get rid of them. We found that
there was no such thing as accountancy in
the service, and only one duly certificated
accountant. He was tired of his job. He
made a report which, had it been acted on
in the early days of Federation, would have
prevented a great deal of trouble; but one
accountant has no chance against so many
so-called accountants who are not quali-
fied. In the Department a man cannot rise
higher than the high water mark, and if he
is where the tides are low he cannot rise
very high. Men have to conform to the
standard set to them, and a brilliant man is
crushed down, or crushed out of the ser-
vice by his superior officers. Bright men
who could not tolerate the system have left
the service at the first opportunity, to seek
better employment elsewhere. The Public
Service Commissioner complained of the
character of the employes in the clerical
division in New South Wales in 1902 and
1903, saying that the standard was low,
and the creation of the State regime, but
God knows if anything could be lower than
the standard produced by his regime.
Although he contended that their standard
was low, and that they were inefficient, he
took away twenty of the brightest lads, and
put them into the Customs Department,
making a weak service still weaker. As I
have mentioned, I asked the Chief Accoun-
tant whether he could tell us how the De-
partment stood, what we owe, what we
have in hand, and so on, but he could not
tell us. That was three years ago, and we
do not know the position now. The men
in the Accountancy Branch were not fit for
their work, and the service was like a ship
without a rudder. The accountant should
be the “ king pin,” the guiding star of the
administration; but in Tasmania an ac-
countant drawing a year, after sub-
mitting a statement which he swore was his
own, could not tell us anything about it;
and we ultimately discovered that it was
drawn up by an inferior officer, getting
about a year, who was the only man
who could explain it. The other man
fainted off, to get out of the difficulty.
When you find an officer like that at the
head of a Department
Mr. Roberts. —Is the honorable mem-
ber sure that he was the man?
Mr. WEBSTER. —The name of the man
who occupied this high position was Octa-
vius Lord. One would hardly expect to
find another case of the kind in the course
of such an inquiry; but we did. We went
to South Australia, where there was sup-
posed to be an accountant in charge of the
big financial branch of the Department.
This accountant submitted to us a statement
which we subsequently found had been com-


piled by some one else. He swore to it; mud because he could not see any clear
but later on could not identify any part of
it. Subsequently, we had before us an offi-
cer of the Audit Department, who ad-
mitted that he had prepared every line of
the statement. The man who had presented
it to us as his own statement, thinking that
he could bluff us, was unable to explain
any part of it, and did not seem to be fami-
liar with the simplest proposition in it;
yet he was at the head of an important
branch of the service. Is that not sufficient
to prove what this system of controlling the
service by a Commissioner has produced ?
Is it any wonder that the Department
should have occupied the position that it
did in 1907 ? Unless radical changes are
made, not at the bottom, but at the top of
the service, we shall return again to the old
state of affairs.
Mr. West. —The Act must be amended.
Mr. WEBSTER.—That, too, must be
changed. If we are to have a service that
will be a credit to the country, and which
will be up to date and efficiently and econo-
mically managed, we must have in charge
of it men who stand at the very head of
their profession, and who will be ready to
reward the deserving officers. A young and
brilliant officer should be nlaced in the posi-
tion for which nature has fitted him, irre-
spective of his age or any question of
seniority.
Mr. Bamford.—Who is going to be the
judge of that?
Mr. WEBSTER.—The man who knows
his work.
Mr. Bamford. —Where are we going to
find him ?
Mr. WEBSTER.—I am surprised that
the honorable member should ask such a
question.
Mr. Riley.—The honorable member
would also give the foreman power to sack
a man if he did not suit him?
Mr. WEBSTER.—Yes; but under the
existing order of things there is no such
power, and a man may remain in the ser-
vice until he is removed by death or reaches
the retiring age.
Mr. Riley.—Does not the honorable
member think that we must amend the Act ?
Mr. WEBSTER.—Yes; but we must
have, in addition, at the head of a Depart-
ment a man who is qualified to judge.
Mr. Bamford.—How wou'd the honor-
able member find him ?
Mr. WEBSTER.—Surr.y the honorable
member would not be content to stick in the
way of getting on to jolid ground.
Mir. J. H. Catts. —We have the whole
workd to choose from.
Mir. WEBSTER.—We have, if neces-
sary ;; and good men are to be found. 1
do mot desire to give all the examples that
I couild put before the House on this phase
of thie subject, but there are one or two more
quotations which I propose to make. The
Comimissioner was asked—
If a man said, in effect, that he was respon-
sible for a statement, and it was afterwards
found! out that he was not, would that man be
tit too control a body of men.
He implied, “ No. I should say he was a
very weak man.” Yet such a man was the
prodluct of management of the service by a
Public Service Commissioner. He was
asked!, further, in regard to Mr. Kinmond,,
central office accountant —
As central accountant, does he practically oc-
cupy the position of your proposed chief ac-
countant ?
He implied—
Yes-., but as I say, it wants, in my opinion, a
very much bigger man. Mr. Kinmond might
do ass an assistant to such a man, but he is not
the type of chief accountant that I have in view,
althouigh he is exercising that position to-day.
That was prior to the adoption of the Com-
missiion’s recommendation by the appoint-
ment of an accountant from the railway
service of Western Australia. The Com-
missiioner admitted that he had to put in
these positions men who were much too
smalll, although bigger men were necessary.
Regarding the power of the Public Service
Commissioner to select officers, and the
necessity for a Public Service Inspector to
supervise the work of departmental officers
in sellecting men for different purposes, the
Commissioner had a great deal to say. He
urgedi that such powers were abso-
lutely necessary. He always kept in
front! the importance of his presence
on the ship, yet he admitted jn
answrer to question 49325 that during the
whole of his seven years’ administration
he diid not think there had been twenty re-
fusals of applications for increased staff in
Sydmey. Imagine the necessity of a Public
Service Commissioner and a staff of officers
for tflae purpose of rejecting twenty cases in
a Staite like New South Wales, where there
are mearly 5,00'0 officers. Twenty cases
have been disallowed in seven years, and
there is no proof that the Commissioner
was might in all those cases. All the cir-
cumlcQcution and all those safeguards which


he says are so necessary in the public in-
terest, have resulted in his having to refuse
the recommendations of the Deputy Post-
master-General of New South Wales in
.about twenty cases during a period of seven
years. Surely that ought to be enough to
convince any one that to continue that sort
of service is not only unwise, but absolutely
unjustifiable. In answer to another ques-
tion, the Public Service Commissioner said
that there was not much trouble now. The
Deputy Postmasters-General and the Public
Service Inspectors are now in almost total
agreement on ail questions. Is it not truly
marvellous ? A few years ago when there
were a few vacancies for Deputy Post-
masters-General, we had a scramble going
•on in the Department. We had one man
■cutting another man’s throat, and each striv-
ing to get into favour. The result was that
the recommendations of the officers then
officiating were more closely scrutinized than
at any other time. When the office of
Deputy Postmaster-General of New South
Wales became vacant, the Public Service
Commissioner recommended Mr. McKay for
the position. He recommended not a man
in the Department, but an officer in his
own branch of the service. It was ruled
by the authorities, however, that Mr.
McKay could not legally occupy the office.
The Public Service Commissioner was ad-
vised that he could, and possibly Mr.
McKay would have been the best man for
the position, but because of this legal
disability, a worse man, according to the
Commissioner, obtained it. There we have
another illustration of the remarkable power
which the Public Service Commissioner is
able to exercise with regard to officers in
his own Department. Another vacancy
arose in Victoria, and again the Public
Service Commissioner recommended that
the position of Deputy Postmaster-General
in this State should be filled by the then
Public Service Inspector for Victoria. It
was held that he could not take the position,
the result of that ruling is, according
to the Commissioner, that the service secures
an inferior officer- for want of a merely
nominal amendment of the law. I am not
here to say whether or not these Public.
Service Inspectors would have been the
most suitable officers to appoint to these
positions, but I do know that the progress
of a man in the Department of the Public
Service Commissioner is very rapid. He is
under the eye of the administrator of the
service, and has a better chance of ad-
vancement than has a man in any other
part of the public service. The position
was the same in Queensland, under the old
staff system. I spoke about the senior in-
spector in New South Wales not being able
to make inspections anywhere outside the
metropolitan area. I may mention that Mr.
Golding, the Electrical Construction En-
gineer, was also confined to the metropolitan
area. We found that he had no power to
control country districts which wanted
guidance and development, and that there
was no continuity of supervision. The
work in country districts was left to the
senior lineman or any employes who
chanced to be able to give details. There
was no connecting link between them and
the officer charged with the administration
of the metropolitan area in this regard.
Only recently we had in New South Wales
electrical engineers who for months had no
engineering work to do. They had simply
to engineer a pen over a piece of paper.
They were doing clerical work, and were
deprived of the opportunity to develop
their special knowledge, which was really
lost to the Department. This is. the way in
which the Department has been adminis-
tered as the result of the system I am now
discussing. Of course, it was said that
these men have grown up in the system;
but the trouble is that they do not grow
bigger. The system, we are told, will not
produce bigger men, and, therefore, we
have to put up with the best we can get.
The Public Service Commissioner said in
reply to question 49158, “ I took the best
that was offered to me.” That is
what he always said when he found
himself in a difficulty. He admitted
that a particular man might not be
the best that could be produced, but he
said, “ The opportunity exists in the De-
partment, but men do not rise to it.” I
suppose they rise to a certain standard and
cannot get any higher.
Mr. J. H. Catts. —'Perhaps there is no
incentive to rise.
Mr. WEBSTER. —That seems possible
when we examine the improved scale as now
introduced by the Commissioner. We
have Sir Robert Scott and Mr. McLachlan,
the one Scott by name, and the other Scot by
nature; one running the Department, and
the other supposed to be running it. Sir
Robert Scott, of the central office, alleges
that the whole system of control by Com-
missioner is absolutely ill-adapted for a
service of this kind. Mr. McLachlan re-
torts that Sir Robert Scott knows nothing
about it. Those are the opinions of the
two men at the top, but I was glad to find,


as shown in the answer to question 49377,
put by me to Mr. McLachlan, an agreement
on at least one point—•
On page 131 of the Minutes of Evidence, the
following evidence was given in regard to Mr.
Young, and the overtime worked in Sydney :
3723. Do you not think that the Permanent
Head of the Department should have made
himself acquainted with the disability under
which the then Deputy was labouring? —I
think it would have been impossible. The
Permanent Head is tied to his table to an
even greater extent than is the Deputy.
What is your opinion in regard to that matter?
—That evidence is a corroboration of what f
said all along. It is impossible for the Secretary
<0 thoroughly do the managerial work of a
large Department.
In other words, he says he is tied down,
the Secretary is tied down, and the Deputy
Postmaster-General is tied down. I should
like to know who is loose in the Depart-
ment. All those men admit that they are
tied down, cannot do their work, and have
no opportunity of effecting proper super-
vision, regulation, cr organization. They
plead that it is impossible for them to do,
even if they are able to do it, the work
which they are called upon to discharge in
their positions. What a humiliating ad-
mission for men of their standing to make !
Things that are tied together do not gene-
rally agree, and those gentlemen, tied down,
agree at last.
I come now to the crux of this problem—
the question of the management of the De-
partment. It is marvellous how those three
Scots—Mr. McLachlan, Mr. McKay, and
Sir Robert Scott—are interested in ques-
tions of management. The two Macs
are specially m evidence, as the canny
Scotsman always is when there is
anything to manage at all. They agree
that the present condition is abso-
lutely impossible—that it is hopeless to
expect the Department ever to succeed under
the Secretary. They are both positive on
that point. When asked what system
should be substituted, Mr. McLachlan sug-
gested a manager to take charge, with the
Secretary under him, Mr. McKay also re-
commended a manager. When Mr. McKay
was asked if he would go to other coun-
tries for a manager, he said, “No-.”
When asked if he thought he could find a
man in Australia capable of filling the posi-
tion, he said, “Yes, one.” When asked
who was the one, he said, “ Duncan
McLachlan.” I do not know whether
there is any family relationship between
those two men, but if there is not, there
ought to be, because of the kindly feeling
they have towards one another when a ques-
tion! of advancement is at stake. When
Mr.. Duncan McLachlan had to fill the
cfficre of Deputy Postmaster-General in
Sydiney, which was practically a step-
pingg-stone to the Secretaryship, he wanted
to jput in Mr. McKay, so that Mr.
MclKay would subsequently become Sec-
retairy, and Mr. McLachlan would have
beem king of the other place. They
woulld have managed it all between them.
However, he did not get the position. Mr.
MclKay said that only one man with a
bromd outlook was available as manager,
and! that was Duncan McLachlan. When
we asked Mr. McLachlan whom he would
recommend as manager, he said the man he
had! in his mind’s eye as being able to do
the work was not in the Postal Service,
but was in the Public Service ! Of course
Mr.. McKay has since become “ the
reall McKay ” in the Land Tax Depart-
ment, and so is out of the way. Mr.
MdLachlan recommends a manager for the
Department, but the Royal Commission re-
commend the appointment of a Board of
Comtrol. We say that a Department of
this kind cannot now, and never will be,
effetctiveiy conducted unless there is a man
at tthe head of each branch of the service.
Let: honorable members try to imagine what
the Department will become in a few years
witlh the expansion of population that we
hopie for. The Department now employs
2c,c000 permanent and temporary employes,
witlh a population of only 4,000,000
people. Can any man say how many it
willl employ when we have a population of
20,0000,000, which we hope to get within the
nextt decade or two? Are we to provide
onliy for to-day, and not for the future?
Charged, as we are, with the adminis-
trattion of the affairs of the people, are we
nott bound to look ahead ? The Department
is (capable of expansion in many directions
beffore it becomes equal to the Postal Ser-
vices of other countries. There are many
othser ways in which it could meet the con-
veniience of the public, which have not yet
beem attempted. If we extend its useful-
nesss, bringing it into touch with every
home in the country, carrying its ramiri-
catiions through the bush and back-blocks
to tthe isolated settlers everywhere, wiii it
be possible to find one man capable of
mamaging it all ? It will be enough for
one; man to look after the postal facilities
alome. That branch of the Department
alome spends between and
sterling a year. No progres-
sive American would think of running a
business of a year, with three


great branches, with only one manager. A
man who suggested such a scheme to him
would be regarded as insane. Yet in this
community the Public Service Commis-
sioner, while acknowledging all the de-
fects of the system hitherto followed, wants
to put the Department under one manager.
That is an absurdity when we consider the
great responsibilities involved in the ad-
ministration of the Postal, Telephonic, and
Telegraphic Services, with wireless tele-
graphy developing rapidly, and likely
to become more intimately interwoven -with
our daily life, with telephony spreading
and carrying the voice of the people to the
most distant and isolated quarters, with the
day of the automatic telephone at hand—
a development to which we recommended in
our report that keen attention should be
given, and which is destined to further
popularize the use of the telephone—and
with ail the possibilities of change and ad-
vancement that the genius of man may ac-
complish. Are we to leave the manage-
ment of all this in the hands of a man
who has had practically no experience, no
training, and no knowledge of the funda-
mental requirements of a big Department
of that kind ? . We of the Postal Commis-
sion, who had no axe to grind in this
matter, and gave the best of our services
and intelligence practically free to the
people of this country, have no object in
advising the Government and Parliament
to do anything but what we believe to be
right. We have had far more opportuni-
ties than any of the officers of the Depart-
ment in investigating the whole of the sur-
roundings of this case. What opportunity
have Postmasters-General, even if they
have the capacity of giants, of grasping
the magnitude of this question? There-
fore, the recommendations of the Commis-
sion should have weight with the Govern-
ment and the Minister. If the Minister has
any respect for the members of the Com-
mission, any regard for the evidence they
took, or the conclusions they arrived at,
then his duty is to pay serious attention to
that all-important section of their report,
namely, the Board of Control. We want,
at the head of the Postal Branch, a man
who is, first of all, a born organizer, a man
with financial knowledge, who will see that
the accounts are kept in a proper condi-
tion, who is able to handle men, and who
has a general knowledge of administrative
affairs. Men of that class are found in
other countries, and can be found here.
We want a man to take charge of
the Postal Service solely. We want
an expert to take charge of the great
Telephonic Service and • Telegraphic Ser-
vice. When we get those three men,
charged with the responsibilities of
those three branches of this large Depart-
ment, this Parliament will be able to re-
ceive their reports, and to know something
of what is going on—a knowledge which
it has not had in the past. They will be
responsible to this Parliament, which will
hold them to their trust. Having put men
qualified for the duties into those positions,
we shall have nothing to blame ourselves
for, we shall have done the best we can
to remedy the evils that we know to exist,
and to bring about a lasting and beneficial
reform in the great Department with which
I have had the honour to deal to-night.
Mr. J. H. Catts.— We want continuity
of policy also.
Mr. WEBSTER. —Continuity of policy
will follow as night follows day, or the
sun follows the moon. With such a body
of practical men continuity of policy would
be assured. Whilst we recommend a Board
of Control, it is only to manage the Depart-
ment, and not to interfere with the policy.
The policy of the service must be preserved
to the Minister and to this Parliament,
which is responsible to the people of this
country.
Mr. J. H. Catts. —That is the political
policy.
Mr. WEBSTER. —The political policy,
and practically the policy regarding such
matters as minimum wage and other im-
portant questions.
Sir John Quick. —How does the honor-
able member distinguish between policy and
business ?
Mr. WEBSTER. —The policy of such
a Department cannot be established by re-
gulation. It must be fixed by law, and
the only body that x can make that law is
this Parliament, which will act at the in-
stance of the Minister. The conduct of
the Department would be established by
regulation. Its business would be estab-
lished by the • Board of Management, and
so we should get the whole position com-
plete.
At present we have this glorious and
latest production of the Public Service
Commissioner. I would not say a hard
word unjustifiably against any man, but
when we have an official who has given the
evidence I have read, and who makes the


statements he did subsequently, I am war-
ranted in dissecting the position in the
keenest way of which I am capable. This
is a memorandum prepared by the Public
Service Commissioner on the Postal Com-
mission. In that memorandum the Com-
missioner said —
It is perhaps sufficient to remark that a num-
ber of the changes of administration indicated
by the Royal Commission were under considera-
tion prior to the advent of that body.
That is a very vague statement, because
there is scarcely anything under the sun that
is not a long time in the incubator before
it is hatched. What we required was his
evidence when he had the chance to give
it. It is not enough for him to say that
.things were premeditated or under con-
sideration ; he had the chance to tell us in
his evidence rvhat the proposals were. He
did not, however, take advantage of that
-opportunity, and only tells us now, when
he knows what the report of the Commis-
sion contains, what was contemplated.
That, in my opinion, is not straight dealing.
He further savs —
As a matter of fact, the appointment of the
Royal Commission was the signal for holding
in abeyance all changes except those of a mani-
festly urgent nature.
If that statement is true, it indicates that
he did not give the Commission what he
professed to give on his oath, namely, the
utmost he knew of the Department and of
the intentions of those who administer it.
If that be so, then he is an officer who is
not worth}' of admiration. There was no
doubt he was waiting for the report, but he
was waiting for the guidance that it would
give him. He further on says—
It was, of course, recognised by the Govern-
ment —
I wonder which Government, because there
have been two or three since—
It was, of course, recognised by the Govern-
ment, and by the Public Service Commissioner,
that it would be unwise and impolitic to intro-
duce any proposals seriously affecting the work-
ing of the Public Service while a Royal Com-
mission was engaged in investigating the con-
dition of the Department, and such proposals
had perforce to be held over until such time as
■they could be fairly carried in'o effect.
I have previously read a list of the pro-
posals which were adopted between the be-
ginning of the inquiry and the date of our
report; and there is no doubt that those
who had control carried out all the sugges-
tions that thev could read into the evidence.
The only thing the Commissioner did
not do was what he said did not
rrequire to be done, namely, to put
tthe service in a better condition in the
imterests of the public. Yet the Public
Service Commissioner has the audacity to
prut a report like this before intelligent men.
'The Commission were quite willing that any
suggestions that could be gathered from the
evidence for the good of the service should
Bse adopted. The Public Service Commis-
siioner is on the horns of a dilemma; if he
diid not do what ought to have been done,
hie neglected his duty ; and if he did it, and
diid not say so when he was giving his evi-
dlence, he was deceiving the Postal Com-
rmission. Under the circumstances, there is
mo warrant for this report, which is an
efffort of the Public Service Commissioner
tco justify himself in the eyes of the public
amd of those tvho employ him. In the course
oif the report the Public Service Commis-
siioner does what a lawyer does —he abuses
tthe other side in order to make his own look
tlhe brighter. Every time he refers to the
IPostal Commission he seems to say, “It is
ewident they have not been able to grasp all
tthe facts as they are exhibited in ordinary
aadministration.” It is “ Duncan,” and
Duncan ” all the time. He practically
fcblames the associations in the following
words—
In analyzing the evidence placed before the
PRoyal Commission, and reading in connexion
I therewith the recommendations of that body, the
csonclusion arrived at by the Public Service Com-
rmissioner is that there has been a tendency to
ai’ tribute greater weight and importance to the
v.uews of Public Service Associations than would
ayppear to have been justified on the merits of
tthe statements submitted.
Who was to judge—he or the Royal Com-
rmission ? Would he have liked the Com-
tmission to call each individual, and to
Itiave thus protracted their proceedings inde-
fiinitely ? The Royal Commission took the
course recognised in modern industrialism,
amd examined the officers of the associations
im order to get some concrete proposition—
ssomething worthy of consideration. The
Public Service Commissioner blames us for
mot inquiring as to the numbers in the asso-
ciations. I happen to be in a position to
Mcnow the numbers pretty well in every
arssociation in the Postal Service; and I do
mot see what right the Public Service Com-
tmissioner has to sit in judgment on me
[because I did not proclaim the fact from
tthe housetops. It matters not, however,
wvhat the numbers in the associations are—
tthe witnesses called represented the men.
The Public Service Commissioner had the


opportunity to counteract any evidence to
which he thought consideration was not
due. Further on in his report, he tries
to hide behind the law, and says there are
many things he could not do because of the
law. But what of those things he has done
without the law since? He tries to shelter
behind some legal disability which doeg
not exist. Then, .again, he says—
It is certain that in the fulness of time the
circumstances of the transferred Departments
will have altered very, materially as vacancies
occur and officers trained under modern con-
ditions of management rise to positions of im-
portance and responsibility.
When the young men rise and grow, he
hopes that, in days to come, we shall have
officers who will do credit to the Depart-
ment. But what is the Department to do in
the meantime ? No doubt we can keep it go-
ing if we have plenty of oil on the wheels.
If there is a Government in power with
plenty of money to meet the demands of
bad management, we, no doubt, can tide
over the difficulty. But, if ever the time
arrives when the Treasurer has to consider
the position of the finances, we shall feel
the results of present mismanagement, and
discontent will once more permeate the ser-
vice, as it ever must do when there is no
effective control and no proper understand-
ing between the staff and those at the head.
He further says—
There was justification for larger additions of
staff than were provided by Parliament. Much
could have been done by efficient administration
to improve the organization and management of
the Department, so as to obfain better results.
What an admission ! But this, of course,
was not because of Mr. McLachlan —only
the management and organization were de-
ficient. The Public Service Commissioner
thus tries to excuse himself for the posi-
tion into which he has got. The most piti-
ful wail of all comes Later on when, in re-
ference to the Board of Control, he en-
deavours to show that such a body would
mean a vast increase in the staff—from
seven to twenty-two. The Public Ser-
vice Commissioner, however, does not
give us any idea of the number of
officers who are employed on staff busi-
ness, advising the State Deputy Post-
masters-General. He tries to prejudice the
proposal by making it appear most costly,
and as tending to multiply, to an enor-
mous extent, the difficulties and duties of
the Chief Officer. As a matter of fact,
however, the Deputy Postmasters-General
are supposed to do that work to-day, and
would, under our proposal, be relieved of
it. The Staff Committee would be ap-
pointed to perform the duties, and there
would be a Board of Management, as a
Board of Appeal. I shall endeavour to
show, in a few moments, exactly what the
Chief Officer is called upon to do to-day;
and it is marvellous that the Public Ser-
vice Commissioner should try to throw dust
in the eyes of those who read this report.
He says that the Chief Officer has —
to furnish the Public Service Commissioner dur-
ing the month of March in each year in accord
with section 21 (4) of Public Service Act 1902
a report upon the conduct, diligence, and general
efficiency of each officer in sth class of the
Clerical Division.
Now before a Chief Officer can furnish a
report he must understand what he is re-
porting about. Before he can estimate the
diligence, efficiency, and conduct of an
officer, he must know what work that offi-
cer is doing. If he is doing what he is
bound to do by law, what is the meaning
of this clap-trap about the impossibility of
a Staff Committee doing it under the con-
trol of a Board of Management ? These
are some of the duties of the Chief Offi-
cer—
Duplicating ’Puttie Service Inspectors.
To report re unfitness or incapacity of an offi-
cer to Public Service Commissioner.
To report re promotion of officers from sth
class to 4th class, Clerical Division, and from
F to Class E, Professional.
To report re transfers of officers within the
sth and 4th classes, Clerical Division, and Class
F, Professional Division, and all cases of trans-
fer or promotion in General Division of officers
below Grade XI.
In all cases of promotion to the third and
higher classes. Clerical Division, Class D, and
higher classes, Professional Division, Grades XI.
and XII,, General Division, and (J) trarsfers
within such classes or grades in to;
transfers within Class E, Professional Division,
recommendations should be submitted through the
Permanent Head or Chief Officer.
Negotiations re leasing of premises when in-
dorsed by Central Office, agreements, &c., to
be performed by Deputy Postmaster-General
direct with Secretary to Department of Home
Affairs.
Electrical Engineer.
Electrical engineers to communicate direct with
postmasters re new works and maintenance; also
with Chief Electrical Engineer direct re plans,
specifications, material, statistics, to facilitate
business.
Direct communications between Chief Ac-
countant, Central Office, and Electrical Engi-
neer, on routine matters affecting Department’s
accounts.
Chief Officer.
Deputies apply for special advances direct
Treasury, instead of Central Office.


By Chief Officer in -place of Permanent Head.
Granting 24 days’ extra leave for unavoid-
able overtime worked in remote centres; leave
to accumulate to 48 days;
(») May accumulate for three years in isolated
and trying climates.
(c) Time for travelling up to two weeks to be
allowed.
161, 163, 163 a. —Special Allowances.
Additional allowance, added to travelling
allowance in certain cases.
Cleaning allowances, and also bicycles, £lO
.and £4 respectively; also, horse allowance
liberalized, and 15s. per month for typewriter.
Overtime.
Full record to be kept, no payment for
bringing up arrears of work which properly
comes within the scope of their ordinary duties.
Time olt in lieu, overtime to the extent of twenty
hours in any financial year may be paid without
reference to the Commissioner.
No overtime until 88 hours have been worked
in two weeks, applies to principal telegraph
offices, where there are change of staff, no
overtime for country offices without express
sanction of Chief Officer. This only applies to
Clerical and Professional Department.
Annual report on sth Class Officers re con-
duct, diligence, and general efficiency of each
officer, Permanent Head may assign his powers
to Chief Officer, who will submit, through In-
spector, to Public Service Commissioner.
Transfers exceeding three months to be sub-
mitted to Public Service Inspector.
Officers in remote localities to get preference
in transfers.
Vacancies to be reported to Inspector by
•Chief Officer, who is generally _ called upon to
advise Inspector, and through him, Public Ser-
vice Commissioner,
Re increments General Division, Chief Officer
•still to advise on general claim of officer.
Classification of Professional Division.
Subject to favorable report by the Chief
Officer, every officer of the Professional Divi-
sion in Class F with twelve months’ service shall
be eligible to receive annual increase on the
recommendation of the Commissioner, such in-
crease not exceeding £2O until he reaches £l6O
per annum.
Abolition of section 119, re non-competitive
examinations and exemptions of certain officers.
Temporary employment. —Permanent Head or
Chief Officer to select, remuneration subject to
review by Public Service Commissioner.
Furlough.
Depends on recommendation of Permanent
Head and certificate of Public Service Commis-
sioner. New scale of proportionate furlough
adapted. Eliminate Permanent Head.
Those are only a few of the many duties
imposed on the Chief Officer. The Commis-
sioner is attempting to mislead, by throw-
ing dust in our eyes, when he says that
men cannot do what he must admit they
are practically doing now, and so effectively
that, according to him, there have only been
twenty cases of refusal in New South
Wales during seven years. His statement
throughout is always, “ I intend to do this;
I had that in mind; I have hatched out
F. 16978. —B
tlhei eggs as quickly as possible.” Unfor-
tuinately, he has claimed to be the producer
off the eggs, whereas he has been only the
imcubator; but every egg has proved fertile.
Mr. Roberts. —The honorable member
siuggests that, while he laid the eggs, the
Commissioner has done the cackling.
Mr. WEBSTER. —The Commission pro-
diuced the eggs, but the Commissioner has
cackled as it he had laid them. They say
that the hen that cackles never lays. There
is; one humiliating passage in the Commis-
siioner’s report which I would have rather
cult my hand off than have written, had I
been he. It is this —■
As a matter of fact, the Commissioner’s evi-
dence was abruptly terminated owing to the
triavelling arrangements of the Royal Commis-
siton, and, although some indication was given
tlimt the taking of his evidence would be re-
suimed at a later date, this was not done.
That statement is made to cause it to be
thought that the Commission did not do its
dluty, and did not give the Commissioner
ewery chance to be heard. On the con-
trary, he had nearly two years in which
tco put his views before the Commission.
The evidence was submitted to him, and he
hiad officers to dissect it. He put before
the Commission a statement covering
eiighteen and a half closely-printed pages,
tout if he did not give, us what he had to
gjive, he was unfaithful to his duty. As a
matter of fact, he was not sorry to get a
sjpell. I myself was Becoming a little
wveary. It takes one all his time to hold
the Public .Service Commissioner, and to
Deep him in hand for eight hours is an
oirdeal. I shall not read other portions
off the evidence of the Commissioner
amd Mr. McKay on management, but I
reefer honorable members to questions 4886',
418864, 48865, 48866, 48868, 48876,
448877, and 48892. The questions to which I
reefer honorable members for Mr. McKay’s
evidence on the point are 47750, 47754-.
417755, 47758 —that is the question in the
amswer to which he says, “ Mac is the
rman ” —47759, 47768, 47769, and 48991.
These are the questions, the answers to
which contain the opinion of these two emi-
ment administrators with regard to the posi-
tion of manager. They want one manager
off the Department. I do not know what
tihe Government propose to do. They haie
done pretty well up to date in connexion
with subordinate matters, but I am wait-
ing to learn whether they will deal with
tlhe fundamental question affecting this De-
partment in a manner which will do credit
bo them, and to all concerned. Unless thev
do so, they, and we, will have to return


to this subject before many years are over, of, and could not understand, probably, if
In view of the knowledge we now possess,
we shall be unable to excuse ourselves by
saying that we did not know what was re-
quired, and it will go hard with the party
who, having the power to make the neces-
sary reform in the management of this
Department, neglected to do so. Mr.
McLachlan himself admits that there must
be a manager. It is impossible to run this
Department successfully under a secretary;
as we are trying to do to-day. Let hon-
orable members imagine the kind of secre-
tary we have. He is mainly a clerical
officer, though he is now at the head of
the Department. He has had little, if
any, experience in telegraphy, and other
sciences, the officers connected with which
he has to control. He went with the Post-
master-General of the day to attend the In-
ternational Postal Conference, which was
held on the Continent, and when he came
back, and presented himself as a witness,
and was asked, “ Can you tell us anything
of the systems that are in operation in the
older countries of Europe, or in England,”
this man, who was aspiring to be head of
the Department, and had had the oppor-
tunity of his life to make rapid inquiries
into the systems and methods in operation
in the countries he visited, answered, “ I
do not know; I did not inquire.”
Mr. Cann. —Who was this ?
Mr. WEBSTER.—The present Secre-
tary of the Post and Telegraph Depart-
ment.
Mr. Cann. —Was he sent Home to get
that information ?
Mr. WEBSTER.—No; he went Home
with the Postmaster-General to attend
the Postal Conference, but he had a
good deal of time at his disposal. Junior
officers of the Department who went Home
at their own expense took far more interest
in the Department than this aspirant for
the highest position in it. They went
Home in their own time, and spent their
own money gaining information which we
did not possess in Australia, and they sub-
mitted it to the Postal Commission when
they were asked to do so, for the advance-
ment of the country and the benefit of the
service. While these men could do that,
what was done elsewhere was apparently a
matter of no concern to the gentleman who
was aspiring to be at the head of the ser-
vice. He was one of the system. It was
good enough for him, and lie did not care
about other systems at all. It had pro-
duced him, and he did not wish to inquire
into innovations and systems he knew not
he had investigated them. These are the
hard facts we have to face. I say to the
the whole way. Appoint a Board of Con-
trol, remodel the service, and put it under
the control of men capable of conducting it.
Let the staff be governed by men in close
contact with them, who will understand
their work, and be able to assess
its value. Let the whole management
of the Department depend in sec-
tions on three managers. Let the:
policy be dictated by the Government or
Parliament, and let three competent men be
responsible for the management of the ser-
vice. Put the finances of the Department
in order as quickly as possible, as any busi-
ness men would do, and then, in Australia,,
we shall have a post and telegraph ser-
vice of which any one might be proud.’'
If this were done I say, unhesitatingly,
that it would relieve members of this
House of a great deal of worry and
trouble. If it be contended that what I
propose would permit the introduction of
political influence, my answer is that, by
the adoption of the recommendations of the
Postal Commission, political influence would
be more effectively kept out, because there
would be no need for it. It is brought
to bear in connexion with a department of
this kind, only when injustice is rife, and’
men are without a means of redress. With
such a board of management as I have re-
ferred to, the conduct of the Department
would be such that there would be no need
for men to come to this Parliament per-
sonally, or collectively, for the redress of
grievances. Such conditions as those-
which have naturally sprung from the-
lack of system followed in the past, could
not possibly be reproduced under the sys-
tem recommended by the Postal Commis-
sion in their report. I appeal to the At-
torney-General especially in this matter. It
is through him, very largely, that lam
to-night moving the adoption, of the Com
mission’s report. Had it not been for
the service I offered to render him when
he was away in England I should never
have been brought into contact with the
centre of trouble which existed at that time,
and would not have been induced to focus-
my attention on this great question. i
thank the honorable gentleman for giving
me the opportunity to do plenty of work
for nothing, and for opening to me the door
for an investigation of the service. The
Sydney Genera] Post Office is still in the


honorable gentleman’s electorate, and he
has a greater individual and political con-
cern in the matter than I have. I appeal
to him, therefore, not to stop half-way.
Let the Government appoint, not one man-
ager, but a full board of control, and let
us have this great Department conducted
as though it were providing for the next
twenty years, instead of a day. I have
nothing further to say. I have done my
duty. I have done my best to fight the
battles of the Postal Commission in this
House against all odds. I have done my
best as a member of the Commission, and
have laboured day and night. I have often
been pointed at as working night after
night, not excepting Sunday night, in this
building in the effort to master the con-
dition of affairs in this Department. I
have been away from my home, deprived
of its comforts, and my people have been
deprived of my company. The work has
been to me a labour of love without any
hope of reward. I have been engaged in
it now for four years, and, God knows,
I am proud to-night to have arrived at the
end of my task, and to be able to say that,
for the future, the week-end is my own.
j have done my best for the country I have
the honour to be a representative of, to
advance the interest of the Government
and the party to which I belong, and to
help to improve the condition of affairs in
a very important public Department. I
have done all I can to put the position
clearly before the House. lam sorry that
I have taken so long, but I was deter-
mined to do my duty. I have striven to
lay before the House, in an unbiased
manner, the conclusions at which I have
arrived. I now leave the Government,
with the information at their disposal, to
act as they think fit; but, in future, it can
never be said of me that, whilst I had
obtained certain information regarding the
working of this great Department, I made
no attempt to use it for the betterment of
the service, and to forward the interests
of the country and of the Parliament, and
for the satisfaction of a conscience which
I have always had, and trust shall continue
to have, to guide me in the discharge of my
public duty.
MELBOURNE : J. KEMP, GOVERNMENT PRINTER


;v. , ! ./>
1 ') 'j i
