

f mi*
SPEECH
DELIVERED BY
G. R. NICHOLS, ESQ.
TO THE
Stette #1 % f |umfottefc §owss,
FRIDAY, 7tk MARCH, 1856.
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY DANIEL AND MASON,
9, MARKET STREET EAST.
1856.


NOTE .
The want of time necessarily occasioned the condensation of
the latter part of this Speech in the reports in the public
As, at this crisis it is desirable that the opinions
of every man, desirous of serving his country in Parliament,
should be fully developed, particularly on those questions,
the solution of which, must influence the destinies of the
* ,
colony, the Candidate has thought it his duty to republish
it in its present form.


| 14 .
SPEECH
DELIVERED BY
G-. R. NICHOLS, ESQ.,
TO THE
Slfite 0! §wli|umWaiifo goiuiuglj^.
At a Meeting of the Electors of the Northumberland Boroughs,
held on the 7th March, to meet G. R. Nichols, Esq.,
late Representative of the Boroughs, and Candidate for
the Suffrages of the Electors, for a seat in the New
Parliament, Walter Rotten, Esq., having been moved
into the Chair, Mr. Nichols, who came forward amidst
universal and long continued burst of welcome, addressed
the Meeting as follows :
My Fellow-Colonists,
I have not only to thank you for the reception you have given
this evening, but me for the kindness with which you have always
welcomed me amoung you during the eight yeajts in which I have
been connected with you as your representative. Daring that
eight years, I have reason to hope from your reception of me now
that I have not been found unworthy of your confidence. (Great
and continued cheering.) No doubt, during that time I have
done some things which cannot altogether meet your
approval. I frankly admit that during that time I have done
some things, that I have recorded some votes, which, after more
mature consideration, I myself do not think were right; but this I
can with a clear conscience tell you, that nothing have I done, no
vote have I given, which I did not do, or which I did not give, in
the belief in the honest conviction of my heart, that it was for the
benefit of the land of my birth, and the interest of all who dwell in
it. (Great cheering.) No man is infallible, all men with human
judgment liable to error, must sometimes make mistakes, and in the


excitement of the political struggles which beset the first era of
representative institutions in the colony, it can scarcely be wondered
at that I, a lesser light of the Legislative Council, should have some-
times mistaken the right course ; nor, if I could lay claim to greater
perfection than I can pretend to, could it be expected that on all the
subjects which have engaged my attention, I could have pleased or
satisfied every one. We have all our own shades and varieties of
opinion ; we must all occasionally differ, and it is well that this is
the law of our nature, for it is only by this difference of opinion that
we can arrive at the truth ; and without this difference of opinion,
which gives rise to discussion on all great principles, even our new
Parliament will be a useless and inanimate machine. Without this
difference of opinion, is is impossible for either individuals
or classes to obtain justice ; it is impossible to redress griev-
ances, —vain to expect great reforms. When two men, honest in
heart, but differing in opinion, meet to discuss what is right, in
matters concerning their fellow-men, they are anxious to arrive at a
just and right conclusion ; and it often happens that a mingling of
these opposite opinions is more favourable to the moral and social
justice of the question, than the views of either one or the other of
the individuals. Therefore, to elicit truth, to ensure justice, there
must be two parties and two opinions on most great political ques-
tions, and admitting this principle, I am not surprised that some even
of my warmest friends should not approve of all that I have said, or
aH that I have done, in the stewardship which they entrusted to me.
Those, however, who do approve of my past acts those who do
approve of my present principles will give me their votes, and it
is only on this ground that I would seek them. In this election I
emphatically declare I stand alone, on my own merits, and I wash to
be judged by you on those merits only. (Immense cheering.) I
shall not follow the example of some candidates for public favour in
this electioneering contest. I shall not only not make the slightest al-
lusion to the opinions, of any rival candidate for the representation of
these boroughs, but I shall also refrain from any allusion to those of
any candidate for any other constituency. lam here tospeak, not of
others, but of myself ; to declare my own principles —judge of me
by those principles, not by comparison with other men ; and if you.
find me worthy, elect me—if my principles are wrong, reject me.
But of this be assured, that I will not seek to represent you by any
coalition ; on my own worth, my own merits alone, will I accept
your suffrages. I would scorn to go into the Parliament of the
country on the joint merits of any other candidate and myself.
Coalition in election matters is always bad ; it is an injustice to the
best man who may offer himself, and it is unfair to you, who may
be deprived of giving your vote for one man, because he is not
linked with another for w'hom you happen to entertain a higher
opinion. (Immense cheering.) I may here properly tell you that


t should not have kept you so long in suspense as to my opinions,
had it not been that I was detained from visiting you before by cir-
cumstances over which I had no control, and I must say that those
circumstances at one time led me to believe that I had seen you for
the last time. (Sensation.) But though, through these circum-
stances lam perhaps the last candidate w T ho will appear before you,
I do not think even now I shall be the least in your affections when
we go to the poll (Cheers, and cries of “ you shall be at the head
of it.,) I will now come to those matters less personal to myself,
and more immediately connected with the future policy of the coun-
try ; and in alluding to the various topics, I shall have to bring
before you, I shall as nearly as possible follow the order in which
I have mentioned them in the address to the electors published in
the newspapers, and which I have no doubt most of you have had an
opportunity of seeing. The first and most important of these topics
is that connected with the New Constitution of the country, and I
feel it to be my duty to state exactly the part I took in the passing
of that measure. I voted for the second reading of that bill, but
when the motion for its second reading was put, it was distinctly
understood that the hereditary clauses, or, as they were better known
the nobility clauses, would be abandoned ; in fact, the only principle
asserted by the second reading of the Bill was, that there should be
two Houses, the details of the constitution of which would be con-
sidered in committee of the whole house. It happened, however,
from illness, that I was never able again to attend the Council while
the Constitution Bill was under discussion, and I am free to confess
that, in its present form, that had I been in attendance, there were
many clauses in it to which I should strongly have objected. To
some of these clauses I shall presently allude, but you must, on a
broad principle consede, that whether you like the bill in all its
details or not, it confers upon the colonists a larger amount of free-
dom than was ever yet conceded to any British colony. It gives us
the power to alter our own Constitution ; our own system of Govern-
ment ; it consolidates the revenues of the colony, including those
derived from the Crown lands, and for which we have been so long
battling, and which are all now to be placed at the disposal of the
representatives of the people. It gives us the power of self-govern-
ment —of choosing those alone to rule us whose feelings and senti-
ments are in accordance with our own ; for, under the new Constitu-
tion, even the Governor himself will have no power, except under
the advice and consent of his ministers ; who, like the councillors
and advisers of the sovereign in England, are responsible to the
people, and can only hold office under the will of the people, as
expressed by our representatives in Parliament. (Great cheering.)
Therefore this crisis imposes a great responsibility on you, but it
imposes a far greater responsibility on those who may accept office
as responsible ministers of the Crown. It is our duty now to elect


representatives from whom men fit to govern the country may he
chosen, but the responsibility of those who may accept office will
be far greater. They must know that they will have to meet their
constituents at all events at the quintennial elections, and if
they can not give an account of their stewardship they
must retire from the administration of the Government
of the country. They will have to come to you and
ask whether you approve of their acts or not, and upon your ap-
proval their retention of the power of Government will depend.
(Cheers.) The first point in the new Constitution Act which is
objected to, is w'hat is popularly termed the two-thirds clause. Now
in the Act I find there are two—two-third clauses;
the first of these is the seventeeth section
of the Act, which provides that the electorate of
the country shall not be altered without the consent of a majority of
two-thirds of both branches of the Legislature. To this clause, had
I been in the Council, I could never have consented, and its is very
easy to show that it is opposed to the views that I had always ex-
pressed on previous occasions. Had I been able to attend on the
occasion when the clause was passed, I should certainly have main-
tained the opinions I expressed when the Electoral Act of 1851 was
passed ; that the large constituencies of the country were* not fairly
represented ; that new townships in a country like this must con-
stantly arise to cause a fluctuation in the population of the
country ; and that therefore every facility should be given to adjust
the representation according to the circumstances of the country.
(Cheers.) My votes on the electoral clauses will show that these
were my opinions then, and the opinions on which I gave those votes
have been only confirmed by the circumstances of the countiy
since the Constitution Act was passed. These votes showed that
I never would have consented to the proposed electoral distribution.
Even in regard to the counties of the country it was most unjust. I find
that the county of Durham has a list of 1500 electors, and it returns
three members. The United Counties of Northumberland and
Hunter have an electoral roll of upwards of 2000, and they return
three members only. Is this fair or just ? But this is not all ;
the electors in Northumberland were very numerous, the electors of
the county of Hunter are very few, and as the former could un-
questionably put in the candidates they pleased, the latter were
virtually disfranchised. Again, when the Electoral Act of 1851 was
passed, which, mind you, forms the basis of the present system of
representation, I proposed that Sydney should have four members.
Dr. Lang said six ; but both propositions were negatived. I also
pryposed to give the Sydney Hamlets two members, and the opin-
ions I expressed then, and supported with my votes then, are the
principles I held when the Constitution Act was passed, and there-
fore it is very plain I should have not restricted the power of Parlia-


went to extend the representation of the country beyond the limits
afforded by the Electoral Act of 1851. (Cheers.) The other two-
thirds clause in the Constitution Act is the forty-second section,
which, adopting the same principle, renders it necessary to that a
majority of two-thirds shall assent to any alteration or modification
of the Constitution Act. To this clause I did give, when the Bill
was introduced, my most grave consideration, because I thought it
contrary to the spirit of the British Constitution—the rule of the
English Parliament being that all questions should be decided by a
simple majority. I, therefore, discussed the matter very seriously
with Mr. Wentworth in the library of the Legislative Council; but
I admit I was compelled to yield to the force of the arguments he
used in favour of greater caution being taken, before organic changes
of the conditions of this colony should be submitted to. When I
found that in framing a constitution for the United States, men like
Washington, the founder of the liberties of the great western world;
like Jefferson, a red-hot republican just returned from revolutionary
France—-like the bold independent, but philosophical Franklin—
like John Quincey Adams, and Patrick Henry,—had all agreed
upon the necessity of the introduction of this principle into the
constitution of the great country they had made, I was
compelled to bow before the names and authority of such
men. (Loud and continued cheers.) But, gentlemen, I am re-
lieved from any necessity of differing with you on this question.
The Parliament of England has already decided it for us. As far
as it could do it has said this clause ought to be repealed. It has
pointed its finger at it as contrary to the precedents of the British
Constitution, and in doing so it has told us most significantly that
it must be repealed. (Cheers.) The next debateable point in the
New Constitution is the nominated Upper House, but the history of
this principle in the bill has never been fairly stated. A bargain
was made with the Government of England, in the grievance petition
and remonstrance which, on the motion of Mr. Wentworth, and was
assented to by the late Council, that on condition of the surrender
hy the Crown of all its rights to the Crown land revenues derived
from sale, leases, mines, or droits of any description, we would pro-
vide a civil list for the maintainance of the administration of the
Government, and accept a Constitution similar to that of Canada.
Now at that time the Constitution of Canada was precisely
similar to that which we have now. They, the people
of Canada, had then a nominated Legislative Council, and
an elected House of Assemby, and these are in name
as well as in principle the two branches of which our colonial par-
liament is to consist. Since that time no doubt the constitution of
Canada has been altered, and the Upper House, or Legislative
Council, has been made elective; but with this exception there is no
precedent in British colonial history for an elective Upper House.


And there is good reason for it, for it seemes to me incomprehen-
sible, if the Upper Chamber were elected, why it should not claim
the same power over the finances of the colony, the same control
over the purse-sJrings as the Lower Chamber possessed. This, in
fact, had already been the case in the Cape of Good Hope, to which
colony a somewhat analogous constitution was given. The officers
of the Government there were members of the House, and in passing
their Bill of Supply, which is equivalent to our Appropriation Act,
they walked out of the House without voting. Well, this bill of
supply was sent up to the Legislative Council, and that body chose
to return it with suggestions for some alterations. When the mes-
senger of the Legislative Council, however, brought the altered bill
back to the House of Assembly, the Speaker, considering that ac-
cording to all British precedent the right of*the Chamber of Repre-
sentatives to determine all financial questions had been interfered
with, showed the resentment the House felt, by casting the bill under
the table ; and a vindication of the rights of the Assembly to deal
solely with money bills, followed. The Upper House asked, how-
ever, on what ground they claimed this right, and the answer was,
“ we are elected by the people,” and the rejoinder was, “ so are we.”
The matter was finally adjusted by certain grants of money neces-
sary to the administration of the Government being passed, but on
the very day when Governor Darling prorogued the Parliament,
when the two assemblies had met to have their session prorogued,
the Legislative Council (the elected Upper House) entered its pro-
test against the right of the Lower House to dispose finally of money
bills, and on reference being made to the Commissioners of the
Board of Trade at home, the right of this elected House to take
part in the legislation of the country in matters of finance was con-
firmed. Now to give the Upper House any voice in money mea-
sures was altogether opposed to the spirit of the British Constitution
and to British precedents, and as the colonists have been invited to
repeal the two-thirds clause on this ground, let us have the spirit and
precedents of the British Constitution in reference to the construc-
tion of our Upper House. If the argument is good in one case, it
is good in the other. But there was no doubt if this nominated
Upper House is bad and operated injuriously, we have the power
to alter it, for with the powers given to us under this bill, there can
be no doubt in this age that the voxpopuli will be the supremo, lex.
Another principle of the Constitution Bill has been very much mis-
represented, and, I regret to say, by those who must have known
better. It has been stated that the Upper House would be nominated
by the Governor. This is not the fact ; the members of the Upper
House can only be appointed by the Governor acting under the
advice of his Executive Council, and that Council must be respon-
sible to the people. It is quite a mistake to imagine that without
-the consent of the people the Governor can dismiss his present


Council to their pensions and call others to his assistance not chosen
by the people, to appoint this Upper House. This is a mistake
which has prevailed to a very considerable extent, and it is one into
which some of the officers of the Government have fallen. The
Judges of the land, however, have given their opinion upon it, and I
believe they are unanimous that no such construction can be put
upon the Act, That Mr. Thomson, if they do not chose to tell him
through their representatives, that they do not longer require his ser-
vices, must continue to serve them till they do so, or else resign his
salary and all claim to his pension. The officers of the Government
to whom pensions are granted must be released by you from their
present positions before they can claim them. They cannot say we
will resign office with its labours and anxieties and fall back upon
our pensions. But this was the construction first put upon the Act,
and the Colonial Treasurer, Mr. Riddell, had actually taken his
passage in La Hogue with the view of going to enjoy his
pension at home, when he was suddenly informed if he did so,
while indulging in some shooting excursion at his brother’s in
Roxburghshire, he might be informed that the supplies were stopped,
and that those troublesome people at Botany Bay, not having relin-
quished his services, he was absent without leave, and had therefore
forfeited his salary. (Cheers.) But if the people by their repre-
sentatives should send the present holders of office away, and should
tell them that they have no further need of them, then a new and
responsible ministry must be formed, and whether Mr. Donaldson,
Mr. Cowper, or any one else, was at the head of it, it would be by
him, their representative, that the Upper House must be appointed.
Therefore you, though not directly, yet indirectly through your repre-
sentatives, will have the nomination of the members of the Upper
House in your own hands. While we have a power like this what
cause have we to fear ; why since the days of the Norman conquest,
we have been continually tinkering up what is called the glorious
Constitution of old England. It is but little over twenty years ago
that the Reform Bill was passed, and that was found insufficient, and
had it not have been for the breaking out of the Russian war, long
before this the franchise in England would have been reduced to a
forty shilling suffrage, and I should be glad to see it so reduced.
(Cheers.) There is another clause in the Constitution Act, which I
do not approve. It is the last clause which has reference to the claims
of the squatters. It provides that the Council shall not make laws
to interfere with the tenure on which the squatters at present hold
their leases. Now, if the Parliament is to have power to make laws
for the welfare and good government of the colony, I do think it
should have power to legislate in this respect. Although I have
many personal friends among the class called squatters, still I do not
think that justice has been done in the way that many squatting


leases have been issued ; under the order of Council it was found,
from a formal defect, that the leases could not be made out. But
this defect has been cured, and many leases have been taken out
since. Some on the Clarence and Manning Rivers had not been
taken out at all, but the leases that had been taken out
had been dated at the time they were issued. Now I think
they s hould have been dated on the day when the orders
in Council were made known, and this, I think, would
have been fair and equitable to all parties. I need not tell you that
in the last Council I was busily engaged in preparing a measure for
the establishment of municipal institutions throughout the colony. I
took the best advice I could obtain on the subject, and obtained
much from some of my friends here. My attention was first drawn
to the subject by the introduction into Council by the Government
of the Health of Towns’ Bill, which also provided for the establish-
ment of municipalities. This bill was referred to a select committee,
of which I was the chairman ; and the committee reported that that
bill could not be carried out, and I was appointed to draw up a fresh
bill in its stead. My health however failing, this new bill broke
down, and was not introduced into the Council. lam not sorry that
this was the case, because when this important matter is brought
before the new Parliament, it will be your own fault if you do not
have all that you require. The principle, however, on which I had
proposed to construct the measure, was this :—Whenever the resi-
dents in any district required to have the management of their own
local affairs, power should be given to them for such purpose. Thus
if you had such a power you would be able to construct public
buildings such as a town-hall for the transaction of public business ;
you could bring water to every man’s house, light your streets with
gas, make your own streets or repair them. I did not, however, wish
to thrust institutions such as these down the throats of people who did
not desire to have them, and therefore left it to the people to say whether
they would wish to have this power of local self-government or not.
If you do wish to possess this power, now is the time to say so; for
now that the Government of the country is in your own hands in
the construction of these institutions, you may include in them all that
you require. I believe that the power of Municipal Government
is the great foundation of all constitutional rule; that in the local
communities, as with individuals, it is the practice of governing them-
selves well that will enable them to take a wise and useful part in
Government of the state. (Loud Cheers.) If therefore you do me
the honor to return me as your representative to the New Parlia-
ment, I shall not pause in the efforts I have ahvays made in this
direction, but I shall stedfastly turn my attention to the maturing
of a measure, which will spread municipal institutions through the
length and breadth of the land ; believing that in such institutions we


shall find the best schools in which to nurture the political intelli-
gence of the country, and the best bulwarks of her political freedom.
(Immense cheering.) There is yet another ground to which I must
advert, in respect to the wisdom and expediency of establishing such
institutions here. Perhaps more prominently than in any other
country in the wojld will they tend to relieve the community from
the oppressive weight of general taxation, under which it at present
labours. (Cheers.) I have no hesitation in saynig, that the enor-
mous amount ot general taxation required for the maintainance of
the Government of this colony, is a disgrace and scandal to the
country and the Government. (Cheers.) But large, and unneces-
sarily large, as the taxation has always been, it is yet found to be
unequal to the exigencies of the Government: and it was, during the
last session, proposed to put a tax on the poor man’s necessaries,
his soap, his salt, his tea, his sugar, and his candles. It has been
said that the tax which was imposed on the tea and sugar is so trivial
that it cannot affect any man; but if lam rightly informed, and I have
it from a high authority on financial matters, this tax will amount
to no less a sum than £175,000 per annum ; and I ask if this is a
trifling sum to be paid, as it must be, principally paid, out of the
pockets of the working classes. It has been said that the class of
members who contributed mainly to the imposition of this tax, had,
in saddling the country with it, saddled themselves with the heaviest
part of the burden. It is said that the tax will fall on the employ-
ers of labour up the country ; but this is a simple delusion, that will
not bear the test of economic scrutiny. It is a fixed rule in fiscal
politics, that all taxes, by whomsoever they may be paid in the first
instance, in the end fall on the consumer. (Cheers.) It is true
the squatters did think that the tax on the tea would fall on them ;
and it is true that they consented to this tax, in the hope that it
would save them from a heavier and more inconvienient burden,
in the shape of an assessment on stock; aud they entered into a
sort of bargain with the Government, to support its miserable tax-
ation scheme, on the condition that no assessment bill should be
introduced. But the Government did not succeed in getting its
taxation scheme passed in full. An increased tax was put on tea
and sugar ; but it did not meet the requirements of the country, and
the Assessment Bill was passed as well; and thus, the “ biter,” in
the shape of the squatter, “ got bitten.” (Cheers.) I did not vote
for this tax on the necessaries of life. I have arrived at the con-
clusion that it is time to make a stand against the increasing tax-
ation of the country —to resist the constant and extortionate demands
of the Goverment, which, like a barren women, keeps up its try of
“ give, give,” for the purpose of a fruitless and profitless expendi-
ture. (Cheers.) The more they have, the more they want, and the
more they ask. Another reason why I was opposed to the Gover-


nor’s financial scheme, was, because it was plainly shewn, that the
amount required could have been raised by a stamp tax, which
would in reality have been a tax on property, without taxing the
necessaries of life. There is no reason, if a large revenue be ne-
cessary, the banks and other great monetary institutions, who are
drawing enormous profits from the country, should not contribute their
fair quota to that revenue. The indirect taxation of the country at the
prsent time, amounts to no less than £600,000 a year, or £2 per head
fore very man, woman, and child in the colony. It is a stain upon us
that we should require to pay so much for our government; and if it
please God to give me health and strength, and you should give me
a seat in the New Parliament, earnestly will I devote my best
energies to the work of financial reform. (Cheers.) The local
taxation which I propose to establish by means of municipal insti-
tutions, will relieve the general revenue, and I believe will greatly
reduce the present extravagant expenditure of the country. (Cheers.)
I believe, that while the expenditure of the Goverement here is the
most extravagant in the world, that the work of the Government is
performed in the worst manner. We have offices and departments
crowded with useless and inefficient functionaries of every descrip-
tion, who, if they work at all, are chiefly employed on work of their
own ereating. Let me however be understood ; in my understanding of
good and wholesome retrenchment, I have no place for the notion of
poor salaries for good and efficient men. (Cheers.) Pay the men
who do the work of the nation well—you cannot pay them too
well, but employ only those who can do it, only those who
are required to do it, and having got such men, make them do
it, and pay them accordingly. (Cheers ) It is not that the salaries
in the offices of the Government are too high. Here lies the great
mistake —there is an infinitesmal number of salaries miserably low,
on which a man competent to do the work of the country could not
live, and which he would not except; but these salaries are frittered
away for nought—no work is done for them, and that is not the worst
of the evil; the incompetency which is thus introduced into the
business of the country, fills every office with confusion and error,
and it has reduced the Government of this country to a state, in
which no portion of the public out of doors has the slightest trust in
the fidelity and management of any department of it. (Cheers.)
I say, employ the best men only —employ good men —employ three
where you now employ six ; pay them double if you please, but pay
them only when the work is done. Now you pay six men as much and
more, but the work is not done, or is so miserably performed, that the
public suffer and blush for the manner in which they are governed.
(Cheers.) I know it is an unpopular thing,—l feel it is an unplea-
sant thing to abolish offices and cut down establishments; but I also
know that the people have the power, and if they will that this re-
duction shall take place, it must be made ; and as delay will only


tend to further grievance and increased exasperation, the sooner the
reduction is made the better, (Cheers.) I now proceed to another
topic, the most intricate and difficult as well as the most important
of any which can occupy the attention of the Legislature of this
country. I allude to the Land Question. (Cheers.) It is the most
important, because the peopling of the land and the development of
its resources, are in a great degree dependent on the mode in which
the w aste lands of the Crown are administered ; it is the most diffi-
cult and most intricate, because the ground is encumbered with the
remnants of past systems and past abuses. (Cheers.) But however
difficult the question may be, it is one which every statesman who
undertakes to govern this country must look boldly in the face.
(Cheers.) The man who proves himself capable of dealing satis-
factorily and broadly with this question, will be the greatest benefac-
tor his country has ever possessed. But one way or other this
question must be settled, and without delay, or I see no possibility
of averting those agrarian outrages which have attended all coun-
tries, from Rome downwards, in w'hich the lands of a country have
been ia the possession, or at the disposal of a class. (Cheers.) So
far as general principles go, I will endeavour to state roy opin-
ions on this great subject; but I shall not attempt to go into
the details of any plan of the distribution of the lands,
and this, because I think that individual speculations on such
a question will only tend to increase the embarrassment which is
attendant upon it. It is a matter which will require combined and
deliberate discussion, in which what is good of many varied indivi-
dual opinions may be blended together. Some are in favor of the
American system of disposing of the wastelands, others have systems
of their own, and some, would, under survey, have the wffiole of the
unsettled lands of the colony thrown open at a fixed price. This
latter plan I should be disposed to favor, provided I can see any way
in which to prevent the jobbery, consumption, and speculation which
took place in the case of the special surveys at Port Phillip. There
it is well known special surveys of 20,000 acres of land, a portion
of w hich became part and parcel of the tow r n of Melbourne, were
granted to private speculators, who have since cut up the land into
small allotments, and sold it at an incredible profit. This is not
throwing open the land for settlement —it is the most effectual means
of preventing its settlement. The same system, the same error to a
certain extent, has taken place in the Southern District of this
colony, at Twofold Bay ; but fortunately the injustice has been seen,
and the system of special surveys at a fixed minimum price has
ceased. But if the land is to be surveyed and offered for sale accor-
ding to its capabilities at a fixed price, it is absolutely necessary
that such a system shall be hedged round with conditions which shall
prevent private capitalists or public companies from entering into


speculations, to monopolize the best lands of the colony, with a view
their re-sale at an extravagant profit. (Cheers.) But while it is my
anxious wish, and earnest conviction that the waste lands of the
colony should be thrown open to all who want them for settlement
and cultivation, and that no existing system should delay or retard
such a consummnation, far is it from my thought to destroy, or even
to injure the squatters. (Cheers.) To the squatters as a class,
the country is more highly indebted than to any other body of people;
there is no interest of the colony, there is no advance of the con-
dition of the community, which has not been aided by the ener-
gies and enterprise of the squatters. (Cheers.) What I ask would
this great and rising town of Maitland be ? What would Sydney
itself be, if it were not that the former is the leading toll-gate through
which the squatters produce downwards, and their supplies upwards,
pass ; and that the latter is the depot for the export of that produce,
and the import of their supplies ? (Cheers.) But the fair and open
distribution of the lands will not destroy the squatters. It is known
to every man who has seen anything of the interior of this great
country, that it contains millions of acres of barren land, unfit to
maintain anything but a bandicoot or a sheep. 1 hese lands will
never be re-claimed, will never be sought for for settlement, at least
for centuries to come. But there are some lands occupied by the
squatters that may be wanted—that will be wanted —lands on the great
navigable rivers of the colony ; lands within a short distance of some
of the rising towns of the interior, and if the public weal require the
surrender of these lands, as the people have now the power legally to
compel such surrender, it must be made. (Cheers.) But when it is made
for the benefit of the state, the state must make reasonable compensa-
tion to the squatter for what it takes from him. (Cheers.) The
moral law as well as the technical law makes no difference in its
equities on account of class. If you are to have a municipal cor-
poration, you will have to reclaim portions of land that have become
private property, to form your streets. It may be a hardship and
a grievance to the owners of such lands to part from them, but the
public weal requires them and they must be given. It was neces-
sary a short time ago, that the valuable estate of the Messrs. Lord,
at Botany, should become the property of the City of Sydney, in
order to ensure the supply of water. Mr. Lord demurred to the
taking his land from him, not improperly, but with a view to the
fair assessment of the value of that, which he knew he could not with-
hold where the public exigency required him to surrender it. The
assessment was made —a fair price was paid to Mr. Lord for the
sacrifice he made; and so will you, when you want your streets made
and alligned, have to pay out of your local funds compensation for
the private lands you infringe upon. This is the process of law and
equity going on now ; I am sure you will not wish it to be departed


from when you come to deal with the squatters. When you demand
in behalf of the interest of the state, the lands occupied by any
squatter, you will refer him to the tribunals of his country. Not
to resist your claim, which, if the welfare of the country is concerned,
is irresistible, but to assess a full, reasonable, and even generous
compensation made to him for the sacrifice he is compelled to make.
This, gentlemen, on broad principles, is my view of the land
question. If I am in the house, and associated in any enquiry into it
I shall endeavour, by careful study and attention, to apply these
principles to the duty which may come before me. (Immense
cheering, lasting some moments, and principally from country gen-
tlemen.) I now come to another subject, and lam content to name
it, and leave it to affix its own place in your attention. I allude to
the subject of education. In no shape can the question ot educa-
tion be brought before the Parliament in which it will not enlist my
most deep and anxious attention. I hardly need to say that I have
advocated every legislative movement for the advancement of educa-
tion, and that even beliving one system, the national system, to be
the best suited to the circumstances of the colony, I have never at-
tempted to interfere with institutions established on different princi-
ples, and in which I knew on so important, so sacred a subject, the
heart, as well as the intellect, the affections as well asthe reason of my
fellow-citizens, must be engaged. But if there be one great national sub-
ject on which the legislature of the country, which has now expired,
may exult with fair honorable pride, it is this one of education.
You have now your schools, where from babyhood to boyhood your
rising generation may be trained, and perfected in knowledge to an
extent that would have girded them with the reputation of scholars
and sages, but a century or two ago. You have, too, your University,
fulfilling day by day, and year by year, the high and holy destiny pre-
dicted for it by its great founder, my honored, my venerated country-
man, William Charles Wentworth. (Immense cheering.) Truly
did that great man say, for small as the community was in which he
passed most years of his political life, his name will be great in all
time through which Australian history will live, (Cheers.) that the
Act of Council, which established the University of Sydney contained,
“ the germ of immortality,” That it was an institution “ that would
prove a fountain of knowledge, at whose springs all may drink, be
they Christian, Mahomedan, Jew or Heathen. That its gates will
be open to all, whether they be disciples of Moses, or Jesus, of
Brahmin, of Mahomet, of Vishna,or of Buddha.” This is the Univer-
sity that has been established, this is the University, which in its
encouragement to the promotion of a higher class of Education, by
exciting generous emulation and discovering what education may
do, is already pouring out unnumbered blessings over the land.
(Cheers, reiterated and long continued.) It is true that I, in


common with others, thought that in the first instance
Grammar Schools should have been established in the diffierent
towns of the colony, where education could have been
afforded to the colonial youth, to fit them for University training.
But though this w r as my own opinion, the high amount of education
afforded at the elementary schools, in Sydney at least, made the pas-
shge from these schools to the University comparatively easy. But
within the last session a bill has been passed to authorise the erection
of grammar schools, and the endowment of them, and also for the
establishment within the University of affiliated colleges, in which in
the domestic and sectarian portions of education the student might
be instructed by teachers of his own selection. Already one gram-
mar school has been projected, and lam one of its trustees. Already
has one affiliated college been established, and I trust it will be but
the precursor of many others. (Cheers.) I believe, and though I
cannot hope to live to see my belief realized, that from this Univer-
sity—from these grammar schools, and from these affiliated colleges,
we shall see the awakened intellect of this distant part of the world
proclaim itself. I believe that we shall be able to send forth to the
world in the “ good time coming,” and for which we most patiently
wait —through these institutions —our full contribution to the social
and political advancement of the human race. (Cheers.) But
while I believe we have much to exult in, in what we have for edu-
cation, I am bound to own there is much left to be done. It is a
subject that will ever require minute and watchful attention, I can see
defects in the national as well as in the denominational system, and
these defects are at least sufficient to warrant enquiry. If there were
no other defect there is one which is common to both systems, that the
man—the teacher of youth, who, except to the clergy, is entitled to
our greatest respect, is treated worse than the ordinary day labourer,
He who is to mould the mind and intellect of your children, is placed
in a situation in which he can hardly physically live—in which he
cannot possibly mentally live and thrive. Till the schoolmaster is
placed in a proper position, education will not maintain its proper
footing in the colony. The schoolmaster is our greatest benefactor.
From the time at which he watches over us while we learn our alpha-
bet, till the hour in which we sink into the grave, we are more indeb-
ted to the schoolmaster for the good or evil he instils into us than to
any man in the community ; and when such a trust is to be reposed
in any body of men, I will ask, should they not be well paid, placed
in a position to hold up their heads among us ? (Great cheers.)
On this ground alone I think there is sufficient room for enquiry
into both systems; and in the full hope that such enquiry will be con-
ducted in a liberal and generous spirit —that one great object, the
intellectual advancement of the commvnity, will be the aim
of all, I shall heartily and cordially support it. (Cheers.)


In the address which I have written to you, I have told you that
it is necessary that some amendment should he made in the laws,
Civil and Criminal, of the country. Now while I have had the
honor of representing you in the late Council, I have devoted more
time to this subject than any other member in the House, until
the present Solicitor-General, Mr. Manning, took his seat in it
The great object which I have laid out as the end of all Law Re-
form, is that which was pursued by Lord Brougham, in his efforts
in England in a similar direction. That object is, that speedy and
cheap justice be brought to every man’s door. Now, I believe that
the temper and spirit of this community is in favour of a reform in
this direction, and that what is now wanted would have been ac-
complished long ago, had it not been that under the restrictions of
the late Constitutional Act, it was impossible, without the in-
fringement of higher principles, to extend the schedules appointed
for the administration of public justice. Now, premising that I
do not wish to give any detailed plan of law reform to this meeting,
I will state very briefly what I think would best meet the wishes
and the convenience of the colony. I would propose to establish
district courts, who should have jurisdiction in civil cases to the
amount of £6O, or if they pleased to the amount of one or two
hundred pounds. That such courts should also possess in criminal
cases the jurisdiction which the Court of Quarter Sessions now
holds, and that such courts should itinerate ; should go from place
to place in their district to administer justice, instead of those
seeking justice, coming to them. By this means, instead of drag-
ging prosecutors and witnesses and jurors from Singleton to Mait-
land, the court would go to Singleton and try the cases there. The
result would be, that the poor man who could not afford to travel
far to obtain justice would have it brought home to him, while the
rich man will not suffer, because he will obtain justice if it is on
his side at less cost. (Cheers). The plan he suggested had been
tried in Victoria, and had been found most beneficial, and many
were anxious in the late Council that a similar system should be
tried here, but time would not permit the perfecting of a well-ar-
ranged measure to bring this principle into effect. There is no
doubt that amongst the first subjects to which the New Parliament
will turn its attention, this will occupy a prominent place, and I
think I may rely upon the testimony of my past services in this
direction, as security for my earnest efforts for the future. (Cheers).
I will now change the subject, and bring you from the consider-
ation of the law to the road, I come to the subject of the forma-
tion of railroads in the colony. I, as much as the warmest well-
wisher of railroads would desire to see speedy communication be-
tween the remote districts of the colony and the metropolis estab-
lished. But while I would wish to see railroads formed in the


colony, 1 would not in the meantime wish to see the colony get too
deeply into debt. I would wish to see every railway pay at least
the interest of the money expended upon it, and I am pretty well
assured that short lines of railway will not pay that interest. I
believe, if the line from Newcastle to Maitland were carried on to
Singleton, it would pay, but I deprecate the idea of rushing into
an enormous debt for the formation of railroads, for the payment
of the interest on the capital by which such roads are formed, it may
be necessary to increase the general taxation of the country.
(Cheers). The next point that I come to, is one which is not
purely local, or rather I should say, not purely colonial, so far as
it refers to New South Wales. But it is a point which will de-
mand the earnest and most mature reflection of the coming Par-
liament. It is as to the advisability of establishing a federal union
among the Australian colonies, with a view of regulating on one
common basis the Commercial Tariffs of these colonies, and also of
establishing a High of Court Appeal, to which cases disputed in
the courts of this colony may be referred, instead of resorting to
the dilitary, expensive, and inexpedient process of referring them
to the Judicial Committee of the House of Lords at home. (Cheers).
I regret now that I have to turn my attention to matters with which
lam more personally connected; but as reflections have been made
upon me, and as what I have done in some instances in the way of
legislation seems to be misunderstood, it is best that I should ex-
plain at once. The first matter to which I will allude as having
been found fault with, and most unjustly found fault with, is in
relation to the Masters’ and Servants’ Act, and I may say that it
was with the view that all who are engaged in labour might ques-
tion me, that I fixed the time of my meeting this evening, at an
hour when the labourer has parted from his toil, and can meet me,
as he has a right to meet me, on fair grounds. (Great cheering).
Now, with regard to this Masters’ and Servants’ Act, I must tell
you the history of it. The Masters’ and Servants’ Act, which was
the original of the present amended one, was passed in the Legis-
lative Council before I was a member of it, I was professionally
employed by Mr. Murray, the framer of the Bill, to draw it up
under certain instructions, but I had nothing to do with the Bill
itself But with regard to the amended Act, I will tell you what I
did do. I introduced a clause into it by whicli the labourer or the
servant was empowered to claim his wages from his employer,
and to imprison him if they were not paid, because I
thought it only equal justice that if the servant should
be imprisoned for failure in his part of the contract,
the employer should stand in the same position. (Great Cheers.)
Another clause, which so far as I am connected with the Bill, I
attempted to introduce, was that in case any servant being paid b}


an order, the payment of which was dishonored, he (the servant)
should be enabled to summons the maker for it; at the place
where the order was payable, and that the employer should pay
all costs and damages which the servant had sustained. (Gireat
cheers.) This was the part I took in framing the Masters’ and
Servants’ Act; and I ask, in doing so, if I sought to do justice or
injustice to the servant. But in the year 1851, some reform in
the Act became necessary, and what that reform should be, was
debated, until the House, not being disposed at that time to deal
with the subject, was counted out. The reforms proposed in the
bill were purely technical, and Mr. Murray asked me to move
them, and I did so. Perhaps to a larger extent than any man in
the community, I have had an opportunity of watching the legal
working of this act, and I declare upon my honour, that the
only case of injustice which has resulted from it in my ex-
perience is in the case' of a Chinaman who was imprison-
ed for six months, and which case I brought before the
Legislative Council, and as far as possible the injustice
was redressed. But even in this case, I say that they
had no right to attack the law. It is very easy to find
fault with laws and law-makers, but the people who make laws are
not answerable for the stupidity and ignorance of those whose sworn
duty it is to administer them, and I am not answerable if a good
Act of mine is perverted into evil by an ignorant or prejudiced
Justice of the Peace. (Cheers.) Gentlemen, lam sorry to detain
you with small matters, but I fear small matters have weight when
they are used to my disadvantage. I must now allude to the Goat
Act. I was the framer of that Act, and who are those who complain
of it ? Those only who infringe it. I did n@t in that Act restrict any
man’s right to keep his goat, or to protect his goat; but what I did in
that Act was, that the goat should not be allowed to trespass upon
my cabbages, my peas, my pumpkins. That I should not suffer in
the value of £2O for a goat that might be valued at £l, and who
was only valuable to his immediate possessor, who of course would
make no recompense for wrong done to me. I brought this Act in,
not on interested and small principles on which it could be justified,
but because some law for the purposes of justice was absolutely neces-
sary. You may catch a common thief, you cannot catch a goat.
It may destroy your garden—it may demolish the outlay of many
hundreds of pounds, but do what you will you cannot catch the
goat, and some prized flower or shrub of which you or I had the
understood right of possession, is to be destroyed because the pri-
vileged goat is to roam where it pleases. (Cheers.) There is
another Act, with the fame or infamy of which I am connected,
and from the principle of which I am not prepared to flinch at all.
1 allude to the Vagrant Act. I introduced that Act because I be*


lieved it was necessary to tire protection of public order in the
colony. Because I believed it was necessary to protect the honest
man in this colony, against the invasion of rogues and vagabonds
from the neighbouring colony, and it was only against rogues and
vagabonds of this description that this act was levelled. If that
law be properly administered, I contend that it is the safeguard and
the protection of all honest men. It is an Act which no honest
man need fear, and which was intended to be a terror only to the dis-
honest and wicked. But when this Act of mine, introduced by me
for the protection of the community, for the exclusion from it only
of characters whose contact was infamy in itself was passed, I
asked no more restriction on the working man in this colony, than
was imposed in England ) and I thank God that even the poor
wretches who slave in crime and ignorance for a pittance to save
themselves from starvation at home, can in this country meet
with a happy and comfortable subsistence. But here again I have
to proclaim against the outcry raised against this Act. I am ac-
countable for the Act itself, I am willing to be so, because I think
its principle thoroughly and entirely good But I am not res-
ponsible for the administration of that Act by the Justices, and I
doubt not in many instances it has been very much abused.
(Cheers.) I deny that we ought to be made the receptacle of the
crime and vagrancy of any country, and therefore it was I intro-
duced this Act. Our own pauperism, our own misfortunes in
the lives of the humble classes, we will meet and provide for as
we can. That noble institution of the town of
“ its Hospital,” well and nobly sustained as it ought
to be is significant of the spirit of the people of the
colony at large. While fair attention is paid to the interests of
the working classes —while a fair rate of wages prevails, pauperism
will be unknown amongst us, except the pauperism that springs
from crime, and that it is our duty to check. (Cheers.) But
almost every clause of the much abused Vagrant Act is taken
from English Acts of Parliament \ and in England these clauses
have been found to work well. But again, the act was passed at
a particular time, and under particular circumstances. If it had
not been passed we should have had here an immigrated banditti
of trebly distilled convicts from Norfolk Island and Van Piemans
Land. I wished to prevent this influx, I considered it my duty to
do so, —consistent with all the political principles I ever professed
—consistent with my opposition to the renewal of transportation
consistent with my wish for the permanent establishment of a
virtuous population in my native land, and on these grounds I
introduced the Vagrant Act; and I believe that act, properly
administered, will be a safeguard to the state, without inflicting
injustice on any man. (Cheers.) I know not if there are any


further topics on which I should address you. (Question about
the pensions.) I ask pardon, and thank the gentleman who has
suggested to me, an explanation, which in a former part of my
speech I promised to make. I wish distinctly and emphatically
to state my views with regard to the Pensions clause. I am
opposed to the principle of pensions at all. I think it a bad one,
and one, the sooner it be got rid of the better. But
gentlemen, the question of the propriety of pensions does nok arise
in this instance. The pensions have been granted at your s pecial
request. The pensions have been bargained for by your elected
representatives. Either the pensions are due, or you relinquish
your claim to the Coustitution Act as it now appears before you.
Not one of the gentlemen who is entitled to a pension, can claim it,
till you relinquish him from your service. You do so knowing the
expense it will entail. Any one or any two of these men, if you,
the people of the colony, think proper to trust them, you may keep
in your service for seven or eight years. But mark you, if you do
not want them to serve you —if you are willing to dispense with
their services, you can do so; but you by your
agreed to do it on certain conditions. But even without these
conditions, the recipients of these pensions are entitled to their
salaries under the Queen’s Sign Manual for life, or during good
behaviour. The same as*the colonel of a regiment, or the
captain of a ship of war is guaranteed. Now in this colony there
are a number of gentlemen holding civil commissions under the
Queen’s Sign Manual for life or during good behaviour. A peace-
ful revolution takes place which does not affect in the slightest
degree, much less annul those commissions. But the services to
be performed are not required from the officers. We wish to en-
trust them to other hands; but does that discharge us from our
duty of fulfilling our contract with these gentlemen, and giving
them their salaries according to their bond. (Cheers.) If we
relinquish their services we do it of our own accord. If we take
responsible Government, we take it as a “ quid pro quo” of a
putting out the present executive on honorable terms. We asked
for these pensions; and the British House of Parliament
recognised the justice of the demand. They passed an
Act which ensured these pensions, and never has it fallen
to my lot, to meet with Englishmen, Irishmen, or Scotchmen who
would repudiate the bond which an act of his own Parliament had
made for him, (Cheers.) If these pensions are too large : if they
are wrongly given we must put up with the grievance. If we repu-
diate them we shall place ourselves on a level with the drab coloured
inen of Pensylvania ; we shall be branded, deservedly branded with
the title of robber and plunderer, because we entered into a compact
for our freedom, offerings little money, and having gained the freedom,


we button up our pockets. (Great cheers.) I hope I shall never sea
my country descend to such a course. (Cheers.) Better far, that
these pensions should he paid ten times over, than that in this contest,
our freedom, our honor, and good faith should be tarnished.
(Cheers.) I have now done with discussion on all controversial
topics. Our connection has ceased, it is with you to say whether it
shall be renewed. (Immense cheering, and cries of it shall.) Ido
not ask you to make unconsidered promises—l do not ask you
in an electioneering spirit to vote for me: I ask you to
select the man you would trust to represent you, and having found
him, elect him, whether I be the man or not. In this contest I stand
entirely on my own merits, nay I scarcely stand on these. I desire that
the country shall express its opinion without the pressure of external
influence, and it is only on such principles I would wish to represent
you. It may be that I could look back to services that I have done
you, but my time of servitude is up, and it is not as a reward for what
I have done that I would accept a seat in the house which is to be.
(Cheers.) But when I meet you here, I cannot put on the cold dis-
guise,, of the disinterested politician. I have no wish to be your repre-
sentative except to serve you ; and I have a right to ask you to look
back at my past acts as an earnest of what I may do in the future.
(Cheers.) If hitherto you have found me a good and faithful steward
you will render to me at least the honor’ which is due. (Cheers.) I
have come forward on this occasion, after long and earnest consultation
with my friends, and myself. I wish I could see even now any escape
from the responsibility in which I am involved. But I believe that
I have served you well, I now offer to serve you again, but it is my
earnest wish that if a better candidate comes forward, you should take
the best man. The present is a critical time for my country, and
selfish indeed should !beif I did not feel deeply interested; and how the
vessel of the state is to be steered in the right direction, it is difficult
to say. But the firm and stedfast hearts who really love their country
will not flinch in this crisis. They will be there to support and sustain
her, and I rely upon the better and the higher souls of those who love
their country better than party, and better than place. (Cheers.) I
am aware, that in speaking out my thoughts to you, I have no appeal
to any higher tribunal. I would wish now, if my opinions are not
consistent with the opinions of the electors of Maitland, let them
reject me. Tuey cannot at all events accuse me of having concealed
aught connected with my past career, or with the future, into which we
are about to embark. They cannot tell me I have neglected trusts
and duties which they have reposed in me. They cannot tell me I
have beguiled them with vague and delusive promises for the future.
You the men of Maitland may reject me now when I ask you to
accept me, as a soldier in the service of my country —you cannot
wipe out the memory of services done, of duties performed, of trusts


honestly and fulfilled. (Cheers, prolonged for some
moments). I only to thank you for,the kind and patient
hearing you have given me—a hearing for which I was particularly
anxious, as I wish my views to be distinctly understood before the
election takes place. I repeat, I stand in this election, in reference
to the whole political world, of Australia, entirely on my own
merits. I earnestly entreat, none of these who conscientiously
differ from my principles to vote for me from motives of personal
esteem, friendship, or kindness. They will best serve me, by serving
the country that I love, and doing their duty to that country in
her hour of need.
Mr. Nichols sat down amidst the most enthusiastic cheering, and
a motion, moved by Mr. Thomas Evans, and seconded by Mr.
Frederick Curry, that Gr. R. Nichols, Esq., is a fit and proper per-
son to represent the electors of the Northumberland Boroughs in
the New Parliament, was carried unanimously. »


