

ELECTION FOR WEST CAMDEN.
SPEECHES
HENRY MOLESWORTH OXLEY
ANI>
JAMES MACARTHUR, ESQUIRES.
WITH A REPORT OF THE ELECTION
PROCEEDINGS AT CAMDEN,
16th JUNE, 1856.
i >
SYDNEY:
PRINTED BY READING AND WELLBANK,
BRIDGE STREET,




INTRODUCTORY REMARKS.
The following revised Report of the proceedings at the
recent West Camden Election, has been prepared from
the Newspapers, and from reference to the works quoted.
One or two passages, having no direct bearing upon the
main questions discussed, and which originated out of
passing allusions the mere bye-play of an Election
Meeting—are now omitted, while others, of greater per-
manent, as well as immediate interest, are given in a
fuller and more accurate form than in the Reports before
published.


WEST CAMDEN ELECTION.
Monday last, the 16th June, being the day fixed for the nomination
of a member to represent the constituency of West Camden, left
vacant by the resignation of Mr. James Macarthur, upon acceptance
of a seat in the Cabinet, a large number of the electors assembled
at the hustings at the appointed hour. Mr. Macarthur, accom-
panied by several gentlemen, appeared on the hustings and was
received with cheers.
The Returning Officer (j' Macquarie Antill, Esquire) ad-
dressed the assembly, and expressed a hope that a patient and
attentive hearing would be accorded to the various speakers. They
had assembled, he said, to nominate a gentleman to represent the
constituency of West Camden in the Legislative Assembly.
Their former Member, Mr. James Macarthur, was again before
them as a candidate for their suffrages, and he would, no doubt,
explain to them the reasons which had actuated him in re-
signing his seat and again appearing before them. He was not
aware whether there was any other candidate in the field, but,
should there be, every opportunity would be afforded him to
address the electors, and it would be afterwards their duty to judge
between them. He would now call on the proposer of Mr.
Macarthur.
Mr. H. Oxley having come forward, said that at present he would
confine himself to the mere performance of the pleasing duty he had
undertaken, that of proposing Mr. James Macarthur as a fit and
proper person to represent the constituency of West Camden in the
Legislative Assembly. He was convinced that all present had
unshaken confidence in Mr. Macarthur’s integrity and ability, and
that they would cheerfully return him to the seat he had so recently
vacated. Jhe proposition was received with loud cheers.
Mr. Henry Thompson seconded the motion, and was loudly
cheered.


Mr. Mitchell proposed that, in consequence of the weather
being very unfayourable to the holding of an open air meeting, they
should adjourn to the Court-house.
This suggestion, which was supported by Mr. Oxley, M.P.,
met with the hearty approval of the meeting, and it was there-
upon resolved to adjourn to the Court-house.
The Returning Officer said that before they adjourned from the
hustings he had a duty to perform, they had heard Mr. Macarthur
proposed as a candidate for their suffrages, and his nomination duly
seconded, but he had to enquire if there was any elector present who
had another candidate to propose in opposition to Mr. Macarthur.
No person having appeared, Mr. Antill declared that Mr. James
Macarthur was duly elected a representative of the constituency of
West Camden in the Legislative Assembly of New South Wales.
The announcement was hailed with vociferous cheering, which
lasted some time.
Mr. Macarthur said he concurred in the proposition for an
adjournment, as he was as sensible as any person present of the
coldness of the weather. Having, however, received the expression
of their confidence in the open air, he could not retire from the hustings
without thanking the electors of West Camden for the distinction
they had again conferred upon him. The reasons which had caused
him to resign his seat, he would fully explain in the Court-house, but
he could not withdraw from the hustings without assuring them of his
desire to serve them and to promote the welfare of the colony. (Loud
cheers.) He begged them to accept his thanks in the same spirit
in which he offered them—that of sincerity. The proof they had
that day shown that they would not forget those who endeavoured
honestly to discharge their duties to the country, could not fail to
have its proper effect. For his own part he had been more than
repaid for past efforts, and would be stimulated to renewed exer-
tions to discharge the trust reposed in him by the unanimous voice
of the independent electors of West Camden. (Loud cheers.)
The meeting then adjourned to the Court-room, which was
densely crow r ded. When order was established,
The Returning Officer having taken the chair,
Mr. H enry Oxley said : Mr. Returning Officer and gentlemen
—At the hustings I confined myself to merely proposing Mr.
Macarthur for re-election; but I feel bound to make some few
observations in justification of the course I have taken on the present
occasion. I think it is only due to myself and others that I should


do so. We have been called upon, after the lapse of a very short
period, again to elect a representative in the Legislative Assembly,
in consequence of Mr. Macarthur having resigned the seat to which
he was elected by the constituency of West Camden in March last.
At the last election Mr. Macarthur told you that, in the event of his
taking office, his seat would become vacant. Well, it so happened
that he did take office under the Government—that is, he took on
himself the responsibilities of office, but he derived no pecuniary
or other emolument therefrom. In fact, he did not take office
in the way that rendered it strictly necessary, by the literal interpre-
tation of the Constitution Act, for him to resign his seat. His seat
did not, therefore, become vacant until he of his own accord placed his
resignation in the hands of the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly.
He then again appealed to the constituency of West Camden, to
stamp with their approval or disapproval his acts as a member of
the ministry under the New Constitution. Mr. Macarthur was in
no way called upon to resign his seat, as he had not been a paid
officer, but he did so from a conscientious scrupulousness, that no
act of his should be misinterpreted, and from a feeling that in what-
ever he did he would not attempt to screen himself under the plea
that he derived no emolument from the office he held. So far,
therefore, from seeking to screen himself under the wording of the
Act from the consequences of his accepting office at all, he resolved
on doing more than even the spirit of the Act required, by asking his
constituency, as I said before, to signify by electing him or rejecting
him, their approval or disapproval of his actions as a member of
the ministry, and to say whether, in regard to the course he
took in the formation of the Donaldson ministry, he did anything
unworthy of a gentleman or a statesman. It would no doubt have
been more satisfactory to a great portion of the inhabitants of the
colony, had it been possible for the late Colonial Secretary, Mr.
Deas 1 homson, who possessed so much legislative experience and
administrative ability—it would have been more satisfactory to
many, if it had been possible for him to have initiated the
New Constitution; but objections arose to his doing so—
objections which, perhaps, it was impossible for him to
overcome. But with regard to the formation of the Donaldson
Ministry, it certainly appears to me that the great majority
of the members of the Legislative Assembly have passed over
the real point in dispute. They have indeed gone too far into
the matter. I do not attempt to say that Mr* Donaldson assumed


office constitutionally, in the strict sense of the word. I should
hesitate to express my own opinion on this matter, were it mine
only, but I am satisfied that what I am about to say is the opinion
of a great many thinking people in this country. The facts appear
to be these. The minute the New Constitution was proclaimed,
Mr. Thomson and his colleagues ceased to have any existence as
political officers of the Government, and became, as it were, merely
head clerks of their respective departments. It, therefore, became
necessary for the Governor to form a temporary Executive Council,
which he did ; and till the elections were over, and the Upper House
nominated, it was impossible to form a ministry. For this reason,
therefore, I think that the calling upon any gentleman to form a
ministry before the Upper House was nominated, was premature.
Mr. Macarthur : The attempt to form a ministry took place
at two separate periods—first before, and afterwards, subsequently
to the elections.
Mr. Oxley : I am aware, but I ignore the first occasion alto-
gether, and confine my remarks to the second occasion—after the
elections. In my opinion it was impossible to form a ministry, not
only till after the elections, but till after the nomination of the
Upper House; and it was the laudable desire of the Governor to
go beyond the requirements of the Act, and to have the Upper
House nominated by a responsible ministry which led him into the
course he had pursued. It was not contemplated by the Act that
the Upper House should be nominated by such a ministry, else
why should the duration of the first Upper House have been limited
to five years. I take it that such a limitation was fixed in order to
provide that the permanent House—the members of which were to
be nominated for life—should be nominated by a responsible
ministry. It was never contemplated by the Act that the first
Upper House should be nominated by a responsible ministry ; and,
therefore, in having it nominated by such a ministry, the Governor-
General had gone beyond the limits of the Constitution. No doubt
it was a very gratifying proof of the desire of the Governor to meet
the legitimate wishes of the people, but at the same time I cannot
see that his doing so was altogether constitutional. It was, I take
it, intended by the Act that the first Upper House should be
nominated by the Executive, and after the nomination of the
Upper House, the ministry should be appointed. After the nomi-
nation of the Upper House it would have been competent for his
Excellency to have commanded Mr. Thomson to form a ministry.


But I contend that at the time he was directed by the Governor
to form a ministry he was no more in a fit position to do so than any
gentleman in this room, because at that time he was a member
of neither house of the Legislature. I do not think, therefore, that
Mr. Donaldson assumed office altogether constitutionally. Ido
not think that the Governor, when he sent for Mr. Donaldson and
commanded him to form a ministry, acted altogether constitutionally,
whatever may be said to the contrary ; neither do I think that Mr.
Donaldson was in a fair position to accept office at the time he was
called on, though the elections were then over and it was seen in
what way public opinion tended, because the Upper House was still
not in existence. But Ido not see that the informality was in any
way derogatory to Mr. Donaldson. If blame in the proceedings
attach to any one it is to the Governor-General ; and the irregularity
that has been so much complained of arose, in my opinion, from
the anxious desire of the Governor, not in any way to influence
the nomination of the Upper House, but that that branch of the
Legislature should be wholly appointed by a ministry responsible to
the people. (Hear, hear.) In that way the error and irregularity
complained of had arisen ; nevertheless the Governor-General was
justified, and had the undoubted power to nominate the present
ministers to seats at his Executive, more particularly as they were
willing, afterwards, to form a responsible ministry. Those who
object to Mr. Donaldson l s ministry do not do so on legitimate
grounds, but go on to say that it was not in the power of the
Governor to say to one, you shall not form a ministry, and to another,
you shall. They say that the Governor had not the power constitu-
tionally to do so, in other words, that the Queen, whose representa-
tive the Governor is, had not the power to do so ; and, therefore,
that he did wrong in releasing the old Executive, which had, in
truth, strictly speaking, been released already, and asking Mr.
Donaldson to form a ministry and appoint those who were to act
with him.
They say the sovereign never dismisses a ministry, and has not
the power to do so. But I do not see that such an objection
is at all tenable. Since I left home—and lam sorry the matter did
not occur to me before, or I would have been able correctly to cite
the circumstance I am about to relate, which will show you that the
power of choosing a ministry does not entirely rest with the repre-
sentatives of the people, but that the ministry are occasionally
willing to abide by the decision of the sovereign—l remember that


on one occasion—and I beg to be excused if I make a mistake, as
I quote from memory—during the Pitt and Grenville administra-
tion in 1792, Lord Thurlow, the Lord Chancellor, and leader in
the House of Lords—who was so intractable that it required all the
tact of the other members of the ministry to manage him—turned on
his colleagues on an important occasion, “ The National Debt Bill,”
and nearly defeated them. Of course Pitt and Grenville, and
the rest of the ministry were taken aback by the course pursued
by Lord Thurlow. On that occasion Lord Grenville, writing to
his brother, said what will prove to you, as it proves to me, that he
and his colleagues were of opinion that the king had a right to
choose which of his ministers he would dismiss, and which of them
he would retain —he said, in a letter to his brother, as nearly as I
can recollect, —“ We” (meaning himself and the rest of his col-
leagues) waited in suspense to know what course the king would
pursue ; and we were gratified that the king had sent for Mr. Pitt,
and expressed his confidence in him and his colleagues, and in their
integrity, and in the uprightness of the course we were pursuing, and
that he still continued to have confidence in us, and wished to
know if we would remain as we were, and carry on the Government.
(Hear, hear.) Lord Grenville and his colleagues expressed them-
selves at his Majesty’s disposal, and the letter goes on to say that
the king sent for Lord Thurlow, and required him to deliver up the
seals of office. In other words, he dismissed him from the
ministry. The circumstance is related in Buckingham's Court and
Cabinet of George 111. Now, that is a case where the king, without
asking the consent of the House of Commons, dismissed one of his
ministers —one too who had great influence in that branch of the
Legislature in which he held a seat. I consider that case suffi-
cient to show that the Governor-General has the power to dismiss
one administration, and to form another without the consent of the
Legislative Assembly.
But supposing we had not the authority for such a course in
English history, I maintain that the objections against the
conduct of the Governor ought not to have been made ; because
the circumstances of this colony are altogether of an excep-
tional character, and no analogy can be drawn between them and
any part of the history of England. As there is no instance in the
history of England of a state of things similar to that which existed
recently in this colony, no precedent could of course be found of the
conduct of the king under such circumstances. As the circumstances


of the colony are exceptional, so also is the position of the Governor-
General. We cannot go to history for precedents to condemn him
for sending for Mr. Donaldson. It should be borne in mind that
we cannot go on following precedents throughout all ages. We
cannot expect in this colony to find precedents for every case ; and
on some occasions we have to form precedents —we have to form
history. (Hear, hear.) We have no records of the origin of the
English Constitution, for it had no definite beginning. It grew
into existence with the first faint dawning of civilization, and in-
creased and strengthened as time rolled on, by additions and amend-
ments being made to meet special circumstances. It would seem,
nevertheless, that many entertained the belief that it sprung into
existence some time in the course of the seventeenth century,
whereas it had been growing up from times long antecedent to the
authentic records of history. Seeing, then, that the position of the
Governor is altogether exceptional, his conduct in the present case
should not be too nicely criticised. (Hear, hear.) Now, though I
do not think that Mr. Deas Thomson, as he had no office, except as
it were that of chief clerk in a particular department, was in a fit
position to carry on the business of the government; and although
the Governor had a right to choose Mr. Donaldson to form a
ministry, if he preferred him to any one else, yet, I think, putting both
those considerations aside, that it was competent to the Opposition
to object to Mr. Donaldson on account of the way in which he took
office. But when they had done so, I think that was quite enough,
because even the most liberal of them had no room to take
exception to the line of policy which Mr. Donaldson and his
colleagues put forth as that which they would pursue. In fact, their
policy was so liberal that the ground was taken from under the feet
of the Opposition, and the so-called liberal party in the Assembly
ground their teeth with rage, because no standing-place was left
them on which to’ oppose The policy of the Donaldson ministry. It
took the legs from under the ultra-liberal party, so liberal was the
course the ministry proposed to pursue. But determined, never-
theless, to oppose, they rose and made long historical references as
to the course that ought to have been pursued in the formation of
the ministry, and the nomination of the Upper House, under
circumstances of so peculiar a kind that there was no precedent to
be found for them in history—though the shelves of half the book-
sellers, editors, and lawyers in the country were ransacked to obtain
one. (Hear,.» hear, and applause.)


Now, in regard to the course pursued by Mr. Macarthur,
with whom we have more particularly to deal, I think his
throwing up his seat was highly honourable to him. What-
ever may have been the circumstances under which the
ministry was formed, I am willing to leave it to his constituents,
whether they do or do not think that he acted in a highly
honourable manner ; and I know you will all bear me out in saying
that he has not acted in any respect in a way to forfeit the
confidence we reposed in him at the last election. (Cheers and
applause.) It has been said, and I confess that I feel a little
nettled at it (laughter), that it was all a piece of “ bounce”—to use
a common expression—on the part of Mr. Macarthur to resign his
seat—that he knew very well the position in which he stood, and
that he possessed sufficient influence over the majority of the electors
to ensure his re-election. Now, such a statement I regard as
nothing less than a direct insult to every elector in the district,
and I feel it to be a direct insult to myself; and I think you would
all consider it a personal insult to be told by any man that you dare
not give your votes to any candidate but Mr. Macarthur. This
monstrous assertion, however, was got up by a party who desired to
vent their spleen against one who occupied a high position, not only
as a landlord but as a statesman (applause) ; and his opponents are
vexed that the part he has taken is so highly popular. They, in
consequence, turn round, for want of any other charge, and say that
he occupies his seat as the representative of a pocket borough.
Now, I firmly deny that assertion, which is not in accordance with
facts. I find, by the electoral list, that there are 664 voters in the
whole of the division of West Camden. Of that number 295 are
freeholders; and what undue influence, I would like to know, can
Mr. Macarthur hold over them. Now, of the remaining 369, there
are only 151 residents on Camden Park estate, so that in other parts
of the district there are 218 electors, besides the 295 freeholders,
making a total of 513 out of 664 over whom Mr. Macarthur has no
influence, other than a general approbation of his principles and
public conduct; and that was supposing the 151 residents on
the Camden Park estate to be otherwise influenced by Mr.
Macarthur. But Ido not believe that Mr. Macarthur is the man
to exert any undue means of influence he might possess to induce
any one of the constituency, whether a tenant or not, to forego his
conscientious opinions. (Applause.) Now, though I am not a
tenant, I would scorn the idea of being influenced by a landlord in


giving my vote ; and I am sure Mr. Macarthur would scorn the idea
of influencing any one of his tenants, though his lease had but one
year to run. (Hear, hear.) And I am sure not a man here would
give a vote contrary to what he thought was right, even if by
not doing so he were to lose the lease of his farm. (Applause.) If
he would give a vote contrary to what he believed in his conscience
was right, in order to obtain some advantage, then his vote would
not be worth having ; and I am sure Mr. Macarthur would not wish
to have the vote of such a man recorded in his behalf. (Hear, hear,
from Mr. Macarthur.') He would not wish to obtain his seat by
the vote of a man who would be such a traitor to his country as to
vote against what his conscience declared was the right course for
him to pursue (applause) ; and so I am sure you will throw back
the insinuation in the teeth of those who made it—that West
Camden is the pocket borough, or the pocket constituency of Mr.
Macarthur. (Cheers.) For my own part, I would be inclined to
knock the man down who would have the audacity to tell me to my
face that I could not vote as I liked (cheers and applause)—and I
feel assured that there is not one of you but feels indignant at
such an insinuation being thrown out against a constituency of honest
and independent men. (Applause.) lam sure that in regard to the
present occasion, you are not one of you influenced, and that you
are satisfied that all the acts of Mr. Macarthur were the acts of a
gentleman and a statesman, or you would not have supported him.
(Cheers and applause.) It is on an occasion like the present that
we, removed from the influence of the party strife and political
conflicts of large cities, stand on vantage ground, and have an
opportunity of calmly expressing common-sense and unwarped
opinions ; and it must be to the advantage of the excited and per-
plexed inhabitants of large cities, and to those incessantly engaged
in legislative duties, to hear the opinions of those who are placed
in a position such as ours —a position where we are uninfluenced by
the atmosphere of Metropolitan, or Macquarie-street jealousies and
rivalries. It appears to me extraordinary that men naturally
conscientious and kind—who, in private life endeavour to act accord-
ing to the strict line of right—and every man knows that such
a line exists, though I confess it is sometimes difficult to find it, —
(laughter,)—but there is undoubtedly a line which is impassable
by every right minded man without doing violence to his feelings.
It appears to me extraordinary that conscientious, and kind, and
right-acting men in private life, as soon as they stqi into the arena


of political life, as soon as they get into Macquarie-street or St.
Stephen’s chapel, act in a totally different manner —act as if they
were all at once placed in a position of enmity to their fellow-men.
Why do they not continue to act in the fair and manly spirit of
gentlemen quietly discussing the affairs of the country, without
indulging in acrimonious personalities? Why is it that instead of
meeting each other in a fair and honourable manner, they encounter
each other as if they were dire enemies ? Instead of trying to find
out that abstract line of right conduct by which business ought to be
regulated, and which can be discovered by every one who sets
himself to find it, with a determination to be free from party or
personal views or interests. I never knew of a case yet of the
imposition of a tax, or the passing of an Act, where, with a little
attention, it could not be seen where the line of right had been
adhered to or swerved from. Now, could not legislators in every
case, try to find that line, and act according to it, instead of going
into long discussions, and raising up acrimonious feelings, sometimes
on points altogether apart from the proper subject under consider-
ation. I may be set down as a visionary for making such an
observation ; but I feel certain that if they sought first to find out
the principle of right, and then acted accordingly, the public business
of the colony would be more efficiently and satisfactorily performed.
If, instead of going into long debates on matters which do not affect
the welfare of the country, our legislators were to content themselves
with trying to find the right principle of action, and to be guided by
it, the welfare of the country would be greatly increased and its
progress advanced. Those members, for instance, who raised a
factious opposition—for it was nothing but a factious opposition,
deny it as they might —to Mr. Donaldson’s ministry, would have
done a positive good to the colony, would have conferred
advantage on it, commensurate to the time occupied, had they set
their wits to work in order to devise means for the development of
the resources of the country, instead of putting off, by personal
debates, the day when we are to have a good and strong Government.
The party who so strenuously opposed Mr. Donaldson pro-
fessed to represent the liberal party of England; but I deny
that they do so. Those who in this country are termed conser-
vatives more truly represent the English liberal party. In fact, there
is no such thing as a conservative party in this country. (Hear,
hear.) We all belong to the liberal or progressive party. And
what says the mouth-piece of the English liberals ? A very able


writer in the Westminster JRevieto, the organ of the English liberal
party —thus expresses himself, with reference to the principle of the
constitutional question our legislators have recently been considering;
and were the opposition of this country to do as that writer advises,
how much better would it be for the country. This writer,
speaking of the Constitution of Piedmont, which, after many struggles
it had just obtained—and by substituting Australia for Piedmont, or
Italy, you would think he referred to this country, under its present
circumstances, —this writer says :
There is, however, one difficulty in the onward progress of the Sardinian
monarchy, which England has never known : its Constitution is not native to its
soil; has not grown with its growth, and strengthened with its strength, like the
English Parliament; and, consequently, the defects from which no human
works are free, are more keenly scanned, because the whole is new and strange.
Time honoured institutions are approached with a certain degree of respect; but
every man holds himself able to canvass a thing of yesterday; and thus there
is danger of the same itching desire for change, which has proved so fatal in
France. We trust, however, that the good sense of the people will prevent this.
Statesmen will always be liable to mistakes. Human contrivances will always
be imperfect: and the power of watching over and correcting these, which is
vested in the people, must be cautiously and wisely used, or the vessel of the
state will founder, and with it the best hopes of Italy.
These are the words of a liberal reviewer—npt of the Conservative
and Tory party of England ; and do those gentlemen who arrogate
to themselves to be the representatives in this colony of the liberal
party carry out those views ? (Cries of “ No, no.”) No, they do
not watch over and seek to reform our Government. They would
rather see the day of no Government than see the day when a
strong Government—a Government strong in right principles, rather
than in party power—existed in this colony. (Hear, hear.) I say
that it is neither patriotic nor honourable in them to act as they
have done. But the gentleman whom we have re-elected to-day,
and whose conduct we have stamped with the seal of our approba-
tion, has in times past striven, and I feel assured in time to come
will always strive, to do that only which in his heart he firmly
believes to be right. (Applause.) He is willing and anxious, and
has pledged himself to watch over,, and use his utmost endeavours
to correct those abuses that may be found to exist in the Constitu-
tion ; but will not submit to see anarchy and disorder reign in this
noble colony, which is languishing for a strong and right-principled
Government—and which only requires to have such a Government
to ensure the development of vast and rich resources—(applause)—


and to strengthen that freedom of the people, which is enjoyed to
such an extent by the inhabitants of the colony. As one of the
people, I say, that if we stand together, and will not allow ourselves
to be dictated to or insulted, we may continue to enjoy a measure of
freedom that will be a blessing to us and ours ; and which, as we love
our country and our children, we ought to strive to preserve unin-
fringed, and to hand down, from sire to son, unsullied as it came, for
all time to come —(applause)—and that our country may securely
enjoy such a Government, may it ever continue under the sceptre of
our great and gracious Queen. (Loud cheers and applause.)
Mr. Macarthur, who, on rising, was received with prolonged
cheering, said: Gentlemen, we have adjourned here for your con-
venience, that is, for the public convenience, on this occasion. I
regret that this room is not larger, so as to afford you better
accommodation, but I hope the permanent Court-house will soon be
finished, and will furnish ample space for public meetings of this or
any other kind. The subject which has brought us together to-day
is so wide, and embraces considerations so important, that I assure
you, often as I have had occasion to speak in public, I have never
felt more embarrassed as to the proper mode of treating the matter
under consideration. If, therefore, in the course of the observations
I shall have to address to you, I should be somewhat discursive —
if I should tresspass too much on your time and patience, I trust
that you wdll consider this a legitimate ground of excuse. (Hear,
hear.) If the matter related merely to myself or to considerations
affecting my re-election, I could dispose of it very briefly,
inasmuch as no words of mine can express the gratitude which I
feel to the constituency of West Camden, for the proud position in
which they have this day placed me. The subject may, indeed in this
light be considered as disposed of by what I have already said from
the hustings. But as by the proceedings of this day, from my being
returned as one of your representatives, I may be said to stand
before you as the embodiment of the principle of responsible
Government, this, then, is to you, gentlemen, in truth, the first
act in the great drama of Constitutional administration, the first
palpable instance of the inauguration and actual existence of that
new state of things, in this young and rising country, which has been
so long and'ardently desired. It is true that when you did me the
honour to elect me but a short time since— on the 26th of March
last—l stated that it was under a constitution embodying that
principle ; but I now appear before you as an instance of the actual


working of that principle ; and it is on that account that I am now
here again to appeal to you, or rather, I should say, to thank you
for the judgment you have deemed it right to pronounce, in so
emphatic a manner in approbation of my conduct. Gentlemen, 1
thank my kind friend, who has proposed me in terms far too flattering.
I esteem his friendship the more because I know the grounds on which
it is based—that this is not with him, or me a matter of mere
personal friendship, but a political amity, a Constitutional alliance
—(hear, hear, and applause) —that in this act we shake hands
together, and embracing the constitutional principles of England, we
pledge ourselves to do all in our power, and you in yours, to assert and
maintain the true principles of English constitutional liberty. (Ap-
plause.) Gentlemen, I shall endeavour to show you that, in the course
which I have taken, in connexion with the present ministry, there
has been nothing not in accordance w r ith constitutional principle.
Whatever may have been said of the irregularity or unconstitu-
tionality of our conduct, I shall, I think, be able to show you that our
course was a constitutional course, though not laid down in the Con-
stitution Act, Why, it may be asked, did you riot follow the strict
letter of the law ? Simply because it was a “ casus omissus.” The
Act made no provision for the emergency that arose. It contains
nothing to serve as a direction what should be done under the cir-
cumstances. There was no beacon to warn us against rocks or
hidden dangers, or to guide us in the true course. We were obliged
to make a precedent for ourselves, but it was a precedent in accord-
ance with English principles, and the spirit of Representative
Government. (Applause.)
Gentlemen, on the 30th of January, I received from the hands
of the representative of the Queen in this colony, a commis-
sion as a member of the interim Executive Council. lhat
commission I still hold; and, according to English precedent, I
am incapable of resigning it. That commission confers on me an
honour, it is true, but it carries with it, as all such honours should,
grave duties and responsibilities. The office of Executive Councillor
here is analagous to that of Privy Councillor at home. It confers
the title of honorable. If, however, there is any honour in the office,
it must be from the right discharge of the duties attached to it.
(Cheers.) Gentlemen, I have told you that Ido not feel that I could
resign the office if I would. But if I were to disgrace the office, if I
were to debase myself, and to forfeit all claim to public confidence,
I might be dismissed from it; but I trust the history of the past w ill


be accepted as affording some guarantee for my future conduct.
(Applause.) Well, gentlemen, from the 30th of January, until the
end of April, my duties as a Member of the Interim Executive
Council were merely of a formal nature. I was asked at that
period whether I would join the Donaldson Administration. I
did not hesitate to do so, because I felt that the country in the
hour of need, had a right to my services.
Gentlemen, I undertook to fill the office of Colonial Trea-?
surer, and if it had been practicable at the time for the members
of the ministry to have taken office without vacating their seats,
we should all have done so. I should have been Colonial Trea-
surer for a time only, it is true —because, as Colonial Treasurer,
I should not have been the right man in the right place —and
therefore, I would not take on myself the duties permanently,
but only until some one better qualified should be found to hold the
office. You gentlemen, who know me, will believe that I should have
performed them honestly. I trust I may, in the words of Pitt to his
great rival, ask, is there any thing in my past career to lead to the
supposition that I would soil my hands with the public money ?
(Applause.) But, gentlemen, lam not an accountant; I could
not sit down and pore over books, and attend to the dry routine of
such an office day after day, and, therefore, I should not have been
the right man in the right place. I should have been wasting
what energies of life remain to me.
The frost of age is showing itself on my head, and in many ways
I am reminded of the lapse of time, which has, however, had a good
effect, I trust, in sobering down my judgment, and teaching me not
to attempt things beyond my strength. However, as regards both
myself and my colleagues, had it not been for a defect in the Con-
stitution Act, we should have felt bound to take office at once —I
acknowledge that. We should have taken upon ourselves the whole
of the duties —departmental as well as merely political of—the offices
which we had expressed our willingness to fulfil, but the necessary
consequence wonld have been that our seats in the House of
Assembly would have become vacant; and by a flaw in the Act
there was no way of re-filling them. Till the Speaker of the House
was chosen no writ could be issued for a re-election, and conse-r
quently if we had accepted office and thus vacated our seats, you,
gentlemen, would, on the opening of the first Parliament, have been
without a representative—the Northumberland Boroughs would
have been without a representative—the Sydney Hamlets would


have been without a representative—and so also would have been
the North Riding of Cumberland, at that important juncture ; our
lips would have been sealed, and only one member of the ministry
—my honorable friend the member for the South Riding of Cum-
berland, Mr. Manning—would have had a seat in the House.
Singly must he have met the flood of invective, and the tortuous party
tactics of an Opposition which my friend, Mr. Henry Oxley, has
designated by the right name. It was a factious opposition.
(Cheers.) Well, gentlemen, I ask you, as men of common sense,
not as constitutional lawyers—l am not much of that myself—
(laughter) but I ask you, as men of common sense, if you
were placed in a difficulty, and two courses were open to you—
would you not take that course which appeared to you to be the
right one ? (Applause.) I ask you whether in our position you
would have taken a course, that would have left without any
representative several of the principal constituencies of the country,
and by which the lips of the administration would have been sealed,
—a course which would at the meeting of Parliament, have
prevented the bringing forward the Address with that programme of
measures, which has received the almost unanimous approbation of
the colony,—(cheers and applause)—which would have left it a
sealed book, till a future opportunity, which possibly might never
have occurred, for I doubt if the so-called liberals, had they suc-
ceeded in driving us from office, would have brought forward so
constitutional an address as ours, or measures equal in liberality
and usefulness. (Hear, hear.) Gentlemen, my friend, Mr. Henry
Oxley, has spoken of the conduct of Mr. Donaldson as having
been in some degree irregular, inasmuch as the Upper House
should, in his opinion, have been nominated before the ministry
was formed. If the proper course was not observed in that matter,
the blame rests in part with me as well as with Mr. Donald-
son. But I think Mr. H. Oxley overlooks a slight difficulty there
was in the way. We have been so much accustomed hitherto to
consider our local Legislature as only one House, that we are
hardly sensible of the full extent of the change, now that
it consists of two separate Houses. The new Legislature of
this colony consists of three estates —the Governor, represent-
ing the Crown; the Legislative Council, representing, in a
very qualified degree, I admit,—but still, to a certain extent*
taking the place of the House of Lords, and the Assembly or
House of Commons. Now, until the Legislative Council was nomi-


nated, the House of Assembly could not be brought together. The
Legislative Council of New South Wales is simply a Chamber of
Revision, with powers of general legislation ; but not as in the
North American colonies and Jamaica—with the additional functions
of a Privy Council and Court of Appeal. It was necessary that
both Houses should exist in order to constitute the Parliament.
But how, I would ask, was the Legislative Council to be nominated,
except according to the terms of the Act, viz. ; by the Governor
and Executive Council. Now Mr. Donaldson and his colleagues
were the Executive Council, and ready to take office so soon as the
meeting of Parliament enabled us to be re-elected. That we did
not assume the departmental, as well as the political functions, of
the Executive officers, was the fault of the law and not ours. Mr.
H. Oxley has indeed told us that the intention of the Act was that
the Legislative Council should be nominated by the old officers—by
Mr. Deas Thomson and his colleagues. But their political func-
tions had ceased.
Mr. H. Oxley : By the interim Executive Council.
Mr. Macarthur : Well, my friend says it was to be nominated
by the interim Executive Council —that is, politically , mark you
—in the political sense of the word —by an irresponsible Executive.
(“ Yes, yes,” by Mr. H. Oxley,) But there is nothing in the
Act to shew that such was its intention. If any gentlemen will
point out to me a passage in the Act that proves such to have
been its intention, k shall feel myself under an obligation. The
Act says the Upper House is to be nominated by the Governor
and the Executive Council.
Mr. H. Oxley : Not by a responsible ministry,
Mr. Macarthur : Just so, by the Governor and the Executive
Council, which was also a responsible ministry. If then there was
any error in the course pursued, it was in the Governor. General’s
placing the nomination of the Upper House in the hands of a
responsible ministry—responsible for that and every other act
performed to the country at large. But, gentlemen, I think there
is some misapprehension as to this being a departure from the
intention of the Act, In the course of the recent debate on this
subject in the House of Assembly, Mr. Nichols and Mr. Plunkett
quoted from their speeches, on the second reading of the bill, to
show what were their opinions on this point, when the Act was
under discussion in the old Council, and the sentiments of those
gentlemen were closely in accordance with what fell from me on the


same occasion. During the debate upon the second reading of the
bill, I expressed myself as follows :
It is argued that the nominee House would not have the prestige which the
elective House would. Why not ? Why should more confidence or respect
attach to a Council consisting of members selected by the landholders of the
colony than to a Council appointed under the responsibility of the Executive 1
The latter was at least as likely to choose men capable of serving their country,
and acquiring the respect and confidence of the public. Another feature, which
has not yet been alluded to in the debate, was that under the new form of
Government, the Upper House would be nominated by responsible ministers,
answerable to the country as well for this as for every other of their acts. The
House thus appointed would therefore, in fact, approach, as nearly as circum-
stances permitted, to the Upper House of Parliament in England, and the
Senate of the United States.
Those were my views, on the second reading of the bill,
participated in by Mr. Plunkett and Mr. Nichols.
That the Upper House should consist of members elected by the
landholders of the colony was the proposition of the honorable mem-
ber for Cook and Westmoreland. Now, as regards the difference
between my views as expressed on that occasion, and the report of
the select committee—the committee no doubt contemplated that the
nomination of the Upper House would be by the old Executive ;
but the existence of an interim Executive was not even dreamt of
then, and certainly was not at any time under consideration. But it
should also be borne in mind that when the report was drawn up,
the bill had not been introduced into the Council at all, —it had not
so much as gone through the first reading. In the arguments
adduced on the subject in the course of the second reading, this
improved view presented itself to Mr. Nichols, Mr. Plunkett,
and myself. We thought that the Legislative Council ought to be
nominated by a responsible Executive, subject to the proviso that
the first Council so nominated should exist only for years.
That limitation was adopted, not for the reason supposed by Mr.
Oxley,—namely, that the first Upper House could not be the nomi-
nation of a responsible Government—but for this reason—that if
the first nominated Upper House were for life—if instituted on the
life principle, its members would be likely to have a strong bias to
maintain that principle during their lives—they would be unwilling
to forego it in favour of an elective Upper House, or to sanction
any other change, or departure from the nomination principle.
It was not merely in order to prevent the nomination by the old
Executive, and to introduce the second nomination by a responsible


Executive —that might have been the view taken by Mr. Wentworth
and others —but with me it was, that for the first five years, the nomi-
nated House should exist as a precautionary measure —to give a fair
trial to the principle of nomination—to wait and see the result of five
years, so that the colony might be in a position to say whether
that principle should be continued, or the elective principle, in some
form or other, be adopted. That, as far as I can recollect, was my
chief reason for the course I took in this matter.
All that I now ask for the Constitution —as I told you on the day
you did me the honour of electing me, when I last appeard before you
as a candidate for your suffrages—all that I asked then, and all that
I ask for it now, is a fair trial ; and that it should not be condemned
without such trial. And that is all I ask for the Legislative
Council as now constituted, for I am not one of those—and I am
sorry that my friend the honorable member for Murrumbidgee is
not with us to-day, in consequence of public engagements in
Sydney, otherwise, as one of this constituency, he would have been
here—l am sorry he is not, as he is one of those who, because the
Legislative Council as nominated by us, does not exactly suit his indi-
vidual views, turns suddenly round, and says at once—“ My opinions
are altered, and I am for an elective Upper House.” Why ? Because
the House, as now nominated, does not meet the views of my
honorable friend and those who think with him. Neither does
it altogether meet my own views, and, perhaps, it does not suit
the exact views of the Prime Minister, nor exactly accord with
those of the honourable members for the North Hiding and the
South Riding of Cumberland, or the Northumberland Boroughs.
Perhaps, if each of us in his own person had had the nomination of
the Upper House, it would have been very different from what it
is—indeed, I am sure it would—it is scarcely possible that it could
have been the same, if it had been nominated by any single
individual; and no doubt, it would have been very different, if it
had been appointed by his Excellency the Governor-General.
But in the multiplicity of councillors, it is said,''there is wisdom ; at
all events, 1 can assure you, the present House was nominated
honestly and without any political bias whatever, for in my list were
the names of several who call themselves of the liberal party in this
country. It was from my list that their nomination originated,
and not from the lists of gentlemen who are considered to be less
exclusive in their views than I am. We all felt that it was but right
and fair that, in this nominated Council, the public interests of the


colony should be represented as fairly and as broadly as we could
make the House represent them.
There are some things that pass in the Executive Council
which are secret, on these my lips are closed ; I, however,
may say that I and others see no cause to regret that the
ecclesiastical element does not exist in the Upper House. It
is better that element should not be there; and I am glad that
the heads of the several persuasions, who received invitations
to the Upper House, had the good sense to decline them. But }
gentlemen, not so with regard to the judicial appointments. lam
quite aware of the force of the arguments that may be brought
against the judges having seats in the Legislative Council. lam
quite aware that if the judges were to lend themselves to political
purposes, or were so far to forget themselves as to become imbued
with party spirit, they could do nothing more detrimental to their
own character or the public ; and we should have occasion to
rue the day when the tribunals of justice became polluted at the
source by political influences. But it does not follow that, because
they hold seats in the Upper House, the judges ate Id lend them-
selves to such things; and I am sure that in the character of
the judges there is a sufficient guarantee against their doing
so. But it may be asked, what are they there for ? One of the
functions of the Upper House is that of a chamber of revision ; and
Who so able to revise the laws as those who know where their
defects exist, or who so capable of suggesting improvements in the
laws as those whose business it is to administer them. lam sure
those honourable functionaries will not, in their capacity of legis-
lators, forget what is due to themselves in their higher position of
judges. They may exercise the one duty without trenching on the
other. If they should not do so, then, that among others, will be
a strong argument against the Legislative Council being constituted
as our present Council is. And whenever it shall so happen, I for
one will at once admit that I have been Wrong in my estimate as to
the probable working of that bodyi But lam not prepared, because
it is the fashion at present to run down the Upper House, to say it
is a failure. Let it be proved by the test of experience to be wrong,
and I for one will do all in my power to rectify the abuse. (Applause.)
Gentlemen, I have told you that the nomination of the Upper House
was made by us without fear and without favour. We desired only
honestly and faithfully to discharge our duty in that respect; but I
will not go so far as to say that it might not have been better


if we had had more time; and I ask you to mark particularly the
force of what I say as to time, because it was the main difficulty of
our position. We had barely time to do anything. The Consti-
tution had been proclaimed nearly six months when we undertook
the duties of ministers ; and it was absolutely necessary that the
Parliament should be called together on or before the 23rd of May,
or where would your Constitution have been? It would have
become a mere waste and worthless parchment, not indeed to be cast
into the fire, but to have remained a blot on our annals —an indelible
stigma on the character of this community. (Hear, hear.)
Gentlemen, I felt this, and my colleagues felt this. I felt it
more especially, perhaps, because of the part which I had taken in
the proceedings which drew from the officials of Downing-street
a tardy and hesitating assent to that great measure of constitu-
tional liberty which we are now enjoying—l say enjoying, because if
properly exercised, liberty must be a blessing and enjoyment; and
I am satisfied it will be so exercised in this community, as to show
we do know what British liberty is. (Applause.)
But there was your Constitution. The law said it must be brought
into operation by the 23rd of May, or it expired. Ihe Queens re-
presentative called on the public men of the colony to form an Ad-
ministration, to give vitality to this parchment scroll, to breathe into
it the undying principle of well regulated Freedom. Ihe final hour-
glass was turned. The last sands of time were ebbing fast. Was this a
moment to stay higgling who should be first, or because not first, to
refuse to act? (Cheers.) That cheer satisfies me that your hearts
are in the right place—that you have heads, too —that you have not
only right feeling, but that strong common sense that distinguishes
the parent community, from which we are all sprung; and that, as I
said before, you will make the charter of our liberties a blessing to
our country. But it was not by standing aside hestitating whether
we should commit ourselves to a position, not exactly such as we
might think ourselves entitled to —(cheers) —a position by which
our dignity might be in some degree infringed upon —that the Con-
stitution was to be saved. (Cheers) I should have been glad to have
seen a ministry formed on the broadest possible basis —a ministry
framed on the principle suggested in the passage quoted from the
Westminister Review by my friend, Mr. H. Oxley—a ministry
uniting the best men from all parties—(cheers) —(a voice “ mem-
bers of the Bunch.”) Yes, even of the “ Bunch,” but one of them
would have been quite enough. I should have liked to have seen


an administration formed on such a basis, to carry out measures
for the public good ; to promote the best interests of this great
country, and not to make the halls of Council the mere arena of
personalities in debate, and of paltry rivalries as to position and
place. (Cheers.)
This point, as to time, is one which I am desirous to have clearly
understood by this meeting and by the country. It was on the 25th
of April we signified our willingness to form a ministry, and
in doing so were precluded from accepting office, solely because
of the impossibility of new writs issuing for our seats; but it
\vas not till the 28th of April that Mr. Deas Thomson and the
old heads of departments left the Executive Council. So that, in
fact, it was not till May, we could be brought together to perform
bur functions at all. Therefore, within a fortnight, with a multi-
plicity of affairs pressing on us—private, as well as public—for we
could not divest ourselves of these all at once—with these claims on
our time and thoughts—and I can say that when the proposition was
made to me to join the ministry, I had made no arrangements respect-
ing my personal affairs to enable me to meet the contingency, for I had
not contemplated the probability of being called on to join in forming
an administration ; but I felt that it was my duty; and in such an
emergency, private considerations should weigh but as feathers in
the balance. (Cheers.)
Under these circumstances, then, we were called on to undertake
the duties of ministers under the New Constitution, with only three
weeks to lapse before the final day fixed by law for the calling
together of the Parliament. 1 ask you, then, to consider what must
be the position of any five men, however well drilled to the per-
formance of public duty as members of former Councils, however
qualified from experience in Executive business, when brought
together thus suddenly for the discharge of public duties of
Unusual importance and difficulty. There was not merely the nomi-
nation of the Upper House, but the political basis, on which the mi-
nistry should act, had to be definitively settled, as well as the
measures political and administrative, which were to be undertaken.
All this had to be considered and agreed on. Gentlemen, 1 hold in
my hand the Address —1 hope you have read it —that address which
although submitted to Parliament nominally as the speech of the
Governor, is actually the address of the ministry. It has been
alluded to by Mr. Oxley as having received the approbation of the
country. It is all very well for the Opposition to say it is made up


from old addresses and old speeches—it is easy to pick holes in
anything—but I assure you this address is the legitimate production
of the ministry. We said, what can we undertake to do
that will be satisfactory to us and to the public, as a mani-
festation of our desire to do our duty ? I cannot say we shall
achieve all the good that is there shadowed forth, but we will try,
and with God’s help and yours, we will achieve it. (Loud cheers.)
Yes-, Gentlemen, whether in this session or the next, the
principles of policy indicated in the Address, will be carried by
the public voice of this community. (Renewed cheers.)
Gentlemen, I have dwelt more at length, than I contemplated at
the outset, on this portion of the subject. I will now shortly refer you
to some illustrations from history—authentic history, which may be
worthy of your notice—despite the warning against history of the
honorable member for the Southern Boroughs. [A voice: “He
promised to be here.”] He threw down a sort of gage to that effect,
probably in jest. Nevertheless I would, in the first place, beg your
attention to the principle of constitutional law, which has caused me
to resign my seat and to ask you to re-elect me. If I were to go
fully into the matter, as laid down by Hallam in his Constitutional
History, it would be detaining you too long, I will state it, therefore
as shortly as I can. After the memorable revolution of 1688, there
were so many new offices created with salaries, that the House of
Commons proposed a law to prevent any one, holding a paid
appointment, from having a seat in the House. The Bill was
carried in the Commons, but rejected by the Lords. Next session
it was again brought forward, and passed both Houses, but the King
refused his assent, because he felt that the chief Ministers of the
Crown ought to be present, in one, or both Houses. It did not
follow that the door should be thrown open to all subaltern appoint-
ments. Well, as I have said, the King refused his consent to a
measure of total exclusion, and the subject continued without legal
remedy till the year 1706, when the House of Commons introduced
into the Act of Security, a long clause, carried on a division by 167
to 160, January 24, 1706, enumerating various persons who should
be eligible to Parliament; the principal Officers of State, the
Commissioners of Treasury and Admiralty, and a limited number
of other placemen. The Lords thought fit to repeal the whole
prohibitory enactment. It was resolved in the Commons, by a
majority of 205 to 183, that they would not agree to this amend-
ment. A conference, accordingly, took place, when the managers


of the Commons objected, February 7, that a total repeal of that
provision would admit such an unlimited number of Officers to sit
in their House as might destroy the free and impartial proceedings
in Parliament, and endanger the liberties of the Commons of
England. Those on the Lords’ side gave their reasons to the
contrary at great length, February 11. The Commons determined,
February 18, to insert the provision vacating the seat of a member
accepting office ; and resolved not to insist on their disagreements as
to the main clause. Well, you see illustrated in this instance, in a
very striking way, the positive advantage that results from those
checks, and counter-checks, and balances that exist in the British
Constitution, and which we have been so much sneered at for
endeavouring to imitate, however humbly, in our Constitution.
It was by the operation of the checks resulting from differences of
opinion between the Lords and Commons, and from the exercise of
the Veto, by William the 111., that the law assumed its present shape
—not that the mere receipt of pay .should exclude from a seat in the
House of Commons, or from our Assembly, but that the taking
a paid office shall vacate the seat, and require the party to be re-
elected. And in our Assembly the number of paid officers who
may hold seats is besides limited to ten. There are five at present,
and five more may be nominated hereafter.
Well, Hallam goes on, in his usual lucid manner, to show the
great disadvantages which would have arisen from carrying out the
first view of the Commons, or their later view, and how much better
is the course ultimately adopted. The utter exclusion of paid officers
would have led either to a despotic monarchy or to a Republic.
Responsible and Constitutional Goverment, as now enjoyed under
the British Constitution, could not have existed. He concludes
by saying that these restrictions should be rigorously observed,
and in doubtful cases exercised according to their constitutional
spirit. Gentlemen, when I made up my mind—and I first ex-
pressed my views in reference to this matter at Picton, at the
election meeting that took place there in March last—as to what
would be my duty, supposing I took on myself the political duties
of an Executive office, —I had not referred to Hallam—l had not re-
ferred to books, when I told my colleagues that having exercised
those functions, although without pay, 1 was bound to resign my
seat and appeal to my constituency.
We all agreed that according to the broad principle of the
Constitution, I should vacate my seat. The letter of the law would


have allowed me to hold my seat, but I had determined not to
shelter myself under the letter, but to follow what I thought the
spirit of the Act. I have endeavoured to do my duty on this, as on
other occasions, on the principle of right; and it is most grati-
fying to me to receive this mark of your approbation of my conduct.
I may tell you, without arrogating too much to myself, that a high
authority on moral and political ethics—has spoken in terms of
eulogium of the conduct in this instance pursued, as well
calculated to have a beneficial influence on the youth of
Australia—who would see that the first responsible ministry
of this colony scorned to shrink behind the mere letter of the
law, or to resort to quibbles and nice legal points; adhering to
that course under circumstances of acknowledged difficulty, which
appeared to them the right one—and finally appealing to their con-
stituents and the country. Should the voice of the country be against
us, which I do not believe it will, we shall at least have the satis-
faction of retiring into private life with the proud consciousness,
that we cannot justly be charged with dereliction of public duty, or
of right principle. (Cheers.) For whatever the angry ebullitions
of the present moment* those who come after us, and look calmly
and dispassionately on our conduct, will pronounce the verdict which
you have pronounced this day. (Cheers and applause.) Gentlemen,
it is not merely as the constituency of West Camden that you
pronounce your approval of our conduct, but, to use the words of a
great statesman, who has gone to the grave admired and lamented
as few have been before, and on whom posterity will pronounce yet
higher enconiums, in the words of Peel —“ as an integral portion of
the British Empire ” you this day give the verdict, which I prize so
highly, as the assertion of Constitutional principle, and of rational
liberty—and because it shows a just discrimination between party,
or personal motives, and the love of country. (Loud cheers.)
Gentlemen, I have referred to English history in illustration
and support of the course adopted by the ministry, in taking office,
and, thereupon, vacating their seats. I will now venture to mention
one or two historical instances illustrative of the right of the sovereign
to appoint and dismiss ministers. When I speak of the sovereign, of
course I include her Majesty’s representative in this colony. From
1688 to the present time, the historical Annals of England fully bear
out the theory, that in the sovereign is vested the power not only to
appoint, but to dismiss the ministry. Gentlemen, the first illustration
to which I will refer you, is from Lord Mahon’s History of England,


it relates to the resignation of Sir R. Walpole—a resignation caused by
the desertion of his friends and the dread of a threatened impeach-
ment.
But it is to Lord Mahon’s vivid description of the disap-
pointed political aspirants of that day that I ask your especial
attention. It would really seem as if written expressly in reference
to the conduct of certain parties here.
In 1742, when Pulteney was sent for by George 2nd to form a ministry, on
the retirement of Sir Robert Walpole, he named the Earl of Wilmington, First
Lord of the Treasury, and Samuel Sandys, Chancellor of the Exchequer,
Carteret, Secretary of State, and the Marquis of Tweeddale, the new Secretary
for Scotland ; while for himself he required a peerage, and a seat in the cabinet.
Meanwhile the rumours of the negotiations and intended appointments raised a
great ferment in the ranks of opposition. The Tories though forming the larger
share of the anti-ministerial phalanx, found themselves as yet utterly excluded.
Among the patriots many wished to be employed, and all to be consulted. Nay
more, as always happens in such cases, several persons, exasperated at the want
of concert, murmured against the very course which they themselves would have
advised had they been applied to, (Cheers.)
Gentlemen, —Lord Mahon’s History of England is a work which
any party may appeal to as unbiassed and fair. I will next
refer you to another memorable portion of history—the great
struggle between the Pitt and Fox ministries, on the subject of
Fox’s celebrated India Bill, which, if it had been allowed to pass,
would have made Fox and the whig leaders paramount to the
sovereign, and supreme rulers of the empire. The bill was rejected
by the Lords and the ministry dismissed. Dismissed ! By whom ?
By the King, and that in defiance of a majority of the House of
Commons, for Fox had a majority with him. The struggle, however,
went on in the Commons, Pitt contending with the majority, on con-
stitutional principle, till it dwindled down to one.
In the course of the various discussions in which Fox, by means
of the House of Commons, strove to controul and set aside the
decision of the Sovereign, that great statesman never ventured to
say that the appointment or dismissal of ministers, vested in
the House of Commons, as was alleged in the recent debate in
our Legislative Assembly. On the contrary, the King, in the face
of a majority of the Flouse of Commons, dismissed the Fox ministry ;
and on an appeal to the country, Pitt, the minister of the King’s
choice, was placed triumphantly at the head of a large majority.
Fox’s India Bill was thrown out, and Pitt’s India Bill became
the law of the land. The matter is of sufficient importance to


warrant the reading a short passage referring to the dismissal of the
Fox and the appointment of the Pitt ministry.
On Wednesday, the 17th of December, the India Bill was rejected by the
Lords, on a division of 95 to 76. It was remarked that the Prince of Wales who
was in the minority in the former division, having learned in the interim that
the measure was offensive to the King, was absent on this occasion. At twelve
o’clock on the following night, a messenger delivered to the two Secretaries of
State his Majesty’s orders. “ That they should deliver up the seals of their
offices, and send them by the Under Secretaries, Mr. Fraser and Mr. Nepean, as
a personal interview on the occasion would be disagreeable to him.” The seals
were immediately given by the King to Lord Temple, who sent letters of dis-
mission, the day following, to the rest of the Cabinet Council; at the same time,
Mr. William Pitt was appointed first Lord of the Treasury and Chancellor of
the Exchequer.
Now, Gentlemen, I am satisfied you will agree with me, that
this is conclusive as to the principle that in the King, independently
of the Commons, vests the authority both to appoint and to dismiss
ministers. I may again mention that Pitt and his colleagues, not-
withstanding a majority of the House of Commons, headed by Fox,
used every effort to remove them, remained in office ; and before
the dissolution succeeded in carrying the Mutiny Bill, and other
necessary measures of the session ; and that finally upon a dissolution
of the House, and an appeal to the country by a new election, Pitt
obtained a large majority, and the public voice pronounced empha-
tically in favour of the course adopted by the sovereign and his ad-
visers. I might refer to various other illustrations of the principle,
but none that I remember so striking as this. There is, however, one
instance which was alluded to in the course of the late debate by
several speakers, and by myself; and as what fell from me on that
occasion was misreported, I will now re-state it. I allude to the
appointment of Sir Robert Peel, by William the Fourth, in 1834.
The Melbourne Ministry was on that occasion placed in a difficulty,
in consequence of the death of Earl Spencer, the father of Lord
Spencer, who was their leader in the House of Commons. Lord
Melbourne as Prime Minister, went to the King at Brighton, and
proposed that Lord John Russell should take the post in the House
of Commons, vacant by the death of Earl Spencer, and at the same
time he named some one else to succeed Lord John Russell. The
King on reflection said to Lord Melbourne—“ Ido not think such
an administration could govern the country satisfactorily.” The
Duke of Wellington was consequently applied to by the King, and
he recommended his Majesty to send to Rome for Sir Robert Peel.


His Majesty did so, and when Sir Robert Peel arrived he formed a
ministry. Now, this also is a parallel case, in which the Sovereign
exercised the power of dismissal, as well as appointment. For
although the dismissal originated in the first instance from a casual
even t—the death of Earl Spencer yet Lord Melbourne pro-
posed that the vacancy should be filled by the appointment of
Lord John Russell, in the place of Lord Spencer. But the King
said “ no, such an arrangement is not likely to be satisfactory;
your ministry must cease, and a new ministry he appointed.”
From this modern instance, then, it is equally manifest that the
Sovereign possesses the power of appointing and dismissing his
ministers independently of the House of Commons. In fact, as I
said in the Legislative Assembly—though in saying so I shocked
the peculiar sensitiveness of one honorable member —it is a princi-
ple of the Constitution of England, which every school-boy or tyro
in history ought to know. This and some other remarks I made on
that occasion, gave the honorable member great offence. In making
those remarks, however, then as now, there was, on my part, no
temper or ill-feeling.
Gentlemen, I hope I have satisfied you that the course I have
taken, as a member of the existing administration, is in accordance
with the spirit and principles of the Constitution ; and that our
brief continuance as a Privy Council —or Executive Council,
without office, arose from a circumstance over which we had no
controul. We were in a difficulty, and took the course we thought
the right one. We appeared in our places in the assembly to
defend that course —ready to take office when we could do so without
sealing our lips, or giving up our seats, with no means of being
restored to them by appeal to our constituencies, The more I
consider the course we have pursued, the more I am persuaded
it was the right one. It has been urged against us that our
taking office was irregular and unconstitutional, But a large
majority of the assembly has decided that we were right, and
the country will, I am satisfied, affirm that decision- (Cheers.)
Then, we were told that the old officers of the Government—
Mr. Deas Thomson, Mr. Riddell, and the other members of the
old Executive Council —ought to have nominated the Upper
House. But the law does not say so. There is nothing in the Act
to justify an assertion to that effect. In the course of the debate
the contrary was clearly shewn, as well by superiority of argument,
as by the final test of the division, so decidedly against our
opponents,


I have shown that the duration of the Legislative Council
was limited at first to five years, because, if made a life institution at
once, there would have been great difficulty in retracing our steps.
If the nominated Upper House, during the five years of its existence,
should prove to work well, the country may be disposed to continue
it on the life principle ; but on the contrary, if it should be found
to work ill, some other system than that of nomination may be
adopted. I have told you already that it is very easy to pick holes
in other people’s work, and to find fault with a thing after it is done ;
but what would the Opposition have said if the old Executive had
nominated the Upper House. We should have been told that it
was the double distilled essence of Nomineeism, that the old
nominees had nominated the Upper House, that it was a flagrant
attempt to trample on the liberties of the people —that the principle
of Nomineeism, monstrous in itself, was yet more monstrous in its
exercise. (Cheers.)
And because this course was not adopted, we are now told
that the Governor acted in an unconstitutional manner, and that we,
as a responsible Executive, lent ourselves to this unconstitutional
proceeding. When my friend, Mr. H. Oxley, comes to consider
the matter more closely, he will, I think, see that if the old, or as
he suggests, the interim Executive had power by the wording of the
act, to nominate the Legislative Council, there can be no reason
against that power being exercised by a responsible Executive.
But apart from the subject of the Upper House, those opposed
to us—l will not call them our adversaries—but those who occupy the
opposition Benches, in other words the Outs say we have “ infringed
on the rights and privileges of the people’s House,” because they
the Outs, ought in the nature and fitness of things to have enjoyed
the right and privilege of kicking out the Deas Thomson
Executive, and thus becoming the Ins. The fallacy of this
assumption I have shown by constitutional precedents. Without doubt
if the Governor were to appoint a ministry of no character —men
who, from their past career, or proposed measures, were not to be
trusted — then the Commons’ House, or House of Assembly —and
I trust the Legislative Council, too, would show by their votes
that such a ministry had not the confidence of the country, and,
therefore, could not have their confidence —both Houses would, I
trust, reject their measures —and if it came to a matter of necessity,
the Assembly could stop the supplies. That is the constitutional
controul which the House of Assembly possesses.


Whenever the House of Commons has, by the exercise of its
legitimate controlling powers, compelled the dismissal of a ministry,
it has been on account of its not possessing the necessary attributes of
a government —on account of some gross abuse of power, or weakness,
or incapacity to deal with the great interests confided to its hands.
But what did our opponents say ? “We approve of your measures,
you out-liberalise the liberals”—(applause)—and that is their chief
objection to us—that, and the fact of our having a decided majority
of the House and the country, therefore, say they—we, the minority,
must find fault with you, and try to turn you out on patriotic and
constitutional grounds. (Laughter and cheers.) Mr. H. Oxley has
spoken of the personalities that were indulged in during the debates
in the Legislative Assembly. But there were in the Opposition two
examples to the contrary; I refer to one of the honorable members
for Sydney, Mr. Parkes, and to the honorable member for Durham,
Mr. Jones. The speeches of both those gentlemen were against
the ministry. Mr. Jones, it appeared to me, had taken the report
of the Select Committee on the Constitution Act, as an index to the
meaning of the law, but the report was drawn up, as I have already
noticed, before the Bill had even a first time, and various
important changes were made in it during its progress through the
Council.
Mr. Jones’ argument was based upon what I cannot but hold to
be an erroneous view of the Constitutional Act of this Colony, and,
a yet greater and more dangerous fallacy, as regards the established
principle and practice of the English Constitution, in reference to the
appointment and dismissal of ministers.
In the course of the debate in the House of Commons, in 1784,
on Mr. Powys’ motion, “ for a limited and efficient administration,”
Fox spoke upon this point as follows; —.
“ That it had ever been an established and understood maxim, that
ministers ought not to remain in office who had not the confidence of the House,
was to he proved by a reference to the most remote periods of our history. So
long ago as the reign of Henry the 4th, when the nature of our Constitution was
but little known, an application had been made to that Monarch from Parlia-
ment for the removal of certain of his ministers, when Henry, with the spirit of a
British King, had said, “ He knew no cause why they should he removed, hut
only because they were hated by the people. Yet he charged them to depart
from his house, according to the desire of the Commons.” This answer, which
would have done honour to a Monarch in more modern times, when the
Constitutional privileges of that house, as the representative of the Commons of
England were so much better understood, clearly evinced how essentia} it had


ever been considered, that there should exist a mutual confidence between that
house and the ministers, who were entrusted with the Executive Government.
With regard to the argument, that stopping the supplies would be attended with
confusion and distractions, that depended entirely upon ’ His Majesty’s
ministers ; good ministers, who wished well to the peace and quiet of their
country, would always prevent them, by resigning before that House had pro-
ceeded to such a vote.
What, then, was the Constitutional maxim urged hy Fox
when using every effort to displace his rival ? “ that Ministers ought
not to remain in office, who had not the confidence of the Commons’
Houseand in illustration of this maxim—that Henry 4th, on an
address from Parliament, had dismissed his ministers, because they
were hated by the people.” Where is the assertion of a right in the
Commons’ House to appoint or even to dismiss ministers ? But what
said Pitt in answer to this passage of Fox’s speech ?
Notwithstanding those terms of obloquy with which I am assailed, I will
not shrink from avowing myself the friend of the King’s just prerogative.
Prerogative, Sir, has been justly called a part of the rights of the people, and
sure I am it is a part of their rights which the people were never more disposed
to defend, of which they never were more jealous than at this hour. Grant
only this, that this House has a negative in the appointment of ministers, and you
transplant the Executive power into this House. ••* If the Constitutional
independence of the Crown is thus reduced to the very verge of annihilation,
where is the boasted equipoise of the Constitution? Where is that balance
which our ancesters have measured out to each with so much precision?
Where is the independence—nay, where is even the safety of any prerogative of
the Crown, or even of the Crown itself, if its prerogative of naming ministers is
to be usurped by this House, or if (which is precisely the same thing) its nomi-
nation of them is to be negatived by this House, without stating any one ground of
distrust in the men, and without suffering ourselves to have any experience of
their measures ?
Could words be more in point as to the conduct of the opposi-
tion here, in the recent debate upon the address? Ihe true
Constitutional doctrine, to be derived from these eloquent passages
from the lips of two of the most renowned and gifted Statesmen of
England, as well as from other sources of undoubted authority, is
that the ministers can only be appointed or dismissed by the
Sovereign, as head of the Executive. But they are the servants of
the State, including the whole legislature, and therefore sworn to
maintain the rights and privileges of each separate Estate. 1 hey
are in one sense, no doubt the servants of Parliament, but as influen-
tial members of either House—and none other should be ministers
they by their eloquence, or weight of character lead the f to


which they belong, and sway the Councils of the Nation. In this way
the Parliament, —the Commons’ House especially, exercises a
preponderating share in the administration of public affairs. In this
way, to use the words of Hallam, “ we enjoy the individual pride
and dignity which belong to Republicans, with the steadiness and
tranquillity which the supremacy of a single person has been sup-
posed peculiarly to bestow.”
There is one other passage in the Speech of Pitt, from which I
have already quoted, which seems to me peculiarly to demand the
attention of our Colonial Statesmen and of the public, at this impor-
tant juncture, when we are laying the foundations of Constitutional
Government.
“ Above all, Sir, (said tbat great statesman,) Let the House of Commons
beware of suffering any individual to involve his own cause, and to interweave j
his own interests in the Resolutions of this House. The dignity of the House is
for ever appealed to. Let us beware that it is not the dignity of any set of men ;
let us beware that personal prejudices have no share in deciding these great
Constitutional questions.”
To revert to the personalities remarked upon by Mr. H. Oxley,
the choice epithets, applied in the course of the debate, which I felt
it my duty to repel at the time—not in anger, but on principle—
because I felt that I was bound, as your representative, to repel
them. They _might fall harmless on private individuals, but
you, the Constituency of West Camden, and through you the
whole Constituencies of the country were insulted. (Cheers.)
Therefore was the affront at once repelled. Such epithets as
these were applied to us, —a corrupt ministry, a ministry deriving
its existence from corrupt influences and intrigue, a thimble-rigging
ministry, sneaks. These, certainly, are choice attributes and epithets
to apply to the representatives of the people. You know best if I
have ever so acted as to lay myself open to such imputations.
I may err in being too candid, that is more likely to be
my fault. If, then, I have disdained artifice to obtain your good graces,
can you believe I would debase you by attempting “ to climb into
power by a back door” or by any such miserable trick ? No! taking
an open and straight forward part, I have submitted my con-
duct to you and my country ; and you, gentlemen, on the ground
alone of my past character, without requiring any explanation at
all, have placed me again in the proud position of your representa-
tive. For the fourth time, I have now the honour to occupy that
post, and I trust it is not the last. (Applause.)


Gentlemen, I might have stood here to-day as a paid officer
of the Government, and thus have avoided the necessity of coming
before you again, in the event of the requirements of the public
service calling on me to take office It is just within the range of
possibility that I may be called on to undertake some official
position, for which I may think myself not incompetent, and to
which a salary is attached. And in order to evade, —not ,( to sneak
from," but “ unworthily to evade ” coming before you again, I might
have accepted some fraction of a salary, a pound or a shilling —the
tip from the enlisting serjeant,—(laughter) —I might on the present
occasion have / evaded what I believe to be the true spirit of the
law, and have retained my seat. When I am found to act so
unworthily, I hope your voices will be the first to denounce such
conduct, and to scout me as no longer fit to enjoy your confi-
dence. (Applause.)
Gentlemen, four nominations are going on this day—the nomi-
nation for the North Riding of Cumberland —that for the Sydney
Hamlets, the election for which will be determined to-morrow, —
the nomination for the Northumberland Boroughs, and finally—that
which, I may say, is now terminated. I hope and trust—and
I feel sure you will go with me in this sentiment—that the verdict
of the other three constituencies will be as unmistakeably—though
in every instance not so peacefully determined —that it will be
as emphatically pronounced, as in this instance. I say this, because
I am satisfied that, setting aside the question whether our Consti-
tution is to be precisely what it is now ; whether we are to have a
nominated, or a representative Upper House; whether the consti-
tuencies are to be altered according to the desire of the honorable
member for Cook and Westmoreland, Mr. Martin, who is anxious
to unite with West Camden some of his own staunch supporters
in the romantic vale of Burragorang, (laughter), a change to which
our friend Mr. Lacy and others having an interest there will not
I dare say object, while I am sure we shall all welcome so
stalwart a band of voters, (Cheers), or by other and more exten-
sive changes ; these, with you as with me, are questions of time,
and of minor consideration to the questions, on which we have now
to pronounce and to act. Not that I despise those subjects, or
consider that they are not deserving of the utmost possible attention,
at a proper time, and when reform is proved to be necessary —but
because I am satisfied that there is sufficient work for us, in practical
matters, of far more importance 10 the good of the colony, than the


debating political theories of which we have no practical knowledge ;
that it is far better therefore, that we should employ ourselves on
measures, of substantial practical good, leaving the theories to the
settlement which time, after all, will bring about much better than
human intellect can devise.
Gentlemen, a new era has dawned on us. Political respon-
sibility has come upon us, I may say, like a strong giant, and
taken us almost in our slumber, when we scarcely expected it.
But here it is. We have realized a great fact. Responsible
Government exists in this colony, and that being the case, what
is our duty ? To turn it to the best practical account. That
is the course of duty which has been handed down to us. as a
precedent, by our ancestors. Gentlemen, an intelligent member
of this constituency, not present to day, Mr. Dunn, of the Oaks, —
told us at Picton, at the time of the last election, that notwithstanding
the diatribes of the newspapers, and the invectives of the Opposi-
tion benches, you had nothing in the shape of tyranny to complain
of under the old Government; and that too much must not be
expected from the new.
There is much of truth and good sense in Mr. Dunn’s remark.
To use the beautiful language of Macaulay, under the old Govern-
ment, “ freedom of conscience, and freedom of discussion prevailed
to an extent unknown in any preceding age,” and, as in England, in
1688, to which the passage applies, so here, at this eventful period,
our 1688, I trust we may say —“the ancient constitution was
adapting itself by a peaceful, a gradual, a natural development,
to the circumstances of a modern society.” Gentlemen, that
was the position of England in 1688, according to Macaulay. It is
our position now, if we know but how to realise it. (Cheers.)
Gentlemen, 1 am sure you desire to do justice to the
old Government. I may be permitted to allude first to a member
of it, who is the Attorney General of the new ministry. I need
scarcely remind you of an act, which redounds so much to Mr.
Manning’s honour. The moment he was released from his political
position, as regarded the former Government, he paid £3OOO into the
public Treasury, as an instalment in liquidation of his late father’s
debt to the public. Nearly one half the debt was thus liquidated
lie who has acted thus honourably, carries the same spirit into
the ministry of whi h he forms so important a part. (Applause,)
But we must not omit the tribute of justice which is due to
the late Colonial Secretary, and Attorney General, Mr. Deas Thom-


son, and Mr. Plunkett. There were others who deserved credit,
but they had not the brunt of opposition to undergo, and far less
responsibility. For those great principles of Religious Freedom and
enlightened commercial Legislation, which, in some respects, have
placed this colony a-head of England herself, the chief credit is due
to the late Sir R. Bourke, and to Mr. Deas Thomson. Our past
Legislature has the ciedit also of doing aw r ay with imprisonment
for debt. This was mainly through the efforts of Mr. Lowe, with
the full support, however, of the Government. The country owes,
then, much to the former Government, but especially to Mr.
Thomson and Mr. Plunkett, as chiefly responsible for its policy.
To them you owe, in a great degree, freedom of conscience, and
freedom of discussion —together with that absence of direct taxation,
that freedom from commercial restrictions, or vexations interference,
and that general security and tranquillity, which happily charac-
terise this community. (Cheers.) There are some things which
thev were precluded from doing. In some respects, they could
only do as directed by the home ministry. They had not the full
power of selecting efficient men, but had some times to appoint
those who were sent from England. Centralization was the
pervading principle —the grand defect of the Government.
Under our new Constitution this will be entirely changed, and
the mode of carrying on the public business may be reformed and
simplified, so as to ensure a more prompt and regular, as well as a
more generally efficient system. t
As regards the public lands, you know I am not an advocate for
lowering the price, because I am satisfied it' would not be for the
benefit of the man of moderate means, but would enable monopolists
to purchase the best lands, and turn them to their exclusive advan-
tage. To facilitate the settlement of the public lands, the surveys
must be kept in advance of the demand. Land offices will be estab-
lished throughout the colony, and maps exhibited of the land for
sale in the several districts ; while means will also be adopted to
supply every information required by intending purchasers.
As to the squatters, their rights as guaranteed to them by law,
must be respected. They should receive the full benefit of their leases.
They have as much right and title to that as any leaseholder.
The land question is one which requires great consideration ; I
would not wish to commit myself rashly, but as I told you before,
the past is the best guide to the future. 1 did not in former years
join the Pastoral Association, because, in my opinion, it was made


the means of putting forward undue pretensions on the part of the
squatters —but it was my good fortune to be instrumental in
obtaining redress for Mr. Lee of Bathurst, and for other parties,
when unjustly deprived of their Stations, by undue exercise of
the prerogative of the Crown. The maintenance and security of
the pastoral interest is essential to the welfare of all classes. It is
the great interest of the country, upon which all others are in no
slight degree dependent. But its just protection demands no ex-
clusive or class legislation.
In answer to the charge of being an exclusionist, I may be per-
mitted to refer to the part I took in 1837-8, in conjunction
with that much lamented statesman, the late Charles Buller, for
the introduction of a constitutional form of Government; and the
course pursued by me on the Emancipist question, when raised by
the bill of Sir George Gipps, for the establishment of a municipal
Corporation in Sydney.
As regards our existing Consitution, should an attempt be made
to introduce the elective principle into the constitution of the Legis-
lative Conncil. I for one am prepared to resist it, on the ground
that it is inopportune, and that we should wait till we have
illustration by experience, not only of its working in this colony,
but of the working of the Councils, in the adjoining colonies. This
practical illustration will prove better which system is preferable,
than debating or theorising, at the present moment.
In my published letter to you, Gentlemen, I have said that
the ministry is essentially a reform ministry. Its first efforts will
be directed to the reform of practical defects or abuses ; and when
the time comes, it will not be found wanting in carrying out
reforms, where proved to be necessary, in the Constitution.
Till that time comes, I consider the revival of discussion on
the subject unnecessary, and positively mischievous, because
inducing acrimony in debate, and separating man from man, and
party from party ; introducing discord, where there should be none,
and retarding the accomplishment of beneficial measures. (Cheers.)
These, Gentlemen, are the principles on which you have been
pleased to place me again in the position of your representative, I
hope to continue in that position till I am removed by your finding
a better and more faithful servant to you—and one more able to
discharge his public duties tp the Country. (Loud and prolonged
cheering.)
The Returning Officer then said—l have now to thank you,


Gentlemen, for your attendance here to-day, and for the orderly
manner in which you have conducted yourselves during the proceed-
ings. I beg also to congratulate Mr. Macarthm on his being again
returned to represent you in the Legislature, and on having a con-
stituency who, when he considers himself bound, from conscientious
and constitutional reasons, to appeal to them for their verdict
on his conduct, prove in unanimously re-electing him, that they will
not allow scurrility and abuse to be heaped upon their representa-
tive. (Applause.)
After three cheers for the Queen, and three cheers for Mr. Mac-
arthur, Mr. Oxley, M.P., was called to the chair, and conveyed the
thanks of the meeting to the Returning Officer, for his services
on the occasion. Mr. Antill having briefly returned thanks, the
meeting separated.
Beading and Wellbank, Printers, Bridge-street, Sydney.


JAfo
muo
ft
