

E'tH
Empire Parliamentarp Association
(UNITED KINGDOM BRANCH).
DOMINION PRIME MINISTERS
AND
MINISTERS
DELIVERED BEFORE THE ASSOCIATION DURING
1918.
{lssued as a Supplement to the Annual Report of the United Kingdom
Branch of the Empire Parliamentary Association
Vachbr & Sons, Ltd., Printers, Westminster House, London, 5.W.1.-67321.


EMPIRE PARLIAMENTARY ASSOCIATION,
(UNITED KINGDOM BRANCH.)
Telephone No.:
Offices:
6240 Victoria.
Royal Court,
Telegrams and Cables:
Houses of Parliament,
“ Emparlasso, London.
Westminster, S.W. I
Presidents
The Lord Finlay, G.C.M.G. (Lord Chancellor),
The Rt. Hon. J. W. Lowther, M.P. (Speaker of the House of Commons)
Vice-Presidents :
The Rt, Hon. D. Lloyd George, M.P. (Prime Minister),
The Earl oe Rosebery, K.G.
The Rt. Hon. A. J. Balfour, 0.M., M.P.
The Rt. Hon. H. H, Asquith, K.C., M.P.
The Rt. Hon. Walter Long, M.P, (Colonial Secretary).
The Marquis of Crewe, K.G.
The Viscount Harcourt.
The Rt. Hoh. A. Bohar Law, M.P.
Chairman of the Executive :
The Rr. Hon. A. J, Balfour, 0.M., M.P.
Deputy Chairman :
The Lord Downham.
Honorary Treasurers :
The Lord Blyth.
Colonel The Lord Burnham, C.H.
Executive Committee :
The Rt. Hon. W. Adamson, M.P.
Lt.-Col. L. S. Amery, M.P.
The Rt. Hon. A. J, Balfour, 0.M., M.P. (Chairman).
Lt. Cecil Beck, R.N.V.R., M.P,
The Lord Blyth (Joint Hon. Treas.).
Col, The Lord Burnham, C.H. (Joint Hon. Treas.).
Sir John Butcher, Bart., K.C., M.P.
The Rt, Hon. Evelyn Cecil, M.P.
Major David Davies, M.P.
The Lord Emmott, G.C.M.G., G.B.E.
The Lord Downham (Deputy Chairman).
Col. Sir Hamar Greenwood, Bart., M.P.
The Hon, Geoffrey Howard, M.P.
The Lord Islington, G.C.M.G,, D.S.O.
The Marquis of Lincolnshire. K.G.
H. J. Mackinder, M.P.
The Viscount Milner, G.C.B.
Lt. Sir W. Mitchel-Thomson, Bart,, K.8.E., R.N.V.R., M.P.
The Rt. Hon. Sir Alfred Mond, Bart,, M.P,
The Duke of Northumberland.
T. P. O’Connor, M.P.
The Rt. Hon. Herbert Samuel, M.P.
Sir Arthur Stebl-Maitland, Bart., M.P.
Sir Owen Philipps, G.C.M.G., M.P.
The Lord Sydenham, G.C.M.G.
Maj.-Gen. The Lord Treowen, C.B,
Stephen Walsh, M.P.
Hon. Secretary :
Howard d’Egville.


PREFATORY NOTE.
The following collection of speeches consists of the ad-
dresses by Dominion statesmen which were delivered publicly
before the Members of the Association in the Lords and
Commons during 1918.
Though some of the facts given may be now somewhat
out of date, it is considered that these speeches should be
printed as delivered in order that they may form part of the
historical record of Dominion effort in the war.
The following speeches do not include the addresses which
were delivered by Oversea statesmen at Private Meetings of
the Association during the year
Howard d’Egvillb,
Hon. Sec.
Empire Parliamentary Association
(United Kingdom Branch),
Royal Court, Houses of Parliament, S.W.I.
November, 1918.


CANADA.
Address by Sir Robert Borden.
The Rt. Hon. Sir Robert Borden, G.C.M.G., M.P. (Prime Minister
of Canada, and Vice-President of the Branch of the Empire Parlia-
mentary Association in the Dominion Parliament), in reply to the
toast of “ Our Cabinet Colleagues from the Dominions,” proposed by
the Rt. Hon. David Lloyd George M.P. (Prime Minister of the United
Kingdom, and Vice-President of the Branch of the Association in the
Home Parliament), at a dinner of welcome given by the Association
on 21st June, 1918, in the Royal Gallery of the House of Lords to the
Prime Ministers, Ministers and Members of Parliament visiting London
from the Dominions, said :
My Lord Chancellor, my Lords, and Gentlemen, —I desire at once
most gratefully to acknowledge the very kind terms in which this
toast has been so eloquently proposed by the Prime Minister, and to
acknowledge also the way in which you have received it. Your
welcome to us has been that of kinsmen to kinsmen.
Journeys across the oceans in these days are not of the pleasantest
and are sometimes protracted. Ours, fortunately, across the Atlantic
was uneventful, and both during the voyage and after arriving here
it was with the deepest satisfaction that I noted a profound change in
the outlook towards the submarine peril, as compared with what it
was when we left here a little more than a year ago. Ido not wish
to be understood as suggesting that the menace has passed, but I do
venture to believe, from what I have seen and from what I have heard,
that the extreme peril of twelve or fourteen months ago has indeed
disappeared, and that in meeting that peril the British Navy has
upheld the most splendid traditions of the past.
And we in the Overseas Dominions, in common with you in these
Islands, acknowledge—must acknowledge—with the utmost appre-
ciation the remarkable service which the Navv has rendered to this
Empire. Because after all this British Commonwealth of Nations
can only be held together by sea power. It can only maintain its
strength when the highways across the acean are kept open. If it
had not been for the Navy, what could we overseas have done to aid
in this war ? What, indeed, could you have done to aid our gallant
Allies on the Continent of Europe ? Not only on the surface of the
ocean, but beneath it as well, the Navy has done its part, and done it
wonderfully and splendidly. I have often thought, in that sunlit
Continent across the ocean, of the perils and the darkness, the storms
and the tempests, of the North Sea, and of the wonderful vigil that
the men of the Navy were keeping there and throughout the oceans
in order that this Empire might be held together and might play its
part in this war.
I am glad that I have come back here again, because in coming
I have realised that the spirit of your people, in common with the
spirit of all the peoples of the Empire, is as unflinching and indomitable
as it was m 1915, when I saw you, and as it was a year ago. And so
it will be to the end. We realise the sacrifices that you have endured,
the burdens that you have laid upon yourselves, the mighty power
that you have exercised. We understand and realise the way in
which you have overcome all the traditions of the past, in order that
the energy and power of this natioii might be systematised and co-
ordinated, so that it could be thrown with all its strength into this
struggle. We admire you for it. We admire the leadership that has
been given, and we hope that we of the nations beyond the seas have


not been wholly backward in doing our part. Perhaps it might not
be amiss for me to-night, speaking of my own country, my own
Dominion, with the affairs of which I am naturally best acquainted,
to give you an idea of what our effort has been, and to assure you that
the spirit of our people Justifies me in telling you to-night that that
effort will indeed be continued until the issue is decided, and decided
for the right.
When I was here a year ago, we had enlisted in Canada for this
war something more than 400,000 men. To-day we have enlisted
considerably more than 500,000 men. During the past twelve or
fourteen months more than 100,000 men have Joined the Colours in
Canada. Our forces in France —I may not tell you the number,
but I may at least tell you this—that we have 35,000 more men in
France than we had when I left these shores last year. To-day more
than 385,000 men of the Canadian Expeditionary Force have crossed
the ocean, and they are still coming. In addition to that, we have
sent into the Air Service, during the past three and a half years of
war, 14,000 men ; and to the Naval Services and to the reserves of
various nations we have contributed from the manhood of Canada
at least 45,000 men. So that lam able to assure you that the man-
power of Canada has furnished to the military and naval forces of
this Empire and of the Allies not less than 425,000 men.
And I should not be frank with you if I did not tell you that I am
proud of what the Canadian forces have done in this war. lam proud
of what all the forces of the Empire have done. We in Canada are as
proud of what your Australians, Mr. Hughes, and your New Zealanders,
Mr. Massey, have achieved as of what the men of these Islands and
of our own country have done. And I should tell you also, you men
of these Islands, that of the 385,000 men who have sailed from Canada
across the ocean, not less than 175,000 were men born in these British
Islands and resident in Canada. The effort has been great, and the
sacrifice has been great as well. There had been 78,000 casualties
when I left these shores last year. Up to the present there have been
152,000 casualties in the Canadian Expeditionary Force. I saw more
than 2,000 of these men —men who had come back from the Front
wounded —I saw them last Sunday morning at Epsom ; and I do
not believe there was one man in that room fit, in a military sense,
to return to his duty, who was not keen and eager again to do his
part, and desirous of standing, at the earliest possible moment, along-
side his comrades in Prance. That spirit, from first to last, has pre-
vailed throughout the Empire.
Since I was here last year many important things have happened
in Canada —among other things, the enactment of compulsory military
service. I believe that here, as elsewhere, the trifling disturbances —
the relatively trifling disturbances—occasioned by the enforcement
of that Act have been very greatly exaggerated. lam happy to tell
you to-night that from one end of Canada to the other that Act is
accepted, and that our men are flocking to the Colours. When the
Act w T as first proclaimed, some 10,000 or 12,000 men Joined the Colours
at once, without waiting for the call. There have been trifling dis-
turbances here or there —not entirely confined to any one section of
the country—and we have been obliged to enact certain amendments
to the Military Service Act, with a view to preventing any attempt
at forcible resistance. One measure which I think had a very happy
effect, was a provision that any man forcibly resisting the Military
Service Act. or encouraging forcible resistance to it, should ipso facto
become a member of the Canadian Expeditionary Force, and authorised
to employ his warlike spirit against the enemies of his country. One
further word about the men who have been enrolled under that Act ;
their spirit is as fine, and as worthy of their country, as that of the
men who came in under voluntary enlistment. There are thousands
Of them in these Islands at present—l have not yet had the oppor-


tunity of seeing them —X hope to see them in the early future—but
my colleagues who have seen them speak in the highest terms of their
admirable spirit and of their fine physique.
What have we done besides ? I only desire to dwell upon this for
a moment. Besides men you require food. The Empire requires
food, the Allies require food. You require ships, you require munitions.
We have tried to do our part in all these matters. There has been an
active campaign for increased food production in Canada during the
past year, and I make my grateful acknowledgement to those Premiers
of the Canadian Provinces who are here to-night for their splendid co-
operation in the attempt to increase food supplies. A recent report
from Canada informs us that the acreage under cultivation for food
purposes during this season will be at least 10 per cent, greater than
it was last year, and including wheat, oats, rye, and barley, we expect
in Canada, unless weather conditions prove unfavourable, a crop of
about 900,000,000 bushels.
But we have tried to help you also with ships, and I am very
glad to assure the Prime Minister that we have now some fourteen
shipyards at work in Canada. About 45,000 tons of shipping have
recently been laid down, and we expect to lay down about 175,000
tons this year. We expect to turn out 84,000 tons dead weight during
the present year, and 250,000 tons next year ; and, although the need
may not be so great now as it was a year ago, we are endeavouring to
do our small part in aiding you in that way.
As to munitions —well, you know, I think, that the industries of
Canada have proved more extensive and more highly organised than
you were inclined to believe possible at the commencement of the war.
We have produced nearly one thousand million dollars’ worth of muni-
tions, and of some particular varieties of shells Canada has turned out
for the past eighteen months 40 per cent, of the entire needs of the
British Armies. We did something more than that. These munitions
had not only to be provided, but had to be paid for, and the Canadian
Exchequer has advanced four hundred and sixty million dollars and
the Canadian banks one hundred million dollars to assist in pay in g
for them.
As I am speaking to so many Members of Parliament, they may
perhaps be interested to hear something of what we have done in the
way of legislation. I did not lose a great deal of time when I reached
Canada last year. I arrived there on the 15th May, and my first act,
on the 16th May, was to announce the extension of the suffrage to
women —so that women in Canada now enjoy the same franchise as
men. Not all of them voted at the last Election. Only those voted
at the last Election who had immediate relatives in the Canadian
Expeditionary Force. But hereafter, through legislation enacted at
the last Session, every woman in Canada of twenty-one years of age
or upwards will have the right to an equal voice in the nation’s coun-
cils with the men of Canada. And the women of Canada have earned
that right by their splendid devotion to our cause throughout the war.
W 7 e have enacted another very important article of legislation.
Every Province of Canada except Quebec has prohibited the sale of
intoxicating liquors, and the Legislature of Quebec has provided that
after the Ist May, 1919, the sale of intoxicating liquor shall be pro-
hibited throughout that Province. The Provinces, however, have not
the right under our system to prohibit importation, manufacture,
or transportation. After the formation of the present Government,
and in pursuance of a pledge given to the electorate, we have provided
by Order in Council, under the War Measures Act, that the importation,
manufacture, and transportation of intoxicating liquors in Canada
shall be absolutely prohibited. That is the situation in all the Pro-
vinces. In Quebec the sale is permitted, in the few communities in
which licences are granted, until the Ist of May, 1919. In all the
other Provinces the sale is entirely prohibited.


Another important measure which we have enacted might not
suit conditions in other parts of the Empire. It has been passed
under the War Measures Act —a very import nt Statute which confers
upon the Governor-General in Council practically all the powers of
Parliament, and which we have found exceedingly convenient. The
measure to which I allude is popularly known in Canada as the Anti-
Loafing Law. It is a very good law’ in time of war, and lam not sure
that it w ould not be an equally good Law in time of peace. It provides
that every man in Canada, from the age of 16 to 60, both included,
regardless of his financial position, regardless of his income, must be
engaged in some useful occupation. We have left it largely to the local
authorities throughout the country to interpret and enforce it, and I may
tell you in confidence that they are enforcing it with remarkably good
results in many cases.
So far as taxation is concerned, we believe that we have in Canada
the highest taxation upon war profits that is to be found in any belli-
gerent country. Whether or not you may believe that, I am con-
vinced that the business men of Canada are entirely of that opinion
because they have so assured me over and over again. We have an
income tax which is approximately the same as that of the United
States. Adjoining the United States as w r e do, it is obvious that we
Cannot go very much beyond them in taxing incomes.
Last autumn the Minister of Finance called for a loan of
150,000,000 dollars, and the subscriptions reached 400,000,000 dollars.
In domestic loans we have raised in Canada, since the beginning of this
war, 746,000,000 dollars. And if you realise that our wealth is
estimated as one-thirtieth, or perhaps not more than one-fiftieth, of
that of the United States, you will agree that themffort of the people
of Canada in raising money for the purposes of this War has been no
mean effort.
We have enacted other important legislation upon which I need
not dwell. The Canada Food Board controls the use of food and
endeavours to prevent its waste. We have a War Trade Board,
which deals with the importation and exportation of articles essential
for the purposes of the war, and restricts their use. Our Fuel Con-
troller exercises important functions ; and I should be remiss in my
duty if I did not acknowledge the helpful and generous spirit in which
the Government of the United States has co-operated with us in all
these efforts. We depend very largely upon the resources of the
United States for our coal supplies in some parts of the Dominion.
In dealing with the fuel problem that Government treated the needs
of the Canadian people as generously as if Canada had been a part
of the United States. A Canadian War Mission recently established
at Washington has been found most useful in dealing with business
questions that had to be taken up with the Departments of the United
States Government. And in order that our human energy may be
mobilised to the best advantage, we have provided that there shall be,
on the 22nd day of this month of June, a general registration of every
man and woman in Canada above the age of sixteen years. That
reg stration, we hope, will accomplish some of the good results attained
in the United Kingdom, so that the man power and woman power
of Canada may be made even more effective for the purposes of the
war than in the past.
Now, I shall not speak to you at greater length except to say
a word about the War Cabinet and the War Conference. A great
step in the Constitutional development of the Empire was taken last
year by the Prime Minister, when he summoned the Prime Ministers
of the Overseas Dominions to the Imperial War Cabinet. We meet
there on terms of perfect equality. We meet as Prime Ministers of self-
governing nations. We meet there under the leadership and the
presidency of the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom. After all,
my Lord Chancellor and gentlemen, the British Empire as it is at


present constituted is a very modern organisation. It is perfectly
true that it is bruit up on the development of centuries, but as it is
constituted to-day, both in territory and in organisation, it is a rela-
tively modern affair. Why, it is" only 75 years since responsible
government was granted to Canada. It is only a little more than
50 years since the first experiment in Federal Government —in a
Federal Constitution —was undertaken in this Empire. And from
that we went on, in 1871, to representation in negotiating our Com-
mercial Treaties, in 1878 to complete fiscal autonomy, and after that
to complete fiscal control and the negotiation of our own Treaties.
But we have always lacked the full status of nationhood, because
you exercised here a so-called trusteeship, under which you undertook
to deal with foreign relations on our behalf, and sometimes without
consulting us very much. Well, that day has gone by. We come
here as we came last year, to deal with all these matters, upon terms
of perfect equality with the Prime Minister of the United Kingdom
and his colleagues. It has been said that the term “ Imperial War
Cabinet ” is only a misnomer. The word “ Cabinet ” is unknown
to the law. The meaning of “ Cabinet ” has developed from time
to time. For my part, I see no incongruity whatever in applying the
term “ Cabinet ” to the association of Prime Ministers and other
Ministers who meet around a common council board to debate and to
determine the various needs of Empire. If I should attempt to
describe it, I should say it is a Cabinet of Governments. Every Prime
Minister who sits around that board is responsible to his own Parlia-
ment and to his own people ; the conclusions of the War Cabinet
can onlv be carried out by the Parliaments of the different nations,
of our Imperial Commonwealth. Thus, each Dominion, each nation,
retains its perfect autonomy. I venture to believe, and I thus expressed
myself last year, that in this may be found the genesis of a develop-
ment in the Constitutional relations of the Empire which will form,
the basis of its unity in the years to come.
One word, before I conclude, with regard to the war. We are all
opitimists in this war, because it has been undertaken in a cause
which cannot be permanently defeated. But that cause may be tem-
porarily defeated, and optimisin. alone will not by any means prevent
so disastrous an outcome. It would be idle to pretend that mistakes,
and serious mistakes, have not been made. It would be still more
idle and foolish to dwell upon them merely for the sake of pointing
them out. Against them is to be set off as wonderful and mighty a
military effort as was ever undertaken and accomplished by a non-
military country. And in that military effort let us never for one
moment forget ‘ the wonderful valour and heroism of those seven
divisions who went to France in the early weeks of this war, and made
that wonderful stand which stayed the German onrush.
My Lord Chancellor and gentlemen, it is necessary for us to pul
into this fight not only all our energy and all our effort, but the very
best brains that the Empire can produce. Let us not be turned from
our purpose by any adherence to tradition or system, or by any personal
considerations. The position, or the career, of any man or group
of men is less than dust in the balance when weighed against the,
issues of this war. If we can draw any lesson at all from what has
gone amiss in the past, in heaven’s name let us learn that lesson so
thoroughly that our mistakes will never be repeated.
I rejoice especially to-night to know that we are fighting side by
side with our kinsmen in the United States. Bordering that country,
as we do, for nearly 4,000 miles, I know something of her people.
I have seen thousands of her young men thronging to the Colours,,
and keen to take their part in this struggle. Germany utterly fails to
realise the giant strength of the American Republic, whose people
she outraged bv her barbarity and provoked by her insolence until,
in the very naxne of humanity, America was obliged to take up arms.


There is no spirit more formidable, or even more terrible, than that
of a peace-loving and patient people who, without lust of conquest
or material gain, but purely for the vindication of public right and
common justice among the nations, take up arms with reluctance, but
with a relentless resolve never to lay them down until the task is
accomplished. I believe that the death-knell of German militarism
was sounded when the United States entered this war. I believe that
before peace is signed the military forces of the mighty Republic of
the West will prove to be the most formidable that Germany has
ever met, and that militarism will eventually go down before the
onset of democracy.
In the meantime, it may be that we stand at the gate of peril.
If so, it is well that you of these Islands, and we of the Overseas Nations,
should stand there together. Grave though the peril be, and keenly
realised, we do not shrink from it. The line must be held, and it
will be held, until our kinsmen can strike with their full strength.
And in the hearts of all the British people there is a profound con-
viction, a faith strong enough to endure and surmount any reverses
that have come or can come—a faith that this world-wide Common-
wealth of free nations, founded upon the aspiration, and effort, and
sacrifice of a thousand years, was not born to be destroyed or dominated
by the brutal force of the Hun.
AUSTRALIAN COMMONWEALTH.
Address by Mr. Hughes.
The Rt. Hon. W. M. Hughes, M.P. (Prime Minister of the Com-
monwealth of Australia), and Vice-President of the Branch of the
Empire Parliamentary Association in the Commonwealth Parliament,
in reply to the toast of “ Our Cabinet Colleagues from the Dominions,”
proposed by the Rt. Hon. David Lloyd George, M.P. (Prime Minister
of the United Kingdom and Vice-President of the Branch of the
Association in the Home Parliament), at a dinner of welcome given
by the Association on 21st June, 1918, in the Royal Gallery of the
House of Lords, to the Prime Ministers, Ministers and Members of
Parliament visiting London from the Dominions, said :
My Lord Chancellor, my Lords, and Gentlemen,—l feel it a very
great honour and privilege to be here to-night to respond to this toast
in the presence of so many of the men who, in one way or another,
have had upon their shoulders the task of guiding the British Empire
during these dark years. We have now been plunged for four years
in a veritable inferno of war. We are weary and worn with the war.
There is hardly one among us who has not lost a near relative, or who
is not torn with anxious dread lest someone dear to him, and now
fighting in the line, shall be the next to go. Yet we stand here to-day
as firm and as resolute in our determination to see this war out to
the end, as on the day on which we first drew the sword.
And we stand here, too, a united Empire. Much has been said
this evening about the Dominions, and what they have done —about
the Empire, and what it stands for—what it has achieved. But no
words can do justice to those achievements. Had a man been en-
dowed with prophecy, and had he ventured to say, before the war
broke out, that this Empire would have done what it has done, it
would have been thought that a madman was speaking. We have
done great things. We have been down in the valley of the shadow
of death. We have marshalled great armies, and sent them with all


pomp and circumstance into the field. We have not yet gained the
end that we set out to gain, but we have already done something which
will live when even the memory of this war shall have passed away.
We have created an Empire where before was but the name of an
Empire. The British Empire meant, to the men beyond the seas,
a vague and formless thing, without life or purpose. But at the first
blast of war’s alarm, these men sprang to the defence of that Empire,
which then assumed a new and nobler shape, and that which had
seemed dead pulsed high with glorious life. This war has brought us
very near together. Before it, the people of the outer Dominions
did not understand Britain, and Britain did not understand the people
of the outer Dominions. There is not yet between us that perfect
clarity of vision which is to come. But we know each other. We
have shed our blood with each other. The men whom I have the
honour to represent, who have come in their thousands and tens of
thousands over 12,000 miles of ocean, have fought for three and a
half years side by side with their brethren from these Islands and
from the other Dominions, and in so doing have achieved more for the
unity of the Empire than could have been achieved in three and a
half centuries in times of perfect peace.
In what form this Empire will develop in the days to come no man
can say. That it will hold together, and that it will not. only hold
together, but will, by trial and tribulation and sacrifice, be cemented
into a unity that will endure for ever, we most firmly believe.
Perhaps I may be permitted to make passing reference to the
part played by Australia in this war. You, Mr. Prime Minister, have
said that the Dominions, excluding India, have put a million men in
the field. What a tremendous and magnificent achievement this is !
You have said something, too, of the manner of men they .are —and
if their deeds will not speak for them, no words of ours will serve.
But these men for whom I have the honour to speak- like those for
whom my distinguished colleague, Sir Robert Borden, has spoken so
eloquently to-night—these men have fought on every continent and
sailed over every ocean. Within one month after the declaration of
war, they had wrested New Guinea from the enemy. They have
cut their way through the ranks of the Turks, and put to flight the
picked legions of the Germans. They have endured alike the fiercest
and most dreadful shocks of war, the rigors of winter in the trenches,
and the scorching heats of desert campaigns. They have stood, with
their British comrades, in the Holy City itself.
To-day, Australia is very proud to be one of the free nations
that make up the British Empire. For while we call ourselves an
Empire, we are not as other Empires that have gone before us. We
are indeed a league of free nations. Men speak in these days of what
the League of Nations is to do after the war. There is a League of
Nations already, as my friend, General Smuts, pointed out last year —-
a League of Nations that points the way —that has shown itself to be
the greatest guarantee of the world’s peace that the world has ever
known. It is a League of Nations bound together by ties of kindred,
of common ideals, and of material interest. It is a League of Nations
which this dreadful war has drawn closer together, and which have
met now, at the very extremist crisis of the war, to take counsel one
with the other. As Sir Robert Borden has pointed out, we sit in this
council on a footing of equality—the inner heart of the Empire and
the outer Dominions —to determine the fate of the Empire and of
the world.
And as we sit here now, one of the most intense phases of the
greatest battle of all the ages is being fought. Upon the issue of
that depends whether the world shall be bond or free—whether the
spirit of freedom shall prevail, or whether it shall be trodden under
the heel of military despotism. And it is a great thing that we are
assembled here to-day, and are able to sit here in perfect peace, ringed


about by this mighty Navy which has scoured the sea clean of every
trace of the enemy flag—which has plunged into the ocean depths
and raked him from his lair —which now defies his every effort to pre-
vent our argosies bringing men and food to Britain, and to the troops
of France and Flanders. I say, with my friend, Sir Robert Borden,
that no man of British blood-race can cross the ocean now and not
feel the blood leap in his veins to think that he is akin to the gallant
men who, with sleepless vigilance, through fair weather and foul,
guard and watch every part and portion of the Empire. The spirit
which animates the British Navy to-day—and which must animate us
too, and spur us on to whatever further efforts may be required of us
—is the spirit of that watchword which Nelson gave to his fleet, and
left to us for ever.
We are now gathered together, as I say, awaiting the next dread-
ful onslaught of the German legions : and throughout the length and
breadth of the Empire there is, I believe —save in certain insignificant
quarters—no sign of yielding. There is, on the other hand, perfect
confidence, or at the least an implacable resolution to see this thing
out fairly to the end. We ought to look facts in the face, but we
ought to balance the account fairly, putting down that which stands
for us as well as that which stands against us. To-day the moral of
our Army is as high as it was on the first day we declared war. There
is no hesitation and no doubt in the minds of the men who stand
now in the forefront of battle. They stand, and they will stand, there
with absolute confidence. The French stand with them, animated
by the same spirit, and. daily the Americans take their places, in ever-
increasing numbers, in the line. On the Piave the Italians are re-
pulsing the Austrian onslaught. There remains nothing but that we
here, for whom these men fight and die, should tune our spirits to
the highest pitch.
We all want peace. We are worn, I say, and w T earied with the
war, but we are resolute to have no peace save that peace which will
endure for ever. We want that peace the essentials of which Mr.
Asquith set out long ago when he stated the war aims of Britain and
the terms upon which she would sheathe the sword. We want a peace
which will endure-—a peace 'which will ensure liberty and justice for
the world. There are men amongst us in that country from which
I come—in every part of the Empire—in these Islands —who go
fearfully about, thinking and dreaming of nothing but peace—who
are, as it were, making w r ar in a spirit which invites not victory but
defeat. These men must be silenced. The blood that we have poured
out must not be shed in vain. Australia, with her five millions of
people, separated from us by 12,000 miles, has lost nearly 50,000 men
in this war. Our casualties have indeed been very heavy. Many
have died, but upon xis rests a solemn responsibility that they shall
not have died in vain. The soldiers of the Empire, inspired by the
glorious example of those who have made the supreme sacrifice, will
not fail ; it is the civil population whom we must adjure to have
courage.
This Conference, which has within it the nucleus of a system from
which a League of the Nations of the British Empire may take shape and
substance which will lead us on, I hope, to a new and greater destiny,
which will be the vanguard of that greater League of Nations which we
hope may come after the war, and make future year impossible—this
Conference, sitting under the shadow of this great war, yet sitting in
perfect security, is at once an omen bright with promise for the future,
an example of the genius of our race for self-government, and a tribute
to the supremacy of that mighty Navy under whose wing during
four years of dreadful war Britain and the Empire have been safely
sheltered. The Dominions are watching this historic Conference with
keen interest. They note with great satisfaction that there runs
throughout all its deliberations a recognition of the principle of local


autonomy ; of the fact that every one of these nations marches on,
and is resolved to achieve its destiny in its own way.
Let us hope that when the war has passed away, the free nations
that make up this Empire, drawn closer together by this war, will
devise means by which those things, Imperial in their nature and
affecting us all, can be dealt with without impairing that autonomy of
each part which is the very foundation of our greatness.
I rejoice exceedingly that the efforts of the Dominions during this
war have met with the approval of the people of Britain. In our turn,
we have watched with admiration and pride the efforts made by the
Mother Country in this great struggle of life and death. We recognise
to the full our many and great debts to you. We have endeavoured
to pay them. We have in every way at our disposal shown that we
are ready, both in men and in treasure, to do our uttermost to secure
victory in this war. And the message that I wish, in conclusion, to
give you is this —that the people of Australia, who have sent out over
400,000 men in this war, have by voluntary enlistment maintained five
divisions in France and Flanders, besides a, cavalry division in Palestine
and other units elsewhere, will be satisfied with nothing less than that
victory which shall endure for ever. Not for them is the vain illusion
of a peace which will satisfy us for the moment and vanish anon in
the crash and thunder of another war, but a peace which will break
for ever the power of Prussian militarism, and establish liberty and
justice to reign together upon the earth.
NEW ZEALAND.
Address by Mr. Massey.
The Rt. Hon. W. F. Massey, M.P. (Prime Minister of New Zealand
and Vice-President of the New Zealand Branch of the Empire Parlia-
mentary Association), in reply to the toast of “ Our Cabinet Colleagues
from the Dominions,” proposed by the Rt. Hon. D. Lloyd George,
M.P. (Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and Vice-President of
the United Kingdom Branch of the Association), at a dinner given on
21st June, 1918, to the Prime Ministers, Ministers and other Members
of Parliament visiting London from the Dominions, said :
My Lord Chancellor, my Lords and Gentlemen, —Following up all
that my colleagues have said —because they are my colleagues so far
as the Imperial War Cabinet is concerned —I want to thank you, Mr.
Prime Minister, for the very kind terms in which you have proposed
the toast of the overseas representatives, and you, my lords and entle-
men, for the enthusiastic manner in which you have honoured it.
And I want to tell you how highly I value the privilege of meeting-
to-night so many of the Ministers of the Crown of the United Kingdom,
so many of its legislators, and so many of its public men. I know
perfectly well that since the war broke out you have had, individually
and collectively, to carry a tremendous load of responsibility. I know
that during those years" mistakes have been made. But mistakes are
unfortunately inevitable in a war period ; but, while mistakes have
been made, a very great deal of good and solid work has been done,
work that has been good for the Empire, and that has brought us
more closely together than we ever have been before. And it is right
that credit should be given where credit is due.
So far as the purpose which has brought the overseas representa-
tives fo Britain is concerned, the purpose itself, and the work that is
being done, must appeal to the least imaginative of British citizens.


Our preliminary work has been that of arranging a form of representation
in Imperial affairs for the people of the Overseas Dominions of the
Empire. We are in effect practically framing a Constitution which
will give to oversea citizenship a representation which will “ broaden
down from precedent to precedent,” and which will, I hope, go on
improving and developing for many centuries to come. That our
meetings have already brought the citizens of Greater Britain more
closely together than ever before is an admitted fact. The War
Cabinet and the War Conference are in fact continuing what the
war itself has begun. Reference was made by a previous speaker
to the friendly feeling that exists, I believe that the term is too mild.
The feeling that exists now between the citizens of Britain is fraternal
rather than friendlv. The pride, the soul-stirring affection, which the
citizens of Britain—and I speak of what I know —feel for the Empire
to which they belong is greater than has ever been experienced in our
history. Here is where the duty of members of the War Cabinet and
of the'War Conference comes in.' To me it seems that it is their special
duty to do everything that is possible to encourage British sentiment
and British ideals and to do everything that is possible to discourage
anything which will interfere with legitimate British aspirations.
We have had many difficulties during the last three or four years,
but we have much to be thankful for. After all our difficulties, and
after all our discouragements, we can say, with our gallant fighting
men, that we are not down-hearted. Why ? Because we have
confidence in ourselves, we have confidence in our Allies, and we have
confidence in the great and glorious cause for which we are fighting.
Freedom’s cause will never die, and Freedom’s cause to-day is Britain’s
cause. We have heard it said repeatedly that this war will resolve
itself into a war of attrition. We shall all be sorry if anything of the
sort takes place. But we have this satisfaction and consolation —that
the staying powers of Britain are at least as great as, and I think they
are very greatly superior to, the staying powers of Germany.
It has been said to-night, and with truth, that we are somewhat
war-weary. I will admit that we are longing for peace. We all admit
that, because, as a matter of fact, though we are at war to-day—in a
war forced upon us —we are after all a peace-loving people. But I
endorse the opinions expressed by the speakers who have preceded
me, and I say this, speaking for the people with whom I come in contact,
my fellow-citizens on the other side of the world —that we would rather
see this war go on for a generation than allow Germany to accomplish
the object which she apparently has in view—that of dominating the
world.
In the early days of colonisation in New Zealand trouble arose
between the native races and the European settlers, and. troops were
sent out from England to assist in defending the settlers. A sort of
guerilla war broke out, and was carried on for a number of years. One
of the matters, by the way, which we are proud of in New Zealand
to-day is this, that the native races who fought us sixty years ago, and
who fought us chivalrously, gallantly, and bravely, are fighting to-day
shoulder to shoulder with the British troops, on the Western Front
and in other theatres of war. But I was going to tell you that on one
occasion, when the British forces were bombarding one of the native
fortifications, things were going against the natives, as might have
been expected, and the British general, wishing to save life, sent an
emissary under a flag of truce to call upon the natives to surrender,
offering them the honours of war. There was no hesitation on their
part. The native chief promptly responded in his own language :
“ Tell your general that we scorn to surrender ; we fight on for ever,
and for ever, and for ever.” I know perfectly well that the parallel
is not complete—heaven forbid that it should be —but the spirit that
actuated that native chief when he sent his message to the British
general is the same spirit that to-day actuates Britons, aud that


actuates our fighting men both on sea and land, as well as in the air,
and who say, and who prove by their actions, that they will never
sheathe the sword which was unwillingly drawn in August, 1914, until
the objects for which they set out have been accomplished.
Britain has been in peril on many occasions—perhaps in even
more serious peril than that in which she stands to-day. But Britain
has always come through. And I am very firmly of this opinion,
that the Higher Power which guided and controlled and protected
Bi’itain as a nation will now guide and control and protect Britain as
an Empire. It is sometimes said that the darkest hour is the hour-
before the dawn. I believe, my Lord Chancellor and gentlemen,
that we have had our darkest hour, I believe that we had our darkest
hour at the end of March last, in the month of April, and perhaps in
the beginning of May. I believe that the rays of dawn are beginning
to appear, and that they will presently develop into a glorious sunrise
and a perfect day—a day of rest and recuperation for the nations who
are at present engaged in war, and for exhausted humanity.
War is one of the worst evils, I do not need to emphasise this,
which can possibly afflict the human race. But war is not always an
unmixed evil, and I think this war will not prove to have been an
unmixed evil when it has come to an end. What it has done already
is this : it has shown us conclusively that if we are to continue to possess
the great Empire which has been handed down to us, we must be
prepared to make good use of it, and we must be prepared to defend it.
We must be prepared to make better use of it than we have ever made
up to the present, and we must get into a stronger position to defend
it than when the present war broke out.
Reference has been made to the war efforts of the Dominions.
I am not going to speak in any boastful spirit, and I am not going to
quote figures. The hour is too late for me to quote figures, even if I
were willing to do so. But let me say this. New Zealand, I need
hardly remind you, is a small country, far-distant, under the Southern
Cross, where the skies are always blue and the sun is always shining—
where a comparatively small number of British citizens are endeavour-
ing, and I believe not altogether unsuccessfully, to do for the Southern
hemisphere what in days gone by the British Islands have done for
the Northern hemisphere. As I say, lam not going to quote figures,
but we take a pride in this fact, and it is a fact, that the war effort
of New Zealand, in proportion to its population, is second only to the
war effort of Britain. As for the courage and fighting capacity of its
men, they speak for themselves. When war broke out, there was a
response from the men of New Zealand which stirs the pride of every
citizen of that Dominion. We have lost many. There is hardly a
household in New Zealand where there is not one vacant chair. The
same, I know, may be said of almost every other part of the Empire.
The graves of our boys are scattered far and wide, by land, by stream,
and sea—at Gallipoli, in Palestine, in Mesopotamia, and on the Western
Front. The way in which they responded to the Empire’s call, and
the deeds they have done, will never be forgotten by their fellow-
citizens in New Zealand, and I do not think they will ever be forgotten
by the people of this Empire.
I will leave it at that, except just to say this. I noticed that my
friend and colleague, Mr. Hughes, mentioned just now that within
six months of the outbreak of war the troops of Australia had taken
possession of New Guinea. Within one month of the outbreak of war
the troops of New Zealand had taken possession of Samoa. We have
done our share. It is for you to do your share. Hold for the Empire
what our boys have taken. I was somewhat interested, too, just now,
to hear my friend, Sir Robert Borden, refer with a great deal of pride to
the fact that Canada had brought female suffrage into operation just
recently. We did it only twenty-four years ago ! And as a matter
of fact, in the very first Parliament to which women had the oppor-


tunity of electing members in New Zealand, I was one of the members
returned, and they have returned me every time since then.
Returning to the subject of war efforts, the people all over the
Empire, both here at home and in all parts of the Dominions, have
done extraordinarily well, and as Dominion representatives we are
all proud of them. And in so far as we have done well in the Dominions,
we have done so because the citizens of British Dominions overseas are
intensely patriotic. And when I speak of citizens, I include the native
races. It does not matter what the race may be, or what they call
themselves ; I include all the native races as British citizens, and I
cannot help saying that after the glorious effort of India they too
are entitled to all the privileges of British citizens. What we'have
done has been owing to the fact that British citizens overseas are
intensely patriotic, that they know their duty, and are willing to do it,
and I think that so far they have been successful in doing it. They
know that in sending their men to the front as they have done they
are fighting not only for the Empire—not only assisting the Mother-
Country, as has been expressed by the Prime Minister of Britain —but
fighting for themselves. And they know also that the troops from
the United Kingdom and from the other Dominions are fighting for
them just as much as they are fighting for the Mother Country and the
other countries to which they belong.
Sometimes 1 have heard of people—l have not come across them,
but I have heard of people—who have said that too many lives are
being wasted in this war (and we know that to be a very sad fact)
and that too much money is being expended, that too many people are
becoming impoverished. All these things are inseparable from a war
policy. But if we save civilisation, if we prevent Germany from
dominating the world, the lives will not have been wasted, and the
money will not have been expended in vain. As for property, just
let me say this. When we ask certain classes of men to carry their
due share of the war, and this happens in Britain and everywhere else,
as well as in New Zealand, we are sometimes met with complaints and
grumblings. These people forget that if we win this war they will
still have left at least part of their property. It will not all have gone.
But if we lose the war there will be nothing left. Germany will want
all the property she can lay her hands on, and there will be nothing
left to British citizens. I know I am now putting an impossibility,
nothing of this sort will take place, Germany cannot win.
As for. America coming into the war, I glory in the fact, just in
the same way as the speakers who have preceded me. I think it is
one of the most important events that have occurred in British history.
We have lost Russia, but as a compensation we have got a mighty
nation with us to-day, a nation of kindred people to ourselves, who
will stand by us and stand with us until Germany accepts such terms
as will make it impossible for them to renew at any future time the
horrors of the present war, or to repeat the outrages with which the
Press of the Empire has made us familiar during the last three or four
years. America and Britain have been estranged for over a century,
and I trust, and hope, and believe that they will never be estranged
again. I hoped to see each nation working but its own destiny under
its own form of government, but ready to act together in the interests
of humanity whenever occasion requires, and always remembering
that they are the same race, the same stock, with the same language,
the same ideals, the same aspirations, and holding in common those
principles which properly belong to free and enlightened nations.
Some day or other I believe the prediction will be verified and
given effect to which says that men will beat their swords into plough-
shares and their spears into pruning-hooks ; if ever that does come to
pass it will come by a combination of nations, Britain, France, America,
and the other Allies, acting up to the great principle of peace on earth
and good will toward men.


SOUTH AFRICA.
Address by Mr. Burton.
The Hon. Henry Burton, M.L.A. (Minister for Railways and Har-
bours in the Union Parliament of South Africa), in reply to the toast
of “ South Africa,” proposed by the Rt. Hon. H. H. Asquith, K. 0.,
M.P. (ex-Prime Minister of the United Kingdom and Vice-President
of the United Kingdom Branch of the Empire Parliamentary Associa-
tion), at a luncheon held in the House of Commons on 18th July, 1918,
said
It may be some relief to you to know that I do not feel called
upon to offer you any opinion as to how the war should be won, or
indeed how your own affairs, generally, should be managed. I appre-
hend you are as jeaUus of your rights of local government as we are.
Rather I hope you will allow me to express what I know of the feelings
of the great bulk of the inhabitants of South Africa, and to convey to
you the deep impression which has been made upon us by the glorious
answer the British people have given to those who thought and declared
that they had lost the ancient vigour of their race. Mistakes we know
have been made. They were bound to be made, and no doubt more
mistakes will be made, but the great outstanding historic fact, which
will be the fact of the future, is the splendid spirit —and that is what
impressed us —in which the people of these islands have risen to the
enormous undertaking which was thrust upon them against their will.
Your achievements, not merely on the sea and in finance, which we
fully expected, but on the military field, and your unquestionable
supremacy in the air, have thrilled us and stirred the pulse of the
Dominions. You have rightly referred to the one great motive of
the support which the British cause has had from South Africa. I
will briefly give you an illustration. There can be no doubt that what
has mainly moved the Englishman in South Africa is the sentiment
of blood affinity. What has moved the Dutchmen of all things is the
fact that you are the least imperialistic government of all empires the
world has ever seen. You are hardly an Empire in the ordinary ac-
ceptation of that term. What has influenced the Dutchmen is not
your greatness, your wealth, your influence, your power—it is the
priceless privilege of their constitutional liberties. That is the motive
which has actuated them in giving you the support they have. I
met a man in Pretoria —a Transvaaller born and bred, and a republican
by birth. I saw him in khaki ; he was a Captain, and I asked him
why he was fighting. He said, “I have been through German West
Africa, and I am going through German East Africa, and when that is
over lam going to France.” I expressed my admiration at his atti-
tude and intentions, and he said, “I cannot, as a man of honour, act
otherwise in view of the honourable way Great Britain has acted.
If they had not done that I should not have stirred hand or foot in
the matter.”
It may interest you perhaps to know something of what is
going on in our own country. I have found a good deal of alarm,
certainly of perturbation, with regard to what is known as the
Republican movement there. It is difficult to prophesy, particularly
of South Africa. The only thing you can say with certainty is that
you may rely upon it you will not have a dull moment there. I told
each of our Governors General this on their arrival, and I believe their
experience has justified it. One must not minimise of
this sort, but it is also unwise to exaggerate unduly. What I think
I can say fairly with safety is that I do not think there is any sub-


stantial danger of active violence in the shape of a rising or rebellion
in South Africa. The movement is the consequence of the political
doctrines of the Nationalist party, and it is to a large extent, I believe,
political in its objects. I think probably votes are looked for more
than anything else, and the movement does appeal, naturally appeals,
to the population in the late Republics. But it does not appeal to, and
is not received favourably by, the great bulk of our Dutch speaking
fellow-countrymen. In Natal and the Cape Province, where they
have lived for years under the British system of government, they
have a lively appreciation of the advantages of that system, and are
not likely to exchange those advantages for the extremely problematical
benefits of republicanism. The only substantial danger which I see
in the situation is that while the leaders do not intend any violence,
yet their preaching and doctrine is extremely likely to have an effect
on the minds of people who are not in responsible positions, and you
have the danger that these irresponsible persons will bring about an
explosion which the leaders will find it difficult, if not almost impossible,
to control. But against that we have a safeguard, and you may be
surprised to hear what it is. We have a reputation in South Africa
for what I may call an eventful national life, and our tendency towards
disturbances of the peace is no criterion of the essential character of
the people. As a matter of fact, speaking for our English speaking
people and the Dutch, they are at bottom and in the main unquestion-
ably a people who value law and order and who are respecters of con-
stituted authority. That is what has seen us time after time through
our difficulties in South Africa.
As to the political aspect of the matter we are in a somewhat
abnormal position. I am not sure whether we are in quite as
abnormal a position as you are here. We have also to govern by
the consent of other parties than our own. We have a political
truce with those who used to be our traditional opponents —the
Unionists —which has lasted during the war. It is working on
the whole very well and has been observed loyally in spite of some
little strain at times. Broadly speaking, I should be disposed to
say that the Nationalist movement is not making any substantial
progress. It is making some progress no doubt, but nothing like what
is supposed and alleged by the Nationalists themselves. It has not
the support of the substantial and influential classes of our community
to any extent. There is the odd and interesting feature about it that
it makes an appeal to the younger generation amongst our Dutch
people, the students and what one may term the young intellectuals.
It is, after all, perhaps not surprising it should be so. The history of
all countries shows us how powerful an appeal is made by the sentiment
of nationality and nationhood and the assertion of a national indi-
viduality to the young mind. The sentiment is an excellent and an
admirable one. We complain that it is expended upon a wrong con-
ception of what nationhood should mean in South Africa. The
Nationalist conception is one which is restricted, sectional, and prac-
tically racial, and as long as that continues their activities and energies
seem to us to be spent in a cause that is bound to fail. When, as tney
surely will one day, these young men see the vision of a great common
nationhood as the true ideal, their enthusiasm will become a powerful
factor in our country’s destiny. They say their motto is “ South
Africa first.” We agree, but they interpret “ South Africa first ”
as meaning South Africa first, South Africa last, South Africa all the
time, and South Africa alone. We cannot accept that view. We
think those ideas will lead not merely to hopeless chaos, but to ruin
for South Africa. We say we think we have obligations towards
others ; obligations towards the British Empire, for instance. Not
merely have our people realised that your cause is our cause, not merely
have they been actuated by the beneficent influence of the British
system of liberty to all peoples, they have begun to realise, and to


realise more and more, the truth of the inward significance of this
struggle ; to understand that the world’s freedom is at stake, and with
it their own freedom and their own future. Therefore you will find
more and more, I hope and believe, that the common support and
active support in the way of recruits will improve as time goes on.
I have said that our people h ave begun to wake up to this great truth.
When I said that South Africa first was the motto we accepted—
a motto which every race must accept for its own country—l meant
that we also realised not only that our future and our freedom was
at stake in this great issue, but that we also realise more fully how
intimately bound up our interests are with the British Empire, and
it is because we realise that that the Government of the Union in these
troublous times has nailed its flag to the mast. We declared that
there was no other honourable or safe course, or right course, open
to us but immediately to signify our adherence in every possible way to
Britain’s cause. We have stuck to it through good report and ill,
through much trial, trouble, suffering, and sacrifice. I want to give
you this last message, if I may, as the representative of the Govern-
ment. Upon that attitude of the Government of the Union you
may depend to the very last. We may be forced —I do not see any
present prospect—to abandon our responsibilities, but until we are
so forced we shall adhere absolutely to the letter and the spirit of the
undertaking we have given and the path we have adopted and followed
hitherto.
NEWFOUNDLAND.
Address by Mr. Lloyd.
The Rt. Hon. W. F. Lloyd, M.H.A. (Prime Minister of Newfound-
land, and President of the Branch of the Empire Parliamentary Associa-
tion in the Newfoundland Parliament), in reply to the toast of “New-
foundland,” proposed by the Rt. Hon. W. Hayes Fisher, M.P. (President
of the Local Government Board and Deputy Chairman of the United
Kingdom Branch of the Empire Parliamentary Association), at a dinner
at the House of Commons held on Ist August, 1918, said :—•
I hardly need to say how gratified I am to tell those of you who
are here and others who may read the report of the proceedings, some-
thing of the efforts made by the Colony I represent in the momentous
and unprecedented struggle which Germany has forced on the free
nations of the world. Ido not hesitate to use the word “ Colony,”
because it is the word we use commonly in Newfoundland, and the
reason is obvious, as we take pride in being able to style Newfoundland
the oldest Colony of the British Empire. We are pleased at the recog-
nition of Newfoundland as a Dominion under the British King, but
we keep a Arm hold on the past, and are pleased to talk of Newfound-
land as the oldest Colony and the newest Dominion of His Majesty
King George V. ...
In our small way when the Great War broke out, we unhesitatingly
threw in our lot with the Mother Country, the sister Dominions, and
her gallant Allies. We were only too pleased to become brothers-in-
arms to those who were determined to fight out to a finish and defeat
those who sought to trample underfoot the smaller and weaker nations
of the world.
I thank you, Mr. Hayes Fisher, for the kindly references to the
w r ar efforts of Newfoundland. I should like to enlarge a little on the
spirit which has mainly prevailed in our House of Assembly during
war time. When the war broke out the House of Assembly was not


in Session. At that time I was in Opposition, and the usual struggle
between parties was taking place, perhaps with more than usual
acerbity. The Government determined they would try to aid on
land as well as on sea. Newfoundland had contributed men to the
Royal Naval Reserve, but there was no military force in the Island,
The Government called a special War Session of the Assembly. Mr
Kent, the Leader of the Opposition, at that time also called the Members
of the Opposition together to consider the situation. As a result
of that discussion, Mr. Kent, now Mr. Justice Kent, on the day Parlia-
ment opened, announced that the Opposition would co-operate cordially
in measures calculated to aid in winning the War. From that date
the Opposition co-operated fully in all war measures, and eventual! v
the needs of the case fostered that co-operation into the form of a
Coalition Government, and I am here to-day as Leader of that Coalition
Government.
If I read the people of Newfoundland aright the spirit in which
we acted is the spirit which dominates them. Newfoundland’s whole
soul is in the war, and she is determined to do her part in so fighting
the war that there shall be no inconclusive peace, and that such a.
peace shall ensue as will make it impossible for Germany again
to risk embroiling the whole world for territorial gain and com-
mercial profit.
May I now say a few words on Newfoundland’s contribution to
the effort of the Entente Allies in the war ? It appeared, at first, to
some of us at least, a doubtful expedient to endeavour to offer soldiers
to? the King. Newfoundlanders are mostly fishermen and sailors,
and obviously their sphere would have been the sea, but the great
need of the day was a need for soldiers. Our enemies jibed at the
British Army as contemptibly small, and the urgent necessity was to
increase its size. The Government determined to contribute a little
in that direction. The offer, in the light of the experience of to-day,
appears quite modest and unquestionably moderate. The Govern-
ment proposed a Volunteer Force of some 500 men, and the Opposition
supported the movement. Since that day the effort has increasingly
enlarged. The following particulars have been placed in my hands
by Major Timewell, the Officer in Command of the Newfoundland
Pay and Record Office in London. There are 5,583 men in the Roval
Newfoundland Regiment and 485 in the Forestry Corps. It is esti-
mated that 2,000 have joined the Royal Naval Reserve, while at
least 2,000 have joined the Canadian Forces. Therefore, up to August,
1918, Newfoundland’s contribution in man-power was 10,108.
In the early days of the war we thought that if we could get 500
soldiers we should be doing something wonderful, but we got them
together. We had some important national characteristics we could
work on. In the first place, we had the genius of the people. That
was largely due to the circumstances of their environment. Our
Newfoundlanders are outdoor people. They are accustomed to, and
can accommodate themselves to, all sorts of risks. The young New-
foundlander takes pride in getting out on to the ice in' the spring.
He likes to get his chance of getting to the ice floes, hunting for seals.
The life is a hazardous one, but the Newfoundlander takes hazardous
risks ; it may be on small steamers off the coasts of Labrador, it may
be some other risky occupation, but they are accustomed to this open-
air life, and they are taught from their earliest days to take care of
themselves and endure hardships. In the winter' they live in the
woods, either hunting or lumbering and learning to take care of them-
selves. That was a great asset to them when they were being made
into soldiers. We were fortunate in St. John’s in having a Church
Lads’ Brigade and certain other institutions modelled on it, such as
the Catholic Cadet Corps, the Methodist and the Highlanders. Those
institutions have guides as their officers and training staff, and they
have made our splendid men into splendid soldiers. They are the


men who have won many of the M.C.’s, the D.G.M.’s and other
decorations awarded to the Regiment, so you will see we were not
absolutely devoid of something to work on and with. I was told an
interesting story of something that happened at Gallipoli, where a
number of our brave fellows went to. It is a story that was told me
by an officer on a steamer. It appears that there was a little dispute,
on one of the steamers carrying the troops, between the Colonel of the
Newfoundland Regiment and the Captain of the transport, and it was
a question in which their dignity was concerned, and neither of them
wanted to lose it. The Colonel sent for the Captain of the steamer,
who refused to respond, until the Colonel said he would send a file of
soldiers to bring him. The Captain came. The dispute arose as to
who should give orders. The Colonel said : “It has got to be done,
or I’ll put you in irons.” The Captain laughed, and said : “If you do
that, what is to become of the ship ? ” The Colonel replied : “ That
does not matter —on board here I have a number of men with masters’
certificates, a number of men who have been mates of steamers, a
number of men who have been fishermen, lots of firemen, and I can
do without the whole crowd of you.” That showed the type of men
the Newfoundlanders were, and the upbringing they had had, and the
life they had been leading before. Their all-round usefulness and
capability was shown in other directions on the Gallipoli expedition.
When they got there they found that there were sappers and miners
to assist them. They soon told these good fellows that they could
do without them, and they did so well by themselves and showed
such fine work and initiative, that they were borrowed by other bat-
talions until their Colonel objected. The result of all this was that
they were the last to leave Suvla Bay, because they could take care
of the boats and rebuild the wharves. When the evacuation of Helles
took place, half the battalion was sent to do the same job there.
I was somewhat gratified when I was in France to hear some
remarks about the Newfoundlanders by a liaison officer on General
Foch’s staff that I met there. He said he knew the Newfoundland
Regiment. He had been, he said, in command of a large unit and had
borrowed the Brigade in which the Newfoundlanders were, and on
one or two occasions Newfoundland Regiments were the only regi-
ments to reach their objective. I can assure you that I was highly
gratified at the story, and I told the officer so. I can, therefore, add
my testimony to the Newfoundlander as a soldier.
I would "add this, that so far as my own observation goes, it is
rather a pity the world at large does not know what has been done
and is being done by the Home Government. Your propaganda has
been very largely ineffective, perhaps owing to your modesty, but
more likely to a misunderstood policy of silence. It is not known
what sacrifices in men and money, particularly men, the Homeland
has made. It is not known what you are doing in the industrial world-
We want it known. Your own people do not know it, much less is
it known by America and France. It is highly desirable that in order
that they shall work with you and us to their full bent they should
know what is being done by you. It will stimulate them to greater
efforts. It is said that Great Britain is not doing her part. This is
owing to misrepresentation and lack of knowledge of what is being
done. What I have seen since I have been here, the vast efforts and
the vast sacrifices that have been made by Great Britain, are matters
that should be made known to the world at large, and the sooner the
better. I thank you very heartily for the priv lege, and I esteem it
a privilege, of being afforded an opportunity of speaking for Newfound-
land in this historic building connected and associated with the Mother
of Parliaments.
